Nursing
the
Feline
Patient
EDITED BY
LINDA E. SCHMELTZER AND GARY D. NORSWORTHY
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://Ltahc.aobao.com
Nursing the Feline Patient
Nursing the Feline Patient
Editors
Linda E. Schmeltzer, RVT
Gary D. Norsworthy, DVM, DABVP (Feline)
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
 A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication
This edition first published 2012 @ 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific,
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered Office
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial Offices
2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how
e asqam n aas asd ooq su u a do au sna ot ussuad aidde o
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
dlients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted
Jo shan a sapoo aa au pauee uaaq sey suaued jo uaiss aeedas e q asua adoooud e
the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-4709-5901-5/2012.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
names and prod uct names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered 
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor 
mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information
pasetua pou st lausqnd aut ieu suipueisianun aui uo pios st iI paiaaoo ialeu palqns aut ot piedai u!
in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services
of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Nursing the feline patient / editors, Linda E. Schmeltzer, Gary D. Norsworthy.
p. / cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-470-95901-5 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Schmeltzer, Linda E. 1. Norsworthy, Gary D.
[DNLM: 1. Cat Diseases-nursing. 2. Animal Technicians. SF 985]
636.8'0896-dc23
2011036439
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not
be available in electronic books.
Set in 8/10pt Palatino by SPi Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
12012
Dedications
Linda E. Schmeltzer
I would like to dedicate this book to all veterinary technicians, formally trained or trained on the job, who are always interested in furthering their
education and knowledge of the patients in their care.
 To my husband, Eric, thank you for believing in me. To my sweet Katlyn, thank you for reminding me to take time out to be silly. To my mom and
sister, you helped me more than you will ever know.
I am blessed to work with an awesome team of people everyday. Thank you for your dedication and for making work fun.
 Dr. Norsworthy, my boss and coeditor, thank you for trusting me to lead your technician team. I've learned so much from you and have truly enjoyed
Aoddo sn au unai son no yueu no ym ioaloud sn ue
Gary D. Norsworthy
I would like to dedicate this book to the technicians who have made the rigors of private practice efficient and enjoyable for me and my colleagues. I
would like to specifically mention Linda Schmeltzer, my head technician for over 10 years and my coeditor, and Emily Boulet, my personal technician
for the last 2 years. Both of you have allowed me to concentrate on patient care at the veterinarian's level knowing that the details of patient care would
be handled by you. I hope that my colleagues have technicians who are as efficient, competent, and fun to work with as these two special ladies.
Editors / oili
Contributors / ix
Preface / x
 Section 1: Patient Management
1
 Patient History and Physical Examination
Nicole Atkens Humphreys /3
2
Restraint
Linda E. Schmeltzer /7
 Environmental Enrichment in the Hospital
Gary D. Norsworthy and Linda E. Schmeltzer /12
《
 Preventive Health Programs
Linda E. Schmeltzer /18
Gestation, Parturition, and Neonatal Care
Linda E. Schmeltzer /21
Geriatric Care
Karen M. Looelace / 24
 Section 2: Diagnostics
7
 Diagnostic Imaging of the Feline Patient
JudithHudson andMerrileeHolland/31
8
Venipuncture and Cystocentesis 
Karen M. Lovelace / 66
9
Cytology
j. Scot Estep /70
10
In-OfficeMethodology andQuality Assurance Assessment
Craig M. Tockman / 80
11
Interpretation of Common Feline Laboratory Values
Keith Dejong /90
12
Hematology
Laura V. Lane and Rick L. Cowell /97
 Section 3: Surgery and Recovery
13
Anesthesia: Sedation and General
Ludooic Pelligand/113
14
Surgical Preparation
Eric Schmeltzer/119
15
Anesthetic Monitoring of the Feline Patient
SusanBryant /121
16
 Pain Assessment and Management
Susan Bryant/129
17
Postoperative Care
Linda E. Schmeltzer/136
18
 Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation
Barbara Bockstanler and David Levine/138
19
 Dentistry and Dental Radiography
Diana Eubanks/145
 Section 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
20
Cardiology
Gary D. Norsworthy /155
21
Dermatology
Gary D.Norsuworthy /164
22
 Diseases of the Digestive System
Linda E. Schmeltzer and Gary D. Norsworthy / 172
23
 Endocrine Diseases
Linda E. Schrmeltzer/178
24
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus
Teija Kaarina Viita-aho/182
25
Feline Infectious Peritonitis
Linda E. Schmeltzer/185
26
 Feline Leukemia Virus Diseases
Linda E. Schmeltzer/189
27
Parasitology
Teija Kaarina Vita-aho /195
28
 Respiratory Diseases
Linda E. Schmeltzer /204
29
Toxicoses
Sharon Fooshee Grace/208
 Urinary Tract Diseases
Linda E. Schmeltzer and Gary D. Norsworthy / 213
Index
219
vii
Editors
Linda E. Schmeltzer, RVT
Gary D. Norsworthy, DVM, DABVP (Feline)
Head Technician
Chief of Staff
 Alamo Feline Health Center
Alamo Feline Health Center
San Antonio, Texas
San Antonio, Texas
Adjunct Professor
College of Veterinary Medicine
 Mississippi State University
vii
Ontributors
Barbara Bockstahler, PhD, DVM, CCRP
Judith Hudson, DVM, PhD, DACVR
Head of Physical Therapy
Professor
University of Veterinary Medicine
 Auburn University College of Veterinary Medicine
Clinic for Surgery and Ophthalmology
Auburn, Alabama
Vienna, Austria
Nicole Atkens Humphreys, MBA, RVT
Susan Bryant, CVT, VTS (Anesthesia)
Critical Care Specialist and Sales
Veterinary Technician Manager
The Pet Blood Bank, Inc.
Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
Lago Vista, Texas
North Grafton, Massachusetts
Laura V. Lane, DVM, DACVP
Rick L. Cowell, DVM, MS, MRCVS, DACVP
Resident (Clinical Pathology)
IMEXX Laboratories
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology
Stillwater, Oklahoma
 Oklahoma State University
Stillwater, Oklahoma
Keith DeJong, DVM, Dipl. ACVP
Clinical Pathologist
David Levine, PT, PhD, DPT, OCS, CCRP
Professional Services Veterinarian, Northwest Area
Walter M. Cline Chair of Excellence in Physical Therapy
Abaxis North American Animal Health
Professor
Union City, California
 Department of Physical Therapy
 The University of Tennesse at Chattanooga
 J. Scot Estep, DVM, DACVP
Chattanooga, Tennessee 
Chief of Comparative Pathology
US ARMY Institute of Surgical Research
Karen M. Lovelace DVM
Spring Branch, Texas
Veterinarian
Ventura, California
Diana Eubanks, DVM, MS, DABVP, FAVD
 Associate Clinical Professor 
Ludovic Pelligand, DVM, MRCVS, Dipl. ECVAA
Mississippi State University College of Veterinary Medicine
North Hymms, Hatfield
Mississippi State, Misssippi
 Royal Veterinary College
Hertfordshire, United Kingdom (England)
Sharon Fooshee Grace, MAgric, MS, DVM, DABVP (Canine-Feline),
DACVIM (Small Animal)
Eric Schmeltzer, DVM
Clinical Professor
Veterinarian
Program Leader for Student Affairs
Boerne, Texas
of Clinical Sciences
Craig M. Tockman, DVM
 Misssippi State, Mississipi
Director of Professional Services
Abaxis North American Animal Health
Merrilee Holland, DVM, DACVR
Wild wood, Missouri
 Associate Professor
Radiology
Teija Kaarina Vita-aho, DVM
 Auburn University College of Veterinary Medicine
Helsinki, Finland
Auburn, Alabama
ix
Preface
According to the 2011-2012 American Pet Products Association survey,
 proves to be an excellent resource for any practicing veterinary technician
there are 86.4 million cats owned in the United States and 78.2 million
as well as a useful reference for technician students.
dogs. Veterinary technicians should be well educated in the unique qual-
ities of the feline patient. The goal of this book is to ad dress all aspects of
Linda Schmeltzer, RVT
feline nursing from the examination room to the surgical suite. I hope it
SECTION
1
Patient
Management
CHAPTER 1
Nicole Atkens Humphreys
Introdu ction
diomyopathy (HCM). When a Maine Coon cat has cardiac signs, the
One of the most important parts of a medical record isthe patient history.
veterinarian will consider HCM and perform relevant tests. Knowing
Without an accurate and detailed history, the most experienced veteri-
narian may not be able to define the problems of a particular patient. A
thorough history may be time consuming, but in a busy practice, a tech-
Chief Complaint and History of lllness
nician can begin the history-taking process thus allowing the veterinar-
ian to ask the client other pertinent questions. The key to history taking
It is important to determine the primary reason for the visit. This is
is asking the right questions to obtain the most important information.
known as the chief complaint. It is crucial that that the ow ner is given
History-taking questions are important details that alert the veterinarian
time to elaborate on the reason the cat was brought in. Because this
or veterinary technician to problems or symptoms that may be contribut-
ing factors to the patient's ailment. Questions will vary among species
process can be prolonged if the conversation is not controlled, specific
questions will quickly lead to a definitive reason for the visit. Not
being evaluated, but in general they should remain unbiased so as not to
lead the client toward a specific answer.
o sisat iadoudun on peal ueo sueidu Aieud aun uo Susng
misdiagnoses.
 Because cats cannot speak, the owner is relied upon during the patient
 Understanding the chief complaint will lead to questions regarding
history-taking process. Asking a question in an unbiased fashion may
require the owner to reflect on a change in the pet's behavior and overall
severity and duration. This information will determine how aggressive
the diagnostic workup should be and how quickly therapy must be insti-
health and draw conclusions whether this change has been a positive or
negative one. More often than not, a question may have to be asked more
tuted.
than once but phrased in a slightly different way to make sure the owner
understands the question and is consistent with answers. When asking
Past Ilness and Surgical History
specific questions be mindful of the owner's ability or inability to observe
the cat. Questions such as "Does your cat have diarrhea?" may not be as
-ousep pidex aour e ot pea[ ue Aiosu leouns pue ssaul eipau ised
suitable as "Have you noticed a change in your cat's stool?"
sis and greatly affect the outcome of certain cases. For example, a cat
 The medical record is comprised of pertinent facts about the patient's
brought in for increased urination can have its presenting sign as a result
life and health history. It can be used to describe past and present ill-
of current furosemide administration for cardiac disease instead of renal
nesses as well as treatments that were ordered by the clinician. The his-
failure or diabetes. Not knowing the cat was given a drug that can cause
tory provided by the animal's owner, the veterinarians' observations,
increased urination may result in unnecessary tests.
and results of any laboratory tests that were performed help determine a
diagnosis or course of treatment for a particular patient.
Itis important to create a complete patient history. Begin with owner's
Dietary and Environmental History
name, address, and telephone numbers (home, work, cell, pager, fax,
etc.). The cat should be assigned an identification number or a case num-
Knowing the type of food and the daily quantity consumed will provide
helpful insights when dealing with weight change (increased or
ber. The cat's name and signalment (age, gender, breed, and species)
should also be entered into the chart so the correct history is linked to the
decreased), obesity, and other problems such as vomiting or diarrhea.
patient.
Diet is especially important when obtaining a history for feline patients
Use of a standard history form ensures that all of the pertinent ques-
tions are asked (Table 1-1).
foods. The timing of a food consumption change can be helpful in under-
standing the duration of a problem. An understanding of a cat's dietary
preferences can be helpful in establishing quality dietary intake in the
Signalment
hospital setting.
 A cat's habitatis also important in assessing the patient. It is important
The signalment of an animal is the age gender, breed, and species; these
to know if a cat is an indoor cat, an indoor-outdoor cat, a supervised
are crucial pieces of data for developing the history and ruling out spe-
outdoor cat, or a free-roaming outdoor cat. Environmental situations
cific problems. Certain disease processes and ailments are inherited or
pose a wide variety of potential toxins and hazards that can contribute to
are more common in certain breeds. Age is relevant in obtaining a history
problems and illnesses. Outdoor cats are more prone to ethylene glycol
for many reasons. Older patients may show similar symptoms but for
poisoning, retroviral conditions (feline immunodeficiency virus [FIV]
different reasons than younger ones. For example, a young energetic and
feline leukemia virus [FeLV]), infections, and trauma. It is also important
curious cat may vomit due to a foreign body. An older more geriatric cat
to understand the number of pets and species in the household because
may vomit due to chronic pancreatitis, renal disease, or small bowel dis-
households with ten cats or more are more prone to gastrointestinal and
ease. Knowing the age of the patient may alert the technician or veteri-
respiratory diseases and behavior problems.
narian to ask age-appropriate questions regarding the issues. Knowing
the breed of an animal is especially helpful when trying to rule out
 Complete Physical Examination
The physical examination is one of the most important parts of a
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
diagnostic workup. Despite the number of blood, urine, and imaging
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
tests available, all of those must be interpreted in light of physical
3
SECTION 1: Patient Management
TABLE 1-1:
History and Examination Record
History and Examination Record 
Doctor:
Technician:_
Species:_
Sex: M Mn F Fs
Age:
Last visit:
Vaccines: Never Current Not current 
Last time(s) given .
Weight:
Last Weight & Date:
Temp:
Chief Complaint:
Appetite: Anorexia Greatly reduced Slightly reduced Normal Slightly increased Greatly increased Duration from normal:
Diet: List foods, canned vs. dry, and % of each
 Meds taken including HW and flea control products:
Vomiting:Never <1/mo 1/mo2-3/mo1/w> 1/w
Stool: Hard Normal Watery  Pancake Batter  Soft Serve Ice Cream
Color:
 Urine:  Less than normal amt Normal amount More than normal amt 
Blood present:
Activity level:  Very lethargic  Reduced Normal  Increased  Sleeps less
Exam Notes: _
 Plan:
Fllow-up:
TABLE 1-2: Sample History Questions for Body Systems
System
Sample Questions
General Attitude
Is your cat playful? Is it interested in its surroundings?
Integument
Is your cat scratching, licking, or biting more than usual? Do you notice changes in your cat's skin or hair coat?
Respiratory
Does your cat have nasal discharge? Have you noticed your cat sneezing, coughing, or wheezing?
Cardiovascular 
Have you noticed a change in your cat's activity level? Is respiration rapid or labored?
Gastrointestinal
Has your cat vomited? If so, how often? Have you noticed a change in stool?
Urogenital
Is your cat intact? Have you noticed changes in your cat's urinary habits ? Does your cat drink more or less than usual?
Nervous
Does your cat seem alert and aware of its surroundings? Have there been any seizures?
 Musculoskeletal
Have you noticed lameness, weakness, or reluctance to move or jump?
examination findings. It is important to develop a systematic approach
remember that cats like to explore. Many times when a cat is taken out of
so no aspect of the examination is inad vertently omitted. Some choose an
its carrier in an examination room, it wants to smell and explore its new
approach based on major body systems as described. Others prefer a
surroundings. Take note if a cat seems uninterested or unable to respond
"geographic" approach beginning with the head and progressing cau-
to the new stimuli of the examination room. Is the cat trying to hide?
dally. Regardless of the approach, it should be used consistently.
Does the cat seem angry? These subtle observations can also determine
 The physical examination process begins when the patient arrives in
how the cat will act during examination. Itis important that every obser-
the examination room. The first impression of how the cat looks and acts
vation is documented in the patient record, and each entry be initialed by
is essential, although one must realize that some cats are unusually with-
 the observer. This eliminates any confusion when trying to document
drawn or aggressive in a clinical seting. It is important to recognize the
entries regarding history and examinations.
"Three A's of Examination:" Appearance, Attitude, and Awareness are
Another component of the physical examination is the assessment.
significant segments of an initial examination. It is important to
Simply stated, each system or body region is examined for abnormalities
4
Patient History and Physical Examination
Figure 1-1  There was some evidence of flea dirt on this cat's hair coat:; however, when
the hair was brushed backward copious amounts of flea dirt were seen. Brushing the hair
 cmat backward often reveals abnormalities that can easily be missed.
Figure 1-3 Sensitive thyroid palpation is performed on one side at a time with the tip
of one's index finger placed in the groove between the trachea and the sternohyoideus
muscle. It is important that the chin be lifted 45 degrees and turned 45 degrees away
from the side to be palpated.
Following general skin appearance, the ears and eyes should be exam-
ined. An ocular examination includes examination of the external and
internal ocular structures. Observe for ocular discharge and the nature of
the discharge (serous or purulent), scratches on the cornea, inflammation
of the conjunctiva, and cloudiness of the lenses. It is also important to
note pupil size, consistency between pupil size (Fig. 1-2), and pupillary
response to light.
Examining the ears involves visual as well as palpation of the external
ear. Note if the pinnae exhibit hair loss, crusting, or dermatitis or if there
 are masses present. When examining the external ear canal, it should be
clear of hair, mucus, and debris. If mucus or discharge is present, record
color, smell, and consistency of the exudate. Use an otoscope to examine
the ear canal for discharge, redness, ear mites, and foreign objects; evalu-
ate the tympanic membrane for color and to determine intactness.
Respiratory System
Examining the respiratory system should begin by observing the cat's
au peun uu sueadu ue si easeaziseldnd asisuoul  an
respiration rate and depth. The normal respiratory rate for feline patients
 missed with a casual glance of the cat's eyes.
is 16-30 breaths per minute. Observe for nasal discharge, abnormal
sounds, such as coughing or wheezing, and any other indications of dif-
ficulty breathing. Lung sounds are heard with a stethoscope. The lung
and issues. Although there is no particular order for examining body sys-
sounds of a normal cat are often heard during inspiration only. Normal
tems a usual routine pattern should be established. Most practitioners
air passage through the airways is usually barely audible so when feline
will start with the head and progress to the tail. This ensures that no
patients present with easily heard lung sounds it is usually significant.
system is overlooked. The veterinarian may also ask certain questions
The lack of respiratory sounds can also be significant, often signaling
while examining each part to get a better understanding of each system
fluid accumulation in the pleural space (pleural effusion). Crackling or
(Table 1-2).
 popping noises indicate abnormalities in the respiratory system and
should be recorded.
Skin, Eyes, and Ears
The integument, or skin, can be examined while examining other body
Cardiovascular System
systems or as an overall system itself. It is crucial to remember to exam-
Examining the cardiovascular system begins by visualizing the cat's res-
ine all areas, such as the skin on the extremities as well as the underside
piratory rate and depth. Next, the mucus membrane color and capillary
of the cat. Many times brushing the hair coat in the opposite direction of
refill time should be determined; they are a preliminary measure of car-
growth will expose skin and many abnormalities that may be present
diac output. Look at the color of the membranes and then blanch the
(Fig. 1-1). Skin discoloration, hair loss, ulcerative or proliferative lesions,
Aq suno (sung au uo iauy anok guissaid Aq saueaquau aut jo sonon
and pustules all should be marked in the record with their locations. Also
seconds how long it takes to recover the color. Normal capillary refill
note whether the hair coat is matted, oily, dry, or normal.
time is 1-2 seconds. Times greater than 2 seconds can indicate poor
5
SECTION 1: Patient Management
cardiac output, which can be due to cardiac disease, dehydration, or
evoke a pain response. Although the uterus and ovaries of an intact
other ailments. Palpation of the jugular and the femoral pulses is per-
female are not palpable in the nonpregnant queen, it is crucial to examine 
formed to monitor for adequate blood flow. Heart rate and pulse quality
the mammary chains for masses and the testicles of intact male cats.
should also be recorded. Femoral pulses should be palpated while listen-
Aaaa iog asind e st arau ansua o adoosouas e uim ieau au ot Su
beat of the heart. Cardiac auscultation should progress to listening for
Nervous System and Musculoskeletal System
rate, rhythm, and the presence of a murmur. Murmurs are assessed by
 The nervous and musculoskeletal systems can be harder to examine than
five indicators intensity, grade, quality timing, and location, which are
the others. Neurological examinations are performed when a patient has
factors in determining the need for further tests. See Chapter 20.
central nervous system (CNS) or peripheral nerve symptoms. Examining
the musculoskeletal system includes palpating joints, muscles, and bony
Gastrointestinal System
structures. The spine is examined for pain responses and reflexes.
Although the gastrointestinal (Gl) system is considered abdominal in
location, it actually begins in the oral cavity. Examining the mouth
Miscellaneous
could reveal clues to GI disease,including gastritis and GI foreign bod-
ies. A foul odor coming from the patient's mouth may be more than
Several feline diseases result in enlargement of the peripheral lymph
 just "vomit breath." Malodorous smell coming from the pharyngeal
 nodes. The most commonly enlarged ones are the mandibular, prescapu-
area can indicate impactions further down the gastrointestinal tract.
lar, and popliteal. Those lymph nodes should be palpated in a normal cat 
Palpate the neck gently with one hand on both sides to feel for any
So enlargement can be appreciated.
masses or objects. Abdominal auscultation is used to detect gut sounds.
 Hyperthyroidism is common in geriatric cats. If the thyroid lobes are
The next step is abdominal palpation. A one-handed palpation tech-
normal they are not palpable (Fig. 1-3). However, enlargement that is 
nique may be easier to use in feline patients because of their small size.
palpable justifies performance of blood tests (usually a total T4) to evalu-
With the thumb on one side of the abdomen and four fingers on the
ate thyroid function.
other, the internal structures can be examined. The perineal area
should be examined for masses, evidence of bowel movement prob-
lems, and inflammation.
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC. 2000. Textbook of Veterinary Intermal Medicine,
 5th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Urogenital System
McCurnin DM, Bassert, JM. 2005. Clinical Textbook for Veterinary
 The feline kidneys can be palpated in most cats. They are about 4cm
 Technicians, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Health Sciences.
longitudinally in the young adult cats and have a smooth surface. The
Norsworthy GD. 2010. The Feline Patient, 4th ed. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
full to half full urinary bladder should be palpable and is normally
Poffenbarger EM, McCurnin DM. 2001. Small Animal Physical Diagnosis
spherical in shape. The presence of uroliths or severe inflammation may
and Clinical Procedures, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Health Sciences.
CHAPTER 2
Restraint
Linda E. Schmeltzer
One of the main reasons clients seek cat-only practices is the practice
Restraint for Auscultation and Abdominal Palpation
environment, which includes how cats are handled. The ability to
safely and humanely restrain a cat is a vital task for every veterinary
During thoracic auscultation and abdominal palpation the restrainer
should be positioned at the cat's head and the examiner at the cat's tail.
technician. The general rule of less is more is a good approach to most
restraint situations. This means assessing the attitude and stress level
The objectives of restraint during this portion of the examination are to
keep the cat from leaving the examination area and to restrain the cat's
of each patient and using the least amount of restraint required to
head to prevent the cat from turning and biting the examiner. With docile
accomplish the task. Proper restraint allows a procedure to be suc-
cessfully accomplished without harm to the patient, client, or staff
cats this may be as easy as standing in front of the cat and petting its
members involved. There is not a universal restraint technique that
neck. Petting the neck distracts the patient from the examination and also
works for every cat that comes into a veterinary office. Loud noises
puts the restrainer's hand in a position to scruff the neck should it be
outside the room, overhandling, or pain can cause the most easy.
necessary (Fig. 2-4). Timid cats are often more cooperative when they are
going, cooperative patient to become defensive or aggressive during
given a towel to hide under. If the cat is not aggressive, the restrainer
should reach under the towel and scruffthe neck (Fig. 2-5). For aggres-
a physical examination. The more methods of restraint a technician
can learn, the better equipped that technician will be to handle these
sive cats, it is best for the restrainer to stand to the cat's side and face
situations.
toward the cat's head. Place a heavy bath towel over the cat's head and
front legs. The restrainer can then apply gentle pressure over the cat's
shoulders to prevent the cat from leaving the examination area (Fig. 2-6).
The thick towel will act as a barrier to prevent the cat biting the restrainer
Restraint for Examinations
or examiner. The cat may bite the towel during this part of the examina-
The following restraint techniques are effective for most cats during
tion. Some aggressive or frightened cats do not tolerate this method of
 physical examination. Refer to Chapter 8 for discussion of restraint dur-
restraint and will become even less cooperative when covered with a
ing sample collection. At the discretion of a veterinarian, chemical
towel. If this occurs do not apply stronger pressure to the shoulders
restraint may need to be used for aggressive patients. Technicians should 
because doing so can result in injury to the patient or acceleration of
never place themselves in a restraint situation with which they are not
aggression.
A second restrainer may be needed to hold the cat's rear feet during
comfortable. If such a situation occurs communicate with the other staff
members involved to formulate a plan to exit the situation in the safest 
this part of the examination if the cat uses its back feet to push the
examiner's hands away during thoracic auscultation or abdominal
way possible.
palpation. The second restrainer stands at the cat's hindquarters and
places his or her hands at the bend in the tarsus to hold the leg down
(Fig. 2-7).
Restraint for Examination of the Head
During examination of the head, it is important for the restrainer to keep
the cat from using its front feet to push the examiner's hands away. This
Restraint for Examination of Extremities
is best accomplished by placing the cat on a countertop, head facing the
Examination of extremities works best if the cat is in lateral recum-
examiner The restrainer stands opposite the examiner, at the cat's tail.
bency. This allows the examiner access to the legs and the bottom of
For docile cats, restrainers cradle the cat's body between their forearms
the feet. With the cat in lateral recumbency the restrainer scruffs the
and hold the cat's front legs at the elbows (Fig. 2-1). This prevents the cat
cat's neck with one hand and holds the back feet with the other hand.
from rolling to the side and pushing the examiner's hands away or
 Bracing the cat's shoulders and back against the arm that is holding
scratching. Timid cats may feel more secure with a towel placed over
the scruff may prevent the cat from wiggling (Fig. 2-8). Timid cats may
them before the restrainer cradles them as previously described
(Fig. 2-2). Using a thick bath towel to cover an aggressive cat can offer
towel so they feel they are hiding (Fig. 2-9). For aggressive cats, place
 protection for restrainers and allow the examination to be accomplished
a towel between the cat's forelimbs and head as a barrier between the
suuccessfully.
cat's mouth and the examiner's hands (Fig. 2-10). Some cats do not
Some cats will tuck their heads down between their front legs making
have enough loose skin to scruff or they may resist being scruffed. For
it difficult for the examiner to look into the eyes or mouth. Restrainers
these cats, the restrainer holds the cat's head by hooking thumb and
sie aut iapun siasuy xapui suipis Auas Aq dn peay aut l diau ue
index finger of his or her hand under the right and left zygomatic
chin and pushing upward. If possible, place the little fingers in front of
arches. A second restrainer or a towel may be needed to keep the cat
the elbows to help keep the cat's front legs down (Fig. 2-3). If using a
Aeme spuey s,xauexsan Aieuud au ysnd oiaay uox st Suisn uoy
towel for a timid or aggressive catthen be sure tokeep the towel between
(Fig. 2-11).
the restraining hands and the cat.
Restraint for Pilling
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
It is often the technician's job to teach owners how to successfully pill
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
their cats. There are several versions of a joke circulating the internet
@2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
about how to give a cat a pill. Most of them involve injury to the human
7
SECTION 1: Patient Management
Figure 2-1 Hold the cat's front legs at the elbows and cradle the cat's body between
Figure 2-4  Petting the neck of docile cats distracts them during the examination and 
forearms during examination of the head.
alsputs therestraner's handinapsitiot scrufftheekshouldiemeneesary.
Fgure 2-5 Timid cats are often more cooperative for examination when they are given
atowelthieerftheatisnt agressive, eachuder the twelandscruffthe.
spe peyseaseeanameqyeld gan
Figure 2-3 Lift the head up by gently sliding the index fingers under the cat's chin and 
aul bunea wou ien au luaaaid ot siapnous s,ien aul lano aunssad auah Adde uaul
push upward when cats tuck their heads down between their frontlegs during examination.
examination area.
Restraint
Figure 2-7  A second restrainer holds the cat's hind legs preventing the examiner from
Figure 2-10 For aggressive cats, place a towel between the cat's forelimbs and head
being scratched while palpating the cat's abdomen.
 as a barrier between the cat's mouth and the examiner's hands.
Figure 2-8 Bracing the cat's shoulders and back while restraining it in lateral recum-
 bency may prevent the cat from wigling.
lyiu aui lapun lahuy xapu! pue qunul ayi buyooy Aq peay aul pioh 1l-z aunbi
lsisal jo yns oi us asool yonoua aey iou op ieul sien ioj saupie pewoikz al pue
being scruffed. A second restrainer keeps the cat from using its front feet to push the
 primary restrainer's hands away.
Figure 2-9 Timid cats may fe more secure and be more cooperative if they are
 covered with a towel so they feel they are hiding.
SECTION 1: Patient Management
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(F
g
(h)
Figure 2-12 (a) Place the cat on a table or counter and stand behind the cat. Cradle the cat's body between the forearms while holding front legs at the elbows. (b) Place the left
ring finger and little finger on each side of the neck at the base of the skull behind the cat's ears. (c Hook the let index finger and thumb below the right and left zygomatic arches.
(d) Tip the cat's head upward so the nose is at a 45-degree angle to the table. The cat's mouth should begin to open. (e) Hold the pill between the thumb and index finger and use the
middle or ring finger to push down on the cat's lower jaw. (f The caudal aspect of the tongue forms a groove. This is the pil slot. (g) Drop the pillinto the midle of the pill slot
(h) Continue holding the chin up and wait for to the cat to stick its tongue out.
10
Restraint
How to Give a Cat a Pill
This technique is initially described using two people: a restrainer and a
pill-giver. An alternate technique for a single person pilling a cat will be
described subsequently.
 Place the cat on a table or counter. The restrainer will stand behind the
cat and cradle the cat's body between his or her forearms while holding
the cat's front legs at the elbows (Fig. 2-12a). The pill-giver, using the
nondominant hand (left in this description), places the left ring finger
and little finger on each side of the neck at the base of the skull behind
the cat's ears (Fig. 2-12b) and hooks the left index finger and thumb
below the right and left zygomatic arches (Fig. 2-12c). This willallow for
good control of the head, which is essential for success. The pill-giver
then tips the cat's head upward so the nose is at a 45-degree angle to the
table (Fig. 2-12d). The cat's mouth should begin to open. Hold the pill
between the thumb and index finger of the dominant hand and use the
middle or ring finger to push down on the cat's lower jaw, opening the
mouth wider (Fig. 2-12e). Note the way the caudal aspect of the tongue
forms a groove (Fig. 2-12f). This is the pill slot. Drop the pill into the
middle of the groove (Fig. 2-12g). If it drops to one side, the cat will be
able to spit it out. Do not let the cat's head drop down until the pill is
swallowed. Continue holding the chin up and wait for to the cat to stick
its tongue out, signaling that swallowing has occurred (Fig. 2-12h). The
most common reason this method is unsuccessful is letting the head
drop before the cat swallows, allowing the cat to spit the pill out.
 If only one person is available for pilling, wrap the cat tightly in a
towel or pillow case, allowing both hands to be free (Fig. 2-13).
 Suggested Readings
Figure 2-13 Wrap the cat tightly in a towel allowing both hands to be free when
French DD, Tully IN. 2006. Restraint and Handling of Animals. In DM 
 piling a cat without an assistant.
McCurnin, JM Bassert, eds., Clinical Textbook for Veterinary Technicians,
6th ed., Pp. 65-68. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
Norsworthy GD. 20l1. Restraint Techniques and Devices.
In
involved, destruction of the house, and a cat that has successfully
GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 920-23. Ames:
avoided taking a pill. Realistically there are few cats that cannot be pilled.
Wiley-Blackwell.
Some medications must be given on an empty stomach, so wrapping
Pattengale P. 2009. Animal Restraint. In P Pattengale, ed., Tasks for the
them in a treat may not be possible. With proper instruction an owner
can safely and successfully administer a pill to a cat without personal
Rodan I, Sundahl E, Carney H, et al. 20l1. AAFP and ISFM Feline-
harm, harm to the cat, or damage to the house. Before demonstrating any
Friendly Handling Guidelines. J Fel Med Surg. 13(5):364-75.
technique to an owner, a technician should feel comfortable and confi-
 dent using it. This allows for easier troubleshooting if problems occur for
the owner.
11
CHAPTER 3
Environmental Enrichment
in the Hospital
Gary D. Norsworthy and Linda E. Schmeltzer
Overview
Reception Area
A hospital visit can be a terrifying event, whether as an outpatient or
The reception area makes the first impression. It should convey the mes-
inpatient and regardless of species, including humans. However, when
sage that cats are valued as patients, and it should project cleanliness.
a cat visits a typical small animal practice the experience can be espe-
 :sAem uimoy au us uaai aie saessu asau
cially unpleasant. Many indoor cats have had no exposure to dogs and
● The daecor should be cat themed. The decorations in small animal
are terrified at the first and subsequent encounters, and many dogs,
 practice need to have equal emphasis on cats as on the other species
even those that live with a cat, find unknown cats to be objects of prey.
treated. Reception areas that have a 90% canine theme send a strong
Both of these situations are likely in a waiting room filled with canines
negative message to the cat owner (Fig. 3-1).
and felines.
● The furnishings in a feline-exclusive reception area can be living-
Veterinarians, technicians, kennel personnel, and receptionists who
room quality. Most cats travel in carriers. They do not have chain
are not particularly fond of cats only add to the cat's anxiety.
leashes that are raked across the furniture. They do not paw at the
[es ieid aun un punog uao ane adoad asan jo auos Kiaeunonun
furniture with claws. A nicely decorated reception area will motivate
animal practice. Procedures that are necessary, beginning with the rectal
your clients to rise to that level.
thermometer, further add to the cat's response of self-preservation and
● Odor control is vital. The smell of cat urine often pervades the recep-
aggression and often result in a threatening situation for those who
tion area. Even though it may originate in other areas of the hospital,
 restrain and treat the cat.
its presence in the reception area is not acceptable. Urine must be
This chapter will chronicle how the authors have tried to minimize the 
cleaned up immediately. An effective odor-neutralizing product, such
unpleasantries of a hospital visit. The goals of hospital environment
as Zero Odor Pet (www.ZeroOdorStore.com) should be used imme-
enrichment are to make the visit as pleasant as possible for the cat and for
diately when urine is not contained within cat litter. Tom cat urine
those who treat the cat so that minimal restraint is needed and that qual-
odor is especially pungent and pervasive. Either do not keep intact
ity health care can be provided.
male cats overnight (our policy), or if they must stay, keep them in an
Environmental enrichment in the hospital is two pronged. First, it
isolation ward with a good exhaust system and use Zero Odor Pet@
seeks to reduce anxiety on the cat. Second, it seeks to reduce anxiety
 frequently. Their litter boxes must be cleaned immediately after urina-
lou isn rauid e seo an uea jo ssad au un samo au uo
tion occurs, and the wet litter should be taken to an outdoor trash
forget that owners ultimately decide whether the cat receives the treat-
ment that the veterinarian recommends or if the hospitals services are
receptacle.
sought in the future.
The following ideas are based on the experience of the authors. A
virtual tour of their hospital can be taken at www.alamofeline.com.
Examination Rooms
Examination rooms are the first "medical" area. They must be efficient
for patient care, and they must have appeal to clients.
The Feline-Exclusive Practice
● The daecor is important. In our feline practice the six examination
The first feline-exclusive practice was established in the United States in
rooms each have a different theme based on a famous cat (Fig. 3-2). If
the 1960s. Although many considered it a strange concept, it had an
the examination room is used for other species than just cats, its deco-
ay sieo 'sieak Dt ised aul laao 'shaumo ieo snoas Aue on [eadde
rations should include some feline recognition. In a small animal
gone from being a casual, almost disposable pet to an integral part of
 practice, ideally one or more examination rooms should be dedicated
to cats. The feline rooms do not need to be as large as those used for
many families. A proliferation of feline-exclusive practices, now number-
ing over 300 in the United States, has accompanied the increase in feline
dogs. Their dedicated use eliminates the odors of dogs. During con-
 popularity as a valued family member.
struction, sound board should be put in the walls to reduce or elimi-
The feline-exclusive concept is based largely on three premises that cat
nate the sounds of dogs.
owners find appealing. First, a veterinarian who concentrates his or her
● If one or more examination rooms in a small animal practice are des-
professionalife on one species should become more proficient. Second,
ignated for feline patients, ideally they should be located out of dog
the feline practice offers a dog-free environment, which automatically
traffic paths. The sound of dogs walking past and sniffing at the bot-
produces an atmosphere that is less threatening to feline patients. Third,
tom of the door will add to a cat's level of anxiety.
 Cleanliness is paramount. Every countertop, table top, and sink
narians who truly like cats and like working with cats.
should be spotlessly clean when the client enters the room. There
The authors practice in a feline-exclusive practice, and the following
should be no cat hair on the countertops or floor.
procedures are utilized in that practice. However, most of them can also
● Odor control is of equal importance to cleanliness. A cleaner that also
be used in a canine-feline practice either as described or with some
deodorizes should be used. Zero Odor Pet should be used for any
residual odor. Odoriferous materials (e.g, urine, stool, and anal sac
creativity.
material) should be removed from the room, not just putin a trash can
in the room.
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
● The room needs to be "cat proof." There should be no small, tight
and Gary D. Norsworthy
 places where a cat can hide, thereby giving them the freedom to roam
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
around the room. This is a stress reducer.
12
EnoironmmentalEnrichmentintheHospital
(a)
(b)
Figure 3-1  The decor of the reception room should include a feline theme proportional to the percentage of feline patients there are in the practice. Living-room quality furniture is
feasible in a feline-exclusive practice.
ae aui jo jean aul sy lae shlpo ino pand, aq uen ien aul e-e aunb
approaches vertical, the cat will be forced to put one or more feet on the examination
Figure 3-2  The decor of our examination rooms are each themed to a different famous
table. When either two front or two rear feet are on the table, the carrier can be lifted 
cat. The examination tables are L-shaped, and a computer is located in each using a
upward so the cat walks out.
paperless system (www.avimark.com).
● However, designated hiding places can be stress relievers. Some cats
several approaches can be used. In some cases, the owner is proactive
like to curl up in a sink. Others prefer a plastic pan (dish pan) or a
in coaxing the cat out; if not, the technician or veterinarian can remove 
designated cabinet. These need to be cleaned after each use.
the cat as long as the cat is reasonably willing. If not, other tactics can
●There should be a place for cat carriers other than on the examination
be employed with the goal of not inciting the cat into a defensive (or
table.
offensive) posture. The top of many plastic carriers can be removed;
●Feliway (www.feliway.com) can be helpful for calming nervous or
doing so removes the cat's need to defend its territory. If that is not
aggressive cats. It can be sprayed on the examination table prior to use.
feasible,the carrier door can be opened and the cat "poured" out. This
should be done by tipping the rear of the carrier upward slowly while
the front of the carrier rests on the examination table. The cat will
Examination Room Equipment and Procedures
slide down to the door but still try to remain in the carrier. As the rear
of the carrier approaches vertical, the cat will be forced to put one or
more feet on the examination table. When either two front or two rear
● The first step in the examination is to remove the cat from the carrier.
feet are on the table, the carrier can be lifted upward so the cat walks
In many cases, the owner has done so or the cat comes out voluntarily.
out (Fig. 3-3). It is important that this be done slowly so the cat is not
However, if the cat is resistant to leaving the security of its carrier
 J Aeme iaueo aun hl sou nok 1eun sueiodul osle st i 'pazjuogeue
13
SECTION 1: Patient Management
(a)
(b)
Figure 3-4 When first approaching your patient, allow it to assess you by smelling ofyour index finger ("the cat scan.After that, scratch it behind the ear stroke it a few times down
the back, and, if the cat is willing, hold it a few seconds. Going through this sequence usually makes the cat less apprehensive and more cooperative during the physical examination.
(a)
(b)
yuaike
170ct.RanllPoc
n ad aseai  sm u leaas mus sa asu e an
(IV) pump hangs on the front of the cage. This cat is recovering from a urethral obstruc-
tion. His urinary collection bag is below the cage with its line entering the cage at the
same point as the IV line. (b) The cat is more comfortable in a box. A soft Elizabethan 
collaris used to protect the IV line and urinary catheters.The bowls are elevated by taping
them to a similar bowl so he can get food and water while wearing the Elizabethan collar.
 A slotted rack is used for floring because a litter box is not being used for this patient.
14
EnoironmentalEnrichment intheHospital
28
口
3%4
Figure 3-7  The dimensions of the echocardiogram table area shown in this drawing.
It is padded, covered with vinyl, and placed on 6-inch legs.It is placed on the ultrasound
table.
● Successful feline cardiac auscultation is best accomplished using a
stethoscope with a 12-mm (-inch) or 2-cm (%4-inch) bell. Feline mur-
Figure 3-6  The dedicated ultrasound room has an appropriately sized table attached
 murs are usually located very near the sternum.
to the wall, a cushioned trough for the cat to lie in for an abdominal study, a spotlight
● The cat has a strong anal reflex. A rectal thermometer should be lubri-
that shines on the patient but not on the ultrasound screen, ight switches near the table.
cated but not forced into the rectum. Gentle pressure will result in
 and an oxygen outlet for use by an anesthetic machine.
sphincter relaxation and less resistance from the cat. For apprehen-
sive/scared cats, take the temperature after the physical examination
is complete because this procedure can result in an aggressive response.
there is one front and one rear footon the table.If that happens,setthe
 Blood pressure should be measured in a quietexamination room with
carrier back down on the table and begin again.
the owner present and touching (or holding) the cat. Ideally, this
● The next step in the examination (after greeting the client) is to assess
should be the first event of the examination because other events will
affect blood pressure causing unreliable readings.
the cat's personality. Cats tend to fall into three groups: (1) friendly, (2)
apprehensive/scared, and (3) aggressive/fractious. Cats in the first
● Blood collection can be a challenge. Most of our blood profiles are
two categories should be greeted with an outstretched, nonthreaten-
performed using a chemistry machine that requires less than 0.5ml of
m 1l (et-e ig) iatuy xapui anoA laus ieo au ial nok j 'puey su
blood (www.abaxis.com; VetScan VS2). Blood is taken from a medial
usually become less apprehensive. After it has done this, slide your
saphenous vein. If a large quantity of blood is needed, a jugular col-
finger behind the cat's ear and give it a few strokes. Follow that with
lection proced ure is used. If you are consistently proficient in drawing
a few strokes down the back. If it shows interest in your advances,
blood, it will impress the client; do so in the examination room.
a sue ano uhl apeao pue dn il yid so sa arou mah e hl aos
 Another benefit is that this location allows you to avoid the areas of
a baby (Fig. 3-4b). Some cats will let you do this and others will not.
the hospital that contain dogs.
These proactive movements on your part will set the cat at ease and
make it less likely to become aggressive during the examination. It
will also send the two most important messages to the client: (1) you
The Hospital Area
love cats, and (2) you love this cat.
● Aggressive or fractious cats must be handled with caution. Cat bites
can create serious infections. Sedation is sometimes needed to pro-
● Ceanliness and odor control are also important in this setting. Odors
ceed safely.
may be carried from the hospital to the examination rooms and recep-
● Each of our six examination rooms is set up the same. Each is simi-
tion area along hallways or through air conditioning or heating systems.
larly equipped, and the equipment is located in the corresponding
● Hospital cages are more cat friendly if they are not made of stainless
cabinets or draws. This permits effciency when more than one doc-
steel. Laminates are quieter, warmer, and sufficiently durable for cats.
tor uses the examination rooms. It also reduces staff stress. Stressed
Our cages (www.clarkcages.com) have been in use for 10 years and
doctors and technicians are likely to transmit anxiety to their
 show almost no signs of wear.
patients.
· Cage size is usually a compromise between comfort, expense, and
· Our main restraint device is a heavy bath towel. Drawers in the
available space. Most cats are comfortable for a few days in a
examination tables contain three towels per examination room;
24"x 24" ×24"(width,height, depth)cage.Large cats and cats that are
they are located so they can be retrieved quickly by the veterinar-
ian or the technician. Designate towels specifically for examina-
● Food and water bowls should be as large on the bottom as on the top
tion rooms making sure they are free of stains, holes, and frayed
so they do not turn over easily.
areas.
-eadde aou aue sauo sseld leus saxoq ianll o sadk oml asn am e
● Every cat should be weighed on every visit. We use a digital package
ing to cats but can consume more cage space and litter. They must be
scale (www.pelouze.com; model 4010) and place a plastic dish pan on
washed and disinfected between cats. Cardboard litter trays (www.
it for the cat to stand or lie in. There is one in each examination room.
chinet.com; 7" x 9" flat trays) are well accepted by most cats. They
It is stored in a drawer on the client's side of the examination table;
consume less litter and are disposable so disease transmission is not
when the drawer is pulled out, the scale can be used without remov-
an issue.
ing it from the drawer. A strongly made drawer with heavy duty
● Cats on intravenous (IV) fluids, with severe diarrhea or those that are
hardware is vital for long-term use.
just messy do well on racks that fit into the cages (www.clarkcages.
●Veterinary otoscope cones are too large for the feline external ear
com). They allow fluids to go through while being reasonably com-
canal. We use an otoscope and cones made for humans.
fortable to the cats.
15
SECTION 1: Patient Management
Figure 3-8  The x-ray table is made from a base cabinet with a custom made top to
aun apun ans peau palaon e ym pauuieu s aneaduan pog -e anni
accommodate the digital receiving plate.It is placed in a corner of the room to help with 
cat (www.thermogear.com).
restraint between exposures. The monitor for the digital x-ray system (www.soundeklin.
com} is mounted on the back wall; the computer CPU and other x-ray system equipment 
ayl jof pieoqay ayl'lauiqen aseq ayl jo pua ayl ol uo ynq lauiqen e ul pasnoy aie
Switches for the spotlight and the room lights are located next to the
computer is located in one of the drawers in the table.
ultrasound table. A sink is available for rinsing ultrasound gel off of
the moist towel used for cleaning the patient. Nearby drawers contain
syringes, needles, microscope slides, and other equipment used dur-
● Elizabethan collars are necessary in select situations. Use a soft collar
ing the ultrasound procedures. An oxygen outlet is available when
when it is acceptable. Hard plastic collars are needed for some situa-
gas anesthesia is needed (Fig. 3-6).
tions (www.kvpusa.com).
● Our ultrasound table measures 25" x 32" and is 32 inches high. An
· IV catheters can be placed in several peripheral veins. Short catheters
echocardiography table is placed on it. See Figure 3-7 for size and
 perform well in the cephalic veins for 2-3 days. Long (central venous)
shape; it is on 6-inch legs. Abdominal procedures are performed in a
catheters can remain in place for up to 7 days, and blood samples can
foam rubber tray that has a trough cut to fit the cat when the cat is in
be collected through them. They can be placed in the jugular vein or
dorsal recumbency. It measures 18" x 24". A plastic bag is taped in
in the medial saphenous vein.
place over it to keep body fluids from getting into the foam rubber.
● Frequently cats feel more secure when some form of seclusion is pro-
The tray is covered with a bath towel when in use.
vided. Cardboard boxes can be used; they should be discarded after
·Our x-ray table is constructed from a base cabinet. A custom made
top, measuring 24" x 51", was built to accommodate the digital x-ray
sprayed on the boxes for added stress control.
sensor. It is located in a corner of the room. Although it does not per-
● A deep sink is an acceptable place for bathing cats. Cats usually need
mit access to both ends of the table, the enclosed corner is advanta-
less restraint and are less aggressive compared to being in a bathtub.
geousbetween exposuresbecause cats can be released but not allowed
● Ultrasound studies are performed in a dedicated room. This room is
to get off of the table (Fig. 3-8).
themed like the examination rooms because owners are frequently
● Our surgery tables are stainless steel; the top measures 18.75" x 46".
invited to observe these studies. A spot light is attached to the ceiling
Body temperature is preserved during surgery using awarming blan-
and shines on the patient from behind the ultrasound screen.
The
ket (ChiliBustere Vet Surgical Warming System by ThermoGear)
spotlight is on a rheostat so the intensity can be adjusted as needed.
placed on the surgery table (Fig. 3-9).
16
Environmental Enrichment in the Hospital
● Surgical monitoring is performed with a multiparameter monitor
● Our luxury boarding area has cages with glass backs. They are placed
(www.vmedtech.com; PC-VetGard+) that transmits data wirelessly from
on an outside wall with large windows so the cats can look outdoors.
the surgery table to a computer at the front of the surgery room. The data
● Cats are allowed out of their kennels daily, one at a time, to roam the
is displayed on large monitors near the ends of each surgery table.
boarding area. Climbing trees and scratching posts are provided dur-
● Declawing is performed exclusively with a carbon dioxide surgical
ing the cat's exercise time.
laser (www.aesculight.com). We are convinced that cats have less
● Toys are provided unless the owner brings cat toys. The ones we pro-
pain and bleeding. This is especially evident when adult cats are
vide must be washable.
declawed.
auoaiaaa 'uonsans iao Aue se jueiodun se sdeuuad pue Aeu ●
Con clusion
on the staff should open cage doors and give some personal tender
loving care to the patients. Knowing they are being cared for by car
 The goal of each item listed is to reduce patient stress and increase com-
ing cat lovers is reassuring to feline patients.
fort level, even when medical proced ures are performed. Thoughtfulness 
pue ymo aead on ppe ym jo yoq 'eadde iaumo pue suaed
income.
 Boarding Facilities
 Suggested Readings
● Boarding wards are separate from the hospital wards.
● The same cages as previously described are used; however, multiple
Norsworthy GD, Schmeltzer, L. 2010. Environmental Enrichment in the
sizes are available depending on the size of the cat, the number of cats
Hospital. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 571-76.
the owner wants together, and the comfort level the owner desires.
Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
17
CHAPTER 4
Preventive Health Programs
Linda E. Schmeltzer
The Annual Visit
Veterinarian recommendations vary between practices. Therefore,
technicians should educate themselves with regard to the benefits and
Many pet owners see the annual trip to the veterinarian as simply an
risks of the vaccination program recommended in their practice. It is
exercise to update vaccines. In actuality it is the veterinarian's best
important for technicians to feel comfortable with their practice recom-
chance to practice preventive medicine. Cats age at an average equiva-
mendations so they may properly educate owners and be in agreement
lent of 5 human years with the passing of one calendar year. In other
with the practice owners. The follwing vaccination guidelines are cur-
words, a cat's annual examination or yearly examination is the equiva-
rently
recommended by the American Association of Feline
lent of a person having a physical examination every 5 years.
Practitioners.
The annual visit at Alamo Feline Health Center in San Antonio, Texas,
consists of six steps:
Core Vaccinations
1. Owners are asked to fill out a questionnaire that asks specific
Core vaccinations are those recommended for all cats. Vaccines for pan-
questions related to known feline diseases and aging changes
leukopenia virus (FPV), feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1), feline calicivirus 
(Table 4-1).
(FCV), and rabies virus are in the core vaccine category.
2. A single-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) is performed to identify
 Kittens can begin their primary series as early as 6 weeks old. They can
early signs of heart disease. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy occurs in
receive a vaccination for FPV, FHV-1, and FCV every 3-4 weeks until
cats as young as 1 year of age. Several early indicators occur on the
they are 16 weeks old. A single dose of rabies virus vaccine should be
ECG before the onset of congestive heart failure. See Chapter 20.
administered as directed on the manufacturer's product label or by state
 3. A thorough examination is performed beginning at the nose and
or local regulations between the ages of 8 and 12 weeks. If rabies vaccine
ending with the tail. See Chapter 1.
is given before 12 weeks of age, a booster given 2-4 weeks later is
4. Written recommend ations regarding the health needs of each patient
required. A second dose of rabies virus vaccine should be given 1 year
are provided to the client. These recommendations may include flea
after the initial dose.
and heartworm prevention, diet change, dental prophylaxis, or fur-
 Unvaccinated adult or adolescent cats (cats older than 16 weeks old)
 ther screening for possible disease processes.
will have an amended primary series. Vaccination for FPV, FHV-1, and
5. After completing an individual patient risk assessment, needed vac-
FCV will be administered in two doses spaced 3-4 weeks apart. A sin-
cines are administered.
gle dose of rabies virus vaccine will also be administered. A second
6. At checkout, clients receive a printed document listing eight things
dose of rabies virus vaccine should be given 1 year after the initial
owners can do to keep their cats healthy and 18 early signs of dis-
dose.
ease of which owners should be aware (Table 4-2).
Booster vaccines for all cats are recommended. American
Association of Feline Practitioners (AAFP) guidelines recommend
An annual wellness examination gives the veterinarian an opportu-
that FPV, FHV-1, and FCV be given 1 year following the last dose in
nity to look for disease in its early and hopefully, treatable stages. Dental
the primary series then no more frequently than every 3 years. Rabies 
disease, thyroid disease, tumors on or under the skin, and heart disease
are just a few examples of diseases that are more easily treated if diag-
ordinance.
nosed early. Consequently, this examination should be viewed seriously.
The annual visit is a practitioner's annual opportunity to be proactive for
the health of patients.
Noncore Vaccinations
As cats age into the category of a senior (1l-14 years) or geriatric
 Noncore vaccinations are administered to cats in specific risk categories.
(15 years and beyond) patient some veterinarians recommend biannual
Vaccines for feline leukemia virus (FeLV), feline immunodeficiency virus
wellness visits. Twice-a-year examinations allow for even closer moni-
(FIV), Bordetella bronchiseptica, and Chlamydophila felis are included in this
toring of patients' health. Early detection and prompt treatment of dis-
category.
l o Aenb poo e ieu os stes iapo au u sueiodui ileioadsa si asea
can be maintained for as long as possible. As cats become older addi-
tional grooming, such as regular nail trims or brushing, may be needed.
Feline Leukemia Virus Vaccine
This examination allows for an additional opportunity to educate pet
 Owners about aging changes in their cats.
It is highly recommended that all kittens receive FeLV vaccine. Ideally
the primary series should be administered at 8 and 12 weeks old.
Transdermal and injectable vaccines are available. Some products require
Vaccination Guidelines
a second dose; follow the manufacturer's recommended guidelines. A
single dose should be repeated 1 year after the last dose of the initial
There is much discussion in the veterinary community regarding what
series. Annual booster vaccines are recommended only for cats consid-
constitutes the safest and most effective vaccination program.
ered to be at risk of exposure.
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus Vaccine
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
FIV vaccine is recommended only for cats at high risk of infection. See
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Chapter 24. Cats should test FIV-antibody negative immediately prior to
18
Preventive Health Programs
TABLE 4-1: History Form
Give Us Some Important Information About Your Cat
Cat
Owner
Date
Habitat:  Indoor only
Mostly indoor
Outdoor only
Mostly outdoor
 In and out freely
Appetite:  Very good
Good
 Erratic
Picky
Poor
Very poor
Change in appetite:  Up
Down
Food(s):
Diet: Eats specific meals
Fed free choice
% table food
% treats
p0o, 6op %
Water Consumption:  Does not drink excessively
 Drinks very excessively
Amount up
Amount down
Activity level:  Very active
 Normal
Very inactive
 More active
 Less active
YESNO
口口
Do you board your cat?
口口
Does your cat go to cat shows?
口口
Lameness: Which leg(s)
Constant
 Intermittent
Duration:
口口
Behavior: Any notable change?
口口
Vomiting: If yes, how often?
What is vomited?
Is there a relationship to eating?  No
 Yes How?
口口
Diarrhea:  Occasionally
Frequently
Frequency:
If diarrhea is present: Number of bowel movements per day:
 Straining to defecate:  Yes
No
口口
Coughing:  Occasionally
Frequently
口口
Sneezing:  Occasionally
Frequently
口口
Nasal discharge:  Pus
Watery
Bloody
Duration: 
口口
Itching:  Seasonal
Year-round
 Location(s) on the cat's body:
口口
History of fight wounds: How many in the last 2 years:
口口
Has tested positive for:  Feline Leukemia Virus 
Feline AIDS Virus 
If yes, how long ago?
口口
 Fleas or ticks noted recently
口口
 On heartworm preventative?  Irregularly
Regularly
Number of months per year:
口口
 On flea preventative?  Irregularly
Regularly
Number of months per year:
Medications regularly taken:
Summary of your concerns: 
Has your address or phone number changed since last year?
New information:
Our fax number: (XXX) XXX-XXX
vaccination. The initial vaccination series is three doses administered at
 tered as early as 8 weeks old. Annual booster is recommended as long
as the exposure risk remains.
istered as early as 8 weeks old. A single dose is given 1 year following the
last dose of the initial series and then annually as long as there is a risk of
Chlamydophila Felis
exposure.
[ouos ot uexgoad e jo hed se Ajuo pasn aq pinous auiooea s!af 
disease in multicat environments where infections associated with the
disease have been confirmed. The primary series is administered in
Bordetella Bronchiseptica
two doses 3-4 weeks apart. This vaccine may be used in kittens as
Vaccination is recommended when cats are likely to be at risk of
young as 9 weeks old. If the risk of exposure continues, an annual
booster is recommended.
19
SECTION 1: Patient Management
TABLE 4-2: Early Signs of Disease
Feline
HealthCenter
Recommendations for Cat Owners
Pet ownership carries with it the responsibility of being proactive in health care. There are certain steps that you should take to prevent health problems.
We recommend the following:
examination.
2. Keep vaccinations current. A vaccination program should be individualized to meet the needs of your cat.
3. Brush frequently to keep hair coat from matting. Many cats do not groom themselves well.
4. Clip toenails as needed to prevent overgrowth. (Most cats younger than 10 years need no nail care.)
5. Keep plenty of fresh water available and monitor its consumption.
6. Monitor urine output by measuring the amount of wet litter in the litter box.
7. Keep other pets from preventing this one from free access to food and water.
8. Keep indoors all the time if possible but at least at night
 9. Eliminate parasites, including fleas, ticks, intestinal worms, and heartworms on a regular basis.
10. Weigh your cat on the same scale and record results at least every 60 days. Both weight loss and weight gain are noteworthy. Obesity is a serious
 condition that is becoming more and more common in the feline population.
12. Different life stages and health conditions often require special diets. We can help you pick a diet that is appropriate for your cat's needs.
Early Signs of Disease
The following are early signs of disease. Some of these are so minor that they may not seem significant. However, our goal is to diagnose and treat diseases
 a jo ue  uxa ue o e n sd u yn saessns a ua sas ea ia u
1. Sustained, significant increase in water consumption. (Abnormal is intake greater than 50 ml/#/day or approximately 1.5 cups (8 oz cups)/day or 12 oz
total for 9 pound cat.)
2. Sustained, significant increase in urination or amount of wet litter.
3. Weight loss.
4. Significant decrease in appetite or failure to eat for more than two consecutive days.
 5. Significant increase in appetite.
6. Repeated vomiting.
7. Diarrhea that lasts more than 3 days.
8. Difficulty in passing stool or urine or prolonged sitting or laying in the litter box.
9. Change in litter box habits, especially if urination or defecation occurs out of the litter box
10. Lammeness that lasts more than 5 days or lameness in more than one leg.
11. Noticeable decrease in vision, especially if sudden in onset or pupils that do not constrict in bright light.
12. Masses, ulcerations (open sores), or multiple scabs on the skin that persist more than 1 week.
13. Foul mouth odor or drooling that lasts more than 2 days.
14. Increasing size of the abdomen
15. Increasing inactivity or amount of time spent sleeping.
(pazile lauab oi pasoddo se) seaie pypads u! j! lo bulupie ns Ag paue duonne ji Alle padsa 'ssol lieh 9l
17. Breathing heavily or rapid at rest.
18. Inability to chew or eat dry food.
Other Vaccines
Richards J, Elston T, Ford R, et al. 2006. The 2006 American Association of
Feline Practitioners Feline Vaccine Advisory Panel Report. J Amer Veter
 There are other feline vaccines available. Due to lack of sufficient research
Med Assoc. 229(9):1405-41.
or d ata they are not generally recommended.
Suggested Readings
Hoskins JD, Eades SC, Gill MS. 2006. Preventive Health Programs. In
McCurnin DM, JM Bassert, eds., Clinical Textbook for Veterinary
Technicians, 6th ed., pp. 337-41.St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
20
CHAPTER 5
Gestation, Parturition, and Neonatal Care
Linda E. Schmeltzer
Overview
Complications during Pregnancy
The female cat (queen) reaches puberty by 4-12 months of age. Oriental
Infection, abortion, and uterine torsion are potential complications that
breeds tend to reach puberty much earlier than other breeds. Long-
may occur during pregnancy. It is important for clients to understand
haired breeds and British Shorthairs may not reach puberty until 1 year
that vaginal discharge is never normal during pregnancy Should the
of age. Queens are seasonally polyestrous, meaning they come into heat
queen become suddenly ill and painful or have vaginal discharge, imme-
(estrus) only during part of the year,typically spring.
diate veterinary examination is advised.
 Estrus lasts about 2-3 weeks. Queens are ind uced ovulators, meaning
that copulation (breeding) causes a hormone release that induces ovula-
Parturition
tion. Ovulation usually occurs 24-48 hours after copulation. A single
copulation may not be sufficient to induce ovulation; therefore, queens
 During the final week of pregnancy the queen willbegin to search for the
may require three or four breedings within a 24-hour period. Once ovu-
most suitable place to deliver her kittens. Depending on the tempera-
lation has occurred, the queen will go out of heat within a day or two. If
ment of the queen, she will choose either a dark enclosed space away
the queen is not bred, she will return to heat in 1-2 weeks. This pattern
from people and noise or seek comfort from the owner and choose a
will continue for several heat cycles or until she is bred. The period of
xoq suuanb, e idaooe m suaanb aos 'auasaid au eau uoe
time that a queen is out of heat will vary depending on geographic and
as a suitable place for delivery The box should be large enough for the
environmental factors, such as temperature and the number of daylight 
queen to move around freely but have low enough sides so that she can
hours.
see out. The bottom of the box should be lined with several layers of
newspaper or other disposable absorbent material. The upper soiled lay-
ers should be able to be removed with minimal interruption to the queen
Gestation
and her newborn kittens.
The term gestation means the period of time when the fetuses are
 The process of labor and delivery is known as parturition. The signs of
developing in the uterus. Gestation (pregnancy) ranges from 63 to 66
uaanb aui Suued pue ssausnoaiau apnpul Alleiauag 1oqel Suipuadu!
days. Increased litter size is associated with a shorter gestation
may quit eating 24 hours before labor begins. She may also have a drop
period.
in rectal temperature below 37.8°C (100°F). The temperature drop may
 The only way to accurately determine the days of pregnancy is to
count days from the time of breeding. Abdominal palpation to diagnose
be constant for the last 24 hours.
pregnancy is easiest when performed 3-4 weeks after successful breed-
Phase I of parturition is from the first observed contraction until the
ing. Embryonic sacs are visible on ultrasound by days 11 to 17; a heart-
birth of the first kitten. The average duration is 30 to 60 minutes and
beat can be visualized from 20 to 24 days onward. Radiography usually
typically takes less than 2 hours.
shows uterine enlargement about day 25 to 30. The fetal skeleton is min-
Phase Il is the time between the birth of the first and last kitten.
 eralized enough to be visible by about 36 to 35 days.
Delivery times will vary greatly Shorthair breeds and breeds having slim
heads, such as Orientals, may complete delivery in 1-2 hours. Domestic
laul aunbai Aleraua (speau punou 'sie Suraeu) spaaq adk Apoq
 Nutritional needs for Pregnancy and Lactation
delivery times. Persian and other domestic body type kittens tend to
be very large and have sizable heads that make delivery more difficult
A pregnant queen will have increased nutrient needs to maintain her
daily energy needs and support the additional energy required for fetal
(Fig. 5-1). It is not unusual for Persians to rest an hour or more between
each kitten. Rarely, a queen may deliver one or two kittens, then have
development. A 4- to 5-kg (~10 pound) queen supporting four fetuses
will require around 600 kilocalories per day, to include 41 grams of crude
labor stop for as long as 24 hours before the remainder of the litter is
nd e jo uonu ua  den lnt jo su z pue uad
born. However, if labor does not resume within a few hours after the
brand food should meet these needs. These diets are typically high in
delivery of the first kittens, examination by a veterinarian is advised. If
labor is interrupted for 24 hours or more, veterinary assistance should
calories and protein and will provide all of the vitamins and minerals a
definitely be obtained.
queen needs.
 During pregnancy, the queen's daily food consumption will often 
Most queens experience delivery without complications; however,
first-time mothers should be attended until at least one or two kittens are
reach 1.5 times her nonpregnant level. Her body weight should increase
born. If these are born quickly and without assistance, further attendance
by 40% to 50% by the end of her pregnancy. Do not withhold food;
may not be necessary, although it is desirable.
increasing the number of feedings per day is helpful in allowing her to
 Kittens are usually born head first; however, breech presentations, in
eat enough for her needs and those of the fetuses. By the end of the nurs-
ing period, daily food consumption may exceed two times the prepreg-
which the kitten is delivered tail-end first, occur about 40% of the time
and are also considered normal. Each kitten is enclosed in a sac that is
nancy amount. Weight loss during nursing is normal no matter how
much the queen eats.
part of the placenta. The placenta is usually delivered with each kitten.
However, any that do not pass will disintegrate and pass within 24 to 48
hours after delivery If the delivery proceedsnormally, afewcontractions
will discharge the kitten; it should exit the birth canal within 10 minutes
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
of being visible. Once the delivery is completed, any soiled bedding
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
should be removed with as little interruption to the queen as possible.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 The queen should accept the kittens readily and recline for nursing.
21
SECTION 1: Patient Management
Figure 5-3 Drainage from the eye of a kitten before the eyes have fully opened can
 indicate infection.
Figure 5-1 Dystocia occurs in several ways. Brachycephalic cats have proportionally larger 
oal peay, u ynsal pue euen yuq auiyonau huissed Aunp aey Aew jeu speay
Signs of problems
● No kitten is delivered after 20 minutes of intense labor.
· A kitten or a fluid-filled bubble is visible in the birth canal after
 10 minutes of intense labor.
· The mother experiences acute (sudden) depression or marked
lethargy.
● The mother's rectal temperature exceeds 39.4°C (103°F).
● Fresh blood discharges from the vagina for more than 10 minutes.
Difficulty delivering (dystocia) may be managed with or without sur-
gery. The condition of the mother, size of the litter, and size of the kittens
are factors used in making that decision.
Stillborn Kittens
It is not uncommon for one or two kittens in a litter to be stillborn.
Although there is always a cause for this occurrence, it is often not easily
determined without a necropsy that includes cultures and the submis-
sion of tissues to a pathologist. This is only recommended in special
circumstances.
Figure 5-2  Newborn kittens have difficulty maintaining normal body temperature.
 os op ot jaurow jaui ym Aeis pue jayiaot aippny Aau
Newborn Kittens
The mother will spend most of her time with the kittens during the next
few days. The kittens need to be kept warm and nurse frequently. They
The queen and her litter should be examined by a veterinarian within
should be checked every few hours to make certain they are warm and
24 hours after the delivery is completed. This visit is to check the queen
well fed. The mother should be checked to make certain she is producing
for complete delivery and to check the health of the newborn kittens. The
adequate milk
mother may need to receive an injection to contract the uterus and stimu-
late milk production.
 It is normal for the queen to have a bloody vaginal discharge for 3 to
 7 days follwing delivery. If it continues for longer than a week, she 
should be examined by a veterinarian.
Eclampsia, commonly known as milk fever, is a depletion of calcium
from the queen due to heavy milk production. It generally occurs to
Problems during Delivery
mothers with large litters, during the peak of lactation (when the kittens
are 3-5 weeks old) but may occur during parturition. Clinical signs vary
Although most queens deliver without need for assistance, problems do
-aou snseds 'ssal pioi un unsau suseds aosnu pnou Aeu inq
arise that require the attention of a veterinarian. Professional assistance
ments, and heavy panting. This can be fatal in 30 to 60 minutes, so a
should be sought if any of the following occur:
veterinarian should  be  consulted immediately.  Treatment  with
22
Gestation,Parturition,and Neonatal Care
intravenous calcium is usually successful. Heart rate should be moni-
check for infection (Fig. 5-3). A cotton ball dampened with warm water
leau mois) eipueoApeaq jl paddois pue suauea durnp Ainjareo paiol
may be used to assist opening the lids. If the swelling is due to infection,
rate) develops.
pus will drain from the opened eyelids and should be treated as pre-
scribed by a veterinarian.
Troubleshooting Newborn Kittens
Kittens should be observed for their rate of growth, especially if they
are being fed a milk replacement. Within 1 week a kitten should double
If the mother does not stay with the kittens, their temperature must be
its birth weight. At 2 weeks of age kittens should be alert and trying to
monitored. Kittens are not capable of body temperature regulation until
stand.At3 weeks theygenerallybeginexploring their environment out-
around their sixth day of life; therefore, supplemental heating should be
side their bed or box. At 4 weeks all of the kittens should be able to walk,
provided.During the first week of life, the newborns' rectal temperature
run, and play.
should be maintained between 35° and 36.1°C (95°-97°F). Providing a
Kittens should begin eating solid food about 3 to 4/ weeks of age.
warm environment between 29.4° and 32.2°C (85°-90°F) should be suf-
Initially, one of the milk replacers can be diluted 50:50 with water. This
's are og utu se ida aq ot paau pou e aieiadat a a
should be placed in a flat saucer. Once the kittens are comfortably lap-
As kittens huddle together, their body heat provides additional warmth
ping milk from the sauucer, canned kitten food should be mixed into the
(Fig. 5-2). The room temperature may grad ually be decreased to 26.7℃
milk untilit is soggy The amount of milk should be decreased daily until
(80°F) around the seventh to tenth day and to 22.2°℃ (72°F) by the end of
they are eating the canned food with little or no moisture added. This
the fourth week.
should occur by4 to 6 weeks of age.
 Kittens should eat or sleep 90% of the time during their first two weeks
of life. Crying during or after eating can be a sign they are becoming ill or
are not getting adequate milk. A newborn kitten is highly susceptible to
 Dietary Requirements of the Growing Kitten
infections. If excesive crying occurs, the queen and the entire litter
should be examined by a veterinarian promptly.
Proper nutrition is extremely important for a growing kiten. A kitten
weighing 2 to 3kg (~5 pounds) will need an average of 200 kilocalories
When the queen's milk supply is inadequate, supplemental feeding
per day. Kittens will eat small amounts as often as 12 times during the
uo pawsojuad aq pinous pue papuauuosau st Aep iad sawn aanu ot auo
day. There are many commercial foods specially formulated for kittens.
any litter with five or more kittens. There are several milk replacement
These foods meet the kiten's unique nutritional requirements and
formulas available that are made to supply the needs of kittens. Some
should be fed until 12 months of age.
should be warmed to between 35° and 37.8°℃ (95°-100°F) before feeding.
The formula temperature can be tested on one's forearm and should be
 Suggested Readings
about the same temperature as the skin. The commercial products have
directions concerning feeding amounts. If the kittens are still nursing
Colville T. 2008. The Reproductive System. In TColville, JM Bassert, eds.,
from their mother, the amounts recommended will be excessive.
Clinical Anatomy and Physiology for Veterinary Technicians, 2nd ed.,
Generally, one-third to one-half of the listed amount should be the daily
pp. 403 4. St. Louis: Mosby Inc.
goal. Supplemental feeding may be continued until the kittens are old
Hoskins JD, Bolt DM, McCurnin DM, et al. 2006. Neonatal Care of the
enough to eat kitten food.
Puppy, Kitten, and Foal. In DM McCurnin, JM Bassert, eds., Clinical
 If the mother does not produce milk or her milk becomes infected,
Textbook for Veterinary Technicians, 6th ed., Pp. 382-88.St. Louis: Elsevier
the kittens will require supplemental feeding. Adopting the kittens to
Saunders.
another nursing mother would be the most ideal. If replacement feed-
National Research Council of the National Academies. 2006. Nutrient.
ing is the only option, the amounts of milk listed on the product should
Requirerments of Dogs and Cats, Pp. 39-45; 103-104; 364, 366, 368.
be fed. Kittens less than 2 weeks of age should be fed every 3 to
Washington: The National Academies Press.
4 hours. Kittens 2-4 weeks of age usually do well with feedings every
Norsworthy GD. 2011. Dystocia. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline
6 to 8 hours. Weaning, as described, should begin around 4 weeks
Patient, 4th ed., pp. 138-39. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
of age.
 Tefend M, Berryhill SA, McCurnin DM, et al. 2006. Companion Animal
Clinical Nutrition. In DM McCurnin, JM Bassert, eds., Clinical Textbook
The First Few Weeks of Life
for Veterinary Technicians, 6th ed., Pp. 464-65. St. Louis: Elsevier
Saunders.
Kittens are born with their eyes and ears closed. Their eyes will open in
Vita-aho TK. 20l1. Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation. In GD
7to 14 days. Their ears usually open 24hours after their eyes. If swelling
Norsworthy, ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 979-81. Ames: Wiley-
0 Auag pauado aq pinous Aau spala au iapun patou si Surginq xo
Blackwell.
23
CHAPTER 6
Geriatric Care
Karen M. Lovelace
Overview
Inquire as to curent medications, including parasiticides, name of
medication, dose, frequency, and route of administration. Ask the owner
As the field of veterinary medicine advances so does the recognition that
if there have been any changes in medication or administration or any
cats need and benefit greatly from lifelong routine health care. More cats
concerns surrounding the cat's medication routine.
are being seen for routine wellness visits and preventative care every
 Ask for an appetite assessment such as "How would you characterize
6 months or less, depending on special needs. In turn, more of the cats
his or her appetite,” and regardless of coat length, ask about frequency of
presented forexamination are older cats, and many of their ownershave
vomiting, especially related to hairballs and grass.
questions about how to increase longevity and quality of life for their
 Note if the cat has had any coughing, sneezing, or breathing changes
feline companions. Veterinary teams must, therefore, become familiar
since the last visit.
with the special considerations and needs that an aged feline may
Ask about any change in social interactions with other animals or peo-
present.
ple in the home.
 In response to this growing need, the American Animal Hospital
The client should be questioned about litter box routine and frequency
Association (AAHA) and the American Association of Feline Practitioners
and character of the cat's bowel movements and urinations. Specifically
(AAFP) have developed Feline Life Stage Guidelines (AAFP and AAHA)
ask if the cat is consistently using the litter box, and if not, request infor-
and Senior Care Guidelines (AAFP). More emphasis has been placed on
 mation such as how many litter boxes are in the home, location, size, and
recognizing the needs of cats based on life stage, especially the aging cat.
height of box sides, litter substrate, and if the box is shared with any
The AAFP and AAHA guidelines classify cats ages 7-10 as mature, 11-14
other cats. When probing for polyuria, ask if there has been an increase
as senior, and 15 years and older as geriatric. This chapter will highlight
in wet litter in the litter box.
the considerations that deserve unique attention in these older feline
 Ask about water intake and availability and if any change in thirst has
[isaud penuue-nuas ot piesau un dnoa sieat au Aeioadsa 'sdnotg
been noted.
examination, aging changes, routine diagnostic/laboratory needs, and
 Ask questions about the availability of other resources such as scratch-
specific nutritional considerations.
ing posts, toys, beds, hiding places, and perches or "look out" areas 
(i.e. vertical surfaces).
 Inquire as to any changes noted in vocalization or sleeping patterns or
Semi-Annual wellness Examination
changes in the cat's behavior from day as opposed to night.
, dxa o  aaa ae susn p-ua
Examination findings of an older cat, when compared to examination of
changes have you noticed?", "What concerns do you have?", "What
a younger cat, will likely center more on weight and body condition
changes, dental disease, behavior related to cognitive or physical
else?", and "How is that going?" are more productive than "yes" or "no"
questions or questions that lead the client or result in limited choices as
tension, renal disease, neoplasia, endocrinopathy, pain, and quality of
answers. You may also want to use the history-taking session as an
ife assessment. General knowledge of approximate age and the special
opportunity to open a dialogue about specific areas previously noted in
considerations pertinent to older feline life stages should be supple-
the medical record, such as grooming or at-home dental care. Using this
mented with a thorough history that includes age-directed questions. In
time to converse with clients also gives the cat a chance to acclimate to
addition to developing clues about a cat's health and quality of life that
the examination room setting and may reduce the overall stress of the
may otherwise be missed on a routine diagnostic screen or even the
veterinary visit.
examination itself, this will help guide the veterinary team in making
appropriate recommendations to clients about older feline patients.
Physical Examination
If the client brought the cat in for a specific concern, questions may be
posed related to this topic first, but a thorough history should still
When history taking is completed, the cat should be weighed and its
include questions relating to the whole cat and its environment, and ide-
temperature, pulse, and respiratory rate recorded. This is a good time
ally, should not be limited to questions surrounding the presenting com-
to conduct a visual examination of the cat and make any notes that
plaint alone.
might be appropriate as to overall body condition, coat quality, vision,
hearing gait, ease of movement, and attitude. It is also a good time to
review visual aids with the client such as body condition score charts
History Taking for Older Cats
or computer-generated graphs showing trends or changes in weight
(Fig. 6-1).
History for a wellness examination may start by inquiring about specific
 If time permits and the cat is cooperative, veterinary technicians are
dietary habits including brand, whether food offered is wet and/or dry,
frequency and location of feeding, portions, number of animals in the
examination and report these findings to the veterinarian. Involvement 
home, whether animals are fed in groups or individually, any treats,
nutraceuticals, herbal remedies, and/or supplements, any changes or
of multiple tiers of the veterinary team may allow the client to express a
specific concern not already addressed during the history-taking session
concerns regarding eating behavior, and the cat's preferences or
and build trust in the veterinary team. Although the veterinary techni-
aversions.
cian should not make a diagnosis, sharing observations (such as showing
a client dental calculus [tartar] prior to the veterinarian's examination)
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
will likely help increase client compliance with the veterinarian's recom-
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
mendations. Preliminary examination may also help to catch problems
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
the veterinarian or client may overlook.
24
Geriatric Care
Nestle PURINA
BODY CONDITION
SYSTEM
Ribsvisible on shorthaired cats;no palpable fat;
severe abdominal tuck;lumbarvertebrae and wings
ofilia easilypalpaled.
N
Ribs easilyvisibleon shorthaired cats;lumbarvertebrae
tuck;no palpable fat.
vertebraeo
abdominal fat.
Ribs palpablewithminimal fat covering:noticeable
waistbehindribs;slight abdominal tuck;abdominal
fat pad absent.
Well-proportioned;observewaistbehindribs;ribspalpable
with slight fat covering;abdominal fat padminimal.
Ribs palpablewith slightexcessftcovering;waist and
abdominal fatpaddistinguishable butnotobvious;
abdominal tuck absent.
Ribs noteasilypalpatedwithmoderate fatcovering;
AI
waist poorly discernible;obviousrounding of abdomen
E
moderate abdominal fat pad.
工
obvious rounding of abdomen with prominent abdominal
fat pad;fat deposits present over lumbar area.
Ribs not palpable under heavy fat cover,heavy fal
depositsover lumbar area,face and limbs;distentionof
abdomen with no waisl;extensive obdominal fat deposits.
Call1-800-222-VETS(8387),weekdays,8:00a.m.to4:30p.m.CT
NestlePURINA
Figure 6-1 Use of the Purina Body Condition Scoring Chart should be part of the physical examination of all cats and especially older cats. The cat's conformation is judged on a
1- to 9-scale with 5 being ideal.
Used courtesy of Nestle Purina Company, 5t. Louis.
The next step is the physical examination itself. The veterinarian
● The ears are checked; the otoscope should be used to visualize the
should assess each body system and should share with the client his or
eardrums and check for debris. A rough assessment of hearing can be
her findings verbally and by pointing out specific findings as they are
made by clapping your hands behind the cat's head, where it cannot 
discovered. The veterinarian should examine the cat in a systematic and
see, and checking for response, such as movement of the pinnae.
repeatable fashion, such as from head to tail.
'paou si asou au wog aeusip Aue so yearq pue Aemi
· The lips, teeth, and oral cavity are checked including the back of the
throat and under the tongue. Examination under the tongue is most
easily achieved by gently pressing a thumb or forefinger in an upward
Specifics of the Physical Examination
direction between the mandible (Fig. 6-2). This can be an important
· Quality of hair coat and skin is noted.
location to look for masses or foreign objects, such as string.
·The head and face are noted for symmetry.
· Any abnormalities in the breath or gingiva and the presence of dental
· The eyes and vision are assessed, including fundic examination
 tartar are specifically noted.
(examination of the retinas) with an ophthalmoscope.
● Lymph nodes at the base of the jaw (mandibular lymph nodes) are
 palpated, and then both sides of the neck are gently palpated to check 
ets) to check for masses behind the eyes.
for any thyroid gland enlargement.
25
SECTION 1: Patient Management
Figure 6-2 A mass is seen ventral to the tongue by pressing upward with a finger
between the mandible.
Photo courtesy Dr Gary D. Norsworthy.
Figure 6-4  Iris atrophy results in discoloration ofthe iris as seen in this 16-year-old cat.
Photo courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
Figure 6-3  Geriatric cats often have overgrown and thickened nails They often grow
into the pads.
Photo courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
Figure 6-5 Nuclear sclerosis is not the same as a cataract, but it results in lenticular
doudiness and reduces vision.
● A stethoscope is used to assess heart rate and rhythm and to listen for
Photo courtesy Dr Gary D. Norsworthy.
 murmurs and lung sounds. The cat's pulse (usually of femoral artery)
 may be palpated during cardiac auscultation to assess for synchronic-
ity or pulse deficits.
 Any significant findings should be reported to the client and a discus-
●The abdomen is palpated.Size,symmetry, and shape are noted for the
sion opened about diagnostic and therapeutic recommendations. Use the
liver, kidneys, stomach, spleen (if enlarged), and urinary bladder, and
findings developed through the history,examination, and any diagnostic
for any thickening of the small and large bowel or mesenteric lymph
results to educate clients about the unique needs of their older feline
nodes. A stethoscope may be used to assess motility via gut sounds,
called borborygmi.
patients and to tailor diagnostic and therapeutic advice, including die-
tary recommendations.
· Response to palpation including any perceived pain is noted.
●Joints are assessed for thickening, crepitus, pain, and range of motion.
· The mammary glands should be palpated in female cats to detect 
Aging Changes
masses.
●The veterinarian may also do a final once over with the hands by pet-
ueuny ui sueaA gt ot dn ase Aipiden Aeu eo e ayl yo xeak suy au laaO
ting the cat's entire body to check for symmetry or any lumps or areas
terms, but then maturation slows to approximately 3 to 5 cat years for
of pain.
each calendar year thereafter. At age 15, a geriatric cat is comparable to
26
Geriatric Care
Photo courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
Figure 6-8  Oosification (calcification} of the rib cartilages is seen on this radiograph.lt 
 signifies aging, but it causes no functional problems.
 Photo courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
Figure 6-7 Osteoarthritis, as seen in these elbows, also commonly affects the shoul-
older cats may result in more treatment options, better prognosis, and
 ders, hips, and knees of geriatric cats.
improvement in quality of life.
Photo courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
a 60- to 88-year-old human, and at age 21 it is comparable to a person that
 As cats mature, the incidence of specific diseases increases and cats may
is 78-118 years old. At these advanced ages, some predictable physical
develop concurrent diseases that are not uncommonly chronic or com-
 plex in nature. Therefore, diagnostic screening is more important in older
Physically, skin elasticity decreases, nails may become thickened and
cats. Most notably, there is an increased incidence in hypertension, renal
overgrown (Fig. 6-3) or brittle; eyes may show iris atrophy (Fig. 6-4) or
disease, and hyperthyroidism,but an increase in neoplasia, other end
pigment changes; and lenses may become cloudy (lenticular sclerosis,
crine disease, weight loss/decreased body condition score, dental dis-
not to be confused with cataracts [Fig. 6-5]). The hair coat may show loss
of pigment (grey hair also known as achromotrichia or leukotrichia
[Fig. 6-6]);joints may degenerate (osteoarthritis [Fig. 6-7]); ribs may min-
physical examination and a "senior panel" including blood pressure
eralize (Fig. 6-8); and sensory perception, such as hearing and olfaction,
measurement, complete blood count, chemistry panel, thyroid level, and
may decrease. These are some of the more predictable findings one can
urinalysis with or without culture are recommended at 6-month
expect in an older cat, but every animal ages at a slightly different rate
intervals.
based on metabolism, genetics, and environment. Therefore, an examina-
 This minimum data base is recommended every 6 months as early as
tion and diagnostic screen every 6 months is particularly important in
shes sof sueodu Aened st l iq (se t-) aes al ae au
older cats that are aging at an accelerated rate compared to their younger
in the senior and geriatric life stages (i.e. older than age 10). Total T4
counterparts. Old age is not a disease, but early detection of changes in
should be used as a minimum parameter to screen the thyroid, but often 
27
SECTION 1: Patient Management
additional thyroid screening, such as free T4, may be indicated. Renal
cats with specific renal, hyperthyroid, hypertensive, or cardiac condi-
function and degeneration should be carefully monitored using a com
fions, renal specific diets, which are reduced in phosphorus, salt, and
plete blood count to evaluate hematocrit; chemistry panel to monitor
carefully balanced in protein, are indicated to increase survival times and
creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, phosphorus, calcium, and potassium;
result in better control of disease and quality of life. Calculation of daily
and urinalysis to assess urine specific gravity and urine protein. The
energy requirements should also take into consideration age as it per-
tains to activity and lifestyle. Daily energy requirement (DER) is calcu-
tein measurements are often inaccurate. A UPC more than 0.4 warrants
lated using this formula: DER = Kg × 30 + 70 times a factor for life stage,
further testing. Urine culture is indicated if there is active urine sedi-
disease, or activity level, which would be less than one for desired weight 
ment, concurrent renal or thyroid disease, hypertension, or diabetes mel-
loss and greater than one for conditions that necessitate increasing
energy demands such as neoplasia.
 These screening aids can help to detect otherwise occult (hidden) disease
at an early, more treatable stage in a clinically normal aging cat.
Conclusion
Hypertension and urinary tract infection are common comorbid occult
diseasesin cats with renal disease, thyroid disease, and diabetes mellitus;
Although age itselfis not a disease,the aging process does induce com-
therefore, blood pressure measurement and urine culture are indicated
plex and interrelated metabolic changes that complicate health care.
in each of these cases.
Management decisions should not be based solely on the age of the
 Every attempt to keep cats comfortable and decrease stress should be
 patient because many conditions that affect older cats can be controlled
made when blood pressure is measured. The cat should be placed on a
if not cured. With the help of veterinary technicians, veterinarians treat-
soft, warm surface, such as a towel, in a quiet, dimly lit room away from
ing senior cats should be adept at recognizing, managing, and monitor-
loud noises and barking dogs, ideally with the owner present. It is advis-
ing chronic disease, and when possible, preventing disease progression
able to allow the cat to acclimate to the new surroundings for up to
while ensuring a good quality of life. With prevention, early detection,
10 minutes with the owner present to help reduce anxiety associated
and treatment of health care problems, the human-animal-veterinarian
with a new environment. In a clinical setting, a consultation room or a
bond is strengthened and the quality of life for cats improved.
room situated away from the hospital treatment area or lobby may be
As cats live longer and more cats receive more frequent veterinary
best suited for this purpose. Undue anxiety can lead to false elevations in
routine blood pressure measurements. An average of three, but no more
care, increased attention must be paid by the entire veterinary staff to the
than five, measurements should be taken. Beyond this many readings,
special needs of older felines, especially regarding routine semi-annual
physical examination, aging changes, routine diagnostic/laboratory
au xamo Aiase pue aneg ot uaq Ae Aeno asind ao iassa aul
needs, and specific nutritional considerations. Both veterinarians and
measured readings. Data collected from serum creatinine concentration,
veterinary team members alike must be trained in recognizing age-spe-
UPC ratio, and blood pressure measurements are further used to stage
feline renal status to aid in the management of chronic kidney disease as
cific changes to facilitate preventative health care, improved quality of
life, and a better relationship between the veterinary practice, feline
based on the International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) guidelines. When
 patients, and their owners. This increased emphasis and training will
examination and age-directed considerationshave yielded appropriately
indicated diagnostic results, these compiled findings can be used to
of seeing more and older cats and willfacilitate the veterinary team and
make the best dietary recommendations for specific older felines.
clients alike in addressing health problems that an aging feline popula-
tion may face and enabling cats to lead happier, healthier lives.
Special Nutritional Considerations
Suggested Readings
Nutritional recommendations for the aged feline should be based on
physical examination and diagnostic screen findings, as well as history,
Bond BR. 2005. Fine Tuning the History and Physical Examination:
number of cats in the household, and any concurrent disease or painful
Correlations with Miscellaneous Techniques. Clin Tech Small Anim
condition. Every physical examination should involve the owner in
Pract. 20(3):203-10. New York: Animal Medical Center Publishing Co.
Boyd LM, Langston C, Thompson K, et al. 2008. Survival in Cats with
have reduced body condition scores owing to decreased digestive
Naturally Occurring Chronic Kidney Disease. J Vet Intern Med.
absorption of B-vitamins (most notably cobalamin, or B) and fat,
22(5): 1111-17.
whether due to normal aging or to concurrent metabolic or inflammatory
Lovelace KM. 2010. Age Approximation. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
diseases; therefore, a highly digestible diet is recommended. In some
Feline Patient, 4th ed.,pp. 933-36. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
instances, such as progressive weight loss, cobalamin levels and survey
Norsworthy GD. 2010. Jugular Blood Collection. In GD Norsworthy, ed.,
diagnostic imaging will be indicated. Smaller but more frequent meals
The Feline Patient, 4th ed., Pp. 902-903. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
with an ample fresh water supply are vital to keeping older cats hydrated
Vogt AH, Rodan I, Brown M, et al. 2010. AAFP-AAHA: Feline Life Stage
and aiding in assimilating nutrition.Because some wet foods are signifi-
Guidelines. I Fel Med Surg. 12(1):43-54. Philadelphia: Elsevier, www.
catvets.com.
and more water, lower carbohydrate wet food is generally recom-
Vogt AH, Rodan I, Brown M, et al. 2010. AAFP-AAHA: Feline Life Stage
mended. For cats that are obese or diabetic, wet foods are also recom-
Guidelines. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 46(1): 70-85. Philadelphia: Elsevier,
mended due to decreased caloric levels as related to carbohydrates. For
www.aahanet.org.
28
SECTION
2
Diagnostics
CHAPTER 7
 the Feline Patient
JudithHudson and MerrileeHolland
Overview
the cathode. More electrons strike the anode prod ucing more x-rays.
Increasing mA increases exposure or the number of x-rays.
Radiography has a multifaceted role in patient management. It is one of
If the distance between the patient and the x-ray tube is changed,
many possible diagnostic aids, sometimes permitting precise diagnosis,
exposure to the patient will be altered according to the inverse square
but more commonly, it aids expansion or red uction of a list of diagnoses.
law. For example, halving the distance causes exposure to increase four
It can also enable better evaluation of the course of a disease whether or
times. Because mA can be considered as affecting the number of x-rays,
not therapy has been administered. Even when ultrasonography is avail-
mA can be changed to compensate for a change in distance. In the exam-
able, abdominal radiography can help provide a complete picture of the
ple in which the distance is halved, it might be desirable to keep the
abdomen to prevent abnormalities from being missed. Gas can obscure
blackness of the film unchanged. Because halving the distance causes the
visualization of abdominal organs by ultrasound.
effective exposure to be increased four times, mA can be decreased to
one-fourth of the original value to maintain the film density.
Doubling or halving mA is roughly equivalent to increasing or
Radiation Safety
decreasing kVp by approximately 15%. It should be noted, however, that
X-rays are a form of ionizing radiation. Film badges should be used to
a minimum kVp is necessary to penetrate the abdomen. If the kVp used
 monitor radiation exposure to personnel to reduce exposure toalevel that
is too low to penetrate the abdomen, increasing mA will not result in a
is "as low as reasonably achievable" (ALARA principle). Pregnant radia-
diagnostic film.
[e peu os um un sadns u u ps sim uo
 precautions can be taken to avoid radiation or keep it at a legal level.
 Technique Chart
 In some instances, the patient can be sedated or anesthetized so that
positioning can be achieved using tape, gauze, Velcro straps, or sand-
A technique chart for each body part should be used for consistency in
bags. If the patient must be physically restrained by hospital personnel,
determining the correct mA and kVp to use for different thicknesses
people holding the cat should wear protective clothing that minimally
(Table 7-1). An individual technique chart must be developed for each
includes lead gloves, lead-lined aprons, and a thyroid collar. Protective
machine and film/screen system.Grid factor depends on the grid being
eye glasses are also available. Remember that primary radiation can pen-
uised.
etrate through the lead protective clothing. Hands should never be in the
 In creating a fixed mA/variable kVp chart, choose a high mA so that
 primary beam even when gloves are worn.
time can be reduced. An initial kVp is chosen using the following rela-
 The inverse square law states that the amount of radiation exposure is
tionship (based on Sante's rule):
inversely related to the square of the distance to the source of radiation.
kVp =(2 × tissue thickness) + focus film distance + grid factor
 New Exposure /Old Exposure = Old Distance2/New Distance2
More simply, this means that if you double the distance between you and
the x-ray tube, you reduce your exposure to one-fourth of the original
exposure. If you are holdinga patient,extending your arms and stepping
TABLE 7-1: Example of a portion of a fixed milliamperage/variable kilovolt-
back away from the table will also reduce your level of exposure.
age technique chart. A technique chart should be set up for each x-ray machine.
Collimators are present on the tube assembly to restrict the primary
What works for one machine is not likely to work for another. Using this chart
beam to the area of the patient to be radiographed. Correct collimation
 for a 12-cm abdomen, one would select 250mA, 20 milliseconds, and 64kvp.
can help reduce the radiation field protecting the radiographer as well as
the patient from unnecessary radiation.
TECHNIQUE CHART FOR GRID
SELECT LARGE FOCAL SPOT AND BUCKY
Technical Factors
THORAX 250 mA TIME 1/120 seconds
 The main technical factors include kilovoltage (kVp), milliamperage
CM
10
11
12
13
14
14
15
16
suaq seu-x suonpond jo ssaoud aul (p) aueisip pue (s) aun (yu)
when electrons are "boiled" off the cathode of the x-ray tube and acceler-
KV
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
ated toward the anode. X-rays are emitted when the electrons interact
with the anode. kVp can be considered as controlling the quality of the
ABDOMEN 250 mA TIME 1/60 seconds 
X-ray beam. Increasing the kVp increases the speed of the electrons strik-
CM
10
11
12
13
14
14
15
16
ing the anode so that the resulting x-rays are more energetic and thus,
have more ability to penetrate. Reducing kVp increases the contrast of a
KV
58
60
62
64
66
89
70
72
74
film (fewer shades of gray). mA and time are considered together;
increasing the mA or time results in the emission of more electrons from
 PELVIS/HUMERUS/SHOULDER/FEMUR/STIFLE 300 mA TIME 1/30 seConds 
CM
9
10
11
12
13
14
14
15
16
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
KV
52
54
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
kyp, kilovoltage; ma, miliamperage.
31
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
The focus film distance is normally set at 40 inches. The grid factor
(a)
varies with the type of grid that is being used. A grid is unnecessary if the
body part measures less than 9-1l cm.
For each body part, the chosen mA and calculated kVp are used to
expose an initial film of an average-sized cat. If the film is too black,
reduce kVp by increments of 15% until the exposed film is optimal. If the
flm is too light, increase kVp by increments of 15% until the goal is met.
The chart can now be created by starting with the exposure factors for
the initial film. The mA will be fixed at the value you selected. Write the
thickness of the cat and the optimal kVp on the chart. Values of kVp for
1-cm increase (or decrease) in thickness. Above S0kVp, the amount to
increase or decrease should be changed to 3kVp. More than 100kVp,
4kVp should be used.
 Digital Radiography
 For digital radiographs, incorrect exposure does not result in the image
Jeadde ot aoew ue sasneo ainsodxaiapu 'lua oot ro yoenq oot suiaa
too noisy or too grainy. A certain amount of graininessis acceptable and
(b)
exposure should not be increased simply toeliminate noise. Overexposure
 can cause some parts of the image to be lost.
Examining the Radiograph
A lateral radiograph should be placed on the view box or viewing screen
with the head of the patient on the left side of the view box or screen. A
ventrodorsal radiograph is positioned so that the right side of the patient
is on the viewer's left. This tradition is borowed from radiography of
humans; the radiologist views the film as though he or she was about to
shake hands with the patient.
The quality of a radiograph should be assessed by evaluating posi-
tioning (below) and technical factors and by checking for the presence of
any artifacts (Fig. 7-1). If mA, kVp, or time is too low, the film will be
underexposed appearing too light (Fig. 7-2). If kVp is too low, the body
-ns o siapiq pue paeuadapun aq lm paudepe uaq led
tures will not be visible. If mA, kVp, or time is too high, the film will be
overexposed, appearing excessively black.
Distance should also be checked. If distance was too short, the exposure could be cor-
rected by increasing the distance. (b) The film shown is underexposed, requiring an 
Aa paaao ag pinoo ainsodxa aui'iean ooi sem aueisip l day jo yu ui aseau
decreasing the distance. Note that if kvp is insufficient to penetrate the patient, increas-
ing mA will not correct the problem.
Film processing can also affect the quality of the film. Underde-
velopment can occur if chemicals are weak, their temperature is too low,
or the film is left in the developer for too short a time. Overdevelopment
occurs if chemicals are too strong, the temperature of development is too
high, or if the film is left in the developer too long. An underdeveloped
flm will appear "washed out" and will appear too light. An overdevel-
oped film will be too black. Examination of the film label can help deter-
a film to be too light or too dark. If the blackness of the film label is
correct, the problem is due to the exposure of the film and not the pro-
cessing. If both the image on the radiograph and the film label are 
affected, the problem is due to development.
 The film should be examined for any artifacts, particularly those
that can interfere with interpretation of the film. If visible artifacts are
likely to affect the interpretation of the film, radiography should be
repeated. Common artifacts include static electricity and those caused
Figure 7-1 Static electricity can produce tree-like designs on your radiograph that are
by foreign material in the cassette or on the table or positioning
interesting but can hide diagnostic information.
sponges.
32
Diagnostic Imaging of the Feline Patient
Thorax
(a)
Radiography
The typical radiographic examination of the thorax includes lateral, ventro-
dorsal (VD), or dorsoventral (DV) views taken at maximum inspiration. In
views and a VD or DV view can be beneficial for complete evaluation of the
thorax. In less cooperative patients, a DV view of the thorax may be impos-
sible. A VD view using a positioning foam trough or v-shaped pad may
provide some assistance with keeping the patient in position. The most
common technical errors are as a result of position and motion artifacts.
 Special considerations prior to taking thoracic radiographs are high-
lighted here.
Respiratory Status
 The most important consideration before taking thoracic radiographs is to
determine whether the patient's respiratory effort is normal (Fig. 7-3) or
abnormal. Obese patients may require an increase in technique because of
their size (Fig. 74).Ifthe patientshows increased respiratory efforteither
-ord ueaq ynu uado io ueaq epqe en pasaun aq
(b)
eds dend a u paadsns i p  upad aaq uax a
(Fig. 7-5), the radiographic technique should be increased by 5-10kVp.
When fluid is suspected, a DV view of the thorax can be obtained with
minimal restraint. Remember the position of the head will determine the
position of the thorax. The trick is to gently encourage the patient to face
forward; the body will remain in a more symmetrical position for radio-
graphic interpretation. This can be accomplished by placing your gloved 
hands outside of the front legs without pulling them forward. After evalu-
ation of this image, a lateral view can be obtained when only minimal
compression of the lungs is present from the pleural fluid. A similar
approach should be done in patients with suspected heart failure (Fig. 7-6)
or severe lung disease (Fig. 7-7) a DVimage should be obtained prior to
the lateral. Now the fluid will be within the lung parenchyma and the
 radiographic techniques may need to be increased by 5-10kVp.
Positioning
The lateral view is best obtained by pulling the front legs forward with
the center beam along the caudal border of the scapula. For the VD view,
center the beam along the caudal border of the scapula with the front
limbs pulled cranially. For the DV view, the center of the beam should be
caudal to the scapula. The DV view is usually preferable to the VD view
when respiratory compromise is significant.
Assessment
The front limbs should be extended forward and the radiograph should
include from the caudal cervical spine /thoracic inlet to the cranial abdomen.
Extra Views
Horizontal beam views can only be done when the tube housing can
be rotated horizontal to the patient. Indications for these views include
distinguishing between "walled off" fluid and soft-tissue masses.
Ultrasound
After obtaining thoracic radiographs, ultrasonography can assist with
  q   ss   
(whiter). Pleural effusion (Fig. 7-8) or mediastinal cyst (Fig. 7-9) can be 
distinguished from a mediastinal mass (Fig. 7-10) or pleural mass
(Fig. 7-1l) within the thorax by use of ultrasound. Ultrasound can assist
with localization and aspiration of fluid pockets, pleural or mediastinal
Figure 7-3  (a) Lateral and (b) ventrodorsal radiographs of a normal thorax.
33
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Figure 7-4  (a)} Lateral and (b) ventrodorsal radiographs of a normal overweight feline
Figure 7-5  (a) Lateral and (b} dorsoventral radiographs of a patient with pleural effusion.
patient.
34
Diagnostic Imaging of the FelinePatient
(a)
a
(b)
(b)
R
Figure 7-6  (a) Lateral and (b) ventrodorsal radiographs of a patient with pulmonary
edema due to a congenital ventricular septal defect.
Figure 7-7 (a) Lateral and (b) dorsoventral radiographs of a patient with pleural
effusion and lung dise ase.
35
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
(a)
LTCR MED
Pleural
effusion
Figure 7-8  Anechoic (black) fluid is seen within the pleural space in a patient with
suspected feline infectious peritonitis.
(a)
(b)
FLUIDI
HEART
Mediastinal
mass
2.25cm
Hgure 7-10 (a) Normal cranial mediastinum surrounded by pleural efusion. (b) A
mixed echogenic massis seen cranial tothe heart. Lymphosarcoma was the final diagnosis.
(b)
Jiaphragn
Pleural
mass
Figure 7-9  (a) A large anechoic fluid pocket adjacent to the heart is consistent with a
Figure 7-11  An echogenic mass surrounded by fluid is seen extending from the body
mediastinal cyst. (b) A mediastinal cyst with a needle (arrows) in place for aspiration.
wall to the diaphragm. The final diagnosis was a neoplastic process.
36
Diagnostic Imaging of the Feline Patient
(a)
R/LVent
All Points
RVD(D)
0.5cm
IVS(D)
0.5cm
LVD(D)
1.6cm
LVPW(D)
IVS(S)
0.4cm
0.7cm
LVD(S)
EF
86%
FS
56%
LV Mass
10g
%FS
Figure 7-12  A lung mass was identified on thoracic radiographs. Ultrasound can be
used to aspirate abnormal lung masses when they are adjacent to the body wall and not
surrounded by normal lung. This mixed echogenic mass within the lung was aspirated
'ewoupenouape ue sem sisoubeip jeu aul pue
(b)
P
Liver
Heart
Figure 7-13  A large portion of the liver was found within the pericardial sac adjacent to
the heart. A pericardioperitoneal hernia, a congenital malformation, was the final diagnosis.
(C)
neal (Fig. 7-13) hernias can be diagnosed by use of ultrasound imaging.
Echocardiograms are more technically difficult to perform in feline
 patients than in canine patients and are beyond the scope of this text to
completely describe. It is best to perform an echocardiogram without
aaeun uaai suiaq o pateapauap pou s suaed au uaum pue uoepas
nous fluids because all of these will alter the cardiac measurements.
A normal echocardiogram will typically have the measurements of the
interventricular septum and left ventricular free wall less than 6mm in
diastole, and the fractional shortening between 45% and 55%. The diam-
eter of a normal left atrium is less than 1.5cm (Fig. 7-14). It is helpful to
perform echocardiography in a quiet room with dimmed lighting. Most
patients will tolerate these examinations without sedation if the majority
of the examination is done while they are in a sternal position. A cardiac
table with a cut out will facilitate the probe positioning while the patient
Figure 7-14  (a) M-mode of the right and left ventricle from a right parasternal short-
probe will need to be closer to the sternum to avoid lung interference.
axis view shows normal wall thickness of the interventricular septum and left ventricular
Avoid tunnel vision. The structures surrounding the heart are as impor-
free wall. (b) The M-mode of the mitral valve from a right parasternal long-axis view is
tant to assess as the actual echocardiogram. An abnormal echocardio-
within normal limits usually less than 2 mm. (c) Measurement of the two-dimensional
gram along with fluid accumulation in the pleural space or pericardium
image of the aorta and left atrium from a right parasternal short-axis view shows the left
can indicate a more advanced stage of heart disease (Fig. 7-15). Increased 
 atrial size less than 1.5 cm.
37
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
2.93cm
Figure 7-15  (a) A two-dimensional image of the heart in a right parasternal short-axis
vew shows fluid within the pericardial and pleural space. (b) M-mode tracing shows a thick-
ened interventricular septum and let ventricular fre wall consistent with cardiomyopathy.
view shows increased lung interference surrounding the heart. (b}A two-dimensional image
of the heart base shows an enlarged left atrium 2.06 cm with increased lung interference.
lung interference during the echocardiogram can be seen with pulmo-
 For the VD projection, the cat should be positioned on its back with
 nary edema and is another sign of cardiac failure (Fig. 7-16).
the hindlegs extended and the front legs held adjacent to the head. The 
sternum should be superimposed over the spine in the resulting radio-
Abdomen
graph.
 If dorsal recumbency is resisted, the patient can be placed in sternal
Radiography
 recumbency (DV view) with the hind limbs in a frog leg position. The
forelegs are positioned alongside the head securing both the limbs and
Preparation
the head.
 For the lateral view, the cat is rotated slightly so that the ventral midline 
 The abdomen should be properly prepared by having the patient fast
is at a level even with the spine. The hindlegs are slightly extended to
and administering an enema to avoid superimposition of fecaloid mate-
 prevent the cat from curling up causing compression of abdominal organs.
rial over abdominal organs. Adequate chemical or physical restraint
should be available to prevent patient movement from causing blurring
of the radiographs. A grid should be used if abdominal thickness exceeds
Assessment
9-11 cm. Although the phase of respiration is less critical than for thoracic
radiography, exposure is best made at the expiratory pause to lessen the
A well-positioned lateral radiograph (Fig. 7-17a) should show superim-
influence of respiratory movement.
position of the lateral processes of the spine. The abdomen should be
straight so that abdominal organs are not compressed.
Positioning
A well-positioned VD or DV radiograph (Fig. 7-17b) should be sym-
 metrical with the spine being centered in the middle of the radiograph
 At least two projections (VD or DV and lateral) should be obtained. In
and the spinous processes centered in the vertebrae
 Positioning is less critical for the abdomen than for the thorax particu-
helpful. The diaphragm and pelvic inlet should always be included.
larly if the cat is uncooperative and cannot be sedated.
38
DiagnosticImagingoftheFelinePatient
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
St
LK
RK
RK
Sp
DC
一
Figure 7-17 (a) Lateral radiograph of the abdomen of a normal thin cat. The smallopacity superimposed over the cranial pole of the right kidney is the spleen (Sp). B, urinary bladder:
C, colon; L, liver; LK, left kidney; RK, right kidney: St, stomach. (b) Ventrodorsal radiograph. The white arrows indicate the margins of the spleen. The black arrowheads indicate the
cranial and caudal margins of the right kidney. DC, descending colon. (c) Lateral radiograph of the abdomen of this less cooperative normal fat cat. The falciform fat (F) separates the 
leo siui u ypewois ing aui uaamiaq aouaiap ayi ajn sieo iel u uawope aui po aippiu ayi u! paupung, jeadde sausau aul liem leujwopge jeuan auf won ypewois pue ianll
 and the cat pictured in Figures 7-17A and 7-17B. (d) Ventrodorsal radiograph.
39
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
The stomach is seen caudal to the liver and may contain fluid or gas. It
o pae uaq snd a ym ualoid  au ui adeus-f see
or just to the right of the midline. The diameter of the normal small
intestine is normally less than 12 mm from serosa to serosa or two times
the height of the middle of the body of the fourth lumbar vertebra.
 The ovaries and uterus are not seen in the nonpregnant cat. The uri-
nary bladder will be seen in the caudoventral abdomen. Cats have a
longer bladder neck than dogs, causing the bladder to be located more
cranially.
Contrast Procedures
Contrast Media
Negative contrast media are black (radiolucent) and include air or car-
bon dioxide (Table 7-2).
 Positive contrast media are white (radiopaque) and include barium,
ionic organic iodinated contrast, and nonionic organic iodinated con-
Figure 7-18  A ventrodorsal radiograph was obtained of a cat in right lateral recum-
organic iodinated contrast media for oral and intravenous use; the label
bency using a horizontal beam. Air can be seen outside the gastrointestinal track. Left
should be checked to determine the correct use. Because nonionic iodi-
lateral recumbencyis preferred to avoid confusing normal gas in the fundus with free gas
nated contrast media are safer and cause fewer side effects than ionic
in the peritoneal cavity. F, gas-filled fundus; S, spleen.
iodinated contrast media, nonionic products should be used in cats. Ionic
products are becoming less available (see Table 7-2).
 Double-contrast procedures can be done, which include both positive
and negative contrast procedures. Survey radiographs should always be
obtained immediately prior to administration of contrast to obtain a
Extra Views
baseline for comparison with contrast radiographs and to check that the
Horizontal beam radiography (Fig. 7-18) can be performed to check
technique is correct. In some cases, the diagnosis can be made without
for small amounts of extraluminal gas that could indicate perforation
the necessity for contrast radiography.
of bowel or the presence of gas forming organisms. The patient is
to rise to the nondependent side of the body. Left lateral recumbency
Celiography (Peritoneography)
is preferred so that the gas-filled fundus is dependent. It is important
to recognize that gas could also be present for several weeks follow-
contents (Fig. 7-19).
ing abdominal surgery.
 Sterile iodinated contrast medium is injected into the peritoneal cavity
at a dosage of 350-400 milligrams of iodine per kilogram. A nonionic
iodinated product manufactured for intravenous use can be used.
The injection is made at the level of the umbilicus lateral to the midline 
Normal
with the patient in dorsal recumbency. In a normal celiogram, contrast
The normal liver (see Fig. 7-17) has smooth margins with sharp cau-
doventral edges. Falciform fat displaces the liver away from the ventral
abdominal wall in the lateral projection. The gall bladder is fluid-opaque 
Upper Gastrointestinal Series("Barium Series")
and cannot be distinguished from the liver.
The spleen is a small opacity cranial to the kidneys in the lateral
Liquid barium sulfate (30% weight/volume of micropulverized barium
view. The tail or distal extremity of the spleen is not usually seen ven-
suspension) is most commonly used (Fig. 7-20). Nonionic iodinated con-
trally as it is in dogs. In the VD view, the head or proximal extremity
trast should be used if gastrointestinal perforation is suspected.
Except in emergency situations, the abdomen should be thoroughly
and left kidney. The tail of the spleen may extend caudally along the
prepared. The patient should be fasted for 12-24 hours and laxatives
left body wall.
should be administered. Enemas should be given at least 1-2 hours prior
The kidneys are usually superimposed over each other in the lateral
so the colon is as empty as possible. Water should be withheld 1-2 hours
view. The cranial pole of the right kidney is seen separate from the
before the study so the stomach is not fluid filled.
liver unlike in the dog. The kidneys are fluid opaque, smoothly mar-
Barium is administered orally at a dosage of 12-20mg/kg using a
ginated, and surrounded by fat. Each kidney measures about 2.4-3.0
syringe or orogastric tube. The standard abdominal technique should
times the length of the second lumbar vertebra except in older cats that
be increased by 6-8kVp for barium contrast radiography to increase
may have kidneys that are about two times the length of second lum-
x-ray absorption of the barium and increase contrast between barium
bar vertebra.
and the adjacent soft tissues. Immediately following the administra-
The right lobe and body of the pancreas are found in the
tion of contrast, all four views should be obtained (both lateral, VD,
mesoduodenum. The left lobe is located in the greater omentum. Lymph
and DV).
nodes are scattered throughout the abdomen associated with abdominal
 On the right lateral projection, barium fills the pylorus. Air is usu-
organs and vessels. Each adrenal gland is an oval structure usually
ally seen in the pylorus on the left lateral recumbent view. Films
located cranial to the kidney on the same side adjacent to the ca udal vena
should be exposed frequently. Segmental contractions give the duode-
cava. Normal pancreas, lymph nodes, and adrenal glands are not
Jo %e iaexdde u sead jo sus, e jo auiadde au un
radiographically apparent although about 30% of older cats have
cats. Barium will enter the colon by about 30-60 minutes. By 90 min-
nonclinical dystrophic mineralization of the adrenals that causes them to
utes, most of the barium will be in the colon. The cecum is small and
be more radiopaque and visible.
has a comma shape.
40
DiagnosticImaging of the Feline Patient
TABLE 7-2: Examples of Radiopaque Contrast Media. Note that specific manufacturer's instructions and information should be consulted prior to use.
Product Name
Purpose
Contrast Agent
Concentration
Dosage
Isovue-200 (multiple strengths
Angiography, excretory
lopamidol (nonionic iodide 
 200 mg iodine/ml 
 For excretory urography: 600-800 mg iodine
 available; number indicates the
urography upper Gl series.
product)
 per kg given intravenously
mncentration of iodine?
cystography
 For upper Gl series: 600-800 mg iodine
 per kg diluted to a volume of 10ml per
Omnipaque-180 (multiple 
Angiography, excretory
lohexol nonionic iodide
180 mg iodine/ml
kilogram 
 strengths available; number
urography upper Gl series.
product)
Cystography:First infuse 2-3ml 2% lidocaine to
indicates the concentration
cystography
 alleviate straining. Place patient in left lateral 
 of iodine}
recumbency when air is infused into the
 bladder 
Hypaque meglumine 30%
lonic product but can use for
 Diatrizoate
141 mg iodine/ml
 Positive contrast cystography: Infuse 2-5 ml/kg 
 cqystography
meglumine tionic
 iodinated contrast (1 ml/kg or less for fibrotic 
iodide product
bladders)
Double contrast cystography: Infuse 3 ml
 iodinated contrast followed by 2-3 ml/kg of
iodinated contrast (1 ml/kg or less for fibrotic 
bladders)
 E-Z-Paque
 Oral use only 
 Barium sulfate suspension
96% weight/weight
Water is added to bring volume to the 25%
(w/w)
w/w fill line (approximately equivalent 
 to 30% weight/volume). Give 12-20 ml/kg 
orally.
E-Z-Em Barium sulfate
 Oral (provided as suspension,
Various formulations of 
Variable
Varies with the formulation
paste or tablets) and rectal
 barium sulfate 
use provided as an barium
enema kit}
Gl, gastrointestinal.
determined, the contrast medium should be diluted to 10ml/kg. Iodine
is not used routinely because it does not coat the intestine as well as
barium (see Table 7-2).
Pneumogastrography
Air can be instilled into the stomach through an orogastric tube
until the stomach is mildly distended so that foreign bodies can be
outlined.
Double-Contrast Gastrography
 A combination of air and barium can be used to examine the gastric wall
 for neoplasia or ulcers (double-contrast gastrography). Fasting is neces-
sary prior to this procedure to avoid artifacts. A small amount of barium
is administered through an orogastric tube after which air is used to
inflate the stomach.
Pneumocolography
Figure 7-19  Celiography in a cat with multiple ventral hernias. Sterile water soluble
nonionic iodinated contrast is injected into the peritoneal space to perform this study.
 Pneumocolography can be performed to check for ileocolic intussuscep-
Arrows indicate contrast flling the ventral hernias. Contrast is also seen between
tion or cecal inversion or to determine the location of the colon (Fig. 7-21).
 the abdominal organs. The diaphragm is bulging cranially into the chest but is not
A 20- to 30-cc syringe is filled with air and used to infuse air in the
ruptured.
colon at a dosage of 5ml/kg. No preparation is required.
 If there is any reason to suspect that there is perforation of the gastro-
Excretory Llrography
intestinal tract, nonionic iodinated contrast should be given orally
instead of barium. The dosage should be calculated to deliver 600-800
Excretory urography is useful for visualizing the kidneys and ureters but
milligrams of iodine per kilogram. After the correct amount of iodine is
can also be used for diseases of the urinary bladder when catheterization
41
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
(a)
(c)
Stomach
Colon
(b)
Figure 7-20 Normal upper gastrointestinal series in a cat using liquid barium sulfate. Barium sulfate should only be given orally. (a) Lateral view. (b) Ventrodorsal view. Arrows 
indicate normal contractions in the duodenum. LK, let kidney. (c) Ventrodorsal view showing that the stomach is now almost empty and most of the barium is in the colon. The white
arrow points to the cecum.
is not possible (Fig. 7-22). It is better than ultrasonography for ruptured 
Cystography
 ureter or bladder or ectopic ureter.
 The abdomen should be prepared by having the patient fast and
A catheter is placed into the urethra with the tip positioned in the lumen
 administering cleansing enemas.
of the bladder using sterile technique (Fig. 7-23). Injection of 2-3ml of 2%
 Nonionic iodinated contrast is given intravenously at 600-s00 milli-
lidocaine into the bladder can help reduce straining.
snuu z ot I haao Aimos weido iad aupoi jo sue.a
 Positive- or negative-contrast media or both (double contrast) can be
Vomiting is a common complication, but more serious complications
used. Air is most commonly used for negative contrast. Carbon dioxide
such as pulmonary edema, allergic reactions, and contrast induced renal
(CO) can be used to avoid air embolism but is rarely used because the
failure can occur rarely.
incidence of air embolism is rare. Placing the cat in left lateral recum-
 In the early part of the study, the kidney becomes radiopaque (nephro-
bency with the caudal half of the body elevated may avoid consequences
gram phase) after which the contrast willbe seen in the pelvis and ureter
by trapping air in the apex of the right ventricle. Sterile nonionic iodi-
on each side (pyelogram phase), eventually entering the bladder (cysto-
 nated contrast should be used to provide positive contrast. A three-way
gram phase). Normal ureters are about 1 to 2mm in diameter, have
valve is useful to facilitate double-contrast cystography. Possible compli-
smooth margins, and appear discontinuous beca use the contrast moves 
cations include infection, kinking of the catheter, bladder rupture, trauma
in waves down the ureter.
to the urethra or blad der, and (rarely) air embolism.
42
Diagnostic Imaging of the Feline Patient
RK
LK
DC
B
Figure 7-22 Excretory urogram. Nonionic iodinated contrast medium was given
intravenously to this cat. Contrast in the right (RK} and left (LK} kidneys is referred to as
the nephrogram phase. The arrows indicate the pelvis and ureter of each kidney (pyelogram
phase). Contrast in the urinary bladder (B) is referred to as the cystogram phase.
infused into the bladder at a rate of 2-3ml per kg. A radiograph should
be made if resistance is felt to avoid overdistending the bladder.
from smallintestine. white arrows, ascending colon; black arrow, cecum; DC, descending
LIrethrography
 colon; TC, transverse colon.
Urethrography is performed to evaluate urinary tract infection and to
check for urethral calculi particularly in males (Fig. 7-24). The catheter is
Lateral and oblique views should be obtained to avoid superimposi-
filled with fluid to avoid introduction of air bubbles before catheterizing
tion of the bladder over the spine.
the cat; 2-3ml of 2% lidocaine diluted 1:1 with sterile water should be
aup jo anpaod au si (e-z dtu) Auderois iseo-aaiso
infused into the urethra 1-2 minutes before the infusion of contrast to
for suspected rupture of the bladder because it is easier to visualize radi-
prevent pain and urethral spasm. A cassette should be placed under the
cat and the rotor of the x-ray machine should be started before rapidly
contrast medium is diluted 1:1 with sterile water and infused through
infusing 5ml iodinated organic contrast.
the catheter at a dosage of about 2-5ml/kg. Alternatively, iodinated con-
 Both lateral and V projections should be obtained. If catheterization
trast medium can be used that is made specifically for use in the bladder.
is not possible, the cat can be anesthetized and a voiding urethrogram
If resistance is felt, a radiograph should be made to ensure that the blad-
can be obtained by expressing the urinary bladder following injection of
der isnotbecoming overly distended. In a normal cystogram,the bladder
contrast directly into the lumen.
should appear uniformly radiopaque with no visible radiolucencies.
 Double-contrast cystography (Fig. 7-23b) is preferred for evaluation of
the bladder mucosa, bladder wall, and mucosal contents because small 
Ultrasonography
calculi can be missed when negative or positive contrast is used alone.
Gastrointestinal
Infuse 2-3ml iodinated contrast into the bladder. The patient is gently
moved back and forth to coat the bladder wall. Then, 2-3ml/kg of air are
Longitudinal and transverse images of the stomach, intestines, and associ-
infused into the bladder making sure not to overly distend the bladder.
ated lymph nodes should be obtained from both sides of the abdomen. The
Radiopaque contrast smoothly coats the bladder mucosa and forms a
degree of distension, appearance of the contents, and motility should be
puddle in the dependent side of the bladder. Air surrounds the contrast 
 evaluated. Decrease depth as much as possible so that bowelloops appear
puddle.
as large as possible on the screen. Applying some pressure can help dis-
Negative-contrast cystography (pneumocystography) can be effective
place gas in superficial loops allowing visibility of deeper structures.
in localizing the urinary bladder or outlining calculi, but the thickness of
Gastric foreign bodies may be seen more easily if the patient is allowed to
the bladder wall can be overestimated and air embolism may be more
stand while the probe is placed on the ventral abdomen. This procedure
likely to occur if the bladder wall is ulcerated and nondistensible. Air is
 allows the ultrasound beam to pass through fluid rather than gas.
43
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
(a)
Figure 7-25
5 Sonogram o small intestine of a normal cat showing normal wallayering.
(b)
Calipers have been placed to measure the near (+ markers) and far (x markers) walls.
1, subserosa/serosa; 2, muscularis; 3, submucosa; 4, mucosa; 5, mucosal luminal interface.
Figure 7-23  Cystography. (a) Positive contrast cystogram performed by infusing iodinated
mntrast medium into the urinary bladder. (b) Double-contrast cystogram performed by infus-
ing iodinated contrast medium and air into the urinary bladder. Arrow indicates air in the
Figure 7-26  Sonogram of an empty stomach of a normal cat (arrow). The cat's head
renal pelvis. Reflux from the bladder into the ureter and kidney can occur in normal animals.
is to the left ofthe image. The stomach is located at the cranial margin of the spleen (Sp}.
Compare this to the gas- and fluid-filed stomachs in Figure 7-28.
Stricture
Normal stomach and intestines have a layered appearance (Fig. 7-25).
The outer layer (serosa and subserosa) is hyperechoic. The muscularis is
usually hypoechoic but is thicker and almost anechoic in the ileum. The
submucosa is a central hyperechoic layer. In the stomach, it is poorly
defined and extends into the rugal folds. The mucosa is hypoechoic and
is the thickest layer in the duodenum and jejunum. The interface between
the wall and lumen (mucosal luminal interface or mucosal surface) is
hyperechoic.
 An empty stomach has a star-shaped or wagon wheel appearance
(Fig. 7-26). These terms have also been used to describe the ileocolic
valve imaged in the transverse plane (Fig. 7-27a). The ileum can be dis-
Figure 7-24  Urethrography.A urethrogram was performed by placing a catheter in the
tinguished by its thick dark muscularis layer. The colon has a thinner
rean aui ui ains e sey ie slwnpaw seuo paeuipoi huisnu pue euan
wall than the smallintestine due to its thinner mucosa.
44
Diagnostic Imaging of the Feline Patient
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Stomach
Fluid
Ileum
MLI
Figure 7-27 (a) Transverse sonogram of the ileocolic valve of a normal cat. The
muscularis layer (arrow) in the ileum is darker than the muscularis layer of other intestinal
Figure 7-28 (a) Sonogram of the stomach of cat showing reverberation artifact
loops. (b)Longitudinal sonogram ofthe ileum of a normal cat. The cat's head is to the left
caused by gas in the lumen. Sound passes through the near wall and strikes the gas in
of the image. Gas in the colon causes reverberation artifact that prevents the far wall
the lumen. Echoes reverberate multiple times before returning to the probe to be
from being seen. The arrow points to the muscularis layer of the ileum.
recorded. The result is that reverberations prevent the far wall (and anything in the
lumen) from being seen. Cursors (+ markers) have been placed to measure the wall.(b)
Sound readily passes through the fluid in this cat's stomach so that the far wall is clearly
 The electronic calipers of the ultrasound machine are used to measure
visible. Cursors measure the gastric wallfrom the outside of the serosa to the outside of
gastrointestinal walls from the outside edge of serosa to the outside edge
the mucosal luminal interface (MLI).
of muicosal luminal interface (see Fig. 7-25).
Gas is hyperechoic and strongly reflective resulting in reverberation
 lm pe o an lm jo ss   q il lm
artifact, which has been termed a"dirty acoustic shadow"because it pre-
signals infiltrative disease such as neoplasia or severe inflammatory
vents visualization of deeper structures (Fig. 7-27). Fluid is anechoic and
bowel disease (Fig. 7-29).
allows visualization of deeper structures (Fig. 7-28). A large amount of
fluid will have fewer interfaces to reflect, absorb, or scatter sound than
surrounding tissues. As a result, tissues deep to a fluid-filled stomach or
Kidneys
tic enhancement). A small amount of mucus or ingesta will be hypere-
 The most echogenic portions of the kidney are the pelvis, the diverticula,
 choic but will allow visualization of deeper structures.
and the capsule. The renal cortex and medulla are hypoechoic but the
Common problems in the gastrointestinal tract include foreign bodies
 cortex is more echogenic than the medulla.
and neoplasia. Foreign bodies vary in appearance. Some are hyperechoic
 The appearance of the kidney varies with plane of the ultrasound
with deep acoustic shadowing whereas the shape of others is visible. If a
beam (Fig. 7-30) as it passes through the kidney. The mid-dorsal plane of
foreign body causes obstruction, the bowel proximal to the obstruction
the kidney cuts the kidney into two symmetrical halves. The ureter
45
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
Splenic enlargement or the presence of nodules is more significant
in cats than in dogs. Aspiration is recommended for further evaluation
(Fig. 7-32).
Liver
at ie si npung sse aui 'apis suh au uo Asou paeo st iaa au
left caudal border of the liver. A hyperechoicline at the cranial margin of
the liver represents the interface between the diaphragm and lung.
Liver may appear to be located on both sides of the diaphragm (mirror
image artifact).
Best images are obtained with the probe positioned just caudal to the
xiphoid with the beam directed cranially in a sagittal plane (Fig. 7-33a).
 Sweep the probe from side to side. Then, rotate the probe 90 degrees and
image from dorsal to ventral and back to ensure that the entire liver is
imaged.
 Move the probe to the right of the ventral midline imaging in a sagittal
plane medial to the right kidney to visualize the caudal vena cava as it
Figure 7-29  The wallof the stomach of this cat is thickened and exhibits a loss of wall 
passes through the diaphragm. Hepatic veins may be seen entering the
layering. This change is usually associated with neoplasia or other infitrative disease. L.
caudal vena cava. The aorta will be located more dorsally and the portal
lumen.
vein will be located more ventrally and to the left.
Intrahepatic branches of the portal vein have hyperechoic walls; the
walls of the hepatic veins are poorly seen causing the veins to appear as
enters at the hilus of the kidney; the diverticula can be seen extending
anechoic tubes.
The gall bladder is located to the right of the midline appearing as an
from the pelvis toward the cortex. There are three sagital planes. The
anechoic oval structure with poorly delineated walls. Some echogenic
medial sagittal plane cuts through the kidney where the ureter enters
and expands into the pelvis, giving the kidney a dumb-bell appearance
material can be seen in the gall bladder but should swirl around when
the cat is repositioned. A bilobed gall bladder is not unusual in cats
a um seane era ep omi e seadde seare area aun um u
(Figs. 7-33b and 7-33c). The gall bladder will be larger if the cat is anorexic
an sin aueid ienespiu au eao uas ieg pue stalad onouoaad
or has fasted.
kidney centrally through the ventral and dorsal branches of the pelvis,
kidney through the diverticula and medulla causing the kidney to resem-
Pancre as
ble a watermelon with the hypoechoic medulla being divided by the
The pancreas is found by imaging dorsomedial to the duodenum (right
hyperechoic diverticula. In the transverse plane, the kidney is somewhat
extremity) and between the stomach and transverse colon (leftextremity).
circular and the branches of the pelvis take the shape of a C.
The pancreatic duct runs centrally through the pancreas as an anechoic
ventral structure that is not seen in all cats (Fig. 7-34). Color Doppler 
Urinary Bladder
imaging can be useful to distinguish between the two structures.
The urinary bladder has a smooth wall with three or four layers, usually
measuring 0.2-0.4cm (Fig. 7-3la). The lumen is primarily anechoic,
Adrenal Glands
although fat, large glucose molecules, or protein can cause the appear-
ance of hypoechoic foci suspended in the lumen even in normal cats.
Feline adrenal glands are small, oval, and almost anechoic. They are
Tissues deep to the bladder are often more hyperechoic than adjacent
usually found by scanning just cranial to the cranial pole of the kidney
tissues because sound is not attenuated as it passes through the fluid in
(Fig. 7-35a), although they are sometimes found more caudally closer to
the bladder (deep acoustic enhancement).
the renal artery.
 If present, urinary cystic calculi are generally hyperechoic and will be
The left adrenal gland is imaged with the cat in right lateral recum-
found on the dependent side of the urinary bladder (Fig. 7-31b). Larger
bency with the probe on the lef side of the abdomen angled so that the
calculi will often attenuate sound preventing deeper tissues from being
beam passes in a ventrolateral-dorsomedial direction.
seen (deep acoustic shadow).Sound strikes curved surfaces like those of
The right adrenal gland can be found by placing the cat in left lateral
the bladder and kidney at an angle causing sound to be reflected and
recumbency and scanning in a sagittal plane between the kidney later-
refracted at the edge of these structures. This can cause the bladder to
ally and the caudal vena cava medially. The left adrenal gland may also
appear as though there were a hole at the apex. A real hole would not be
 be visible when scanning in this manner.
visible because the bladder would contract as urine flowed from the
 Mineralization of the adrenal gland is common in older cats, appear-
bladder into the peritoneal cavity. Although ultrasonography would
ing as a hyperechoic area with deep acoustic shadowing (Fig. 7-35b).
reveal free peritoneal fluid, a ruptured ureter or bladder would be better
demonstrated with excretory urography or cystography.
Ovaries
 Feline ovaries are usually only visible when the cat is pregnant or in heat.
Spleen
Follicles appear as anechoic structures within the ovary (Fig. 7-36).
 The spleen can be found cranial to the left kidney in the craniodorsal
abdomen (see Fig. 7-26). It is smaller and usually less echogenic than the
Extremities
Ganine spleen. Compared to the liver, the spleen has a finer, more uni-
form echotexture. Echogenicity is similar to the liver. The spleen has a
 The radiographic approach to the extremities may require sedation to
well-defined hyperechoic capsule. The splenic vein exits the spleen at
pinous azne xo 'adet 'adou uul saseu snsousep aunboe Aiaeanooe
several points along the deep surface.
be used to extend the limbs to avoid exposure of human hands.
46
DiagnosticImagingoftheFelinePatient
(a)
(b)
(e)
(c)
Figure 7-30  The appearance of the kidney varies with the plane of the ultrasound beam. (a) The mid-dorsal plane divides the kidney into two symmetrical halves. (b) In the lateral
sagittal plane, the kidney resembles a watermelon. (c) In the midsagittal plane, the two hyperechoic lines (arrows) represent the dorsal and ventral branches of the renal pelvis. (d) In
the medial sagittal plane, the pelvis and surrounding fat are seen as a hyperechoic area (P) in the center of the kidney. The medullary areas (M) are hypoechoic. (e) In the mid-transverse
plane, the kidney is round. The hyperechoic pelvis (arrows) wraps around the renal crest (C).
47
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
e ym padeus dop-ean sl le e o lapa eun jeu al (e) te- an
anechoic lumen. Some echogenicity at the edge of the walls is a normal artifact caused
(c)
by imaging of adjacent tissues. (b) Calculi are usually hyperechoic and often exhibit deep
acoustic shadowing (arows).
Figure 7-33 (a) Sonogram of the liver of a normal cat. The probe was placed on the
pemoipue Aiesop paap weaq punosen auiym pioudx aul jeau uapge jea
the diaphragm. The cat's head is to the viewer's left. Fat F)is seen superficial to the liver.
White arrows indicate the ventral margin of the liver. White arrowheads indicate the
interface between the diaphragm and lung. G, gall bladder. (b) Transverse image through
Figure 7-32  Sonographic image showing aspiration of the spleen near the abdominal
the liver of a cat revealing two anechoic (blackstructures that look like cysts. (c) Rotating
wall. odules in the spleen and enlarged spleens are most often abnormal and should 
 the probe to obtain a longitudinal image shows that the structures are the two lobes of
be aspirated. Wwhite arrows indicate the path of the needle and the black arrowhead
 a bilobed gal bladder. A bilobed gallbladder is not uncommon in cats. Care should be
indicates the needle's tip as it approaches a hyperechoic nodule (W).
 taken to avoid confusing the gall bladder with a true cyst.
48
Diagnostic Imaging of the Feline Patient
lenum
Pancreas
Figure 7-34  The pancreas is difficult to image but can found by imaging deep to the
duodenum, outlined by black arrowheads in this sonogram of a normal feline pancreas.
The white arrow indicates the pancreaticoduodenal vein, which is a good landmark
because it runs through the pancreas ventral to the pancreatic duct (not shown).
Figure 7-36  Sonogram of an ovary in a normal cat in heat. The ovary is usually found 
supeficially near the caudal pole ofthe kidney (K).Arrows show the margins ofthe ovary.
(a)
F, follicle.
Orthogonal views centered on each joint are important for complete and
 proper evaluation. A common technical difficulty is achieving proper
positioning (not rotated) if the patient is uncooperative or inadequately
sedated.
Scapula
See Figure 7-37 for views of the scapula.
Radiographic Views
Lateral and caudocranial are used for imaging the scapula.
Technical Difficulties
ing problems.
(b)
Positioning
LateralView
The scapula of interest should be closest to the table and pulled back
caudally, while the opposite limb is pulled forward. Another method for
Suusnd Aq paaaue si eindess leuxoud aut jo maa lerael e sunuieiqo
the down scapula in a dorsal direction and pulling the opposite limb
ventrally.
CaudocranialView
CVC
With the patient lying on its back and rotated 15-30 degrees toward the
unaffected side, the front limb is pulled forward, and the beam is cen-
trally located over scapula.
Shoulder Joint
 See Figure 7-38 for views of the shoulder joint.
Figure 7-35 (a) Sonogram of a normal cat showing the left adrenal gland cranial to
Radiographic Views
the left kidney. Cursors have been placed to measure the adrenal gland. (b) Arrows
indicate mineralization in the adrenal gland of an older cat. The mineralization is hyper-
Mediolateral, caudocranial, or oblique views are used for imaging the
echoic with deep acoustic shadowing. CVC, caudal vena cava.
shoulder joint.
49
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
(a)
(C)
(b)
Figure 7-37  Scapula. (a) Proximal lateral view of the scapula. (b) Distal lateral view of scapula. (c) Caudocranial view of the scapula.
Technical Difficulties
Radiographic Views
 Rotation, superimposition of the cervical spine, sternum, or opposite
 Lateral and caudocranial are used for imaging the humerus.
 limb on lateral image can cause problems with imaging the shoulder
joint.
Positioning
Positioning
Lateral View
Lateral View
 The limb of interest should be closest to the table and pulled forward.
Proper evaluation includes both the shoulder and elbow joints. The
 The shoulder of interest should be closest to the table and pulled for-
 opposite limb is pulled in a caudal and dorsal direction.
ward. The beam is centered on the shoulder joint and closely collimated.
 The opposite limb needs to be pulled in an upward and caudal direction;
the head and spine need to be extended to prevent overlap with the
Caudocranial View
shoulder joint.
The patient is lying on its back with the foreleg of interest extended for-
ward. The beam is centered on the mid-humerus and includes the shoul-
Caudocranial View
der and elbow joints.
With the patientlying onitsback,the front limbs are pulled forward, and
the beam is centered on the shoulder joint. If possible keep the front legs
Elbow
at a symmetrical distance from the table so the patient is not rotated.
See Figure 7-40 for views of the elbow.
Humerus
Radiographic Views
See Figure 7-39 for views of the humerus.
Lateral, craniocaudal, or oblique views are used for imaging the elbow.
50
Diagnostic Imaging of the Feline Patient
(a)
(b)
u hapinys aun po mai leueone (a) uio lpnus jo maa leaen e) ui apinus s- aun
(a)
(b)
Figure 7-39  Humerus. (a) Lateral view of the humerus. (b) Caudocranial view of humerus.
51
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Figure 7-41  Radius/Ulna. (a) Lateral view of radius and ulna. (b) Craniocaudal view
of the radius and ulna.
Figure 7-40
 Elbow joint. (a) Lateral view of elbow joint. (b) Craniocaudal view of the
elbow joint.
Craniocaudal View
Positioning
The cat is placed in a sternal position with the limb of interest extended
forward. Try to palpate the distal humerus to be sure the limb is not
LateralView
rotated prior to exposing the radiograph.
The limb of interest should be closest to the table and extended forward;
 Radius/Ulna
the opposite limb should be pulled upward and back. The head and neck
can be a neutral lateral position.
See Figure 7-41 for views of the radius/ ulna.
52
Diagnostic Imaging of the Feline Patient
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Figure 7-42 Carpus. (a) Lateral view ofthe carpus. (b) Dorsopalmar view ofthe carpus.
Radiographic Views
Lateral and craniocaudal are used for imaging the radius/ulna.
Positioning
For both views, include from the elbow to carpal joints.
Lateral View
The limb of interest should be closest to the table and pulled forward.
With the cat's head extended and the nose pointing up, the beam should
be centered in the middle of the radius/ulna.
Craniocaudal View
forward. The head should be directed toward the opposite limb to ensure
it is not superimposed of the area of interest.
Carpus/Metacarpus
Figure 7-43 (a) Lateral and (b) dorsopalmar views showing soft-tissue swelling is
 present surrounding the carpus. No bone lysis was evident. A faint periosteal reaction
See Figures 7-42, 7-43, and 7-44 for images of the carpus/metacarpus.
was present along the accessory carpal bone adjacent to the swelling.
53
SEC TION 2: Diagnostics
(a)
(b)
(d)
R
(c)
Figure 7-44 Metacarpus. (a} Lateral view of the metacarpus. (b) Dorsopalmar view of the metacarpus. (c) Cat positioned with digits spread apart using gauze to avoid superimposi-
'sndieiaw aui po mala anbigo (p ship pue sauog jedieneia aul po u
54
Diagnostic Imaging of the Feline Patient
(c)
(a)
(b)
(d)
04/07/140
Figure 7-45 Pelvis. (a}Lateral pelvis. b) Extended ventrodorsal view ofthe pelvis. (c)Flexed or frog-leggedview of the pelvis.(d Oblique view ofthe pelvis to visualize the coxofemoral joint.
Radiographic Views
Dorsopatmar View
Lateral, dorsopalmar, or oblique views are used for imaging the carpus/
 The cat is placed in a sternal position with the limb either pulled forward
metacarpus.
after taping the digits or by pushing from the elbow joint. A wooden
spoon can be used to fully spread out the digits.
Extra Views
Positioning
 An oblique view may be helpful to isolate a specific digit, typically by
LateralView
applying tapeto the first and last digits then pulling them apart. The key
is to mark which digit is pulled forward or back to facilitate interpretation.
The limb of interest should be closest to the table and pulled
forward. This can be accomplished by pushing from the elbow
joint or by taping the distal limb before pulling it cranially with
Pelvis
the tape.
See Figures 7-45 and 7-46 for images of the pelvis.
55
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
(a)
(b)
Figure 7-46 Cat with a chronic fracture of the right femoral neck. (a) Lateral view. (b) ventrodorsal view. A small bone fragment is seen adjacent to the right coxofemoral joint.
Congenital malformations of the caudal vertebrae and tail are present.
Radiographic Views
and upward causing the coxofemoral joint of interest to be
Lateral, VD extended, VD frog legged, or oblique are used for imaging
two joints. This view is helpful when evaluating for acetabular
the pelvis.
fractures.
Positioning
Femur
LateralView
See Figure 7-47 for images of the femur.
Center the beam over the coxofemoral joints with the limbs in a "scissor-
kick" position with the leg closest to the table pulled cranially and other
limb caudally. Open collimation to include the caudal lumbar spine and tail.
Radiographic Views.
Lateral and craniocaudal are used for imaging the femur.
VD View (Extended)
With the patient lying on its back using a positioning trough, the legs are
pulled toward the table with equal force to minimize rotation. Remember
Lateral View
to rotate the stifles slightly inward and down toward the table.
 Positioning is similar to that used for an oblique view of the coxofemoral
 joint. The limb of interest should be closest to the table with the opposite
VD View (Frog Legged)
limb pulled back and upward.
With the patient lying on its back in a positioning trough, pressure is
equally applied to the feet so the hip joints will now be in a flexed posi-
Craniocaudal View
tion. This view is essential when a fracture of the femoral head or neck is 
suspected but is not visualized on the extended view.
The patient is placed on its back in a positioning trough with the leg
pulled toward the table.
Oblique View of the Coxofemoral Joint
The cat is placed in a lateral position with the coxofemoral joint
Stifle
of interest closest to the table. The opposite limb is pulled back
See Figures 7-48 and 7-49 for images of the stifle.
56
Diagnostic Imaging of the Feline Patient
(a)
(b)
Figure 7-47 Femur. (a) Lateral view of the femur. (b) Craniocaudal
view of the femur.
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 7-48 Stifle joint. (a) Lateral
view ofthe stifle joint. (b) Craniocaudal
view ofthe stifle joint. (c The cat can be
placed in a "sitting" position for
imaging of the stifle and femur.
57
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
(a)
(b)
Figure 7-49  (a) Lateral and (b) craniocaudal views of a stifle joint with chronic medial luxation of the patella. Soft-tissue swelling and degenerative changes are present.
Radiographic Views
Lateral View
Lateral, craniocaudal or oblique views are used for imaging the stifle.
Positioning of the limb is similar to the stifle.
Positioning
Craniocaudal View
Lateral View
Positioning is similar to the stifle. While holding the patient in a sitting
The limb of interest should be closest to the table with the opposite limb
position, push down on the musculature over the femur to extend the
pulled caud ally to prevent superimposition.
limb.
Craniocaudal View
Tarsus/Metatarsus
 Positioning can be done in a V trough with the leg pulled toward the
See Figures 7-51 to 7-54 for images of the tarsus/metatarsus.
toward the table.
Radiographic Views
Lateral, dorsoplantar, or oblique views are used for imaging the tarsus/
Tibia/Fibula
metatarsuis.
 See Figure 7-50 for images of the tibia/fibula.
Positioning
Radiographic Views
Lateral View
 Lateral and cranioca udal views are used for imaging the tibia/fibula.
Extending the limb from the level of the proximal femur allows your
gloved hands to be out of the primary beam. Alternatively tape could be
Positioning
applied around the distal limb to allow extension of the down limb over
the table. However, some digital systems may pick up the tape and this
Center the beam on the mid-shaft of the tibia/fibula and include the
may obscure the image.Be sure to leave a tag so the tape can be removed
stifle and tarsal joints.
 quickly beca use most awake cats will not appreciate its removal.
58
DiagnosticImaging of the FelinePatient
(a)
(b)
Figure 7-50 Tibia/Fibula. (a) Lateral view of
tibia and fibula. (b) Craniocaudal view of the
tibia and fibula.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7-51  Tarsal joint. (a) Lateral view of the tarsus. (b) Dorsoplantar view of the tarsus.
59
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
(a)
(b)
Figure 7-52  Metatarsus. (a} Lateral view
of the metatarsus. (b) Dorsoplantar view of
the metatarsus.
a)
(b)
Figure 7-53 (a) Lateral and (b) dorsoplantar views of a patient
with multiple fractured metatarsal bones.
60
DiagnosticImaging of theFelinePatient
(b)
(a)
Figure 7-54  (a) Lateral and (b) dorsoplantar views of a kitten with a chronic fracture involving the tarsal and metatarsal bones. Notice the entire foot is displaced almost perpen
dicular to the proximal limb.
Dorsoplantar View
skull is rotated between 30 and 45 degrees from the lateral position to
isolate each arcade of the maxilla and mandible. Intraoral radiographs
 Place the cat in a sitting position and extend the leg. Alternatively place
tape around the distal limb to extend the limb into position.
can also be made with dental plates.
VD and DV views allow evaluation of the temporomandibular joints.
 Oblique views can be made by positioning the skull for a VD projection
Extra Views
and then rotating the skull 20 degrees.
Tympanic bullae can be visualized on open mouth rostrocaudal, left
 Use and oblique view similar to front leg for evaluation of the digits.
 dorsal 20 degrees right ventral oblique, and right dorsal 20 degrees left 
ventral oblique views.
Skull
Radiographic Views
Spine
See Figure 7-55 for images of the skull.
A high mAs/low kVp technique should be used to maximize film
 Heavy sedation or general anesthesia is necessary for well-positioned
contrast. Anesthesia should be used to relax the spine and allow correct
radiographs of the skull, particularly when open mouth and oblique
views are included. Lateral and VD or DV views of the skull are stand-
trauma to the spine, a VD view can be obtained using a horizontal
a uo sanns jo uoseduo moe on uod si Ana pi
beam.
side.
Sponges should be used to elevate the mid-cervical spine and other
 The frontal view is useful to evaluate the frontal sinuses. The nasal
areas as necessary so that the spine is parallel to the cassette. For the VD
pue Aa leroeun maia CA ynou uado au un uaas aq ues saessd
"ueiou suaaaid on pasn aq ues sseqpues maa
lateral oblique views are also helpful.
 Lateral and VD radiographs (Fig. 7-56) should be made centered over
Nasopharyngeal polyps can be visualized most consistently from the
each portion of the spine (cervical, cervicothoracic, thoracic, thoracolum-
lateral projection.
bar, lumbar, and lumbosacral). Additional views can be made centered
Oblique views are useful for evaluating the upper and lower dental
over the area of interest.
 arcade. The mouth is held open using needle caps cut to size while the
Disease conditions include fracture, disc disease, and neoplasia.
61
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Right
Left
62
Diagnostic Imaging of the Feline Patient
(e)
(g)
Figure 7-55  Skullradiographs. (a) Lateral view. (b) Ventrodorsal view. (c) Oblique view
to demonstrate the left tympanic bulla and temporomandibular joint (black arrow).
Although both tympanic bullae (white arows) are seen, the left is more easily visualized.
The cat is in left lateral recumbency with the head rotated to the left (d) Cat positioned to
image the nasal passages. Gauze has been used to open the mouth, moving the mandible 
out ofthe way lIfnecessary tape can be applied to secure the maxilla to the table. (e) Open
mouth view showing the nasal passages. f Cat positioned to image the tympanic bullae.
sasig ll os Ajea paap s! weaq Aeix aul'adel no azneh ylm pauado s yinow au
the angle formed by the jaws. (g) Open mouth view showing the tympanic bullae (black
arrows) and petrous temporal bones (white arows).
63
SECTION 2:Diagnostics
(a)
(b)
(e)
f
g
(h)
们
[k]
Figure 7-56 Spine radiographs. Radiographs are optimaly obtained from the cervical, cervicothoracic, thoracic, thoracolumbar, lumbar, and lumbosacral regions. (a)(f, Lateral
views. (g)(l, entrodorsal views.
64
Diagnostic Imaging of the Feline Patient
Acknowledgment
Penninck D, d'Anjou M. 2008. Atlas of Small Animal Lltrasonography.
Ames: Wiley Blackwell.
Special thanks to Leigh Wagner, Catherine Bassett, Kim Bryan, and
Morgan JP. 1993. Techniques of Veterinary Radiography, 5th ed. Ames: Iowa
Betty Files for their assistance in obtaining images and reviewing the text.
State University Press.
7           
 Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co.
 Suggested Readings
Thrall DE, ed. 2007. Textbook of Veterinary Diagnostic Radiology, 5th ed.
 Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co.
Bonagura JD. 2000. Feline Echocardiography I Fel Med Surg. 2:147-51.
Wallack ST. 2003. The Handbook of Veterinary Contrast Radiography. Solana
Feeney D, McClanahan SL, Walter PA. 1999. Radiography in Veterinary
Beach: San Diego Veterinary Imaging.
Technology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Wright M, Spencer D, Stafford C, et al. 2008. Radiation Safety and Non-
Lavin L. 2006. Radiography in Veterinary Technology, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Manual Patient Restraint in Veterinary Radiography. San Diego:
WB Saunders.
Animalinsides.com.
65
CHAPTER 8
Venipuncture and Cystocentesis
Karen M. Lovelace
Overview
Pre paration
Venipuncture refers to venous (veni-, ie. vein) puncture using a needle
Because cats are easily stressed, location is essential. Ideally, urine should
for the drawing of a blood sample. Cystocentesis refers to the puncture of
be collected in a quiet room away from barking dogs and other loud
ahollow body cavity such as the urinary bladder (cysto-) for the purpose
-aooua aq pinous 'suasaid jl 'siaumo (Aqqol o Aipunel se yons) sasiou
of drawing out fluid (-centesis), such as urine. There are numerous safe
aged to remain calm. Giving cats a soft, warm, and comfortable area to
and effective techniques for collecting blood and urine samples from cats
using a sterile yringe and needle.Equipment, indications, contraindica
to calm a stressed cat. Life stage, body condition, and temperament will
tions, preparation, and procedure will be covered for both in this chapter.
help determine patient preparation and technique. For senior or geriatric
Because it is often preferable to collect urine from patients prior to
-i e q  suo d ro r se m un s
venous sampling in the event that a nervous patient should evacuate his
tion, pain medication at the veterinarian's discretion should be given
or her bladder, cystocentesis will be covered first.
ahead of time. For cats that appear apprehensive, feline facial phero-
mone (FeliwayTM) or Bachflower Essence (Rescue RemedyTM) may be
Cystocentesis
also be calmed when a muzzle or snap on Elizabethan collar is used to
cover or shield their eyes, or the patient may be placed in a "cat bag,"
Equipment
although this is generally more likely to be warranted for venipuncture.
A 6- or 12-cc syringe and a 1.0- or 1.5-inch 22- or 25-gauge needle are
a jo s auie paed d ssd ae e s ym 'd ie, e eu
used. A 1.5-inch needle is preferred for ultrasound assisted cystocentesis.
neck, may help to release natural endorphins and relax a cat for minimal
A 25-gauge needle may be preferred for cystocentesis in kittens. Other
restraint.
equipment needed includes isopropyl alcohol and appropriate sterile
 In the awake, unobstructed feline patient body condition score will
urine laboratory submission tubes. For learning purposes, it may be
affect positioning and needle size. For obese patients in which the blad-
easiest to use a 3- or 6-cc syringe.
der is harder to isolate, using a 1.5-inch needle in right lateral recum-
bency, the two-hand technique (which will be described) can be
employed, or the patient can be placed in dorsal recumbency for
Indications/Contraindications
ultrasound-guided cystocentesis using a 1.5-inch needle. For cats with
thin to normal body condition scores, right lateral recumbency is pre-
Cystocentesis, manual bladder expression, catheterization, or voided
"free catch" samples are all means of obtaining urine samples for urinaly-
ferred because the bladder can usually be successfully isolated. If the
bladder cannoteasily belocated (for anysize cat),itisbest to wait several
sis. Diagnostic cystocentesis and sterile catheterization are chosen when
a sterile urine sample devoid of contaminants from the lower urinary
hours for the bladder to fill and become easily identifiable for safety
tract or skin is desired. For example, when a bacterial urinary tract infec-
reasons. Isopropyl alcohol can be used to cover the area targeted for
o sog aun suuieiqo sog paajaid ae spouau asau paadsns s uon
cystocentesis regardless of positioning or method.
ture. Other than samples naturally voided by the patient, all techniques
may result in some degree of physical trauma to the patient. For this rea-
Right Lateral Recumbency
son, cystocentesis is often preferred over catheterization in awake, unob-
structed feline patients when an uncontaminated urine sample is desired.
In this method, the bladder is palpated and isolated dorsally away from
Nevertheless, the bladder should always be physically handled in a gen-
other organs, and cystocentesis is performed blind (i.e. without visuali-
e manner, especially in cases of suspected urethral obstruction in which
zation using ultrasound). Some clinicians will advocate visualization of
the bladder may be large, turgid, and painful. Although rare, if the blad-
the bladder in all cases, but if the bladder is correctly isolated dorsally
der is handled too aggressively, the vagal nerve may be stimulated to
against the body wall,the needle will enter only through the body wall
elicit a vagal response that may manifest as weakness or collapse. In
and the bladder rather than entering another organ such as the colon,
extreme cases, such as urethral obstruction in which the bladder is very
which could result in contamination. An assistant will gently position
full and very firm, a combination of bladder manipulation and urine
the cat with its right side down on the table, head facing away. The
leakage into the abdomen from the needle puncture site may result in
assistant should gently stretch the cat's hind legs caudal to the abdo-
such pain as to elicit shock, the symptoms of which could include col-
men and help keep the cat's spine in a straight alignment by using the
lapse, extreme weakness, vocalizing, pale mucous membrane color, or
forearm to support the cat's back. Supporting the back also aids in
vomiting. Extreme caution should be used when puncturing a full, turgid
calming the cat and reduces struggling (Fig. 8-1). To gently palpate and
bladder and avoided in favor of catheterization whenever possible.
isolate the urinary bladder in this position using one hand, choose the
Catheterization is chosen in these cases to avoid bladder rupture, tears, or
hand that will not be holding the syringe, which is usually the non-
dominant hand. Make a C shape with the fingers and thumb of this
eterization is not practical because of high bladder pressures or unsuc-
hand, and starting as caudally as the pelvic inlet, with the thumb posi-
cessful catheterization and only under the supervision of a veterinarian.
tioned dorsally, move the C all the way to the spine until the bottom of
the vertebrae is felt. Gently close the fingers and thumb together and
move the hand together cranially until light resistance is met and the
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
bladder is felt. If you unsure whether it is the bladder, slightly decrease
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
the distance between them thumb and fingers in the C shape and move
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
the hand both cranially and caudally until the bladder slips swiftly
66
VenipunctureandCystocentesis
paou st poo j io idwae is au uo passu si iappeiq aut jn 'sipaau
in the needle hub, stop aspiration and withdraw the unit to change nee-
dles, but only if a second attempt is safely indicated. It is not advisable
to continuously redirect the needle blindly. Doing so risks urine leak-
age, hemorrhage, or sample contamination. A careful new attempt (if
safely indicated) using a clean needle will reduce these risks as well as
reduce the risk of spreading neoplastic cells in the event that a tumor is
discovered in or around the bladder.
For larger or obese cats, a two-hand technique, using a second assis-
tant, may be appropriate. In this method, one assistant gently restrains
the cat in right lateral recumbency as previously described. A second
-neo sheis pue uonusey ypimpues paddno e ul spuey oml sasn jueisisse
dally to try and isolate the bladder. Closing the sandwiched hands at
either cranial or caudal ends while attempting to roll over the bladder in
a cranial to caudal fashion is used to isolate the bladder. Once isolated,
the bladder is again elevated to the skin surface and the person to aspi-
rate taps the bladder prior to puncture and aims the needle through the
skin where the bladder is in closest contact with the skin dorsally. This
Figure 8-1  Restraint for cystocentesis is accomplished with a technician holding the
technique will often take more practice because it requires a third person
scruff in one hand with the forearm parallel to the cat's spine. The other hand holds the
and therefore, better person-to-person communication. Again, if the
cat's rear legs.
bladder cannot be easily identified, cystocentesis should be temporarily
abandoned.
When palpation is unsuccessful, ultrasound-guided cystocentesis
may be preferred. The advantage of ultrasound guidance is that the
bladder size, location, and surrounding structures can be visualized,
and thus the risk of puncturing unwanted structures is greatly reduced.
Bladder identification is generally easier in cats that are thin or have
aunoa, m aipaau aui idua ieau st sappeiq aut  siappeia ra
off of the wall instead of penetrate it; if so, cystocentesis should be aban-
doned. Position the cat in dorsal recumbency, ideally in a soft trough.
H se iappeq aun iaao Aepneo lood pou saop uato louoole [doudos]
does in some dogs, so visualization is still best for guiding aspiration.
However, wetting the skin with alcohol allows good contact with the
ultrasound probe and avoids the need for coupling gel. Once the blad-
der is visualized on ultrasound, the needle should again be introd uced
in a straight "in and out" fashion, and aspiration employed as described
previously. If possible, once visualized the bladder can be gently iso-
lated with a free hand up toward the cat's ventral body wall. If traumatic
urinary sampling inadvertently leads to suspected bladder tear, rupture,
or abdominal hemorrhage, ultrasound can be used to screen for free
fluid in the abdomen.
Figure 8-2  The operator stabilizes the cat's bladder with one hand lifting it up to the
 Once urine is collected, it should be analyzed as soon as possible or
saua apaau aul lun puey lauo aul ym papin ane alpaau pue ahuuis aul llem Apog
the bladder.
(1.e. pH, bacteria, crystal content, turbidity), which can result in the aber-
through the fingers. Because it is hollow and filled with fluid, the blad-
ration of diagnostic results.
der should feel like a water-filled balloon. When the bladder is isolated,
keep the thumb and fingers closed and gently position the bladder dor-
sally (up) and to the spine (away). Gently tap on the bladder with a
Venipuncture
finger to confirm that it feels bouncy, as if tapping a water balloon. The
average-sized bladder will be approximately the size of a large lemon,
Equipment
but it can range from the size of a walnut to grapefruit. Remember that
A 6-cc syringe and a %-inch 20-gauge needle are used for adult cats. A
the bladder is most fixed at its base caud ally and most mobile cranially.
1-cc syringe and 25-gauge needle or a tuberculin or insulin swaged
Therefore, isolation will be most successful when starting palpation
27-gauge needle/syringe is preferred in kittens. Other equipment
caudally especially if the bladder is small. Once the bladder is success-
includes isopropyl alcohol and appropriate sterile laboratory submission
fully isolated, hold the syringe and needle in the dominant hand and
tubes. It may be easiest when learning to practice using a 3-cc syringe.
puncture through the skin and directly into the dorsally isolated blad.
der, ideally at a 45-degree angle (Fig. 8-2). If the bladder is correctly
isolated dorsally toward the skin, the needle (especially if using 1.5-
 Indications/Con traindications
inch needle) should not need to be advanced very far. Approximately
half an inch should be sufficient. Once the needle has been inserted into
Venous blood collection is contraindicated when safety to the cat or to
the bladder, the syringe should be aspirated to collect urine. Once the
veterinary personnel is prohibitive for most feline adults and kittens. If
syringe is full, stop aspiration, then withdraw the syringe and needle.
airway or circulation is compromised because of restraint or underlying
Aspirating as the needle is withdrawn can result in urine leakage, hem-
disease or if the patient would suffer undue pain or stress as determined
orrhage, or sample contamination. So when the syringe is full, stop aspi-
by the overseeing veterinarian, sedation may be employed or venipunc-
ration, then, after aspiration is stopped, withdraw the syringe and
ture abandoned.
49
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
Preparation
Aiedde ui as au l pinous poo "inydiu si uaa au
5-6 seconds once you are correctly in the jugular vein. Also remember
Preparation can be approached similarly to that of cystocentesis in that
that veins are low pressure relative to the arterial blood supply, so if you
any pain, temperament, or life stage related conditions should first be
aspirate too forcefully, you may inadvertently collapse the vein. Use
addressed with appropriate analgesic or anxiety relieving treatments as
light, slow, and steady aspiration. Practice withdrawing the plunger
 prescribed by a veterinarian.Similar methods of restraint to shield a cat's
from the needle on room air to become more comfortable holding the
visual perimeter (i.e. muzzle, snap-on Elizabethan collar), "cat clip," or
needle in one place while drawing back on the syringe. Once blood has
cat bag, can be used to calm cats and protect veterinary staff. Such
been collected, stop aspirating, remove the needle and syringe, and
 restraint devices may be more practically used for venipuncture due to
apply pressure to the venipuncture site for 30-60 seconds as sufficient to
patient positioning. However, for venipuncture, most often a "less-is-
prevent bruising.
more" approach to restraint will be most successful. The environment for
Blood collection from the jugular vein can often be accomplished in
feline blood collection is equally (if not more) essential than for urine
cats that are in a seated upright position with no more restraint than
collection because cats notoriously experience stress-related changes on
lightly directing their jaw dorsally and to the right with little else than a
their leukogram. This can be tempered by collecting blood in a dimly lit,
finger. In fact, many cats are more cooperative with minimal restraint
quiet room, away from barking dogs and other loud noises. Owners, if
and will often allow for one-person venipuncture (with practice).
 present, should be encouraged to remain a calming influence. Providing
Alternatively, in slightly more nervous cats, situating the cat in dorsal
cats with a soft, warm, and comfortable towel or pillow to lie on during
recumbency in a lap over a towel, with the legs bent at a 90-degree angle
collection is also helpful, especially if the body condition score is 3/9 or
aids in a calmed patient restraint and good jugular vein visualization. Sit
ui paaip auo suisn pue shuai woou sunpunouns au Suamog 'ssa
Uo s ot isaisea st l inq 'loots dais e uo iaag um sieuo e u so ioo au u
source for vein identification may also help to calm a stressed cat.
Blood can be most easily collected from three main sites: the (left) jug-
a countertop (Fig. 8-3). The back of the cat's head rests at the knees, and
ular vein, the medial saphenous veins, and the cephalic veins. Ideally,
its rump and feet rest against the abdomen. This technique usually
these areas should be sterilely prepared by clipping the hair and apply-
requires two assistants. One assistant extends the neck and directs it in a
45-degree angle to the right as previously described for jugular collec-
ing isopropyl alcohol to cleaned skin. However, preparation will depend
On case selection and should be directed by the veterinarian.For exam-
tion, and the other assistant gently holds the front and back legs together
in a cradled position directed caudally.
ple, some cats (and owners) will fare better if hair is not shaved.
 If only a small amount of blood is indicated or jugular blood collection
Regardless of the area chosen, while learning in a teaching seting or if
is prohibitive, the cephalic or medial saphenous veins are frequently
time permits in a clinical more practical setting, local analgesia as when
used to collect blood in cats. These veins can be prepared as if for place-
used for intravenous catheterization may be useful. In these instances,
ment of an intravenous catheter. For cephalic blood collection using the
after the skin is shaved and cleaned, a topical cream containing 4% or less 
lightest restraint possible, point the cat's head upward as an easy distrac-
lidocaine (such as EMLA Cream) is applied to the skin, covered with a
tion while keeping the head pointed forward. This relaxes the cat's jaw
dressing, and venipuncture is delayed for at least 30 minutes. For obvi-
muscles and can result in calming, as well as keeps the teeth safely away
ous reasons, in a clinical setting this is not always practical.
from the phlebotomist. Sometimes the cat will relax more when placed
For jugular and cephalic blood collection, the cat can be "restrained"
gently in the sternally recumbent Sphinx position. The assistant will use
his or her thumb to wrap from medial to lateral across the cephalic vein
just distal to the elbow, to occlude the vein. The vein should be apparent 
nique that places the cat in dorsal recumbency can also be employed.
centrally and dorsally over the antebrachium. Lightly tapping over the
This technique will be described.
vein and using alcohol will again help the vein to stand up. The needle
 Jugular blood collection is often preferred and will be described first.
and syringe are advanced in the same fashion as for the jugular vein,
The left jugular vein in most cats is more prominent, so this side is often
preferred. To locate the left jugular vein, anatomically draw an imagi-
nary line from the lateral right limbus of the eye (junction of the cornea
and sclera) to the thoracic inlet. Place light pressure with the right thumb
at the thoracic inlet in this location, and the jugular should appear.
Alcohol will help to make the jugular vein more prominent, as will
lightly tapping the finger on top of and from right to left over this imagi-
nary line or shaving hair over the area. In addition, having an assistant
gently stretch the cat's neck and turn the cat's head to the right approxi-
mately 45 degrees may also help make visualization easier. In obese or
very dehydrated cats, the jugular may not be seen, and this imaginary
line and anatomical landmarks will guide for aspiration. In obese cats, a
layer of fat will often surround the jugular vein, and although it may not
be seen, the vein is ofen very flat and superficial. Insert the hub of the
needle, bevel up, into the jugular vein. Some may find it helpful to first
bend the needle at its base at a 30-degree angle. Be deliberate in the nee-
dle insertion. While harpooning the vessel is neither necessary nor ben-
eficial, if the eedle insertion is too delicate the vein willbe pushed away
by the needle tip, and the cat will feel the needle tip and be more likely to
but continuous pressure until a flash of blood in the hub is seen. Be care-
ful not to thread the needle to far or deep because penetration through
the opposite side of the vein is possible. If you think this has happened,
del aui se umo ual pan enng po poia aiuae u ea ann
method," has the operator siting on a countertop or table and placing the cat in dorsal
the needle back into the vein. Once you get a flash of blood, hold the
recumbency on his or her lap with the head near the operator's knees. One assstant
syringe and needle steady and continue to aspirate until the syringe is
uoe ym eae au huam ay laat sen auispiy auoue pue peay s,ie auispiou
full. Maintaining anatomical alignment with the needle and syringe to
 the jugular vein stands up more prominently than with other methods.
68
Venipuncture and Cystocentesis
to occlude the vein (Fig. 8-4). Unlike the jugular or cephalic vein
approach, this vein has low pressure and will less often "bounce" or
stand up when gently tapped. However, because the skin is very thin in
this region, the vein filled with dark blue blood can frequently be seen
with ease, especially after alcohol is applied or the hair is shaved. A
25-gauge needle with a 1- or 3-cc volume syringe is recommended.
Conclusion
Careful consideration to the unique needs, history, and temperament of
each feline patient, along with patience, loving care, and practice, will
result in successful blood and urine collection in feline patients. The
skills of venipuncture and cystocentesis will enable the veterinary team
to submit the diagnostic tests necessary for the treatment of feline
patients. This, in turn, will result in improving the quality of life of our
feline patients, and their owners.
Figure 8-4  Small amounts of blood can be collected from the medial saphenous vein
Suggested Readings
with the assistance of one helper The helper holds the cat's scruff and supports the cat's
spine with one hand and holds the free rear leg and the tail while holding ofthe vein
Buckley GJ, Aktay SA, Rozanski EA. 2009. Massive Transfusion and
with the other hand.
Surgical Management of latrogenic Aortic Laceration Associated with
Cystocentesis in a Dog. J Amer Vet Med Assoc. 235(3):288-91.
except that it may be necessary to use less and slower aspiration because
The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 902-903. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
smaller veins tend to collapse more readily. If this is consistently a prob-
Pozza M, Stella J, Wagner S., et al. 2008. Clipnosis Technique. J Fel Med 
lem, consider trading to a smaller volume syringe with an extension set
Surg. 10(2):82-87. Philadelphia: Elsevier.
or using a 26-gauge butterfly set.
Rush JE. 1999. Syncope and Episodic Weakness. In PR Fox, D Sisson,
For cats that do not tolerate minimal restraint, seated, or dorsally
NS Moise, eds., Textbook of Canine and Feline Cardiology, 2nd ed.,
recumbent positions, the medial saphenous veins may be used. Most
pp. 446-54. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
often, the patient is positioned in right lateral recumbency as for cysto-
Wagner KA, Gibbon KJ, Strom TL, et al. 2006. Adverse Effects of EMLA
centesis, except that the assistant uses his or her left hand in a "karate
(lidocaine/prilocaine) Cream and Efficacy for the Placement of Jugular
aue leoua au jo uoan au ie ainsad ut kidde on uousey ,do
Catheters in Hospitalized Cats. J Fel Med Surg. 8(2):141-44.
69
CHAPTER 9
J. Scot Estep
lens with oil all contribute to poor image quality and compile the frustra-
Introduction
tion of cytology.
Cytology is an incomplete art, like looking at a crime scene through a
[ ym uuno u pasn pue uens  au un 'auaad
The "Home Run or Nothing" Mentality
information cytology can provide valuable diagnostic data, but in the
wrong situation with the wrong technique it can be a waste of time and
in some cases misleading as to the actual diagnosis. The goal of this chapter
every case it can give some useful clinical information. A monomorphic
is to empower the technician and clinician with proper cytology collec-
population of lymphoblasts from a lymph node aspirate is diagnostic,
tion and slide preparation techniques to get the most out of cytology.
asn aeu osie si sao esed pue stoud aaear uug in
Minimal guidance for slide interpretation is offered; Chapter 13 and
even if it does not confirm the differential.
numerous excellent cytology books are available to guide the systematic
evaluation of cytology samples.
Sample Collection
Samples can be obtained from almost any tissue and in many different
ways: fine-needle biopsy, fine-needle aspiration, impression smear, body
Preparing all the necessary items before beginning sample collection will
cavity fluid, joint fluid, cerebrospinal fluid, transtracheal wash, trau-
improve identification and eliminate sample degradation as a result of
matic urinary catheterization, prostate massage/ejaculation, vaginal
delays. The supplies that are needed for every sample are (Fig. 9-1):
swab, eye/ear swab, blood, bone marrow, impressions, and scrapes.
· Clean dry slides preferably with one frosted end.
·Pencil or slide marker pen.Identify slides before collecting sample.
Control Points
· Clean fresh cytology stains preferably Diff-Quik (a modified
Each step of sample collection and slide preparation is critical for the
Romanowsky stain).
production of diagnostic cytology samples. A photo is only as good as
● Immersion oil and coverslips.
the focus and lighting when the picture is taken; likewise, a cytology
sample is only as good as the process that made it. The following are the
Fine-Needle Biopsy (FNB)
five fixable pitfalls, which are the critical control points of cytology.
This technique is gentle on the cells and is ideal for soft masses, lymph
nodes, and intra-abdominal organs. It works well for specimens that are
Lack of Identification on the Slides
fragile and cannot handle the negative pressure of aspiration. Start with
 this more gentle method and move on to the more aggressive fine-needle
Failure to identify radiographs or blood samples is considered malprac-
aspiration if good cells are not obtained.
tice, yet most clinicians/technicians do not label cytology slides.
Supplies: 18- to 22-gauge needle, 5- or 20-cc syringe, and intravenous
Admittedly slides are hard to write on, but without a name and location
extension tube (optional).
on the slide, a sample quickly becomes useless. The best way to learn to
be a better cytologist is to refer back to the slides once a diagnosis is
●Shave area if necessary for exposure.
made; however, without proper identification this is impossible.
· Clean area with alcohol or surgical prep.
Poor Sample Collection
Mastering the right collection technique for the right situation is critical.
It takes practice, and in the long run it will improve service to patients.
Poor Slide Prep
 Making a good smear, drying and fixing the slides, proper staining, and
cover slipping slides are all critical for getting the most out of the sample.
 Poor Microscope/Poor Utilization of a Microscope
Microscopes need to be clean and mechanically maintained regularly,
and most clinics have a better microscope than they think. Lack of knowl-
edge of how to use the diaphragm and condenser, lack of a coverslip
with the high dry (40x or 60x) lens, and contamination of the high dry
aus -lapu u ae- sapis paisoy adns o l6 an
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
short intravenous extension set, gauze pads, purple top tube, Diff-Quik stain set, cover
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
slips, and immersion oil.
70
Cytology
L.vte
m.11n.xtty
mey10
2
4
Live
obw6
Gmey
Figure 9-2  A subcutaneous or intra-abdominal mass is immobilized with one hand so
a 22-gauge needle can be inserted into the mass with the other hand.
● Stabilize mass or lymph node between fingers.
· Use either a needle only, a needle attached to a plunger-less syringe,
or a needle attached to an intravenous extension set that is attached
to a syringe (Fig. 9-2).
● Insert the needle into the mass and redirect four to five times with a
pecking motion without leaving the capsule of the target tissue.
Open the syringe plunger and attach to needle and then blow the
Figure 9-3 (1} A sample is applied to a prelabeled slide and covered with second
sample onto a prelabeled slide.
prelabeled slide placed face down. The top slide is then rotated 90 degrees. (2)The slides
● To prepare a vertical pull-apart smear (drop-spin-pull), place another
are pulled laterally apart. (3) Two stainable smears are produced. (4) wo stained smears
prelabeled slide upside down and cross ways on top of the sample
 mntaining multiple clumps of cells are seen after staining.
allowing only the weight of the slide and capillary action to stick the
slides together. If they will not stick together a small drop of saline
can be ad ded.
● Holding the frosted edges, rotate the slides and pull them vertically
 apart from each other, producing two good slides (Fig. 9-3).
● Dry the slides. Stain some and leave others unstained.
Fine-Needle Aspiration
Thistechnique is more aggressive and can be used as a follow-upif insuf-
ficient cells are retrieved with the FNB. It can be used as a primary tech-
nique for fibrous masses. Some choose to start with this technique for
intra-abdominal organs.
souaaeui pue 'auss -z 1o -g 'aipaau anes-7 0t -gt saddns 
extension tube (optional).
· Shave area if necessary for exposure.
Clean area with alcohol or surgical prep.
 Stabilize mass or lymph node between fingers.
● Use either a needle attached to a 5- or 12-cc syringe or an intravenous
extension tube that is attached to a syringe.
● Insert the needle into the mass, apply negative pressure with the
Figure 9-4  A subcutaneous or intra-abdominal mass is stabilized with one hand while
syringe, and redirect four to five times with a pecking motion with-
the other hand inserts a 20-gauge needle attached to an intravenous extension set and
out leaving the capsule of the target tissue. Release the negative pres-
a syringe. An assistant applies negative pressure with a 12-cc syringe.
sure and withdraw (Fig. 9-4).
Remove the needle from the syringe,fill the syringe with air, reattach
neoplastic versus inflammatory lesions but can be misleading for any
the needle, and blow the sample onto a prelabeled slide.
lesion with surface ulceration and secondary infection.
 Prepare a vertical pull-apart slide (drop-spin-pull) as described pre-
'aa iadless pue uoq sog sped aznea so lamot iaded rsaddns
viously, producing two good slides.
● Dry the slides, stain some, and leave others unstained.
● Cut solid samples to get a clean surface or clean the surface of skin
lesions.
● Alternate between blotting with a gauze pad and touching the slide
 Impression Smear
(blot, smear, and repeat [Fig. 9-5]).
This technique is useful for surgical or necropsy samples as well as ulcer-
● Make at least four slides in case special stains are needed.
ated or draining cutaneous lesions. It can be useful to quickly separate
● Dry the slides, stain some, and leave others unstained.
71
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
2
3
4
Figure 9-5  (1}A transected mass is blotted with gauze. (2) A slide is pressed on it.(3) and (4) These two steps are repeated.
Swab
 This technique is useful for any area with a surface lesion or orifice that
cannot be reached for an impression smear. The swab is most frequently
used for ear and vaginal samples but is also useful for draining tracts,
nasal, eye, anal sacs, and more surfaces or mucocutaneous areas. The
biggest downfall of the swab is that the sample is frequently too thick;
therefore, be careful to avoid leaving too much material on the slide.
If the sample is too thick, another slide can be used with the vertical
 pull-apart method to produce two smears that are not as thick.
 Supplies: Clean, dry swabs and saline.
· Clean and dry the area if possible
● Avoid surface contamination by inserting a dry or saline-moistened
swab (do not use lube or ultrasound jelly) into the area of interest and 
gently spin the cotton tip.
· Remove the swab being careful to avoid contamination.
●Gently roll the swab on the surface of three to four slides, avoiding
leaving too much sample on the slide (Fig. 9-6).
· Dry the slides, stain some, and leave others unstained.
Skin Scrape
Figure 9-6 A thin layer of material collected from a lesion with a moist cotton-tipped 
applicator is rolled out on a slide prior to staining.
 This technique is useful for superficial cutaneous and follicular lesions
that cannot be sampled with an impression smear or fine-needle aspira-
tion. It works for a well with follicular parasites, fungal infections, and
● Pinch up and elevate skin.
● With fresh prep samples to rule out follcular parasites apply mineral
flat cutaneous lesions.
 Supplies: Scalpel blade and mineral oil or saline.
oil to the skin surface; for samples that will be stained before evalua-
tion, use saline.
· Shave the area if necessary.
● Aggressively scrape the skin with the scalpel blade without lacerat-
· Clean the area with alcohol or surgical prep.
ing the skin.
72
Cytology
 Alternate between scraping the skin and squeezing the area until
gravity), and three to four smears should be made from the fresh fluid.
blood and serum exude from the scraped surface (Fig. 9-7).
These two procedures will provide a snapshot of what the cells look like
 Apply the exuded serum and blood to a slide, create a vertical pull-
at the time of collection. Fluid samples can be obtained from the thoracic
part sample, and either add a coverslip and examine the fresh sample
or abdominal cavity, joints, epidural space, cysts, trachea, urinary blad-
or dry and stain some slides for examination.
der, and others.
See Table 9-1 for interpretation guidelines.
Fluid Samples
Supplies: 18- to 22-gauge needle, 12- or 20-cc syringe, purple-topped
tube, red-topped tube,refractometer, urine dipstick, intravenous exten-
Fluid samples can be obtained from numerous sources. Subsequent cyto-
sion set, and stopcock (optional).
logic examination can be useful for determining the origin. Cells within
fluids will degrade quickly; therefore, immediately after collection all
·Shave the area if necessary.
fluids should be checked with a refractometer for total protein (not specific
● Clean the area with surgical prep. Most fluid samples come from
closed compartments, and surgical sterility should be maintained if 
possible.
● Insert the needle, withdraw fluid, leaving the needle in place, remove
the syringe and save some fluid for culture and some in the ethylen-
 ediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) tube for cytology.
● Immediately invert the EDTA tube several times to mix contents.
● Check and record the total protein level with a refractometer.
● Make three to four blood smear-type slides with the fresh fluid.
ot ie pana aq uo hl Aiea mo sy adus aut  o
rpm for 5 minutes (similar to urine sediment), and slides can be made
from this sediment.
· Dry and stain some slides and leave others unstained.
 Slide Staining and Preparations
Most clinics use a modified Romanowsky stain kit (Diff-Quik). This
stain will differentiate nuclei from cytoplasm and will stain most bacte-
rial and fungal organisms. Stains used for cytology should be kept clean
Auen ino patueuo Aeoipoiad pue (suieis iea io [eoaj iog pasn pou)
Figure 9-7 After pinching the skin to cause blood or serum to exude, a slide is pressed
facilities rotate the stains from cytology use for the first 30-45 days then
onto the lesion.
to fecal and ear samples for another 30-45 days. Slides should be stained
TABLE 9-1: Laboratory interpretation of fluid samples
Chylous Effusion
 Transudate
Modified Transudate
Exudate
Fip
Hemorrhage
Refractometer
High lipid content 
<2.5 (most 
2.5-7.5
>3.0
>4.0
>2.5
 total protein
interferes
below 1.5}
(1P/6)
Nucleated cell
<10.000 sometimes
<1500
1000-7000
>10,000
2000-6000
Variable PCV up to 10% 
count (cells/μl)
lower
Color
 Milky white to pink 
Amber, white, red
White to red, cloudy
Clear, amber to pink 
Red
Cells
Lymphocytes, 
Macrophages,
Macrophages, lymphocytes.
Septic: Degenerate
Nondegenerate
Fresh hemorrhage: RBCs,
macrophages
lymphocytes,
 mesothelial cells,
 neutrophils 
 neutrophils. 
 platelets, peripheral 
 mntaining fat
mesothelil cells,
mondegenerate
 nonseptic: 
lymphocytes.
blood >24hrs post
droplets
mondegenerate
reutrophils,
nondegenerate
macrophages
hemorrhage: RBCs.
neutrophils 
 neoplastic cells
neutrophils,
macrophages with 
 macrophages.
erythrophagocytosis
 neoplastic cells
and hemosiderin, no
platelets
 Differential
Idiopathic,
Low oncotic
 Increased hydrostatic
Peritonitis, bile
Wet form has a
Trauma, neoplasia,
 cardliomyopathy.
pressure:
 pressure, passive 
 peritonitis,
 viscous fluid, dry
 coagulation defects.
neoplasia,
Hypoalbumin,
mngestion, neoplasia,
 ruptured urinary 
form does not
heart disease
 mediastinal mass,
protein losing
impaired, lymphatic
bladder,.
product an
ruptured thoracic
diseases
drainage
pancreatitis,
effusion 
duct
bacterial/fungal,
abscess.
 neoplasia
73
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
m.ller
9mayll
L.Ve
Ahayll
Figure 9-8 Lefto right, A small drop of oil is applied to a stained slide; a coverslip is placed over slide; and the completed smear is ready for viewing.
by the manufacturer's instructions, but the number of dips or dipping
times can be altered based on clinic preference or the age of the stains
(l prefer 12 dips in each jar). After staining, slides should be thoroughly
dried and covered with a small drop of mineral or immersion oil and a
coverslip. The high dry 40x or 60x lens will only work with a coverslip
(Fig. 9-8).
Evaluating Slides
 Every cytology sample should, at a minimum, be stained and evaluated
in house for quality, cellularity, artifacts, and contamination. To improve
abilities as cytologist it is also educational to critically evaluate the slide
and add a diagnostic impression on the submission form to the patholo-
gist. Most pathologists will consider the differential and will comment
on the salient features of the slide in response to comments.
Each step of slide evaluation should be completed systematically; no
one feature or cell is enough to support a diagnosis. Follow the "rule of
three" to support any diagnosis. Example #1: Bacteria on a slide do not 
indicate a bacterial infection, but (1) bacteria, (2) inside, and (3) degener-
 axg n a e se as a  so e
Just the presence of a mitotic figure does not support a diagnosis of neo-
plasia, but (1) mitotic figures, (2) variation in nuclear size, and (3) nuclear
atypia are diagnostic for neoplasia (Figs. 9-9 to 9-15).
Figure 9-9 Renal cell carcinoma. (1} Normal epithelium. (2)Anisokaryosis. (3)Abnormal
The recommended steps are:
mitosis.
● Look at the slide off the stage in the light and get an impression as to
 cellularity and staining.
tually pyknotic (nondegenerate). See Figure 9-16. In infected inflamma-
● At low power (4x-10x) drive around the slide; find where the best
tory lesions the neutrophils undergo rapid degeneration, vacuolation,
 clumps are and evaluate overall cellularity. Do not forget the bottom
and eventual rupture (degenerate). See Figure 9-17.
edge of the slide.
● Evaluate cells at 40x and using the algorithm in Figure 9-16.
Lymphocy tes
Normal lymphocytes are identical to blood smear lymphocytes. They are
Cell Types
7-10μm wide with a large nuclei and a small amount of blue cytoplasm.
Activated lymphocytes have more prominent cytoplasm that often blebs
 The first question of a cytology sample after assessing the quality is
up or extends from the cells like a handle. Immature lymphoid cells
eun uaamiaq ae susp oeu au suasaid ae sadai lan ieu,
(lymphoblasts) are characterized by their large size (10-15μm) and the
matory cells and tissue cells. The following is a summary of the major
presence of a nucleolus.
cell types (Figs. 9-17 and 9-18).
Plasma Cells
Neutrophils
Plasma cells are similar in size to small lymphocytes, but the nuclear
Neutrophils are 7-15μm wide with multilobed nuclei. In the absence of
chromatin is denser, the cytoplasm is blue and abundant, and a perinu-
pyogenic bacteria, neutrophil nuclei become hypersegmented and even-
 clear clear area (Golgi apparatus) is usually apparent.
74
Cytology
Macrophages
Macrophages range in size from 12-100μm, have a single or multiple
round to oval nucleus that may contain an apparent nucleolus, and have
light blue, usually vacuolated cytoplasm. These cells phagocytize cellu-
lar debris, foreign material, and bacteria. Neutrophils, cellular debris,
erythrocytes, red blood cell pigments, lipids, and phospholipids; how-
ever, they are commonly encountered within the cytoplasm of these
phagocytic cells.
Eosinophils
Eosinophils appear similar to eosinophils in peripheral blood and are
associated with various types of lesions, including allergic inflammation,
 parasitic inflammation, eosinophilic granulomas, collagen necrosis, and 
mast cell tumors.
Mast Cells
 Mast cells are round cells with a round to oval nucleus and cytoplasm
that contains purple granules. The granules occasionally do not stain
well with Diff-Quike. Mast cells may be present in low concentration in 
-asu yu un suasaid jninq 'sapos reu go sad Au
Figure 9-10 Mast cells (round cell tumor).(1) Individual round cels. (2) Multifocal
tions, mast cell neoplasia should be suspected (see Fig. 9-10).
multinucl eate cells.
Common features
of malignancy
7
8
9
10
Figure 9-11 Common features of malignancy:(1}>Variation in nuclear size (anisokaryosis).(2) Multinucleate cells.(3) Multiple nucleoli and irregular nucleoli. (4) Frequent mitosis. (5)
Nuclear molding hugging). (6 Irregular nuclear chromatin. 7) High yield of spindled cels. 8) Dyskeratosis (keratinizing with intact nucleol). 9Abnormal mitosis 10) Monomorphic
cell population.
75
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
 Figure 9-14  Nasal squamous cell carcinoma. (1}Normal nasal epithelium. (2) Atypical
squamous cells.
Figure 9-12 Sarcoma. This tumor is characterized by (1) formation of tails by the 
 Cytoplasm and (2) anisokaryosis. Note the overall high cell yield typical for a for spindle 
 cell tumor.
Figure 9-15 Hepatic lipidosis. (1} Large discrete vacuoles that sometimes peripheral-
ize the nuclei.(2) Normal bile duct epithelia cells. (3)If ultrasound gel is used, it will be
Figure 9-13 Lymphosarcoma in lymph node. (1) Mitotic figures. (2) Lymphoblasts.
 found in the sample.
(3) Normal lymphocytes (size of erythrocytes).
usually somewhat uniform in size, present within the cytoplasm of
Mesothelial Cells
neutrophils, and if present in large numbers, may be both free and
 Mesothelial cells tend to proliferate and exfoliate when fluid accumu-
 phagocytized. Other types of microorganisms, such as fungal organisms
lates in abody cavity. They may appear singly or in clusters and are large
and protozoa, may also be infrequently seen in cytology specimens,
(12-30 μm), have light to dark basophilic cytoplasm, and have single or
including: Coccidioides, Blastomyces, Histoplasma, Cryptococcus, and
multiple, round to oval nuclei with one or more nucleoli. The cytoplas-
Toxoplasma gondii.
"! punoue ,asuu, Yuid e aaey ot seadde Aeu xapuoq ou 
Epithelial Cells
Microorganisms
Epithelial cells occur in high cell numbers, so they usually exfoliate eas-
Bacteria stain blue with Romanowsky stains and must be distin-
ily. In addition, they tend to be shed in clusters. Cell shape may reflect
guished from background protein and stain sediment. They are
that of the specific epithelial type (squamous, cuboidal, or columnar).
76
 Consider sample collection, slide making, and
Slide quality
Poor
 staining technique
Degenerate:
Good
Acute process:
 pyogenic bacteria
70% Neutrophils
 degenerate or
nondegenerate
 Nondegenerate:
 severe irritant
Inflammatory cells or
Inflammatory
50-70% Neutrophils,
Subacute or pyogranulomatous
tissue cells
30-50% macrophages
inflammation: resolving acute or
 persistent irritant
>50% Macrophages,
Chronic inflammation:
Lymphocytes, and plasm
 bacterial or fungal 
cells
 granuloma, chronic irritant
Tissue cells
Round cells
Epithelial cells
 Spindled cells
Inflammation or
Epithelial
 Reactive change or
 benign round cell 
hyperplasia or
 benign spindled cell
 proliferation
 adenoma
 proliferation
Three criteria of malignancy
Malignant
neoplasm
Figure 9-16 Algorithm for evaluating cells.
i eseld () sdou aeaaan (l) in lenld il-e an
Figure 9-18 Suppurative rhinitis. (1} Respiratory epithelium. (2) Degenerate neutro-
(3) Lymphoblast. (4) Activated lymphocyte. (5) Normal lymphocyte.
phils. (3) Bacteria.
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
Cytoplasmic Criteria of Malignancy
Cytoplasmic criteria are basophilia, vacuolation, and ill-defined margins.
Clinical Feline Cytology
 There are numerous well-written books that will lead the technician/clini-
cian in a systematic evaluation of cytology slides. Several are listed in the
suggested readings. The following information is intended as a shor list of
the major conditions seen in each system, listed in order of frequency.
Skin and Subcutis
Dermatitis
Mixed inflammatory cells are the key to diagnosing dermatitis (see
Fig. 9-2). Granulomatous aspirates should be stained for fungal of acid
Figure 9-19 Feline osteosarcoma. (1) Clumps of cells are separated by pink "osteoid
fast organisms.
material." (2) Occasional tails are present.
Basal Cell Tumor
These are epithelial tumors, but they often exfoliate as round cells, indi-
acinar-like formations (balls, morulae) indicates glandular epithelial ori-
vidually or in groups. They produce one or more bulging skin nodules,
gin. The neoplastic cells tend to be roundish, polyhedral, and large, and
often located on the head and neck, and are usually ulcerated.
their nuclei tend to be round (see Figs. 9-9, 9-14, and 9-15).
Mast Cell
Spindled (Mesenchymal) Connective Tissue Cells
This is a common round cell tumor of the skin of cats. Some can be pleo-
Spindled connective tissue cells tend to exfoliate poorly (low cell num-
morphic and multinucleate, but despite these malignant features, these
bers) and are more prone to exfoliate individually, although groups of
 masses are almost always benign (see Fig. 9-10).
cells may be closely apposed in highly cellular specimens. Cell shape is
sedo pateluoa io eao ane lanu pue padeus aurds) paeuoa
tends to "stream" at the end of the cell making a tail or point. These tails
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
are the best feature to differentiate clumps of spindled cells from epithe-
lial cells and, when in doubt,"tails trump clumps" (Fig. 9-19).
This is a common tumor of older cats, especially white cats, and it occurs
in various locations including the skin of the ears, nose, and mouth.
 aear - so ae ueus sese apaau-au ao sudu yn
Round Cell Tumors
60μm in diameter - with abundant basophilic to gray cytoplasm, and
 central toeccentric round nuclei. Usually there are numerous neutrophils
Round cell tumors exfoliate high numbers of discrete cells. Round cells
present because the tumors have an ulcerated surface (see Fig. 9-14).
are previously described with inflammatory cell. The amount of cyto-
plasm varies with the tumor type. Nuclei are round and often quite
uniform. Specimens from these tumors tend to be cellular, and charac-
Sarcoma
teristic morphologic features often allow specific cytologic diagnosis
 There are many categories of sarcomas in the cat, but itis rarely possible to
(see Fig. 9-10).
diagnose the cell type with cytology. Most sarcomas have the same poor
 prognosis so the important feature is being able to diagnose the cytoplas-
 Criteria of Malignancy
mic tails, elongated nuclei, and multiple malignant features (see Fig. 9-12).
Once a sample is differentiated between inflammatory and tissue cells,
Mammary Gland
the individual cells need to be assessed to determine if there are signifi-
cant characteristics of malignancy. This requires consideration of the
In the cat, most mammary masses are caused by infection, cysts, diffuse
entire clinical picture. Even if the cells are spindled or epithelial, finding
fibroadenomatous hyperplasia, or neoplasia. Mammary neoplasms are
usually highly malignant simple adenocarcinomas.
excision and further characterization with histology.
Lymphosarcoma
General Criteria of Malignancy
Cutaneous lymphosarcoma is a difficult diagnosis to make with cytol-
The general criteria are uniform population, pleomorphic cells, large cell
soudui jo uoenndod oudo e Aq pazaoeeu si h o
size, abnormal location, and cell yield.
with multiple malignant features.
Nuclear Criteria of Malignancy
Melanoma
Anisokaryosis (most frequent feature of malignancy), variable nuclear
Melanoma is found most commonly in the mouth and eyes. It can be
to cytoplasmic ratio, multiple/irregular nucleoli, irregular chromatin,
characterized cytologically by round, spindled, or epithelial cells that
irregular nuclear size, frequent mitoses, and abnormal mitoses are the
contain brown pigment and have prominent nucleoli and moderate
nuclear criteria (see Fig. 9-11).
anisokaryosis.
78
Cytology
 Feline Lymph Node Cytology
it is important not to overinterpret the sample just because there is some
intercellular lipid.
Lymphoid Hyperplasia
Normal lymph nodes contain 20% lymphoblasts that are 10-20 μm in
diameter and 80% small lymphocytes that 7-10μm in diameter.
Bile Stasis
Hyperplastic lymph nodes can have up to 45% lymphoblasts but are also
This is also common in sick cats. It is characterized by green-black pig
 ment that is within the cytoplasm and occasionally filling the bile canali-
culi, causing bile plugs to form between some hepatocytes (see Fig. 9-15).
Lymphosarcoma
Lymph node aspirates with greater than 50% lymphoblasts are consistent
Lymphosarcoma
with lymphosarcoma. Many cases of lymphosarcoma have greater than
 This neoplasm is often associated with anorexia and is therefore accom-
S0% lymphoblasts. Cases with near 50% should either be biopsied and
 panied by hepatic lipidosis and bile stasis in many cases. It features mod-
submitted for histology or reaspirated in 4-6 weeks (see Fig. 9-13).
multiple malignant features (see Fig. 9-15).
Suppurative Lymphadenitis
Lymph nodes near sites of infection will frequently have draining neu-
Hepatitis, Acute or Suppurative
trophils, but more than 15% neutrophils are consistent with suppurative
Suppurative hepatitis can be challenging cytologically. It is characterized
lymphadenitis.
Granulomatous Lymphadenitis
swelling, disruption of the cell membranes, and fragmenting of the
nuclei.
High numbers of histiocytes in a cutaneous lymph node is supportive of
granulomatous lymphadenitis. If no etiology is seen on the slides, special
stains for fungal organisms or acid-fast bacteria should be performed.
Hepatitis, Lymphoplasmacytic
 Metastatic Neoplasia
cytes, and especially plasma cells that are associate with the hepatocytes
Unless there is previous history of carcinoma or melanoma, it is rare to
clumps, are supportive of chronic hepatitis.
-and jo saseo ung saese apou yduu eisedoau oesau pu
Hepatitis, Granulomatous
test for spread to lymph nodes.
As with skin and lymph nodes, granulomatous inflammation is generally
secondary to fungal or bacterial and special stains should be performed
Feline Basal Cytology
to rule out organisms.
The normal cells that you expect to see here are elongated cells of
respiratory epithelium, not spindled cells.
Carcinoma
Clusters of epithelial cells with multiple features of malignancy.
Rhinitis, Suppurative
High numbers of neutrophils with or without bacteria (see Fig. 9-17).
 Suggested Readings
Cowell RL. 2008. Diagnostic Cytology and Hematology of the Dog and Cat.
 Rhinitis, Granulomatous
Philadelphia: Mosby.
High numbers of macrophages, some multinucleate. Rule out fungal
Cullen JM. 2009. Summary of the World Small Animal Veterinary
infection with special stains.
Association Standardization Committee Guide to Classification of
Liver Disease in Dogs and Cats. In JM Cullen, ed. Vet Clin North Am
Small Animm Pract. 39(3):395418.
Lymphos arc oma
Dean R, Adams V, Whitbread T, et al. 2006. Study of Feline Injection Site
 A monomorphic population of lymphoblasts with multiple malignant
Sa rcomas. Vet Rec. 159(19):641-42.
features.
Dempsey SM, Ewing PJ. 2011. A Review of the Pathophysiology.
Classification, and Analysis of Canine and Feline Cavitary effusions.
J A*m Anirm Hosp Assoc. 47(1):1-11.
Carcinoma
Clusters of epithelial cells with multiple features of malignancy (see
KW Prasse, eds., Duncan & Prasse's Veterinary Laboratory Medicine:
Fig. 9-14).
Clinical Pathology, Pp. 304-30. Ames: Iowa State Press.
Rothuizen J. 2006. WSAVA Standards for Clinical and Histological Diagnosis
f Canine and Feline Liver Disease.World Small Animal Veterinary
Feline Liver Cytology
Association. Liver Standardization Group. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders.
Hepatic Lipidosis (Fatty Liver)
Tyler RD, Cowell RL. 1989. Evaluation of Pleural and Peritoneal
This is by far the most common finding in feline liver biopsies. It is char-
Effusions. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 19(4):743-68.
acterized by large discrete vacuoles that expand the cytoplasm of over
Withrow SJ, Vail DM. 2007. Withrow and MacEwen's Small Animal Clinical
Os 'hese iaai raaa isoe u uass stie ao 'sroedau aul jo 
Oncology. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier.
64
CHAPTER 10
In-Office Methodology a
anc
Assurance Assessment
Craig M. Tockman
those 90 patients? When did the analyzer start producing inaccurate
Introduction
results, or is it really even producing inaccurate results now? What
   m n   no   e 
should you tell the owners of those cats?
house or point-of-care laboratory equipment designed to measure blood
The same scenario can occur with a hematology analyzer or any other
chemistry, hematology, blood gases, and some combination of these tests
analyzer. In addition to performing quality control as recommended by
and others. Laboratory evaluation of the patient is a critical component 
-oud suawssasse Aenb anu e aaey ot sueodun st il ainioejnueu au
of not only diagnosing illness but also assessing patient health at the
gram in the practice to ensure accurate and precise results. This does not
routine visit.
have to be difficult or extensive, and it should not make one fearful of
using in-office point-of-care analyzers. For optimum use, understand
how analyzers work, what they can and cannot do to ensure quality
Benefits of In-House Testing
results, and what to look for in results. Therefore, some definitions
 Technology now provides the ability to perform a large percentage of
important to the process need to be understood.
tests in the veterinary hospital. Today's analyzers are accurate, precise,
and extremely competitive in cost to run and maintain. There are many
Analyte
advantages to performing these tests in the veterinary office. This is
known as point-of-care testing, and the immediate results provide infor-
Analyte is the chemical being evaluated. Examples are blood urea nitro
mation that allows the doctor to rapidly determine the health status of
gen (BUN), creatinine, and glucose.
the patient. The doctor can discuss the results with the pet owner during
the visit, allowing for a beter understanding of the results, as well as
creating time savings for both the doctor and the pet owner. If additional
Quality Control
tests are indicated from the results those tests can be performed immedi-
ately, again providing better medical care for the patient and cost and
This term usually refers to the use of solutions with a known value to be
time savings for both the practice and the owner. Monitoring of the
used in the analyzer. The analyzer should produce a result within a cer-
patient is improved, especially when hospitalized. Critical care patients 
tain range provided with the solution. Two examples are the BUN on the
benefit greatly from immediate results. Preanesthetic tests can be per-
chemistry analyzer should fall between 10 and 15mg/dl, and a white
formed the same day providing real-time information that is far more
blood cell (WBC) count on the hematology analyzer should be between
valuable than older information. This is only a partial list of the benefits
6,000 and 6,500 102 / mm?.
of in-house testing.
Quality Assurance
Need for Quality Control
This term usually refers to the entire process of monitoring the accuracy
 Part of operating these analyzers, however, requires that they be main-
and precision of results.
tained properly and that their accuracy and precision be checked or veri-
fied on a regular basis,if not on every patient. This is true for all analyzers
including those far more expensive ones used in veterinary university
Accuracy
reference laboratories and commercial labs. In addition, it is best when
running blood analyzers that knowledge of the operating principles of
 This term refers to how close the value is to the true value. Graphically, if
shooting arrows at a target, you will hit the bull's eye every time. This is
the equipment be understood. In that way, problems that occur are
an accurate shot (Fig. 10-1a).
understood, and quality of patient care is maintained.
This chapter will not attempt to provide details on any particular
product or equipment. The goal is to understand the important concepts 
Precision
required to obtain the optimal, accurate, and precise laboratory results
for patients.
This is the repeatability of the test. If the test is repeated, the same
(or similar result) will occur every time (Fig. 10-1b).
Clearly, for a truly accurate result,both good precision and good acc
Quality Control versus Quality Assurance
racy are needed so that a clinician is confident that the results are correct
On a Monday morning, a technician runs a quality control panel on the 
and repeatable.
chemistry analyzer. All the results are within the appropriate ranges. As
-aad st siseue louo Aienb au 'sunsun s, lanennuu aun had
formed 30 days later and the results for three of the analytes are not
Calibration
within range. These tests have been performed on 90 patients between
This provides the proper mathematical formulas to the analyzer to calcu-
these quality control analyses. What do you know about the results from
late the result from the data provided. This is usually provided in soft-
ware from the manufacturer and is specific to each lot of reagents, and
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
in the best analyzers, specific to each species. When an instrument is
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
calibrated, it has the mathematical computations to meet the standard
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
for which the analyzer was designed.
80
In-Office Methodology andQuality AssuranceAssessment
(a)
O
High accuracy - low precision
(b)
O
Low accuracy -high precision
Figure 10-1(a) Accuracy refers to how close the value is to the true value. The four shots are close to the bulls eye. (b) Precision is the repeatability of the test. The four shots are
dustered cdlose to one another.
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
The goal in performing a quality control and a quality assurance
In addition, the air in veterinary practices usually contains hair and
 program is to ensure that results from the analyzer are as accurate as
other debris. However, hair and dust can get into instruments or con-
taminate samples and affect the reaction or the absorbance. Instruments
external materials cannot be performed prior to every analysis there
that run in a closed environment will minimize this effect. This is even a
must be a way to evaluate every result. This means we need to under-
stand how the analyzer works, what information it provides on every
cles. It is critical that hematology instruments be kept clean.
analysis to evaluate its accuracy, what its limitations are, and how it is
calibrated.
Poor Sample Handling
Quality Assessment with a Chemistry Analyzer
Sample handling should be one of the most important areas of concern,
whether performing the testing in the office or sending it to a reference or
 si ad eaa aed u pd sise s
commercial lab. It is also a factor that can be directly controlled. How the
sample is drawn, how it is placed in the tubes, and how it is handled after
reads changes in color. Most of these analyzers use either liquid reagents
it is placed in the tubes can all affect the results.
or dry slides. In either case, the analyte in question is part of a chemical
reaction thatcauses a color change to occur in the solution or on the slide.
The instrument then measures either the change in the intensity of the
Important Tips
color at a certain time point (called end point reaction) or the rate of
change of the color (called rate reaction).
Some important tips regarding sample handling and the effects include:
Color change is used to obtain a result using Beer's Law. In the sim-
· Difficult blood draws with a struggling patient can cause hemolysis 
plest terms it means that the change in color of the reaction is propor-
tional to the concentration of the analyte in questions (Fig. 10-2).
or rupture of the red blood cells (RBCs). This will be discussed in
Many things can affect the results of a chemistry reaction. The major
detail later in the chapter.
ones will be addressed.
● Blood transfer: Transferring blood into the tubes can be a source of
sample damage. Blood is a tissue or organ system and must be han-
dled accordingly. If you are not using a one-way vacuum system
Environment
Vacutaineritsmperativetremveboththeneedle and thcap
Chemistry reactions should take place at an appropriate temperature.
of the blood tube prior to dispensing the blood. The vacuum inside
For most tests, the temperature should be close to the body temperature
vacuum tubes is determined so it will not harm the blood; however,
of the patient. Therefore, it is most desirable if the analyzer has a con-
pushing blood back through the needle can easily cause cells to rup-
trolled temperature that allows the reactions to occur near body tempera-
ture. Blood contains a great deal of protein and is quite sticky.
ture. If not it should at least be placed where the ambient temperature is
Pushing blood back through a needle is like running it over
fairly consistent and close to body temperature. Keep analyzers away
sandpaper. It is important that you prepare your tubes prior to the
blood draw by removing the caps to insure good sample quality.
 from vents and windows.
 Tube filling order: Some blood tubes, such as green and purple (laven-
der) top tubes, contain an anticoagulant to keep blood from clotting.
Purple top tubes contain ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)
either as a sodium or potassium salt. EDTA essentially prevents blood
from clotting by binding all the calcium in the sample because calcium
is required for clotting. If blood from this tube is used in the chemistry
analysis or if the syringe is contaminated with EDTA because that tube
was filled first, the results of the blood chemistries will likely have
fallaciously low calcium and high potassium values. This could cause
a misdiagnosis or lack of trust in the analyzer. Therefore, always fill
blood tubes in the following order: red (or tiger), green, and purple.
● There are many available references to remind you of these important
procedural concepts, such as the one shown in Figure 10-3.
 Fill volume: If the blood tube containing anticoagulant is not filled to
 the appropriate level the sample may be diluted. This will cause the
results to be inaccurate because the concentration of the analytes
would be affected.
●Mixing of the blood: Except for purple top tubes to be used for complete
blood counts (CBC) tubes should not be placed on a rocker or shaken.
Blood rockers are designed only for the CBC; hemolysis occurs when
other tubes are placed on them. If whole blood is the desired sample, it
should be hand-mixed by gentle inversion ten times prior to use.
Sample Integrity
 Sample integrity evaluates three common interferents that cause poor
Absorbance
results: hemolysis, lipemia, and icterus. These affect results on all analyzers
regardless of what anymanufacturer orliterature states. These can cause
Figure 10-2  Color change is used to obtain a result using Beer's Law. In the simplest
either an increase or decrease from the real result, depending on the analyte
terms it means that the change in color of the reaction is proportional to the concentra-
and the interferent. Sample integrity is vitally important to obtain accurate
 tion of the analyte in questions.
results. Reports from laboratory instruments costing more than $100,000
82
In-Office Methodology and Quality Assurance Assessment
Sample HandlingMethods
SYRINGESIZEGUIDE
SMALLBRLD
MEOIUMBRED
LARGEBRIED
GIANTBRLID
(adlt weightup to10kg)
(adult wegh10-30kg)
(adult weight30-60kg)
(ult weightover60kg)
25g
22g
20g
18g
UsePasmafordehy
toavoidMemolysis
ddrawcfftopofthe
isewinmlebe
TESTTUBECOLORCHART
REDTOP(IFNECESSARY)
PURPLETOF
FILLSAMPLESINCORRECTORDER
NO
EDTA
Uwaysfisamplesncorrectordertoaoid
for chemistry only
for hemutology only
anti-coagulant
neverbeplaced ontestuberocke
TESTTUBE HANDLING
COMMONPROBLEMSWITHTEST
RESULTSDUETOSAMPLEQUALITY
HEMOLYSIS
broken R8C'sdistortsanalytevalues-causes pink plasma
LIPEMLA
ipen
iainterfereswithallchem
ical reactlonsand
ICTERUS
yCA-
SyourcliotstoNOTfeed theit
widbe
tothel
ppointmenttovoidbpemi
ABA
Figure 10-3 This chart shows proper tube selection and the order in which blood is to be split between different tube types.
will clearly state the likelihood of interferents. The level of hemolysis,
color can cause significant problems. In addition, hemoglobin can inter-
lipemia, and icterus is measured, and the potential effect on each analyte is
fere with the reactions themselves with high amounts.
reported. In some cases the results can change by 50% or more (Fig. 10-4).
Common effects of excessive hemolysis are:
· Addition of constituents to the sample: aspartate aminotransferase
Hemolysis
(AST), potassium (minor), and adenylate kinase (can affect creatine
When a sample is hemolyzed, the RBCs have broken apart or lysed, and
kinase [CK] results).
the hemoglobin that carries oxygen has been released from the cell. This
●Alteration of the following (not a complete list):
creates a red color to the serum or plasma. Because almost all the meas-
● Mild changes: alkaline phosphatase (ALP), total protein, calcium,
 urements are based on a color change read by the instrument, the red
albumin, and bilirubin.
83
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
Examples of the effects of lipemia and
Application
 hemolysis on sample integrity.
It is important to know if these interferents are present in the sample.
One chemistry analyzer (Abaxis Vetscan@ and Vetscan VS2@), Abaxis Inc,
Union City, CA) used for point-of-care testing measures sample integrity
Lipemia, 1+
and reports the levels to the user. This provides either a correction of the
value based on the level of the interferents or the instrument alerts the
Lipase increased by 10-20%.
user that the result was affected. As of this writing, no other point-of-care
analyzer displays this information. If the analyzer used does not meas-
Hemolysis, +2
ure these interferents, it is important at least to visually inspect the sam-
ALT increased up to 45%
ple prior to the analysis. Although this cannot provide quantitative or
numerical information, it can be determined that the sample may be
AST increased upto 20%
affected and result in spurious data.If the sample appears compromised,
it is best to either redraw the sample (hemolysis) or fast the patient
LDH increased up to 50%
(lipemia). A compromised sample can not be uncompromised.
Total bilirubin increased up to 30%
The Chemistry Reaction
Potassium increased by 20-25%
Sometimes chemistry reactions simply do not run correctly. There are
many factors that can cause this. A quality assurance program should
Direct bilirubin decreased up to 90%
identify when this occurs.
 First, always remember that patients are being treated, not values or
Triglyceride decreased up to 10%
chemistry results. If a value does not match the clinical picture question
se eas  sa is a e siu pe eadll i an
the validity of the results. More expensive instruments, such as those at
in the chemistry profile.
reference or commercial laboratories, can identify when these reactions
do not run properly. The laboratory automatically repeats the analysis
without even indicating this was performed. Some in-house point-of-
● Moderate changes: alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and CK.
● Marked changes: potassium and AST.
care analyzers also are capable of monitoring each chemistry reaction. It
is vitally important that as part of the quality assurance program you
understand if your analyzer is capable of this and to what extent.
Hemolysis can occur naturally with some disease states that cause the
RBCs to break apart. However,it is usually caused by poor sample han-
There are two basic types of chemistry reactions: rate reactions and
ding, either because of a diffcult blood draw or because the needle and
end-point (often involving dye binding) reactions (Figs. 10-5 and 10-6).
 Some analyzers can accurately monitor these reactions and others can-
cap were not removed prior to transferring blood into the tube.
not at least not to any appreciable degree. It is important to understand the
capabilities of the analyzer used so the frequency and the need for quality
       q  se 
Lipemia
passed to regulate and standardize protocols in human laboratories. This
Lipemia is caused by excessive fat in the blood, usually in the form of
law - the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act of 1988 (CLIA 88) - set
triglycerides (not cholesterol). When blood is centrifuged the liquid part
standards for quality control and quality assurance in human laboratories.
looks like a milkshake. Pancreatitis and a few other diseases may cause
It requires that analyzers be evaluated for their ability to perform advanced
lipemia; however, the most common cause of lipemia is a recent meal.
quality assurance. If the analyzer or test is deemed to have significant
This is why fasting is recommended prior to blood collection. Fortunately,
internal quality control checks the frequency of performing actual quality
this is not as common a problem with cats as with dogs. Lipemia affects
control is either greatly reduced or in some cases eliminated. For example,
all chemistry instruments and every effort should be made to red uce its
a human pregnancy test has waived status, meaning anyone can run it 
without specialized training. There are many levels of waived status, but
ter or can completely block light from passing through the sample. It also
some chemistry analyzers have been assigned this level. This means the
can affect the actual chemical reaction. In addition it takes up physical
frequency of quality control runs are required at a far less level than other
volume, so for analytes such as electrolytes, it can cause a major problem.
analyzers because of the redundant internal quality control systems they
It also causes hemolysis thus complicating the integrity of the sample
contain.
even further.
 Although this law does not apply to veterinary laboratories, equip-
Commonly affected analytes (not a complete list) include:
ment suppliers should do everything possible to meet those standards.
It is important to ask sales representatives or technical service represent-
●Bilirubin, glucose, and creatinine.
atives about how the analyzer used performs these internal control
● Electrolytes measured with an isoelectric method: Dilutional >>
Nondilutional.
chase. Some veterinary systems are used in human medicine and there-
fore, have this type of status; others do not. This should be a major
determinant in the level of comfort with results.
Icterus
Quality controls should be performed at a minimum based on the
Icterus is caused by a yellow pigment in the blood. When it stains the
manufacturer's recommendations. Some hospitals prefer to run them
tissues it is called jaundice. There are many potential causes of icterus,
more frequently, and some hospitals do not need to run them at all
but the most common ca uses are liver disease and disease that affects bile
because of the internal quality control systems on their analyzers. The
flow in the liver or through the bile duct. It can also be caused by pro-
frequency depends on the clinician, but some guidelines to consider:
longed fasting and by disorders that cause red cells to rupture.
 Because icterus changes the color of the plasma or serum it interferes
●Follow manufacturer's recommend ations.
in a manner similar to hemolysis, but the color is different. The most
● Perform controls if questionable results are occurring.
affected analytes are bilirubin and creatinine.
●Perform controls to individual comfort level.
84
I-Office Methodology and Quality Assurance Assessment
(a)
(a)
Surfactants
L-Alanine + α-Ketoglutarate
 L-Glutamate + Pyruvate
BCG +Albumin
BCG-Albumin complex
Acid pH
LDH
Pyruvate + NADH + H+ — Lactate + NAD+
Bound albumin is proportional to the concentration of
albumin in the sample. This is an endpoint reaction that
The rate of change of the absorbance at 340 nm relative
is measured as the difference in absorbance between 
to the change at 405 nm is due to the conversion of
630 nm and 500 nm.
NADH to NAD+ and is directly proportional to the amount 
 of ALT present in the sample.
(b)
(b)
Color change
Color change
Figure 10-5 Example of a rate reaction.(a)The analyte in question catalyzes a reaction
Figure 10-6  Example of an end-point reaction. (a) The analyte in question binds to a
that converts NADH to NAD+. (b) This is measured over time at two different wavelengths
dye to form a complex, which creates a color change. (b) This is measured at the end of
to determine the rate of color change. The difference between the two wavelengths is
the reaction, when no more color change occurs.
 monverted to a value for the analyte.
Although most systems have barcodes on the tests to identify what
they are to the analyzer, one company (Abaxis) includes calibration data
Sometimes everything appears to run correctly, but a value is reported
for the specific lot and species differences on the barcode to remove vari-
that does not correlate with the clinical picture. This is called a flier, and it
ability in different lots as well as to provide specific calibration data for
Gan occur on any analyzer. Remember that chemistry is a science, and
species. This is part of the CLIA SS standards discussed previously. Many
sometimes chemistry reactions do not work correctly. Always look at the 
people feel this provides a higher level of quality assurance over other
patient, and be sure the results make sense. Fliers do not mean the
systems.
instrument is bad, they simply occur once in a while and they need to be
understood.
Sample Dilutions
Calibration of Chemistry Analyzer
sea eau au uu iaean ana e ioda lm iazaieue ue saao
For blood chemistry testing, calibration is the process of setting the
of the analyzer (i.e. BUN >130), so the actual value is not known. Some
instrument to provide results based on factory-derived testing for each
 practices will dilute the sample with saline and repeat the test to get a
analyte. Analytes with a known value based on a gold standard used by
value and then multiply the value by the dilution factor to get a result.
the company are tested against the analyzer, and the appropriate math-
If this is done in your practice it is important to realize that you are not
ematical models are loaded into the software. In addition, some chemistry
receiving a completely accurate result, only a possible estimate of the
tests are different for different species, especially those dye-binding tests
value. There are two reasons for this:
 discussed previously.
 Some companies provide software updates on a regular schedule that
 1. Few practices have the precision pipetting instrumentation to do
includes calibration information for a defined set of upcoming lots of
this accurately.
reagents. If the software update is notloaded, calibration data and results
2.
The diluent used may have an affect on the chemistry reaction caus-
will be inaccurate. The instrument may not even run the analysis if the
ing a result change.
lot on site does not match the software. For companies using this model,
ask if the calibration data also includes species variability and how far in
Using analyzers with as wide a linear range as possible can minimize
advance the lots of reagents will be valid.
the number of dilutions needed.
85
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
Quality Assessment with a Hematology Analyzer
5. Live cells sometimes need human evaluation with a microscope; this
can be part of the quality assessment program.
Quality assessment with a hematology analyzer follows many of the
same rules as with a chemistry analyzer. Quality controls should be run
Quality Control and Calibration
at a minimum based on the manufacturer's recommendations or to indi-
vidual comfort level. There are things to consider when planning and
Figure 10-7 is an example of a package insert from a quality control mate-
 implementing a quality assessment and assurance program in a hematol-
rial for a hematology analyzer. Notice that there are two tables. The
lower table is what should be used to run a quality control. It provides
ranges that the analyzer should produce when running this sample. If
1. Calibration can often be performed in the office if needed.
the quality control run has values falling outside these ranges follow the
 2. Understand methodology and limitations.
manufacturer's instruction or contact the technical service department
 3. Identify issues through histograms or dot plots.
for the company. In most cases, either clean the analyzer (which is not
4. Hematology instruments run whole blood through the analyzer, so
difficult but also not an option on many analyzers) or perform a calibra-
they must be able to be cleaned.
tion on the instrument.
ScantHM5ControlPackageInsert
AB
3240Whipple Road.Union City.CA 94587
FORCALIBRATION
Normal Level Control LOT #91042
Pleaseuse the assay table belowforinstrument calibration(when thedefault choiceMCV&MPVcalibrationis selected）
Control Parameter
Assay
Units
RBC
4.34
M/ul
MCV
85
RDWc
15.6
%
PLT
235
K/ul
MPV
11.9
fl
HGB
12.1
IP/6
WBC
8.0
K/ul
EOS
4.4
K/ul
HM5ControlValuesforQualityControl
If you use these controlstoperformquality control.pleaserefer to theassay andgapvalues in the tablebelow.
Low:Lot#91041
Normal:Lot#91042
High:Lot#91043
Expires:
05/02/2011
05/02/2011
05/02/2011
Parameter
Assay
Gap
Assay
Gap
Assay
Gap
Units
WBC
3.8
±0.4
8.0
±0.8
19.2
±2.0
K/ul
RBC
2.39
±0.15
4.34
±0.2
5.03
±0.25
M/ul
HGB
5.0
±0.4
12.1
±0.5
16.0
±0.6
Ip/6
HCT
15.1
±2.0
36.9
±2.5
48.3
±3.0
%
MCV
63
±4
85
±4
96
±4
fI
MCH
20.9
±2.4
27.9
±2.8
31.8
±2.8
pg
MCHC
33.1
±3.0
32.8
±3.0
33.1
±3.0
g/dl
PLT
82
±15
235
±30
528
±55
K/ul
PCT
0.09
±0.04
0.28
±0.06
0.64
±0.10
%
MPV
11.4
±2.0
11.9
±1.5
12.2
±1.5
f
PDW-CV
35.5
±12.0
36.7
±6.0
36.8
±4.0
RDW-CV
18.0
±3.0
15.6
±3.0
14.8
±3.0
%
LYM
1.4
±0.5
3.2
±0.6
10.6
±1.5
K/ul
MON
0.2
±0.2
0.6
±0.6
1.4
±1.4
K/ul
NEU
2.2
±0.8
4.2
±1.0
7.2
±2.5
K/ul
EOS
2.3
±0.3
4.4
±0.6
6.8
±1.2
K/ul
Figure 10-7
This is an examle of a package insert from a qualty contro materia for a hematology analyzer The upper table is the calbation table.In this case, there are no ranges.
but rather, exact values for the analyzer to measure. The lower table is what should be used to run a quality control. t provides ranges that the analyzer should produce when running
 this sample.
86
In-Office Methodology and Quality Assurance Assessment
The upper table is the calibration table. In this case, there are no
not realistic. Consider HgB as the primary value for evaluation of
ranges, but rather, exact values for the analyzer to measure. These values
the RBC mass.
are placed into the analyzer before the calibration is run, and the instru-
2. Mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) is determined from
ment is recalibrated to meet these known values.
both the HgB and the HCT. Therefore, this is an important part of a
Calibration should not need to be performed often, but if the analyzer
quality assessment because it requires that both sides of the analysis
can be calibrated in house it provides a distinct advantage for the quality
have proceeded normally.
assessment program.
 The mean cell volume (MCV) or mean red cell volume is measured.
 This is important especially in the anemic patient in determining the
 Understanding Methodology and Limitations
cause of the anemia.
Although quality controls and calibration are important to keep an ana-
lyzer functioning properly, there are several other important things that
Laser Flow Technology
can and should be done to ensure that the quality and accuracy of every
This has also been used for many years. This technology uses a light
individual patient is understood. An important first step is to under-
beam to read the reflectance of each cell. In this methodology there is no
laqawan ot pue iazrieue Aooiewaq au jo konopouau aut puis
lysis of cells to separate the cell types. In most cases with in-house sys-
that no hematology instrument can do everything. If an instrument
tems a chemical is mixed with the cells to make the RBCs round instead
requires no maintenance or that it gives all the values needed every time,
of concave. This allows the cells to be more uniform and able to be eval-
you are probably being misled.
uated. A stain is often used, usually one similar to new methylene blue,
 There are two main methodologies used in the veterinary point-of-
to help identify components within the cell and help differentiate them.
ca re instruments.
Some differences in laser flow technology from impedance include:
 Impedance Technology
1. Laser flow technology calculates MCV in many cases.
2.
 HgB is calculated as well beca use there is no cell lysis.
This is sometimes known as the Coulter method and was developed
3.
 HCT is a calculation, as for impedance analyzers.
many years ago for the Coulter Counter.Current analyzers have taken
4. Some companies do not offer external controls for these analyzers.
this reliable technology and improved it to be accurate and precise. The
cells pass through an electronic current. The size of the deflection of the
Both of these technologies have positives and negatives because no
current determines the size of the cell. There are two separate counts
system is perfect. Impedance instruments tend to be more efficient and
that occur with an impedance analyzer; these are shown in Figure 10-8.
effective in counting cells while providing good differentials. Laser flow
 There are some important points about the analysis in Figure 10-8.
instruments do not seem to count as well, but the differential WBC anal-
ysis seems to work better. The bottom line is that neither type of system
1. Hemoglobin (HgB) is actually measured, whereas hematocrit
can provide everything necessary for a complete blood analysis.
(HCT) is calculated. HCT is an estimate of the packed red cell vol-
 Reference lab instruments often incorporate both technologies, but this is 
ume. This makes the HgB a more reliable indicator of anemia as
well as monitoring its progression. HgB is the molecule that carries
understanding the limitations and taking the next step when an analysis 
shows abnormalities is important to patient care.
oxygen in the RBCs and is what should be truly monitored.
Veterinarians have typically used the HCT value, but with the accu-
rate hemoglobin measured by these instruments, the latter is a more
Utilizing Histograms or Dot Plots
reliable value. In general, three times the HgB value will equal the
HCT or packed cell volume (PCV). HCT and PCV will rarely match 
A complete description of how to read histograms or dot plots is beyond
on any analyzer because HCT is a calculation, whereas PCV is a
the scope of this chapter. However, examples of each will be presented so
manual measurement. However, the PCV can be inaccurate because
an understanding of their use in a quality assessment program can be
of human error, plasma viscosity, inconsistent spin times and
developed. These graphs are pictorial representations of what the
speeds, or other causes. It is desirable for these two values to be
nearly identical (within 4%-5%), but to expect better correlation is
the accuracy of the run.
Blood sample
Dilution 1
Dilution 2
RBC Lyse
Isotonic
WBC Count
HgB
RBC
MCV
PLT
PCV
MCHC (calc)
HCT (calc)
le anowal o unjos as e ylm pax pue panp pue uaeis aldwes e'siseue aul po jed is au ul siseue uno pong aalduoo auepadw of anpanaid leid g-ot aunb
the red blood cells This allows the white blood cell count to occur and the hemoglobin to be measured. Another aliquot of the sample is then diluted with a different solution to count the
red blood cells and platelets as well as to determine their size. A calculation then is made to determine the mean cell hemoglobin concentration as well as the hematocrit. HCT, hematocrit;:
HgB, hemoglobin; MCHC, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; MCV mean corpuscular volume; PLT, platelet; PCV, packed cel volume; RBC, red blood cell;WBC, white blood cell.
87
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
The histogram, provided with impedance analyzers, is divided into
analyzer stops counting platelets and starts counting RBCs. Studying
an RBC / platelet, WBC, and eosinophil (if the instru ment is capable of
several of these graphs will equip you to recognize normals and
a five-part differential) graph (Figs. 10-9a,b). The WBC histogram
abnormals.
shows how the WBCs were separated by size into lymphocytes,
 In a similar manner, dot plots evaluate the cell populations, but this is
monocytes, and granulocytes. If it is a five-part analyzer, the eosino-
based on reflectance rather than physical size. A typical dot plot is shown
phil graph is also shown. The RBC/PLT graph shows where the
in Figure 10-10.
(a)
100% 
27
92
152
400 fc
WHChistogram
(b)
RBC
30
200
RBC-Platelethistogram
Figure 10-9 The histogram, provided with impedance analyzers, is divided into a RBC/platelet, WBC, and eosinophil (if the instrument is capable of a 5 part differentiall graph. (a} The
WBC histogram shows how the WBCs were separated by size into lymphocytes, monocytes, and granulocytes. If it is a five-part analyzer, the eosinophil graph is also shown. (b)The RBC/
 PLT graph shows where the analyzer stops counting platelets and starts counting RBCs. RBC, red blood cell; PLT, platelet; WBC, white blood cell.
(SS
GRANS
公
scatt
%
DEBRIS
MONOS
LYMPHS
Forward scatter (FSC)
Figure 10-10  Dot plots evaluate the cell populations, but this is based on refectance rather than physical size. RBC, red blood cell.
88
I-Office Methodology and Quality Assurance Assessment
A company representative should provide information regarding the
 Evaluation of Platelet Count
use of these important graphs to best assure quality in results.
e siaatel aaq dois pue d e g ot saast s siai
activated the moment a needle is placed in the vein of a patient. Because
 Maintaining a Clean Analyzer
of this, accurate platelet counts are difficult to obtain. Even analyzers in
Blood is a living tissue. It contains live cells, proteins, electrolytes, and
reference labs report that platelets are clumped and cannot be accurately
wastes. Cells and proteins, when placed directly into a mechanism such
counted. Therefore, platelet counts should be regarded as the minimum
 e sad pe anpisan aa lm aze u e se
count, not the absolute count. The platelets are then reported as
interfere with accurate counting. It is therefore important that the
"Adequate,” "Increased,” or "Decreased" on these reports. This can only
analyzer remain clean.
be determined by evaluation of the blood smear. If an analyzer reports a
 The analyzer should be a closed system. This means nothing internally
count that is below normal, a quick scan of the blood smear is the best
in the analyzer is exposed to the clinic environment. This is helpful in
method to determine if the platelet count is adequate. Adequate is
keeping an analyzer clean, but it also means far more. Analyzers have dif-
defined as 6-10 platelets per high-power field.
ferent ways of staying clean, some better than others. Most have a deter-
 gent cycle after and analysis to remove debris. Automatic back flushing
Visual Inspection of Cell Morphology
and electronic cleaning of the cell aperture also occurs on some analyzers.
 No matter what an analyzer does after each run, it needs to be cleaned
No instrument can evaluate cell morphology. There are many morpho-
as per the manufacturer's instructions. If the analyzer can be cleaned on
a regular basis, this will provide the best possible situation. This clean-
 and prognosis.See Chapter 12. There are many excellent texts and online
ing should only take a few minutes and will provide the best results
classes as well as classes at veterinary conferences to help in this area. In
possible. If an analyzer cannot be cleaned manually, then it should be
addition, the use of a clinical pathologist may be needed, even when run-
sent into the factory on a regular basistoensure it isclean and providing
ning a sample in-house.
good results.
Identification of Cellular Parasites
Manual Blood Smears
Many cases of anemia are caused by blood-born parasites; no analyzer
Performing manual blood smears in the veterinary practice intimidates
can identify them.
many technicians and veterinarians. However, there are many benefits to
performing these smears in house. Better information about a patient is
Con clusion
-ansse Aienb poog e jo jued yueodul ue aq ueo sieaus pue 'paureiqo
Quality assessment for the point-of-care laboratory is an important part
ance program.
 The process begins by preparing a good blood smear. It takes a drop of
of ensuring accurate and precise values for patient care evaluation. This
(1-Z1 ly s) anbruupat poo e pue saps om pooa
goes well beyond running occasional quality controls. Implementing a
As part of a quality assessment protocol manual smears are important
true quality assessment protocol, based on the strengths and weaknesses
in several areas. See Chapter 12.
of an analyzer, is an important part of a quality practice. Quality assess-
ment need not be difficult or time consuming and should be evaluated
Evaluation of Anemia
even if all or a majority of the blood tests are sent to a commercial lab
because many of the same issues causing problems for the in-house lab
If a CBC analysis shows the patient to be anemic, examination of the
ca use problems at the commercial lab as well.
blood smear will help confirm this. RBCs are numerous and in contact
with each other until the outer feathered edge is reached; this is the area
of the slide to be evaluated. If the patient is anemic, a decrease in the
concentration of the red cells will be noted.
Latimer SK, Mahaffey EA, Prasse KW, et al. 2003. Quality Control, Test
Validity, and Reference Values. In JR Duncan, KW Prasse, eds., Durcan
Evaluation of WBC Count
Prasse's Veterinary Laboratory Medicine: Clinical Pathology,Pp.331-42.
Evaluation of a low or high white count is done in the same manner. Patients
Ames: Iowa State Press.
with elevated WBCs will have more WBCs per field than those with normal
Schembri CT, Burd TL, Kopf-Sill AR, et al. 1995. Centrifugation and
or low counts. This is another means for confirming the WBC count.
Capillarity Integrated into a Multiple Analyte Whole Blood Analyzer.
[Automat Chem. 17(3):99-104.
Stockham SL, Scott MA. 2002. Fundamentals of Clinical Pathology. Ames:
Evaluation of WBC Differential
 Blackwell Publishing.
The CBC analyzer counts thousands of cells, but confirmation of this
Thrall MA, Baker DC, Campbell TW, et al. 2006. Veterinary Hematology
is always prudent, especially if the WBC count is elevated or if the
and Clinical Chemistry. Ames: Blackwell Publishing.
histogram or dot plot seems illogical. Either visually scan the slide to
US. Food and Drug Administration. 2
2009.
ClinicalLaboratory
estimate the cell differential or count 100 cells and differentiate
ImprovementAmendments.http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/
them. Alternatively, the slide can be sent to a clinical pathologist for
DeviceRegulationandG uidance/IVDRegulatoryAssistance/
confirmation.
ucm124105.htm.
68
CHAPTER 11
Common Feline
Laboratory
Values
Keith DeJong
Lymphocytosis, monocytosis, eosinophilia, or basophilia may be
Introduction
observed. Stress-related and inflammatory conditions can occur simulta-
The availability of diagnostic tests for feline diseases has soared in the
neously, sometimes making differentiation difficult, but the presence of a
past two decades. Tests for diseases not discovered two decades ago are
left shift always indicates acute inflammation.
now often part of routine blood or urine panels. The purpose of this
 Decreased neutrophil numbers, termed neutropenia, are observed
chapter is to give a brief description of how to interpret the commonly
with overwhelming, rapidly developing tissue inflammation, or
used laboratory tests.
decreased, ineffectual bone marrow production and generally carry a
This chapter will be organized by the test group then the individual
 poorer prognosis than neutrophilia. Inflammatory neutropenia in which
analytes within that group. The common reasons for an increase and a
immature neutrophils outnumber mature neutrophils is termed a
decrease of each analyte will be listed.
degenerative left shift and carries a poor prognosis. Neutropenia due to
decreased bone marrow production can be caused by chemotherapeutic
agents, chloramphenicol toxicity, other medications, or from infectious
Complete Blood Count
diseases such as panleukopenia, feline leukemia virus (FeLV) diseases,
The complete blood count (CBC) is the cornerstone of hematologic
and toxoplasmosis.
evaluation and provides information about the presence and cause of
disease, monitoring disease progression and severity, and evaluating
response to treatment. The CBC can be broken down into three main
Lymphocytes
parts: leukogram, erythrogram, and thrombogram.
Lymphocytes are often the second most common circulating leukocyte in
e  e o e n d    s 
immune response through the production of immunoglobulins and
Leukogram
cytokines.
Evaluation of leukocytes consists of total white blood cell (WBC) count
and differentiation and enumeration of the five types of leukocytes.
observed with physiologic stress, chronic inflammation, and the leuke-
Leukogram analysis often does not provide a specific diagnosis but does
mic phase of lymphoma, which can be associated with FeLV.
give information about the pathologic processes that may be occurring.
Decreased lymphocyte numbers, termed lymphopenia, are most
commonly observed with glucocorticoid stress and acute inflammation,
 especially as a result of bacterial or viral infections. Lymphopenia is also
Neutrophils
seen with repeated drainage of chylous effusions and lymphoma.
Neutrophils are the most common circulating leukocytes observed in
health (see Fig. 12-12). Their primary responsibility is to migrate into tis-
Monocytes
sues to sites of inflammation and participate in phagocytosis of infec-
tious organisms and other material.
Monocytes are immature cells in peripheral blood circulation that dif-
 Increased neutrophil numbers, termed neutrophilia, are commonly
ferentiate into macrophages or dendritic cells after migrating into tissues
observed and can occur due to physiologic and glucocorticoid stress and
(see Fig. 12-15).
acute or chronic inflammation. Differentiating between these conditions
 Increased monocyte numbers, termed monocytosis, are commonly
is important because they are associated with different etiologies, severi-
observed with acute and chronic inflammation, tissue necrosis, and
ties, and prognoses and can lead veterinarians to formulate different
glucocorticoid stress.
medical and treatment decisions. Physiologic stress caused by epineph-
Decreased monocytes numbers, termed monocytopenia, are not
rine is often seen in young, frightened, or excited cats and can also cause
 recognized as a clinical entity in cats.
-pua ui seaui ue Aq pasneo si sans pioooo sisod
enous or exogenous corticosteroids and can also cause lymphopenia,
monocytosis, and eosinopenia. Acute inflammation is caused by infec-
Eosinophils
tions and other sources of tissue inflammation and is characterized by
Eosinophils are leukocytes that are responsible for combating
a left shift. A left shift is the presence of immature neutrophils: bands
multicellular parasites and certain bacterial and fungal infections (see
Fig. 12-13a).
Fig. 12-19c). A left shift indicates that tissue demand for neutrophils
 Increased eosinophil numbers, termed eosinophilia, are commonly
currently exceeds the current productive ability of the bone marrow.
observed with allergic disorders (flea-bite dermatitis), parasitism
Chronic inflammation, also caused by infections and tissue inflamma-
(especially lungworms and lung flukes), and the idiopathic conditions of
tion, is observed when bone marrow productive ability is increased and
hypereosinophilic syndrome, eosinophilic granuloma complex, and
meets the body's demand for neutrophils. It takes about a week for the
eosinophilic enteritis.
bone marrow to up-regulate its productive ability. Generally, chronic
Decreased eosinophil numbers, termed eosinopenia, can be difficult to
inflammation is not associated with the presence of a left shift, but
recognize because the low end of many reference intervals are zero or
close to zero. Acute inflammation and glucocorticoid stress can cause
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
eosinopenia.
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
90
InterpretationofCommonFelineLaboratoryValues
Basophils
 s s soq a  n a ixo o 
12-9d). Decreases, termed hypochromasia or hypochromic, are seen in
Basophils are the least common circulating leukocytes and are thought to
iron deficiency or regenerative anemias.
participate in specific kinds of inflammatory and allergic reactions (see
Fig. 12-13b).
 Increased basophil numbers, termed basophilia, are not commonly
Red-cell Distribution Width
observed in cats but have been associated with parasitic disease, allergic
Red-cell distribution width (RDW) is a calculation of the variation
disease, and mast cell neoplasia.
in RBC volumes, a mathematical measurement of anisocytosis (see
 Decreased basophil numbers, termed basopenia, are not recognized as
Fig. 12-7b). Increases are most commonly observed with moderate to
a clinical entity in cats.
marked regenerative anemias as the result of the presence of increased
numbers of reticulocytes. Decreases are not often observed but indicate a
The Hemogram
lack of variation in RBC volume.
Hemoglobin/Red Blood Cell Count/Hematocrit (HgB/RBC/
HCT)
Nucleated Red Blood Cell
Nucleated red blood cells (nRBC; see Fig. 12-7d) are immature nucleated
 These three analytes are often evaluated together because they essen-
RBC precursors. They can be observed with marked regenerative ane-
tially measure the same attribute.
mia, bone marrow injury or neoplasia, extramedullary hematopoiesis, or
An increase is termed polycythemia and is most commonly observed
disrupted splenic function. nRBCs are counted as WBCs by all auto-
secondary to dehydration and can also be seen with splenic contraction
as a result of physiologic stress.
mated hematology analyzers, and corrected WBC counts derived from
 manual blood smear review are required for accurate WBC enumeration.
A decrease is termed anemia and can be observed as the result of
many etiologies. One of the most important determinations regarding
anemia is characterizing it as being regenerative or nonregenerative. This
Platelet
differentiation leads down two different diagnostic paths.
 Platelets (PLTs; see Figs. 12-17a,b) are small anucleate cells formed from
 Nonregenerative anemia is observed more frequently than regenera-
bone marrow megakaryocytes. These cells often contain small fine pink
tive anemia, and specifically, anemia of inflammatory disease (AID) is
the most common cause of anemia in feline patients. Sometimes also
 granules and are integral participants in hemostasis.
 High numbers of platelets, termed thrombocytosis, can be seen with
called anemia of chronic disease (ACD), AID/ACD causes decreased
RBC survival,iron sequestration, decreased erythropoietin production,
inflammatory conditions or the result of splenic contraction secondary to
 physiologic epinephrine stress.
and decreased bone marrow response. Other common causes of nonre-
 generative anemia are renal and liver disease and FeLV infection.
 Low numbers of platelets, termed thrombocytopenia, can be observed
with decreased production resulting from chemotherapy or infection,
Regenerative anemia is characterized by the presence of increased
increased consumption as a result of disseminated intravascular coagu-
numbers of aggregate reticulocytes and is often observed secondary to
 external or internal blood loss and hemolysis.
lopathy (DIC), or from a variety of infections.
 Occasionally an anemia can be termed "pre-regenerative" because it
takes time for the bone marrow to respond and increase RBC production.
Mean Platelet Volume
This often occurs 3 to 4 days after the onset of blood loss or hemolysis.
Mean platelet volume (MPV) is the average volume of platelets; this
U saseaoun shazaieue Aonoieuau isou Aq papaond st juaanseau
Reticulocytes
 MPV can be seen in platelet regenerative responses and platelet clump-
ing and can also be seen in clinically normal cats.
 Reticulocytes are immature RBCs that have been released from the bone
marrow and contain small amounts of ribonucleic acid (RNA). This RNA
can be identified by special staining, usually new methylene blue (NMB)
Platelet-Crit
stain, and is lost as the cells mature over the next 7-10 days. Aggregate
Platelet-crit (PCT) is analogous to hematocrit and is a measurement of
reticulocytes (see Fig. 12-5c) have large aggregates of reticulum on NMB
the percentage of the plasma volume that is comprised of platelets. This
staining and mature into punctate reticulocytes in less than 24 hours.
is a relatively new value that is reported by some hematology analyzers,
Punctate reticulocytes (see Fig. 12-5d) have few small scattered punctate
and its utility is still under investigation.
specks of reticulum and become mature RBCs within several days.
Aggregate reticulocytes correspond to the polychromatophils observed
in peripheral blood (see Fig. 12-7c) and are the only cells counted for enu-
Platelet Distribution Width
meration of reticulocytes.
 of platelets. Its increase could signal the presence of a population of large
Mean Cell Volume
or small platelets.
Mean cell volume (MCV) is the average size of RBCs. Increases, termed
Clinical Chemistry
macrocytosis, are most often observed secondary to moderately to
Clinical chemistries are biochemical tests that measure the concentrations 
observed with iron deficiency and portosystemic shunts.
or activities of various components of bodily fluids, usually blood, serum,
or plasma. These tests can provide information concerning organ function,
Mean Cell Hemoglobin Concenfration/Mean Cell Hemoglobin
tissue damage, and acid-base, endocrine, electrolyte, and mineral status.
Mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) and mean cell hemoglobin
(MCH) are measurements of the concentration of hemoglobin or quan-
Total Protein
tity of hemoglobin per average RBC. Increases, termed hyperchromasia
Total protein is the total combined concentration of albumin and
or hyperchromic, are artifactual changes and occur due to lipemia,
globulins in the plasma or serum.
91
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
 Increases in total protein, termed hyperproteinemia, are caused by
Normal sodium, termed normonatremia, occurs in normally hydrated
dehydration or inflammation. Decreases in total protein, termed
cats. In dehydrated cats, normonatremia occurs as a loss of free water in
hypoproteinemia, are most often observed as a result of blood loss, exu-
dation, renal disease, or secondary to liver disease.
resis (diabetes mellitus). In cats with edema, normonatremia occurs sec-
ondary to heart, liver, or kidney disease.
 Decreased sodium, termed hyponatremia, can be observed as a loss of 
Albumin
sodium from vomiting, diarrhea, or renal disease. Hyponatremia can
also be seen with heart disease, hyperglycemia, and from repeated
Albumin is a protein that is made by the liver. It is a major contributor to
drainage of chylous effusion.
 Increases in albumin, termed hyperalbuminemia, are only caused by
dehydration because overproduction of albumin by the liver has not been
Potassium
documented. Decreases in albumin, termed hypoalbuminemia, are seen
with decreased production as a result of liver disease, starvation, or inflam-
Potassium (K) is the major intracellular cation and is the major contribu-
mation or from an increased loss from bleeding, exudation, or renal disease.
tor in maintaining the resting membrane potential of body cells. Only
approximately 5% of the body's potassium concentration is in the blood.
 Increased potassium, termed hyperkalemia, is commonly observed
Globulin
with urinary tract obstructions and acute renal failure. Hyperkalemia is
also observed with some acid-base disturbances, repeated drainage of
Globulins are a diverse group of proteins produced by the liver and
chylous effusions, and can be falsely increased with potassium ethylen-
B-lymphocytes. Globulins are most commonly measu red as the difference
ediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) contamination.
of total protein minus albumin but can also be measured and quantified
 Decreased potassium, termed hypokalemia, is commonly observed
Increases in globulin, termed hyperglobulinemia, are caused by
with anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, chronic renal failure, and aggressive 
administration of intravenous fluids.
dehydration and inflammation.
 Decreases in globulin, termed hypoglobulinemia, are caused by loss
from bleeding or decreased production from acquired immunodeficien-
Chloride
cies secondary to FeLV or feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infection.
Chloride (Cl) is the major extracellular anion (negatively charged electro-
lyte) and is important in acid-base maintenance. Chloride, along with
Blood Urea Nitrogen
sodium, is also important for osmolality and, given this relationship,
changes in chloride should always be interpreted with knowledge of
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), sometimes called urea, is a molecule synthe-
sodium and patient hydration status.
sized by the liver from the ammonia produced during the metabolism of
 Increased chloride, termed hyperchloridemia, is fairly uncommon
amino acids. It is one of the analytes used to measure glomerular
in cats but can be seen with dehydration, water loss as a result of
hyperventilation or fever, and administration of hypertonic saline.
kidneys into the urine.
Hyperchloridemia can also be observed with metabolic acidosis resulting
 Increases in BUN, termed azotemia, are caused by decreased GFR as a
from loss of bicarbonate secondary to diarrhea.
result of dehydration, kidney insufficiency or failure, postrenal obstruc-
Decreased chloride, termed hypochloridemia, can be observed as a
tion, high protein diets, and gastrointestinal bleeding.
result of a concurrent loss of sodium or loss of chloride from vomiting.
 Decreases in BUN are not commonly observed but can be caused by
Hypochloridemia can also be seen with ketoacidosis and lactic acidosis.
liver failure or insufficiency. Low normal BUN concentrations are
 commonly observed in young growing animals.
Total Carbon Dioxide
Creatinine
Total carbon dioxide (TCO), sometimes called bicarbonate or repre-
sented as HCO, is the major extracellular buffer base of body acids and,
Creatinine is a muscle breakdown product that is produced at a constant
Ueo1 uawaunseau se8 pooq pue Hd 1oap aoeda pou saop t ynoule
rate in the body It is predominately filtered into the urine and excreted
be used as an indicator of acid-base status.
by the kidney. It is the arguably the best commonly used analyte to meas-
 Increases in TCO, often termed metabolic alkalosis, occurs as a result
ure GFR because it is not actively secreted or resorbed by the kidney.
of loss of acid from the body from vomiting or renal loss or from a gain
 Increases in creatinine, also termed azotemia, are caused by decreased
in base from treatment with sodium bicarbonate.
GFR resulting from dehydration, kidney insufficiency or failure, or
 Decreases in TCO, often termed metabolic acidosis, occur as a result
 postrenal obstruction.
of increased acid from lactic acidosis, ketoacidosis, and decreased acid
Decreases in creatinine are not commonly observed but can be the
secretion resulting from kidney disease, urinary tract obstruction, or
result of decreased muscle mass secondary to starvation or cachexia.
increased loss of base due to diarrhea.
Low normal creatinine concentrations can be observed in young growing
animals.
Calcium
Calcium (Ca) is essential for cells primarily as a signal for intracellular
Sodium
-ond pazun so anu un suasand si eseid au un ne 'sassaid
Sodium (Na) is the major extracellular cation (positively charged electro-
tein bound to albumin, and complexed. The majority of body calcium is
stored in the bone, absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, and excreted
osmolality. Therefore, knowled ge of patient hydration status is necessary
by the kidneys. Calcium and phosphorus are controlled through many of
 the same metabolic processes, and assessment of calcium and phosphorus
 Increased sodium, termed hypernatremia, is fairly uncommon in cats
but can be seen with dehydration, water loss as a result of hyperventilation
measure total calcium, but ionized calcium determination is also available
or fever, and administration of hypertonic saline or sodium bicarbonate.
and can be useful to further describe and diagnose calcium abnormalities.
92
Interpretation ofCommonFelineLaboratory Values
Increased calcium, termed hypercalcemia, is caused by neoplasia,
Asparfate Transaminase or Asparfate Aminofransferase
hyperparathyroidism, and rarely, from renal disease. Idiopathic hyper-
calcemia, hypercalcemia resulting from an unknown cause, has been
Aspartate transaminase or aspartate aminotransferase (AST) is a cyto-
plasmic and mitochondrial enzyme that is found in high concentrations
reported commonly in cats and is the most common form of hypercalce-
mia seen clinically.
within hepatocytes, skeletal muscle cells, and RBCs and has a half-life of
e mo  pasne aq uo eaeod paat ieo pasea
less than 2hours. AST is considered a liver leakage enzyme and increases
min, hypoparathyroidism, and chronic renal failure. Hypocalcemia has
in AST are associated with the same processes as observed with ALT.
also been reported with acute pancreatitis.
Additionally, skeletal muscle damage, and in vivo and in vitro hemolysis
will also cause increases in AST.
Phosphorus
Sorbitol Dehydrogenase and Glutamate Dehydrogenase
jo suauoduo e si pue uoue seinnaenun sole aun st () snoudsou
 Sorbitol dehydrogenase (SDH) and glutamate dehydrogenase (GLDH)
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), RNA, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and
cell membranes.It is stored in the bone, absorbed from the gastrointesti-
are cytoplasmic (both) and mitochondrial (GLDH) enzymes that are
 nal tract, and excreted by the kidneys.
found in high concentrations primarily within hepatocytes. These
 Increased phosphorus, termed hyperphosphatemia, can be caused by
enzymes have not been widely available in the United States, but their
decreased GFR resulting from dehydration, kidney insuffciency or
pue saazua aeeal iaall parapisuoo ane Aau suiseou s! asn
failure, or urinary obstruction. Hyperphosphatemia also occurs
increases are associated with liver damage. Liver damage could be the
secondary to hyperthyroidism and from treatment with phosphate-
result of hypoxia, hepatic lipidosis, diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism,
containing enemas.
neoplasia, infectious causes (including FIP), steroid hepatopathy, and
Decreased phosphorus, termed hypophosphatemia, is most commonly
tralma.
observed as a result of anorexia or phosphorus-deficient diets.
Hypophosphatemia has also been observed secondary to diabetes
Creatine Kinase
 mellitus and hepatic lipidosis.
Creatine kinase (CK) is a cytoplasmic enzyme that is found in high con-
centrations within skeletal and cardiac muscle. CK is considered a mus-
Magnesium
cle leakage enzyme, and increases in CK are associated with muscle
damage. Muscle damage could be due to hypoxia, saddle thrombus, and
Magnesium (Mg) is the second most abundant intracellular cation and
trauma.
an important intracellular enzymatic catalyst. It is stored primarily in the
bone, and only relatively small amounts are found in the blood.
 Increased magnesium, termed hypermagnesemia, can be observed
Alkaline Phosphatase
with decreased GFR from acute or chronic renal failure and urinary
obstruction.
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an inducible membrane-bound enzyme
 Decreased magnesium, termed hypomagnesemia, can be observed
that is found within many tissues, but the highest concentrations are
with hypoproteinemia, hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and diabetic
found within hepatocytes, biliary epithelial cells, and osteoblasts.
ketoacidosis.
Intestinal, placental, and mammary gland epithelium also contain ALP
but generally do not contribute to measured plasma concentrations.
Increases in ALP are specific for liver disease in cats because the half-life
Serum Enzymes
of ALP is less than 8 hours. Therefore, any and all increases in ALP are
clinically relevant. Increases in ALP commonly occur as a result of chol-
    d  s 
edoedau prorais snap ueia Aq uonun sisoidil onedau siseisa
reactions. Leakage enzymes are enzymes that "leak" from cells during
thy, and hyperthyroidism.
states of cellular stress or damage, and induced enzymes are those that
have increased production during cholestasis. Knowledge of tissue
specificity and plasma half-lives of these enzymes gives information of
Y-glutamyltransferase or Y-glutamyltranspeptidase
the location, extent, and time course of disease, especially with serial
Y-glutamyltransferase or y-glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT) is an inducible
testing. The magnitude of serum enzyme increases can give some
membrane-bound enzyme that is found in highest concentrations within
indication of the severity of the disease processes but cannot differentiate
mild diffuse disease from marked focal disease or reversible and
biliary epithelial, renal tubular cells, and exocrine pancreatic acinar cells.
Increases in GGT are caused by cholestasis, biliary hyperplasia, and
irreversible cellular damage. Decreases in enzyme activities are not
induction by certain drugs. GGT generally increases before ALP in many
clinically relevant, and enzymes have no physiologic purpose in the
instances of liver disease, with the exception of hepatic lipidosis.
blood.
Bile Acids
Alarine Transaminase or Alanine Aminotransferase
Bile acids are produced by the liver from cholesterol, stored in the gall
 Alanine transaminase or alanine aminotransferase (ALT) is a cytoplas-
bladder, and released into the small intestine to aid in fat digestion. The
mic enzyme that is found in high concentrations within hepatocytes,
vast majority of bile acids are then absorbed into the portal circulation
lower concentrations within skeletal muscle, and has a half-life of less
and recycled by the liver. Bile acid are often considered to be the most
than 24 hours. ALT is considered a liver leakage enzyme and increases in
sensitive indicator of hepatic dysfunction but do not have good specific-
ALT are associated with liver damage. Liver damage could be the result
ity for the determining the cause of dysfunction. Paired pre- and post-
of hypoxia, hepatic lipidosis, diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism, neo-
prandial samples are often performed to aid in the diagnosis of
plasia, infectious causes (including feline infectious peritonitis [FIP]),
steroid hepatopathy, and trauma. Although ALT is also found within
temic shunts, diffuse hepatocellular disease, hepatic cholestasis as a
skeletal muscle, only mild increases in ALT are observed with marked
result of hepatic lipidosis, diabetes mellitus, infectious diseases, and pos-
skeletal muscle damage.
thepatic cholestasis.
93
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
Bilirubin
feline medicine and is most often observed secondary to treatment for
hyperthyroidism, namely surgical removal of the thyroid gland or
Bilirubin is the yellow pigmented breakdown product of heme catabo-
radioactive iodine therapy.
ism from hemoglobin. Increases in bilirubin, termed hyperbilirubine-
mia, are observed with hemolytic disease, hepatic and posthepatic
cholestasis, fasting, and anorexia. Increased bilirubin can cause jaundice,
Urinalysis
a yellow discoloration of the skin, conjunctiva, and mucous membranes.
Cats can become jaundiced before increases in ALP and GGT are
Jo suauoduoo e st ,aupi aut jo Asdoq pinbl, pallen-os aun 'sisieuu
observed, especially with obstructive cholestasis.
the minimum database and is essential for proper interpretation of CBC
and blood chemistry results. The majority of in-house urinalysis is
Cholesterol
refractometry, and microscopy.
 Cholesterol is a steroid metabolite that is an important constituent of cell
membranes and a precursor for steroid hormones and bile acids. The
Color/clarity
liver is responsible for the synthesis of the majority of circulating choles-
Evaluation of the color and clarity of the urine is the first step in urinaly.
 terol, but other tissues also contribute.
 Increases in cholesterol, termed hypercholesterolemia, are observed as
sis. The color (clear, yellow, straw, orange, red, brown, other) and clarity
a result of obstructive cholestasis, diabetes mellitus, nephrotic syndrome,
(clear, cloudy, flocculent, opaque) of urine can provide essential initial
information into the clinical state of the patient.
and protein-losing enteropathy. Hypercholesterolemia commonly occurs
after eating (postprandial), with a peak a few hours after eating and a
return to a basal cholesterol concentration in 8-16 hours. Decreases in
cholesterol, termed hypocholesterolemia, are observed with portosys-
Urine Specific Gravity
Auedorasua Sussoi-uatoad pue Suunus sal
Urine specific gravity (USG) is a measure of the concentrating ability of
the kidneys. It is the ratio comparing the density of urine to water and
-a auoiu aq ue sanea sn eon, Anapeai Aq painsea st
Triglycerides
able, even in healthy cats, and are often dependent on the hydration
status of the cat.However,the normal USG range for normally hydrated
 Triglycerides are lipids that are the major constituent of fat and are made
by the liver, small intestine, adipose tissue, and mammary glands.
cats is generally accepted as being 1.035 or greater. Evaluation of USG
Triglyceride concentration is representative of the balance of absorption
values in combination with hydration status and BUN/creatinine val-
by the small intestine, synthesis and export by the liver, and uptake into
ues is vital in the proper assessment of prerenal, renal, or postrenal dis-
orders. The inability to concentrate urine, a USG of ~1.007-1.013, is
-eip pue seanoued anoe ym pue Aleipuendisod paarasqo Auoo
often the first sign of renal insuffciency and occurs before azotemia or
other clinical signs.
betes mellitus. Decreases in triglycerides, termed hypotriglyceridemia,
are not a clinical entity in cats.
pH
Amylase and Lipase
pH is the hydrogen ion concentration of the urine and is not an indicator
Amylase and lipase are cytoplasmic enzymes found in high
of body pH. Urine pH in health is most affected by the diet, and cats,
concentrations within pancreatic acinar cells. Increases in amylase or
being obligate carnivores, normally prod uce acidic urine. Knowledge of
lipase are often associated with pancreatitis or decreased GFR. However,
urine pH can aid in urine crystal identification, can give insight into
 r e    s n    i 
whether the patient can correct an acid-base abnormality, and can indi-
with pancreatitis, amylase and lipase evaluation is of little to no clinical
cate the presence of bacteria.
utility.
Glucose
Feline-Specific Pancreatic Lipase Immunoreactivity
Normal urine does not contain glucose. The renal threshold for glucose
in cats is around 280-300 mg/dL, and when plasma glucose concentra-
that is specific to feline pancreatic acinar cells. Increased concentrations
tions exceed that level, glucose will enter the urine. Increased urine glu-
are associated with leakage from the pancreas, typically from inflamma-
cose, termed glycosuria, can occur due to physiologic stress, intravenous
tion, and are associated with pancreatitis. This test has a greater sensitiv-
glucose therapy, and diabetes mellitus.
auss sauo Aue ueun saoued jo sisoueip au rog Aads pue Ail
blood test; however, it is recommended that this test be used only as one
 of several criteria for diagnosing pancreatitis.
Protein
Normal urine has undetectable protein concentrations, although trace
Total Thyroxine
amounts can occasionally be observed in very concentrated urine.
Increases in urine protein, termed proteinuria, can occur as a result of 
Thyroxine is a hormone synthesized by the thyroid gland that is
preglomerular, glomerular, or postglomerular causes. Preglomerular
released into circulation and regulates basal metabolism. Total thyrox-
proteinuria occurs when small proteins, mainly hemoglobin and myo-
ine (Tr) is the total thyroxine concentration of the blood, composed
globin, pass through the glomerulus during intravascular hemolysis and
principally of protein-bound thyroxine plus a small amount of free,
muscle damage, respectively Glomerular proteinuria occurs when the
unbound, biologically active thyroxine (fT). Increased Tr, termed
glomerulus is damaged and plasma proteins (albumin and globulins)
hyperthyroxemia, is produced by thyroid neoplasia and is the cause of
leak into the urine. Postglomerular proteinuria, the most common cause
the most common endocrine disease of cats, hyperthyroidism.
of proteinuria, occurs when inflammation of the urinary tract allows
Decreased Tr, termed hypothyroxemia, is a rare clinical disease in
exudation of plasma proteins into the urine.
94
Interpretationof CommonFeline LaboratoryValues
Heme
 produce positive FIV antibody screening test results, and although
there is currently no gold standard method of differentiating natural
Normal urine does not contain heme proteins. Increases in heme can be
versus vaccination exposure, IDEXX now offers a PCR test with about
the result of RBCs, hemoglobin, or myoglobin in the urine. RBCs in the
80% sensitivity and 100% specificity for FlV. It is accepted as a reason-
urine, termed hematuria, occurs as a result of hemorrhage into the uri-
ably good (80% sensitivity) test for differentiating between infection
nary tract from trauma, inflammation, or neoplasia and can also occur
and vaccine or maternal antibodies. Therefore, all kittens with positive
because of a traumatic urine collection. Hemoglobin in the urine, termed
paisaiau ro yod Aq paisal pinous shnsau isat unuaaos Apoqiue Ai
hemoglobinuria, occurs during intravascular hemolysis. Myoglobin in
after 6 months of age.
the urine, termed myoglobinuria, occurs as a result of muscle damage or
necrosis. Differentiating the cause of a positive heme reaction often
requires urine sediment and plasma evaluation because hematuria has
RBCs in the sediment and hemoglobinuria is associated with hemo-
Heartworm Antibody and Antigen
globinemia. Marked amounts of heme in the urine generally yield trace
Heartworm disease is caused by the parasite Diroflaria immitis. Tests
to 1+ proteinuria on urine reagent strips.
for heartworm antigen (HWAg) detect the presence of sexually mature
female heartworm antigen. Tests for heartworm antibody (HWAb)
detect the presence of antibodies produced against either male or
Bilirubin
nosis of active heartworm infection; however, given the possibility of
Normal urine does not contain bilirubin. Increase in bilirubin, termed
bilirubinuria, is evidence of cholestasis.
male-only infections, immature worm-only infections, and infections
with only one or two female worms, false-negatives can commonly
occur. Positive antibody tests indicate that an infection has occurred,
Other Urine Reagent Test Strip Analytes
but by itself, cannot confirm the presence of active disease because
antibody presence may persist about 4 months following resolution of
Urobilinogen, nitrite, leukocytes, and USG on urine reagent test strips
an infection. False-negatives can occur because some larval stages may
are not clinically useful in veterinary medicine.
not produce a detectable antibody response. Therefore, these tests are
 often performed concurrently, and clinical signs and thoracic imaging
analysis may also be necessary for definitive diagnosis of heartworm
 Sediment Evaluation
disease. These tests should be considered "rule in" tests but not "rule
A properly performed sediment examination can lead to the identifica-
out" tests.
tion and enumeration of RBCs, WBCs, epithelial cells, casts, crystals,
spermatozoa, lipid droplets, infectious organisms, and neoplastic cells.
 Feline Coronavirus
Normal urine should have no to rare RBCs, WBCs, epithelial cells, and 
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is ca used by a virulent biotype of feline
feline urine. The presence of infectious organisms, increased numbers
coronavirus (FCoV). There are curently no testing modalities that can
of RBCs, WBCs, epithelial cells, crystals, casts, or abnormal cells can
differentiate the virulent biotype that causes FIP, the highly infectious
lead to further evaluation of the urine through culture and sensitivity,
and common enteric coronavirus (ECV), and relatively avirulent bio-
imaging studies, further urine biochemical testing, or pathologist
types. A positive FCoV antibody test occurs as a result of infection by the
review.
ECV or as a result of infection by the FIP virus. Therefore, clinical signs
and other testing are needed for further characterization. A negative
Feline Leukemia Virus
FCoV antibody test suggests that it is highly unlikely to be clinical dis-
ease resulting from ECV or FIP infection; however, cats in the terminal
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) is a retrovirus and one of the most common
stage of FIP will often have a negative FCoV titer.
feline infectious diseases. Common in-house FeLV screening tests rely
tomatic cats are highly accurate, but positive test results in all cats
Toxoplasmosis
should be confirmed given the serious consequences of positive results
and the possibility of false-positives. Common confirmatory testing
Toxoplasmosis is caused by the protozoal parasite Toxoplasma gondi.
Felids are the only known definitive host for this zoonotic parasite and
-oud sem ieut auo Aeapi 'isat uasiue zd puoras e apnoun saltepou
duced by a different manufacturer than the initial test, laboratory-
can shed infectious oocysts in their feces.
performed immunofluorescent antibody (IFA), or a polymerase chain
 A positive immunoglobulin G (lgG) or immunoglobulin M (IgM) test
reaction (PCR) test.
in any cat is an indication that the cat has been, or is currently, infected.
A positive IgG test generally indicates prior infection, that oocyst shed-
ding is unlikely, and that the cat is likely immune to reinfection, espe-
 Feline Immunodeficiency Virus
of a recent or active infection as IgM antibodies are only present for
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) is also a retrovirus and is also one
about 12 weeks postinfection. Most cats with positive IgM tests are also
of the most common feline infectious diseases. Common in-house FIV
not currently shedding oocysts. Negative IgG and IgM tests suggest
screening tests rely on detection of antibodies directed against several
that the cat is susceptible to becoming infected and shedding oocysts
different viral antigens. Negative test results in asymptomatic cats are
if infected.
highly accurate, but positive results in all cats should be confirmed
given the serious consequences of positive results and the possibility of
false-positives. Common confirmatory testing modalities include a sec-
 Suggested Readings
ond antibody test, ideally one that was produced by a different manu-
facturer than the initial test or send-out PCR testing. Western blotting.
Giori L, Giordano A, Giudice C, et al. 2011. Performances of Different
IFA, and virus isolation testing are also available but are not performed
Diagnostic Tests for Feline Infectious Peritonitis in Challenging
as frequently. FIV vaccination or circulating maternal antibodies will
Clinical Cases. J Sm Anim Pract. 52:152-57.
95
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
Levy J. 2008. 2008 American Association of Feline Practitioners' Feline
Stockham SL, Scott MA, eds. 2010. Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical
 Retroviral Management Guidelines. J Fel Med Surg. 10:300-316.
Pathology, 2nd ed. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Osbourne CA, Stevens JB. 1999. LIrinalysis: A Clinical Guide to
Thrall MA, ed. 2004. Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chermistry.
Compassionate Patient Care. Pittsburgh: Bayer Corporation.
Baltimore Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Paul A, ed. 2010. 2010 Feline Guidelines. American Heartworm Society.
Vollaire MR, Radecki SV, Lappin MR. 2005. Seroprevalence of Toxoplasma
http: // www.heartwormsociety.org/veterinary-resources/ feline-
gondi Antibodies in Clinically Ill Cats in the United States. Amer J Veter 
guidelines.html.
Res. 66(5):874-77.
96
CHAPTER 12
Hematol
Laura V. Lane and Rick L. Cowell
● Using a microhematocrit tube, wooden applicator stick, or pipette,
 Introdu ction
place a drop of blood on the glass slide just in front of the frosted
A complete blood count (CBC) and microscopic blood film review are
edge.
excellent diagnostic tools for evaluation of the feline patient's erythro-
● Place the bottom edge of a second slide (pusher slide) in front of the
cytes (red blood cells [RBCs]), leukocytes (white blood cells [WBCs]),
drop of blood (Fig. 12-1a).
and platelets (thrombocytes). The CBC is generated either in the clinic
● Back the pusher slide into the drop of blood. Allow the blood to wick
-zaueoeuupaeneqioeoq auaiajaiapsnoueeo
across the bottom edge of the pusher slide (Fig. 12-1b).
ers. Blood film review on every CBC is mandatory because it provides
● In one smooth, quick motion move the pusher slide forward at a
quality control on the hematology analyzer (to verify the values on the
 45-degree angle along the length of the bottom slide without apply-
CBC) and provides additional information that is not detected by
ing downward pressure (Fig. 12-1c). Increase the angle of the pusher
analyzers (immature leukocytes, toxic change, cell morphology, and
slide to avoid running off the end of the slide with anemic (thin) sam-
parasites). This chapter will cover basic hematology techniques and
ples. Decrease the angle of the pusher slide to spread out the cells for
provide a brief description of normal morphology of RBCs, WBCs,
thick samples.
platelets, and their bone marrow precursor cels as well as common
●Allow the slide to air dry completely for about 10 minutes (Fig. 12-1d);
abnormal findings.
a hairdryer may be used to shorten the time.
Hematology Techniques
Bone Marrow Aspirate Preparation
Sample Collection
Slides from bone marrow aspirates must be made at the time of collec-
tion to avoid deterioration of the cells. Frosted edged glass slides are
The CBC may be artifactually affected by lipemia (excess fat in the blood),
required; if available, a Petri dish or watch glass and pipette for picking
hemolysis (ruptured RBCs), traumatic collection (platelet clumps), and
out bone marrow particles can be used. The following steps are recom-
stress (alterations in RBC and WBC numbers). Therefore, fasting the
mended:
patient (~12 hours), minimizing stress, and proper collction technique
are important. Use of the appropriately sized syringe and needle (range
20- to 25-gauge) for the vein and patient will help reduce hemolysis.
● Label the frosted end of several glass slides with patient identifica-
-ua dot apuaae paaq e ot paasun s auas a wo po
tion. Pencil is preferred for labeling because it will not fade or wash
off during staining.
enediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) anticoagulant blood tube that con-
tains a preset vacuum. The preset vacuum will allow the tube to be
 aluas au wo eae paendse jo sdop omi ot auo asuas o
properly filled (two-thirds to three-quarters full); select the size of the
the middle of a slide. Alternatively, dispense the aspirated material
tube to fit the sample. If multiple types of blood tubes are filled from the
into a Petri dish and use a pipette to remove a bone marrow particle
(dull white spec; glistening specs are fat) from the blood and place it
same syringe, the EDTA tube should be filled last to avoid the chance of
accidentally transferring a small amount of EDTA to the other tubes
in the middle of a slide (Figs. 12-2a,b).
 m a a jo d uo eiad  ies e a s
resulting in artifactual changes to other test results.A blood flm should
be made soon after collction and can be made from the syringe or EDTA
tube.In-clinic CBCs should be performed within 2 hours or stored in the
applying downward pressure (Fig. 12-2c).
● Without applying downward pressure, gently pull the slides apart
refrigerator until analyzed. Send-out CBCs need to be stored in the
refrigerator and shipped with an ice pack. Be sure to send a premade
(Fig. 12-2d).
blood flm along with the EDTA tube; the blood film does not need to be
●Stand slides on end to drain excess blood and allow to completely
 stained and should not be stored in the refrigerator.
air dry.
Blood Film Preparation
Stains
A blood film is made soon after collection to prevent cell deterioration.
Quick Romanowsky Type Stains
 The materials needed include EDTA anticoagulated blood, frosted edge
For routine staining of blood film/bone marrow aspirate slides before
glass slides, and a microhematocrit tube, wooden applicator stick, or
microscopicevaluation quick Romanowsky type stains (e.g., Diff-Quik@)
 pipette. The following steps are recommended:
are commonly used because they are fast, easy to use, and require mini-
mal equipment (glass or plastic containers). The following steps are
● Label the frosted end of the glass slide with patient identification.
recommended:
Pencil is preferred for labeling because it will not fade or wash off
during staining.
· Prepare a blood film/bone marrow aspirate slide, and allow it to
completely air dry.
● Dip the blood film in the fixative (usually methanol) 10-15 times
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
(according to the manufacturer's instructions), remove the slide, and 
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
blot the end on a paper towel (Fig. 12-3a).
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
● Repeat step 2 with the eosinophilic (orange) stain.
26
A
Figure 12-1 Blood film preparation. (a) After a drop of
EDTA anticoagulated blood is placed on a labeled glasslide a
second pusher slide is placed in front of the drop of blood.
(b) The pusher slide is backed into the drop of blood and the
blood is allowed to wick across the bottom edge ofthe pusher
slide. (c) In one smooth, quick motion the pusher slide is
pahen
moved forward at a 45-degree angle along the length of
Finfo
the bottom slide without applying downward pressure.
(d) Allow the slide to air dry completely before staining. EDTA,
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid.
Courtesy of Dr L. V. Lane.
Figure 12-2 Bone marrow aspirate preparation. (a)
Aspirated bone marrow material is dispensed into a Petri
dish. Bone marrow particles (spicules) are seen as dull white
specs farrows). (b) Using a pipette the spicules are harvested 
and placed in the midle of a labeled glass slide. (c) A
spreader slide is placed perpendicularly on top of the slide 
with the aspirated material to spread the bone marrow parti-
cles.Avoid applying downward pressure (d) Slides are gently
 pulled apart without applying downward pressure.
Courtesy of Dr L. V. Lane.
Hematology
Figure 12-3 Quick Romanowsky type stains. (a) Moving
Aleluanbas paddip s! wl pooq paedaid e yu o yal wo
 in the fixative, eosinophilic stain, and basophilic stain. Slides
are blotted between stains and rinsed after the last stain. (b)
Pahent
Pakent
A stained blood film. (c) A stained bone marrow aspirate
info
 preparation. The bone marrow particles are seen as the blue
Info
 material in the center of the slide (arrow).
Courtesy of Dr. L. V. Lane.
● Repeat step 2 with the basophilic (blue) stain, then gently rinse the
· Staining may reveal WBC aging artifacts that are most ofen noted as
slide with tap water.
distinct holes in the cytoplasm and nucleus of neutrophils (Fig. 12-4c).
● Place the slide upright to drain the water, and allow it to air dry (Figs.
● In addition, rare ruptured, unidentifiable cells are seen on most blood
12-3b,c).
films (Fig. 12-4d).
Artifacts
New Methylene Blue Stain (NMBS)
Several common artifacts of improper staining should be recognized and
Required material consists of a small glass or plastic test/culture tube, a
remedied before interpretation is made on the blood film.
pipette, and frosted edge glass slides (Fig. 12-5a). This stain is used to
identify Heinz bodies (RBC inclusions; Fig. 12-5b) and reticulocytes
pue lam ueis pou Aew sanueng ao isew pue tudoseq ieu aon ●
(immature RBCs; Figs. 12-5c,d). The following steps are recommended:
 polychromasia may not be distinctive.
pale so aun sunueis aenbapeun aun inu pauieisun pue a
● Label a test/culture tube with patient identification. Mix one to two
stain (Fig. 12-4a). To correct, increase the number of dips in each solu-
drops of EDTA anticoagulated blood with equal parts of NMBS.
tion or replace the stains.
●Allow the mixture to sit for a minimum of 15 minutes.
 Uneven staining is often the result of water pooling on the surface of the
● Remix the blood /stain mixture, make a blood film, allow it to air dry,
slide after staining and rinsing. Always place the slide upright to dry.
and examine it microscopically. No additional staining is needed. If
● Excessive pink staining is a result of too many dips in the eosino-
reticulocytes or Heinz bodies are pale and difficult to distinguish
philic stain or not enough dips in the basophilic stain. Adjust the
allow the blood /stain mixture to sit for additional time.
number of dips.
● Excessive blue staining results from prolonged time in the basophilic
stain or a thick blood film. Adjust the number of dips or make a thin-
have clumps of blue/black dots (Fig. 12-5c). Punctate reticulocytes
ner blood film.
contain a few separate small blue/black dots (Fig. 12-5d). One thousand
● Stain precipitate (not to be confused with infectious organisms) is an
 RBCs are counted and the number of punctuate and aggregate reticulo-
indication to change aged stains.
cytes are recorded; alternatively, a Miller square placed in the microscope
●Water artifact is a result of incomplete drying of blood flms or mois-
eyepiece can be used to facilitate reticulocyte counting per manufactur-
ture in the fixative (Fig. 12-4b). To avoid, completely dry blood films,
er's instructions. Punctate and aggregate numbers are reported as a
change stains as recommended by the manufacturer, and recap stain
percentage by dividing the number of each type by 10. Some hematology
containers when not in use.
analyzers will provide an automated reticulocyte count.
99
Y
Figure 12-4 Common blood film artifacts. (a) Poorly
stained blood cells. Note that all cells are pale and platelets
lack visible granulation (arrowheads). (b) water artifact is
seen as refractile dots on the edge of the RBCs (arrows).
Incompletely dried blood films or water in the stain are com-
mon causes. (c) wBC aging artifacts are noted as distinct
holes in the cytoplasm and nucleus of this neutrophil. (d)
Ruptured, unidentifiable cell. Aqueous Romanowsky stain 
(a-d) original magnification 1000x. RBCs, red blood cells:
WBC, white blood cell.
 Courtesy of Dr L V. Lane.
Figure 12-5 New methylene blue stain. (a) Equal parts of
 EDTA anticoagulated blood and NMBS are allowed to sit for
a minimum of 15 minutes in a labeled test/culture tube. A
blood film is made from the blood/stain mixture. (b) Heinz
bodies (RBC inclusions) stain dark blue (arows) (c}Aggregate
reticulocytes (immature RBCs) have clumps of blue/black dots
(center cell. (d) Three punctate reticulocytes contain a few
separate small blue/black dots. NMBS (b-d) original magnifi-
cation 1000x. EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; NMBS,
new methylene blue stain; RBCs, red blood cells.
Courtesy of Dr L. V. Lane.
Hematology
Ratent
Pahent
info
info
Figure 12-6 Saline dilution/dispersion test. (a) Two t0
three drops of saline (0.9% NaCl are placed in the middle of
a labeled glass slide. A wooden applicator stick is dipped into
the EDTA anticoagulated blood tube and swirled around in
the saline. (b) A coverslip is placed over the saline/blood 
mixture. (c) Under microscopic examination agglutination is
seen as clumping of RBCs in the saline/blood mixture. (d) If
RBCs disperse and no clumping is seen in the saline/blood
mixture rouleaux is confirmed. Unstained (c and d) original
®
magnification 200x. EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid;
RBCs, red blood cells.
a and b courtesy of Dr L. V Lane. c and d courtesy of Dr. T.E. Rizzi
 Oklahoma State University.
Saline Dilution/Dispersion Test
cell count and evaluate cell morphology. The body of the blood film is the
back portion of the blood film closest to the blood drop where cells are
thick and piled on top of each other. Every blood film should be
RBCs from rouleaux (charge interaction). The equipment needed
approached in the same manner to avoid missing important changes.
includes EDTA anticoagulated blood, frosted edge glass slides, cover-
The following steps are recommended:
slips, saline (0.9% NaCl), a pipette, and a wooden applicator stick. The
following steps are recommended:
● Scan the entire feathered edge using the 10x or 20 x objective to iden-
tify platelet clumps, large parasites, or large atypical cells.
● Label the frosted end of two glass slides with patient identification.
● Find the monolayer in relation to the feathered edge using the 10×
 On one slide place a single drop of EDTA anticoagulated blood in the
objective. If RBC density is normal, the monolayer (cells are shoulder 
middle (control). On the second slide place two to three drops of
to shoulder) begins one to two microscope fields behind the feath-
saline in the middle.
ered edge and extends to the body of the film. If it takes more fields
to reach the monolayer a decreased density is suggested supporting
tube and then swirl it around in the saline on the second slide
the presence of an anemia. Anemia is an indication to perform a
(Fig. 12-6a).
NMBS to evaluate reticulocyte numbers.
 Place a coverslip over the single drop of blood and another over the
● Using the 40x objective evaluate the WBC number by taking the
saline/blood mixture (Fig. 12-6b).
average number of WBCs in ten fields and multiplying by 2,000 to
 Examine both slides microscopically with the substage condenser of
give a "rough" estimate of WBCs/microliter. Placing a drop of oil on
the microscope lowered. If clumping of RBCs is seen in both the drop
the slide with a coverslip over the oil may sharpen the image when
of blood and the saline/blood mixture agglutination is confirmed
using this objective.
(Fig. 12-6c). If the RBCs disperse and no clumping is seen in the
●On the 100 × oil objective estimate the platelet number by taking
saline/blood mixture rouleaux is confirmed (Fig. 12-6d).
the average number of platelets counted in ten fields and multiply-
iad j  , 0  0 m q 
Blood Film Evaluation
This equates to a minimum of ten platelets per 100 x field to indi-
cate adequate numbers (typically the low end of the reference
A well-made blood film is made up of a feathered edge, monolayer, and 
interval).
body. The feathered edge is the end of the blood film furthest from the
● On the 100× oil objective perform a 100 leukocyte differential count
 blood drop. In the monolayer, the RBCs are shoulder to shoulder but not
by counting 100 consecutive WBCs and categorize them according to
overlapping. The monolayer is the best place to perform a differential
type (neutrophil, lymphocyte, monocyte, eosinophil, and basophil).
101
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
uaned e uitl ynoru aaou pue iaeououi aut jo alpa auo seau peis
0 Acanthocytes: RBCs with multiple, irregular, unevenly spaced
to avoid counting the same cells twice. Finally evaluate the morphol-
blunt spicules; in contrast to echinocytes (Fig. 12-8b).
ogy of all three cells lines (RBC, WBC, and platelets).
0 Codocytes (target cell): RBCs with a central area of hemoglobin
● Report the absolute numbers/microliter of each type of WBC by mul-
 surrounded by a clear ring separating it from the hemoglobin
tiplying the percentage of each leukocyte type by the total WBC. For
around the edge of the cell.
example, for a patient with a WBC count of 12,500/μLand 55% neutro-
o Eccentrocytes: RBCs in which the membrane has collapsed and fused
phils the absolute number of neutrophils is: 12,500 x 0.55 = 6,875/μL.
 pushing all the hemoglobin to one side creating a clear vacuole.
o Echinocytes: RBCs with multiple regular, uniform, evenly spaced 
spicules; in contrast to acanthocytes (Fig. 12-8c).
Review of Blood Cells
0 Schistocytes: Smallfragments of RBCs (Fig. 12-8d).
0 Keratocytes: Blister cells or pre-keratocytes have an intact blister
Erythrocytes
on the edge of the RBC (Fig. 12-9a). After rupture of the blister the
Review Figures 12-7 to 12-10. Normal feline RBCs are round biconcave
RBC is known as a keratocyte (Fig. 12-9b).
discs that stain orange-red with quick stains and often do not contain a
● Rouleaux: RBCs that form like a stack of coins as opposed to aggluti-
 pale center (Fig. 12-7a). Although RBCs with pale centers may be found
nation (Fig. 12-10a); they may be observed in clinically normal cats.
as an artifact on blood films made from stored EDTA anticoagulated
Confirm with a saline dilution/dispersion test (RBCs will disperse;
blood, they may be significant when present in numbers high enough to
see Fig. 12-6d)y.
be readily recognized in most fields of freshly made blood smears.
Agglutination: RBCs that form grape-like clusters as opposed to rou-
Common changes that should be recognized and reported include:
leaux (Fig. 12-10b). Confirm with a saline dilution/dispersion test
(RBCs will not disperse; see Fig. 12-6c).
●Anisocytosis: Variation in size between cells (Fig. 12-7b).
● Basophilic stippling: Multiple small blue dots in RBCs.
●Poikilocytes: Abnormally shaped cells (Fig. 12-Sa); when possible,
● Heinz bodies: Round to oval pale areas within the RBCs; these are
these should be further classified:
difficult to identify until seen projecting from the RBC membrane 
Figure 12-7 Feline erythrocytes. (a) Normal feline RBCs are round biconcave discs that stain orange-red with quick stains and often do not contain a pale center. (b}Anisocytosis or
variation in size between cells is seen as a large RBC (arrow) surrounded by smaller RBCs. (c) Polychromasia is seen as a blue/gray hue in the two center cell (arrows). These are 
wdo um snanuep n e su aa agnu oauaui ueaa m aqaeneapasn ae pe s eu sana eae alena
that is similar to the color of a mature RBC.Aqueous Romanowsky stain (a-d) original magnification 10oox. EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; NMBS, new methylene blue stain:
nRBC, nucleated red blood cell; RBCs, red blood cells.
Courtesy of Dr. L. V. Lane.
102
Figure 12-8 Feline erythrocytes. (a) Poikilocytes are
abnormally shaped RBCs that should be further classified
whenever possible. (b) Numerous acanthocytes with multiple,
irregular, unevenly spaced spicules are present. (c) In contrast
to acanthocytes, echinocytes (anrows) have multiple regular.
uniform, evenly spaced spicules.(d}A schistocyte or RBC frag-
ment (arrow) is surrounded by normal RBCs. Aqueous
Romanowsky stain (a-d} original magnification 1000x. RBCs.
red blood cell s.
Courtesy of Dr L. V. Lane.
Figure 12-9 Feline erythrocytes.(a}A blister cel/prekerato-
cyte contains a blister on the edge ofthe RBC. (b}A keratocyte
is a ruptured blister cel with the two ends projecting from the
cell. (c) A Howell-Jolly body (retained nuclear chromatin,
arrow) is seen in a RBC. (d) Heinz bodies projecting from the
RBC membrane (arrows). NMBS wil confirm their presence.
Aqueous Romanowsky stain (a-d) original magnification
1000x. NMBS, new methylene blue stain; RBC, red blood cel.
Courtesy of Dr. L. V. Lane.
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
Figure 12-10  Feline erythrocytes. (a) Rouleaux is seen as a stacking of RBCs like coins (arows). This may be seen in clinically normal cats. (b) In contrast, agglutination is seen as
grape-like clusters of RBCs (arrows). A saline dilution/dispersion test is used to differentiate between the two. Aqueous Romanowsky stain (a-b) original magnification 100ox. RBCs,
red blood cells.
Courtesy of Dr. L. V. Lane.
(Fig. 12-9d). Low numbers of small Heinz bodies may be seen in clin-
(Fig. 12-1la). More commonly, small signet ring inclusions are seen in
ically normal cats. Confirm with a NMBS; the Heinz bodies will stain
RBCs (Fig. 12-11b).
dark blue (see Fig. 12-5b).
●Mycoplasma hemofelis (previously Hemobartonella felis): Small dot or rod-
●Howell-jolly body: A single small dense round blue dot of nuclear
shaped blue bacteria on the surface of RBCs (Fig. 12-1lc). They may be
chromatin in RBCs (see Fig. 12-9c). These must be differentiated from
seen as ring forms and in chains. With prolonged storage in EDTA they
stain precipitate and infectious organisms.
will fall off the RBCs and may be seen in the background.
●Hypochromasia: RBCs that have excessively pale centers.
● Nucleated RBC (nRBC): A RBC that has retained its nucleus (see Fig.
12-7d).
Leukocytes
o If the CBC analyzer reports total nucleated cell count (TNCC), the
Review Figures 12-12 to 12-16. There are five types of WBCs that must be
WBC count should be corrected for the nRBCs if they exceed 5/100
categorized for a differential count on a CBC. These can be placed into
WBCs. Corrected WBC = TNCC x (100 /100+nRBCs).
two groups: the granulocytes that have a segmented nucleus and gran-
0 RBCs may be recorded separately while performing a WBC
ules in their cytoplasm and the mononuclear cells that have a round
 differential count and reported as number of nRBCs per 100 WBCs.
nucleus and generally no granules in their cytoplasm.
● Polychromasia: RBCs that have a blue/gray hue (see Fig. 12-7c).
 These cells are larger than normal RBCs and are used to evaluate
·Neutrophils: These are the predominant granulocyte in health. The
bone marrow regeneration; they are equivalent to aggregate reticulo-
nucleus is blue, dense, and segmented. The cytoplasm is generally
cytes on a NMBS (see Fig. 12-5c). Polychromasia may be difficult to
clear; occasionally pale pink granules may be seen (Figs. 12-12a-d).
see with quick stains.
● Eosinophils: These granulocytes are presentin low numbers in health.
They are slightly larger than neutrophils. The nucleus is blue, less
dense, and less segmented than a neutrophil nucleus. The cytoplasm
Parasites
is filled with rod-shaped eosinophilic (orange) granules (Fig. 12-13a).
● Cytauxzoon felis: Occasionally, large monocytes filled with hund reds
·Basophils: Only rarely are these granulocytes seen in health. They are
of developing merozoites can be found on the feathered edge
slightly larger than neutrophils. The nucleus is blue, less dense, and less 
104
Figure 12-11 Parasites in peripheral blood. (a) Cytauxzoon
felis schizont. A large monocyte is flled with hundreds of
developing merozoites that often obscure the nucleus fout-
lined byarrows). (b) The small signet ring inclusion in the RBC
(arrow) is a Cytauxzoon felis piroplasm. (c) Mycoplasma
hermofelis bacteria on the surface ofthe RBCs farrows. These
may be seen in ring forms or in chains. (d) Numerous
Histoplasma capsulatum organisms are present in a mac-
rophage. These fungal organisms are round to oval with a
cescent-shaped purple nucleus and a clear capsule. Aqueous
Romanowsky stain (a-d) original magnification 1000x. RBCs,
red blood cells.
Courtesy of Dr L. V. Lane.
Figure 12-12 Feline leukocytes. (a) A mature segmented
neutrophil. Note the blue, dense, and segmented nucleus and
the clear cytoplasm. (b) Numerous segmented neutrophils.
Note the variation in nuclear shape. (c) A band neutrophil has
a horseshoe shaped nucleus that is not constricted and is not
as dense as a mature neutrophil. The cytoplasm is lightly blue.
(d) Four mature segmented neutrophils and a single band
neutrophil are seen (arrow). Aqueous Romanowsky stain
(a-d} original magnification 1000x.
Courtesy of Dr. L.V. Lane.
Figure 12-13 Feline leukocytes/mast cells. (a) Two eosino-
phils with segmented nuclei and rod-shaped eosinophilic
(orange) granules in the cytoplasm are present. Note the neu-
tophil for comparison. (b) Two basophils with segmented 
nuclei and round lavender granules in the cytoplasm are
seen. Note the neutrophil for comparison. (c) Two mast cells 
with round nuclei and abundant cytoplasm are present. The
lower mast cell contains numerous purple granules, whereas
the upper mast cell contains few purple granules. (d} A single
mast cel with non-staining granules. Aqueous Romanowsky
stain (a-d) original magnification 1000x.
Courtesy of Dr L. V. Lane.
Figure 12-14 Feline leukocytes. (a}This field contains four
small ymphocytes with round to cleaved, dense nuclei, and a
thin rim of basophili (blue) cytoplasm. (b)}A reactive lympho-
qyte is present. It is slightly larger than a small lymphocyte
with expanded and deeply basophilicytoplasm. (c A large
granular lymphocyte is seen and is slightlylarger than a small
Alenid iey wsedopo jeap pue papuedxa ylm aooudun
contains few variably sized pink granules (arrow) in the cyto-
plasm. (d) Large granular lymphocyte in which the granules
have not stained is present. Aqueous Romanowsky stain
(a-d) original magnification 1000x.
Courtesy o Dr L. Lane.
Figure 12-15 Feline leukocytes. (a-d) Monocytes are pre-
sent with variable-shaped nuclei and variably abundant and
vacuolated blue-gray cytoplasm. Aqueous Romanowsky stain
(a-d) original magnification 1000x.
Courtesy of Dr. L. V. Lane.
Figure 12-16 Toxic change in feline neutrophils (a}A seg-
mented neutrophil is seen with foamy vacuolated cytoplasm
and numerous blue Dohle bodies (arrows) in the cytoplasm.
(b)A segmented neutrophil is present with normal cytoplasm
and two Dohle bodies (arrows). These may be seen in low
numbers in clinically normal cats. (c) A band neutrophil with
increased cytoplasmic basophilia (blueness) is seen. (d}A neu-
trophil with a ring-shaped nucleus is present. Aqueous
Romanowsky stain (a-d) original magnification 1000x.
Courtesy of Dr. L . Lane.
SECTION 2: Diagnostics
segmented than a neutrophil. The cytoplasm is filed with round laven-
ogy analyzers. Decreased platelet numbers must always be confirmed by
der granules (Fig. 12-13b). Eosinophils and basophils can sometimes be
microscopic evaluation of a blood film. If clumped/enlarged platelets are
confused with mast cells because of the presence of granules; however,
found the number generated by the analyzer should be viewed as
mast clls have a round nucleus and purple granules (Figs. 12-13c,d).
a minimum number. Immature megakaryocytes (platelet precursors;
● Lymphocytes: These mononuclear cells are the second most abun-
Fig. 12-17c) and mature megakaryocytes (Fig. 12-17d) are present in the
dant WBCs in health. They are slightly smaller than a neutrophil with
bone marrow and their numbers can be evaluated via bone marrow aspi-
a round to cleaved dense blue nucleus. The cytoplasm is seen as a
rate cytology.
thin blue rim (Fig. 12-14a). There are several variations of lympho-
cytes that may be seen. (Figs. 12-14b-d).
● Monocytes: These mononuclear cells are the largest WBC and are
Bone Marrow Precursor Cells
present in low numbers in health. The nucleus is variable in shape
Review Figures 12-17 to 12-19. Well-made bone marrow slides contain
(round, oval, bean, and horseshoe) and is lighter and less dense than
numerous particles composed of developing RBC, WBC, and platelet
a neutrophil nucleus. The cytoplasm is abundant, blue-gray and
precursors along with fat, bone marrow stromal (supporting) cells, and
often contains distinct vacuoles (Figs. 12-15a-d).
· Common changes that should be recognized and reported include:
 marrow is an indication for review by a veterinary clinical pathologist.
o WBC aging artifact may be the result of extended storage in EDTA.
This is avoided by making a blood film soon after collection.
Changes include deteriorated or shrunken pyknotic (condensed)
Stages of RBC (Erythroid) Maturation
nuclei, hypersegmentation (≥5 segments), and distinct holes in the
cytoplasm (see Fig. 12-4c).
o Toxic changes are seen in neutrophils as a result of accelerated
● Rubriblast: The earliest identifiable stage; it is a large cell with a large
 bone marrow production. Dohle bodies are the most common mild
round nucleus, a visible nucleolus, and moderately abundant deeply
change and may be seen in low numbers in clinically normal cats.
basophilic (blue) cytoplasm (Fig. 12-18a).
● Prorubricyte: This stage is similar in appearance to the rubriblast but
These are small blue-green often multiple intra-cytoplasmic
inclusions (Figs. 12-16a,b). Foamy cytoplasmic vacuolation (see
does not contain a visible nucleolus (Fig. 12-18b).
Fig. 12-16a) and increased cytoplasmic basophilia (blueness;
● Rubricyte (aka nRBC): This stage is smaller; the nucleus is perfectly
Fig. 12-16c) are commonly seen with moderate to severe inflam-
round and appears ropey. The cytoplasm is deeply basophilic (blue)
mation while ring-shaped nuclei are observed only rarely and
(Fig. 12-18c).
occur with severe toxic change (Fig. 12-16d).
● Metarubricyte (aka nRBC): This stage is smaller than rubricytes and
o Ruptured cells and bare nuclei should not be counted in the dif-
may have orange or blue/gray cytoplasm. The nucleus is small and
ferential (see Fig. 12-4d). The differential is invalid if greater than
pyknotic (dense; see Figs. 12-7d, 12-18c).
10% of the WBCs are ruptured.
● Polychromatophil: The final stage before matu re RBCs. These cells do
o A left shift refers to the presence of immature neutrophils
not have a nucleus, are slightly larger than mature RBCs, and have a
most often consisting of band neutrophils (Fig. 12-12c,d).
blue-gray hue (see Figs. 12-7c, 12-18d). They are equivalent to
aggregate reticulocytes on a NMBS (see Fig. 12-5c).
These are released prematurely from the bone marrow and
should be counted separately from mature segmented neutro-
phils in the differential. See overview of the bone marrow for
Stages of WBC (Myeloid) Maturation
descriptions.
0 Neutrophils and monocytes are capable of phagocytosis (inges-
tion) of organisms. Although rare in peripheral blood, this may
● Myeloblast: The earliest identifiable stage; it is a large cell with a
include bacteria or fungal organisms (e.g. Histoplasma capsulatum,
large round nucleus, a visible nucleolus and a moderate amount of 
see Fig. 12-1ld).
basophilic (blue) cytoplasm (Fig. 12-19a).
  a e a ae as sr a o
cyte (slightly smaller than the size of a neutrophil) with more cyto-
 but does not contain a visible nucleolus and has numerous small faint
 plasm that is deeply basophilic (blue; Fig. 12-14b).
pink intra-cytoplasmic granules (Fig. 12-19b).
● Myelocyte: This stage is smaller with a round nucleus and clear
cytes (slightly larger than a neutrophil) with abundant pale cyto-
cytoplasm (neutrophil; Fig. 12-19c, arrow). Orange granules
plasm that typically contains a few variable sized pink granules in
aq  (dose sn saua ao (ea  aas oiso)
the cytoplasm (Fig. 12-14c). These granules do not always stain
present.
with quick stains (Fig. 12-14d).
Metamyelocyte: similar to a myelocyte but with a bean-shaped
o Mast cells: These are large cells that tend to be pulled out to the
nucleus and clear cytoplasm (neutrophil; Fig. 12-19d), orange gran-
m lanu anq Adap pun ae aaey au apa paae
ules (eosinophil), or lavender granules (basophil) may be present.
variable numbers of round purple granules in the cytoplasm
(Fig. 12-13c). These granules do not always stain with quick stains
shaped nucleus that is not constricted at any point and has parallel
(Figs. 12-13c,d).
sides. The nucleus is not as dense as a mature neutrophil and the
o Leukemia/other neoplastic cells: If cells are seen that are not
 pe p s aas o a s uo
expected, contain nucleoli, or cannot be identified, review by a
with orange granules (eosinophil) or lavender granules (basophil).
veterinary clinical pathologist is indicated.
Platelet Precursors
Platelets
 These are known as megakaryocytes and they are the largest cells in the bone
Platelets (Fig. 12-17) are cytoplasmic fragments of megakaryocytes that
marrow. As immature cells they have a round nucleus with scant deeply
contain distinct purple granules.Feline platelets have a tendencyto form
basophilic (blue) cytoplasm (see Fig. 12-17c). As they mature their nucleus
clumps that can be seen on the feathered edge of a blood film (Fig. 12-17a)
starts to form many lobules, and the cytoplasm becomes more abundant,
and are highly variable in size (Fig. 12-17b). These characteristics often
more purple, and appears granular (se Fig. 12-17d). The cytoplasm issheared
cause an artifactual decrease in platelet counts from automated hematol-
offin bone marrow sinusoids to form the platelets seen in peripheral blood.
108
Figure 12-17 Feline platelets and megakaryocytes. (a) A
platelet clump is seen on the feathered edge of a blood film.
This may decrease the platelet count from automated analyz-
ers. (b) Feline platelets are frequently seen varying in size
from large (RBC size, arrows) to small arowheads,. This may
decrease the platelet count from automated analyzers. (c) An
immature megakaryocyte (platelet precursor) is present in the
bone marrow. Note the large size and deeply basophilic
cytoplasm. (d) A mature megakaryocyte (platelet precursor) is
prominent in the bone marrow. Note the large size, multi-
lobulated nucleus and abundant granular purple cytoplasm.
Aqueous Romanowsky stain original magnification 1000x.
RBC, red blood cell.
Courtesy of Dr. L. V. Lane.
Figure 12-18 Feline bone marrow, erythroid maturation.
(a}A rubriblast has a visible nucleolus (arrow) (b)Prorubricyte.
(c) Three rubricytes and a metarubricyte (arrow). (d) A poly-
chromatophilic cell (arow) is surrounded by mature RBCs.
Aqueous Romanowsky stain (a-d) original magnification
1000x. RBCs, red blood cells.
Courtesy of Dr. L. V. Lane.
 SECTION 2: Diagnostics
Figure 12-19 Feline bone marrow, myeloid maturation.
(a) The myeloblast in the center has a visible nucleolus.
A eosinophil myelocyte is located above. (b) A promyelocyte
with faint-pink intracytoplasmic granulation, (c a myelocyte 
with a round nucleus (arrow), and (d) a metamyelocyte with
a bean-shaped nucleus are seen. (e) A band neutrophil
(arrow) is noted with several segmented neutrophils.Aqueous 
Romanowsky stain (a-d) original magnification 1000x.
Courtesy of Dr. L. V. Lane.
 Suggested Readings
Thrall MA, ed. 2006. Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Ames:
Blackwell Publishing.
Grindem CB, Tyler RD, Cowell RL. 2008. The Bone Marrow. In RL Cowell,.
Walker D. 2008. Peripheral Blood Smears. In RL Cowell, RD Tyler, JH
RD Tyler, JH Meinkoth, et al., eds., Diagnostic Cytology and Hematology
Meinkoth, et al., eds., Diagnostic Cytology and Hematology of the Dog and
of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed., pp. 422-50. St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier.
Cat, 3rd ed., pp. 390-421. St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier.
Reagan WJ,Irizarry Rovira AR,DeNicola DB. 2008. Veterinary Hematology
Wiley-Blackwell.
110
SECTION
Recovery
CHAPTER 13
Anesthesia: Sedation and General
Ludovic Pelligand
Overview
Opioids are the cornerstone of intraoperative and postoperative
analgesia. See Chapter 16. Nevertheless, opioids used alone do not
In a recent study on perioperative death in small animals, the risk of
 generally provide good sedation in the cat. The pure mu agonists com-
anesthesia- or sedation-related death was 0.24% in cats overall and 1.4%
monly used and their duration of action are: morphine (4-6 hours),
in sick cats. Although feline anesthesia appears increasingly safe, further
methadone (4 hours), hydromorphone (4 hours), pethidine in Europe or
reduction of mortality could be achieved with greater patient care and
meperidine in the United States (2 hours), and fentanyl (30 minutes).
nursing during and after anesthesia.
Their level of analgesia is dose related. Butorphanol (1.5 hours) is a
A thorough clinical examination is necessary before sedation or gen-
kappa agonist and mu antagonist. It provides good sedation but only
eral anesthesia. Even a healthy young cat subjected to "routine anesthe-
 mild analgesia. Buprenorphine is a long-lasting partial mu agonist (6-8
sia" may hide sublinical congenital disease, which may become
hours) that may be included in a premedication protocol; however, its 
problematic during anesthesia. The proportion of the geriatric feline
 peak effect occurs 45 minutes after injection (Table 13-1).
population is growing with the progresses of medicine; these animals
Acepromazine in combination with opioids results in moderate to
may have chronic subclinical conditions.
good sedation, which is often enough for catheter placement in calm
conditions (see Table 13-1). This combination is frequently used as
 premedication prior to surgery The action of acepromazine lasts 8 hours.
Conditions and Drugs Affecting Anesthesia
This vasodilator should not be used in cats in shock because it may
● Respiratory: Pleural effusion, diaphragmatic hernia, and pneumothorax.
exacerbate hypotension.
· Cardiovascular: Cardiomyopathy, systemic hypertension, hypov-
 An efficient and reversible immobilization is obtained with alpha-2
olemia, and distrib utive or septic shock.
adrenoreceptor agonists alone or in combination with opioids (see
· Renal: Chronic kidney disease, urinary obstruction, and electrolyte
Table 13-1). Nevertheless, they cause peripheral vasoconstriction and
areu un idaxg indino oeipieo jo uoonpau ot urpeal eipreoperq xaa
imbalance.
●Hepatic: Portosystemic shunt and hepatic lipid osis.
exceptions, they should only be administered to healthy cats that have a
● Medications: Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, diuretics,
normal cardiac function.
beta blockers, and calcium channels blockers.
Ketamine and midazolam are commonly combined in the same
oeunqos stul (-et aqei s) uoepas punooud e apiaoud ot stuss
is preferred tothe use of alpha-2 agonists when the cardiovascular func-
Further Preanesthetic Considerations
tion cannot be assessed prior to sedation. Recoveries are occasionally
stormy with this protocol. A quiet, dark environment is essential for
A stabilization period is beneficial to the outcome of anesthesia or
recovery after this protocol.
sedation if a cat is presented in an unstable cardiorespiratory state.
Insulin syringes or l-cc syringes should be used for accurate volume
Laboratory analyses and diagnostic imaging are justified in an older or
measurement of medetomidine and acepromazine. The use of a diluted
traumatized cat, particularly if the results might change the anesthesia
stock solution in saline (1:10 v:v) is also acceptable. Patients should be
protocol.
monitored following administration of sedation. Water bowls must
 Some cats may not be amenable to minimal restraint for an examina-
be removed from the kennel. Sufficient time should be allowed for the
loj Aqeins lau Suipiebau apeu aq isnu ssang paeonpa ue os uog
drugs to reach their peak effect (5 minutes for medetomidine, at least 30
sedation or anesthesia based on their clinical history age, and apparent
minutes for acepromazine).
symptoms. Sedation for better cooperation is usually preferred to a
 stressful restraint that can lead to sudden collapse.
Sedation
General Anesthesia Procedure
Sedation is required to facilitate a diagnostic procedure or placement of
Intravenous Access
intravenous (IV) access. Sedation or premedication is also the first step of
Placement of a peripheral catheter is strongly recommended for general
an anesthesia protocol that should include analgesics (opioids, alpha-2
agonists), hypnotic agents (induction agents, volatile anesthetic), and
ized with a 22-gauage catheter after clipping and preparation of the area.
drugs that produce muscle relaxation (volatile agents, benzodiazepines
Initial skin perforation with the bevel of a needle prevents catheter tip
and alpha-2 agonists). The choice of the most appropriate sedation pro-
damage when catheters are placed in male cats with thick skin.
tocol is influenced by the age and temperament of the patient, American
A T-connector filled with heparinized saline(1 unit per ml) is attached on
Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) status, and the degree of pain
the Luer-lock of the catheter and taped in place. Good handling by an
expected from the procedure.
experienced person and adequate chemical restraint make catheter
placement easier and efficient. If IV access is required for more than 48
hours, placement of a central venous catheter under general anesthesia
should be considered.
 Placement of a temporary intraosseous catheter (spinal needle) in
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
young kitens or dehydrated cats is another option. The best sites for
and Gary D. Norsworthy
their placement include the trochanteric fossa of the femur and the flat
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
medial aspect of the proximal tibia.
113
sisepu pue snnus oAisuas
nuied uou pue buibew! ssoubep
Moderate to good sedation. Reduce
Profound sedation, reduce dose if 
intravenous access on fractious
dose in elderly or in cardiovascu-
 Possible hyperesthesia, increased 
Profound sedation; cat might be 
Profound sedation; cat might be 
intravenous.Ideal to secure 
recumbent. Appropriate for
 Usually profound sedation 
procedures. Reversible 
recumbent.Appropr
Moderate sedation
Profound sedation
Profound sedation
Comments
cats
Hydromorphone
0.05-0.15mg/kg
0.05-0.15mg/kg
0.05-0.15mg/kg
IM or IV 
 0.1mg/kg
0.1-0.3mg/kg
 0.1-0.2mg/kg 
0. 1-0.2mg/kg
 0. 1-0.2mg/kg
Morphine or
 0. 1-0.2mg/kg
methadone
IM, IV
 intravenous
Pethidine
4-6mg/kg
3-5mg/kg
3-5mg/kg
license)
SC, IM
 Buprenorphine 
0.2-0.4mg/kg 10-20 μg/kg
0.2-0.4mg/kg 10-20 μg/kg 
0.2-0.4mg/kg 10-20 μg/kg
10-0 μg/kg
SC, IM, IV
license)
20μg/kg
0.2-0.4mg/kg
Butorphanol
(Veterinary
TABLE 13-1: Combinations for sedation and premedication in the cat 
license)
0.4mg/kg
SC, IM
License
bna
Route
Alone
Alone
Alone
with
 Alone
with
3-10 + 0.2-0.3
Opioids alone 
0.025-0.05
IM. intramusclary I, itravenously SC, subutaneousy.
0.01-0.03
Dose
Medetomidine IM20-40
10-20
10-20
5-10
Dexmedetomidine
Ketamine IM (mg/kg) and
midazolam IM (mg/kg)
IM (μg/kg)
function 
(6)/6)
function
Normal
Normal 
Alphaz-agonist 
114
Anesthesia:SedationandGeneral
TABLE 13-2: Use of intravenous induction aqents in the cat
Dose* depends on
Cardiovascular
Veterinary
 depth of sedation seen  or respiratory
license
 after premedication 
 depression
 Analgesia  Accumulation 
Recovery
Cost
Recommendation
Propofol
Yes
6-8mg/kg (if mild 
Marked
None 
Yes if repeated 
Good
Moderate  Low risk
sedation)
 or prolonged 
2-4mg/kg (if deep 
infusion 
sedation)
Thiopental
No
10-12 mg/kg (if mild
Marked 
None
 Yes especially if 
Good
Cheap
Low risk
sedation)
young or liver
 5-10mg/kg (if deep
disease
sedation)
Tiletamine and
 Depends on  4-5mg/kg (if mild
Mild, dose
Some
Yes if kidney
Stormy
Moderate 
 Stable cat
zolazepam
country
sedation)
 dependent
failure
Avoid if cardiac
1-2 mg/kg (if deep
sedation)
Ketamine with
Yes for
5mg/kg (if mild sedation) Mild, dose 
Some
Yes if repeated
Stormy
Cheap
Moderate risk
benzodiazepine
ketamine 
1-3mg/kg (if deep
 dependent 
 administration
 Avoid if cardiac
sedation)
Etomidate
No
1-2 mg/kg if mild 
Almost none
None
None
Good
Expensive  High-risk cat 
sedation)
0.5-1.0mg/kg (if deep
sedation)
 Fentanyl with
No
Fentanyl: 5-10mcg/kg 
None for CV
Good
None
Good
Expensive  High-risk cat
benzodiazepine
Benzo.: 0.2-0.3 mg/kg
but severe for
respiratory
*5low IV injection to effect, as animal's requirement may be lower than the proposed dose. The proposed doses are reduced with deep sedation in comparison to mild sedation.
Cv, cardiovascular.
Anesthesia Induction Agents
effect. Thiopental causes marked respiratory and cardiovascular depres-
sion. It also accumulates in fat, which delays recovery, especially after
Healthy Cats
repeated administration.
Propofot
Mask or Chamber Induction
Open vials should be discarded within 24 hours because of the risk of
bacterial contamination in the absence of preservative. The new
Sevoflurane is preferred to isoflurane in this case because of the quicker
"28-day" propofol contains the preservative benzyl alcohol. In the
uptake and the absence of the pungent smell. Initial excitement is
seo ul paieoipuieuoo st i Xquo soop iog paaoudde st ll sateis patiu
 commonly observed in early stages of the inhalant induction. Beware of 
because benzyl alcohol is toxic to cats. The dose varies depending on
pollution of the working place with such induction techniques. This
induction technique may also expose the cats to high volatile anesthetic
 effect over 60 seconds (watch a clock). Propofol causes a marked respira-
concentrations and may be dangerous for critical patients.
u ogodord jo an paeadau proay "uoissaidap senoseaopieo pue Arot
cats who are anesthetized on a daily basis due to the risk of developing
Heinz body anemia and dyslipidemia.
More Criftical Patients
Ketamine+Benzodiazepine
Thiopental
 Ketamine minimally depresses the cardiovascular system, but apnea can
Prepared as a 2.5% solution, thiopental is stable for 1 week. It should
occur (see Table 13-2). Cranial nerves reflexes persist until the plane of
anesthesia is deepened by other drugs. Ketamine provides good
analgesia and has valuable properties for the management of chronic
and the status of the cat (see Table 13-2). The dose should be further
pain. Ketamine should be avoided in cats with cardiomyopathy or raised
reduced in cats with acidosis. Half of the calculated dose is given as a
intraocular pressure. Similar effects but longer duration are obtained
bolus, and the rest is given to effect over 1 minute to reach the desired
with the combination tiletamine and zolazepam.
115
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
Very Ill Cats
oxide is deleterious in case of gas-filed internal spaces (e.g. pneumotho-
rax). It should be discontinued 10 minutes before disconnection from the
Etomidate given at 0.5-2mg/kg intravenously or a combination of
breathing system.
fentanyl (5-10mcg/kg) and midazolam (0.2-0.3mg/kg) can also be used 
The drug combination used during premedication and induction may
reduce the requirement of the volatile agent of a given cat at sub-MAC
levels, especially if alpha-2 agonists, ketamine, or fentanyl is used.
Endotracheal Intubation
Endotracheal tubes should be placed in all cats undergoing general
 Maintenance of Homeostasis
Uoezlensia [eatufiel ainsua ot pastape sl Adossogukie] 'eisauisaue
and to limit laryngeal trauma. A short Miller laryngoscope blade
Intravenous fluids should be administered for procedures exceeding 30
should be used. Lidocaine may be applied to the arytenoids for
minutes unless contraindicated. Crystalloid solutions, such as lactated
intubation; it will also limit the risk of laryngospasm on recovery. If
Ringer's solution or Hartmann's solution, are administered at a rate of 
using a spray (not more than 2% concentration), apply only one squirt
10ml/kg/h during the first hour. The infusion rate can be reduced to
because cats are sensitive to lidocaine toxicity; allow at least 30 seconds
5ml/kg/h thereafter if blood pressure is adequate. IV pumps or drip sets
for effect to occur. Preoxygenation is required (3-5 minutes) if a difficult
dup anaanq e 'pasn pou si dund Al ue jI 'pasn aue (oueipad so [euou)
intubation is anticipated to allow more time before hemoglobin
set is recommended to allow precise monitoring of fluid administration
saturation drops.
and avoid overload. Protective or lubricant gel is applied to the cornea to
Cuffed endotracheal tubes are preferable (high volume, low pressure
avoid desiccation especially after ketamine administration. Because of
if possible). Disconnect the cat from the anesthesia machine when rolling
it to its other side to avoid twisting the endotracheal tube and causing
anesthesia. Hypothermia increases the risk of infection, delays recovery.
laryngeal or tracheal damage. Avoid excessive inflation of the end-
and requires adjustment in anesthetic agents. Proactive temperature
otracheal tube cuff, especially in dental patients. This can lead to mucosal
sparing strategies should be followed soon after induction because body
'suate Aoeposea jo asn au suimolg Aleui doup m anenadua
airways during dental proced ures.
A heat and moisture exchanger should be attached between the
 Laryngeal mask airways can be used in some cases to deliver anesthetic
endotracheal tube and the breathing system, and bubble wrap should be
agent and fresh gas. Because there is no tracheal intubation aspiration of
applied to the extremities to limit heat loss. Warm air blankets, perfusion
gastric contents can occur. Positive-pressure ventilation may result in
warmers, and lavage of body cavities with warm saline contribute to
bloating.
warming the cat. Great caution must be exercised with electric heating
blankets or gloves filled with hot water because of the concern of skin
burns. However, the use of modern thermal-controlled heating blankets
Maintenance of General Anesthesia
can be of great value.
The anesthesia machine and breathing apparatus should be checked at
the beginning of each day (leaks, alarms, and oxygen supplies). In a
Monitoring
normal setting, semi-open breathing systems such as the Bain, the
"T-Piece," or the Mini Lack systems are used. Minute volume (MV) is
The senses of an experienced anesthesia technician can be reliable for
[n aexodde au Aq aeu oedsau au uidnu Aq patene
-d aaie uyol q passsse st esausaue jo ydap au uu
volume (10ml/kg). MV is multiplied by a system coefficient (2.5 for
tion and pupil size (from light to very deep: eye central with palpebral
T-Piece or Bain and ‘1 for Mini Lack) to calculate the minimal flow to
reflex present; ventrally rotated; back to central position with constricted 
pis aul ot iday aq pinous aeds peap suaudinbg gunueaiqan pioae
pupil; central eye with dilated pupil). Serial assessment of jaw tone is 
minimum in cats (short endotracheal tubes and connectors) to avoid
useful to monitor muscle relaxation. Estimation of tidal volume can be
rebreathing.
obtained by observing chest excursions or movements of the rebreathing
The drug given during premedication and induction may be enough
 bag. Qualitative information on pulse may be obtained by palpating the
to carry out a short procedure. In other cases maintenance of general
femoral, metatarsal, or sublingual arteries. Peripheral perfusion is
anesthesia is achieved with repeated boluses or a continuous infusion of
assessed by capillary refill time. An esophageal stethoscope permits car-
injectable agents (propofol). In both cases, the cat is connected to the
diac and pulmonary auscultation.
anesthesia machine delivering at least 30% oxygen (the use of nitrous
Additional monitoring devices are useful to confirm clinical observa-
oxide will be discussed).
tions and to help to support vital physiological functions (Table 13-3).
 In most cases anesthesia is maintained with volatile anesthetic agents
Their goal is to reduce the incidence of complication and accidents.
-op e aneo squase aeloa lv ainixiu ypiu-uasxo ue ul pae
Pulse oximeters act as a pulse monitor and hemoglobin saturation
dependent cardiovascular and respiratory depression.
monitor. The user must be aware of its technical artifacts (see Table 13-3).
 The minimal alveolar concentration (MAC) of isoflurane in the cat is
They are not sensitive for early detection of respiratory compromise
when 100% oxygen is administered. Nevertheless, they will detect desat-
used halothane because of lower solubility in blood. The respiratory
 shu uaum 'a) paiasiunpe si uaxo %ee Auo j Ainb uoe.m
depression is marked around MAC levels. Because isoflurane is a
oxide is used).
vasodilator, hypotension often occurs during anesthesia, but cardiac
 Capnography provides information on ventilation and gas exchange
output will be better maintained.
passau ppe aqisnu uoneiuaaiadAu pue -odAh indino seipieo se llam se
The MAC of sevoflurane is 2.6%. The cardiovascular effects are similar 
(see Table 13-3). A sudden drop of expired carbon dioxide (CO) with con-
to those of isoflurane, but sevoflurane is a lesser respiratory depressant.
stant ventilation is a warning sign of a sudden drop in cardiac output.
Because of its lower blood solubility, changes in anesthesia depth and
See Chapter 15.
recoveries are faster than with isoflurane.
 A Doppler apparatus is a useful and affordable monitoring device to
 Nitrous oxide may be used to facilitate gas uptake and possibly spare
detect pulse and systolic blood pressure. It is a reliable noninvasive
inhalant anesthetic. To reach the desired effect, it must represent at least
means of blood pressure monitoring in the cat. An ultrasound sensor is
60% of the inhaled mixture (always keep at least 30% oxygen). Nitrous
placed over a peripheral artery (metatarsal, palmar, or caudal). An
116
Anesthesia:SedationandGeneral
TABLE 13-3:  Monitoring information and troubleshooting guide 
Monitoring device
 Reference range
Troubleshooting
Action
Pulse oxymetry
More than 90%
1) Movements artefacts
-> Stop movements
(hemoglobin oxygen
 2) Vasoconstriction
-> Alpha-2 agonists, severe hypovolemia or hypothermia
saturation)
3) Interruption of flow
-> Move probe to another location 
4) True hypoxemia
-> Increase oxygen fraction, improve gas exchanges
Capnography (CO partial
No more than
1) Increase CO, uptake
a) Rebreathing -> increase gas flow
 pressure in expired gases
50mm Hg
b) Check for faulty breathing system
and shape of the curve)
 c) Excessive CO inflation for laparoscopy?
 2) Hypoventilation
a) Assess anesthetic depth: reduce if possible
 b) Opioid or infusion related -> ventilate
 Not less than
1) Technical fault 
-> Check leak, obstruction, disconnection, dislodgement 
30mm Hg
2) Mixing with fresh gas
-> Reduce fresh gas or change breathing system
3) Hyperventilation
-> Assess depth of anesthesia and analgesia 
 4) Imminent cardiac arrest
-> Immediate cardiovascular status check
 Doppler systolic blood
No more than
1) Hypertension
a) Supply of anesthetic? (e.g. empty vaporizer)
 pressure or oscillometric
160mm Hg
b) Lack of analgesia -> renew if due
blood pressure monitor
c) Check anesthesia depth -> deepen if too light 
d) Envisage endocrine or renal cause (clinical history)
 No less than
1) Technical fault
a) Disconnection; surgeon or instrument leaning on blood pressure
90mm Hg
 device or Doppler probe
 b) Check cuff size and probe position
2) Hypotension
a) Decreased venous return (bleeding, major vessel occlusion)
b) Assess anesthetic depth: reduce if possible
c) If bradycardia: anticholinergics
d) Assess fluid status -> fluid load (crystalloids, colloids, blood)
e) Use inotropes and pressors 
audible signal is heard for each pulse. Contact gel is applied between the
tubes 3-French or less. Gentle suction or change of tube generally works 
skin and the probe, which is taped in place. If hair is not shaved, alcohol
in this case. Bronchoconstriction resulting from bronchospasm or
then contact gel may resultin sufficient contact. A cuff, with a width
anaphylactic reactions must be treated
1with bronchodilators
equal to about 40% of the limb circumference, is applied proximally to
(aminophylline or epinephrine respectively). Barotrauma is damage
the probe. The pressure at which blood flow is heard again after cuff
inflicted to the alveoli when excessive airway pressure is reached. The
occlusion and gradual deflation is equal to the systolic blood pressure
usual scenario is when the pop-off valve is accidentally left closed.
(see Table 13-3). Most oscillometric monitors tend to be less accurate at
Pneumothorax and cardiovascular collapse may occur if not detected
the extremes of the blood pressure range and fail to read during
immediately. Upper respiratory obstruction and pawing of the face
hypotension and vasoconstriction. Invasive arterial blood pressure
(risking self-trauma) on recovery is frequent in the cat. Keep the neck
monitoring via an arterial catheter placed in the dorsal metatarsal artery
extended, with the mouth slightly open and tongue out (if possible)
can be achieved in feline patients. If used it should not be leftin place for
until the cat is more awake.
postoperative monitoring, because in contrast to dogs, complications
with blood supply to the paw can be seen.
Cardiovascular
Recovery
The procedure for hypotension or hypertension is described in
Table 13-3. Bradycardia may occur with large doses of opioids,
The cat should be taken to a quiet place where it can recover. Monitoring
hypothermia, intracranial lesions, or hyperkalemia. Hyperkalemia is
during the postanesthesia or postsedation period is paramount because
frequent in cats with urinary obstruction and must be treated. See
many deaths happen during this phase. Brachycephalic cats should be
Chapter 30. The quantity of blood loss must be carefully monitored, and
 monitored closely for airway obstruction following extubation.
au uo surpuadaa iaaneiadoeun passauppe aq isnu dupaalq araaas
volume lost, crystalloids, colloids, or whole blood (stored or fresh)
should be used. The signs of impending arrest include: (1) weak or
Accidents and Complications
irregular pulse or loss of pulse signal, (2) sudden deepening of the
Respiratory
anesthesia plane, (3) sudden drop of expired CO, level, or (4) grey
mucous membranes or absent capillary refill time. Urgent assessment of
Most respiratory complications are detected with the use of pulse
the situation is needed. If cardiac arrest is confirmed, call for assistance,
oximetry and capnography. Respiratory obstructions are diagnosed by
immediately discontinue anesthetic administration, give positive-
capnography and auscultation with a stethoscope. A mucus plug is
pressure ventilation, antagonize cardiovascular depressants, and start
frequently the cause of airway obstruction, especially endotracheal
cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
117
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
Miscellaneouls
hyperthermia can be seen in cats in association with the administration
of hydromorphone or other opioids.
 Excitement, dysphonia, or restlessness in recovery must be addressed.
Express the bladder if necessary, and check the analgesic level. Sedation
with small doses of acepromazine or medetomidine will be beneficial.
Suggested Readings
Hypothermia and drug overload can lead to prolonged recoveries
requiring active warming and support of elimination processes that
Brodbelt DC, Blissit KJ, Hammond RA,et al. 2008. The Risk of Death: The
include increasing diuresis and exhalation of volatiles. Partial or total
Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities. Vet 
reversal of opioids and alpha-2 agonists should be considered, but drug
Anaesth Analg. 35(5):365-73.
reversal should not result in insufficient analgesia. Marked postanesthetic
118
CHAPTER 14
reparation
Eric Schmeltzer
Introdu ction
catheter can be done allowing for initiation of IV fluids and administra-
tion of IV anesthetic induction agents. Finally, the use of analgesics, as
It was Alexander Graham Bell who said, "Before anything else,
part of a complete pain management protocol, should always be
a au sueds uoeedaid iens 'ssans on Aay au st uoeedand
add ressed prior to surgery. See Chapter 16.
from which the patient fasts until the surgical drapes are placed and the
surgeon begins. All the steps in between are crucial to a successful
outcome.
Preventing Hypothermia
Decline in body temperature begins as soon as an animal is placed under
Food Restriction
anesthesia. If a body cavity (thorax or abdomen) is opened and exposed
to ambient temperature air, hypothermia develops more quickly. It is
Restricting food prior tosurgery prevents vomiting during the procedure
important to address these concerns prior to surgery with the use of a
 and recovery, which can lead to aspiration pneumonia. Generally, food is
preheated circulating water blanket, surgical warming blanket (The
withheld 8-12 hours prior to induction of anesthesia. In very young cats,
ChillBuster@ Vet Surgical Warming System), or forced air blanket (Bair
restriction should be as little as 4-6 hours to prevent hypoglycemia. If the
Hugger@). Additional methods for limiting hypothermia include
shaumo uonsanb Kiains jo Aep au uo ienidsoy aut ot paupe si ie
warmed towels, warmed IV fluid bags, and warm water-filled examina-
about anything ingested prior to surgery,including treats or snacks. It is
tion gloves. Electric heating pads and heat lamps are not recommended
also important to consider metabolic diseases that can affect anesthesia.
due to the possibility of thermal burns.
One common protocol for diabetic cats is to give half of the normal dose
of insulin the nightbefore and none the morning of surgerybecause mild
 to moderate hyperglycemia is more desirable than hypoglycemia.
Preparation of Surgical Site
Numerous factors influence the ability to prevent postsurgical infections.
Patient Admission
The patient's ability to resist infection, the type and population of
microorganisms present, and the interaction of the microorganisms with
Preparing a cat for surgery continues once it arrives at the hospital.
the host all play a role in determining postsurgical success. The size and
Identification of the cat including,but not limited to, name and procedure
type is critical. This information should be clearly stated on the cat's
location of the skin incision, alterations in blood supply around the
pue ae (suedu [ens pue ainns) sae usiarog usi
neckband, cage card, in the record, and on a surgical release form signed
physical condition of the patient along with, most importantly, the time
by the client. All of these should be double-checked for accuracy prior to
taken for the surgical proced ure all affect the likelihood of postoperative
respiration rate, and pulse followed by a minimum laboratory work-up
infections.
After anesthesia has been induced and surgical monitoring has begun,
(complete blood count and serum chemistries) should always be done
the patient's surgery site is clipped. This is ideally performed in a
prior to any surgical procedure.
type, anatomical location, room for expanding the incision if necessary.
Preparation of Surgical Suite
and possible drain hole placements should all be considered when
determining the size of area to be clipped. A number 40 clipper blade is
All surgical supplies required for a given procedure should be gathered
used to first clip in the direction the hair lays, then as close to the skin as
and in order prior to a patient's anesthetic induction. For routine
possible against the lay of the hair. Once the entire area has been clipped
surgeries, a checklist to include surgical pack, suture materials, surgical
it is important to make sure the edges are as straight and smooth as
blade, surgical cap, gown, and gloves along with materials required to
possible. The appearance of the surgical site is often the client's first
prepare the surgical site can be followed. For nonelective procedures it is
impression of their cat's surgery, so providers must take pride in making
important to consult with the surgeon for additional equipment and
the clipped site look nice and neat. Clipped hair can be vacuumed away
 supplies that may be needed.
from the patient and an initial scrub (which will be described) can be
 performed prior to moving into the surgical suite.
 Patient Preparation
 There are a few anatomical locations that provide a challenge to
surgical preparation. The clipping of hair around the paws, muzzle, and
Preparation of the surgical site can be initiated prior to induction. If the
eyes can be difficult with a number 40 clipper blade alone. A disposable
patient has an accumulation of dirt, litter, or other debris in its coat, it is
pasn jn seare asau un aey aaouau ot pasn aq ueo xozea apeiq auss
o dundd uquoo Aq uonpui oh soud su aouan ot A on isaq
carefully. Surgical scrub can be used to provide lubrication red ucing the
bathing. This will shorten the time for surgical site preparation as well as
incidence of skin irritation in these areas. Hair from the scrotum can be
the total length of anesthesia. Next, the placement of an intravenous (IV)
smoother surface) or removed with a number 40 clipper blade for the
castration procedure.
 The preparation of surgical sites involving the proximal portion of the
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
limb also presents an added challenge. The lower extremities are
and Gary D. Norsworthy
frequently used as a handle by the surgeon during procedures of the
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
upper limb, including femoral head and neck ostectomy, cranial cruciate
119
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
ligament repair, and fracture repairs. The use of a latex examination
the presence of organic matter and alcohol. It has also been found to be
glove placed over the affected limb's distal extremity and attached with
more irritating to skin.
 No matter which surgical antiseptic agent is chosen, the technique
to cover this with sterilized flexible cohesive bandage (VetrapTM by
used for the final sterile surgical preparation is of utmost importance.
3MTM) or aluminum foil after the final surgical scrub has been done.
The final surgical prep is done in the surgical suite after the patient has
There has been much discussion concerning the best antiseptic agent
been properly positioned for the given proced ure. It is common practice
to use a sterile wash bowl filled with the antiseptic agent of choice, sterile
inhibiting of the growth and multiplication of microorganisms. Antiseptic
gauze squares, and sterile gloves for this procedure. Air-tight canisters
is defined as opposing sepsis, putrefaction, or decay, especially prevent-
flled with antiseptic soaked gauze squares and isopropyl alcohol soaked
ing or arresting the growth of microorganisms. It must be made clear that
gauze squa res can also be used.
we are not sterilizing (destruction of all microorganisms) the skin surface
The final surgical scrub is started at the incision site closest to the
when a surgical preparation is done.
center of the clipped area. Use a circular motion to move from the center
One important aspect of the microorganism's interaction with the
to the periphery of the clipped area. Once the gauze has touched the
patient is the formation of a biofilm matrix. It was typically thought that
haired margin, it is discarded and must not be returned to the center of
free-moving bacteria were contributing to postoperative infections;
the clipped area. If using alcohol between povidone-iodine scrubs, it is
however, new information suggests a bigger problem. The biofilm matrix
important to remember that alcohol inactivates this detergent and will
is a layer of bacterial organisms and extracellular material capable of
affect its total contact time. A recent study has shown that rinsing chlo-
adhering to the patient's tissues, IV catheters, suture materials, and
rhexidine gluconate with alcohol after the final scrub can increase the
surgical implants. Although it cannot move on its own, it can be
likelihood of postoperative infections. Either a dilute chlorhexidine solu-
transferred to a new location on any object that touches it, such as a
tion or saline can be used to rinse the final scrub without decreasing its
finger or a sterile surgical glove. It has been documented that bacteria in
 effectiveness. This type of rinse is also used for laser and electrosurgical
a biofilm matrix are 500-1500 times more resistant to antibiotics than are
 procedures when alcohol must be avoided.
free-moving bacteria. Consequently, it is crucial that the veterinary staff
 There have been several new developments in the field of surgical site
be meticulous in every surgical site preparation.
preparation and prevention of postsurgical infections. New, one-step
The ideal surgical antiseptic would have specific characteristics: it
solutions (DuraPrepTM by 3MTM, ChloraPrep@ by CareFusion, and
would kill all forms of pathogenic (disease causing) microorganisms
ACTIPREP@ by Healthpoint Biotherapeutics) have been formulated to
 - e iav ra as e u pde se odase ad u
reaction or irritation at the skin surface; it would be nontoxic and not
3minute drying time, the surgical site is ready and has been shown to
absorbed into the body; and it would have residual activity. There is no
 provide equal effectiveness to older conventional techniques. Another
surgical antiseptic that has all of these characteristics, but some good
area of interest has been the use of an antimicrobial incise drape (Ioban TM
choices are available. The two most commonly used antiseptic agents
by 3MTm) that is applied over the surgical site and seals off bacteria
used in veterinary medicine are chlorhexidine gluconate and povidone-
through a barrier film technique. More recently, the development of a
iodine. Both agents are available in a detergent (scrub) and a solution.
 qw dad  
Although not recommended for use by itself, isopropyl alcohol is often
that is painted onto the surgical site and helps to lock pathogens in place 
used in conjunction with the two previous agents for its ability to kill
 has been promising.
bacteria quickly and for its ability to break up fatty or oily material. There
No matter how skilled the surgeon, if the cat is not properly and
are also alcohol-based solutions containing a combination of antiseptics
thoroughly prepared for surgery the outcome may not be optimum. All
that improve its spectrum of activity.
of the fine details from the time of admittance to the hospital until the
Chlorhexidine gluconate is the fastest-acting antiseptic scrub with a
patient has recovered from surgery have to be undertaken precisely.
consistent effect of more than 6 hours and residual activity for up to 2
Attention to detail and a thorough knowledge of the procedures required
days because of its attachment to the outer layers of the skin surface. The 
for obtaining surgical site asepsis are crucial to a successful surgery.
spectrum of activity for chlorhexidine covers gram-positive and some
gram-negative bacteria, yeast, and some viruses. It also remains active in
Suggested Readings
the presence of organic matter (blood or serum) and alcohol and is
nonirritating to the skin surface. It is, however, ototoxic, neurotoxic, and
Cockshutt J. 2002. Principles of Surgical Asepsis. In DH Slatter, ed.,
toxicto the cornea, so it is not recommended for periocular proced ures or
Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed., Pp. 149-54. Philadelphia:
surgeries within the ear canal. In addition, it has been proposed that
 Elsevier Saunders.
chlorhexidine scrub, if ingested by the feline patient, can lead to glossitis
Davidson JR, Burba Dj. 2006. Surgical Instruments and Aseptic
(ulceration/inflammation of the tongue). This is prevented by thoroughly
Technique. In DM McCurnin, JM Bassert, eds., Clinical Textbook for
rinsing the surgical site with chlorhexidine solution, sterile saline, or
Veterinary Technicians, 6th ed., pp. 701-5. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
alcohol.
Fossum TW. 2007. Preparation of the Operative Site. In TW Fossum, ed.,
 Povidone-iodine is also a rapid-acting agent, although it is generally
Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed., pp. 32-37. St. Louis: Elsevier Mosby.
accepted that this antiseptic requires more than 5 minutes of contact time
Osuna Dj, DeYoung DJ, Walker RL. 1990. Comparison of Three Skin
to be fully effective compared to about 2 minutes for chlorhexidine glu-
Preparation Techniques.I1. Clinical Trial in 100 Dogs. Vet Surg. 19:20-23.
conate. It has persistent action of 4-6 hours but no residual activity The 
 Paulson DS. 2005. Efficacy of Preoperative AntimicrobialSkin Preparation 
spectrum of activity for povidone-iodine is broader than chlorhexidine,
Solutions on Biofilm Bacteria. AORN Joumal. 8l:491-501.
adding effectiveness against mycobacteria, more gram-negative bacteria,
Phillips MF, Vasseur PB, Gregory CR. 1991. Chlorhexidine Diacetate
and bacterial spores with longer contact times. It is also the antiseptic of 
Versus Povidone-lodine for Preoperative Preparation of the Skin:
choice when preparing surgical sites close to the eye because of its lack of
A Prospective Randomized Comparison in Dogs and Cats. I AHAA.
corneal toxicity. The effectiveness of povidone-iodine is diminished in
27:105-8.
120
CHAPTER 15
Anesthetic Monitoring of the
Feline Patient
Susan Bryant
leak in the anesthetic circuit, or it can tip off the anesthetist to sepsis or
Introduction
infection. Monitors may need to be readjusted during the procedure. The
The purpose of anesthetic monitoring is to ensure a safe anesthetic expe-
use of asurgicalhalo canbeextremelyuseful for allowing access tofeline
rience and outcome. Because most, if not all, of the anesthetic drugs used
patients during anesthesia so that the surgical drape does not occlude
in veterinary medicine affect body systems in some way, it is the anesthe-
view and access to the patient.
aun aeuua ho anau pue saisss asout souou in aisuodsau s,is
side effects of the anesthetics before they cause irreversible crises. The
astute and knowledgeable anesthetist will be able to anticipate potential
Temperature
uupn ue aate sud
Body temperature should be monitored regularly throughout any anes-
of patient parameters. Parameters to be monitored on any patient under
thetic procedure. The anesthetic drugs used can cause vasodilation that
anesthesia include cardiovascular (heart rate and rhythm) and blood
can exacerbate heat loss through the skin. When patients are anesthe-
pressure. Respiratory function should be assessed by monitoring the rate
and character of respirations. Patient temperature should always be
tized they lose their ability to thermoregulate. During surgery, open
body cavities will be exposed to the cool ambient temperatures of the
monitored because any patient placed under anesthesia loses the ability
to thermoregulate.
surgery suite.
 Hypothermia or decreased body temperature can result in a number
 Measurement of the patient's parameters should take place at regular
intervals, usually every 5 minutes, and the results tracked on an anesthetic
of complications including prolonged recovery, reduced metabolism
record. This record should become partof the patient's permanent record,
of anesthetic drugs, impaired platelet function, and even death.
Hypothermia red uces anesthetic drug requirements and without careful
and it also becomes a legal document. By regularly monitoring and
Aisea pue paouou aq ueo spuan 'siaaeed oionoisaud uproa
monitoring, can result in anesthetic overdose. Heat supplementation for
tracked. The record provides a visual aid in which even slight but steady
feline patients can be supplied by circulating warm water blankets,
forced warm air blowers or an electric thermal pad such as the Hot Dog
decreases or increases in parameters can be tracked. Monitoring trends
Patient Warmer (Augustine Temperature Management, Eden Prairie,
means watching parameters and taking note of any subtle changes that
MN) or the ChillBuster Blanket (ThermoGear, Inc., Tualatin, OR). These
result. For instance if the anesthetist has been monitoring blood pressure
every5 minutes and the resultshave been asystolic reading in the range
thermal pads can be folded over the patient for procedures involving the
head, such as ophthalmic procedures or dental procedures. Warmed lav-
of 100-120mm Hg for the first half hour of the procedure, that is a trend.
age fluids should be used intraoperatively, especially for abdominal
If at 35 minutes the reading begins to decrease to a systolic below 100 mm
flushing. Fluid warmers can be helpful as long as they are placed as close
Hg and does not rebound, that is a change in the trend, or norm, and this
to the patient as possible. Drip rates for feline patients are low and fluids
information should be a flag to the anesthetist that a crisis could be
looming. Now would be the time to investigate the reasons for the
change, begin troubleshooting the ca use, and begin treatment for it before
ther away from the patient. Warm fluid bags or hot water-filled gloves
it progresses or becomes a life-threatening emergency.
must be used with great care, if at all. Cats have thin skin that is easily
Mechanical monitors are useful and desirable, but there is no
burned and these warming tools must be covered well with a towel so
replacement for the diligent and observant anesthetist. Monitors need to
that they do not rest directly against the skin to prevent burns.
be monitored for accuracy because several extrinsic factors can alter
 Heat retention can be further accomplished by wrapping the feet with
plastic wrap or bubble wrap or applying baby socks for the duration of
movement or occlusion of the instrumented area by the surgical team.
the procedure and into recovery. Many multiparameter monitors come
with an esophageal temperature probe that provides continuous
The skilled anesthetist will use all of the senses to suiccessfully monitor
temperature readings. Every effort should be made to maintain body
the anesthetized patient especially concerning the physical signs of
anesthetic depth. The anesthetist must be able to get access to the patient
temperatu re to at least 99°F.
during the procedure so that anesthetic depth can be assessed and
monitor issues can be addressed. Anesthetic depth can be assessed by
Blood Pressure
judging the amount of jaw tone when trying to open the mouth,
measuring the withdrawal reflex by using a toe pinch, and by assessing
Blood pressure isthemeasurement of the forceapplied tothe wallsof the
palpebral reflex. (The latter can be affected by the use of ketamine; the
arteries as blood is pumped by the heart through the body. Blood
palpebral reflex may never disappear.) The loss of reflexes corresponds
pressure is determined by the force with which the heart pumps
with increasing anesthetic depth, as does a relaxed jaw. The anesthetist
(contractility) and the volume of blood pumped. It is also determined by
should be able to assess pulse strength on the patient. If the patient is in
the size and flexibility of the arteries.
'ydap sssse t pasn aq ues uoisod aa ouaqunoau [eae so deuais
Ideally, any cat under anesthesia should have regular blood pressure
A cat in a medium plane of surgical anesthesia will have an eyeball that
monitoring because most of the anesthetic drugs used affect blood
is rotated ventromedially (except with use of ketamine where it does not
 pressure in some way Prolonged hypotension (more than 15-30 minutes)
rotate). The anesthetist will use his or her eyes to visualize spontaneous
can lead to nephron damage. Although the effects may not be immediately
movement in the patient. Even the sense of smell can be used to detect a
apparent because 65%-75% of nephrons need tobe damaged before renal
disease becomes clinically observable, the effects could certainly play a
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
role in the onset of renal disease later in a cat's life. Consider that this
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
means untreated or unrecognized hypotension during the cat's spay
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
surgery at 6 months of age or even during a dental prophylaxis in midlife
121
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
could be a contributing factor to renal disease a cat develops later in its
life. Severe untreated hypotension can lead to cardiac and respiratory
 pa  ssd   iisx ro  e
124
problems as well A mean arterial pressure (MAP) of at least 60mm Hg is
needed to properly perfuse the heart, brain, and kidneys. Mean arterial
blood pressures consistently below 60mm Hg can lead to renal failure,
recovery from anesthesia, neuromuscular complications, and central
 nervous system abnormalities, including blindness after anesthesia.
Methods of Measuring Blood Pressure
Pulse Palpation
F no monitor is available, manual palpation of an arterial pulse can give
some indication of the state of the blood pressure. A palpable pulse pres-
sure is the difference between the systolic and diastolic pressures. A dif-
asnd Suons e aedied on Aiessau si SH wwne iseal ie jo aouaia
Peripheral pulse palpation sites in the cat include the lingual, dorsal
metatarsal, carpal,and coccygeal arteries. Itisbest tomonitor the periph-
eral arteries because these pulses are lost at a much higher mean pressure
Figure 15-1 The HDO blood pressure monitor can be attached to a computer for
than the central (femoral) arteries.
mmputerized analysis of the quality of the reading. A bell-shaped curve indicates a
 Potential cardiovascular abnormalities may be detected by regular
reliable reading.
palpation. Pulses should be assessed for strength, rate, and regularity,
and palpation should begin prior to induction so that any differences in
 ro    ( r)    
through recovery. Certainly pulse palpation should be done prior to
with the proper placement over the artery. They must not be applied too
induction so that any abnormalities caused by premedications can be
tightly because this may occlude flow and cause inaccurate readings as
detected and dealt with if necessary prior to the administration of induc-
well as swelling distal to the cuff. Poor pulse signals from poor flow or
tion drugs.
any movement of the limb during a reading will interfere with the device
 and may cause it to fail or deliver an inaccurate reading.
Capillary Refill Time
Blanching the mucous membranes with direct pressure should result in
Doppler Ultrasonic Flow Detector
a refill time of less than 2 seconds. Delays in refill time can indicate
 Doppler ultrasonicblood pressure monitors are useful for feline patients.
intense vasoconstriction (potentially from anesthetic drugs, such as
 They are relatively inexpensive and easy to use once the anesthetist is
alpha-2 agonists) or hypotension.
 properly trained on placement and use (Fig. 15-2).
 Doppler flow detectors involve the placement of an ultrasonic probe
(crystal) over an artery. The frequency of the sound reflected from the
Indirect Blood Pressure Monitoring
moving arterial blood differs from that of the sound from the crystal and
uonsnooo ue saun uesnd dn uid Aq yuom saaap oa
the shift in frequency is converted into an audible sound. Doppler probes
cuff placed over an artery The cuff is connected to a monitor that can be
may be placed over any artery, but the most useful for measuring blood
programmed to measure blood pressure at specific intervals of time.
pressure in cats are the palmer arterial arches of the forelimb and
These devices deliver systolic, mean, and diastolic readings, as well as
hindlimb (Fig. 15-3).
the heartrate. Most have alarms that can be set to alert when readings are
Consideration of patient recumbency and accessibility of the crystal
out of the accepted range. Unfortunately many of these devices do not
should determine the choice of artery because these monitors occasion-
work well or at all on the feline patient. Many of the blood pressure
ally need to be troubleshot during the procedure. The crystal may need
machines used in veterinary practice are actually designed for human
to be readjusted or relubricated. Trying to troubleshoot the monitor by
Use and, therefore, designed for much larger patients. There are, how-
blindly reaching under a surgical drape to find it adds stress and frustra-
ever, some veterinary specific monitors available (Cardell Blood Pressure
 tion for all involved in the procedure. The area should be shaved and a
Monitor, SurgiVet, Smiths Medical, Dublin, OH; PetMap, Ramsey
generous amount of ultrasonic or lubricating gel applied to the area or to
Medical, Inc., Tampa, FL; HDO, DVM Solutions, San Antonio, TX;
the concave side (the side toward the body) of the crystal. The crystal is 
VetGard+, VMed Technology, Mill Creek, WA) that are designed specifi-
o aaap au ad um (un ot iou inq Anus aed ui pa
cally to work on smaller veterinary patients. These are much more relia-
then be turned on to make sure it is properly placed over the artery.
ble on cats beca use the settings and calibration are set for smaller patients
There should be an audible "whooshing” sound that corresponds with
(Fig. 15-1).
the pulse rate. If no sound is heard, the crystal should be repositioned
 The cuff size for any blood pressure monitor should be approximately
until the sound is heard. A properly sized occlusion cuff is placed above
40% of the circumference of the limb around which it will be placed.
the crystal. The cuff is inflated using a sphygmomanometer until the
s pe su m e oi pe lm ae o ane ieu s
sound of the pulse is eliminated. The cuff is allowed to deflate slowly
that are too small will give false high readings. For average-sized cats
 until the sound of the flow returns. The first audible sound heard is said
this usually means a size 2 cuff. Kittens may need a size 1 cuff. Ideally,
to correspond with the systolic blood pressure. There are some contro-
cuffs should be placed on a limb that is in the same horizontal plane as
versies over what the first audible sound heard in cats is. Some suggest
the heart when the patient is in position for the procedure taking place.
that the first audible sound heard correlates most closely with MAP in
(The level of the right atrium is the zero mark for blood pressure.) Limbs
feline patients. In some patients it may be possible to detect a second
well above the heart may give artificially low readings. Legs hanging
sound, this is said to be the diastolic pressure. With the Doppler and in
well below the heart willgive false highs. The cuffs are usualy marked
the absence of a MAP, systolic pressure, or the first sound heard, should
122
Anesthetic Monitoring of the Feline Patient
(a)
(b)
TVelch
VmedVet-Dop2
ULTR
SONICDOPPLER
VelchAll
FLC
ETECTOR
AETURN'S
Model811-B
RETURNTA
DEPT.
DEPT.
A
D
?
PRM
Figure 15-2 The Doppler ultrasonic flow detector monitor is a reliable means of measuring blood pressure. (a) The Parks Medlical Doppler (Model 811-B, Parks Medical Electronic
Sales, Inc., Las Vegas, NV, www.parksmed.com) has been used successfully in cats although it is designed for neonatal human use. (b) The Vet-Dop2 (Vet-Dop2, VMed Technology, Mill
Creek, WA, www.vmedtech.com? is a newer unit made specifically for feline and canine patients. (c) Due to its sensor, the Vet-Dop2 can be used on kittens weighing less than 0.5kg 
(1 pound). It was attached to a rear leg on his 0.4 kg (12 ounces) kitten during surgery for enucleation of the left eye.
be maintained above 80-90mm Hg. Doppler flow detectors are useful
Direct Method
monitors, with one of the biggest advantages being the audible sound of 
Direct blood pressure measuring is the gold standard for blood pressure
blood flow. Changes in flow, especially a reduction, can be heard as well
 measurements. It involves placing a catheter into an artery and attaching
as changes in the regularity of the pulse. Doppler probes are sensitive to
the catheter to a transducer. The transducer (placed at heart level) is con-
movement or bumping by the surgical team, and they are also sensitive
 nected to an oscilloscope that gives systolic, mean, and diastolic readings
to air flow such as that caused by a warm air blower. To prevent interfer-
continuously. In addition, most monitors also display a wave form that
ence a Doppler "guard" can be easily constructed from a small plastic
corresponds with the pulse. This provides important information about
bottle (such as a saline bottle). Cut the bottle lengthwise in half and cut a
the patient and the blood pressure. The arterial wave form should match
small half-circle on one end that can fit over the instrumented limb. This
the electrocardiogram complexes. Arterial catheters can be difficult
structure provides protection from bumping or occlusion from the sur-
to place in feline patients, but if the anesthetist has experience catheters
geon inadvertently leaning on the limb, and it also provides a barrier
may be placed in many arteries. The most common sites are the same
from excessive air flow from the warm air blower/blanket.
as listed previously The possible complications of arterial catheter
123
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
heart rates (bradycardia). Anesthetic drugs affecting the contractility of
the heart include the inhalants, propofol, and alpha-2 agonists. The
inhalant drugs are potent vasodilators and are often major contributors
to hypotension. For this reason a balanced anesthesia technique is recom-
mended. Alpha-2 agonists cause vasoconstriction of blood vessels that
result in hypertension. The effects of hypertension from the alpha-2 ago-
nists is transient, lasting only a few minutes before the vessels relax and
 then hypotension can result. The dissociative drugs, ketamine and tileta-
mine /zolazepam (Telazol, Pfizer Animal Health, New York) have indi-
rect positive effects on the cardiovascular system and thus, increase heart
rate, but this can cause a reduction in stroke volume. Patient positioning
can affect blood pressure. Patients that are obese, bloated, or pregnant or
Auu auaqunoau iesiop un paseid sasseu eupqe ale um suaed
be hypotensive because of excessive pressure on the caudal vena cava.
"usuaodu un hnsai pue unau snouaa asuduoo eu ainssaid stu
The same can happen when positive-pressure ventilation is used.
 Certain disease states common in feline patients that can contribute to
patients will have their hypertension well controlled before surgery If a
patient develops hypertension under anesthesia that is not related to a
Figure 15-3 This image shows the proper placement of a Doppler ultrasonic flow
disease state, the cause is most likely related to inadequate anesthetic
detector probe and cuff on the hindlimb of a feline patient undergoing endoscopy. The 
depth or inadequate analgesic administration. Adjusting anesthetic
cuff can also be placed on the forelimb or the base of the tail.
depth and providing additional pain medications should result in nor-
motension.
 The first step in developing a plan for treatment of hypotension is
determining the cause. If the patient is otherwise normal and healthy, the
placement should be considered when deciding whether direct measure-
anesthetic drugs are most likely the cause of hypotension. The effects of
ment is necessary and when choosing a site to catheterize. Hematomas,
these drugs are dose related, and therefore, the best first treatment always 
air embolism, thrombosis, and infection are the most common, yet rare,
involves reducing the dose of the drug or reducing anesthetic depth by
complications. Sterile technique should be considered when placing
turning down the vaporizer. Anesthetic protocols thatinclude appropriate
these catheters to reduce complications. Arterial catheters should be
clearly marked so that nothing but heparinized saline is ever injected
all anesthetic drugs to be used, lowering the side effects of each drug as
into them. The catheter needs to be flushed at regular intervals with hep-
well. Any patient anesthetized with inhalant drugs or premedicated with
acepromazine will have some degree of vasodilation. Intravenous fluid
administration of crystalloids at a rate of 10ml/kg/hr is recommended
ing technology can add $1,000 or more to the price of a monitor making
elosea q pasnes ,aeds au l, dio eisauisaue iapun stuaed u
cost a big factor when choosing blood pressure measuring components
and to replace normal ongoing losses that occur for patients under
on a monitor.
anesthesia with normal cardiovascular and renal function; patients with
certain cardiac and renal diseases may not be able to handle excessive
fluid overload. Fluid therapy is best begun before hypotension exists. For
Troubleshooting Abnormal Blood Pressure Readings
suspected hypovolemia in a cat with normal cardiac and renal function a
Hypotension is classified as a MAP of less than 60 mm Hg. When using a
fluid bolus of "one hour's worth" the patient's maintenance rate may be
Doppler device, which is common with feline patients, the systolic read -
given (i.e. 6-kg cat = 60-ml bolus, along with maintenance fluids).
ing should be greater than 80-90mm Hg. It is important to be able to
Reassess following the bolus. If the patient is instrumented with a
identify the cause of a blood pressure abnormality to know how to begin
Doppler monitor you may be able to hear the improvement and
treatment for it. There are generally three things to consider when look-
"stronger" flow. Blood loss should be replaced with two to three times
ing for causes of hypotension. Look for drugs or physiological or patho-
the suspected amount of loss (i.e. 1 ml of blood loss should be replaced
logical factors that may reduce systemic vascular resistance (SVR), which
with 2-3ml of crystalloid). Excessive hemorrhage may require
is the amount of resistance to flow through the vessels.Some vessels may
replacement with colloids such as hetasta rch and blood prod ucts.
be dilated and, therefore, allow more flow at less resistance. Constriction
If blood pressure fails to respond to these therapies, and surgical
of vessels may limit blood flow and require more pressure to get blood
stimulation does not fix the problem, then pharmacologic intervention
through. Look at heart rate, and look for things that affect stroke volume
may be necessary. Pharmacologic agents stimulate the cardiovascular
(preload/contractility). As mentioned previously, many of the drugs
system through two primary mechanisms. Vasopressor effects increase
used in anesthesia cause some degree of hypotension, and less often,
MAP through changes in heart rate, myocardial contractility or affecting
hypertension. Knowing the side effects of these drugs and how they
the tone of the vasculature through vasoconstriction. Inotropic effects
work will help in determining treatment. Drugs that decrease SVR (and 
increase the contractility of the heart muscle and cardiac output. The
 cause vasodilation) in a dose-dependent manner include acepromazine,
most common drug used for increasing blood pressure in cats is
propofol, isoflurane, and sevoflurane. Other physiologic factors that may
dopamine. Less commonly, ephedrine, phenylephrine, and vasopressin
cause a decrease in blood volume or vascular tone include hemorrhage,
can be used. In extreme circumstances, epinephrine and norepinephrine
inadequate volume administration or replacement, dehydration, shock,
may be indicated. Before beginning dopamine therapy it is important to
sepsis, anaphylaxis or severe hypercapnia (high carbon dioxide). Patients
ensure proper vascular volume. Side effects of this drug include
with acid-base abnormalities should be stabilized prior to anesthesia if
tachycardia and possible arrhythmias. Tachycardia is more prevalent in
possible to help reduce the possibility of hypotension. Drugs that can
hypovolemic patients or with overdose. Electrocardiograms should be
decrease heart rate include opioids (although not that commonly in cats),
monitored for potential arrhythmias when beginning therapy. Therapy
alpha-2 agonists, and the inhalant drugs isoflurane and sevoflurane.
should be reduced or discontinued at any sign of side effects. The half-
Patients with intracranial disease or that are hypothermic may have low
lfe of dopamine is relatively short and side effects should diminish with
124
AnestheticMonitoring of theFeline Patient
Figure 15-4 Aligator clips can be traumatic to the thin skin of feline patients. Even
with the teeth flatened, a "buffer," such as a gauze square, is recommended between
the lip and the skin.
the discontinuation of therapy. Dopamine is given as a constant rate
infusion with the dose varying from 2 to 10mcg/kg/min. Infusions
should be started slowly and increased to the desired effect while the
heart rate and rhythm are monitored closely.
Blood pressure should be routinely measured on any feline undergo-
 ing general anesthesia. The best way to prevent hypotension is to detect 
 changes in blood pressure as soon as they begin.
Figure 15-5 The pulse oximeter probe is usually placed on the tongue. The probe
As the heart undergoes depolarization and repolarization, the electrical
should be adjusted occasionally to ensure perfusion to the tissue beds underneath it. On
currents that are generated spread not only within the heart but also
this light-skinned cat the probe would likely work on a toe, the tail flank, or ear.
throughout the body. This electrical activity generated by the heart can
be measured by electrodes placed on the body surface. The recorded
tracing of this activity iscalld an electrocardiogram (ECG). The different
waves that comprise the ECG represent the sequence of depolarization
Tachycardia, or a fast heart rate, that develops in a cat under anesthesia
and repolarization of the atria and ventricles. The complete cardiac cycle
can be the result of an anesthetic plane that is too light, pain, hypercarbia,
blood loss, or hypovolemia. Investigate the cause and treat for it.
that is portrayed on the ECG is represented by waves that are identified
as P wave, QRS complex, and T wave.
 The ECG is useful for recording and identifying cardiac arrhythmias.
 It is important to note that the ECG measures only the electrical activity
Cardiac arrhythmias are not prevalent in cats with a healthy heart. If it is 
of the heart. It does not measure the function or effectiveness of the heart 
only occasional and not affecting blood pressure no action need be taken.
 muscle as a means to pump blood around the body. The ECG may be a
Jo aeua pue asne a Auap pue An ot eapi pool e semie siH
useful adjunct to other monitors in determining and recording heart rate
rectify it if possible. Some causes of potential arrhythmias in cats under
anesthesia include pain, hypercarbia, and electrolyte disturbances, such
but, as with all monitors, results should be verified by simultaneously
feeling and counting pulses. ECG machines for veterinary patients usually
as high potassium in a cat with urethral obstruction.
use the alligator clip type leads.For cats and other small patients that can
suffer a skin injury from the alligator "teeth" a buffer is recommended.
Pulse Oximetry
Usually a small gauze pad in between the teeth and the skin helps protect
it (Fig. 15-4). The gauze can be moistened with conductive gel along with
Pulse oximetry is a simple, noninvasive method of monitoring the
the lead to prevent drying out (like alcohol) under the drape from the
-xo asnd au uaxo ym paees s reut uqosouay o aeuaiad
warm air blower or other heating device. Normal heart rates in cats under
meter does not directly measure ventilation adequacy. The pulse
anesthesia range from 100 to 180 beats per minute.
oximeter consists of a probe attached to the patient. Usually in cats the
Bradycardia, or a slow heart rate, that develops under anesthesia may
tongue is a common site for measurement, although for dental patients,
be caused by anesthetic depth that is too deep, hypothermia, vagal stim-
the probes can work equally well on the tail, a toe, or even the flank skin
ulation, or opioid administration. As always when dealing with compli-
of a light-colored nonpigmented cat (Fig. 15-5). The probe is connected to
cations try and lighten the anesthesia first. If the heart rate does not
rebound after troubleshooting these potential causes and the blood pres-
saturated with oxygen together with an audible signal for each pulse
sure is reduced as well, treatment with an anticholinergic is likely indi-
beat, a calculated heart rate, and in some models, a graphical display of
cated. Note that anticholinergic d rugs such as atropine and glycopyrrolate
the blood flow past the probe. A pulse oximeter can detect hypoxia
do not work well in hypothermic patients.
a e e saaq saed a aaq (a a mo
125
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
1001
3
26
43
IBP
ALARMS
DISPLAY
ZERD
LAMITS
ST
TKENI
MUTE
COHIT
UICHARCE
EVEK
Figure 15-6  This pulse oximeter is light and mobile. The top number represents the 
Figure 15-7  A multiparameter monitor displaying the plethysmograph or SpO, wave 
 oxygen saturation; the lower number represents the heart rate.
form on top beside the oxygen saturation reading. The smaller number to the right of the
100 is the calculated heart rate. Below the plethysmograph is the capnograph displaying
the classic shape universal to all animals on a scale where the high limit is 60mm Hg. To
the right of the capnograph is the ETCO2 number, 43 mm Hg. Note the number 3 above
oximeter is dependent on a pulsatile flow and produces a graph of the
the ETCO,that represents the inspired CO, Ideally this number should be 0. The 3 repre-
Aq panoid mo aesnd un uonpau Auv mo au jo Aenn
sents a small amount of rebreathing of expired gas containing Co. The monitor also
vasoconstriction, hypovolemia, severe hypotension, hypothermia, and
displays respirations per minute. CO, carbon dioxide; ETCO, end-tidal carbon dioxide;
some cardiac arrhythmias will resultin an inadequate signal for analysis.
 SpO, oxygen saturation of blood.
Sometimes moving the probe to a new location will work. The probe can
cause constriction of the vessels beneath it over time, so repositioning it
occasionally is a good idea. Wetting the tongue, a popular myth among
technicians, does not improve the signal. It is likely the repositioning.
tidal volume or the physiologic state of the patient. These monitors can
add dead space tothe anesthesia circuit causing a rebreathing of expired
affect the signal as well. Movement artifact is a problem for the pulse
carbon dioxide, so care should be taken to monitor for this especially in
oximeter. This comes mostly into play during recovery when patients
feline patients whose tidal volumes are normally low. They can also be
begin shivering or gaining control of their tongues. The oxygen saturation
falsely activated by pressure on the chest or abdomen of the patient or by
should always be above 95% (Fig. 15-6). Slight changes over time may
cardiac oscillations that cause gas movement in the trachea.
just mean the probe needs to be repositioned, but the overall patient
should be assessed for desaturation. Sudden steady decreases, especially
during thoracic surgery or in the critical patient, should be investigated
Capnography
immediately and supportive measures taken. Usually this means
Capnography measures the carbon dioxide concentration in expired gas.
instituting positive-pressure ventilation and improving oxygen delivery
 It provides a noninvasive means of measuring arterial carbon dioxide
immediately while the cause is determined and rectified.
ing, the airway and the lungs are filled with carbon dioxide free gases.
Ventilation
Carbon dioxide diffuses into the alveoli and equilibrates with the end-
alveolar capillary blood. As the patient exhales a carbon dioxide sensor
Observations
at the end of the endotracheal tube will detect no carbon dioxide as the
Monitoring ventilation on feline patients under anesthesia can be done a
initial gas sampled will be the dead space gas. As exhalation continues
carbon dioxide concentration rises gradually and reaches a peak as the
number of ways. Respirations should be assessed in terms of rate,
carbon dioxide-rich gas from the alveoli makes its way to the sensor. At
rhythm, and tidal volume. Initially, careful observation of the patient's
the end of exhalation the carbon dioxide concentration decreases to
chest excursions prior to induction should be done to evaluate for quality
0 (base line) as the patient commences inhalation of the carbon dioxide
and effort. Auscultation of the lungs should be performed prior to sedat-
free gases. The number given on the capnograph is called the end-tidal
ing or anesthetizing any patient. Normal lung sounds should be heard
carbon dioxide(ETCO). The ETCO, value is approximately 5-10mm Hg
on both sides of the chest. Any abnormal sounds should be investigated
less than the PaCO, of the patient with normal pulmonary function. The
prior to moving forward with anesthesia because anesthetic drugs can
evolution of the carbon dioxide from the alveoli to the sensor during
depress respiration and ventilation and may worsen existing problems.
 Mucous membrane color should be assessed regularly during anes-
exhalation and inhalation of carbon dioxide free gases during inspiration
gives the characteristic shape to the carbon dioxide curve on the capno-
thesia. The tongue and gums should be pink. Any change in color, espe-
cially blue or purple tingeing, can indicate hypoxemia.
identical shape should be investigated to determine a physiological or
pathological cause prod ucing the abnormality. A report of inspired car-
bon dioxide (graph not returning to baseline 0) on the monitor means
Apnea Monitors
rebreathing of carbon dioxide is occurring and can indicate equipment
Apnea or respiratory monitors detect the movement of gas through the
problems such as expired soda sorb or a malfunction in the valves of the
 proximal end of the endotracheal tube. They provide no information on
anesthetic machine. Excessive dead space can also be a cause and can be
126
AnestheticMonitoringoftheFelinePatient
The Capnograph
40
Figure 15-8 The capnograph representing a normal breath pattern.
The upswing. (numbers 1-2) represents expiration, numbers 2-3
represent the alveolar plateau, and numbers 3-4 represent inspiration.
Drawing courtesy Kristen Cooley.
Expiration
Inspiration
TABLE 15-1: The iStat* is a cage-side analyzer that is capable of
tor and even the carbon dioxide sensor) is added to the patient's endotra-
performing blood gas analysis using three cartridges
cheal tube. Abnormal shapes on the capnograph can be caused by a
number of things and can be interpreted if normal wave physiology is
CG4+
CG8+
EC8+
understood. The beginning of exhalation should be the baseline. The
upswing represents the variable emptying of alveoli; however, airway
pH
pH
pH
disease willflatten out the slope. The plateau reflects alveolar gas. The
PCO2
PCO2
PCO2
down slope represents inspiration (Fig. 15-8). Rebreathing will make the
HCO;
HCO
HCO;
down slope less steep. If there is no waveform, it means the patient is
apneic for some reason. If the baseline is increased it represents rebreath-
0)1
TCO2
TCO2
ing malfunction. An increased plateau is representative of hypoventila-
Base Excess
Base Excess
Base Excess
tion or increased rate of carbon dioxide production. A decreased plateau
to a new stable level indicates hyperventilation, hypothermia, airway
PO2
PO2
Anion Gap 
leaks, tachypnea, or a calibration error. An abrupt drop to 0 means an
5O2
5O2
H
airway obstruction, disconnect, apnea, or cardiac arrest. An unstable,
fluctuating plateau represents patient "bucking" the ventilator.
Lactate
12H
Hgb
 Normal carbon dioxide is 35-45 mm Hg. Low carbon dioxide can indi-
q6H
Glu
cate overventilation or poor perfusion. High carbon dioxide (hypercar-
Glu
BUN
bia) can indicate hypoventilation, airway disease or obstruction, or
anesthetic machine malfunction.
iCa
Na+, K+
 Capnography is easy to use and noninvasive. It provides a continu-
Na+, K+
1
 ous measurement of end-tidal carbon dioxide. It provides information
on the adequacy of ventilation, airway obstruction, disconnection from
ACT, activated clotting; AnGap, anion gap; BE, base excess BUN, blood urea nitrogen; Cl-
the breathing system, and severe circulatory problems. It is also a useful
chloride; Glu, glucose; Hb, hemoglobin; HCO, bicarbonate; Hct, hematocrit; iCa, ionized cal-
tool in an arrest situation to help determine the adequacy of cardiopul-
cium; K+, potassium; Na+, 5odium; PCO, partial pressre of carbon dioxide; PO, partial
monary resuscitation. Expense may limit its use in practice, but smaller
 pressure of oxygen; 5O, oxygen saturation; TCO, total carbon dioxide concentration.
*Vet5 can i-Stat 1, Abaxis North America, Union City, CA, ww.abaxis.com.
sive than one of the multiparameter monitors with the technology
included.
considered acidotic if the pH is less than 7.35 or alkalotic if the pH is
greater than 7.45. Next look at the PaCO2. Remember normal is consid-
 Blood Gas Interpretation
ered to be 35-45mmHg. 1f pH is less than 7.35 and PaCO, is greater than
Blood gases are the gold standard method of monitoring ventilation. The
45-50mm Hg it is indicative of a respiratory acidosis, and the patient is
analysis of carbon dioxide and oxygen tensions in an arterial blood sam-
underventilating or not being ventilated adequately. If the pH is alkalotic
 ple provides useful information on pulmonary function. Most analyzers
and the PaCO, is low, it is indicative of a respiratory alkalosis, and the
also provide acid-base status and some electrolyte values. There are now
many different bedside portable blood gas units available, although
as an acid. Therefore, if there is a lot of it (result is high) then the pH
expense wilimit their availability in general practice.
should indicate acidosis, and vice versa.
 Blood gas samples are drawn from an artery, either directly or through
an arterial catheter, into a heparinized syringe. Care must be taken to
e oun umeap so ine wou on pasodxa pou si aldues au ieul anns au
Positive-Pressure Ventilation
syringe with excessive heparin in it because this can affect results. Most
blood gas analyzers will measure or calculate partial pressure of oxygen
Positive-pressure ventilation (PPV) is indicated when a cat cannot
ventilate adequately on its own. This indication may be defined as one or
blood (PaCO2), pH, base excess (BE), bicarbonate (HCO,-), potassium
more of the following: hypercarbia (increased CO2, >60mm Hg),
(k+), sodium (Na+), and perhaps other electrolytes (Table 15-1).
Jo d) eruaxoy Aderau uaxo adsap (%e > ods) uoeesap
In cats breathing room air and with normal lung function PaO, should
less than 100mm Hg on oxygen), or a low observed or measured minute
be S0-S5 mm Hg. Numbers below this can indicate hypoxemia. Increases
'saup uado ue Suruinbau Aiasins Aue ui paleoipui saemle sl Adld 'aunloa
in inspired oxygen lead to increases in PaO. As a general rule PaO2
whenever paralytic neuromuscular blocking drugs are to be used,
should be five times the inspired oxygen concentration. Therefore, a cat
neuromuscular diseases, chest wall problems, abdominal enlargements,
on 100% oxygen should have a PaO, of greater than 500 mm Hg. To eval-
 or pulmonary parenchymal disease. Any patient that is to be anesthetized
uate blood gas results for ventilation effectiveness first look at the pH to
with potentially increased intracranial pressure should be mechanically
 determine acid-base status. Normal pH should be 7.35-7.45. Results are
ventilated. PPV is of great benefit to many patients, but it is not without
127
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
dorsal recumbency, higher pressures may be needed. Overall,
whatever it takes to deliver the needed minute volume and ade-
quately ventilate the patient should be done. Ideally, ventilation
assessment and adequacy will be determined by monitoring ETCO2
and blood gases. In the absence of these monitors it is possible to
d on pied si ue a se o s A an Asns
inspiratory pressure, chest excursions, pulse oximetry, mucous
membrane color, and blood pressure. Hypotension can be indicative
of hypocarbia (low CO,) and overventilation because carbon diox-
ide causes sympathetic stimulation and a subsequent rise in arterial
blood pressure. Brick red (injected) mucous membranes can be
indicative of hypercarbia.
Monitoring the cardiovascular system function, respiratory system
function, and temperature of patients under anesthesia should be a
routine part of the overall monitoring plan for each and every patient.
Monitoring should continue well into recovery. More critical patients
-aosau inouanouut tuoddns Suoguo paau Aeu Aiagins pey aaey teu
ery and beyond. Many times the recovery period is crucial. Patients
 may have had high levels of physiologic support (100% oxygen, blood
pressure support, fluid therapy, temperature support) throughout the
Figure 15-9  Patients should be continuously monitored throughout anesthetic recov-
anesthetic period; to take it all away suddenly can cause a crisis. Most
ery until they are alert and able to maintain their airways unassisted. Some feline patients
feel more comfortable ifthey are able to hide, but care should be taken to make sure they
throughout the procedure and complications have not been allowed to
easily viewed in early recovery.
develop. Nonetheless, until the patient recovers enough that it can
maintain its own airway, is alert, and can right itself from lateral
recumbency (if feasible), it should continue to be closely monitored.
 potential complications. These can be avoided with careful monitoringy
suaned Aue pue 'suoddns sisojoisAud Suroguo paau Aeuu stualed auos
attention to detail, and a good understanding of the underlying
recovering from a surgical procedure will need pain assessment and
physiological processes. A major contraindication for PPV is a closed
management. These patients will benefit from recovering in the inten-
pneumothorax because PPV will make it worse. PPV can decrease
Kai os Aiaaoau oi pateuisap si uosiad auo araum lo hun aeo aa
arterial blood pressure and reduce cardiac output, especially if airway
Gan be continuously monitored. Overall, a warm, quiet, darkened
pressures are consistently more than 10mm Hg or if circulating blood
room will help facilitate a calm, stress free recovery for the patient
volume is low. Artificial ventilation decreases pulmonary blood flow,
(Fig. 15-9).
and therefore, may lead to ventilation-perfusion abnormalities.
Circulatory changes during PPV are caused by prolonged increases in
mean airway pressures and decreases in carbon dioxide.
Suggested Readings
Tidal volumes are generally calculated as 10-20 ml/kg of lean
body weight. Smaller patients like cats will most often do well with
Haskins SC. 2007. Monitoring Anesthetized Patients. In W Tranquilli, J
the lower volumes. Usually in small animals the peak inspiratory
Thurmon, K Grimm, eds., Lumb and Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia and
pressure should not exceed 20 cm H,O to prevent damage to the tis-
Analgesia, 4th ed., p. 537. Ames: Blackwell Publishing.
Smith LJ. 2002. Hypotension. In SA Greene, ed. Veterinary Anesthesia and
masses, bloating, respiratory disease, or compliance issues, and in
Pain Management Secrets, pp. 135-40. Philadelphia: Hanley & Belfus, Inc.
128
CHAPTER 16
Pain Assessment and Management
Susan Bryant
 Introdu ction
Hyperalgesia, or an exaggerated sensitivity response, can be
potentiated in anxious and stressed animals. The stoic or fearful cat can
Pain is a difficult sensation to characterize and assess despite the fre-
be difficult to assess, but if close attention is paid to its behavior, subtle
quency of situations in which it is encountered. Managing pain in felines
changes can often be noted; it should be treated with analgesics according
'ured jo sadk pue AonoisAyd oiseq aut jo aapalmou sunboe saaloau
to assessment results and anticipated levels of pain. Many older patients
understanding the pharmacology of the different drugs used today to
may have arthritic pain that can worsen if they are anesthetized and not
treat pain, and learning and practicing methods of assessing pain in cats.
carefully positioned. They may recover with pain from more than one
Veterinary technicians provide the bulk of nursing care to the hospital-
area. Younger patients, especially kittens, are usually less stoic, but they
ized patients and are, therefore, better able to detect changes in behavior
can be more fragile as well and less able to handle intense pain and
of the patient and alert the veterinarian that the patient seems painful.
illness (Fig. 16-1).
Sometimes the size of these patients makes the idea of administering
analgesics a frightening one, but pain medications can be diluted and
Pain Assessment
titrated to effect in tiny kittens. Fear of side effects from analgesics is
noted to be one of the biggest excuses veterinarians give for not treating
pain. Knowledge, experience, and education can help to eliminate these
between the patient and the physician. This is not possible in the feline
patient. Feline patients present special challenges because their instincts
fears. Many analgesics can be given to effect, and many (pure opioids)
can be reversed if absolutely necessary. Reversing the drug completely
and survival techniques often prevent them from showing visible signs
will also reduce or eliminate the analgesic effects, soalternative therapies
of pain and distress. In general, if there is difficulty in interpreting the
behavioral characteristics of a patient, the anthropomorphic approach
should to be used. If caregivers understand the potential side effects of
should be used. If the cat has undergone surgery or is suffering from a
the analgesics used then the patient can be monitored for these side
disease that is known to be painful in humans or if there is a history of
effects and dosages adjusted accordingly. Ethically and otherwise there
are no valid excuses for not treating pain.
trauma, the cat is likely to have some level of discomfort and should be
treated as such. An appropriate dose of analgesic should be given to treat
There are many pain scales available designed to help with pain
assessment. Although use of pain scales can help ensure that every
the anticipated level of pain, and the response to therapy should be eval-
uated. Inflammation, which occurs to some extent after any surgical
patient is evaluated for pain, they all have their limitations especially
when assessing a prey species like the feline. Many are subjective and are
intervention, is known to be a major cause of pain. Inflammation is likely
eu umou st hn ued Adue ueo pue Aiains Sumooy Aisuaun o
 prone to observer variability to some degree. There has not been a perfect
scale developed yet. The ideal scale would be highly specific to detect a
untreated pain can lead to any number of deleterious physiological
patient's pain level and would not produce any false-positives. It would
changes, delayed healing, and even death. Pain is an individualized
experience, for humans and animals, and patients undergoing the same
be highly reproducible so identical, or at least similar, results would be
obtained by any observer. To base a patient's pain level on one number
procedure may recover quite differently. Assessment of pain intensity in
animals varies greatly between caregivers. Because of this and because
pain management is best tailored to each individual patient, it is impor-
patient to patient and observer to observer and may lead to under or
tant to develop and use a pain assessment plan that can be routinely and
overestimating pain levels in patients. Pain scales that have mainly been 
consistently used by all members of the practice who provide patient
care. When an effort is made to routinely study and observe the behavior
of the patients before and after surgery changes in "normal" behavior
nonsurgical patients coming into the clinic because "they are not quite
right," it may be necessary to rely on the owner's insight regarding the
pet's behavior changes at home in a nonstressful situation. The ultimate
goal of any pain management plan should be to assist the patient in
returning to normalcy as soon as possible.
iad ste apnoun sie un ued ussasse uaum apisuos ot shu
ity, and normal feline behavior. Potential prey species, like felines, are
Uaaa paueoadde uaqm Sumon pue Suissiy Aq lendsoq au un ane Aau
before surgery. It is important not to ignore these behaviors and dismiss
a Sussase Aadod inoum Aiaaenadosod paeassexa se uau
individual. For these patients and others who show signs of anxiety and
often provide optimal relief.
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Figure 16-1  Young or neonatal patients are less able to cope with pain and stress.
129
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
Figure 16-3  This cat demonstrates many of the signs that can be attributed to pain in
-aun aa sheadde pue uood pemme ue ui hu s! le aul uaid aual au
Figure 16-2  Softer, more flexible Elizabethan-collars are better tolerated by patients
ble. Perhaps it is unable or unwiling to reposition itself The patient is staring aimlessly
 than the traditional plastic collars.
and has wide, dilated pupils. The cat never acknowledged the picture taker opening the 
cagedoor.
used to assess acute postoperative pain may not be effective for
assessment of pain that is chronic in nature or that is caused by disease
away, hissing, growling, swatting, and biting. These responses require
states such as pancreatitis, sepsis, or even cancer pain. Pain scales are
generally used to help guide analgesic therapies and to help track the
depending on the observation of other behaviors.
 Behaviors to consider when assessing pain include posture, facial
respiration rate) alone can be a helpful tool in determining whether a
expression, ability/willingness to walk or move around, ability and will-
 patient is in pain when under general anesthesia, but in postoperative 
ingness to use the litter box, ability to lie down and sleep, position in 
patients the results can be variable and typical signs (elevated heart rate,
cage, appetite, demeanor or mental status, greeting behavior, attention to
respiration rate) can be the result of factors other than pain. If a high
wound, and vocalization. For posture, consider whether the cat is lying
heart rate exists after appropriate analgesic treatment the patient may be
in a normal position or lying continuously in one position. Is the cat
hypotensive or hypovolemic, and alternative physiologic causes should
sleeping sitting up? Most relaxed and pain-free cats sleep laterally
be identified. Patients should be evaluated for pain on a regular,
recumbent with the spine curved. Is the cat sitting with its front legs
predetermined basis through the recuperative phase and the response to
stiffly in front of it? Is the cat lying in lateral recumbency with its front
analgesic therapy should be evaluated as well.
 legs stiffly extended or leaning a hind leg up on the cage wall so that the
 Observation of behaviors should be measured by noninteractive
abdomen is not under pressure from the limb? Is the head hung low; is
methods (observation of the patient from outside of the cage) and also
the cat reluctant to move its head? It is possible to assess the facial expres-
by interactive methods. Patients may behave differently when they
sion in cat. Is there a noticeable "grimace" to the face? Are the brows
furrowed? Is the cat squinting? Are the pupils dilated? Are the ears flat-
 contact and may seem more relaxed when someone is with them. This
tened and to the side or up at alert Isthe tongue in the mouth orhanging
does not mean that they are not in pain, perhaps just less anxious than
out? Does the patient get up and change position frequently or has it
when alone. Remember, anxiety and distress can intensify pain. Other
been in the same position for an extended period of time seemingly
o pue sluens un shoaeuaq ued Aue mous ot suenau aie suad
unwilling to move around (Fig. 16-3)? Has the cat defecated or urinated
stressful environments. It is important to note that good nursing care
can help to alleviate some pain and anxiety. Full bladders can cause dis-
 passersby. Painful or sick cats often face the rear and are oblivious to
comfort and distress, and many patients are more relaxed with clean,
dry bedding if they have soiled their current beds and are unable to
back of the cage but will usualy keep an eye on what is happening out-
move away from the mess. Many cats are social eaters and will not eat
side (Fig. 16-4). Has the patient returned to eating and drinking? Look at
unless someone sits with them and encourages them. Many cats will not 
the general demeanor of the patient. Has the cat stopped normal groom-
eat with an Elizabethan collar on. There are soft, more flexible
ing? Does it have an unkempt appearance? Was the cat happy and
Elizabethan collars available, and these may be better tolerated by feline
excited to greet you at the front of the cage presurgically and now barely
patients (Fig. 16-2).
acknowledges company? Does the cat flick its tail or does the tail remain
 If patients are immobile following surgery, be sure food and water
still? Most healthy cats will use their tails to convey how they are feeling.
bowls are within reach. Patients that are unable to change positions
Has the friendly cat suddenly become aggressive?Does it growl or flinch
themselves may need to be turned and repositioned to prevent pressure
soreness. An important tool for pain and analgesic therapy assessment
chewing or biting at the wound or bandage? Catheter wraps are a fre-
involves the patient's response to gentle palpation of the incision or
quent irritation to the meticulous cat. Be sure that the wrap is not too
injury. A nonpainful area should be assessed first to determine the
tight oriritating the skin (Figs. 16-5 and 16-6). Is there growling or yowl-
particular cat's response to being touched in general. Without risking
ing? Does the patient scream or howl when approached or touched?
injury (to clinician) apply slight pressure to the wound and watch the
-opua sasealai Suruand ieu huanout sii und Aeuu uied ui sie jeu aton
phins that can help to alleviate pain. Some patients may develop an
130
Pain Assessment and Management
Figure 16-4  This orange cat demonstrates some behaviors that may warrant further
Figure 16-6 This catheter wrap is too tight and has resulted in a swollen foot, likely a
pain assessment. The cat is hunched, the ears are slightly flattened, and he is trying to
source of pain for this cat.
hide. The cat also refuses to make eye contact.lIn this instance pain cannot be determined
by observation alone. More information is needed to determine whether this cat is in pain
 or just fearful.
abdominal breathing pattern or excessive respiratory effort in response
to pain so watch for these respiratory signs.
As mentioned previously, the goal of good pain management should
be to help restore the animal to normalcy as soon as possible while mini-
mizing pain and discomfort. Using appropriate analgesic techniques
preoperatively, perioperatively, and postoperatively helps patients to
recover more quickly, with less stress on them, their caregivers, and their
 owners, and it helps them to return to their normal routines sooner than
patients left untreated. Learning how to accurately assess and treat pain
in cats takes practice, but the results can be rewarding and well worth the
effort (Table 16-1).
Anticipating Pain Levels
m paeioosse sassau! io 'sanun 'sainpand leiaans au o auos 
severe to excruciating pain include neuropathic pain, extensive inflam-
mation, crush injuries, large ulcerated fibrosarcomas, and fractures with 
soft-tissue injury. Moderate to severe pain is expected from osteoarthri-
tis, intra-articular surgery, limb amputation, onychectomy (declaw),
traumatic diaphragmatic hernia, urethral obstruction, total ear canal
ablation, queening, and corneal ulcers. Procedures or injuries causing
moderate pain include some dental procedures, some laparotomies (with
minimal tissue manipulation), castration, and ovariohysterectomy in
older patients (or done by inexperienced veterinarians), some mass
removals, and enucleation. Mild to moderate pain is expected from
uncomplicated ovariohysterectomy and castration in younger patients,
lump removals, some dental procedures, some ophthalmic surgical
 procedures, lacerations, cystitis, and otitis.
 In general it is better to treat pain before it happens if possible. Pain is
known to be more difficult to treat after the insult. Treating pain pre-
emptively can help prevent some of the pain transmissions from trave-
ling along the pain pathway and can dull or eliminate its perception. It
can also help prevent the phenomenon known as "wind-up." Wind-up
involves the hypersensitivity of neurons and leads to hyperalgesia and
allodynia. Cats that develop wind-up are more difficult to treat.
Premedication with an analgesic drug is recommended.
 Multimodal Analgesia
 Another proven technique in managing pain in cats is called multimodal
Figure 16-5 Catheter wraps can be a source of discomfort and should not be
analgesia or balanced analgesia. The theory behind this technique
overlooked as a potential source of pain.
involves understanding that certain drugs work differently along the
131
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
TABLE 16-1: Signs of pain or discomfort
Posture: not lying in normal position; lying continuously in one position;
sitting with front legs stiffly in front of the cat; lying in lateral recum-
bency with front legs extended; leaning a hind leg up on the cage wall;
head hung low; reluctance to move head
Facial expression: grimace; furrowed brow; squinting: dilated pupils; ears
flattened; tongue hanging out of mouth
Increased heart rate
Increased respiratory rate
Aundui  uoau joueded woussaeo emeu
Lying in urine or stool
Nonresponse to passersby
Facing the rear of the cage
Hiding in the back of the cage
Lack of eating or drinking
Lack of grooming
Hicking of the tail
 Aggression
Growling
Hinching when touched
Trembling or shaking
Chewing or biting a wound or bandage
Growling or yowling
 Abdominal breathing
Figure 16-7  This cat was discovered staring at the walls of her cage following a post-
operative dose of oxymorphone. She was not uncomfortable, just a little dysphoric.
 pain pathway. Also using the balanced technique, or more than one
they are not without side effects. Many cats non-painful given a dose of
analgesic drug, usually reduces the therapeutic doses needed, and
therefore, reduces the potential side effects of all drugs used.An example
This can manifest as extremely friendly behavior, where the cat will
of this for a cat undergoing anesthesia is the use of an opioid and
become interactive, rubs up along the handler or the cage sides, purrs,
tranquilizer as a premedication and then adding a nonsteroidal anti-
and kneads with the front paws. Opioids can cause dysphoria in some
feline patients where they seem "high," staring at imaginary things on
moderately painful proced ure. A protocol such as this should allow for
the wall, rolling around in their cages, and even vocalizing randomly
less induction drug and lower vaporizer settings for maintenance.
(Figs. 16-7 and 16-8). If excessive and self-destructive dysphoria results,
it can often be treated with a low dose of acepromazine, with a
tranquilizer, or sometimes with the addition of a low dose of an alpha-2
Opioids
agonist such as dexmedetomidine. Adverse side effects with opioid
Opioids, which characteristically produce analgesia without loss of
administration are usually dose related and may include excessive
proprioception or consciousness, are currently the most efficacious
sedation, respiratory depression, bradycardia, and nausea and vomiting.
systemic means of controlling acute or postoperative pain. Pure agonist
Patients non-painful seem more susceptible to vomiting when given an
opioids used in veterinary medicine include morphine, oxymorphone,
hydromorphone, and fentanyl. These drugs can be used in a variety
given by subcutaneous or intramuscular routes. Opioid-induced
of ways to alleviate pain, including as premedications, intra-
or
U se stes ur sualeaaid se iou aie uoissaidap Aroteudsau pue eipreopeaq
 postoperatively as small boluses or as a constant rate infusion (CRI),
other small animal species when used at clinically effective doses.
intra-articular, and epidurally. Fentanyl is also available as a transdermal
Opioid-induced hyperthermia is a common side effect in cats, especially
patch although plasma fentanyl concentrations are variable in the cat
with the use of hydromorphone. Although its use does not prod uce
and may not reach effective, steady doses. If used, cats must be assessed
hyperthermia in all cats, in one report 60% of cats that received the drug
regularly for effectiveness. Using them as premedication drugs allows
had elevations in temperature to greater than 40°C (104°F). It is something
forlower doses of induction and inhalant drugstobe used.When opioids
that should be monitored for throughout recovery. If hyperthermia
are given as part of the premedication plan prior to surgery, the patient's
results itcan be treated by removing heat sources and bedding so that the
blood pressure and heart rate tend to remain stable because they are not
cat lies directly on the cool cage floor, administration of alcohol to the
 influenced by noxious stimuli. These drugs are potent analgesics, and
foot pads, fans, and the administration of cool subcutaneous or
132
Pain Assessment and Management
diagnostic proced ures, such as ultrasounds or radiographs. It might also
be a good choice for a patient receiving a dental prophylaxis without
extractions.
Buprenorphine
Buprenorphine is a partial mu-agonist opioid, so it does not induce the
same effects as a full agonist nor the degree of side effects that full agonist
og np aaaa pue rendod e si auydiouaidng anpun ueo sproido
e uaaoad seu shea man ised au saao yreasa steo un uied uea
buprenorphine is effective at providing moderate analgesia in cats and
can be administered by a variety of routes. It can be given intramuscularly
and intravenously, but it is also highly effective when given
transmucosally, which is thought to occur because of the cat's highly
alkaline saliva. Doses of 0.02mg/kg given by the transmucosal route
have proven to be equally as effective as the intravenous route at the
same dose. This allows buprenorphine premeasured doses to be sent
home with owners for continued analgesia after leaving the hospital.
Buprenorphine has strong affinity for mu receptors, but this effect can be
slow in onset. Peak effects of buprenorphine take 30-45 minutes;
therefore, it is not a titratable drug. Its analgesiceffects can last 6-8 hours.
an opioid.
Buprenorphine is difficult to reverse, but reversal is rarely indicated as
the side effects tend to be minimal compared with those of the pure
agonist opioids. This drug is acceptable to use in patients with mild to
moderate pain.
intravenous fluids. In some cases giving a dose of acepromazine will
promote vasodilation and further cooling. In extreme cases the drug can
be reversed through the use of the antagonist naloxone. Be aware that
Nonsteroidal Anti-lnflammatory Drugs
fully reversing the opioid will also eliminate the analgesic effects so
alternative therapies should be used for pain management.
Drugs in this class can be used to relieve pain in feline patients. They can
Cats seem to respond well with the fewest side effects to oxymorphone.
be used to help control moderate to severe acute and chronic pain. They
Oxymorphone can be expensive, and its availability has been intermittent 
are usually given postoperatively rather than preoperatively because of
in recent years, but it can be a good analgesic option for cats with
their potential for harm and the inability to reverse their effects; their
moderate to severe pain. Morphine should be given very slowly if given
mechanism is to inhibit COx-1 and COX-2 enzymes. Because they work
intravenously because it can cause histamine release that can cause a
differently along the pain pathway from opioids, nonsteroidal anti-
severe drop in blood pressure and potential cardiovascular collapse.
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can be used synergistically with opioids.
There are definite contraindications for the use of NSAIDs, and the
half-life so its duration of action is brief. For this reason it is often a good
overall health of the patient needs to be determined before administer-
drug to use on more critical patients as a constant rate infusion (CRI)
 ing these drugs. NSAIDs should onlybe given to well-hydrated, normo-
tensive patients with normal renal and hepatic function, with no
Using an opioid CRI during surgery allows for less inhalant anesthesia to
hemostatic abnormalities, not receiving corticosteroids, and with no
be used because it lowers minimum alveolar concentration (MAC)
evidence or concern of gastric ulceration. When used judiciously, they
significantly. And using CRls can eliminate the peaks and valleys in
can be a useful tool in a multimodal technique and can be used routinely
 plasma concentrations associated with a bolus of drug. If an opioid was
in normal healthy cats undergoing routine surgeries such as ovariohys-
not included in the premedication, a loading dose will need to be given
terectomy and castration and for routine dental procedures requiring
before starting the CRl so that therapeutic levels of the drug may be
extractions.
achieved and then maintained. The pure agonist opioids have the
Currently, meloxicam and robenacoxib are frequently used in cats.
advantage of being reversible with the antagonist naloxone. However, as
 Both are used in many countries; however,the oral use of meloxicam is
mentioned previously, reversing the negative side effects (excessive
not approved in the United States. Robenacoxib is approved in the
sedation, hyperthermia, respiratory depression) also reverses the
 United States for three-day use although long-term use of this drug for
analgesic effects, and the results may be sudden and dramatic. It is best
arthritic pain is common.
to titrate the reversal to effect unless it is an emergency situation.
Butorphanol, an agonist-antagonist, can be used to partially reverse the
effects of an opioid while retaining some of the analgesic effects. To do
Ketamine
this, calculate a dose of 0.05-0.1 mg/kg, dilute to desired volume, and
Ketamine has traditionally been used as a dissociative anesthetic in cats
give in incremental doses until desired effect is achieved.
for induction purposes. More recently ketamine has been identified as an
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist. Stimulation of these
receptors causes central nervous system sensitization. Blocking these
Butorphanol
receptors provides a degree of analgesia. Subanesthetic doses
Because it is an agonist-antagonist butorphanol does not induce the
anpan ot dau Aeu pue eisaleue apiaoid ueo aureiax jo (sasono)
 profound analgesia that the full agonists do. Butorphanol should only be
opioid doses. Ketamine is used in conjunction with other analgesics and
used to treat mild pain; thus, itis not an effective analgesic for orthopedic
is ideally given as a CRl. An initial dose of 0.5mg/kg intravenously
 procedures or other invasive procedures. It does appear to be more
before surgical stimulation can be given (unless ketamine was used for
effective in treating visceral pain, such as that associated with interstitial
induction) followed by a CRl of 0.1-0.6mg/kg/hr. This is an effective
cystitis. Butorphanol does tend to provide good sedation in cats and can
adjunct analgesic technique for cats. It is usually recommended to
be a good choice for premedication or sedation for noninvasive
discontinue the CRI 20-30 minutes prior to recovery, but for painful
133
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
 Figure 16-10  Many cats are tolerant of acupuncture treatments. Note the acupuncture
 needles in this cat's head.
Figure 16-9  This cat had a lateral thoracotomy. She has a diffusion catheter. Note her
halflattened ears and the way she is looking at her wound. Gentle palpation can tell us
if she is reactive to the bandages covering her incision and difusion catheter or if she 
Wound Soaker Catheters
 needs additional analgesics.
A wound soaker or diffusion catheter is a variable length (2-10 inches
long) catheter that has small holes incorporated into it at one end (like a
soaker hose) that are used to infuse local anesthetic into a wound bed for
proced ures it may be continued into recovery as part of a multimodal
an extended period of time (Fig. 16-9). The surgeon buries the catheter
analgesic plan.
into the deepest part of the wound bed possible and the end of the
[eon 'deo uooalun ue um paddeo pue pasodxa sureuan iaaue
anesthetic can be infused at certain intervals or the device can be attached
Alpha-2 Agonists
to a syringe pump for continuous infusion. Because cats are so sensitive
Alpha-2 agonists are powerful analgesics that are effective as part of a
to local anesthetics, doses at 4- to 6-hour intervals are recommended over
the syringe pump method. Soaker catheters are proven effective at
multimodal approach in young healthy cats. They can also potentiate the
analgesia provided by other drugs such as opioids and NMDA
Aau suoneindue qul ym steo ui sasop pioido aaneiadotsod suonpa
antagonists. Alpha-2 agonists can provide sedation and act as anxiolytics,
are also a good choice for postoperative thoracotomy patients. These
as well as provide analgesia. They can reduce anesthetic requirements
soaker catheters can be "homemade" out of a red rubber catheter and
sterilized or they are now commercially available (Diffusion/Wound
small animals today It can be used as an adjunct to other anesthetic and
Catheter, Mila International, Inc., Erlanger, KY).
analgesic drugs at a dose of 0.0001-0.0005mg/kg intravenously or
intramuscularly It can alsobe used as a CRI at 1 μg/kg/hr. The dose can
Alternative Methods of Pain Control
be adjusted accordingly if the patient seems too sedate. The alpha-2
agonists are not without side effects, and these drugs are not
Other alternative methods of pain control can and should be added to
recommended for use on any patient that is shocky or has renal, kidney,
drug therapy. Ice packing wounds or surgical sites can dramatically help
or cardiovascular disease. Overall their use should be limited to
reduce inflammation, which is known to be painful. Acupuncture can be
otherwise healthy and cardiovascularly stable patients only. Alpha-2
chosen as adjunctive therapy to other analgesics, or it can be effective 
agonists can be reversed with the antagonists yohimbine and
Lused alone for chronic pain. Acupuncture is said to have some value in
antipamazole, if necessary.
"(0l-gl dig) uiege Suea oi sieo juataddeuou '1nguied Susisse
Good nursing care is an important part of a patient's recovery and
includes attending to full bladders, hungry stomachs, and the overall
Local Anesthetics
 Comfort of the patient. Stress and anxiety can add to the level of pain a
Local blocks are a great addition to an analgesic protocol. Local
patient experiences. Adding an anxiolytic to an analgesic protocol is
anesthetics can be used as "splash blocks,” injected into joints and
often helpful, allowing the patient to relax and rest. Giving the cat a place
nerves, and infiltrated through the dermis and subcuticular to
to hide, such as a box, can help them to feel more comfortable, but cats
facilitate minor procedures such as laceration repair. A commonly
needing close monitoring postoperatively still need to be carefully
watched.
anesthesia can be a good choice for cats having urethral surgeries.
Brachial plexus blocks can provide analgesia for amputations of the
Summary
forelimb or elbow surgery. Cats are more sensitive to toxicity by local
anesthetics so doses should be carefully calculated, and a dose of
- au asneaq aeadsaauaeup e aq ue se un saaseu ed
6mg/kg should be considered the maximum dose. In general doses
not verbally communicate and to say what is effective. Experience with
much below the potential toxic dose can be effective at blocking pain
particular protocols and the willingness to "try it and see" when addi-
impulses during surgery.
fional therapies are needed will help to aid in succeeding at treating pain
134
Pain Assessment and Management
in the feline patient. In general, pain medications should be tapered 
Mathews K. 2000. Management of Pain. In The Veterinary Clinics of North
down slowly over time instead of discontinuing them abruptly.
America, Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Robertson S. 2009. Pain Management in the Cat. In R Gaynor, W Muir,
eds., Handbook of Veterinary Pain Management, 2nd ed., Pp. 415-36. St.
Suggested Readings
Louis: Mosby, Inc.
Grimm K. 2002. Recognition of Pain in Small Animals. In SA Greene, ed.,
Skarda RT, Tranquilli WJ. 2007. Local Anesthetics. In RT Skarda, WJ
Veterinary Anesthesia and Pain Management Secrets. Philadelphia:
Tranquilli, eds., Lumb and fones' Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4th
Hanley & Belfus, Inc.
ed., p. 408. Ames: Blackwell.
135
CHAPTER 17
Postoperative Care
Linda E. Schmeltzer
Introduction
mia, remove the supplemental heat as soon as the cat's body temperature
is within the normal range.
The care a cat receives after the surgeon has finished the procedure is
paramount to the success of the procedure. Lack of postoperative care
can result in injury, infection, or even death. Being as prepared as possi-
Pulse, Heart Rate and Respiration
ble for every step of the recovery process can prevent life-threatening
Pulse quality, heart rate, and respiration rate should be checked at
complications.
regular intervals throughout the recovery period. Elevations in any of
these parameters can be an indication of pain and should be addressed.
See Chapter 16. An elevated heart rate accompanied by weak pulses, pale
Transport to Recovery Area
iun ue aq eu au au Aeideo mons pue 'sauequau snon
Every cat should have a designated area setup for recovery before it is
of internal hemorrhage. Auscultation of the chest gives the technician an
transferred from the surgery suite. The ideal recovery area is clean, dry,
opportunity to access heart rate and rhythm as well as the lungs. Lung 
warm, and quiet while allowing for easy observation and access by the
sounds in the cat are quieter than in the dog. Wheezes or short popping
staff. The cat should be confined to a safe area large enough for the cat to
noises (crackles) heard during lung auscultation are abnormal and
should be brought to the attention of a veterinarian.
usually sufficient.
When carrying the cat from surgery to recovery, use caution to avoid
Fluid Therapy
restriction of the airway If the end otracheal tube is still in place, hold the
head to prevent the tube from prematurely slipping out of place.
Intravenous fluid therapy should be continued as prescribed by a
veterinarian. Whenever possible continue to use warmed fluids until the
information to the recovery technician when the cat is transferred. The
cat's body temperature is within the normal range. Intravenous infusion
verbal information should include any complications that occurred
of room temperature fluids will slow the body-warming process and
during the procedure, medications given, the last recorded body
prolong recovery.
temperature, heart rate, and respiration rate. Special care instructions
must be discussed. All of the instructions should also be recorded in the
Care of Surgical Incision Site
patient chart as a reference.
The area around the incision site should be kept as clean as possible.
Initial cleaning typically occurs in the surgical suite. Postoperatively it is
Extubation
important to prevent the incision site from being soiled by stool or feces.
It is ideal to place cats that are not able to posture to properly use a litter
 To decrease the possibility of choking or suffocating extubation should
pan on a rack that allows the urine and stool to fall away from them. If
not occur until the cat's swallowing reflex is present. In some cats jaw
the cat becomes heavily soiled a bath may be necessary. Be gentle when
tone willreturn before the swallowing reflex returns creating a risk that
washing around the incision site to avoid breaking sutures loose. Use a
the cat may chew or bite through the endotracheal tube, therefore mak-
mild shampoo to prevent irritation to the skin. Dry the cat as quickly as
ing it necessary to extubate the cat immediately. For cats that have had a
possible, using towels or a warm cage dryer to prevent hypothermia.
proced ure causing blood or other secretions to collect in the mouth or
In some cases cleanup of minor blood soiling may best be left to the cat
upper airway keep the cuffinflated to prevent aspiration. Ensure the cuff
 following anesthetic recovery.
is deflated before pulling the endotracheal tube. Recovering these cats at
a slight incline (head tilted down) can decrease the risk of aspiration.
Care should be taken not to tear the cuff with the teeth when the tube is
Feeding
removed.
 It is always a good idea to keep the supplies needed to reintubate a cat
Check the chart or ask the veterinarian if special diet or feeding
instructions need to be followed. Unless otherwise indicated, small
amounts and food and water may be offered to the cat as soon as it is
fully awake and able to stand. Offering small amounts at frequent
Temperature Regulation
intervals can help prevent vomiting from overeating. If the cat does not
 The majority of postanesthetic cats willhave some degree of hypother-
eat consult a veterinarian for further instructions to administer needed
mia. Providing cats with supplemental heat in the form of a warmed
nutritional support.
towel, warming cage mat (Chillbuster@), forced warm air blanket (Bair
Hugger?), warm water bottle, warm bean or rice bag, or circulating
Preparing for Discharge from the Hospital
water blanket will help them to retain body heat. To prevent hyperther-
On the day the cat is scheduled to be released to the owner it should be
examined by the veterinarian. Make sure that intravenous catheters,
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
identification collars, and nonessential bandages have been removed.
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
The cat should be as clean as possible when it is transferred back to the
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
owner. The technician should ensure that all home care instructions are
136
Postoperative Care
dearly written down for the owner. Gather all medications, food and
to reiterate important home care instructions. Concerns or complications
 personal belongings in one place before the owner arrives.
should be addressed by the veterinarian.
Discharge from the Hospital
 Suggested Readings
The technician should review all home care instructions and medications
Looney A, Bohling M, Bushby P, et al. 2008. The Association of Shelter
with the owner before discharging the cat. Having the instructions
Veterinarians Veterinary Medical Care Guidelines for Spay-Neuter
clearly written down for the owner will allow them to reference the
Programs. I Amer Veter Med Assoc. 233(1):814-83.
instructions at home and prevent call backs from owners who did not 
Pattengale P. 2009. The Postoperative Period. In Tasks for the Veterinary
 retain verbal instructions.
Assistant, 2nd ed., pp. 489-93. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Willard MD,Seim HB. 2002. Postoperative Care of the Surgical Patient. In
 Postdischarge Call
TW Fossum, ed., Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed., Pp. 90-93. St. Louis:
Mosby Elsevier.
A staff member should call the client within 24 hours of discharge to
check on the cat's progress at home. This will be an opportunity for the
137
CHAPTER 18
Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation
Barbara Bockstahler and David Levine
Overview
Special Recommendations
Physical therapy and rehabilitation is a rapidly growing field in
● In general cats arelesstolerant than dogs;therefore, it is more difficult
veterinary medicine. To help ensure optimal treatment adequate
to perform exercises with them.
knowledge should be obtained not only about the different types of
● Cats are relatively impatient and quickly bored. Therefore, the time of
treatments utilized, but also about the pathophysiology and treatment of
the session should be as short as possible and offer a variety of differ-
the underlying disease, the anatomy and physiology of the tissues and
ent activities.
their healing processes, and the timing of introducing rehabilitative
● Behavioral characteristics of cats such as playing and hunting can be
techniques to the tissues based on their strength. In this chapter a short
used to design active exercise.
overview of common physical therapy interventions are given. For more
● Not all treatments are tolerated by all cats. Some cats enjoy electro-
detailed information, several recent textbooks on physical therapy for
therapy or ultrasound treatment, and some do not. Therefore, each
small animals are available.
therapy should be introduced carefully to avoid injuries of the patient
In contrast to dogs, the feline patient is underrepresented in veterinary
and the therapist.
physical therapy and rehabilitation. This might be a consequence of the
● Some cats will tolerate being in the water as a treatment (hydrother-
(false) belief that cats are not treatable with traditional methods of
apy). However, for the majority of the cats this causes high stress and
physical therapy because of their behavior. Although the species-related
should be only used as a last option.
behavior of cats makes it somewhat more difficult to handle the patient,
cats have some unique characteristics that can be used in the development
of a rehabilitation program.
Techniques
Examination
Massage
Before starting a physical therapy program a thorough clinical
Massage has been proven as an effective treatment modality in several
conditions such as low back pain in humans and is often recommended
examination has to be performed by the veterinarian. Never start a
rehabilitation program without a clinical diagnosis and recommend ations 
for rehabilitation of small animals.
or prescriptions from the veterinarian on the scope of the rehabilitation
program. In addition to the physical examination special attention
should be given to:
● The general muscle condition, symmetry, and tone. Older cats or cats
that have undergone a prolonged period of immobilization, such as
cage rest, often show a loss of muscle (muscle atrophy) and decreased
muscle strength. The muscle mass of the limbs can be easily measured
using a tape measure, but it is crucial to always measure the limb cir-
cumference in the same location. In cases of neurological disorders,
such as a disc rupture, the muscle tone can be diminished or increased
based on where the injury has occurred. Painful muscle spasms that
often occur secondary to orthopedic and neurological disorders can
also be detected.
● The passive range of motion of joints. This means the full comfortable
motion that a joint can be moved through without resistance or signs
of discomfort. The passive range of motion can be measured with a
goniometer. The joint is flexed and extended through its range of
motion and the values are read from the goniometer (Figs. 18-1
and 18-2). Jaegger reported range of motion values in normal cats for
the carpal joint 22 degrees (flexion)/198 degrees (extension), elbow
22 degrees/163 degrees, shoulder 32 degrees/163 degrees tarsal
21 degrees/167 degrees, stifle 24 degrees/164 degrees, and hip
33 degrees/164 degrees.
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
 sg  u a  n  so a  i 
Figure 18-1  Measuring knee flexion range of motion with a goniometer.
138
Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation
Indications and Precautions/Confraindications
It is useful in cases of osteoarthritis, back pain resulting from conditions
such as spondylarthrosis or disc lesions, muscle spasms, and to prepare
tissues such as muscles and tendons for exercise. Contraindications
include acute inflammation, tumors, open wounds, severe cardiac insuf-
ficiency, and decreased sensation in the treatment area.
Use of Cold
Biological Effects
The application of cold (or cryotherapy) causes vasoconstriction and
therefore, reduces bleeding in the area after injury or surgery. Cold also
decreases the metabolism of cells, decreases nerve cond uction velocity,
and helps to alleviate pain.
 Indications and Precautions/Contraindicafions
 Cold is used to decrease swelling, pain, and the overall inflammatory
process after surgery and exercise, and to reduce swelling and pain in
Figure 18-2  Measuring elbow flexion range of motion with a goniometer.
acute stages of osteoarthritis, for example. Cold should not be used in
case of paresthesia and circulatory disorders.
Biological Effects
Methods
There are many beneficial therapeutic effects of massage such as the
To cool tissues commercial available cold packs or ice packs can be used.
increase of blood flow, increasing oxygen supply to the area, and the
They are typically wrapped in a towel and placed directly on the affected
release of endogenous endorphins (the bodies natural painkillers), which
body part for 10-15 minutes, one to three times daily.
can be used effectively in the rehabilitation.
Therapeutic Ultrasound
Methods
In physical therapy therapeutic ultrasound is commonly used for deep
A lot of different massage techniques are described in the literature; the
tissue heating to improve the extensibility of connective tissues, to
most commons classic or "Swedish" ones are:
decrease pain and muscle spasms, and to promote tissue healing and
improve the quality of scar tissue.
● Efleurage, which means gliding, is a superficial technique to increase
 Two frequencies are used, 1.0MHz and 3.3MHz; 1 MHz is absorbed at
blood flow and make the cat comfortable with the treatment.
a depth of 2-5cm, and 3.3MHz acts more superficially at a depth of
● Petrissage is a kneading type of massage and is effective atincreasing
0-3cm. Two modes of ultrasound are used; continuous (100%) and
blood supply and the mobility and length of connective tisues.
pulsed (typically 20%).
●Friction is a deep form of massage that can help to restore the mobility
between tissue interfaces.
Biological Effects
Depending on the mode the biological effects of ultrasound differ:
Indications and Precaufions/Contraindications
The indications are the improvement of muscle spasms secondary to
● Continuous mode: The thermal effects are higher, and it is primarily
musculoskeletal disorders, increasing the blood flow, increasing the elas-
used for tissue heating prior to stretching.
ticity of tendons and ligaments, improving the joint and muscle function,
● Pulsed mode: The thermal effects are minimal, but a variety of effects
aq pou pinous asessen Xiagans iahe suoisaupe ansst suaaand on pue
may occur based on the phase of tissue repair. These include an accelera-
used in case of tumors, infections, cardiac decompression, fever, and
tion of the inflammatory process, increased fibroblast proliferation,
bleeding disorders.
increasing tensile strength of healing tissues, and numerous other effects.
Use of Heat
Indications and Precautions/Contraindications
 Biological Effects
Common indications include increasing tissue temperature prior to
stretching, decreasing pain, treatment of calcifying tendinitis, and accel-
Heat can be applied to increase the blood flow and the metabolic rate
eration of the wound healing process. It should not be used over the
of tissues, relax muscles, relieve pain, and increase the extensibility of
heart or in animals with pacemakers, in areas at risk for embolism, over
connective tissues.
tumors or infections, over the epiphyseal area of immature physis, and
over the spinal cord after laminectomy.
Methods
Commercially available hot packs can be used to heat tissues up to a
Methods
depth of 2cm. They are applied to the affected body part for about 15-20
● The choice of the mode (continuous/pulsed) depends on the desired
minutes, one to three times daily, commonly before an activity such as
effects. The thermal effects are pronounced with a continuous mode,
range of motion (ROM) and stretching or to decrease pain.
the tissue healing effects if a pulsed mode is used.
139
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
● The choice of the frequency depends on the depth of the target tissue.
● The intensity for ultrasound is generally between 0.5 (little soft tissue)
and 1.5 (large amount of soft tissue) W /cm2. For pulsed treatments with
the goal of wound healing, specific guidelines have been developed.
● The treatment time depends on the size of the area and of the sound
head. Generally four minutes for each sound head that fits into the
treatment area (e.g. sound head size 5cm2, treatment area 10cm2:
8 minutes).
● The treatment area must be shaved and a suitable contact gel must be
used. Hair must be clipped for effective transmission and to avoid burns.
● The sound head must be slowly moved during the treatment to avoid
overheating the skin.
Electrotherapy
Electrical stimulation is a useful therapeutic modality and is often pos-
sible to use in cats; in fact many cats like this modality. The two most
pain control.
 Biological Effects
 For muscle strengthening the motor nerve is stimulated, which causes a
muscle contraction. For pain control, analgesia occurs as a result of sev-
eral mechanisms such as the Gate Control Theory and the release of
endogenous endorphins.
Indications and Precautions/Confraindications
Electrical stimulation is often used for pain management, improvement of
muscle spasms, prevention of muscle atrophy, and muscle strengthening.
Precautions/contraindications include anesthetized areas of skin,
acute inflammation, infection, and tumors.
Electrodes
A variety of electrodes are available (rubber, gel, bristle). With excep-
tion of bristle electrodes (Fig. 18-3) the skin must be clipped before
treatment, and a suitable contact medium such as ultrasound gel must
 be applied.
 Electrodes can be placed directly on the painful area, segmentally via
the nerve innervating the targetissue, over acupuncture/trigger points,
and to stimulate muscle over the motor point and the muscle-tendon
junction.
Therapeutic exercises
Therapeutic exercises are one of the most important parts of the rehabili-
 Figure 18-4  Performing passive range of motion to increase flexion ofthe elbow joint.
uo Auos spuadap ueoud Aderau au po uisap aui 'ssanoid uoe
the needs of the individual patient and should ensure that the exercises
can be performed safely without the risk to worsen the symptoms. The
Passive Range of Motion
exercises should be selected based on the stage of tissue repair; therefore,
 Passive range of motion (PROM) occurs when a joint is moved without
the therapist should understand the underlying pathology, the expected
an active muscle contraction of the patient within the available range of
recovery progress and biomechanical considerations. Exercises are per-
motion (Figs. 18-4 and 18-5). Adding and holding additional pressure to
Suiseaiou ou Suaoidu Supnu sle Aueuu aaye ot pa
increase the ROM is termed stretching. PROM exercises are therefore
muscle mass, strength, conditioning and endurance, active pain-free
performed to maintain the flexibility of joints, not to increase the flexibil-
ROM and joint function, use of the limbs, coordination and propriocep-
ity, muscle strength, or endurance.
tion, and performance and daily function.
Usually all joints in the affected limb are treated, starting distally and
10-30 repetitions can be performed two to three times daily.
Indications and Precautions/Confraindications
Bicycling
Therapeutic exercises are contraindicated if the desired movement could
worsen the state of the disorders(e.g.high impact exercises in acute cases
Bicycling movements are a type of PROM that involves moving all the
of osteoarthritis or directly after fracture stabilization).
joints in a limb through their ROM in a bicycling type of motion. It can be
140
Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation
Figure 18-5  Performing passive range of motion to increase extension of the elbow
Figure 18-6  Cat with a neurological injury needed a sling support (Four Flags Over 
joint.
Aspen, Inc., P.0. Box 190, St. Clair, Minnesota 56080).
is performed to train the passive ROM of the joints and gait patterns. The
tarsal or carpal region is grasped gently and the limb is moved smooth
circular in caudal to dorsal to cranial movements. If the animal is in a
standing position it should be assisted to prevent falling.
Stretching
Whereas PROM exercises are performed to maintain joint mobility.
stretching is performed to increase the flexibility of joints and periarticu-
lar tissues such as the joint capsule, tendons, and muscles. The joint is
flexed until a restriction is detected and the muscles and connective tis-
sues are stretched. The stretch is held for 20-30 seconds. The same proce-
dure is repeated in the extended direction. Repeat for two to five
repetitions, one to three times daily.
Assisted Standing
This is a valuable exercise especially after orthopedic and neurological
surgery. It is useful to strengthen the patient, to train the neuromuscular
function, and improve proprioception. Usually body slings or harnesses
are used to support the cat (Fig. 18-6). The limbs should be placed
squarely underneath the body. The cat should be allowed to bear as
much weight as possible for several seconds. As soon as the cat shows
signs of weakness it is lifted back into a standing position. As the cat
becomes stronger, less support is provided by the therapist. Repeat for
 5-15 repetitions, one to three times daily.
Weight Shifting
If the cat is able to stand safely this exercise is useful to improve balance,
 Umop ind ot suem pou saop ieo aut qul e jo asn aut pue uondaoouudoud
The therapist triesto disturb the balance by gently pushing the animal on
the shoulder or the pelvis momentarily causing as loss of stability for the
 cat. Repeat for 5-15 repetitions, one to three times daily.
Figure 18-7 Cat playing with a laser light.
Playing with Laser Lights, Toys, and Treats
au ad on ieo au aeao on da u sea pue 'so '-gt )
desired exercise. For example moving the light along the wall can moti-
Cats may be difficult to motivate, but some of their playing and hunting
vate the cat to stretch the legs to reach the light. Other possibilities
behaviors can be used to design active exercises. The use of laser lights
involve playing with toys or treats.
141
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
Osteoarthritis
Osteoarthritis (OA) in cats is underdiagnosed. This might be caused by
the fact that cats do not articulate pain as clearly as dogs. Often they do
not show lameness but only changes in their behavior such as aggres-
sion, house soiling, and difficulty with activities such as stair climbing
and jumping onto a bed. Nevertheless, OA in cats is a common problem.
Clinical Signs
The clinical diagnosis might be difficult, but affected animals can show
 pain during manipulation, limited ROM, or joint effusion.
Goals of Physical Therapy
Pain treatment (in addition to the conservative pain medication) and
improvement of the ROM are the goals.
Methods
●Acute stage: Cold (two to three times/day, 15min), therapeutic ultra-
sound (20% pulsed) daily, 0.3-0.5W /cm2, gentle PROM exercises two
Figure 18-8   Cat in a wheelbarrowing exercise.
times/daily.
● Chronic stage: Massage, heat (hot pack or therapeutic ultrasound con-
tinuous, 0.5-0.75W /cm²) before therapeutic exercises (PROM and
stretching), electrical stimulation (usually transcutaneous electrical
nerve stimulation (TENS), two to three times/week, therapeutic
 exercises for muscle strengthening.
Pelvic Fractures
Pelvic fractures frequently occur as a result of a high-rise syndrome (fall
from a height) or if the cat was hit by car.
Clinical Signs
Clinical signs depend on the location and severity of the fracture. The cat
might show lameness up to the inability to move. The kind of therapy
Goals of Physical Therapy
 Pain treatment (in addition to the conservative pain medication), main-
tain or improve ROM, prevent or improve muscle atrophy, and improve
 lameness are the goals.
Methods
 Start during cage rest with cold packs on the fracture side. As soon the
swelling is improved start PROM exercises (carefully), bicycling in
standing, or lateral recumbency. Active-assisted exercises can be intro-
duced as soon as the cat can bear some weight. Increase to more active
Figure 18-9   Cat in a dancing exercise.
exercises if the fracture is stable.
 Be gentle. Conservatively treated cats (longer cage rest) must be
treated carefully!
Wheelbarrowing and Dancing
Brachial Plexus Lesions
The wheelbarrowing exercise (Fig. 18-8) is designed to improve the use
of the forelimbs and to strengthen or stretch the forelimb muscles. The
These injuries usually occur as a result of an accident. They are often
rear legs are lifted off the ground and the cat is moved forward. Dancing
extremely difficult to heal, and it is necessary to make a thorough
puq au jo o io yauas aosnu pue asn aaoudu on paad s
diagnosis (e.g. using electromyography) before start of the treat-
legs (Fig. 18-9). The forelimbs are lifted off and the cat is encouraged to
ment. If the prognosis is poor, the owner must be clearly informed
move several steps forward or backward.
accordingly.
142
Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation
Clinical Signs
Clinical Signs
 The clinical signs depend on the extent of the nerve damage. Neurogenic
Cats show pain, kyphosis, or neurological symptoms and vary depend.
muscle atrophy can develop very quickly.
ing on the location of lesion.
Goals of Physical Therapy
Goals of Physical Therapy
Physical therapy is important to maintain the ROM of the joints and to
In the first days after injury the goals are the improvement of the neuro-
decrease the amount of muscle atrophy. Physical therapy will be only
logical function and the maintenance of the joint's ROM. As soon the
successful if the injury is reversible. In cases in which partial weight bear-
fracture is stable, more effort can be placed on the improvement of
ing is present, active exercises like weight shifting can be performed.
muscle mass and strength.
Methods
Methods
Thermotherapy (hot packs or therapeutic ultrasound continuous,
In general these patients must be treated carefully to avoid any aggrava-
0.5-0.7W/cm2)before PROM exercises and stretching. Massage might be
tion of the symptoms. During the first days start with PROM exercises of
useful to prevent muscle tensions. Electrical stimulation of denervated
the joints of the legs and bicycle movements. If the fracture is stable,
muscle can be useful to prevent muscle atrophy provided the nerve is
introduce assisted standing exercises and weight shifting. These patients
intact and can recover with time.
can profit from underwater treadmills exercises, but this type of training
should only used if the cat tolerates the water well. Further useful exer-
Cruciate Ligament Rupture
pue  ued st ieo au j panu aq ue ueid l ase all sas
able to walk safely.
Cruciate ruptures in cats are often traumatic and often involve more
ligaments than only the cruciate.
Clinical Signs
Weight management is an important aspect of physical therapy in cats
Cats show mild to severe lameness, pain during manipulation, and joint
with orthopedic and neurological problems. Excess weight contributes to
the development of musculoskeletal diseases and places excessive strain
effusion. The management can be conservative (cage rest) or surgical.
on joints, muscles, tendons, and ligaments, thus aggravating existing
health problems. Numerous body condition scoring systems are used to
Goals of Physical Therapy
 evaluate for obesity in cats.
 Possible consequences of obesity in cats include:
Pain treatment (in addition to the conservative pain medication), mainte-
· Cardiovascular disease, heart failure, and high blood pressure.
atrophy, and improvement of lameness are the goals.
· Diabetes mellitus.
● Gastrointestinal problems such as constipation and flatulence.
Conservatively Treated Cats
●Loss of liver function.
● Reprod uctive disorders such as decreased breeding performance and
Start with cold packs to reduce swelling on the affected stiles during the
dystocia.
cage rest. As soon the swelling is improved start PROM exercises (care-
· Increased risk of complications during anesthesia.
fully) and bicycling in standing or lateral recumbency Transcutaneous
●Higher frequency of skin problems.
electrical stimulation can be applied during the acute phase segmentally
● Susceptibility to infection due to decreased immune defense.
and during later stages locally. Active-assisted exercises can be intro-
● Shorter life expectancy.
duced as soon as the cat can bear some weight. Increase to more active
exercises during the following weeks, but avoid exercise that can lead to
Cats with long-term exercise restrictions because of medical reasons
high degrees of extension (like dancing) during the first weeks. If a
may have decreased energy requirements. It is therefore important to
restricted ROM is present stretching after warming up of the joint should
devise a weight maintenance plan for these patients and to switch them
be performed (hot packs or therapeutic ultrasound). Remember that heat 
to low-calorie foods if needed. The decision as to which food the cat
should be not used during the acute stage of the wound healing.
receives lies mainly in the hands of the cat owner. Clients who have prob-
lems restricting their cat's food intake as prescribed should be encour-
Surgically Treated Cats
aged to use low-calorie cat foods. Because premium diet cat foods contain
high-quality ingredients with a balanced mixture of all essential nutri-
Start with cold packs and careful PROM exercises at the day after sur-
ents, they facilitate dietary management considerably. When low-calorie
gery. If the cat is able to bear weight on the operated leg start with
cat foods are used, the owner must simply follow the feeding recommen-
assisted active exercises like weight shifting. If the weight bearing
dations printed on the prod uct label.
improves, increase to active exercises, but avoid any exercise that could
damage the surgical stabilization. Transcutaneous electrical stimulation
lae sunp pue Aleiuauas aseud anoe aui sunp padde aq ue
Home Modifications
stages locally. In case of a restricted ROM apply heat before stretching
The home environment (for indoor cats) may need to be modified for a
exercises (not in the acute stage).
patient to meet their needs. Nonslip flooring for cats with neurological
m  As  d  s r s
Fractures of the Spine
Sleeping areas should be padded and warm to help minimize pain from
conditions such as arthritis. Raised feeding and water bowls are available
Fractures of the spine are frequently seen and usually caused by a high-
for cats that have neck disorders. Ramps can be used when a cat can no
rise syndrome or car accidents.
longer ambulate on stairs. Cats that were predominantly living outside
143
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
J o snoas aie sanun nau j a soopu ue ot uosuen ot pau Aeu
 Jaegger G. 2007. Validity of Goniometric Joint Measurements in Cats.
being outside poses a potential risk of exacerbating their problems (such
Amer I Vet Res. 68(8):822-26.
Levine D, Millis DL, Marcellin-Little D). 2005. Introduction to Veterinary
tremendous effort and commitment on the part of the owner, especially
Physical Rehabilitation. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 35(6):
if the cat is incontinent.
1247-54.
Millis LM, Levine D, Taylor RA., eds. 2004. Canine Rehabilitation and
Suggested Readings
 Physical Therapy, St. Louis: Saunders.
Saunders DG. 2007. Therapeutic Exercise. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract.
Bockstahler B, Levine D, Millis D,eds. 2004. Essential Facts of Physiotherapy
22(4):15559.
in Dogs and Cats. Babenhausen, Germany: BE VetVerlag.
Saunders DG, Walker JR, Levine D. 2005. Joint Mobilization. Vet Clin
 mo n aess 60 e 1a 1 uapi  enl a ue
North Am Small Anim Pract. 35(6):1287-1316.
 Pain: An Updated Systematic Review Within the Framework of the
Steiss JE, Levine D. 2005. Physical Agent Modalities. Vet Clin North Am
Cochrane Back Review Group. Spine ( Phila Pa 1976). 34(16):1669-84.
Small Anim Pract. 35(6):1317-33.
144
CHAPTER 19
Dentistry and Dental Radiography
Diana Eubanks
Overview
The Unique Feline Mouth
The feline mouth differs somewhat from other species. One of the most
In decades past, the importance of veterinary dentistry has been under-
remarkable differences stems from the fact that cats are true carnivores,
emphasized. Largely due to the increasing awareness of animal pain and
having sharp cusps on nearly all cheek teeth (molars and premolars) and
the strengthening of the human-animal bond, dentistry has emerged as a
vital and important area of veterinary medicine. Owners are becoming
having no flat occlusal surfaces like those found in most other species.
more educated about the value of dental services and the problems asso-
 Many a beginning veterinary or technician student has mistaken the
membranous molar pad, a fleshy protrusion of tissue located bilaterally
ciated with neglecting oral health care.
ca udal to the lower molars, as an abnormal structure. This pad is a nor-
Dental diseases are among the most common ailments affecting
felines; most may be alleviated and some even prevented with proper
mal finding and it envelops a small salivary gland (Fig. 19-2).
oral health care. The role of the technician is paramount in the evalua-
tion of dental disease, its prevention and treatment on a professional
level, and the education of pet owners concerning home care. The
technician can perform a variety of the tasks associated with dental
cleanings, dental radiology, charting, and pain management.
Additionally, the educated technician is an invaluable source of infor-
mation for the client.
 Normal Anatomy and the Oral Examination
The oral examination is the first, and arguably the most important,
step in overall oral evaluation of a patient. Head symmetry, oral or
facial swellings, and nasal discharge can be evaluated without touch-
ing the cat. Especially cooperative cats may allow a full intraoral exam-
ination including evaluation of the gingiva, teeth, mucous membranes,
palate, tongue, and caudal mouth to be conducted without the aid of
anesthesia. "Lifting the lip" can be performed as part of petting and
aques teu (sassu xo) sumeA teo e I ses Aueu ,uo Surao,Alliauas
an advantageous time to sneak a peek at the caudal mouth. Still, many
cats will require sedation or general anesthesia to allow a thorough
oral assessment.
 To identify disease, the veterinary technician must be familiar with the
Figure 19-1 The normal occlusion for a cat is termed a "scissors bite." The lower
normal anatomy of the feline mouth. The incisive and maxillary bones
Ganine tooth should fit in the space between the most lateral incisor and the upper
hold the teeth of the upper arcade. Collectively these structures are
canine tooth.
referred to as the maxilla, or upper jaw. Likewise, two mandibles, a left
and right, are fused at midline by a fibrous symphysis and serve to hold
the teeth of the lower arcade.
 Occlusion refers to the manner in which the upper and lower portions
of the mouth "meet" one another. The normal occlusion in the feline is
termed the "scissors bite." In a proper scissors bite, the upper incisors
should rest immediately rostral to ("in front of") their lower counter-
parts. The lower canine tooth on each side should fit in the space between
interdigitate, like a pair of pinking shear scissors. Finally, because the
upper arcade is slightly wider than the lower arcade, the fourth upper
premolar should be located just outside (or buccal to) the lower first
molar (Fig. 19-1).
Some cats may exhibit variations of the scissors bite. These variations
may be normal for a particular breed (especially seen in brachycephalics)
or they may be an abnormal finding. Misaligned teeth may be more
 prone to trauma or can themselves traumatize surrounding tissues.
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
Figure 19-2  A membranous molar pad is located just behind the lower molar on each
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
side and should not be mistaken for an abnormal finding.
145
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
TABLE 19-1: The stages of periodontal disease.
Stage 1
Gingivitis only.
No attachment loss.
Stage 2
Early periodontal disease.
Attachment loss <25%.
Stage 3
Moderate periodontal disease.
Attachment loss 25%-50% .
Stage 4
Advanced periodontal disease. Attachment loss >50%
Although definitive links have been established in humans between
periodontal disease and systemic diseases, research in veterinary
 medicine is ongoing.
 Despite the best oral health care, a layer of glycoproteins begins to
develop on the tooth surface only minutes after cleaning. This layer,
termed the pellicle, traps bacteria on the surface of the tooth giving rise to
plaque. Initially plaque bacteria is composed of mostly gram-positive
Figure 19-3  The incisive papilla (arrow) and the rugae of the hard palate.
organisms, but if left undisturbed, the organisms yield to the more patho-
genic gram-negative bacteria as well as anaerobes and spirochetes. The
 Likewise, the incisive papilla is located on the hard palate immediately
latter can lead to a great deal of tissue destruction. As the patient's immune
Au 'sieo auos ui aliel ainb seadde ueo pue shosiui iaddn aun puaq
system attempts to fight the infection, tissue destruction may worsen.
Periodontal disease is one of the most common findings in cats.
openings on either side of this structure lead to the vomeronasal organ,
which responds to pheromones. Caudal to the incisive papilla, the hard
Healthy gingiva should be pink (or in some cases pigmented) with
"-6t d) aesn paes sasp o saas e Aq pasiaaen si aeled
knifelike margins. Gingivitis represents the least pathogenic level of
periodontal disease (Stage 1), and with proper cleaning and treatment
the gingiva can return to normal. True periodontal disease can be
Kitten Eruption Times and Normal Adult Feline Dentition
classified as stages 2, 3, and 4 and is based on increased periodontal
probing depths and radiographic bone loss (Table 19-1).
Kittens have 26 teeth, decid uous predecessors of all the adult teeth except
Prevention of periodontal disease  through a combination of
for the four molars, which erupt only as part of the permanent dentition.
professional and home care can be rewarding and provide many health
Primary (deciduous) canine teeth erupt at approximately 34 weeks of
benefits for a cat including a longer life and decreased pain. Treatment of
age in the kitten. Primary incisors are visible 1 week prior and premolars
existing periodontal disease may be a more frustrating undertaking as
generally follow in 1-3 weeks, though some premolars may erupt at the
the patient tends to require lifelong treatment once the destructive
same time as the canine teeth. Permanent incisors, canine teeth, and
process begins.
premolars erupt at3 4 months, 4-5 months, and 4-6 months, respectively.
The molars erupt at 4-5 months of age.
 The adult cat has 30 teeth, a number far fewer than many other
The Periodontal Probe and Dental Explorer
domestic species. When considering the mouth in four separate
Periodontal probes come with a variety of markings and are used for
quadrants (upper, lower, right, and left), each quadrant has three incisors
and a canine tooth. The upper arcade has three premolars (designated
measuring the depth of the gingival sulcus. This instrument should be
second, third, and fourth because there is not a tooth in the space that
carefully inserted into the space between the tooth and the free gingiva.
would normally be occupied by the first premolar in many other similar
The depth of the sulcus in a cat should measure not greater than 0.5 mm.
species such as the dog). The large (and sharp) fourth upper premolar is
Increased probing depths are found in cases of periodontal disease and
followed caudally by a single smaller molar that may be difficult to see
result from the loss of soft-tissue attachment to the tooth. Any measure-
ment greater than 0.5mm should be noted on the patient's chart
on cursory examination.
The lower arcade has only two premolars (designated third and fourth
(Fig. 19-4). Many periodontal probes have an explorer on the opposite
 premolar) but has a rather large, sharp molar tooth on each side.
end of the handle. This instrument can be used to carefully probe broken
teeth and assess pulp exposure. The explorer is sharp and should not be
 In the cat, the incisors, canines, and second upper premolar have one
root each. The upper fourth premolar is the only tooth with three roots.
introd uced into the gingival sulcus.
The remainder of the teeth have two roots, with the possible exception of
the upper molar which can have one to three, usually fused, roots.
Common Abnormalities of Cats
Tooth Resorption
Periodontal Disease and Staging
Formerly known as feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions (FORL),
The periodontiu is composed of the following four tissues: alveolar
among other names, tooth resorption is not entirely unique to the feline.
bone, cementum on the root surface of a tooth, a network of collagen
 Other species have demonstrated resorptive lesions though none are as
fbers termed the periodontal ligament, and the gingiva. Periodontal
frequently affected. Tooth resorption is the most common pathological
disease is simply inflammation and infection of these tissues. Periodontal
condition associated with the hard substance of the tooth. Lesions can
disease is the result of bacterial colonization within the mouth that leads
appear anywhere along the tooth surface and on any tooth but may first
to secondary tissue destruction as well as seeding of the bloodstream.
be identified immediately above the gum line on the mandibular
Aeu 'shaup pue heay aui se yns 'mo pooa isauaty au yhm suei
premolars. A crater-like defect occurs on the tooth and inflamed gingiva
be most prone to bacterial infections secondary to periodontal disease.
may cover the affected area of the tooth surface in an attempt to "patch"
146
Dentistry andDental Radiography
severe inflammation in the caudal portion of the mouth, affecting
 primarily the palatoglossal arches. Treatment can be challenging and
may include immunosuppressive medications, tooth extraction, and
more recently, carbon dioxide laser therapy. A small portion of cats are
unresponsive to all modes of treatment.
Persistent Primary Teeth
Other terms used for persistent primary teeth include retain teeth,
deciduous teeth, or “baby” teeth. Besides the obvious problems
associated with periodontal disease (trapping of debris and tartar by
these teeth), persistent primary teeth may be associated with certain
orthodontic abnormalities, and therefore, should be removed shortly
after the adult tooth begins to erupt. Veterinary dentists adhere to the
e aeds aues aut Adnono ot n pinous yaa omi ou, ieut anu [eiauas
the same time."
Lance Canines
Figure 19-4  Use of a periodontal probe.
Rostroversion of the upper canine teeth, sometimes called lance canines,
often results from persistent primary canine teeth in the maxilla. The
(Aqeq o) Aieud au (jo quou u) ot [esauu pdna saunue Arelixeuu inpe
canines. A persistent primary tooth can force the adult to incline rostrally,
resembling a knight's lance as the cusp of the tooth aims forward in the
animal. Extraction of the primary canine teeth may correct the problem if
discovered early. Otherwise, orthodontic correction may be necessary.
Base Narrow
Base narrow canines are frequently the result of persistent primary man-
dibular canines. In the lower arcade, adult canines erupt lingual to
(toward the tongue) their normal position. Persistent primary canine
teeth in the mandible can prohibit the normal eruption and lateral "tilt-
ing" of these teeth as they emerge. Extraction of the primary canine teeth
may correct the problem if discovered early. Otherwise, orthodontic cor-
rection may be necessary.
 Missing Teeth
 Termed anodontia, the absence of teeth can affect the entire mouth or sim-
ply a single tooth. Causes include teeth that never formed, are slow to
Figure 19-5 Intraoral radiograph of a resorptive lesion affecting 407 (lower right third
erupt, or were present but were lost. A radiograph should be taken to
ewou jeadde 60t pue g0t len e ul eloaid 
determine if there is any underlying pathology associated with the area,
such as a cystic structure or imbedded tooth.
the defect. Affected cats are quite painful and may drop food when they
Extra Teeth
eat. An almost certain sign of tooth resorption is that the cat will "chatter?
when the painful area is touched with a cotton-tipped swab, thumbnail,
 The term superumerary is used to describe extra teeth in the mouth. In
or periodontal probe. The chattering response can still be elicited even
most cases, supernumerary teeth do not cause a problem.
under anesthesia because there is direct nerve stimulation.
Intraoral radiographs are needed to assess the full extent of the
Periapical Abscess
pathology and most of these teeth require extraction. The cause of tooth
resorption is still not fully understood and affected cats are likely to
The area around the root of a tooth (the apex) may become infected, usu-
continue to develop more lesions as they age (Fig. 19-5).
ally as a result of pathology located within the pulp canal. Infectious
debris leaks from the pulp canal into the surounding soft tissues result-
ing in an abscess or granuloma, which can usually be detected by a halo
Stomatitis
surrounding the apex on radiographs. These teeth must be treated either
with extraction, or in some cases, root canal (endodontic) therapy.
Although stomatitis may affect any species, cats are particularly prone to
lymphocytic plasmacytic gingivostomatitis. This immune-mediated
disease can resultin severe pain and a remarkable decrease in the quality
of life for a cat. Clinical signs include decreased appetite, dropping food,
Stains
and excessive salivation. Painful cats may be reluctant to groom, and
Enamel normally resists staining though exposed dentin is porous and
thus, their hair coat may be unkempt. Stomatitis is characterized by
Xooloued ut snsau Alensn pou saop Surureis <isea urets Aeu
147
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
Hypoplasia
(middle) incisor would be designated 301. Cats do not have first
premolars as do many other species. As such, they do not have a 105, 205,
Enamel is formed during a specific phase of development of the tooth.
etc. The first tooth encountered behind the upper canine is termed the 06,
Trauma or an infection resulting in a high fever can negatively affect
aq ln aerd aus sanbau uasss au reoaid punas addn o
enamel development. Immediately after eruption, teeth many appear
proficient, but once the veterinary technician masters the language, its
benefits become apparent. Deciduous teeth are numbered in much the
Sometimes termed enamel hypoplasia, this condition is more correctly
same way except that the quadrants are numbered as follows: 5, upper
referred to as enamel hypocalcification.
right quadrant;6,the upperleftquadrant;7,the lower left quadrant; and
8, the lower right quadrant. A lower left primary canine tooth would
Luxations and Avulsions
therefore be labeled as 704.
A sort of shorthand for charting is often used to indicate abnormalities
A tooth that is dislocated from its socket, either partially or entirely, has
found on examination. A list of commonly used charting terms and sym-
probably had its blood supply disrupted, which will result in subsequent
bols can be found at www.avdc.org/dental-charts. Many veterinary den-
death of the pulp. A tooth that is completely out of the socket should be
tal textbooks also contain charting information.
transported to the clinic in milk and reimplanted immediately for best
results. A reimplanted tooth will need to have root canal therapy at a
later time.
Dental Radiography
 The importance of intraoral radiographs cannot be underestimated.
Oronasal Fistulas
Many common conditions affecting oral structures cannot be visualized
during the oral examination. Conditions such as tooth resorption, broken
A fistula may be associated with any of the maxillary teeth but especially
roots, and periapical abscesses are often unapparent. Intraoral
the canines. Nasal discharge is often noted as the fistula allows direct
radiographs illuminate the area beneath the gum line and allow for
communication between the oral and nasal cavities. Oral secretions and
food may leak into the nasal cavity causing odorous infections.
accurate diagnosis of what lies beneath the surface. The tooth root and
surrounding structure are the most important area to capture in a
radiograph since the crown can be visualized.
Discolored Teeth
The veterinary technician can perform all aspects of positioning and
producing dental radiographs. Although positioning may be a bit
Teeth should normally be white and transilluminate when a light is
frustrating at first, quality radiographs are easy to prod uce with a little
shone on them. Any dullness may indicate a dead or diseased pulp.
practice. Traditional intraoral films require developing in a dark room
A pink or purple hue indicates pulpitis, which often leads to a dead pulp.
imaging systems reduce the amount of time required to produce a quality
Oral Masses
image. Both systems use the same positioning techniques as both the
traditional film packet and the digital probe are used similarly.
Because many oral masses can be malignant, any questionable mass
Although areas of the mouth, such as the mandibular premolars, may
should be evaluated by a veterinarian. The most common malignant
have enough room to position a probe for a parallel technique similar to
neoplasm of the oral cavity in the feline is squamous cell carcinoma
that utilized in radiographing extremities such as the paw, many areas
(SCC). SCC tends to be locally aggressive and often difficult to cure.
are not amenable to this technique (Figs. 19-7 and 19-8).
Other oral malignancies include fibrosarcoma, malignant melanoma,
Because of the presence of the hard palate, a probe cannot be positioned 
and lymphosarcoma. Careful evaluation and posible biopsy or imaging
in such as way as to acquire a parallel radiograph of the upper premolars.
is warranted in any suspect case.
 The bisecting angle technique must be used. This technique relies on
visualizing angles, much like that used in a game of billiards. A film or
probe is placed in the mouth parallel to the hard palate. If one considers
Charting
a line drawn down the longitudinal axis of the tooth to be radiographed,
each other. The bisecting angle technique then splits the angle (bisects it),
Any abnormality noted on the oral examination should be noted on the
patient's dental chart. The chart becomes a part of the patient's medical
record as well as an excellent means for monitoring progression of
disease and response to treatment. Knowing the correct dental formulas
and eruption times is important. There are a number of systems for
identifying teeth. The following abbreviation may be used: I, incisor; C,
canine; P or PM, premolar; and M, molar. Writing the formula as a
fraction represents teeth in the upper and lower arcades. The total
number is arrived at by multiplying by 2 to account for left and right
sides of the mouth.
Deciduous: I =3/3;C = 1/1; P =3/2; Total = 26 teeth
Permanent: 1 =3/3; C = 1/1; P =3/2; M = 1/1; Total = 30 teeth
The Triadan tooth numbering system assigns a three-digit number to
each tooth. The first number corresponds to the quadrant of the mouth:
1, upper right quadrant; 2, the upper left quadrant;3,the lower left
quadrant; and4,thelowerrightquadrantThe second and third numbers
correspond to the tooth itself with the incisors being numbered 01-03
starting with the most central one. Canine teeth are assigned 04. Hence,
an upper right canine tooth would be number 104 and aleftlower central
Figure 19-6  A chairside darkroom.
148
Dentistry andDental Radiography
and the x-ray tube head is then aimed perpendicular to the bisecting
too short (at noontime), picture the sun at mid-afternoon. The x-ray tube
0-61 pe 6-61 s) aoue
head (the sun) should be positioned at about a 45-degree angle to the tree
Another way to look at it is that the x-ray tube head is the sun shining.
(the tooth). The resulting shadow is our radiographic image as captured
The tooth to be radiographed can be thought of as a tree. To produce a
on the probe or film. Obvious adjustment will need to be made depend-
shadow that is neither too long (such as occurs late in the afternoon) or
ing on the individual tooth, interference with other oral structures, such
as the zygomatic arch, and other considerations. Patience and practice
will pay off in learning to produce quality images.
 At times oral structures may overlap one another such as often occurs
tube head more rostral (toward the front of the mouth) or caudally
(toward the back of the mouth) will separate superimposed structures
and allow better diagnosis.
Figure 19-7  Positioning for the parallel technique.
Figure 19-9  Positioning for the bisecting angle technique.
Parallel technique
Film or sensor
Tooth crown
Dental
radiographic
unit
Toothroot
Mandible
Figure 19-8 Using the parallel technique the x-ray beam strikes the tooth and the x-ray film at 90 degrees to their long axis.
149
SECTION 3: Surgery and Recovery
Bisecting angle technique
Dental
radiographic
Maxilla
un
Bisecting angle line
Tooth
root
Tooth crown
Filmorsensor
Mandible
Figure 19-10 Using the bisecting angle technique the film is placed in as close proximity as possible to the desired object.The angle formed between the tooth's long axis and the
flm is then bisected, and the primary beam is directed perpendicular to this bisecting angle.
Home Care
 Tooth brushing is considered the gold standard in veterinary oral
health care.It isthe single most effective means of removing plaque,sig-
Many clients may ask the question: "Why isn't professional cleaning
nificantly outpacing other dental products. Though some cats may be
enough; why do I need to worry about homecare?" As discussed previ-
a  aedd um m e snd s ae it 
ously, within minutes to hours of a thorough professional teeth cleaning.
owner has patience. It is important to emphasize the need for veterinary
a layer of salivary glycoprotein begins to form on the surface of the tooth.
toothpastes because human toothpastes contain detergents and fluoride
This layer (the pelicle)gives rise to plaque that is primarily composed of
that should not be swallowed. The tuna flavoring is also more acceptable
bacteria. If left undisturbed, more pathogenic bacteria begin to colonize
to the feline palate. Finger brushes may be used for the initial training
the tooth sur face as well as the surrounding str uictures. Within a period of
period, but a brush with traditional bristles should eventually replace the
about 10 days, salivary minerals initiate the formation of tartar or calcu-
finger brush.
lus. Once calculus has formed, a professional scaling will be necesary to
 The veterinary technician can provide a helpful client service by dem-
remove the build up. Thus, the results of a professional cleaning begin to
onstrating proper brushing technique using a model or a clinic cat.
be lost within days following the procedure.Disruptingthe pellicle before
Although itis beneficial to brush the incisors and the inner surfaces of all
it has time to mature is the goal of home therapy. With proper homecare,
teeth, these areas usually have less tartar and plaque build up. The areas 
 the interval between professional cleanings can be greatly extended.
 of primary concern are the outside surfaces of the cheek teeth and the
 The best time for an owner to begin oral homecare is when a kitten has
 canines. The toothbrush should be held at a 45-degree angle to the long
deciduous teeth, building up to proper brushing technique and frequency
axis of the tooth and small circular motions should be made on the tooth
(daily) by the time the adult teeth erupt. Early treatment of plaque and
surface. Brushing should take approximately 30-60 seconds on each side
tartar build up allows an owner to start with a comfortable mouth rather
of the mouth.
than trying to treat a mouth that has already become uncomfortable from
A vast array of additional products is on the market for reducing
periodontal disease. Additionally, kittens are naturally curious and more
 plaque, calculus, and gingivitis. These include water additives, waxy
adaptable to a new procedure than are many older cats.
polymers, rinses, chew toys, and dental diets. Although most of these are
150
Dentistry andDental Radiography
not as effective as brushing, they can augment the effects of brushing or
 Suggested Readings
replace brushing in those pets that do not tolerate the procedure. It
should be emphasized to the owner that oral healthcare begins in the
Holmstrom SE. 2000. Veterinary Dentistry for the Technician and Offce Staff.
veterinary clinic and continues at home.
Philadelphia: Saunders.
 The Veterinary Oral Health Council (VOHC) is an independent body
Lobprise HB, Wigs RB. 1999. The Veterinary Companion to Common Dental
that reviews research on the effectiveness of veterinary dental products.
Procedures. Denver: AAHA Press.
The VOHC exists to recognize products that meet preset standards of
Wiggs RB, Bloom BC, Ruth SL. 2010. Oral and Dental Radiography. In
plaque and calculus (tartar) retardation in dogs and cats. Products are
GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 610-13. Ames:
awarded the VOHC Seal of Acceptance following review of data from
Wiley-Blackwell.
trials conducted according to VOHC protocols. The VOHC's most
current list of products can be found at www. vohc.org.
151
SECTION
4
Major Diseases
of the Cat
CHAPTER 20
Cardiology
Gary D. Norsworthy
Introduction
About 40 years ago it was believed that cats did not have significant
heart disease. However, major increases in awareness and diagnostics
have shown that feline cardiac disease is common and a frequent cause
of severe illness and death.
8b
 Cardiac Anatomy and Function
 The heart is a hollow organ with muscular walls and four chambers sep-
arated by valves. An electrical system generates electrical impulses that
stimulate the two upper chambers - the atria - to contract simultane-
ously followed by simultaneous contraction of the two lower chambers -
the ventricles.
 In a simplistic way, the heart has two major purposes. The first is to
 move blood from the organs that use oxygen to the lungs for oxygen
Pulv
acquisition and then back to the oxygen-consuming organs. The second 
is to collect nutrients from the gastrointestinal tract, move them to the
liver for further processing, and then move the nutrients to the various
organs. If either of those functions is impaired as a result of poor cardiac
function, the cat cannot sustain life.
 The heart is the body's pump. It receives oxygen-depleted blood from
the body into the right atrium, moves it through the tricuspid valve
IVS
into the right ventricle, and then pumps it to the lungs. Following oxy-
genation, the blood moves into the left atrium then goes through the
mitral valve to the left ventricle from which it is pumped vigorously to
LVFW
the distant part of the body (Fig. 20-1).
 Diagnostics
 Diagnosis of cardiac disease is based on several modalities. The findings
will vary considerably between asymptomatic cats and cats in heart failure.
Asymptomatic Cats
Clinical Signs
Figure 20-1 Blood flow through the heart. (1} Oxygen-depleted blood enters the
heart through the vena cava (VC). (2) It flows into the right atrium (RA), flows through
These cats typically show no obvious clinical signs of heart disease.
However, upon close questioning owners may report slow growth of kit-
poog sdund auaa yiu aul l apuaa  au oui e (li aea pidsni au
-s pana a ae panau pue se u ot pared sua
through the pulmonary valve (PulV) into the pulmonary artery (PA) (4} on its way to the
ina following exertion that may include short periods of panting.
aul ou! (Ad) sulaa Aeuowjnd ayl ela bunl aui wouy suunjal poojq paeuabixo (s) shun]
Ieft atrium (LA).(6) It is pumped through the mitral valve (MitV) into the Iet ventricle (LV).
Murmurs
(7} The left ventricle contracts forcibly sending oxygenated blood through the aortic valve
(AorV into the aorta (A) (8) on its way to the distant parts of the body IVs,interventricular
e jo auasad au si uexa deisud e uo su uo s au
 septum; LVFW, let ventricular fre wall.
murmur (abnormal sound heart sound). Murmurs in cats are usually not
detected in the same locations as dogs; rather, they are usually heard
Electrocardiogram
very near the sternum. Although they may occur on either or both sides,
more are found on the right side. Therefore, if auscultation is limited
 An electrocardiogram (ECG) records the electrical activity of the heart on a
because of the cat's temperament, auscultation of the right side is more
beat-by-beat basis (Fig. 20-2). The important features to recognize include:
likely to be rewarding. Murmurs are graded on a scale from 1 to 6, with
6 being the loudest. Most detected feline murmurs are grades 2, 3, or 4.
● The P-QRS-T waves are created when the atria contract (P wave), the
There is only a mild correlation with the grade of the murmur and the
ventricles contract (QRS complex), and the ventricles repolarize or
recharge themselves for the next contraction (T wave).
● The intervals between the P, QRS, and T waves have normal ranges;
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
variation from the established normal is indicative of disease.
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
● The amplitudes of the five waves are considerably less than that
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
of the dog.
155
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
Recorded: 10 Nov 2003 06:37
Scale: 10mm/mV, 50mm/s
HR: 177 bpm
00:00.0
DRS
Figure 20-2 Normal electrocardiogram (ECG). The three components of the ECG are the P wave (contraction of the atria), the QRS complex (contraction of the ventricles), and
the T wave (repolarization of the ventricles).
Recorded: 14 Feb 2007 15:21
Scale: 10mm/mV, 50mm/s
HR: 118 bpm
00:00.0
P
R
PR
PR
P
R
B
Figure 20-3  P and QRS noncorrelation. The P-R interval should be fixed; however, a heart block willresult in variation of this interval.
00:10.5
P
R
Figure 20-4 Escape beats. This ECG tracing shows only two normal P-QRS-T complexes. The ventricles are not being properly stimulated to contract so they contract spontaneously
● The cat's heart rate is considerably faster than the dog. A medium-
● An abnormal heart rate, either less than 140bpm or greater than
sized dog has a rate of 60-160 beats per minute (bpm); the cat's rest-
220bpm. It should be noted that, by definition, 10% of normal cats 
ing heart rate is 140-220 bpm.
fall slightly out of this range. Also note that excitement and stress
● The QRS complex is often not as distinct as that of other species.
accelerate the heart rate. However rates greater than 260bpm should
Q waves are rare, and the ECGs of many cats have only an R wave or
be considered abnormal in all but the most stressed cats.
an S wave.
· Lack of P wave and QRS complex correlation. This situation occurs
· The dog's heart rate changes during the respiratory cycle (sinus
when the electrical impulse is blocked (heart block) after leaving the
arrhythmia) resulting in an increase in heart rate during inspiration
atria. Electrical stimulation to the ventricles does not occur so the
and a decrease duringexpiration. However, there is no sinus arrhyth-
QRS complex is not formed (Fig. 20-3).
mia in the cat. The intervals between heart contractions are regular
· Ventricular escape beats occur when an undue amount of time
and not influenced by normal breathing.
occurs after the last ventricular contraction. The ventricles sponta-
neously contract producing a beat that is life-sustaining but atypical
ECG Abnormalities
(Fig. 20-4).
· The amplitude of the R and S waves should not exceed two large
ECG abnormalities are commonly found in cats with asymptomatic heart
boxes (1 mV) on the ECG strip. Tall R waves and deep S waves usu-
disease. The most common are:
ally represent thickening of the ventricular walls (Fig. 20-5).
156
Cardiology
(a)
Recorded: 26 Nov 2003 08:58
Scale: 10mm/mV, 50mm/s
HR: 251 bpm
00:00.0
(b)
Recorded: 13 Nov 2003 12:16
Scale: 10mm/mV, 50mm/s
HR: 232 bpm
00:00.0
Figure 20-5  Tall R and S waves.When the R (a) and S (b} waves exceed two boxes, they represent left ventricular hypertrophy. This occurs in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, hyperten-
sion, and hyperthyroidism.When extreme, as shown here, and combined with tachycardia, hyperthyroidism should be the first differential. That was the diagnosis of both ofthese cases.
Recorded: 25 Sep 2003 12:16
Scale: 10mm/mV, 50mm/s
HR: 218 bpm
00:03.5
Figure 20-6 Ventricular premature complexes. These are as a result of electrical conduction disturbances or ventricular disease but not a specific disease. They are usually infrequent
and clearly different from the P-QRS-T complexes, which are typically normal.
● Ventricular premature contractions (VPCs) are atypical beats that occur
can be appreciated. In addition, it allows one to visualize the major
as a result of electrical conduction disturbances and ventricular dis-
vessels (aorta, caudal vena cava, caudal pulmonary arteries), the trachea
ease. They are not characteristic of any specific heart disease (Fig. 20-6).
(size and position), and the lung fields (Figs. 20-7a,b). It also permits
identification of fluid within the lungs (pulmonary edema) (Figs. 20-Sa,b)
It is unlikely that specific heart diseases will be diagnosed with an
or within the pleural space (pleural effusion) (Figs. 20-9a,b).
ECG; however, the ECG is an important screening tool to identify the
However, most cats with early or asymptomatic heart disease will
presence of early cardiac disease. It serves as a basis for recommending
further cardiac workup.
have normal thoracic radiographs.
Thoracic Radiographs
Ultrasound
These radiographs allow one to visualize the outline of the heart (cardiac
Ultrasound of the heart (echocardiogram or "echo") allows measure-
silhouette). Changes in overall size and in the size of certain chambers
ment the thickness of the heart walls, measurement of the diameter of the
157
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Figure 20-7  Normal thoracic radiographs. Ventrodorsal (a) and lateral (b) radiographs
clearly show the cardiac silhouette, lung fields, trachea (containing an endotracheal
tube), and major blood vessels.
Figure 20-8  Pulmonary edema. Dorsoventral (a) and lateral (b) radiographs show an
interstitial lung pattern because fluid is within the lungs. This makes the cardiac silhou-
ette difficult to clearly define.
158
Cardiology
(a)
chambers, and observation of the structure and function of valves. None
of these are possible with a thoracic radiograph. These criteria are vital in
 documenting the presence of heart disease in asymptomatic cats and cats
in heart failure. An echocardiogram is considered the definitive test for
heart disease, and if possible, should be employed when the history,
physical examination (auscultation), ECG tracing, or thoracic radio-
graphs is suggestive of heart disease.
Symptomatic Cats
Clinical Signs
paseaop pue sson uiam lenpen apnun uao suis leu aie
activity or stamina. However, these signs are subtle and often undetected
Or unappreciated by owners. The onset of congestive heart failure can
take several days or can occur within a 24-hour period. Cats are usually
presented with clinical signs of severe respiratory compromise resulting
from either pulmonary edema or pleural effusion. Profound lethargy,
rapid, shallow breathing, cyanosis of the tongue, and open mouth
breathing are typical. Physical examination reveals one or more of the
following: hypothermia, dull lung sounds, a murmur, tachycardia, and
an arrhythmia. Thus, careful thoracic auscultation is imperative. Ascites
(accumulation of fluid in the abdomen), a common finding in dogs with
congestive heart failure, is only rarely seen in cats with congestive heart
failure.
ECG
An ECG may reveal any of the aforementioned abnormalities. In many
cats, several are present; however, in some cats the ECG findings are
normal.
Thoracic Radiograph
The most meaningful diagnostic tool is a thoracic radiograph. In addi-
[enald so euapa Areuound Kesaupeo jo saadap snoea ot uo
effusion is expected; uncommonly, both occur simultaneously. Ascites is
not an expected finding. Because these cats are struggling to breathe,
radiography may need to be delayed until treatment with an oxygen
(b)
view is usually the least stressful and may be the only view that is
initially feasible. A combination of DV and lateral views is the most
diagnostic.
Ultrasound
 An echocardiogram is not needed to establish a diagnosis of congestive
heart failure; however, it is needed to diagnose the specific cardiac dis-
ease present. It can be helpful in establishing a prognosis, so it is desira-
ble to have this study performed as soon as the cat is clinically stable
enough and an ultrasonographer is available. Unlike radiographs, visu-
alization of the heart in the presence of pleural effusion is enhanced with
ultrasound.
 Therapeutics
Asymptomatic Cats
saa si ae iu se ym sie i e
Depending on the specific disease present, some veterinarians elect no
treatment. Others preemptively treat with angiotensin-converting
 pressed lung lobes (dark) as a result of fluid in the pleural space. The cardiac silhouette
enzyme inhibitors (ACEi), calcium channel blockers, or beta-blockers.
has the radiographic same density as the fluid so it is not identifiable. This cat has less
Diuretics are rarely indicated because asymptomatic cats do not have
than 20% normal lung capacity and is struggling for every breath.
 pulmonary edema or pleural effusion.
159
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
Congestive Heart Failure
(a)
Congestive heart failure (CHF), or heart failure, is the end point of
heart disease. It results in the heart's inability to move blood, oxygen,
and nutrients well enough to sustain life. It causes pulmonary edema
(Fig. 20-8) or pleural effusion (Fig. 20-9). Severe respiratory distress
occurs. Without successful treatment, the cat dies of respiratory failure or
cardiac arrest.
Diagnosis
The history and clinical signs of CHF include an often rapid onset of
anuot at jo sisuo unueaq ynou uado) sans Aroensa
'sop aun uoisnjuad sood ot anp euauodu pue sleual punogond
coughing does not occur. Auscultation often reveals a murmur and dull
lung sounds. ECG findings may include many or all of the abnormalities
listed previously. Thoracic radiographs usually find cardiac enlargement
and either pulmonary edema or pleural effusion, but usually not both.
Ascites is uncommon in feline heart failure. An echocardiogram usually
reveals abnormal thickness of the left ventricular walls, an increase or
decrease in the left ventricular chamber diameter, enlargement of the left
atrium, and pleural effusion. When present, pulmonary edema is not
well recognized with ultrasound.
Tre atment
In general, CHF is treated the same regardless of the underlying cardiac
disease. There are three drugs that should be given immediately. Oxygen
(b)
is administered either with a face mask, oxygen tent, or oxygen cage. One
should be attentive to the degree of resistance the cat offers to the chosen
1IVSd
LVID
0.89cm
1.17cm
route of oxygen administration. Struggling to fight a face mask is not
LVPWd
0.90cm
uncommon; if it occurs, another method should be employed.
EDV(Teich)
3.18m
Nitroglycerin is given for its vasodilation properties. It is administered in
2IVSs
0.98cm
the form of a transdermal ointment and applied to the concave surfaces
LVIDs
of the pinnae. If the pinnae are cold (because of vasoconstriction) they
LVPWs
0.92cm
will not absorb the drug well so they should be warmed with hot packs
ESV(Teich)
0.36m
EF(Teich)
88.57
%FS
%955
intramuscular (IM) administration may be more feasible because of the
SV(Teich)
2.81m
Snap stu 'suaed oiaudsap e ot uooafun snouaaeun ue suai jo ssans
stimulates the kidneys to remove fluid from the lungs or pleural space
d
4.06cr
R-R
(diuresis). It may also create or aggravate dehydration so hydration sta-
HR
0.00BPM
tus should be monitored and free choice water should be available.
CO(Teich）0.00/mir
 Other drugs are used to break the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone sys-
or enalapril, and spironolactone are used for RAAS interruption. They
should be given to all cats in CHF. Atenolol, a beta blocker, is used for
tachycardia or arrhythmias; however, it should not be given in a cat
with a respiratory crisis resulting from CHF. If it is not effective,
diltiazem, a calcium channel blocker is used in its place. Pimobendan is
a drug that helps to stimulate the cardiac muscle to contract (positive
Figure 20-10 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. (a) The diameter of the left ventricle (LV)
inotrope). It is used for some cases of dilated cardiomyopathy. Aspirin
is very small because the left ventricular walls have thickened and compressed it. The
and clopidogrel are given to prevent blood clot formation in cats with a
interventricular septum (Iivs) is thickened but not as much as the left ventricular free wall
dilated left atrium. They are also given following a thromboembolic
(LVFW). Asymmetric thickening is not unusual. Note that the diameter ofthe left ventricle
(blood clot) event.
is much less than that ofthe right ventricle (RV). (b)The short-axis ultrasound view of the
left ventricle shows thickening of the IVS and LvFw. They should measure less than
0.6 cm. Instead they measure 0.89 and 0.90 cm, respectively.
Major Feline Cardiac Diseases
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Disease Progression
Overview
A progression of events occurs that ultimately terminates in CHF and
usually death. The first event is thickening of the left ventricular walls.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a disease that causes thickening
Usually both are affected, but asymmetric thickening is not uncommon.
of the muscle walls of the left ventricle (interventricular septum and left
Because left ventricular thickening is primarily directed inward, the left 
ventricular free wall; Fig. 20-10). As in humans, most cases are geneti-
ventricular chamber's internal diameter gets smaller. As blood is
cally driven; therefore, when it is diagnosed littermates and parents
pumped into the left ventricle from the left atrium, some of it is forced
should also be examined for the disease.
backward through the mitral valve because there is not room for all of it
160
Cardiology
in the left ventricle. This damages the mitral valve creating a leak; a leaky
Diagnosis
valve causes the sound we call a murmur. The left atrium contains regur-
gitated blood from the left ventricle; more blood arriving from the lungs
Because the walls of the left ventricle are thinner than normal, they are
also weaker and less able to contract with the force needed to move
(pulmonary veins) causes it to overfill and dilate. The left atrium enlarges
blood well This results in reduced cardiac output and CHF.
because of volume overload. Soon afterward, ventricular failure occurs
leading to reduced cardiac output and CHF.
Measurement of the left ventricular walls with an echocardiogram is the
confirmatory test.
Diagnostics
Treatment
HCM is the most common heart disease of cats. Early changes in the
heart often begin during the first 1-2 years of life. Young cats with
Treatment of cats with DCM isthe same as described in CHF. Pimobendan,
murmurs are at high risk of developing HCM and should be monitored
a drug with proven efficacy for DCM in dogs, is often used in cats.
dlosely for it. ECG tracings of these cats often show tachycardia, arrhyth-
Documentation of efficacy is pending.
mias, or VPCs. An echocardiogram should be recommended when a
murmur or an ECG abnormality is found.
Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
Treatment
Overview
Treatment of cats in CHF proceeds as described ; however, pimobendan is
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) is an uncommon heart disease char-
not indicated for this disease.
 r    () si  
walls). The cause has not been documented; however, inflammation of
the cardiac walls (myocarditis) is present in many cases. It can have char-
Thromboembolic Disease
acteristics of HCM and DCM so it is classified as an intermediate form of
cardiomyopathy. RCM ultimately causes CHF; treatment is as described
 A potential sequel to HCM is the formation of blood clots in a dilated left
for CHF.
atrium as described. See p. 163.
Dilated Cardiomyopathy
Primary Mitral Insufficiency
Overview
Overview
The mitral valve is a one-way valve. When the left atrium contracts,
 Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a disease that causes thinning of the
blood is forced through it into the left ventricle. When the left ventricle
muscle walls of the left ventricle (interventricular septum and left
contracts, blood is refused re-entry into the left atrium because of the
ventricular free wall; Fig. 20-1l). It can be caused by a deficiency of
mitral valve; instead, blood is forced through the aortic valve into the
taurine, an essential amino acid; however, it also occurs in cats with
aorta. If the mitral valve leaflets do not close completely, blood re-enters
normal dietary and blood levels of taurine. Beca use the level of taurine in
the left atrium, and a murmur occurs. Incompetence of the mitral valve
commercial cat foods was raised to feline-sufficient levels in the late
that occurs without other cardiac disease being present is termed pri-
1980s, the incidence of DCM is much less than it was prior to that.
mary mitral insufficiency (PMI).
 PMI is a common disease in small breeds of dogs that is most likely
-aun a rsou st pue sie u uanbau sno i saua q paou
口
G5
lated to genetics.
1IVSd
0.16cm
LYIRa
Diagnosis
EDV(Teich）23.63ml
2IVSs
PMI is virtually always accompanied by a 2+ grade murmur. Clinical
LVPWs
signs are often not present. An echocardiogram is used to confirm the
m
diagnosis.
ESV(Teich)
16.37ml
EF(Teich)
30.719
%FS
13.64%
Treatment
SV(Teich)
7.26ml
+d
3.73cm
 Treatment is generally not instituted unless clinical signs of heart failure
R-R
0.00ms
or ECG (tachycardia, bradycardia, arrhythmia, etc.) abnormalities occur.
HR
0.00BPM
When CHF occurs, treatment proceeds as described previously.
CO(Teich)0.001/min
Ventricular Septal Defect
Overview
 The most common congenital heart disease of kittens is ventricular sep-
tal defect (VSD). A hole occurs in the interventricular septum. When sys-
tole occurs, blood is forced from the left to right ventricle because the
Figure 20-11 Dilated cardiomyopathy. In contrast to Figure 20-10b, these left ven-
contraction velocity is greater in the left ventricle. A loud murmur occurs.
tricular walls are very thin, measuring 0.16 and 0.15 cm (N = 0.30-0.55 cm}. Note that
there is little difference inthe left ventricular internal diameter between systole (leff and
detected on the first kitten vaccine examination. They usually have a
diastole (right). This is represented in the fractional shortening being 13.64% (N= 35%-
ueu ssal uan e ui anuunu e Supuu (g io f apei) anuamuu pnol Aiaa
 55%} and results in reduced cardiac output.
3 months old justifies a diagnostic workup.
161
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
(a)
LV
cm/s
LVFV
Figure 20-12 Ventricular septal defect (VsD). Blood can be seen flowing from the left
ventricle (LV} through the defect into the right ventricle (RV) IVS,interventricular septum;
LVFV, left ventricular free wall.
Diagnosis and Treatment
 Diagnosis is confirmed with ultrasound using color-flow Doppler. The
defect (hole) in the septal wall can usually be seen; blood can be visual-
ized going through it from the left to right ventricle (Fig. 20-12). Most
septal defects occur high on the septal wall near the aortic valve. Some
small VSDs close as the kitten grows; however, most do not. Surgery to
repair the defect is not feasible at the present time so medical manage-
ment if CHF occurs is the mainstay of treatment.
Pericardial Diaphragmatic Hernia
(b)
Overview
 The diaphragm is a thin sheet of muscle that separates the chest from the
abdomen. It stretches from side to side and from dorsum to ventrum. The
pericardium is a thin sac that surrounds the heart. A pericardial dia-
phragmatic hernia (PDH) is a hole in the diaphragm that communicates
with the pericardium. Depending on its size, it may permit much of the
liver and loops of intestines into the pericardium.
 Clinical Signs and Diagnosis
When stressed, affected kittens have little stamina. They may breathe
heavily and rapidly,even with their mouths open. Cyanosis of the tongue
is possible. A chest radiograph reveals a very large, usually round car-
diac silhouette (Fig. 20-13). The disease is confirmed with an echocardio-
gram that reveals abnormal structures (liver, small intestine) within the
pericardium (Fig. 20-14).
Cats with PDH that live indoors may not show clinical signs; the
abnormality may be detected when a thoracic radiograph is made for
other reasons.
Tre atment
Figure 20-13 Pericardial diaphragmatic hernia. Abdominal contents, usually one or
Most PDHs can be surgically corected. It is technically easier in cats
 more lobes of the liver have moved through the rent in the diaphragm and entered the
more than 6 months of age, and most cats survive well until this age if
 pericardium giving it a global appearance in the dorsoventral (a) and lateral (b) radio-
 they are not physically stressed.
 graphic views.
162
Cardiology
left atrium. Initially it is usually attached to the inner left atrial wall
or the mitral valve; however, as it enlarges it breaks free, goes through
the mitral valve into the left ventricle, and then exits the heart into
the aorta.
LIVER
 The most common route taken is the descending aorta. Because it
decreases in diameter as it traverses caudally, the thrombus usually
lodges when the aorta splits into three arteries - one to each rear leg and
one to the tail. This is called a saddle thrombus (Fig. 20-15). When this
sed asau 'let au pue sa eau au ot paeuat s mo po 'snoo
are paralyzed and become painful. Over a few hours the feet and rear
legs get cold. Femoral pulses are no longer palpable.
 There are other locations a thrombus can lod ged. If it travels cranially
it usually obstructs much of the blood flow to the right front leg resulting
in sudden-onset lameness. If it enters the renal artery, acute renal failure
may occur.
Diagnosis
eap aq a im suis l aendodde uo paseq si sise
If the diagnosis is questionable, ultrasound of the abdominal aorta can be
 confirmatory. Successful ultrasound of other thrombus locations is usu-
ally not possible. Nonselect angiography of the abdominal aorta is
Figure 20-14 Ventricular septal defect. Ultrasound of the pericardium shows liver
another test that can be used.
adjacent to the heart. LV, left ventricle.
Treatment
The first part of treatment is directed at relieving the resulting pain and
restoring leg function. Analgesics are given, and heat is applied to the
-eoj aenooua ot Aep iad sa [eiaaas pasesseu ae ssal aul 'ssal
tion of collateral circulation. The second part of treatment is to address
the underlying heart disease. An echocardiogram should be performed
so the cardiac disease can be understood; most of these cats have HCM.
If the cat is in CHF, treatment for that is instituted. If the cat is not in CHF,
there may be no immediate need for cardiac drugs.
About 50% of cats with a saddle thrombus will die within the first
24 hours. If they survive that long and their underlying heart disease
can be controlled, function of the rear legs usually returns in 2-3 weeks,
and the prognosis is good as long as another clot does not form and
pass.
Suggested Readings
Norsworthy GD. 2010. Diaphragmatic Hernia. In GD Norsworthy, ed.,
The Feline Patient, 4th ed., Pp. 121-23. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Norsworthy GD. 2010. Plueral Effusion. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
Feline Patient, 4th ed.,pp. 412-13. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
l au u uaas si (sagi snqaui ahe aa snqui aip hoz an
 Tilley LP. 2010. Dilated Cardiomyopathy. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
tudinally split aorta (1}. Blood flow through the internal iliac arteries (2L and 2R) and the
Feline Patient,4th ed. pp. 129-30. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
median caudal artery (3)is occluded causing acute onset of paralysis and severe pain in
Tilley LP. 2010. Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. In GD Norsworthy, ed.,
the rear legs.
The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 261-64. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Tilley, LP. 2010. Ventricular Septal Defect. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
Feline Patient,4th ed., pp. 546-47. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Thromboembolism
Tilley LP. 2010. Thromboembolic Disease. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 506-8. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Overview
 Tilley LP, Smith FWK. 2010. Arrhythmias. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
Thromboembolism is a disease that results from a blood clot (thrombus)
Feline Patient,4th ed., pp. 26-27. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
that accesses circulation and becomes lodged somewhere downstream.
Tilley LP, Smith FWK. 2010. Mumurs. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline
The most common scenario is formation of a thrombus in an enlarged
Patient, 4th ed., Pp. 334-35. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
163
CHAPTER 21
Dermatology
Gary D. Norsworthy
the two in some cases, the term food reaction is often used to include
Introduction
both types of adverse response.
Skin disease is not as common in cats as in dogs, butit is still a significant
 In theory, cats may be allergic to any type of food product. However,
 part of feline practice.
the allergen most commonly causing a food reaction is the protein source.
 This is an important concept for testing purposes.
 Although there are blood tests available to determine a food allergen,
 Skin Anatomy and Function
the accuracy of these tests has been questioned repeatedly in humans,
dogs, and cats. Therefore, most veterinarians rely on food trials to diag-
The skin is comprised of two distinct layers, the epidermis and the der-
nose food allergy and to determine the specific offending foods. This
mis. Immediately below the skin is a layer of tissue known as the subcu -
means feeding a protein source never before eaten by the cat. Because it
tis.
can take 4-6 weeks for all present food to be eliminated from the body, a
 The epidermis is comprised of four or five microscopic layers depend-
food trial lasts for 6 weeks. During this time a special diet is fed with
ing on location with the nonhaired areas of the pads and nasal planum
either a protein never before eaten (rabbit, duck, venison) or a food com-
having the fifth layer.
posed of protein molecules that have been broken down (hydrolyzed) to
 The dermis is comprised of collagen, elastic and reticular fibers, inter-
asau sunna azuoau ot uass aunu au rog leus oot stuauodo
stitial ground substance, nervous tissue, blood vessels, lymphatics, arrec-
6 weeks, the diet must be limited exclusively to the test diet; no other cat
tor pili muscles, and various cellular components.
food, dog food, table food, or treats should be fed. A positive result is the
 A hair follicle is the hair and the immediate surrounding structures.
elimination of the clinical signs. A failed food trial means that the clinical
Hair follicles extend from the epidermis to the deep layer of the dermis.
signs persist. If that occurs, the trial can be repeated using another food
Feline hair shafts grow to a genetically determined length grouping cats
product; however, it is unusual for a second trial to be successful.
into short-haired, medium-haired, and long-haired breeds. After several
 The most common clinical sign of food allergy is itching. The cat
weeks to months a hair will be released (shed); soon it will be replaced by
scratches, licks, or bites the skin resulting in hair loss. Most cases of food
a new one. Shedding may be spontaneous, seasonal, or ind uced by stress
allergy have itchinglimited to the head and neck(Fig.21-1). Uncommonly,
or excitement. The latter explains why cats are always shedding when
hair loss may be on other parts of the body or vomiting or diarrhea may
they visit a veterinary hospital.
occur. Chronic rhinitis (sneezing and nasal discharge) has also been
 The skin's thickness varies from one location to another. In general,
aunae susesa se maeuaepoo q panu
the skin is thickest on the dorsum of the trunk and on the proximal
may also have food allergy and another form of allergy simultaneously.
aspects of the limbs. The latter has clinical significance when venipunc-
which may result in itching and hair loss on other parts of the body.
tures are made. Because the skin is thinnest in the more distil aspects of
Treatment for food allergy is withdrawal of the offending food.
the limbs, it is easier to make a venipuncture in these locations.
This may mean continuing the food trial diet on a long-term basis.
Because of the expense of these diets, clients may wish to try other
commercial foods. If so, direct them away from protein sources the cat
Allergic Dermatitis
has eaten in the past. Have them read the label on the package to
determine ingred ients.
 The concept of allergy is based on an exaggerated, abnormal response
Typically, cats with food allergy do not respond well or at all to oral or
of the immune system to a substance not normally found in the body.
injectable corticosteroids. Because the skin lesions of food allergy may be
Only rarely are cats born with allergies. Rather, allergies are developed
similar to inhalant allergy, lack of response to corticosteroids can be an
after weeks to months to years of exposure to the foreign material.
important negative finding that should prompt the veterinarian to con-
Thus, it is unusual to find a cat younger than 1 year of age with an aller-
sider a food trial.
gic condition.
 Feline allergies are typically three types: food, flea, and inhalant.
Contact allergyis another type that is uncommon in cats. Unlike humans,
Inhalant Allergy (Atopy)
the primary, and usually only, manifestation of allergy is itching.
 Inhalation of offending substances can trigger a strong allergic response.
Unlike humans, this response is typically manifested as itching in the
in allergic cats.
Jog eoidkt st ieu uodai Apoq ou st ahaul 'susis Aioteudsau pou pue us
inhalant allergy. Because many of the allergens are airborne and plant
Food Allergy
related (pollens), many cats with inhalant allergy have seasonal disease.
However, many of these cats will develop allergies to other substances
A food allergy is an abnormal response of the immune system to a
over time; therefore, what may begin as a seasonal disease may morph
food component going through the digestive tract. Food intolerance
into a year-round problem.
also causes distress but is caused by an adverse response not con-
 Diagnosis of inhalant allergy begins with the recognition of the clinical
trolled by the immune system. Because it can be difficult to separate
sign of itching, which may be severe in some cats. Following suspicion of
allergy, clinical confirmation can be made in one of two ways. Relief of
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
a strong indicator of inhalant allergy (Fig. 21-2). Intradermal or blood
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
testing are also ways to identify allergens that may be causing the
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 problem. Intradermal testing is based on injecting small amounts of
164
Dermatology
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Figure 21-2 (a) This cat had hair loss and signs of self-trauma in many locations
including the head and neck. (b) Afer treatment with corticosteroids for 6 weeks the
Figure 21-1  Food allegy produces pruritus and results in scratching and hair loss.
itching, self-trauma, and hair loss were gone. Inhalant allergies often respond dramati-
Most lesions are located on the head and neck. (a) This cat was allergic to fish. (b) The
cally to corticosteroids.
speificallergen for this cat was not found, but the lesions are typical of a food allergy.
[(a) courtesy Dr. Vanessa Pimentel.
repeatedly over weeks to months, it may develop an allergic reaction to
many potential allergens into the skin and observing for an abnormal
the saliva in the flea's mouth. At that point, each bite evokes a strong.
response at each injection site. The blood tests are based on detecting
pruritic response resulting in itching and self-trauma.
immunoglobulin E (ligE) levels specific for various allergens.
Clinical signs of FAD are hair loss and inflamed skin. Because fleas
 Treatment can be performed in three ways: (1) The ideal approach is to
have a propensity to bite just cranial to the base of the tail (tail head), this
remove the cat from its allergens. This requires no further treatment, but
location is likely to experience the reaction and hair loss first. Scabs and
it may not be possible in many cats. (2) Because the side effects of corti-
flea dirt are often present followed by hair loss. Scratching this area with
costeroids arenot as severe incats as in dogs,ntermittent treatment with
one's fingers usually stimulates to cat to turn and lick further or to lick it 
injectable or oral corticosteroids can be effective and safe. The dose and
front feet (Fig. 21-3a).
frequency should be the minimum amount and frequency required as
 Diagnosis is based on the presence of fleas or flea dirt, the characteris-
determined by the veterinarian. (3) Hyposensitization is an attempt to
tic skin lesions, especially at the tail head, and response to therapy.
"reprogram" the immune system so it no longer overreacts to the aller-
Although these may be sufficient for a diagnosis, confirmation may be
gens. Small amounts of the allergens are injected subcutaneously once or
made with intradermal skin testing or blood tests for allergy.
twice per week over weeks to months. Unfortunately, this approach is
The most important aspect of treatment is to remove existing fleas and
not always successful.
prevent further exposure to fleas. If these are both possible, further treat-
ment is not needed. However, in most cases it is not possible to com-
au dos o pasn aq ue spioaisos os ainsxa ea duoo iaad
 Flea Allergic Dermatitis (FAD)
reaction and give the cat relief. Even in the presence of further flea bites,
When fleas bite a normal cat litle local reaction occurs. It is likely that the
corticosteroids will bring the cat relief beca use it blocks the allergic reac-
cat is unaware of the bite. However, after the cat has been bitten
tion that causes itching.
165
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Figure 21-3 Flea allergic dermatitis causes intense pruritus, chewing scratching, and
hair loss (a)The most common location is the tail head. (b) However, other areas may itch
intensely, including the he ad and face.
Figure 21-4  Bilateral truncal alopecia is characteristic of obsessive-compulsive alope-
cia.(a) This cat had symmetrical alopecia on its sides. (b)It also had hair loss on its ventral
abdomen and the caudal aspect of the rear legs.
Obsessive-Compulsive Alopecia
Some cats with pruritic skin disease from any cause (food allergy,
chew, or scratch compulsively. This results in hair loss that is usually
inhalant allergy, flea-bite dermatitis) will lick and scratch long enough
bilaterally asymmetrical. The areas most commonly affected include
to develop a compulsive desire to continue licking even if the itching is
the caudal aspects of the rear legs, the ventral abdomen, and the flanks
relieved. This is also called psychogenic alopecia. The cat will lick,
(Fig. 21-4).
166
Dermatology
Treatment is based on treating any skin disease that is causing itching
hot-packed to open the pores for better penetration. A warm, moist
and controlling the obsessive-compulsive aspect of the disorder.
cloth should be applied to the chin for 30-60 seconds prior to applica-
Treatment of the former is described previously. Treatment of the latter is
tion of a topical antibiotic such as clindamycin. If infection is present
based on centrally acting drugs, such as phenobarbital, clomipramine, or
systemic antibiotics that are likely to be effective against Staphylococcus
others. One of these drugs is usually given for 4-6 weeks while pruritus
are used. In some cases, a 2- to 3-day course of a corticosteroid may be
is controlled appropriately. If the cat is normal at 4-6 weeks, the centrally
acting drug is withdrawn. If compulsive licking returns, the drug is rein-
therapy.
stated for another 4-6 weeks. In a few cats, therapy may be needed for
 months to break the compulsion.
 Dermatophytosis
Dermatophytosis is an infection with a cutaneous (affecting the skin)
Acne
fungus. It is commonly called ringworm. The circular shape of the lesions
Acne is a proliferation of the glands in the skin of the chin. It is usually
is the basis for the ring portion of this term, but the disease is not due to
a worm. Although the term is both incorrect and misleading, it is in
found in ad ult cats; however, it has been reported in a few cats younger
than 1 year of age.
widespread use.
 Acne causes comedones (black heads) to form in the hair follicles of
 There are two primary fungal species that infect the hair, skin, and
the chin. Rarely, they may also form on the lower or upper lips. Hair loss
nails of cats. Microsporurm canis is diagnosed in about 90% of feline cases,
and Trichophyton mentagrophytes accounts for the majority of the remain-
begins so the cat's chin has a peppered appearance. Infection can occur
resulting in swelling of the chin and purulent drainage from the hair fol-
ing 10%.
licles (Fig. 21-5).
 The fungus invades growing hairs, causing them to fall out. Then the
 Treatment begins with clipping the hair from the chin to assess the
fungus spreads to the more peripheral hairs, usually resulting in a circu-
-au leidot o uedde aq uad ot pueaseasp aut jo aa
lar lesion. However,the lesions are not always circular and can be irregu-
cations. Prior to application of a topical antibiotic, the chin should be
lar in shape (Fig. 21-6a). Immunosuppression or open skin lesions make
active infection more likely.
 Transmission of the fungi is by direct contact, fomite contact, or via a
(a)
contaminated environment. Thus, animal (cat, dog, or other)-to-animal,
human-to-cat, or environment-to-cat transmission is possible. The fungi
can live in the environment 12-24 months, making environmental decon-
tamination an important aspect of control.
 Diagnosis begins with the observation of focal alopecia (hair loss),
often with crusts on the skin. The lesions are so nonspecific that they can
mimic almost any skin disease. A Wood's light examination of the skin
causes affected hairs to fluoresce with a characteristic apple-green color
(Fig. 21-6b). Note that many topical medications also fluoresce, so it is
important to observe fluorescence of individual hair shafts that have
been broken just above the skin surface, leaving stubble. Fungal culture
is the only method of confirming dermatophytosis. Dermatophyte test
media (DTM") and Sabouraud's dextrose agar are the most commonly
used media. A positive culture results in a change of the media color
from yellow to red, followed by a white cottony growth of the fungus
(Fig. 21-6c). Saprophytes (fungal skin contaminants) will cause the red
color change after colony growth. Direct microscopic examination of the
hair shafts revealing arthrospore invasion into the hair shafts can also
confirm diagnosis.
Treatment is multipronged. Systemic fungal drugs are almost always
(b)
required to eliminate the infection and prevent the carrier state.
Griseofulvin and itraconazole are the most commonly used drugs.
Griseofulvin can be dangerous in a pregnant cat or a catinfected with the
feline immunodeficiency virus. It can also cause liver or bone marrow
toxicity, although these occur infrequently when the drug is adminis-
 tered at proper doses. Fat in the stomach is required for good absorption.
Itraconazole is much more expensive and can cause liver toxicity and
birth defects in some cats. The chosen oral drug should be given a mini-
[esunue leidon isisiad suoisal aae jn salun pue sep oe jo wn
drugs are also useful, but cats are often not tolerant of topical drugs and
willick them off quickly.
Aaut asneoaq sads lelung jo peaids iuaaad ot uoui si 
become the source of future infections. Lime sulfur dip or enilconazole
are used for this purpose. Clipping long-haired cats can be beneficial,
st ouo [euauonaug 'snung aut jo peaids pue ymoa paseaun u
also central to stopping this disease. Vigorous vacuuming of exposed
areas, especially those with carpet or upholstery, is important. A solu-
tion of 1 part bleach and 10-30 parts water should be used on bleachable
Figure 21-5  Acne causes comedones to form on the chin (a) and can become infected(b).
surfaces.
167
SEC TION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
(a)
(C)
(b)
5929
Figure 21-6  (a) Round, focal areas of crusty alopecia are the typical ringworm lesions; however, the lesions can have many appearances. (b) Fluorescence of individual hairs with a
Wbood's light is typical for Microsporum canis but not for Trichophyton mentagrophytes. (c A white cottony growth willoccur after the agar turns yelw to red for a diagnosis of
dermatophytosis to be confirmed.
168
Dermatology
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 21-7 The eosinophilic granuloma complex is composed of several loosely related skin diseases. (a> The rodent ulcer is found on the upper lips and, when severe, may extend
past the upper canine teeth. (b) Eosinophilic plaques most commonly occur on the ventral abdomen, although they may also occur at the base of the tongue (c).
169
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
(d)
f)
(e)
Figure 21-7 (contd) (d}An eosinophilic granuloma is a raised, linear mass or collection of masses usually found on the caudal aspect of the rear legs. In this location it is sometimes
called a linear granuloma. Mosquito-bite hypersensitivity is a local reaction that ocurs on the bridge of the nose (e) and the pinnae (f.
170
Dermatology
Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex (EGC)
identification of allergens, including food, is also indicated. Unless an
underlying disease can be identified and controlled, intermittent or
The EGC is a group of somewhat-related diseasesthat cause character-
long-term use of corticosteroids may be needed as these are all recur-
rent diseases. If corticosteroid use is not feasible (ineffective or side
gesting an allergic component, and most respond well
to
effects) other immunosuppressants, including cyclosporine, should
corticosteroids. Some of the more common manifestations will be
be tried.
described.
 An eosinophilic ulcer ("rodent ulcer") is a unique disease that occurs
 on the upper lips of the cat and is usually bilateral. A smallto very large
Suggested Readings
ulcer occurs resulting in pain and odiferous breath. Some cats are so
 painful that eating becomes problematic (Fig. 21-7a).
Horwitz DF. Psychogenic Alopecia. 2010. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The 
 Eosinophilic plaques are masses that form on the ventral abdomen
Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 587-90. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
(Fig. 21-7b), between the toes, and on the base of the tongue (Fig.
Rees CA. Acne. 2010. In GD Norsworthy, ed. The Feline Patient, 4th ed.,
21-7c).
 p. 7. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
 An eosinophilic granuloma is a linear-shaped row of raised lesions
Rees CA. Atopic Dermatitis. 2010. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline
that typically occur on the caudal aspect of the rear legs (Fig. 2l-7d).
Patient, 4th ed., pPp. 33-34. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
 Mosquito-bite hypersensitivity is the reaction that occurs in some cats
Rees CA. Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex. 2010. In GD Norsworthy,
to mosquito bites. The primary locations are the areas with thin hair,
ed.,The Feline Patient,4th ed., pp. 154-56. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
notably the bridge of the nose (Fig. 21-7e), the pinnae (Fig. 21-7f), or the
Rees CA. Flea Allergy Dermatitis. 2010. In GD Norsworthy,ed., The Feline
thin-haired area between the eyes and the ears.
Patient, 4th ed., pp. 189-90. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Treatment for the various forms of the EGC is based on corticoster-
Rees CA. Food Reaction. 2010. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline Patient,
oids. Because there is likely an allergic component to most of these,
 4th ed., pp. 195-96. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
171
CHAPTER 22
Diseases of the
stem
Linda E. Schmeltzer and Gary D. Norsworthy
from the heme, and amino acids, from globin molecules. Iron, amino
Overview
acids, and globin are recycled. The non-iron protein portion of the heme
The primary function of the digestive system is to break down food into
is converted to unconjugated bilirubin. Unconjugated bilirubin is not
smaller particles that the body can absorb and use for nutrition and
water soluble. It is carried to the liver by attaching itself to the plasma
energy at a cellular level. The digestive system consists of a continuous
protein albumin. In the liver unconjugated bilirubin combines with an
tube - the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract - that extends from the mouth to the
acid formed by glucose (glucuronic acid) and becomes conjugated biliru-
anus. The process of digestion within the GI tract is aided by secretions
bin making it water soluble. Conjugated bilirubin is stored in the gall
from accessory digestive organs: the salivary glands, liver, gall bladder
bladder as part of bile until it is needed.
and pancreas. This overview covers the basic structure of the GI tract and
 The liver makes bile continuously, but bile is needed only when food is
the functions of the liver, bile duct, and gall bladder.
in the upperintestine. Normal bacteriain the intestines convertconjugated
bilirubin into urobilinogen. Some of the urobilinogen will be absorbed and
eliminated in the urine as urobilin. The rest will be converted to sterco-
Gastrointestinal Tract: Basic Structure
bilinogen and excreted as stercobilin in the feces. These pigments - urobilin
The organs of the GI tract include the mouth, pharynx, esophagus,
and stercobilin - help give urine and feces their normal colors.
stomach, small intestine, cecum, and large intestine. The wall of the GI
tract is made up of four layers. From inside to outside they are the mucosa,
Icterus
submucosa, muscularis, and serosa. The mucosa is a moist layer of semi-
permeable tissue. In the stomach and intestine the mucosa also contains
Icterus, also known as jaundice, is not a disease; it is a sign that disease is
exocrine cells that secrete mucus and fluid into the GI tract. The submucosa
present. Icterus occurs when excess bilirubin is deposited in the tissues.
is a layer of dense irregular connective tissue that contains glands, nerves,
Yellowing of the tissue will first be seen in the soft palate, the soft tissue
and blood vessels and joins the mucosa to the muscularis. The muscularis
of the roof of the mouth. Icterus may also be easily seen on the gums;
is two thin layers of smooth muscle. The inner circular muscle layer
skin, especially the pinnae or ear flaps; third eyelids; sclera, white part of
prevents food from traveling backward, and the longitudinal muscle
the eyes; and irises, colored portion of the eye (Fig. 22-1).
layer shortens the digestive tract. Involuntary contraction of these layers
Normal serum bilirubin in cats is less than 17umol/L (1.0mg/dL).
is called peristalsis. Peristaltic contractions help to physically break food
The serum of a cat with an elevated serum bilirubin will not appear
down, mix it with digestive secretions, and propel it along the GI tract.
icteric (yellow) until the levels measure 25-35umol/L (1.5-2.0mg/dL).
The serosa, the outermost layer of the GI tract, secretes a lubricating fluid 
Tissues will not be visibly icteric until serum bilirubin levels exceed
that reduces friction with the other organs due to muscle movement.
35 umol/L (2.0mg/dL).
Diagnosis of icterus is simple: a visible yellow color is seen in the tis-
sues or serum. The causes of icterus fall into three main categories.
Hepatobiliary Function
Hepatobiliary refers to the liver, gall bladder, and bile duct. These three
Prehepatic
organs work together to produce, store, and secrete bile into the GI tract.
The liver is the largest gland in the body. It performs numerous vital
An excess breakdown or destruction (hemolysis) of red blood cells will
functions. One function is to break down toxins, including many medica-
result in an excess amount of unconjugated bilirubin. The liver is not able
tions, absorbed from the GI tract. Liver cells are also known as hepato-
to conjugate all of the unconjugated bilirubin, and the excess is deposited
cytes. Hepatocytes synthesize (build) plasma proteins such as albumin,
in the tissues. Hemolysis may be caused by toxic plants, chemicals,
 prothrombin, and fibrinogen. Prothrombin and fibrinogen are needed in
drugs, parasites on red blood cells, heartworms, autoimmune diseases,
the process of coagulation (formation of blood clots). The liver stores and
or cancer. Immune-mediated causes of hemolysis are less common in
breaks down triglycerides. Hepatocytes synthesize lipoproteins to trans-
cats than in dogs.
port triglycerides and other fats to cells in the body. In the cells fat is
processed into energy Vitamins A, Bp D, E, and K, and some minerals,
such as iron, are also stored in the liver.
Hepatic
The gall bladder is a small sac that stores bile until it is needed. Bile
This category is the most common cause of icterus in cats. Any disease that
contains water, electrolytes, bile acids, cholesterol, and conjugated biliru-
causes destruction or decreased function of liver cells will prevent the
bin. The gallbladder isconnected to the duodenum (upper portion of the
liver from conjugatingeven the normal amount of unconjugated bilirubin.
small intestine) by the bile duct.
 The unconjugated bilirubin from normal red blood cell breakdown will be
 Bilirubin is the yellow pigmented breakdown product of heme. Heme
deposited in the tissues. This may be caused by a disease that primarily
is found in hemoglobin, the oxygen-binding component of red blood
 involves the liver, such as cholangiohepatitis, or be a secondary symptom
cells. Red blood cells are produced in the bone marrow. Their average life
of a different disease process, such as feline immunodeficiency virus.
Uaum jo pasodsip aqisnuu shlao pooia pay sep oz inoqe stieo e ut ueds
they get old or damaged. The body breaks these cells down into iron,
Posthepatic
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
and Gary D. Norsworthy
the intestines will eventually result in a back up of conjugated bilirubin
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
in the blood stream and the tissues. Obstructions can occur within the
172
Diseases of the Digestive System
(a)
Figure 22-2 This necropsy specimen shows an enlarged and yelow liver (arrow).
(b)
gallbladder or anywhere along the bile duct. Such obstructions are less
likely to occur in cats than in dogs. Pancreatitis, cholelithiasis (stones in
the gall bladder), trauma, cancer, and liver flukes are all possible causes
of obstruction.
The Workup
Determining the cause of icterus can be difficult and usually requires
several tests. Initial tests may include a complete blood count (CBC),
chemistry profile, urinalysis, and screening for feline leukemia virus and
feline immunodeficiency virus. Once the probable cause is placed into
one of the three categories (prehepatic, hepatic, or posthepatic), addi-
tional tests may be needed to determine the specific disease causing the
icteric state. Abdominal ultrasound or radiography to evaluate the liver,
pancreas, and gall bladder may be ordered. Biopsies of the liver or aspi-
ration of the bile in the gall bladder may also be needed to diagnose
specific diseases.
 There is no treatment for icterus itself. Treatment for the underlying
disease is required for icterus to resolve. The prognosis will depend on
the underlying cause.
(C)
Hepatic Lipidosis
 The most common liver disorder in cats is hepatic lipidosis, also known 
as fatty liver syndrome. It is caused by an excessive accumulation of tri-
period of time, stored fat (triglycerides) will be broken down in the liver
-lp Jo aounos aenbape ue noum sao s,Apoq au ot Ataua Addnso
tary protein, the liver is not able to efficiently convert triglycerides into
usable energy. The liver will take in fat at a faster rate than it is able to
convert and export it causing an excess accumulation of fat in the liver
(Fig. 22-2).
The origin of this disease is not well understood. Obesity will make a
cat more susceptible to hepatic lipidosis. In many cats a thorough history
and diagnostic workup will expose a primary disease or circumstance
that caused the anorexia; however, the anorexia-inducing disease will not
always be present or diagnosed. Circumstances, such as a new diet, har-
assment by another pet, or separation from the owner, can cause anorexia.
 Diseases such as cholangiohepatitis, pancreatitis, and diabetes mellitus
ai aeed os ui ses e o se aas i s sal e an
have been reported as primary causes leading to hepatic lipidosis.
common early location for observing icterus is the skin cranial to the pinna or on the
Clinical signs of hepatic lipidosis can include anorexia, weight loss,
 pinna itself. (c) Severe icterus results in all of the skin becoming visibly yellow.
icterus, and vomiting. When taking a history, questions about the cat's
173
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
living environment and habits prior to the onset of anorexia will be
(a)
helpful in determining a primary cause. Any cat with a history of obesity
and a period of anorexia lasting at least 1 week should be suspected of
hepatic lipidosis.
A comprehensive blood profile will show a marked alkaline phos-
phatase increase (two to five times normal). More than 50% of affected
cats will have hypoalbuminemia (low blood albumin). A mild nonregen-
erative anemia may alsobe present. A urinalysis may reveal bilirubinuria
(the presence of bilirubin in the urine). Microscopic evaluation of the
hepatocytes will be required to confirm a diagnosis of hepatic lipidosis.
Cells or tissue may be collected by a fine-needle aspirate, fine-needle
may require several days of hospitalization and treatment before they are
stable enough to undergo anesthesia for any proced ures.
Treatment: Phase One
Treatment for hepatic lipidosis occurs in two phases. The first phase, sta-
bilization, lasts approximately 2-7 days and involves hospitalization.
Almost all deaths from hepatic lipidosis occur during this phase.
Minimizing patient stress as much as possible can increase the survival
rate. This phase of therapy may include:
· Control of vomiting: Antivomiting medication may be needed to
(b)
control vomiting. The stomach of cats with hepatic lipidosis may
have a small capacity. Feeding small quantities of food frequently
will help prevent vomiting caused from feeding too large of a meal.
● Intravenous or subcutaneous fluids are used to correct dehydration.
● Potassium may be added to the fluids or given orally. Serum potas-
sium levels should be monitored and potassium supplementation
adjusted as needed.
●Nutrition is the cornerstone of treatment. A balanced diet containing
adequate protein is needed to form the lipoproteins necessary to
transport triglycerides out of the liver. Nutritional support begins
with the use of syringe feeding or orogastric tube feeding to effi-
ciently deliver a balanced diet. The daily nutritional goal is
60-90kcal/kg of ideal body weight.
● Antibiotics, usually amoxicillin or metronidazole, are recommended
to treat possible underlying infection. Avoid antibiotics that have
vomiting as a side effect.
·S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) and milk thistle are nutraceutical agents
that have been shown to have anti-inflammatory and antioxidant prop-
erties within the liver. These medications are best absorbed when given
On an empty stomach, preferably at least 1 hour before food.
Figure 22-3  (a) An esophagostomy tube is placed through an incision in the neck and 
impaired as a result of decreased bile flow and lack of fat ingestion.
extends to the lower esophagus. Injected contrast material shows its placement.
S Y una j Aal ssal yn si ais Asdoq haal e w paa
(b) Feeding is as simple as injecting food through the tube. Most clients can do this
given prior to biopsy.
without assistance.
Vitamin B, is used as an appetite stimulant and to further support
liver function.
type of indwelling feeding tube used in their practices. Proper care
and maintenance of these tubes is important for the patient's well-
Treatment: Phase Two
being. Understanding how the tube is placed and what problems can
The second phase of treatment, long-term care, can last for several weeks
occur after placement is important so owners' questions may be
until the cat's appetite returns.
answered properly and potential problems that need veterinary
attention can be quickly identified (Fig. 22-3).
● Antibiotics and medications to support hepatocyte function will be
continued for 24 weeks.
Completion of Therapy and Prognosis
Nutritional support is still of primary importance. An indwelling
feeding tube, such as an esophagostomy tube or gastrostomy tube,
When a cat returns to eating normally, treatment is discontinued. On
will be needed to efficiently deliver nutrition. The use of these tubes
average it takes about 6 weeks for the appetite to return. Liver function
allows owners to take their cat home and still manage feedings suc-
will eventually return to normal; there is no long-term damage.
cessfully. Feeding small quantities three to six times per day is recom
 The prognosis is good with aggressive therapy and treatment of the
mended because the stomach will take time to return to normal
underlying disease or circumstance that caused the anorexia. The most
capacity. Veterinary technicians should become familiar with the
174
Diseases of the Digestive System
underlying disease that perpetuates anorexia. It is possible for hepatic
(a)
lipid osis to recur if there is another episode of prolonged anorexia.
Inflammatory Hepatitis
The second most common liver disease in cats is inflammatory disease.
 au ui paois si a usasp ig papaau aq sanoid iaa au
bladder and transported to the intestine through the bile duct. In addi-
tion to bile the small intestine needs bacteria. The bile duct is a one-way
conduit for bile to pass into the duodenum. Inflammatory hepatitis
begins when normal bacteria leave the duodenum and ascend the bile
duct to the gall bladder and liver.
Inflammatory hepatitis is separated into two types: cholangitis/cholan-
giohepatitis complexandlymphocyticportal hepatitis.Clinical signs ofthe
diseases may include anorexia, fever, icterus, vomiting, and weight loss.
Cholangihepatitis means inflammation or infection of the liver, gall blad
der, and bile duct. CCH is further divided into acute and chronic forms.
Acute Cholangitis/Cholangiohepatitis
Bacteria are the primary cause of acute cholangitis/cholangiohepatitis
(CCH). Most access the gall bladder and bile duct by ascension from the 
duodenum; however, bacteria may also reach the liver via the blood
(b)
stream from infections elsewhere in the body. Cats with acute CCH typi-
cally exhibit anorexia, vomiting, lethargy, fever, icterus, and sometimes
abdominal pain. Confirmation is by liver biopsy, with the predominant
inflammatory cells seen on histopathology being neutrophils.
Chronic Cholangitis/Cholangiohepatitis
It is unknown whether chronic CCH is a continuation of acute CCH or an
immune-mediated condition. Some cases have been linked to infection
and parasites. Fever does not usually ocur with chronic CCH. Icterus
and hepatomegaly (liver enlargement) are common findings. Ultrasound 
can reveal changes typical of chronic CCH (Fig.22-4). Confirmation is by
liver biopsy, with the lymphocyte being the predominant inflammatory
Kooouedoo 1o Aotouedotsy uo uaas ia
Lymphocytic Portal Hepatitis
Lymphocytic portal hepatitis (LPH) is inflammation of the area around the
portal triad. The portal triad contains branches of the hepatic artery, hepatic
portal vein, and bile dutbound together within the liverby fibroustissue.
Common linical signs of LPH are anorexia, weight loss, and hepatomeg-
aly. llness resulting from LPH is usually not as severe as with CCH.
Figure 22-4 Ultrasound findings typical of chronic cholangitis/cholangiohepatitis
(CCH) include (a) sludged bile in the gall bladder (arrow) and (b) thickening of the gal
Diagnosis
bladder walls (arrow).
-au euoa  isse o paaio aq lm ssasu
titis so the proper treatment may be administered. Coagulation profiles to
determine the presence of clotting abnormalities may be requested prior to
  is  se   
Acute Cholangitis/Cholangiohepatitis
surgical procedure. Tissues are collected though fine-needle aspirates or
● Antibiotics for treating the infection are the foundation of the treat-
biopsies. Comprehensive blood profiles, urinalysis, abdominal ultrasound,
 ment protocol. Up to 12 weeks of antibiotic therapy may be needed to
liver biopsy, and gal bladder aspirates may be among the first tests ordered.
eliminate the infection.A combination of antibiotics may be pre-
Aerobic and anaerobic cultures of the bile aspirated from the gall bladder
scribed at the discretion of the veterinarian.
may be requested to isolate the type of bacteria causing the infection.
· Ursodeoxycholic acid is a bile acid that improves the flow of bile,
promotes the production of less toxic bile acids, and decreases the
Treatment
immune response to hepatocytes.
S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) and silybin (flavonoid extracted from
 Treatment for inflammatory hepatitis is determined by the type of dis-
milk thistle) are nutraceutical agents that have been shown to have
ease diagnosed. Depending on the severity of the disease some patients
anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties within the liver. These
will need to be hospitalized initially for supportive care including fluid
medications are best absorbed when given on an empty stomach at
 therapy and nutritional support.
least 1 hour before food.
175
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
Chronic Cholangiohepatitis
Table 22-1
 Characteristics of small dowel diarrhea and large bowel diar-
● Antibiotics are usually included in treatment even though most cats
mea. The key to remembering these characteristics is to know that digestion
do not have active liver or bile infections. Up to 6 weeks of antibiotic
 and absorption of nutrients occurs in the small bowel.
 therapy may be needed.
● Glucocorticoids, such as prednisolone, are used to decrease inflam-
Location
Small Bowel
Large Bowel
mation. Prednisolone is created when prednisone is metabolized by
the liver. Because the liver is not functioning normally, prednisolone
#BM per day
1-2
5+
Volume of BM
 Normal 
is more likely to be biologically active than prednisone.
Small
 Ursodeoxycholic acid is used for the same effects as in acute CCH.
Mucus in BM
No
Yes
· S-adenosylmethionine or SAMe plus silybin is used for the same
Red blood in BM
No
Yes
effects as in acute ACH.
Dark blood in BM
Maybe
No
Fat in BM
No
Yes
Urgency
No
Yes
Lymphocytic Portal Hepatitis
Straining 
No
Yes
Weight Loss
Yes
No
· Prednisolone is used to decrease inflammation.
Vomiting
Probably
●Ursodeoxycholic acid is used as for acute CCH.
Maybe
● S-adenosylmethionine or SAMe plus silybin is used as for acute
BM, bowel movement
CCH.
Chronic Vomiting
Prognosis
 The prognosis of a cat with inflammatory hepatitis will depend on the
for cat owners to report vomiting that began infrequently (less than once
severity of the disease, the integrity of the cat's immune system, and the
 per 60 days) then slowly (over months to years) increased in frequency to
compliance of the owner for medium- to long-term treatment. Many cats
 o   ad      - 
with acute CCH recover completely without any long-term effects. Cats
Ma e o Aep ad sposida leaas apnun Aeu iy ua jo ssanq
with chronic CCH or LPH need long-term or recurrent treatment.
days. In general, these cats show little, if any, other clinical signs, which
is why owners tolerate it. Because hair is often vomited, owners fre-
Vomiting
quently attribute it to hairballs. These cats need testing to determine the
diagnosis because most of them have inflammatory bowel disease or
Vomiting may be classified as acute (less than 3 days in duration) or
intestinal lymphoma. Both diseases can produce thickening of the small
intestinal walls, which can be verified with ultrasound. Both are diag-
chronic (more than 14 days in duration). Acute vomiting is common in
cats to the point that some think (incorrectly) that some vomiting is "nor-
nosed with full-thickness biopsies of the affected areas of the small
mal" for cats, especially when hairballs are involved. Chronic or recur-
bowel. Food intolerance is another cause of chronic vomiting, although
ring vomiting is also common and often accepted by cat owners as
most of these cats have severe itching in the head and neck area. See
normal feline behavior.
Chapter 21. Food trials with novel protein diets (rabbit, duck, or venison)
or hyd rolyzed diets are used for diagnosis and treatment.
Irritative Gastritis
Diarrhea
 There are two things that are commonly swallowed by cats that cause
stomach irritation and result in acute vomiting: hair and grass.
Diarrhea can also be classified as acute or chronic based on its duration.
Cats shed hair, and cats groom. This results in swallowing of hair. The
It is also classified as to the site of origin, being either small bowel diar-
swallowed hair must either be vomited or pass in the stool. Thus, cats
rhea, large bowel diarrhea, or a combination (Table 22-1).
that are compulsive groomers or cats with long hair are predisposed to
vomiting hairballs.
Acute Diarrhea
Many cats that vomit large hairballs willremain nauseous for 24 hours
following hairball expulsion. Symptomatic treatment to prevent further
Diarrhea of less than 3 days duration is considered to be acute. It is often
vomiting and corect or prevent dehydration may be need in some cats.
as a result of dietary indiscretions, but many cases come and go without
 Most cats that eat grass do so because they like the taste of it. Most
a confirmed diagnosis. Symptomatic treatment, consisting of antidiar-
grasses are hard to digest and irritate the stomach lining. Thus, vomiting
rheal medications and enteric-type diets may be all that is needed for
of grass and other stomach contents follows. This is contrary to the
 normal stools to return.
widely held belief that cats eat grass to ca use themselves to vomit.
Chronic Diarrhea
Foreign Bodies
Diarrhea of 14 days or more duration is considered to be chronic.
Cats are not as prone to ingesting foreign objects as dogs. However, this
Intestinal parasites are a common cause, especially in kittens and in cats
event usually occurs when they are playing with objects and accidently
from multicat situations (shelters, catteries, or homes). Fecal flotation is
swallow them, resulting in another common cause of acute vomiting.
the first test to be performed. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests for
Small objects, such as hair bands and ear plugs, may be swallowed then
parasites of lesser frequency, such as Giardia, Tritrichomonas, and
pass into the small intestine. Obstructions, requiring the need for surgical
Cryptosporidium, should be considered if fecal flotation is negative.
removal, may result. Swallowing linear objects, such as dental floss, sew-
 Chronic diarrhea may also be diet related or the result of chronic small
ing thread, string, and ribbon, is also common. If the linear object is
bowel disease as mentioned previously. Most cases of chronic diarrhea
ad a jo yu au paanxa m hl u  e uu a
require more than symptomatic treatment. Various tests are indicated
waves and become trapped in the small intestine. This also requires sur-
based on the characteristics of the diarrhea (see Table 22-1), other clinical
gical removal for the cat to survive.
signs present, and resources available by the client and the veterinarian.
176
Diseases of the Digestive Systerm
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
wheat, and corn should be fed exclusively. Supplementing additional
fiber in the form of psyllium or canned pumpkin has also been beneficial
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is not a specific disease. The term
for some cats. Immunosuppressive therapies may be prescribed to
describes a group of intestinal diseases characterized by chronic abnor-
suppress the exuberant inflammatory reaction of the GI tract. Secondary
mal Gl signs and infiltration of inflammatory cells into the Gl mucosa.
therapies that may be prescribed include probiotics, prebiotics,
These cells can be identified through histopathology. The form of the dis-
cobalamin, fatty acids, and metronidazole.
ease is classified by the predominant inflammatory cells present. For
IBD is not curable. In most cases diet and medications control the
example, the most common form, lymphocytic-plasmacytic IBD, is so
symptoms. Some cats are able to be weaned off medications and remain
named because lymphocytes and plasma cells are the primary types of
symptom free with dietary therapy alone.
inflammatory cells present in the mucosa. Eosinophilic IBD is the second 
most common form. Less common forms include granulomatous, neu-
trophilic, and histiocytic gastroenteritis.
Suggested Readings
 The most common clinical sign of IBD is chronic intermittent vomit-
ing. Other clinical signs include anorexia, weight loss, and intermittent 
Bassert JM. 2008. Nutrients and Metabolism. In T Colville, JM Bassert,
eds.,Clinical Anatomyand PhysiolgyforVeterinaryTechnicians,2nded,
extended period of time.
pp. 283-313. St. Louis: Mosby Inc.
 Diagnostic tests to rule out alternative causes of Gl disease should be
Colville T. 2008. The Digestive System. In T Colville, JM Bassert, eds.,
performed. These tests may include a CBC, chemistry profile, total thy-
Clinical Anatomy and Physiology for Veterinary Technicians, 2nd ed.,
roxine, urinalysis, and fecal examination for parasitic and bacterial
pp. 281-82. St. Louis: Mosby Inc.
agents. The most essential diagnostic test for IBD is a microscopic assess-
Gilbert, SG. 1997. Pictorial Anatomy of the Cat, revised ed. Seatle:
aq Ae sdues anss Xsdoa leuun ue jo isionoed e Aq suu
 University of Washington Press.
obtained during exploratory laparotomy, laparoscopy, or endoscopy.
Grace SF. 2011. Hepatitis, Inflammatory. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The 
 The goals of treatment are to reduce and prevent stimulation and to
Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 184-86. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
decrease the overactive immune response of the GI tract. A hydrolyzed
Norsworthy GD. 2010. Hepatic Lipidosis. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
diet or a diet containing a unique protein source that is free of milk,
Feline Patient, 4th ed., Pp. 220-21. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
177
CHAPTER 23
Endocrine Diseases
Linda E. Schmeltzer
Overview
Clinical Signs
The endocrine system works together with the nervous system to
manage the functions of all body systems. The nervous system accom-
accompanied by weight loss. Essentily the catis eating more in an effort
plishes its tasks by sending nerve impulses to muscles or glands.
to compensate for the weight loss caused by the increase in metabolism.
These impulses cause muscles to contract or glands to secrete. The
1eut [enpeia os aq Aeu ssol rubtam aut aseasi aul jo saseis Aiuea au u
endocrine system releases hormones from glands or organs that are
some owners are not aware it has occurred; however, rapid weight loss
absorbed into the bloodstream and delivered to all of the cells and
occurs as the disease progresses. Increased water intake and urine output,
tissues throughout the body. Hormones have many functions, such as
vomiting, and diarrhea have also been reported with hyperthyroidism.
controlling metabolism and regulating growth and development. The
endocrine glands include the pituitary gland, thyroid gland, parathy-
Diagnosis
roid glands, and adrenal glands. The organs containing cells that
secrete hormones but are not exclusively endocrine glands include
 The normal thyroid gland is not palpable; with hyperthyroidism,
the kidneys, stomach, small intestine, and pancreas. For the purposes
enlargement of one or both lobes may occur. It is possible to palpate
of this chapter, an overview of the pancreas and thyroid gland will be
 enlarged thyroid lobes (see Fig. 1-3). As the thyroid lobes enlarge, they
covered.
migrate ventrally down the neck. In some cases they may descend
 The thyroid gland is located in the neck. It consists of a right and left
through the thoracic inlet, making them nonpalpable. The cat has clus-
lobe located on either side of the trachea (Fig. 23-1). Iodide is taken from
ters of ectopic(not in the normal location) thyroid tissue in the neck from
the blood and stored within the thyroid gland. Iodide is then combined
the base of the tongue to the base of the heart. About 5% of hyperthyroid
with the amino acid tyrosine to prod uce two of the thyroid hormones: T,
cats have a tumor that originates in ectopic tissue instead of one of the
(triiodothyronine) and T, (thyroxine or tetraiodothyronine). The hor-
thyroid lobes. If an ectopic thyroid tumor is in the chest, it is also not 
mone name indicates how many iodine atoms each molecule of hormone
palpable.
contains, three and four, respectively. Most T, is converted into T, by the 
 Based on clinical signs or thyroid palpation, a veterinarian will order
removal of one iodine molecule as it circulates in the blood stream and
a total T, level. This blood test can be run in clinic on some laboratory
enters cells. T, is the active, more potent, hormone. The normal thyroid
equipment and is also available at commercial laboratories. In some hos-
secretes greater quantities of T, than T. T, and T, have several functions,
pitals, a total T level is part of routine screening in geriatric patients. An
one of which is controlling the conversion of proteins, carbohydrates,
elevated T, level confirms a hyperthyroidism diagnosis in a cat that has
and lipids for energy.
appropriate clinical signs.
The pancreas is located in the abdomen. It is connected to the duode-
 In some cats, the T, level is within normal range but hyperthyroidism
num by the pancreatic duct. The organ has both endocrine and exocrine
is still suspected because of clinical signs. In these cases, a T, suppression
functions. The exocrine tissues produce enzymes that aid in food diges-
test may be ordered. This test requires an initial blood sample collection,
tion. The endocrine tissues in the pancreas are known as pancreatic islets
followed by the administration of T, in tablet form every eight hours for
or islets of Langerhans. The pancreatic islets contain alpha cells that
seven doses. A postpill blood sample is collected 2-4hours after the last
secrete thehormone glucagon,beta cells that produce insulin, and dta
dose. Both samples are submitted to a commercial laboratory for total T
cells that produce somatostatin. Insulin moves glucose out of the blood -
and total T, testing. The timing of medication administration and collec-
stream and into the cells, lowering the blood glucose level. Glucagon
tion of the postpill sample are extremely important. When the test is per-
raises the blood glucose level in two ways: (1) stimulating the liver to
formed properly, it is extremely accurate.
convert glycogen to glucose and (2) causing the formation of glucose
 The free T, (fT) is another thyroid test that has been used to diagnose
from lactic acid and amino acids. Somatostatin inhibits the secretion of
hyperthyroidism. However, free T, can be elevated in nonthyroid dis-
insulin and glucagon and slows absorption of nutrients from the gastro-
ease, so its specificity for hyperthyroidism is not ideal.
intestinal tract.
Secondary Complications
Hyperthyroidism
Thyrotoxic Cardiomyopathy
Hyperthyroidism is caused by an overproduction of the thyroid hor-
Increased metabolic demand stimulates the heart to pump faster and
mone Tq, resulting in a persistent increase in the metabolic rate. About
more forcefully In response to the increased demand, the heart muscle
a pue pionau au uum shon uuaq aay sie paoae jo %gh
o  e si () eoeo oixnu  pue aeua m
other 2% have malignant thyroid tumors. The primary cause of hyper-
cardiomyopathy resulting in thickening of the left ventricular walls. On
thyroidism is unknown. The disease has been reported in cats 4 to 22
years old. The majority of affected cats are older than 10 years old; the
S  m  m   (  )
average age is 13 years. Males and females are equally affected.
resolved.
Hy pertension
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
Hypertension (high blood pressure) will develop as an effect of increased
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 pumping pressure of the heart. If the blood pressure becomes too high,
178
Endocrine Diseases
Masked Kidney Disease
Hyperthyroidism can mask kidney disease. High blood pressure
increases blood flow through the kidneys, resulting in more efficient
function. When hyperthyroidism is treated, the heart rate falls to normal,
the blood pressure goes down and the blood flow through the kidneys
returns to normal, exposing previously hidden kidney disease.
Treatment
There are two phases to treatment. The initial phase involves administra-
tion of methimazole, a drug that directly prevents the production of thy-
roid hormone by preventing iodine from combining with tyrosine. The
 purpose of this phase is to stabilize the cat by reducing the elevated heart
rate and stopping the weight loss, vomiting, and diarrhea. Methimazole
is usually given for 2 to 4 weeks and the dosage may have to be adjusted
several times before this is accomplished. The T, and kidney function
should be rechecked until the T is normal. Some cats experience adverse
reactions to methimazole, the most common of which are loss of appetite
and vomiting. If kidney insufficiency is revealed, treatment for that dis-
ease may need to be started before moving to phase two of the treatment
process. See Chapter 30.
 There are three treatment choices available in phase two of treatment
for hyperthyroidism. Many factors come into consideration when choos-
ing the best therapy for the individual cat, so any one of these may the
correct approach to any given cat.
Long-term Medication
Long-term administration of methimazole is an effective treatment for
hyperthyroidism. The drug is administered to the cat for the remainder
of its life because methimazole only stops the production of thyroid hor-
mone and does not destroy the overactive tissue or the tumor. Side
effects to methimazole may begin as long as 6 months after the begin-
Figure 23-1  The normal thyroid lobes are highlighted in this scintigraphy study. The
ning of the treatment. Because the tumor is not destroyed, it continues to
uptake in the salivary glands (1} and the normal thyroid lobes (2) should be approxi-
enlarge and produce more T. Consequently, the cat will need to have
mately equal. Hyperthyroid cats will have increased uptake in the affected lobe(s).
routine examinations and T, levels checked so the dose can be adjusted
accordingly.
Surgery
Surgical removal of one or both thyroid lobes (throidectomy) is an effec-
tive treatment for hyperthyroidism (Fig. 23-3). Anesthesia is necessary,
Figure 23-2  Hypertension may be caused by hyperthyroidism and can result in retinal
hemorrhage and detachment. Both of this cat's pupils are dilated, and hemorrhage from
 the left retina has seeped into the anterior chamber.
retinal hemorrhage (abnormal bleeding of the blood vessels in the mem-
brane in the back of the eye) can occur. Retinal hemorrhage will cause
blurred or decreased vision. If hypertension becomes too great, retinal
detachment can occur, causing the retina to pull away from the outer part
Figure 23-3  Thyroidectomy is the surgical removal of one or both thyroid lobes. It is
of the eyeball. This will result in sudden blindness (Fig. 23-2).
 one of the three treatment options for hyperthyroid cats.
179
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
meaning the patient will need to be stable and healthy enough to undergo
complete blood profile because many cats with DM have a bacterial uri-
the procedure. Even if both thyroid lobes are removed, the cat rarely
nary tract infection. A blood test for pancreatitis (feline pancreatic lipase
develops hypothyroidism because the ectopic thyroid tissues are stimu-
immunoreactivity [fPLl]) may also be ordered because about 50% of
lated and begin producing thyroid hormone. The most common and
newly diagnosed diabetics have this disease. Bacterial cystitis and pan-
severe complication of this surgery is hypocalcemia (low blood calcium
creatitis are known causes of insulin resistance.
levels as a result of parathyroid damage during thyroid surgery.
tion if the cat has complicated diabetes, known as diabetic ketoacidosis.
Supplemental feeding may be needed until the cat begins to feel better
Radiation Therapy
and eat on its own. Short-acting insulin may be administered to stabilize
glucose levels during hospitalization.
Radioactive iodine, radioiodine, or I3' (also referred to as I3'1) is only
 Once the cat is stabilized, the long-term goal of treatment is to control
available through facilities that have been licensed by the state to
the clinical signs. This is accomplished by managing the blood glucose
administer radiation therapy. When radioactive iodine is injected, the
level so that it remains within the normal range or as close to normal as
body recognizes it as iodine and directs it to the thyroid gland. Once
possible. This goal is accomplished with insulin, diet, and careful glucose
in the thyroid gland, the radioactive iodine destroys the thyroid tumor
monitoring.
and disrupts the function of the overactive cells. Normal thyroid tis-
sue is preserved and continues to function. The treatment is relatively
simple, safe, and reported effective in 95% of cats when dosed cor-
Diet
rectly. The cat must be hospitalized post treatment until the cat's emit-
ted radiation level drops below a certain level, as dictated by the
Research has shown that feeding a low carbohydrate diet can increase
regulations of the state.
chances for remission. There are commercial therapeutic diets available
 ae s a eo  re p s ae i
palatable, but not all cats easily accept a new diet. The owner may need
Prognosis
 change alone controls DM in 15% to 30% of cats, and remission is more
 Most cats have an excellent prognosis when properly treated for hyper-
likely when a canned low carbohydrate diet is fed exclusively.
thyroidism. Recurrence is a possibility in some cats but is unlikely.
Insulin
Diabetes Mellitus
 Insulin can be manufactured from the pancreas of pigs (pork insulin),
There are two diseases called diabetes: diabetes insipidus and diabetes
pancreas of cattle (beef insulin), or a combination of the two. It can also
mellitus (DM). Diabetes insipidus is a rare disorder in cats that originates
be engineered in a laboratory setting (recombinant insulin). Insulins are
in the brain or kidneys. DM is fairly common, affecting about 1 in 200
cats. The average onset of diabetes mellitus is 10 to 13 years. Male cats are
Duration refers to how they differ in their onset, peak, and length of time
twice as likely to develop the disease.
they remain in the cat's body Insulin is available in concentrations of 40
 DM is failure of the pancreas to regulate blood glucose levels. There
units/ml (U40) and 100 units/ml (U100). The number identifies the
shnsau Na I adAl ' adAi pue I adAi :sueunq ul NQ jo sadAi omi ane
number of active units of insulin in each milliliter of liquid. There are
from total destruction of the beta cells that produce insulin. Type Il DM
corresponding syringes to use for the measurement of each concentra-
causes insulin resistance, meaning that insulin, even if produced in suf-
tion of insulin. Using the incorrect syringe would result in over- or
ficient amount, is not able to work properly to control blood glucose lev-
underdosing the cat.
els. Most diabetic cats have features of Type I and Type Il diabetes.
Long-acting insulin, such as protamine zinc insulin, is prescribed in
Insulin production is reduced, and insulin resistance makes that cat's
most cases. Owners may initially be uncomfortable with the thought of
insulin less effective than normal. If the causes of insulin resistance can
giving injections. However, the insulin needle is so small (27- to 29-gauge)
be determined and reversed, many cats will go into diabetic remission.
that most cats do not react to the injection, helping make the owner feel
However, if their insulin production is significantly subnormal, insulin
more comfortable with the procedure. Injections are needed twice a day,
injections will still be needed.
preferably 12 hours apart.
 The classic signs of DM are weight loss, polyuria, and polydipsia.
Without an adequate amount of insulin, glucose is unable to move from
the blood into the cells, leaving them starved for energy. In response to
Monitoring
the cells' need for energy, the body begins to break down stored fat and
protein as alternative energy sources, resulting in weight loss. The body
Monitoring is a joint project in which owners, veterinarians, and techni-
will try to get rid of the excess glucose in the blood by eliminating it in
cians must work together. Home monitoring of the cat's appetite, body
the urine. Glucose attracts water and will take large quantities of fluids
weight, water consumption, and urine output are essential. Close moni-
with it, resulting in large amounts of urine production (polyuria). To
 toring of the cat's daily habits are important for establishing how well
avoid dehydration, the cat drinks more and more water (polydipsia).
the DM is controlled. During each recheck visit in the hospital, the owner 
o dn eu o sn i se anadde snoun e aaey eu ie au 
should be asked about changes in appetite, water consumption, and
the breakdown of energy stores to supply the cells. As the disease pro-
urine output. Specifically, whether any of these have increased or
gresses without treatment, the cat becomes anorexic and lethargic.
decreased since the last check up and how close to normal (pre-illness)
The diagnosis of DM is based upon these three clinical signs and a
they are. The cat's general attitude and activity level are also important
persistently high blood glucose level accompanied by glucose in the
indications of how well the DM is controlled. A weight chart should be
urine. Clinical signs are present once blood glucose concentrations exceed
kept to monitor trends. Adjustment of insulin dosage should be based on
14-16mmol/dl (250-290mg/dL). Stress can also increase the blood glu-
clinical signs and blood test results. Rechecks will be scheduled as neces-
cose level, but it usually returns to normal within a few hours. The kid-
 sary at the discretion of the veterinarian. Some veterinarians will equip
neys do not filter glucose out of the urine until it has reached excessive
and train diabetic cat owners to collect blood and test glucose values at
levels; therefore, glucose in the urine is used to differentiate DM from
home. There are pros and cons to this approach that need to be weighed
stress hyperglycemia. A urine culture may be ordered in addition to a
by the veterinarian in charge of the case.
180
Endocrine Diseases
a few days to as long as many months. Prognosis of DM is good if it can
Hypoglycemia
 be controlled well or if remission can be achieved. Good owner compli-
Hypoglycemia, or low blood glucose, can be life-threatening. It is most 
ance is the greatest determinant of success.
likely to occur at the peak insulin effect, about 6 hours after an insulin
-odsaun aq pue pai seadde Ae enuaoday um ies y uooalu
sive when called. It may appear unsteady when it stands and walk
 Suggested Readings
with a stagger. If severe hypoglycemia occurs, it may have seizures or
Colville T. 2008. The Endocrine System. In T Colville, JM Bassert, eds.,
stand the clinical signs and to know when veterinary attention should
Clinical Anatomy and Physiology for Veterinary Technicians, 2nd ed.,
be sought.
pp. 358-73. St. Louis: Mosby Inc.
Gilbert SG. 1997. Pictorial Anatomy of the Cat, revised ed., Pp. 40, 48-50,
 Prognosis and Remission
 67. Seatle: University of Washington Press.
 Norsworthy GD. 2010. Diabetes Mellitus: Chronic Complications. In GD
Norsworthy, ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 113-14. Ames: Wiley-
 causes of insulin resistance are remedied or if the pancreas spontane-
Blackwell.
ously begins to produce a normal amount of insulin. Remission can
Norsworthy GD, Crystal M. 2010. Hyperthyroidism. In GD Norsworthy.
occur suddenly, sending the cat into a hypoglycemic crisis after a few
ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 256-60. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
 doses of insulin. Owners with a cat in remission should monitor closely
 Rand J. 2011. Diabetes: Uncomplicated. In GD Norsworthy,ed., The Feline
for the typical signs of DM because it is likely to return within as little as
Patient,4th ed., pp. 118-19. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
181
CHAPTER 24
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus
Teija Kaarina Viita-aho
Overview
Primary Phase
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), formerly known as the
Nonspecific signs, such as lethargy, anorexia, enteritis, or respiratory
T-lymphotropic lentivirus (FTLV), is a retrovirus that belongs to the len-
signs, may occur. In some cats clinical signs of the primary phase are
mild and go unnoticed by the owner. A transient period of fever and
tivirus genus. It is closely related to the human immunodeficiency virus
lymphadenopathy usually begins about 10 days afer infection. If the
(HIV), but because these viruses are species specific, transmission
infection occurs during the neonatal period lymphadenopathy may per-
between humans and cats does not occur. FIV was discovered in 1986,
sist for life, whereas it is transient if it occurs in kittens and young cats.
but it probably existed for several years, if not decades, prior to that date.
The virusisendemicinthe cat population worldwide,but the prevalence
In adult cats lymphadenopathy is usually undetectable. In addition to
fever and lymphadenopathy neutropenia is a hallmark of this primary
varies greatly geographically. The prevalence is higher in Oceania and
phase. Neutropenia occurs 6-8 weeks after infection and increases sus-
Asia than Europe and North America. FIV is divided in subtypes, also
ceptibility to secondary bacterial infections. A decrease in CD4+
called clades, of which subtypes A and B are most common in Europe
T-lymphocytes begins around 4 weeks after infection. Neurological
and B most common in North America. Only subtype A has been
 reported in the United Kingdom.
signs may occur in the primary phase and include anisocoria, delayed
pupillary light reflexes, delayed righting reflex, and alterations in the
sleeping pattern. Of FIV infected cats, 50% spend more time awake than
Transmission
healthy cats.
 The most common route of transmission is via bites because virus is shed
in the saliva of infected cats. Cats that show clinical signs, particularly
Prolonged Asymptomatic Phase of Infection
cats. Cats that have access to the outdoors where they interact and fight
Following the primary phase of infection there is a prolonged period of
with other cats are at the highest risk for infection. Feral cats, especially
asymptomatic infection in most infected cats. Most cats recover from
intact males and cats with large territories, are the most likely to fight
the first phase well and appear normal for months or years before clin-
and be bitten. The likelihood of infection increases by age because of pro-
ical signs related to immunodeficiency appear. The asymptomatic
 u m si  po ad u axa  p
period occurs because the virus can be suppressed at low levels.
younger than 1 year of age and highest in cats older than 6 years of age.
Nevertheless, total clearance of the virus does not occur, and the cat
Nonpedigree cats are more commonly infected as a result of greater
remains infected for life. The length of the asymptomatic phase varies
exposure to free-roaming cats outdoors.
from several months to several years; the duration is unpredictable
Transmission from mother to kitten occurs. Infection can be transmit-
because there are many contributing factors. They include the age of
ted in utero or later through milk or saliva. If infection occurs in utero
the cat at the time of infection, the infective viral dose, the route of
arrested fetal development, abortion, stillbirth, and subnormal birth
infection,and subtype-related pathogenicity.During the asymptomatic
weight may occur, but most kittens are born clinically normal.
phase the cat's immune status progressively deteriorates because the
Even though virus is shed in saliva, transmission of infection via
virus destroys CD4+ T-cells eventually leading to development of clin-
grooming, food, and water bowls is not likely because the virus does not
ical signs.
remain infective long in the environment and is destroyed by common
disinfectants such as soap. However, transmission in a closed population
of cats without a history of fighting has been reported.
Terminal Phase, Progressive Immunodeficiency
latrogenic infection resulting from the use of infected surgical instru-
Syndrome (AIDS)
ments or transmission of infected blood is possible. Penile to vaginal
-sen sg u haer y iaun si  unp A jo uisssn
In the terminal phase clinical signs are the result of immunodeficiency.
mission is as a result of a tom cat's tendency to bite the queen's neck
Clinical signs vary greatly and are nonspecific. They are due to second-
during mating. Transmission by blood-sucking insects is not significant.
 in ssa  an u pe su e
Diseases of the oral cavity, respiratory tract, and gastrointestinal tract
predominate. Oral cavity diseases such as chronic lymphoplasmacytic
Clinical Signs
gingivitis-stomatitis occur in 56% of the infected cats (Fig. 24-1). Chronic
Infection is lifelong and is divided in three phases: primary phase, pro-
pue '-  suaed jo %te ui sno aseasp ioe Aroeadsu sadn
chronic enteritis causing persistent diarrhea in 19% of patients.
longed asymptomatic phase, and terminal phase (acquired immunodefi-
Ciency syndrome [AIDS]). The primary phase of infection occurs shortly
Additionally, lethargy, depression, nausea, vomiting, inappetence or
anorexia, weight loss, chronic skin disease, recurrent or frequent
after infection. This phase is followed by a subclinical and asymptomatic
abscesses, recurrentcystitis, and pyrexia may ccur Chronic conjunctivi
phase. Clinical signs during the progressive immunodeficiency syn-
tis occurs in ll% of infected cats. Other inflammatory ocular diseases
drome are either the result of an active viral replication or of immune
may occur including keratitis, uveitis, ocular discharge, glaucoma, chori-
suppression ca used by the virus.
oretinitis, and retinal hemorrhage. Approximately 5% of cats have neuro-
logical abnormalities such as dementia, behavioral changes, ataxia, and
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
sa 'sui a suaou ue i  aa uaq sy an
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
leukemias, and other tumors may also occur in infected cats.
182
FelineImmunodeficiency Virus
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), but if the FIV is present the disease is much more
dlificult to manage.
Figure 24-3 Otitis externa is not a common disease in cats as it is in dogs. When
present, one should look for an underlying disease or disease agent such as feline immu-
nodeficiency virus.
Diagnosis
Figure 24-2 Immunosuppression induced by feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV} con-
tributes to various chronic infectious processes, including chronic rhinosinusitis.
Diagnosis of FIV is based on demonstrating FIV-specific antibodies in
serum or plasma. There are in-house enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) test kits for FIV that are easy to use and give results within
Laboratory Changes
10-15 minutes. The most commonly used test kit (IDEXX Laboratories) is
based on whole blood.
 Hematologic changes are common but nonspecific and vary depending
 The presence of antibodies isstrongevidence of infection. Nevertheless,
on the phase of the disease. Multiple abnormalities occur in 54% of
because false-positives may occur, confirmation should be made with a
infected cats, and 17% of cats have single ones. In the primary phase
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test, which is not as sensitive but is
neutropenia is common. Neutrophilia may follow in the presence of sec-
more specific.
ondary infections. Lymphopenia, progressive anemia, and monocytosis
 In the early stage of infection (during the first 2-4 weeks), antibodies
often occur in later stages. Biochemically, elevations in serum proteins,
are usually not present in the blood. Most cats have positive test results
within 60 days of infection, but rarely, some may require 6 months or
sent consistently and is progressive.
more. Therefore, testing should be repeated 60 or more days after the last
possible exposure if there is a possibility of infection. Some cats may
never produce enough antibodies to be detected by an ELISA test thus
Other Concomitant Diseases
creating a diagnostic challenge. Conversely, cats in the terminal phase of
infection may have undetectable antibody levels resulting in false-nega-
Concurrent or opportunistic infections are common because of a sup-
tive test results.
pressed immune system. These include demodicosis, toxoplasmosis,
 If the cat has been vaccinated with FlV vaccine, the antibody test result
cowpox, notoedric mange, bacterial cystitis, hemotropic mycoplasms,
will be positive because the test is not able to distinguish vaccine-related
calici virus infection, herpesvirus infection, bacterial pneumonia, sys-
antibodies from antibodies of natural infection. Vaccine induced anti-
temiccandidiasis, coccidiosis,pyothorax,bartonellosis, and otitis externa
bodies persist for about 2-3 years. IDEXX Laboratories offers a PCR test
(Fig. 24-3).
for FIV that is not affected by vaccination. It is about S0% sensitive and
183
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
nearly 100% specific. It should be used in cats with a positive ELISA test
 cats that live with a cat infected with FIV or cats that have unsupervised
and with an unknown vaccination history.
access outdoors.
-a uaaq sey ieut uaanb e ot so uanb paoajui-al ue ot uroq suaii
 There are other preventative measures that should be considered
cinated against FIV usually get FIV-antibodies via colostrum. Therefore,
 including keeping the cat as an indoor-only pet or having a restricted,
kittens that test positive should be retested immediately with the PCR
enclosed area outdoors to prevent any direct contact with other cats,
test or with the ELISA test after 6 months of age. It is highly unlikely for
especially feral and stray. If the cat goes outdoors, keeping it indoors at
maternal antibodies to persist after 6 months of age.
night helps to reduce fighting behavior. Pure-bred cat breeding colonies 
 Other possible means for diagnosis are virus isolation and in situ
should have negative FIV status, and breeding cats should not have
hybridization. However, these are research tests that are not commer-
access outdoors or have contact with cats that have access outdoors.
cially available to practitioners.
Additionally, regular testing is important.
Therapy
Vaccination
FV is an incurable infection. Currently there are no specific antiviral
 There is an inactivated FIV vaccine available in some countries. It con-
drugs that are effective against it. Some HIV-drugs may be effective in
tains subtypes A and D, and there is cross-protection against subtype B.
slowing down the progression of FIV. Nevertheless, none of those drugs
The American Association of Feline Practitioners considers it a "non-
can be routinely recommended for cats. Azidothymidine (AZT) is one of
core" vaccine because many cats are not at risk of FIV infection; there-
the HIV drugs that may be beneficial in cats positive for FIV with chronic
fore, a cat's need for FIV vaccine should be evaluated on an individual
gingivostomatitis.
basis. FIV vaccination should be started at 8 weeks of age or older. Three
Treatment is mainly symptomatic and supportive including antibiot-
injections should be given at 2- to 3-week intervals followed by annual
ics when needed for secondary infections, fluid therapy, and possibly
boosters.
 blood transfusions in case of severe anemia. Several immune stimulants
have been used in cats with FlV, most without significant response. The
exception is Oxstrin, a nutraceutical product that has been shown to
 Prognosis
improve several immune markers in cats infected with FIV.
FIV is lifelong, progressive infection that often leads to severe illness or
death. As the disease progresses the clinical signs become more persis-
 Management and Prevention
 tent and more severe. Approximately 20% will die during the first phase
It is important to understand that FIV infection is not solely a reason for
of the infection, but up to 50% of cats will remain asymptomatic for 4-6
years after infection. The prognosis depends on when the diagnosis is
euthanasia. Cats may live normal lives for years despite the infection.
Regular check-ups are recommended (at least every 6 months) to detect
made related to disease phase. If the diagnosis occurs during the first or
asymptomatic phase, theremaybemanyyears of normal life ahead.ut
any changes in clinical status and manage possible secondary infections
if the diagnosis is made when the cat already has signs related to immu-
a ui uadxa al aeraae ai rood si sisd au auaao
care and regular vaccinations, is important. It is recommended by some
to use inactivated vaccines in cats with FIV because of immunosuppres-
terminal stage of the disease is less than a year.
sion. Attention should be paid to feeding high quality food, and if weight
loss appears, a change to palatable food with high caloric density is rec-
 Suggested Readings
ommended. Any unnecessary stress should be avoided because stress is
known to suppress the immune system. Keeping the infected cat indoors
Harbour DA, Caney SMA, Sparkes AH. 2004. Feline Immunodeficiency
Or only in a restricted area outdoors reduces both the risk for secondary
Virus Infection. In EA Chandler, CJ Gaskell, RM Gaskell, eds., Feline
infections and transmitting the infection forward to other cats. If the
Medicine and Therapeutics, 3rd ed., pp. 607-22. Ames: Blackwell.
infected cat still continues go outdoors neutering is essential to red uce
Sparkes AH, Hopper CD, Millard W,et al. 1993. Feline Immunodeficiency
the tendency to fight.
Virus Infection: Clinicopathologic Findings in 90 Naturally Occurring
Cats that live in the same household with an infected cat have only
Cases. J Vet Intern Med. 7:85-90.
minimal risk for infection if hostility and fighting do not occur.
Grace SF. 2010. Feline Immunodeficiency Virus Infection. In GD
However, the safest course is to separate the infected cat from nonin-
Norsworthy, ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 179-80. Ames: Wiley
fected cats. FlV vaccine should be considered for exposed cats,including
Blackwell.
184
CHAPTER 25
Feline Infectious Peritonitis
Linda E. Schmeltzer
Overview
Fever, lethargy, and appetite suppression are also common. The dry, or
noneffusive, form primarily affects abdominal organs, the eyes, and the
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is a fatal viral disease of domestic cats.
central nervous system (CNS). There may be symptoms related to failure
Itis caused by the feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV), a virus in the
coronavirus family. FIPV is a mutation of the feline enteric coronavirus
are also associated with this form of FIP (Fig. 25-2). CNS signs may
(FECV), another virus in the coronavirus family.
include personality change, weakness in the hind legs, lack of coordina-
tion, head tilt, circling, or seizures.
Transmission and Prevalence
Diagnosis
FECV is an intestinal virus that usually causes either no symptoms or
mild symptoms, such as diarrhea. The virus is shed through feces, urine,
Diagnosis can be difficult beca use there are no specific tests reliable for
and nasal and salivary secretions and is easily passed to other cats on
diagnosis other than histopathology with immunohistochemical staining
objects such as clothing or countertops. It is especially difficult to control 
sAemle pou st Asdoq ueio jueaalan Kiateuogun ueaio paae ue jo
exposure in shelters, catteries,or households with large numbers of cats.
Kittens become infected with the virus about 3 to 5 weeks of age if their
mothers are shedding it. Once a cat is infected with FECV it will carry the 
(b)
virus for the rest of its life.
At some point during an infected cat's life, the virus within the cells may
mutate from FECV to FIPV. This is more likely to occur in kittens, presuma-
bly because of their reduced immunity and the rapid replication of the virus.
The cause of the mutation is not known and happens to about 20% of cats
infected with FECV. However, only a small number of cats that carry the
FIPV actually become il with FIPbecause most cats have a rapid and strong
immune response. Male and female cats are affected equally. The mutation
'plo siea z ueu haunoA steo ui sinooo Aensn ssau dle jo jasuo pue
clinical Signs
There are two forms of FlP. The most common form is the effusive, or
wet, form. Fuid may accumulate in thechest, causing dyspnea(diffculty
breathing), or in the abdomen, causing a bloated appearance (Fig. 25-1).
(a)
Figure 25-1 The effusive ("wet") form of feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) causes
fuid to collect in the thoracic or abdominal cavities. (a)This lateral thoracic radiograph
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
shows pleural effusion causing compression of the lung lobes; however, pleural effu-
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
 sions can be caused by many diseases. (b) Thoracentesis of a few milliters of fluids 
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
185
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
(c)
(f)
(d)
(g)
(e)
Figure 25-1 (cont'd)  (c The thorax has been opened showing white granulomas on
syl (pi aneds einad aui uum pin aa pue (anpid aul o jauanj unpiejad au
lateral abdominal radiograph shows ascites (fluid) in the abdomen. It has the same
radiographic density as the abdominal organs so there is a uniform white appearance
present. The dark lines are gas pockets in the intestinal tract. (e}Abdominal distension
is obvious in thiskitten as a result offluid buildup in the abdomen. f When the abdo-
men is opened at necropsy,fluid runs out. (g) This abdomen has free fluid present. Note
the white granulomas on several loops of small intestine.
Images courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
186
FelineInfectiousPeritonitis
(a)
(d)
(b)
e
(c)
Figure 25-2 The noneffusive ("dry") form of feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) affects various organs causing masses (granulomas) to form. (a) This liver has several small granulomas.
(b) This liver has several very large granulomas. (c) The medullary rim sign can be caused by several diseases including FlP. The arrows point to the hyperechoic line that occurs in the
outer zone ofthe medulla parallel to the corticomedullary junction. (d) Small FIP granulomas are seen throughout the cortex and medulla of this young cat. (e) Several large granulomas
are seen in these kidneys.When this size the kidneys have a “lumpy, bumpy" feel when palpated. (f Dry FIP may also be a cause ofuveitis. The irises change colors and white precipitates
form in the anterior chamber.
187
 SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
practical either as a result of the location of the affected organ (brain,
● Do not breed cats that have produced kittens that have developed
retina) or the cat's declining health condition making it too high a risk for
FIP. Some evidence points to a genetic factor.
anesthesia and surgery. There is a blood test, the coronavirus titer, that
 Eliminate overcrowding. This can be difficult in a cattery.
detects the presence of coronavirus antibodies, but this test does not
 Reduce fecal-oral transmission by cleaning litter boxes several times
discriminate between FIPV and FECV. Antibodies may be present in the
per d ay.
blood even when the virus is no longer present. A positive test indicates 
Regularly disinfect surfaces.
that the cat was exposed to or is infected with one or both viruses.
● Strictly isolate queens and their kittens. Wean kittens at 3-5 weeks of
A veterinarian will interpret the results in conjunction with results of
age and isolate them from other cats, including their mother.
other tests to make a definitive or reasonable diagnosis. A decrease in the
Continue isolation of the kittens until they are 16 weeks old.
white blood cells in combination with a low lymphocyte count is fairly
consistent with FIP. However, not all cats will have abnormal white
blood cell counts, and other nonfatal diseases may also cause these
 Treatment and Prognosis
changes. The accumulated fluid in cats with the wet form of FIP will be a
 There is no effective treatment for FIP. When a veterinarian is reasonably
characteristic yellow-tinged, stringy or mucous-like fluid, and is of great
benefit in diagnosis.
sure of the diagnosis euthanasia is generally recommended.
Suggested Reading
Prevention
Norsworthy GD. 2011. Feline Infectious Peritonitis. In GD Norsworthy,
Apreventive vaccine is available for FlP,but there is much debate regarding
ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 181-83. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
its safety and effectiveness. The most effective way to prevent FIP is to
minimize or avoid situations that have been proven to spread FECV:
188
CHAPTER 26
Feline Leukemia Virus Diseases
Linda E. Schmeltzer
Overview
of FeLV antigen within the blood cells. FeLV antigen is mixed with a
fluorescent compound and then with a sample of the patient's blood. If
In the 1970s and 1980s the feline leukemia virus (FeLV) was the most
FeLV antibody is present in the white blood cells (WBC) of the patient
common fatal infectious disease of cats. Because infected cats can now be
sample, the WBCs will fluoresce when examined with an ultraviolet
identified by testing and healthy cats can be protected with leukemia
microscope. A positive test result occurs in the later stages of infection,
virus vaccine, fewer cases of this disease are being seen. However, it is
approximately 3 weeks after the virus enters the blood stream. False-
 still one of the common infectious diseases of cats.
negatives may occur if the number of leukocytes in the sample is low
 The FeLV is classified as a retrovirus. Retroviruses are species specific.
(leukopenia).
These viruses produce an enzyme (reverse transcriptase) that permits
them to insert copies of their own ribonucleic acid (RNA) genetic mate-
rial into the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) of the cells they have infected.
 Polymerase Chain Reaction Test
Once FeLV produces DNA from its RNA, it incorporates its DNA into the
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test is another laboratory performed
host cat's DNA. There it can remain dormant, giving no sign of its pres-
test that is highly sensitive for FeLV antigen. It can be performed on
ence, or it can take over the host cell's genetic machinery to produce
blood or other body fluids. Unfortunately, its relatively high cost prohib-
more of the virus.
"t paad iaunu e aq o h s!
 Transmission
Outcomes of FeLV Infections
Large amounts of the FeLV virus are shed in saliva. The most common
source of transmission is through social interaction such as mutual
There are several possible outcomes for cats infected with FeLV.
 Understanding these will explain the wide variation in clinical signs.
grooming or sharing food and water dishes. It may also be transmitted
by biting. Transmission may also occur through blood, nasal secretions,
feces, and milk. Sharing a common litter box, nose-to-nose contact,bite
Regressor
wounds, and nursing are also possible routes for infection. The virus
may also be passed from mother to kitten across the placenta during
Following infection by the FeLV through the oronasal route (mouth or
pregnancy and from donor to patient in a blood transfusion.
nose), the virus will replicate in the lymphoid tissues in the mouth and
 The FeLV does not survive for more than a few hours on dry surfaces
throat (oropharynx). An immune response is initiated within the cells,
outside the body, and it is easily killed using standard disinfectants. It is
virus replication is stopped, and the virus is completely eliminated from
possible for FeLV to survive outside the body for up to several weeks when
the cat's body. Regressor cats will test negative on ELISA and IFA tests
it remains moist and at room temperature. Transmission can occur through
because they have high levels of antibodies and no presence of the FeLV
contaminated needles, endotracheal tubes, and surgical instruments.
antigen in their blood.
Testing
Transient Viremia
There are three tests that can be used to detect FeLV. Positive test results
Viremia is defined as the presence of the virus in the blood stream. If the
will vary depending on the stage of the disease, the organs involved, and
initial immune response is not successful the cat will become infected
the outcome of the infection. Vaccination for FeLV will not interfere with
with FeLV. The virus will spread within the lymphatic tissue to other
any of the test results.
organs including the lymph nodes and spleen. The cat can develop fever,
ge ixau au una sapou ydu uaoms pue Kueual aadde iod
Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay
weeks, the immune system may still be able to produce antibodies and
eliminate the virus resulting in transient viremia. For this reason, ELISA
The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test is the most com-
tests can turn positive within 1-3 days of infection but will later turn out
monly used screening test; it detects free FeLV antigen in plasma. This
negative. The IFA test will be negative during this phase. Until the virus
test is easily performed in a clinic setting, with results available in about
is completely eliminated, the cat will shed the virus and be able to infect
10 minutes. In-clinic test kits can be run on plasma or anticoagulated
other cats.
whole blood. It is possible for a cat to test positive and then later test
negative. See Outcomes of FeLV Infections.
Latent Infection
Immunofluorescent Assay
Some cats are able to mount an immune response and eliminate the virus
after it has entered the blood stream but not before it invades the bone
An immunofluorescent assay (IFA) test is performed by a commercial
marrow. These cats do not actively produce or shed the virus. Cats with
laboratory on a blood or bone marrow smear. It will detect the presence
a latent FeLV infection may appear healthy. They will test negative on
ELISA and IFA tests. A stressful event can cause the virus to be reacti-
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
vated, at which time the tests will turn positive. These cats may develop
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
neoplasia (abnormal growth of cells, such as malignant tumors). The
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
longer the virus remains latent, the less likely it is to reactivate.
189
SEC TION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
(C)
(a)
Lung
Trachea
(b)
Figure 26-1  Thoracic ymphoma. (a) (b) The most common form of thoracic lymphoma causes fluid to form in the pleural space (pleural effusion} secondary to a mass that forms in
the anterior mediastinum. Masses in this area elevate the trachea (left arrow) so it is nearly against the thoracic spine The lungs become compressed by the surrounding fluid. The only
functional lung tissue is seen a black (right arrow) because it is filled with air. (c) (d) This cat also has a mediastinal mass but only a minimal amount of fluid. Note the elevated trachea.
190
Feline LeukemiaVirus Diseases
(g)
(0)
Lungs
Mass
Diaphragm
Heart
f
(h)
Figure 26-1 (cont'd)  (e) The left thoracic body wall has been removed so the heart and mediastinal mass can be seen. f (g) Discrete masses can be seen in the thoracic radiographs
of this cat. (h}At necropsy, the white masses are seen in the lung lobes. This is an unusual form of lymphoma.
Images courtesy Drs Gary D. Norsworthy and Vanessa Pimentel.
191
 SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
(b)
C
Figure 26-2 Abdominal lymphoma. (a) This is an opened stomach showing several
e 5! ssew ahiel sul qi liem ypewons aui ul sassew snoiewoudus patean 'ahie
lymphoma in the small intestine. (c) Lymphoma in the kidneys causes discrete masses,
making the kidneys "lumpy and bumpy."
Images courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
192
Feline LeukemiaVirus Diseases
(a)
d
(b)
e
(C)
Figure 26-3 Unusual manifestations of lymphoma and the feline leukemia virus 
(FeLV). (a)True lymphoblastic ymphoma (cancer of the blood cells) occasionally occurs as
a result of Felv. (b) This cat has a lymphomatous mass in the anterior chamber. (c) This cat
has a lymphoma on the lymphoid tissue (gland of the third eyelid) of the third eyelid.
(d) FelV uveitis causes the iris to change color and for the blood vessels in it to become
 enlarged. (e) A curled pinna is one of the unusual manifestations of FeLV.
Irmages courtesy Drs. Gary D. Norsworthy and Vanessa Pirmentel.
193
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
Persistent Viremia
and feces can be recommended as a means to detect problems early.
When the virus reaches the bone marrow it is then released into the
 Medications to aid immune system support are available and can be
blood. This results in a permanent infection, and affected cats will test
recommended by the veterinarian. It is important for a client to under-
positive on ELISA and IFA tests. Most of these cats die from a FeLV.
stand that these medications are not a substitute for proper nutrition
associated disease within 3 years of infection.
and care.
Diseases
Prognosis and Prevention
The FeLV causes a wide variety of diseases. Lymphoma (cancer), anemia,
There is no cure for a FeLV infection. Cats with persistent viremia and
abortion, and immunosuppression are a few examples (Figs. 26-1, 26-2,
latent infection will always be infected. Some of the diseases caused by
and 26-3). Immune suppression willcause the cat to be more susceptible
FeLV can be successfully treated with aggressive therapy; however, the
to many diseases that would ordinarily be successfully eliminated by the
virus will remain in the cat.
immune system. Commonly mild diseases, such as upper respiratory
FeLV vaccination is considered a noncore vaccine by the American
infections, can become fatal because of the immune system's inability to
Association of Feline Practitioners (AAFP). Outdoor cats and cats that
mount a proper response and eliminate the disease.
live with cats infected with FeLV are at risk for exposure. Owners who
Lymphoma is commonly caused by FeLV, but not all cats that develop 
foster cats with unknown history of exposure to FeLV may unintention-
lymphoma have FeLV infections. Lymphoma is a cancer that can occur in
ally expose their own cats to FeLV and should consider vaccinating the
many different organs, including the blood, bone marrow, brain, intes-
resident cats as well. If an owner chooses not to vaccinate, he or she
tines, kidneys, liver, lymph nodes and spinal cord.
should be counseled to isolate fostered cats to prevent passing infection
to unvaccinated cats. Vaccination for FeLV is not 100% effective; a small
 percentage of vaccinated cats do become infected. This is most likely to
Maintenance of a Cat Infected with FeLV
happen when daily exposu re to the virus occurs.
Cats infected with FeLV should be kept indoors and separated from
noninfected cats. The client should be educated on a proper nutrition
Suggested Readings
 program for the cat infected with FeLV. Raw meat, raw eggs, and unpas-
teurized milk should be avoided because they can contain bacteria that
Amorim de Costa FV, Norsworthy GD. 20l1. Feline Leukemia Virus
a nssans oi aqeun aq eu ie pasaddns-unus ue
Diseases. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 184-86.
Water and food bowls should be changed and washed regularly to pre-
Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
vent bacterial or fungal growth. Litter boxes should be scooped at least
Colville T. 2008. Blood, Lymph and Immunity. In T Colville, JM Bassert,
daily and thoroughly cleaned at least weekly. Preventive health pro-
eds., Clinical Anatomy and Physiology for Veterinary Technicians, 2nd ed.,
grams, including regular vacinations, should be followed. Heartworm
pPp. 221-46. St. Louis: Mosby Inc.
and parasite prevention is extremely important. Biannual wellness vis-
Levy J, Hartmann K, Hofmann-Lehmann R, et al. 2008. 2008 American
its can be recommended to detect weight loss or early stages of second-
Association of Feline Practitioners' feline retrovirus management
ary diseases. Regular dental prophylaxis should be performed to
guidelines. J Fel Med Surg. 10(3):300-316.
prevent dental related diseases. Routine screening of the blood, urine,
194
CHAPTER 27
Parasitology
Teija Kaarina Viita-aho
Overview
Feline parasitology is a broad topic with significant variation in parasite
- au uo uuadap Aae pom a jo sed suaa ui auaeaaid
mate and other environmental factors. Cats are definitive hosts to many
parasites, but some parasites occasionally infect cats even though cats are
not their primary host.
Parasites always have a definitive host or primary host, which is
required for maturation and completion of the parasite's life cycle. Many
parasites additionally require an intermediate host or secondary host,
which the parasite infects for some time period during which some stage
of the life cycle is completed. Paratenic or transport hosts are similar to
intermediate hosts, but they are not required for the parasite's life cycle
to progress. Paratenic hosts may transport the infection to intermediate 
or definitive hosts or act as a reservoir of the parasite.
Parasites are divided into ectoparasites and endoparasites.
 Ectoparasites live on the host animal's external surfaces: on or within the
skin, within the ear canal, and on the hair coat. Endoparasites live inside
sasdie
the host: in the gastrointestinal tract, the respiratory tract, and within
various organs, including those of the cardiovascular system.
The most intense reaction for most cats is at the tail head, just cranial to the base of the tail.
Image courtesy Dr Gary D. Norsworthy.
Ectoparasites
Otodextes Cynotis (Ear Mite)
Ctenocephalides Felis (Cat Flea)
These small (-0.5mm) mites live in the external ear canal. They are
Fleas are blood-sucking parasites. They are easily recognized by their later-
distributed worldwide and infect cats, dogs, foxes, and ferrets. Humans
uo punoy aie sea tnpe Auo'dunfot ilqe saut pue adeys pauane Ae
may also get rashes and pruritus when bitten. Ear mites are the most
the cat; the remainder of the life cycle is completed in the environment.
common cause of otitis externa in young cats. Infection is transmitted
Adult fleas live on the cat's skin where they suck blood. Female fleas lay
through direct cat contact. Female mites lay eggs in the ear canal. The life
eggs on the cat. Eggs drop off and hatch into larvae within a few days.
cycle, consisting of eggs, larvae, two nymph stages, and adult mites,
Larvae develop to pupae before maturation to adult fleas. The duration of
takes 3-4 weeks. The primary clinical sign, pruritus, is usually bilateral
the pupae stage varies; it can take more than 100 days. However, in a warm
and results in head shaking and intense scratching of the ears. This self-
and humid environment the life cycle can be completed in 2-4 weeks.
trauma contributes to secondary infections and aural hematomas
 The flea population is enormous; however, adult fleas compromise only
(Fig. 27-2). Infection may even spread into the middle ear (otitis media)
5% of the entire flea population. The largest segment of the population
resulting in a head tilt, circling, and ataxia. Chronic infections may result
consists of eggs (50%), larvae (35%),and pupae (10%). Therefore, the most
 in hyperkeratosis of the pinna. Occasionally mites can be found elsewhere
important aspect of flea control is controlling the eggs and juvenile fleas.
on the skin leading to regional pruritus or dermatitis.
 Diagnosis of a flea infection is usually straightforward. Fleas or flea
Diagnosis is suspected based on the presence of black ear discharge.
feces ("flea dirt") is usually seen on cat's hair coat. To determine if the
Close examination of the ear canal with an otoscope or microscopic
dark dirt on the cat's hair coat is flea dirt, comb it off, and drop a small 
examination of the discharge may reveal motile mites and confirms the
amount of water on it. If it is flea feces, the water will change to red as the
diagnosis. The mites are tiny, white, organisms. The heat of the otoscope
blood is resuspended.
light may encourage their movement, making diagnosis easier. When
 Some cats become hypersensitive to flea bites resulting in flea allergic
treating ear mite infection it is recommended that allin-contact dogs and
dermatitis (FAD). FAD causes pruritus, alopecia, and dermatitis and may
cats be treated; however,transmission does not occur readily.
be severe. The pruritus results in scratching and licking and may lead to
secondary infections (Fig. 27-1).
 In areas where fleas are common it is recommended to use regular flea
Cheyletiella Blakei
control. There are several spot-on products available.
These grey, white, small (0.3-0.5mm) mites are also known as "walking
dandruff" because of their appearance on the hair coat. Mites live on the
skin-surface keratin and get nutrition from tissue fluids and skin debris.
Ctenocephalides Canis (Dog Flea)
 The life cycle is completed on the host in approximately 35 days. Eggs are
This dog flea may also infect cats. The life cycle is similar to cat flea.
attached to the cat's hair, which serves as the means for contaminating
the environment. Infection is highly contagious and spreads easily by
direct contact. Indirect contact may also be a source of infection because
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
adult female mites may survive up to 14 days in the environment. Males
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
and juveniles die within 48 hours outside the host. Eggs shed in the
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
environment can also be a source of infection. Infection can also spread
195
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
Figure 27-3 The Notoedres cati mites live on the head and cause intense itching.
Figure 27-2  Ear mites cause severe itching in the ear canals. Cats respond to that with 
Crusty lesions are common. Scratch marks as the result of self-trauma are seen on this
scratching and head shaking. The latter can result in broken blood vessels in the pinna:
cat's he ad.
 and aural hematoma results.
Image courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
Image courtesy of Dr. Vanessa Pimentel.
to other animals and humans. Additionally, the canine (Cheyletiella
yasguri) and rabbit (Cheyletiella parasitovorax) species can infect cats.
 Infection is more common in long-haired cats. Clinical disease is typi-
 cally mild, and asymptomatic carriers are possible. The clinical signs
include scaling of the tail from where it spreads cranially resulting in
crusting of the dorsum. Pruritus is variable. If it occurs, secondary infec-
tions as a result of scratching usually develop. In human infections there
usually appear small, erythematous, pruritic papules in groups of two or
As Aq apew si sisouei 'uaopqe pue sue aut jo us aut uo sanu
tape preparations or superficial skin scrapings in which the mites can be
seen on microscopic examination. In heavier infestations white moving
brushed over a black sheet of paper. A flea comb can be used to collect
mites and eggs from the coat. When a cat is diagnosed with cheyletiello-
sis all in-contact animals should be treated.
Notoedres Cati (Feline Scabies)
 Notoedres mites are 0.2mm long and live under and on the skin. Female
mites burrow under the skin and lay eggs. In these subcutaneous tunnels
eggs hatch into larvae that then mature to nymphs. Nymphs reach the
skin surface and mate. Mites survive less than 48 hours in the environ-
Figure 27-4 Demodex gatoi is shorter and thicker than D. cati and lives in the skin's
ment; therefore, the entire life cycle is completed on the host animal. Cats
keratin layer (stratum corneum), not in the hair follicles.
Image courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
highly contagious; transmission is by direct contact. Young and debili-
tated cats are most susceptible to disease, and humans can also be infected.
In the cat skin lesions usually start at the margins of the pinna with crust-
ing and papules and then spread to the face, head, and neck. There is hair
lesions, which are similar to Notoedres infection, occur usually around the
loss, erythema, and scaling initially, but as the disease progresses thick
head and neck but can also be found on the paws and elsewhere in the
crusts, very heavy scaling, and lichenification develop (Fig. 27-3). In
body, possibly through grooming. Diagnosis is made with skin scrap-
severe cases the lesions spread from the head and neck to other parts of
ings, and all in-contact animals should be treated simultaneously.
the body, and local lymphadenopathy may occur. Infection causes severe 
pruritus and self-trauma frequently leading to secondary bacterial infec-
tions. Diagnosis is made based on clinical signs and microscopicexamina-
Demodex Cati and Demodex Gatoi (Cigarette Mites)
tion of skin scrapings. All in-contact animals should be treated.
D. cati can be regarded as normal fauna. These cigarette-shaped mites are
0.2-0.4 mm in length and live in the hair follicles and sebaceous glands,
usually a few millimeters under the skin surface (Fig. 27-4). Kittens get
Sarcoptes Scabiei (Canine Scabies)
infected from their mother by direct contact. Infection lasts for life, but
Cats are not natural hosts of these mites, but they may become infected
transmission between cats does not occur again in later life. In healthy
from dogs or foxes. The life cycle is similar to feline scabies. Compared to
cats there are no clinical signs of infection. Clinical disease appears only
N. cati, in S. scabiei infections pruritus is usually absent or is mild. Skin
if the cat's immune system is compromised, most commonly by a
196
Parasitology
(a)
(C)
(b)
Figure 27-5 Felicola subrostratum is the louse of the cat. It can be found on the skin
or hair (a) This is a louse attached to a hair and seen under 40 x magnification. (b) The
eggs (nits) of the louse can be seen as tiny white objects attached to the hair. (c) The
attached eggs are seen under 40 x magnification.
Images courtesy Dr Gary D. Norsworthy.
retroviral infection, immunosuppressive medication, stress, or severe
they are not treated if pruritus is not present. Nevertheless, it is crucial to
systemic disease. Clinical disease can also be idiopathic.
treat the underlying disease that caused the clinical signs to erupt.
D. gatoi is not a normal inhabitant of the cat. It is shorter and thicker
Generalized demodicosis requires treatment.
An unnamed "long" Demodex spp. has also been discovered that may
the hair follicles. It is an infective disease that is highly contagious
be found in conjunction with D. cati.
between cats. It can cause clinical disease without concomitant immuno-
suppressive disease. Most cases of clinical demodicosis are caused
by D. gatoi.
Felicola Subrostratum (Louse)
 Clinical demodicosis is divided into focal and generalized forms. In
focal disease there is alopecia or thinning of the hair coat or reddish, scal-
Lice are host-specific insects that spend their whole life cycle on the skin
ing dermatitis on the head and front limbs. It usually affects the eyelids,
and hair coat. They are about 1 mm long, wingless, and dorsoventrally
face, or ears. Demodicosis can also cause ceruminous otitis. Generalized
flattened, and their life cycle is completed within 3 weeks. Transmission
disease starts as focal disease but extends wider and deeper becoming
between cats occurs by direct contact or by grooming with contaminated
generalized folliculitis or pododermatitis. It causes usually symmetrical
brushes and combs. Eggs are attached to the hair. Eggs hatch into nymphs
alopecia or barbered hair. Of affected cats, 50% have significant pruritus
which undergo several moults prior to becoming adults. Clinical disease
that leads to self-trauma and secondary infections.
varies from asymptomatic carriers to pruritus, alopecia, papules, and
'sundess us ym usiuelio au Supu Aq apeu si sisouae
o (- ) al u Aq ap si sis oui a
However, because all cats potentially have a few mites present the clini-
eggs on the skin or hair (Fig. 27-5b,c). Infection should be always treated
cal signs described previously and several mites must also be present.
because lice are intermediate host to the tapeworm Dipylidiurm caninum.
Focal and idiopathic demodicosis are usually self-limiting diseases, and
Cats can also be infected by dog louse Tricodectes canis.
197
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
Ixodes Ricinus
(a)
These blood-sucking ticks are oval and dorsoventrally flattened.
Prefeeding, the female is 2.5-5.0mm in length,but after sucking blood it
can grow up to 15mm long. Male ticks are 2-4mm and do not suck
blood. Adulticks live in a moist environment that includes long grass.
They attach to animals and humans and mate. Female ticks suck blood
upto 14 days,then drop off the cat,layeggs, and die. Eggs become larvae
that become nymphs and then mature to adults. A new blood meal is
needed for completion of each stage in the life cycle. The duration of the 
entire life cycle depends on environmental conditions. In cooler climates
and locations where the summer is short it takes up to 3 years to com-
plete the life cycle.
Ticks do not cause any symptoms to the host besides local irritation.
10
However, their significance is in disease transmission including borde-
(b)
tellosis and tick-borne encephalitis, some of which can affect humans.
Cats may carry ticks inside the house resulting in human infections.
Fortunately, there are products available for effective tick control.
Trombicula Autumnalis (Harvest Mite, Chiggers)
Adult T. auturmnalis are not parasites, but their larvae infect cats with
outdoor access causing small pruritic erythematous papules on the
ventrum or on the feet. Some papules may have small orange-red spots
at the place where the larva is embedded into the skin, or there may be
clusters of larvae seen on the affected area. Pruritus can be intensive, but
some cats remain asymptomatic. Diagnosis is made according to
appropriate clinical signs that occur seasonally and direct visualisation
 of red-orange larvae or by visualization of the larvae on skin scrapings.
Sometimes the larvae have already abandoned the cat prior to
 presentation so the diagnosis will be presumptive.
Endoparasites
Gastrointestinal Tract
Figure 27-6 (a), Roundworms are so named because of their propensity to curl. (b), The
three large eggs are those of Toxocara cati seen under 100 × magnification. The four
Roundworms or Ascarids
smaller eggs are hookworm eggs.
Toxocara Cati
Images courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
This roundworm is the most prevalent of all endoparasites in cats. It is a
white and large arrow-headed worm. Males are usually 5-6cm in length
Toxascaris Leonina
but may be up to 10cm. Females are longer, 4-10cm, but may be up to 15cm
(Fig. 27-6a).Adultworms live in the smallintestine where femaleslay eggs,
 This ascarid is smaller than T. cati. Male worms may grow up to 7cm and
which are passed to the environment via feces(Fig. 27-6b). Eggs need to
females up to 10cm. The life cycle is similar to T. cati, but it occurs only in
embryonate before becoming infective; this takes at least 4 weeks and
 the small intestine; there is no liver-to-lung migration or transmammary
longerincoldertemperatures.Duringembryonation infectivesecond-stage
infection. Infection occurs by ingestion of embryonated L2 eggs or by
larvae (L2) develop within the egg, and after a cat ingests these infective L2
ingestion of a paratenic host that harbors infective L2 in its tissues. The
eggs the larvae migrate from the intestine to the liver and lungs. In the lungs
L2s become L3s in the cat's intestine and undergo maturation. The pre-
the L2s maturate to third-stage larvae (L3), which eventually are coughed 
patent time, which is the time from ingestion to shedding of eggs, is at
up and swallowed returning to the small intestine. There the L3 mature,
least 8 weeks. Because infection does not occur via milk and the prepat-
and female worms start laying eggs about 6-1l weeks after infection.
su un uaas Aiaien Auo s! uooaun mun i duol s! poad sua 
 If infective L2 eggs are ingested by a paratenic host (earthworm, bee-
younger than 6 months of age.
tle, rodent, bird) L2s migrate into tissues and remain there until a cat eats 
T. cati and T. lenonina are common roundworms in cats. In adult
this paratenic host. When a cat eats an L2-containing paratenic host there
 healthy cats infection is usually either asymptomatic or mild. There may
is noliver-to-lung migration; maturation occurs entirely in the intestine.
be vomiting with or without the worms being expelled and some degree
In adult cats most of the roundworm larvae migrate from the intestine
of diarrhea. The hair coat may be poor, and weight loss may occur in
to other parts of the body and encapsulate, most commonly in mammary
chronic infestations. Clinical signs of roundworms occur often in kittens
tissue. Larvae are passed in the milk during lactation, infecting the kit-
that have acquired heavy infestations via milk. In addition to diarrhea
tens. When infestation occurs from the milk there is no liver-to-lung
and vomiting kittens usually have abdominal distension (pot-bellied
migration. Intrauterine infection does not occur in cats even though it
abdomen) and failure to gain weight. Intestinal obstructions occur rarely.
may occur in dogs infected with T. canis.
Because of lung migration T. cati infection may also cause coughing
suitu eaie leasa Susnes adoad poaun ose u dds no
because of larva-induced pneumonitis or pneumonia; this is the most
 This disease occurs mainly in small children who have ingested large
common cause of coughing in young kittens.
quantities of eggs. It may cause fever, pneumonitis, hepatomegaly, and
sg snuoa Jo saa ut puno ae sum jsea apeu st sisouse
 rrl s al in aer   a s 
can also be found in the feces by fecal flotation but not until 6-8 weeks
 migrans) and cause blindness.
after infestation. There are good deworming medications available.
198
Parasitology
Because of infection acquired via milk, all kittens should be dewormed
reptiles, and rodents may act as paratenic hosts if they eat an infected
starting at 4-6 weeks of age and followed by retreatment every 3 weeks
beetle. Cats become infected by eating either an intermediate or para-
until 4 months of age. During adulthood the need for deworming
tenic host. Larvae are released in the stomach, penetrate the stomach
depends on the cat's lifestyle. For outdoor, hunting cats regular deworm-
wall arteries and migrate to the aorta from where they migrate to esoph-
ings are recommended.
agus and stomach after 2-3 months. Eggs are passed in the feces
 As previously mentioned T. cati has public health significance because
5-6 months after infection. Clinical signs are usually absent or mild, but
it may cause visceral and ocular larva migrans in humans. However, the
opportunity for humans to obtain a roundworm infection from cats is less
of fibrous nodules, which may be related to esophageal sarcoma.
than from dogs (T. canis) because cats bury their feces. Therefore, T. canis
Diagnosis is made by finding eggs in the feces or by esophagoscopy or
is the most important roundworm regarding human larva infections.
gastroscopy.
Ollutanus Tricuspis
Tapeworms
 These small roundworms live in the cat's stomach wall. Males are only
Usually tapeworm infections are asymptomatic; therefore, infection
-oueduou e si stu Aensh 'yua un wwo'tg'o saewa pue wwg'o-0
remains undetected in cats that bury their feces outdoors. Abdominal
genic parasite, but it may cause vomiting, anorexia, weight loss, and
discomfort may be occasionally seen. The most dramatic occurrence is
the reaction of the client to seeing the segments.
chronic fibrosing gastritis. Infective L3 forms may be passed either in the
vomit or with feces, but usually the entire life cycle occurs in the stom-
ach, and intermediate hosts are not needed. Therefore, diagnosis is chal-
Taenia Taenieformis
lenging because worms, larvae, or eggs may never leave the stomach.
Direct microscopic examination of vomits or stomach washings or direct
 Tapeworms live in the small intestine.Small numbers are usually present 
endoscopic visualization can be performed for diagnosis.
in each host; there is rarely more than three to four worms in a cat. Adult
[ools aul un ssed pue o xeanq ieul suauoas jo isisuoo sunomadel
e ao os a jo as a u us aq A a (qe- s)
Physaloptera spp.
to the hair near the anus (Figs. 27-7c,d). Each segment contains many
eggs. These gravid proglottid segments are passed with the feces. When
This is another roundworm of the feline stomach that is acquired by
a proglottid segment comes in contact with water it disintegrates and
ingestion of an infected intermediate or paratenic host (reptile, insect, or
releases infective eggs (Fig. 27-7e). In water, eggs become larvae. When
small mammal). Typical clinical signs include chronic or intermittent
an intermediate host (rat, mouse, vole, squirrel, or rabbit) ingests this
vomiting. Melena and anemia may occur in heavy infestations. Diagnosis
larva, a metacestoid cyst develops in the intermediate host's liver. This
is difficult to confirm from a fecal sample because eggs do not float in
Suea Aq paioauna sie 'sep og iate sieo iot aaoaui si ais os
routine fecal flotation solutions. Worms may be found in the vomitus.
an intermediate host. After ingestion, the adult tapeworm is mature in
Direct visualization via gastroscopy is the preferred diagnostic method.
4-8 weeks. Usually a tapeworm infection in cats is asymptomatic, but
proglottid segments may cause local perianal irritation.
Strongyloides spp.
Dipylidium Caninum
These small threadworms live in the crypts of the small intestine. There
are four species that can infect cats: Strongyloides felis, Strongyloides plani-
Adult worms live in the small intestine and are usually less than 25cm in
ceps,Strongyloides tumefaciens,and Strngyloides stercorals.Femaleslay
length. In most cases, the more worms a cat has the shorter the worms
ae sasds  odaa   ase s
are. Like T taenieformis, proglottid segments are passed in the feces, and
hatched either in the gut or passed in the feces and hatch in the environ-
they can also pass directly from the rectum and are seen crawling out the
anus. The intermediate hosts for this tapeworm are fleas (Ctenocephalides
ment: they can become infective larvae or develop into free-living adults
spp.) and lice (Felicola subrostratum)in which cysticercoids are developed
and lay eggs that hatch and become infective larvae. When the larvae
after ingestion of eggs. Cats get infected via ingestion of an infected flea
become directly infective the life cycle is called homogonic, and the life
or louse.
cycle involving development of free-living adults is called heterogonic.
 Infective larvae penetrate the skin of cats in skin locations that contact 
the soil. The larvae travel to the lungs from where they are coughed up
Spirometra spp.
and swallowed. After skin penetration, infective larvae may also travel
These are tapeworms found in southeast United States. Their life cycle
randomly until they reach the small intestine. The prepatent period is
resembles that of Diphyllobothrium latum. Copepods act as primary and
approximately 2 weeks. S. stercoralis and S. felis have also the capability
small mammals and reptiles as secondary intermediate hosts. Adult
for autoinfection. Autoinfection happens when Lls become infective
worms are about 25cm in length and live in the small intestine. Infections
inside the cat's gut. These infective larvae penetrate the gut wall or peri-
are rare and remain usually asymptomatic. In more severe cases, cats
anal skin and re-enter the blood stream. They travel to the lungs then are
may have weight loss and changes in appetite. Diagnosis is based on
coughed up and swallowed returning them back to the small intestine. In
finding eggs in the feces.
healthy adult cats clinical strongyloidosis usually causes mild clinical
signs consisting of local skin irritation and respiratory and gastrointesti-
nal signs.
Diphyllobothrium Latum (Broad Fish Tapeworm)
aut ot dn mor Aeu pue sieo jo ausaui au un saal uomadet peouq au
whole length of cat's intestine. Proglottid segments are 1-1.5cm long and
Spirocerca Lupi
are usually shed in chains. When eggs access water, larvae are hatched.
S. lupi is abright red worm that lives in the esophagus and stomach and
Larvae are eaten by shellfish, which are then eaten by fish. Infective
is much more common in dogs than in cats. Eggs are passed in the feces,
forms for cats (and dogs and humans) are plerocercoid cysts that are
and beetles act as an intermediate host. When a beetle eats the eggs,
found in the muscles, intestine, and roe of fish. Cats get infected when
infective L3s develop and become capsulated in beetle's body. Chickens,
they eat raw or undercooked fish. Salt water prevents the maturation of
199
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
(a)
(C)
(b)
(d)
(e)
Figure 27-7 Taenia taeniaeformis is a segmented worm. (a) The head attaches to the
aui ui ssed pue o yeaq ieyi suawas ui saieuwa pua el aul (qi llem jeusau!
 stool. (c) They are often seen on the surface of the stool or attached to the hair near the
anus (d). (e) when segments are ruptured, eggs are released.
Images courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
this worm; therefore, fish from sea water are not a source of infection.
insects, wind, and rain. An intermediate host becomes infected by ingest-
Infection is usually asymptomatic, but it may cause mild diarrhea and in 
chronic infections, anemia and deficiency of vitamin B, may occur.
tissues. Cats get infected by eating this tissue cyst contained within the
intermediate host. Usually infection is asymptomatic for the host animal,
Echinococcus spp.
but because it causes life-threatening disease to humans, this is a disease
that should be prevented by regular dewormings in the endemic areas of
Echinococcosis is an infection caused by the tapeworms Echinococcus
echinococcosis.
granulosus and Echinococcusmulilocularis. Cats, dogs, and foxes are hosts
for these tapeworms, and other mammals, including humans, are inter-
 mediate hosts. Hundreds of infective eggs are produced by these worms
Joyeuxiella Pasqualei
in the cat's intestine, and eggs are passed with the feces. Infective eggs are
resistant in the environment and may remain infective for up to 1-2 years,
in Africa and the Middle East. Beetles and lizards act as intermediate
 but heating and drying will destroy them. Eggs are easily spread via
hosts.
200
Parasitology
Hookworms
in the cat's intestine, penetrate the intestinal wall, and migrate to the
lungs where maturation occurs. Egg production starts 40 days after
Ancylostoma Tiubaeforme
infestation. This parasite has direct life cycle, which means that it does
 This feline hookworm lives in the small intestine where they suck blood.
not need an intermediate host to complete its life cycle. Clinical signs
Adult worms are 7-12mm long. Female worms lay eggs, which are
include coughing, sneezing, and nasal discharge. The eggs can be identi-
passed in the feces into the environment from where the eggs are ingested
fied from a tracheal wash, bronchoalveolar lavage, and fecal flotation.
by cats. Rodents and other transport hosts may also be a sou rce of infec-
tion. Sometimes the infection may be acquired via skin penetration. In
the cat's small intestine, larvae hatch, the worms mature, and new eggs
Paragonimus Kellicotti (North-American Lung Fluke)
are produced. The life cycle takes 2-3 weeks and does not include an
This is lung fluke of cats (and dogs) found in the southern, Midwestern,
extra-intestinal migration. A hookworm infection is significant only in
and Great Lakes regions of the United States and in a few other parts of
the world. Adult worms are about 1cm long and live in the lung paren-
include diarrhea, vomiting, dark stools (see Fig. 27-6b), and weight loss
chyma where they form bullae or cysts. Eggs are laid, coughed up, and
iq u l e ym ap st sisoa iam  on a o
swallowed. Freshwater snails and crayfish act as intermediate hosts,
dinical signs may develop before eggs are detected in the feces.
usaun Aq paaus ia se 'saoay s,ieo aut u paus sa isau yium
Ancylostoma braziliense is the canine hookworm; it has been reported in
  o  is r     
cats. Llncinaria stenocephala, which is a canine hookworm of colder
-uared Sunl u isAo e JI 'saunl au ul uoypeal Aiojeuueul ue Aq pasneo
climates, may also infect cats even though it is rarer.
chyma ruptures, rapid and usually fatal pneumothorax may develop.
Whipworms
Bladder
Trichuris Serrate
Capillaria Feliscati
Whipworms live in the colon. They are quite rare among cats. Infection
These small hair-like nematodes live in the surface of the bladder mucosa
occurs when a cat eats an infective egg from which a larva is hatched.
of cats. Adult females measure 30-60mm and males 13-30mm long. The
The larva enters the small intestine and moves to the large intestine
life cycle of bladder worms is not totally understood. Eggs are released in
where maturation occurs. Worms suck blood from the intestinal epithe-
ue Aq paisaun ane sasg snooaun Aiatepa rou ane inq auan au
lium, which causes local inflammation. Clinical signs are result of colitis
earthworm in which infective Lls are hatched. Cats get infected when
including frequent, bloody, and mucoid diarrhea. Cats may also be inap-
ingesting this intermediate host. Larvae migrate from the intestine to the
petent and depressed. Diagnosis is made from a fecal sample, but
bladder. Eggs usually appear in the urine 2 months after infestation.
because eggs are not shed continuously, it may be necessary to examine
There are usually no clinical signs of infestation, which is usually self-
fecal samples for several consecutive days.
limiting. Treatment is indicated if the cat has clinical signs.
Lungs
Protozoas
Aleurostrongylus Abstrusus (Lungworm)
Toxoplasma Gondii
Adult lungworms are small (male 5mm, female 9mm) and live in the
T. gondii is a coccidian protozoan that can infect any warm-blooded ani-
terminal bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and smaller branches of the pulmo-
mal, but only cats can shed infective oocysts into the environment.
nary arteries. Eggs are laid in the alveoli. After the first-stage larvae have
hatched they are coughed upintothe pharynx,swallowed, and passed in
T. gondii has three infective forms: tachyzoite, bradyzoite, and sporulated
0ocyst. Tachyzoites are rapidly dividing forms that migrate from the
the feces. Further development only occurs in the intermediate hosts,
intestine to extraintestinal tissues via blood and lymph during active
which are slugs and snails. The Lls survive for months in the environ-
infection. Damage to these tissues is responsible for the clinical signs of
ment. L3s develop in the intermediate host. Cats acquire infection by eat-
ing either an intermediate host or a paratenic host (rodent, amphibian,
reptile, bird) that has ingested a slug or a snail containing L3. The L3s are
the tachyzoite phase is eventually changed to slowly dividing brady-
not infective to paratenic hosts; they remain unchanged within the para-
zoites, which encapsulate into cysts in tissues. This cyst stage is the
tenic hosts. In the cat L3s penetrate the intestinal wall and migrate to the
chronic phase of toxoplasmosis. If a cat's immune status worsens
lungs via lymph and blood vessels. Egg production is started four weeks
bradyzoites may reactivate and cause clinical disease. Oocysts are the
after infestation.
result of a reproductive cycle, which only takes place in domestic and
 Most infections are mild and self-limiting in 3-4 months because of an
wild cats. Oocysts are shed in the feces, but they are not readily infec-
effective immune response. Nevertheless, in heavy infestations respira-
tory signs may be severe consisting of dyspnea, coughing, harsh respira-
when oocysts are exposed to oxygen and takes 1-5 days. Cats shed
tory sounds, sneezing, and oculonasal discharge. Diagnosis is made
large numbers of oocysts within 3 weeks after infection. The shed-
based on clinical signs and demonstrating Lls in fecal samples. After the
ding continues usually a week. Oocyst shedding is heaviest in kittens
first infection occurs cats tend to be resistant to reinfection.
6-14 weeks of age.
Cats and other warm-blooded animals can become infected by eating
sporulated oocysts, tachyzoites, or meat containing tissue cysts (brady-
Eucoleus Aerophila (Formerly Capillaria Aerophila)
zoites). Additionally, infection is possible through the conjunctiva, the
These larger (25-30mm) lungworms live on the mucous membrane of
respiratory tract, and percutaneously. Milk and eggs may be infective,
the trachea and bronchi of the dog, cat, and fox. Disease is quite rare
among cats and is most likely found in cats sharing the same environ-
requires 3 weeks for completion. However, if tissue cysts are ingested,
ment with foxes. Eggs are laid in the trachea and bronchi. They are
the entire life cycle can be completed within 3 days. The most common
coughed up, swallowed, and passed in the feces where they become
infection route for cats is eating a tissue cyst usually found in a rodent. In
infective and can survive in the environment for more than a year. When
pregnant animals and humans T. gondii may infect the fetus transplacen-
a cat eats eggs or a paratenic host (earthworms and rodents), larva hatch
tally. For humans the most common route of infection is undercooked
201
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
meat (tissue cysts) or from vegetables contaminated with oocysts. Direct
transmission from cat to humans is rare.
Clinical signs of toxoplasmosis refer to the individ ual organs affected.
 The most commonly affected organs are the lungs, liver, intestine, and
eye. Anorexia, fever, lethargy, diarrhea, dyspnea (due to pneumonia),
ocular signs, and icterus are the most common clinical signs.
Toxoplasmosis can also cause neurological signs. Most cats show no
linical signs and spontaneously recover from infection developinggood
immunity. Susceptible cats may become severely ill and even die.
Diagnosis is made based on clinical signs and serum antibody tests.
Immunoglobulin G (lgG) and immunoglobulin M (lgM) antibodies
should be measured. IgG antibodies are present for life, and therefore,
indicate that the cat has been exposed to T. gondii at some point in its life.
IgM antibodies are present only for about 3 months after infection and
indicate recent or active infection. A fourfold rise in an IgG titer from
blood samples taken 2 weeks apart also suggests recent infection.
 Toxoplasmosis has human health significance because it may cause
abortion if a pregnant woman becomes infected. To prevent infection
proper meat handling is critical. Meat should be cooked at temperatures
Figure 27-8 Ancylostoma tubaeforme, the cat hookworm, lives in the smallintestine
above 70°C (160°F) or frozen at -20°C (4°F) for at least 24 hours before
Uaas ae sha wou leaassaa au u passed ae s aupoog sns ll aau
cooking. Surfaces and utensils that have been in contact with raw meat
with one roundworm egg.
should be washed adequately. Pregnant women should avoid contact
Image courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
with soil, raw meat, and cat feces. Beca use oocysts need at least 24 hours
to sporulate, litter boxes that are emptied daily should not be means of
transmission.
in the environment but can be destroyed by freezing or heating to 60°℃
(140°F) for 30 minutes. Cats become infected by ingesting oocysts within
Isospora Felis, Isospora Rivolta
are the main clinical signs, but most infections are mild and self-limiting.
These coccidian protozoans are common and widespread but only rarely
cause clinical disease in adult cats. Clinical disease occurs mainly in kit-
feces. This is a zoonotic disease. Diagnosis is made by demonstration of
tens and usually in poor hygienic conditions. Cats shed infective oocysts
oocysts in fecal smears with special staining or by the fecal flotation test.
in their feces (Fig. 27-8). Oocysts contain two sporocysts each of which
A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test that detects Cryptosporidium
contains four sporozoites. Rodents act as paratenic hosts, and when they
 DNA in feces is available. Direct fecal ELISA or immunofluorescent anti-
body tests are also available.
eating either oocysts or rodents that have eaten oocysts. Because cats
-is mous Aiensn sua Auo Kunuu paela-ale Suons doiaaap
cant clinical signs. Mild infections may occur in cats that hunt rodents.
CytauxzoonFelis
Cinical signs include large bowel diarrhea with tenesmus. Infection is
This is a hemoparasite transmitted by tick as vectors with bobcats serv-
usually self-limiting, and reinfections are unlikely. Diagnosis is made by
ing as asymptomatic reservoir hosts. Infection is more common in the
detecting oocysts in fecal smears or by fecal flotation.
spring and summer when ticks are most active. The disease has two
Sarcocystis spp.
leading to vascular obstruction and severe clinical disease or death. In
Sarcocystis is another coccidian protozoa. Cats and human are definitive
signs, which are also often fatal. Clinical signs usually occur approxi-
hosts for some Sarcocystis species. In cats they infect the mucosal cells of
mately 10 days after infection and include fever, anorexia, pallor, icterus,
the intestine. Oocysts are produced in the intestine and passed in the
dehydration, lethargy, tachypnea, or dyspnea. Diagnosis is made based
feces. Oocysts release infective sporocysts in the environment. When an
on clinical signs and identification of the parasites within the red blood
intermediate host (cow, pig, rodent, or small mammal) eats these sporo-
cells. Without therapy cats usually die within 1 week. Therapy includes
cysts, sarcocysts are formed in its tissues, usually muscles or lymph
aggressive supportive therapy and antiprotozoal drugs. Clinical signs
nodes. Inside these resting sarcocysts bradyzoites maturate and become
may worsen during therapy prior to recovery, and many cats still
infective to the definitive host. This cystic disease of the intermediate
die despite therapy. Therefore, prevention based on tick control is
host is called sarcosporidiosis, and cysts can be so large that they are vis-
paramount.
ible to the naked eye. When a definitive host eats an intermediate host,
Oocyst production begins about a week later. Sarcocysts are also formed
in cats' tissues (heart, skeletal muscles, or diaphragm muscles), but the
Giardia spp.
infection is usually asymptomatic. Sarcocystis encephalitis has been
Giardia is protozoan that infects many mammals and birds and is
reported in young cats.
common in cats. Trophozoites live on the mucosa of the small intestine
and occasionally in the large intestine. They encyst in the small or large
intestine and are passed in the feces. Oocysts are resistant in the environ-
Cryptosporidium Felis and Cryptosporidium Parvum
ment. Cysts are infective, and transmission occurs by ingestion of these
These coccidia usually infect young cats with poorly developed immune
cysts. Cyst shedding may be continuous or intermittent. After ingestion
system or individuals with compromised immunity. The life cycle is
trophozoites are released from oocysts in the intestine and are responsi-
similar to other coccidians, but there are two types of oocysts produced.
ble for clinical signs. The prepatent period is 5-14 days. Clinical signs
Some infective oocysts pass in the feces, and others release infective
sporozoites within the intestine causing autoinfection. Oocysts are stable
and weight loss. Feces are light brown in color, a have strong odor, and
202
Parasitology
are usually mucoid; blood in the stool is common. There are many
Crystal MA, Walker MC. 2010. Hookworms. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
Feline Patient, 4th ed., p. 234. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
suis deu aendondde jo ueqo e uo pseq ape si sisou
Crystal MA, Walker MC. 2010. Roundworms. In GD Norsworthy, ed.,
and a fecal antigen test, fecal flotation, or a direct saline smear. Because
The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 468-69. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Giardia cysts are excreted intermittently, several fecal examinations
Crystal MA, Walker MC. 2010. Stomach Worms. In GD Norsworthy, ed.,
should be performed if giardiasis is suspected.
The Feline Patient, 4th ed., p. 492. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Crystal MA, Walker MC. 2010. Tapeworms. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 496-97. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Tritrichomonas Foetus
Foreyt WJ. 2001. Veterinary Parasitology Reference Manual, 5th ed. Ames:
T. foetus colonizes the colon of cats resulting in chronic large bowel
lowa State University Press.
diarrhea. It is most commonly seen in kittens and young cats and in
Grace SF. 2010. Fleas. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed.,
cat colonies because increased housing density increases the risk for
 Pp. 191-92. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
infection. Trophozoites live in the bowel, and cysts are shed in the
 Norsworthy GD. 2010. Lung Parasites. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline
Patient, 4th ed., Pp. 306-7. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
tors. Transmission occurs by the fecal-oral route. Incubation time is
4-14 days. The typical clinical sign is malodorous, mucoid, and bloody
The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 512-14. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
diarrhea. Flatulence and tenesmus are also common. Infection usually
Rees CA. 2010. Skin Parasites. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline Patient,
painajui iso sieak 7 oi dn ael Aeu hl inq Kisnoaueiuods saalosan
4th ed.,p. 483-86. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
 Robson M, Crystal MA. 2010. Cryptosporidiosis. In GD Norsworthy, ed.,
many months after the resolution of the diarrhea. Ronidazole can be
The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 100-101. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
used to accelerate clearing the infection. Tritrichomoniasis is usually
Robson M, Crystal MA. 2010 Cytauxzoonosis. In GD Norsworthy, ed.,
 misdiagnosed as giardiasis. Diagnosis can be made by detecting motile
The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 106-7. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
trophozoites under the microscope from fresh feces or rectal swab, by
Robson M, Crystal MA. 2010. Giardiasis. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
culture, or by a PCR test, which is the most reliable test. T. foetus may
Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 197-98. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
also infect people.
Robson M, Crystal MA. 2010. Tritrichomoniasis. In GD Norsworthy, ed.,
The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 523-25. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Trees AJ. 2004. Endoparasites. In EA Chandler, CJ Gaskell, RM Gaskell,
Suggested Readings
eds., Feline Medicine and Therapeutics, 3rd ed., Pp. 697-707. Ames:
Blackwell Publishing.
Bowman DD, Hendrix CM, Lindsay DS, et al. 2002. Feline Clinical
 Parasitology. Ames: Iowa State University Press.
203
CHAPTER 28
Linda E. Schmeltzer
Several diagnostic tests can be ordered to confirm a diagnosis and
Overview
rule out other causes of the clinical signs. Radiographs will show
 The most important functions of the respiratory system are:(1) to supply
characteristic changes in the lungs (Fig. 28-2). The changes will vary
oxygen to all body cells and (2) to eliminate carbon dioxide produced by
with the severity of the asthma. Blood tests to rule out heartworm
cells. Blood is the vehicle used for oxygen and carbon dioxide transport.
disease may also be ordered. Bronchoalveolar lavage or tracheal wash
The respiratory system also filters inhaled air, helps eliminate waste, and 
for cytology and culture may be performed to rule out bacterial or
contains receptors for the sense of smell.
fungal causes.
When a cat inhales air molecules are carried into the upper respira-
Treatment for asthma will vary depending on the severity of the case.
tory tract through the nostrils and into the nasal passages. Within the
Cats with severe, life-threatening disease will be hospitalized and require
nasal passages are thin, scrol-shaped bones (turbinates). The turbinates
oxygen administration until they can be stabilized with medications.
are covered in nasal epithelium, thin moist tissue that contains the
Corticosteroids can red uce the inflammation. Bronchodilators are given
receptors for the sense of smell. Microscopic hairs called cilia help trap
as an inhaler or injectable drug to open the airway and allow air to move
foreign material on the moist surface of the nasal epithelium. Air is
more freely in and out of the bronchi. Antibiotics are often needed
warmed and humidified as it is forced through the twists and turns of
because the lungs of cats with asthma are susceptible to infection. Once a
the turbinates and nasopharynx into the pharynx. The pharynx, or
 cat is stabilized, oral medications are used to help reduce symptoms and
throat, passes food down to the esophagus and air to the larynx. When
 prevent future episodes of respiratory distress. Oral corticosteroids, such
the cat swallows, a leaf-shaped piece of cartilage,the epiglottis, is pulled
as prednisolone, and bronchodilators, such as terbutaline, will often
over the opening of the larynx to prevent food from passing into the
need to be administered long term. Inhaled corticosteroids and broncho-
airway.The larynx islined with mucous and cilia that trap foreign mate-
dilators are also available by prescription and may be chosen at the dis-
rial before it reaches the trachea. The last structure in the upper respira-
cretion of the veterinarian.
tory tract is the trachea, a tubular structure that extends from the larynx
into the chest and connects to the lower respiratory tract. In the chest,
and technique for cats. The equipment consists of a standard metered
the trachea divides, or bifurcates, into the right and left main stem bron-
dose inhaler attached to a tube called a spacer. On the other end of the
chi. Each main stem bronchus leads directly into the lungs, where it
spacer is a small face mask. When the inhaler is depressed, the medica-
tion is released into the spacer, allowing the cat to breath in the entire
dose in 7-10 breaths (Fig. 28-3). The procedure takes very little time, and 
nary artery. The pulmonary artery divides to the right and left lung
most cats will be cooperative. Owners should be taught to watch their
lobes, continues subdividing into smaller vessels along the bronchi, and
cat's breathing during treatment beca use many cats will hold their breath
eventually enters a network of capillaries around the alveoli. The
when first introduced to inhalation therapy. Drug dosages and frequency
of medications and inhalers will be adjusted as needed at the discretion
of tissue that separate the air in the alveoli and blood in the capillaries.
of the veterinarian.
Oxygen-rich blood then travels through venules that join together to
Asthma is usually a manageable disease. With aggressive treatment
become veins. Veins join together and eventually join the large pulmo-
'poog si sisousoid au aouenduoo laumo pue
'eay aut jo apis hal au shaua pue suni aul saaeah ieut uiaa Aieu
When a cat exhales, carbon dioxide and other waste gases leave the
body in the reverse pathway.
Asthma
Asthma, also known as allergic bronchitis, is a disorder of the lower res-
piratory tract caused by a combination of inflammation of the airway
and muscle contraction of the bronchi resulting in a restriction of airflow.
The inflammation may be the result of exposure to allergens, like pollen
or mold, or noxious stimuli, such as ammonia or smoke. The symptoms
can subside spontaneously or may need medical treatment to control.
The irritation results in a buildup of mucous and cellular material within
the bronchi. Severely affected cats may have sudden severe muscle
spasms of the bronchi that are life threatening.
 The most common clinical sign is coughing (Fig. 28-1). Some cats will
omly cough occasionally; others will have multiple coughing episodes
per day. Wheezing or rapid breathing are commonly reported. More
severe cases will have respiratory distress needing immediate treatment.
Figure 28-1 The two major differentials for coughing in adult cats are feline asthma
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
and feline heartworm disease. The cat assumes the position shown here, and the cough
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
is generally nonproductive.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Image courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
204
Respiratory Diseases
(a)
(b)
Figure 28-2 The radiographic findings in feline asthma include a bronchial pattern.
The major blood vessels are normal in size. (a) Ventrodorsal view. (b) Lateral view.
Image courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
Figure 28-4 Adult heartworms are 10-15 cm (4-6 inches) long. Although primarily
found in the pulmonary arteries, they may be in the right side of the heart when there is
no room for them in the pulmonary arteries. It is unusual to find this many adult worms 
using a device with a small face mask and a spacer.
in a cat.
Image courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
Image courtesy Dr Gary D. Norsworthy.
205
(a)
(b)
(C)
(d)
 Figure 28-5 Most of the classic heartworm findings are seen in the dorsoventral or
ventrodorsal view. (a} A focal interstitial pattern is seen at the end of the arrow. (b) Very
large caudal pulmonary arteries (1} and air in the stomach (2), known as aerophagia, are
seen in this cat with heartworms. (c) An enlarged and blunted right caudal pulmonary
artery (1} and a focal interstitial pattern (2) are seen in this infected cat. (d) The enlarged
caudal pulmonary arteries are not appreciated in a lateral view, but areas of focal inter-
 stitial disease as the result dead worms are often seen (arrow).
Image courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
206
Respiratory Diseases
occur, although the mechanism is poorly understood. Sudden death as a
result of a thromboembolism has been reported.
Diagnosis may occur during the workup for respiratory distress or
 coughing. It can be an incidental finding in an asymptomatic cat.
Radiographs of the chest can be suggestive of a heartworm infection (Fig.
28-5). Enlargement of one or both of the caudal pulmonary arteries can
be a sign of heartworm disease. Heartworms in cats are not usually
detected during an echocardiogram because the worms are primarily
found in the pulmonary arteries. However, sometimes the adult worms
become too crowded in the pulmonary arteries, causing one or two to
migrate into the right ventricle (Fig. 28-6).
There are two types of blood tests for the diagnosis of heartworm dis-
ease: an antigen test and an antibody test. These tests can be helpful in
confirming a diagnosis of heartworm disease, but interpretation of the
results must be fully understood. A positive antigen test result occurs
when the cat is carrying at least three mature adult female heartworms.
 Unfortunately, most cats with one or more adult heartworms do not have
three or more female worms present. The juvenile adult worms will not 
cause a positive antigen test result. The antibody test identifies proteins
released from L3, L4, and juvenile adult stages of development. A posi-
tive test indicates that the cat has been infected with heartworms.
However, it does not differentiate between a current infection with live
Figure 28-6 When heartworms are in the right side of the heart ultrasound of the
worms and an infection in which the larvae or juvenile ad ult worms have
right ventricle and pulmonary outflow tract demonstrate adult heartworms as short
died within 4 months.
paralle lines (arrows).
It is important to understand that a positive result on either test is
Image courtesy Dr Gary D. Norsworthy.
confirmation of heartworms, but a negative test result does not rule out
heartworms.
Treatment has two parts. The first is geared toward stabilizing the cat
Heartworm Dise ase
and relieving inflammation caused by the worms. Oxygen therapy will
Heartworm disease is a potentially fatal infestation by the parasite
be required if the cat is in respiratory distress. Once breathing is normal-
ized, corticosteroids can be prescribed to reduce and relieve inflamma-
Dirofilaria immitis. The disease occurs in regions where a favorable envi-
tion. They may be prescribed long term at the discretion of the
ronment supports the parasite's life cycle and affects cats, dogs, and other
veterinarian. The second step is to avoid further infection by using an
mammals in the dog family such as coyotes. The life cycle of the heart-
approved heartworm prevention product. These products will eliminate
worm in cats is similar to that in dogs, but with some notable differences.
the immature larva before they reach the circulatory system, thereby pre-
 The life of a heartworm begins when male and female heartworms
venting further damage to the lungs.
living within an infected animal reproduce and release larva (microfilar-
There is not a safe or effective drug for killing heartworms in cats and
iae) into the bloodstream. A heartworm goes through five stages of
if there was such a drug, killing many juvenile adults or adults at once
would result in acute, severe lung disease. Controlling symptoms and
mature adulthood. When a mosquito bites an infected animal and takes
preventing further infestation while the cat's immune system kills the
a blood meal it also ingests the microfilariae. Over the next 10-14 days
larvae and adults are the recommended approach to the cat becoming
the parasites live inside the mosquito and develop from Ll to L3 larva.
When the mosquito bites a cat the L3 larvae enter the skin through the
heartworm free.
bite. Over the next 75-90 days the parasites develop to L4 and then 2-inch
long juvenile adults and migrate to the pulmonary arteries and lungs.
 Suggested Readings
Most of the juvenile adults that enter the bloodstream die in the pulmo-
nary arteries before reaching the adult stage. On average, one to three
Brunt JE. 20ll. Heartworm Disease. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline
juvenile adults develop into adult worms. Adult heartworms grow to be
Patient, 4th ed., pp. 208-10. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
4-6 incheslong (Fig.28-4). These worms are usually the same sex,sothey
Colville T. 2008. The Respiratory System. In T Colville, JM Bassert, eds.,
are unable to reproduce. It has been reported that adult heartworms can
Clinical Anatomy and Physiology for Veterinary Technicians, 2nd ed.,
live up to 4 years. As the juvenile and adult heartworms die, they cause
pp. 247-63. St. Louis: Mosby Inc.
an intense inflammatory reaction in the pulmonary arteries. The pump-
Eddlestone SM. 2006. Small Animal Medical Nursing. In DM McCurnin,
ing action of the arteries carries the dead parasites into the lungs where
JM Bassert, eds., Clinical Textbook for Veterinary Technicians, 6th ed.,
the same intense reaction occurs.
pp. 810-11. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders.
Clinical signs of heartworm infection in cats include coughing
Padrid P. 2011. Bronchial Disease, Chronic. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
(see Fig. 28-1), rapid breathing, or respiratory distress. Vomiting may also
Feline Patient, 4th ed., Pp. 58-61. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
207
CHAPTER 29
Toxicoses
Sharon Fooshee Grace
Introduction
(a)
The cat has unique susceptibility to a variety of toxins. Both metabolic
at risk for toxicosis. Cats have a deficiency of some hepatic glucuronyl
transferase enzymes needed for conjugation of compounds to glucuronic
acid. Conjugation increases water solubility and promotes elimination of
substances in bile or urine. In cats, lack of sufficient enzyme can result in
slowed or altered metabolism of some compounds. Also, feline erythro-
cytes are predisposed to oxidative damage because they have a large
number of hemoglobin sulfhydryl groups. Oxidation of these groups
leads to development of methemoglobin (hemoglobin which cannot
carry oxygen) and formation of erythrocyte Heinz bodies (denatured
hemoglobin).
Cats may absorb some toxins through the skin or as a consequence of
their grooming habits. Although cats are less likely to have oral exposure
to toxins than are dogs, the dermal route may be relatively more impor-
tant for this species.
Household Toxins
(b)
Phenolic Disinfectants
Jo uoeunua sog uonenfuo apuonon uodn suapuadap si ieo au
phenolic substances. Proximity to household phenols (Lysol, Pinesol)
puts the cat at risk of poisoning by these agents. Dermal exposure may
occur after the cat walks over wet surfaces and then licks the paws or
fur. The caustic nature of these agents may cause necrosis of tissue,
including in the oral cavity. Also depending upon which phenol is
ingested, the liver, kidneys, or nervous system may be affected,
globinemia.
 Treatment is nonspecific. Because of the caustic nature of phenols,
treatment should not include induction of vomition or gastric lavage.
Fluid therapy is indicated for support of vascular volume. If methemo-
globinemia occurs, N-acetylcysteine (NAC) should be administered.
Acid-base status should be monitored, along with biochemical profiles
and urinalysis.
Figure 29-1 (a) The Easter Lily (lium longiflorum} and (b) the Stargazer Lily (li/ium
Plants
orientalis) are highly toxic to cats.
Acute tubular necrosis leading to renal failure can develop in cats follow-
ing ingestion of certain types of lilies (Figs. 29-1a,b). Although not every
lilyisassociatedwithrenalilreitisadvisaletconsideralil
noted within 24-96 hours. Azotemia, hyperkalemia, and hyperphos-
-d upun sued au po ted Aue jo usasun oixot euaod se s
phatemia are detected within 24-72 hours. Epithelial casts may appear in
len, may result in severe toxicosis; death may result from ingestion of
the urine within 2 days of ingestion. Isosthenuria, glucosuria, and pro-
part of a leaf. The presence of the yellow pollen on the cat'shair can be an
teinuria are other supportive findings.
important diagnostic finding. To date, only the cat has been shown to
Treatment is nonspecific because there is no antidote. If exposure is
develop renal failure following lily ingestion. The mechanism of toxicity
known, vomiting should be induced and gastric lavage considered.
is unknown.
Intravenous fluid therapy is critical and must be closely monitored
 Clinical signs may be apparent within 2hours and include depression,
with strict attention to the balance between fluid input and urine out-
 vomiting, and anorexia. Dehydration, uremic breath, and renal pain are
put because of the potential for oliguria or anuria. A crystalloid fluid is
a reasonable first choice. Electrolytes and acid-base status should be
monitored.
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
 The prognosis is good if the cat is presented immediately and the gas-
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
trointestinal (GI) tract is successfully decontaminated; prognosis is poor
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
after onset of renal failure.
208
Toxicoses
Ethylene Glycol
Cats are commonly poisoned by ethylene glycol (EG) follwing inges-
Auo unbasopueu pauosod Alsea aou aue pue azaaue jo uon
rapidly absorbed from the Gl tract with blood levels peaking in a few
hours. Metabolites of EG cause the toxicosis; these form rapidly and per-
sist for several days. Metabolic acidosis and acute renal failure often lead
to death.
  al sis a yo ssalod id sis 
begin within 30 minutes and reflects central nervous system (CNS)
changes. The cat may have a drunken appearance, as indicated by ataxia,
incoordination, vomiting, and depression. Stage 2 develops 12-24 hours
after ingestion and is characterized by the onset and progression of acute
is marked by oliguria which progresses to anuric renal failure. Cats in
Stage 3 will exhibit vomiting and depression, renal pain and palpably
enlarged kidneys, coma, worsening azotemia, crystals in the urine and,
eventually, death.
Figure 29-2  This photo shows an ecchymotic hemorrhage on the pinna of a cat that
Diagnosis may be established by history of possible exposure to EG,
ingested an anticoagulant rodenticide.
consistent laboratory findings, and measurement of blood EG with in-
 Photo courtesy Dr. Gary D. Norsworthy.
house test kits. Wood's lamp screening of the oral cavity, vomitus, or
urine may show fluorescence, a finding which is consistent with EG
poisoning.
 Nonspecific therapies directed toward GI decontamination are rarely
Many practices utilize the activated clotting time (ACT) test because it
helpful because of the rapid EG absorption and minimal efficacy of acti-
is simple and relatively inexpensive. It evaluates the ability of blood to
vated charcoal in binding EG. Fluids should be initiated and the patient
clot upon exposure to a contact activator (diatomaceous earth). After an
monitored for urine output relative to fluid input. Therapy aimed at
atraumatic blood draw, 2ml is placed into a specialized ACT tube
interrupting production of toxic EG metabolites may be achieved with
(Becton-Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ). The tube is gently rocked several
intravenous administration of ethanol or fomepizole (4-methylpyra-
times and is then immersed in a water bath or placed into a warming
zole). Ethanol may be given as a constant rate infusion or intermittent
block at 37°C. After 60 seconds, the tube is tilted to look for the presence
therapy; it is not without risk because it may lead to further CNS and
of a gel or clot. If none is observed, the tube is returned to the bath or
respiratory depression. Cats require a higher dose of fomepizole than
warming block for another 5-10 seconds and then gently tipped to look
 dogs. Therapy is rarely successful if begun more than six hours after
for the clot. This continues until a clot is observed. Normal cats have an
ingestion.
ACT of less than 75 seconds.
 The prothrombin time (PT) detects abnormalities in the factor with the
shortest half-life (factor Vll) and will identify early or mild cases of toxic-
ity. The activated partial thromboplastin time (APIT) will not prolong
Rodenticides
until the coagulopathy is more severe. Blood for PT and partial thrombo-
Anticoagulant Rodenticides
 plastin time (PIT) testing should be drawn into a syringe with the origi
nal needle replaced by a new one, followed by evacuation into a citrated
 Rodenticide poisoning occurs when cats inadvertently ingest rodent
tube. Tests may be sent out or performed in house with an in-house
bait. Dogs are more commonly poisoned than cats. Relay poisoning
analyzer.
(by ingestion of poisoned rodents) is unlikely with the first-
Vitamin K is the antidote and the mainstay of therapy. It should be
generation hydroxycoumarins (warfarin, dicoumarin) and indandi-
initiated whenever ACR poisoning is suspected (especially if lab tests
ones (diphacinone) but can feasibly occur with the newer, more
must be sent outside). Initially, it is given subcutaneously, and then the
potent second generation hydroxycoumarins (brodifacoum, bro-
cat can be transitioned to oral therapy. It should never be given intrave-
madiolone).
nously because of the risk of anaphylaxis. Length of therapy is depend-
 Several coagulation factors depend upon vitamin K for conversion to
ent upon the bait ingested. In all cases, the ACT should be checked every
functional forms. The anticoagulant rodenticides (ACR) impair clotting
34 days after vitamin K is discontinued to be sure that the length of
by interfering with normal recycling of vitamin K. After ingestion of
 therapy has been adequate.
ACR, vitamin K becomes depleted, and there is an eventual failure of
normal coagulation.
Diagnosis may be achieved with a thorough history, potential expo-
Cholecalciferol Rodenticides
sure to bait, appropriate clinical signs, and laboratory abnormalities.
Clinical signs are variable but may include cutaneous bruising (Fig.
Cholecalciferol, or vitamin D, is contained in a variety of rodenticides.
29-2), prolonged bleeding after venipuncture, dyspnea (bleeding into
-ady sdoaap ieo au eq au jo uondosqe pue uonsaui uimo
lungs, pleural space, or mediastinum), hematuria, oral bleeding, seizures
calcemia and hyperphosphatemia. Reported signs in cats have included
(meningeal bleeding), lameness (bleeding in joint), epistaxis, and ocular 
 polydipsia, weakness, vomiting,halitosis, and depression. Mineralization
hemorrhage. Radiographs may provide evidence of blood accumulation 
of soft tissues is a common necropsy finding. Diagnosis is based upon
in the lung or pleural space.
dinical and laboratory findings and potential exposure to causative
Clotting tests may be come abnormal within 24 hours while the onset
baits. Some labs are able to measure vitamin D levels. Treatment is aimed
of clinical bleeding may lag for several days, though there is greatvaria
at lowering serum calcium levels. Fluid therapy (0.9% saline recom-
tion dependent upon the type and amount of bait ingested. It is expected
mended), furosemide, and prednisolone are therapies that encourage
that coagulation tests become abnormal before evidence of bleeding
calcium diuresis. Salmon calcitonin may be helpful in cases that do not 
occurs.
respond to other therapies.
209
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
Phosphorous-Containing Enemas
Over-the-Counter Medications
 Phosphate-containing enemas should never be used in cats beca use they
Aspirin
can cause severe hyperphosphatemia and hypocalcemia, sometimes
Aspirin has a much longer half-life in cats (45 hours) than dogs (7.5
leading to death. Treatment is aimed at restoring normal calcium levels
hours) because of the cat's impaired ability to conjugate the drug. Most
with slow intravenous administration of 10% calcium gluconate. Once
cases in cats result from unintentional overdosing by owners. This drug
the cat is stabilized, continued monitoring of calcium and phosphorous
can be safely given to cats when dose and dosing interval are carefully
should occur and additional calcium administered as needed. A continu-
 monitored. The primary signs of toxicosis are nonspecific and include
ous rate infusion may be prepared with 5% dextrose.
depression and vomiting.
d o sdd e  s siix dse jo n
Pharmaceuticals
management.
Methemoglobinemia/Heinz Body-Inducing Drugs
Acetaminophen
Methemoglobinemia and Heinz body hemolytic anemia may be ca used
Acetaminophen is a human pain reliever that is highly toxic to cats. One
by several pharmaceuticals, which are found in small animal clinics.
regular strength (325mg) tablet is capable of inducing life-threatening
Topical laryngeal anesthetic sprays that contain benzocaine were once
toxicosis in a few hours. Toxic metabolites quickly overwhelm the cat's
commonly used to facilitate endotracheal intubation of cats. Benzocaine
limited drug conjugation pathways and lead to development of methe-
has largely been replaced by lidocaine gel or 2%-4% lidocaine solution.
aq Ae suis Aieg eaue oouay Apoq zuna pue euauono
These may be applied to the larynx with a cotton-tipped applicator. The
urinary antiseptic methylene blue is another agent that is associated with
nonspecific, but over a period of a few hours, respiratory distress and
cyanosis herald the onset of methemoglobinemia. Swelling of the face
Heinz body hemolytic anemia in cats.
and paws are sometimes seen and are considered highly correlated with
acetaminophen toxicosis. Heinz body hemolytic anemia develops within
 Insecticides
24 48 hours (Fig.29-3). Diagnosis can sometimes be confirmed with a
thorough history.
Permethrin
 Treatment of recent exposure is aimed at gastric emptying through
 Permethrin is a synthetic pyrethroid insecticide commonly used in spot-
induction of emesis or gastric lavage. Activated charcoal may be helpful
if given soon after ingestion.Methemoglobinemia should betreated with
on preparations marketed for flea control in dogs. It has low toxicity in
NAC to facilitate prod uction of nontoxic metabolites. This drug is avail-
dogs but is highly toxic to cats. Cats are usually exposed when owners
able in 10% and 20% solutions and should be diluted to 5% concentration
fail to read label warnings about its toxicity for cats and inadvertently
with 5% dextrose. It may be administered orally or intravenously, with a
treat all pets with the same flea product. Veterinary poison control cent-
total of five to seven treatments usually given over 48-72 hours.
au    m saa e   a
 Its effects are mediated by continuous stimulation of excitable mem-
drug metabolism and limiting formation of toxic intermediates.
branes in muscle and nervous tissue. Consequently, hyperexcitability,
Sadenosylmethionine (SAMe, Denosy] or Denamarin°, Nutramax
muscle tremors, and signs of neurotoxicosis predominate. Other com-
Laboratories) may help because of its hepatoprotective and antioxidant
-nsn suis euauady pue 'eixeie uuiimt 'sanzias ane susis uou
properties, although it should notbe used assole therapy.Fluid therapy
ally appear within a few hours of application. Diagnosis is based on a
and blood transfusion (or Oxyglobin°) may be indicated if hypoxia per-
history of permethrin application and the presence of typical clinical
sists. Handling of affected cats should be limited because methemo-
signs.
globinemia alters the ability to handle stress.
Treatment is supportive with a focus on decontamination and control
of clinical signs. Dermal decontamination involves bathing the cat with a
mild dishwashing detergent and lukewarm water, followed by blow dry-
ing. The cat should be closely monitored so as to avoid hypothermia after
bathing because this can exacerbate the toxicity. Intravenous fluid ther-
apy muscle relaxants (methocarbamol), anticonvulsants (diazepam or
propofol), and hospitalization in a quiet, dark room are the mainstays of
therapy because there is no specific antidote. Cats who recover generally
have resolution of signs within a few days.
Organophosphates and Carbamates
Organophosphate (OP) and carbamate poisonings have decreased dra-
matically since safer topical spot-ons have become popular for flea con-
trol. These agents bind acetylcholinesterase (AChE), the enzyme that
degrades acetylcholine at some receptor sites. Toxic effects are a result of
accumulated acetylcholine at nerve endings. Common clinical signs are
salivation, lacrimation, urination, and defecation (SLUD). Other findings
include vomiting, increased bronchial secretions, bronchospasm, muscle 
twitching, and weakness. Diagnosis may be confirmed by history of
application or determination of blood AChE levels.
 Treatment is aimed at decontamination. Bathing with mild dishwash-
Figure 29-3  Heinz bodies are seen on severa red blood cells (arrows).
ing detergent is indicated. If the cat has been orally exposed, GI decon-
Photo courtesy Dr Gary D. Norsworthy.
tamination should be considered. In most cases, signs are evident at the
210
Toxicoses
time of presentation. Atropine is used to control SLUD signs and is
Inductionof Emesis
important for relief of respiratory distress but is ineffective against neu-
Attempts to limit toxin absorption through induction of vomiting are
romuscular signs (weakness, tremors). Pralidoxime chloride (Protopam
helpful for only the first 1-2 hours after ingestion. Xylazine is the emetic
chloride [2-PAM]) can relieve the neuromuscular signs not affected by
of choice for most clinicians. Some clinicians are beginning to question
atropine. After a period of time, 2-PAM may be ineffective, but it should
use of hydrogen peroxide as an emetic because it has been associated
be given when OP toxicosis is suspected. It is not effective in carbamate
with esophagitis in some cats. Apomorphine is a less predictable emetic
uaum sasop suneadai Aq papioae aq ueo uoeziuidoe-raao 'sisoixot
 indicated and not on a prescribed schedule.
in cats than dogs and may cause adverse effects in this species. Vomiting
should not be induced once signs of poisoning are evident.
Contraindications for ind uction of emesis include weak, depressed, or
General Principles of Poison Management
seizuring patients, those that have ingested petroleum distillates (risk of
-qns oipioe io osneo e paisaaul aaey Aew ieul asout pue 'uoenidse
Initial stabilization and Assessment
stance (which may burn the esophagus). Induction of vomiting may add
Maaan e orapun pinous ansodxa uxot paadsns ao umou yim sie
an intolerable level of stress to some patients, especially those with res-
of all body systems, with special attention to airway patency, breathing.
piratory compromise.
aq pinous ioiam Apoq pue anieiadan ieay snieis Aoennoi pue
recorded prior to institution of therapy, when possible. Blood and urine
Gastric Lawage
should be obtained at this time and, at a minimum, the blood glucose,
calcium, packed cell volume (PCV), and total protein determined. In
most cases, it is reasonable to place an intravenous catheter to maintain
emesis fails. The cat should be placed under general anesthesia and intu-
venous access. Assoon as possible, a complete blood count,biochemistry
bated, with the cuff fully inflated to protect the airway. The head should
 profile, and urinalysis should be performed.
be lower than the stomach and thorax. A stomach tube with fenestrations
on the end should be premeasured; the approximate distance from the
Circulation and Cardiovascular Assessment
oral cavity to the last rib should be determined and the distance should
be marked on the tube. The tube is carefully advanced up to the mark,
 At presentation, the hydration status, mucous membrane color, capillary
with proper placement confirmed by listening for "bubbling" sounds in
refill time, pulse quality, heart rate and rhythm, and mental status should
the stomach as air is blown into the tube. Small aliquots (5-10ml/kg) of
be evaluated. As soon as possible, electrocardiographic monitoring
lukewarm water should be instilled and allowed to drain by gravity. The
should be initiated.
goal is to retrieve fluid that is clear and free of stomach contents; the
majority of lavage fluid should be recovered during the procedure.
Activated charcoal may be administered after lavage is complete and
 Breathing and Respiratory Assessment
while the endotracheal tube is still inflated. Prior to removing the tube, it
 The respiratory rate and depth should be noted and the patient observed
should be kinked or the end occluded or the syringe left attached to
for exaggerated respiratory effort. Lung sounds should be auscultated.
avoid leakage of contents. Complications include water intoxication,
Patency of the airway should be determined, and the larynx inspected
esophageal or gastric perforation, and accidental tracheal intubation by
for edema. During the oral examination, the oral cavity should be exam-
the stomach tube.Contraindications to gastric lavage are the same as for
ined for debris, ulcers, and oropharyngeal swelling. If indicated, exces-
induction of emesis.
via face mask, nasal tube, or intubation.
Activated Charcoal
Neurologic Assessment
Charcoal is administered to bind toxic substances in the GI tract, although
it does not reliably bind all substances (including EG and plant hyd rocar-
The cat's level of alertness should be noted. Seizures should be treated
bons). Premixed activated charcoal is convenient and less messy than
immediately with intravenous diazepam; it may be given rectally if
powdered formulations. Premixed products often contain a cathartic,
venous access cannot be established.
such as sorbitol, to hasten transit of material through the Gl tract.
Administering charcoal by syringe is less than ideal because this
Nonspecific Therapy
increases the risk of aspiration. If gastric lavage has been performed,
charcoal may be administered before the tube is removed. Charcoal is
When toxicosis is suspected, nonspecific therapy should be immediately
initiated. Good supportive care is essential because the causative toxin
absorption of toxins, it may also interfere with treatment by binding oral
may never be identified and, even when known, specific antidotes are
therapeutic agents in the GI tract.
rarely available.
Fluid Therapy
 Decontamina tion
Fluid therapy is useful for hastening the elimination of toxins from the
Dermal and Ocular Decontamination
body. A crystalloid solution, such as lactated Ringer's solution, is usu-
Cats in which dermal exposure is suspected should be bathed with a mild
ally a good first choice. Because cats are easily volume overloaded, a
dishwashing detergent and clipped, if necessary. Hand soap and sham-
conservative rate of fluid administration (10-15 ml/kg/hr) should be
poos are not recommended as they do not break down greasy substances
adopted until the patient is completely assessed and monitoring
well. All types of citrus-based products should be avoided. Body tempera-
parameters are established. Urine output should be recorded. If an
ture should be monitored before and after bathing, and the cat monitored
indwelling urinary catheter cannot be placed, absorbent underpads
for hypothermia after rinsing. Eyes should be gently rinsed with a saline
should be placed in the cage to subjectively monitor for adequate
solution. Gloves should be worn when handling cats with dermal toxins.
urination.
211
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
 Suggested Readings
Norsworthy GD. 2010. Organophosphate and Carbamate Toxicosis. In
GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed., p. 364. Ames:
Crystal MA. 2010. Rodenticide Toxicosis. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
Wiley-Blackwell.
Feline Patient, 4th ed., p. 466-67. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Norsworthy GD. 2010. Pyrethrin and Pyrethroid Toxicosis. In
Grace SF. 2010. Acetaminophen Toxicosis. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed., p. 439. Ames:
Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 5-6. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Wiley-Blackwell.
Grace SF. 2010. Aspirin Toxicosis. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline
Norsworthy GD. 2010. Vitamin D Toxicosis. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
Patient, 4th ed., p. 32. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp.553-54. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Grace SF. 2010. Heinz Body Hemolytic Anemia and Methemoglobinemia.
 doe   se    
In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed., Pp. 211--12. Ames:
Volmer, eds., Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 32(2):311-21.
Wiley-Blackwell.
St. Louis: Elsevier.
Grave T, Boag A. 2010. Feline Toxicological Emergencies. J Fel Med Surg.
Weissova T, Norsworthy GD. 2010. Ethylene Glycol Toxicosis. In GD
12(11):84960.
Norsworthy, ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 167-68. Ames: Wiley-
Lovelace KM. 2010. Hypocalcemia. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline
Blackwell.
Patient, 4th ed., pp.270-71. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Lovelace KM. 2010. Plant Toxicities. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline
Patient, 4th ed., pp. 402-11. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
212
CHAPTER 30
Urinary Tract Diseases
Linda E. Schmeltzer and Gary D. Norsworthy
Overview
function because it is less influenced by nonrenal factors (diet, dehydra-
tion, or liver disease) that often affect the BUN. However, emaciation will
The urinary tract consists of the kidneys, ureters, urinary bladder, and
result in a lower creatinine value than would be expected; therefore, it is
urethra. The kidneys and ureters comprise the upper urinary tract; the
important to consider the body condition score when interpreting creati-
urinary bladder and urethra comprise the lower urinary tract. Thus, uri-
nine values. The most commonly used urine test for kidney function is a
nary tract diseases are often referred to as upper urinary tract disease or
urinalysis, and the most important value in that test group is urine spe-
lower urinary tract disease, based on the organ(s) involved.
cific gravity. In theory, urine specific gravity less than 1.035 indicates kid-
Kidney disease is a common disorder in cats. It is one of the leading
ney disease; however,the cat is able to concentrate urine better than most
causes of death in geriatric cats. The kidneys serve as a waste filtration
species, so that value is not as reliable as in other species.
and elimination plant for metabolic waste in the blood. The renal artery
carries blood into the kidneys. Inside the kidney it divides and subdi-
vides into smaller arteries and capillaries. Blood pressure forces some of
Kidney insufficiency
the plasma (water and dissolved blood components) to filter out of the
blood through fenestrations in the capillaries, a process called glomeru-
Kidney insufficiency occurs when the kidneys are no longer able to effi-
lar filtration. As the filtrate continues through the kidney, the water and
ciently perform their normal function of removing waste products from
the blood. Kidney deterioration occurs slowly as the kidneys undergo
usable blood components are reabsorbed into the blood. The purified
blood leaves the kidney through the renal vein. The unusable compo-
various disease processes or microscopic, irreversible aging changes.
nents filter into the renal pelvis, out through the ureter, and into the uri-
Depending on the cause, this process can take months or years. An eleva-
nary bladder as urine. These processes are called tubular reabsorption
tion in blood values (BUN and creatinine) will not occur until about 75%
and tubular secretion. If any of these processes are compromised due to
of kidney function is lost. A cat with a blood creatinine value above nor-
aging, disease, or trauma, filtration becomes less effective and waste
mal and up to about 440-530 umol/L (5.0-6.0 mg/dl) has kidney insuffi-
prod ucts will build up in the blood.
ciency. Clinical signs will become more severe as the creatinine value
 Each kidney has an outflow duct called a ureter. Urine is constantly
increases. Because the waste product is building up in the blood the body
being produced by the kidneys and channeled through the ureters to the
increases blood flow through the kidneys producing more urine. Kidney
bladder. The ureters are tube-shaped structures consisting of three lay-
insufficiency eventually progresses to kidney failure, a state of renal
ers. The outer fibrous layer is made up of connective tissue containing
decompensation that usually leads to death.
blood vessels and nerves and functions as an anchor to keep the ureters
 For most cats, clinical signs will begin to appear between the ages of
in place. The middle muscular layer contains smooth muscle fibers that
9 and 14 years. A gradual decrease in weight and appetite and a gradual
move urine through the ureter with peristaltic (wave-like) contractions.
increase in water consumption and urine output per day will occur.
The inner mucosal layer is lined with transitional epithelial cells that
 These signs often go undetected by owners for months. Owners will usu-
allow the ureter to inflate and deflate as urine passes through it on the
ally note slight increases in the number or size of urinations, based on the
way to and into the urinary bladder. As the bladder fills the opening of
amount of wet litter in the litter box, before noticing slight changes in
thirst. Therefore, when taking a history questions about the quantity of
the ureter collapses (closes) to prevent urine from flowing back into the
ureters. The peristaltic contractions are strong enough to force urine
wet litter in the litter box are important. Because the change is slight an
 through the collapsed opening.
owner might not realize it is important to mention this to a technician or
veterinarian. Multicat households make detection in water consumption
 The urinary bladder is an elastic organ that changes shape according
to the amount of urine it contains. It resembles a deflated balloon when
and urine output more difficult to detect.
empty but becomes somewhat pear-shaped and ascends into the abdom-
 Kidney insufficiency is often identified during routine blood screen-
inal cavity as the volume of urine increases. The urinary bladder is lined
ing. Laboratory findings include a creatinine value between 220 and
 520umol/L (2.5-6.0mg/dl) and low urine specific gravity on a urinaly-
with transitional epithelial cells that allow it to stretch as it becomes filled
with urine. The wall of the bladder becomes thinner as the volume of
sis. As the filtering ability of the kidneys declines and creatinine levels
urine within the bladder increases. When the bladder reaches a certain
increase, anemia, elevation of blood phosphorus, decrease of blood
volume muscles in its wall will stretch and stimulate the nerve endings
potassium, and metabolic acidosis (imbalance of acid levels) may occur.
in the bladder wall. Impulses are sent up the nerves to the brain telling
 Because of the flow of blood through smaller kidneys, hypertension
the cat that it needs to urinate. When the sensation occurs normal cats are
(high blood pressure) may be present in many of these cats.
able to voluntarily tighten the muscle around the neck of the bladder.
 The purpose of treatment is to increase kidney function and slow fur-
When a suitable place to urinate has been located, the cat will posture
ther deterioration. Treatments are chosen based on clinical signs, test 
and voluntarily relax this muscle to pass urine out of the bladder and
results, capabilities and motivation of the owner, and the cooperation
level of the cat.
through the urethra to the outside.
 Kidney function is measured with various blood and urine values. The
most commonly used blood values are creatinine and blood urea nitro-
gen (BUN). The creatinine value is considered more specific for kidney
Kidney Diet
A restricted protein diet helps minimize the waste products filtered
through the kidneys. These diets have decreased phosphorus, increased
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer
potassium, and are nonacidifying. For a picky eater this can be a difficult
and Gary D. Norsworthy.
transition, so it is important to offer a choice of more than one renal diet
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
and to educate the owner on the proper way to transition to a new food.
213
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
Benazepril
Appetite Stimulant
Recent studies have shown benazepril may slow the progression of
Imbalance of acid levels caused by decreased filtration in the kidneys
kidney disease by reducing glomerular blood pressure (renal hypertension).
may cause an increase of stomach acid resulting in nausea or loss of
 po ussaoud yo sasne soe aul jo auo a s uosuaadu ieu
appetite. An acid reducer (H2 antagonist), such as famotidine, may be
ney disease.
helpful in improving appetite. Mirtazapine and cyproheptadine can be
effective appetite stimulants for some cats.
Rehydration and Diuresis
Client Education
Depending on the creatinine levels, some cats will need to be hospital-
ized for fluid therapy Intravenous (IV) or subcutaneous (SC) fluids will
During the first 3 months of treatment some cats have decreases in creati-
correct dehydration and assist the kidneys in flushing out the waste
nine values, even into the normal range. It is important for the owner to
 products in the blood. This flushing process, known as diuresis, is 
understand that this event is an indication that the treatment is working;
designed to maximize the function of all remaining kidney tissue.
therefore, treatment should be continued rather than stopped. Regularly
scheduled rechecks are important to assess creatinine and other blood
values, as well as to monitor weight and clinical signs. Patient history
Client Administered Fluids
should include questions about diet, appetite, and overall attitu de.
 Fluids can be administered subcutaneously two to seven times per week
to keep hydration levels up and aid in diuresis. Most owners easily mas-
ter the technique, and most cats tolerate it well. Technicians and assistants
Prognosis
playa vital role in teaching and reassuring owners.Itisimportant tohave
s anss aup unu mou uo suaixa aie e o spudp sisuoud au
patience and understanding with them, especially during the initial
functional, how well the patient adjusts to the prescribed treatment, and
karning phase. Occasionally an owner will prefer to bring the cat into the
how closely the owner follows the treatment plan. In most situations
office for fluid administration. Performing this treatment with the owner
many cats respond well to treatment and have good quality of life. They
present may serve as a coaching opportunity for him or her to become
may often live 1-3 years before the onset of kidney failure.
more comfortable with the technique and can also be used as a time to
assess how the cat is doing at home with other prescribed treatments.
Kidney Failure, Chronic
Phosphate Binder
Chronic kidney failure is often the result of several diseases or insults to
If a kidney diet alone does not reduce elevated phosphorus levels in the
the kidney over many years. These include pyelonephritis, exposure to
toxins, normal aging, or trauma. The exact cause usually can not be
blood, a phosphate binder can be prescribed. Phosphate binders attach to
  d i si a u o 
phosphorus in the intestinal tract, preventing the phosphorus from being
insufficiency.
absorbed. Blood levels are usually monitored so the dosage can be
A cat in kidney failure will have a creatinine level higher than
adjusted properly. Some of the available phosphate binders contain cal-
485 umol/L (5.5mg/dl). The most common clinical signs are weight loss,
cium. If a rise in blood calcium levels occurs, a veterinarian can prescribe
anorexia, lethargy, increased urination, and increased thirst. Poor hair
a product that does not contain calcium, most commonly aluminum
coat, diarrhea, and bad breath may alsobe present. Vomiting may occur
hydroxide. The desired serum phosphorus level is less than 1.9 mmol/L
but is less common than in dogs. Blindness can occur if severe high blood
(6mg/ dL).
pressure occurs. Many patients will be dehydrated and emaciated and
have pale mucous membranes. On palpation, the kidneys are usually
Calcitriol
smaller than normal. Abnormal kidney size can also be documented
with radiographs or ultrasound.
This drug regulates the parathyroid gland and calcium levels. An
 Laboratory findings can include azotemia (increased BUN and creati-
 nine), low urine specific gravity, nonregenerative anemia, hyperphos-
increase the blood calcium level by removing calcium from the bones.
phatemia (elevation of blood phosphorus), hypokalemia (low blood
This helps to normalize the needed 2:1 ratio of calcium to phosphorus.
potassium), and metabolic acidosis (imbalance of acid levels). Because
Calcitriol can be used to reduce the function of the parathyroid gland
pyelonephritis is a recognized cause of kidney failure, a urine culture can
and to increase calcium absorption from the intestinal tract. Data for its
detect bacterial infection. As with kidney insufficiency, these cats may
efficacy in cats is pending.
also have systemic hypertension.
Treatment for chronic kidney failure usually requires hospitalization
Erythropoietin Replacement
for rehydration and diuresis. If enough functional kidney cells remain
they may be able to adequately meet the body's need for waste removal
Feline red blood cells live an average of 68 days, after which they are
with the help of IV fluids. The purpose is to substantially increase kidney
broken down and must be replaced by new cells. The kidneys prod uce
function resulting in a decrease of BUN and creatinine levels. Potassium
erythropoietin, the hormone that stimulates the production of red blood
supplementation may be added to the fluids, if needed.
cells by the bone marrow. The presence of a nonregenerative anemia
Nutritional support via orogastric or nasogastric feeding may be
could indicate the production of erythropoietin has been impaired or
needed for anorexic patients. Some patients may have a red blood cell
stopped. Administration of synthetic forms of erythropoietin can help
count low enough to require a blood transfusion. Treatments prescribed
correct this anemia in most cats.
in the kidney insufficiency section may also be used at the discretion of a
veterinarian. Blood profiles should be repeated during treatment to
determine progress.
Hypotensive Agent
 If there is no improvement in blood values after 3-5 days of fluid ther-
If testing determines the cat has high blood pressure medication may be
apy, the prognosis is poor. If there is improvement in the blood tests and
prescribed to control the blood pressure, helping to prevent blindness
the cat begins eating, treatment can continue at home (see kidney insuf-
and strokes.
ficiency section for treatment list), and the prognosis is favorable.
214
LIrinary Tract Diseases
 insufficiency but not normal kidney values. Thus, it will need long-term
treatment.
Kidney Failure, Acute
Acute kidney failure (AKF) is a disease of rapid onset, usually occurring
within a few days. It is less common than chronic kidney failure. AKF is
the result of an acute disease process that adversely affects kidney func-
tion. Some of the possible causes of AKF include toxins (from drugs,
chemicals [antifreeze] or plants [ilies]), trauma (resulting in loss or
decrease in blood supply), pyelonephritis, hypotension during anesthe-
sia, and urethral obstruction. When taking a history, asking questions
about onset, duration, and progression of the illness are important. Also
include questions about environment and possible exposure or access to
toxic plants, medications, or chemicals. A list of medications the cat has
recently taken may also be helpful. Clinical signs can vary but may
include anorexia, lethargy, kidney pain, or vomiting.
 Laboratory findings will include an elevated BUN and creatinine as
with chronic kidney failure. The most reliable way to determine the dif-
ference between acute and chronic kidney failure is the red blood cell
Figure 30-1 Pyelonephritis is characterized by a dilated renal pelvis. Both of these
count. With AKF the red blood cell count will typically be normal; do not
kidneys exhibit that characteristic. The smallkidney was damaged severely and shrank.
fail to account for dehydration when interpreting packed cell volume
ayl op pinoo ll os (palydouaduj pabieua nq ahewep awos paujeisns Aauply ahie aul
values. Additional tests, such as urine culture or an ethylene glycol test,
work of both.
may also be required to help determine the cause. Radiographs and
ultrasound can be ordered to determine if there are stones causing a
blockage in the kidney or ureters.
urine culture results. Some patients will require up to 12 weeks of ther-
 d s a    a  
apy with a rotation of antibiotics based on bacterial culture and sensitiv-
caused the acute kidney failure. IV fluid therapy for rehydration and
am I Aiateuxondde paieada aq pinous sanno aun stunpu ai
diuresis will probably be prescribed. Antibiotics or medications to reduce
after the completion of antibiotics to confirm the infection has been
vomiting may alsobe needed. If fluid therapy at ahigh rate of infusion is
cleared. If the culture is negative, it should be repeated 4-6 weeks later to
 prescribed or if cardiac compromise is present, overhydration is a risk. A
verify that the infection has definitely cleared. Clients should be edu-
veterinarian may request weighing the cat frequently, as an increase in
cated to return the cat for an examination anytime the cat is not acting
weight can be an indication of overhydration. The cat should also be
well or is showing signs of cystitis (frequent urination, blood in the urine,
monitored for other signs of overhydration such as elevations in breath-
or straining to urinate). If chronic renal insufficiency or failure has also
ing or heart rate, serous nasal discharge, and swelling of the tissue that
occurred, long-term support for kidney function may be needed.
lines the eyelids and surface of the eye.
The prognosis is generally good if a diagnosis is made before exten-
Prognosis will vary depending on the cause and how quickly the cat
sive permanent damage occurs to the kidneys. Cats that are not treated
received treatment. A successfully treated cat will usually have kidney
'(l-oe ainbty as) aseuep Aaupy suaueuad auos aaey Allensn Aea
insufficiency and will need long-term treatment.
which will eventually lead to chronic renal failure; however, this may not
occur for several years.
Pyelonephritis
Polycystic Kidney Disease
 sit s   u   e i 
mation of the renal pelvis and parenchyma, which is part of the kidney
 Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is an inherited disorder that occurs in
where filtration occurs (Fig. 30-1). Bacteria typically access the kidneys
man, cats, dogs, and mice. In cats it most commonly affects Persians and
either by ascending up the ureters from the bladder or via the blood-
other long-haired cats. Studies in Persians have shown that the disorder
stream from infections elsewhere in the body. Periodontal disease is
is inherited as a dominant trait. PKD causes fluid-filled cysts to develop
thought to be a common source of the bacteria that causes pyelonephritis
throughout the kidney, increasing in number and size over time
in cats.
(Fig. 30-2a). As the cysts grow, they compress and replace normal
Clinical signs of pyelonephritis can include increased urination,
functioning kidney tissue with nonfunctional fluid-filled compartments,
increased thirst, weight loss, and lethargy There may also be low grade
ultimately causing renal failure. Cysts can occur in one or both kidneys
fever, pain in the kidneys, abdomen, or lumbar area when palpated, and
and may also develop in the liver. PKD can be present in kittens as well 
even signs of cystitis. Many of these patients have an infection that has
as older cats.
been ongoing for several weeks or longer and will often present for
Clinical signs of a cat with severe PKD will be identical to those of a cat
chronic renal failu re.
in chronic kidney failure. Enlargement of one or both kidneys may be
 palpated or seen on a radiograph. An ultrasound will reveal multiple
tein, occult blood, and leukocyte (white blood cell) casts. If more than
fluid-filled cysts throughout the kidney (Fig. 30-2b).
75% of kidney function has been lost, the blood profile will include an
 Treatment is directed toward the resulting kidney failure that the cysts
increase in BUN, creatinine, and phosphorus, nonregenerative anemia,
eventually cause. Secondary bacterial infections of the cysts are possible,
hypokalemia, and metabolic acidosis. An excretory urogram or ultra-
requiring appropriate antibiotic therapy. There is not a treatment availa-
sound of the kidneys can be performed to confirm the diagnosis and
ble to remove the cysts.
assess damage done to the kidneys by the infection.
Cats affected with PKD will develop chronic kidney failure as adults.
The cornerstone of treatment is identification of the bacteria causing
The average age of onset of kidney failure is 7 years, although in many
 the infection. Antibiotic therapy is prescribed for 4-6 weeks, based on
cats it occurs at less than 3 years. The long-term prognosis depends on
215
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
(a)
oxalate. Uroliths may occur singularly or as multiple stones. The size and
 shape of uroliths can also vary. Male and female cats are affected equally.
Clinical signs of a cat with bladder uroliths generally include hematu-
ria (blood in the urine) and dysuria (straining to urinate). The irritated
bladder can be painful. Hematuria occurs when the surface of the blad-
der wall bleeds from the irritation of the stones. Dysuria is caused by a
'auan jo aesed aun sunnsqo Aig ao Aleed auos
 The specific cause of urolith formation is unknown. Diet may contrib-
 psean e sui o an a ss aos un an
tion of materials that can produce crystals. For example, struvite crystals
are composed of ammonium, magnesium, and phosphate. Cats thathave
crystals in their urine may not necessarily develop uroliths. Urine pH
may also play a role in urolith formation. Struvite crystals dissolve read-
ily in acidic urine, and form readily in alkaline urine. Uric acid crystals 
dissolve readily in alkaline urine but not in acid urine.
Diagnosis can be obtained with radiography or ultrasound (Fig. 30-3).
Special procedure radiography may be ordered if stones are suspected
but not visible on routine radiographs. Refer to Chapter 7. Palpation of
uroliths within the bladder is not usually possible because the uroliths
d s e a  n  s  ai 
(b)
inside a water balloon. Every time the balloon is squeezed the pebble will
quickly move way from your hand before you can grasp it.
 There are several treatment options available. Cystotomy (surgical
incision into the urinary bladder) can be performed to remove the uro-
-eraut e Sursn st Araains ot aaeuuae uv uappelq aut ul are Aau ji su
peutic diet that will alter the pH of the urine, thereby dissolving the
urolith. This treatment has been proven successful only with struvite
uroliths. Not all cats will eat the special diet that must be fed exclusively
for several months.Surgery is generally required for removal for removal
of uroliths in the ureter or urethra (Fig. 30-3d).
 If the chosen treatment is successful the prognosis is favorable. If the
urolith is removed surgically or retrieved after passing out the urethra it
should be sent to a commercial laboratory for analysis. To prevent recur-
pasaid aq ue Hd auan ispe o suoeipau so iai eads e saua
based on the urolith analysis.
Feline Idiopathic Cystitis
Cystitis is inflammation in the urinary bladder. A bacterial infection, a
 bladder stone, or bladder trauma can cause cystitis. However, cats have 
a specific form of cystitis that has eluded our understanding of its cause
even after decades of research. It has been called by many terms: feline
urologic syndrome, feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD), and
Figure 30-2  Polycystic kidney disease results in multiple cysts forming in the kidney
interstitial cystitis. Currently the best term is feline idiopathic cystitis
tissue. (a) The arrows point to several cysts in both kidneys. As in Figure 30-1, the large
(FIC) beca use the cause is unknown.
kidney hypertrophied so it could do the work of both. (b) An ultrasound study of this
Various causes have been proposed over the last 40 years including
polycystic kidney shows many cysts (black areasof varying sizes. The arrows point to the
dry cat food, cat food with high ash (mineral) content, fish flavored cat
renal capsule.
food, high pH producing cat food, cat food with high magnesium con-
tent, and stress. None of these have been proven to be the cause, and it is
possible that there are several factors that occur together to cause FIC.
the age of the cat when clinical signs appear and the severity and pro-
 FIC causes inflammation of the bladder wall, changes in urine pH,
gression of the resulting kidney failure.Some cats die within a few weeks
hematuria (blood in the urine), pollikuria (increased frequency of urina-
of diagnosis, others can live comfortably for several years. Few cats with
tion), and dysuria (difficulty urinating or straining to urinate). These
PKD live past 10 years of age.
clinical signs are common to all forms of cystitis because they represent
Littermates and parents of affected cats should have periodic ultra-
the way the bladder responds to an insult of any type.
dns on Aderau Aea smoe uoaiap Aeg 'e iog sunuaas punos
 Diagnosis of FIC is based on the presence of two or more of the listed
port kidney function.
clinical signs and the ruling out of other causes of cystitis. The urinalysis
of a cat with FIC may be normal, but it usually has abnormal changes in
pH, blood content, and crystal content. Most affected cats have a high pH
Urolithiasis
and struvite crystals; others have a low pH and calcium oxalate crystals.
 The consistent finding is the lack of bacteria on a urine culture.
Uroliths, also known as stones, are rocklike mineral structures that are
There are two forms of FIC, the obstructive form and the nonobstruc-
formed in the urinary tract. The two most common types are struvite
tive form. The obstructive form results in formation of a mucous and
uroliths and calcium oxalate uroliths. Other types of uroliths that have
crystal plug that obstructs the urethra (see below). The nonobstructive
been identified in cats include calcium phosphate and urate. Stones may
form causes the classic clinical signs of cystitis for several days and then
also be of mixed composition, comprised of both struvite and calcium
spontaneously resolves.
216
LIrinary Tract Diseases
(a)
(d)
(e)
(b)
APGAR,SIMBA
MI0.5 TIs0.28C
7767-SIMBA
-----
FelAbd
务
Figure 30-3  (a) This radiograph shows one small urolith in the pelvis of the right
kidney and two medium-sized uroliths in the left kidney The arrows point to the uroliths.
(b) One of the uroliths in the left kidney is shown at necropsy. The kidney has been cut
open. (c) Several uroliths are seen in this ultrasound study ofthe urinary bladder They are
within the bracket. (d) Five uroliths were removed from the bladder of the cat in figure c.
(e) a 1-mm urolith is shown being removed from a ureter at surgery arow).
217
SECTION 4: Major Diseases of the Cat
Treatment of the obstructive form is addressed herein and must occur
be left in place for 1-2 days to allow for proper urine drainage from the
 promptly because urethral obstruction of any cause is life threatening.
bladder. During this time the cat may also need IV fluid therapy for rehy-
There have been many treatments used for the nonobstructive form,
dration and diuresis.
most of which have resulted in a cure. However, because this is a self-
With proper treatment prognosis is favorable. Once the indwelling
limiting disease, even no treatment, sometimes called tincture of time,
urinary catheter is removed the patient should be monitored closely for
will result in a cure. The use of anti-inflammatory or antispasmodic
urine output beca use recurrence of a blockage within a few hours of cath-
drugs is the most common approach.
eter removal is possible. If the kidneys suffered damage treatment for
kidney insufficiency may be required. The owner should monitor the
cat's urine output closely and return for further treatment at the first
Urethral Obstruction
 signs of distress.
 Urethral obstruction is a serious emergency and requires immediate treat-
ment. It can be fatal if urine flow is not restored within 2448 hours. It is
Bladder Atony
possible for a female cat to develop a urethral obstruction; however, it is
much more common in males. In male cats even the smallest uroliths may
If the urethral obstruction is not relieved within 24 hours, the bladder
be unable to pass because the male urethra tapers down to about 0.5mm
may distend to the point that the muscles in the wall of the bladder
in diameter as it exits the body. Stones will travel down the urethra and
become unable to contract. This is called bladder atony. This is a reversi-
become lod ged, blocking the flow of urine out of the bladder (Fig. 30-4).
ble condition as long as the bladder does not remain distended.
 Uroliths are only one possible cause of urethral obstruction. Urethral
ue po an panuuo Kep iad saw [iaaas iappenq a jo uonssandxg
plugs composed of a mucus-like material may also cause an obstruction.
indwelling catheter, or drugs that stimulate smooth muscle contraction,
 The kidneys will continue to produce urine, which flows down the
such as bethanechol, will usually reverse the condition in a few days. The
ureters into the bladder. Because of the obstruction, urine cannot pass out
Umo st o Aiaa aeun u h un pazisou eidi si ie
of the body, and the bladder will become excessively large and painful.
The most common clinical sign of a cat with a urethral obstruction is
severe abdominal pain. Owners may report the cat making frequent trips
Perineal Urethrostomy
to the litter box and unsuccessfully attempting to urinate. This is often
Perineal urethrostomy is a surgical procedure that removes the very nar-
misinterpreted as constipation. Physical examination will reveal a large
row portion of the urethra in male cats. During the procedure, the penis
firm bladder. Use caution when palpating or trying to express the blad-
is removed because this is the location of the smallest urethral diameter.
der; the wall may be thin and fragile, and excessive force can cause it to
The portion of the urethra with the larger diameter is then sutured to the
ruptu re.
skin, creating a new urethral opening and a urethra of consistently large
-pu uoeunuexa leisaud snonaqo aun uo paseq aq Aeu sisouse
diameter.
ings. Radiography or ultrasound can be used to confirm the diagnosis.
Blood profiles should be ordered to determine if damage to the kidneys
other comfortable restraint device is used for about 48 hours so the cat
has occurred and to assess electrolyte status. Obstruction to urine flow
cannot reach the surgery site to groom or clean. The urethra and skin are
will always result in elevated BUN and creatinine values that typically
sutured with multiple tiny sutures. If the cat tries to clean the area too
return to normal within 48-72 hours after relief of the obstruction.
soon damage can occur to the surgery site, resulting in complications
Treatment includes relieving the obstruction. If the patient has multi-
which are difficult to correct.
 ple recurrences of urethral obstruction or if the veterinarian is unable to
pauaai aq au souan luad e unsqo ue aa
-ua e uisn Aq pausuoe aq Aeu uoonsqo euaan sua
nique to carefully flush the urethra and clear the obstruction. Once the
Colville J. 2008. The Urinary System. In T Colville, JM Bassert, eds.,
obstruction is relieved an indwelling urinary catheter can be placed. The
  euan auoi aeep suaaad on naies paeid aq isnu iaau
Clinical Anatomy and Physiology for Veterinary Technicians, 2nd ed.
pp. 374-86. St. Louis: Mosby Inc.
Grace SF. 2011. Renal Failure, Acute. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline
Patient, 4th ed., pp. 452-54. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Marshall R. 2011. Urethral Obstruction. In GD Norsworthy,ed., The Feline
Patient, 4th ed., pp. 530-34. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Norsworthy GD. 20l1. Renal Failure, Chronic. In GD Norsworthy, ed.,
The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 455-56. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Norsworthy GD. 2011. Renal Insufficiency. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The
Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp. 457-59. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Norsworthy GD. 2011. Urolithiasis. In GD Norsworthy, ed., The Feline
Patient, 4th ed., Pp. 538-42. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Weissova T, Norsworthy G. Feline Idiopathic Cystitis. In GD Norsworthy.
ed., The Feline Patient, 4th ed., pp.176-78. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Bladder
Figure 30-4  The arrow points to a urolith in the urethra.The resulting urethral obstruc-
tion resulted in a full urinary bladder.
218
Abdomen
Amylase, in blood chemistry, 94
Aorta
physical exam of, 6, 26
Anal reflex,15
imaging, 37, 46, 157,161
radiology of, 38-43
Analgesia, 129-35
 position in the heart muscle, 165
ultrasound of, 43-6
definition of, 131
Aortic thromboembolism see
Abortion, 21,182, 194
multimodal,131-2
 Thromboembolism
Abscess, periapical, 147
Analgesic drugs, 132-4
Apnea, monitoring, 136-7
ACE inhibitor see Angiotensin-converting
Anaphylaxis, and Vitamin K administration,
Apomorphine, 211
enzyme (ACE)inhibitors
209
Appetite stimulant,174, 214
Acepromazine,113, 124
Ancylostoma tubaeforme, 201-2
Arrector pili, 164
Acetaminophen, toxicity, 210
Anemia
Arrhythmia
Acetylcholine, 210
evaluation by impedance counter, 87
during anesthesia, 124-6
Acetylcholinesterase,210
with hepatic lipidosis, 174
on ECG, 156
Achromotrichia, 27
with kidney diseases,213-15
and heart disease, 159-61
Acidosis, 115, 127 see also Metabolic acidosis
 on a manual blood smear, 89, 101
Arthritis see Osteoarthritis
on blood chemistry, 92-3, 127
and propofol use, 115
Artifacts
Acne, 167
types of, 91
on blood smears, 74, 99-100
Activated charcoal, 209-11
with parasite infestation, 199-202
radiology,32-3; 41
Acupuncture,134,140
with toxicosis,210
Ascarids see Roundworms
Adenoca rcinoma, cytology, 78
with viral diseases, 183-4, 194
Ascites, 159-60, 186
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 93
Anesthesia
Aspiration
Adrenal gland
general, 113
of bladder,67
location of, 40, 46
recovery,136
fine-needle, 70-71
on ultrasound, 46,49
sedation, 113
into lungs during anesthesia, 116, 119, 136
Age approximation, dental eruption times, 146
 Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
ultrasound guided needle, 33, 36, 38
Agglutination,101-2,104
inhibitors
Aspirin, blood clots, 160
Aging changes, 26
effects on anesthesia, 113
Aspirin toxicosis, 210
Albumin
heart disease, 159
Assisted standing, 141, 143
 in blood chemistry panel, 91, 92-3
Anisocoria, 5
Asthma, 204-5
in conjugation of bilirubin, 182
Anisocytosis
Ataxia
Alcohol, for surgical scrub, 120
definition of, 102
with ear mites, 195
AleurostrongylusAbstrusus201
on hemogram, 91
with FIV, 182
Allergy, 164-6
of platelets, 91
with toxicosis, 208-10
Allergy testing, 164-5
Anodontia see Missing teeth
Atenolol, 160
Alopecia, 167-8, 197
Anorexia
Atopic dermatitis see Atopy
Alopecia, psychogenic, 166
with abnormal blood values, 92-4
Atopy, 164
Alpha cells, function of, 178
with hepatic lipidosis, 173-5
Atrophy
Alpha-2 agonist
with inflammatory hepatitis, 175
of iris, 267
blood pressure, 124
with lymphosarcoma,79
muscle, 138, 140, 152-3
and capillary refill time, 122
with parasite infestation, 199, 202
muscle, physical therapy for, 138,
contraindications, 124
with toxicosis, 208
140, 1423
definition of, 124
Anterior chamber, 179, 187, 193
Atropine
effects on heart function, 124
 Anterior cruciate ligament see Cranial cruciate
for bradycardia, 125
and general anesthesia, 116
ligament rupture, physical therapy
for SLUD treatment, 211
and opiods for pain, 122
Anticholinergic drug, 125
Aural hematoma, 205-6
and sedation, 123
Anticoagulant
 Aluminum hydroxide, 214
rodenticides,209
 Bain anesthesia system, 116
 Alveolar sac see Alveoli
sample handling, 82, 97
Balanced anesthesia, 124
Alveoli
Anticonvulsant, permethrin toxicity, 210
Barium, 40-42
in capnography, 126
Antifreeze, 209,215
Barium series, 40
damage to, 117
Antigen
Basal cell tumor, 78
function,204
FeLV testing, 95, 189
Base Narrow Canine Teet, 147
Amino acid
FIV testing, 95
Basophil, 91, 106
 in dilated cardiomyopathy, 161
giardia testing, 203
Beetle, as intermediate host, 198-200
 in red blood cell breakdown, 172
heartworm testing, 95, 207
Benazepril, for kidney disease, 214
in thyroid function, 178
Antiseptic, in surgical preperation, 120
Benign characteristics, cytology, 78,
Ammonia, conversion to urea, 92
Anxiolytics, 134
Benzodiazepines, 113
Nursing the Feline Patient, First Edition. Edited by Linda E. Schmeltzer and Gary D. Norsworthy.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
219
Index
Beta blocker
Calcitriol, 214
Clopidogrel, 160
affecting anesthesia, 113
Calcium gluconate,210
Coagulation, 172
for cardiac disease, 159-60
Calcium oxalate crystals, 216
Coccidioides, 76
 Beta-ad renergic blocker see Beta blocker
Calcium oxalate urolith, 216
Cold therapy see Cryotherapy
Bethanechol, 218 
Colon
Bicycling, 140-143
Calcium
imaging,39-46
Bile acids, 93-4, 172, 175
and EDTA, 82
parasite infestations, 201,203
Bilirubin
intravenous administration, 23
Colostrum, and FIV transmission, 184
definition, 94
physiology, 92-3
Congestive heart failure (CHF), 18, 159-63
effects of sample integrity, 84
in poisoning, 211
Conjugated bilirubin, 172
and icterus, 172
and sample integrity, 83
Conjunctivitis, and FIV, 182
physiology of, 172
Calculi see Urolithiasis
Coronavirus, 185, 188 see also Feline infectious
in urine, 95, 174
Calicivirus see Feline calicivirus caccine
peritonitis
Biofilm matrix, 120
Caloric requirements
Coronavirus, test interpretation, 95, 188 
Biopsy see Fine-needle biopsy
of geriatrics, 28
Corticosteroid
Birds, as intermediate host, 198,202
of kittens, 23
for dermatologic diseases,
Bladder see Gall bladder; Urinary bladder
during pregnancy and lactation, 21
164-5, 167
Blastomycosis, 76
in weight management, 143
and lymphopenia, 90
Blindness,122, 179,198, 214
Canine teeth
and NSAIDs, 133
Blood film 
abnormalitites, 147
for respiratory diseases, 204-7
analysis, 101-9
charting,148
Coughing
making, 97-9
eruption time, 146
and asthma, 204
 Blood gases, interpretation of, 127-8
Capillaria aerophila see Eucoleus aerophila
and heartworm disease,207
blood glucose, 178-81
Capillaria Feliscati, 201
history taking, 4, 5,24
 Blood pressure equipment 
Capillary refill time, 5, 116-17, 122, 136
with parasite infestation, 198-9, 201
 anesthesia monitoring, 121-8
Capnography, 116-17, 126-7
Cranial cruciate ligament ru pture, physical
direct, 123
Carbamate toxicosis, 210
therapy, 143
Doppler, 122
Carcinoma, 74-9,148
Crayfish, as intermediate host, 201
geriatric screening, 27-8
Cardiac cycle,125
Creatine kinase (CK), 93
hypertension, 178-9
Cardiac muscle see Heart
Cryotherapy, 139
measuring, 116-17
Cardiac output, 161
Cryptosporidim spp., 176,202
and opiods, 142-3
during anesthesia, 134, 138
Crystalloids, during anesthesia, 117, 124
oscillometric
Cardiology, 155-63
Ctenocephalides canis,195
conventional, 122
Cardiomyopathy
Ctenocephalides felis, 195,199
high definition, 122
dilated, 160-163
Cyanosis, 159-60,210
Blood sample
hypertrophic, 157,160-163
Cyclosporine, for eosinophilic ulcer, 171
 collection of, 67-9, 97
restrictive, 161
Cyproheptadine,214
handling of, 70, 82-3
thyrotoxic, 178
Cyst, mediastinal, 33, 36
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 92
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 117, 127
Cystocentesis, 66-7
Blood
Carpal bone,53
Cystography,41-6
 capillary refill time, 5, 122
Carpus, 53, 55
Cystotomy, 216
cellular components of, 102-10
Castration
Cytauxzoon felis, 104-5, 202-3
packed cell volume, 87
and pain management, 131, 133
Cytology, 70-79
parasites, 104
surigical preperation, 119
B-lymphocyte,92
Cat flea, 195
Dancing, 142-3
Bobcat, 202
Cataract, 26
Dandruff see Walking dandruff
Body condition score, 24-5
Catheter, central venous, 113
Deciduous teeth
Bone marrow aspiration, 97-9
Cecum
charting, 148
Bone marrow, blood cell production, 90-91
anatomy, 172
retained, 147
Bordetella bronchiseptica, 19
imaging, 40-43
Dehydration
Brachycephalic cats, anesthesia, 117
Celiogram, 40
and capillary refill time, 6
Bradycardia, during anesthesia, 117, 124-5, 132
Cellular casts, 95, 208, 215
with diabetes mellitus, 180
Bradyzoite, 201-2
Cephalic venipuncture, 68-9
effect on blood pressure, 124
 Breed-related disease
Cervical line lesion see Resorptive lesions
with heart disease, 160
dystocia, 22
Chamber induction, 115
with kidney diseases, 213-15
polycystic kidney disease, 215-16
Charcoal, 211
Demodex cati, 196-7
Broad fish tapeworm, 199
Charting see Dental charting
Demodex gatoi, 196-7
Brodifacoum, 209
Cheyletiella blakei, 195
Demodex, long species, 197
Bromadiolone, 209
Cheyletiellosis, 196
Demodicosis, 183, 196-7
Bronchi, 204
Chiggers, 198
Dental
Bronchoalveolar lavage, 201, 204
Chlamydophila felis, 18-19
avulsions, 148
Bronchodilators
Cholangiohepatitis
charting, 148
inhaled, 204-5
acute,175-6
enamel stains, 147
oral, 204
chronic,175-6
eruption, 146
Buprenorphine, 113-14, 133
Cholangitis see Cholangiohepatitis
examination, 145
Butorphanol, 113-14, 133
Cholecalciferol toxicosis, 209
explorer (se Explorer probe)
Cholelith, 173
extractions, pain management, 133
Cage
Cholelithiasis, 173
formula (see Dental charting)
boarding, 17
Chronic renal failure see Renal failure, chronic
hypoplasia, 148
post-operative,14-15
Cilia, 204
luxations, 148
size,15
Cimetidine,210
radiography, 148-50
warming mat, 136
Circling, 185,195
resorption see Tooth resorption
Calcitonin,209
Clades, FIV, 182
Dentition, 146
220
Index
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
Ctenocephalides canis,195
FCoV titer,95
as component of phosphorus, 93
Ctenocephalides felis,195
Felicola subrostratum, 197
and retroviruses, 189
Dermodex cati, 196-7
Feline
Dermatitis
Dermodex gatoi, 196-7
calicivirus caccine, 18
 allergic, 164
dog flea, 195
coronavirus, 95
cytology,78
ear mite, 195
dental resorption (see Tooth resorption)
flea allergic, 165-6,195,197
Felicola subrostratum, 197
distemper (see Panleukopenia)
Dermatophyte test media, 167
feline scabies, 196
enteric coronavirus, 95, 185
Dermatophyte see Dermatophytosis
harvest mite, 198
herpesvirus Vaccine, 18
Dermatophytosis, 167-8
Ixodes ricinus, 198
idiopathic cystitis, 216-18
Dermis, 164
Notoedres cati, 196
immunodeficiency virus
Dexmedetomidine, 114, 132, 134
Otodextes cynotis, 195
infection (FIV), 182-4
Diabetes insipidus, 180
Sarcoptes scabiei,196
tests, 95
 Diabetes mellitus, 180-181
Trombicula autumnalis,198
vaccine, 18-19
complications, 181
Ectopic thyroid tissue, 178
indolent ulcer (see Eosinophilic ulcer)
hepatic lipidosis, 173
Ectopic ureter,imaging,42
infectious enteritis (se Panleukopenia)
hypophosphatemia, 93
Edema see Pulmonary edema
infectious peritonitis
Diabetic ketoacid osis, 180
EDTA
cattery control, 188
Diagnostic imaging see Imaging
 and blood film artifacts, 102, 104, 108
diagnosis, 185
Diaphragmatic hernia, pericardial, 162
and false hyperkalemia, 92
virus, 185-8
Diarrhea, types, 176
for fluid cytology, 73
leukemia virus
Diazepam, 210-211
sample handling, 82, 97
 outcome of infection, 189
Liet
Effleurage, 139
testing, 95, 189
diabetes, 180
EKG see Electrocardiography
vaccine, 18
hepatic lipidosis, 174
Electrical stimulation, in physical therapy,
leukemia virus infection (FeLV), 189-94
renal,213
140-143
lower urinary tract disease, 216
urolithiasis,216
Electrocardiogram
odontoclastic resorptive lesions (see Tooth
Diff-Quik stain, 70
at annual visits, 18
resorption)
Digestive system, 172
 and direct blood pressure measurement,
oral resorptive lesions (see Resorptive
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 161
123
lesions)
Diphacinone, 209
reading and understanding, 125, 155-7
pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity, 94
 Diphyllobothrium Latum, 199
Electrocardiographic tables, 156
 FeLV see Feline, leukemia virus
Dipylidium caninum, 197, 199-200
Electrotherapy, 140
Femur, imaging, 56-7
Dirofilaria immitis, 207
Emesis, induction of, 211
Fentanyl, 113, 115-16, 132-3
 Discoloration of tooth see Tooth Discoloration
Enalapril, 160
Fetus, development, 21
Disinfectants, phenolic, 208
Endocrine glands, 178
Fibrinogen, 172
Diuresis, for kidney disease, 214-15
Endocrine system, 178
Fibula, imaging, 58-9
DNA see Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
 Endoscopy, anesthetic monitoring for, 124
Fine-needle aspirate, 71
Dog flea, 195
Endotracheal intubation, 116
Fine-needle biopsy, 70
Dopamine, 124-5
Enema, phosphorous-containing, 210
FIP see Feline, infectious peritonitis
Enilconazole, 171
Fistula, oronasal, 148 
flow detector
Environmental enrichment, hospital, 
FIV see Feline, immunodeficiancy virus
Doppler ultrasonic flow detector, 1224
12-17
infection (FIV)
Draining tracts and nodules, cytology of,
Eosinophil, 75,90
 Flea allergic dermatitis, 165
71-2, 78
Eosinophilia, 90
Flea bite hypersensitivity see Flea allergic
Duodenum
Eosinophilic granuloma, 171
dermatitis
anatomy, 172
Eosinophilic granuloma complex, 167
 Flea hypersensitivity se Flea allergic
imaging,40,42,44,49
Eosinophilic plaque, 169, 171
dermatitis
Dysphonia,118
Eosinophilic ulcer, 171
Fleas, 195
Dyspnea
Epidermis, 164
Fluid analysis, in cytology, 73
with FIP, 185
Epidural anesthesia, 134
Fluid rate, during anesthesia, 116
with parasite infestation, 201-2
Epiglottis, 204
Fluoride, 150
with rodenticide toxicity, 209
Epistaxis,209
Fomepizole,209
Dystocia, 22-3
Epithelial cells, cytology of, 76
Food allergy, 164-6
Dystrophic mineralization of adrenals, 40
Epithelium, cytology, 74, 76, 79
Food trial, 164
Dysuria, 216
Erythrocyte,102
Fractional shortening,37,161
Erythropoietin, replacement, 214
Free T4 test, 178
Ear
Esophagostomy tube, 174
Friction, 139
examination of, 5, 15
Estrus cycle, 21
Fund us, imaging, 40 
mite,195-6
Ethanol, 209
 swab for cytology, 72
Ethylene glycol, 209
Gall bladder
ECG see Electrocardiography
Etomidate, 115-16
imaging, 40,46,48, 175, 185
Echinococcus multilocularis, 200
Eucoleus aerophila,210
and liver diseases, 173, 175
Echocardiogram, 37-8, 157-9,
Excretory urogram, 43, 215
physiology, 172
Echocardiographic table, 15
Exercise see Therapeutic exercise
Gastritis, irritative, 176
Echocardiography see Echoca rdiogram
Explorer probe, dental, 146
Gastrointestinal tract, structure, 172
Eclampsia, 2-3
Extra teeth, 147
General anesthesia see Anesthesia, general
Ectoparasites
Geriatric care, 24-8
canine scabies, 196
Famotidine, 214
Gestation, 21
cat flea, 195
Fat
length, 21
Cheyletiella blakei, 195-6
digestion of,174
Giardia spp., 202-3
chiggers, 198
as energy source, 174
Gingivitis, 146
cigarette mites, 196-7
Fatty liver syndrome see Hepatic lipidosis
Glomerular filtration, 213
221
Index
Glucagon, 178
Hypernatremia, 92
Interventricular septal defect see Ventricular
Glucocorticoids, for Cholangiohepatitis, 175
Hyperphosphatemia,93
septal defect
Glucose
Hypertension
 Intraosseous catheter, for general anesthesia, 113
 and diabetes mellitus, 180
during anesthesia, 117,124
Intravenous pyelogram, 43
 and pancreatic function, 178
hyperthyroidism, 178
Iodine,404,94780sees
in urine,94
renal associated,213-14
 treatment; Povidone-lodine
Glycogen, 178
Hyperthermia, with opiod use, 132-3
lodine, physiology, 178
Goniometer, 138
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy see
Iris atrophy, 26
Granulocyte, 104
Cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic
 Islets of Langerhans, 178
Griseofulvin, 167
Hypoalbuminemia, 92
Isospora spp,202
Hypocalcemia, 93
Itraconazole, 167
Hair follicle, 164
Hypoglycemia, 181
Ixodes ricinus, 198
Hard palate, 146
Hypokalemia, 92
HARD see Heartworm disease
Hypomagnesemia, 93
Jaundice see Icterus, categories of
Hartmann's solution, 116
Hypophosphatemia, 93
Jejunum, imaging, 44
HDO blood pressure, 122
Hypotension, during anesthesia, 117, 124
Joyeuxiella Pasqualei, 200
Heart block, on electrocardiogram, 156
Heart failure see Congestive heart failure
I3l treatment, 180
Kappa agonist, 113
Heart murmur, 15, 155
Icterus, categories of, 172-3
Ketamine
Heart rate, 156
Jeum, imaging, 44-5
as analgesic, 133
Heart
Imaging
as anesthetic, 115-16
anatomy of, 155
abdomen
as sedative, 113-14
vessels of, 155
ad renal glands, 46
 Ketoacidosis see Diabetic ketoacidosis
Heartworm associated respiratory disease see
ascites, 186
Kidney failure see Renal failure
Heartworm disease
blad der, 39-44, 46
Kidney insufficiency see Renal insufficiency
Heartworm disease, 207
colon, 39-46
Kidney, function of, 213
Heartworm stages
ectopic ureter,42
Kitten
adult, 207
free gas, 40
care of, 23
juvenile adult, 207
gall bladder,40,46,48
feeding off, 23
Heartworm tests, 95, 207
gastrointestinal tract, 38-41, 43-5
Heinz bodies, identification on blood film, 99,
herniation, 40
Lactation, 21
102
intussusception, 41
Lance canine teeth, 147
Heinz body hemolytic anemia, 210
kidneys, 39-40, 42, 45-6
Larynx, physiology, 204
Hematocrit, 91
liver, 39, 46
Laser flow technology, 87
Hematology
lymph nodes, 40, 43
Laser light toy, 141
 blood film evaluation, 101-2
ovary, 36, 49
Latent infection,189
bone marrow precursor cells, 108-10
pancreas, 40, 46
Left atrial enlargement, 160
CBC interpretation, 90-91
polycystic kidney disease, 216
Left ventricular hypertrophy, on ECG, 157
cell types, 102-8
spleen,39,46
Lenticular sclerosis, 27
platelets, 108
ureter, 42-3,45-6
Lentivirus, 182
sample collection and handling, 82-3, 97
urethra,42
Leukemia virus see Feine, leukemia virus
stains, 97-101
cardiovascular
Leukocytes
Hematology analyzers
dilated cardiomyopathy, 161
immature,108
histograms, 87
heartworm disease, 207
types of, 90, 104-8
calibration, 86
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 38, 160
Leukotrichia,27
dot plots, 87
pulmonary edema, 35, 158
Lidocaine
maintenance, 89
ventricular septal defect, 162-3
 use in endotracheal intubation, 116
quality assessment, 86-7
head and spine
use in urethrography, 43
quality control, 86-7
skull views, 61, 63
Lily toxicosis,208
technology, 87
spine, 61
Lime sulfur dip, 171
Hematoma, aural, 196
temporomandibular joints, 61
Lipase
Hematuria, 95
thorax
 on chemistry profile, 94
Hemoglobin, 91
asthma,205
sample integrity, 84
Hemoglobinuria, 95
diaphragmatic hernia, 162
Lipemia, and sample integrity, 82-4
Hemolysis, blood sample integrity, 83-4
heartworm disease, 207
Liver
Hepatic lipidosis, 173-5
lung patterns, 33-5
cytology of cells, 79
on cytology,76,79
pleural effusion, 36, 159
imaging,40,46
Hepatitis, inflammatory, 175-6
Immunodeficiency virus see Feline,
physiology, 172
High rise syndrome, 142
immunodeficiency virus
Local anesthesia, 134
Histamine release, from morphine, 114, 133
 Incisive papilla, 146
Louse see Felicola subrostratum
Histoplasma capsulatum, 105, 108
Incisor, 145-6, 148
Lower respiratory tract, 204
Hookworm, 20i-2
Indandione, 209
Lower urinary tract disease see Feline,
Howell-Jolly body, 103-4
Induction agents,115
idiopathic cystitis
Humerus, imaging, 5051
Inflammatory bowel disease, 177
Lung
Hydrogen peroxide, as emetic, 211
Inflammatory hepatitis, 175-6
anatomy and physiology, 204
Hydromorphone, 113-14, 132
Inflammatory masses, 74-6, 77
fluke, 201
Hydrotherapy, 138
Insecticides, 210-11
imaging, 33-8
Hypercalcemia, 92-3
Insulin
sounds during exam, 5
Hypereosinophilic syndrome, 90
before anesthesia, 119
Lungworms, 201
Hyperglobulinemia,92
production in the body, 178
Lymph node
Hyperglycemia, in diabetes, 180
protamine zinc, 180
cytology of, 79
Hyperglycemia, interpretation of, 92
resistance, 190
imaging, 40,43
Hyperkalemia, 92
types of, 180
palpation on exam, 6,25-6
222
Index
Lymphadenitis, 88
Nuclear sclerosis, 26
Physaloptera spp.,199
Lymphoblast,74-9
Nucleated red blood cells (nRBCs), 91
Physical examination, 3-6
Lymphocyte, 74
Nutrition
Physical therapy, 138-44
Lymphocytic portal hepatitis, 175-6
for diabetes mellitus, 180
Pimobendan, 160-161
for geriatrics, 28
Piroplasm, of Cytauxzoon felis, 105
Macrophage, 73, 75
for hepatic lipidosis, 174
Placenta, delivery of, 21
Magnesium, 93
for pregnancy and lactation, 21
Plant toxicities, 208
Maine coon, 3
Plaque, 146
Malignant criteria, 78
Obsessive-compulsive alopecia, 166-7
Plasma cell, 74
Mammary gland, tissue cytology, 78
Odontoclastic resorptive lesion see Tooth
Platelet
Mask induction, 115
resorption
on blood film, 108
Massage, 138-9
Oliguria, in toxicosis, 208-9
on CBC,89,91
Mast cell
Ollulanus tricuspis,199
precursor cells, 108
cytology, 75-6,78
Opioids, 132-3
Pleural effusion, imaging, 33, 34, 36, 159
Oral administration of medication, 7-11
Pleural effusion, in feline infectious peritonitis,
Maxillary bones, 145
Oral charting, 148
185
Medetomidine, 113-14
Oral examination, 145
 Plexus brachialis lesions, 142
Medication, administration of, 7, 10-11
Oral masses, 148
Pneumocolography,41
Medullary rim sign, 187
Organophosphate toxicosis, 210-212
Pneumogastrography,41
Melanoma
Orogastric tube feeding, 174
Pneumonia, imaging, 33
cutaneous, 78
Oscillometric blood pressure, 117, 122
Poisoning see Toxicosis
intraocular, 78
Osteoarthritis
Poisonous plants see Plant toxicities
oral, 78, 148
aging,24,27
Polychromasia, 99, 102-4
Meloxicam,133
analgesia,131
Polycystic kidney disease, 205-6
Membranous molar pad, 145
physical therapy, 139-40, 1523
Polycythemia, 91
Metabolic acidosis, 92
Osteosarcoma,78
Polydipsia, with diabetes mellitus, 180
Metacarpal bones,maging54
Otitis externa, 183
Polymerase chain reaction test
Methadone, 113-14
Otitis media, and ear mites, 195
for FeLV, 189
Methemoglobinemia, with toxicosis, 208-12
Otodextes cymotis, 195
for FIV Virus, 95, 183
Methimazole, 179
Oxymorphone, 132-3
for parasites, 176, 202, 203
Methocarbamol, 210
 Postoperative care, 136-7
Methylene blue see New methylene blue stain
Packed cell volume (PCV), 87
Potassium
Microsporum canis, 167-8
Pain assessment, 129
 on blood chemistry, 92
Midazolam, 123-4, 126
Pain management, 129-35
sample integrity, 83-4
Milk thistle, 174
 Pain management drugs
Prednisone, in cholangiohepatitis treatment,
Mini Lack anesthesia system, 116
buprenor phine, 133
176
Mirtazapine, 214
butorphanol, 133
 Pregnancy, 21
Missing teeth, 147
dexmedetomidine, 134
Premolar
Mite
fentanyl, 132-3
eruption times, 146
cigarette,196-7
hydromorphone, 132
location, 145
Demodex,196-7
ketamine,133
Presistant primary teeth, 147
harvest, 198
methadone, 114
Preventive health program, 18-20
Mitral valve, 155
morphine, 133
Primary mitral insufficiency, 161
Molar
Palpebral reflex, 121
Probing, dental, 146
charting, 148
Pancreas, 172
Propofol, 115
eruption times, 146
imaging,40,46
Protamine zinc insulin, 180
location, 145
physiology, 172
Povidone-lodine, 120
Monitoring
 Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity see Feline,
Psychogenic alopecia see Obsessive-
during anesthesia, 125-8
 pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
compulsive alopecia
post-operative, 136
Panleukopenia, vaccine, 18
Psyllium, in inflammatory bowel disease
Monocyte,90
Paracetamol see Acetaminophen
treatment, 177
Morphine, 123-4, 142-3
Paragonimus kellicotti, 201
Pulmonary artery,155,04
Mucosa
Parathyroid glands, 178
Pulmonary edema, imaging, 35, 38, 157-8
WSuseu
Parturition, 21-2
Pulmonary thromboembolism see
 physiology, 172
Passive range of motion, 138-40
Thromboembolism, pulmonary
Multimodal analgesia, 131-2
 PCR see Polymerase chain reaction test 
Pulmonary valve, 155
Murmur, 155
 Periapical abscess, 147
Pulse oximeter, anesthetic monitor, 125-6
Mycoplasma haemofelis, 104
Perineal urethrostomy, 218
Pumpkin, in Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Myocarditis, in restrictive cardiomyopathy, 161
Periodontal disease, 146
Treatment, 177
stages, 146
Pyelonephritis, 215
 Nail overgrowth see Toe nail overgrowth
Permethrin, 210
Pyrethrin toxicosis, 210
Naloxone, 133
Persistent viremia, 194
Nasopharynx, 204
Pethidine, 113-14
QRS complex see Electrocardiogram
 Neck lesions see Tooth resorption
pH
Quality control, of laboratory samples, 70-79
Nematode see Capillaria feliscati
blood, 127
Queening see Parturition
Neonatal care,23
urine,94
New methylene blue stain, 99
 Phenobarbital, for obsessive-compulsive
Rabies, vaccination, 18
Nitroglycerin, 160
alopecia, 166
Radiation safety, 31
Nitrous oxide, 116
Phenolic disinfectants, 208
Radioactive iodine, 180
Non-regenerative anemia, 91
Phlebotomy see Venipuncture
Radiographic technique, dental
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs, 133
Phosphate binder, for renal diseases, 214
bisecting angle, 148-50
Notoed res cati, 195
Phosphate-containing enema, 210
parallel, 149
Nuclear scintigraphy see Scintigraphy
Phosphorus, in blood chemistry, 93
Radiography, 31-65
223
Index
Radioiodine see Radioactive iodine
Spironolactone, 160
Triglyceride, 94
Radiology technique chart, 31
Squamous cell carcinoma, 78
Tritrichomonas foetus, 203
Radius, imaging,523
Staining, cytology sample, 73-4
Tritrichomoniasis, 203
Range of motion, 138
Stomatitis, 147
Trombicula autummalis, 198
Red blood cell see Erythrocyte
Stretching, 141
Turbinate bones, 204
Regenerative anemia, 91
String of pearls sign, 40
Tympanic bulla, imaging, 61, 63
Regressor, in FeLV Infections, 189
Strongyloides spp., 199
Rehabilitation, 138-44
Subtypes, FIV, 182-4
Una, imaging, 52-3
Renal artery, 213
Supernumerary see Extra teeth
Ultrasonography see Imaging
Renal failure
Surgical preparation, 119-20
Ultrasound, therapeutic, 139
acute, 215
Upper respiratory tract, 204
acute vs. chronic, 214-15
T, suppression test
Urea see Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
chronic, 214
diagnosis of hyperthyroidism, 178
Ureter, 213
Renal insufficiency, 215-16
procedure, 178
Urethra, 213
 Renal pelvis 
T, test, 178
Urethral obstruction, 218
imaging, 44, 47
Tachyzoite, 201
Urethrogram, 54
physiology,213
Taenia spp, 199-200
Urethrostomy see Perineal urethrostomy
Resorptive lesions, 146, 147
Taenia taenieformis,199
Urinalysis, interpretation of, 94-5
t07 KlolonsAyd pue Auoieue uaiss Aiotendsa
Tapeworm, 199
Urinary bladder
Restraint, for examination
Tarsus, imaging,58-9
cystocentesis, 66-7
 abdominal palpation, 7-8
Taurine, and dilated cardiomyopathy, 161
cytology of cells, 73
auscultation, 7,9
Telazol, 124
diseases, 216-18
extremities, 7,9
Terbutaline, 204
examination, 6, 26
head, 7-8
Therapeutic exercise, 140-142
imaging, 39-44, 46, 48
 Restraint, for oral pill administration, 7, 10-11
assisted standing, 141
parasites, 201
Restrictive cardiomyopathy see
bicycling, 140
physiology, 213
Cardiomyopathy, restrictive
laser lights, toys, treats, 141
Urinary calculus see Urolith
Resuscitation see Cardiopulmonary
stretching, 141
Urinary stone see Urolith
resuscitation
weight shifting, 141
Urinary tract, 213
Reticulocyte, on CBC, 91
wheelbarrowing-dancing, 142
Urinary tract disease, 213-18
Reticulocytes, types of, 99
Therapeutic ultrasound see Ultrasound,
Urobilinogen, physiology, 172
Retinal hemorrhage, hypertension, 179
therapeutic, 139
Urolithiasis, 216
Rhinitis
 Thermoregulation, during anesthesia, 121
Ursodeoxycholic acid, 175-6
granulomatous, 79
Thiopental, 115
Ursodiol see, Ursodeoxycholic acid
suppurative,79
Thorax,imaging,3-8
Uterine torsion, 21
Rhinosinusitis, 183
Thrombocyte see Platelets
Uveitis, 187,193
 Right atrial enlargement, 160
Thromboembolic disease see
Right ventricular hypertrophy, on ECG, 167
 Thromboembolism
Vaccine
Ringworm see Dermatophytosis
 Thromboembolism, 163
Bordetella,19
Rodent ulcer see Eosinophilic ulcer
Thyroid palpation, 5, 6
calicivirus, 18
Rodenticides, 209
Thyroid testing
Chlamydophila,19
Romanowsky-type stains, 97
free T 178
herpesvirus, 18
Rostroversion see Lance canine teeth
total thyroxine (TT), 94, 178
leukemia,18
Rouleaux, 101
T, suppression test, 178
rabies, 18
Roundworms, 208-9
Thyroid, function of, 178
Vagal stimulation, 125
Thyroidectomy, 179
Vasopressin, 124
Saddle thrombus, 163
Thyrotoxic cardiomyopathy see
Venipuncture, 67-8
Sadenosylmethionine, in hepatic lipidosis
Cardiomyopathy, thyrotoxic
Ventilation, 126-7
treatment, 174
Tibia, imaging, 58-9
Ventricular hypertrophy,157
Salicylate toxicosis see Aspirin toxicosis
Tiletamine,114-15
Ventricular premature complex, 157
Salmon calcitonin, for chalecalciferol
Tissue cells, 74-6
Ventricular septal defect, 161-2
rodenticide toxicity, 209
epithelial cells, 76
Vitamin D rodenticides, 209
SAMe see S-adenosylmethionine
round cells, 78
Vitamin K supplementation, 174
Sarcocystis spp., 202
spindle (mesenchymal) cells, 78
Vitamin K, for toxicities, 209
Sarcoma, cytology, 78, 85
Toe nail overgrowth, 26
Vomeronasal organ, 146
Sarcoptes scabiei, 196
Tooth discoloration, 148
Vomiting,176
Scabies, 196
Tooth resorption, 146
Scapula, imaging, 49-50
Total T, test see Total thyroxine
Walking dandruff, 195
Scintigraphy, 179
Total thyroxine, 94
Warfarin, 209
Sedation, 113
Toxicosis
WBC see Leukocytes
 Serum bile acids see Bile acids
acetaminophen, 210
Weight shifting, 141
Serum enzymes, 93
aspirin,210
Wheelbarrowing, 142
Sevoflurane, 115-16
ethylene glycol, 209
Whipworms,201
Signalment, 3
Toxocara cati, 198
White blood cell see Leu kocytes
Sinus arrhythmia, 156
Toxoplasma gondi,201-2
 Skin, anatomy and physiology, 164
Toxoplasmosis, 95, 201-2
Xylazine, 211
Skull, imaging, 61
Transient viremia, in FeLV Infection, 189 
Sodium, on blood chemistry, 92
Triadan tooth numbering system, 148
Yohimbine, 134
Spine, imaging, 61
Trichophyton, 167-8
Spirocerca lupi,199
Trichuris serrate, 201
Zolazepam, 115, 124
Spirometra spp., 199
Tricuspid valve, 155
Zygomatic arch, 149
224