BSAVA
BSAVA Manual of
BRITISH SMALL ANIMAL
VETERINARY ASSOCIATION
Canine and Feline
Endoscopy and
Endosurgery
Edited by
Philip Lhermette
and David Sobel
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
List of contributors
V
Foreword
vii
Preface
!!A!
An introduction to endoscopy and endosurgery
1
Philip Lhermette and David Sobel
Instrumentation
11
2
Christopher J. Chamness
3
Flexible endoscopy: basic technique
31
Edward J. Hall
Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
42
4
Edward J. Hall
Flexible endoscopy: lower gastrointestinal tract
73
5
James W. Simpson
6
Flexible endoscopy: respiratory tract
84
Diane Levitan and Susan Kimmel
Rigid endoscopy and endosurgery: principles
97
7
Philip Lhermette and David Sobel
Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
8
109
Philip Lhermette and David Sobel
 Rigid endoscopy: otoendoscopy
131
9
Laura Ordeix and Fabia Scarampella
10
 Rigid endoscopy: urethrocystoscopy and vaginoscopy
142
Alasdair Hotston Moore and Gary England
11
Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
158
Eric Monnet, Philip Lhermette and David Sobel
Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy
12
175
MaryAnn Radlinsky
 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
13
188
Rob Pettitt and John F. Innes
An introduction to laser endosurgery
14
220
David Sobel and Jody Lulich
Index
228
V
Contributors
Christopher J. Chamness DVM
Karl Storz GmbH & Co., 175 Cremona Drive, Goleta, Santa Barbara, CA 93117, USA
 I a    P  P P 
Loughborough LE12 5RD
Edward J. Hall MA VetMB PhD DipECVIM-CA MRCVS
Division of Companion Animal Studies, Department of Clinical Veterinary Science,
University of Bristol, Langford House, Langford, Bristol BS40 5DU
Alasdair Hotston Moore MA VetMB CertSAC CertVR CertSAS MRcvS
Division of Companion Animal Studies, Department of Clinical Veterinary Science,
University of Bristol, Langford House, Langford, Bristol BS40 5DU
John F. Innes BVSc PhD CertVR DSAS(Orth) MRCVS
Small Animal Teaching Hospital, Leahurst Campus, University of Liverpool, Chester High Road
Neston, Cheshire CH64 7TE
Susan Kimmel DVM DipACVIM
The Center for Specialized Veterinary Care, 609-5 Cantiague Rock Road, Westbury, NY 11590, USA
Diane Levitan VMD DipAcVIM
The Center for Specialized Veterinary Care, 609-5 Cantiague Rock Road, Westbury, NY 11590, USA
Jody Lulich DVM PhD DipACVIM
1352 Boyd Avenue, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA
Philip Lhermette BSc (Hons) CBiol MIBiol BVetMed MRCVS
Elands Veterinary Clinic, Station Road, Dunton Green, Sevenoaks, Kent TN13 2XA
Eric Monnet DVM PhD FAHA DipACvS DipECVS
Department of Clinical Sciences, Colorado State University, 300 West Drake Road, Fort Collins,
CO 80523, USA
Laura Ordeix DvM DipECVD
Carrer Tragi 4, 08003, Barcelona, Spain
Rob Pettitt BVSc CertSAS MRCVS
Small Animal Teaching Hospital, Leahurst Campus, University of Liverpool, Chester High Road,
Neston, Cheshire CH64 7TE
MaryAnn Radlinsky DVM MS DipACVS
University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA
Fabia Scarampella DVM DipEcVD
Studio Dermatologico Veterinario, Via Sismondi 62, 20133 Milano, Italy
James W. Simpson SDA BVM&S MPhil MRCVS
Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, Easter Bush Veterinary Centre, Roslin,
Midlothian EH25 9RG
David Sobel DVM MRCvS
Foreword
The BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Endoscopy and Endosurgery has been written to help
 a   ns  sio s   sls  s
'minimally invasive' usually refers to flexible endoscopy for diagnosis and rigid endoscopy for both
diagnosis and surgery, largely reflecting the practices of minimally invasive procedures performed in
human medicine. The availability of advanced imaging modalities such as ultrasound, CT and MRI
enables more precise targeting of affected tissues in veterinary medicine. Reasonably priced surgical
tools for tissue cutting and coagulation, such as diode lasers, bipolar electrocautery devices and the
harmonic scalpel, are now available to improve surgical precision. New endoscopic tools will facilitate
more therapeutic procedures being performed with flexible endoscopy in the future. The magnification
and visualization provided by endoscopic approaches makes diagnosis and therapy possible in areas
of the body that were previously inaccessible. Though veterinarians still, and will continue to, utilize
open surgery, current trends suggest that less invasive procedures are here to stay.
If we take a lesson from human medicine, when new procedures are facilitated by new technology.
demanded by patients, produce equivalent or better outcomes, and are cost-effective, they most surely
the early 1990s, I have seen tremendous advances in instrumentation, techniques, procedures, and
in our ability to teach these techniques to others. We are witnessing a growing demand for minimally
invasive procedures from clients who see the excellent outcomes from friends and family members
 By first giving an introduction to the instrumentation, and then focusing on the endoscopic application
very experienced in minimally invasive surgery and are able to present the material in such a way that
is easily read and assimilated into small animal practice. The editors, along with the authors, have
worked diligently not only to demonstrate equivalent or better clinical outcomes, but also to show the
cost-effectiveness of these procedures in a practice setting.
Although veterinarians are still in the early phase of adoption of minimally invasive procedures, I
believe that we are poised for endoscopy and endoscopic surgery to be a vital element of the future
veterinarian's armamentarium. I anticipate even greater utilization of flexible endoscopy for therapeutic
procedures and perhaps even combinations of flexible and rigid endoscopy to diagnose and treat
Lynetta Freeman DvM Ms
West Lafayette, IN
March 2008
vii
Preface
The second millennium has brought with it a new era of modern surgery. The
of anesthesia and sterile technique was to the last one.'
Marelyn Medina MD
Rio Grande Regional Hospital (McAllen, TX)
Society of Laparoscopic Endosurgeons Public Relations Committee
Minimally invasive techniques, or 'keyhole surgery' as they are commonly known, have become the
standard in human healthcare over recent years. Veterinary surgeons have been slow to exploit fully
these new techniques, partly due to the high cost of instrumentation in the early days, and partly through
natural conservatism. With the availability of equipment at a reasonable cost, these techniques have
become cost-effective in general practice and provide several advantages over conventional surgery.
fascinating branch of veterinary surgery. lt is intended as a guide for those starting out in this interesting
field -- and subjects covered range from the purchase of equipment to basic techniques, with a few
references to more the advanced techniques to whet the appetite of more ambitious surgeons.
We have tried to make the Manual as practical as possible, drawing from our own experience, to
give hints and tips that we find useful both in surgical technique and on purchase of instrumentation
without breaking the bank - and without compromising quality - in order to maintain high surgical
to take practical wet lab' courses with qualified instructors before embarking on these techniques for
hand-eye coordination can, with practice, carry out most of these procedures.
allowing day surgery where previously recovery would take days or weeks. Reduction in perioperative
pain is a major benefit for all patients. At a time when the profession is becoming more and more
and trauma in the first place? In the words of Hippocrates first do no harm.'
knowledge and experience but also an unbridled enthusiasm for their work that will hopefully inspire
others to continue to develop techniques in the future.
Philip Lhermette
David Sobel
December 2007
vili
An introduction to endoscopy
and endosurgery
Philip Lhermette and David Sobel
Introduction
Frankfurt in 1805. The breakthrough was the addition
of a light source to improve visualization. The
Endoscopy is derived from two words: the Greek
Lichtleiter utilized a beeswax candle as a light source,
endo meaning inside and scopein meaning to look
reflecting the light down a hollow tube using a mirror.
at or view. Over the past few years there have
The operator peered through a hole in the centre of
the mirror. This device was used for looking at the
patients and to perform quite complex operations
rectum, vagina and urethra via a selection of different
through tiny incisions. This has given rise to the term
specula. However, visibility was still poor and the
keyhole surgery.
procedure was uncomfortable or even painful for the
But endoscopy is not new. Mankind has seemingly
patient (with the additional risk of burns), so the device
always possessed an innate curiosity to peer inside
did not gain popularity at the time. Added to this, when
body cavities. The first reports of endoscopy come
Bozzini demonstrated his device to the Academy of
from Hippocrates (460-377 Bc), who described the
Medicine of Vienna in 1806, he was ostracized for his
use of a rectal speculum. Roman, Greek and Arab
'undue curiosity', and his invention described as '.but 
physicians all made use of various primitive specula
a magic lantern'. He died a few years later, in 1809,
for peering into body cavities, indeed three- and four-
but his work inspired some to continue in this field.
pronged vaginal specula (not dissimilar to modern
instruments) were unearthed at the ruins of Pompeii,
dating from AD 79. However, these devices used only
natural light and no lenses or optics of any kind. No
real advances on these initial attempts were made
until the 19th century.
Endoscopists have had a difficult time throughout
history convincing the critics. The modern era of
endoscopy really started in the early 19th century with
the introduction of the Lichtleiter (Figures 1.1 and 1.2)
or light conductor, by Philipp Bozzini (Figure 1.3) of
Attachable light-carrying tubes. (Courtesy of
1.2
Magister E Krebs)
1.1
Restored light
1.3
conductor with
attached four-part
Philipp Bozzini
light-carrying
(1783-1809).
tube.(Courtesy of
(Courtesy of the
Magister E Krebs)
Collectionsof the
Medical University.
Vienna)
sbaini
Chapter 1  An introduction to endoscopy and endosurgery
Half a century later, in 1853, French surgeon
Antonin Desormeaux (Figure 1.4), another urologist,
designed the first functional cystoscope. This device
used a Gazogene lamp, burning a mixture of turpentine 
and alcohol and was based on the Lichtleiter. This
had all the drawbacks of Bozzini's apparatus, but 
prompted Desormeaux to write his monograph 'De
l'endoscopie' in 1865, which greatly increased interest 
in endoscopy and resulted in the early commercial
 production of endoscopes in the USA.
Maximilian Karl Friedrich Nitze (1848-1906)
1.5
 (Courtesy of the Collections of the Medical 
University, Vienna)
Antonin Jean Desormeaux (1815-1822).
1.4
(Courtesy of the Austrian Urological Society)
Up until then most attention had focused on cysto-
scopy and the urogenital tract. In 1868, a Desormeaux
endoscope was used by Adolf Kussmaul in the first
attempts to explore the oesophagus and the stomach.
Since this device was essentially a hollow rigid tube, it
was somewhat difficult to introduce into the stomach,
especially in a conscious subject, so it was probably
no coincidence that the 'patient' used for his demon-
stration was a professional sword swallower. Although
visualization was limited using this apparatus, the
 principle of gastroduodenoscopy was born.
When Thomas Edison invented the light bulb in
1879, it was immediately seen to be the answer to
many of the problems of poor illumination in the early
endoscopes. In the same year, Maximilian Nitze
(Figure 1.5) and Josef Leiter (Figure 1.6) produced a
rigid cystoscope with a built-in light source made from
electrically heated platinum wire. The endoscope itself 
incorporated a working channel and a multi-lens sys-
tem, and the whole apparatus was water-cooled, much
 to the relief of their patients. They followed this up with
 Josef Leiter (1830-1892). (Courtesy of the 
1.6
a crude gastroscope based on the same pattern.
 Collections of the Medical University, Vienna)
Chapter 1  An introduction to endoscopy and endosurgery
In 1887, Nitze and Leiter improved the design by
introduction of a rubber gasket by Stone in the USA,
moving the light bulb to the distal end of the device,
which dramatically reduced gas leakage through the
improving illumination still further. The rigid nature of
trocar, and the introduction of a new needle for
these devices limited the range of view and required
induction of pneumoperitoneum by Janos Veress
from Hungary in 1938. The Veress needle was
prevent iatrogenic damage. The limitations caused by
originally designed for induction of pneumothorax
blind spots were partly overcome by the introduction
prior to thoracoscopic treatment of tuberculosis, but it
of a gastroscope with a flexible lower tip. This was
was quickly adopted by laparoscopic surgeons. It 
developed in 1898 by George Kelling in Dresden, and
comprised a sharp needle containing a spring-loaded
was controlled with a system of wire pulleys operated
blunt trocar to minimize trauma to intra-abdominal
from the proximal end. However, this instrument did
organs, and is stil widely used today.
Up until the 1920s endoscopes had been almost 
tion of an earlier rigid instrument, a triple tube gastro-
entirely rigid instruments, often with an arrangement
scope, originally invented by Theodore Rosenheim in 
of angles and mirrors to negotiate around corners. In 
Berlin in 1896.
1920, Rudolph Schindler, a physician from Munich,
This consisted of: an inner tube containing a
modified an old Elsner gastroscope by adding a
 number of short focus lenses; a middle tube containing
channel for air insuffation, which greatly improved 
the lighting system, derived from a water-cooled
the image and reduced smearing of the lens with
platinum wire loop; and an outer sheath with a scale
 gastric contents and mucus. The rubber tip was
of measurement. This was modified by Elsner in 1911
inserted using a rigid inner tube that was then
to include a rubber tip for introduction, and became
withdrawn and replaced with the lens and lighting
 the standard gastroscope for the next 20 years.
system. In 1932 Schindler, in collaboration with
The first attempt at an endoscopic examination of
George Wolf of Berlin, replaced the lower third of the 
the abdominal cavity was carried out by Dimitri
gastroscope with a flexible bronze spiral covered in
Oskarovich Ott of Petrograd, Russia in 1901. He used
rubber. A system of short focus lenses in the inner
a head mirror and speculum to peer through an inci-
tube could be bent in any direction to an angle of 34
sion made in the posterior vaginal wall. In the same
degrees without visual distortion, thus heralding an
year George Kelling of Dresden, Germany, performed
era of semi-flexible endoscopy, which remained
the first true laparoscopy on a dog. He used a Nitze
dominant until 1957.
cystoscope and insufflated the abdomen by injecting
Schindler  was an  inspirational  teacher  and
air through a sterile cotton filter. He published this
 groundbreaking researcher, introducing photography
work in 1902, terming his procedure celioscopy.
and microphotography to his work and publishing
Working separately, Hans Christian Jacobaeus
widely. He became a world authority on endoscopy
from Stockholm, Sweden, published his initial series
and inspired a medical student, Heinrich Lamm, to
of endoscopic examinations of patients with ascites
suggest that a bundle of flexible glass rods might
and coined the term laparoscopy. He went on to apply
conduct light and images better than the system of
this technique to the thorax, and performed thoraco-
lenses traditionally used. John Logi Baird, renowned
scopic lysis of pleural adhesions and chest drainage
as the inventor of the television, coincidentally
under local analgesia in a tuberculosis sanatorium.
patented the idea of using curved glass rods to carry
By 1912 Kelling and Jacobaeus had reported 160
light around a curve at about the same time, but failed 
examinations and described liver pathology, neoplasia
to develop his idea. Lamm spent 2 years developing
and tuberculosis. In 1912 Victor Darwin Lespinasse,
his prototype and in 1930 was able to photograph
working in Chicago, performed the first endoscopic
writing on a piece of paper placed in the stomach. In
neurosurgical procedure: intracranial intraventricular
1934 Schindler, a Jew, was arrested by the Gestapo
 endoscopy and coagulation of the choroid plexus for
and sent to Dachau concentration camp, where he
the treatment of hydrocephalus in two children. Walter
remained for 6 months until the combined efforts of
Dandy went on to improve the technique in 1932 with
colleagues in the USA and Germany managed to get
results similar to craniotomy. In 1911 the first laparo-
him released. He travelled to Chicago where, as a
scopic procedure was carried out in the USA by
visiting professor, he established Chicago as the new
Bertram Bernheim, and the diagnostic use of laparo-
world centre of endoscopy and was responsible for a
scopy  expanded  rapidly amongst internists 
and
renewed and serious interest in the manufacture of 
gynaecologists, but general surgeons lost interest as
endoscopes in the USA.
the therapeutic value appeared limited.
By the 1950s antibiotic therapy had largely
Over the following 20 years, many modifications
replaced the use of thoracoscopy in the treatment of
to instrumentation and technique were made to
tuberculosis, and over the next 20 years thoracoscopy
facilitate exploration of the abdominal cavity. Sharp-
developed as a mainly diagnostic procedure. It was
tipped pyramidal trocars were introduced in 1920,
still used in the management of pleural effusion and
and insufflation by syringe was supplanted by a
manual insufflator operated by a foot pump, introduced
 metastatic tumours. It was not until 1954 that flexible
in 1921 by Goetze. A move to carbon dioxide as
endoscopes as we know them today were first
the insufflation gas was made popular in 1924 by
conceived. Harold H. Hopkins, who invented the
Zollikofer in Switzerland, as it was less flammable
zoom lens in 1946, was a mathematician and
and more rapidly absorbed, and therefore less likely
to result in embolism. Other major advances were the
Science in London. In 1929 Hopkins had thought of
3
Chapter 1  An introduction to endoscopy and endosurgery
the idea of using flexible plastic rods, coated with a
 at the distal end. These had a much improved image
low refractive index material and outer layer of black
 quality as they did not produce the pixelated image,
paint, to transmit undistorted images from one end of
which results from fibreoptic transmission.
the bundle to the other.
Even at this late stage, endoscopy was largely
Instrument maker Karl Storz had suggested to
used by internists in a predominately diagnostic role.
Hopkins the idea of optical fibres to transmit light,
Minor procedures, such as intestinal polyp removal,
coupled with a rod lens system within an optical
 biopsies and bladder stone retrieval, were being
shaft to transmit images. These improvements
performed but general surgeons were still rather dis-
allowed a much clearer, brighter image than had
 interested. The stimulus for advances in laparoscopy
been possible before, with a more natural rendition
and endosurgery came from German gynaecologist
 of colours. An additional advantage was that the light 
Kurt Semm (Figure 1.7), widely acknowledged as the
source was removed from the tip of the instrument,
father of modern laparoscopy. Semm developed an
decreasing the risk of burning the patient. Storz pat-
automatic carbon dioxide insufflator to monitor intra-
ented this idea in 1965, and this principle is still used
abdominal pressure during laparoscopy, as well as
today in most rigid endoscopes, giving a wider field
tissue morcellators, suction/irrigation systems and
 of view and better light transmission with a smaller
various techniques for laparoscopic haemostasis.
diameter of insertion tube than when using tradi-
Above all he was an enthusiastic teacher and innova-
tional thin lenses.
tor, and, with the assistance of Karl Storz, developed
Hopkins was also interested in transmitting the
 the pelvi-trainer, a laparoscopic model which enabled
 image via optical fibres, and together with his post-
surgeons to practise the vital hand-eye coordination
graduate fellow Narinder Singh Kampany, a physicist
 and suturing techniques necessary for successful
studying advanced optics, he researched ways of 
interventional laparoscopy.
coating optical fibres and arranging them in a coher-
ent bundle so that the spatial arrangement of fibres
remained unchanged along the length of the bundle.
In this way an image could be transmitted even if the
bundle were bent through 360 degrees. In 1954
 Hopkins and Kampany published a report of success-
 fully transmitting images through fibreoptical bundles 
in Nature entitled ‘A flexible fibrescope using static
scanning'. A cardiology registrar at the Hammersmith 
Hospital in London, Timothy Counihan, had read this
paper and mentioned it to a colleague, Keith Henley.
 Henley was a gastroenterologist, and Counihan,
rightly as it turned out, suggested that this might have
a practical application in gastroenterology. A short 
while later, Henley was in the USA and discussed the 
idea over lunch with a fellow gastroenterologist Basil 
Hirschowitz, a South African who trained at the Central
Middlesex Hospital in London. Hirschowitz was con-
 ducting research into a miniature camera that could
be used to take diagnostic images of the gastric
lumen, and he immediately saw the potential of this 
idea and contacted Kampany in London. The discus-
sion convinced Hirschowitz that these techniques
 could be applied to endoscopy, and on his return to
the USA he collaborated with two physicists from
 Michigan, C. Wilbur Peters and Lawrence T. Curtiss,
to produce the first working flexible fibreoptic endo-
scope in 1957. This was manufactured commercially
in 1960, and in 1962 a controllable directional tip was
introduced following a suggestion by Liverpool gastro-
Kurt Karl Stephan Semm (1927-2003).
1.7
 scopist Robert Kemp. Over the following 10 years or 
(Courtesy of L Mettler, University of Kiel)
so further modifications were introduced, with the
 addition of water and air insufflation channels and
provision for suction and passage of instruments.
However, laparoscopy was still widely viewed with 
 Another leap forward came with the development
considerable scepticism; indeed, it was variously
 in 1969 of the Charged-Couple Device (CCD) by Bell
thought of as unethical, reckless and even downright
Laboratories in the USA. This device is common
dangerous. On one occasion Semm was in the
today in digital still and video cameras, and
middle of a slide presentation on ovarian cyst
revolutionized endoscopy. CCDs are small, light, and
enucleation by  laparoscopy  when suddenly  the
very sensitive to light, and are ideal for capturing
projector was unplugged with the explanation that
endoscopic images. By 1983 the first flexible vide0-
 such unethical surgery should not be presented.
endoscopes were being introduced with a CCD chip
When he was appointed to the chair of the Department
Chapter 1
Aabnsopua pue Adoosopue oi uoonpou! ua 
of Obstetrics and Gynaecology at the University of
 procedures to resect colon cancer met with scepticism
Kiel in 1970, Semm introduced laparoscopic surgery
and worries that it might increase wound recurrence
into his department and, at the request of co-workers,
through seeding at the operative site. However, these
had to undergo a brain scan because colleagues
fears have not been realized and indeed rates of
 suspected that only a person with brain damage
recurrence have been similar or less with laparoscopic
would perform laparoscopic surgery.
techniques, whereas return of bowel function and lack 
 Upon requesting that surgeons at the University of
of adhesions have been greatly enhanced.
Kiel in the years 1975-1980 perform laparoscopic
Veterinary  surgeons have also pioneered
cholecystectomy, Semm was greeted with laughter.
minimally invasive techniques since the early 1970s,
Despite all this he persisted with his vision. In 1983
but uptake has been slow, due in part to the
Semm performed the first laparoscopic appendectomy,
considerable cost of instrumentation and the same
making the first move from diagnostic to therapeutic
scepticism that so inhibited the early pioneers in the
 pns e p si u uu o
human field. Flexible endoscopy was the first to gain
what he had done, the President of the German
acceptance in the veterinary field with the obvious
Surgical Society called for his suspension. But the
 benefit that these instruments give in the exploration
seed had been set.
of the tubular structures of the body, in particular
Erich Muhe of Germany carried out the first chole-
the respiratory and gastrointestinal (Gl) tracts. The 
cystectomy in 1985, amidst severe criticism from the
first reports of bronchoscopy in small animals
 German Surgical Society. These procedures were dif-
appeared from O'Brien in 1970 and were followed
ficult and awkward to perform as the surgeon had to
by flexible endoscopy of the Gl tract by Johnson et
hold the endoscope in one hand and peer through the
 al. in 1976. Biopsy samples could be taken and
 oculus. Then came the development of the CCD tele-
foreign bodies removed without resorting to open
vision camera. For the first time, cameras were small
surgery, and these procedures rapidly gained
enough to clip on to the eyepiece of an endoscope
 acceptance. Rigid endoscopy has taken longer to
 and transmit a magnified image to a monitor. Not only
become established, despite the first reports from
did this greatly increase the diagnostic and surgical
Dalton and Hill (1972) and Lettow (1972), working
ability of the endoscopist, it also allowed other mem-
separately, on the use of laparoscopy for evaluation
bers of the surgical team to view the procedure.
 of the liver and pancreas.
Surgical assistants could operate the camera and
endoscope, freeing the surgeon's hands to enable
that 'wounds heal side to side, not end to end; make a
 more delicate procedures to be carried out using two
big hole', the aim of which was to give the surgeon
hands, and the maintenance of a sterile field was
 optimum visualization of the surgical field. Video-
greatly enhanced. The first video-assisted chole-
 assisted endoscopy has completely superseded this
cystectomy was carried out by Philippe Mouret of
Lyon, France in 1987, and was rapidly followed by 
enhanced, magnified and well illuminated view of
others. Despite the early scepticism, the advent of
almost the entire abdominal or thoracic cavity through 
video-assisted endoscopy heralded a major paradigm
 a tiny 5 mm incision. It has enabled veterinary
 shift in the view of general surgeons worldwide, and 
 surgeons to visualize areas, such as the urethra and
by 1991 there was an explosion of new techniques
 sn  m   
unparalleled in surgical history. In 1993 the National
 access adequately, and even carry out endosurgical
Institutes of Health held a consensus conference,
 procedures without the need for any surgical incisions.
which declared laparoscopic  cholecystectomy  the
The benefits to the patient are obvious and, much as
treatment of choice for uncomplicated cholelithiasis.
has been the case in human surgery, the impetus for
Laparoscopic techniques were applied to almost
veterinary minimally invasive procedures may well
every aspect of abdominal and thoracic surgery, as
become client driven, at least in part. As the cost of 
well as arthroscopic exploration of joints. After experi-
equipment has come down in price, it has become 
encing years of ridicule, Kurt Semm's vision had
economically viable to convert to minimally invasive
finally been vindicated.
procedures,
human
and
surgical
equipment
 Surgeons quickly appreciated the benefits of fewer
manufacturers have formed  veterinary divisions.
abdominal adhesions, faster return of bowel function
Manufacturers
are
 also
 producing
equipment
 after surgery, and fewer wound complications and
 exclusively for the veterinary market with modifications
 postoperative infections. Patients were up and about
that suit veterinary patients and techniques, as well
more quickly, freeing hospital beds, and there was
as our pockets.
 much less postoperative pain and scarring. This led
to an added impetus from patients themselves,
Incorporating endoscopy into
hospital authorities were quick to appreciate the
veterinary practice
benefits  too.  Laparoscopic  hernia   repairs
6and
 antireflux surgery were quickly followed by techniques
The decision to incorporate minimally invasive surgery
for removal of solid organs, such as the spleen,
 and diagnostics into a companion animal practice is a
 adrenal glands, liver lobes and kidney. This not only
complicated one, taking i
 into account practice
benefited patients with organic disease but also
demographics, economics, staffing, physical plant
increased the donor pool for transplantation, since
considerations, practitioner interests, and relative
donor organ removal became less traumatic. Initial
 proximity to similar practices.
5
Chapter 1  An introduction to endoscopy and endosurgery
Make no mistake - endoscopic equipment is
With the used equipment market thriving in the
 expensive. It is expensive to purchase, expensive to
USA, more and more high-quality endoscopic
maintain and expensive to operate. For the purchase
equipment is making its way across the Atlantic. This
of instrumentation, both the used secondary
has made it much easier for practitioners to purchase
equipment market and the new equipment market are
instrumentation  and  reduced   the  costs  in  the
viable sources.
secondary market. However, it is prudent for the
 In the USA, where human healthcare is largely in
European veterinary surgeon to carefully evaluate the
the competitive marketplace, the market for used
electrical and video compatibility of North American
medical equipment is thriving. At top US hospitals,
equipment with those available in their countries. The
when new and improved instrumentation becomes
electrical supply in the USA is based on a standard 
available, there is often a race to procure the latest
110 volt power source with country-specific mains
sa      
high-quality equipment ends up on the secondary
transformer is needed to make the equipment usable
market, where it is either exported overseas or sold on 
in other countries. In addition, the video standard
 to the veterinary market. In the UK, current NHS regu-
used in the USA is NTSC. It can be dificult to use
lations make it difficult for individual NHS hospitals to
NTSC video cameras with monitors and video
dispose of excess or redundant equipment to the vet-
recording apparatus using the standard European
erinary community. The government does maintain a
PAL video format. Often converters are needed,
resource database of available used medical equip-
decreasing image quality, complicating set up and 
ment, but it is limited, and navigating the NHS bureau-
increasing costs.
cracy to obtain medical equipment can be frustrating.
 In response to the burgeoning need for endoscopic 
That being said, having a good working relationship
instrumentation  in the  veterinary  market, 
new
with personnel in the operating theatres and store-
equipment, much of it specifically engineered for
rooms of your local NHS hospital can be helpful.
companion animal practices, has become more
Surplus equipment from the NHS and private sector is
readily available. In the UK and worldwide, there are
often sold off at medical auctions, and this can be a
now many companies that specifically work with the
useful source for the veterinary surgeon. However, it
veterinary community. New equipment almost invari-
is a case of buyer beware' since the equipment is
ably costs more. However, skilled representatives
sold with no guarantee and it can be difficult to assess 
from these companies can provide advice as to the
 functionality in the auction environment.
best equipment for  the particular species and
The used medical equipment market, whilst
 procedure. Often these companies provide excellent
variable in inventory and quality, can be an excellent
warranties and service plans, guaranteeing a high
place for  the  veterinary practitioner  to obtain
 degree of 'up-time'. In addition, continued professional
endoscopic equipment. However, there are some
development (CPD) and installation training  to
important qualifiers for navigating these resellers. It
facilitate the integration of endoscopy into the practice
should be borne in mind that all of the human
 are often available from these companies.
equipment sold on the secondary market was not 
 Financing the purchase of endoscopic equipment 
 designed for small animal use. The veterinary surgeon
is beyond the scope of this manual. Suffice to say that
must have a solid understanding of what procedures
creative financing options, including leases with low-
they will be performing and on what patients. For
cost buyouts, and many other options are available.
instance, buying a very 
 inexpensive  12
mm
This discussion should be held with tax advisers and
sigmoidoscope will be of limited value for the feline
other business professionals to make sure that the
practitioner looking to perform small bowel endoscopy.
best financial option is explored for the individual
Taking careful stock of what equipment is needed for
practice. As competition increases, the cost of new
the  most common procedures intended to be 
equipment falls, and a basic set of rigid endoscopy
 performed is critical prior to going shopping.
equipment, including camera and monitor, now costs
Equipment history is difficult to obtain from the
roughly the same as an ultrasound machine. However,
secondary market. How, 
, where and for what
the cost of the equipment is an abstract number
procedures the equipment was used, and if there is
without adequate planning and prediction of the
any relevant repair history, all affect the potential
number of procedures to be performed and the
resale value of the equipment. Resellers often obtain
revenue expected to be generated.
the equipment in bulk lots and have little information
Once a general figure for the start-up costs has
to pass on to their customers. As such, warranty
been determined, it is possible to calculate the fees
 information is often unavailable or limited in duration
needed to be generated to justify the equipment pur-
or scope. Purchasing a 10-year-old video camera
chase. It is a good idea to keep a log of the instances
system without a warranty can be a risky proposition,
in which the surgeon would consider performing an
especially if spare parts have gone off the market. It is
endoscopic procedure. For example, when presented
wise to enquire from the secondary reseller as to
with a sneezing dog, a note should be made that this
whether they provide on- or off-site service, the
 patient may be a potential rhinoscopy case. Similarly,
service costs, and spare part and repair availability. A
when presented with a giant-breed dog for an ovario-
service contract may be available to purchase; the
hysterectomy, a note should be made of the laparo-
cost of the contract must be evaluated in light of the
scopic spay and gastropexy that might be performed.
age and value of the equipment relative to its
This information can then be extrapolated to come
replacement cost.
up with a prediction of how many of each type of
Chapter 1
 An introduction to endoscopy and endosurgery
Marketing the minimally invasive surgery pro-
procedure might be performed over.the course of the
fiscal year. These basic calculations can give a very
 gramme to the clientele and veterinary community
rough approximation of the client costs of each pro-
should be an integrated component of any scheme to
cedure, being sure to account for an appropriate
establish a successful endoscopy practice. The vet-
 profit margin. Does this number correlate well with
erinary support staff of receptionists and nurses are
the fees generated by similar traditionally performed
often the first line in introducing these procedures to
procedures in the surgery currently? Does it allow
clients. When phone calls come in to the surgery, staff
endoscopy to be a cost-competitive alternative to
should be well trained in identifying the patients for
 traditional approaches?
whom a particular endoscopy might be appropriate.
Consideration of the demographics of the human
The practice should be identified to the client as offer-
ing the most advanced diagnostics or treatments for
 and animal clientele is also important. Analysis of the
 the given problem. Staff should be equipped with the
clientele in terms of income, education, proximity to
ability to answer questions regarding the superiority
large urban centres and proximity to advanced human
of endoscopic intervention compared with traditional
healthcare are all somewhat predictive of a clientele's 
 approaches, including the benefits of speed of recov-
likelihood   of  availing   themselves  of   advanced
ery and less pain to their pet. When the consultation
veterinary care. Careful observation of the type of
with the veterinary surgeon is scheduled, additional
pets seen in the practice is also important. Is the
time should be allotted to allow for adequate discus-
practice an urban small dog/cat/pocket pet practice?
sion of the appropriateness of endoscopic interven-
gns bop abiel liag aaie, e aonid a si
tions. Surgeons should be cautioned against
practice? Is the predominant pet the farm dog or
overplaying the 'gee whiz' factor of endoscopic sur-
stable yard cat? These observations play a role in
gery, but rather should focus on the very real physio-
determining the type of procedures to be performed,
logical benefits to minimally invasive approaches.
the equipment needed and the numbers of cases
 Observations of the author [DS] over the last 10
likely to be seen.
years, from practising in both the UK and the USA,
 Another important factor to be considered is the
have given the firm impression that when it comes to
physical plant. Whilst most practices do not have a
medical technology, the general public is quite savvy.
dedicated endoscopy suite, it is truly wonderful if this 
Virtually every week clients come in for a consultation
can be accommodated. Having a dedicated room to
and enquire as to whether the particular procedure
 perform endoscopy is a huge benefit. Indeed, having
can be performed in a keyhole (or Band-Aid, USA)
a dedicated room for non-sterile endoscopy and a
fashion. Even on those occasions when it might not
separate theatre for surgical endoscopy would be the 
be appropriate, it is very interesting to note how aware
best of all. In reality, it is helpful to have a theatre of 
clients are of the advances in surgical procedures.
adequate size to allow for movement of the equipment
When clients are presented with surgical options that
in and out of the room, and space in a non-sterile area 
might realize less pain and trauma, and improve
 of the building to perform non-sterile endoscopic pro-
recovery of their pets, they are often very keen to
 cedures. A wet sink table is very beneficial when per-
explore those possibilities.
forming rhinoscopy, cystoscopy and colonoscopy. The 
Client education brochures and pamphlets are
ergonomics of the workspace need to be examined to
very helpful in disseminating information to pet
 allow for adequate access of the anaesthetist to the
owners. Full colour glossy productions, highlighting
patient, adequate visualization of the video monitor
the unique offerings of the practice and the advanced
and adequate room to perform the procedures appro-
level of care the patients receive, will be read carefully
 priately and comfortably. These factors are covered in
by owners and often distributed to their friends and
 the appropriate procedure chapters.
colleagues. Many practices will have open house
Another factor worthy of consideration is the
days at the surgery to allow the public to come in and 
practitioner's commitment to learning and perform-
see for themselves the impressive level of care that
ing endoscopy.  Virtually  all  of the  techniques 
advanced endoscopic techniques will allow. Video
described in this Manual can be performed with
presentations and tours of the endoscopic theatre are
expertise by most practitioners. Aside from the finan-
all very impressive to the general public.
cial commitment, the veterinary surgeon needs to
evaluate their interest in spending the requisite time
to learn and perfect the skills needed to become a
 component to their practice. For the existing referral
 competent endoscopist. Certainly in the initial phases 
practitioner  or  specialist,  the  introduction and
 of learning, procedures will take more time; frustra-
 marketing of endoscopy is of critical importance. The
tion level can be high. But with practice and persist-
referring veterinary clientele are expecting their
ence endoscopy will become easier and more
referral and specialist sources to have access to the
time-efficient. Does the practice allow for enough
 most current state-of-the-art techniques. They will be
time to learn these new techniques? Is the volume of
looking to the referral practitioner to allow access to
consultations and surgical procedures so great that
these modalities for their patients. For the first opinion
 it makes introducing new procedures difficult? These
practitioner, endoscopy offers a unique opportunity to 
break into the referral market. The first question for
vidually, assessing the particulars of the desires of
the practitioner to ask themselves is 'do I have the
 the veterinary staff and the time constraints placed
requisite degree of expertise to offer referral services?'
 on each veterinary surgeon.
Initially, it may be the case that a limited offering be on
Chapter 1  An introduction to endoscopy and endosurgery
 the menu. Additional procedures can be added as the
 should be avoided. However, special attention obvi-
practitioner gains experience with different and more
ously needs to be given to the systems directly related
advanced procedures. It is important for first opinion
to the presentation, as well as to the cardiovascular
practices to have firm and well publicised policies
 status, as noted above. A review of the previously per-
regarding their referral practices. Often competing
formed clinical pathology needs to be undertaken,
local practices will be reluctant to send referrals to
 and, if indicated, appropriate completion of the diag-
their competitors who also provide first opinion
nostic work-up prior to endoscopy. The underlying
services, for fear of losing the client. Each practice
 principle for any surgical or anaesthetic intervention is
must make this decision, but careful consideration
to perform the least invasive intervention needed to
must be given to developing a policy that will
 encourage referrals for endoscopy and alleviate fears
The first order of business is to stabilize the patient 
of losing clients.
in preparation for subsequent intervention. Supportive
Many practices will put on small informal CPD
 management of hydration status via intravenous fluid
 programmes to introduce their services to veterinary
therapy should be dictated by clinical assessment
surgeons in the local area. Often equipment or
and clinical pathology. Cardiovascular status needs
pharmaceutical manufacturers can be encouraged to
to be monitored and maintained. Monitoring and 
help sponsor such CPD. This low key informal way of
correction of blood gas abnormalities, thoracocentesis,
educating and marketing new referral services is a
pericardiocentesis and abdominocentesis (as well as
fun, easy way of answering questions and encour-
appropriate fluid analysis of all samples) should be
aging local participation in the new services from
performed if clinically indicated and needed to improve
the practice.
haemodynamic stability. Therapy for secondary or
concomitant disease states should be undertaken,
 including managing infectious diseases, vomiting and
Patient assessment and stabilization
 diarrhoea, and endocrinological anomalies. Nutritional
support in the form of total or partial parenteral
The initial assessment of each patient presenting for
nutrition, force-feeding or tube hyperalimentation 
an endoscopic or endosurgical procedure is based on
should be considered.
the  clinical  history  and  general  haemodynamic
stability of the individual, as well as the stability for the
practice, traditional diagnostic modalities have not
specific procedure being considered. Careful history-
been abandoned. Indeed, the ability to perform mini-
taking should be performed:
mally invasive surgery has increased the use of other
imaging and diagnostic modalities as well. Traditional 
 Diet and housing should be questioned 
s aun sheme Aien aie Aydeiboen enbi pue
Eating and drinking patterns should be evaluated,
imaging techniques for evaluating both the pleural as
and examined in the consultation room if possible
well as the peritoneal space. Positive and negative
Urinary and defecatory patterns should be
contrast studies are still performed, albeit with less
evaluated
frequency than prior to endoscopy. Ultrasonography
 Duration of the clinical problem and the owner's
and echocardiography and excellent techniques for 
perception of the progression of clinical signs are
 examining the internal structure and size of viscera,
important
 and are commonly employed prior to endoscopy.
Enquiries regarding animal housemates and/or
Ultrasonography is very helpful in determining the
littermates should be made.
 size and structure of organs such as the liver, spleen,
 For any endoscopic procedure, consideration 
pancreas, bowel, adrenal glands, kidneys and bladder.
The presence and location of free peritoneal fluid can 
must be given to the relative safety of general anaes-
easily be assessed. Echocardiography is ideal for
thesia. The first consideration is haemodynamic sta-
bility. Careful auscultation of the heart and lungs is of
evaluating the morphology and structure of the heart,
 determining both cardiovascular stability and disease
paramount importance. Many endoscopic procedures
have the potential to decrease ventilatory efficiency,
state of the heart and surrounding structures. Thoracic
ultrasonography is helpful in examining the pleural
so it is critical that the patient has an acceptable
cardiovascular status. Ideally, resting S,O2 should be
space, although its role in assessing pathology of the
evaluated. In addition to the standard series of bio-
 pulmonary parenchyma is less consistent.
 When available, computed tomography (CT) and 
chemistry analysis and complete blood count (CBC),
blood gases (arterial if possible) should be evaluated.
magnetic resonance imaging (MRl) are also very val-
uable. MRl is excellent for examining pathology of the
Thoracic radiographs should be obtained if clinically
indicated, and, if there is any clinical or historical indi-
nasal passages and sinuses, and CT is very helpful in
cation of cardiac disease, an echocardiogram (ECG)
evaluating the abdomen. However, limitations of
performed. The patient's hydration status should be
access and cost make these modalities less fre-
evaluated  both  via clinical pathological  analysis
quently used. This situation is rapidly changing with
(packed cell volume, PCV; total solids, TS; urine spe-
   sn o     g
cific gravity, USG) and clinical assessment.
both in both private practice and teaching hospitals.
 A good general physical examination is indicated.
 The endoscopist must give constant consideration
The tendency to focus exclusively on body parts or
to the potential for the need for open or traditional
organ systems related to the presenting problem
surgical approaches. In spite of the author's [DS]
8
Chapter 1  An introduction to endoscopy and endosurgery
keen interest in performing as much surgical and
Rigid endoscopes are simpler in construction with
diagnostic  work   as  possible   using  endoscopic
 no moving parts. Light transmission and image qual-
techniques, there are significant limitations as to what
ity is much better than with a fibreoptic flexible endo-
can be accomplished endoscopically. If during the
 scope, and cleaning, sterilization and maintenance
diagnostic work-up it becomes apparent that an
are relatively simple. Initial cost is also considerably
aggressive  surgical  intervention  will  yield  more
less. Instrumentation for rigid endoscopy can be
complete and timely information or therapeutic results,
larger since it does not always need to be passed
the veterinary surgeon must remain open to the
through an instrument channel. It can be passed
possibility that endoscopy may not be the most
alongside the endoscope or indeed through a sepa-
reasonable approach. The best interests of the patient 
rate operative portal. This allows larger instrumenta-
must always be the guiding principle.
tion, which not only enables the use of a variety of
instruments akin to the normal familiar day-to-day
surgical instruments, but also allows larger tissue
Flexible versus rigid endoscopy
samples to be taken, which can result in a higher
diagnostic yield. Rigid endoscopy also enables instru-
The flexible endoscope is essential for examining
ments to be inserted in several ports, spaced apart, 
tubular structures that have a tortuous course, such
and triangulated to the operative area. This can allow
as the Gl tract or lower airways. Long flexible
easier surgical manipulation than a strictly linear flexi-
endoscopes allow structures deep within the lungs
ble endoscope would permit, so that many of the sur-
and digestive tract to be seen, and for biopsy samples
gical operations that are currently performed through
to be taken, without the need for invasive surgery.
open surgery may become possible endoscopically
This has obvious benefits for the patient.
Their
with appropriate instrumentation.
limitations, apart from expense and the problems of 
The advantages of this are obvious to the patient;
cleaning and maintenance,
are due to light
smaller wounds mean less trauma and reduced
 transmission and instrumentation.
postoperative pain, rapid healing and fewer sutures to
Flexible endoscopes are complex instruments
take out. Much of the operative time in open surgery
with channels for suction/irrigation and passage of
is taken up closing the wound made in the first place.
instruments, as well as light guide fibres and optical
 Surgical operating time is often shorter for endoscopic 
image fibres, and guidewires for the angulation of the
examinations, sothe price differential with conventional
tip. This complexity accounts for the initial expense of
open surgery need not be enormous despite the
the instrument and high maintenance costs, and also
increased cost of instrumentation.
gives rise to numerous nooks and crannies where
 an a i do   a s as i
bacterial contamination can reside, making adequate
rigid and flexible endoscopes. Although flexible endo-
cleaning difficult but essential. The majority of flexible
scopes are used widely in the respiratory and Gl
endoscopes on the veterinary market are fibreoptic
 tracts, rigid endoscopes may be useful in some situa-
endoscopes. In a fibreoptic flexible endoscope, the
tions. Rigid endoscopes are used in tracheoscopy,
image is transmitted down a bundle of optical glass
where a view down as far as the carina is possible in
fibres to the eyepiece. This results in poorer light
most patients. Rigid instrumentation is more robust
transmission than a rigid endoscope and a pixelated
than the smaller forceps that must be passed through
view of the operative site, since the final image is a
the instrument channel of a flexible endoscope and,
composite of a large number of smaller images
therefore, may be better suited for removing some
transmitted down each individual fibre.
foreign bodies from the trachea or oesophagus. Rigid 
In addition, the glass fibres are very fragile and
biopsy forceps are also larger in size, for the same
easily damaged, leading to black spots within the
reason, and may result in a more diagnostic sample
image representing broken fibres.  This further
in sites such as the colon. Although rigid access is
degrades the final image. These problems have been
limited to the descending colon, most colon pathology
largely overcome by the newer video-endoscopes,
is fairly diffuse and representative samples can usu-
which have a digital camera chip at the business end,
ally be obtained from this site. Conversely, although
but at a significant cost penalty since essentially a
rigid endoscopes are more commonly used in the
separate camera is purchased with each endoscope.
nose and bladder, small flexible endoscopes can be
 As the cost of equipment comes down this will be less
used to access the sinuses and the male urethra.
 of a problem, but at the moment the price premium is 
not  inconsiderable.
.  Video-endoscopes  are  also
 subject to size limitations since miniaturization of 
Future advances in endoscopic
CCDs does not currently permit the manufacture of
surgery
 insertion tubes much below 6 mm in diameter.
Instrumentation for a flexible endoscope has to
Flexible endoscopy of the Gl tract is limited to some
 pass down the instrument channel, which limits its
extent by the length of the insertion tube. Wireless
 size and requires it to be long and flexible. In particular,
endoscopic CCD camera systems have been
biopsy samples are necessarily small and it 
 developed, which can be swallowed in a capsule and
is
sometimes difficult to biopsy to an adequate depth to
controlled from outside the body. Propulsion devices
ensure obtaining representative pathological tissue.
attached to the capsule are being developed to allow
This is particularly true where the mucosa overlying
its movement to be controlled by the surgeon. In this 
an area of pathology is inflamed and thickened.
way, images of the entire Gl tract can be obtained
9
chapter 1  An introduction to endoscopy and endosurgery
and, eventually, with the incorporation of biopsy,
 As the surgeon moves their hands, the operative
cautery or laser instrumentation, minor procedures
 arm of the robot mimics the movement, and the
 may be carried out without the need for any traditional
addition of filters (similar to those employed as 
insertion tube.
'shake' filters in modern digital camcorders)
Flexible endoscopes have also been developed
eliminates tremor, which can be a problem at
 with zoom-enabled magnification of up to 100 times,
high magnification. This allows extremely precise
 allowing extremely detailed mucosal analysis for the
manipulation of tiny instruments for intricate 
diagnosis and management of mucosal disorders,
vascular and neurosurgery.
such as coeliac disease.
The  incorporation 
of
ultrasound devices into the tip of the flexible endoscope
The ability to record procedures into the computer
enables detailed examination of structures such as
memory, coupled with the integration of MRI and CT
the pancreas and hepatic portal system.
scans of the patient, enables simulations to be carried
There is currently a great deal of research being
out for training purposes complete with tactile
carried out on endoluminal or natural orifice surgery.
feedback, much as an airline pilot practises in a flight
Natural  Orifice   Transluminal  Endoscopic  Surgery
simulator. A surgeon is able to carry out 'dummy' runs
(NOTES) involves passing a dual operating
 before performing a complex procedure on a live
uod
flexible endoscope via the mouth and through the
 patient, and the superimposition of coloured MRI
 gastric wall into the peritoneal cavity to carry out
scans on live video-endoscopic images allows the
laparoscopic surgery, without making any external
 surgeon to visualize enhanced borders of abnormal
incision. An appendectomy has been carried out on a
tissue to facilitate dissection.
human patient in India with the appendix removed via
The limits of minimaly invasive surgery are being 
the mouth and the gastric mucosa repaired from
within. More recently, in April 2007, at the University
modern era of laparoscopy and minimally invasive
Hospital of Strasbourg, 
 the first transvaginal
 surgery, championed by Kurt Semm and others, has
performed. Various
 revolutionized human surgery and is set to do the
cholecystectomy  was
other
 procedures, from splenectomy to hernia repair, have
same in the veterinary world. In the words of Dr
been described in the pig model. With the advent of
Paul A Wetter, chairman of the Society of Laparo-
improved optics, endosurgical sewing machines and
endoscopic Surgeons
electrocautery devices, NOTES is likely to become 
commonplace in future years.
"Someday in the future, people will look back at a
Advances in surgical glues may render sewing or
regular surgical incision as something archaic and
stapling redundant, and greatly facilitate endosurgical
barbaric. We have Kurt Semm to thank for that."
 procedures; the advent of electrosurgical instruments,
such as Ethicon's harmonic scalpeiTm and Tyco's
LigaSureTm, have already improved haemostasis and
References and further reading
reduced the length of surgical procedures.
Dalton JR and Hill FW (1972) A procedure for the examination of the liver
The use of robotics has revolutionized many
and pancreas in dogs. Journal of Small Animal Practice 13(9),
aspects of laparoscopic and thoracoscopic surgery.
527-530
Doglietto F, Prevedello DM, Jane JA Jr., Han J and Laws ER Jr. (2005) A
In 2001, Marescaux used the Zeus robot to perform a
cholecystectomy on a patient in Strasbourg, France
with the surgical team located in New York; whilst in
Neurosurgery Focus 19 (6), E3
Harrell AG and Todd Heniford B (2005) Minimally invasive abdominal
Italy, in May 2006, the first surgery was performed 
surgery: lux et veritas past, present and future. American Journal of
entirely by a robot with no human assistance. The
Surgery 190, 239-243
 50-minute operation for atrial fibrillation was carried
Johnson GF, Jones BD and Twedt DC (1976) Esophagogastric endoscopy
 in small animal medicine. Gastrointestinal Endoscopy 22, 226
out on a 34-year-old patient in Milan. The Da Vinci
robotic system is used in heart and prostatic surgery,
 Officiail Journal of the Association of Iranian Endoscopic Surgeons
and is being applied to many other laparoscopic
1 (1), 45-48
 Kaushik D and Rothberg M (200o) Thoracoscopic surgery: historical
procedures. There are many advantages of robotic
perspectives. Neurosurgery Focus 9 (4), 10
devices:
Lettow E (1972) Laparoscopic examination in liver diseases in dogs.
VeterinaryMedcineeviw2,15917
NIH Consensus Conference (1993) Gallstones and laparoscopic
 The binocular endoscope provides high-definition,
cholecystectomy. Journal of the American Medical Association 269,
full colour, magnified, 3D images of the surgical 
1018-1024
O'Brien JA (1970) Bronchoscopy in the dog and cat. Journal of the
 site to the surgeon who sits at a remote console
American Veterinary Medical Association 156(2), 213-217
The surgeon's hands are attached to
 manipulation controls, which have 7 degrees of 
 Journal of the Royal College of Physicians (Edinburgh) 33, 124-
134
 freedom movement to mimic the natural flexibility
Tuffs A (2003) Obituary: Kurt Semm - a pioneer in minimally invasive
of the human hand and wrist
 surgery. British Medical Journal 327, 397
10
Instrumentation
Christopher J. Chamness
Introduction
may be used for gastroscopy but not duodenoscopy.
The same may be used for colonoscopy but only to
When most veterinary surgeons hear the term
examine the distal portion of the colon. Rigid endo-
endoscopy, they think of a flexible endoscope being
scopes are preferred for cystoscopy in females but a
used to examine the upper or lower gastrointestinal
flexible  endoscope  is needed  for  transurethral
(GI) tract. In reality, the general term endoscopy
cystoscopy in male dogs. Either flexible or rigid endo-
means to look inside', and refers to an almost endless
 scopes may be used for tracheobronchoscopy; how-
number of applications that make use of both flexible
ever, a small-diameter flexible endoscope enables 
 and rigid endoscopes. To name a few, Gl endoscopy, 
 the operator to reach deeper into the bronchial tree.
bronchoscopy, cystoscopy, rhinoscopy, arthroscopy,
laparoscopy and thoracoscopy are all endoscopic
procedures performed by doctors and veterinary
surgeons using flexible or rigid endoscopes,
Flexible endoscopes
depending upon the anatomy, available equipment
Most flexible endoscopes contain three regions
 and preference of the surgeon.
 Flexible endoscopes are most useful in anatomical
(Figure 2.1):
regions where access requires an optical instrument
that is able to turn corners, such as the Gl, respiratory
 The insertion tube is the part of the endoscope
and urinary tracts. It should be noted that under
that enters the patient
certain conditions these procedures may also be
 The handpiece contains the manual controls and
performed using rigid endoscopes, but that visual
working channel port (if present)
The umbilical cord plugs into the light source.
2.1
Air/water valve
 Suction valve
 A flexible
 Deflection control knob (letright) 
 Deflection control knob (up/down)
video-
Deflection lock (let/right)
endoscope
with 4-way tip
 deflection.
Program
Deflection lock (up/down)
Video cable connection
Distal tip
Light post 
Air inlet 
suction pump
 Distal tip
 Objective lens
Light guide lenses (2)
nsufflation nozzle
Umbilical co
11
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
Some flexible endoscopes have no umbilical
Deflection control
cord, such as the fibrescope shown in Figure 2.2. A
The deflection control knobs are located on the
simple light-transmitting cable, like those used for
handpiece (Figure 2.4). When rotated, they cause the
rigid endoscopes, attaches to the light post of the
shortening or lengthening of cables within the insertion
handpiece.
tube, which deflects the distally located bending
portion of the insertion tube. The larger inner control
knob controls up/down deflection and is operated
using the left thumb. The maximal deflection of a
typical gastroscope is in the up direction, and should
be at least 180 degrees. Deflection capabilities in the
other three directions (down, left and right) should be
controls left/right deflection and may be operated
using either the right hand or the thumb of the left
hand. Each deflection control knob also contains a
Fibrescope (2.7 mm diameter. 100 cm long)
locking lever,which may be used to fix the deflection
2.2
with 2-way tip deflection.
of the tip in any given position. Care should be taken
never to attempt deflection of the endoscope when
Structure
either locking lever is in the locked position.
The flexible endoscope most commonly used by
veterinary surgeons is the gastroscope, sometimes
also referred to as a multi-purpose flexible endoscope,
since it has applications in both small and large
animals. It can be used in the Gl, respiratory and
urinary tracts,
depending upon patient  size.
Gastroscopes have a 4-way tip deflection (i.e. up/
down and left/right) as shown in Figure 2.3. This
deflection capability is very important forthe successful
manoeuvring of a gastroscope through the small
intestine, and particularly for the fine manoeuvres
required to traverse the pylorus.
2.4
Video-gastroscope handpiece.
180%200°
Insufflation, irrigation and suction
Other mechanical functions of a gastroscope include
insufflation, irrigation and suction. Insufflation is
required to expand the viscus and create a space
between the distal lens of the endoscope and the
 mucosa to obtain a clear image. Ilrigation is needed 
to clean the distal lens of the endoscope when mucus,
120°
debris or fogging obscures the view. Suction is applied
(a)
to reduce insufflation as needed and also, in some
cases, to remove fluid which may otherwise interfere
with visibility. Each of these mechanical functions is
120°
120°
activated by touching or depressing one of the valves
on the handpiece of the endoscope.
Instrument channel
Gastroscopes also contain an instrument channel,
the opening of which can be found at the distal end of
the handpiece. A variety of instruments, including
biopsy forceps, foreign body graspers and cytology
brushes, may be placed through this channel until
they exit the tip of the endoscope. Care should be
taken when passing instruments through the deflected
tip of an endoscope, as forceful passage of any
instrument could cause damage to the inner lining of
the instrument channel. It should be noted that the
instrument channel also serves as the suction channel
for the endoscope. This means that suction will be
(b)
is in the channel. This also means that suction will not 
Tip deflection in a gastroscope. (a) Up/down
2.3
deflection.(b) Right/left deflection.
be effective if the instrument channel cap is open.
12
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
Insertion tube and umbilical cord
Both the insertion tube and the umbilical cord of a
flexible endoscope contain glass light fibre bundles.
This is true for both fibrescopes and video-endoscopes
(see below), since light fibre bundles are used to
transmit light from the light source to the tip of the
endoscope to illuminate the area being examined.
Accordingly, the entire shaft of any endoscope should
be handled with care, avoiding banging, crushing or
tight coiling. The distal tip of an endoscope should
also be carefully protected as it contains glass lenses
and tiny nozzles for the exit of air and water.
The umbilical cord of a gastroscope contains the
connector to the light source as well as fittings for
insufflation, irrigation and suction. The insufflation
 and irrigation of a gastroscope are both driven by an
air pump, which either is integrated into the light
source or is a self-contained unit that is connected via
a piece of tubing. Gastroscopes come with a small
plastic bottle that provides the water for irrigation,
which should always be demineralized or distilled in
order to prevent the channel from clogging with
mineral deposits from hard water. A fluid line on the
2.5
Leakage tester.
bottle cap connects directly to the water connector on 
the umbilical cord.A standard hospital suction unit is
 connected to the suction connector.
endoscopy. Any gastroscope used forrespiratory endo-
On video-endoscopes only,
avideocable
scopy should be sterilized prior to use. Depending on
connector is located at the distal end of the umbilical
manufacturer's recommendations, this may be
cord, for connection to a video processor which
achieved either with ethylene oxide gas sterilization
transmits the image to a monitor for viewing.
or by soaking in an approved cold sterilant solution 
A pressure compensation valve is also typically
(see below).
found at the distal end of the umbilical cord. This valve
Since gastroscopes are typically 8-10 mm in
is used for leakage testing as well as pressure
diameter, there is a need for smaller diameter flexible
compensation under high pressure conditions, such
endoscopes to examine the respiratory and urinary
as ethylene oxide gas sterilization and shipment in
tracts of dogs and cats adequately. Smaller diameter
aeroplanes. By attaching the pressure compensation
(s6 mm) flexible endoscopes (see Figures 2.2 and
cap or leakage tester to this valve, the inside of the
2.6) typically deflect only in one plane (i.e. up/down or
endoscope is opened to the external air. It is therefore
up only). They also lack the dedicated insufflation and
critical that neither of these items is attached to
irrigation channels of a gastroscope. However, a small
the valve when the endoscope is immersed in fluids
instrument channel is typically included, which can be
for cleaning.
used for the passage of instruments, suction, and
even irrigation or insufflation when needed.
Leakage testing
Endoscopes must be watertight in order to prevent
damage by fluids leaking into the inner workings,
which could corrode deflection cables and/or stain
glass fibre bundles causing brittleness and breakage.
It is therefore highly recommended that a leakage test
be performed before and after every endoscopic
procedure. The leakage tester (Figure 2.5) is attached
to the pressure compensation valve and the bulb on
the tester is squeezed until the endoscope is
pressurized to the appropriate level. The pressure
should remain stable if no leaks are present. The cost
of repairing a leak caught early is usually much less
than for a leak that has been allowed to go undetected
for a period of time.
Fibrescope (5.2 mm diameter, 85 cm long) with 
2.6
 2-way tip deflection.
Other
Gastroscopes can also be used for bronchoscopy in
patients large enough to accept the diameter of the
Video-endoscopes versus fibrescopes
gastroscope in the respiratory tract (i.e. medium- and
Flexible  endoscopes  can be  divided   into 
two
large-breed dogs). Sterility of the endoscope is a
 categories: fibrescopes and video-endoscopes. Both
greater concern in bronchoscopy than it is for Gl
types of endoscope utilize fibreoptics for the
13
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
transmission of light from the light source to the tip of
the insertion tube in order to illuminate the area of
examination. However, they use different methods for
transmitting the image from the tip of the endoscope
to the eyepiece or video monitor.
 A fibrescope image is transmitted via a fibreoptic
image bundle from the objective lens at the tip of the
insertion tube to the ocular lens located in the eyepiece.
Transmission of that image to a video monitor requires
 the attachment of an endoscopic video camera to the
eyepiece of the fibrescope (see below).
A video-endoscope, on the other hand, has no
image fibre bundle and no eyepiece (Figure 2.7). The
image is transmitted electronically through wires from
a sensor located just behind the objective lens at the
2.8
Fibreoptic imagewithbroken fibres.
tip of the endoscope, along the length of the entire
endoscope directly to the video processor, and finally
to a television monitor. The sensor at the tip of the
much as 50% or more of the price of a new endo-
insertion tube is a semiconductor or chip, analogous
scope. However, fibrescopes have one significant
to the one found in the camera head of endoscopic
advantage over video-endoscopes in that they cost
video cameras, which attaches to the eyepiece of
significantly less in the first place (i.e. they are
fibrescopes or rigid endoscopes. For this reason,
 approximately half the cost of a video-endoscope).
video-endoscopes are sometime referred to as distal
The higher cost of video-endoscopes is justified,
 chip endoscopes or chip-in-the-tip endoscopes.
in some cases, by the improved image quality,
reduced incidence of repair and longer lifespan of the
endoscope. However, due to the size of the distal tip
sensors required, video-endoscopes are not widely
available under about 5-6 mm in diameter.Until
manufacturers succeed in further miniaturizing these
sensors, there is no choice but to use fibrescopes for
examination of small anatomical spaces, such as the
urethra of dogs and the respiratory system of cats.
Selection
Selecting a flexible endoscope for small animal prac-
tice can be a daunting task, given the vast array of
endoscope models and sizes available, both new and
used. Given the assumption that any consumer wants
to get as much as possible for their money, the
following priorities are worthy of consideration:
Size: is the endoscope of appropriate diameter
and length to perform the desired procedures?
Video-endoscope attached to a video
2.7
 Optics: does the endoscope provide adequate
processor,light source and irrigation bottle.
?
image quality to perform the desired tasks with
ease?
The quality of a fibreoptic image is determined by
Dependability: does the endoscope supplier
a number of factors, including the number, size,
provide adequate warranty, service and loans in 
quality and cladding of glass fibres in the image
the case of instrument failure?
bundle, as well as the optical technology and quality
Ease of use: is the endoscope comfortable in the
of lenses used at the proximal and distal ends of the
operator's hand and easy to set up, take down,
image bundle. When that image is projected on to a
clean and store?
television screen, other critical factors determining 
Future integration: can the endoscope system be
image quality include illumination and endoscopic 
upgraded and/or integrated with other types of
 video camera and monitor technology.
endoscopes as the practice expands in the
Fibreoptic images may appear pixelated (i.e. a
future?
honeycomb pattern is seen) to a greater or lesser
Cost: what is the endoscope system likely to cost
degree, depending on the previously mentioned
over the next 5-10 years?
factors. lt should also be noted that over time
individual glass fibres of the image bundle will
Size
inevitably break, appearing as black spots in the
The most versatile endoscopes for small animal
image (Figure 2.8). These individual broken fibres
use are <10 mm in diameter, >125 cm in length, and
can only be repaired by replacing the entire image
have 4-way tip deflection. The small diameter and
bundle of a fibrescope, which typically costs as
extended length enables the small animal practitioner
14
Chapter 2  Instrumentation
to examine a wide range of patients from cats and
products should be taken into account. For example,
puppies to giant-breed dogs. Some veterinary
approximately half the cost of a flexible endoscope
 gastroenterologists prefer an endoscope 9 mm or
system lies with the light source and video camera.
less in diameter, and 140 cm in length. Attention
Ensuring that these items will function optimally
 should also be paid to the diameter of the instrument 
with other endoscopes as a practice progresses
channel, which should be at least 2 mm in order to 
may be a significant factor in determining overall
cost for endoscopy.
procure diagnostic biopsy samples. Smaller diameter
There is a seemingly endless supply of used
fibrescopes for respiratory and urinary endoscopy
 endoscopes available on the market, either online or 
are also available in extended lengths for veterinary
through  second-hand dealers.
Most of these
use, which is important to reach the bladder of
large-breed dogs or the distal portions of the
endoscopes come from the human medical field.
bronchial tree.
Buyer beware - there is a reason these endoscopes
were retired. It would behove the prudent consumer
to identify any shortcomings before making such a
Optics
 purchase. In some cases, a second-hand endoscope
The optical quality of an endoscope is very difficult to
can be purchased in good working order at a very
judge from specifications alone. Ideally, an objective
reasonable price. In other cases, what appeared to
 and “blinded' comparison of the endoscopes under
be a good deal can turn out to be money wasted on a
e u apis-rq-apis paoad aa pinous uoniapisuo
product that is unusable, unserviceable, or not
real patient. In addition to optical resolution, particular
appropriate for the vast majority of procedures
 attention should be paid to illumination or brightness 
 performed by veterinary surgeons.
of the endoscopic image, especially when viewed on
In addition to noting the
 points  previously
 a video monitor, bearing in mind that brightness will
 mentioned, selection of a used endoscope should 
be inversely proportional to the size of the viscus 
 include a rigorous examination to include leakage
being examined. In other words, an endoscope
testing, passage of instruments through the channel,
system may produce a beautiful image in the palm of
 judgement of optical quality both through the eyepiece
your hand while being unacceptably dark in the
and on a television monitor, light bundle integrity.
 stomach of a dog.
deflection of the tip and examination of the rubber
covering the bending tip of the endoscope. If at all
Dependability
possible, a minimum 30-day money back guarantee
In addition to the reputation of the manufacturer, the
 should be negotiated with the vendor of a second-
level of service expected from the vendor is critical.
hand endoscope, which would allow several trials
 Any new endoscope should include at least a one-
in patients.
year warranty. Occasional repairs of flexible endo-
 While purchasing a new  endoscope direct
 scopes are inevitable. Reputable vendors will provide
from the manufacturer requires more cash up front
either reasonable repair turnaround times or loan
than purchasing a second-hand endoscope, it may
instruments in the case of extended repairs.
cost less in the long term. The value of product
quality,  full  warranty. 
 serviceability,  veterinary-
Ease of use
 specific design and the relationship between buyer
The endoscope should be handled by the potential
 and seller should not be underestimated. Just as the
buyer, deflection control knobs and focus rings turned,
veterinary profession  needs  medical instrument
instruments passed through the channel, and a
manufacturers  to develop products specifically
thorough understanding of set up and disinfection
suited to veterinary medicine and surgery, the
options obtained. For example, an endoscope that
manufacturers need veterinary surgeons to invest in
can be entirely immersed and gas-sterilized may be
their products in order to fuel that development. Only
much more desirable than one that cannot.
through such collaboration will the profession be
able to benefit, as medical doctors do, from highly
 Future integration
advanced and cost-effective technology specifically
In the author's experience, one endoscope is never
suited to their patients.
enough for the practice that seriously adopts this
technology. The components of a system may or may
Instrumentation
not be compatible with other types of endoscopes.
A wide variety of reusable and disposable instruments 
 Particular consideration should be given upon initial
(Figure 2.9) is available for passing down the channel
investment to whether the light source, camera and
of flexible endoscopes. Some of those commonly
 other devices are compatible with future expansion.
 used in veterinary practice include:
Cost
Biopsy forceps
The overall cost of owning an endoscope may not be
Foreign body graspers
directly related to the purchase price. For example,
Cytology brushes
?
the income-generating potential of the endoscope,
Bronchoalveolar lavage tubing 
which may vary considerably for different models,
 Stone retrieval baskets (also used for foreign
must be taken into consideration. In addition, the
bodies)
cost of repairs, longevity of the product and potential
 Polypectomy snares (also used for foreign
integration of the endoscope system with future
bodies)
15
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
 Biopsy forceps
 Snares
 Round jaws
35 mm
Large
Round jaws with pin
 Oval jaws
30 mm
Medium
Y
Oval jaws with pin
Grasping forceps
30 mm
Hexagonal 
Alligator jaws
 Alligator jaws, round
Universal (spoon-shaped, serrated jaws)
Alligator jaws with teeth
40 mm
60 mm
Rat tooth
Crescent
Two-prong, 1 x 2 teeth
Cytology brush
Two-prong, 2 x 2 teth
With protective tube
Two-prong, serrated
 Coagulating electrode
Unipolar or bipolar
 Three-prong, sharp
Injection/aspiration needle
Three-prong, blunt
With retractable tip
 Dislodger
Scissors
With four-wire basket
2.9
 Flexible instruments. (Reproduced from Tams (1999) with permission from the publisher)
Although reusable instruments cost more, they
and never forced against resistance. If the position
tend to last longer, and are designed for cleaning and
of an instrument requires deflection of the endo-
multiple uses. After
r thorough cleaning, it 
scope tip, it is always best to pass the forceps
recommended that flexible instruments be oiled or
through the un-deflected tip until the instrument can
soaked in instrument milk to keep them well lubricated
be seen in the field of view, before bending the
 and functioning properly.
tip with the deflection control knobs. Instrument 
It is critical that the instruments selected are of
channel tears due to aggressive passage of instru-
appropriate diameter and style for the endoscope
ments or inappropriate instrumentation are among
being used. Instruments should always be passed
the most common causes of damage to flexible
carefully through the channel, in a closed position,
endoscopes.
16
Chapter 2
Instrumentation
Rigid endoscopes
Conventional
optical system
Like flexible endoscopes, rigid endoscopes come in a
variety of sizes (Figure 2.10), making them useful for
a number of minimally invasive diagnostic and surgical
procedures. In contrast to flexible endoscopes, rigid
Rod lens
endoscopes are simpler, less expensive and can last
system
a lifetime if not dropped or banged. Although they
cannot manoeuvre around corners through a tubular
structure, like flexible endoscopes, rigid endoscopes
HOPKINS rod lens system and a conventional
offer unsurpassed optics and a rigidity that allows
2.11
optical system.
them to be more easily manoeuvred inside non-
tubular structures, such as the abdomen, thorax,
Rigid endoscopes are available in a variety of
urinary bladder and joints. Rigid endoscopes are
viewing angles. The viewing angles of the telescopes
therefore preferred for laparoscopy, thoracoscopy,
most commonly used in veterinary practice are 0
and arthroscopy, and for cystoscopy in females. They
degrees and 30 degrees (Figure 2.12). A0 degrees or
forward-viewing telescope has a field of view centred
For some surgeons they are the endoscope of
on the axis of the telescope. A telescope with a 30
choice for oesophagogastroscopy, tracheobronch-
degrees viewing angle has a field of view where the
oscopy and colonoscopy.
centre is offset by 30 degrees from the axis of the
telescope. Acute viewing angles enable the operator
to visualize a greater area simply by rotating the
telescope on its longitudinal axis. Although telescopes
with increasing angles of view enable examination of
a wider area, they also present a challenge to the
novice endoscopist with regards to spatial orientation,
particularly when using instrumentation through
additional ports, such as during laparoscopic and
 arthroscopic surgery.
2.10
Rigid endoscopes (telescopes).
Structure
The highest quality rigid endoscopes are actually
telescopes, consisting of a series of rod lenses
arranged in a specific linear sequence to maximize
light transmission, magnification and resolution.
(a)
Figure 2.11 shows the HOPKINS rod lens system in
comparison with a traditional optical system. Rod
lens   telescopes   are 
 capable   o   transmitting
 considerably more light and producing a wider field of
view than traditional telescopes. Surrounding this
tube of lenses are numerous glass fibres, much like
those found in a flexible endoscope, which transmit 
light from the light post of the telescope to the distal
tip of the endoscope, where the subject is illuminated.
One end of a fibreoptic light cable is connected to the
light post of the telescope and the other end is
(b)
connected to a remote light source. The image
Telescope viewing angles. (a) 0 degrees.
produced through a rigid endoscope can be viewed
2.12
(b) 30 degrees.
directly at the ocular or eyepiece of the rigid
endoscope, or transmitted to a television monitor by
Most rigid endoscopes are relatively simple in
attaching
an endoscopic video camera to the
structure (see Figure 2.10) and designed to be used
eyepiece. Since rigid endoscopes contain glass
with various sheaths or cannulae. However, others
lenses and glass fibres, it is important to handle them
are more specialized and contain an integrated
with care. Banging or dropping them could cause
working channel (Figure 2.13). A telescope with an
damage to the lenses or fibres, reducing image quality
integrated channel may be more convenient for a
and/or light transmission. A rigid endoscope may
dedicated purpose and less susceptible to damage
contain one or more dislodged or cracked lenses,
than one with individual sheaths. The advantages of
which do not completely obscure the image but
these specialized designs must be weighed against 
reduce the quality of the image.
the loss of versatility inherent in such a design.
17
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
Selection
The dizzying array of rigid endoscope sizes available
in the market place can be even more confusing than
flexible endoscopes. The most versatile endoscope
for small animal practice is the Multi-Purpose RigidTM
endoscope (Figure 2.15a). With a diameter of 2.7
mm, working length of 18 cm and a 30 degree
viewing angle, this endoscope is ideal for rhinoscopy.
cystoscopy, otoscopy (in anaesthetized patients) and
endoscopy of small exotic animals (coelioscopy and
(a)
oral cavity examinations). It is also commonly used
for arthroscopy in dogs, intubation in rabbits and
laparoscopy (Figure 2.15b) or thoracoscopy in small
 mammals, kittens and puppies.
(b)
(c)
(a) Rod lens otoscope (5 mm diameter with an
2.13
integrated channel of 5 Fr). (b) Cystoscope/
(a)
rhinoscope (9.5 Fr diameter with an integrated channel of
3 Fr). (c) Operating laparoscope (10 mm diameter with a
5 mm integrated channel).
The optical quality of rigid endoscopes varies
greatly and is dependent upon the optical design
and quality of lenses used in the manufacturing
process. They also vary in terms of durability,
immersibility, gas sterilizability and autoclavability.
Finally, it should be remembered that one manu-
facturer's rigid telescope will not necessarily be
compatible with another manufacturer's light cable,
video camera or sheath systems.
 A subclass of rigid endoscopes at the lower end of 
the size spectrum (i.e. <2 mm in diameter) is the 
(b)
semi-rigid endoscope (Figure 2.14). Rather than the
Multi-Purpose RigidTM endoscope.
2.15
rod lens optical system of larger diameter telescopes,
(a) Top down: Examination and protection
these fine-diameter semi-rigid endoscopes utilize a
sheath,arthroscopy sheath,laparoscopy trocar and
operating sheath. (b) Laparoscopic ovariectomy in a
fused silica bundle. These tiny semi-rigid endoscopes 
are useful for the examination of anatomical areas
puppy.
otherwise inaccessible with rod lens telescopes or
When seeking the best size endoscope for a given
fibrescopes, such as the trachea of small birds and 
medical or surgical procedure, the following concepts
the urethra of male cats.
should be borne in mind:
Larger diameter endoscopes produce larger
images and transmit more light
 Smaller diameter endoscopes fit into smaller
 places but transmit less light
 Longer endoscopes will reach farther but
 excessive length increases the chance of
breakage
 Specific sheaths and cannulae are required for
 most rigid endoscopic procedures and must fit
properly in order to perform the desired
examination or surgery with ease, and without 
Semi-rigid endoscope (1 mm diameter, 20 cm
2.14
long).
injury to the telescope or patient.
18
Chapter 2
Instrumentation
The second most popular size of rigid endoscope
(Figure 2.16) for small animal use is a 5 mm diameter,
0 degree laparoscope, with typically a 33 cm working
length. This telescope size is ideal for both laparo-
scopy and thoracoscopy in small animal patients. It is
also the standard laparoscope used in many human
 surgical procedures, and therefore a wide variety of
ancillary instrumentation  is available. Since most
laparoscopic hand instruments are also 5 mm in
diameter, this means that the telescope and instru-
 ments can be passed through the same cannula, with-
 out the need for reducers or different sized cannulae.
(a)
Laparoscope (5 mm diameter) (right) with a
2.16
standard trocar/cannula (middle) and EndoTIP
cannula (left).
(b)
Many other sizes of rigid and semi-rigid endo-
scopes are available and useful for small animal
practice. For example, a short 1.9 mm or 2.4 mm
diameter telescope (Figure 2.17a) is commonly used 
for arthroscopy in dogs. An extended length 3.5 mm
or 4 mm diameter cystoscope (Figure 2.17b) is
 as well as transcervical endoscopic insemination.
(c)
Long narrow rigid endoscopes (Figure 2.17c) are
(a) Canine arthroscope (1.9 mm diameter) in
2.17
used for obtaining biopsy samples and retrieving
sheath with sharp and blunt obturators.
foreign bodies from the trachea, oesophagus and
(b) Extended length cystoscope (29 cm working length,
 stomach. A 7 mm or 10 mm diameter telescope can
17 Fr outer diameter). (c) Rigid endoscope (2.9 mm
diameter, 36 cm long) with optical grasping forceps.
also be used for laparoscopy and thoracoscopy (see
specific chapters for recommendations of endoscope
size for each organ system).
The shaft of the telescope, as well as its distal tip,
In addition to the critical factor of size in the choice
should be carefully inspected for any dents, cracks or
of the appropriate rigid endoscope, the previously
other external damage which would be likely to cause
mentioned recommendations for the selection of a
damage to the optical system, and thus affect image
flexible endoscope also apply to rigid endoscopes. Of 
quality. An endoscope is only as good as the picture it 
particular importance with regard to rigid endoscopes
 can produce.
is the need for compatibility with appropriate sheath
systems, cannulae and connections to light sources
Instrumentation
There is a variety of ancillary instrumentation
and video cameras.
When selecting a second-hand rigid endoscope,
required to perform rigid endoscopic procedures. In
particular attention should be paid to optical quality
most cases, some sort of sheath or cannula is
and light transmission. A simple inspection of light
required to gain access to the anatomical region
transmission can be performed by pointing the light 
being examined.
post towards a window or light, and examining the
distal tip of the endoscope for black or grey areas in
The term sheath usually refers to a tube that
the light fibre transmission zone, which indicate
locks on to the telescope, providing not only
broken fibres. Better still, the endoscope can be
 anatomical access but also access for the 
 passage of instrumentation, fluids or gas as
 connected to the light source that will be used and the
tip placed inside a dark container of similar size to
needed for the given procedure.
that of the cavity to be examined. If a video camera is
The term cannula usually refers to a tube through
to be used, it should be borne in mind that this may
which rigid endoscopes or instruments are
require considerably more light than viewing directly
 placed, and are freely movable within the cannula
through the eyepiece.
rather than being locked in place.
19
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
Sheaths
2.19
Operating sheaths serve a variety of functions:
Multi-Purpose RigidTM
protection of the telescope, the ingress and egress of
endoscope (2.7 mm
fluids via the side ports, and the passage of flexible
diameter) in operating
 instruments (Figure 2.18) through the channel which
sheath (left) and
come into view as the forceps tip exits the sheath.
arthroscope sheath (right).
This type of telescope and sheath system is commonly
 used for cystoscopy, rhinoscopy and otoscopy. The 
same system is used without irrigation fluids for
 coelioscopic examination of small birds and reptiles.
2.20
Biopsy forceps for use alongside a telescope.
 operating instruments during arthroscopy require
(a)
 portals (for more information see Chapter 13).
Cannulae
 A conventional laparoscopy trocar and cannula are
 shown in Figure 2.21. The trocar has a pyramidal tip
with cutting edges, which facilitates piercing the
body wall to provide a portal for the laparoscope and
rigid instrumentation. The Luer lock valve is used for
the attachment of insufflation tubing to establish a
pneumoperitoneum during laparoscopy. The cannula
(b)
contains an automatic valve which snaps shut when
 an instrument or telescope is not in place, thus main-
(a) Multi-Purpose RigidTM endoscope with
2.18
operating sheath and biopsy forceps. (b) Tips 
 taining insufflation. A rubber washer provides a tight
of a variety of 5 Fr flexible instruments.
seal around the telescope or instrument when placed
through the cannula (Figure 2.22).
Arthroscope sheaths (see Figures 2.15a and
2.17a) have no instrument channel but serve to
protect the telescope and provide ingress of fluid
around the telescope to distend the joint during
arthroscopy. Arthroscope sheaths are also often used
in rhinoscopy, cystoscopy and otoscopy, when the 
total diameter of an operating sheath is too large for
the opening (Figure 2.19); for example, in a small 
cat's nose or urethra. When a biopsy sample is
acquired via the arthroscope sheath, small rigid
forceps (Figure 2.20) are used alongside the
telescope. It should be noted that using a small-
diameter telescope without a sheath should be
2.21
Standard laparoscopy cannula and trocar.
avoided, since the sheath protects the telescope and
provides a means for fluid ingress, which helps 
maintain a clear field of view.
 Since arthroscopy requires a small incision into
the joint cavity, an arthroscope sheath system has
optional sharp and blunt obturators (see Figure
2.17a), which are used for initial creation of the portal.
 Once access to the joint is successfully achieved, the
 obturator is removed from the sheath and replaced by
Telescope through cannula used for
2.22
the arthroscope. Fluid egress and the insertion of
 laparoscopy and thoracoscopy.
20
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
A newer style laparoscopy cannula called an
Many rigid and flexible instruments, as well as tro-
EndoTiP (Figure 2.23) requires no trocar. Instead
cars and cannulae, are available in both reusable and
disposable forms (Figure 2.25). Although disposable
the cannula is surgically placed by making a small
stab incision through the body wall, placing the tip
instruments are designed and recommended
for
of the cannula in the incision and inserting the
single use only, and therefore not easily cleaned
cannula with a twisting 'corkscrew'-like motion. By
and sterilized, many of these instruments can be
eliminating the need for a sharp trocar, these
reused several times as long as sterility, lubrication
 and sharpness can be maintained. Reusable instru-
cannulae minimize the risk of inadvertent laceration
of intra-abdominal organs.
mentation is designed for longevity and repeated
cleaning and sterilization, and therefore comes at a
higher price than disposables. It is important to deter-
 mine which type of instrumentation is more conven-
ient and cost-effective in the long term.
2.23
EndoTip cannulae require no trocar for entry.
Other
Various styles of rigid instruments for laparoscopy
and thoracoscopy are available in varying lengths
and diameters (Figure 2.24a). The instruments most
commonly used in small animal laparoscopy and
and biopsy forceps (Figure 2.24b).
Laparoscopic surgery using a 5 mm
2.25
laparoscope and EndoTiP cannula. Note the
use of disposable forceps for coagulation and cutting.
The endoscope system
In addition to the endoscope and instruments, a
 complete endoscope system includes other devices
such as:
A light source
A video camera and monitor
Other optional devices, e.g. printers, digital
capture systems, pumps for insufflation, irrigation
(a)
or suction, electrosurgical generators and/or an
arthroscopic shaver.
The most basic endoscope system must include a
light source and fibreoptic light-transmitting cable
(Figure 2.26) to deliver light through the endoscope
and illuminate the site of examination. Depending on
the particular endoscopic procedure and model of
endoscope being used, a video camera and monitor
cases a video camera system is highly desirable as
the image seen on a television monitor is much larger
than that which can be seen through the eyepiece of
an endoscope, and it is more comfortable for the
endoscopist to accomplish the procedure. Further-
more, video imaging allows other members of the
(b)
endoscopy team to view the procedure, and also
 makes possible the storage of still images or streaming
(a) Rigid instruments used for laparoscopy and
2.24
video either digitally or on to hard copy prints and/or
thoracoscopy. (b) Laparoscopic palpation
probe, grasping forceps and biopsy forceps.
VHS or digital tape.
21
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
quality, more powerful light, for a higher price. When
comparing the output of light from sources of different
technology types, simply comparing wattages is not
STORZ
sufficient. Light output is measured in lumens.
69111020
Electricity usage is measured in watts. Xenon light
sources produce more lumens per watt than halogen; 
for example, a 100 watt xenon light source is much
brighter than a 150 watt halogen light source.
For many years halogen was the technology type
(a)
 most commonly found  in  veterinary endoscope
systems. The light produced from a halogen source
may be adequate for many small animal procedures
requiring low  to medium  levels of illumination.
However, with the advent of video-endoscopy and
advanced procedures, such as laparoscopic surgery.
xenon light sources are becoming increasingly
popular in the veterinary endoscopy suite. The colour
temperature of xenon is 5700 Kelvin, making it a
whiter, brighter light than halogen, which burns at 
 approximately 3000 Kelvin. This translates into more
(b)
realistic colour rendition of tissues when viewing
endoscopic images illuminated with xenon light.
(a) Halogen light source with built-in air pump
2.26
However, these colour variations can be overcome to
for insufflation. (b) Fibreoptic light-transmitting
some extent by using a high-quality endo-video
cable.
 camera with a white balance feature.
The final image produced on a television monitor
Most light sources are fitted with an intensity
originates at the endoscope tip and its quality is
adjustment control knob, and some include an integral
dependent upon the optics of the endoscope, the
insufflation pump that may be used to drive the
power and colour temperature of the light source, the 
insufflation and irrigation of a gastroscope. When
electronics and resolution of the endo-video camera,
and finally the quality of the terminal monitor. Each of 
auto-exposure feature, the manual adjustment of light
these devices comprises one aspect of the entire
intensity is not critical, as the camera will automatically
video chain (Figure 2.27). In order for a video system 
illuminate the subject properly. The most versatile
to function at its maximum potential, each item in the
light sources have the ability to adapt to a variety of
chain must be functioning properly. The quality of the
light-transmitting cables. The light connector of a
final image viewed on the monitor can only be as
 gastroscope is typically quite different from that of a
good as the weakest link in the chain.
simple rigid endoscope light cable (Figure 2.28).
Video cables
Light source
Lighguide
STORZ
Monitor
Endoscope
Camera head
The video chain starts with a light source and
2.27
ends with a video monitor.
(a)
Light sources
Light sources are available in several technology
types, styles and wattages. The amount of light
required for a given procedure depends upon a
number of factors:
STORZ
The size of the cavity to be illuminated
The type of endoscope being used
The light sensitivity of the endo-video camera
The condition and length of the light-transmitting
cable.
(b)
(a) Xenon light source (175 watt) with a
The most common light source technology types
2.28
connector for a simple fibreoptic light cable.
are halogen and xenon. Halogen is the more
(b) Xenon light source (100 watt) with a builtin air pump
economical choice, whereas xenon produces a better 
and connection for a gastroscope.
22
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
Besides technology type and versatility.  the
portability of a light source (Figure 2.29) might be
important to practitioners for some situations, such as
examination room applications, mobile practice or
emergencies.
Carbon dioxide insufflator designed for
2.31
laparoscopy.
gas is then delivered to the patient via sterile tubing,
which connects from the front of the insufflator to a
Veress needle or to the Luer lock connector on a
laparoscopy cannula.
The Veress needle (Figure 2.32) is used for initial
insufflation of the patient, prior to the placement of
2.29
Hand-held light source attached to a rod lens
any trocars, telescope or instruments. The needle
otoscope.
consists of a sharp outer cannula and a blunt hollow
inner stylet, through which the gas passes.
Pumps and insufflators
Various types of pumps and insufflators are available
2.32
to aid in endoscopic imaging or therapy. Regarding
Veress needle.
insufflation, a very important distinction between the
(a) The blunt hollow
use of room air and carbon dioxide must be made.
stylet,used for initial
Insufflation of the upper or lower Gl tract during endo-
delivery of carbon
al
scopy is achieved using room air. The air pump may
dioxide, protrudes
be integrated into the light source or contained within
through the sharp 
a stand-alone unit (Figure 2.30). Air distension of the
outer needle.
(b) The sharp outer
viscus during Gl endoscopy is controlled manually by
needle with the
depressing a valve on the gastroscope handpiece.
spring-loaded stylet
(b)
retracted.
 Pump systems for irrigation and suction are useful
for a variety of endoscopic procedures, including
 otoscopy, laparoscopy and thoracoscopy. Lavage of
STORZ
the external or middle ear, abdomen or thorax under
endoscopic guidance is a relatively new concept in
veterinary medicine. The therapeutic value of powerful
yet precise flushing and suctioning of contaminated
or inflamed cavities is considerable. A versatile pump
system (Figure 2.33) can be used for these procedures,
as well as for Gl insufflation, irrigation and suction.
Air pump designed for insufflation during Gl
2.30
endoscopy.
However, the insufflation required during laparo-
scopy is typically carbon dioxide (see also Chapter
7). The choice of carbon dioxide rather than room air
eliminates the possibility of air embolism formation,
which could, in rare instances, be fatal to the patient.
An insufflator for laparoscopy (Figure 2.31) is also a
much more sophisticated and sensitive device than
 the air pump used in gastroscopy. This is because it 
must automatically regulate gas flow and pressure in
 order to maintain appropriate pneumoperitoneum,
whilst not exceeding values that could compromise
venous return or respiration of the patient. A
pressurized tank of carbon dioxide provides the
source of gas, which is regulated by the insufflator
VETPUMP2 suitable for insufflation, irrigation
2.33
and connected to it by a high pressure hose. The
and suction.
23
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
Fluid pumps dedicated to arthroscopy (Figure
2.34) are also available and represent an advanced
method of joint distension, whereby flow rates and
pressures can be accurately and quickly adjusted.
Joint distension can also be achieved by the
gravitational flow of fluids hung above the level of
the patient, or by inserting a fluid bag into a
pressurized cuff.
(a)
STORZ
2830:20
STORZ
(b)
An arthropump accurately regulates the flow
2.34
rate and pressure of sterile fluids needed to
 distend the joint space during arthroscopy.
Video imaging systems
Although endoscopic images can be viewed directly
through the eyepiece of a fibrescope or rigid telescope,
most endoscopy systems nowadays include a video
camera or processor capable of transmitting the
image to a television monitor. Not only does this
 capability make performing endoscopic procedures
(c)
much more comfortable for the surgeon, but it also 
enables all members of the team to view the procedure,
(a) Basic endoscopic video system. Clockwise
2.35
and allows for documentation of the findings with
(bottom left): camera head, camera control unit,
video or still images.
xenon light source with fibreoptic cable and video monitor.
(b) Endo-video camera attached to a rigid endoscope.
A basic endoscopic video system consists of a
(c) Endo-video camera attached to a fibrescope.
camera head with integral cable, a camera control
unit (CcU; or processor) and a video monitor (Figure
2.35a). The camera head contains a coupler which
The endoscopic image is transmitted from the
attaches to the eyepiece of a flexible or rigid
sensor in the camera head, along a series of wires in
endoscope (Figure 2.35bc). The camera head itself 
the cable, to a CCU or processor. Here the video
contains an objective lens, a prism assembly and
signal is processed for display on the monitor as well
either one or three sensors. The sensor is called a
as for transfer to recording and printing devices.
CCD  (charged   coupled device)
Some newer CCUs are capable of connecting to
whichis
:a
semiconductor or chip responsible for sensing the
video-endoscopes as well as endoscopic camera
image and converting it to an electronic signal. In
heads. These models eliminate the need for two
three-chip cameras each of the three primary colours
different CCUs.
(red, green and blue) is transmitted separately,
Modern endoscopic video cameras may contain a
resulting in a more accurate colour reproduction and
wide variety of features, controllable via buttons either
resolution than with single-chip cameras. However,
 on the camera head or on the CCU. Some of the most 
single-chip cameras are significantly less expensive
useful are white balance, freeze frame, zoom, gain,
and, therefore, more common in veterinary practice.A
contrast enhancement and control of peripheral
modern high-quality single-chip camera can produce
recording devices. More recently, high-definition (HD)
 perfectly acceptable results for veterinary endoscopic
endoscopic video cameras have become available.
diagnosis and surgery. Camera heads should be
This new generation of cameras is based on a three-
lightweight, small and easy to clean and sterilize.
chip design and represents a further step in terms of
Some are soakable, gas-sterilizable and even
resolution, depth perception and colour contrast. In
autoclavable. lIf the camera head is needed for surgery
addition, the HD format offers a 16:9 aspect ratio,
but cannot be sterilized in a timely manner,
giving the surgeon a wider lateral view than the
disposable sterile camera sleeve may be used.
standard definition 4:3 aspect ratio.
24
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
The video monitor provides the final display for
Documentation
viewing the endoscopic image and is connected via a
Until recently, endoscopic documentation was limited
cable, either directly from the camera processor or
to video prints and video tapes. However, in the digital
from any number of various recording devices that
age video printers and VHS recorders are rapidly
may be placed in between the camera processor and
being replaced by digital capture devices, which
the monitor.The video chain should always terminate
facilitate capturing, storing and archiving both still and 
with the monitor. Video cables (Figure 2.36) come in
video images on to any of a variety of digital media,
a variety of types, including composite (BNC), S-video 
including CDs, DVDs, flash drives and computer
(Y/C) and RGB (limited to three-chip cameras).
databases. These images can then be printed
S-video cables transmit the highest quality signal for
whenever a hard copy is needed, without concern for
single-chip video cameras. The monitor resolution
deterioration of image quality over time. In addition,
must be properly matched to the camera head
an advanced image data archiving (AIDA) system
acquisition resolution, in order to take full advantage
(Figure 2.37a) with a touch screen is available, which
of the image quality capabilities of an endoscopic
enables the endoscopist or an assistant to capture
video camera. Forexample, attaching a low-resolution
digital still images and start or stop digital video
consumer grade monitor to a high-quality endoscopic
video camera will not yield the best results. High-
Other devices, such as the TELE PACK(Figure
quality single-chip cameras typically offer about 450
2.37b), combine a light source, air pump, camera
lines of horizontal resolution, three-chip cameras offer
processor, monitor, character generator and still
750 lines of horizontal resolution, and high-definition 
image capture system into one compact unit. The
cameras >10o0 lines of horizontal resolution.
images are captured on to a PCMCIA card, which can
 then be inserted into any computer for downloading.
Composite
口口
(a)
Y/C(S-video)
(b)
(a) The AIDA DVD system is a digital image
2.37
capture device.(b) The TELE PACK?compact,
RGB
portable endoscopy system includes a camera, light
source,keyboard,digital capture system and integrated
2.36
Video cables.
flat screen monitor in one unit.
25
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
Digital capture and storage of  images has
the LigaSure vessel sealing device from Tyco (Figure
numerous advantages compared with hard copy
2.39). With this device, the magnitude of electrical
prints and video tape:
energy and duration of application is achieved by the
virtue of 'smart technology' within the generator, which
 Space-saving
produces an audible signal when appropriate vessel
No degradation in photo quality
sealing has been achieved.
Easy transmission by email to colleagues
Easy, cost-effective duplication for colleagues,
medical records or clients.
Traditional video printing and video taping are still
available and widely used for endoscopic documen-
tation. Virtually any recording device that accepts the
proper video signal cable from the back of the camera
processor can be used to record endoscopic images.
These devices should be chosen with resolution and
colour reproduction parameters capable of reproduc-
ing high-quality images of diagnostic value.
Energy sources
As veterinary surgeons move beyond diagnostic endo-
LigaSurevessel sealing device(manufactured
2.39
 scopy into minimally invasive surgical procedures,
by Tyco).
there is an increasing need for energy sources that
attach to hand instruments (both rigid and flexible) to
Electrosurgery is particularly advantageous as
 effect haemostasis, cutting and other desired results,
more abdominal and thoracic surgeries are being
such as lithotripsy in cystoscopy and tissue debride-
performed via laparoscopy and thoracoscopy. By
ment or capsular shrinkage in arthroscopy. Electro-
reducing the need to exchange instruments or
surgery units continue to be the standard in veterinary
introduce suture material, a single instrument capable
practice, although lasers and ultrasonic cutting and
of both coagulation and cutting, such as the LigaSure?
 coagulation devices are gaining popularity.
or Hotblade (Figure 2.40), can significantly reduce
Electrosurgical units (Figure 2.38) operate in
surgical time.
either a monopolar or bipolar mode. Insulated instru-
ments are available, designed for either monopolar or
bipolar use. Monopolar settings generate a current 
that runs from the instrument tip to the target tissue,
and through the body of the patient to a grounding
plate. Care must be taken to avoid lateral thermal
damage to the tissues. Bipolar settings provide a
more discrete intraoperative haemorrhage control,
use significantly less electrical voltage and current,
Hotblade disposable bipolar cutting and
2.40
 and do not require a grounding plate since the current
coagulation instrument (manufactured by Patton
Surgical).
is passed between the two electrodes located at the
tip of the bipolar instrument.
When choosing a laser or unit for electrosurgery,
attention should be paid to whether the instrumen-
tation will be used in a fluid or gas medium, because
certain devices and instrument tips are designed to
be effective in different media. In most cases, a single
unit may be useful for both endoscopic and open
surgery.
Power shavers
Power shavers are used in arthroscopy for the rapid
debridement of tissues within the elbow, shoulder and
stifle joints. The system consists of an electronic
control box, a handpiece and a variety of tips, including
blades and burrs (Figure 2.41). Handpieces are
An electrosurgical generator can be used for
2.38
typically available in standard and small-joint sizes.
both endoscopic and open surgery.
The latter is most appropriate for canine arthroscopy,
Care must be taken to apply the appropriate
although a standard handpiece may be used in the
amount of electrical energy to provide adequate
stifle joint. The handpiece connects to the control box
haemorrhage control, whilst preventing tissue dam-
and also has a connector for suction tubing, through
age secondary to carbonization. A recently developed
which debrided material is removed along with
device that addresses these concerns, and is capable
irrigation fluids, which are continually replaced through
 of reliably sealing vessels up to 7 mm in diameter, is
 the arthroscope cannula ingress.
26
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
The endoscopy team and theatre
set up
The successful establishment of an efficient and cost-
effective endoscopy service requires a dedicated
team that is thoroughly familiar with equipment set
STORZ
up, procedures and trouble-shooting. Since a sub-
2000RPM
stantial financial investment is required, it is recom-
mended that only a limited number of well trained
staff are authorized to use and handle the instru-
mentation. One of the best sources of information
regarding equipment care and set up is a knowledge-
able vendor who is experienced in all aspects of
endoscopy instrumentation care and use.
During each endoscopic procedure it is advisable
to have a veterinary nurse or surgeon dedicated to
anaesthesia, so that the primary endoscopist is free
to focus on the endoscopy. Although many diagnostic
procedures and some simple surgeries can be
performed by a single person, there are times when
an additional pair of hands will make the procedure
much easier to perform and more time-efficient. For
example, it may be helpful to have a camera operator
during laparoscopic surgery, or an assistant to
Motorized arthroscopic shaver system with
operate the biopsy forceps and prepare the samples
2.41
handpieces and blades.
for submission to the laboratory during Gl endoscopy
or bronchoscopy.
One of the primary indications for a shaver in
It is most convenient if the endoscopy system is
 canine arthroscopy is debridement of the fat pad to
stored on a ready-to-use cart or in a dedicated room,
improve visibility in the stifle joint. For this an
where procedures can be initiated with a minimum of 
aggressive cutting blade is most useful. Burrs are
set up time. Figure 2.42 shows two examples of
used for debridement of bone. Blades and burrs come
complete endoscopy systems on mobile carts, which 
in a variety of sizes and styles, in both reusable and
are easily moved to the most convenient location of a
disposable designs. Each consists of two parts: a
practice as needed. Only in this way are practitioners
rotating inner cutting blade or burr, and a hollow outer
inclined to use the system often, and for applications
cannula. The most useful sizes for canine arthroscopy
that might otherwise be overlooked or considered too
are in the range of 2.0-4.0 mm.
cumbersome. It is recommended that spares of
(a) Mobile cart with
2.42
monitor,digital capture
device, camera and light source.
(b) Mobile cart with flat screen
monitor, camera,light source, digital
capture device, carbon dioxide
insufflator, arthropump and
VETPUMP2.
(a)
(b)
27
Chapter 2  Instrumentation
certain critical items be kept on hand, such as light
bulbs and flexible biopsy forceps. This prevents the
need to abort a procedure once the patient is under
anaesthesia if one of these items fails.
An efficient, ergonomic set up of the cart or
operating theatre is also vital in making endoscopy
attractive and minimizing fatigue. At all times the
monitor height should be adjusted to the eye level of
the surgeon, and positioned in such a way as to
 minimize neck strain. The ideal positioning of the
video monitor is directly across from the endoscopist
(Figure 2.43ab). In cases where an assistant is
needed, the monitor should be placed so that it is
easily viewed by both parties (Figure 2.43c). Relatively
inexpensive flat-screen monitors can be mounted on
the walls of the endoscopy suite to aid the surgeons
(a)
and/or assistant, even if they are not of the same
quality as the primary viewing monitor stored
permanently on the endoscopy tower.
Prior to the procedure, all electronic devices and 
 non-sterile instrumentation should be tested either by
the assistant or primary endoscopist, in order to
minimize procedure time once the patient has been
anaesthetized. Prior to placing the endoscope into
the patient, a clear, focused, white balanced image
should be obtained on the monitor. Care should
always be taken prior to, during, and after the
procedure to protect the endoscope and the camera
head, two items which represent a substantial portion
 of the cost of an endoscope system.
(b)
 Care, cleaning, storage and
maintenance
 Proper care, cleaning and sterilization of endoscopes 
and instruments will prolong the life of the equipment 
and prevent iatrogenic infection of the patient. All
individuals using the equipment should be trained in
its proper care and handling to prevent unnecessary
damage and costly repairs. The following recommen-
dationsare generalguidelines only. The manufacturer's
specific recommendations for care, cleaning and
sterilization of the instrumentation purchased should 
always be consulted.
 Endoscopic instrumentation should be cleaned
immediately following use. This prevents
proteinaceous matter and bodily fluids from drying
 Sterile table
and adhering to the surface of instruments, which 
(c)
makes them more difficult to clean.
 Hand instruments and trocars should be
(a) Room set up for gastroscopy. (b) Room set
2.43
 disassembled before cleaning, disinfecting and 
(c) Room set up for laparoscopy in dorsal recumbency.
sterilizing, so that all surfaces and crevices are 
This is the ideal set up for multiple surgeons or
adequately contacted with cleaning and
procedures where the surgeon must move from one side
disinfecting agents.
 of the patient to the other. Note the additional monitors.
 A neutral pH enzymatic cleaning solution should 
 be used for the initial cleaning of endoscopes
 Items containing optics, such as the endoscope,
and instrumentation.
camera head and light cable, should be handled 
 Only distilled or demineralized water should be
with particular care to prevent damage to the
used for diluting cleaning solutions and rinsing, to
glass lenses or fibres. It should also be noted
avoid mineral deposits that may damage
whether the particular items are completely
instruments, clog channels and prevent smooth
immersible in fluids, gas-sterilizable or 
operation of moving parts.
 autoclavable before proceeding.
28
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
Cleaning
MedDisTm. It is imperative to consult with appropriate
Various brushes (Figure 2.44) are available to aid in
authorities to determine the safe and legal use of glu-
cleaning endoscopic equipment. Brushes for instru-
teraldehyde in veterinary facilities. Proper staff train-
ing, protection and ventilation are important to ensure
ment channels or the lumens of sheaths and cannu-
lae should be of the appropriate diameter and length
that these products are used in a safe and efficacious
for the intended equipment, to avoid damage to the
manner. These solutions usually have a shelf-life of
14 or 28 days from the time they are activated. It is
 instrument channel and to ensure thorough cleaning.
The length of a flexible endoscope channel cleaning
important to follow the instructions on the label as
brush is important because the back-and-forth motion
soaking times, solution reuse and solution disposal
may vary. It is recommended not to soak instruments
of the bristles inside the channel can actually cause
micropunctures, which lead to leakage of fluids into
 containing optics (endoscopes, light cables and cam-
era heads) in any solution for longer than 45 minutes.
the inner workings of the endoscope. A flexible endo-
scope channel cleaning brush should be long enough
Sterile water should be used to rinse equipment thor-
to pass all the way through the channel until it exits
 oughly, as disinfectant residues that come in contact
the other end, and should be smoothly withdrawn to
with the patient can cause irritation. Instruments
should be dried completely with sterile soft cloths or
prevent 'scrubbing' the inside of the channel.
sterile (filtered) compressed air. Lenses, light posts 
and the glass surfaces of light cables can be cleaned
with alcohol wipes to thoroughly dry them and remove
any   remaining  residue.
Disinfected  instruments
should either be used immediately or stored in a man-
ner to avoid recontamination.
Sterilization
There are several methods of sterilization for endo-
scopic equipment. It is important to check with the
equipment manufacturer to determine which methods
are authorized for the instrumentation in question,
before proceeding. Equipment that is to be sterilized
Cleaning brushes for endoscopes and
will need to be packaged properly, depending on the
2.44
instruments.
method of sterilization. There are a variety of storage/
sterilization trays available that are designed for spe-
Ultrasonic cleaners are an excellent alternative
cific instrumentation (Figure 2.45). The proper tray
to manual cleaning of both rigid and flexible hand
should be chosen, based on the type of instrumenta-
instruments. Ultrasonic cleaning is helpful in
tion and method of sterilization. A common method for
cleaning hard to reach areas of instruments, such
sterilizing rigid endoscopes, flexible endoscopes and
as hinges and locking mechanisms, but should not 
instruments is ethylene oxide (ETO) gas sterilization.
be used for any equipment that has lenses or
A pressure compensation cap must be attached to
flexible endoscopes during gas sterilization. Steam 
fibreoptic bundles.
Enzymatic cleaning solution should be disposed
sterilization or autoclaving is another common sterili-
of once cleaning is completed and all equipment
 zation method for some instruments and rigid endo-
should be rinsed thoroughly. A clean, lint-free, soft 
scopes. Telescopes and camera heads that are
cloth should be used to dry the equipment com-
autoclavable may be authorized only for specific
pletely. Alternatively, compressed air can be used
cycles and temperatures. Flexible endoscopes are
for drying; this is particularly beneficial for instru-
usually not steam-sterilizable due to the high temper-
 ment channels, lumens and hinged areas. To main-
atures involved in this process.
tain the working parts of the instruments, all joints,
hinges, locks and stopcocks should be lubricated
using the manufacturer's recommended lubricants
or instrument milk. Opening and closing joints,
 hinges, locks and stopcocks repeatedly will work the
lubricant into the intended area. Any excess lubri-
cant should be removed.
Once cleaning is complete, the equipment can be
disinfected or sterilized according to the manufac-
turer's recommendations. For soakable instrumenta-
tion, high-level disinfection can be achieved using a
manufacturer-approved disinfectant solution, such as
glutaraldehyde or MedDisTM (Medichem International
Ltd). Gluteraldehyde containing sterilization solutions
are still used quite commonly in the USA and other
countries. However, as gluteraldehyde is a known
 carcinogen, its use in the UK and other EU countries
Sterilization and storage tray for rigid
2.45
has been superseded by safer alternatives, such as
 endoscopes and instruments.
29
Chapter 2 Instrumentation
Two additional sterilization methods,STERRAD
2.46
 and Steris, are relatively uncommon in veterinary
Mobile cart
practice due to cost. STERRAD is a type of hydrogen
withvideo-
peroxide gas plasma sterilization. Steris uses
endoscope
paracetic acid for the sterilization process.
stored in a
hanging
Storage
position to
Endoscopes and instruments should be stored in a
maximize
drainage
convenient and safe place, so that damage is
andreduce
prevented yet the equipment is readily available for
stress on
use without undue set up time. Flexible endoscopes 
glass fibres.
are best stored in a hanging position (Figure 2.46)
to allow any residual fluid to drain and to minimize
stress on fibres, which would otherwise occur when
left coiled for extended periods of time in the
 transportation case.
References and further reading
Beale BS, Hulse DA, Schulz KS and Whitney WO (2003) Arthroscopic
instrumentation.In:Small Animal Arthroscopy.pp.5-21.Elsevier
Science,Pennsylvania
Chamness,CJ (1999) Endoscopic instrumentation. In:Small Animal
Endoscopyndedn,edRTamp116MosbyMissuri
Chamness, CJ (2005) Introduction to veterinary endoscopy and
endoscopicinstrumentation.In:Veterinary Endoscopy for the Small
Animal Practitioner,ed.TMcCathy.p.120.lsevier Saundrs,
Missouri
Freeman,LJ (1999) Operating room setup.equipment and instrumen
tationIn:VeterinaryEndosurgery,edFremanpp23.
Mosby, Missouri
Stasi K and Melendez L (2001) Care and cleaning of the endoscope.
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice-
Endoscopy.31(4),589-603
Tams TR (1999) Small Animal Endoscopy. 2ndedn,Mosby,Missouri
30
Flexible endoscopy:
basic technique
Edward J. Hall
Introduction
Protecting the endoscopist
Methods for cleaning and disinfecting endoscopes
With skill and the right flexible endoscopic equipment,
are explained in Chapter 2. Rigorous compliance is
most parts of the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract, major air-
critical in order to minimize the risk of transmitting
ways and lower urinary tract are now accessible, and
infection, not only from patient to patient, but also
many patients have benefited from such endoscopic
investigations. However, in some cases endoscopy
should be used, as only they can be completely
may be unhelpful, and both indications and contra-
disinfected. Although  the risk of a  veterinary
indications can be found in specific chapters.
endoscopist contracting an  infection from  their
 Regrettably, endoscopy can result in serious compli-
patients is small compared with their medical
cations, such as hypoxia during respiratory endo-
 counterparts, contact with potentially zoonotic material
scopy and Gl perforation during Gl endoscopy. Thus,
(e.g. Gl contents, faeces, respiratory secretions) by
' the goal must be to maximise the benefits whilst mini-
direct contact, by splashing or via aerosolization is
mising the risks. The endoscopist needs to be profi-
still possible. Appropriate precautions should always
 cient, undertaking procedures for good indications on
be adopted, making the assumption that all patients 
 patients who are fully prepared and protected, with
 are potentially infectious, even if there is no objective 
skilled assistants, and using optimum equipment.The
evidence of infection.
basic principles are similar for all areas of flexible
Protective clothing should always be worn, and
endoscopy, recognising specific circumstances where
the risks are greater (Cotton and Wiliams, 2003).
gowns, glovesandeyeprotectionareallrecommended.
Measures to reduce infection recommended in human
Minimum standards are applied to endoscopic profi-
endoscopy (Cotton and Williams, 2003) include:
ciency in human medicine, and the veterinary profes-
sion should aspire to the same level.
Learning the techniques needed to perform
Wearing gloves, gowns and eye protection
·
 endoscopy can, for the most part, only be obtained by
(glasses or visor)
undertaking procedures on live patients. There is
Frequent hand-washing
Covering all skin breaks with waterproof 
some, but limited, expertise to be gained using models
dressings
or cadavers. For example, the ability to manipulate
 Use of paper towels when handling soiled
the tip so that the endoscopic view remains centred in
 the lumen of the viscus as the endoscope is advanced,
accessories
can be acquired by passing the endoscope within a
 Putting soiled items directly into a sink and not
?
model or a fresh cadaver, although the colour,
on to clean surfaces
movement and feel is not realistic. Training on healthy
 Appropriate disposal of hazardous waste,
?
animals in wet labs is not permitted within the UK
needles and syringes
except under the Animal (Scientific Procedures) Act
Good general hygienic practice in the
1986, although such classes may be available abroad.
endoscopy room.
Therefore, in the UK, veterinary surgeons trying to
 Protecting the patient
become proficient in endoscopy should ideally train 
under a proficient endoscopist. Such opportunities
 Endoscopy should only be performed when indicated,
are limited and therefore CE
 courses, extensive
 and not because the equipment is available. Thorough 
reading, use of models and viewing recorded
investigation by blood tests, radiographs and ultra-
endoscopy procedures should be undertaken before
sound examination should generally precede endo-
contemplating performing endoscopy.
scopy. The place of endoscopy in the investigation of 
different organ systems is put in context in the
following chapters, but it must be remembered that 
Safe use of the endoscope
endoscopy is not without risk and may not be the best
Before explaining the generic skills needed to use an
approach in some cases. The risks and benefits to
endoscope, it is important to emphasize the need for
the patient must be considered: how likely is
safe practice to protect the endoscopist, the patient
endoscopy to give a diagnosis versus the risk of the
 anaesthetic and procedure?
and the equipment.
31
Chapter 3 Flexible endoscopy: basic technique
Attainment of a certain level of proficiency (see
above) is necessary before any endoscopy should be
attempted, and an understanding of the role of
endoscopy in the whole diagnostic effort as well as its
indications, relative merits and dangers must be
appreciated. Inappropriate use (e.g. mishandling,
overly aggressive or forceful use) can result in
significant injury to the patient. Therefore, adequate
(a)
equipment, and not necessarily the cheapest, is
needed for maximum benefit. Factors influencing the
choice of equipment are discussed in Chapter 2 and
in the specific organ chapters.
Except perhaps for proctoscopy,
veterinary
 patients must be anaesthetized to permit endoscopy
without compromising the safety of patient, endo-
scopist or equipment. The requirement for general
anaesthesia necessitates the presence of an assistant
to monitor the patient, as the endoscopist may be too
(b)
engrossed in the procedure to recognize significant
Damage to a flexible endoscope can make it
 3.1
changes in vital signs before it is too late. Indeed the
unusable. (a) Compression damage to the
'assistant' must be in control and be able to intervene
bending section of a gastroscope caused by a trolley
if the endoscopist is endangering the patient, perhas
being wheeled over the tip as it trailed on the floor.
(b) Breakage of the biopsy forceps due to over-vigorous
by over-inflating the stomach. Endoscopy should
closure of the cups; excessive pressure does not improve
never be done single-handed.
the biopsy quality,but stretches andultimately breaks the
operating wire.
 Protecting the endoscope
A flexible endoscope is a very effective tool if used
properly. However, inappropriate use can result not
ends of the fibres and ultimately leads to fibre
only in injury to the patient but also expensive damage
breakage. Thus, leakage testing should be performed
to the endoscope. As endoscope technology
/has
 after every procedure to avoid the need for expensive
advanced, instrument durability has improved,
but
repairs. Heat sterilization irreversibly damages the
endoscopes are expensive investments and must still
whole endoscope and must neverbe used. Information
be handled carefully and well maintained.
An
on how to test for leakage, and clean and disinfect
understanding of the strengths and limitations of
flexible endoscopes is detailed in Chapter 2.
endoscopic equipment and its care is essential for its
For the reasons given above, it is imperative that
longevity. With care, the working life of a flexible
the endoscopist takes care to ensure secure handling
endoscope should exceed 10 years, and some 20-
of the endoscope. When the endoscope is being held
year old endoscopes are still in service today.
outside the patient, all parts of the endoscope should
As detailed in Chapter 2, both fibreoptic and
be secure, with no part being allowed to dangle or
flexible endoscopes contain light/illumination'guides',
swing freely and knock against a solid surface. The
i.e. bundles of glass fibreoptic fibres that transmit light
endoscope can be held securely in one or both hands
to illuminate the patient. Fibreoptic endoscopes also
(Figure 3.2)
contain an image bundle of similar diameter, coherent,
glass fibres. Both of these glass fibre bundles are
flexible (hence the endoscope is flexible) but very
fragile; they are susceptible to compression and
sudden shocks.Biting of the insertion tube, or trapping
it in a door or suitcase hinge,is very likely to result in
damage (Figure 3.1). However, merely tapping the
end of the endoscope on the edge of a table once
may be sufficient to shatter fibres or dislodge the
objective lens.
llumination by the light guide will gradually
diminish as more fibres in it are broken and so minor
damage may not be instantly apparent, but the
breakage of a single fibre amongst the coherent fibres
of the image bundle immediately results in a black
spot in the viewed image. The presence of too many
broken fibres impairs viewing (see Chapter 2), and
ultimately can make the endoscope unusable. Repair
is then by replacement of the whole bundle, and can
(a)
(b)
cost thousands of pounds. Similarly, perforation of the
Endoscopes should be carried securely in (a)
3.2
insertion tube or biopsy channel causes leakage and
one or (b) both hands to avoid accidental
ingress of water, which loosens the glue securing the
damage.
32
Chapter 3 Flexible endoscopy: basic technique
When the umbilical cord is attached to the light
Injection/aspiration needles
 Recording equipment (camera, PC and capture 
source and the insertion tube is within the patient,
only the handpiece needs to be held; however, care 
software, video or DVD recorder, etc.).
should be taken when withdrawing the insertion tube
from the patient as the end may unexpectedly exit the 
patient, pulled by the weight of the unsupported inser-
Handling the flexible endoscope
tion tube, and drop, potentially striking the examina-
There are certain endoscopic techniques and 'tricks'
tion table or floor and possibly causing damage.
 Demonstrating the flexibility of an endoscope by
that are applicable in specific circumstances, and
these are detailed in the relevant chapters. However,
tightly coiling it should be avoided, and the bending
the way to hold and use flexible endoscopes is generic
section should not be manipulated by the fingers; only
 and this information follows. With practice, manoeuv-
the control knobs should be used to check the range
ring becomes second nature, and the length of the
of bending. The umbilical cord should be connected
and disconnected from the light source by pushing/
procedure becomes shorter, permitting the skilled
pulling in one line, with twisting/rocking motions
the findings in relation to the clinical problem and
avoided. After use, especially if endoscope cleaning
previous experience. However, endoscopy is not a
is likely to be delayed, the channels should be flushed
race, and adequate time should be taken to minimize
 and clean water aspirated to remove gross debris and
trauma and maximize the value of any investigation.
prevent the development of a blockage when the
channels dry out.
General handling rules
When the endoscope is not in use it must be
The endoscope should be used gently, and excessive
stored securely and not left unattended on a work sur-
force should be avoided when:
face. It may be transported safely within its suitcase,
but should not be stored there long-term as it will ulti-
Passing the insertion tube in to the patient
mately take on a permanent curve. Furthermore, stor-
Rotating the endoscope on its long axis (applying
age in the suitcase is likely to encourage microbial
torque), especially when looped within a viscus 
growth, especially if the endoscope channels are not
Turning the steering wheels to deflect the tip.
dried thoroughly. Storage on a secure wall hanger
that allows the insertion tube to hang vertically and
Biopsy forceps should never be inserted when the
 allows free air circulation is ideal.
bending section is fully retroflexed.
Holding the handpiece
Preparation for endoscopy
When performing flexible endoscopy, the umbilical
Preparation of the patient for endoscopy varies
cord is plugged into the air/water pump and light 
 depending on the procedure being performed, and is 
source, and the endoscopist and patient arranged
detailed in the relevant chapters. Every time before
(see Chapter 2) to permit efficient technique. The
operatorholds the handpiece in theirefthand,whilst
an endoscope is used, the equipment should be
checked to ensure it works. An image should be
guiding the insertion tube into the patient with their
visible and the following components checked before
right hand (Figure 3.3).
the patient is anaesthetized:
3.3
Air pump
Holding the
Suction
。
handpiece
Air/water valve
correctly in the
Suction valve
left hand whilst
guiding the
 Disposable cap on biopsy/accessory channel
?
insertion tube
Tip deflection.
with the right.
The light source should be switched on just before
the induction of anaesthesia. All necessary ancillary
equipment, as required for the specific procedure,
should be made available and includes some or all of
the following:
Protective clothing
Mouth gag if performing upper Gl or respiratory
endoscopy
Biopsy forceps
Formalin pots
Wash tube and sterile saline
Cytology brush and slides
Grasping forceps, baskets forceps and other
retrieval devices
33
Chapter 3 Flexible endoscopy:basic technique
Allflexible endoscopes are currently designed for
the handpiece to be held in the left hand, and are
grasped most securely by placing the control head in
the palm of the hand with the umbilical cord running
between thumb and forefinger down the back of the
hand (Figure 3.4). This
positioning allows easy
placement of fingers on the valves and steering
controls and, with fibreoptic endoscopes, is necessary
to keep the endoscope in the right orientation to the
eye (see Figure 3.3).
3.4
Holding the
handpiece.The
handpiece is
held in the palm
of the left hand
with the
(a)
(b)
umbilicalcord
running between
the thumband
forefinger down
the back of the
hand, allowing
the fingers to
reachthe
buttons and
controlwheels.
(c)
When the handpiece is held in the palm, with the
Gripping the endoscope handpiece. (a) Using
3.5
umbilical cord running between the base of the thumb
the fourth and fifth fingers to stabilize the
endoscope handpiece, the left index and middle fingers
and index finger, the index and middle fingers can
are free to operate the air/water and suction buttons,
each be used to operate the valves, whilst the fourth
respectively. (b) Using a three finger grip to stabilize the
and fifth fingers give stability through a ‘two finger'
handpiece, the left index finger is used to operate the
grip (Figure 3.5a). Alternatively, the third, fourth and
valves, whilst the thumb controls the up/down steering
fifth fingers can be used to stabilize the handpiece
wheel. (c) Rotation of the handpiece of a video-
(Figure 3.5b). This three finger' grip requires the left 
endoscope once almost full insertion has been achieved
allows the left thumb to work the valves, and the right
index finger to operate both valves, but does offer
thumb and fingers to manipulate the steering wheels.
greater control of steering by the left thumb. The
choice between using the two or three fingered grip is
based on the comfort of the grip, which is partly
dependent on the distance between the control
wheels and the accessory/biopsy channel opening,
Using the controls
and on personal preference.
The buttons and valves
Rotation of the handpiece
The top of the gastroscope handpiece houses two
The handpiece can be rotated on its long axis in order
to help steer (see below). Such movement is limited if
 colour-coded red) controls suction and is operated by
a fibreoptic endoscope is being held to the eye, as it
full depression. To enable suction, the tip of the endo-
scope should be deflected into any pools of fluid and
body position. However, if a fibreoptic endoscope with
a camera attachment or a video-endoscope is being
tually to be sucked into the channel. When released
used, some endoscopists during gastroscopy prefer
a small red dot on the mucosa, a suction artefact,
to rotate the handpiece through 90 degrees in their
may be seen (Figure 3.6). This is not a serious prob-
hand when almost full insertion has been achieved.
lem, but must not be mistaken for a lesion.
The left thumb can then work the valves, whilst the
The forward button (normally colour-coded blue)
right hand operates the steering controls (Figure 3.5c).
controls air/water instillation. Air from the air pump
This reduces the strain on the endoscopist who can
passes continuously along the umbilical cord and out
through a hole in the centre of the button; coverage of
possible with a fibreoptic endoscope held to the eye.
the hole by light pressure from a finger deflects the
34
Chapter 3 Flexible endoscopy:basic technique
3.7
Holding the handpiece
 of a bronchoscope; the 
lever for 2-way tip
deflection is operated
by the left thumb, and
the suction buttonby a
finger. There is no air/
water channel in
bronchoscopes.
The conventional orientation when holding the
The red dot in the mucosa (arrowed) is a
gastroscope handpiece in the left hand (see Figure
3.6
suction artefact caused by tissue being sucked
3.4) permits manipulation of both steering wheels by
up accidentally, and must not be mistaken for a lesion.
the left thumb and fingers. The left thumb can be used 
(Courtesy of S Warman)
to move either wheel, with the free fingers being used
to lock the position of the wheel by acting as a ratchet
as the thumb is repositioned (see Figure 3.5b). Thus,
single-handed control of steering is possible with
airflow along the insertion tube and into the patient to
practice and is necessary when the right hand is
enable insufflation of the viscus. Further depression
manipulating the biopsy forceps.
of the button allows the flow of water in order to flush
In actual fact, a major part of steering can be
mucus, blood or debris from the objective lens at the
 achieved simply through deflecting the tip up/down by
tip when the view is obscured.
 the left thumb manipulating the inner wheel, and then
 Dedicated bronchoscopes do not have an air/
flexing/extending the left wrist so that the endoscope
water button as there is no need to insufflate the
rotates on its long axis. This has the effect of making
respiratory tract to gain a view. Some, but not all,
the tip “look' to the left and right (Figure 3.8) without
 bronchoscopes have a suction channel, which, if the
the need to deflect the left/right wheel at all. Only
bronchoscope has been disinfected properly, can be
used to aspirate lavage fluid into a trap container put 
in the suction line.
The steering wheels
Gastroscopes have two wheels on the handpiece to
control the deflection of the tip. The smaller‘outer'
wheel (i.e. the wheel further from the body of the
handpiece) deflects the tip left/right whilst the larger
"inner' wheel rotates it up/down. The ability to retroflex
the bending section at least 180 degrees in at least
(a)
 one plane is essential for gastroscopy, and 210-90
degrees up/down is the norm for gastroscopes (see
Chapter 2). Paediatric and veterinary gastroscopes
that have a tight radius of curvature of the bending
section, to enable manoeuvring in the stomach, are
preferred.
Deflection 90-90 degrees left/right is achieved by
turning the outer wheel anticlockwise/clockwise (for-
ward/backward). Steering 210-90 degrees up/down
is achieved by turning the inner wheel anticlockwise/
clockwise (forward/backward). Dedicated broncho-
(b)
 scopes only need to deflect in 90-90 degrees left/
(a) Upward deflection of the endoscope tip and
3.8
right, i.e. in one plane. Such deflection is often con-
(b) longitudinal rotation effectively allow the
trolled by a simple lever, which is operated by the left 
endoscopist to look left or right, without having to
thumb (Figure 3.7).
manipulate the left/right steering wheel.
35
Chapter 3 Flexible endoscopy: basic technique
when fine control is needed (e.g. traversing the
Using the endoscope in a patient
pylorus) is it necessary to use the right hand to operate
Body position
asteeringwheel,althoughinexperiencedendoscopists
do usually find it easier to use both right and left hands
The endoscopist should either try to stand upright (to
to steer. At nearly full insertion of a video-gastroscope,
avoid back strain) or be seated. The length of insertion
when trying to intubate the pylorus, rotation of the
tube outside the patient should be kept in as straight
handpiece in the palm of the hand (see Figure 3.5c)
a line as possible. Leaning over the patient and
allows fine control of both wheels by the right hand.
looping of the insertion tube outside the patient is
considered poor technique, leading to operator strain,
Friction brakes
tension on the endoscope and difficulty in steering
Friction brakes (Figure 3.9) are operated by levers or
because as soon as the tip is deflected, looping the
knobs labelled *F' or 'B'. They permit the position of 
endoscope results in movement of the image.
any tip deflection to be maintained without holding the
Looping also makes advancement of the
steering wheel in position manually, although it is still
endoscope more difficult: the loop grows longer as
possible to move the steering wheels by applying
the endoscope is inserted further and the tip does not
increased pressure. Devised to help maintain deflec-
advance, and in the stomach the pylorus may actually
tion during certain phases of human colonoscopy, the
appear to move away (so-called paradoxical motion).
This problem is countered by withdrawing the
ability to fix the endoscope tip does help the novice
endoscopist maintain the tip position at times when
endoscope until the loop is flattened so that the
the right hand is undertaking other functions such as
endoscope can be inserted further in a straight line.
inserting the biopsy forceps. The experienced endo-
scopist may not need to use these brakes.
Controlling the insertion tube
To insert the endoscope into the patient, it is necessary
to support and guide the insertion tube with the right
hand. Support is not necessary when the endoscope is
 at nearly full insertion during gastroscopy or colono-
 scopy; insertion and withdrawal is simply accomplished
by pushing the handpiece in and out, because the
insertion tube is being held in a straight line within the
oesophagus or large intestine and cannot loop.
Some endoscopists use an assistant to stabilize
the insertion tube and to advance or withdraw it. This
may be helpful during colonoscopy; the endoscopist's
R
R
right hand remains clean as it does not have to touch
D
faecal contamination of the insertion tube. The
assistant can also manually close the anus to stop air
escaping, making insufflation more efficient. However,
having to instruct an assistant to move the insertion
tube forwards and backwards adds a layer of
recommended.
Rotating the insertion tube on its long axis
Application of the deflection brakes permit the
(sometimes referred to as ‘torquing') is facilitated by
3.9
endoscope tip tobe held in a deflected position
the right hand on the insertion tube whilst turning the
without the need to control the steering wheels.
handpiece. This function of the right hand used to be
(a) Friction brakes 'off'. (b) Friction brakes'on'.
essential when the construction of the insertion tube
was inadequate to prevent twisting and possible
 damage of the fibreoptics during rotation. In modern 
Video-endoscope controls
endoscopes, the more robust construction means
Most video-endoscopes and video camera attach-
that this role for the right hand is not essential, and
ments for fibreoptic endoscopes have up to four
the insertion tube can be rotated simply by rotating
 buttons on the handpiece, which toggle on/off, and
the handpiece. Nevertheless, longitudinal rotation
can be programmed to control a number of functions
should not be performed if the endoscope is looped
related to the image:
within a viscus, as the distal tip may be constrained 
within a length of bowel and be unable torotate;
Freeze-frame - often a small live image will
rotation of the handpiece whilst the tip is fixed will
appear in the corner of the screen whilst the main
simply strain the fibreoptics.
image is frozen
Open/close iris - to alter the illumination level
Steering the endoscope
 Zoom in/out - to magnify the image
Steering is accomplished by a combination of:
Image recorder on/off/pause - to control
recording tovideo tape or DVD
Insertion -retraction
Video print - to control printing of images as
Longitudinal rotation (torquing)
?
hard copy.
Up/down tip deflection
36
Chapter 3 Flexible endoscopy: basic technique
Left/right tip deflection
stomach and can be stopped by an assistant gently
Passive movement as the endoscope follows the
constricting the oesophagus in the neck. Similarly, an
wall of a viscus.
assistant can squeeze  the anus shut during
colonoscopy to aid insufflation. Finally, neoplastic
The novice endoscopist often struggles to steer
infiltration may make the Gl tract wall rigid, so an
the endoscope, not only because they are not profi-
inability to insufflate can be a sign of pathology,
cient in the use of the steering wheels and rotating the
assuming that the other causes of failure to insufflate
endoscope (torquing), but because they dwell on
(detailed above) have been ruled out.
which way to turn the endoscope tip. It is true that the
direction of tip deflection is usually written on the
Red-out
steering wheels but that is of little help when trying to
Although the focal length of the objective lens in
see where to go, when which way is which is not obvi-
endoscopes is very short, usually being able to focus
ous. Indeed unless there are distinct visible land-
at distances as near as 2-3 mm, if the lens is too
marks, such as the angularis incisura in the stomach
close or even in contact with tissue, it is impossible to
(see Chapter 4), it may be impossible to determine
see more than an out of focus red blur. This is called
which way is up/down-left/right except by observing
'red-out' (Figure 3.10).
pooling of liquid in the most dependent part. The ori-
entation within a tube (such as the oesophagus or
intestine) is not particularly relevant, as the true orien-
tation of the image depends on the relative rotational
position of the patient and the endoscope.
The experienced endoscopist does not think in
terms of turning leftright-up/down, but intuitively
the image moves as they start to move a steering
wheel. Unfortunately this is something that can only
be acquired through practice, although prior
proficiency on video games may impart some
advantage. The thought process involved is similar to
that of reversing a car around a corner; initially one
has to think which way to turn the wheel to direct the
carin the correct direction,but with practice it becomes
second nature. However, just as there are good and
bad drivers, some operators find endoscopy easier
than others. Nevertheless, with adequate practice,
most should be able to perform a satisfactory
endoscopic examination.
Red-out. Loss of a clear image occurs when the
3.10
Insufflation
endoscope lens is too close to the Gl mucosa.
The ability to instil air into the Gl tract is essential to
It is corrected by withdrawing the endoscope, deflecting
be able to obtain a clear view. The rate of air insuffla-
the tip slightly and insufflating. (Reproduced from the
BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Gastroenterology.
tion should be varied, depending on the size of the
2nd edition)
patient, the ability of the viscus to expand, and the
 rate air escapes. The rate can be controlled by adjust-
ing the setting of the air pump and by adjusting the
Novice endoscopistsoften feel theyhave done
length of time the air hole is covered. The novice
something wrong when red-out occurs. However, it
endoscopist often forgets that their finger is covering
happens to all endoscopists; it is just that the more
the air hole and inadvertent continuous insufflation
experienced ones know how to correct the image so
leads to over-inflation of the viscus. Over-inflation of
that it is not a problem. To get rid of red-out, some or
the stomach is poor technique because, as well as
all of the following manoeuvres are undertaken:
making pyloric intubation difficult (see Chapter 4),
the gastric dilation impairs venous return to the heart 
Slight withdrawal of the endoscope - this moves
 and splints the diaphragm, threatening the anaesthe-
the tipback from the mucosa
tized patient's life. The anaesthetic assistant should
Insufflation with air - inflation of the viscus moves
always be aware of the possibility of over-inflation
the mucosa away from the lens
Deflection of the tip - slight deflection combined
should be withdrawn.
with the above techniques will allow the
If a viscus will not inflate, the first thing to check is
endoscopist to obtain a view of the lumen.
that the air pump is working. If the failure of the viscus
to expand is actually because of excessive air
Clearing the lens
escaping during insufflation, the rubber seal on the
It is not uncommon during Gl endoscopy for the lens
accessory/biopsy channel should be checked for
to be obscured by blood, mucus or Gl contents. This
leaks, and replaced if worn. Air escaping up the
can be cleared by depressing the air/water button and
oesophagus may also prevent insufflation of the
flushing with water. After flushing, a drop of clear
37
Chapter 3 Flexible endoscopy:basic technique
water on the tip may interfere with the view, and
should be removed by repetitively sucking and blowing
air. Failure to flush properly may be due to:
Lack of water in the water bottle
Blocked channel
?
Loss of O' ring around water bottle/endoscope
connection.
Whenever pools of liquid are found during
endoscopy, it is important to suck out the fluid as it
may obscure a lesion. If there is solid matter present,
simple washing may be enough to clear it. Where
there is more food or faecal material, larger volumes
of warm water can be flushed down the biopsy
channel from a syringe, and then aspirated. If this is
unsuccessful, repeat endoscopy after adequate
 preparation of the patient may be necessary.
during  gastroscopy   and  duo-
Occasionally
denoscopy, insufflation causes bilious fluid to foam
and vision becomes obscured. In minor cases,
flushing with water and sucking out the fluid is effective
in clearing the view. In more severe cases, it is
possible to instil a dilute solution of simethicone.
 Advancing through sphincters
It is generally recommended that the endoscope
should only be advanced under direct vision in order
to avoid iatrogenic damage. Within the Gl tract, if the 
way forward cannot be seen, the endoscope should
 be withdrawn and more air insufflated until the lumen 
is visible. However, that general principle may have to
be modified to traverse sphincters, such as the
oesophageal sphincters, pylorus and ileocolic valve.
Occasionally, the sphincter is open and the lumen
can be visualized as the endoscope is advanced
through, but in many cases the sphincter remains
 closed. In such situations, red-out will occur until the
tip reaches the far side. In order to pass closed
sphincters, gentle pressure is applied whilst constantly
readjusting the tip to engage in the opening of the
sphincter. As red-out occurs, there is usually the
impression of aiming for the darkest area of red-out,
which represents the lumen.
Advancing around flexures
A similar problem of red-out may occur as the
endoscope advances around a flexure (e.g. proximal
duodenal flexure, colonic flexures) and the tip
impinges on the outer radius of the intestinal bend. if
the red-out is seen to be moving, it is generally safe to
keep advancing the endoscope until it enters the next
straight length of gut and the lumen can be seen
(Figure 3.11). With this ‘slide-by’ technique, it is
important to realize that the manoeuvre may have
caused some mucosal damage, and any linear
 streaks of hyperaemia or haemorrhage on the mucosa
seen as the endoscope is withdrawn back around the
flexure should be recognized as artefacts. One
method that may help avoid such artefacts is to pre-
Slide-by technique for advancing the
deflect the tip before the flexure is reached so that the
3.11
endoscope around flexures. Red-out occurs as
next length of intestine can be entered atraumatically
the endoscope tip passes along the wall until the next
(Figure 3.12).
straight length of intestine is reached.
38
Chapter 3 Flexible endoscopy:basic technique
fluid, cytology samples and biopsy specimens.
Therapeutic procedures are increasingly possible and
are discussed in the relevant chapters.
Brush cytology and other samples
Brush cytology
Sheathed cytology brushes are inserted via the
biopsy channel of the endoscope, opened within the
organ and rubbed against the mucosa. They are
then withdrawn into the sheath before removal from
the endoscope, and smears are made and stained.
They may be useful in the detection of Helicobacter
infection and for differentiation of neoplastic masses,
as well as for the identification of inflammatory air-
way disease.
Fluid collection
Sterile polyethylene tubing passed through the biopsy
channel can be used to collect fluid samples, e.g.
duodenal aspirates for culture. All these samples
should be collected before biopsy specimens are
taken to avoid blood contamination. Bronchoalveolar
lavage can also be performed using this tube or
through the biopsy channel if it has been sterilized
(see Chapter 6 for more further information).
Fine-needle aspiration
Fine-needle aspirates are occasionally taken with
sheathed injector needles to obtain cytological
 samples from mucosal masses, but pinch biopsy
specimens for histological and other laboratory
 examinations are more valuable.
Biopsy
When to perform a biopsy?
Specimens  should  always be obtained during
endoscopy, even if the mucosa appears grossly
normal. The exceptions to this rule are that biopsy
samples are only taken from the lower respiratory
tract and the oesophagus if there are visible lesions.
The risk of bleeding within the airway means that the
risk/benefit of biopsy is only justified if a mass or
unusual lesion is seen; brush cytology and broncho-
alveolar lavage are usually performed instead. Biopsy
of grossly normal oesophageal mucosa is not usually
undertaken as the mucosa is very tough and
inadequate tissue samples are typically obtained;
oesophagitis is usually recognizable grossly, and so
(b)
oesophageal biopsy is mostly reserved for rare cases
(a) Linear haemorrhages at a small intestinal
3.12
of oesophageal neoplasia.
flexture are artefactual and caused by the
endoscope tip scraping the mucosa of the outer curvature
Collecting biopsy specimens
of the flexture. (b) Pre-deflection of the tip before reaching
Before beginning endoscopy, biopsy forceps should
a flexure allows visualization along the next length of
be made ready and checked that the cups open. If
intestine and avoids slide-by induced artefacts.
they are stuck, immersion in warm water or mineral oil
may release them, sometimes with gentle separation 
Biopsy techniques, handling and
of the cups by a fine needle or fingernail pressure.
It is difficult to operate the endoscope and the
preparation
forceps, and usually the forceps are operated by an
Originally, endoscopes were devised merely to view
assistant. They should be familiar with the opening/
the inside of various organ systems. Advances in
closing
before
mechanism 
commencing 
the
technology now mean it is also possible to collect
procedure. The thumb is inserted through the ring
39
Chapter 3 Flexible endoscopy: basic technique
and the fingers work the mechanism (Figure 3.13);
been obtained. If the tissue pulls away easily, either it
opening the hand opens the cups and vice versa. If
is too superficial or it is severely diseased.
the endoscope has passed around a number of
flexures, opening the cups may be difficult as the wire
Which biopsy forceps?
is bent, and straightening the endoscope as much as 
There is a vast array of types of biopsy forceps
possible helps opening. The operator should not
 available (see Chapter 2) and it is not always clear
squeeze too hard when the cups are closed, as this
when a particular type is preferred. Ellipsoid cups
does not improve the grip on the tissue, but merely
tend to collect more tissue than round cups, and the
stretches the wire so that it breaks prematurely. Re-
presence of a fenestration in the cup potentially
usable forceps should be well maintained
and
reduces crush artefact by allowing the tissue to bulge
lubricated. Disposable biopsy forceps need
no
through the holes. The choice of smooth or serrated
maintenance, but are not as cost-effective as well
edges to the cups depends on the toughness of the
 maintained re-usable forceps.
tissue being sampled. If the tissue is very tough and
the forceps tend to slip off, forceps containing a spike
can help, although they may reduce the volume of
tissue that can be sampled. Rotatable forceps, where
turning the handle turns the cups, can be helpful if
trying to biopsy on the edge of a fold and the cups
open in the wrong plane. These forceps are more
robust but more expensive.
In reality, the two major factors influencing the size
 and quality of the biopsy specimen are the size of the
biopsy forceps (as dictated by the diameter of the
  xa nss    s 
(a)
 operator. There is always a compromise between the
diameter of the biopsy channel (and hence the size of
the biopsy specimen) and the external diameter of the
endoscope (and hence the size of the patient) (see
Chapter 2).
The harder the forceps are pushed, the bigger the
tissue sample obtained (Danesh et al, 1985), and it is
here that experience pays dividends. The most
pressure can be exerted if the biopsy cups are
perpendicular to the tissue, and the experienced
endoscopist knows how to achieve this position, and
(b)
how hard to push safely. When taking biopsy speci-
mens along a tube (e.g. the descending duodenum),
Correct (a) opening and (b) closing of biopsy
3.13
forceps. The thumb is inserted in the handle
'swing-jaw' forceps help turn the cups into the tissue
and the fingers clasp the slider. As the palm of the hand is
to get a bigger bite (Figure 3.14). However, whether
clenched, the cups close.
the increased expense of these forceps is worthwhile
is debatable. Techniques for taking biopsy specimens
When the endoscopist is taking a biopsy sample,
from specific areas are detailed in the relevant
the forceps are inserted through the cap on the biopsy
chapters, but in general deflation of a viscus before
channel, which maintains a seal preventing insufflated
biopsy can increase the size of the sample, by
air from escaping. The forceps are inserted in repeated
reducing stretching of the mucosa.
short lengths to avoid kinking. Similarly, forceps are
removed in short lengths after biopsy, as rapid removal
can damage the biopsy channel due to the heat
generated through friction. A cardinal rule to maintain
the health of the endoscope is that biopsy forceps
should not be inserted whilst the endoscope tip is
retroflexed. If the forceps are forced with the tip in the
retroflexed position, there is a real danger of
(a)
perforating the biopsy channel. This is as disastrous
as a hole in the outer sleeve, as it allows ingress of
water inside the endoscope, and importantly may not 
be detected unless a leakage test is performed.
When the endoscopist is ready to take a biopsy
sample, they should instruct the assistant to 'open'
and 'close'. The tissue is grasped by the forceps cup,
(b)
but unless it is very friable it is not actually cut off;
(a) As 'swing-jaw' biopsy forceps are opened
tissue has to be avulsed by pulling the forceps sharply.
3.14
(b) the cups tilt towards the tissue. This aids
In GI tissue, a tug can often be felt as the biopsy is
taking biopsy samples when the forceps are not
avulsed, indicative that a good deep specimen has
perpendicular to the tissue surface,
40
Chapter 3 Flexible endoscopy: basic technique
Processing biopsy specimens
There are two ways of dealing with the biopsy
specimen when the forceps have been withdrawn
from the endoscope. The cups can simply be
immersed in 10% formalin and opened, releasing the
tissue into the pot, or the specimen can be carefully
removed from the cups with a fine needle and oriented
before fixation. The tissue can be laid on card or even
slices of cucumber, but tissue cassettes with a foam
insert (Figure 3.15) are easiest to use.
3.15
Tissue cassette with
foam insert for collecting
biopsy specimens
before fixation in
formalin and processing.
The needle and cassette method has the advan-
tage that histological processing is more efficient;
samples are not lost and tissue is not sectioned in the
wrong plane. However, the method is tedious and the
sample can become macerated as it is manipulated
by the needle. Proponents of the immersion method
argue that it is much quicker and that many more
specimens can be collected in the same time, so that
it does not matter if some are lost or wasted in
processing. Of course the forceps cups must be
 rinsed before being reinserted into the endoscope.
 It is rare to take more than two or three specimens
1.0mm
from the respiratory tract, but at least six and preferably
Sections of endoscopic biopsy samples
nearer twelve samples should be collected from each
3.16
demonstrating common artefacts.(a) Crush
region of the Gl tract examined (with the exception of 
artefact with loss of discernible tissue and cellular
the oesophagus, see above). This number is neces-
structure. (b) Cross-section of isolated villi when tissue is
sary because some specimens may be too small,
not oriented in a perpendicular fashion. (e) Fragmentation
some may fragment or be lost in processing, and some
of a small tissue biopsy sample. H&E stained sections.
may be sectioned in the wrong plane (Figure 3.16).
(Reproduced from theBSAVA Manual of Canine and
Biopsy specimens are usually processed for
Feline Gastroenterology2nd edition)
routine histology, but samples can also be used for
any lesions found during endoscopy, in addition to
electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry and bio-
taking biopsy specimens. it is also sometimes
chemical analysis. Cytological examination of squash
preparations may be worthwhile if trying to reach an
suggested that either the whole procedure or at least
images of all landmarks are recorded to be able to
early presumptive diagnosis of lymphoma, but they
prove that a full examination was performed in case
are difficult to interpret.
of future litigation.
Image recording
References and further reading
All endoscopic investigations should be accompanied
Cotton PB and Williams CB(2003) Practical Gastrointestinal Endoscopy:
by a written report, and standardized proformas are
the fundamentals,5th edn.Blackwell Publishing Ltd.,Oxford
Danesh BJZ,Burke M,Newman J et al. (1985) Comparison of weight,
depth, and diagnostic adequacy of specimens obtained with 16
are software packages that produce a written report
different biopsyforcepsdesignedforuppergastrointestinal endoscopy.
incorporating recorded images.
Gut26,227-231
There are a variety of ways of recording the
Simpson JW (2005) Gastrointestinal endoscopy. In: BSAVA Manual of
CaninndFatrtrlogydddaln
endoscopic image, as detailed in Chapter 2. For
and DA Williams pp.34-49. BSAVA Publications, Gloucester.
good medical records it is advisable to try and record
TamsTR(1999)Small Animal Endoscopy2ndedn.MosbySt.Louis
41
Flexible endoscopy: u
oer
gastrointestinal tract
Edward J. Hall
Plain thoracic and abdominal radiographs and
Introduction
an abdominal ultrasound examination should also
Upper gastrointestinal (Gl) endoscopy is one of the
always be performed before endoscopy to ensure
most common endoscopic procedures performed in
there are no unexpected foreign bodies present or
companion animal practice, and encompasses exami-
masses/lesions beyond the reach of the endoscope.
nation of the oesophagus, stomach and proximal small
However, the place of contrast radiography has
intestine. It is possible to examine the oesophagus
changed since endoscopy has become available;
with a rigid endoscope (which may also be useful for
although, it should be considered a complementary
foreign body removal) but a flexible endoscope is pre-
procedure and not necessarily redundant. Contrast
ferred for diagnostic investigation of the oesophagus,
procedures do not require anaesthesia and provide a
and is essential to be able to examine the stomach
better  estimation  of  oesophageal  diameter and
completely and to intubate the small intestine. And
function, and gastric motility and emptying. Radio-
whilst early flexible endoscopes were only able to per-
graphs and ultrasonography also detect extramural
mit observation of the Gl tract, modern gastroscopes
diseases. However, endoscopy is more sensitive for
can now also be used for sampling tissues and liquids
the detection of mucosal disease and has the clear
and even for some therapeutic procedures.
advantage of a potential, definitive diagnosis through
This endoscopic procedure is minimally invasive
biopsy. Yet the limitations of endoscopy should be
and atraumatic, with low morbidity and very low
 recognized (Figure 4.1).
mortality. Hence its popularity as a way of investigating
 disease is increasing almost exponentially.
GI
However, it should only be used in cases where a
 Endoscopy cannot assess:
diagnosis has not been achieved by conventional
non-invasive investigations. Furthermore, to perform
 Functional diseases
this procedure effectively and safely takes much
Motility disorders
Hypersecretory disorders (e.g. enterotoxigenic bacteria)
practice and it is sensible to use the endoscope
Brush border enzyme deficiencies
initially only to carry out simple procedures, such as
The whole Gl tract
oesophagoscopy, to avoid the disappointment of 
 Submucosal lesions 
failure whilst developing skill and confidence. Passage
Intraperitoneal lesions
through the pylorus into the duodenum should not be
expected at the first attempt; even the most
 Limitations of endoscopy in investigating upper
4.1
 Gl disease.
experienced endoscopist finds this process difficult
sometimes and occasionally impossible.
Role of endoscopy in investigating
Gl disease
Indications
Complete information on the investigation of Gl
Endoscopy is often indicated in the investigation of
disease is available in the BSAVA Manual of Canine
 suspected oesophageal, gastric and small intestinal
and Feline Gastroenterology, but it should be
disease if the lesion can reasonably be expected to
emphasized here that endoscopy and Gl biopsy are
be accessible from the Gl tract lumen. Exploratory
only part of the investigative process. Before
 surgery is realistically the only other alternative for
endoscopy, routine investigations should be performed 
reaching a definitive diagnosis, but there is clearly an
to confirm that the procedure is indicated. A complete
increased risk with surgery (Shales et al., 2005) and
history and full physical examination is mandatory,
an inevitable convalescence period whilst wounds
and a faecal examination is important if there is
heal. In addition, patients with protein-losing entero-
diarrhoea. Routine laboratory tests will determine
 pathies often have impaired healing and endoscopy
firstly whether systemic disease is causing the Gl
provides the safest method of obtaining a definitive
signs, and secondly whether it is safe to anaesthetize
 diagnosis in most cases. Thus, the clinical advantages
the patient.
of endoscopy to patients are:
42
Chapter 4Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
 Can be discharged on the same day as the
It should again be stressed that upper Gl
procedure
endoscopy  is only part of  the  investigation 
of
No convalescence or wound healing 
suspected Gl disease, and that it is inappropriate to
 Can be immediately treated with steroids if
perform the procedure before less invasive and less
risky investigations have been performed. The value
indicated.
of routine laboratory tests to rule out non-Gl disease,
The recommended best practice for intestinal
and diagnostic  imaging  (plain radiographs and
biopsy (Figure 4.2) is to perform endoscopy first and
ultrasonography) to localize disease and identify
reserve surgery forfocal diseases orwhere endoscopy
surgical conditions, must never be forgotten and they
fails to provide an answer (Elwood, 2005).
should precede endoscopy routinely.
Yet it is important to emphasize that with some
Full upper Gl endoscopy
diseases (e.g. lymphangiectasia, alimentary lymph-
-ip aa ou Ke saidss Asdoga oidosopua (eo
In patients where clinical signs or other investigations
nostic  and  full-thickness 
biopsy   material  from
do
 not localize the disease, a full endoscopic
laparoscopy   or  exploratory   laparotomy   may 
be
examination (i.e. oesophago-gastro-duodenoscopy)
required. Exploratory surgery has a higher diagnostic
should always be performed. However,if oesophageal
sensitivity as the whole Gl tract can be examined,
disease is suspected from the clinical signs and/or
full-thickness biopsy specimens can be obtained from
radiographs, there is usually no need to advance
all levels of the Gl tract, and intraperitoneal disease
beyond any significant lesion that is found. In contrast,
can be investigated. Even if ileoscopy (via colon-
when performing gastroscopy, it is likely (and therefore
oscopy; see Chapter 5) is performed in addition to
standard practice) that it will be necessary to examine
upper Gl endoscopy, there is a significant length of
the small intestine as well as the stomach. For
intestine that cannot be examined by standard flexible
example, an animal presenting with vomiting due to
endoscopes, and views of the pancreas, liver and 
 gastric ulcers may also be suffering from intestinal
other abdominal organs are, hopefully, never seen.
disease, which can cause vomiting as well, and
duodenal biopsy samples are necessary to rule this in 
 or out. Thus, endoscopists need to be able to intubate 
the duodenum if they are to perform an adequate
 Endoscopic intestinal biopsy:
examination, and inexperienced endoscopists should
Is preferred
Is adequate for diagnosis in most cases
 not be investigating such cases until proficient.
 Carres a significantly lower risk than surgery
 It is impossible to be proscriptive about how an
individual actually performs endoscopy, and the
 Effective endoscopic intestinal biopsy requires:
method described below is the author's personal
A competent endoscopist using adequate technique
 preference. Yet as long as the endoscopist examines
The endoscopist to have clinical responsibility and to work with an
all areas, the endoscopic examination will be
 experienced pathologist 
 adequate. The examination needs to be documented
 Surgical biopsy should be reserved for those cases:
to demonstrate that the procedure was performed
 Where diseased tissue is known to be beyond the reach of an 
adequately. This can be achieved using either
experienced endoscopist 
recording equipment or a reporting form that requires
When endoscopic biopsy has failed to produce a diagnosis
a complete endoscopic examination to have been
 Where non-mucosal disease is suspected or fullthickness biopsy
 performed in order for it to be filled in. The WSAVA GI
is required
Standardization Group has produced a proforma that
endoscopists are welcome to use for their own
 Best practice in intestinal biopsy (Elwood,
4.2
2005).
practice (Figure 4.3).
ENDOSCOPIC EXAMINATION REPORT -UPPER GI ENDOSCOPY
 Date of procedure: .
Case Number: .
Client:
Patient:
Name.
Mr/Ms/Mrs/Dr 
Dog /CatOther
Address
Age.... years old
Sex: MF/neutered 
Breed: .
Phone
PROCEDURE(S):
 Indication(s) for procedure:
 Endoscope(s) used:
Forceps/retrieval device(s) used:
 Upper Gl endoscopy reporting proforma. This standard form was developed by the WsAvA Gastrointestinal
4.3
 Standardization Group (Drs Washabau, Willard, Hall, Jergens, Day, Mansell, Wilcox, Minami, Guilford and
 Blizer) with sponsorship from Hill's Pet Nutrition). (continues)
43
Chapter 4  Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
 PROBLEMS/COMPLICATIONS:
Perforation  Excessive bleeding  Anaesthetic complications  Excessively long  Other 
Comments: 
 Unable to complete full examination:
why?
 Unable to obtain adequate biopsies:
Why?
口
Unable to retrieve foreign object:
口
why?
 Visualization obscured
why?
SAMPLING:
Biopsy  Brush cytology  Washing  Aspiration  Foreign body retrieved 
DOCUMENTATION:
Video  Photographs 
 Oesophagus
Normal Dilated  F. body Mass Stricture Hiatal hernia 
Lesion
 Code
Hyperaemia/vascularity
 Discoloration
Friabity
 Haemorrhage
 Erosion/ulcer
 Contents (mucus/bilefood)
GOS open/other lesions
Code:
Normal =0 Slight=1 Moderate =2 Severe =3
Stomach
Normal Polyp(s)  F. body Mass  Parasite(s) 
Site(s) of lesions:
FundusBody
 Incisura AntrumPylorus 
 Site(s) of biopsies:
Fundus BodyIncisura AntrumPylorus 
Lesion
Code
Comments (include location)
 Can't inflate lumen
 Hyperaemia/vascularity
Oedema
 Discoloration
 Friability
Haemorrhage
 Erosion/ulcer
 Contents (mucus/bile/food)
Passing endoscope through pylorus
 Duodenum/Jejunum
Normal Polyp F. body Mass Parasite(s) 
How far was the tip of the endoscope advanced?
Was papilla seen?
YesNo
Lesion
Code
Comments (include location)
Can't inflate lumen
Hyperaemia/vascularity
 Oedema
Discoloration
 Friabilty
Texture
Haemorrhage
Erosion/ulcer
Lacteal dilatation
Contents (mucus/bile/food)
Code:
 Normal =0 Slight=1 Moderate =2 Severe =3
4.3
 Gastrointestinai Standardization Group (Drs Washabau, Willard, Hall, Jergens, Day, Mansell, Wilcox, Minami,
44
Comments and Recommendations:
 Endoscopist signature
 (continued) Upper Gl endoscopy reporting proforma. This standard form was developed by the WSAVA
4.3
Gastrointestinai Standardization Group(Drs Washabau, Willard, Hall, Jergens, Day, Mansell, Wilcox, Minami.
Guilford and Blizer) with sponsorship from Hill's Pet Nutrition).
Oesophagoscopy
 Confirm the presence of a gastric foreign body
 Oesophagoscopy is indicated in the investigation of 
following diagnostic imaging
patients with signs of oesophageal disease or for spe-
Remove selected foreign bodies
cific treatment of oesophageal problems (Figure 4.4).
Investigate significant haematemesis not
responding to symptomatic treatment.
In chronically vomiting patients, routine investi-
 Diagnostic endoscopy
gations  should be performed before considering
 Investigation of clinical signs of oesophageal disease:
endoscopy, as non-gastric diseases frequently cause
 Regurgitation
vomiting. Plain radiographs and an ultrasound exami-
Dysphagia
 nation are performed first to guide the endoscopist as
 Painful swallowing
to what to look for, and to find unexpected chronic
Excessive salivation/inability to swallow
gastric foreign bodies. Gastroscopy can be used to
 Investigation of diagnostic imaging abnormalities:
confirm the likely presence of a tumour by visualizing
 Plain radiographs:
the tissues and collecting biopsy specimens. Gastritis
 Radiodense foreign body
is a common cause of chronic vomiting but changes
Megaoesophagus (NB Caution - potentia risk of inhalation)
are rarely observed onlaboratory  tests or radio-
Hiatal hernia
 graphs. Endoscopic examination and biopsy collec-
参
 Gastro-oesophageal intussusception
tion are therefore essential in reaching a diagnosis.
Neoplasia
 Contrast radiographs:
 Stricture
 Radiolucent foreign body
ui ssun essu aei dosl oe buu ese
 Diagnostic endoscopy
material impacted)
Investigation of clinical signs of gastric disease:
 Oesophageal reflux
 Nausea and salivation
Neoplasia
 Chronic vomiting
Therapeutic endoscopy
Haematemesis and/or melaena 
Unexplained anorexia
 Selected foreign body removal
 Stricture dilation
Investigation of diagnostic imaging abnormalities:
Plain radiographs:
Radiodense foreign body
4.4
 Indications for oesophagoscopy.
Neoplasia
 Contrast radiographs:
Radiolucent foreign body
 Clinical signs of oesophageal disease, supported
Ulcer
by plain and contrast radiography, may sometimes
 Suspected neoplasia
provide a definitive diagnosis (e.g. foreign body,
vascular ring anomaly, stricture formation or extra-
 Ultrasonography:
oesophageal mass). However, with the exception of
Foreign body
Ulcer
extra-oesophageal disease, (
 oesophagoscopy
is
 Suspected neoplasia (loss of layering, mass, thickened gastric 
important in their evaluation and treatment. Oeso-
wall, ulcer)
phagoscopy is the most reliable way of detecting
 reflux oesophagitis, as this often cannot be detected 
Therapeutic endoscopy
 radiographically, even by fluoroscopy.
 Selected foreign body removal
 Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube placement
Gastroscopy
(± removal)
Gastroscopy is indicated in patients presenting with
 Polypectomy
vomiting and for specific therapeutic purposes (Figure
4.5). Gastroscopy is rarely indicated in acute vomiting
4.5
Indications for gastroscopy.
unless it is required to:
45
Chapter 4  Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
Duodenoscopy
However, the availability of enteroscopes is very
limited in veterinary medicine and exploratory laparo-
Intubation of the small intestine (duodenoscopy ±
jejunoscopy) is indicated in patients presenting with
tomy is usually performed if the whole small intestine 
vomiting or other Gl signs, and for specific therapeutic
requires examination.
 purposes (Figure 4.6). Except in the smallest patients,
lleoscopy
 only duodenoscopy is possible because of the limited
Visualization and biopsy of the ileum can be achieved 
length of the endoscope.
quite often during flexible colonoscopy (see Chapter
5), and is a useful adjunct when upper small intestine
Diagnostic endoscopy
endoscopy is indicated.
Investigation of clinical signs of intestinal disease:
 Chronic vomiting 
Chronic diarrhoea
Contraindications
 Melaena (and haematemesis if no gastric lesions present)
 Change in appetite
Endoscopy may be an inappropriate way to reach a
Unexplained weight loss
diagnosis in patients with a suspected Gl disease,
 Abdominal pain (although investigation by laparotomy more useful)
e.g. gastroduodenoscopy cannot diagnose pancrea-
 Investigation of diagnostic imaging abnormalities:
titis as a cause of vomiting and diarrhoea. Endoscopy
 Radiographs:
also requires general anaesthesia and in some
·No radiographic abnormalies despite clinical signs
instances this may be too dangerous to perform; if a
 Ultrasonography:
patient is too sick to be anaesthetized for surgery it is
 Diffusely thickened intestinal wall
also too sick for endoscopy. Specific contraindications
·
Loss of intestinal wallayering in proximal intestine
to endoscopy are given in Figure 4.8.
Therapeutic endoscopy
 Endoscopic jejunostomy tube placement 
 Poor anaesthetic risk 
Relative:
· Poor cardiopulmonary reserve
4.6
Indications for duodenoscopy.
·Uraemia
 Absolute:
 Uncorrected bleeding disorder 
·
 Duodenoscopy is indicated in cases of chronic
 Non-reversible hypoxaemia
diarrhoea and/or vomiting, especially when the patient 
Unstable cardiac arrhythmia
exhibits haematemesis, melaena or panhypoprotein-
Cardiac failure
aemia.  The results of preliminary investigations
 Poorly prepared patient 
 Food not withheld (i.e. stomach full)
(including abnormalities of serum folate and cobalamin 
Known coprophagia not prevented by muzzling
concentrations) are used to provide evidence to
Inadequate investigations prior to endoscopy
suggest small intestinal disease and the need to
collect biopsy samples. Cats with small intestinal
4.8
Contraindications to endoscopy.
disease often present with chronic vomiting rather
than chronic diarrhoea, and some cats with recurring
hairballs have inflammatory bowel disease, indicating
Instrumentation
the need for intestinal biopsy samples in cases of
chronic vomiting. Thus, in all cases where the stomach
The skill needed to intubate the duodenum through
is being examined, it is usual to examine the duodenum 
the pylorus can only be acquired by practice, although
at the same time.
an understanding of what one is trying to achieve and
how to manipulate the endoscope helps (see Chapter
Jejunoscopy
3). It is the technological advances in endoscope
Although it may be possible to reach the proximal
 design and construction that have made gastroscopes
jejunum in smaller patients, one of the significant 
narrow enough to pass the pylorus and yet be steer-
 limitations of gastroscopy is that the intestinal tract is
able. The components of a flexible endoscopy system
much longer than a standard gastroscope, and thus
are discussed in detail in Chapter 2, but the features 
large sections cannot be examined. Jejunoscopy
specifically needed for an endoscope capable of per-
(also known as
 enteroscopy),
in addition
to
forming upper Gl endoscopy are listed in Figure 4.9.
duodenoscopy, may be indicated for the investigation
of specific small intestinal problems (Figure 4.7).
Insertion tube with at least 1 m working length 
Tip diameter <9.5 mm 
 Focal causes of haemorrhage
Minimum 2.2 mm accessory/biopsy channel 
 Focal neoplasia 
4-way tip deflection: 
 Patchy disease (if duodenoscopy is not diagnostic):
 ability to retroflex tip (turn ≥ 180 degrees) in one plane 
 Inflammatory bowel disease 
 small radius of curvature to bending section 
 Lymphangiectasia
Abity to insufflate with air 
 Alimentary lymphoma
Ability to wash lens remotely
 Features of a flexible endoscope suitable for
Indications for enteroscopy.
 gastroscopy.
46
Chapter 4Flexible endoscopy:upper gastrointestinal tract
The features of endoscopes are discussed in
Insufflation is essential as the oesophagus,
Chapter 3 but, for upper Gl endoscopy specifically,
stomach and small intestine must be inflated to enable
the greater the tip deflection and the smaller the
visualization. A xenon light source is preferred
radius of the bending section, the greater the
because the greater illumination permits a panoramic
manoeuvrability of the endoscope. lt is the capability
view across the distended stomach. Suction is
tobe retroflexed that is essential to permit complete
necessary to remove Gl secretions and air (see
examination of the stomach.
Chapter 2 for more details about equipment).
The distance along the Gl tract that can actually
Finally, a range of endoscopic accessories may
be reached depends on the size of the patient and the
be required for therapeutic purposes (see below)
length of the endoscope. Paediatric gastroscopes
However, it is essential that biopsy forceps are
typically have a working length of 1 m and, with skill,
available for diagnostic purposes. Biopsy samples
the duodenum of dogs up to 40 kg can be routinely
from the stomach and intestine should always be
intubated, whilst in smaller animals it may be possible
taken, even if the tissue appears grossly normal. Only
to reach the jejunum. However, pyloric intubation in
in the oesophagus, where the mucosa is so tough
an adult Great Dane, forexample, would be impossible
that taking biopsy samples is usually fruitless, is this
as the insertion tube would not reach. Thus, for most
not done.
patients a 1 m insertion tube is of adequate length but
will be too short in giant-breed dogs. Dedicated
veterinary gastroscopes tend to have a longer working
Patient preparation
length (up to 1.5 m) and are therefore useful for larger
Preparation of the patient for upper Gl endoscopy
dogs. However, they are more difficult to manoeuvre,
requires nothing more than withdrawal of food for at
especially in smaller animals, as a large part of the
least 12 hours before the procedure so that the
insertion tube remains outside the patient and tends
stomach is empty. Water does not need to be withheld
to loop. Enteroscopes several metres long are
available for inspection of the jejunum, but are rarely
before the procedure. Endoscopy too soon after a
meal should be avoided because:
used; they are very expensive, very difficult to
manipulate and often have no biopsy channel.
Visualization is difficult; lesions and foreign
The diameter of the tip of the insertion tube is also
bodies may be missed
crucial in dictating the size of patient that can be
Pyloric intubation is difficult or impossible
examined. A tip diameter >9.5 mm cannot easily be
?
inserted into puppies and cats, and is likely to pre-
The endoscope may get clogged
There is a danger of aspiration during recovery.
clude pyloric intubation in cats, and in dogs <20 kg.
Thus, the diameter of the endoscope used is a com-
Day-case endoscopy is more likely to result in
promise; a narrower endoscope will allow passage
 gastric contents being found because, even if the cli-
through the pylorus in smaller patients, but the wider
ent does withhold food, they do not realise that their
the endoscope the bigger the accessory channel and
pet can scavenge or eat grass (Figure 4.10). It is
the bigger/better any biopsy specimen harvested.
preferable to hospitalize the patient overnight before
Both 2.2 mm and 2.8 mm channels will permit the col-
endoscopy; this allows time for preliminary investi-
lection of adequate biopsy samples, but those from
gations and ensures the patient does not eat before
the 2.8 mm channel will inevitably be bigger. Biopsy
the procedure.
channels any smaller than 2.2 mm are inadequate as
the samples collected are so small that they are likely
4.10
Massof
to fragment (see Chapter 3); being so superficial they
grass in
do not contain the connective tissue necessary to
the stomachofa
hold the sample together. For most patients, a gastro-
poorly prepared
scope with a tip diameter between 7 mm and 9 mm is
patientobscures
examination of the
<9.5 mm, the largest biopsy channel available is
stomach.
2.8 mm, but even the narrowest gastroscope currently
available, with a tip diameter of 5.2 mm, can still
accommodate 2.2 mm biopsy forceps by combining
the biopsy channel with the air/water channel.
Only forward-viewing scopes are used routinely for
veterinary endoscopy. Side-viewing endoscopes (duo-
denoscopes) are used in human gastroenterology for
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (i.e.
catheterization of the bile and pancreatic ducts) but
this procedure is not routine in veterinary endoscopy. A
Normally the stomach will be empty within 12
wide field of view (90 to 120 degrees) facilitates orien-
hours of withholding food. So, assuming that the
tation and a panoramic examination, thereby decreas-
animal has not accidentally eaten, finding food in the
stomach can give useful information about an
ing the likelihood of missing a lesion or foreign body in
the stomach. A depth of focus of 3-100 mm is usually
anatomical outflow obstruction or a functional delay in
adequate; a minimum visible distance of >5 mm pre-
gastric emptying. If a barium contrast radiographic
vents detailed examination of the mucosa.
study has been performed, endoscopy should
47
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
preferably be delayed for 24 hours. Aspiration of
Patient positioning
barium into the endoscope could cause a serious
blockage, Any residual barium found should only be
After induction and intubation, the patient is put in left
lateral recumbency for routine upper Gl endoscopy
aspirated through a tube and not directly via the
suction channel.
(Figure 4.11). This position places the gastric antrum
uppermost (i.e. right side up) so that air will fill it and 
make the pylorus more visible. However, retroflexion
to examine the cardia and fundus is essential,
Premedication and anaesthesia
especially as foreign bodies tend to fall into the fundus
and would otherwise be missed. For gastrostomy
Premedication
tube placement right lateral recumbency is used, as
Premedication should be used to smooth induction
the tube is placed through the left flank (see below).
and recovery. lf a patient is very agitated before
induction it is common to find foamy saliva in the
oesophagus, and this can interfere with the view.
Acepromazine maleate (ACP) plus pethidine or
buprenorphine are suitable combinations for seda-
tion of dogs. In cats, buprenorphine and ACP is
efficacious. Atropine is not necessary, and some
believe that by drying secretions, it makes the pro-
cedure more difficult. Others claim it actually makes
pyloric intubation easier,whilst narcotics stimulate
pyloric tone. An intravenous catheter should be
placed, and ECG and pulse oximetry monitoring
are recommended.
Anaesthesia
The patient is placed in left lateral recumbency
General anaesthesia is essential for upper Gl endo-
4.11
for routine upper Gl endoscopy. Note the ET
scopy, and intubation with a cuffed endotracheal (ET)
tube is securely fastened and a gag and pulse oximeter
tube mandatory because of the risk of reflux. Some
are being used.
endoscopists have a preference for tying the tube to
the mandible but this is not essential. Tying around
the mandible or maxilla is most secure; passing the
tie around the back of the head is least secure as the
Procedure
repeated movements of the endoscope tend to dis-
lodge the ET tube, but is a necessity in cats and
The patient should be prepared as described above.
brachycephalic dogs.
Contrast studies should not be performed immediately
The safest anaesthetic regime is the one the
before endoscopy.
operator is most familiar with, e.g. induction with
The endoscopy equipment should be checked
thiopental or propofol and maintenance with halothane
before the patient is anaesthetized (see Chapter 3).
or isoflurane with oxygen are suitable.In some
When the patient has been induced and the ET tube
countries medetomidine is the preferred agent for
placed and secured, the patient is positioned in left
 canine endoscopy. The anaesthetic circuit used (from
lateral recumbency for the procedure. As soon as the
T-piece to circle) depends on the size of patient.
swallowing reflex has been abolished, the procedure
Nitrous oxide is not used because insufflation of
can begin. Lubrication of the endoscope tip with KY
the stomach will permit diffusion of nitrous oxide ('third
jelly can help insertion, as long as it is kept off the 
space effect') and cause over-distension of the
lens. A mouth gag must always be inserted. The
stomach. Yet as the analgesic properties of nitrous
procedure should then be carried out as quickly as
oxide are not present, some patients show signs of
possible, without rushing, and so it is important that 
all ancillary equipment (e.g. biopsy forceps, formalin 
fully anaesthetized, especially when the pylorus is
pots, etc.) are made ready before the procedure.
intubated or the Gl tract is inflamed. This temporary
It is usual to perform a full examination, but
problem can be overcome by tactical use of intermittent 
with only a quick inspection of the oesophagus and
intravenous diazepam.
stomach on the way to the duodenum. Delay in
Air insufflation is essential during upper GI
intubating the pylorus is believed to make it more
endoscopy to open the lumen and move the wall
difficult, and therefore the stomach and oesophagus
are re-examined fully and the required biopsy sam-
can be obtained. However, the assistant monitoring
ples are collected at leisure on the way out.
the anaesthetic should be aware of over-inflation of
Nevertheless, it is important to have a brief inspec-
the stomach as it may cause cardiorespiratory
tion of these organs to ensure that, when viewed
compromise through compression of the diaphragm
after duodenoscopy, apparent lesions are not arte-
and caudal vena cava.
facts induced by the endoscope. However, the fol-
A mouth gag (speculum) must always be inserted
lowing notes describe the procedure in order of
to prevent damage to the endoscope.
anatomical location (see below).
48
 Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract 
Oesophagoscopy
but a fuller examination may be performed as the
endoscope is withdrawn. Biopsy specimens are not 
Insertion
routinely taken because the mucosa is too tough.
After extending the head and neck, the endoscope is
Oesophagitis is usually recognized by its gross
passed along the midline of the hard palate into the
pharynx, reaching the upper oesophageal (crico-
taken if there is any doubt as to the nature of a lesion,
or if it has already been treated symptomatically and
under direct visualization.When viewed, the sphincter
has not responded. Any masses should be biopsied,
appears as a star-shaped opening dorsal to the lateral
but they are rare. Biopsy forceps with a spike can aid
folds of the larynx, and towards which the endoscope
procurement of tissue (see Chapter 3) and cytology
is steered. If entry into the oesophagus is performed
may be helpful when lesions are present.
blindly, ET intubation for anaesthesia usually forces
the endoscope to pass into the oesophagus; however, 
Gastroscopy
the pyriform recesses either side of the larynx can
Initial examination
trap the tip, the endoscope should not be forced if it is
A full examination of the stomach with biopsy is
being inserted blindly. Gentle pressure is applied to
ultimately performed, but it is easier to try to intubate
pass the sphincter, and air is continually insufflated to
the pylorus as soon as possible. Too much inflation of
enhance the view. However, red-out frequently occurs
the stomach introduces a bulge in the greater
as the sphincter is passed.
curvature that makes advancement into the antrum
Oesophageal body
and through the pylorus more difficult.
After passing the sphincter, indicated by a reduction in
 Once in the stomach it is necessary to orientate so
the force needed to advance the endoscope, forward
that this quick inspection can identify lesions to be
motion is halted and, after re-adjustment of the tip, the
examined more closely later, and the antrum and
lumen is centred in the view. The endoscope is then
pylorus can be found. The initial examination of the
advanced in short segments down the oesophagus
stomach will detect foreign bodies, food, fluid, bile
and blood. Such findings can be important indicators
whilst trying to keep the entire mucosal circumference
in view. Re-alignment is required as it rounds the curve
 at the thoracic inlet and more minor adjustments may
endoscopic examination of the stomach as it impairs
be needed as the endoscope progresses onwards.
There may be redundant tissue at the thoracic
into the duodenum difficult.
inlet, which gives the impression of a diverticulum, but
Orientation
it can be obliterated by extending the neck. The
The initial view on entering the stomach is of the
indentation by the trachea may be seen in the neck
junction of the fundus and body on the greater
and cranial thorax, and the great vessels and heart
curvature, assuming the endoscope tip is not adjacent 
will be seen pulsating through the oesophageal wall.
to the mucosa (Figure 4.12). Slight tip deviation then 
The distal feline oesophagus has circular folds.
By inspecting all the mucosa as the endoscope is
advanced, pathological lesions will not then be
4.12
confused with iatrogenic damage when the endoscope
Theview on
is withdrawn.
entering the
stomach is of the
 Exiting the oesophagus
junction of the
In the distal oesophagus the lower oesophageal
fundus and body.
sphincter will be seen, usually as a star- or slit-like
Note the parallel
rugal folds on the
greater curvature
Anatomically it is not a true sphincter, but endo-
running towards
scopically it usually acts as one. However, depend-
the antrum beneath
ing on the depth of anaesthesia, it may be open and
the angle of the
not closed.
lessercurvature
If the lower oesophageal sphincter is closed, slight
angulation (30 degrees) of the tip with continued
insufflation is needed to pass into the stomach. Red-
out may occur until the gastric lumen is reached, as
indicated by a sudden loss of resistance to forward
motion. lf resistance is not overcome when trying to
enter the stomach, it is usually because the endoscope
tip has missed the lower oesophageal sphincter and
is impacted lateral to it. Excessive force should not be
applied; the endoscope should be withdrawn slightly
and redirected prior to trying intubation again.
Oesophageal inspection and biopsy
The endoscopist should try to examine all the
oesophageal mucosa as the endoscope is inserted,
49
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
gives a panoramic view of the body towards the
Rugal folds on greater curvature are roughly parallel and run towards
antrum.However, if the tip is against the mucosa, red-
the antrum
out will occur. Slight withdrawal of the tip and more
The antrum has fewer rugal folds
insufflation will enable a view of the lumen.
Any waves of peristalsis roll along the antrum towards the pylorus
In order to reach the pylorus there are a number of
On retroflexion and inflation,the endoscope entering through the
landmarks that can be used (Figure 4.13). Of these
cardia is visible
techniques, retroflexion and further insertion of the
The lesser curvature divides the fundus and body from the antrum
The pylorus may be visible at the end of the antrum, orits position is
tube with insufflation is probably the best to perform if
marked by:
one is “hopelessly lost'. Once the cardia has been
A group of rugal folds
identified, by observing the point where the insertion 
Waves of peristalsis encircling it
enters the stomach, relaxation of the tip deflection
 Bile and foam being refluxed through it
(i.e. reducing retroflexion) brings the lesser curvature
into view, and below it will be the antrum (Figure 4.14).
Landmarks used to provide orientation in the
4.13
The angle of the lesser curvature (angularis incisura)
stomach.
is the most important landmark, with the cardia and
Fundus/cardia
Examination of the antrum
Once orientation has been achieved, the endoscope
Angularis
can be advanced along the rugal folds of the greater
incisura
curvature into the antrum. The antrum has fewer rugal
folds, and a ring of contraction passing towards the
Antrum with
pylorus may be present (Figure 4.15). In cats, the
bile bubbling
angle at the lesser curvature is quite acute and a
through from
slide-by technique (see Chapter 3) may be needed to
pylorus
pass into the antrum. Alternatively, the tip can be pre-
deflected within the body and the endoscope then
advanced into the antrum.
Angularis
Cardia
4.15
incisura
Ring of peristalsis
migrating down the
antrum towards the
pylorus.
Antrur
Fund
(b)
Cardia
 In larger dogs, as the endoscope approaches the
antrum, either there is a tendency for the tip to get
Angularis
stuck in the greater curvature or, as the insertion tube
incisura
is advanced, the tip may even appear to move
backwards, i.e. away from the pylorus. This so-called
paradoxical movement happens particularly when the
stomach is over-inflated. It occurs because the
insertion tube is moving along the greater curvature
of the stomach and when pressure is applied to try to
Antrum
advance the tip, it actually presses on the greater
curvature, which expands to accommodate it. With
continual pressure, the tip often swings past the
(c)
angularis incisura and back into the fundus towards
the cardia as over-inflation has made the greater
4.14
Orientationinthestomach.Inorder toreachthe
pylorus there are a number of landmarks that
curvature so rounded the tip cannot enter the antrum
can be used: (a) the angularis incisura divides the antrum
(Figure 4.16).
(below) from the fundus and cardia (above), through
This problem can be prevented by deflating the
which the insertion tube can be seen entering the
stomach as much as possible whilst maintaining a
stomach. (b) Approximate position of the endoscope in
the stomach. (c) Passage of the tip of the insertion tube
view, or by turning the tip slightly into the greater
around the angularis incisura to enter the antrum.
curvature so that it advances into the antrum, or by
50
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
4.17
The normal pylorus
of a cat.
Examination of the cardia and fundus
 By complete upward movement of the inner wheel
and fullretroflexion of the tip(the so-called
‘J manoeuvre') it is possible to view the lesser curva-
ture. Above it are the cardia and fundus, and below it
the antrum. The degree of narrowing of the lesser
curvature is an indication of the degree of inflation; a
sharp ‘edge' to the angularis incisura and complete
flattening of rugal folds is an indication of over-infla-
tion and air should be sucked out of the stomach.
Partial withdrawal of the endoscope whilst retro-
flexed will bring the view of either the cardia or pylorus
closer, depending which way the tip is pointing,
although the pylorus cannot be intubated by this
 method. When viewing the fundus and cardia, by with-
drawing the endoscope the tip is drawn towards the
cardia for a closer view, and by rotating the retroflexed
insertion tube on the long axis (torquing) it is possible
to view the whole cardiac region (Figure 4.18).
Distension of the fundus allows the insertion
4.16
 tube to form a loop, which tends to direct the tip
up towards the cardia. Advancement of the insertion tube
further distends the gastric wall and compounds the
problem.
rotating the endoscope slightly as it is advanced.
Finally, if all else fails, external compression to the
(a)
lower right body wall flattens the flexure and may
assist entry into the antrum.
The pylorus is found at the end of the antrum and 
duodenal intubation is attempted (see below). The 
pylorus has a wide variety of appearances but should 
not be obscured by excessive folds (Figure 4.17). It
may demonstrate rhythmical opening and closing.
Occasionally, bile or foam will reflux from the
duodenum (see Figure 4.14).
Examination of the body
After pyloric intubation and duodenoscopy, a more
 complete examination of the whole stomach is made.
Fluid may pool in the stomach, particularly in the
(b)
fundus, and should be sucked out to ensure no
(a) Retroflexion allows visualization of the cardia
4.18
submerged lesions are missed. Rugal folds on the 
and fundus. (b) Withdrawal of the retroflexed
 greater curvature willbe seen to flatten and reappear
endoscope allows closer vision of the cardia, and rotation
as the stomach is inflated and deflated, respectively.
on its long axis allows visualization of the whole area.
51
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
Gastric biopsy
4.20
Before taking biopsy samples, brush cytology is a
Gastric biopsy.
simple, sensitive technique for identifying spiral
(a) A rugal fold is
 bacteria. A small amount of gastric mucus is retrieved
grasped by the
on a sleeved cytology brush; stained with Diff-Quik,
biopsy forceps and
spiral bacteria are readily seen (Figure 4.19).
avulsed. (b) Site of
a gastricbiopsy.
(Reproduced from
BSAVA Manual of
Canine and Feline
Gastroenterology,
2nd edition)
a]
Approx
10um
Brush cytology showing gastric spiral
4.19
organisms. (Reproduced from BSAVA Manual of
Canine andFeline Gastroenterology.2nd edition)
(b)
The general technique for taking and handling
gross lesions are detected during gastroscopy, multi-
biopsy samples during the same pass of the forceps
ple biopsy samples should be collected from the
gives an increased yield.
“lesion' and the surrounding 'normal' tissue. If no mac-
Biopsy samples should be collected from the
roscopic lesions are observed chronic inflammatory
periphery of any ulcer and not the centre of the lesion.
disease may still exist and samples should always be
This is because sampling the centre of the ulcer may
collected from all regions of the stomach. Samples
result in perforation and is usually not diagnostic,
from different areas may be placed in different forma-
collecting only fibrous or necrotic tissue and
lin pots, although if grossly normal there is an inclina-
inflammatory cells. When malignancy is suspected,
tion to pool them. However, if a specific lesion is seen
repeated sampling from the same site may reveal
and biopsied, the tissue should be fixed separately.
neoplastic cells deeper in the lesion, while superficial
Samples are usually taken from all areas of the stom-
layers contain only non-specific necrotic tissue.
ach (cardia, fundus, greater and lesser curvature, and
Once all the gastric biopsy specimens have been
antrum). At least two biopsy samples should be col-
harvested, all air should be removed from the stomach
lected from the fundus, four from the body (lesser and
before the endoscope is withdrawn into the
greater curvature) and two from the antral canal.
oesophagus to reduce respiratory embarrassment
Alternatively, a mixture of 8-10 samples from different 
and the risk of reflux.
areas can be pooled.
The forceps naturally tend to turn to the lesser
Duodenoscopy
curvature, which will be easier to biopsy if the stomach
Entering the duodenum through the pylorus is the
is deflated. Over-inflation of the stomach stretches
hardest part of upper Gl endoscopy, and has been
the mucosa and smaller biopsy samples are obtained.
likened to trying to push a 3-foot piece of stiff rope
If insufflation is needed to see where the biopsy is
through a small hole in a strong wind! Pharmaco-
being taken from, it is worth deflating the stomach
logical intervention with metoclopramide has not
after positioning the open cups so that when the cups
been shown to help experienced endoscopists, and
are closed more tissue is grasped. Taking samples
its augmentation of peristalsis may even make the
from the edge of a rugal fold increases the yield
procedure harder. Glucagon (0.05 mg/kg i.v.) can be
(Figure 4.20).
given to relax the pylorus, but is not needed by expe-
Biopsy specimens from the fundus and cardia
rienced endoscopists.
should be collected by inserting the forceps with the
 endoscope in a neutral position and then retroflexing
Engaging the pylorus
to avoid damaging the biopsy channel within the
Over-inflation is the biggest mistake made when
bending section. Care must also be taken to avoid
trying to intubate the pylorus (see Figure 4.16). The
taking biopsy samples of the insertion tube as it enters
inflation and pressure on the greater curvature closes
at the cardia, and so a clear view should be obtained.
off the antral canal. The stomach assumes a round
The antral mucosa is tougher than other areas and
shape with the antral opening flattened, the pylorus is
52
Chapter 4
 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
moved out of view and antral contractions are
Entering the duodenum
stimulated. It then becomes difficult to enter the
As the pyloric canal is passed the mucosal colour
antrum and virtually impossible to find the pylorus, let
changes to red or it may be bile-stained. However,
alone intubate the duodenum. In addition, as the
red-out may continue as the cranial duodenal flexure
endoscope is advanced along the greater curvature
is negotiated. ff the endoscope is freely moving there
towards the pylorus it stretches the greater curvature
will be an impression of the mucosa sliding by as
wo seme saow Anioe d adoosopua aun peun os
forward pressure is exerted. Turning both control
wheels clockwise assists slide-by. After 5-10 cm,
the pylorus. This paradoxical motion gets worse the
more the stomach is over-inflated.
intermittent tip deflection and insufflation will usually
When this occurs, air must be sucked out and the
 achieve a luminal view of the duodenum.
endoscope tip moved back before repeating the
manoeuvre. When repeated it is important to ensure
Consolidating small intestine intubation
that the stomach is not continually being insufflated
 Once the proximal duodenal flexure has been passed
 and the lumen visualized, it is relatively easy to push
covering the air hole. The endoscope tip should be
the endoscope along the intestine. In most dogs, intu-
kept lying along the greater curvature, so that the tip
bation of the descending duodenum to the distal duo-
is more likely to move into the antral canal successfully.
denal flexure should be possible. In small dogs and
Particularly in cats, slight rotation of the insertion tube
cats, it may even be possible to reach the proximal
on its long axis may assist the process. However, the
jejunum with a 1 m insertion tube. However, once
inexperienced endoscopist may have to try this
past the pylorus of larger dogs, if using a fibreoptic
manoeuvre several times before the endoscope
endoscope, the handpiece is often in the patient's
 passes to the pylorus and can easily get frustrated.
mouth,  and the 
endoscopist's face adjacent.
 Paradoxically, further movement along the duodenum
Pyloric intubation
can often be achieved by slightly withdrawing the
The pylorus is visualized at the end of the antrum,
endoscope or by external compression of the stom-
and by advancing the endoscope along the greater
ach, thereby reducing looping of the insertion tube in
curvature of the stomach the tip engages with the
the stomach. A slide-by technique may help round fur-
pyloric canal and passes through into the duodenum.
ther flexures, but torquing the instrument becomes
This manoeuvre may fail, especially if the stomach is
more difficult. The duodenum should not be over-
inflated as air may reflux into the stomach, causing
dia. The tip needs continual re-alignment because as
over-distension.
the endoscope is advanced it distorts the greater cur-
vature and moves the relative position of the pylorus.
 Failure to intubate
Once the tip is engaged with the pylorus and the
As discussed previously, duodenal intubation is one
lumen centred, the aim is to move the endoscope tip
of the most difficult endoscopic procedures to carry
forward whilst continually readjusting the centring.
out, especially when the pylorus is closed. Even
With video-endoscopes it may be easier to rotate the
experienced endoscopists can find it impossible to
endoscope through 90 degrees so that the handpiece
achieve in some individuals. It is therefore important
lies flat in the palm (see Chapter 3). As red-out often
not to persist too long as injury or perforation of the
occurs as the pylorus is passed, one may simply aim
pylorus can occur. Undue force to try and enter the
at the blackest area; there is often an impression of
duodenum should not be used as it increases the risk
the mucosa sliding by. Intermittent puffs of air may
of perforation.
assist the passage of the tip, but continual insufflation
 Occasionally in these patients, rotating the patient
will cause over-inflation. It also seems logical to push
to dorsal or right lateral recumbency may facilitate
the endoscope forward to pass the pylorus but,
success. Another trick is to blindly pass the biopsy
because of paradoxical movement, it actually can
forceps through the pylorus and then pass the
help to withdraw the endoscope slightly to straighten
endoscope along this temporary guidewire, as in a
it before proceeding forward. It may also help to suck 
 Seldinger catheterization technique. However, this is
air out of the stomach; the deflation of the stomach
often not successful as the proximal duodenal flexure
then forces the endoscope tip forward as the stomach
prevents minimal entry of the forceps. A few biopsy
collapses over it, and if it has been steered to the right
specimens may be obtained blindly, but it is unsafe to
position the tip may exit the pyloric canal automatically.
take repeated samples from the same site without
If the tip keeps slipping out of the pylorus or cannot
being able to view it.
even reach the pylorus, the endoscope should be
withdrawn, the stomach deflated and the process
 Duodenal biopsy
started again.
 Before harvesting biopsy specimens, duodenal juice
The keys to success in pyloric intubation are:
can be collected to look for Giardia and for culture.
A sterile polyethylene tube is passed and any pooled 
 The stomach should not be over-distended
liquid collected. However, fluid is sparse and it may
?
The endoscope tip position should be constantly
be more productive to insert the tube as far as
 readjusted by steering manoeuvres to keep the
possible, deflate the duodenum and then slowly
pylorus in the centre of the field of view
withdraw the tube whilst applying gentle suction to
 It should be performed as soon as possible, but
retrieve the fluid that has pooled between the
patience is required.
 mucosal folds.
53
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
It is important to note that many forms of small
forceps can be advanced out of the endoscope
intestinal disease are not apparent macroscopically
sufficiently far to be relatively straight. Alternatively,
and can only be detected after histologicalexamination
brand new forceps may be robust enough to open.
of biopsy samples. Therefore, in all cases, multiple
After examination and biopsy of the duodenum,
mucosal biopsy samples should be collected from
the endoscope is withdrawn into the stomach for a
different regions of the small intestine.
more careful examination (see above). However, it is
If the biopsy forceps are used parallel to the
important to observe the proximal duodenal flexure
mucosa only villus tips will be sampled, so to obtain
during withdrawal as lesions missed as the endoscope
the best intestinal biopsy specimens it is useful to
entered may be seen. Duodenal ulcers are rare but
are typically seen just distal to the pyloric canal.
intestinal mucosa. Increased pressure will increase
Jejunoscopy
the size of biopsy, and perforation is unlikely if the
 So-called push enteroscopy uses an endoscope up
forceps are opened before pushing. Optimum biopsy
to 3 m in length. This is usually narrow and may not
specimens can be collected by a number of techniques
have an accessory channel, so is merely used for
(Figure 4.21).
viewing without biopsy. Typically it is difficult to steer,
and may be guided through the stomach by passage
through an oversleeve or by being ‘piggy-backed' on
a standard gastroscope.
Complete examination of the whole small intestine
 can only be guaranteed by using a double balloon
enteroscope. This specialized instrument has an
oversleeve with an inflatable balloon in addition to an
inflatable balloon behind its tip. By repeated cycles of
inflating and deflating each balloon alternately, whilst
(0)
()
(i)
advancing the insertion tube and then the oversleeve,
the intestine can be shortened like a concertina so
(a)
that the whole length is eventually seen. This process
is complex and slow and is not currently performed in
veterinary medicine in the UK.
Ending the examination
After a full duodenal examination, gastric examination
and biopsy, the air is withdrawn from the stomach. If 
(b)
gastric contents are found in the oesophagus on with-
drawal of the endoscope, they should be sucked out
and, if necessary, the oesophagus lavaged. Leaving
gastric acid, bile and digestive enzymes in the
oesophagus of a patient recovering from anaesthesia
(and therefore having depressed swallowing) can pre-
dispose to inhalation pneumonia, oesophagitis and
even stricture formation. The oesophagus is inspected
again for lesions before the procedure is ended.
(c)
(d)
Techniques to enhance the size and quality of
4.21
Rigid oesophagoscopy
duodenal biopsy specimens. (a) Samples
should be taken:(i) from the distal duodenal flexure,
Flexible endoscopy is essential for examination of
(ii) from the 'back' of a peristaltic wave and (iii) after
most of the upper Gl tract due to its tortuous anatomy.
deflation of the duodenum so that folds develop. (b) The
However, just as rigid endoscopes can be used for
forceps should be placed on the wall of the descending
duodenum and the endoscope tip deflected into the wall,
colonoscopy, these instruments can be used to exam-
ine the oesophagus but are potentially most useful for
the biopsy site to be viewed. (c) The open cups should
the removal of oesophageal foreign bodies.
be pushed along the wall to scoop up a larger piece of
A colonoscope (Figure 4.22) is basically a rigid
mucosa. (d) 'Swing-jaw' forceps should be used (see also
hollow tube with a light source and an obturator to aid
Chapter 3).
insertion. Once the patient's head and neck have
been extended, insertion into the oesophagus in a
If the jejunum is reached, more flexures are
straight line is feasible. Then, after removal of the
 passed and it not only becomes harder to rotate and
obturator, it is possible to inspect the oesophageal
steer the endoscope but it is also more difficult to
mucosa. However, the view is poor as the field of view
collect biopsy specimens. Indeed, old forceps that 
is limited by the length of the endoscope relative to
have not been lubricated may be so 'sticky' that the
the diameter of its distal aperture. Insufflation whilst 
cups will not open because of the excessive twisting.
looking through a magnifying window attached at the
even though they opened when operated before
other end improves the view, but insertion of instru-
insertion. The failure to open is frustrating, but
ments is then not possible. Thus, examination by a
occasionally the cups will eventually open if the
flexible endoscope is always preferred if available.
54
Normal findings
Oesophagus
The oesophageal mucosa (Figure 4.23) is generally
pale grey/pink and always paler than the gastric
mucosa. In breeds with pigmented tongues (e.g.
Chow Chow, Shar pei) patches of the oesophageal
mucosa may also be pigmented. The surface is
smooth, and the oesophagus usually appears flac-
cid. Occasionally, when anaesthesia is too light, a
wave of contraction flashes down the oesophagus.
The lumen may appear quite large because of anaes-
thesia and megaoesophagus must not be misdiag-
Rigid colonoscope suitable for aiding the
nosed. The lumen may contain a small amount of 
4.22
removal of oesophageal foreign bodies. Note the
clear fluid and sometimes bile, but the presence of
obturator to facilitate atraumatic insertion, and rubber bulb
food is abnormal.
for insuffation once the viewing window has been sealed.
As the oesophagus is inflated, longitudinal folds in 
the proximal body of dogs are obliterated and a
smooth tube is seen. Indentation by the trachea is
However, a rigid colonoscope can be useful when
seen where the cervical and cranial thoracic
removing sharp oesophageal foreign bodies. The
oesophagus drapes over it, and the outline of tracheal
endoscope acts as a sleeve through which either rigid 
rings may even be visible. Pulsations of the wall mark
 grasping forceps or a flexible endoscope with forceps
the position of adjacent great vessels and heart.
is inserted. Once the object has been freed from the
Submucosal vessels are not visible in normal dogs,
site of obstruction, it can be pulled into the lumen of
but are sometimes seen in puppies and cats. In cats
the rigid endoscope and removed within it so that the
the distal oesophagus has numerous annular folds of 
proximal oesophageal mucosa is not traumatized.
mucosa.
This arrangement is also helpful if removing multiple
The normal oesophagus is hard to biopsy because
or sharp gastric foreign bodies with a flexible
the mucosa is tough and the forceps tend to slide off.
endoscope, as it reduces the risk of trauma to the
A biopsy is usually only performed if there is significant 
oesophagus.
oesophagitis or there is a mass (see Chapter 3).
(a)
(b)
G
4.23
Endoscopic appearance of the normal oesophagus. (a) Indentation of
the trachea into the oesophagus in the cranial thorax. (b) In cats the
distal oesophagus has numerous annular folds of mucosa. Submucosal vessels 
are not visible in normal dogs, but are sometimes seen in puppies and cats.
(c) Normal lower oesophageal sphincter. (d) 'Z-line' demarcation between the
oesophageal sphincter.
(d)
55
The lower oesophageal sphincter is usually closed
may be seen migrating concentrically towards the
and the significance of an open lower oesophageal
pylorus (see Figure 4.15). These are more common 
 sphincter is uncertain, unless there is adjacent reflux
in dogs than cats, occurring three to four times per
oesophagitis (see below) when a hiatal hernia may be
minute, and seem to be stimulated by over-distension 
suspected. A sharp demarcation between the grey/
of the stomach. They also increase in incidence the
pink oesophageal and redder gastric mucosa (known
longer the procedure takes.
as 'Z-line' in humans) may be seen and should not be
Duodenum
confused with oesophagitis.
The duodenal mucosa (Figure 4.25) is pink and has
Stomach
the appearance of crushed velvet or good quality
The gastric mucosa (Figure 4.24) should be pink and
terry towelling, although the granularity depends to a
glistening. Patches of hyperaemia are sometimes
certain extent on the degree of distension and spe-
seen and are thought to be due to local differences in
cies; the texture is slightly grainier and the mucosa
slightly pinker in dogs compared with cats. Biopsy
proceeds and are not considered pathological.
samples should always be taken, even if the gross
Submucosal vessels are seen in the cardia and
appearance is completely normal, as there may
fundus only when the stomach is fully inflated. There
be significant microscopic inflammation present.
may be a few mucus strands crossing the lumen as
Submucosal vessels are not visible.
opposing mucosae are separated by insufflation. In
some dogs dark spots within the mucosa are seen.
They seem to correspond with the lymphoid follicles
4.25
induced by Helicobacter infection, but it is not clear
Endoscopic
whether these are actually abnormal.
appearance of
a normal
descending
duodenum in
4.24
(a) a cat and
(b) a dog. Note
Endoscopic
the paler
appearance of
duodenal
normal stomach.
mucosa in cats.
(a) Parallel rugal
folds running
towards antrum.
(b) Lymphoid
folliclesare
darkerspotson
the rugal folds.
a
(b)
One landmark in the canine duodenum is the
major duodenal papilla, where the common bile duct
(b)
 and major pancreatic duct enter;it is often not detected
in cats. In some dogs (but not in cats) there is also a
 minor duodenal papilla for a second pancreatic duct.
These appear as small white flattish protuberances
Rugal folds are generally smooth and tend to run
 and may be overlooked until the endoscope is being
in straight lines along the long axis of the stomach.
withdrawn. The minor papilla (if present) is slightly
They flatten on insufflation and reform as the stomach
clockwise of the position of the major papilla. Also
is deflated. The antrum has fewer folds except around
only in dogs, Peyer's patches (lymphoid aggregates) 
the pylorus, where a few folds are expected. The
are usually visible as 1-3 cm pale oval depressions
normal pylorus may be open or closed but should not
 along the antimesenteric border of the descending
be obscured by mucosal folds. Waves of peristalsis
duodenum (Figure 4.26).
56
Chapter 4Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
m
(a)
(b)
(c)
Landmarks in normal canine duodenum. (a) The major duodenal papilla in the duodenum of the dog is the site
4.26
 of entry of the common bile duct and major pancreatic duct. (b) Peyer's patches (lymphoid aggregates) in the
 duodenum appear as pale round depressions along the antimesenteric border of the descending duodenum. (e) The
minor duodenal papilla (m) is seen in some but not all dogs distal to the major duodenal papila (M) and approximately
100 degrees clockwise from it.
Pathological conditions
The more common pathological conditions that
 can be recognized endoscopically in the oesophagus
The aetiopathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment of 
are listed in Figure 4.27, with examples given in
various Gl conditions are discussed in the BSAVA
Figure 4.28.
 Manual of Canine and Feline Gastroenterology, 2nd
edition. The endoscopic appearance of the more
Megaoesophagus
 common diseases is described here.
A large cavernous lumen extending the length of the
oesophagus is very suggestive of megaoesophagus
 Oesophagus
(see Figure 4.28a) but under anaesthesia a normal
Reddening, ulceration or masses within the oesopha-
oesophagus can appear flaccid and distended.
 gus are abnormal and are readily detected by endo-
However, accumulation of liquid and food is abnor-
scopy, as are obstructions due to strictures or foreign
bodies. However, megaoesophagus and extraluminal
only extends to the heart base, and pulsating vessels
obstructions are difficult to recognize, although the
 may be seen impinging on the oesophageal wall in
accumulation of fluid and/or food is definitely abnormal.
unusual positions.
Condition
Appearance
Megaoesophagus
Fluid and fermenting food retained in voluminous folds
(Figure 4.28a)
Thin mucosa - submucosal vessels visible 
 Sometimes areas of reddening/oesophagitis
Often difficult to pass lower oesophageal sphincter as endoscope is diverted into fold
Oesophagitis
Erythema, irregularity, eroions
(Figure 4.28bc)
Just proximal to lower oesophageal sphincter if reflux oesophagitis
 Distinguish from junction with gastric mucosa
Stricture
 Circumferential narrowing of mucosa so that endoscope cannot be passed
(Figure 4.28d) 
± Oesophagitis
 Smooth mucosa if fibrous scaring
Irregular if due to neoplasia
Neoplasia (rare) and granuloma
(Figure 4.28ef)
normal mucosa, and sometimes cause bulging of the gastric mucosa
Granulomas due to Spirocerca infection (not in UK)
 Extramural compression 
 Cranial dilatation with narrowing of the oesophagus at some point
 Bulging ± inflamed mucosa 
Examples: anterior mediastinal lymphoma, persistent right aortic arch
4.27
 Endoscopic appearance of oesophageal lesions. (continues)
57
Chapter 4
Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
Condition
Appearance
Hiatal hernia
Sometimes ballooning of oesophageal wall into oesophageal lumen
(Figure 4.28g)
±Distal oesophagitis
Gastro-oesophageal intussusception
Ballooning of gastricrugal folds through lower oesophageal sphincter intolumen making it hard topass
endoscope
Necrosis in severe cases
Diverticulum
Variable size opening into diverticulum
(Figure 4.28h)
Pocket usually fullof liquid and/orfood
 Often difiult to understand orientation
4.27
(continued) Endoscopic appearance of oesophageal lesions.
D
d
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Examples of oesophageal lesions. (a) Megaoesophagus. (b) Severe oesophagitis following reflux under
4.28
58
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
Stricture
is uncertain. Fresh or changed blood (appearance
Occurring anywhere in the oesophagus, a stricture
 like coffee grounds) is abnormal and a bleeding ulcer
(see Figure 4.28d) appears as a distinct circumferen-
or tumour should be sought. The presence of food is
tial narowing of the lumen. It may be pale due to
abnormal if the patient has truly had food withheld for
fibrosis but there is often oesophagitis proximally.
12 hours and may reflect an outflow obstruction or
The lumen may narrow so severely that only closed
abnormal motility, which is most frequently associated
forceps can pass.
with inflammatory bowel disease.
The more common pathological conditions that 
Neoplasia
can be recognized endoscopically in the stomach are
Tumours of the 0esophagus (see Figure 4.28ef) are
listed in Figure 4.29, with examples given in Figure
very rare except in certain parts of the world (e.g.
4.30.
 South Africa) where infection with Spirocerca lupi is
common. Cats most frequently suffer from squamous
Gastritis
cell carcinomas, whilst in dogs adenocarcinomas and 
Gastritis (see Figure 4.30a) is indicated by irregularity
submucosal leiomyomas are sometimes seen.
and friability of the mucosa. There may be small areas
 of haemorrhage associated with erosions (i.e. very
Foreign body
superficial ulcers) in gastritis (Figure 4.30b). Biopsy
Oesophageal foreign bodies (see Figure 4.28i) are
 specimens should always be collected as there may
readily detected and can sometimes be removed
be no macroscopic evidence of gastritis.
endoscopically (see below).
Ulcers
Stomach
Benign ulcers (e.g. non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
The presence of iregularity, friability, ulceration and 
drug (NSAID)-induced; see Figure 4.30c) tend to
overt masses in the gastric mucosa are all abnormal.
have smooth edges and form a depression in the
 Patches of hyperaemia are not necessarily considered 
mucosa,
whereas neoplastic ulcers are often
pathological and the significance of lymphoid follicles
 proliferative, raised and feel rigid on biopsy.
Condition
Appearance
 Gastritis
May appear grossly normal 
(Figure 4.30a)
Increased mucus
Increased number of lymphoid follicles
Mucosal thickening, granularty and rabity
Erosions ± ulcers
Sub-epithelial and frank haemorrhage
 Reduced size and number of rugal folds and prominent submucosal vessels in atrophic gastritis 
Erosion 
 Erosions are shallow areas of mucosal disruption
(Figure 4.30b)
 Red/brown discoloration
 Ulcer 
 Mucosal disruptions penetrating the submucosa 
(Figure 4.30c)
Raised, thickened border 
 Dark brown ulcer bed due to bleeding 
Yellow/white necrotic tissue
 Changed blood in gastric fluid in fundus
 Causes: inflammatory disease; NSAIDs; neoplasia 
Pyloric stenosis 
 Enlarged, protuberant pylorus 
 Small pyloric canal 
± Retained food
 ± Erythema/erosions around pylorus
 Benign mucosal antral polyp
Commonly seen in old dogs 
 Of no clinical significance unless bleeding
Hypertrophic pylorogastropathy
 Thickened rugae not completely flattened by insuflation
(Figure 4.30d)
 Prominent ight reflectivity suggestive of oedema
May be focal or extend to antrum/pylorus
Neoplasia 
Gastric haemorrhage
(Figure 4.30e)
Ulcerated tissue
 Thickening/stiffening of mucosa; rigid when biopsied 
 Carcinomas ofen on lesser curvature extending to cardia or antrum 
 Uicers on greater curvature either non-malignant or lymphoma 
 Parasite 
Physaloptera worm in lumen (not in UK)
 Olulanus in cats is a microscopic cause of gastritis
4.29
 Endoscopic appearance of gastric lesions.
59
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
(b)
(a)
C)
4.30
Examples of gastric lesions.
(a) Gastritis showing.
submucosal haemorrhage. (b) Muitiple 
minor gastric ulcers (erosions)
associated with chronic gastritis.
(c) Ulcer on the lesser curvature
following non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug administration. Hair and debris are
stuck in the ulcer; the fresh blood seen 
is from an adjacent biopsy site.
(d) Hypertrophic pylorogastropathy.
Note the multiple thickened mucosal
folds around the pylorus, which is not 
visible. (e) Gastric carcinoma. A large
ulcerated mass is visible.
(e)
Hypertrophic pylorogastropathy
to friability of the mucosa, increased granularity and 
Excessive folds around the pylorus are typical of
sometimes bleeding. However, there is a well recog-
hypertrophy (see Figure 4.30d).
nized disparity between the gross and histological
 appearance, and intestinal biopsy specimens should 
Gastric neoplasia
always be taken.
 Gastric adenocarcinoma (see Figure 4.30e) is most 
The more common pathological conditions that
commonly seen on the lesser curvature and may be
 can be recognized endoscopically in the duodenum
suspected if more than three of the following six
are listed in Figure 4.31, with examples given in
 observations are made (Simpson, 2005).
Figure 4.32.
Mucosal colour change to a mottled purple
instead of pink
Condition
Appearance
 Deep pigmentation of the mucosa 
Inflammatory
Increased granularity
 An obvious mucosal mass
disease
Increased friability
Ulceration
(Figure 4.32abc)
Erosions
 Loss of normal gastric landmarks
Haemorrhage
Rigidity of the gastric mucosa.
Linear haemorrhage: artefact from trauma;
eosinophilic inflammatory disease
Gastric lymphoma can affect some or all of the
Multiple white spots indicating dilated lipid-
Lymphangiectasia
 stomach and the mucosa is often lumpy and friable.
(Figure 4.32de)
filled lymphatics
However, in all cases the observation must be
Similaraperanceseeninpostprandal
confirmed by histopathological examination. Deep
state
biopsy specimens may be required to make the
Thickening and irregularity if
Neoplasia
 diagnosis, as superficial tissue is often necrotic.
(Figure 4.32f)
lymphosarcoma
Mass or annular obstruction with
Gastric parasites
adenocarcinoma
 Physaloptera spp. worms in the stomach are not seen
u aas Aeuoseno sdjod snoeouap
in the UK, and Ollulanus tricuspis is too small to be
cats 
 Adoosopua Aq Kissob paziubooal 
Parasite
Toxocara - motile, photophobic
Uncinaria - small(1-2 cm), white 
(Figure 4.32gh)
Duodenum
Taenia - recognizable by segmentation
 Deep duodenal ulceration is rare in the dog and cat 
 and is most commonly associated with malignancy,
4.31
 Endoscopic appearance of duodenal lesions.
 but inflammation and erosions are common leading
60
Chapter 4Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
(b)
e
(f)
(g)
(h)
 Examples of duodenal lesions. (a) Inflammatory bowel disease: lymphoplasmacytic enteritis. Note the increased 
4.32
 granularity. (b) Inflammatory bowel disease: eosinophilic enteritis. Note the increased irregularity and ulcerated 
 areas. (c) inflammatory bowel disease: bleeding associated with eosinophilic enteritis. (d) Alimentary lymphosarcoma.
Biopsy is required to confirm the cause of this ulcerated proliferative tissue. (e) Adenocarcinoma: an annular ulcerated 
mass is visible (arrowed). (f) Lymphangiectasia. Note the multiple dilated lacteals containing white lymph. (g) Isolated 
Inflammatory bowel disease
definitive diagnosis. The mucosal surface may appear
The mucosa is often irregular and may be ulcerated
very smooth because of infiltration and loss of villi, or
and even bleeding (Figure 4.32abc). The tissue is
very irregular and friable, and there may be patchy,
usually friable:bleeding often occurs when  the
lumpy infiltration.
mucosa is traumatized by the endoscope merely
touching it, and large pieces may be avulsed when 
Intestinal adenocarcinoma
biopsy is performed.
Carcinomas are more common in the colon (see
 Chapter 5) and stomach (see Figure 4.30e), although 
 Alimentary lymphosarcoma
 gastric carcinomas can extend to involve the duo-
There is no pathognomonic gross appearance for
 denum. Primary intestinal adenocarcinomas (Figure
 alimentary lymphosarcoma (Figure 4.32d), and a
4.32e) are seen most commonly in the ileum of
biopsy should always be performed. However,
 older cats, and are occasionally found endoscop-
 mucosal biopsy may be inadequate in some cases,
ically in the canine duodenum, where they typicailly
with a full-thickness biopsy being required for a
 are ulcerated.
61
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy:upper gastrointestinal tract
Lymphangiectasia
The method chosen for removal will depend on
 Lymphangiectasia (Figure 4.32f) can be patchy and 
the:
full-thickness biopsy of other parts of the small
 Clinical state of the patient
intestine may be needed. Sometimes the lymphatics
Anatomical location of the foreign body
are markedly dilated with fat and appear as multiple
white globules in the mucosa, but a similar less severe
 Size of the foreign body
Type of foreign body:
appearance can occur postprandially, and so biopsy
 sharp or smooth
confirmation is essential.
containing lead, caustics or zinc (e.g.
batteries).
Intestinal parasites
Radiological evidence of:
Occasionally, roundworms (Figure 4.32g) and tape-
obstruction
worms (Figure 4.32h) are seen endoscopically. They
 perforation.
are rarely of clinical significance. Single roundworms
can be retrieved endoscopically for identification,
Instrumentation
although they are photophobic and migrate away
A number of instruments that fit down a 2.8 mm
from the endoscope light if they are not caught quite
accessory channel are available for grasping foreign
quickly. Uncinaria hookworms (small white worms)
bodies (see Chapter 2). There are fewer instruments
are occasionally found in the duodenum. Trichuris is
small enough to pass a 2.2. mm channel. However,
typically found in the caecum (see Chapter 5).
it must be remembered that even an instrument
able to be inserted down a 2.8 mm accessory
channel never opens wider than approximately
Foreign body removal
2 cm, and so large round objects may never be
retrievable endoscopically. A quick exploratory
Foreign bodies in the Gl tract are quite a common
laparotomy is preferable to spending hours fishing
problem in dogs and range from soft objects (e.g.
 in the stomach and failing.
socks) to bones, stones and fish hooks and even
The instruments available include:
bizarre objects such as toys (Figure 4.33). Cats
being more fastidious most typically only swallow
Basket forceps
needles and thread, and baby teats. Foreign bodies
Rat-tooth or alligator jaw grasping forceps
?
 can be managed:
Multi-prong forceps (2-, 3-, 4- and 5-prong,
Conservatively (natural passage)
W-shaped)
By surgical removal
Snares
?
?
By endoscopic removal.
Magnets.
?
a)
(c)
Gastric foreign bodies.
4.33
(a) Rubber ball in stomach.
Despite being swallowed, the ball was
too large to be retrieved endoscopically
and a gastrotomy was performed.
(b) Coin. Note that it has fallen down to
the cardia. (c) Sock. (d) Peach stone.
(e) Stone.
e
62
Chapter 4
Flexible endoscopy:upper gastrointestinal tract
Of these,large grasping forceps and basket
Gastric foreign bodies
forceps are the most versatile and useful. Basket
It is remarkable the size of foreign body that animals
forceps and snares when opened spring to a
can swallow and pass naturally. The presence of a
'memorized' shape and can be manipulated by
stone or bone in the stomach should not immediately
steering the endoscope over the foreign body before
be assumed to be the cause of any vomiting: bones
being closed tight.
will dissolve in gastric acid, and stones are frequently
passed.When deciding whether a foreign body can
 Oesophageal foreign bodies
be removed endoscopically, the size and nature of
These should be removed as soon as possible as
the foreign body must be considered and whether
they cause pain and dysphagia, and can easily
adequate grasping instruments are available. Rubber
perforate,especially as the most common foreign
balls are often impossible to retrieve even though the
bodies are ribs and vertebrae with multiple sharp
patient managed to swallow them. Sharp points
protuberances. Surgical removal is not ideal in light of
should be grasped (ideally with rubber-tipped forceps)
the possible complications, but endoscopic removal
is not always easybecause it is hard to lift the mucosa
the object should be held so that the sharp point is
away from any protuberances, and trauma may be
trailing as the object is pulled up the oesophagus,
caused as the object is pulled up the oesophagus or
e.g. grasping fish hooks in the middle of the curve
pushed into the stomach. It can also be hard to
means the tip is pointing backwards as it is removed.
achieve a good grip. Immediate referral for removal
When attempting to grasp objects they frequently
under fluoroscopic guidance is a sensible approach
fall into the fundus. Manipulating them back into the
(Figure 4.34).
antrum either with the endoscope or by turning the
If endoscopic retrieval is to be performed,
patient on to their right side can help. Once the foreign
protection of the mucosa as the foreign body is
body is securely grasped, the endoscope, graspers 
withdrawn can be attempted by:
and foreign body are removed as a whole until they
are outside the mouth when the foreign body can be
Inserting the endoscope through a rigid tube into
released. The biggest difficulty is getting past the
which the foreign body, e.g. fish hooks, open 
lower oesophageal sphincter. Holding the cervical
safety pins, is withdrawn
oesophagus closed and insufflating to the maximum
Having a thick plastic sleeve attached around the
whilst deflecting the tip obliquely may help.
end of the endoscope by an elastic band. The
Soft items can be grabbed by almost any instru-
sleeve is flapped back as the endoscope is 
ment (i.e. grasping or pronged forceps, basket for-
inserted but unfolds and covers the foreign body
 ceps) but biopsy forceps should not be used as they
as it is withdrawn, e.g. bones that are too large to
will be blunted. lf multiple foreign bodies are to be
be pulled into a rigid endoscope.
removed endoscopically, an oversleeve can be placed
into the oesophagus to reduce the trauma of repeated
intubation and extubation.
4.34
Ring-shaped foreign bodies can sometimes be
removed by entrapment with suture material when
A bone stuck
grasping forceps are not available. Biopsy forceps
in the
 are pre-placed through the endoscope and grasp one
oesophagus
end of a long, strong suture before the endoscope is
hascaused
severe
passed. Once in the stomach, the suture material is
oesophagitis.
passed through a hole in the foreign body and let go.
It is then picked up on the far side and withdrawn
through the mouth. The foreign body can then be
withdrawn on the loop produced by pulling both ends
of the suture material.
Duodenal foreign bodies
Duodenal foreign bodies that can be grabbed with an
endoscope are rare, and surgical intervention is
indicated if there is evidence of obstruction.
Contraindications
Endoscopic retrieval is the safest and preferred
 If a fish hook is caught in the oesophagus it may
method, but a number of objects cannot be removed
have to be pushed through the mucosa back into the
this way because:
lumen before it can be retrieved. Alternatively, by
grasping and forcing the hook down the oesophagus
They are stuck
it may be pulled through the mucosa with just a small
They have caused perforation
linear tear. If it appears to go deeply or is lodged near
They have moved beyond the reach of the
a great vessel, surgical removal is safer. If the case is
endoscope
being referred for endoscopic removal, it is helpful not
They are too large to grasp
to cut an attached line exiting the mouth as this helps
They are too large to pass the gastro-
find the hook.
oesophageal junction.
63
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
Complications
Balloon dilation
This method is preferred because itis more controllable
Following removal of an oesophageal foreign body
there may be severe oesophagitis, which should be
and radial stretching is less traumatic (Figure 4.35).
treated to try to prevent stricture formation. If perfora-
Dedicated  oesophageal balloon   catheters  are
 available but are expensive; second-hand out-of-date
tion has already occurred, or is caused by attempts at
endoscopic removal, exploratory surgery should be
cardiac balloon catheters are suitable. The balloon
performed as soon as possible. Sharp gastric foreign
catheter is usually inserted alongside the endoscope
bodies may cause gastric ulceration, which can be
and through the stricture and inflated to stretch the
treated symptomatically with sucralfate and acid
stricture. However, if the stricture is very narrow it can
blockers once the foreign body has been removed.
be difficult to insert the balloon into the stricture.
Through-the-scope balloon catheters can be used as
they are inserted via the accessory channel and can
Oesophageal stricture
be manoeuvred by steering the endoscope tip.
However, they cost several hundred pounds and are
Causes
almost single use, because after inflation they are
Oesophageal strictures develop following severe
very difficult to deflate and retrieve through the
ulceration of the oesophagus down to the level of the
accessory channel without tearing.
 submucosa, often combined with chemical/enzymatic
The balloon should be long enough to dilate the
inflammation caused by reflux of gastric acid, bile and
whole length of the stricture, and typically is 6-10 cm
pancreatic peptidases. They are most commonly
long. A range of balloon diameters is available and a
caused following:
graduated dilation can be performed. However, it is 
Gastro-oesophageal reflux during anaesthesia
common practice just to use a 2 cm diameter balloon
as that degree of dilation provides satisfactory
Foreign body removal
?
resolution of signs, and unnecessary expense for
 Ingestion of caustic substances
extra catheters is spared.
Ingestion of potentially ulcerogenic tablets (e.g.
Following
identification
of the stricture
by
doxycycline, clindamycin) that get stuck.
oesophagoscopy, dilation is attempted, noting the
Signs of dysphagia, regurgitation and swallowing
distance from the mouth as indicated on the insertion
pain develop 1-2 weeks after the initiating event as
tube markings. This allows the exact site to be found
the stricture gradually forms.
the next time for comparison. The balloon is positioned
within the stricture and inflated with water rather than
Stricture dilation
air as this gives an increased hydraulic effect (see
Surgical resection of strictures is not usually attempted
Figure 4.35).
because of the risks of dehiscence or further stricture
A syringe or pump is connected to a pressure
formation. Endoscopic-guided dilation is the preferred
 gauge and the maximum pressure permitted for the
treatment. The stricture can be dilated by bougienage
balloon is used. Dilation is held for 1-2 minutes. If
 or balloon dilation under endoscopic guidance.
dilation is successful the oesophageal lumen becomes
wider and some bleeding is seen. lf there is no
Bougienage
bleeding, dilation has probably not worked (the
Conical rubber probes of gradually increasing dia-
balloon may have slipped) and should be repeated.
meter are introduced to dilate the stricture gradually.
The method is considered more likely to cause
 trauma as there is a shear force applied to the stric-
Postoperative care
ture, and passage of the probe into very narrow stric-
After dilation the patient is treated for severe oesopha-
tures is tricky, even when visualized endoscopically.
gitis to try to prevent re-stricture formation with:
(a)
(b)
(c)
4.35
(a) An oesophageal stricture. The open biopsy forceps are used as an internal measure; the cups span 4-5 mm,
Figure 4.28d has lead to a mucosal tear and only partial dilation of the remainder of the stricture.The induced oesophagitis
is likely to cause healing by further stricture formation.
64
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
Sucralfate
possible. Minor oesophageal tears should be left to
Metoclopramide
heal spontaneously with percutaneous endoscopic
Acid blocker (cimetidine, ranitidine, omeprazole)
gastrostomy (PEG) tube feeding in the interim. Major
Soft/liquidized food.
tears may require surgical repair, although that
increases the risk of further stricture formation.
 Resting the oesophagus by gastrostomy tube
 feeding may also help and is useful if the animal
is severely debilitated, although the lack of stimula-
Percutaneous endoscopic
tion of peristalsis may make stricture re-formation
gastrostomy tube placement
more likely.
Gastrostomy tubes are very useful for maintaining
There is no evidence that steroids are helpful in
nutrition in chronically ill animals or patients where
preventing stricture re-formation. Indeed they may
 naso-oesophageal or oesophagostomy tube feeding
delay healing, but prednisolone is advocated by
some at 1 mg/kg/day for 7-10 days. The use of the
is not possible (Zoran, 2005). Gastrostomy tubes can
antifibrotic colchicine is even more controversial.
be placed:
 Recently, endoscopic intralesional injections of triam-
cinolone into the stricture just before it is dilated
Surgically:
?
have been recommended, but success rates have
logical if patient is undergoing a laparotomy,
e.g. post-gastric dilatation and volvulus
 not been published.
too invasive in a potentially debilitated patient
Historically, repeat dilation was only performed
if other surgery is not required.
when  regurgitation   recurred.
1.However,
recent
Blindly (e.g. ELD device):
 evidence suggests that frequent repeated dilation
risk of splenic laceration.
(i.e. twice weekly) until there is no clinically significant 
Endoscopically:
 stricture present gives better results; between one
and twenty plus dilations may be needed. If dilation
safer and quicker
fails, or the client cannot afford repeated dilations,
 more convenient.
 there are four options:
Principle
1. Feed a liquidized diet permanently: rarely
The principle of endoscopic placement of a
satisfactory as signs will probably persist.
gastrostomy feeding tube is that an endoscope is
2.
 Place a permanent gastrostomy feeding tube.
used to catch a line inserted through the body wall
3. Try to place an expandable stent endoscopically:
into the stomach and to pullit out through the mouth.
expensive; stents are made for humans and are
The line is then fixed to the end of the tube and pulled
usually too large for dogs and cats.
back out through the body wall with the feeding tube
4. Euthanasia.
 attached until only the mushroom tip remains in the
stomach. After fixation on the outside of the body,
Complications
food can be placed directly into the stomach through
Some trauma (and haemorrhage) is necessary for the
the PEG tube (Figure 4.36).
dilation to have any effect, but the tissue is friable and
The early descriptions of this technique (Armstrong,
the risk of perforation or rupture of major vessels is
1992; Bright, 1993) described quite complex methods
real. Occasionally, an acute tension pneumothorax is 
of passing the tube into the stomach and securing its
caused, and the anaesthetic monitoring needs to be
position. Today, the process is much simpler with the
good to detect respiratory compromise as soon as
advent of PEG tube kits which contain all the
4.36
The principle of placing a PEG tube.
65
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
equipment needed and a PEG tube with an integral
dilator and wire loop attachment. Both the original
 Original method
method and the kit method are described here, as
Mushroom tip catheter:
some readers may not have access to the kits.
Gastrostomy tubes for surgical placement can be used for
However, kits (Figure 4.37) are becoming more widely
available and their ease of use makes this method
 needs to be cut off first
achievable by anyone with an endoscope.
If the mushroom tipis small or to flexible tobe self-retaining,
 then flanges' can be cut from the opposite end, slit and then slid 
on to the tube
Large bore needle or over-the-needle catheter
'Fishing line' nylon or wire long enough to reach from the mouth to
the flank 
 Disposable pipette tip as a dilator
Scaipel
Suture material
 Syringe port adaptor
Revised method (pre-prepared kit)
 Mushroom tip catheter:
 The tips are large and rigid enough to be selfretaining and do
not need “flanges'
The other end is tapered to act as a dilator
 A swaged-on wire loop is used for attachment to the wire pulled
 through endoscopically
4.37
PEG tube kit (Mila International Inc.).
Large bore needle or over-the-needle catheter
Wire loop long enough to reach from the mouth to the flank
 Scalpel 
 Suture material
Indications
Syringe por adaptor 
The principle of feeding assistance is to place the
feeding tube as high up the Gl tract as anatomically
 NB. Some human PEG tube kits also contain drapes and disposable
possible, and to use a tube that can be left in place as
 basket forceps as standard 
longas is necessary (Zoran, 2005). Naso-oesophageal
tubes are only suited to short-term liquid feeding.
Equipment needed for placement of a PEG
4.38
Oesophagostomy tubes can be used if the disease is
tube.
confined to the oronasopharynx; PEG tubes do not
need to be used in these patients. However, if the
patient has suffered head trauma they tend to tolerate
a PEG tube better than an oesophagostomy tube.
 PEG tubes can be used for:
 Severe, painful oropharyngeal disease (e.g. facial
fracture)
Oesophageal disease:
severe oesophagitis
during serial dilations of a stricture
incurable obstruction (e.g. recurrent/refractory
stricture, neoplasia)
(a)
? megaoesophagus.
 Prolonged anorexia (e.g. feline hepatic lipidosis).
The use of permanent gastrostomy tubes to treat
megaoesophagus is controversial; some patients do
well but others continue to inhale saliva and die of
pneumonia.
Contraindications
PEG tubes should not be placed if there is:
Persistent vomiting
(q)
(c)
 Persistent inhalation of saliva in patients with
megaoesophagus
Mushroom tip catheter. (a) PEG tube showing
4.39
Very temporary anorexia.
mushroom tip and centimetre markers (Cooks
Medical Supplies). (b) PEG tube showing wide openings
for food (Cooks Medical Supplies). (c) PEG tube (Mila
Instrumentation
International Inc). The foam in the mushroom tip becomes
The equipment needed for the original and revised
rigid when the feeding adaptor is fitted as it forces air
methods of placement is listed in Figure 4.38, with
down a small tube in the wall of the main feeding tube into
examples given in Figures 4.39 and 4.40.
the mushroom. A large central hole for feeding is visible.
66
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
the stomach, so that when the line is threaded it is 
instantly entrapped. Once the line has been grasped,
the needle is withdrawn from the stomach to prevent
accidental trauma and the line is pulled out through
the mouth with the endoscope (Figure 4.41). The line 
exiting the mouth is then attached to the gastrostomy
tube, and it is here that the original method becomes
slightly confusing.
Revised (kit) PEG tube. A wire loop is swaged on 
4.40
 to the hard conical end of the tube, which acts 
as its own dilator; the mushroom tip is at the other end.
A siliconized mushroom-tipped gastrostomy tube
is used. The mushroom tip is necessary to keep the
tube in place in the stomach. An 18-20 Fr tube for
cats, and 18-24 Fr tube for dogs are suitable. A large
bore needle or catheter and some strong nylon (e.g.
fishing line) or wire are needed to pull the tube into
 position. The line is initially grasped by the endoscope 
(a)
with grasping forceps or a snare, and a dilator is
necessary to ease the passage of the tube back
through the stomach and body wall. Finally suture
material is needed to fix the tube in place.
Method
The patient is anaesthetized and placed in right lateral
recumbency as the tube will be inserted in the left 
flank. A site on the left flank, from behind the costal
arch to just ventral to the end of the 13th rib, is clipped 
 and surgically prepared. The endoscope is inserted 
into the stomach, which is inflated as much as
 possible. This pushes the spleen away from the space
(bl
 between the stomach and body wall so that it cannot 
be traumatized. It also allows identification of the site
 into which the tube will be inserted.
 The light may be seen shining through the body
wall (transillumination); some light sources can 
shine a burst of very bright light to aid
transillumination.
 A gloved finger pushed into the prepared site will
show an indentation in the stomach visible
endoscopically.
Ideally, the insertion site should be at the junction of
the body and the antrum; if it is too near the pylorus the
(c)
mushroom tip may cause an obstruction. To access
4.41
Placing the line to insert a PEG tube. (a) A
this optimum site can be difficult or even impossible in
needle is inserted through the flank into the
deep-chested dog breeds. Once the optimum site has
inflated stomach. (Courtesy of D Holden) (b) The needle
 been determined, the endoscope is withdrawn back to
entering the stomach viewed endoscopically. The wire is
the cardia for safety, and a large bore needle or over-
now inserted. (e) The wire loop inserted through the
the-needle catheter is pushed through the body wall
needle is grasped by basket forceps and pulled out
 into the lumen. The fishing line or wire is then threaded
through the mouth.
through the needle into the stomach, and the line is
 grasped using the endoscope. It should be remem-
Original method
Firstly, a disposable pipette tip (Figure 4.42) is
bered that the distal end needs to be anchored to stop 
it being pulled completely through by accident.
threaded on to the line with the conical point towards
Biopsy forceps should not be used to grasp the
the mouth; ultimately, this will dilate the path through
line as they will be blunted, but grasping or basket
the body wall. The line is then attached securely
forceps can be used. lt is easiest to pre-place open
to the non-mushroom end of the gastrostomy tube,
basket forceps over the needle as soon as it enters
so that when it is pulled into the stomach and
67
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fitting the pipette tip on to a PEG tube. (a) The
4.42
end of the PEG tube and pipette tip. The flared
tip of the PEG tube is cut off and the pipette tip is
threaded on to the wire exiting the mouth. (b) The wire is 
then fixed to the tube by a transfixion knot. A needle
pushed through the tube aids placement of the transfixing
wire. (c) After securely attaching the wire to the PEG tube,
the pipette tip is slid over the join to act as a dilator for
when the tube is pulled out through the body wall.
out through the body wall, the mushroom tip remains
Pulling the PEG tube through the body wall
4.43
in the stomach. To make a secure attachment, the
(Courtesy of D Holden)
line is transfixed on the tube before tying the knot;
this is achieved by feeding it through a large bore
needle inserted temporarily through the tube as a
guide. The end of the tube is then tucked within the
pipette tip.
The line entering the flank is then pulled, bringing
the feeding tube into the stomach and up to the
body wall. Strong traction is then applied to force
the pipette tip and tube through the body wall (Figure
4.43). It is usually necessary to make a small skin 
incision to ease its passage, but the minimum nec-
essary cut should be made or the wound irritates
the patient.
Revised method
The wire loop is inserted into the stomach and
retrieved endoscopically as above. The simplicity of
(a) 
the method comes when attaching the line to the tube,
Wire loop for inserting PEG tube. (a) The
4.44
as the swaged-on loop can be attached without
mushroom tip of the PEG tube is looped through
knotting. The conical end then acts as the dilator
 the swaged-on wire loop to join it to the wire loop passing.
(Figure 4.44).
out of the mouth. (continues)
68
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
(b)
(a)
(c)
(continued) Wire loop for inserting PEG tube.
4.44
(b) The wire loops are interlocked. (c) Pulling
the wires tight produces a knotless connection.
Fixing the PEG tube
With either method, once the tube has exited the body
wall, it is pulled so that the mushroom tip lies snug
against the stomach wall. This should be checked
endoscopically (Figure 4.45); if there is blanching of
(b)
the mucosa, the tube has been pulled too tight. The
Fixing the PEG tube. (a) A feeding adaptor is
most secure way to fix the tube is with a Chinese
4.46
placed on the end of the PEG tube, which is 
finger-trap suture. The position of the tube is noted
attached to the body wall by a Chinese finger-trap suture.
against centimetre markers on the tube in case of
(b) The PEG tube is covered lightly with a stretch netting
future migration (see Figure 4.43). The end of the
dressing. (Courtesy of A Harvey)
tube is cut off (eliminating the pipette tip or swaged-
 on wire loop) and a syringe adaptor port fitted so that
the tube can be capped (Figure 4.46).
Use
Patients tolerate PEG tubes well unless the suture
The PEG tube is not used for the first 24 hours, and
is too tight, or the site is wrapped in occlusive
then initially sterile water is inserted just in case the
dressings. A stretch netting (e.g. Surgifix; Figure 4.46)
tube has migrated. If there is any doubt as to its
is sufficient protection and an Elizabethan collar is not
position, an iodine-based contrast medium (e.g.
usually needed. The stoma site is cleaned daily and
Conray) is instilled and the stomach radiographed.
antibiotic cream applied if necessary.
Once water can be given without problems liquid
feeding is introduced, gradually increasing from 1/3 to
4.45
2/3 to 3/3 of the caloric requirement over three days.
The food is warmed before feeding. Usually 4 divided
Endoscopic
meals a day are tolerated, but if that provokes
appearance of a
vomiting, more frequent smaller feeds or even trickle
fitted PEG tube.
feeding by syringe pump can be introduced. Before
(a) Cooks Medical
Supplies tube.
every feed or after 6 hours of trickle feeding, the
(b) Mila
residual volume should be checked by aspirating the
International Inc.
gastric contents through the tube. If the patient is not 
tube.
clearing the food, the feeding rate should be reduced 
Before each feed the tube is flushed with water to
ensure patency, and then again after feeding to try to
(a)
keep it patent, as well as to give the patient their daily
water requirement. If the tube becomes blocked it can
be cleared either with a probe or, preferably, by
instilling a cola drink and leaving the tube capped; the
acid and effervescence in the cola usually resolve the
 obstruction. Blockages are most frequently caused by
failure to flush the tube adequately, or by including
medication in the feed. Liquid medications are
preferred and any tablets must be crushed finely.
The first PEG tube can be left in for at least 6
 months without problems in many patients, and own-
ers are generally willing to manage them at home.
Tubes are removed either when there are complica-
(b)
tions (e.g. wound infection) or when they are no longer
69
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
needed as the patient is taking its full caloric require-
ment orally, or when a permanent device is going to
be inserted.
 Long-term use
 PEG tubes can be left in situ for months. lf or when 
they need replacing, a low-profile device (button) can 
be fitted (Figure 4.47).
Removal of a PEG tube. Basket forceps are
(a)
4.48
used to grasp the mushroom tip of the PEG
tube as it is cut off outside the patient.
 If a rubber Foley tube is used as it rapidly
disintegrates in gastric acid
 If the mushroom is too small/soft as the tube may
migrate out; applying a 'flange' resolves this 
problem 
If the tube is too tight it may cause tissue
necrosis and the patient will chew the tube
 If the tube is not capped when not in use,
leakage of gastric acid can cause acid burns on 
(b)
the skin (Figure 4.49)
 If a patient also has a chest drain in place, the
4.47
Low-profile gastrostomy tube.(a) The different
tubes must be labelled. Accidental feeding
sizes of stalk are to accommodate differences in
through the chest tube into the pleural space has
 the thickness of the body wall. The conical mushroom is 
killed patients.
lodged in the stomach, whilst the feeding port is flush to
the skin. (b) Stretching the device with a stylet allows it to
be inserted through the stoma when the PEG tube is finally
removed. producing a permanent gastrostomy.
Removal
The PEG tube should not be removed for at least 7
days after insertion to allow adhesions to form and
prevent leakage. That is why this feeding method is
not appropriate if the patient needs assisted feeding
for only a few days.
There are several ways of removing the tube:
The mushroom tip can be stretched with a stylet
and the tube pulled out
The tube can be cut off against the body wall:
4.49
 Acid burns caused by a leaking PEG tube.
it will pass naturally if the patient is >20 kg
retrieve endoscopically: this allows inspection
一
of the stoma
Jejunostomy tube placement
The process can be speeded up by pre-grasping
the mushroom endoscopically before it is cut off
These are more commonly inserted surgically, but
(Figure 4.48).
they can be inserted endoscopically if the patient
already has a PEG tube (Tams, 1999). The endoscope
Problems and failures
is advanced into the stomach and grasping forceps
Although well tolerated, PEG tubes can cause
are then steered so that they exit via the PEG tube.
problems:
The forceps are then used to grasp the tip of the
70
Chapter 4 Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
jejunostomy tube, pull it into the stomach through the
sucralfate after biopsy.Where a significant bleed
PEG tube, and then carry it through the pylorus as far
does occur (Figure 4.50) application of ice cold water
down the small intestine as possible. The tube must
through an endoscopic catheter will usually halt it. If
be long enough that the other end remains protruding
this fails a 1 in 10,000 adrenaline solution may be
from the PEG tube in order that a syringe can be
applied in a similar manner.
attached.
Laceration of major vessels or adjacent
organs
Polyp removal
Laceration of major vessels and adjacent organs is
rare but can occur during foreign body removal and
Polyps in the upper Gl tract are very rare compared
stricture dilation.
with the large intestine (see Chapter 5) and their
removal is not discussed here. Laser surgery can
Gastric dilatation
be performed with a compatible endoscope (see
Gastric dilatation can occur following administration
Chapter 14).
of lavage solutions or during recovery if air is not
a volvulus could follow and it is wise to deflate the
Complications of upper Gl
stomach before withdrawing the endoscope.
endoscopy
Decreased venous return from gastric
Although endoscopy is minimally invasive, there is
over-distension
the potential to doharm to the patient (this is fortunately
Over-distension of the stomach during the proce-
rare) or to damage the equipment (see Chapter 3).
dure is a much more common problem than volvu-
Gastrointestinal perforation
lus. As well as making pyloric intubation difficult or
impossible, it has significant haemodynamic and
Perforation of the Gl tract can result from forceful
cardiorespiratory effects similar to those seen in a
insertion of the endoscope without adequate visuali-
spontaneous volvulus:
zation of the lumen, or from poor biopsy technique. It
is most likely to occur when trying to intubate the duo-
Compression of the caudal vena cava: rapid drop
denum. However, most perforations actually occur
in venous return and blood pressure
when the tissue is diseased and, sometimes, even
Compression of the diaphragm and decreased
just vigorous insufflation is sufficient to rupture an
ulcerated area. The perforation (and even intraperito-
tidal volume: splinting of the diaphragm prevents
neal organs) may be visible but as the viscus is likely
adequate respiratory function.
to collapse seeing this cannot be relied upon. Air
Acute bradycardia
escaping into the peritoneal cavity will cause abdomi-
A slowing heart rate is sometimes encountered,
nal distension that cannot be relieved, and can be
verified by abdominal radiography or abdominocen-
especially when the small intestine is entered, and
occurs particularly in toy breed dogs and patients with
tesis. Although a rare complication, the endoscopist
should always be prepared to take a patient to emer-
severe Gl disease. This appears to be a vagovagal
reflex and can be abolished by atropine. However,
 gency laparotomy if perforation occurs.
there may also be increased respiratory and skeletal
Mucosal haemorrhage
movements, and tactical intravenous diazepam can
Significant haemorrhage is fortunately a rare event
be helpful.
Bacteraemia
associated with malignancy. Haemorrhage following
collection of biopsy samples is rarely significant, and
Transient bacteraemia occurs in about 5% of humans
it is not routine practice to prescribe acid blockers or
undergoing endoscopy. The incidence of bacteraemia
Endoscopic appearance of
4.50
massive Gl bleeding. (a) A large
blood clot is seen in the gastric lumen,
following bleeding from biopsy of a gastric
ulcer. (b) A stream of blood is seen in the
duodenum after biopsy of a more distal
duodenal mass.
(a)
71
Chapter 4  Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract
in dogs and cats undergoing any form of Gl endoscopy
References and further reading
is unknown and perioperative antibiotics are 
not
 Armstrong JP (1992) Enteral feeding of critically ill pets. Veterinary
routinely used. However, it would be sensible to use
Medicine87,900-907
them in 'at-risk' patients, e.g. patients with Gl bleeding
 Bright RM (1993) Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy. Veterinary
or valvular heart disease, as one would when
Clinics of North America 23, 531--545
 Elwood C (2005) Best practice for small intestinal biopsy. Journal of Small
performing dentistry.
Animal Practice 46, 315-316
Hall EJ, Simpson JW and Williams DA (2005) BSAVA Manual of Canine
and Feline Gastroenterology, 2nd edn, ed. EJ Hall et al. BSAVA
 Publications, Gloucester
Transmission of infection
 Shales CJ, Warren J, Anderson DM et al. (2005) Complications following 
disinfected
full-thickness smallintestinal biopsy in66 dogs: a retrospective study.
Poorly 
endoscopes
can
 transmit
Journal of Small Animal Practice 46,317-321
enteropathogenic organisms, and even within the
Simpson JW (2005) Gastrointestinal endoscopy. In: BSAVA Manual of
same patient it is common sense to perform upper
Canine and Feline Gastroenterology, 2nd edn, ed.EJ Hallet al,
34-49. BSAVA Publications, Gloucester
 before lower Gl endoscopy. Adequate disinfection of
Tams, TR (1999) Endoscopic placement of gastrostomy and jejunostomy
a gastroscope is an essential part of the process and 
tubes. In: Small Animai Endoscopy, 2nd edn, ed. TR Tams, pp
starts as soon as the procedure finishes, with the
341-356. Mosby, St. Louis 
Zoran DL (2005) Feeding tubes. In: Manual of Canine and Feline
endoscopist flushing the channels of gross material
Gastroenterology. 2nd edn, ed. EJ Hall et al., pp 288-296. BSAVA
before thorough cleaning (see Chapter 2).
Publications, Gloucester 
72
Flexible endoscopy: lower
gastrointestinal tract
James W. Simpson
examining the entire mucosal surface of the lower
Introduction
bowel and permitting collection of biopsy samples to
The lower gastrointestinal (Gl) tract of the dog and cat
ensure a definitive diagnosis is obtained, which has
is much simpler in its anatomical structure compared
revolutionized the diagnosis of lower bowel disorders
with many other species, comprising a simple tube
in most patients.
which is divided into the caecum, colon, rectum and
For those clinicians considering the use of endo-
anus (Figure 5.1). As a result of this simple structure
scopy, examination of the lower bowel is relatively
and the accessibility of the lower bowel, it is particu-
easy to carry out and offers the best site to develop
larly well suited to examination by flexible endoscopy,
the necessary skills needed and build confidence,
which is fortunate because disease of the colon is
whilst at the same time obtaining diagnostic informa-
very commonly seen in small animal practice.
tion which will benefit the patient.
Previously, radiographs, barium studies and possibly
which wastime-consumingandexpensive. Endoscopy
Indications
provides a simple and readily available method of
Clinical signs of lower Gl disease are generally those
of diarrhoea with or without fresh blood (haemato-
Transverse colon
chezia) and mucus, tenesmus, dyschezia and/or con-
stipation. None of these  clinical  signs 
are
pathognomonic of any individual disorder of the lower
bowel (Figure 5.2). Although many of these condi-
tions can be diagnosed endoscopically, it is very
important to start the investigation with collection of a
detailed history and to carry out a thorough physical
Ascending colon
examination. The physical examination must include
tion, check for disease of the anal sacs and to exam-
ine the rectal tissue for strictures, obstruction and
deviation. The clinical examination will help to rule out
Descending
systemic disease and will support the presence of a
colon
primary lower bowel problem.
lleum
Disorder
Comments
Caecum
Colitis
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic; eosinophilic;
 histiocytic; granulomatous
Infection
Salmonella spp.; Campylobacter spp.: Yersinia
spp: Clostridium spp.: Trichuris vulpis; Giardia;
Uncinaria spp.
Caecal disorders
Typhliti; caecal inversion; caecal abscessation;
perforation; neoplasia
Intussusception
lleocaecal; caecocolic; colocolonic
Rectum
Neoplasia
Adenocarcinoma; lymphoma; leiomyosarcoma
Rectal disorders
Stricture; adenomatous polyps;
 adenocarcinoma; foreign body 
Anus
5.1
Anatomical structure of the lower Gl tract.
5.2
Disorders of the large intestine.
73
Chapter 5Flexible endoscopy: lower gastrointestinal tract
Where the patient's primary clinical signs include
Disease of the caecum (see Figure 5.2) is rare in
rectal tenesmus and dyschezia associated with the
dogs and cats. Typhlitis is the most common disease,
passage of formed faeces or ribbon-like faeces, this
and is usually the result of whipworm infection or
suggests a partial obstruction in the distal colon, rec-
severe inflammation often associated with colitis.
 Endoscopy wilassist in the diagnosis of typhlitis and
tum or anus. A rectal examination will help determine
if anal sac disease or an anal sphincter problem
other caecal disorders including caecal inversion,
exists, whilst flexible endoscopy will permit visualiza-
abscessation and neoplasia.
tion of the rectal and distal colonic mucosa in order to
Flexible endoscopy of the lower Gl tract is also
observe the cause of the obstruction. Where a mass
extremely useful for evaluating the patient's response
is found, biopsy samples should be collected in order
to treatment, whether this be associated with inflam-
to determine whether benign or malignant neoplasia
mation or neoplasia. As no surgical intervention is
is present. Similarly, where a stricture is detected,
involved and only a light plane of anaesthesia is
biopsy samples should be collected as these lesions 
required, many owners will permit follow-up endo-
can have an underlying neoplastic aetiology.
scopy. Endoscopy also permits evaluation of healing
Many patients with lower bowel disease present
following surgical resection.
with chronic diarrhoea (± blood and mucus), tenesmus
and dyschezia. The starting point in this investigation
should be a faecal analysis to look for pathogenic
Instrumentation
bacteria and parasites. Where infection is detected,
Unfortunately, in small animal practice patients range
suitable treatment should be provided and the patient
in size from kittens to Great Danes. Consequently,
reassessed at a later date. In addition, diet should be
the size of the largebowel varies considerably both in
carefully scrutinized and where this is found to be
diameter and in overall length. In large breeds of dog,
inappropriate, dietary corrections should be made.
the entire 1 m length of the endoscope will be required
In those patients where systemic disease, dietary
in order to reach the ileocaecocolic junction. The
factors and infection have been ruled out and clinical
choice of endoscope will also depend on whether
signs have persisted, the most likely cause of the
upper Gl endoscopy is to be carried out in the prac-
lower Gl signs is colitis. Endoscopic examination of
tice. It is not possible to have a single ‘universal
the rectum, colon and caecum should now be
endoscope which will be suitable for kittens through
considered. If there is significant faecal blood loss
to Great Danes, and for both upper and lower Gl
consideration should be given to assessing a clotting
endoscopy. A compromise will normally be made in
profile, which should include: manual platelet count;
selecting an endoscope which will be suitable for the
prothrombin time; and activated partial thromboplastin
time to rule out any clotting defect. Pre-anaesthetic
majority of patients.
Endoscope specifications for lower bowel exam-
blood tests can be carried out at the same time.
Colitis is generally a diffuse disease, which affects
ination include an end-viewing flexible endoscope
with an outside diameter of less than 9 mm and an
the entire colon; however, there are occasions when
insertion tube length of at least 1 m. The biopsy chan-
only part of the colon may be affected. It is therefore
nel must be at least 2 mm in diameter and the endo-
wise to examine the entire colon from rectum to
        o
ileocaecocolic junction in all patients. Biopsy samples
should be collected both from all visually affected
together with four-way tip deflection (Figure 5.3).
Such an endoscope would also be suitable for carry-
tissue and from apparently normal tissue, and
ing out upper Gl examinations, although it is likely to
submitted for histopathology.
When carrying out lower Gl endoscopy it is often
be too large for small breeds of dog and cats, espe-
cially when attempting intubation of the duodenum.
possible, with careful preparation of the patient, to
reach and then enter the ileum. Where the patient
presents with vomiting and diarrhoea, and the char-
acter of the faeces does not clearly reflect large intes-
tinal disease, it is not uncommon to carry out an upper
and lower Gl endoscopic examination at the same
time. Where a protein-losing enteropathy or inflam-
matory bowel disease (IBD) is suspected, this permits
both the cranial and distal small bowel to be exam-
ined and biopsy samples collected, thus improving
the chances of obtaining a definitive diagnosis.
 Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a condition that
has been identified in the dog but not in the cat. The
clinical signs can be identical to those seen with
colitis. As there is no definitive diagnostic test for IBS,
the only method of obtaining a definitive diagnosis is
For carrying out an endoscopic examination of
by ruling out all other causes of the clinical signs,
5.3
 the large bowel in both dogs and cats, a
especially colitis. Endoscopic examination of the
forward-viewing endoscope should be selected, with an
lower bowel should be used as part of the investigation.
insertion tube length of at least 1 m and an outside
In IBS patients, biopsy samples will reveal no evidence
diameter of less than 9 mm. There must be a wash and air
of inflammation or neoplasia.
facility, and a biopsy channel of at least 2 mm in diameter.
74
Chapter 5
Flexible endoscopy:lower gastrointestinal tract
In addition to the flexible endoscope, standard
this is more difficult. To assist in sample collection
accessories required for lower bowel endoscopy
from the descending colon, it is important to ensure
include a suitable light source with an air and water
that it is not over distended, causing the mucosa to be
facility, and biopsy forceps. A suction unit is useful but 
'stretched'. The forceps should be advanced until the
not essential.
mucosa ‘tents' and then the forceps are closed, in this
way much more tissue is collected.
Rigid endoscopes
Although flexible endoscopes are now routinely used
Yes
No
for examination of the large bowel, there is a place for
the use of rigid endoscopes in the examination of the
rectum and distal colon. It can be very difficult to
visualize the rectal mucosa using a flexible endoscope
because air used to inflate the rectal lumen escapes
through the anus. Rigid endoscopy can allow the
rectal mucosa to be examined without need for air
inflation, but in some cases this is still required. This
in turn allows biopsy sample collection from this
 region to be carried out more easily.
Care should be exercised in choosing the diameter
of the rigid endoscope for this procedure, to ensure
adequate visualization without causing tissue damage.
Illumination may also be a problem in some cases, as
the light beam tends to be small with these units. In
 general, biopsy forceps used with rigid endoscopes
Yes
allow a much larger biopsy sample to be obtained
because there is no restriction in the size of the biopsy
 channel, as occurs with flexible endoscopes.
Biopsy
When first starting to collect endoscopic biopsy sam-
 ples, it is not uncommon to receive reports from the
pathologist indicating the samples were undiagnostic 
due to the size of the samples or due to crush arte-
fact. In order to reduce crush artefact when collecting
large bowel biopsy samples, forceps with fenestrated
 cups and no central spike (Figure 5.4) should be
used. The fenestrated cups permit a captured biopsy
sample to expand through the fenestrations, so reduc-
ing tissue damage during collection. To ensure an
(a)
adequate biopsy sample is obtained it is very impor-
tant to direct the biopsy forceps so they open perpen-
dicular to the mucosa (Figure 5.5). If the biopsy
forceps are used parallel to the mucosa, only the sur-
face cells will be harvested and the sample will be
non-diagnostic. Directing the biopsy forceps perpen-
dicular to the mucosa is relatively easy at the junction
 between the transverse colon and the ascending or
 descending colon. However, in the descending colon 
(b)
 Careful selection of biopsy forceps will ensure
(a) Method of collecting biopsy samples from 
5.4
5.5
crush artefact is reduced to a minimum.
the colon. (b) The forceps should be advanced
Forceps with a central spike should not be used; those
as near perpendicular to the mucosa as possible. This will
forceps with fenestrated biopsy cups should be selected.
ensure a good depth of sample is collected.
75
Chapter 5 Flexible endoscopy: lower gastrointestinal tract
Patient preparation
Enemas should be administered
usinga
Higginson's Pump (Figure 5.8); however, prior to use
It cannot be overemphasized how important patient
it is extremely important to carry out a rectal examina-
preparation is to carrying out lower Gl endoscopy. It is
tion to ensure it is safe to insert the pump into the rec-
simply not possible to examine the colon of a patient
tum. It is also important not to induce damage to the
with solid or liquid faecal material present (Figure
rectal mucosa whilst carrying out an enema, as this
5.6). When an endoscope comes into contact with
may be mistaken for pathological change when carry-
fluid or faeces, light is refracted and ‘red-out' occurs
ing out the endoscopy. Lastly, the solution used must 
(see Chapter 3), so the procedure hastobe abandoned
be non irritant, otherwise the mucosa will become
and the patient recovered from anaesthesia.
hyperaemic and inflamed, resulting in difficulty in vis-
ual interpretation of the mucosa. The author finds
more than 15 ml/kg. Individual patients and especially
small breeds may require smaller volumes to prevent
rupture of the colon. ldeally, the first enema should be
given on the day prior to the endoscopy with two fol-
low-up enemas given on the morning of the proce-
dure. However, it is also acceptable to give two or
three enemas on the morning of the procedure until
the material voided by the patient is free of faeces.
Careful preparation of the large bowel is
5.6
essential if the entire mucosal surface is to be
thoroughly examined. The presence of faeces severely
restricts the ability to carry out this examination.
Careful preparation of the patient is essential.
Food should be withheld for 24 hours prior to the pro-
cedure to ensure that the distal small intestine is
 empty and that the colon, which has been carefully
Thorough preparation of the large bowel for
5.8
prepared by repeated enema administrations, will not
endoscopy is essential. A Higginson's pump is a
slowly refill. An oral laxative may be given at this time
very effective method of administering an enema, although
commercial enema preparations may also be used.
to assist in emptying the small intestine (Figure 5.7).
Many references quote the use of polyethylene glycol 
preparations, such as Klean Prep', which will rapidly
cleanse the bowel. However, in the author's exper-
Premedication and anaesthesia
ience, dogs and cats find these agents distasteful
Although lower Gl endoscopy is carried out without 
and difficult to administer in the required volume.
anaesthesia in humans, this is rarely the case in
canine practice and never in feline practice. The author
Type of
Examples
has tried various sedative combinations in dogs and
laxative
has found the use of acepromazine maleate (ACP) at 
Emollient
Liquid paraffin
an effective method of restraint where the risk of gen-
Bulk
Sterculia
eral anaesthesia is high. However, in the majority of
nybedsi
patients and always in those undergoing both upper
Wheat bran
and lower Gl endoscopy, a general anaesthetic should 
Osmotic
Magnesium suiphate
be used. Following successful enema administration,
Lactulose (1-15 ml orally q8h for dogs and
the patient should receive a premedicant followed by
0.2-1 ml for cats)
induction with an intravenous agent before intubation 
Sodium citrate (Microlax) 1 x 5 ml tube per rectum
Phosphates
and maintenance on gaseous agents.
Stimulant
Bisacodyl (Dulcolax) (5-20 mg/dog or
2-5 mg/cat orally
Patient positioning
Polyethylene glycol (Klean Prep) <20 ml/kg o.s.
Where flexible endoscopy is used, the patient should
Laxatives which may be used in the treatment of
5.7
always be placed in left lateral recumbency (Figure
constipation in dogs and cats. Those in bold are
useful in preparation for large intestinal endoscopy.
5.9) as this ensures the descending colon lies
76
Chapter 5Flexible endoscopy:lower gastrointestinal tract
ventrally, which aids intubation of the transverse and
endoscopistssometimesconsider detection of these
ascending colon and assists in drainage of any fluid
blood vessels as a sign of inflammation; this is not the
from the transverse and ascending colon. However,
case. In fact failure to see these blood vessels often
where rigid endoscopy is used, right lateral
suggests thickening of the mucosa, which may be
recumbency is preferred. lt is useful to lightly tie a
due to either inflammation or neoplasia.
linen bandage round the tail from its base to the tip,
Once the lumen of the descending colon has been
especially in long-haired breeds, as this prevents
observed, the endoscope can be advanced examin-
soiling and aids visualization of the anus.
ing the entire circumference carefully for pathological
change. lIf this is not done, damage to the mucosa
Procedure
misdiagnosed as pathological. The junction between
the descending and transverse colon will be readily
The distal 20 cm of the insertion tube should be lightly
detected as an obvious bend' at the end of the straight
lubricated using KY Jelly, taking care to avoid the lens,
descending colon (Figure 5.12). The tip of the endo-
as this will reduce friction and aid forward movement
scope should be moved in the direction of the bend
of the endoscope in the colon. The tip of the insertion
and advanced slowly. It is not uncommon to induce
tube should be inserted into the rectum for about 10
'red-out whilst doing this, as the endoscope brushes
cm, so long as there is no resistance to movement.
along the mucosa. Once in the transverse colon an
The rectum should now be inflated but the endoscope
image of the mucosa should be re-established and
should not be advanced until the mucosa of the
the procedure continued as before. The next ‘bend"
descending colon can be clearly seen (Figure 5.10).
marks the junction of the transverse and ascending
Occasionally, air will escape through the anus
colon, and the endoscope should be manoeuvred as
preventing dilation of the bowel. In this situation it
before to enter the ascending colon. Again visualiza-
may be necessary to pinch the anus to make the
tion of the luminal circumference should be estab-
rectum air tight. The descending colon should now be
lished before proceeding. More air may be required
clearly seen directly in front of the endoscope tip. The
whilst carrying out these two procedures. There is lit-
mucosa should appear pale pink in colour, thin and
tle danger of over-distension so long as the anus is
transparent so that the submucosal blood vessels
not continually occluded, as it will act as a safety valve 
can be observed (Figure 5.11). Inexperienced
to relieve pressure.
 To aid intubation of the transverse and ascending colon, and to ensure that any residual fluid does not interfere
5.9
with the endoscopy, the patient should always be placed in left lateral recumbency.
Once the
 5.10
endoscope has
been advanced into the
rectum, the lumen should 
be inflated with air. It 
should now be possible to
visualize the descending
colon extending in front of
the endoscope.
77
Chapter 5 Flexible endoscopy: lower gastrointestinal tract
The ascending colon is short and ends at the
ileocaecocolic junction (Figure 5.13). This is readily
identified by the opening into the blind-ended caecum
 and the raised prominent and usually red ileocolic
sphincter.
5.13
The ascending colon
is short and ends at
the ileocaecocolic
junction. The ileum 
appears as a raised
redbutton-shaped
structure whilst the
 caecum is a blind-
ending sac.
The mucosa of the colon should appear pale 
5.11
 pink in colour and the submucosal blood vessels 
should be clearly visible through the thin mucosal layer.
5.12 
As the endoscope is
advanced along the 
descending colon,
eventually a bend’ will
be observed, which
represents the flexure
between the
descending and
transverse colon. This
isanormalanatomical
landmark, which will
be observed on a
second occasion as
the endoscope
reaches the flexure
separating the
transverse and
ascending colon.
The caecum should be carefully examined as this
can become inflamed (typhlitis) or may contain the
nematode Trichuris vulpis. If the ileum is to be exam-
ined, the tip of the endoscope should be directed 
towards the ileocolic junction and advanced. However,
 it is extremely unlikely that the ileum will be intubated
unless the insertion tube diameter of the endoscope is
less than 7 mm, except in large breeds of dog. Another
limiting factor in large dogs is where the entire length
of the insertion tube is required to reach the ileocaeco-
colic junction, leaving no available length to intubate
the ileum. Under these circumstances it is permissible 
to advance biopsy forceps blindly' into the ileum and 
collect biopsy samples. This must be done with care
and where any resistance to forward movement is 
detected, the procedure should be stopped.
78
Chapter 5 Flexible endoscopy: lower gastrointestinal tract
Following examination of the entire large bowel, the
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis
endoscope is withdrawn slowly and biopsy samples
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis is the most common
are collected. In areas where no gross lesions have
form of colitis seen in the dog and cat. It is character-
been found, 2 or 3 biopsy samples should be collected 
ized by an infiltration of the mucosa with lymphocytes
from the ascending and transverse colons and a further
and plasma cells. There appears to be a breed predis-
4 or 5 from the descending colon. This will give a good
position in the Golden Retriever. Macroscopically, this
 representative sample for the pathologist to judge the
may be suspected by the presence of hyperplastic
health of the colon. Where a specific lesion is detected,
lymphoid tissue, which can appear like small'dough-
biopsy samples should be collected from the 'lesion'
nuts' on the mucosa (Figure 5.14) and where the sub-
 and from surrounding apparently 'normal' tissue. These 
mucosal blood vessels can no longer be seen. It is
specimens should be placed in separate pots, so the
very unusual for ulceration tobe observed in this form
pathologist can compare tissue samples. The exact
of the disease and the mucosa is not usually friable.
location of any lesion should be carefully noted by
 recording the distance marked on the insertion tube at
the anus, which is given in centimetres. This will be
useful in any follow-up endoscopy so the exact site of
the lesion can be quickly found.
The rectum is difficult to examine as the endo-
scope is inserted through the anus. As previously
described, air often leaks out through the anus, mak-
ing dilation of the rectum extremely difficult. Even
quite large tumours can be missed if the rectum is
visualized as the endoscope is inserted, due to folds
in the rectal mucosa. Therefore, the author has found
that inserting the endoscope through the rectum and
into the distal descending colon, then inflating the
lumen with air and slowly withdrawing the endoscope
while maintaining air inflation, allows good visualiza-
tion of the rectal mucosa. Retroflexing the endoscope
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis results in
5.14
is another method of examining the rectum but can
thickening of the mucosa so submucosal blood
only be successfully carried out in larger dogs.
vessels can no longer be seen, and in many cases
Where a stricture is detected in the rectum or
lymphoid hyperplasia will be observed as raised
'doughnut'-shaped structures.
colon, it is often extremely dificult to advance the
endoscope. This is because the stricture forms a 'lip'
The mucosa in some cases, particularly those with
around the circumference, which catches the
a long history of disease, may become much more
endoscope and prevents further forward movement.
Although most strictures are inflammatory in origin,
severely affected, with marked proliferative changes 
 suggestive of a neoplastic disease (Figure 5.15). It is 
some may be due to neoplasia, and so collection of
biopsy samples from the base of strictures is essential
very important not to assume that neoplasia is present 
prior to deciding on appropriate treatment.
Pathological conditions
Colitis
Colitis is the commonest form of large intestinal dis-
ease seen in the dog and cat. Although bacterial
pathogens and parasitic infections can be inciting
causes, in the majority of patients the clinical signs
are chronic and no underlying aetiology is deter-
 mined. Colitis is generally a diffuse disease involving
the entire colon, and may also occur in conjunction 
with similar changes in the small intestine. These
changes, whether purely large bowel or involving 
both the small and large bowel, come under the
umbrella of inflammatory bowel disease. At this time
no aetiological agent has been found for IBD, which 
is usually classified according to the predominant
cell type present: lymphocytic-plasmacytic; eosino-
Occasionally, lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis
philic; histiocytic.
5.15
may be severe. In such cases proliferative
Rarely, granulomatous colitis is detected, which
changes may be observed suggesting the possible
differs from the other forms of colitis because it is
presence of neoplasia. It is essential to collect biopsy
often a focal disease and involves only a small section
samples for histopathology and not to over interpret the
of the large bowel.
visual changes.
79
Chapter 5 Flexible endoscopy: lower gastrointestinal tract
histopathology, in order to confirm which type of
disease is present. Biopsy samples reveal this form of
 colitis is associated with increased numbers of plasma
cells and lymphocytes, activation of CD4 T helper
cells and an increased production of Th1 cytokines. In
some cases, crypt abscessation has also been
reported and increased numbers of goblet cells and/
or fibrosis may also be observed, depending on the 
chronicity of the case.
However,
occasionally
lymphoma
and
lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis may appear grossly
and histologically very similar. Where a uniform
population of lymphocytes are present and lymphoma
is suspected, immunocytochemistry should be carried
out to determine the type of cells present. If a
monoclonal population of lymphocytes is present then 
Histiocytic colitis may appear very similar to
5.17
a diagnosis of lymphoma may be made.
eosinophilic colitis. Ulceration, friability and
bleeding are common. Proliferative changes may also be
observed.
Eosinophilic colitis
Eosinophilic colitis is less common than lymphocytic-
plasmacytic colitis and is mainly seen in the dog.
plasma cells, MHC class ll cells and PAS cells in the
lamina propria. Neutrophils may also be observed
Catsrarelydevelopthisformofcolitis. Macroscopically,
eosinophilic colitis is characterized by the presence
and there is usually a reduction in the number of
goblet cells.
of mucosal erosion and ulceration, loss of submucosal
blood vessels, and the mucosa is much more friable,
Granulomatous colitis
bleeding easily when the endoscope touches
it
Granulomatous colitis is the rarest form of colitis in the
(Figure 5.16). Histologically, it is quite common for
dog and is not seen in the cat. This form of colitis often
there to be an increased numbers of plasma cells
only involves one small region of the colon. The major-
ity of the colon will look grossly normal on endoscopy,
eosinophils. Where ulceration is severe it is not
but often in the transverse or ascending colon a rela-
uncommon to detect varying numbers of neutrophils
tively small area of mucosal proliferation will be found,
in the biopsy samples as well.
which bulges into the lumen of the colon occluding fur-
ther forward viewing. These proliferative changes are
often accompanied by ulceration and bleeding. It is
not normally possible to pass the endoscope further
along the colon in these patients (Figure 5.18). The
main differential diagnosis in these cases is neoplasia.
Therefore, it is essential to collect biopsy samples to
rule out neoplasia, particularly adenocarcinoma.
Eosinophilic colitis results in destructive
5.16
changes to the mucosa. There are frequently
friable and bleeds easily on manipulation.
Histiocytic colitis
Histiocytic colitis is a rare form of colitis in the dog
young adult Boxers and French Bulldogs, although
the author has seen histiocytic colitis in other breeds
as well In this form of colitis there are gross and
Where granulomatous colitis is found, the
5.18
majority of the colon will appear normal and
diffuse changes to the mucosa, which can be severe
only a small section of the colon will be affected.The
with frank bleeding and marked proliferative changes
lumen of the bowel may appear occluded by proliferative
suggestive of neoplasia (Figure 5.17). Biopsy reveals
change and bleeding is not uncommon. This must be
the presence of a mixed cell population with
differentiated from neoplasia by collection and
significantly increased numbers of CD3 T cells, IgG
examination of biopsy samples.
80
Chapter 5 Flexible endoscopy: lower gastrointestinal tract
Irritable bowel syndrome
especially in the caecum. Lymphoma is generally a
diffuse condition that affects the entire colon and
This is a condition which was first recognized in
humans and has subsequently been strongly
may appear very similar to lymphocytic-plasmacytic
suspected as occurring in the dog but not the cat.
colitis. In some cases, pathologists may find the
Working dogs in particular appear to be predisposed
differentiation between lymphocytic-plasmacytic
to this condition and present with clinical signs typical
colitis and lymphoma difficult. In such cases,
immunocytostaining
of colitis,namely,chronic small volume diarrhoea
to
determine
whether
a
often containing mucus
6and sometimes with
monoclonal population of lymphocytes is present
accompanying rectal tenesmus. Haematochezia is
allows the differentiation to be made. The author has
observed cases where lymphocytic-plasmacytic
not a feature of this condition. Some dogs may appear
to exhibit abdominal pain, which is thought to be
colitis has been diagnosed but on follow-up
associated with colonic spasm. As the majority of
endoscopy lymphoma has been diagnosed. Such
these dogs are working dogs, it has been observed
cases may not truly reflect a progression from one
that resting them from their duties results in resolution
disease to another, but difficulty in differentiation.
of the clinical signs. Pet dogs of a highly nervous
The lumen of the bowel is rarely occluded but
disposition should also be suspected of having IBS.
thickened, and bleeding is not normally a feature.
Unfortunately, there is no definitive diagnostic test
Therefore, it is rarely possible to make a diagnosis
for IBS, so the only way in which a diagnosis can be
from visual examination of the colon, and biopsy
made is by ruling out all other causes of large intestinal
samples should be collected in order to reach a
disease. Therefore, a full clinical examination should
definitive diagnosis.
be carried out to rule out systemic disease, followed 
Adenocarcinoma is normally a more focal disease
of the colon and may appear very similar to
by faecal analysis and routine blood haematology
and biochemistry. These diagnostic tests will rule out
 granulomatous colitis (described above). The majority 
infections and systemic disease.
of the colon will appear macroscopically normal, but
This should be followed by endoscopy to rule out
an area of proliferative change and bleeding, which
IBD (colitis), which is the most likely differential
may occlude the lumen of the colon, will be found
diagnosis. In patients with IBS, no gross mucosal
(Figure 5.20). The mass may be very friable and
lesions will be observed during the endoscopic
irregular in outline, and secondary infection is
common. Consequently, superficial biopsy samples
will usually reveal normal mucosa, but in some cases
often only reveal inflammation and infection. In order
increased numbers of goblet cells may be present.
to confirm neoplasia deeper biopsy samples are
However, at endoscopy it may be noticed that there
several biopsy samples from the same site within the
(Figure 5.19) and the colon itself may be difficult to
mass.
The superficial samples may reveal only
dilate due to colonic spasm. Both these clinical signs
evidence of inflammation, whilst deeper samples may
are typical of the IBS patient.
be more typical of neoplasia. Great care is required
when carrying out this ‘mining' for tissue, to ensure
that only the proliferative mass is sampled and the
bowel is not perforated.
IBS is difficult to diagnose as there are no visual
5.19
or pathological changes present. However, at
endoscopy the bowel may be difficult to dilate and an
excessive amount of mucus may be observed.
Adenocarcinoma is an aggressive tumour,
5.20
which invades the lumen of the colon.The
Neoplasia
tumour will appear irregular and proliferative in
Colonic neoplasia is most often associated with
appearance,may bleed easily and may even appearvery
lymphoma or adenocarcinoma in the dog and cat,
friable to touch. The remainder of the colon usually
although leiomyosarcoma may rarely be diagnosed,
remains unaffected.
81
Chapter 5 Flexible endoscopy: lower gastrointestinal tract
Colonic vascular ectasia
This is a very rare condition of the canine colon, which
has been observed sporadically throughout the world;
it has not been described in the cat. Patients present
with a history of acute episodes of passing large
amounts of fresh blood in their faeces. There is often
an associated anaemia but no other evidence of
systemic disease or coagulopathy. Endoscopy will
reveal a focal area where there are enlarged, dilated
mucosal blood vessels, whilst the remaining colon
appears
normal.
Biopsy is
completely
not
recommended in these cases due to the risk of
inducing a major haemorrhage. Patients should be
referred for surgical exploration and resection of the
affected bowel. lt is therefore very important to
measure the exact location of the lesion, using the
insertion tube ruler, in order to assist the surgeon in
Observation of an intusussception when
5.21
locating the lesion at laparotomy. In humans, laser
carrying out large bowel endoscopy is rare.
cautery using diode or argon lasers may be used to
However, when present the ileum will appear as a normal
pink colour filling the lumen of the colon,with no bleeding
treat these cases, although this has not been reported
or ulceration in the majority of cases.
in the dog. See Chapter 14 for more information on
endoscopic laser surgery.
A similar condition has been observed in both
faecal mass has been cleared, endoscopy may be a
humans and animals, and no obvious underlying
useful method of examining the distal large bowel for
cause has been identified. This lack of agreement as
evidence of disease.
to what type of change is being observed in these
Rectal adenomatous polyps
patients has resulted in considerable variations in
Rectal polyps are a common cause of rectal tenesmus,
terminology used to describe the lesions, which
haematochezia and malformed faeces in the dog.
includes angiodysplasia, arteriovenous malformation 
and vascular ectasia.
They most often occur in the older dog and in the
smaller breeds, especially the West Highland White
Caecal disorders
Terrier.A rectal examination may detect a massbut
because polyps are friable and soft in consistency,
Typhlitis, although rare, may be diagnosed on its own,
associated with whipworm, or in conjunction with
they can sometimes be difficult to palpate. Where a
severe colitis. Whipworms (Trichuris vulpis) will be
polyp is suspected, endoscopic examination to assess
observed at endoscopy and biopsy samples will
the extent of the lesion and to collect biopsy samples
reveal evidence of inflammation with similar cellular
is essential. Some of these rectal masses are benign
infiltrations to those found in the colon.
adenomatous polyps, whilst other may be malignant
When a mass is found within the caecum this may
carcinomas.
Enemas administered prior to proctoscopy must
be due to neoplasia or abscessation. Great care is
be carried out with great care, and in some cases
therefore required in collecting biopsy samples in this
should be avoided due to the risk of tissue damage
situation, and surgery may be considered the safer
option for obtaining a definitive diagnosis and
and induction of bleeding. Each case must be
correcting the problem.
individually assessed for risk and in some patients
endoscopy may have to be carried out with little
Intussusception
preparation.
Both ileocolic and ileocaecal intussusception occur
In order to examine the rectum thoroughly, the dis-
in the dog and cat, although the former is more
tal end of the endoscope should be lubricated (as pre-
common than the latter. In both cases, patients may
viously described) and gently inserted into the rectum
present with chronic diarrhoea with or without blood.
Therefore, it is not unreasonable for endoscopy to
should be halted, and in some cases a gloved finger
be used in the investigation of these cases.
may assist in directing the endoscope into the rectum.
Intussusception is readily recognized at endoscopy
Once at the 10 cm mark, the colon should be inflated
(Figure 5.21) and, when found, the endoscopic
with air until the descending colon can be clearly
examination should be immediately halted and the
seen; the endoscope should then be gently withdrawn
patient referred for surgery.
under positive air insufflation whilst viewing the entire
circumference of the rectum. The polyp will come into
Constipation
view during this procedure and its size and its exact
Endoscopy in constipated animals is rarely carried
position can be determined (Figure 5.22). The mass
 out for the obvious reason that it is impossible in the
is usually markedly proliferative, partially obstructs
presence of large volumes of faecal material. However,
the lumen of the rectum, bleeds readily and appears
constipation carries a large list of differential
very friable. Biopsy samples can be taken from the
diagnoses, which includes partial obstruction of the
proliferative mass but additional samples must be
distal colon and rectum. In such cases, once the
taken from the base of the mass where it attaches to
82
Chapter 5 Flexible endoscopy: lower gastrointestinal tract
 Rectal adenomatous polyps can be diagnosed
5.22
5.23
 Rectal strictures often appear as an obvious
easily with the aid of endoscopy. They appear
narrowing of the lumen and a circumferential lip
very similar to adenocarcinoma and must be differentiated
 may prevent forward movement of the endoscope past the
from the latter.
stricture,
the mucosa. The reason for this second biopsy site is
 References and further reading
to help determine its malignancy. Samples from the 
Fan TM, Simpson KW, Polack E, Dykes N and Harvery J (1999) Intestinal
 main mass are often difficult to interpret due to the 
haemorrhage associated with colonic vascularectasia (angiodysplasia)
amount of secondary infection present. This differen-
in a dog.Journal of Small Animal Practice 40, 25-30
tiation is not possible from visual assessment of the
German AJ, Hall EJ. Kelly DF, Watson AD and Day MJ (20oo) An
immunohistochemical study of histiocytic ulcerative colitis in Boxer
mass alone as both malignant and benign tumours 
dogs. Journal of Comparative Pathology 122,163-175
 can look very similar. Clearly, making such a differen-
HallEJ,RutgersHC,ScholesSFE,t al.1994）Histiocyticulcerativ
colitis in Boxerdogs in the UK.Journal of Small Animal Practice35,
tiation has major prognostic implications.
509-515
Rectal stricture
between anal furunculosis and colitis in the dog: preliminary
observations.Journal of Small Animal Practice 43, 109-114
 Strictures of the rectum occur reasonably commonly 
Knottenbelt CM, Simpson JW, Tasker S, et al. (2000) Preliminary clinical
in dogs but less so in cats. Although the aetiology in 
observations on the use of piroxicam in the management of rectal
the majority of cases is rarely determined, it is
tubulopapillary polyps. Journal of Small Animal Practice 41, 393-
397
assumed that the majority are the result of trauma or
Ridyard AE,Nuttall TJ, Else RW,Simpson JW and Miller HR (2002)
inflammation, which heal by fibrosis. However, there 
is a significant minority which may be due to neoplasia.
expression within the colonic mucosa of dogs with idiopathic
lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis. Veterinary Immunology and
So, where a rectal stricture has been detected by
Immunopathology 86,205-214
 rectal examination, it is wise to carry out an endoscopic 
examination of the tissues to assess the mucosal
 changes present (Figure 5.23) and to collect biopsy 
 samples to rule out neoplasia, prior to treatment.
83
Flexible endoscop
respiratory tract
Diane Levitan and Susan Kimmel
Introduction
Flexible endoscopy is used for the evaluation and management of:
Flexible endoscopy of the respiratory tract can be a
valuable therapeutic, diagnostic and prognostic tool
Posterior nasal passages, pharynx, nasopharyngeal and laryngeal
for most patients with respiratory disease. Endoscopy
disorders:
 Chronic nasal discharge, sneezing or reverse sneezing 
can be used for diagnostic evaluation of the airways,
Dysphagia
including the nasal passages, nasopharynx, dorsal
 Respiratory stertor or stridor
soft palate, pharynx, larynx, trachea and pulmonary
Laryngeal function 
tree, and to assess laryngeal function. Collection of
Developmental abnormalities
 Chronic gagging
tissue and fluid samples can be performed for micro-
Excessive salivation
scope is also a valuable therapeutic tool and can be
Tracheal and lower airway disorders:
used to remove foreign objects from the pharynx, tra-
 Acute cough
chea and bronchi. It can also be used to place and
 Assessment of airway integrity
evaluate airway stents. Visualization of airway injury
Chronic bronchitis 
Chronic cough
Chronic halitosis
and will aid in determining the prognosis of conditions.
Tracheobronchial collapse
Bronchoscopy is most rewarding when the veterinary
 Pulmonary infitrative disease
 surgeon has a good understanding of airway anatomy,
 Recurrent pneumonia
use of equipment, anaesthetic protocols and tech-
 Neoplastic conditions 
 niques. As with any skill, practice is essential.
Haemoptysis 
Dogs and cats with chronic unilateral or bilateral
 Ciiary dyskinesia
Intratracheal device monitoring
nasal discharge, chronic sneezing
 orreverse
 Placement of airway stents 
sneezing, chronic stridor or stertor are seen regularly
Aiway stricture,lung lobe torsionorbronchictasis
by veterinary surgeons. Evaluation of these problems
Foreign body evaluation/retrieval
oftenincludesimaging techniques suchas radiography,
Tracheal/airway trauma
computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRl). These are useful for evaluation of the
Indications for flexible endoscopy of the
6.1
location and extent of lesions in the upper respiratory
 respiratory tract.
tract; however, tissue biopsy, cytology and cultures
 such as eosinophilic airway disease, lungworm infec-
are essential for definitive diagnosis of most disease
processes. Rhinoscopy is often an essential diagnostic
tion, toxoplasmosis, bacterial or fungal infection and
neoplastic infiltrates; other conditions can be diag-
 procedure and is discussed in detail in Chapter 8.
nosed from samples collected from sites within spe-
cific lung lobes and from areas deep in the respiratory
tract. Tumours can be visualized and biopsy samples
Indications
taken. Extra-pulmonary masses can also be aspirated
The indications for flexible endoscopy of the respiratory
 or biopsied through the respiratory tract. Technological
tract are given in Figure 6.1.
 advances in the field of interventional airway endo-
A thorough evaluation of the oral cavity, orophar-
scopy are made daily in human medicine, and will
ynx, nasopharynx, posterior nasal cavity, larynx,
soon  be  commonplace  in  veterinary   medicine.
trachea and lower airway can be performed in one
Applications include bronchoscopic ultrasonography,
quick procedure using a flexible endoscope. Foreign
laser therapy, brachytherapy, electrocautery, cryo-
objects can be identified and possibly removed.
therapy, placement of airway stents, and balloon dila
Tracheobronchial collapse can be definitively diag-
tion to relieve airway obstruction caused by lesions.
nosed as the dynamics of the airway lumen can be
Such tools allow for improved characterization of
directly observed.
lesions, accurate biopsy of the airways and treatment
Bronchoscopy, combined with bronchoalveolar
of various conditions.
lavage (BAL) and airway brush cytology, is used to
 Bronchoscopy is generally a very safe procedure
aid in the diagnosis and aetiology of many disorders,
with few contraindications (Figure 6.2). The flexible
84
Chapter 6 Flexible endoscopy: respiratory tract
There must be a channel within the endoscope to
Absolute contraindication:
allow for the passage of instruments as well as
Severe hypoxaemia
oxygen. The use of a video-endoscope or attachment
Known bleeding disorder/platelet dysfunction
of a video camera system often makes visualization
Severe cardiac arrhythmia
and manoeuvring easier but is not necessary. Cytology
Cardiac failure or severe dysfunction
brushes (Figure 6.4) can be placed through the lumen
of the bronchoscope or can be used alongside the
Significant increased risk of complications:
endoscope to obtain samples for cytology from the
Partial tracheal obstruction
Marked hypoxaemia
airway surfaces. Aspiration catheters (Figure 6.5) are
Uraemia/severe hepatic dysfunction
thin tubes with luer lock tips used for fluid collection
Pulmonary hypertension
and suction during procedures. These can also be
Lung abscessation
placed adjacent to the endoscope or through the
Immunosuppression
lumen for procurement of sterile samples. Trans-
Unstable asthma
bronchial aspiration or biopsy can be performed using
aspiration needles (Figure 6.6). Aspiration or biopsy
 Contraindications to flexible endoscopy of the
6.2
of paratracheal, carinal, hilar or peripheral lung lesions
respiratory tract.
can be performed through the bronchoscope, with or
without the concurrent use of fluoroscopy.
endoscopic procedure is quick and practical, and can
also be used to follow progress, treat and aid man-
 agement of many conditions of the upper respiratory
tract. The benefits of bronchoscopic evaluation must
be weighed against the potential risk of complications 
based on the individual patient's condition.
Instrumentation
 Flexible and rigid endoscopes have both been utilized 
(a)
for airway visualization. However, the flexible endo-
scope provides the greatest advantage due to its
length and manoeuvrability.
Flexible endoscopes range in size: the ideal size
for a small airway ranges from 2.5-5 mm in diameter,
with alength of 25-85 cm; however, larger endoscopes
may be used depending on the size of the patient's
airway (Figure 6.3). A limitation for procedures in large
dogs is the length of the endoscope; however, there is
a 5 mm diameter, 85 cm long endoscope available
that is ideal for cats and large dogs. In giant-breed
dogs, a paediatric gastroscope is an excellent tool, as
the 7.8-8 mm diameter is tolerated and the length of
107-160 cm allows for diagnostic procedures deep in 
(b)
the airways.
(a) Cytology brush in sheath (top) and in
6.4
extended position (bottom). (b) Use of a
cytology brush in an airway.
2.5 mm
4 mm
8mm
Flexible endoscopes in several different sizes
6.3
6.5
Aspiration/lavage catheter.
are available.
85
Chapter 6 Flexible endoscopy: respiratory tract
(a)
(b)
(a) Transbronchial biopsy needle.
6.6
A swivel tip T-adaptor attached to an
(b) Transbronchial aspiration needle.
6.7
endotracheal tube. It has a rubber valve at the
top of the port, which opens enough to allow the 
fibrescope into the airway without allowing gas to escape
 In the near future, interventional bronchoscopy
into the environment. This allows maintenance of oxygen 
will be as commonplace in veterinary medicine as it is
and anaesthetic gas flow to the patient.
in human medicine. The ultrasonic broncho-fibre-
videoscope is an example of a tool used for both
interventional and non-interventional flexible endo-
Premedication and anaesthesia
scopy of the respiratory tract. These are called hybrid
endoscopes as  they incorporate an ultrasound
Evaluation of the respiratory tract with any endoscope
transducer into the video-bronchoscope, all within a
must be performed under deep intravenous sedation
small-diameter insertion tube (4-6.2 mm). Using
 or general anaesthesia. Without deep sedation, elici-
these endoscopes, a dedicated aspiration needle can
tation of reflexes causing laryngospasm, coughing,
be passed through the biopsy channel and the position
sneezing and gagging will result in trauma to the
of the needle tip can be confirmed in real-time during
patient and will likely cause damage to the endo-
the puncturing procedure via the ultrasound feature.
scope. A protective intraoral device (mouth speculum/
Several of these endoscopes have a Doppler
mouth gag) will prevent trauma to the endoscopic
capability, which enables the user to check blood flow
equipment from accidental biting. Each patient should
conditions before puncturing. With the combined
be cleared for anaesthesia and an anaesthetic proto-
ultrasound features, more information can be obtained 
col should be selected on a case-by-case basis.
about the thickness and character of lesions.
Patient risk increases greatly with general anaesthe-
A swivel tip T-adaptor attached to the endotracheal
sia if there is pre-existing hypoxia, cardiac disease or
tube allows for anaesthetic gas to be continuously
cardiac arrhythmia. Coagulopathy, severe arrhythmia,
delivered whilst the bronchoscope is passed through
heart failure or severe hypoxia are contraindications
the endotracheal tube (Figure 6.7). Use of an
to bronchoscopy (see Figure 6.2).
endotracheal tube depends on the size of the patient's 
All patients should have ECG, pulse oximetry and 
 airway relative to the size of the endoscope; therefore,
cardiovascular parameter monitoring before, during
in small patients, intubation may not be possible.
and for a period following anaesthesia. End-tidal
capnography can be helpful in prolonged procedures.
Cleaning
Pre-oxygenation is very helpful, especially when there
The bronchoscope should be sterilized prior to each
is compromised oxygenation. Pre-oxygenation can be 
usage according to the manufacturer's recommen-
dations (see Chapter 2).
Topical 2% lidocaine will help prevent laryngospasm
Handling
tube in dogs and cats.
Bronchoscopes are very delicate and should be
Inhalation anaesthesia is recommended for most
handled with the utmost care to avoid damage (see
procedures; however, if the patient is too small to
Chapters 2 and 3).
have an endoscope passed through an endotracheal 
86
Chapter 6 Flexible endoscopy: respiratory tract
tube, intravenous anaesthesia must be used.
geal examination and biopsy procedures, the patient
Intubation should only be performed if the endoscope
should be intubated with a cuffed endotracheal tube.
 can fit easily through the endotracheal tube, allowing
In addition, packing the back of the throat (Figure 6.8)
for movement of air and the endoscope at the same
is useful to catch blood, secretions and potential
time. This is dependent on the size of the patient's
trachea and the luminal diameter of the endotracheal
ynx. On completion of the procedure, the packing can
tube. The ability of the endoscope to move easily in
be used to remove blood and blood clots from the
the endotracheal tube should be tested prior to
throat, which should be examined for tissue or par-
initiation of the procedure. A swivel tip T-adaptor (see
ticulate matter that may be valuable for diagnosis.
Figure 6.7) can be used to allow constant gas
anaesthesia whilst the endoscope is passed through
the endotracheal tube.
Endoscopes should not remain in an airway for
longer than 30-50 seconds as they interfere with
ventilation, and could result in hypercarbia and over-
inflation of the lungs, trauma or bronchospasm. It
should be remembered that if oxygen is being con-
stantly delivered through the channel, carbon dioxide
cannot escape through that same channel. Oxygen
A Babcock forceps with gauze squares is used
6.8
should be delivered through an endotracheal tube or
to protect from aspiration of blood or particulate
matter during posterior rhinoscopy.
through the ports on the endoscope during proce-
dures. Oxygen can also be delivered nasally or
through a red rubber catheter placed into the trachea
Procedure
along side the endoscope.Flowvolumes of 1-3 litres
Tracheobronchoscopy
per minute can be safely used. Higher flows have 
been associated with over-inflation of the small air-
Tracheobronchoscopy is an excellent technique for
ways, ruptured alveoli and pneumothorax. Adequate
diagnosis and management of disorders of the
ventilation during procedures is imperative. Anaes-
respiratory tract. Successful outcomes require
thetic protocols should be designed to minimize
knowledge of the instrumentation, airway anatomy,
 cardiopulmonary depression. The anaesthetist should
normal appearance of respiratory tract structures,
be prepared in case of an emergency before, during
appropriate anaesthetic protocols and monitoring.
and after a procedure, as rapid respiratory or cardio-
and acquisition of adequate diagnostic samples
vascular decompensation can occur in these patients.
during procedures. A standard method of evaluation 
   pa a pns a 
should be used each time tracheobronchoscopy is
case of respiratory difficulty during the procedure or
performed. This should include standard reporting
for the delivery of oxygen after a procedure. Drugs for
methods for all findings, standard diagnostic testing
and a standard method of navigation through the
the reversal of anaesthetics (if applicable) should be
 readily available in case of an emergency.
airways to ensure a complete evaluation. Canine and
Evaluation of laryngeal function should be per-
feline airway anatomy is very similar;however, the
formed prior to other diagnostic examinations, as it 
feline airways are much smaller and therefore
requires a lighter plane of anaesthesia. Small amounts
visualization of the deeper airways is more difficult.
 of ultra-short-acting barbiturates, acepromazine, nar-
The map of the airways (Figure 6.9) should be kept in 
cotics or propofol can be used. The amount of anaes-
mind and referred to during evaluation.
thetic must be titrated carefully, as moderate or deep
levels of anaesthesia will result in complete absence
Right lung
Let lung
of laryngeal motion. Examination of the oropharynx,
larynx and proximal trachea should be undertaken
prior to intubation in order to visualize these struc-
Cranial
Cranial
tures. After adequate visualization, intubation can
lobe
7lobe
take place if indicated. Visualization of the dorsal soft 
palate, nasopharynx and nasal cavity require intuba-
tion and should be performed after bronchoscopy to
Middle
 avoid contamination of the bronchoscope.
lobe
Prior to anaesthetizing a patient for any proce-
dure, all necessary instruments should be set up
 and inspected to be certain they are in perfect work-
ing condition.
Caudal
Caudal
lobe
lobe
Patient positioning
Accessory
For most airway evaluations, the patient is placed in
lobe
sternal recumbency with the head elevated and the
6.9
Lung and airway anatomy.
neck extended. For oropharyngeal and nasopharyn-
87
Chapter 6 Flexible endoscopy: respiratory tract
Larynx
Thin, crisp vocal folds
 Fine vascular pattern
The examination begins with the endoscope being
advanced to the larynx (the tongue may need to be
pulled forward to aid visualization). The soft palate
length should not extend into the larynx or interfere
with respiration. The laryngeal anatomy, function and
motion should be assessed. Laryngeal motion must
be evaluated under a light plane of anaesthesia (see
 above). Normal laryngeal mucosa should be pink and 
a fine vascular pattern should be visible (Figure 6.10a).
There should be no masses, nodules or irregularities.
Laryngeal saccules should not be everted and there
should be crisp vocal fold edges. There should be no
excessive salivary  secretions.  Everted laryngeal
saccules, an elongated softpalate and an accumulation 
of salivary secretions are classic findings in dogs with
brachycephalic syndrome (Figure 6.10b). Laryngeal
 paralysis (Figure 6.10c) results in thickened arytenoids,
blunted vocal fold edges and loss of the mucosal fine
vascular pattern, resulting in hyperaemic mucosal
(a)
surfaces and often the accumulation of excessive
foamy salivary secretions in the larynx. In the normal
patient, the arytenoid cartilages should abduct during
Accumulation of foamy secretions
inspiration and then return to a paramedian position
during expiration. The arytenoid cartilages (left, right 
or both) may have decreased motion or may not move
 at all during inspiration. If paralysis is complete, motion
 paradoxical to the phase of respiration can be seen.
Trachea
The anaesthetic plane should be deepened to continue
the bronchoscopic evaluation. lIf the patient is to be
intubated, the proximal trachea should be evaluated
prior to intubation. The endoscope should be passed
through the larynx into the proximal trachea. The
 tracheal cartilages appear as C-shaped rings that are
connected dorsally by the dorsal tracheal membrane.
(b)
The trachea should look uniform throughout its length.
The dorsal tracheal membrane should be seen as a
Everted laryngeal saccules
taut, flat mucosal surface connecting the ends of the
Hyperaemic mucous membranes
C-shaped cartilaginous tracheal rings. This membrane
is very helpful to establish proper orientation inside the
Thickened arytenoids
lumen, as it is centrally located in the dorsal most part
of the trachea (Figure 6.11).
Intubation can performed after evaluation of the
length of trachea that would otherwise be covered by
the endotracheal tube. The normal trachea is free of
masses and excessive secretions. There should be
 smooth mucosal surfaces through which normal small 
 blood vessels can be visualized. Mucosal oedema or
excessive secretions result in poor visualization of the
normal mucosa and vasculature, indicating inflam-
mation. The tracheal lumen should be relatively round
and there should be no excessive dipping of the
dorsal tracheal membrane or collapse of the C-shaped
rings. The endoscope should always be centred as it
is advanced and care should be taken not to irritate
C
the surface of the trachea with the endoscope by
rubbing or pressing it into the mucosal surface. The
Thickened vocal folds
mucosa can be easily scraped by the bronchoscope,
(a) Normal larynx of a dog. (Courtesy of
6.10
resulting in a distinct line of hyperaemia oroccasionally
BMcKeirnan)(b) Everted laryngeal saccules
a small superficial mucosal tear. This should be kept
and an accumulation of foamy saliva are common findings
in mind when evaluating areas that the endoscope
in brachycephalic dog breeds. (c) Larynx of a dog with
has passed.
laryngeal paralysis. (b,c Courtesy of T McCarthy)
88
Chapter 6 Flexible endoscopy: respiratory tract
Tracheal
6.11
anatomy. Note
Dorsal tracheal
the distinct C-shaped
membrane
 cartilages and the
smooth,tautdorsal
tracheal membrane.
Normal
(Photograph courtesy of
C-shaped
McCarthy)
tracheal
rings
Mainstem bronchi
attachment should be checked to ensure that it is in
As the endoscope is advanced, the carina or
the proper position. lf possible, the normal tissues 
bifurcation of the trachea will come into view. The
should be evaluated prior to the abnormal areas of
patient's right side is on the operator's left side;
the lung. All segments of the airways should be round
therefore, if the endoscope and camera are correctly
and maintain a shiny, smooth, fine vascular mucosa
positioned, the right mainstem bronchus will be seen
free of excessive mucus, oedema or lesions.
on the left side of the image. The bronchial tree should
 Occasionally, strands or small clumps of mucus can
be evaluated as thoroughly and as systematically as
be seen in the normal airways (Figure 6.12). The
possible. If orientation is lost, the endoscope should
airways should be evaluated for collapse, masses,
be withdrawn to the level of the carina, which acts as
mucosal irregularities and external compression.
a point of reference, and, if applicable, the video
The left and right mainstem or principal bronchi
branch off crisply with sharp edges (Figure 6.13a).
The principal bronchi branch into lobar bronchi, each
of which ventilates a lung lobe. Each lobar bronchus
then gives rise to many smaller segmental bronchi.
The smaller airways that branch from the segmental
Strand of mucus
 bronchi (sub-segmental bronchi) can be visualized in 
large dogs. The right mainstem bronchus is in line
with the trachea (Figure 6.13b). The first lobar
bronchus encountered is of the right cranial lung lobe
(Figure 6.13c). Adjacent is the second lobar bronchus
of the right middle lung lobe (Figure 6.13d). The
 accessory lung lobe bronchus (Figure 6.13e) branches
next, and the right main bronchus ends at the caudal
lung lobe (Figure 6.13f). Segmental and sub-
segmental airways should be visualized if possible.
After a thorough systematic evaluation of the airways
on the right, the endoscope should be withdrawn
Strand of mucus in the normal airway. (Courtesy
6.12
of T McCarthy)
enough to enter the opposite mainstem bronchus.
Entrance to
Entrance to
 Septum between
right caudal
right cranial
right and left 
lobe
lobe
 mainstem bronchi
1
Right
 Entrance to right
Entrance to
middle lobe
accessory lobe
(a) Bifurcation of the trachea. The left and right mainstem bronchi are clearly visible. (b) Right mainstem
6.13
bronchus. (Photographs courtesy of T McCarthy) (continues) 
89
Chapter 6 Flexible endoscopy: respiratory tract
(d)
(e,i)
(e,ji)
(continued) (c) Right cranial lung lobe. (d) Right middle lung lobe. (e) (i) Entrance to the right accessory lung
6.13
lobe. (ii) Inside the right accessory lung lobe. (f) Right caudal lung lobe.
The left mainstem bronchus branches at an angle
visualized if possible.Although there are many lobes
(Figure 6.14a). The first lobar bronchus encountered 
and branches to evaluate, the entire procedure
leads to the left cranial lung lobe (Figure 6.14b),
should not take more than approximately 7-10
where it branches further. Past the first lobar
minutes, including the time required for diagnostic
bronchus, the left mainstem bronchus becomes the
procedures.
left caudal lobar bronchus (Figure 6.14c), which also
 Once the airways have been visualized, diagnostic
branches significantly. Segmental and sub-segmental
procedures such as BAL, brush cytology and biopsy 
airways (Figure 6.14d) on the left side should be
 should be performed.
Entrance to left
caudal lobe
Entrance toleft
cranial lobe
(a)
(b)
(c)
()
(a) Left mainstem brochus. (b) Inside the left cranial lung lobe. (c) Inside the left caudal lung lobe. (d) Deep
6.14
 sub-segmental airways.
90
Chapter 6 Flexible endoscopy: respiratory tract
Bronchoalveolar lavage
deeper, smaller airways difficult and therefore the
diagnostic yield may be limited. BAL is performed
BAL is a technique used to sample the small airways
of patients with lung disease and can be performed
following bronchoscopic evaluation so that airway
routinely in patients undergoing bronchoscopy.It
evaluation will not be affected by the saline infused
and so that grossly affected lung lobes may be
differs from tracheal washes that collect material from
the larger airways only. Therefore, BAL can be a
selected for BAL. However, brush cytology and/or
valuable technique for evaluating patients with lung
biopsy should be delayed until after BAL to prevent
disease involving the small airways, alveoli and
altering the fluid retrieved.
interstitial lung. BAL requires the patient to undergo
Ideally, at least two lung lobes should be evalu-
general anaesthesia and therefore is not appropriate
ated to increase the chance of retrieving representa-
for patients in respiratory distress. BAL may not be
tive samples. Once the lung lobes to be sampled
necessary for all patients with small airway disease.
have been selected, either by bronchoscopic evalua-
For example, a tracheal wash is sufficient for the
tion or based on radiographic findings, the broncho-
diagnosis of most cases of pneumonia without the
scope should be passed into successively smaller
need to place the patient under general anaesthesia.
airways until it is seated snugly. Sterile saline that
Although BAL has therapeutic applications in humans,
has been pre-drawn into syringes should then be
at this time it is used mainly as a diagnostic tool in
instilled via the bronchoscope channel and gently
 small animals.
suctioned back through the same channel also using
As BAL is typically performed during broncho-
a sterile syringe. Alternatively, the procedure can be
performed using a lavage catheter (see Figure 6.5)
scopy, the animal should already be anaesthetized,
positioned and monitored. All supplies and equip-
passed through the biopsy channel into the deeper
ment (Figure 6.15) needed should be set up prior
smaller airways. Negative pressure during aspira-
to anaesthetizing the patient to ensure a quick and
tion would indicate the need to decrease suction to
safe procedure.
avoid airway collapse. If necessary, the broncho-
scope can be repositioned slightly, taking care not
to dislodge the tip of the bronchoscope from the air-
way in which it is wedged. In dogs with a bodyweight
of over 10 kg,2 boluses of 25 ml each have been
used successfully. In cats and dogs with a body-
weight of less than 10 kg, 2-4 boluses of 10 ml each
typically provide satisfactory results. Ideally, 40-90%
of fluid instilled should be retrieved. Fluid is typically
slightly turbid with a foamy layer at the top, repre-
sentative of surfactant.
Fluid obtained from a BAL can be evaluated
culture can be combined from several boluses or
lobes in most cases. Quantitative aerobic bacterial
culture, and in certain cases, fungal culture,
Mycoplasma culture, and anaerobic culture may be
warranted. Generally, the first bolus from each lobe
should be evaluated separately as it may be
6.15
Equipment required to perform a BAL
more representative of the larger airways (e.g.
trachea, bronchi). Cell counts can be obtained from
Technique
undiluted BAL fluid but interpretation of such counts
Sterile saline (0.9% sodium chloride) should be
may be difficult.
used to perform a BAL. The saline should be non-
bacteriostatic to allow bacterial growth during cul-
Bronchial and bronchiolar brush cytology
ture. A diagnostic yield from a BAL requires a
Analysis of bronchial brushings provides information
seemingly large volume of fluid to be instilled into an
about airway inflammation in some dogs and cats
airway in order to reach the alveoli. This volume is
with chronic cough, and is a more sensitive indicator
not standardized; however, as much as 50 ml or
of airway inflammation than cytological examination
more total volume is commonly used in dogs and
of BAL fluid. The procedure is very simple and has
cats. The total volume is typically divided between
a high yield. A sterile sheathed brush (see Figure
2 boluses in dogs and 2-4 boluses in cats. The first
6.4) is passed through the biopsy channel of the
bolus typically contains the most contamination
endoscope to the area of interest and the brush is
from larger airways and therefore at least 2 boluses
advanced, rubbing lightly on the tissue. The brush
are recommended.
is brought back into the sheath and then removed
The preferred technique for BAL requires the use
from the channel. The brush is then advanced again
of a flexible bronchoscope with a sampling channel.
and rubbed gently on to a slide for interpretation
A bronchoscope with a 4.8 mm outer diameter is
(Figure 6.16). This is a very safe and quick proce-
versatile enough for most patients, but an 8 mm outer
dure, and identifies cells that do not exfoliate into the
diameter gastroscope may be used in large dogs.
BAL fluid. lt is also an excellent way to evaluate
Too large an endoscope will make reaching the
the bronchial epithelium.
91
Chapter 6 Flexible endoscopy: respiratory tract
Biopsy within the airway must be performed with
caution and consideration of potentially  severe
bleeding or development of pneumothorax post-
biopsy. The benefit and risk must be considered in
each circumstance.
Pathological conditions
Tracheobronchitis
Tracheobronchitis is commonly diagnosed in the dog
and cat. It is characterized by inflammation, hyper-
aemia and oedema in the tracheal and bronchial
 mucosa. Often the mucosal surfaces are mottled with 
excessive secretions, accumulations of mucus or
mucopurulent debris, epithelial polyp formation and,
Bronchial brush cytology sampling technique.
sometimes, bleeding. The irregular nodular surfaces,
6.16
epithelial polyps and mucosal nodules (Figures 6.17
and 6.18) result from the normal process of tissue
Biopsy
 repair after chronic damage from inflammation, which 
Bronchoscopic biopsy may be useful to obtain
is growth of fibroblasts and production of fibrous
samples  for histopathology  when endobronchial
tissue. These changes should not be confused with
lesions are identified. Samples are obtained under
neoplastic or granulomatous lesions.  Tracheo-
 direct visualization using forceps passed through the
bronchitis can have a number of aetiologies, such as
biopsy channel of the bronchoscope. Transbronchial
chronic allergic airway disease or infection; however,
aspiration and biopsy can be performed, with or
many times the aetiology is idiopathic. Bronchial
without the assistance of fluoroscopy. However, due
brushing, BAL and biopsy are used to sample tissues
to the risk of haemorrhage and pneumothorax,
 and obtain cultures for complete assessment and
 appropriate therapy.
 transbronchial lung biopsy is not routinely performed.
Hyperaemic mucous
membranes
Hyperaemic
mucous
membranes
Epithelial
Foamy 
Accumulation
polyps 
 secretions 
Nodular changes
 of mucus 
Mucosal oedema
(a)
(b)
in mucosa
(c)
6.17
Changes in the trachea
associated with
tracheobronchitis. (Courtesy of
T McCarthy)
(d)
(e)
Mucopurulent secretions in
6.18
 the trachea of a cat with
tracheobronchitis. (Courtesy of 
T McCarthy)
92
Chapter 6 Flexible endoscopy: respiratory tract
Tracheal collapse
Tracheal collapse is a progressive, degenerative
disease of the cartilage rings which leads to dynamic
tracheal collapse during ventilation. Collapse can
 occur in the cervical and/or thoracic trachea and may
extend into the smaller airways. Cervical tracheal
collapse is most evident on inspiration; collapse of the 
intrathoracic trachea or mainstem bronchi is seen
best on expiration (Figures 6.19 to 6.23). In dogs with 
tracheal collapse, the dorsal tracheal membrane 
becomes pendulous and the rings become flattened,
resulting
 in airway  obstruction
and  irritation.
 Obstruction can be mild or can be so severe that it 
creates a double lumen effect.
Cervical tracheal collapse can be addressed
surgically by  placement 
 extraluminal
 polypropylene ring (or spiral) prostheses to open and
stabilize the trachea, preventing collapse. New
techniques, such as placement of intraluminal stents,
 Dog with severe extrathoracic and intrathoracic
6.21
 tracheal collapse, chronic cough and dyspnoea.
are used to open and stabilize the trachea. A number 
of stents have been evaluated in the canine and feline
trachea, including both balloon-expandable and self-
6.22
expanding stents. There can be significant compli-
Severe
cations after stent placement; however, stents can be
intrathoracic
 well tolerated. Stenting is available for patients that 
collapse.
are refractory to medical management and have
(Courtesy of
extensive cervical and or intrathoracic collapse
T McCarthy)
(Figure 6.24).
6.19
Mild cervical
tracheal
collapse.
(Courtesy of
T McCarthy)
6.20
Moderate
intrathoracic
tracheal
collapse.
(Courtesy of 
T McCarthy)
93
Chapter 6 Flexible endoscopy: respiratory tract
6.23
6.25
Mainstem
(a) Deformed
bronchus
tracheal rings
collapse.
and (b) foamy
(Courtesy of
airway secretions
T McCarthy)
ina brachy-
cephalic puppy
with tracheal
hypoplasia.
(Courtesy of
(a)
T McCarthy)
Foamy airway secretions
6.24
(a) Severe
intrathoracic
tracheal collapse
in a dog.
(b) Following
placement of an
intraluminal
stent. (Courtesy
(q)
of T McCarthy)
(a)
with the lung worm Oslerus osleri results in small
irregular polypoid lesions on the tracheal and carinal
mucosa (Figure 6.26a). Deformation of the carina
can also occur due to extramural compression
(Figure 6.26b). This can be caused by hilar lymph-
 adenopathy or extraluminal masses such as a granu-
lomas, abscesses or neoplasia. Transbronchial
 needle aspiration or biopsy can be used to obtain a
diagnosis in these cases.
(b)
Brachycephalic airway obstruction
syndrome
Brachycephalic airway obstruction syndrome in small
brachycephalic breeds is associated with classic
airway changes as a result of chronic excessive effort
 upon inhalation. The most common breeds affected 
are English Bulldogs, Boston Terriers, Pugs and
Pekingese. The syndrome is characterized by the
(a)
 presence of one or all of these features:
 Stenotic nares
Elongated soft palate 
Everted laryngeal saccules
·
·Hypoplastic trachea.
Tracheal hypoplasia can affect segments or the
 entire length of the trachea. With hypoplasia, there is 
 overlapping of the ends of the tracheal rings, creating
a misshapen and narrowed trachea. Common find-
ings in brachycephalic breeds are excessive foamy
airway secretions (Figure 6.25), a long soft palate that 
 extends into the larynx, and everted laryngeal sac-
cules (see Figure 6.10b).
(b)
Other
(a) Tracheal mucosal surface with Oslerus 
 Other tracheal abnormalities include tears, neopla-
6.26 
osleri nodules. (b) Severe airway collapse at 
 sia, granulomas and parasitic infections. Infection
the carina caused by an extraluminal mass.
94
Chapter 6 Flexible endoscopy: respiratory tract
Rounding or blunting of the airway bifurcations
basket, rat-tooth, alligator, net and polyp snare-type
 can be caused by chronic inflammation, infiltration or
forceps may be useful for removal of a variety of
oedema of the lung tissue (Figure 6.27). Biopsy and
foreign objects, such as rocks, teeth, plastic, plant 
cytology of irregularities in the mucosal surface are
material and food (Figure 6.29). Care must be taken
essential. Tracheobronchoscopy can also be used to
to provide adequate ventilation during the retrieval
identify sources of bleeding in the airways, lung lobe
procedure because ventilation will be compromised if 
torsion and causes of airway obstruction. Pulmonary
the bronchoscope blocks the airways for prolonged
abscessation, granulomatous disease, fungal infec-
periods of time. Care should be taken to ensure that 
tion, pneumonia and bronchiectasis are also identi-
the endoscope does not completely fill the lumen.
fiable. Pulmonary oedema can be seen in the airways
The veterinary surgeon should be prepared to stop
in the presence of heart failure (Figure 6.28).
and refer the patient for surgery if the procedure
becomes prolonged. Smooth, round objects are often
very difficult to remove with the limited instrumentation
that can fit into the channels and may be best left for
 surgical removal.
Deep airway foreign body
Retrieval device
6.27
(a) Carinal
blunting is seen in
this chronically
irritated airway.
(b) Granulomatous
inflammationfrom
6.29
Removal of a deep airway foreign body.
coccidioidomycosis
in a young dog.
(Courtesy of
K Gulikers)
Postoperative care
Following bronchoscopy, the patient should remain
(b)
intubated and allowed to breathe 100% oxygen for 10
minutes. This is to resolve the hypoxaemia that may
occur secondary to procedures performed during the
6.28
bronchoscopy. Pulse oximetry should be utilized to
Pulmonary
measure the patient's oxygenation throughout the
oedema seen in
recovery from anaesthesia and during the post-
the airways due
operative period. This is especially important in
to heart failure.
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
respiratory rate, respiratory effort and depth, and
auscultation should be performed serially. Crackles
may be heard on auscultation for up to 24 hours in 
patients that have undergone BAL.
Complications
Foreign body removal
When performed properly, serious complications are
uncommon. Complications can include those related 
Tracheobronchial foreign material is commonly
to anaesthesia (arrhythmia, hypotension, oeso-
retrieved under direct bronchoscopic visualization.
phagitis, tracheitis), as well as the endoscopic pro-
Removal of foreign bodies from the airways is often
cedure itself. Complications of bronchoscopy include
very challenging, depending on the shape and location
hypoxaemia, bleeding and infection. Hypoxaemia is
of the object. Foreign body retrieval forceps including
typically transient, bleeding is uncommon with gentle 
95
chapter 6  Flexible endoscopy: respiratory tract
bronchoscopic manipulation, and infection is rare
References and further reading
 when the equipment is properly sterilized and stored
Andreasen CB (2003) Bronchoalveolarlavage. Veterinary Clinics of North
prior to the procedure. Other potential complications
America: Small Animal Practice 33(1), 69-88
include exacerbation of coughing and bronchospasm
Bolliger CT and Mathur PN (20oo) Interventional bronchoscopy. Progress
secondary to irritation from the procedures and
in Respiratory Research, Volume 30, ed. CT Bolliger and PN Mathur,
pp. 108-119. Karger, Basel
manoeuvring of the bronchoscope in the airway.
 Coolman BR, Marreta SM, McKieman BC and Zachary JF (1998) Choanal
Bronchospasm can be treated with a bronchodilator;
atresia and secondary nasopharyngeal stenosis in a dog. Journal of
in fact, it may be helpful to pre-treat asthmatic cats
the American Animai Hospital Association 34, 497-501
http://ww.olympusamerica.com
with a bronchodilator to decrease bronchospasm
Johnson L (20oi) Small animal bronchoscopy. Veterinary Clinics of North
(terbutaline 0.01 mg/kg s.c., 3
 30 minutes prior to
America:SmallAnimalPractice31(4),691705
 Johnson LR and Fales WH (2001) Clinical and microbiologic findings in
procedure). Coughing is typically transient but,
,in
 dogs with bronchoscopically diagnosed tracheal collapse: 37 cases
some dogs with airway obstruction exacerbated by
(1990-1995). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
coughing, 1-2% lidocaine may be instilled at the carina
219, 1247-1250
King LG (2004) Textbook of Respiratory Disease in Dogs and Cats.
prior to the completion of the bronchoscopic procedure
 Elsevier, St Louis
to decrease coughing. Rarely, pneumothorax can
Levitan DM, Matz ME, Findlen CS and Fister RD (1996) Treatment of
Oslerus osleri infestation in a dog: case report and literature review.
occur from trauma to diseased airways caused by the
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association32(5),435-
endoscope or the diagnostic procedures performed.
438
When performed properly, flexible endoscopy of
McCarthy TC (2005) Veterinary Endoscopy for the Small Animal
the respiratory tract is a very low-risk, high-yield
Practitioner. Elsevier, St Louis
 McKiernan BC (20oo) Diagnosis and treatment of canine chronic
diagnostic tool. Careful planning, thorough and con-
bronchitistwentyyearsof experience.VeterinaryClinics ofNorth
 sistent examination technique, and use of all possible
America:SmallAnimal Practice30,1267-1278
Mehta AC, Prakash UBS, Garland R, et al. (2005) American College of
diagnostics are essential elements of successful flex-
 Chest Physicians and American Association for Bronchoscopy
ible endoscopic evaluation of the respiratory tract.
Consensus Statement: prevention of flexible bronchoscopy-
Many new exciting diagnostic and treatment possibili-
associated infection. Chest 128, 1742-1755
Padrid P (2000) Feline asthma: diagnosis and treatment. Veterinary Clinics 
ties lie ahead for the veterinary patient as veterinary
 of North America: Small Animal Practice 30, 1279-1294
PayneJD,MehlerSJandWeisse C (2006)Tracheal collapseCompendium
ventional endoscopy.
382
 Rha JY and Mahony O (1999) Bronchoscopy in small animal medicine:
 indications, instrumentation and techniques. Clinical Techniques in 
Acknowledgements
Small Animal Practice 14(4), 207-212
Roudebush P (i99o) Tracheobronchoscopy.Veterinary Clinics of North
America: Small Animal Practice 20(5), 1297-1314
The authors would like to thank Robert C Denovo,
Willard MD and Radlinsky MA (1999) Endoscopic examination of the
S Dru Forrester, Keven Guilkers, Steve Hill, Timothy
choanae in dogs and cats: 118 cases (1988-1998). Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association 215, 1301-1305
C McCarthy and Brendan McKiernan for their valu-
 able assistance with the preparation of many of the
figures for this chapter.
96
endosurg
Philip Lhermette and David Sobel
Introduction
Other procedures, such as otoscopy, rhinoscopy
and urethrocystoscopy, have particular requirements
Whereas the use of flexible endoscopes is largely
for operator and patient safety, not least because they
confined to the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts,
are not completely ‘sterile procedures' and the
where the ability to follow a tortuous lumen is
operator may be exposed to body fluids and exudates,
paramount, rigid endoscopes can be introduced into
often diluted by copious amounts of saline. The
any appropriate body orifice - and if a suitable orifice
 potential for zoonoses should always be appreciated
can't be found, then the surgeon can make one!
and the use of surgical gloves, face mask and eye
Laparoscopy and thoracoscopy have challenged the
protection is advised, together with a surgical gown -
traditional paradigms in human surgery and have
 preferably worn over a non-absorbent plastic apron.
revolutionized  the  treatment of many  common
conditions, such as gallbladder disease, reproductive
tract disorders, bowel cancer and heart disease.
Anaesthetic considerations
The advantages of minimally invasive surgery
Any  surgery  requiring anaesthesia or sedation
are as valid in veterinary medicine as they have
requires a thorough knowledge of the condition of the
been proved to be in human medicine, but some
patient and the risks and benefits of various regimes
caution must be exercised. Minimally invasive tech-
and protocols available. The reader is referred to the
niques should only be considered when the pro-
BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Anaesthesia
cedure can be carried out at least as safely and
and Analgesia for comprehensive coverage of the
mally invasive techniques are safer and more effec-
subject. There are, however, specific considerations
that should be taken into account when embarking
tive than traditional alternatives, but they do require
upon some forms of endoscopic or minimally invasive
adequate training and practice in order to be safe
and effective.
un jo Adoosoua on buneia einoed ui abins
respiratory tract, laparoscopy and thoracoscopy.
Anaesthesia will be required for nearly all rigid
endoscopic procedures, with the possible exception
Respiratory tract
of reproductive vaginoscopy and some otoscopy. An
Anaesthetic technique and airway management will
anaesthetist is therefore required and should be
 in  monitoring 
depend entirely on the location of the lesion and the
experienced
J  patients  undergoing
 proposed procedure. Adequate monitoring willalways
endosurgery. Some laparoscopic and thoracoscopic
 procedures will also require a surgical assistant to act
include pulse oximetry, with the addition of capno-
as camera operator, freeing the surgeon to use both
 graphy if available.
hands to manipulate the instruments. Iit is therefore
Bronchoscopy
essential that other members of the team are
For rigid tracheobronchoscopy the usual prerequisites
sufficiently trained in manipulation of  endoscopic
for general anaesthesia apply. Food should be with-
instruments and endoscopes before embarking on
 held overnight and water for 3-4 hours. Since many
these procedures.
 procedures are undertaken without the reassurance
 of a protected airway in the form of an endotracheal
Health and safety considerations
tube, an empty stomach should be considered essen-
tial to prevent regurgitation during anaesthesia and
Effective and timely cleaning and sterilization of
possible aspiration of stomach contents.
endoscopes 
essential
toprevent
cross-
Premedication  with  butorphanol/acepromazine
 contamination between patients and possible infection
helps give a smoother induction and recovery, whilst
of the endoscopist (see Chapter 2).
helping to reduce gagging reflexes. In cats, due to the
 For many endosurgical procedures, particularly
sensitive nature of the larynx, topical anaesthesia
with 1% lidocaine spray is advisable.
are taken as for traditional sterile open surgery. The
In most cases it is desirable to examine the post-
 surgeon is gowned and gloved and a face mask is
erior pharynx and larynx prior to bronchoscopy, and
worn as appropriate.
preferably prior to intubation. For this reason it is often 
97
Chapter 7  Rigid endoscopy and endosurgery: principles
 preferable to use intravenous propofol for induction,
Patient positioning
followed by total intravenous anaesthesia (TIvA) with
continuous infusion or intermittent boluses of propofol
Manipulation   of  tissues  and organs can be
and/or isoflurane by mask to maintain anaesthesia.
accomplished to a large extent using grasping forceps
 All patients should receive 100% oxygen by mask
or a palpation probe. However, careful patient
for 10 minutes or so before starting the procedure,
 positioning can facilitate surgery by moving viscera
out of the field of view. A rotating cradle or operating
since the presence of the endoscope in the airway will
inevitably result in some degree of hypoxia. In routine
table that can be moved in three planes is ideal.
cases where the procedure is not likely to be
 Placing the patient in a head-down Trendelenberg 
prolonged, intubation is unnecessary, but if the
position is useful when operating on the caudal abdo-
procedure is likely to be prolonged, as in the case of
 men to move the viscera towards the diaphragm. It is
foreign body removal, intermittent intubation should
also used to move the spleen out of the way when
be considered.
introducing the Veress needle for insufflation (see
An alternative method of maintaining adequate
below). Venous return is increased but angulations
oxygenation during bronchoscopy is to pass a canine
should not be more than about 15 degrees, as this
urinary catheter or small feeding tube into the trachea
position increases pressure on the diaphragm,
alongside the bronchoscope and attach this to the
increasing the respiratory effects of pneumoperito-
anaesthetic machine. This does not interfere with
neum. Alternatively, a reverse Trendelenberg posi-
visualization of the larynx, and in medium and smaller
tion, with the head up, facilitates surgery on the
dogs allows oxygen and anaesthetic gases to be
anterior abdomen but with a consequent reduction in
delivered throughout the procedure. Alternatively, in
 cardiac return.
larger dogs, the endoscope may be passed through
Rotating the patient to the left or right exposes the
the lumen of the endotracheal tube via a T-piece
kidney on the elevated side and, in bitches, the ovary.
connector. Care should be taken that there is sufficient 
The left lateral position is also useful for visualizing
space to allow adequate gas flow around the
the pancreas and gives good access to the liver,
avoiding the falciform fat. In some laparoscopic
or between the endoscope and endotracheal tube), or
surgery, such as ovariohysterectomy, the patient's
an increase in pulmonary pressure could occur
position is changed intraoperatively to enable access 
resulting in alveolar rupture. lt is not possible to
to both sides of the abdomen.
 maintain the anaesthetic gas concentration in the
 During 
thoracoscopy
 from
a
paraxiphoid
lungs accurately using these methods, since room air
transdiaphragmatic approach, rotation of the patient 
is also being breathed in around the endoscope, and
can be useful to move the lungs out of the way.
so they should not be relied upon exclusively to
enabling the surgeon to access more of the lateral
maintain anaesthesia. Intermittent intubation, mask
 chest wall and the lateral and dorsal lung surfaces.
inhalation or intravenous propofol may be required to
 Manipulation of the bladder through the abdo-
maintain adequate anaesthesia.
 minal wall can be helpful during urethrocystoscopy,
 Use of pulse oximetry or capnography is strongly
especially in large patients where the length of the
advised in all cases, and the patient should be
endoscope can become an issue. A slight reverse
maintained on 100% oxygen for 10 minutes or so
 Trendelenberg position helps move the bladder cau-
 following the procedure.
dally and facilitates entry into the trigone when using
a relatively short endoscope such as the 2.7 mm
Rhinoscopy
30 degree cystoscope.
In addition to the usual prerequisites for general
 anaesthesia,
 rhinoscopy
requires  endotracheal
intubation, with close attention to adequate cuff
Insufflation
 inflation and pharyngeal packing to prevent inhalation
 of fluid and debris from the nose during saline irrigation
The peritoneum is a potential space. In the normal
(see Chapter 8).
animal the mucosal surfaces are in close contact and
the peritoneal space contains just a little fluid. If an
Thoracoscopy
endoscope were placed into this space, the end of the
Thoracoscopy
the induction
instrument would abut various organs and tissues
requires
of
pneumothorax in order to collapse the lungs and
and 'red out' would result - a diffuse pale red image
provide a space in which to operate. Thus, the same
over the whole screen. In order to see anything mean-
anaesthetic procedures and precautions will be
 ingful it is necessary to fill the peritoneal cavity with an
required as in open chest surgery, with intermittent
inert gas and create a space in which to work - a
positive pressure ventilation and careful monitoring of
 pneumoperitoneum. Air has been used successfully 
blood and respiratory gases. Occasionally it may be 
necessary to perform single lung intubation in order to
ries a higher risk of embolism. The use of pure oxy-
 maintain an adequate operative field on the relevant
 gen is ill advised as an insufflation gas as it is highly
side of the chest. Insufflation of the chest has been
combustible in the presence of cautery or lasers. The
described but is rarely necessary in the authors'
most commonly used gas is carbon dioxide, as it is
experience. Pressures as low as 5 mmHg significantly
 cheap, readily available and safe. Any remaining gas 
reduce cardiac output with very litle improvement in 
left in the abdomen following the procedure is
visual field.
absorbed by the bloodstream and expelled by the
98
Chapter 7  Rigid endoscopy and endosurgery: principles
lungs, and carbon dioxide does not support combus-
Raised intra-abdominal pressure inevitably has
tion if using laser or electrosurgical techniques.
physiological effects, such as aiding capillary venous
 An insufflator is therefore essential for laparoscopy.
haemostasis (which can be useful), but care should
It is used to create a pneumoperitoneum in the first
be taken to ensure that bleeding does not increase
place, to maintain it, and to control the gas pressure
 once pressure is reduced at the end of the procedure.
during the procedure. lt may also be required to vent
In practice this is rarely a problem. However, pressure
smoke plume from laser or electrosurgery and replace
on the caudal vena cava can reduce venous return to
 it with fresh gas.
 the heart and thus decrease ejection volume.
 Gas is supplied from a high-pressure cylinder
 Pressure on the diaphragm increases intrathoracic
either directly to the patient, through a pressure reduc-
pressure and not only reduces lung capacity, with a
tion valve in the insufflator, or into a reservoir tank
corresponding increase in physiological dead space,
within the insufflator and thence to the patient. A flow
it also reduces diaphragmatic excursion during
control valve regulates the delivery of gas and moni-
breathing and reduces tidal volume. Carbon dioxide
tors intra-abdominal pressure. If the pressure falls
is highly soluble and can form carbonic acid on serosal
below that set by the operator, the valve opens and
surfaces, resulting in postoperative discomfort. It can 
allows more gas to flow. When the pressure reaches
 also be absorbed into the bloodstream and potentially
the set pressure, the valve closes. Most electronic
cause hypercapnia and respiratory acidosis. However,
insufflators allow different flow rates to be set. The
these effects are relatively minor at the pressures.
lowest flow rate of 1 litre/minute is used for initial insuf-
used for laparoscopy and should not cause problems
flation to allow the patient to adapt to the increased
for the vast majority of patients.
abdominal pressure slowly. Once insufflation pressure
Pressures above 15 mmHg can reduce abdomi-
is reached, the flow rate can be increased so that sud-
nal organ perfusion, particularly in the kidney, bowel 
den drops in pressure are less likely as instruments
are inserted and removed. Insufflators will usually
renin-angiotensin system, causing renal vasocon-
measure the total gas delivered during the operation
striction. Relatively healthy patients compensate for
and also monitor the pressure in the carbon dioxide
these changes readily, and an intra-abdominal
cylinder itself to warn of low gas supply.
pressure of <15 mmHg is of no consequence, but
In cats and small dogs it is recommended to
the surgeon should always be aware of increases in
insufflate the abdomen to a maximum of 12 mmHg,
abdominal pressure and use the lowest pressure
u bh tl un auiy ou sbop sai u! pue
necessary to perform the procedure. Haemodynamic
pressures are often used initially when inserting the
effects are most marked during induction of the
operating ports, as they give maximum distance
pneumoperitoneum, and insuflation should be
between the abdominal wall and underlying viscera,
kept slow to allow the cardiovascular system to
and reduce the ventral deformation of the abdominal
adapt. Preoperative fluid volume loading can help
wall that inevitably occurs when introducing a cannula.
limit the haemodynamic effects, especialy in the
Once the operating cannulae are inserted, intra-
dehydrated patient.
abdominal pressure may be lowered to 10 mmHg or
Since many insufflators do not heat the gas,
below, as all that is required is a sufficient space to
prolonged procedures can result in hypothermia, and
visualize the site of interest.
monitoring of rectal temperature is useful, especially
in small patients.
Technique
The most common method of inducing the initial
insufflation of the abdominal cavity requires a Veress
Choice of endoscope
needle (see Figure 2.32). Alternatively, the surgeon
The simplest endoscope to use when starting to
may choose to use a Hasson or 'modified Hasson'
technique, which avoids the blind insertion of the
perform laparoscopy or thoracoscopy is the 0 degree
sharp Veress needle into the peritoneal space.
endoscope. This gives a true view along the axis of
Cannulae used for the Hasson technique have a blunt
the endoscope, and instruments introduced through
trocar. This technique should minimize the risk of
trauma to the abdominal organ, which can occur with
angle.
a Veress needle. Details of these techniques are
Thirty degree endoscopes can be very useful,
 given in Chapter 11.
especially in tight spaces, since they allow the
endoscope to be kept somewhat out of the way of the
Complications
instrumentation and allow the surgeon to look around
Penetrating a viscus can be a potential problem; the
organs or structures that would otherwise be in the
initial insufflation pressure will be high, alerting the
way. However, the angle of view makes manipulation
 operator. Penetration itself is rarely a problem unless
of instruments a litle more complicated. If the
a major vessel is damaged, but attempting to insufflate
endoscope is oriented with the axis of view upwards,
the spleen can result in a fatal gas embolism. The
instruments introduced from the side will appear on
abdomen should always be palpated underneath the
the monitor to be coming in from below and to the
insertion point and the tip of the Veress needle
side. This takes a little getting used to and requires
directed away from the spleen. If blood is found on
practice. Thirty degree endoscopes are commonly
insertion of the Veress needle, it should be removed
used in the nose, joints and bladder, where
and repositioned before insufflation.
manipulation of the endoscope is restricted in a small
66
Chapter 7  Rigid endoscopy and endosurgery: principles
space and the angle of view can be exploited to see
towards the point of interest, and moving the endo-
 scope close to the point of interest helps appreciation
rotating the endoscope around its long axis. In the
of fine movements and depth of view.
 nose and bladder the endoscope is invariably used in
 Practice is essential and the need for training can-
a sheath, which usually incorporates an instrument
not be overemphasized. The use of a laparoscopy
 channel, so instruments pass directly into the field of
'trainer' is extremely helpful in acquiring the skills to
view and manipulation does not present a problem.
 manipulate laparoscopic instruments in a two-dimen-
 sional video environment. Commercial laparoscopy
trainers can be purchased but are expensive. A sim-
Special considerations for
ple laparoscopy 'trainer' can be manufactured from
endosurgery
an opaque plastic box about the size of a dog's abdo-
men, with holes cut into the top at the site of common
 Endoscopic surgery differs from conventional open
 port placement. These holes should be covered with
surgery in several important ways:
thick cloth-covered neoprene through which cannulae
can be inserted. Simple exercises can then be per-
 The surgical field is viewed in two dimensions on
formed, such as stacking sugar lumps on top of each
a television monitor
 other, placing small objects into a rubber glove or bag.
 The view is magnified and the angle of view may
or dissecting holes in pieces of paper following a pre-
not be along the long axis of the endoscope
drawn pattern. A piece of chicken breast, complete
Instruments are often long and held at a point 
with skin, makes a good model for practising biopsy
distant from the point of interest
 There is a lack of direct tactile feedback to the
technique, cutting tissues and suturing. All these
exercises help to familiarize the surgeon with camera
surgeon
 Manipulation of the position of the patient during
technique and improve manual dexterity. It is essen-
tial that these basic techniques are mastered.
 the operation can be advantageous
 There is limited opportunity to move the positions
Attending wet labs and practising on cadavers should
of the instruments once ports have been placed.
always precede live surgery. Assisting a proficient
Positioning
useful way to become acquainted with the necessary
Correct positioning of the patient (see above),
techniques in a more realistic environment.
 equipment and monitor in relation to the surgeon is
essential. The endoscopy trolley should be positioned
Tactile information
such that it is directly in front of the surgeon, with the
Tactile feedback is used in open surgery to locate
monitor at head height. During some procedures it
solid masses in fat, to differentiate solid from cystic
may be necessary for the surgeon to change sides of 
masses, or to detect variations in texture of a solid
 the patient, and if this is so the endoscopy trolley
organ such as the liver that may indicate a pathological
should also be moved to afford the optimum view.
change. To some extent this can be appreciated
during laparoscopy by the use of a palpation probe, a 
Camera orientation
blunt-ended probe that can be run over the surface of
Camera heads are attached to the endoscope by a
 an organ or used to ballot a cystic structure. With
releasable collar, which allows the endoscope to rotate
practice a good degree of tactile information can be
in relation to the camera. This is useful when using an
 obtained in this way.
endoscope with an angled view, such as 30 degrees,
since it affords a larger field of view as the endoscope
Demisting
is rotated and enables the surgeon to look around cor-
 Placing a cold endoscope in a warm humid abdomen
ners. However, it is vital that the camera head itself
 or thorax can often lead to misting of the lens. Whilst
is kept in the correct orientation. The camera is, in
this can usually be cured by gently wiping the lens on 
 effect, the surgeon's eyes; if it is rotated inadvertently
a serosal surface, it is useful to try and prevent it
through 90 degrees this has the same effect as the
occurring, as far as possible, by prewarming the
surgeon turning on their side. if this is not noticed it
instrument. Placing the endoscope in warm sterile
 can be very confusing as lateral movements of instru-
distilled water for a minute or two is ideal, or even just
 ments in the field of view become vertical on the moni-
warming the tip of the endoscope in the hand can be
tor. Most camera heads have a flat surface or buttons
effective.
 Commercial
demisting  solutions are
 on the top that designate the correct orientation.
available and effective, but not really necessary;
povidone-iodine is a good substitute.
Use of instruments
One of the first obstacles the new endoscopist must
overcome is learning to operate in a two-dimensional
Portal placement
environment with unfamiliar long instrumentation.
Appreciation of depth and distance can be difficult at
Laparoscopic and thoracoscopic cannulae are often 
first, especially in view of the high magnification
called ports' or operative ports. The correct placing of
afforded by the endoscope, which exaggerates the 
ports is vital to a successful surgical outcome.
 smallest movements. Moving the endoscope further
 Placement will vary according to the size of patient as
well as the procedure to be undertaken. Several
ramic view is helpful when moving instrumentation
general principles must be applied:
100
Chapter 7 Rigid endoscopy and endosurgery: principles
Before embarking upon laparoscopy or
along the axis of the cannula can act as a stop to
thoracoscopy, port placement must be carefully
prevent too rapid penetration. Holding the upper end
planned so that additional ports do not have to be
of the cannula in the palm of the hand, pressure is
placed during the procedure
exerted in a twisting motion until the tip of the cannula
Ports must be placed sufficiently distant from the
enters the peritoneal space. The trocar is removed
site of interest so as not to overcrowd the area but
and the cannula can be pushed gently into the abdo-
not so far that instruments cannot reach easily
men a little further. The valve in the cannula closes as
The camera port is placed first and 
 soon as the trocar is removed to prevent escape of
 gas. An endoscope with camera attached is then
instrumentation or operative ports placed to the
sides, sufficiently far apart that instruments do
inserted into the cannula and the area immediately
not interfere with each other, and so that
underneath the entry point is inspected for iatrogenic
instruments can triangulate down to a focus at
damage. The endoscope can then be directed to the
the site of interest at a comfortable angle-
site of interest for further inspection.
       m
usually around 60-90 degrees. This is the normal
position in which a surgeon would hold hand
transferred from the Veress needle to the inlet port of
the cannula. This allows removal of the Veress needle
instruments during an open procedure.
Where two operating ports are used they should
and gas flow is directed away from the endoscope
lens, helping keep it clear. Cold gas can, however,
be equidistant from the camera port (Figure 7.1).
sometimes increase fogging of the endoscope lens. If
The exact position on the abdomen or thorax in
this is a problem, touching the lens to a serosal surface 
relation to landmarks such as the umbilicus or specific
in the abdomen will clear the fogging. Moving the gas
inflow to the operative port may also help if the problem
ribs will vary according to patient size: 2 cm caudal to
persists. Occasionally it may be necessary to remove
the umbilicus is very different in a cat and a Great
the endoscope and wipe the tip with sterile saline-
Dane! It is important to visualize the operative site in
soaked gauze to remove blood, fat or tissue debris.
three dimensions and plan the port sites accordingly
in each case.
Endoscopes should be introduced through the
trapdoor seal should be opened manually before
Procedure
inserting the endoscope through the por. Opening
the trapdoor simply by pushing the endoscope through
With the abdomen insufflated (see above) there
it will eventually damage the lens resulting in costly
should be a reasonable space between the abdo-
repair. The same procedure is used for introducing
minal wall and the underlying viscera, but care
sharp trocars into the port, to prevent blunting. Care
should still be taken not to stab the trocar into the
should also be taken here to ensure the sharp tip is
abdomen too forcefully. A middle finger extended
centrally placed when passing through the grommet
7.1
Port placement for
triangulation in
laparoscopy.
Xmarks the site of
surgical interest.
101
Chapter 7  Rigid endoscopy and endosurgery: principles
as cuts to the rubber grommet result in leakage of
monopolar or bipolar electrosurgery units, enabling
abdominal gas. Other instruments can generally be
bleeding points to be grasped and cauterized.
passed through directly.
Monopolar dissecting hooks are useful for fine dis-
 In thoracoscopy, following insertion of a port and
section and in some cases can obviate the need to
removal of the trocar, the valve mechanism of the
 change instruments when cauterizing and cutting.
cannula is also removed, leaving unsealed access to
 Commercially available EndoloopsTM (Ethicon)
the thorax. Unlike laparoscopy, where a good gas-
 are pre-tied loops of suture material (Vicryl or PDS)
tight seal is obligatory, in the thorax a gas-tight seal is
 attached to a rigid plastic shaft that acts as a knot
not required. On the contrary, air needs to flow in and
 pusher to cinch the knot down once the loop has been 
out of the thorax as the lungs are inflated and deflated
positioned around the tissue. These can be used for
by positive pressure ventilation. Failure to allow this
isolating a pedicle of tissue for biopsy or small mass
risks creating a tension pneumothorax.
removal in the liver or periphery of the lung, or for
It is usually necessary to create a second port in
encircling a bleeding point or organ such as the uter-
order to introduce instrumentation, 
ine stump.
forceps. For operative surgery a third port may be
Haemostatic gauze such as Collostypttm can be
required. Additional ports are always inserted under
placed at biopsy sites to reduce haemorrhage, but this
direct visualization through the endoscope and the
is rarely necessary. Haemorrhage can be controlled
site is chosen with respect to the area of interest.
by simple pressure from a palpation probe, or small
The tip of the endoscope is brought up to the
tonsillar swabs can be introduced down the operative
proposed site to transilluminate the skin. This allows
port and used to apply pressure and remove small
larger vessels in the skin to be seen and a relatively
quantities of blood. It should be remembered that
avascular area selected. Local anaesthetic is injected
haemorrhage always looks considerably worse under
and a 5 mm skin incision is made as before. A cannula
the magnifying lens of the endoscope. In practice it is
is introduced through the incision, only this time under
rarely a problem and is usually easily controlled.
direct visualization through the endoscope to avoid
 Commercially available dissecting and coagulating
 instruments such as the harmonic scalpeltm (Ethicon)
penetration of the spleen or other viscera. The trocar
is removed and replaced by a blunt palpation probe.
and the LigaSureTM (Tyco/ValleyLabs) enable sealing
If instrumentation or probes are smaller than the port
and sectioning of vessels 5-7 mm in diameter, greatly
 diameter, a reducing valve must be used to maintain
facilitating dissection using only one instrument.
a gas-tight seal.
However, these instruments are currently extremely
 Whenever possible, instruments of any kind are
costly and outside the budget of most general practi-
 introduced into the abdomen under direct visualization,
tioners. A more cost-effective alternative is the Patton 
Hotbladerm - a single use disposable instrument 
with the jaws closed, to prevent trauma to abdominal
viscera. The tip of the instrument can then be guided
that can be attached to a standard electrosurgery unit.
down to the point of interest under visual control.
This instrument can be reused if cleaned with care
Retracting the endoscope to give a wide angle survey
and gas-sterilized.
view is often useful as instruments are introduced.
 Endoscopic staplers and clip appliers are a rapid
The endoscope can then be advanced along with the
and simple way to ligate vessels and ligate and divide
instrument to the point of interest to allow a more
tissues. Most of these are 10 mm instruments,
close up view for fine manipulation.
although 5 mm clip appliers are available. A 10 mm
 Rigid endoscopes, particularly those smaller than
linear cutter type endoscopic stapler can be very
4 mm in diameter, are fragile and are easily broken by
useful in resecting lung lobes or anastomosing bowel.
rough handling or sharp knocks. Endoscopes <4 mm 
These instruments place 4-6 rows of titanium staples
should always be used in a protective sheath of some
on either side of a blade that simultaneously cuts and
kind. Failure to do so may result in permanent
divides the tissue when the stapler is fired. Staple
damage. Torsion or bending of the shaft of the
cartridges are quite costly, and although these are
endoscope is the most common problem and occurs
generally single use instruments, they can often be
reused after ethylene oxide gas sterilization.
the endoscope is manipulated in a small, rigidly
Clip appliers usually contain around 20 stainless
steel or titanium clips, which can be applied individually
shadow at the edge of the image on the video monitor
to ligate vessels.
is an indication that excessive torsion is being used
and disaster is imminent.
Suction and irrigation
Removal of ascitic fluid, blood or thoracic exudates
Dissection and haemostasis
requires suction.
 Laparoscopic  suction/irrigation
All the tissue manipulations that are undertaken in
devices designed to fit the laparoscopic cannulae
open surgery can be accomplished endoscopically.
(5 mm) enable suction and irrigation to be carried out 
 Blunt dissection with forceps or sharp dissection with
without significant loss of insufflation. The operative
scissors enables lesions to be isolated from surround-
site can be irrigated with sterile saline and clots and
ing tissues. A wide variety of endoscopic instrument-
free blood removed by suction to give a clear view of
ation is available (see Chapter 2). Many endoscopic
the
operative field, and ensure that adequate
instruments are insulated and have attachments for
haemostasis has been accomplished.
102
Chapter 7 Rigid endoscopy and endosurgery:principles
Specimen retrieval
skills, a great deal of practice is required to become
accomplished at suturing and knot tying using
Concern over seeding of tumour cells at abdominal
laparoscopic instrumentation. These skills should be
and thoracic portal sites has led to the more common
practised using an endoscopic ‘trainer' (see above)
use of retrieval bags. Purpose-made endoscopic
before attempting to operate on a live patient. Some
retrieval bags can be purchased in a number of sizes.
basic knot tying techniques are included here; more
They are rolled into a 5 mm or 10 mm tube for inser-
detail can be found in Freeman (1999). Knot tying can
tion down a standard port; when deployed in the
be extracorporeal or intracorporeal.
abdomen, the mouth of the bag opens up by means
of a plastic spring-loaded mechanism to allow easy
Extracorporeal knots
insertion of tissue. The mouth is then closed with a
The suture material and needle are placed into the
drawstring and the port removed, allowing the bag to
 abdomen through an abdominal port (usually 10 mm) 
be withdrawn through the abdominal incision, which
with the free end remaining outside the body. The
can be slightly enlarged if necessary. When larger
suture material is grasped just behind the needle to
solid organs or tissues are to be removed, a macera-
facilitate passage through the port and the needle
tor can be introduced into the retrieval bag whilst still
holders are then repositioned to grasp the needle
inside the abdomen, and the tissue macerated to
 once in the abdomen. The needle can then be passed
allow easier removal through a small incision.
through or around the tissue to be ligated and brought
If commercial retrieval bags are not available,
back out through the same cannula, leaving both free
sterileziplockbags ora cut-off finger from a surgeon's
ends outside the body.
glove can make a good substitute.
Extracorporeal knots are formed by pushing
individual throws of a surgeon's knot down into the
body with a knot pusher, to cinch them down on to the
Knot tying techniques
tissue, or by forming a slip knot and introducing that in
Those new to minimally invasive surgery are frequently
a similar manner. Alternatively, preformed knotted
keen to learn suturing and knot tying techniques. The
sutures such as EndoloopsTm (Ethicon) may be used
vast majority of procedures can be carried out with
which incorporate a disposable knot pusher and a
the aid of electrosurgical haemostasis(monopolaror
pre-tied slip knot. Once the knot is positioned correctly
bipolar) or with the use of haemostatic clips or
the free ends of the suture material are cut off.
EndoloopsTM but knot tying can have specific uses in
A standard surgeon's knot can
be
tied
advancedsurgery and maybecomemoreuseful as
extracorporeally and seated down using laparoscopic
procedures are developed. Like most endoscopic
Babcock forceps (Figure 7.2).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Extracorporeal knot tied using Babcock forceps. The needle is passed down through the port and around the
7.2
tissue tobe ligated.The needle is thenbrought out of theport such that both ends of the suture material are
outside the body. (a) A single or double half hitch is tied as usual and the free ends of the suture are threaded through the
is slid down into the abdomenwith the jaws of theBabcock forcepsclosed.(continues)
103
Chapter 7 Rigid endoscopy and endosurgery:principles
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(continued) (e) Once the knot is in place, opening the jaws of the Babcock forceps applies tension to the knot to
7.2
cinch it down. (f, g) The Babcock forceps are then gently withdrawn and one end of the suture unthreaded from
as before. (i) The second throw is then pushed down into the abdomen and cinched tight as before.
A commonly used extracorporeal slip knot is the
is grasped and sutured in a similar manner as for
Roeder knot (Figure 7.3).A modified Roeder knot
open surgical techniques.
incorporating an initial double half hitch and two final
Standard suture materials can be used with %: cir-
wraps around just one limb of the suture loop may
cle, 1/2 circle straight or %2 curved 'ski needles. Needle
also be used for added security. The knot is loosely
size is dictated by the cannula size; it is normally nec-
tightened and, with the standing end held under
essary to use a 10 mm cannula with a suitable reducer
tension, the knot is slid down on to the tissue with a
for endoscopic suturing. Half-circle needles up to
knot pusher and cinched down.
CT-1 can be used with 10 mm cannulae.
Endoscopic needle holders are usually 5 mm in
Intracorporeal knots
diameter and should haveanin-linehandleas
These require a laparoscopic needle holder and
opposed to a pistol grip, since this facilitates rotation
grasping forceps. Whereas extracorporeal knot tying
and manipulation of the needle. They should also
requires a long length of suture material, this canbe
have a locking ratchet mechanism. A 5 mm reducing
cumbersome when suturing inside the body, and
valve will be required when using a 10 mm cannula.
suture length is usually cut to 10-20 cm or so to
The needle holders are passed through the reducing
facilitate handling. The whole length of suture material
valve and the suture material is grasped 1-2 cm away
and needle are introduced into the abdomen.Tissue
from the swaged-on needle. The needle holders are
104
Chapter 7Rigid endoscopy and endosurgery: principles
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
Roeder knot. (a-d) This is formed by throwing a half hitch which is then held between the index finger and
7.3
loop between the half hitch and the tissue to be ligated. (f) This free end is then wrapped around just one limb of the loop
and brought back through the last loop so created.
then introduced into the 10 mm operating cannula
with the grasping forceps and the needle passed
 and the reducing valve is attached to avoid loss of
through in the usual fashion. The open jaws of the
pneumoperitoneum. The valve of the operating
grasping forceps can be placed on to the tissue
cannula should be opened manually to permit passage
adjacent to the exit point of the needle to stabilize it if
of the needle and needle holder.
required. The needle is then grasped with the grasping
Suturing is easiest with the suture line running
forceps and the open jaws of the needle holders can
from 11 o'clock to 5 o'clock fora right-handed surgeon,
be applied to the tissue adjacent to the needle to
or from 1 o'clock to 7 o'clock if left handed (Figure
apply counter pressure as required. If long lengths of 
7.4). The monitor should be placed directly ahead of
suture material are used or space is very limited, then
the surgeon.
it is often easier to grasp the needle with the needle
 Once in the abdomen, the needle is manoeuvred
holders again and wrap the suture around the closed
into a suitable position and grasped halfway to two-
grasping forceps so they act as a pulley (Figure 7.5).
thirds from the tip. The tissue to be sutured is grasped
In this way the needle is pulled away from the wound
but the direction of pull on the wound is maintained
and tissue trauma is less likely.
Intracorporeal knot tying: direction of suture
7.4
7.5
Applying tension around a pulley.
line.
105
Chapter 7 Rigid endoscopy and endosurgery: principles
Intracorporeal knots are tied in a similar manner to
create a slipknot to aid in tissue apposition. A square
that for conventional open surgery (Figure 7.6).
knot can be converted to two half hitches and then slid
 On some occasions it may be an advantage to
down onto the tissue to tighten a ligature (Figure 7.7).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(t)
(g)
(h)
7.6
and into the loop from the left. (b-d) The suture material is grasped by the needle holders and wrapped around the
grasping forceps, which then grasp the free end of the suture to form the first half hitch as the instruments are drawn apart.
(e) The needle or long part of the suture material is then grasped again by the needle holders and brought over to the left
to create a reverseC loop. (f-h) The suture material is then grasped by the grasping forceps and wrapped around the
needle holders,which are advanced to grasp the free end and complete the second half hitch.
106
Chapter 7 Rigid endoscopy and endosurgery: principles
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Converting a square knot to a half hitch. (a) With a loose square knot in place and the long end of the suture
7.7
grasped in the left hand and the free end to the right, the suture material is grasped between the knot and the
tissue on the same side as the long end,i.e. the left, and tension applied to the knot by moving the graspers and needle
holders apart. This converts the knot to two half hitches. (b, c) Maintaining tension with the graspers in the left hand, the
needle holders can be placed above the knot and used to slide the knot down on to the tissue. (d) Grasping the free end
security; an additional throw can be formed.
Closure
All thoracic ports should be closed in at least two
layers to ensure an airtight seal.
Most laparoscopic ports require minimal closure.
Ternamian EndoTiP cannulae dissect through tissue
planes as they are inserted and allow tissues to
Postoperative care
re-appose on removal, forming an effective deal.
For the most part, postoperative care is similar to that
Even traditional 5 mm cannulae do not generally
for conventional open surgical cases, and recovery is
result in large enough wounds to allow herniation, so
 5 mm or smaller abdominal ports may be closed in
usually more rapid.Pain relief should be administered
one layerwith a simple interrupted suture.Alternatively,
for the first 24 hours postoperatively and then as
 the skin may be closed with tissue adhesive. All ports
required depending on the procedure.
 placed in the linea alba, where the abdominal wall is
Followinglaparoscopy the abdomen is fully
thinnest and healing delayed, should be closed in two
deflated but carbon dioxide continues to be absorbed
during the recovery period and the patient should be
layers to reduce the risk of herniation. Ports of 10 mm
monitored until completely recovered. Embolisms are
absorbable material such as Vicryl; and skin with
rare but can occur, even in recovery. Insufflation results
tissue glue or non-absorbable polyamide skin suture.
in pressure on abdominal vasculature and an increase
If ascites is present all abdominal incisions should be
in peripheral vascular resistance. As the abdominal
closed in several layers to prevent seepage of fluid.
pressure drops on desufflation, vascular resistance 
107
decreases and there is a resultant hypotension. Most
References and further reading
patients compensate readily but this can be potentially
Freeman LJ (1999) Veterinary Endosurgery. Mosby, St Louis
dangerous in hypovolaemic patients or patients with
McCarthy TC (2005) Veterinary Endoscopy for the Small Animal
pre-existing cardiovascular compromise.
Practitioner. Elsevier Saunders, St Louis
 Release of intra-abdominal pressure can also
 rarely lead to increased intra-abdominal bleeding as
 pressure on the capillaries is reduced.
108
Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
Philip Lhermette and David Sobel
the nose can be carried out and it is therefore the gold
Introduction
standard for diagnosis of intranasal disease.
Nasal disease is common in the dog and cat, often pre-
For the beginning endoscopist, rhinoscopy is one 
senting as a nasal discharge, with or without sneezing.
of the more accessible and easily learned procedures.
stertor or stridor. Epistaxis may or may not be a feature,
Nasal and sinus disease are commonly presented to
and can be present alone. Access to the rhinarium is
the first opinion veterinary surgeon and are often of
difficult, since it is entirely encased in bone apart from at 
significant concern to the owner. Thus, rhinoscopy
either end, and contains numerous turbinate scrolls
tends to be amongst the first and most useful
forming many blind-ending channels in which foreign
procedures to be added to the repertoire of the small
bodies or pathological changes can be hidden. Excellent 
animal practitioner.
coverage of nasal diseases and pathology can be found 
in the BSAVA Manual of Head, Neck and Thoracic
Surgery and the reader is referred to this manual for
Anatomical considerations
detailed coverage of nasal conditions.
There are only a limited number of direct physical
The diagnosis and management of diseases of the
approaches to the nasal cavity: dorsal rhinotomy;
rhinarium and associated sinuses is complicated by
ventral rhinotomy; and rhinoscopy. Rhinoscopy is
the anatomy of the region. The close quarters of so
 many critical structures, the bony encasement of the
other surgical options, and affords the best option for
more physiologically important structures, and the
visualizing lesions and taking biopsy samples for
relative similarity of the presenting signs of most nasal
diagnostic work, either for initial diagnosis or to
diseases make it difficult to easily access nasal and
confirm  a suspected  diagnosis.  A  rhinoscopic
sinus pathology. A sound appreciation of the anatomy
approach may also be used for the removal of foreign
of the nose and sinuses is therefore essential before
bodies and for treatment such as tumour ablation or
embarking on any procedure. Although different from
debulking, using the diode laser or, in cases of nasal
 the standpoint of aesthetics and external appearance,
aspergillosis, debriding fungal plaques and instilling
the nose of the dog and cat serves similar physiological
antifungal solutions. Indeed, rhinoscopy is the only
functions and the anatomy will therefore be considered
manner by which a full direct visual examination of
here together (Figure 8.1).
8.1
Dorsal nasal meatus
Nasal bone
Dorsal nasal concha
Transverse
sections to show
Nasal process of incisive bone
Middle nasal meatus
the anatomy of
the canine/feline
Common nasal
Maxilla
nose. (continues)
meatus
Ventral nasal
concha
Canine tooth
Cartilage of
nasal septum
Ventral nasal
Vestibule-
meatus
Vascularplexus
of hard palate
First premolar
Palatine process of maxila
Vomeronasal organ
(a)
Palatine process of incisive bone
Vomeronasal cartilage
109
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
8.1
Lateral part of frontal sinus
Cribriform plate
(continued)
Medial part offrontal sinus
Longitudinal
sections to show
the anatomy of
Dorsal nasal concha
the canine/feline
nose,
Ventral nasal concha
Entrance to maxillary recess
Ethmoidal labyrinth
(b)
The nose of the dog and cat is formed rostrally by
posteriormost aspect of the dorsal nasal meatus
the nasal planum, which surrounds the nostrils and
forms the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone, through
leads into the nasal vestibule on each side. The paired
which the olfactory nerves pass to terminate at the
nasal bones form the dorsal limits of the nares, whilst
olfactory bulb of the brain.
the lateral and ventral limits are formed by the
maxillary and palatine bones, respectively. Any or all
of these bony structures may be damaged by
Indications
aggressive nasal disease. Often, gross changes in
Patients with primary nasal disease may be presented
either of these two bony locales lead to the initial
to the clinic in a variety of forms, from acute respiratory
suspicion of disease in the nasal cavities.
distress to the chronic long-standing disease state.
The left and right nasal cavities are separated by
The presenting problems that should prompt the
a midline nasal septum and each is divided by dorsal,
diagnostic work-up for nasal disease are listed in
ventral and ethmoidal nasal conchae into the dorsal,
middle, ventral and common nasal meatuses. The
Figure 8.2.
ventralnasalconchaextendsrostrallyintothelateral
part of the vestibule, where it forms the alar cartilage
just inside the nasal planum. Located at the
Common indications
ventralmost aspect of the alar cartilage is the punctum
Nasal discharge: unilateral/bilateral; mucoid/mucopurulent
of the nasolacrimal duct. In disease, nasolacrimal
History of foreign body
duct transit is often interrupted, resulting in epiphora.
The complex scrolling of the bone and resulting
 Other signs affecting the nares
diverticula make full exploration of every part of the
 Sneezing/reverse sneezing
nose impossible. However, the majority of the dorsal
 Stertor (snoring/snorting)
and common meatuses and all of the ventral meatus
Stridor (inspiratory noise/wheezing)
will be accessible in most patients.
Epiphora, through blockage of the nasolacrimal ducts
The paranasal sinuses are a series of small, air-
Facial sweling or deformity
filled, mucous membrane-lined bony spaces that
Epistaxis
communicate to varying degrees with the nasal
 Other clinical signs
cavities. With reference to respiratory disease, the
only sinuses that have frequent clinical significance
Halitosis in the absence of dental disease
are the frontal sinuses, as their natural drainage into
Dental disease
Exophthalmos
the ethmoid concha is often pathologically obstructed
Dysphagia
in the diseased state. The paired frontal sinuses are
Head shaking
divided by a median septum and further subdivided
Pawing at the nose
into three chambers on each side - lateral, medial
 Rubbing the face on the ground
and rostral - which communicate with the nares by
separate nasofrontal openings. In the majority of dogs
8.2
Indications for rhinoscopy.
and cats the sinuses are not directly accessible to a
rigid rhinoscope.
The mucous membrane of the nose is well
vascularized andlined
with ciliatedcolumnar
Clinical history
epithelium. This, coupled with the large surface area
A carefully taken history is essential. For example, a
of the conchae, results in warming and humidifying of 
history of sniffing up a foreign body or acute onset of
inspired air and the trapping of airborne particles in a
signs after walking through long grass may suggest a
thin layer of nasal mucus, which can then be carried
possible diagnosis. A history should include careful
tothe outside by the action of the cilia.The
discussion with the owner concerning:
110
Chapter 8  Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
 Duration of clinical signs
glass slide to demonstrate airflow. Carefui and delicate
Age at onset
percussion of the rhinarium and sinuses may help
Laterality of clinical signs
localize fluid and inspissated mucoid debris or even
Progression versus waxing and waning
tissue masses.
Use of the animal (e.g. hunting, field work)
A careful aural examination can identify evidence
Environmental exposure to toxins
 inflammatory or infectious disease that has
of  i
Travel history
extended to, or arisen from, the middle or inner ear.
 Trauma
On occasion, nasopharyngeal polyps can be identified
Other concurrent illnesses.
on examination of the middle ear, without having to
embark on a full nasal examination.
Figure 8.3 summarizes the diagnostic significance
 Any evidence of epistaxis should give the clinician
 of these questions.
 cause to look carefully for evidence of coagulopathies,
specifically of platelet dysfunction. Examination of the
oral mucosa, the ocular tissues, and urogenital tissues 
Characteristic
 Differential diagnoses and comments
for evidence of ecchymoses or petechiation may
corroborate suspicions.
Acute versus chronic onset
Dental disease is a common cause of secondary
Acute
bacterial  rhinitis  and  a  careful  examination  for
 Foreign body; trauma
periodontal disease is indicated. If the conscious 
Chronic
Neoplasia; fungal rhinitis; lymphoplasmacytic
patient will allow, examination of the oropharynx can
rhinitis (allergic or immune-mediated); trauma/
occasionally identify pathology at the level of the
foreign body; coagulopathy; hypertension; 
posterior nares. Not infrequently, mass lesions that 
hyperadrenocorticism (rare)
u no   sau sosod an o a
 over the caudal aspect of the soft palate.
Unilateral versus bilateral
Figure 8.4 summarizes the diagnostic significance
 Unilateral
Neoplasia; foreign body; localized infection; tooth 
 of clinical findings.
root infection; early aspergilosis
 Bilateral
Lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis; infection (viral/ 
bacterial; allergy; bronchial infection and
coughing leading to secondary nasopharyngeal
Findings and diagnostic
infection. NB Early unilateral infections such as
Procedure
indications
aspergillosis or invasive neoplasia may progress
 from unilateral to bilateral as the infection/mass
 Look for discharge
 Serous: inflammatory;
 breaches the nasal septum
 mucopurulent; epistaxis 
 Age at onset
 Look for epiphora 
Massorinfection affecting
Young (0-7 
Infection,ram,llgytonfre
 nasolacrimal duct
 more likely 
years)
 Look for swellings or deformity; 
 Trauma; neoplasia; inflammation;
Old (>7 years)
Neoplasia increasingly likely
 compare sides
 invasive fungal rhinitis
Waxing and
 Auscultate lungs, trachea and
 Lower airway disease; reduced
Allergic: may be seasonal or geographical;
intermittent exposure to toxins, e.g. smoke, dust
 both sides of rhinarium
 airflow in one/both nares; stertor;
waning
stridor
Species/breed
 Listen for airlow, particularly
 Neoplasia, foreign body
Cats
 Cats prone to grass foreign bodies sneezed 
for discrepancies between
 forward over the soft palate. Oriental cats more
 nostrils. Place small twist of 
prone to sinusitis
cotton wool in front of nares to
 assess flow. Place mirror in
 Dogs
 Dogs tend to sniff up foreign bodies. Dogs more
front of nares and look for
prone to aspergillosis. Dolichocephalic breeds:
misting
increased incidence of neoplasia. German 
 Palpate eyes 
Retrobulbar abscess; neoplasia
Shepherd Dog: increased incidence of 
 aspergillosis
 Palpate rhinarium for signs of
Trauma; aspergillosis; neoplasia
Historical factors and their diagnostic
 pain/discomfort
8.3
 significance.
 Percuss sinuses and rhinarium
Space-occupying lesion: mass/
fluid/fungal plaques 
Clinical examination
Oral examination, especially 
 Dental disease; invasive neoplasia
palate and teeth
Careful auscultation of inspiratory and expiratory
airflow from the nose may reveal the magnitude and
 Aural examination for polyps or
Auropharyngeal polyps
definitive lateralization of the pathology. A neonatal
otitis media
stethoscope is useful for listening to airflow over the
dorsum of the rhinarium, its lateral aspects, and over
8.4
 Clinical examination.
the frontal sinuses. Some clinicians use misting on a
111
Chapter 8  Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
In common clinical practice, a first presentation
found. Any swabs taken for culture and sensitivity
of bilateral nasal disease in a young otherwise
testing must be taken prior to rhinoscopy, as focal
healthy pet is often managed with empirical use of
areas of infection may be washed away or contami-
antimicrobials. However, certain findings always
nated during the procedure.
suggest the need for further diagnostics. Epistaxis, a
Primary bacterial rhinitis is very rarely found.
consistently unilateral discharge, unilateral nasal
Aspergillus may be cultured from swabs taken from
discharge progressing to bilateral discharge, facial
normal dogs, as it is ubiquitous in the environment;
asymmetry, facial pain, or lack of response 
to
conversely, it may not be found in swabs from infected
previous rational therapy indicate the need for further
dogs as it is not always shed in large numbers in
exudates, so false positives and negatives are
diagnostics.
common. Pharyngeal swabs for feline respiratory
 calicivirus,
diseases  (feline
feline herpesvirus,
Preoperative diagnostic work-up
   s sn   (
cause of chronic rhinitis in cats. Full details of testing.
Blood pressure measurement
methodology can be found in the BSAVA Manual of
Epistaxis may be a result of hypertension. This is
Canine and Feline Clinical Pathology.
especially the case in cats, where hypertension
secondary  to hyperthyroidism is not uncommon.
Blood pressure measurement should be carried out in
Intraoperative diagnostic work-up
a calm and quiet environment and repeated several 
(under general anaesthesia)
times to get a representative result. The underlying
cause of hypertension should be investigated prior to
Diagnostic imaging
rhinoscopy unless otherwise warranted. In cats a T4
Radiography is extremely useful for assessing the
analysis may be useful to rule out hyperthyroidism as
location, extent and possible cause of disease (Figure 
a contributory cause of hypertension.
8.5). Several views should be taken as a routine:
Clinical pathology
 Intraoral dorsoventral occlusal (Figure 8.6)
Ventrodorsal open mouth to assess cribriform
should be carried out prior to rhinoscopy. If epistaxis
plate
 Rostrocaudal skyline sinus view of frontal sinuses
is a predominant feature, investigation of primary and
secondary clotting pathways is essential. It is impor-
and tympanic bullae (Figure 8.7)
Lateral.
tant not only to rule out clotting disorders as a pri-
mary cause, but also to alert the surgeon to
 If dental disease is suspected, high-detail dental
complications likely to result from the rhinoscopy pro-
radiographs or oblique lateral views should be taken
cedure. The nose is a very vascular organ and some
haemorhage is to be expected during rhinoscopy,
as well. Mammography cassettes are ideal for high-
even in a normal patient. Clotting disorders may
detail nasal and dental views. Special attention should 
result in severe uncontrollable haemorrhage and
be paid to the apical areas of tooth roots for evidence
 of infection.
 may need to be addressed before continuing with the
procedure. Assessment should include at least a
platelet count and buccal mucosal bleeding time; if
epistaxis is severe, activated clotting time or pro-
Radiographic finding
Possible causes
thrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin
time should be determined.
Dogs
Adrenocortical  function  testing  (adrenocortico-
Loss of trabecular pattern
 Fungal infection; neoplasia; 
tropic hormone 
 stimulation  or 
dexamethasone
(ethmoturbinates/
trauma
suppression test) may be useful to detect hyper-
 maxillary)
adrenocorticism if this is suspected.
 Serological assays for aspergillosis may be use-
 Increased soft tissue density:
 Maxilla 
Neoplasia; foreign body; blood
ful but single samples are of limited use: a 70%
 clot; mucus 
cross-reactivity with non-fungal disease, including
 Sinus
 Mucus; neoplasia; fungal plaque 
neoplasia, may lead to false positives, and failure to
 seroconvert may lead to false negatives. However,
Lucency
 Fungal rhinitis
serology can corroborate other findings during the
 Septal deviation
 Neoplasia
 course of the work-up and may therefore be useful. A
 paired rising titre is required to demonstrate infection
 Tympanic bulla opacity 
 Polyp; infection
with any certainty.
Cats
Microbiology
 Unilateral lucency 
 Neoplasia
Bacterial culture from the nose is generally unhelpful
due to the large number of commensal organisms
 Bilateral lucency 
Chronic rhinitis
found there. Most infections tend to be secondary and
opportunistic rather than a primary cause of disease,
 Common radiographic findings and their
8.5
but culture may be useful if a focal area of infection is
 significance.
112
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
Radiography or MRI techniques should ideally
always be carried out prior to endoscopy. Once the
nasal cavity has been flushed with saline, and the
turbinates have been partially obscured with blood
clots from intraoperative haemorrhage, radiography
will not be possible for a couple of days.
Dental examination
Dental disease is common in dogs and cats and can
often be the cause of, confused with, or contribute to,
nasal pathology. The deep dorsal recesses of the
upper arcade of tooth roots abut the ventral surface of
the hard palate and are thus closely associated
anatomically with the ventral meatus of the nasal
 cavity. The intervening bone and mucosa are easily
Intraoral radiograph, showing soft tissue opacity
breached by trauma or infection. Periodontal disease,
8.6
 in right caudal nares.
resulting in resorption of alveolar bone and the
progressive deepening of periodontal pockets, may
lead to communication with the nasal cavity or
 maxillary sinus. Alternatively, endodontic disease may
lead to lysis of the periapical bone at the tooth root
and associated rhinitis.
 A full dental examination can only be carried out
under general anaesthesia. The periodontal pockets
of each tooth should be explored with a suitable
dental probe to assess their depth and evidence of
infection, which may have tracked into the nasal
cavity. Haemorrhage should be noted. If probing
provokes ipsilateral epistaxis, fistula formation is
confirmed, though lack of haemorrhage does not 
rule this out. Any suspicion of dental involvement 
should be confirmed radiographically. Further details
can be found in the BSAVA Manual of Canine and
Feline Dentistry.
Detailed oropharyngeal examination
 Examination of the pharynx and larynx may reveal
the presence of trauma or foreign bodies. Tonsillar
enlargement (Figure 8.8) is common in chronic
disease. Discharge may be seen passing back from
the nose into the oropharynx, whereas it may not be
obvious at the nares. Examination and digital
Radiographic skyline view of the tympanic
8.7
palpation of the hard and soft palate may reveal
bullae and frontal sinuses in the cat.
masses either on the surface or palpable through the
Thoracic radiography is used to look for dissemi-
soft tissues of the soft palate. A spay hook can be
nated infectious or neoplastic disease within the pul-
used to pull the free edge of the soft palate rostrally
monary parenchyma and pleural space (see BSAVA
and enable limited examination of the nasopharynx
Manual of Canine and Feline Thoracic Imaging).
for foreign bodies or neoplasia.
Computed tomography (CT) or magnetic reso-
 nance imaging (MRl) are very valuable modalities for
examination of the rhinarium (Saunders JH et al.,
8.8
2004; Lefebvre et al., 2005). The detail visible and the
 acute ability to localize pathology can be of tremen-
Tonsillar
dous benefit; limiting factors are often availability
inflammation/
enlargement in the
and timely access, though there is a rapid increase in
dog. The tonsils
veterinary-specific CT and MRl in both private clinical
can be examined in
 practice and in teaching hospitals. CT and MRI scans
detail with a rigid
can be helpful in differentiating neoplasia from infec-
endoscope. The
tion and give a more precise image of the limits of a
tonsillar crypt
should be explored
with forceps under
and/or radiotherapy. The ability to take multiple
direct visualization
images at regular spacing and in diferent planes,
to exclude foreign
 allows a virtual three-dimensional image of the area
bodies.
to be built up.
113
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
Instrumentation
rhinoscopy is performed by retroflexing a flexible
endoscope over the free edge of the soft palate, so as
 A full discussion of endoscopic equipment and its
to look forward, towards the choanae. Since this does
care is provided in Chapter 2. Figure 8.9 lists the
not require fluid irrigation, swabs and samples can be
equipment  required  for  rhinoscopy  and  specific
obtained for culture if required, as well as biopsy
 considerations are discussed in the later sections on
samples of nasopharyngeal and caudal nasal masses.
 procedures. An endoscopic video camera is essential
It may also be pertinent to perform a bronchoscopic
for performing any operative or sterile work. Some
examination if tracheal or lower airway disease is
endoscopists do prefer to look through the oculus of
suspected (see Chapter 6). Following examination of
the endoscope, but the field is commonly obliterated
the bronchi and nasopharynx, the airway is sealed
by fluid and blood and is difficult to see without the
with a well fitting, cuffed endotracheal tube, the seal is 
enlargement the camera affords.
tested and anterior rigid rhinoscopy performed under
saline irrigation to complete the examination.
 Camera and monitor
Xenon, metal halide or halogen light source
Caudal (posterior, retropharyngeal)
 3.5-8 mm flexible endoscope
rhinoscopy
Fibreoptic light guide cable
(Dental mirror)
 Retropharyngeal posterior rhinoscopyis ideal for direct
 2.7 mm 18 cm HOPKINS 30 degree endoscope 
14.5 Fr cystoscopy sheath with 5 Fr instrument channel
examination of the retropharynx and posterior nasal
High-flow arthroscopy sheath 
cavity. It is particularly useful for obtaining diagnostic
(1.9-2.4 mm HOPKINS 30 degree endoscope for small cats, with 
tissue samples and for managing/re-assessing the
 appropriate sheaths)
progress of problems over time. It is essential to
 7 Fr 40 cm biopsy forceps 
understand the normal anatomy (Figure 8.10) and to
 7 Fr 40 cm grasping forceps 
distinguish normal from abnormal findings.
 3 mm cup biopsy forceps
Caudal rhinoscopy is always performed prior to
'Cell-safe biopsy sample frames
 Giving set 
 anterior (rostral) rhinoscopy since contamination of 
 Normal saline (1 litre +) 
the nasopharynx with fluid, blood and discharge
 resulting from the fluid irrigation used during ante-
8.9
rior rhinoscopy would otherwise compromise the
 Equipment required for rhinoscopy.
examination.
Instrumentation
WARNING
 Endoscopes sold as'Autoclavable'are designed
A small flexible endoscope is required for posterior
 for human hospital autoclaves with a slow heat
rhinoscopy, to view the nasopharynx and choanae.
The endoscope must be capable of 180 degrees of
 and cooling cycle. Most veterinary autoclaves
 heat up and cool down too quickly and will
flexion. A 3.5 mm flexible bronchoscope is ideal for
 reduce the life of these endoscopes consider-
cats and small dogs, although a larger endoscope
ably. It is not advisable to autoclave endo-
 such as a gastroscope may be used in most dogs. In 
the absence of a flexible endoscope, a dental miror
 scopes in veterinary practice.
can be used in conjunction with a light source and a
spay hook to pull the soft palate forward and view
Premedication and anaesthesia
 over the soft palate towards the choanae. This is not
really feasible in cats and gives a limited view in large
General anaesthesia is required for rhinoscopy.
dogs, but is better than nothing. However, it does not
Standard preparation  for general  anaesthesia is
allow biopsy sampling or the passing of instruments
undertaken, including withholding food for 12 hours. A
into the nasopharynx. The soft palate can sometimes
be pulled forward sufficiently with a blunt spay hook
access if needed. Anaesthetic protocols are used that
to reveal a foreign body and allow removal but this
are standard to the practice given the clinical scenario,
does not obviate the need to examine the caudal
although premedication with acepromazine helps to
nares properly.
lower blood pressure and reduce haemorrhage, as
well as providing a calm recovery. A combination of
 Patient preparation and positioning
acepromazine 0.02 mg/kg and either butorphanol
Caudal rhinoscopy is commonly performed with the
0.1 mg/kg or buprenorphine 10 μg/kg by intravenous
patient in sternal recumbency, although there are
 or intramuscular injection is commonly used. Appro-
authors who advocate lateral positioning. The head is
propped up very slightly with towels to elevate the
to induction.
mouth and nasal planum for easy access. A cuffed
endotracheal tube should be placed and checked to
Procedure
ensure an adequate seal to protect the airway in the
event of haemorrhage or discharge. The caudal
It is good practice to examine the nasopharynx and
pharynx can be additionally sealed with gauze
choanae using caudal (posterior) rhinoscopy before
sponges or cut squares of feminine hygiene products
performing the rostral (anterior) procedure. Caudal
(see later).
114
Chapter 8
Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
Nasopharynx
Oesophagus
Caudal nasal choanae
Nasal cavities
 Soft palate
Tongue
Trachea
Oropharynx
Epiglottis
8.10
Anatomy of the retropharynx and posterior nasal cavity.
A mouth gag is essential to keep the mouth open
and prevent the patient biting down on to the
endoscope in the event of contact with the pharynx
stimulating a gag reflex.
 Careful monitoring of blood pressure is needed
during rhinoscopy. Caution should be advised in 
performing rhinoscopy in patients who are not cardio-
vascularly stable and are not normotensive.
Procedure
The flexible endoscope is inserted into the mouth and
the oral cavity, laryngeal apparatus and posterior
nasopharynx are evaluated. Advancing the tip of the
 insertion tube towards the larynx, the free edge of the 
soft palate should be passed and the endoscope retro-
flexed into a ‘J’ position behind the soft palate to
view the nasopharynx (Figure 8.11a). The insertion 
tube is then gradually withdrawn rostrally with the tip
still flexed, to advance the tip of the endoscope towards
the choanae (Figure 8.11b). The tip of the endoscope 
can easily be viewed by transillumination through the
soft palate. As the endoscope is retroflexed, the view 
seen on the monitor is upside down and reversed: up
is down and left is right (Figure 8.12).
There is a strong gag reflex present during this
procedure, which can make manoeuvring frustrating
and difficult. This is normal and does not necessarily
mean that the patient is not anaesthetized deeply
enough. The use of topical lidocaine sprayed on to
the mucosal surfaces may help blunt this reflex, but it 
should not be expected to go away. In addition,
bleeding is not uncommon due to the minor trauma
Endoscope in retroflexed 'J' position. For
8.11
caused by the endoscope. If bleeding is expected, as 
visualization of the caudal nasal choanae, the
 with biopsy samples,it is recommended that a gauze 
 endoscope must be advanced by pulling it toward the 
collection system is placed in the caudal pharynx.
 endoscopist while keeping it retroflexed.
115
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
Ventral
8.12
8.14
Normalretroflexed
Haemorrhagic
view of the caudal
discharge from the
nasal choanaeand
choana.
retropharynx
(Courtesy of
RC Denovo)
Right
Left
Dorsal
8.15
Nasopharyngeal
Normal appearance
lymphoid
 During evaluation of the retropharynx, it should be 
hyperplasia in a
Siamese cat. This
possible to visualize (Figure 8.13):
is commonly found 
as the result of
The free edge of the soft palate
chronic
The soft palate
inflammation.
 The mucosa of the dorsal nasopharyngeal wall
 The opening to the Eustachian tubes 
The choanae
 The nasal septum
 A number of the turbinates in the posterior
 nasal cavity.
Biopsy and other sampling
Biopsy samples may be taken from any mass or
abnormal tissue. Brushings and swabs may also be
taken for cytology or culture. Swabs or samples for
culture from the nasopharynx, choanae and nares
Normal dorsal
must all be taken before embarking on fluid-assisted
soft palate
anterior rhinoscopy, since that procedure is likely to
contaminate the field and wash away debris and
infected material.
Normal
Biopsy samples can be obtained under direct
nasal
visualization using the endoscope. It is important to
Nol
mal
choanae
dorsal
remember that the endoscope should be removed
pharyngeal
from the patient and the cytology brush, biopsy or
mucosa
grasping forceps introduced whilst the tip of the
insertion tube is straight. The instrument should be
advanced until it is just at the tip of the insertion tube
before retroflexing the tube and taking the sample.
Forcing an instrument through a flexible tip in the 180
Normal endoscopic appearance of the dorsal
8.13
degrees flexed position, either to insert or withdraw it,
soft palate, the nasal choanae and the dorsal
may cause expensive and often irreparable damage
pharyngeal mucosa. (Courtesy of D Levitan) 
to the endoscope.
Other methods occasionally used to obtain biopsy
Healthy pharyngeal, palatal and retropharyngeal
tissue is usually smooth and pink, whilst diseased
which may be especially useful for retropharyngeal
tissue is often hyperaemic, irregular, friable or has
lesions. lt is important to ensure that the endo-
obvious masses or nodular changes. There should
tracheal cuff is properly inflated and that the pharynx
be no obvious discharge from the choanae in the nor-
is packed with gauze due to the high volume of fluid
 mal animal. Posterior nasal discharge, either haemor-
being flushed. An open-ended catheter, Foley cath-
rhagic or mucopurulent, can sometimes be seen,
eter or feeding tube can then be advanced retrograde
even in the absence of discharge from the anterior
via the nares to the mass, and sterile saline flushed 
nares (Figure 8.14), and is always pathological.
manually with a syringe under high pressure.
Raised nodules of benign lymphoid hyperplasia
Depending on patient size, 10-30 ml of fluid may be 
(Figure 8.15) are quite commonly seen if sneezing
instilled per flush. Any dislodged tissue can be
has been prolonged or if there has been some nidus
retrieved from the gauze used to pack the pharynx,
of chronic inflammation.
nares or oral cavity.
116
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
The disadvantages of flexible endoscopes are the
WARNING
poor light transmission and image quality, coupled
Caution should be exercised in taking nasal
with very small channel size, making diagnostic
swabs prior to anterior rhinoscopy, as this may
sampling or debridement difficult. It is difficult without
 introduce iatrogenic artefacts that could be mis-
a high-pressure fluid pump to flush sufficient saline
 taken for pathology. Since true bacterial rhinitis
down the instrument channel to clear discharge and
is rare, it may be advisable to forego swabbing
haemorrhage, especially with additional diagnostic or
and to culture biopsy samples taken from spe-
therapeutic instrumentation in place, so visualization 
 cific sites during the rhinoscopy procedure.
is easily compromised.
Rigid endoscopes provide a considerably better
view and allow larger instrumentation, enabling the
Foreign body removal
surgeon to obtain larger biopsy samples that provide a
Foreign bodies and tumours can be removed or
 sampled accordingly. Foreign body retrieval from
much better diagnostic yield. The authors recommend
rigid endoscopes for nearly all rhinoscopy cases.
 the nasopharynx may be accomplished with a variety
of forceps that are made to fit through the biopsy
Patient preparation and positioning
channel of the endoscope. In certain cases, nasal or
Sternal recumbency is preferred as it reduces the
nasopharyngeal foreign material is best removed by
chance of contamination of one side by detritus from
flushing. Flushing can be accomplished as described
the other, and the patient is in a more natural position
above for diagnostic sampling. Grass that has passed
in relation to the image on the monitor. The operator
rostrally over the soft palate may be difficult to remove
must be aware that they will be flushing with a lot of
via the pharynx due to the directional nature of the
fluid and there is likely to be some haemorrhage. If in 
hairs on the leaf itself. In these cases it is often better
lateral recumbency the lower of the nares willbecome
to remove the leaf via anterior rhinoscopy to prevent 
filled with detritus, i.e. contaminated from above,
fragments breaking off and being left behind.
 compromising adequate examination - so the lower
Rigid endoscopy
nostril should be examined first. If there is copious
discharge from one nostril, placing that side down will
In some cases nasal masses at or near the choanae
prevent discharge from flowing into the less affected 
can be better examined and treated using a rigid
side before there is a chance to examine it.
endoscope via a pharyngostomy incision. A small
The procedure is best carried out on a wet table
incision is made in the lateral pharyngeal pouch in the
due to the large volumes of irrigant used. A large tray
same manner as when introducing a pharyngostomy
covered with a stainless steel grid will suffice if a wet
feeding tube. The 2.7 mm endoscope in the cystoscopy
table is not available, and will save a lot of mopping
sheath can then be introduced in a rostral direction,
up! Towels placed on the floor are also useful to catch
giving excellent direct access to the area above the
additional spillage. Irrigation is usually provided with
soft palate.
bags of 0.9% saline fitted with standard giving sets. It
is best to avoid performing rhinoscopy in the sterile
Anterior (rostral) rhinoscopy
operating theatre (Figure 8.16).
Instrumentation
Small-diameter flexible endoscopes with 2-way deflec-
tion can be used for anterior rhinoscopy and have the
 advantage of easier manipulation into small crevices.
In some medium to large dogs this will allow access
to the frontal sinuses. A 2.7 mm 30 degree endoscope
and cystoscopy sheath (rhinoscope) can be used
 in almost all dogs and in most cats. The oval cross-
section of the cystoscope allows easy non-traumatic
introduction into the nasal meatuses and provides for
excellent irrigation as well as an integral instrument 
 a  sa  sn  a 
smaller diameter endoscope, such as a 2.4 mm or
even a 1.9 mm endoscope. These very small endo-
scopes are extremely fragile and will require a suit-
able sheath or cannula and instrumentation for any
 procedure, so the cost of buying them for a minority of
cases may be prohibitive. A better solution is to invest
in an arthroscopy sheath for the 2.7 mm endoscope.
This sheath is round in cross-section and smaller
than the cystoscopy sheath, and so can be accom-
Theatre set up for rhinoscopy. The patient is in
modated in smaller cats and dogs. The downside is
8.16
ventral recumbency on a gridded table with the
that there is no instrument channel, and instruments
chin resting on a rolled up towel. The monitor is positioned
must therefore be passed alongside the sheath in
at the caudal end of the patient, directly opposite the
order to take biopsy samples and so on.
surgeon.
117
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
The head is propped up with towels to elevate the
of saline irrigation, especially with cold saline, tends
nasal planum for easy access. Care should be taken
to blanch the mucosa somewhat, so the normal
 not to elevate the nose too much in an attempt to limit
appearance will be diferent in air to that under
the amount of excess irrigant accumulating around
irrigation. The nasal cavity is richly supplied with blood
the endotracheal tube cuff.
vessels and is an ideal heat exchange mechanism so
in small animals, such as cats, persistent flushing of 
Procedure
the nasal cavity with cold saline can significantly
Having examined the nasopharynx in detail, it is
reduce core body temperature of an anaesthetized
important to ensure that the endotracheal tube is
 patient, and this should be monitored if the procedure 
well cuffed and forms a good seal with the trachea.
is at all prolonged.
This is best done by gently applying pressure to the
 Control of saline flow is best adjusted with the tap
rebreathing bag as the cuff is inflated and listening
on the ingress port of the rhinoscope, so the normal
for leakage around the endotracheal tube, so that a
 controls on the giving set may be left open.
 good seal is achieved without overdue pressure on
Beginning with the normal or less affected side (as
the tracheal mucosa from the cuff. Large volumes
determined by preoperative radiographs and clinical
of fluids will be washed over the soft palate and
signs), the nasal planum is deflected dorsally and the 
there will be a continuous flow of saline through the
endoscope introduced into the nose. Fluid flow is
nostril and out of the mouth. A gauze swab or a pad
started. The ventral nasal meatus is examined first 
may be placed over the larynx to protect the airway
(Figure 8.17). Using a technique similar to that for
from solid debris and clots, being careful not to
passing a nasogastric tube, the endoscope is pointed
occlude the pharynx completely. Feminine hygiene
ventrally and medially. Slowly. the endoscope is
products can also be used for this purpose: their
advanced. The operator will appreciate the bony shelf
high degree of absorbency, small size and low pro-
forming the separation between the middle and dorsal
file are ideal. A single thin mini-pad is taken and cut 
meatuses. As the endoscope is advanced caudally,
in half and a slit made in the centre. This slit is posi-
the endoscope willfalloff this shelf and into the ventral
tioned around the endotracheal tube. If the patient is
nasal meatus. It should be possible to pass the
larger, additional pads can be placed in the caudal
endoscope to the level of the posterior nares and
pharynx for additional absorbency. A nurse should
nasopharynx. On entering the nasopharynx, just
be charged with the task of remembering how many
caudal to the posterior nares, the orifice of the
pads were placed to ensure complete retrieval prior
Eustachian tube can be seen on the lateral wall
to extubation.
(Figure 8.18a). The endoscope is retracted rostrally
The monitor is positioned at about the level of the
and the dorsal meatus (Figure 8.18b) and ethmoid
 animal's pelvis with the monitor facing cranially. Using
turbinates (Figure 8.18c) examined.
aseptic technique, the endoscope, light guide cable,
cannula/sheath and camera are assembled. (See
Chapter 2 for details of instrument sterilization
 procedures.) A bag of sterile saline is hung and
8.17
 connected to one of the stopcocks of the cannula;
Normal ventral
 3-litre bags, as used in large animal practice, are
meatus. (a) Cat.
 preferred to avoid constantly changing bags. The
(b) Dog: note the
 shaft of the cannula is coated with sterile water-
smooth pink
 soluble lubricating jelly, being careful not to get any
turbinates, which
 on the lens of the endoscope.
appear almost to
interdigitate.
The endoscope is held in ‘pistol' fashion, with the
light guide cable and port facing towards the floor
 and the camera oriented such that any graphics on 
the camera head can be read right side up. This
will ensure that the image produced on the monitor
is true.
Rostral rhinoscopy may be carried out directly,
(a
viewing the mucosa in air, or under vigorous saline
irrigation. Often the presence of copious discharge or
haemorrhage (iatrogenic or otherwise) obscures the
view and is difficult to remove with suction. In the
majority of cases the procedure is carried out under
saline irrigation as this washes away any debris or
haemorrhage and allows a clear view of the mucosa.
However, when viewing a relatively large cavity, such 
as in the presence of extensive turbinate damage in 
aspergillosis, or when entering the nasopharynx,
turbulence in the saline flow can obscure the view. In
these situations, turning off the saline flow and
reverting to direct viewing through air may greatly
(b)
improve visualization. It should be noted that the use
118
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
8.18
8.19
(a) Normal
Mucus is always
Eustachian tube
abnormal in the
opening in the dog.
anterior nares.
(b) Normal dorsal
meatus in the dog.
Note the smooth
vaulted
appearance
(c) Normal
ethmoid turbinates
in the dog. Note the
corrugated
(a)
appearance of the 
turbinates on the
left compared with
the nasal septum
8.20
on the right.
Ulcerative/erosive
rhinitis with
generalized
swelling and
erythema of the
turbinates.Multiple
small erosions are
evident and bleed
easily on contact.
(b)
Haemorrhage is the bane of rhinoscopy and a
thorough examination must be completed before
biopsy samples are taken. Once the biopsy procedures 
are initiated haemorrhage will be much more profuse 
and will greatly obscure visualization and increase
observational artefact. Many authors and practitioners
have suggested remedies to the obfuscation that
bleeding produces but these have uniformly been of
limited value. These techniques include using very
cold refrigerated saline for irrigation and adding a
(c)
dilute solution of adrenaline (epinephrine) to the
irrigant, all in an effort to produce vasoconstriction.
The mucous membrane should be uniform and
Biopsy
pink/red in colour with no obvious nasal discharge. If
thick mucus is present (Figure 8.19) and hampers the
Once a full initial exploration has been made, areas of
view, it may be preferable to remove the endoscope
pathology are returned to and biopsy samples taken.
and forcefully flush the nose several times with saline
it is important to take samples from multiple sites, as
from a 60 ml catheter-tipped syringe before reintro-
diagnosis is frequently based on histopathology and 
ducing the endoscope. Alternatively, attaching a
there is litle correlation between visual appearance
20 ml or 60 ml syringe of saline to the free port on the
and specific disease entities (Johnson et al., 2004).
rhinoscope sheath allows more accurate direction of
Inflamed mucosa can look similar with a wide range
a forced saline jet. It is important to close the other
of underlying pathology. Even normal nasal mucosa 
ports first or the saline will be directed back up into
bleeds tremendously, and that effect will be greatly
the bag or, worse, through the instrument port into the
magnified by the camera. Aggressive irrigation is
 surgeon's face!
imperative and, while all nasal mucosa is delicate and 
Haemorrhage occurring with little or no trauma
tends towards haemorrhage, note should be taken of 
 may be an indication of inflammation. In these cases
tissue that seems to bleed easily.
the meatuses are narrowed due to mucosal
Biopsy samples can be taken from the nasal
 congestion. Destructive rhinitis due to bacterial or
mucosa, polyps, masses, etc., at this time. The
fungal infection leads to open enlarged airways and
operator can use either flexible cup-style biopsy
may allow visualization of the duct into the frontal
forceps that are introduced via the biopsy channel or
sinuses. Ulcerative lesions (Figure 8.20) should be
rigid biopsy forceps passed alongside the shaft of the
noted as the endoscope is advanced for the first time,
endoscope. Because of the highly reactive nature of
to avoid confusion with any iatrogenic damage.
nasal mucosa, repeat and aggressive sample taking
119
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
is advised. It is not unusual to find that histopatho-
8.21
logical evaluation of superficial tissues reveals only
'Cell-safe' frames are
inflammation, while deeper samples reveal more
ideal for preserving
problematic pathology. It is often helpful to take
small endoscopic
several samples at the same spot - going through the
samples.
same hole into deeper and deeper tissues to ensure
a diagnostic sample has been achieved.
If the operator is not satisfied that he/she can get a
representative sample, it is advisable to use larger
biopsy forceps alongside the endoscope, since the
biopsy forceps designed to pass through the instru-
ment channel may be too small to get a representative 
sample from deeper tissues. In these cases, 3 mm
WARNING
biopsy forceps are passed along the dorsal edge of
Care should be exercised if using cold irigant
the rhinoscope, opposite the light guide post (i.e. into
solutions, especially in small patients. The high
the field of view of the 30 degree endoscope) to the
surface area and excellent vascular supply of
site of interest. In smaller patients where it is not pos-
the nares act like a heat sink and can result in
sible to pass forceps alongside the endoscope sheath,
hypothermia if the procedure is prolonged.
it is useful to measure the position of the lesion by
Careful monitoring of core body temperature
assessing the direction and depth of the tip of the
endoscope, and taking samples blind'. This allows
is advisable.
larger samples to be taken. Markings on the endo-
scope sheath allow a measurement of depth, and the
Frontal sinus exploration
tip of the endoscope can often be seen by transillumi-
nation through the rhinarium if the room lights are kept
If the frontal sinus is diseased, based on prerhinoscopy
low. A pair of 3-5 mm biopsy forceps can then be
work-up, in particular CT, MRI or radiography (frontal 
placed to the same premeasured depth and direction,
sinus skyline view), it is prudent to examine it endo-
to obtain a large sample. It is very important, if using
scopically. A 2 cm x 2 cm square area at the level of the
this technique, to ensure that the tips of the biopsy
top of the orbit, just medial to the bony prominence, is
forceps do not pass beyond the level of the medial
clipped and aseptically prepared. A hole is drilled or
canthus of the eyes. Measuring this position on the
trephined using a Steinmann pin and Jacobs chuck, a
outside of the rhinarium and marking it with a piece of
Hall-type air drill or a Michel trephine. The hole should
inadvertent penetration of the cribriform plate and sub-
and cannula. Care needs to be taken to avoid going
sequent trauma to the frontal lobes of the brain.
too far into the sinus. The space is deceptively small,
Samples that have spicules of turbinate bone in
 and the wall on the far side of the sinus separates the
them are demonstrative of aggressive technique,
sinus from the calvarium. It is the authors' experience
which is necessary if sufficiently deep, diagnostic
that, because of the relative paucity of the membranes
samples are to be obtained. Samples should be care-
 of the sinus as compared with the nose, the diagnostic
fully placed on foam-lined endoscopic tissue cas-
yield from biopsy samples taken in the frontal sinus
settes and sent for evaluation by veterinary
 graphic evidence of disease in both locations.
uation of endoscopic samples. Biopsy samples taken
The endoscope is introduced into the sinus and
through the rhinoscope channel are necessarily small,
the walls of the sinus explored. Between 5 and 7
o'clock to the point of entry into the sinus is the
overlooked by the histopathologist.Cell-safe' frames
aperture of the sinus into the caudal pharynx. The use
(Figure 8.21) available from the external laboratory
of an appropriately sterilized flexible endoscope can
are ideal for endoscopic samples. Biopsy specimens
facilitate examination of this small opening. In the
are placed in the frames, which are then clipped shut 
diseased state the aperture can be much larger,
before being placed in the preservative for transport
 allowing a rigid rhinoscope to be introduced, or even
to the laboratory. The frames are two-sided and can
allowing a flexible endoscope to be advanced
be clipped together on either side, one side giving a
transorally or transnasally into the sinus.
larger space than the other, in order to cater for differ-
Therapeutic irrigation is performed to flush the
ent sample sizes. The samples are fixed and pre-
sinus adequately. The hole is closed with a simple
pared in the frames at the laboratory, so there is no
interrupted skin suture and no attempt is made to
danger of any specimens going astray. Larger sam-
replace the resected core of bone.
ples should be left free-floating and not placed in
these frames as they may be crushed, creating com-
Pathological conditions
pression artefacts. If the sample recovery process
has been relatively atraumatic and sterile, a sample
This topic is covered in some depth in the BSAVA
 of mucosa can be sent in sterile fashion for bacterial
Manual of Canine and Feline Head, Neck and Thoracic
culture and sensitivity testing. Interpretation must be
Surgery, and the reader is referred to that publication
made cautiously, as even the best of technique rarely
for additional coverage. Common conditions found in
maintains complete sterility in this anatomical locale.
dogs and cats are summarized in Figure 8.22.
120
Chapter 8
Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
Disease
Species
Causes
Characteristics
Treatment
Dogs, cats 
 Allergy; virabacterial secondary to
Lymphoplasmacytic
Common. Chronic
 Steroids; antibiotics based on culture and 
rhinitis
 obstructive nasal disease or foreign
 discharge, sneezing 
 sensitivity; nasal drops often more
body
effective
 Dental disease
 Dogs, cats 
 Periodontal disease;fistulas; apical
Common
 Appropriate dental treatment, e.g.
granuloma
extraction
 Dogs, cats 
Grass rass seeds sticks, e.
Foreign bodies
Common
Removal by traction
 Traumatic disease
Dogs, cats
 Uncommon 
 As appropriate
Nasopharyngeal
 Dogs, cats 
 Uncommon
 Surgical: balloon dilation; stent 
stenosis
 Coagulation disorders
Dogs, cats 
 Genetic; drug-induced;
 Uncommon 
Medical
 hyperadrenocorticism 
 Parasitic rhinitis
 Dogs, cats 
 Capillaria aerophila
Rare
Ivermectin
 Pneumonyssoides caninum
 Rare 
Dogs
lvermectin
 Allergic rhinitis
Dogs
Rare
 Corticosteroids: systemic ± nasal drops 
Dogs
Rare
 Pallitive: mucolytic agents (bromhexine
Ciliary dyskinesia
hydrochloride 2 mg/kg q12h in dogs: 
 1 mg/kg q12h in cats)
8.22
Common nasopharyngeal conditions of dogs and cats.
Nasopharyngeal conditions
8.24
Foreign bodies are not infrequently found lodged in
(a) Aspergillus
the nasopharynx, having been coughed up over the
colonies at the
free edge of the soft palate (Figure 8.23). Smaller or
choanae, viewed 
narrow foreign bodies, such as grass awns, may
by posterior
travel rostrally down the nares and can be extracted
rhinoscopy. The
using anterior rhinoscopy.
endoscope is
retroflexed through 
180 degrees,
8.23
giving an inverted
A blade of grass
image, so this 
a
colony is in the
lodged in the
nasopharynx of a 
right nostril.
(b) Posterior
cat dorsal to the
rhinoscopic view
soft palate.
of nasal
lymphosarcoma in
a dog (same dog
as in Figure 8.28).
Note the similarity
in appearance
to (a)
(b)
In chronic rhinitis it is not unusual to see lymphoid
In cats auropharyngeal polyps may be seen
hyperplasia throughout the pharynx, presenting as
emerging from  the Eustachian tubes and can
multiple small raised nodules in the mucosa (see
sometimes be exposed using a blunt spay hook to
Figure 8.15). This is purely reactive and should not be
pull the free edge of the soft palate rostrally. Gentle
mistaken for underlying pathology.
Sa   s  l   
Fungal plaques of Aspergillus can sometimes be
seen at the choanae, but the most common finding at
some cats via anterior rhinoscopy.
this site is neoplasia (Billen et al., 2006). In some
 Rarely, nasopharyngeal stenosis is found as a
cases fungal infection may be mistaken for neoplasia
sheet of tissue almost completely occluding the
and vice versa (Figure 8.24), so diagnosis must be
nasopharynx. This can be resected with sharp dis-
based on impression smears or biopsy.
section or using a diode laser. Alternatively balloon
121
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
dilation may be attempted (Berent et al., 2006),
Unfortunately, bacterial rhinitis is one of the more
although strictures tend to reform and repeat treat-
frustrating bacterial diseases to treat, and clinicians
ments may be necessary.
are often forced to resort to more extreme measure to
rid their patients of the disease. Turbinectomy is an
Allergic rhinitis
aggressive alternative therapy to refractory rhinitis in
Histopathologically this disease may present in
 dogs (while this can be done in cats, they seem to
several forms. Any combination of lymphocytic,
tolerate the procedure far less well). Traditionally, this
plasmacytic, lymphoplasmacytic 
or
 eosinophilic
 procedure has been performed in association with an
rhinitis is suggestive of primary  immunological
open rhinotomy. The turbinates are then removed
disease. lIt is critical to be confident that there is no
using rongeurs or a similar device. The rostrum can
other primary disease process concurrent to make
then be left open for a period of time to allow for daily
this diagnosis. Idiopathic lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis
irrigation with antimicrobial solutions before primary
is also considered to be a relatively common cause of
closure at a later date. A similar procedure has been
chronic nasal discharge in the dog and is often a
attempted and is being refined using endoscopic
bilateral disease, even where nasal discharge is
techniques. Using an arthroscopic shaver system (a
unilateral (Windsor et al., 2004).
mechanized rotating shaving device, with a small
Corticosteroid therapy has been the mainstay of
diameter, designed for curetting bone and cartilage
treatment for years. Treatment is usually started at
 during arthroscopy) a turbinectomy can be performed 
2 mg/kg prednisolone q12h. Experience has shown
without the need for the rhinotomy. The debrided
that this early aggressive immunosuppressive therapy
debris is removed via the suction function of the
makes relapses later in the taper period less likely. The
shaver. Different blades are available to ensure
dose is tapered after 3 weeks, to once-daily treatment.
adequate curettage. As a more refined and complete
Often, when steroids are the sole therapy, the induc-
turbinectomy can be performed with this technique,
tion phase of treatment can take up to 6 months. In the
less bleeding and postoperative pain is likely to be
encountered. Further experience is needed with this
authors' experience, topical treatment using cortico-
 steroid drops available for ophthalmic use can be more
technique before it can be routinely recommended.
effective in some cases than oral treatment, but this
Foreign body rhinitis
does require a cooperative patient, and nasal drops
Nasal foreign bodies are common in both dogs (Figure
are often resented and difficult for owners to administer
8.25) and cats. The presentation in these patients
in the longer term. The recent advent of steroid inhal-
tends to be variable, but chronic mucopurulent nasal
ers adapted for small animal patients has made them a
discharge is a common feature. Radiographically, the 
more attractive option for some patients.
soft tissue densities noted may mimic mass effects.
For patients that are poorly tolerant of steroid
When rhinoscopy is performed, if the offending mate-
therapy, a lower dose of prednisolone can be used in
rial is not noted at first glance, often the only obvious
conjunction with chlorambucil at a dose of 2 mg/m2
findings  are  thickened oedematous proliferative
every other day. Complete blood counts should be
performed every 2 weeks to watch for leucopenia.
mucous membranes, with substantial mucopurulent
exudates. If biopsy is performed on these tissues, the
More frequently, with the standardization of serum
results are likely to come back as lymphoplasmacytic
allergy testing, it has become possible to identify
rhinitis, often with an eosinophilic or a secondary
some environmental allergens that may play a role in
neutrophilic component. These results can be mis-
the pathogenesis of this disease. lf substantial positive
leading and foreign material must be suspected in
results are obtained to allergens that are likely to be
cases of rhinitis that do not resolve with therapy and
in the patient's environment, then hyposensitization
therapy may be instituted.This takes substantial client
that would be appropriate for the histopathological
findings. Often, multiple rhinoscopic examinations or
compliance, but when successful, this safe well
open nasal exploratory operations are needed to
identify the foreign materiai. It is worth noting that by
minimal immunomodulatory drug therapy.
the time rhinoscopy is performed the offending for-
Bacterial rhinitis/sinusitis
eign body has often been sneezed out and the result-
ant foreign body reaction is the only lesion seen by
Primary bacterial rhinitis is rare in dogs and cats. When
the surgeon.
a primarily suppurative response is noted on histo-
pathology, and no other infectious or neoplastic dis-
ease is apparent, then a diagnosis of primary bacterial
8.25
disease can be made. The clinician should always be
A piece of stick
circumspect in making a diagnosis of primary bacterial
(a) embedded in
rhinitis. It is critical to obtain good quality samples for
the nose ofa
bacterial culture. Both exudate and tissue should be
spaniel (middle of
submitted for analysis, from multiple locations in the
the image).
(continues)
?
nose, to confirm the presence of a single or multiple
infectious agent(s). Interpretation of these results to be
sure that the findings are not consistent with contami-
 nation is necessary. When an appropriate drug is iden-
tified against the offending organism(s), long-term
(a)
antibiotic therapy is often indicated.
122
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
foreign bodies such as grass seeds or running on to
bits of stick
 Plant material may become very friable after a
few days incubating in a warm moist nose and,
particularly if it is barbed or rough in texture, may
be dificult to remove intact. Barbed material will
often move only in one direction and should be
removed accordingly. If the foreign body breaks up
and is impossible to remove completely, the nose
should be flushed vigorously with 60 ml of sterile
saline on each side. The throat pack should be
removed to allow fluid to drain over the soft palate
into the mouth freely (a small swab may be left over
the larynx if there is room) and the nose lowered to
allow drainage. The endotracheal cuff should be
checked to ensure a snug fit and the tip of a 60 ml
syringe introduced into the nostril. The nostril is
pinched tight around the syringe and the saline
instilled as fast as possible. Debris collected via the
mouth can be examined for further detritus. The nose
may also be flushed in a rostral direction by placing a
Foley catheter up over the soft palate, inflating the
bulb and packing the pharynx with gauze swabs to
form a seal. The procedure may be repeated on the
 other nostril if necessary.
(b)
Neoplasia
It is beyond the scope of this Manual to give a detailed
(continued) (b) A piece of stick following
8.25
 removal from the nose of a spaniel.
treatise of the oncological management of nasal
neoplasia, and the reader is referred to the BSAVA
Manual of Canine and Feline Oncology. However, a
brief overview of the common nasal cancers (Figure
Cats tend to present with nasopharyngeal foreign
8.26) is in order. Many nasal tumours are locally
bodies, such as grass, which have been inadvertently
invasive and slow to metastasize. However, the gross
coughed up over the soft palate into the caudal nares,
appearance is often misleading and histology.
is
from where sneezing may allow passage to a variable
always required to differentiate between benign
degree down the rhinarium. Dogs may suffer in a
polyps and malignancies. Tumours may be staged to
similar manner but are also more prone to sniffing up
help predict likely prognosis (Figure 8.27).
Disease
Age affected
Characteristics
Site
Treatment
Most commonly
Middle-old age
Locally invasive slow tometastasize
Surgical resection± radiation therapy
Neoplasia of the
nasal planum
squamous cell carcinoma
dogs and cats
Middle-old age
Nasal
Adenocarcinoma
Locally invasive slow to metastasize
 Surgical resection ± radiation therapy
 cavity - dogs 
Middle-old age
Locally invasive slow to metastasize
 Surgical resection ± radiation therapy
Chondroscarcoma
Middle-old age
Surgical resection ± radiation therapy
Osteosarcoma
Locally invasive slow to metastasize
Squamous cell carcinoma
Midle-old age
Locally invasive slow to metastasize
Surgical resection ± radiation therapy
Melanoma
Middle-old age
Locally invasive slow to metastasize
 Surgical resection ± radiation therapy
Chemotherapy ±local debulking
Lymphosarcoma
Young-middle
May be generalized
age
Middle-old age
Benign, recurrent 
Nasopharyngeal polyp
Traction, surgical removal
Nasal
 Lymphosarcoma
Young-middle
May be generalized
Check other sites and FeLV/ FIV status
 cavity - cats
age
Middle-old age
Adenocarcinoma
Locally invasive slow tometastasize
 Surgical resection ± radiation therapy
Middle-old age
Nasopharyngeal polyp
Benign, recurrent
Traction, surgical removal
8.26
Common nasal tumours of dogs and cats.
123
Chapter 8
3Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
unless vital head structures are likely to be com-
Stage
Presentation
Prognosis
promised by local invasion. The benefits, however, of
tumour debulking may be significant to the patient
Unilateral
 Reasonable medium term with
who is experiencing substantial facial/nasal pain and
 surgery/radiation
difficulty breathing. The authors have used endoscopic 
Bilateral
laser diode surgery to effectively debulk this type of
Guarded medium term with
surgery/radiation
tumour in over 60 patients. The procedure is well
tolerated, and while by no means curative, many
Associated external
Guarded short term with
patients achieve substantial clinical improvement.
mass
surgery/radiation
The tumour is radiation sensitive, although cobalt
 Brain involvement 
 Poor prognosis
IV
linear accelerators are likely to be more effective than
orthovoltage radiotherapy. More and more success is
8.27
Tumour staging.
Carboplatin is used at a dose of 30 mg/m² every
3 weeks for 3 cycles. The drug is very well tolerated,
not aggressively nephrotoxic, and easy to administer.
Lymphoma
Its limiting factor is cost. There is an increasing body
Nasal lymphoma (Figure 8.28) is an occasional
of evidence that photodynamic therapy may be of
 manifestation. When it does occur, nasal presentation
value in treating these tumours. This therapy is not
is almost always the singular manifestation. Rarely is
routinely clinically available.
it multicentric. Nasal lymphoma can be treated with a
standardized   L-COPA   protocol  with   moderate
success. The authors' anecdotal observation is that
8.29
nasal lymphomas are more frequently of a large
Adenocarcinomas 
lymphoblastic type, and are more locally aggressive,
in the dog.
although not as aggressively metastatic.
(a) Appearance of
an adenocar-
cinoma at the
8.28
choanae viewed in
air. (b) Opaque
Nasal
irregular pale
lymphosarcoma in
adenocarcinoma 
a Rottweiler.
with swelling and
(a) Initial 
erythema of the
appearance of the
surrounding
(a
lesion. (b) Cut
turbinates.
surface of the
(c) Same dog as
lesion following
in (a) showing the
biopsy. Note the
appearance of an
'cotton wool'
adenocarcinoma
appearance.
under irrigation.
The adenocar-
(a)
cinoma is pale and 
relatively smooth
and translucent
(compare with b),
giving the
appearance of a
polyp.
(b)
(gl
 Adenocarcinoma
Nasal adenocarcinoma (Figures 8.29 to 8.32) is an
aggressive tumour of the glandular epithelium of the
nasal passages. Some surgeons have suggested
therapy but results do not bear out the utility of this
approach. Surgery should not routinely be considered
124
Chapter 8
Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
Melanoma
 8.30
 Nasal melanoma is an unusual extension of melano-
Adenocarcinoma in
mas of the skin of the rostrum and/or the mucocuta-
a cat showing pale
neous junction. This type of tumour is radiosensitive.
lobulated
appearance and 
Chondrosarcoma
vascularity.
This is a frequent nasal tumour (Figure 8.33). Its 
major clinical manifestation is based upon its space-
 occupying nature. Whilst the tumour is not highly
metastatic, it is locally aggressive, and can cause 
8.33
Nasal
chondrosarcomas
8.31
in the dog. Nasal
masses can
Nasal
present with a
adenocarcinoma at 
variety of
the choanae
appearances:
viewed by
(a) well delineated 
(a) posterior
and vascular;
rhinoscopy and
(b) poorly
(b) anterior
delineated and 
rhinoscopy. Note
invasive:
the difference in 
(a)
(c) ulcerative; and 
appearance when 
(d) pale, almost 
viewed under
translucent and
saline irrigation.
relatively avascular.
Histopathology is
always required for
diagnosis as the 
morphology is so
varied.
(b)
(b)
8.32
Biopsy of
adenocarcinomas.
(a) At the choanae,
using posterior
rhinoscopy. The
biopsy forceps
should be
preplaced at the tip
of the endoscope 
before retroflexing 
a
around the free
(c)
edge of the soft 
palate to prevent 
damage to the
biopsy channel.
(b) Nasal 
adenocarcinoma, 
using anterior
rhinoscopy.
(b)
(d)
125
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
tremendous damage to facial symmetry and normal
8.35
functional anatomy of the nose and head. Again, laser
Osteosarcomas in
debulking (Figure 8.34) is potentially of some benefit.
the cat: (a) at the
However, since these are relatively avascular
choana; (b) well
tumours, response to laser debulking alone is often
circumscribed
disappointing, with palliation resulting from removal of
vascularnasal
 overlying inflammatory tissue. A combination of laser
mass; and
debulking with aggressive curettage removes more
(c) pale,friable,
relativelyavascular
 tumour tissue. Aggressive surgery could theoretically
appearance of a 
be considered curative, but getting clean surgical
nasal mass.
 margins in this anatomical region is very difficult. The
tumour is moderately radiosensitive.
(a)
8.34
Laser debulking of
a nasal
chondrosarcomain
a dog.
(b)
Osteosarcoma
In the nose (Figures 3.35 and 8.36) this type of tumour 
 behaves similarly to osteosarcomas of the flat bones
elsewhere in the body. It is less aggressive and less
metastatic than those in the long bone, but its local
damage is considerable. Palliative surgical therapy
can be undertaken to improve nasal respiration, but 
fair to good success is reported with either carboplatin 
(30 mg/m² q3weeks for 4 cycles) as monotherapy, or
in conjunction with doxorubicin (300 mg/m²) given 4
days or so prior to the carboplatin. While the use of
doxorubicin increases the potential toxicity of the
8.36
treatment (increased myelosuppression and cardio-
toxicity) its potential efficacy is controversial. The
Osteosarcomas in
author does try and employ this protocol, as the two
the dog: (a) at the
choana; (b) nasal.
drugs do appear to have a synergistic cell cycle
benefit. Whether this is borne out statistically remains
to be seen.
 Of the benign processes, both chondromas and 
osteomas are occasionally seen. If they are identified
early, and surgical removal can be achieved, along
with appropriate reconstructive techniques, prognosis 
can be good.
(a)
Nasopharyngeal polyps
Nasopharyngeal polyps are fairly common, especially
in cats. Often an endoscope is not necessary to
visualize them (Figure 8.37); however, when they are
small, an endoscope is useful (Figure 8.38).
These inflammatory tissues can originate in the
Eustachian tubes, the middle ear, or the ventral nasal
meatus. They can be associated with chronic inflam-
matory conditions (chronic otitis, chronic rhinitis), but
are often idiopathic. When found nasopharyngeal pol-
 yps are almost always attached to the underlying tis-
(b)
sues by a thin fibrous stalk. As such, grabbing them
126
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
8.37
with forceps (e.g. tonsil forceps) and applying gentle
 continuous traction, almost always removes them.
(a) A
When they originate within the rhinarium, laser (or
nasopharyngeal
electrocautery) resection can be attempted. Removal
polyp seen during
 is curative, but new polyps can occur.
examination above
the soft palate with
a spay hook.
(b) The polyp after
Fungal rhinitis topical therapy
removal. (Courtesy
of RC Denovo)
Aspergillus is the most common nasal fungal pathogen 
in the dog (and in the cat, although it is very rare in 
that species; Figure 8.39) and should be suspected 
(a)
any time there is chronic non-resolving rhinitis,
especially  with  radiographic  evidence  of bony
destruction, mimicking neoplasia. Fungal serology is 
usually included as part of the medical work-up (see 
above). Swelling and depigmentation of the nasal
planum (Figure 8.40a), coupled with a mucopurulent 
 nasal discharge, epistaxis and pain over the rhinarium 
are common clinical presenting signs.
METRICI
Fungal
Characteristics
Species
Age
Treatment
(b)
affected
pathogens
affected
Dogs
Aspergilus
Any
Chronic unilateral,
Debridement+
-and
fumigatus
then bilateral
clotrimazoleor
8.38
(A.niger;
rarely
mucopurulent
enilconazole
A.nidulans:
cats
nasal discharge±
infusion
Benign nasal
A.flavus;
epistaxis;facial
(oral
polyps in the dog.
A.terreus)
pain
itraconazole)
(a) At the choanae
Cats
Cryptococcus
the appearance
Any
Chronic unilateral.
Debridement+
-and
spp.
then bilateral
clotrimazole or
may be vascular
rarely
mucopurulent
enilconazole
and erosive,
s6op
nasal discharge±
infusion
especially in the
epistaxis:facial
(oral
presence of
pain
itraconazole)
secondary
infection. With
(a)
Fungal infections of the nasal tract in dogs and
anterior rhinoscopy.
8.39
cats.
polyps may be
(b) single and
confined to a small
area or (c) present 
throughout most of 
the nasal passage.
(b)
a)
(a) Swelling and depigmentation of the nasal
8.40
planum, characteristic of Aspergillus infection,
(c)
 in a German Shepherd Dog. (continues)
?
127
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
Treatment with oral fungicides such as itraconazole
at 5 mg/kg q12h is both expensive and potentially 
hepatotoxic. Serial blood  chemistries must be
obtained to be vigilant with regard to liver disease,
and therapy must be continued for 2-3 months.
 Success rates as high as 60-70% have been reported 
for oral treatment alone but this can be greatly
improved if used in conjunction with non-invasive
topical treatment (Smith et al., 1998). This compares
favourably with surgical trephination of the sinuses in
order to place indwelling cannulae in the frontal
sinuses for the application of antifungal solutions 
(Mathews et al., 1998). Treatment will normally require
 general anaesthesia, and can be carried out following
rhinoscopic diagnosis. It is imperative to debride
 carefully as much of the fungal plaque as possible 
under direct observation, prior to antifungal treatment 
(Figure 8.42). This allows good exposure of remaining
fungal material to the antifungal solution. Failure to
remove fungal plaques is the most common reason 
(continued) (b) Resolution of swelling and
8.40
for poor response to treatment. Following good
 depigmentation 1 month after initial treatment.
debridement it should be possible to resolve 85-90%
of cases with a single treatment.
The rhinoscopic appearance is quite characteristic
(Figure 8.41) and diagnosis is easily confirmed in the 
laboratory from impression smears and/or culture.
8.42
Nasal Aspergillus
plaque (a) before
8.41
and (b) after
Nasal aspergillosis.
debridement.
(a, b) Colonies in 
the noses of two
dogs: (a)
demonstrating the
classicwhite
plaques; and (b)
showing a greenish
tinge due to
secondary
(a)
infection. Note the 
a
extensive turbinate
damage, leading to
an abnormally
large airspace. In 
(a) turbinate
destruction has
exposed the frontal 
sinus and 
Aspergillus
plaques can be 
seen within the
sinus cavity (rear of
the image).
(c) Close-up view 
bl
of the Aspergillus
(b
colony showing the
'cotton wool'
Following debridement, the throat pack is removed
 appearance of the 
and a suitably sized Foley catheter introduced through 
fungal hyphae.
the mouth and retroflexed over the soft palate. The
bulb of the catheter is inflated with saline to seal off 
the caudal nares from the pharynx, and a further
 gauze throat pack is placed to ensure a good seal.
Tampons may also be used to good effect. A canine
urinary catheter or red rubber feeding tube is
introduced into each nostril, and a small Foley catheter
is then introduced alongside it such that the bulb is
just inside the nares. The bulbs are then inflated with
(c)
saline to seal off the nares and the Foley catheters
128
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
8.43
 are all clamped shut. The nares may require further
then rotated again into dorsal recumbency and finally
sealing with cotton wool, cotton buds or tampons to
into right lateral recumbency, allowing 15 ml and 15
 ensure a good seal. Enilconazole has been used as a 
 minutes each time. In this way almost all the nasal
nasal infusion, and has been demonstrated to be
 mucosa and sinuses should be bathed in the antifungal
80-90% effective, but in the United States is available 
solution (Figure 8.43).
only in the chemical grade solution, is difficult to
The remaining solution is drained as far as possible
obtain, and is very caustic to healthy tissues. It is
through  the   anterior   nares.
Enilconazole and
freely available in the UK, where it is marketed as an
clotrimazole can irritate the trachea, larynx or
antifungal wash for horses and dogs. Enilconazole is
oesophagus, so care should be taken to avoid
more active in vapour form than clotrimazole and
drainage back into the pharynx as much as possible.
gives good results. Care must be taken to carefully
 One treatment is successful in 85-90% of cases but
pack off the oral and pharyngeal cavities to minimize
 some dogs may require two or three treatments for a
contact with heaithy tissues. Clotrimazole has been
 cure. It is always advisable to repeat the rhinoscopy
used extensively in the USA to good effect and is
after one month (Figure 8.44) to assess the
available as a solution. The drug is readily available in 
effectiveness of treatment and repeat if necessary.
a pre-made propylene glycol solution (marked for
8.44
human athlete's foot fungus) or as a gel and is
available without prescription.
Same dog as in
Figure 8.42b, one
month after a single
WARNING
 Formulations of clotrimazole containing alcohol
enilconazole
treatment. No
 should be avoided.
fungal plaques are
visible.
Two 60 ml syringes are filled with 1-5% enilcon-
 azole (or 1% clotrimazole) and attached to the urinary
catheters; 15 ml of enilconazole is then infused into
each nostril for 15 minutes. The dog is then rotated
through 90 degrees (e.g. into left lateral recumbency)
and the process repeated for 15 minutes. The dog is
129
Chapter 8 Rigid endoscopy: rhinoscopy
In some cases fungal infection may extend into
used with caution. In selected cases a single dose of
the sinuses or may even be restricted to the sinuses
dexamethasone (0.2 mg/kg i.v., i.m.) can be given to
with no fungal plaques to be seen on anterior
reduce mucosal swelling.
rhinoscopy. If there is evidence of disease in the
frontal sinus(es) small holes are trephined and fungal
plaques removed as before. A Michel trephine,
Complications
Steinmann pin and Jacobs chuck or Hall air drill can 
Haemorrhage is the commonest complication of this
saan bupaa, lagan par 'asodnd su lot pasn aa
are inserted, and the skin closed around the tubes to
procedure, but is rarely long lasting or significant. A
reduce leakage. The antifungal solution is then
 postoperative dose of acepromazine can help reduce
infused into the frontal sinuses and nasal passages,
haemorrhage by reducing blood pressure and ensur-
initially with a dose of 30 ml to each side, under
 ing a calmer recovery. Overnight hospitalization allows
pressure, and the treatment continued as before. This
a chance for haemorrhage to resolve adequately
topical therapy is generally well treated, with only mild
before the excitement of returning to anxious owners
cutaneous reactions reported at the sites of infusion.
raises blood pressure and potentially dislodges a clot.
 Aspiration of fluid and detritus can be prevented
by ensuring adequate inflation of the cuff on the
Postoperative care
 endotracheal tube and packing the pharynx with
 gauze sponges, leaving enough space for free flow of 
Having completed the examination of the nares and 
fluid over the free edge of the soft palate and out
the sinuses if necessary, and taken any samples, the
through the mouth. The nose should be lowered as
endoscope is removed. If bleeding is heavy it may be
the endotracheal tube is removed to prevent
pertinent to maintain the patient under anaesthesia
accumulation of blood or fluid in the pharynx.
for a few minutes until it has subsided. Recovery from
anaesthesia should be slow to avoid exacerbating
nasal bleeding. A postoperative dose of acepromazine
References and further reading
may also be given to keep the blood pressure low and 
Berent AC, Kinns J and Weisse C (2006) Balloon dilatation of 
nasopharyngeal stenosis ina dog. Journal of the American Veterinary
haemorrhage. The nose is then lowered and the
Medical Association 229,385-388
throat packing removed and the nasopharynx
 Billen F, Day MJ and Clercx C (2006) Diagnosis of pharyngeal disorders
swabbed or suctioned before extubation. Extubation
in dogs:a retrospective study of 67 cases. Journal of Small Animal
Practice 47, 122-129
is left until the last minute to ensure gag and cough
Freeman LJ (1999) Veterinary Endosurgery. Mosby, St Louis
reflexes will protect the airway, and the tube is
Johnson LR, Clarke HE, Bannasch MJ and De Cock HEV (2004)
 Correlation of rhinoscopic signs of inflammation with histologic findings
removed with the cuff partially inflated.
in nasal biopsy specimens of cats with or without upper respiratory
Some practitioners  advocate 
 cold irrigants,
tract disease.Journalof the American Veterinary MedicalAssociation
infusion of dilute adrenaline or pseudoephedrine or
225, 395-400
Johnson LR, Drazenovich TL, Herrera MA and Wisner ER (2006) Results
packing the nose to limit haemorrhage. In any event,
bleeding tends to be ongoing for several hours post-
aspergilosis: 46 cases (2001-2004). Journal of the American
rhinoscopy. The addition of irrigant fluid to the mucus 
Veterinary Medical Association 228,738-742
Lefebvre J, Kuehn NF and WortingerA (2005) Computed tomography as
and blood tends to make the haemorrhage look worse
an aid in the diagnosis of chronic nasal disease in dogs. Journal of
than it really is, but the inevitable sneezing that occurs
Small Animal Practice 46, 280-285
post-rhinoscopy can be alarming. In the non-
Mathews KG, Davidson AP, Koblik PD et al. (1998) Comparison of topical
administration of clotrimazole through surgically placed versus
coagulopathic patient ongoing haemorrhage is rarely
of concern. lf the practitioner is concerned about
dogs: 60 cases (1990-1996). Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association 213,501506
potential blood loss, serial packed cell volumes can
McCarthy TC (2005) Veterinary Endoscopy for the Small Animal
be examined. It is prudent to advise owners to allow
Practitioner. Elsevier Saunders, St Louis 
for overnight hospitalization or at the very least to be
 Saunders JH, Clercx C, Snaps FR et al. (2004) Radiographic, magnetic 
resonance maging, computed tomographic, and rhinoscopic features
aware of the messy nature of the first day or so post-
of nasal aspergillosis in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary
rhinoscopy. Bleeding generally abates within 72
Medical Association 22, 1703-1712
 Smith SA, Andrews G and Biller DS (1998) Management of nasal
hours. There is inevitably some postoperative mucosal
 aspergillosis in a dog with a single, noninvasive intranasal infusion
swelling and owners should be warned that the
of clotrimazole. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
patient's breathing may be worse for a day or two
34, 487-492
Tams TR (1998) Small Animal Endoscopy, 2nd edition. Mosby, St Louis
postoperatively.
Tomsa K, Glaus TM, Zimmer C and Greene CE (2003) Fungal rhinitis and
Postoperative discomfort in dogs and cats is
sinusitis in three cats. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
 managed with buprenorphine (10-20 μg/kg i.m. q2h)
Association 222, 1380-1384
Windsor RC, Johnson LR, Herrgesell EJ and De Cock HEV (2004)
or morphine (0.2-0.5 mg/kg i.m. q2-4h). Ongoing
Idiopathic lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis in dogs: 37 cases (1997-2002).
pain relief in dogs is provided with non-steroidal anti-
Journalof theAmericanVterinaryMedicalAssociation224,95
inflammatory drugs such as meloxicam (0.1 mg/kg
1957
 Zonderland JL, Stork CK, Saunders JH et al. (2002) Intranasal infusion of
p.0. q24h) or carprofen (2 mg/kg p.0. q24h). Off-label
enilconazole for treatment of sinonasal aspergillosis in dogs. Journal
use of meloxicam at 0.05 mg/kg p.o. q24h may be
 of the American Veterinary Medical Association 221, 1421-1425
130
lid endoscopy: otoendoscopy
Laura Ordeix and Fabia Scarampella
Introduction
The light is positioned at the tip of the endoscopic
otoscope, allowing direct visualization while
Ear disease is one of the commonest conditions affect-
forceps or catheters are introduced into the ear
ing dogs and cats. Otitis externa (OE) is one of the
through the working channel
most common and challenging ear diseases encoun-
Diagnostic techniques improved with the use of a
tered, particularly in the dog. In dogs chronic inflamma-
VO system include sampling of exudates and
tion of the ear canal is frequently associated with an
pathological tissue with biopsy forceps and
extension of inflammation to deeper structures of the
myringotomy
ear, resulting in otitis media (OM) (82.6% of cases in
The recording capability of the VO system offers
 one report) or, less commonly, otitis interna (Ol). Feline
the ability to produce images for medical records.
OE is less prevalent and rarely progresses to OM.
Images are then available for comparison at
More commonly, feline OM is the consequence of aeti-
subsequent re-evaluations to compare current 
 ological factors that directly affect the middle ear (e.g.
findings with the prior documented findings. In 
inflammatory polyps, neoplasia, infection from the
veterinary medicine, where owner compliance is
upper respiratory tract).
very important, images or videos are used to
The first diagnostic procedure that must be per-
improve client communication and compliance.
formed on a patient with suspected ear disease is an
Video digital images may also be recorded in order 
otoscopic examination. Otoscopy is utilized: to detect
to improve the communication with veterinary
potential causes of OE (e.g. foreign bodies, ear mites,
colleagues and for educational purposes.
masses); to evaluate the presence of lesions and
exudates in the ear canal; and to assess the tympanic
VO is indicated in the diagnosis of diseases of the
membrane. Routine otoscopy alone is often not suffi-
external ear, the tympanic membrane and the middle
cient to detect all changes in the tympanic membrane,
ear. In addition it is used in the medical therapy of
making the diagnosis of OM difficult. Video-otoscopy
infectious OE and OM. Specifically, VO under general 
(VO) systems utilize components of endoscopic tech-
anaesthesia would be appropriate in cases of:
u jo sabewi oap poanod pue anboe o rogou
tympanic membrane, allowing a high degree of mag-
Severe acute OE in which a foreign body is
nification and detailed resolution of this structure. In
suspected
human medicine, studies have demonstrated that VO
Chronic or recurrent OE
examination of the tympanic membrane is superior to
Presence of neurological signs compatible with
?
routine otoscopy. In recent years, VO systems spe-
OM and/or Ol.
cifically designed for use in the canine and feline ear
VO can also enhance therapeutic cleansing of the 
have improved the quality of medical care that can be
ear canal and tympanic cavities. The attachable
provided to these patients.
double-port adaptor allows the examiner to suction
and flush the ear simultaneously under constant
Indications
visualization.
Contraindications are limited to those cases in
An examination of the ear canal and tympanic
which anaesthesia is dangerous to the life of the
membrane is indicated for all patients that are
patient.
presented for clinical signs associated with ear
disease, such as head shaking or aural pruritus,
erythema, swelling or discharge.
Instrumentation
VO provides significant advantages in the diagnosis
 of ear disease when compared with routine otoscopy:
The standard otoendoscope is a forward-viewing
telescope of 0 degrees with a three-way stopcock
 The superior optics of the VO system provide a
(Figure 9.1). The telescope has a length of around
?
high degree of magnification, allowing greater
8.5 cm, tip diameter of 5 mm and a 2 mm working
visualization and detailed resolution of the ear
channel, which is fully immersible and ethylene oxide
canal and tympanic membrane after appropriate
sterilizable. Ear curettes, biopsy forceps and grasping 
cleaning
forceps are suitable for the 2 mm working channel.
131
Chapter 9 Rigid endoscopy: otoendoscopy
Patient preparation using a short course of sys-
temic glucocorticoids may be needed to reduce ear
canal stenosis associated with chronic OE, particu-
larly in the dog. Daily oral prednisolone at 1-2 mg/kg
for 4-7 days will reduce swelling and inflammation,
allowing for a more complete examination of the
ear canal. Anti-inflammatory therapy with gluco-
corticoids is anecdotally recommended to reduce
neurological complications of ear flushing and
myringotomy. Steroid administration  should be
postponed until results of the preoperative work-up
have been obtained.
Veterinary otoscope set consisting of an
1'6
otoscope for dogs and cats, and a stopcock
attachment with integrated working channel. (Courtesy of
Karl Storz GmbH &Co.KG,Tuttlingen, Germany)
Preoperative diagnostic work-up
Alternatively, a standard 2.7 mm 30 degree
Because an intact tympanic membrane does not rule
'universal telescope' and cystoscopy sheath can be
out OM, additional imaging of the middle ear is
used. A camera system is essential to provide high-
necessary to aid diagnosis. Moreover, imaging of the
resolution images on a monitor, and a suction/
middle ear may be indicated to rule out involvement
irrigation system will allow accurate cleaning and
of the tympanic bulla when a mass is observed in the
better visualization during the endoscopic procedures
ear canal. It is important to remember that if imaging
(Figure 9.2).
studies and VO examination are to be performed on
the same day, ear flushing should be carried out only
after any imaging procedure, as the presence of fluid
within the bullae may mimic pathological lesions.
Radiographic assessment of the tympanic bullae
can be helpful in determining changes attributable to
OM, such as a thickened irregular bulla and soft
tissue opacities within the cavity. Unfortunately,
radiography is not very sensitive for the diagnosis
 of OM, with false-negative results reported in 25% of
cases. Positive-contrast ear canalography has
been described as a more sensitive method than
STON
tympanic membrane status in dogs with chronic OE
 and secondary OM.
Computed tomography (CT) has been proposed
as an alternative to radiography. When available, CT
has some advantages over conventional radiography,
including  avoidance of  superimposed overlying
structures and superior soft tissue contrast. CT has
been suggested to be more sensitive than, and as
specific as, radiography for predicting moderate to
VETPUMP2, a flushing and suction apparatus.
severe disease in dogs with OM. Nevertheless, CT
9.2
(Courtesy of Karl Storz GmbH & Co. KG,
may underestimate the presence of middle
eear
Tuttlingen, Germany)
disease. It has been suggested that magnetic
resonance imaging (MRl) may be useful in patients
with neurological signs relating to middle or inner ear
Patient preparation
disease, because of its potential to detect extension
 of infection into the meninges and capacity to reveal
Proper otoscopic examination allows  complete
the cochlea and semicircular canals of the inner ear.
visualization of the ear canal and tympanic membrane.
Frequently, careful examination at the level of the
tympanic membrane requires general anaesthesia
Procedure
and ear flushing. particularly in reluctant patients or in
those patients with debris in the ear canal(s).
It is recommended that the orientation of the video-
Due to the potential risk of tympanic membrane
otoscope relative to the position of the animal is
rupture in any case of otitis (particularly in cases of
standardized. Moreover, it is essential that the
chronic OE and/or with neurological signs), it is
clinician becomes familiar with the normal structures
always recommended that the patient have a prop-
and their otoscopic appearance before interpreting
erly placed and inflated endotracheal tube. Flushing
abnormal findings. Practice makes perfect; therefore,
could cause material to drain from the middle ear to
only with repetition andexperience canthe practitioner
the nasopharynx through the auditory tube, resulting
easily recognize and evaluate the different structures
in aspiration pneumonia.
of the ear.
132
Chapter 9 Rigid endoscopy:otoendoscopy
The video-otoscope is inserted into the ear at the
adherent materials. Although it is extensively reported
intertragic incisure. To visualize the entire length of the
in the scientific literature that these agents are
ear canal and the level of the tympanic membrane, the
contraindicated in ears with ruptured tympanic
ear canal needs to be straightened to minimize block-
membranes, in practice they are still used in these
age of the lumen by the cartilage fold that occurs at
patients under anaesthesia because they can be
the junction between the vertical and horizontal canals.
removed completely from the ear canal and middle
To achieve this objective, the pinna should be pulled
ear, using flushes with an inert fluid such as sterile
up and outward whilst inserting the video-otoscope.
saline. Moreover, in most patients undergoing ear
flushes the integrity of the tympanic membrane is
Cleaning and flushing
difficult to evaluate before the procedure. Because of
After the patient is anaesthetized and imaging studies
 the higher prevalence of neurological side effects in 
have been performed, the practitioner may begin the
cats, the use of ceruminolytic agents before flushing
VO examination. In many cases, if not all, an ear flush
is not recommended.
may be necessary before any examination is pos-
There are many ear cleaning preparations com-
sible. In addition to allowing visualization, the ear
mercially available. However, the clinician should
flush removes exudates that are irritating and capable
choose the most appropriate, based on the charac-
of inactivating some antibiotics (e.g. gentamicin, poly-
teristics of the exudate. For mildly waxy ears (Figure
myxin B), allows sampling from the horizontal canal,
9.3a), products containing a ceruminolytic such as
and allows sampling and cleaning of the tympanic
propylene glycol are suitable. Hard waxy secretions
cavities through a ruptured tympanic membrane or
(Figure 9.3b) break down well with an oily squalene
after a myringotomy. VO has facilitated this procedure
preparation. This organic oil is relatively safe and
and allowed practitioners to perform more thorough
unlikely to cause ototoxicity. For an ear containing
flushes and examinations, particularly in cases that
purulent exudate (Figure 9.4), a ceruminolytic sur-
involve the middle ear. The VO system allows con-
factant such as dioctyl sodium sulphosuccinate
tinuous visualization through fluid while flushing,
which is not possible with hand-held otoscopes.
The animal is placed in lateral or sternal recum-
bency. A towel may be used to elevate the caudal
head and the neck slightly in relation to the muzzle.
This allows fluid exiting the tympanic bulla through
the auditory tube to flow rostrally and out through the
nares. It is always recommended to protect the eyes
from flushing  solutions containing ceruminolytic
agents and pathogens during the procedure. All the
clinicians involved in flushing procedures should wear
gloves, facemask and, ideally, eye protectors to avoid
 contact with contaminated aerosols.
Sampling
Sampling of exudates from the ear canal for cytological
examination should take place before the preliminary
cleaning process. Contrary to previous belief, culture
and susceptibility testing of external ear canal exu-
(a)
 dates may not be necessary. In fact, in a recent pub-
lished study, diferent bacterial organisms were isolated
from the same sampling site of the ear canal in 20% of
cases of OE. The same bacterial organism, with differ-
ent antimicrobial susceptibility, was isolated from the
same anatomical location in 20% of the cases.
Moreover, cytological examination agreed with culture 
results only 68% of the time. Furthermore, different
microbial isolates and susceptibility patterns have been
reported from the middle ear and external ear canal of
dogs with OE and OM. Therefore, to choose appro-
priate antimicrobial agents in cases of concomitant
infectious OM, bacterial culture and susceptibility test-
ing of swab specimens from both the horizontal ear
canal and middle ear should be performed.
Preliminary ear cleaning
After samples of the exudates from the ear canal have
(b)
been collected, the ear canals are filled with a
ceruminolytic ear cleaner. This agent hastens the
9.3
(a) Mild and (b) hard waxy secretions in the
cleaning process by breaking down waxy and
ears of dogs with ceruminous OE.
133
Chapter 9 Rigid endoscopy: otoendoscopy
(a)
Purulent exudate in an ear of a dog with
t'6
 Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection.
(DSS) is probably the best option. Products contain-
ing foaming agents, such as urea and carbamide
for tenacious secretions.
 After the ceruminolytic agent has been instilled, a
flushing solution is used to remove it completely from
the ear. Sterile isotonic (0.9%) saline and warm water
are the solutions more commonly used for this
b
purpose. An ear bulb syringe is first used to dislodge
Flushing technique using a VO system.
large amounts of debris, gently flushing the ear until
9.5
(a) Note the polypropylene catheter targeting 
the solution running out of it is relatively clean. The
tenacious debris. (b) The same ear canal after several
bulb syringe should never completely occlude the ear
cycles of flushing and suctioning.
canal: a gap should be left between the nozzle and
the wall of the ear canal as complete occlusion may
cause excessive fluid pressure and iatrogenic rupture
can be performed by an assistant, who fills the 20 ml 
 of a weakened tympanic membrane. Once most of
syringe with saline, attaches it to the three-way tap,
the exudate has been removed, and before using the
and empties the syringe in short pulses through the
video-otoscope, ear cleaning may continue using a
catheter. The operator can then move the tip of the
three-way tap connected to a syringe, saline supply
catheter within the ear canal to target tenacious
and a urinary catheter, tomcat catheter or feeding
debris. The fluid is then suctioned out through the
tube of the appropriate length and diameter.
The
second syringe. Several cycles of flushing and
feeding tube is preferred by the authors because it is
suctioning are generally needed to remove all debris
softer and less traumatic in case of contact with a
from the ear canal.
damaged tympanic membrane. The catheter tip is
Hair or other debris that does not dislodge with
placed at the level of the tympanic membrane under
flushing may be removed with instruments, such as
visualization and the ear canal is flushed and
 grasping forceps or curettes designed specifically for
suctioned until completely clean. The ear should be
use with the video-otoscope. Although the video-
examined at this time with the video-otoscope, and
 e  e   o   o
further flushing can be performed if needed.
level of the tympanic membrane, the catheter can
eventually be advanced further into the bulla if the
Flushing
tympanic membrane is absent. Samples of material
 A relatively simple technique of suctioning and flushing
from the middle ear should be obtained before middle
with the VO system involves using a three-way tap
ear flushing.
connected to a long polypropylene catheter and two
When the tympanic membrane is absent or
 20 ml syringes, one for flushing and the other for
spontaneously ruptured, samples from the middle ear
suctioning. If available, a VETPUMPe2 (see Figure
may be obtained with the tube technique. This
 9.2), an automatic suction/irrigation system, allows
technique utilizes an open-ended  sterile urinary
 accurate and better visualization during the cleaning
catheter or a 3.5 Fr tomcat catheter or a polypro-
 procedures. The operator advances the catheter
pylene catheter attached to a syringe placed through
through the working channel of the video-otoscope
the working channel of the video-otoscope. Under
until the tip is visible in the video field and directed
visualization, the operator passes the tip ventrally into
towards the remaining exudates (Figure 9.5). Flushing
the tympanic bulla, and applies suction with the
134
Chapter 9 Rigid endoscopy: otoendoscopy
syringe. If necessary, 1 ml of sterile saline may be
flushed into the middle ear cavity and aspirated. The
tube is then removed and disconnected from the
 syringe. The syringe is filled with air and then attached
again to the tube and the material in the tip of the tube
expressed. Part of the material is then cultured and
part is processed for cytological examination. The
role of anaerobic bacteria in recurrent OE and OM is
unknown. However, there are some recent reports of 
isolation of anaerobic bacteria from the horizontal ear
canal and tympanic cavity of dogs with OM undergoing
total ear canal ablation or lateral bulla osteotomy.
Therefore, both aerobic and anaerobic cultures should 
be recommended in cases of infectious OM.
If the tympanic membrane is intact but the index of
suspicion for OM is high (compatible clinical signs,
abnormal tympanic membrane or compatible results
Normal canine tympanic membrane. A = Pars
9.7
of imaging  studies) a  myringotomy  should
be
flaccida; B = Pars tensa; C = Stria mallearis.
 performed for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes.
Nevertheless, inexperienced examination of an
engorged pars flaccida may result in mistaken
Normal findings
identification of a mass.
The pars tensa appears as a thin, translucent,
On VO examination, the normal ear canal of dogs and
tense portion of the tympanic membrane. This part is
cats appears pale pink and smooth with fine blood
the majority of what is seen of the tympanic membrane
vessels on its surface (Figure 9.6). Fine hairs are
when it is examined through the video-otoscope. The
frequently present at the entrance to the external ear
outline of the manubrium of the malleus, the stria
canal and may be present in the vertical and horizontal
mallearis, is visible through the pars tensa. In the dog,
canals. In some dogs a tuft of hair is present in front
the manubrium has a hook that points rostrally. Given
of the tympanic membrane. The diameter of the ear
this anatomical characteristic, photographs from the
canal as well as hair density varies based on species,
right or left canine ear can be easily recognized.Blood
and between breeds.
vessels in the pars tensa may be seen associated
with the manubrium, and striations are often visible
radiating away from this structure (Figure 9.8).
9.6
 Normal canine ear canal.
A minimal amount of cerumen is present in normal
 Blood vessels in the pars tensa associated with 
9.8
ears and the tympanic membrane is easily visualized.
the manubrium.
 Using the video-otoscope, both the pars flaccida and
pars tensa of the tympanic membrane are visible
The region of the tympanic membrane overlying
(Figure 9.7). The normal tympanic membrane in dogs
the manubrium is reported to be the location of the
 and cats appears translucent. The pars flaccida is the
germinal epithelium in dogs and cats, which is
 small pink region forming the upper quadrant of the
responsible for the healing of a damaged tympanic 
tympanic membrane. It contains small blood vessels.
membrane. In a normal ear, structures of the middle
In some dogs, it appears dilated and prominent. It has
ear, other than the manubrium of the malleus, are 
been suggested that this bulging region may be a
rarely seen. However, a whitish discoloration can
product of increased air pressure within the middle
sometimes be seen through the lower to mid-section
ear, most commonly seen in dogs with hypersen-
 of the tympanic membrane. This represents the bony
sitivity disorders. However, the significance of this
ridge that separates the tympanic cavity from the
observation has not been completely defined.
tympanic bulla.
135
Chapter 9 Rigid endoscopy: otoendoscopy
Pathological conditions
On otoscopic examination, the condition of the ear
canal should be evaluated, foreign bodies or masses
should be looked for, the presence and the character
of the discharge should be noted, and the presence
and appearance of the tympanic membrane should
be evaluated.
Abnormal appearance of the ear canal
 Otitis externa
In cases of acute OE, signs of inflammation such as
oedema and erythema are evident along the skin
 surface lining the ear canal. Clinically, the swelling
caused by the oedema appears as stenosis of the ear
canal. Progressive histopathological changes occur in 
chronic OE, which result in continuous reduction in the
diameter of the lumen. Sebaceous and ceruminous
glands become elongated; this may appear clinically
Ulceration of the skin of the ear canal
9.10
associatedwithPseudomonasaeruginosa
as a nodular or cystic dermatosis (Figure 9.9). The
infection.
subcutaneous tissues thicken due to fibrosis and, with
time, the auditory cartilages may became calcified.
This may be accomplished using the biopsy forceps
Calcification manifests as a loss of flexibility of the ear
through the working channel on the video-otoscope
canal and difficulty in passing the video-otoscope.
There are breed-related differences regarding the
(Figure 9.11b). A mass in the ear canal can be of
neoplastic or inflammatory (e.g. inflammatory polyps)
prevalence of histopathological changes in canine
origin. Neoplastic lesions observed through the video-
chronic OE. A recent study demonstrated that >70% of
otoscope can arise from any of the structures of the
Cocker Spaniels react with a glandular pattern rather
ear canal, with or without progression into the
than a fibrotic one, whereas the glandular pattern was
tympanic cavities, or from a tumour in the middle ear.
present in only 31% of the other breed evaluated.
Therefore, in addition to the histopathological diag-
nosis, imaging studies for detection of middle ear
involvement may be necessary for therapeutic pur-
poses. Inflammatory polyps originate from the middle
ear mucosa. They appear as pink to red smooth-
surfaced nodular pedunculated lesions (Figure 9.12).
This structure is clinically characteristic, though in
some instances they may appear irregular and
multinodular. Therefore, histopathological differen-
tiation from a neoplastic lesion arising from the
tympanic bulla is mandatory.
Glandularproliferationofthehorizontalear
6'6
canal of a dog with a history of chronic OE.
Ulceration
Ulceration of the skin of the ear canal is associated
with bacterial infection, particularly with rod-shaped
bacteria, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Figure
9.10).
Masses
Occasionally, when evaluating a dog or a cat for OE
(a)
(after proper cleaning of the ear canal), a mass may
(a) Mass of neoplastic origin discovered using 
9.11
be observed (Figure 9.11a). Any mass in the ear canal
video-otoscopy in the ear canal of a cat.
should be sampled for histopathological examination.
(continues)
136
Chapter 9 Rigid endoscopy: otoendoscopy
(b)
9.13
 A hard concretion at the eardrum of a dog.
(continued) (b) Biopsy of the mass using 
9.11
biopsy forceps (visible at the top of the image)
placed through the working channel on the video-
removed using the grasping forceps through the work-
 otoscope. Histopathologically the mass was identified as
ing channel of the video-otoscope. Because they are
ceruminal gland carcinoma.
frequently attached to the lateral wall of the tympanic
membrane, removal of these aggregates may be asso-
ciated with iatrogenic perforation of the tympanum.
Discharge
A crucial step during otoscopy is the evaluation of otic
discharge. The amount, consistency and colour of
exudates should be recorded. Although the character
of the exudates may suggest a cause, the practitioner
should always confirm the suspicion with appropriate
 diagnostic tests, such as microscopic and cytological 
 examination of the debris.
 Abnormal appearance of the tympanic
membrane
Examination of the tympanic membrane is a critical
step in the diagnosis of OM. In obvious cases the
tympanic membrane is not present. To confirm true
absence, inexperienced operators should compare
 Inflammatory polyp in a cat. Note the pink to red 
the diseased ear with the healthy contralateral ear;
9.12
smooth surface.
the video-otoscope tip is advanced as far as possible,
Foreign bodies
it is likely to be absent (Figure 9.14).
Foreign bodies may be observed in the ear canal or in
the middle ear. Some of the more common foreign
bodies include plant awns and impacted wax. Plant
awns may be removed using the grasping forceps
through the working channel of the video-otoscope.
Impacted wax occurs more commonly in older patients 
and in those that have been affected with OE in the
past (Figure 9.13).
Usually impacted wax is responsible for clinical 
 signs analogous to those observed in OE (e.g. aural 
pruritus, head shaking) but signs of inflammation are
absent on otoscopic examination. It is suggested that 
in these animals a decrease in the physiological migra-
tion of the epithelium present on the lateral surface of
the tympanic membrane occurs, leading to the accu-
mulation of cerumen, hairs and cellular detritus.
Impacted wax should be dissolved with a ceruminolytic
 agent and then gently flushed out of the ear canal. In 
 OM in a dog. Note the absence of the tympanic
9.14
some instances, the impacted wax needs to be 
membrane.
137
Chapter 9 Rigid endoscopy: otoendoscopy
Sometimes a small ring of granulation tissue may
be seen at the annulus fibrosus, where the tympanic
 membrane attaches to the ear canal. The medial wall
of the tympanic cavity appears like a dark space at the
end of the canal. Viewed using a video-otoscope, the
mucoperiosteum lining the clean tympanic cavity may
occasionally reflect enough light to appear shiny and
white. This may be interpreted as a diseased but intact
tympanic membrane. To determine the nature of the
structure, a small-diameter soft feeding tube can be
gently advanced and directed to the ventral portion of
the observed object until it stops. If the tympanic mem-
brane is intact, it resists gentle pressure and may dis-
tort slightly. On the other hand, if the tympanic
membrane is absent, the tip of the tube disappears
ventrally into the tympanic bulla. Absence of the mem-
brane can also be inferred if fluid used for flushing
exits through the nostrils when the ears are flushed.
The practitioner must be aware of a condition
described in dogs called a false middle ear'. In some
instances, the examiner may have the impression
9.15
OM with rupture of the tympanic membrane.
that the tympanic membrane is absent when in fact
the tympanic membrane has been displaced medially
into the middle ear cavity. This alteration may develop
as a result of two changes that occur simultaneously.
examination in 28%, 40% and 66% of dogs with
First, increased pressure on the tympanic membrane
chronic OE in three different published studies. Other
secondary to obstruction along the horizontal ear
techniques, such as positive-contrast ear canalo-
canal from inflammation, neoplasia, impacted wax or
graphy and tympanometry have been performed to
hypertrophic or cystic glands will stretch and bulge
determine the integrity of the tympanic membrane
the tympanic membrane into the middle ear cavity.
when it cannot be visualized. Tympanometry uses a
Secondly, negative pressure inside the tympanic bulla
sensor that measures the compliance of the tympanic
as an effect of poor air movement through the auditory
membrane in response to sound waves. It is used
tube will pull the tympanic membrane even further
frequently in evaluation of OM in human patients, but
into the middle ear cavity. This condition may be
it has poor sensitivity and specificity in evaluating
recognized using CT, which reveals a “finger' lesion
canine OM.
protruding into the bulla. However, dogs with this
An intact tympanic membrane does not rule out
alteration are often misdiagnosed as having OM.
OM, particularly in dogs with chronic OE. One study
These patients can be retrospectively diagnosed at a
revealed an intact tympanic membrane in up to 72.5%
2-week recheck after ear canal cleaning, when the
of canine ears with OM. These patients may have had
previously unseen tympanic membrane returns to a
a ruptured tympanic membrane that healed, trapping
normal location. The normal tympanic membrane has
microorganisms and exudates in the middle ear.
been shown experimentally to heal in 21-35 days.
Frequently, a healed or diseased tympanic membrane
Therefore, if the tympanic membrane was truly
appears altered in colour/opacity or outline. However,
absent, a recheck performed 2 weeks later should
it may also change colour in response to inflammation
show the membrane to be incomplete.
due to chronic otitis. It may appear opaque, white,
In some cases of OM the tympanic membrane is
brown or grey. Sometimes there is fluid behind the
ruptured (Figure 9.15). However, integrity of the
tympanic membrane (e.g. infectious OM, primary
membrane can be difficult to assess visually, even
secretory OM), resulting in a bulged appearance
with  the increased resolution  and magnification
(Figure 9.16). It is therefore recommended that in any
provided by the video-otoscope, and holes or partial
case with an abnormal tympanic membrane and
tears may go undiagnosed. An easy technique for
suspected secondary OM, a surgical incision
evaluating the integrity of a visualized but diseased
(myringotomy) of the diseased tympanic membrane 
tympanic membrane is to fill the ear canal with sterile
should be performed to rule out middle ear disease.
saline while the patient is placed in lateral recumbency
latrogenic focal rupture of the tympanic membrane
with the suspected ruptured membrane uppermost.
may be done with either the hand-held otoscope or
The tip of the video-otoscope is then positioned under
the video-otoscope. However, the VO system allows
the fluid near the membrane. If small perforations are
continual visualization and accurate positioning for
present, air from the tympanic cavity escapes from
the myringotomy procedure. The site elected for
the middle ear and air bubbles are visualized by the
performing the myringotomy incision is very important.
examiner any time the animal breathes.
It is essential to make the incision in the caudoventral
It may be difficult to visualize the tympanic
portion of the pars tensa (at 6 to 7 o'clock; Figure
membrane otoscopically in some dogs with chronic
9.17) to avoid damaging the tympanic germinal
OE due to stenotic or occluded ear canals. The
epithelium and the structures of the middle ear such
tympanic membrane was visible by routine otoscopic
as the middle ear ossicles or the promontory.
138
Chapter 9 Rigid endoscopy: otoendoscopy
tympanic cavities should be gently flushed using
sterile saline instilled through a ventrally directed
catheter through the incision until the fluid aspirated
back is clear.
Abnormal appearance of the middle ear
 Cholesteatoma has been rarely described in dogs
with OM. This pathological condition is an epidermoid
cyst within the middle ear cavity, composed of
abundant keratin lamellae produced by the stratified
squamous epithelium of the lateral wall of the tympanic
membrane, which migrates into the tympanic cavities.
In the dog it is usually associated with a moderate to
severe stenosis of the ear canal. It is difficult, if not 
impossible, to visualize this structure with routine
 otoscopy. In some instances VO examination may be
suggestive, but definitive diagnosis requires CT scan 
and histopathological examination (Figure 9.18).
9.16
The bulged appearance of a tympanic
2000S
UNIVERSITA' DI MILANO
 membrane in a dog with empyema of the bulla.
Ex:
2101
AFGHANO
M BOLLE
C: N
Acc:
2005 Sep 16
Se: 4600/3
Im:16/37
Tm: 14:20:23.880
Ac
Ax: 1251.5(CO1)
512×512
120.0 kV
C
R
100.0 mA
1.0 mm/0.0:1
Tit: -8.0
2.1
Lin:DCM / Lin:DCM / Id:1D
(a)
L:469
DFOV.14.0x14.0cm
Proper position for performing a myringotomy.
9.17
 using an open-ended tomcat catheter.
The incision is made in the caudoventral portion of the
pars tensa (at 6 to 7 o'clock). C = Caudal; D = Dorsal;
R =Rostral; V = Ventral.
After cleaning and drying the ear canal, a 3.5 Fr
 tomcat catheter or polypropylene catheter is placed 
through the working channel of the video-otoscope.
The instrument selected depends on the length of the
ear canal: a myringotomy in a German Shepherd Dog 
is rarely done using a tomcat catheter because it
B
would be too short. The tip of the catheter is cut at an
 angle to make it sharper and used to make the incision 
9.18
(a) CT scan of left cholesteatoma in a male
into the caudoventral quadrant of the pars tensa.
8-year-old Afghan Hound. There is enlargement
of the middle ear cavity, complete loss of air contrast and 
Once the tip has been passed through the medial part 
early mild lytic changes to the bulla wall.(Courtesy of M Di
of the tympanic membrane into the middle ear, an
Giancamillo) (b) Removal of a huge quantity of keratinic
assistant should infuse 1 ml of sterile saline solution
debris from the tympanic cavity of a 10-year-old male
into the bulla and then aspirate. The fluid obtained is
Flat-coated Retriever with right cholesteatoma during a
then used to make cytological preparations and for
total ear canal ablation procedure. (Courtesy of 
culture and susceptibility. After sample collection, the 
CM Mortellaro)
139
Chapter 9 Rigid endoscopy: otoendoscopy
will allow continuous flushing of the tympanic bulla as
Postoperative care
long as the tympanic membrane is perforated. The
Oral glucocorticoid therapy is started before the video-
 authors prefer to use an antimicrobial solution such
otoscopic examination and continued during the
as Tris-EDTA to dilute antibiotics and to flush the ear
 recovery phase to reduce inflammation and pain. The 
canals and tympanic bullae. The reader is referred to
period of time under systemic glucocorticoid therapy
other articles for discussion of specific systemic and
depends on the ear disease present. For acute
topical antibiotic medications for infectious OM.
disease in which the primary cause of the inflammation
In cases of infectious OM, therapy can only be
is removed (e.g. foreign body) or medically controlled
discontinued when weekly examination reveals no
(e.g. ear mites), a few days on a once-daily dose of
signs of inflammation in the ear canal and the results
corticosteroids is sufficient before discontinuation. On
of cytological examination are negative for  the
the other hand, systemic corticosteroids may be used
presence of microorganisms and inflammatory cells.
for a few weeks in cases of OE with secondary OM.
At this point, regular cleansing of the affected ears is
Corticosteroids aid in reducing the inflammation and
recommended. Complete healing of the tympanic
pain of the ear canal in cases of OE. In addition, they
membrane should not be a curative criterion because,
slow the inflammation and exudation in middle ear
in some cases, the tympanic membrane may not
disease and the amount and viscosity of mucus
regenerate (e.g. damaged germinal epithelium or
produced in the bulla. Changing the quality of the
vascular supply from the pars flaccida).
mucus aids in its removal. Corticosteroids also reduce
the sweling present in the auditory tube, increasing
the drainage of mucus into the nasopharynx. Oral
Complications
prednisolone is administered daily at 1-2 mg/kg for 2
weeks then decreased to 0.5 mg/kg every other day
Complications of the VO system refer mainly to those
until discontinuation.
caused by otic flushing and myringotomy. These
Successful medical management of infectious
problems are infrequent in dogs but more common in
OM requires long-term treatment (6-8 weeks) with
cats. Pain and head shaking after the procedure may
 antimicrobial   drugs
be a result of aggressive flushing and inadequate
systemically
administered
selected on the basis of susceptibility tests, in addi-
analgesia. Neurological signs may be a consequence
tion to topical antimicrobial therapy. After flushing,
 of mechanical trauma from instruments used to clean
antibiotic therapy based on cytological results should
 the middle ear or high fluid pressure on the nerves in
be started. However, systemic therapy should be
or in close proximity to the middle ear. Clinical signs
modified once the results of the antibiotic suscept-
may include enophthalmos, ptosis, miosis and protru-
ibility tests are obtained. Efficacy of systemic anti-
sion of the nictitating membrane (Horner's syndrome)
bacterial therapy for OM relies on the low levels of
or drooped lip and ear, inability to close the eyelid,
antibiotics arriving in the middle ear by haemato-
 and decreased palpebral reflex (facial nerve injury).
genous spread or through inflammatory cells.
Severe neurological signs such as head tilt, imbal-
Antimicrobial selection based on the results of sus-
ance and circling (vestibular syndrome) and deafness
ceptibility tests that measure the minimum inhibitory
may be a result of overly aggressive irrigation of the
concentration (MIC) or the use of maximal doses of 
tympanic cavities or the use of ototoxic agents that
oral antibiotics increases therapeutic success.
 are not removed appropriately from the ear.
 Topical antibiotics placed into the middle ear can
Most complications are transient but owners should
achieve many times the blood MIC. Although it has
be aware that possible complications may occur and
-e jidoi jeun jodai juaoai e u! pasabns uaa
 that some of them may be permanent. Moreover, own-
biotic treatment alone following a thorough lavage of
ers should be aware of the need for myringotomy to
the tympanic bulla can be quite successful, combined
evaluate and treat middle ear disease in many cases.
systemic and topical therapy is still the ideal thera-
Therefore, ear flushing should never be done in a
peutic option. There are several techniques for sup-
patient under anaesthesia for another purpose without 
plying topical antibiotics into the bulla. Gotthelf(2004)
the owner's written consent; the owner should be
describes a technique to infuse drugs into the bulla,
made aware that a similar risk of complications some-
providing high concentrations directly to the bulla.
times also arises from untreated ear diseases.
One millilitre of an aqueous solution containing non-
toxic antibiotics can be placed directly on to the
infected mucoperiosteum through a small catheter
References and further reading
placed into the bulla. Most of the topical antibiotic
solutions can remain within the bulla for several days
 Angus JC and Campbell KL (2001) Uses and indications for video-otoscopy
 after infusion; however, the entire procedure of flush-
in small animal practice. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small
ing, suctioning and bula infusion should be repeated
Animal Practice 31, 809-828
 Angus JC, Lichtensteiger C, Campbell KL and Schaeffer DJ (2002) Breed
weekly during therapy. Others recommend perform-
variations in histopathologic features of chronic severe otitis externa
ing one video-otoscopic lavage of the tympanic bulla
in dogs: 80 cases (1995-2001). Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association 221, 1000-1006
followed by the application of 1-2 ml of the aqueous
 Cole LK (2004) Otoscopic evaluation of the ear canal. Veterinary Clinics
solution of the antibiotic every 12 hours and applica-
of North America: Small Animal Practice 34, 397-410
tion of a high volume (2-4 ml) of an antiseptic solution
 Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Hilier A et al. (2004) Comparasion of bacterial
 organisms from otic exudate and ear tissue from the middle ear of
at least every 48 hours by the owner into the ear
untreated and enrofloxacin-treated dogs with chronic end-stage otitis.
canal. Application of this amount of aqueous solution
Veterinary Dermatology 15 (suppl.1) 9 (abstract)
140
Chapter 9 Rigid endoscopy: otoendoscopy
 Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Hillier A et al. (2005) Comparison of bacterial
American Animal Hospital Association 227, 748-755
 organisms and their susceptiblity patterns from otic exudate and ear
Kinga G (2004) Otic flushing. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small
tissue from the vertical ear canalof dogs undergoing a total ear canal
Animal Practice 34, 557-565
Little CJL, Lane JG, Gibbs C and Pearson GR (1991) Inflammatory middle
ColeLK,KwochkaW,KowalskiJand HilierA(18)Microbia flora and
ear disease of the dog: the clinical and pathological features of
antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of isolated pathogens from the
cholesteatoma, a complication of otis mediaVeterinary Record128,
horizontal ear canal and middle ear in dogs with otitis media. Journal
319-322
of the AmericanVeterinary Medical Association 212,534-538
Morris DO (2004) Medical therapy of otitis externa and otitis media.
 Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Podel M, Hiller A and Smeak DD (2002) Evaluation
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice 34,
 of radiography, otoscopy, pneumatoscopy, impedance audiometry
541-555
and endoscopy for the diagnosis of otitis media in the dog. Advances
Nuttall T and Cole LK (2004) Ear cleaning: the UK and US perspective.
in Veterinary Dermatology 4,49-55
Veterinary Dermatology 15, 127-136
 Gotthelf LN (2004) Diagnosis and treatment of otitis media in dogs and 
cats. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice 34,
of outcome of otitis media after lavage of the tympanic bulla and
469-487
long-term antimicrobial drug reatment in dogs:4 cases (1998-2002).
Griffin CE (2006) Otitis techniques to improve practice. Clinical Techniques
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 225, 548-
 in Small Animal Practice 21, 96-106
553
Hettich BE, Boothe HW, Simpson RB et al. (2005) Effect of tympanic
Scott Jones W (2006) Video otoscopy: bringing otoscopy out of the “black 
cavity evacuation and flushing on microbial isolates during total ear
box". International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology 70,
canal ablation with lateral bula osteotomy in dogs. Journal of the
1875-1883
141
v: urethrocvs
toscopl
and
Alasdair Hotston Moore and Gary England
Introduction
External urethral
Cervix
Pseudocervix
orifice
Examination of the lower urinary tract and reproduc-
tive tract is a core part of the diagnosis of various
medical and surgical disorders of small animals.
Vagina
Historically, radiographic examinations were almost
the sole way to investigate structural abnormalities,
but more recently both ultrasonography and endo-
Cervical os
Urethra
scopy have become essential additional modalities
for diagnosis. Anatomical considerations limit the
Vestibule
application of urethroscopy in male animals, espe-
cially the cat, but in females the entire urethra and
 Schematic representation of the caudal
the bladder are readily accessible to endoscopic
10.1
urogenital tract of the bitch.
evaluation. In the male, examination of the urethra
may be possible in some dogs, using highly special-
In most animals the vagina is continuous with the
ized equipment; the bladder of male dogs and cats is
vestibule, although the mucosa is paler in appearance
accessible via a transabdominal approach (laparo-
and has the typical redundant folds. There is a smal
scopic or  laparoscopically  assisted  cystoscopy).
blind-ending pouch, approximately 5 mm deep, on
Interventional procedures in the lower urinary tract
either side of the urethral orifice. The vagina runs
are still limited in application, but urolith removal and 
 cranially and lies parallel with the pelvic floor (changing
ablation, tissue biopsy, injection of bulking agents
direction from the vestibule).
into the urethral wall, and palliation of urethral neo-
In a significant number of bitches there is a distinct
plasia have been reported.
 narrowing at this level, termed vestibulovaginal sten-
osis. The clinical importance of this condition is often
minimal; although it has been reported to be associ-
Anatomical considerations
ated with urinary incontinence, the epidemiological
evidence for this is poor. In other animals there may
A key difference between the sexes is the relatively
be vertical bands of mucosa across the vagina at this
long, narrow and curved urethra of the male. This
level; these probably represent incomplete recession 
limits the application of rigid endoscopy in particular,
of the embryonic cloacal membrane. The clinical sig-
and only the distal penile urethra can be examined
nificance of these is also unknown. Around the ure-
with this equipment in the male dog. In the tomcat, the
thral orifice, the endoscopist may notice a number of
penile urethra is extremely narrow and urethroscopy
 small pits, the function of which is unknown.
is virtually impossible with the equipment currently in
The caudal vagina has a smooth pink mucosa that
common use.
is arranged into longitudinal folds. Each fold may
In the bitch (Figure 10.1) and queen, the anatomy
appear to have a slightly segmental appearance.
lends itself to endoscopic examination. Apart from the
Generally there is one fold positioned on the dorsal
difference in size, the anatomy is practically identical
surface of the vagina and a further five or six folds
in both species. The caudal urogenital tract in the
around the vaginal wall. The vagina of the average
female is bordered by the lips of the vulva, which are
bitch is deceptively long; often the cervix is positioned
positioned ventral to the bony pelvis. The clitoris is
level with the third lumbar vertebra (the vagina of a
housed under a thin frenular band within the ventral
20 kg dog is often 25 cm in length). The cranial half of
commissure of the vulva. Opening within the vulval
the vagina narrows to approximately half its caudal
lips, the vestibule is common to both urinary and
diameter. The majority of this narrowing is caused by
reproductive tracts. The normal mucosa is pale pink,
an increase in the size of the dorsal vaginal fold (see
with little evidence of vascularization. The vestibule is
Figures 10.2 and 10.12). The region of the noticeable
angled dorsally and at its cranial limit the urethral
 narrowing is often called the pseudocervix (see Figure
orifice is found on the ventral floor, marking the
vulvovaginal junction (see Figure 10.5).
be mistaken for the cervix. However, the vagina runs
142
Chapter 1o Rigid endoscopy: urethrocystoscopy and vaginoscopy
cavernous and somewhat featureless space. The
10.2
epithelium is paler than that of the urethra and smooth,
Dorsal vaginal fold.
with prominent mucosal blood vessels visible
(Courtesy of
throughout (Figure 10.4). The only landmarks within
P Lhermette)
the bladder are thepaired ureteral orifices,which are
located dorsolaterally, just cranial to the bladder neck.
They are recognized as slits in the bladder epithelium
(see Figure 10.6), which become flattened and less
prominent as the bladder is distended by infusion
during examination. In companion animals the ureters
cannot normally be entered with an endoscope, the
exception being in cases of dramatic hydroureter or in
particularly large patients.
10.4
cranially for some significant distance from the
Endoscopic
pseudocervix and is dominated by the dorsal
appearance of a
longitudinal fold (often termed the dorsomedian
normal bladder
postcervical fold).
wall. (Courtesy of
P Lhermette)
The cervix is a thick-walled structure, generally
seen as a rounded or elliptical feature protruding into
the dorsal wall of the vagina. The cervix is usually
smooth and pink; the small lumen opening on its
ventral aspect is directed dorsally into the uterus.
When viewed endoscopically from the cranial vagina,
it is usually not possible to see the cervical os
because of its ventral position, but its position can be
determined as there are multiple small wrinkles that
diverge away from it.
Indications
The uterus of the bitchhas a relatively long body
and two equally sized horns that diverge significantly
Urethrocystoscopy is indicated for investigation of a
as they traverse the caudal abdomen to end at the
variety of lower urinary tract presentations. These
include dysuria and obstruction, stranguria and
oviductal papilla protrudes into the lumen of the uterus
increased frequency of urination, haematuria and
on its dorsomedial aspect.
incontinence. In addition, therapeutic interventions
On entering the urethra, initially the mucosa is
include treatment of urethral sphincter mechanism
noted to be pink and, particularly in entire females,
incompetence (UsMl), ureteral ectopia, urolithiasis
folded into a rosette appearance (Figure 10.3). It is
and urethral neoplasia, and the placement of cysto-
uniform in diameter and runs along the dorsal surface
stomy tubes. Laparoscopic neutering is dealt with in
of the pelvic floor before deviating ventrally to the
Chapter 11.
bladder. However, if the urethra is distended by
infusion of fluid, the mucosa flattens and the lumen
Clinical history
becomes circular. There is no distinct narrowing of
Cases that are selected for urethrocystoscopy
the urethra at the level of the urethral sphincter;
typically have a chronic history that includes
indeed, it widens abruptly at the bladder neck to
incontinence, dysuria or stranguria. Less common
become confluent with the bladder. The smooth
signs of lower urinary tract disease include vaginal or
 muscle of the urethra is continuous with the detrusor
preputial discharge, perineal or preputial irritation, or
muscle of the bladder; together these form the
pain on urination. Haematuria alone, without other
functional internal urethral sphincter. The bladder is a
signs of lower urinary tract disease, is more likely to
result from renal or ureteral conditions, and is less
suitable  for endoscopic evaluation.
Giventhe
10.3
incidence of uncomplicated urinary tract infection
Endoscopic
(UTI), especially in bitches, it is difficult to recommend
appearance of
urethrocystoscopy as an initial investigation in acute
normal urethra.
(Courtesy of
recurrent or refractory cases which may have an
P Lhermette)
underlying pathology such as polypoid cystitis,
urolithiasis or neoplasia.
Clinical examination
In the majority of cases with this type of presentation,
clinical examination is unrewarding. However, partic-
ular attention should be paid to vulvar conformation:
some authors have suggested a link between an
143
Chapter 10
 Rigid endoscopy: urethrocystoscopy and vaginoscopy
infantile vulva and USMl. Although this link is dis-
Radiography
puted, the conformation should be noted. Neoplastic
Radiography is a vital component of the evaluation of
conditions of the vulva are rare.
these cases, even when ultrasonography and endo-
Abnormalities of the prepuce are rare but preputial
scopy are available. In cases of urinary incontinence,
stenosis is an occasional cause of dysuria.
intravenous urography (IVU) provides additional infor-
In males the penis should be extruded from the
sheath as part of the examination, since penile neo-
urinary tract disease, retrograde urethrography (males)
plasia is an occasional cause of haematuria and penile
 and vaginourethrography are useful to demonstrate
trauma (including fracture of the os penis) is a cause
urethral abnormalities due to tissue change and also
of urinary obstruction. In most dogs the penis can be
to clarify congenital anatomical defects. Cystography,
extruded in the conscious patient, but in tomcats seda-
notably doubie-contrast cystography, also provides
tion or general anaesthesia is required to allow a
useful structural information that assists in planning
detailed examination that is safe for the patient.
Digital vaginal examination is possible in larger
to quantify the number of stones present before
dogs. However, in cats and most smaller patients it 
removal and as a postoperative check to ensure that 
should only be attempted after general anaesthesia 
all have been retrieved.
or significant sedation. In many cases, vaginoscopy is
Thoracic radiographs should be taken when neo-
a more useful technique for examination.
plasia is suspected, since there is a significant inci-
Rectal examination is essential in males and
dence of pulmonary metastasis with urinary and
females of both species, although sedation or anaes-
prostatic carcinoma. In most cases of transitional cell
thesia is required in cats and smaller dogs. In the
carcinoma local metastasis is more of a problem, since
female, rectal palpation is useful to evaluate the
urethral blockage and euthanasia will often occur
vagina and the urethra. In normal animals the vagina
before pulmonary metastasis can take place. Caudal
is barely perceptible as a smooth and soft structure
abdominal radiographs are valuable for assessing the
ventral to the rectum. In animals with vaginal tumours
size of the sublumbar lymph nodes and, in particular,
(most commonly vaginal leiomyoma), these are pal-
for demonstrating the bony proliferation around the
pable as firm (in the typical case, globoid) masses.
pelvis and ventral to the lumbar vertebrae, which is
Although a single larger mass is usually present, in
commonly a feature of prostatic carcinoma.
 many cases smaller multiple tumours are also detect-
Ultrasonography
able. In normal females, the urethra is not palpable,
but in animals with urethral neoplasia, granulomato-
Ultrasonography is a critically important adjunct to
both radiographic and endoscopic evaluation of the
sis urethritis or urethral caruncle, the urethra is detect-
able as a firm tubular structure beneath the vagina. In
lower urinary tract. Ultrasonography provides infor-
male dogs, rectal examination is useful particularly for
mation in particular about the structure of solid organs,
initial evaluation of the prostate. In normal adult
 notably the prostate and kidneys, and additional infor-
males, this is detectable as a firm bilobed mobile
mation about the wall of fluid-filled viscera, such as
structure that is non-painful on palpation. Prostatic
the bladder, that may not be detectable on other
disease often results in enlargement, together with a
investigations. It is also valuable for investigating hol-
low organs or cavities not accessible to endoscopy,
firmness) and pain. Prostatic carcinoma, however, is
such as the uterus when the cervix is closed and pro-
characterized by a small or barely enlarged prostate,
static cysts. Aspirates or needle biopsy specimens
which is extremely painful and fixed to local soft tis-
can be readily obtained from these organs under
sues. Prostate disease is rare in cats.
ultrasound guidance.
Urethrocystoscopy
Preoperative diagnostic work-up
Instrumentation
In addition to routine haematological and plasma
In principle, urethroscopy can be performed with a
 biochemical evaluation, all animals should have urine
rigid endoscope or a flexible (fibreoptic or video-)
collected for both urinalysis and bacterial culture.
endoscope.
likely to be associated with increased rates of
Males
complication. Additionally, many lower urinary tract
In the male dog, because of the long curved urethra,
diseases are complicated by secondary UTl. Urine
only the distal penile urethra can be examined with
cytology is often unhelpful, even in the presence of
rigid endoscopy. Flexible endoscopy is the only prac-
gross neoplasia, but vaginal cytology may be useful 
in cases of suspected reproductive disease.
endoscopy through a perineal urethrostomy has been
described, given the morbidity associated with this
surgical approach, it cannot be routinely recom-
Intraoperative diagnostic work-up
mended. Unfortunately, the narrow diameter of the
(under general anaesthesia)
canine urethra and the presence of the os penis
Rectal and vaginal palpation should be repeated in
around the distal portion severely limit endoscope
the anaesthetized animal where muscular relaxation 
access and urethroscopy is therefore performed
facilitates careful palpation.
uncommonly in male dogs.
144
Chapter 10
In tomcats, although the urethra can be straight-
second giving set is attached to the other stopcock to
ened, the extremely narow penile urethra limits
allow drainage of urine and irrigant as required. lt is
access. However, small-diameter semi-flexible endo-
worth noting that the use of cold irrigants can result in
scopes, such as a 1.2 mm cystourethroscope, have
a significant reduction in the patient's core body
been used successfully in tomcats; some have a
temperature. Warming the saline irrigant to body
ng abup/uoisnju! pin moie on jauuuo js
temperature reduces the likelihood of hypothermia,
there is no instrument channel or angulation. A 1 mm
especially in smaller patients.
semi-rigid endoscope has also been used in tomcats.
 A diode laser is suitable for interventional pro-
Biopsy samples can be taken blind' or using a pre-
a  sssu s o  s ss
pubic approach with the cystoscope placed trans-
through a semi-flexible fibreoptic cable, which can be
urethrally for guidance.
 passed through the instrument channel of the sheath
and used to resect soft tissue within the urogenital
Females
tract. For transabdominal cystoscopy, standard equip-
In bitches and queens, either rigid or flexible
ment for laparoscopic procedures is required.
endoscopes can be used; however, given the superior
image quality of rigid endoscopes, these are more
 Care of instruments
commonly deployed. Flexible video-endoscopes are
Care of the rigid cystoscope is identical to that of other
generally too large in diameter for this application,
similar instruments. Particular care should be used in
whilst  narrow  flexible endoscopes have  the
handling the unsheathed endoscope, which is fragile
disadvantage of being somewhat less robust than
when unsupported. The semi-flexible forceps are also
rigid endoscopes. These limitations also prevent
fragile and care should be taken both in use and
ureteroscopy in dogs and cats.
during cleaning. Additionally, the channels in the
The most commonly recommended rigid endo-
 operating sheath are narrow and prone to obstruction
 scopes are 2.7 mm or 4 mm in diameter, used with a
 by dried protein if not promptly flushed and cleaned
cystoscopic operating sheath. The 2.7 mm endo-
after use. Most moderm endoscopes are suitable for
scope is suitable for queens and smaller bitches, but
 sterilising by autoclave, although the manufacturer's
is usually too short to be used to examine the bladder
 recommendations should be followed (see Chapter
in larger bitches, where the 4 mm diameter, 300 mm
 2). In common with other holow tubular equipment,
long, endoscope is applicable. In either case, an
the endoscope and sheath can only be reliably
endoscope with a moderately angled field of view,
 sterilized in a vacuum-assisted, rather than gravity
typically 30 degrees oblique, is selected to allow
displacement (typical benchtop model) autoclave.
examination of the entire lumen of both urethra and
bladder and examination of the trigone in particular.
Patient preparation
The endoscope is generally used with a cystoscopic
sheath, which has two portals (for infusion and out-
eral anaesthesia, although it may be possible under
flow) together with an operating channel. Ancillary
sedation and/or epidural analgesia. It is important that 
equipment includes semi-flexible biopsy and grasping
the patient is relaxed and immobile to allow atrau-
forceps to pass through the operating channel,
matic inspection and avoid damage to either tissues
together with basket forceps to retrieve uroliths.
or instrumentation. The external genitalia of the
Particularly with the narrower endoscope, the operat-
patient should be clipped in long-haired breeds and
ing channel only permits the passage of fine forceps,
the local skin cleaned. To allow detailed inspection of
 and the operator should recognize both the limitations
the bladder lumen, urine must be removed, the blad-
on the size of specimen that can be retrieved and the
der rinsed and then infused with fresh saline; this can
be carried out by catheterization prior to endoscopy
fragility of these instruments.
or with the endoscope during the procedure.
General
 A standard light guide and light source are required.
Procedure in the bitch and queen
Illumination of the urethra is undemanding in terms of
The animal is positioned in either lateral or sternal
intensity, but the bladder of larger patients requires a
recumbency with the hindlimbs extended caudally.
good quality light source. Notably, until the bladder
Lateral recumbency allows  greater flexibility
Iin
has been emptied of urine, flushed and filled with
 manipulation of the rigid endoscope. The hindquarters
saline, sediment and coloration of the urine markedly
are positioned at the edge of the table.
absorb the light and hinder examination.
Provision should be made to avoid the animal
 An endoscopic camera system is highly recom-
becoming excessively wet from urine or irrigation
mended for urethrocystoscopy because of the bene-
fluid: either a gridded table top or placement of
fits of documentation, improved sterility and to avoid
incontinence bedding under the animal is suitable. A
the need to place the operator's face near the area of
fluids stand is placed alongside the patient to suspend
examination, which is contaminated with urine.
 the saline for gravity infusion. The monitor is positioned
Procedures are carried out during distension of
 at the head of the patient.
the lower urogenital tract with fluid, commonly sterile
When the endoscope has been placed within the
saline. This is infused via a standard giving set through 
operating sheath, the camera is attached and the
one of the portals of the sheath, each of which is
sheath flushed with saline from the giving set to
equipped with a Luer lock stopcock. Gravity infusion
remove air bubbles from the system. The tip of the
is adequate and safer than use of a fluid pump. A
endoscope is now placed within the vulvar lips at
145
Chapter 10 Rigid endoscopy: urethrocystoscopy and vaginoscopy
the dorsal commissure to avoid the clitoral fossa, and
10.6
the vulva is pinched closed around the sheath during
(a, b) Normal
examination of the vestibule, vagina and lower
ureteral openings
urethra. The ingress stopcock is opened and the
in the dog. In (b)
egress stopcock closed until the vestibule becomes
urine can be seen
distended with saline, allowing identification of the
discharging into
urethral orifice on the floor of the vagina at the
the bladder.
vestibulovaginal junction (Figure 10.5) and the vaginal
(Courtesy of
P Lhermette)
lumen running cranially. The vagina is generally
examined before the urethra is entered.
10.5
(a)
Normal feline
vestibulewith
vaginal os above
urethral opening.
(Courtesy of
P Lhermette)
On entering the vagina, a reflection of the anterior
vagina/cervix is often seen in air bubbles on the dor-
(b)
sal vaginal wall. It is important not to mistake this
for the true cervix, but to move the tip of the endo-
The endoscope will need to be rotated, so that the
scope ventrally to realign with the more horizontal
obliquity is dorsal, to examine this area. Once the
vaginal lumen. This can then be explored cranially,
ureteral openings have been identified, the remainder
noting the prominent dorsal fold which culminates at
of the bladder lumen is examined, using ingress and
the cervix. The vaginal mucosa of the neutered
egress of irrigant as necessary. In the normal animal,
bitch is relatively smooth in appearance, not unlike
the bladder surface is uniform in appearance, with no
that of deep anoestrus, whereas that of the entire
other landmarks identifiable.
bitch often has prominent longitudinal folds when the
bitch is not in anoestrus.
Biopsy
Once the vaginal examination is complete the
Biopsy samples can be taken from the urethral or
endoscope is withdrawn slightly until the urethral
bladder surface using cup forceps passed through
orifice is identified once more (see Figure 10.5) and
the operating channel. Normal urothelium is relatively
the endoscope advanced into it. With continued saline
tough and may prove difficult to obtain samples from,
infusion the urethra will distend to form a circular tube.
but proliferative areas suspected of inflammatory or
The endoscope is then advanced to the bladder neck
neoplastic change are more readily sampled (Figure
under direct observation, rotating the endoscope to
10.7). Biopsy samples should be submitted for both
allow examination of the entire circumferenceas
histopathology and bacteriology. lf a grab biopsy
required. In the normal animal, the urethra is a single
cannot be performed, suction is a suitable alternative,
lumen with no other orifices.
the samples being retrieved blindly'using a urethral
At the bladder neck the urethra abruptly opens
catheter. The operator is cautioned that if the bladder 
into the bladder, which has a much larger lumen. If
is over-distended, it will be much more difficult to
urine has not previously been drained, the image
retrieve adequate samples.
quality will be lost due to the opacity of normal urine.
The ingress stopcock is closed and the egress
10.7
stopcock opened, allowing urine to be evacuated
under gravity flow to below the height of the patient.
Endoscopic
Once the bladder has collapsed, the egress stopcock 
appearance of
is closed once more and the bladder slowly distended
taking a tissue
biopsy from a mass
with saline. Excessive distension is avoided as it may
in theproximal
cause artefactual subepithelial haemorrhage, prevent
urethra.(Courtesy
examination of the cranial pole in larger bitches, and
of PLhermette)
potentially cause bladder rupture.The bladder is
examined as it distends: the trigone is usually
identified first, at the caudal dorsal surface of the
lumen, and the two ureteral openings are identified as
small slits (Figure 10.6). Jets of coloured urine may
be seen if the bladder is not excessively distended.
146
Urolith removal
through the purse-string suture into the bladder to
Uroliths that are smaller than the urethral diameter
collect uroepithelial biopsy samples or retrieve calculi.
can be grasped with a stone basket or grasping
Additionally, by opening the valve on the cannula and
forceps and then removed as the endoscope and
slowly withdrawing the endoscope whilst infusing the
sheath are withdrawn together. The stones should be
bladder, calculi that are smaller than the cannula
submitted for stone analysis and culture,even if other
diameter can be encouraged to flush up and out
larger stones cannot be removed, since medical
through the cannula. When urolithiasis is being
treatment aimed at dissolution should be based on
managed in this way, it is important that the urethra is
chemical analysis of the calculus.
flushed actively in a retrograde fashion to ensure no
calculi remain in the urethra.
Laser techniques
Once transabdominal cystoscopy is complete,
The fibreoptic tip of the laser can be passed into the
tying the purse-string suture closes the cystotomy,
operating channel of the sheath and used for tissue
and the bladder can then be returned to the abdomen.
 transaction or destruction. Two described applications
The mini-laparotomy is closed routinely after deflation
are: treatment of ectopic ureter; and palliation of
of the pneumoperitoneum.
urethral neoplasia. At the time of writing, both are
considered to be in early clinical evaluation.
The principle of treatment of ureteral ectopia by
Laparoscopic-assisted cystostomy
this approach is to identify the ureteral orifice in the
tube placement
urethra and then follow it cranially, ablating the thin
two-layered sheet of epithelium (ureteral and urethra)
A similar approach to transabdominal cystoscopy can
that separates it from the urethra, creating a single
be used in either sex to place a cystostomy tube. In
this instance, the instrument portal is placed in the
lumen. Once the bladder neck is reached, the ablation
is finished and the ureteral orifice is now effectively
caudal flank so that the lateral aspect of the bladder
translocated from its ectopic position to the trigone.
can be grasped and brought to the skin in a neutral
Results of this treatment have yet to be reported in a
position. Again, the portal is enlarged sufficiently to
large case series.
exteriorize the bladder serosal surface and a purse-
Urethral neoplasia (most commonly diagnosed as
string suture is placed. The cystostomy tube (ideally,
transitional cell carcinoma) can be palliated by
a 16-20 Fr mushroom-tipped or De Pezzer catheter)
destruction of the proliferative epithelium which
is placed through the purse-string suture, which is
obstructs the urethral lumen,using a diode laser
then tied. In this instance, two additional cystopexy
(Figure 10.8). Anecdotally, this can eliminate dysuria
sutures are placed to secure the bladder to the mini-
for prolonged periods, but a comparison of the results
laparotomy site, which is then closed routinely.
of this therapy (which usually is complemented by
piroxicam) with piroxicam alone or with tube cystotomy
Vaginoscopy in the bitch
is not available.
A further discussion of the use of lasers in tissue
Instrumentation
ablation and in lithotripsy is given in Chapter 14.
Generally, rigid endoscopyequipment with an external
sheath and catheter port is most suitable for
10.8
examination of the vagina. Endoscopes that are too
Canine urethra
large will be unable to penetrate the pseudocervix of
following laser
medium-sized and small bitches,and those that are
ablation of
too short will be unable to reach the cervix in all but
transitional cell
small breeds.
carcinoma.Note
the 8 Fr urinary
Rigid endoscopes allow better manipulation within
catheterinthe
the vagina than do flexible endoscopes, and more
lumen. (Courtesy of
simple passage of flexible catheters or sampling
P Lhermette)
brushes. In the authors' opinion, best results are
viewing angle and an external sheath of 1.9-7.3 mm
diameter, according to the size of the bitch. For the
purpose of cervical catheterization it may be helpful if 
there is a built-in catheter deflecting device to help
change the direction of the catheter within the cranial
vagina (Figure 10.9).
Transabdominal cystoscopy
Patient positioning and restraint
In animals where the bladder cannot be entered
through the urethra (most notably males), cystoscopy
In general, endoscopic examination of the caudal
can be carried out transabdominally. Full details of
reproductive tract is well tolerated by bitches, with the
this procedure can be found in Chapter 11.
exception of those that are prepubertal or in anoestrus.
Similar considerations apply as for urethrocysto-
At most other times it is possible to undertake the
scopy in terms of intervention,but in addition larger
examination in a standing bitch restrained on a table.
forceps can be introduced alongside the cannula
Lateral movement of the animal can be prevented by
147
Urethrocystoscope with built-in catheter
10.9
deflecting device in operation, suitable for
cervical catheterization in the bitch.
arranging the table against a fixed wall or with the use
Normal anatomy of the vulva of the bitch. The
10.10
of a belly-band. Some surgeons prefer to elevate the
endoscope should not be inserted into the
hindquarters of the bitch using a belly-band, claiming
clitoral fossa (black arrow) but should be directed above
that this restricts movement and encourages the
the transverse frenular fold into the vestibular opening
 abdominal viscera to move cranially and so increase
(whitearrow).
space within the pelvic canal; however, some bitches
resent this method of restraint. Where a greater level
of restraint is required, low doses of sedative agents
may be useful.
Procedure
The vulval lips should be cleaned of any discharge
 prior to insertion of the endoscope. The use of a dilute
disinfectant solution is not necessary but may be
(a)
useful for wetting surrounding hairs and therefore
moving them away from the vulva. Lubricating gel
may be applied to the outer sheath but will not
 generally be necessary for bitches that are in oestrus.
When lubricants are used it is important not to place
material close to the tip of the endoscope as this
quickly obscures the field of view. Where endoscopy
is required for the purpose of artificial insemination
with semen it is preferable to use physiological saline
as a lubricant, or if a specific lubricant is required to
use oil-based materials which are less toxic to sperm
compared with water-soluble lubricants.
Prior to insertion of the endoscope the position of
the clitoris within the ventral commissure should be
(b)
identified (Figure 10.10). The endoscope should be
(a) Schematic representation of the direction of
directed abovetheclitoris through the dorsal
10.11
endoscope insertion into the caudal
commissure of the vulva, or the bitch may exhibit pain
reproductive tract of the bitch. (b) Correct angle of
when the endoscope is introduced.
insertion of the endoscope into the vestibule.
The endoscope is normally angled dorsally towards
the base of the tail to facilitate its introduction into
mucosal fold and require redirection. This can usually
the vestibule and it can be pushed gently forwards in
be achieved by visualizing the lumen of the vagina as
this direction to ensure the tip of the endoscope does
the endoscope is advanced. Pushing the endoscope
not penetrate the external urethral orifice. When the
into a vaginal fold may result in some discomfort to
endoscope reaches the level of the external urethral
the bitch.
orifice the angle is normally changed so that the
In some cases insufflation of air through one of the
endoscope is parallel with the pelvis (Figure 10.11).
endoscope ports may be useful to push the vaginal
There may be minor resistance to passage of the
wall away from the endoscope; this can be achieved
endoscope from the vestibule into the vagina. In most
either using a low-pressure pump or by the sporadic
cases the endoscope will pass along the length of the
injection of air from a 60 ml syringe. If the purpose of
vagina quite easily, although in some cases as the
the examination is to assess the appearance of the
endoscope is advanced it may become lodged on a
vaginal wall to evaluate the stage of the oestrous
148
Chapter 1o Rigid endoscopy: urethrocystoscopy and vaginoscopy
cycle, however, it is best not to use insufflation. In
As the endoscope is advanced, multiple larger
some bitches that are in oestrus there may be a
folds can be identified; there may be up to six or seven
significant volume of haemorrhagic fluid within the
larger folds protruding inwards. It may be helpful to
vaginal lumen. This can obscure the view and can be
have a catheter within one of the endoscope ports to
overcome either by insufflation, by aspiration of the
push the vaginal wall away from the tip of the
fluid, or by lavage of the vaginal cavity with a large
endoscope and facilitate identification of the vaginal
volume of sterile saline. Obstruction of the field of
lumen. Approximately midway along the vagina the
view for other reasons such as debris,mucus or
pseudocervix is reached, evidenced by the large
moisture can be dealt with by removal of the
dorsal median fold - a large and consistent landmark.
endoscope, rinsing of the tip in warm sterile saline
In small or maiden bitches it may be necessary to use
and then reinsertion.
 a smaller endoscope than normal to pass beyond this
When the endoscope reaches the area of the
region.The dorsal fold continues cranially to the level
of the cervix. In the non-oestrous bitch the fold
pseudocervix there is an obvious reduction in the
diameter of the vagina (caused predominantly by the
appears as a continuous structure, although during
large dorsal vaginal fold), which may result in some
pro-oestrus and oestrus it appears divided along its
difficulty in advancing the endoscope. In many cases
length into three equal-sized zones called tubercles
it is easiest to advance the endoscope lateral to,
(Figure 10.13).
rather than ventral to, this fold.
As the endoscope reaches the level of the cervix
Cranial tubercle Middle tubercle
Caudal tubercle
it may be difficult to identify the position of the
(pseudocervix)
cervical os, the opening of which is usually present 
on the ventral aspect of the cervix; significant mani-
pulation of the endoscope may be necessary to
move the position of the cervix to facilitate identifica-
tion of the os.
Hysteroscopy can only be performed in the
immediate post-partum period. At this stage the uterus
has a larger size than normal, usually the endometrium
is folded and a lochial discharge is present upon the
Schematic representation of the differentiation
10.13
of the dorsal median fold into three distinct
 endometrial surface. A slightly protuberant oviductal
tubercles. This is normally evident when examinations are
papilla may be identified, usually on the dorsomedial
conducted during oestrus.
aspect of the uterine wall.
Normal findings
In the cranial vagina the cervix can be readily
identified as a rounded structure originating from the
Non-oestrous bitch
dorsal wall of the vagina and projecting in a ventral
The vestibule has a relatively flat and pink mucosa.
direction. Normally the cervical os faces downwards
and is not immediately in view; it is the dorsal surface
After passage of the endoscope over the external ure-
thral orifice,thelongitudinalvaginal foldsbecomevery
of the cervix that is initially seen. The endoscope may
apparent. When the bitch is not cycling (either anoe-
be manipulated under the cervix, enabling the cervi-
strus or mid to late met/dioestrus) these folds have a
cal os to be visualized. The endoscope may be
low height and a relatively thin appearance. This
pushed beyond the cervix into the blind-ending
means that the underlying vasculature can be seen,
cranial vaginal pouch.
and overall the folds appear red or pink-red (Figure
Cyclical changes
 ance, and lubrication is warranted in most cases.
The hormonal changes that occur during the onset of
When the vaginal folds are examined in profile
 pro-oestrus, oestrus and the early luteal phase have
they have a round and flaccid appearance. If there is
a direct effect upon the vaginal epithelium, resulting in
significant insufflation of the vagina with air the folds
an initial proliferation and oedema of the mucosa, a
 may be compressed and become dificult to see.
subsequent reduction in oedema, and finally sloughing
of the epithelium. These changes can be readily
detected with vaginoscopic examination.
10.12
During pro-oestrus, increased plasma oestrogen
Endoscopic
concentrations cause thickening of the vaginal
appearance of the
mucosa,which becomes a keratinized squamous
caudal vagina of a
epithelium. This is essentially a mechanism to protect
bitch in anoestrus.
the normally thin vaginal mucosa from potential
The mucosa is
relatively dry and
trauma at the time of mating. Under the influence of
red,with small
oestrogen there is also significant oedema of the
folds.
vaginal wall. A subsequent decline in oestrogen and
slight increase in plasma progesterone initiates
oestrus, at which time the bitch will allow mating. The
reduction in oestrogen is associated with a reduction
in oedema. The rise in plasma progesterone
149
Chapter 1o Rigid endoscopy: urethrocystoscopy and vaginoscopy
concentration (a result of preovulatory luteinization)
10.15
and the low oestrogen-to-progesterone ratio causes a
Endoscopic
surge in luteinizing hormone (LH) from the pituitary
appearance of the
gland. Most ovulations commence 48 hours after
mid-vagina of a
peak LH concentrations are reached. High concen-
bitch on days
trations of progesterone occur approximately 7 days
(a) 3 and(b) 5
after ovulation, after which time the proliferated
after ovulation.The
epithelium starts to slough.
mucosaremains
Endoscopically, at the onset of pro-oestrus the
thick but there is
extensive wrinkling
mucosa becomes thickened and oedematous due to
and angulation of
the increase in plasma concentrations of oestrogen.
the mucosal fold
The mucosal folds therefore appear greatly enlarged,
(a)
profiles compared
thickened and oedematous (Figure 10.14). Serosan-
with early oestrus.
guineous fluid can be observed within the lumen and
may be seen to exit from the cervix. This is a stark
change in appearance from the relatively thin, flat and
dry mucosa noted during anoestrus. Furthermore,
there is a considerable change in colour of the
epithelium, which changes from being red with clearly
visible vessels to pink or pink/white.
(q) 
There is progressive flattening of the epithelium,
which develops a concertina-like appearance. At the
end of the fertile period there israpid shedding of
the epithelial surface. Sometimes passage of the
endoscope lifts large sheets of cells from the vaginal
wall. Complete shedding of the epithelium is usually
completed within 48 hours. The mucosal folds
become less distinct and are clearly softer and
flaccid. The surface of the mucosa at this time
becomes variegated in colour with white patches
mixed with areas of red thin epithelium. Finally, as
the luteal phase progresses (whether pregnant or
Endoscopic appearance of the mid-vagina of a
10.14
non-pregnant), there is a reduction in the diameter of 
bitch in late pro-oestrus/early oestrus.The
the lumen, similar to that seen in the anoestrus bitch.
mucosa is oedematous and relatively thickened and has
Initially there is apparent contraction of the folds,
an obvious white colour. The mucosa is arranged in larger
rounded folds than in thenon-oestrousbitch.
dry and red epithelium is similar to that observed
during anoestrus. The progressive changes from
As pro-oestrus progresses, the mucosal surface
pro-oestrus through oestrus to the luteal phase can
be used to assess the optimal time for breeding, as
white, because the thickened mucosa prevents the
discussed later.
underlying capillaries (that were visible during anoe-
strus) from being seen. In late pro-oestrus or early
oestrus, at approximately the same time as the LH
Pathological conditions
surge, there is a progressive shrinking of the folds that
is accompanied by further pallor. These effects are the
The presence of a coloured discharge from the
result of anabrupt withdrawal of oestrogen. Oestrogen
external urethral orifice may be a useful finding, since
concentrations decline rapidly during and following
it confirms that pathology is associated with the
the LH surge. Subsequently, over the next several
urinary tract rather than the genital system.
days, mucosal shrinkage is accompanied by gross
wrinkling of the mucosal folds and they now develop
Urethra
a distinctly angulated appearance but remain a dense
Disorders of the urethra can be generally classified as
cream to white colour. The epithelial peaks become
functional or structural. The important functional
sharp-tipped and irregular in appearance (Figure
disorders result in urinary incontinence or dysuria.
10.15). The mucosa also starts to look drier, and in
Urinary incontinence can also be due to structural
many bitches there is a change to a clear/creamy col-
disorders but often is a result of overall loss of the
our to any discharge originating from the cervix.
sphincter mechanism of the urethra.
150
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence
10.16
USMI is a multifactorial disorder. more commonly
(a) Early and
encountered in bitches than in male dogs or in cats. It
(b) severe
is typically seen as an acquired disease of adult
transitional cell
neutered bitches but does occur less commonly in
carcinoma inthe
young animals, where itmaybeconsidered congenital,
canine urethra.
and in entire adults. Although USMI is often associated
(Courtesy of
with a short urethra and intrapelvic bladder neck, this
PLhermette)
is not invariably the case, and in some cases there is
no detectable anatomical abnormality. In these
animals, urethrocystoscopy will be unremarkable and,
although a judgement of urethral length may be made
endoscopically, a more consistent and comparable
(a)
judgement of both urethral length and bladder neck
position   is  obtained   with   retrograde   vagino-
urethrography. Since USMI is often a disease of
neutered bitches,and thought tobe related to absence
relative lack of folding of the urethral mucosa, although
this finding is not invariably present and can be difficult
to appreciate. Other animals with USMI may have
urethral structural abnormalities, such as cystic
urethral dilatation (more commonly encountered in
males than females), or urovagina (a form of
anatomical intersex resulting in a continuity of the
vestibule with the urethra and absence or dorsal
(b)
deviation of the vagina). UsMl is also recognized to
be exacerbated by UTl and by obesity. In general,
however, most affected animals show no abnormalities
on physical or endoscopic examination.
proliferative mucosal lesions obscuring the urethral
lumen, usually circumferentially and along variable
Urethral dys-synergia
lengths of the urethra. In most cases, biopsy is
Inappropriate contraction of the urethra (urethro-
required to distinguish these pathologies, although
spasm) during micturition is an occasional cause of
disease, as may ultrasonography of the caudal
urethral dys-synergia, it is a poorly characterized dis-
abdomen (sublumbar lymphadenopathy).
order and is typically a diagnosis of exclusion: since
many cases are idiopathic, by definition there are no
Prostate
detectable structural abnormalities.In these cases
Prostatic diseases are common in older male dogs,
the prognosis is guarded because of the tendency for
particularly entire animals, but may not be readily
the disease to be recurrent, even though each epi-
diagnosed
on urethroscopy. However, prostatic
sode is usually self-limiting. Urethral spasm also
carcinoma is often advanced at the time of examination
occurs in animals with other urethral conditions (e.g.
and may be recognized by the presence of proliferative
tissue protruding into the lumen of the prostatic
irritation after use of an indwelling catheter) and in
males with prostatic disease.
urethra. Diagnosis of prostatic disease is more readily
achieved in most cases by a combination of retrograde
Urethral obstruction
urethrography, ultrasonography and biopsy.
Physical obstruction of the urethra is more common
Ureters
than dys-synergia. The most frequent cause in males
is the presence of calculi (dogs) or accretions of
calculus and mucus (cats). The feline male urethra is
Ureteral ectopia
not amenable to endoscopy (except with endoscopes
Ureteral ectopia is the second commonest cause of
of very small diameter), but in dogs it may be possible
urinary incontinence in dogs, especially in bitches,
to identify the calculi using urethroscopy. In most
instances, radiographic evaluation may be more
niles, it accounts for a significant proportion of animals
appropriate for diagnosis, since the bladder and
with an adult onset of incontinence. In normal animals,
urethra are readily examined concurrently. Retrograde
the ureters enter the bladder at the trigone. When
urethrography and double-contrast cystography are
ectopic, the ureteral opening is distal to this, typically
recommended. In the bitch, urethral obstruction is
in the urethra. In most male dogs, the ureter enters the
more commonly associated with mucosal lesions of
prostatic urethra; in bitches it is variable in position,
the urethra, in particular neoplasia (Figure 10.16).
positioned anywhere from the bladder neck to the ure-
Grossly similar lesions include granulomatous
thral papilla. Entrance into the vagina away from this
urethritis and urethral caruncle. In each case,
site or the uterus is reported but appears to be rare.
endoscopic or radiographic examination will reveal
The situation in the cat is similar, although the disease
151
Chapter 10 Rigid endoscopy: urethrocystoscopy and vaginoscopy
is much rarer in this species. In dogs the course of the
acute UTl is unlikely to be helpful but in chronic cases
ectopic ureter is usually intramural, whereas in cats it
significant abnormalities may be encountered. In
is typically extramural. Intramural ureters enter the
established cases it is important to rule out the
serosal surface of the bladder at the trigone, in the
possibility of complicating factors, including polypoid
normal position, but do not perforate the bladder wall
cystitis (Figure 10.19), neoplasia of the bladder
fully; rather, they run within the thickness of the blad-
(Figure 10.20) or urethra, and urolithiasis (see below).
der and urethral wall. Extramural ectopic ureters do
Polypoid cystitis and most cases of bladder neoplasia
not enter the bladder at all but run within the abdomen
and pelvic canal to enter the urethra directly.
10.18
Urethroscopy is recognized as a very sensitive tool in
the diagnosis of ureteral ectopia, since the ectopic
(a) Endoscopic
openings can be readily identified (Figure 10.17) and
appearance of
in addition the trigone can be examined to confirm the
felineidiopathic
interstitial cystitis.
absence of the normal orifice.
(Courtesy of
TMcCarthy)
10.17
(b) Endoscopic
appearance of
Endoscopic
moderate to severe
appearance of an 
cystitis.(Courtesy
ectopic ureter.
(a)
ofPLhermette)
(Courtesy of
P Lhermette)
In addition to the simple situation of ectopia, ure-
throscopy is likely to be of value in the confirmation of
ectopic ureters with more than one orifice and ure-
(b)
teral troughs. The latter situation is when the ureter
opens at the trigone but the orifice is elongated into
an extreme slit, passing beyond the bladder neck and
10.19
into the urethra; this rare condition is a diagnostic
Polypoid cystitis in
challenge except by cystotomy, unless urethroscopy
the dog. (Courtesy
is available. Although urethroscopy is a very useful
of P Lhermette)
tool for the diagnosis of ureteral ectopia it gives no
information about the more proximal ureter or the kid-
ney; given the significant incidence of concurrent
hydroureter, hydronephrosis and pyelonephritis, ultra-
in addition to endoscopy for a complete evaluation
and surgical planning.
Ureteroceles
Ureteroceles are cystic dilatations of the terminal
ureter, usually occurring concurrently with ureteral
ectopia. They are also reported to accompany blind-
ending ureters and possibly normal ureters with ter-
minal strictures. Their significance is not always clear
but they have been associated with both incontinence
and dysuria. Urethroscopy would be expected to be a
useful method of diagnosis, although this has not
been reported.
Bladder
Urinary tract infection
Cases in the bladder are commoner than those in the
urethra, although uncomplicated UTl accounts for
many of these cases (Figure 10.18). Cystoscopy of
152
 
10.20
cystoscopy has the advantage of offering the chance
Endoscopic
stones (see above), in selected cases.
appearance of
(a) transitional cell
Reproductive tract
carcinoma in the
trigone and
Lymphoid follicles
proximal urethra
A common finding in the bitch is the presence of
and (b) transitional
cell carcinoma in
multiple lymphoid follicles on the vestibular or vaginal
thebladderwall.
wall (see Figure 10.22).These lesions are usually
(Courtesy of
multiple, small(1-3 mm in diameter) and pale or white
P Lhermette)
in appearance. Some bitches have a concurrent UTI.
The follicles appear to be a normal response to
(a)
vaginal bacteria and do not require treatment. These
lesions need to be differentiated from herpesvirus
vesicles, which may initially be vesicular in nature
(2-3 mm in diameter) and if ruptured may develop
into smaller focal red raised lesions. Herpesvirus
lesions are most commonly observed in previously
infected bitches that are in pro-oestrus or oestrus, as
there is viral recrudescence at these times.
Remnant hymen/persistent hymen/
paramesonephric septum
in some bitches that experience pain during coitus,
the presence of remnant tissue immediately cranial to
(b)
the external urethral orifice may be detected using
vaginoscopy.
The normal hymen is a thin membrane separating
both produce proliferative lesions of the bladder
the vagina from the vestibule and failure of this to
epithelium that can be detected on cystoscopy. The
break down completely may result in thin 'strings' of
site of predilection for each condition varies (although
tissue obstructing the vaginal cavity. A complete
this cannot be relied upon diagnostically): polypoid
hymen (imperforate) with bulging of the membrane
cystitis often affects the ventral pole of the bladder but
transitional cell carcinoma (the most frequent
because of trapped fluid is occasionally seen.
neoplasm) is typically centred on the trigone.
Insomebitches,wheretherehasbeeninaccurate
development of the paramesonephric duct system, a
ventrodorsal band of tissue or partial vaginal septum
Urolithiasis
may be present (Figure 10.22) Vaginoscopy may be
Urolithiasis (Figure 10.21) is encountered in cats and
used to place ligatures around hymenal remnants to
dogs of both sexes, although males tend to present 
allow their sectioning. Alternatively, the remnant may
with urethral obstruction and females with signs of
be sectioned with a diode laser or even with scissors
cystitis or haematuria. There are several types of
stone reported (see BSAVA Manual of Canine and
be required.
Feline Nephrology and Urology), but the commonest
in both species is struvite. Diagnosis of urolithiasis
10.22
 can be established by various imaging modalities but
Endoscopic
appearance of a 
paramesonephric
remnant Note
multiple nodules
dueto lymphoid
hyperplasia.
(Courtesy of
PLhermette)
Vestibulovaginal stenosis
In some cases there may be an appreciable narrowing
of the vestibulovaginal junction, although this is often
Endoscopic appearance of uroliths. The round
10.21
structure at the top left of the image is the
inflated bulb of a Foley catheter (Courtesy of P Lhermette)
imately one half the diameter of the vagina. In cases
153
Chapter 10 Rigid endoscopy: urethrocystoscopy and vaginoscopy
 of vestibulovaginal stenosis, there may be evidence
Assessment of breeding time in
of fluid pooling cranial to the stenosis, and signs of
the bitch
vaginitis. The clinical importance of this condition is
 often minimal; although it has been reported to be
The most common cause of infertility in the bitch is
associated with urinary incontinence, the epidemio-
associated with a normal female that is simply mated
logical evidence for this is poor.
at an inappropriate time. Bitches ovulate approx-
imately 12 days after the onset of pro-oestrus, but
Vaginal hyperplasia
some normal bitches may ovulate as early as day 5
Thickening of the vaginal wall during oestrus is normal;
whilst others ovulate as late as day 30. Many dog
however, in a small number of bitches there is exces-
breeders try to impose standard mating regimes, for
 sive tissue proliferation. Often this originates immedi-
example, days 10 and 12. For many bitches this is not 
ately cranial to the external urethral orifice, and a
appropriate and, although both the male and female
tongue-shaped mass of hyperplastic vaginal tissue
are normal, there is no resultant pregnancy. Careful 
may be identified. The tissue is only present during
monitoring of oestrus is important to establish the time
oestrus and regresses in the luteal phase. These cases
of ovulation and therefore the most appropriate time
 are normally presented because of pain at attempted
for mating (Figure 10.23). Observation of the behav-
coitus. It is often difficult to advance the endoscope
iour of the bitch has limited value, and whilst the gold
into the vagina because it persistently abuts the ventral
standard for evaluation is measurement of plasma
margin of the hyperplastic tissue. In some bitches the
progesterone, the use of vaginoscopy provides a
first signs may be when the tissue becomes so large
rapid, simple and cost-effective method of assessing
that it protrudes from the vulval lips.
the underlying hormonal changes. Examination is nor-
mally performed with the bitch standing. In most cases
Vaginal polyps
 it can take as little as 2 minutes to make an evaluation
Vaginal polyps are relatively common, particularly in
of the stage of the cycle. One specific advantage of
older intact bitches. They are most commonly
vaginoscopy is the ability to detect the end of the fer-
asymptomatic, although they may be associated with
tile period; something that is difficult to achieve by
vaginitis. Polyps usually have a thin stalk-like
 measurement of plasma hormone concentration.
attachment to the vaginal wall, whilst the polyp itself is
usually rounded, smooth and pink/white in colour.
Period
Days from 
 Days from
Vaginal neoplasia
LH surge
 ovulation
Vaginal tumours are not uncommon. The most
 Period of potential fertity - the
-3 to +7 (or 
-5 to +5 (or 
frequently seen are leiomyomas, or in some countries
later)
later)
in Europe, Africa and the United States a transmissible
"fertile period'
venereal tumour (TVT) may be identified. Tumours
 Period of potential fertilization
+4 to +6 (or 
+2 to +4 (or 
may be intraluminal or extraluminal. The intraluminal
later)
later)
 of mature oocytes - the 
leiomyomas usually have a wide-based attachment,
"fertilization period'
whilst extraluminal tumours often press on, and
 Time of oocyte maturation
+4 to +5 
+2 to +3
distort, the normal outline of the vagina. Both have a
(estimated)
thick fibrous white capsule, although there may be
prominent vessels visible. TVTs are often irregular,
 Period of peak fertility in 
O to +6 
-2 to +4 
red and have ulcerated areas.
 bitches of high fertility at 
 natural mating 
Abnormalities of the cervix
 Observation of the cervix may document abnormalities 
 Preferred time for managed
+2 to +6 
0 to +4 
 breeding of natural service or 
 that interfere with the establishment of normal preg-
 fresh semen insemination 
nancy. Non-patency of the cervix or severe adhesions
 or fibrosis may cause such problems. Examination of 
 Time for critical managed 
+4 to +6 
+2 to +4 
the cervix may also be useful for investigation of bitches 
 breeding or frozen semen 
with a vulval discharge. During pregnancy this may be
artificial insemination.
associated with resorption or abortion, or bleeding from
 Period of reduced fertity with
+7 to +9 
+5 to +7 
themarginalhaematomaofthe placenta. Documentation
matings or inseminations late
of the site and the nature of the discharge may influ-
 in oestrus
ence the management of these cases.
 In the non-pregnant bitch the nature of the dis-
10.23
 The timing of peak fertility in relationship to the 
charge can be assessed and it may be possible to
day of the LH surge and day of ovulation.
Vaginoscopic evaluationis baseduponassessment
screening.
of the appearance of the vaginal wall (the mucosal
Endometrial disease
fold contours and profiles, the colour of the mucosa
For a more accurate assessment of endometrial
and of any fluid present), and the changes in this
disease it is necessary to catheterize the cervix, either
 appearance at specific times of the oestrous cycle. A
to allow direct endoscopic visualization of the endo-
specific scoring system was devised by Lindsay et al.
metrial surface, or to enable collection of material for
(1988) and has been modified by the author [GE] as
cytological and bacteriological investigation.
below (Figure 10.24):
154
Phase I
Phase O
 Phase O
Phase S1
Phase S2
Phase A1
 Phase A2
Phase A3
Phase D1
Phase D2
Phase D3
Phase D4
 Vaginoscopic appearance from late anoestrus through pro-oestrus and oestrus 
10.24
and into the early luteal phase. See text for explanation.
Phase I
 Inactive phase: characterized by a thin, red and 
 Angulated phase: characterized by a thickened 
 dry mucosa with low and flattened mucosal folds.
mucosa that is normally white but where there is
This appearance is designated I
significant reduced turgidity such that in profile
Oedematous phase: characterized by a
the mucosal folds have progressive shrinkage
thickened and oedematous mucosa that appears 
and angulation such that the peaks are sharp-
turgidly swollen, rounded and grey/white in 
tipped and irregular in appearance. The mucosa 
 colour. Folds with this appearance are
is wrinkled and shrunken in appearance. The 
designated O
progressive nature of this phase means that the
 Shrinkage phase: characterized by a thickened 
early changes are designated A1 and the later
 mucosa that is normally white but where there is
 changes A2 and A3
reduced turgidity with progressive furrowing,
Declining phase: characterized by a progressive
wrinkling and indentations. The mucosal fold
decline in the size of the mucosal fold profile.
profile is, however, still rounded rather than 
Early in the phase (designated D1) there is a
angular. The progressive nature of this phase
flaccid appearance to the mucosal fold profile.
means that the early changes are designated S1
Subsequently, the folds become more rounded 
and the later changes S2
(D2) and there is sloughing of the cornified layers
155
chapter 10 Rigid endoscopy: urethrocystoscopy and vaginoscopy
of the epithelium (D2 and D3), resulting in a thin
For cervical catheterization it is normal to use a
mucosa of variegated colour with flattened folds
semi-flexible urinary catheter with terminal rather than
 and a rosette appearance to the mucosa (D4)
side holes. A guide wire will help with introducing the
 Inactive phase: the decline phase is followed
catheter through the cervix. In most cases a 2.5 mm
by a return to a phase characterized by a thin,
diameter catheter is suitable, although in small breeds
red and dry mucosa with low and flattened 
or previously non-pregnant bitches a 2 mm diameter
 mucosal folds. This appearance is also
catheter may be necessary.
designated I. There may be more debris present
Using a rigid endoscope the cervix can be visual-
at this stage than found in phase I prior to the
ized and the endoscope then manipulated under the
 onset of pro-oestrus.
cervix until the os can be identified. The os is usually
located in the centre of a rosette of wrinkles/furrows
 Studies that have related the appearance of the
but sometimes its location can only be identified by
vaginal wall to the underlying endocrinology have
the presence of fluid originating from it. A fine catheter
 demonstrated a progression as described above in all
may then be placed through the endoscope towards
bitches. The specific timing of some events is variable
 the cervical os. In many cases it is necessary to place
but a good correlation has been demonstrated
a guide wire inside the catheter to increase rigidity.
between the onset of ovulation and phase A1, and a
 Once the catheter tip is placed into the os, the guide
good relation between the fertilization period and
wire may be withdrawn slightly, and the catheter
phases A1 to A3 (Figure 10.25). Generally, the onset
pushed forward (using a rotating action). The catheter
of the fertile period can be detected by observing the
can normally be introduced the fullength of the uter-
onset  of  mucosal  shrinkage  without  excessive
 ine body. The technique requires training and practice
angulations, whilst gross shrinkage of entire mucosal
before catheterization can be achieved reliably.
folds with obvious angulation (phase A2 and A3) is
 Catheterization is simplest in medium-sized dogs,
characteristic of the fertilization period.
and most difficult in giant breeds (with a very long
vagina) and toy breeds (where the size of the catheter
Breeding is best planned approximately 4 days
may be too large). Some bitches need to be sedated,
after the first detected mucosal shrinkage, or at the
otherwise movement of the bitch makes placement of
onset of the period of obvious angulation of mucosal
the catheter very difficult. The cervix is most simple to
folds. The end of the fertilization period can be
catheterize during oestrus; however, the cervix is also
relaxed during anoestrus and pro-oestrus; catheteri-
detected by observing sloughing of the vaginal
zation during the luteal phase can be difficult in some
epithelium   and   development 
of
a variegated
 bitches. Catheterization during oestrus is most com-
appearance to the colour of the mucosal surface.
monly performed for the purpose of artificial insemi-
nation. However, material for microbiological and
Cervical catheterization
cytological investigation may be collected from the
It is difficult to place a catheter through the cervix of a
brushes passed through the catheter.
bitch because the vagina is long and narrow, and the
 In the post-partum bitch the endoscope may be
cervical opening is small and at an angle to the vagina.
passed directly through the cervical os to enable
The procedure is not possible in queens.
visualization of the endometrial surface.
 Relation between
10.25
vaginoscopic score,
Fertile period 
 Fertilization period
time of ovulation, fertile and 
fertilization periods, and plasma 
progesterone concentrations in
bitches.
S1
S2
A1
A2
A3D1 D2 D3
D4
 Ovulation
 Plasma progesterone
-10
-8
-6
-2
0
2
6
8
10
14
156
Chapter 10
0 Rigid endoscopy: urethrocystoscopy and vaginoscopy
Postoperative care
approach to management (direct repair) is considered,
retrograde urethrocystography should be used to
 Postoperative care in uncomplicated cases requires
confirm the site of rupture (intrapelvic or intra-
no special precautions: routine analgesia is ade-
abdominal) before exploratory surgery. This is also
quate. Antibacterial therapy is used at the surgeon's
the technique of choice to confirm that the tear has
discretion: it is recommended that urine is collected
healed after management.
 at the time of endoscopy and submitted for bacterio-
Similar to other urinary tract interventions, post-
logical examination. If UTI is suspected, then a short 
operative UTI may occur. The value of perioperative
course of broad-spectrum antibiotics can be pre-
antibacterial therapy for uncomplicated urethroscopy
scribed whilst culture is pending. Perioperative anti-
is not known, but it is a reasonable precaution,
puuopqesuen  buunp pasn aq pinoys soong 
particularly if preoperative UTI is suspected or trauma 
procedures if UTI is suspected.
occurs during the procedure.
Urination patterns should be monitored carefully
Amild and transient haemorrhagic vulval discharge
for the first 24 hours after surgery: dysuria may sug-
or, rarely, vaginitis may occur following diagnostic
gest that urethral obstruction is present (perhaps due
vaginoscopy of non-oestrous bitches. This is extremely
to urethrospasm, incomplete removal of uroliths or
uncommon for bitches examined during oestrus.
urethral trauma) or that urethritis or cystitis is present.
Perforation   of   the 
uterus has been reported
In the former instance, the bladder is likely to be tense
 occasionally following hysteroscopy.
and full; in the latter cases, it will be small and empty.
Obstructed animals require further investigation but
may benefit from urethral muscle relaxants (e.g.
References and further reading
diazepam or phenoxybenzamine) if urethrospasm is
Barth A, Reichler IM, Hubler M, Hassig M and Amold S (2005) Evaluation
catheter placed if the problem is persistent.
of long-term effects of endoscopic injection of colagen into the urethral
If urination is not observed, the possibility of blad-
dogs: 40 cases (1993-2000). Journal of the American Veterinary
der or urethral rupture should be considered and evi-
Medical Ass0ciation 226, 73-76
dence sought for accumulation of fluid in the peritoneum 
Cannizzo KL, McLoughlin MA, Mattoon JS, et al. (2003) Evaluation of
or within the pelvic canal (e.g. by ultrasonography). If 
ectopic ureters in female dogs: 25 cases (1992-2000). Journal of the
uncertainty remains, retrograde urethrography is likely
American Veterinary Medical Association 223, 475-481
to be more sensitive than repeated urethroscopy to
Davidson EB,Ritchey JW,Higbee RD,Lucroy MD and Bartels KE (2004)
Laser lithotripsy for treatment of canine uroliths. Veterinary Surgery
identify a urinary tract perforation.
33, 56-61
Jeffcoate IA and England GCW (1997) Urinary LH, plasma LH and
progesterone and their clinical correlates in the periovulatory period
Complications
of domestic bitches. Journal of Reproduction and Fertility Suppl. 51,
267-275
Lindsay FEF (1983) The normal endoscopic appearance of the caudal
 Complications relate primarily to iatrogenic trauma to
reproductive tract of the cyclic and non-cyclic bitch: post uterine
the vagina, urethra or bladder. Unnecessarily forceful
endoscopy. Journal of Small Animal Practice 24, 1-5
Lindsay FEF, Jeffcoate IA and Concannon PW (1988) Vaginoscopy and
technique or excessive infusion pressure, particularly
the fertile period in the bitch. Proceedings of the 11th International
in patients with diseased tissue, may result in tears or
Conference on Animal Reproduction and Artificial Insemination,
perforations of these organs. This may become
Dublin, abstract 565
Messer JS, Chew DJ and McLoughlin MA (2005) Cystoscopy: techniques
apparent during the procedure, e.g. distension may
and clinical applications. Clinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice
 not be maintained or extraluminal tissue may be seen
20, 52-64
 Sami VF, McLoughin MA, Matoon JS, et al. (2004) Digital fluoroscopic
 during endoscopy, or only become apparent after
some hours. Although there is little published
information on the management of this type of
ureteral ectopia. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 18, 271-
281
complication, experience of other types of urinary
 Simpson GM, England G and Harvey M (1998) BSAVA Manual of Small
 tract trauma suggests that many cases would be
 Animal Reproduction and Neonatalogy. BSAVA Publications,
 amenable to conservative management, using an
Cheltenham 
Wang KY, Sami VF, Chew DJ, etal.(2006)Vestibular, vaginal, and urethral
indwelling urethral catheter  to maintain bladder
relations in spayed dogs with and without lower urinary tract signs.
 decompression for 2-5 days. If a more aggressive
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 20, 1065-1073
157
Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
Eric Monnet, Philip Lhermette and David Sobel
2.7 mm 30 degree telescope is often used in cats and
Introduction
small dogs. If used through a 3.9 mm cannula, it is 
Exploratory laparotomy is a major invasive procedure,
essential to place the telescope in an examination
often carried out on a sick or debilitated patient.
sheath first as any leverage on the bare insertion tube
Clinicians may hesitate to put their patient through
is very likely to damage the endoscope irreparably. A
such a procedure, and may therefore rely on incom-
2.7 mm telescope can also be used on medium-sized
plete information from indirect observations such as
 dogs; however, the smaller field of view and decreased 
blood tests and other imaging studies to form their
light transmission limits its usefulness. Telescopes
diagnosis. Owners may also be reluctant to subject
with a 5 mm diameter do not require a protective
their pet to major surgery just to get a sample'.
 sheath and can be used directly through the operating
Laparoscopy is a minimally invasive surgical tech-
nique used in veterinary practice for diagnostic proce-
dures and surgical treatment of a variety of conditions.
 Essential equipment 
It is a very safe technique if the basic rules are fol-
Endoscopic camera and monitor
lowed. Laparoscopy enables surgeons to carry out a
 Sterile camera drape
thorough visual inspection of the abdominal cavity
 Xenon (or metal halide/halogen) light source
and obtain tissue samples quickly, with minimal
Light guide cable 
trauma to the patient. This in turn allows more accu-
Electrosurgery unit (monopolar/bipolar)
rate diagnosis, treatment of abdominal disease or
 Carbon dioxide insutflator
Veress needle
 staging of tumours. Soft tissue trauma is minimized,
 Sterile insuffation tubing
biopsy samples are larger and more diagnostic than
 2.7 mm 18 cm HOPKINS 30 degree endoscope 
percutaneous Tru-cut needle biopsy samples, and
(14.5 Fr cystoscopy sheath with 5 Fr instrument channel)
haemorrhage can be controlled directly. Patient recov-
(7 Fr 40 cm biopsy forceps) 
ery is quicker than following conventional surgery,
(7 Fr 40 cm grasping forceps)
and smaller incisions result in a reduced incidence of
3 mm examination sheath
3.9 mm Ternamian EndoTIPe cannula or 3 mm operating cannula and 
 postoperative wound interference and infection.
sharp trocar
Laparoscopy requires a basic set of specialized
5.0 mm 29 cm HOPKINS 0 degree endoscope 
equipment. This is equipment that can be used for dif-
(5.0 mm 29 cm HOPKINS 30 degree endoscope) 
ferent rigid endoscopic applications such as thoraco-
6 mm laparoscopic cannula with sharp trocar (x3) or 6 mm Ternamian
scopy, urethrocystoscopy, rhinoscopy and otoscopy.
EndoTIP cannulae (x3)
Laparoscopy also requires the induction of a pneumo-
11 mm laparoscopic cannula with sharp trocar
periteoneum to allow distension of the abdominal cav-
11/6 mm reducing valve
5 mm endoscopic biopsy forceps (cup and/or punch type)
ity with an inert gas to obtain a working space sufficient 
5 mm endoscopic grasping forceps 
to perform diagnostic and surgical procedures. After
5 mm endoscopic Babcocks forceps
the basic technique of diagnostic laparoscopy is mas-
5 mm endoscopic scissors 
tered and the appropriate indications learned, these 
5 mm palpation probe with cm markings 
procedures become an easy and rewarding addition
Normal saline or sterile deionized water (≥1 litre)
Standard laparotomy surgical kit
to any small animal veterinary practice.
 Useful additions
Instrumentation
 Image capture device (still and video)
 5 mm bipolar cutting devices (e.g. Hotblade, LigaSure)
The basic 
equipment  required   for  diagnostic
 5 mm suction/irrigation cannula
Monopolar hook dissector
laparoscopy is listed in Figure 11.1. Much of this
5 mm bowel handling forceps 
equipment is also used for other minimally invasive
5 mm endoscopic clip appliers
procedures such as otoscopy, rhinoscopy, cystoscopy
 10 mm endoscopic gastrointestinal anastomosis (GIA) stapler
and thoracoscopy. The telescope most commonly
5mm needleholders
used by the authors for laparoscopy is a 5 mm
diameter forward-viewing telescope. This can be
11.1
Equipment required for laparoscopy.
used on all sizes of dogs and even cats, although the
158
Chapter 11  Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
cannula. Operating telescopes with a working channel 
Anaesthetic considerations
to pass instruments into the abdominal cavity are
available but are not generally recommended for
Laparoscopy is usually performed using general
surgical intervention as tissue handling becomes a
inhalation anaesthesia. Most patients tolerate general
limiting factor. Laparoscopes as large as 10 mm are
anaesthesia well during laparoscopy but it is to be
 beneficial in examining large- and giant-breed dogs.
A high-intensity xenon light source is considered
dioxide  insufflation  will  increase  intra-abdominal
to give the brightest, whitest light and truest colours of
pressure and may interfere with ventilation (Duke et
the abdominal viscera and is highly recommended
al., 1996; Bufalari et al., 1997). The increase in intra-
(Magne and Tams, 1999). However, if a halogen or
abdominal pressure associated with laparoscopy can
metal halide light source is already available for
also potentially cause compression of the caudal
flexible endoscopy, this can be used instead.
vena cava and liver, decreasing venous return to the
 Utilization of a camera and a video monitor allows for
heart. Diaphragmatic movement is also reduced.
much better visualization of the abdominal cavity by
These effects are not usually significant at the
the operator and the assistant, and is essential for the
recommended intra-abdominal insufflation pressures
maintenance of a sterile field.
and are easily counteracted by normal homeostatic
The most common method of inducing initial
 mechanisms, but may be more significant in patients
insufflation of the abdominal cavity requires a Veress
with severe respiratory compromise or pulmonary
needle (see Figure 2.32). This contains a spring-
 disease. For these reasons the patient's respiratory
loaded hollow blunt obturator, which normally
status should be  carefully evaluated prior  to
 protrudes past the sharp point of the needle. As the
 laparoscopy. Initial insufflation should be at the lowest
needle is pressed against the abdominal wall the
rate to allow the patient to compensate for increased
obturator is pushed back into the body of the needle
intra-abdominal 
pressure.
Once
insufflation
is
and the sharp point passes through the muscle and
complete, flow rates can be increased to maintain a
fascia into the peritoneum. As soon as the point of the
near uniform pressure in the event of gas leakage
needle enters the peritoneal space the obturator
during insertion of instruments. The intra-abdominal
springs back, revealing the blunt point and reducing
insufflation pressures should always be maintained
the chance of iatrogenic trauma to internal organs.
below 15 mmHg. Usually a pressure of 8-10 mmHg is
 Automatic insufflators are designed to deliver gas
sufficient  for  excellent  visualization.  It may be 
at a prescribed rate while maintaining a predeter-
mined intra-abdominal pressure (see Chapter 2).
of the initial port to reduce the indentation of the
Carbon dioxide is considered to be the gas of choice
 abdominal wall during insertion, thereby reducing the
for insufflation because of the safety factors in pre-
risk of iatrogenic damage by the sharp trocar. Once
venting air emboli and spark ignition when using
the ports are in place the intra-abdominal pressure
electrocautery or lasers.
can be reduced. In cases in which ventilation becomes
Trocar-cannula units (see Chapter 2) are used
 compromised it will be necessary to use either manual 
to gain access to the abdominal cavity. The carbon
or mechanically assisted ventilation. Before starting a
dioxide insufflation tubing can be connected to the
laparoscopy, the urinary bladder should be evacuated 
cannula to maintain insufflation of the abdominal
to prevent inadvertent puncture with trocar-cannulae.
cavity during the procedure. Diagnostic procedures
A local block with bupivacaine is recommended at
usually require two cannulae, while surgical proce-
each cannula site at the beginning of the procedure to
dures might require two, three or more, depending on
aid in analgesia and balanced anaesthesia.
the specific procedure to be performed.
During laparoscopy  a number of accessory
instruments are essential. A palpation probe is
Procedure
required to move and palpate the abdominal organs.
 Surgical approaches
Almost  all  palpation 
 probes  have  centimetre
 graduations so that the relative size of organs or
The two most common approaches include the right
lesions can be estimated. Biopsy forceps are used for
lateral and ventral midline. The right lateral approach
is recommended for diagnostic evaluation of the liver,
liver, spleen, abdominal mass, lymph node and
pancreatic biopsy. For surgical intervention, common
gallbladder, right limb of the pancreas, duodenum,
instruments  include 
 grasping
 forceps, scissors,
right kidney and right adrenal gland.
aspiration tubes and clip applicators. Many of the
A ventral approach is often useful for surgical pro-
biopsy and surgical instruments also have capabilities
cedures, and offers good visualization of the liver, gall-
bladder, pancreas, stomach, intestines, reproductive
for monopolar electrosurgery at their distal tip.
There are a number of minimally invasive surgical
system, urinary bladder and spleen. In the ventral
d an e sne n n sn
approach, the primary portal is placed on the midline
using laparoscopy. Most of these require multiple
 caudal to the umbilicus. A disadvantage of the ventral
, specific laparoscopic sur-
approach is that the falciform ligament may hinder
trocar-cannula portals,
gical instruments, loop ligatures, clip applicators,
visualization of the anterior abdomen, especially in
and/or monopolar or bipolar electrosurgery. Ultrasonic
obese animals. Placement of the telescope port cau-
dal to the umbilicus will usually allow the surgeon to
able to establish safe and reliable haemostasis dur-
withdraw the telescope sufficiently to manoeuvre
ing laparoscopy.
 around the caudal boundary of the falciform ligament.
159
Chapter 11  Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
A left lateral approach may be used, but because
the spleen lies directly under the normal entry sites
there is the potential for splenic trauma by a trocar.
The left lateral approach is required for visualization
of the left kidney and left adrenal gland.
In all cases careful preoperative planning of port
positions is essential, and will vary according to the
size of the patient and the procedure to be undertaken.
It is essential to imagine the operative site in three
dimensions and plan the procedure such that the
ports are sufficiently distant to the site of interest that
the instruments are not crowded together and can be
 introduced at a comfortable angle for the surgeon.
Insufflation
A working space has to be created by introducing
carbon dioxide into the abdominal cavity. The most
common method of inducing the initial insufflation
11.2
Introducing the Veress needle.
of the abdominal cavity requires a Veress needle
(see below). Alternatively, the surgeon may choose
to use a Hasson or 'modified Hasson' technique,
With experience, the tip of the needle is felt
which avoids the blind insertion of the sharpVeress
entering the peritoneal space with a slight ‘pop'. The
needle into the peritoneal space (see below).
tap on the top of the Veress needle is then opened
Cannulae used for the Hasson technique have a
and a syringe of saline attached to the Luer fitting.
blunt trocar. This technique should minimize the risk
Gentle suction is applied to check for fluid or blood,
of trauma to abdominal organs, which can occur with
 and the needle repositioned if this is found. If all is
a Veress needle.
well, 1-2 ml of sterile saline is injected into the
After connecting the carbon dioxide line to the
abdomen. lt should flow freely and easily. The syringe
Veress needle or the first cannula (Hasson technique),
is then removed and, with the tap still open, the
the abdomen is adequately distended with the gas.
abdominal wall is tented up with the distal end of the
The abdomen will become softly tympanic upon
Veress needle to ensure that the drop of saline sinks
palpation. The abdominal pressure should be no
in the needle hub with the negative pressure so
higher than 15 mmHg (see Chapter 7).
created (hanging drop method). This should ensure
correct placement of the needle. Penetration of the
Veress needle technique
spleen will result in haemorrhage which can obscure
If aVeress needle is used,it is usuallyplaced in the
visualization and interfere with surgery, but is rarely
same site to be used by the first telescope portal, or
dangerous and will usually cease unaided. However,
the instrument portal. lt is beneficial to introduce a
insuflation of gas into a mass, organ or vessel can
small bleb of local anaesthetic (bupivacaine) at this
result in fatal gas embolism so it is essential to ensure
puncture site and at all the port sites, prior to their
that the Veress needle is correctly placed before
introduction, as this greatly reduces any postoperative
commencing insufflation.
discomfort.
Problems that may be encountered include:
A small 1 mm stab incision using either a number
11 or number 15 scalpel blade is made at the chosen
Placing the needle subcutaneously or
site, either in the ventral midline or in the paralumbar
retroperitoneally
fossa of the side corresponding the side of the sur-
Placing the needle into the omentum or falciform
gical approach.
ligament
It is very important to palpate the abdominal cav-
Penetrating a viscus.
ity to localize the spleen before placing the Veress
needle. The spleen can sometimes be manipulated
Subcutaneous placement of the Veress needle
out of the way but in any case must be avoided. The
can be very frustrating and is fairly easily avoided.
skin of the abdominal wall is grasped with forceps
With practice it is possible to appreciate the feel of the
and tented up, and the Veress needle is grasped by
Veress needle penetrating the peritoneum, 
but
the barrel, allowing the central blunt trocar to move
inexperienced endoscopists are understandably
freely. lt is then introduced at an angle to the skin
cautious and may fail to penetrate the abdominal wall
surface by pointing it caudally towards the pelvis
completely before starting insufflation. This results in
(Figure 11.2). In this way iatrogenic damage to the
subcutaneous emphysema. Although not dangerous,
spleen is less likely and the fatty falciform ligament is
this can impede technique and make subsequent
avoided. It may be helpful to allow the heel of the
proper placement of the Veress needle more difficult.
hand to rest gently on the abdominal wall to allow a
The emphysema will resolve over 48 hours or so.
more controlled entry into the abdomen. The bladder
Once the Veress needle has been placed, sterile
should also have been voided either naturally before
tubing is attached to the hub and connected to the
anaesthesia or through preoperative catheterization
insufflator. Abdominal pressure should be low initially
to prevent inadvertent puncture.
(2 mmHg). If it rises rapidly, this usually indicates that 
160
Chapter 11  Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
needle placement is wrong (i.e. subcutaneous) or the
Holding the upper end of the cannula in the palm of
needle is blocked. Manipulation of the tip of the needle
the hand, pressure is exerted in a twisting motion until
or replacement may be required. The abdomen is
the tip of the cannula enters the peritoneal space
slowly insufflated to a pressure of about 10-14 mmHg
(Figure 11.3). Depth of penetration of the cannula is
(8-12 mmHg in cats). Once the initial ports have been
limited by a finger placed along the shaft. Immediately
placed it is often possible to drop the intra-abdominal
after abdominal entry, the sharp trocar is removed
pressure to 5 or 6 mmHg just to maintain a sufficient
from the cannula to prevent organ trauma and the
operating space.
cannula can be pushed gently into the abdomen a
If the Veress needle is inadvertently inserted into
little further. The valve in the cannula closes as soon
the omental bursa, mesentery or falciform ligament,
as the trocar is removed to prevent escape of gas.
these structures can insufflate and obscure the view
The telescope with camera attached is introduced
when the endoscope is inserted via the primary port.
through the rubber seal on the cannula and the
If this occurs, and it is not possible to negotiate the tip
trapdoor' valve in the cannula is opened manually to
of the endoscope around the obstruction, it may be
 reduce trauma to the lens of the telescope.
necessary to desufflate the abdomen, reposition the
Veress needle and try again.
Hasson technique
This technique requires a small surgical incision
through the skin and the abdominal wall: essentially a
 mini-laparotomy is performed. A blunt obturator and
cannula can then be placed into the abdominal cavity.
A suture is required to maintain the cannula in place
and provide a good seal around it for insufflation.
The disadvantage of this technique is that it cre-
 ates a bigger incision than needed for the placement 
of the first cannula and the risk of subcutaneous
emphysema is increased from carbon dioxide leaking
 around the cannula. Hasson cannulae are commer-
cially available, although standard laparoscopic can-
 nulae can also be used with this approach.
11.3
 Inserting the primary trocar and cannula.
Cannula placement
It is very important to avoid the spleen when placing
the first cannula, especially if using a sharp trocar.
Alternatively, a Ternamian EndoTip? cannula may
Abdominal palpation to locate the spleen before
be used. This has no sharp trocar and is introduced
insufflation, together with careful insertion technique,
with a clockwise screw motion to allow blunt dissection
will help prevent iatrogenic damage. A trocar-cannula
through the abdominal wall. The initial incision must 
unit or an EndoTip cannula, which receives the
penetrate the fascial sheath below the skin to facilitate
telescope, is then placed through the abdominal wall.
blunt dissection through deeper tissues without the
Selection of the site for the endoscope is determined
need for a sharp cannula. The telescope is already in
by the relative importance of visualization of different
place and allows entry into the peritoneal cavity to be
abdominal structures. The entry site is determined
seen. The threaded barrel also helps prevent
and, following local analgesia, an incision is made
displacement during surgery.
through the skin large enough to accommodate the
The insufflation tubing can now be transferred from
diameter of the cannula.
the Veress needle to the inlet port of the cannula. This
 It is important to ensure that the initial incision is
allowsremoval of theVeress needle,if it is still in place,
the correct size. lf a smooth cannula is used, an overly
and gas flow is directed away from the endoscope
large incision will allow the cannula to move in and
lens, helping keep it clear. However, cold gas can
 out of the incision as instruments are inserted and
withdrawn, due to friction between the instrument and
this is a problem, moving the gas inflow to the opera-
the rubber grommet. A practical way to assess the
tive port may help. The telescope is then connected
correct incision size is to make an impression of the
to the light source and the camera, and advanced
open cannula end on the skin (with trocar removed).
through the cannula and into the abdomen (Figure
If the trocar end is cut at an angle, the impression will
11.4). Upon entry into the abdominal cavity the image
be oval. The incision should be made just smaller
may be blurry due to fogging of the telescope lens. To
than the narrowest diameter to ensure a tight fit. If a
prevent fogging it is recommended to use a commer-
Termamian EndoTiP? cannula is used the technique is
cially available anti-fogging solution or alternatively a
slightly different. The incision size should be just very
povidine-iodine solution. It is helpful to immerse the
slightly larger than the diameter of the cannula as a
telescope in warm saline for a minute or two before its
small incision will result in skin being caught up in the
introduction into the abdomen (see also Chapter 7).
thread and rotated as the cannula is screwed in.
Alternatively, if fogging becomes a problem during a
Once the skin incision has been made the trocar-
procedure,gently touching the lens of the telescope on
cannula unit is passed through the abdominal wall.
a serosal surface will usually clear the lens.
161
Chapter 11 Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
Ending the procedure
At the conclusion of the laparoscopic procedure the
instruments and telescope are removed. The pneumo-
peritoneum is relieved by discontinuing carbon dioxide
the cannulae. The cannulae are then removed. Gentle
pressure on the abdominal wall will help remove any
 gas not removed via the cannulae. The puncture sites
are sutured in two layers in a routine manner.
Additional considerations
If appreciable ascites is present, this is best partially
drained prior to laparoscopy. Gas-filled loops
of
intestine floating on top of ascitic fluid are more prone
to damage by the Veress needle or introduction of
(a)
cannulae, and will make visualization difficult during
surgery. Drainage by syringe and three-way tap, with
a large bore intravenous catheter placed in the midline
will usually suffice. lf ascites is present all abdominall
incisions should be closed in at least two layers to
prevent seepage of fluid postoperatively.
With any laparoscopic procedure, the surgeon
should always be prepared to convert to conventional
open surgery should it be required. For example,
persistent haemorrhage, unforeseen complications or
removal of a large mass may all require conversion to
open laparotomy. A full laparotomy kit should be
available in theatre at all times.
(6)
Biopsy
11.4
(a) Following insertion of the telescope, the
Liver
area immediately underlying theprimaryport
and Veress needle is examined for iatrogenic damage.
Liver biopsy is one of the most common indications
(b) A secondary port has been inserted for the
for laparoscopy and with practice can be completed
introduction of the biopsy forceps.
very rapidly and with minimal trauma to the patient.
Most diseases of the liver will be managed medically,
Examination technique
but often a definitive diagnosis can only be obtained
Once the telescope is in the abdominal cavity, careful
histologically. Tissue samples can be taken under
examination of the viscera is performed. The region
direct visualization from lesions in the liver, and
directly below the cannula site is evaluated first for
graphic images of the entire organ or specific lesions
any evidence of haemorrhage or other iatrogenic
can be sent to the laboratory along with the samples
damage. The site of entry for the second (accessory)
to aid diagnosis. Any haemorrhage can be seen and
portal is then selected under direct visualization and
dealt with directly. Excellent work has been under-
percutaneous palpation of the body wall. This location
taken by Dr Sharon Center and her colleagues at
depends upon the procedures that are tobe performed.
Cornell demonstrating the superior histopathological
Transillumination of the abdominal wall using the
results from wedge-style biopsy samples compared
telescope will enable any large vessels to be avoided
with those obtained using a Tru-cut-style needle.
when making the incision for the second portal. The
Furthermore, there is less risk of iatrogenic damage
second cannula is then placed through the abdominal
than with percutaneous needle biopsy and, as an
wall in the manner previously described, and is
added bonus, the entire abdomen can be examined
observed directly through the telescope as it enters
in detail during the same procedure.
the abdomen to avoid damage to underlying viscera.
Before undertaking a liver biopsy a coagulation
Exploration of the abdominal cavity is assisted by
profile should be obtained. This should include
using the palpation probe to “feel’ and move the
prothrombin time (PT), partial prothromboplastin time
organs as needed. Instruments should never be
(PPT) and an accurate platelet count. Determination
passed blindly into the abdomen but rather viewed
of buccal mucosal bleeding time is also advised.
internally as they pass through the cannula, and
Althoughcoagulopathiesarearelative contraindication
directed to the area of interest. Using this technique
to liver biopsy, the coagulation status does not
will help prevent serious tissue trauma by the probe
necessarily predict whether the animal will bleed from
or other accessory instruments. It may sometimes be
a liver biopsy.
helpful to tilt the patient from side-to-side or up/down,
to allow gravity to move viscera out of the field of view
lateral recumbency, with a right lateral approach. A
and facilitate examination.
ventral approach may also be used and gives access
162
Chapter 11 Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
to more of the ventral liver surface, but access may
a significant amount of tissue is available for histo-
be partially obstructed by the falciform ligament in
pathological analysis. The normal liver should be of
obese patients. The first cannula for the telescope is
uniform, deep red colour and should not be friable or
placed in the caudodorsal abdominal wall in the region
bleed easily on palpation. The gallbladder should be
of the paralumbar fossa. A second cannula is then
thin walled and easily compressible. Any swellings or
areas of discoloration or obvious pathology are noted
placed at the same level as the first, but more towards
the midline (Figure 11.5). (A left-handed surgeon may
and the gallbladder is also palpated. The biopsy for-
do the opposite so as to have the biopsy instrument in
ceps are directed to the area of the liver to be sam-
the dominant hand.) Eighty-five percent of the liver,
pled - either an edge or the surface of the liver can be
extrahepatic biliary system and right limb of the
sampled with forceps (Figure 11.7). It is always impor-
pancreas can be visualized with this approach. The
tant to take samples from three or four areas, includ-
telescope and palpation probe are moved cranially,
ing some that appear grossly normal, if the liver
 pathology is diffuse, and generalized biopsy samples
with the tip of the probe in view. The diaphragm and
the diaphragmatic surface of the liver can then be
are taken from the edge of the liver lobes. Biopsy for-
examined. The telescope is withdrawn slightly and
ceps are passed down to a position just below the
the gallbladder can be seen between the right lateral
border of the lobe to be biopsied. The jaws of the for-
and right medial lobes of the liver, which are elevated
ceps are opened and the forceps are slowly with-
to expose the visceral surface and the proximal biliary
drawn with slight upward pressure, such that the edge
tree. The gallbladder can be palpated with the probe
of the liver lobe naturally fallswithin the jaws as the
forceps come to the edge of the lobe. The authors
and the patency of the biliary tree assessed.
The
generally hold the cups tightly closed for approx-
cystic duct can be traced down to the common bile
duct where it enters the duodenum. The other lobes
imately 15-30 seconds before pulling the sample
of the liver are then elevated in turn to visualize the
away from the liver. Normal liver capsule is quite
visceral surfaces and hilus (Figure 11.6).
tough and a reasonable tug is often needed. This
does not cause damage to the liver or sample and
there is rarely much haemorrhage.
XO
Portal positions for liver biopsy (O) and 
11.5
11.7
Biopsy of the liver using cup biopsy forceps.
The biopsy area is then closely monitored for
excessive bleeding. Generally, most biopsy sites
bleed very little (Figure 11.8), although the magnified 
image observed on the monitor can often make a
 slight seepage of blood seem like a lot; usually it is a
maximum of 5 ml and bleeding stops within two or
three minutes. lf bleeding is considered to be
excessive, pressure can be applied with the palpation
 probe, or a small piece of saline-soaked haemostatic
gauze, such as Gel-Foamm, can be placed into the
biopsy site. These options are sufficient to control
excessive bleeding. On occasion the judicious use of
electrocautery is of benefit. Cautery can be applied to
the biopsy forceps while performing the biopsy, but
11.6
 Inspecting the liver with a palpation probe.
this has the potential for thermal injury to the sample
and is not recommended.
 Cup biopsy forceps (5 mm) are recommended.
Endoscopic needles or long spinal needles can be
used to drain and flush cysts and abscesses, or take
The quality of sample collected with this technique is
considered superior to that from any other technique
samples from cysts or the gallbladder under direct
as the sample is taken from the region of interest and
visual guidance.
163
Chapter 11 Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
Liver biopsy site immediately after a sample has
11.8
been taken, showing minimal haemorrhage.
11.9
biopsy forceps.
Pancreas
The right lobe of the pancreas lies adjacent to the
duodenum, between twolayers of the mesoduodenum.
The body of the pancreas, adjacent to the pylorus,
unites the left and right lobes, and the left lobe is in
the deep leaf of the greater omentum.
Pancreatic biopsy is performed via a right lateral
 approach. This approach gives an excellent view of 
the duodenum, the right limb of the pancreas, the
extrahepatic biliary system and the liver. A ventral
midline approach enables examination of the whole
 pancreas but requires considerably more dissection
to access the left lobe and is rarely necessary. Access
to the left lobe in the omental bursa is gained by blunt
omentum just caudal to the gastro-epiploic vessels.
The greater curvature of the stomach may need to be
Pancreatic biopsy site immediately after a
elevated first and cranial traction applied to the omen-
11.10
sample has been taken, showing minimal
tum in order to see the left lobe of the pancreas.
haemorrhage.
As for liver biopsy (see above), two cannulae are
required. These are placed in the caudal part of the
Kidney
abdomen in sites similar to those for liver biopsy, but
it is often beneficial to place each cannula 3-5 cm
Laparoscopy is well suited for evaluation and biopsy
caudal to those used for liver biopsy. The endoscope
of the kidney. An automatic core-type biopsy needle
is introduced to the level of the pylorus, and the
is recommended for biopsy. Direct visualization of
mesentery moved cranially and to the left with a gentle
the kidney allows the operator to navigate the biopsy
raking movement of the blunt probe. The duodenum
needle to the desired site to be sampled and also to
is identified and elevated, revealing the right limb of
 monitor and control excessive postoperative bleeding.
the pancreas for inspection.
Prior to renal biopsy, adequate renal evaluation is
The normal pancreas is pale pink and uniformly
necessary, including such techniques as contrast
nodular in texture. Swelling and oedema may indicate
excretory urography and ultrasonography. This is vital
pancreatitis, whereas extensive nodularity or calcifi-
to determine the functional integrity of the kidney in
cation may indicate chronic pancreatitis. Tumours
question and to determine whether specific pathology
may also be seen, although islet tumours are often
is present in one or both kidneys. Unless there is a
too small to be seen macroscopically. Punch-type
specific indication to sample the left kidney, the right
biopsy forceps are preferred (Figure 11.9), although
kidney is preferred because it is less mobile. A left
kidney biopsy through a left lateral approach is more 
cup biopsy forceps can also be used. The biopsy site
selected should be at the edge of the pancreas, away
difficult because of the location of the spleen
from the location of the pancreatic ducts that traverse
underlying the usual cannula entry site.
the centre of the gland and subsequently enter the
The ventral abdomen and right abdominal wall to
duodenum with the common bile duct. As with all pan-
just below the lateral processes of the lumbar
creatic surgery, minimal manipulation minimizes the
risk of iatrogenic mechanically induced pancreatitis.
patient is positioned in partial or complete left lateral
In practice, this is rarely a problem. Haemorrhage
recumbency. Using a right lateral mid-abdominal
from biopsy sites is minimal and can be controlled as
telescope placement the right kidney is easily
for liver biopsies (Figure 11.10)
visualized (Figure 11.11). The authors then always
164
1Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
Chapter 11
biopsy site. Haemorrhage can appear alarming due
to the magnification, and is generally greater than that 
seen with liver or pancreatic biopsy samples taken
with biopsy forceps. The palpation probe is quickly
moved over the bleeding area and pressure applied
for several minutes. Additional samples are taken if
the first is not considered suitable. Once the
haemorrhage has been controlled, the palpation
 probe is removed and the abdomen deflated. Finally
the camera and primary port are removed and
cannulae withdrawn. Port closure is routine.
Intestine
Full-thickness small intestinal biopsy samples can
be obtained at laparoscopy using the technique of
grasping and then exteriorizing a portion of intestine
11.11
Laparoscopic view of the right kidney of a cat
through the abdominal wall. The intestinal biopsy
with renal lymphosarcoma.
sample is then obtained from the exteriorized bowel,
as would be done for a standard full-thickness surgi-
place a second cannula so that a palpation probe is
cal biopsy.
available to provide tamponade at the biopsy site.
Intestinal biopsy requires three cannulae. One is
The palpation probe is placed in the abdomen above
used for the telescope and the two others are used to
the kidney. The entry site for the needle is determined
introduce two pairs of grasping forceps. Generally,
by percutaneous palpation on the abdominal wall
this procedure is performed in dorsal recumbency
whilst viewing with the telescope internally. When
from a standard ventral midline approach. The camera
kidney biopsy samples are taken, the needle entry
portal is placed just cranial to the umbilicus along the
site through the abdominal wall should be caudal to
ventral midline and the two operative portals are
the diaphragm. If the needle penetrates the diaphragm
placed 4-6 cm lateral to the midline on either side
 an iatrogenic pneumothorax may result from leakage 
(Figure 11.13). The technique involves using 5 mm 
of the pneumoperitoneum into the thorax.
atraumatic grasping forceps with multiple teeth to
A 1 mm stab incision is made in the skin at the
 grasp the intestine at the site to be sampled. It is often
desired entry site and the needle directed into the
necessary to 'run' the bowel, using two pairs of
abdominal cavity and to the kidney. The usual location
 grasping forceps. This is done in much the same way
for sample collection is the cranial or caudal pole of
as when performing the same operation in an open
the kidney, being careful to obtain predominantly
laparotomy. An assistant manipulates the telescope
cortex with little medulla. The needle should not
penetrate deep into the kidney because the arcuate
arteries are located in the corticomedullary junction.
The biopsy needle is seated through the renal capsule
and the needle “fired' (Figure 11.12). The needle is
then removed from the abdominal cavity. There are
 generally several millitres of blood flowing from the
X
X
X
Taking a biopsy sample from the right kidney
11.13
Portal positions for full-thickness intestinal
11.12
with an automatic core-type biopsy needle.
biopsy.
165
Chapter 11 Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
and camera, while the surgeon uses atraumatic
Feeding tube placement
grasping forceps in the other two ports to run the
bowel until a suitable area is found for biopsy.
Duodenal and/or jejunal feeding tube placement has
The antimesenteric border of an intestinal loop is
been described as a modification of percutaneous
firmly grasped with the forceps and pulled to the
endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube placement
cannula. The cannula incision is carefully enlarged
techniques. Following routine PEG tube placement,
with a scalpel blade or cautery, sufficient to exteriorize
a duodenal feeding tube is inserted through the PEG
the loop of bowel. It is helpful to place an 11 mm port
tube into the gastric lumen and grasped by a pair of
at the site selected for exteriorization as this requires
forceps placed through the flexible endoscope. The
less enlargement, and may even be of sufficient size
end of the feeding tube can then be guided through
in cats and small dogs. Four to five centimetres of the
the pylorus and into the duodenum and/or jejunum
loop of intestine are exteriorized and stay sutures are
as required.
used in the intestine to prevent it from falling back into
An alternative method of laparoscopic jejun-
the abdominal cavity (Figure 11.14). It is important not
 ostomy tube placement does not require the use of
to exteriorize too much bowel as this can make
a flexible endoscope or PEG tube. The patient is
replacement into the abdomen difficult through a
positioned in dorsal recumbency and the abdomen
small incision. A small full-thickness biopsy sample is
shaved, prepared and draped for surgery. The abdo-
then obtained in the same manner as during open
men is insufflated (see above) with a Veress needle
abdominal surgical biopsy.
placed at the site of the proposed feeding tube place-
ment, just caudal and lateral to the umbilicus on the
right side. A primary camera port is then introduced
cranial to the umbilicus in the midline a comfortable
distance away. The insufflation tubing is transferred
to the camera port and the Veress needle removed
from the abdomen. A secondary port, preferably
10 mm with a 5 mm reducer to accommodate the
instruments, is introduced under direct visualization,
on the right side at the position of insertion of the
Veress needle. A third port may be required to
'run' the bowel and select a suitable site for the jejun-
ostomy tube. This also allows easier identification
of the direction of the bowel to allow the duoden-
ostomy and/or jejunostomy tube to be placed cor-
rectly in an aboral direction. This tertiary port is
placed at the same level as the secondary port on
the other side of the midline.
Duodenostomy or jejunostomy feeding tubes can
beplacedusing the laparoscope simply
by
exteriorizing the respective piece of intestine through
the abdominal wall and inserting the tube externally.
11.14
Exteriorized loop of smallintestine.
The technique of bowel exteriorization is similar to
that described above for intestinal biopsy. A purse-
string suture is placed on the antimesenteric border
The small bowel is generally closed in the standard
of the jejunum. The tube is inserted in the centre of
the purse-string suture, which is then tightened. Then
manner in two or three layers. If there is any question
the intestine is pexied to the abdominal wall. The
of contamination of the peritoneal space with bowel
 pexy is performed with four sutures placed around
contents during the procedure, warm saline lavage
the insertion site of the feeding tube. The sutures are
can be performed using a laparoscopic suction
cannula with portals for inflow and egress. The
placed between the antimesenteric border of the
intestine is then returned to the abdominal cavity. This
jejunum and the abdominal wall. The skin is closed
technique results in loss of pneumoperitoneum and it
around the feeding tube in a routine fashion. The
is therefore difficult to take multiple intestinal biopsy
tube itself is sutured to the skin with a Chinese
samples. However, if multiple biopsy samples are
finger-trap pattern of suture material placed around
required it is possible to re-insert the 11 mm cannula
the tube itself. The jejunostomy site is visualized
and place a temporary purse-string suture in the
through the endoscope before desufflating the
 abdominal wall around it to form a seal. The abdomen
 abdomen and removing the endoscope and cannula.
can then be re-insufflated and the procedure repeated
 Port closure is routine.
to obtain further samples. Following the final sample,
A gastrostomy feeding tube can also be placed
the abdomen is re-insufflated and all operative sites
using laparoscopy by exteriorizing the body of the
inspected for haemorrhage. The abdomen can then
stomach through the left abdominal wall and inserting
be deflated and the telescope and ports removed.
the tube externally following a gastropexy (see below
Closure of the abdominal wall is performed in the
and Chapter 4). A purse-string suture and pexy are
standard manner.
performed as for the jejunostomy tube.
166
Chapter 11 Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
Gastropexy
A prophylactic gastropexy is recommended for ani-
mals at high-risk of developing gastric dilatation-
volvulus
(GDV).
Laparoscopic
gastropexy
is
performed by exteriorizing the pyloric antrum through
the right abdominal wall. The animal is placed in dor-
sal recumbency and the abdomen shaved, prepared
and draped for surgery. The abdomen is insufflated
(see above) with a Veress needle placed on the mid-
line at the level of the umbilicus, and a primary tele-
scope portal is then introduced at this site. The
instrument portal for the grasping forceps is placed
2 cm behind the last rib on the right side, at the
X
 junction of distal and proximal third of the last rib. It 
may be helpful to use an 11 mm port with a 6 mm
U
reducer at this site. Fine-tooth grasping forceps or
X
Babcock forceps are used to grasp the pyloric antrum
between the greater and smaller curvatures. The
 abdominal cavity is then deflated to minimize tension
on the wall of the stomach. The portal for the grasp-
X
ing forceps is then enlarged parallel to the last rib. A
5-6 cm incision is adequate. A portion of the pyloric
 antrum is exteriorized and stay sutures are placed in
 the gastric wall. A 3 cm incision is made into the mus-
cularis of the gastric wall to develop a serosomuscu-
laris flap, without penetrating into the gastric lumen.
Portal positions for laparoscopic
11.15
The edges of this incision are then sutured to the
ovariohysterectomy.
transverse abdominal muscle with a simple continu-
ous pattern of 3 metric (2/0) monofilament absorba-
available) is used to maintain the position of the ova-
ble suture. The internal and external oblique muscles
are then closed. Subcutaneous tissue and skin are
ries percutaneously during the ligation of the pedicle.
closed in a routine fashion.
The abdomen is insufflated using a Veress needle
placed 3-4 cm cranial to the umbilicus in the midline.
A primary telescope portal is then established in the 
midline 1-2 cm caudal to the umbilicus. The area
Ovariohysterectomy
under the point of insertion is examined as usual for
The peritoneum is very sensitive to painful stimuli
 any iatrogenic damage and the insufflation tubing is
 and tearing the ovarian ligament from its peritoneal
transferred to the telescope portal. The Veress needle
is removed. A second 5 mm portal is established
insertion during a routine open bitch spay results in
considerable postoperative discomfort.  This
is
under direct visualization at the site of the Veress
 completely eliminated using a laparoscopic technique
needle. Entry here may be through the falciform
 and postoperative pain is therefore greatly reduced,
ligament and it is helpful to introduce the cannula at a
parly due to less intraoperative trauma and partly
slight angle towards the right side. The final port is
due to a reduction in wound size.
established in the midline 2-3 cm cranial to the pubis,
 Ovariohysterectomy can be performed using lapar-
under direct visualization, being careful not to damage
oscopy in most medium-sized and large dogs.
the bladder which lies just underneath the point of
Limitations  of  laparoscopic-assisted ovariohyster-
 entry. In medium-sized to large bitches, an 11 mm
 ectomy relate to the size of the patient, as the space in
port with reducer is used here to facilitate the removal
the abdominal cavity of small animals can make the
of the ovaries and uterus.
procedure technically more difficult. The advantage of
The surgeon (and assistant if required) stands to
laparoscopic ovariohysterectomy is the perceived
one side of the patient, and the patient is rotated
rapid recovery of the patient following the procedure.
towards them approximately 45 degrees. The uterine
Ovariohysterectomy is performed with the patient
horns are visualized (Figure 11.16) and traced forward
to the ovary.
to move the abdominal viscera to the cranial part of
The ovary is grasped with Babcock forceps passed
the abdomen. It is also necessary to tilt the patient on
through the caudal portal. Gentle caudal traction and
the right side to work on the left ovary, and then tilt the
 elevation are applied and the ovarian suspensory
patient on the left side to work on the right ovary. The
ligament and associated ovarian blood vessels are
identified. If preferred, the handle of the Babcock
procedure requires three cannulae. The authors' pref-
erence is to place the cannulae along the midline
forceps can be laid down, maintaining the position of
(Figure 11.15). It is also possible to perform the pro-
the ovary unaided and allowing the surgeon to operate
the camera and hand instrumentation through the
cedure with only two cannulae; in that case a large
curved needle with a weighted handle (commercially
other ports. This enables a surgeon to cary out the 
167
Chapter 11 Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
11.16
 Caudal abdomen of a bitch at laparoscopy
(a)
 showing the uterine body and horns emerging 
from beneath the urinary bladder.
procedure without a surgical assistant. Monopolar or
bipolar grasping forceps passed through the cranial
 port are used to bluntly dissect the blood vessels from
the surrounding fat and seal them in two places. The
forceps are then replaced by scissors and the ovary is
freed by cutting between the cauterized points on the
blood vessels.
Alternatively, a monopolar dissection hook can be
used to cauterize and dissect the ovarian ligament
and pedicle. This reduces the need to change
instrumentation, although in larger bitches, it may still
be necessary to transect the ovarian ligament with
 scissors as it can be quite tough.
If preferred, the vessels can be ligated using
endoscopic vascular clips (Figure 11.17) or sutures.
Alternatively, a bipolar cutting device such as a Patton
Hotblade (Figure 11.18) or LigaSure device can be
used if available; this makes surgery a lot simpler as
(b)
it does not require a change of instruments in order to
11.17
(a) Ovarian pedicle exposed with caudal
dissect the ovary free. However, these instruments
retraction of the uterus. (b) Vascular clips have
are expensive and require gas sterilization.
been placed.
 Once the ovary is free, the area is checked for any
bleeding and any small vessels are grasped with the
monopolar grasping forceps and cauterized. Gentle
traction is applied to the ovary, and the broad ligament 
and associated mesentery are gradually stripped
 down, applying cautery as necessary, until the ovary
lies just under the point of entry of the caudal port,
where it can be released.
The patient is then rotated on to her other side, the
surgeon swaps sides, and the process is repeated for
the other ovary. However, this time the ovary is not
released. The patient is rotated back into dorsal
recumbency and, whilst maintaining a firm hold on the 
ovary, the forceps, cannula and ovary are all with-
drawn from the abdomen in one go. If the ovary is
very large or surrounded by a lot of fat, it may be
necessary to enlarge the port slightly before the ovary
11.18
Transecting the ovarian pedicle with the
can be withdrawn from the abdomen. This is achieved
Hotblade bipolar device.
by passing a no. 11 scalpel blade cranial to and
alongside the port in the midline, with the sharp edge 
The ovary can be grasped with a pair of Allis tissue
facing away from the port. Entry of the blade into the
forceps or haemostats at this point to enable removal
abdomen can be monitored through the telescope. In
 of the cannula, ensure a firm grip and facilitate traction.
 yonoua isng pabeua s! uod jepnno au Kem si
Once the ovary and one uterine horn are exteriorized,
exteriorize the ovary.
 gentle traction is applied to exteriorize the uterine
168
Chapter 11 Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
body and cervix (Figure 11.19). The uterine body is
11.21), which is then tightened down at the level of
then clamped and ligated, using a transfixing suture,
the cervix. The uterus is transected and both the
before transection and removal in the usual fashion.
uterus and ovaries are removed through one of the 
The uterine stump is replaced into the abdomen, and
cannula holes, which is enlarged if necessary.
the remaining uterine horn and ovary are exteriorized
to complete the procedure. The caudal port is held
closed manually in order to insufflate the abdomen
sufficiently for a final inspection for haemorrhage, and
to ensure the uterine stump has been fully returned to
the abdomen. The abdomen is then deflated and the
cannulae are removed. All the incisions are closed
using 3 or 2 metric (2/0 or 3/0) absorbable suture
material; usually only one suture is necessary. The
skin is closed using tissue adhesive (Figure 11.20)
Both uterine horns have been passed through
11.21
anEndoloopTM
Ovariectomy
Ovariectomy can also be performed via laparoscopy.
This is a simpler and faster procedure than ovario-
hysterectomy. Ovariectomy has been the standard
practice in many European countries for over 20
Exteriorizing the uterus through the caudal
years and is becoming more common in the USA
11.19
portal position.
and elsewhere. A recent report by Goethem et al.
(2006) concluded that 'ovariohysterectomy is techni-
cally more complicated, time-consuming, and is
incision, more intraoperative trauma, increased dis-
 comfort) compared with ovariectomy, making ovari-
ectomy the preferred method of gonadectomy in the
healthy bitch.'
Experience has shown that removal of the uterus
is unnecessary and does not result in pyometritis in
the absence of ovarian tissue. Conversely, there are
 no published data to show any benefit from removal
of the uterus.
Instrumentation  required   for ovariectomy   is
essentially the same as for ovariohysterectomy, with
the addition of an ovariectomy hook (commercially
 available). This is a sharp curved needle attached to
a heavy handle. This is passed percutaneously and is
used to fix the ovary in place against the body wall to
facilitate dissection.A wider than normal surgical clip
is required to give access to the body wall in the mid-
lateral abdomen.
The procedure and port placements are similar to
11.20
Wound closure following laparoscopic
those used for laparoscopic ovariohysterectomy, but 
ovariohysterectomy in a 2-year-old Retriever.
the caudal portal is not required. In larger bitches
(over 25 kg) an 11 mm cranial portal, located midway
An alternative technique is to dissect the ovaries
between the umbilicus and the xiphoid process, is
as above and then place a pre-tied loop of suture
used for removal of the ovaries. A 6 mm portal just
(Endoloop SutureTM or Loop LigatureTM) in the
caudal to the umbilicus is used for the camera/
abdominal cavity through one cannula. Both ovaries
telescope. In small bitches, a 6 mm cranial portal and
and uterine horns are passed through the loop (Figure
3.5 mm caudal portal are used.
169
Chapter 11 Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
Following insufflation of the abdomen and place-
Ovarian cyst
ment of the portals, the patient is rotated towards the
surgeon and the contralateral ovary is grasped with
Babcock forceps introduced through the cranial portal.
The ovary is held up against the abdominal wall and
the site of contact is determined by palpation on the
external abdominal wall whilst observing the perito-
neum through the endoscope. Once the exact site is
determined, an ovariectomy hook is placed through 
the abdominal wall to transfix the ovarian pedicle and
hold the ovary in place. The weight of the handle on
this device means that it can maintain the position of
the ovary unaided when the handle is laid down on the
patient. The Babcock forceps can then be removed
and replaced with a bipolar cutting device, such as a
Ovarian remnant
Hotblade? or LigaSure?. The ovarian ligament, pedicle
and uterine attachments are transacted and cauterized
to free the ovary. The bipolar device is replaced by the
Babcock forceps and the ovary is grasped. The
ovariectomy hook is then removed, and the patient is
rotated back into dorsal recumbency. The ovary is
removed from the abdomen, either through the lumen
of the cannula or, if it is too large, by removal of the
cannula and direct traction through the body wall. The
cannula can then be replaced and the procedure
repeated on the other ovary.
Following desufflation, closure is routine, with a
single 2 metric(3/0) absorbable suture and skin
adhesive at each portal site.
Removal of the ovarian remnant with monopolar
Ovarian remnant removal
11.22
scissors in a cat.
Location of ovarian remnants in open surgery can
be difficult and time-consuming. The magnification
and illumination provided by laparoscopy greatly facil-
itates this procedure and results in considerably less
surgery. Laparoscopic vasectomy can also be
trauma for the patient. Location of the remnant is eas-
performed. The dog is placed in dorsal recumbency,
in the Trendelenberg position, and the abdomen
ier if the patient is in oestrus at the time of surgery.
Only two portals are required and the technique is
shaved, prepared and draped for surgery. Gravity will
the same as for laparoscopic ovariectomy. The portals
then displace the abdominal organs into the cranial
are placed as before and the patient is rolled to each
abdomen, which will facilitate visualization of the
internal inguinal canal. Two cannulae are adequate to
side in turn to visualize the contralateral kidney. The
area around and behind the kidney is inspected with
perform the surgery. The abdomen is insufflated (see
the aid of a palpation probe. Location of the ovarian
above) with a Veress needle placed just caudal to the
umbilicus. The Veress needle is then removed from
remnant is usually quite straightforward. The pedicle
can be grasped directly in a bipolar cutting instrument
the abdomen and a primary telescope port is
(e.g. Hotblade or LigaSure) or, if necessary, it can
introduced at the same site. Care should be exercised
to palpate the abdomen and direct the Veress needle
be transfixed with an ovariectomy hook prior to
and primary cannula well away from the spleen. The
transection. In many cases, especially in cats,
insufflation tubing is then transferred to the camera
laparoscopic scissors attached to a monopolar
port. A secondary port, preferably 11 mm with a
electrosurgery unit are all that is required for
transection (Figure 11.22). Following isolation of the
6 mm reducer to accommodate the instruments, is
introduced under direct visualization just lateral to the
remnant, the scissors or bipolar cutting device is
replaced with grasping forceps, and the remnant
rectus abdominis muscle, about half-way between
removed via the cannula. The abdomen is then
the umbilicus and the pubis on the affected side.
In unilateral cases, the normal side (usually the
desufflated and the ports closed routinely.
left) is examined first and the vas deferens and
testicular vessels are traced down to the inguinal ring,
Cryptorchid surgery
which is inspected for herniation. The inguinal ring on
the affected side is located and checked (Figure
A testicle that is located in the abdominal cavity can
11.23). If the vas deferens and testicular vessels are
be removed easily using laparoscopy. This technique
seen entering the inguinal ring, then the testicle is in
is simpler, quicker and less traumatic than open
the inguinal canal.
170
Chapter 11 Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
Inguinal canal
Testicular vessels
Vas deferens
Right cryptorchid testicle cranial to the bladder.
11.25
An EndolooptM has been placed around the
Normal inguinal canal showing the vas deferens
11.23
and testicular vessels.
pampiniform plexus.
 In bilateral cases, both inguinal rings are inspected
ectopic testicle is transected and removed through
to determine the presence of the vas deferens and
 one of the cannula holes. The abdomen is desufflated 
testicular arteries. If these structures are present,
and ports closed routinely.
either the dog has already been castrated or the tes-
ticles are beyond the inguinal ring. An absence of the
Laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy
vas deferens and testicular artery in the inguinal canal
means that the testicle is ectopic. The ectopic testicle
Laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy is the procedure
is usually readily visible upon entering the abdominal
of choice for male dogs and cats where large stones
 cavity. If not visualized immediately, it may be located 
are to be removed. This procedure does require more
by gently moving the bladder laterally with closed
instrumentation than urethrocystoscopy, in particular
 grasping forceps to locate the vas deferens, and trac-
insufflation equipment, but it gives greater access to
ing this back to the testicle. The testicle is grasped
the bladder in these patients.
and pulled up to the mouth of the operating cannula.
The patient is clipped and prepared for routine
The cannula, forceps and testicle are then drawn out
abdominal surgery. A catheter is placed in the bladder
of the abdomen together (Figure 11.24). In small dogs
and the urine evacuated. The bladder is flushed with
this does not require any further enlargement of the
warmed sterile saline and drained. A Veress needle is
abdominal wound. The vas deferens and spermatic
placed at or just caudal to the umbilicus, and the
vessels are then ligated and the testicle removed in
abdomen is insufflated with carbon dioxide in the
routine fashion. The ligated stump of the vas and
usual way. The primary telescope portal is placed at
 pampiniform plexus is returned to the abdomen.
the site of the Veress needle and the insufflation tube
is attached to the cannula. A 5 mm 0 degree telescope
is introduced to visualize the bladder (Figure 11.26). A
 second portal is placed in the midline, directly over
the cranial extremity of the bladder under direct visual
guidance. A 6 mm port will suffice as the incision can
be enlarged, but an 11 mm port with 6 mm reducer
will make the procedure easier, especially in large
11.24
Removal of an ectopic testicle.
Alternatively, the ectopic testicle can be brought
against the abdominal wall towards the midline and
stabilized with a suture passed percutaneously
11.26
Laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy. The primary
through the abdomen wall. The vascular pedicle and
telescope portal is in place and a small skin
the vas deferens are then ligated with a pre-tied
incision has been made for insertion of the instrument 
suture (Figure 11.25), staples or electrocautery. The
portal.
171
Chapter 11 Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
dogs. Babcock forceps (5 mm) or atraumatic graspers
are introduced through this second port (Figure 11.27)
and the bladder wall is grasped and bought up to the
mouth of the cannula.
 Telescope and laser fibre inserted into the
11.29
bladder.
Babcock forceps are placed in the secondary
11.27
portal to grasp the apex of the bladder.
The abdomen is deflated to reduce tension on the
bladder and the cannula is then removed from the
animal whilst maintaining hold of the bladder wall,
thus exteriorizing a small portion of the bladder wall
through the abdominal incision. If necessary, this
incision may be extended a little (1-1.5 cm is usually
 sufficient) using a scalpel blade placed with the sharp 
placed in the bladder wall and a continuous suture is
placed between the bladder wall and the periphery of
the abdominal wound (Figure 11.28). An incision is 
 Small bladder polyp seen at laparoscopic
11.30
then made in the centre of the exposed bladder wall
cystoscopy.
to enter the lumen of the bladder. The telescope is
transferred into this incision (Figure 11.29) to inspect 
the interior of the bladder and instruments can be
passed alongside to retrieve stones, remove polyps
or take biopsy samples. Diode laser fibres can be
introduced to debulk transitional cell carcinomas or
remove polyps (Figure 11.30; see Chapter 14). The
urinary catheter can be withdrawn and, in most male
dogs, the urethra can be examined to the prostatic
urethra and even as far as the pelvic flexure (Figure
11.31). The urinary catheter is withdrawn to near the
tip of the penis and flushed with sterile saline to push
any urethral stones into the bladder for removal.
View of urethra looking caudally towards the
11.31
peivic flexure.
At the end of the procedure, the bladder wall is
sutured in the normal fashion, the sutures to the
abdominal wall are removed and the bladder is
returned to the abdomen. All ports and catheters are
removed and skin closure is routine (Figure 11.32). It
should be noted that whilst laparoscopic cystoscopy
does provide access to the bladder of patients that
otherwise wouldnot be abletobeexamined
endoscopically, visualization of  the more distal
11.28
Bladder wall sutured to the abdominal incision.
 portions of the mid-urethra is still limited.
172
Chapter 11 Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
Following dissection of the gallbladder, the cystic
artery and vein should be exposed and isolated with
care. Clips (5 mm) are then triple applied and the
vascular supply transected. The 5 mm clips are
applied in similar fashion to the neck of the gallbladder
and the proximal portion of the cystic duct, which are
also transected. In larger patients this can be
performed using a endoscopic linear cutter and a
vascular cartridge. Babcock forceps are used hold
the gallbladder, which is now free of any attachments.
The gallbladder can then be removed directly via an
enlarged incision in one of the portal sites or, if the 
galbladder is friable, an endoscopic retrieval bag
should be considered to minimize the risk of spillage
of gallbladder contents and subsequent bile peritonitis.
11.32
Postoperative view following wound closure
 after cystoscopy.
The retrieved gallbladder should be submitted for
histopathology and culture.
With the gallbladder removed, the surgical site is
Cholecystectomy
examined for haemorrhage and bile leakage. Any
bile or blood leakage can often be easily controlled
Laparoscopic  cholecystectomy has become the
with judicious use of cautery. lrrigation of the area is
modality of choice in human surgery for treatment of
performed to make sure that the surgical sites are
a variety of pathologies requiring removal of the
clean. The liver retractor is removed and the
gallbladder. This procedure can be used in small 
mechanical pressure from the right middle liver lobe
animal surgery, although it does require a more
provides compression of the surgical site. Closure of
experienced operator as well as additional equipment
the portal sites is performed in a routine manner.
and personnel. Cholecystectomy is indicated in cases
of chronic cholelithiasis/mucolithiasis, obstruction of
Other potential surgical procedures
the cystic duct, gallbladder neoplasia and chronic
cholecystitis.
Other surgical procedures that can be performed
The surgical approach is generally identical to that
using laparoscopy are:
of the ventral midline approach for exploration of the
liver. Once the gallbladder is visualized, the right
Adrenalectomy
middle liver lobe must be retracted ventrally and
Correction of portosystemic shunts
cranially to provide separation between the gallbladder
Nephrectomy (hand-assisted)
and the hepatic bed. This is usually achieved with a
Removal of abdominal masses
specialized liverretractor ora 10 mm fan-fold retractor.
Removal of intestinal masses
The retractor is introduced into the peritoneal space
Hernia repair.
via a 10 mm portal placed just to the left of midline,
An additional assistant is often needed to manipulate
Complications
this instrument.
Potential laparoscopic complications may be related
Once the liver has been adequately retracted,
to various aspects of the procedure.
dissection of the gallbladder and vascular supply is
undertaken. The gallbladder is gently grasped with
Anaesthesia
?
atraumatic forceps and retracted cranioventrally.
Veress needle/trocar insertion:
Curved 5 mm Metzenbaum scissors attached to
Injury to abdominal wall
一
cautery are then used to separate the serosal surface
 Penetration of organs
一
of the gallbladder from the liver. Often chronically
Perforation of hollow viscus
一
diseased gallbladders are thickened and friable with
Insufflation: subcutaneous emphysema
significant adhesions to the surrounding hepatic bed.
 Peritoneal tenting
Some degree of oozing haemorrhage is expected,
Inappropriate insufflation
which can be controlled with cautery, and visualization
Pneumothorax
?
 can be maintained by occasional irrigation and suction
Gas embolism
using a 5 mm suction/irrigation cannula. The curved
 Operative complications:
blade of the Metzenbaum scissors should be pointed
Bleeding
away from the gallbladder and towards the liver, to
Tissue injury
avoid iatrogenic puncture of the gallbladder lumen.
Technical problems:
This dissection can also be performed using a
Lack of experience
一
harmonic scalpel if available. The left side of the
Equipment-related.
一
gallbladder is generally dissected first and then a
similar dissection is performed on the right side.
Complications are rare and generally relate to
Dissection should be carried out to the neck of the
the surgeon's inexperience, the underlying disease
gallbladder at the origin of the cystic duct.
process or anaesthetic risk.
173
Chapter 11 Rigid endoscopy: laparoscopy
latrogenic damage can be induced by entry of the
responses during medetomidine, propofol, and halothane anesthesia
Veress needle or trocars, and can lead to haemorrhage 
for laparoscopy in dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research
12,1443-1450
or perforation of underlying viscera. Penetration of
Cole TC, Center SA, Flood SN, Rowland PH et al. (2002) Diagnostic
the bowel by the Veress needle is seldom a cause for
comparison of needle and wedge biopsy specimens of the liver in
dogs and cats. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
major concern and the small perforation will heal
220, 1483-1490
without surgical intervention. Larger lacerations may
 Duke T, Steinacher SL and Remedios AM (1996) Cardiopulmonary effects 
 of using carbon dioxide for laparoscopic surgery in dogs. Veterinary
require surgical repair. Fatal air embolism can be
Surgery 1, 77-82
induced if the Veress needle is inserted into the
spleen. If air embolism is suspected, the patient
laparoscopy in a dog. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association 5, 552-554
should be placed in left lateral recumbency with the
head down and ventilated with oxygen. This moves
rational choice between ovariectomy and ovariohysterectomy in the
the gas bubbles away from the right ventricular outflow
dog: A discussion on the benefits of either technique. Veterinary
Surgery 35, 136-143
tract to help alleviate the obstruction. Carbon dioxide
Grauer G (1999) Laparoscopy of the urinary tract. In: Small Animal
is readily soluble and if the embolism is minor the gas 
 Endoscopy, 2nd edn, ed. TR Tams, pp. 427--430. Mosby, St Louis 
Grauer GF, Twedt DC and Morrow KN (1983) Evaluation of laparoscopy
should dissolve rapidly.
Proper technique and positioning of the Veress
the AmericanVeterinary Medical Association183,677-679
needle should reduce the risk of complications con-
Harmoinen J, Saari S, Rinkinen M and Westermarck E (2002) Evaluation
siderably. Alternatively, EndoTIP? cannulae or an
Veterinary Therapy 3, 31-36
open (Hasson) technique may be used as described
 Johnson GF and Twedt DC (1977) Endoscopy and laparoscopy in the
above. Penetration of major biood vessels with instru-
diagnosis and management of neoplasia in small animals. Veterinary
ments, such as biopsy needles, can lead to haemor-
Kolata RJ and Freeman LJ (1999) Access, portal placement and basic
endosurgical skills. In: Veterinary Endosurgery, ed. LJ Freeman, pp.
Penetration of the diaphragm by an instrument
44-60. Mosby, St Louis
 Magne ML and Tams TR (1999) Laparoscopy: instrumentation and 
or biopsy needle can lead to pneumothorax, as can
technique. In: Small Animal Endoscopy, 2nd edn, ed. TR Tams, pp.
pre-existing diaphragmatic hernia. Positive pressure
397-408. Mosby, St Louis
 Minami S, Okamoto Y, Eguchi H and Kato K (1997) Successful laparoscopy.
ventilation must be commenced immediately, and the
assisted ovariohysterectomy in two dogs with pyometra. Journal of
procedure can usually proceed with appropriate
Veterinary Medical Science 9, 845-847
Pena FJ, Anei L, Dominguez JC, Alegre B, Alvarez M, Celorio Iand Anel
monitoring as for an open chest surgery. A thoracic
 E (1998) Laparoscopic surgery in a clinical case of seminoma in a 
drain should be inserted at the end of the procedure
 cryptorchid dog. Veterinary Record 142, 671-672
as normal.
Rawlings CA (2002) Laparoscopic-assisted gastropexy. Journal of the
 Haemorrhage from biopsy sites is rarely a prob-
American Animal Hospital Association 38, 15-19
Rawlings CA, Foutz TL, Mahaffey MB, Howerth EW, Bement S and
lem, even in patients with laboratory evidence of
Canalis C (2001) A rapid and strong laparoscopic-assisted
minor clotting defects. Biopsy of tumours could lead
gastropexy in dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research 6,
871--875
to seeding of tumour cells to other parts of the abdo-
 Rawlings CA, Howerth EW, Bement S and Canalis C. (2002) Laparoscopic-
men or abdominal wall. If this is of concern, biopsy
assisted enterostomy tube placement and ful-thickness biopsy of the
specimens can be placed into a retrieval bag, fash-
jejunum withserosal patching in dogs. American Journalof Veterinary
Research 63, 1313-1319
ioned out of a finger of a sterile surgical glove or a
 Richter KP (2001) Laparoscopy in dogs and cats. Veterinary Clinics of
sterile zip-lock bag, before removal from the abdo-
North America: Small Animal Practice 4, 707-727
 Rothuizen J (1985) Laparoscopy in small animal medicine. Veterinary
men. Specialized endoscopy retrieval bags are avail-
Quarterly 3, 225-228
able and are easier to use, but are expensive.
Endoscopy, 2nd edn, ed. TR Tams, pp. 44-60. Mosby, St Louis
Twedt DC and Johnson GF (1977) Laparoscopy in the evaluation of liver
disease in small animals. American Journal of Digestive Disease 22,
 References and further reading
571-580
Widt DE (1980) Laparoscopy in the dog and cat. In: Animal Laparoscopy,
BufalariA, Short CE, Giannoni C, Pedrick TP, Hardie RJ and Flanders JA
ed. RM Harrison and DE Wildt, pp. 31-72. Williams & Wilkins,
(1997) Evaluation of selected cardiopulmonary and cerebral
Baltimore
174
Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy
MaryAnn Radlinsky
Introduction
Thoracoscopy allows for exploratory and interven-
tional procedures within the chest to be performed
through multiple 5 mm or 10 mm thoracic portals.
Significant spreading of the ribs or sternum is avoided,
decreasing the perioperative morbidity associated
with intrathoracic procedures. Use of a rigid endo-
scope allows for significant visual magnification of
normal structures while allowing access to the organs
 and areas normally approached by standard inter-
costal thoracotomy or median sternotomy. Complete
evaluation of the parietal pleura, mediastinum, lungs,
lymph nodes, diaphragm and pericardium can be
accompanied by biopsy of any of the listed structures.
Samples may also be obtained for aerobic, anaerobic
12.1
Excellent illumination and magnification during
 and fungal culture.
 thoracoscopy provide detail beyond that
normally seen with open thoracotomy.
The use of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery
(VATS) was initially limited to diagnostic exploration of
the structures listed above. However, with more
lungs collapse upon establishment of an iatrogenic
advanced instrumentation, experimentation and expe-
pneumothorax, and further collapse is possible with
rience, many more surgical procedures have become
selective bronchial intubation or bronchial blockage,
feasible. These include: lung biopsy; partial or com-
 all of which may make insufflation unnecessary.
plete pneumolobectomy; pericardectomy; thoracic
Any rigid telescope may be used for thoracoscopy.
duct ligation; ligation and division of the ligamentum
Most surgeons prefer to have both a 0 degree and a
arteriosum; and closure of a patent ductus arteriosus.
30 degree telescope available. The 0 degree telescope
is best suited for early exploration, as the view is
Indications
easiest to understand, being straight on and simple to
process. The 0 degree telescope, however, causes
Thoracoscopic exploration is indicated for most intra-
the surgeon to lever the telescope against the ribs in
thoracic conditions in which a diagnosis or treatment
 order to see as much of the thoracic cavity as possible.
is necessary. Conditions include: pleural effusion;
This problem can be alleviated by use of the 30
 pericardial effusion; pulmonary disease; mediastinal 
degree telescope. A 30 degree telescope has a field
mass lesions; lymphadenopathy; chylothorax; regur-
 gitation; persistent right aortic arch; pulmonary mass
of view that is angled 30 degrees from the long axis of
the telescope. By using an offset angle, more of the
lesions; and spontaneous pneumothorax.
The benefis of thoracoscopy over thoracotomy
thoracic cavity can be evaluated. The surgeon can
"look around corners' with the angled endoscope and
includethevisualizationofallareasaccessiblebythe
 cause less pressure on, and place less torque on, the
approach normally taken for the disease process
ribs adjacent to the port site, as well as on the
being evaluated. Not only can all areas of the thorax
endoscope itself. By turning the 30 degree telescope,
normally evaluated be seen, but magnification greatly
enhances the chance of identifying small lesions
the surgeon gets a much wider view of the area than
(Figure 12.1). Multiple biopsy samples can be obtained,
is possible with the 0 degree telescope.
and small or early lesions may be easily identified.
The size of the telescope used is determined by
the size of the patient. A 5 mm 30 cm telescope has
the widest range of use. A 5 mm telescope can be
Instrumentation
used in cats and dogs of all sizes. The length of the
The equipment required for thoracoscopy differs little
5 mm telescope is appropriate for nearly all sizes of
from that required for laparoscopy (see Chapters 7
dog but may be slightly longer than needed for small
and 11). The thorax is supported by a rigid wall, the
dogs and cats. The light transmitted by the 5 mm
175
Chapter 12 Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy
telescope is appropriate for viewing the thoracic
Laparoscopic cannulae may be used  for
structures of most sizes of patients. Small dogs and
thoracoscopy but are often longer than required. As
cats may be well served by a 2.7 mm telescope (often
described above, flexible cannulae are useful for
used for rhinoscopy and cystoscopy), even though it 
intercostal space applications and can be cut to fit
transmits less light. Due to the small size of those
each patient. Longer cannulae or threaded cannulae
patients, the decreased illumination and diminished
may be useful for thoracoscopic evaluation of the
field of view are less of a problem, and the ability to
patient in dorsal recumbency. A paraxiphoid approach
manoeuvre a smaller telescope in the small intercostal
(see below) requires a longer cannula, and the
spaces is also a benefit. The shorter length (e.g.
threaded cannula may be useful for slow controlled
18 cm) of the 2.7 mm telescope is also appropriate
placement in the paraxiphoid position. Threaded
for use in small patients. A 10 mm telescope is useful 
cannulae may also be used intercostally and are more
in large- to giant-breed dogs, but is not essential.
secure than regular laparoscopic ports. Traditional
The telescope and operating instruments 
are
laparoscopic cannulae are, however, supplied with
introduced into the thoracic cavity via cannulae that
valves (which may be removed for thoracoscopy) and
are inserted into the pleural space using a trocar.
sharp trocars. Extreme care must be taken when
Sharp trocars are not necessary for thoracoscopy if
using a sharp trocar for thoracic insertion of a cannula
insufflation is not being used. Blunt trocars can be
as it is more likely to damage pulmonary parenchyma.
placed through mini-thoracotomies in an open fashion.
Open placement, establishment of a pneumothorax,
Performing a mini-thoracotomy allows for  the
and placement under direct visualization may not be
establishment of a pneumothorax prior to trocar-
enough to decrease the risk of trauma. Replacement
cannula insertion, thereby decreasing the risk of
of the sharp trocar with a blunt trocar is recommended
pulmonary trauma.
if laparoscopic cannulae are used for thoracoscopy.
Cannulae used for thoracoscopic surgery are
Xenon light sources provide the best lighting,
often open rather than valved. Open cannulae allow
superior to that of halogen light sources. The rigid
for rapid exchange of instruments into and out of the
thoracic wall provides a stable cavity to explore, and
thoracic cavity and decrease the trauma to the
the far reaches of the thoracic inlet and diaphragmatic
thoracic wall. If insufflation of the thorax is desired for
recesses are easily illuminated and evaluated with a
further pulmonary atelectasis, valved cannulae may
xenon light source.Flexible fibreoptic cables attach
be used. Cannulae that are soft and flexible (Figure
the light source to the telescope, causing minimal
12.2) decrease the pressure on the adjacent soft
interference with manipulation of the telescope and
tissue structures and may decrease the perioperative
adjacent instrumentation.
pain associated with nerve compression by rigid
The video camera must be of high quality and is
cannulae. They are recommended for intercostal
usually designed to fit the associated telescope so
ports and can be sutured in place to decrease the risk
that the thoracoscopic procedure can be viewed on a
of dislodgement upon changing instruments.
video monitor. Either a single- or three-chip camera
(see Chapter 2) may be used for evaluation of the
thoracic cavity; the three-chip camera provides the
best quality for video and image capture.
FLEXIPAIH
Diagnostic procedures
7
Operative instruments for diagnostic thoracoscopy
are no different from those used in laparoscopy. As
with the telescope and cannulae, the size of the
patient should be considered: 5 mm instruments are
the most versatile; smaller patients may benefit from
2.7 mm shorter instruments; and large patients will
tolerate 10 mm instruments. As thoracoscopic
techniques become more advanced, more instruments 
may be required.
Basic instrumentation for diagnostic thoracoscopy
includes: a palpation probe for palpation, manipu-
lation and measurement of structures; biopsy forceps
Flexible endoscopic ports and the blunt
12.2
obterator used for placement.Ports have been
cut to different lengths for different sized patients.
and scissors. With these instruments, samples of
pleura, mediastinum,pericardium and lymph node
Some flexible cannulae may also be cut to size to
may be obtained. An aspiration-irrigation cannula
fit the patient better and may be resterilized for
can be purchased. Alternatively, a small Poole suction
repeated use. Occasionally the flexible cannulae may
tip or a feeding tube may be inserted through a
have friction problems that inhibit movement of the
cannula to obtain fluid samples. Spinal needles may
instruments, or more commonly the telescope.
be inserted through the thoracic wall to obtain
Application of a small amount of water-soluble lubri-
pericardial fluid samples under direct visualization.
cant dramatically decreases friction, but application to
Sampling for cytological evaluation, bacterial and
the end of the telescope should be avoided so as not
fungal culture, and histopathological evaluation
to interfere with visualization.
should be considered.
176
Chapter 12 Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy
Specific patient preparation depends  on  the
Therapeutic procedures
As therapeutic intervention is considered, more
approach used. Thoracoscopy may be performed
instrumentation may be necessary. Straight and
from an intercostal approach, which approximates lat-
curved dissectors are useful for dissection of fine
eral thoracotomy. From this approach, the entire
hemithorax can be examined. All dorsal, middle and
structures within the thorax. Lymph node removal,
ventral structures should be able to be viewed, includ.
mass removal, ligation of the ligamentum arteriosum,
 ing the diaphragm, lungs, mediastinal structures (e.g.
ligation of the thoracic duct, and pericardectomy are
all best performed when the surgeon has several
vessels, nerves, lymphatics, lymph nodes), pulmo-
different types of dissecting forceps and scissors at
nary hilus and lymph nodes, great vessels, pericar-
their disposal. More aggressive grasping forceps are
dium and the thoracic inlet. The patient preparation
for such an approach is similar to that for a standard
useful for manipulation of the pericardium and other
connective tissues within the mediastinum. A fan
lateral thoracotomy. The entire hemithorax should be
retractor is useful for holding pulmonary parenchyma
clipped and aseptically prepared for port and thoraco-
out of the surgical field for many procedures and may
stomy tube placement. Draping of the chest should
be vital to dissection of the pulmonary hilus,
be wide enough to allow palpation of intercostal
ligamentum arteriosum and patent ductus arteriosus.
 spaces and placement of multiple ports; draping is
Lung biopsy is greatly facilitated with the application
often wider than that for an open thoracotomy.
 of pre-tied suture loops. Clip appliers are very useful
A dorsally recumbent patient undergoing thoraco-
for haemostasis and ligation of the thoracic duct.
More advanced procedures, such as partial or
median sternotomy. With this approach, both sides of
complete pneumolobectomy, may utilize endoscopic
 the chest may be explored, but access to the very
 anastomosis
(GiA)   or   thoraco-
dorsal structures is limited. This approach is often
gastrointestinal
abdominal (TA) stapling devices.
used for general exploration in cases of unknown
diagnoses, such as chronic pleural efusion of
Much of the instrumentation used, e.g. grasping
unknown origin. The patient should be clipped and
forceps, scissors, dissectors, can be connected to
electrocautery or radiosurgical devices. The insulated
 aseptically prepared from 5 cm caudal to the xiphoid
process to the thoracic inlet and dorsal enough for
shaft allows for monopolar use. Specially designed
bipolar forceps and cutting devices are also available.
placement of thoracostomy tube(s), giving access to
More specialized devices for incision and sealing of
 the whole of the ventral two-thirds of the thoracic wall
vascular structures include harmonic scissors and
 on both sides of the chest. Draping is again some-
vessel sealing devices. The more advanced the
 what wide to allow ventral intercostal portal placement 
 procedure, the more advanced instrumentation is 
and thoracostomy tube placement.
usually used.
Preoperative diagnostic work-up
Patient preparation and positioning
Most patients undergoing thoracoscopic evaluation
will have already had non-invasive diagnostic pro-
 cedures such as complete blood count, biochemical
that may be required for immediate conversion to an
profile, urinalysis, thoracic and abdominal radiogra-
open thoracotomy should be in the operating suite.
phy, abdominal ultrasonography and echocardiogra-
The patient should not require re-draping, and
phy completed. Fine-needle aspiration of any mass
equipment must be immediately available for use.
lesions and analysis of pleural fluid, if present, should
The patient's position may be changed during the
be performed. Pleural fluid should be evaluated for
procedure to gain from gravity's pull on the internal
 protein level, nucleated cell count, cytological exami-
organs, primarily the heart. Lungs will also gravitate
nation, aerobic and anaerobic cultures, and trigly-
ventrally as they become atelectic. The surgeon
 ceride and cholesterol evaluation if necessary. Systemic
should be aware, however, that fluid within the pleural
alterations in the patient, as well as cardiopulmonary
 status, should be considered prior to thoracoscopy,
 depending on the positioning of the patient. Removal
 just as they would be prior to open thoracotomy.
of as much fluid as possible will improve visualization
 of thoracic structures.
 Patient positioning on the operative table should
Anaesthetic considerations
be secure and appropriate for the procedure. The
 patient may be positioned in dorsal, lateral or sternal
Diagnostic thoracoscopy under heavy sedation and
recumbency, as required for the procedure. In each
 oxygen supplementation has been reported, but is
case, the ability to change position of the patient
usually not practical in veterinary medicine. Such a
intraoperatively should be considered. Simple angling
practice requires valved cannulae and a controlled
of the patient may allow gravity to provide improved
 pneumothorax, with rapid examination and biopsy of
exposure of the desired site. The need to convert
 appropriate structures.
rapidly to an open approach should also be considered
General anaesthesia and mechanical ventilation
when securing the patient to the operating table.
are the standard practice for thoracoscopy in
Many types of table are available for laparoscopy and
veterinary medicine. The physical status, systemic
thoracoscopy that allow for tilting of the patient in
compromise and ventilatory capability of each patient
multiple directions.
 should be considered, and the anaesthetic technique
177
Chapter 12 Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy
should be tailored to the patient's needs. Establishing
Procedure
pneumothorax during thoracoscopy, in which both
lungs were mechanically ventilated, has been shown
 Any time that thoracoscopy is performed the surgeon 
 pe (od) uabxo jo anssid peed aseaoap oi
 must be prepared to convert to an open thoracotomy
increase partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2).
should the need arise, either due to unexpected com-
These changes were probably due to ventilation-
plications or to resect a large mass. The approach
perfusion mismatch but were not severe enough to
 chosen should be appropriate for the site to be evalu-
result in clinical compromise (Kudnig et al, 2004). A
ated, for the intended surgical intervention, and take
 decrease in total peripheral vascular resistance did
 account of the possible need for open surgery. All
result secondary to the hypercapnia, but again was
 instrumentation for open thoracotomy should be avail-
 not severe enough to lead to complications. Clinical
able to the surgeon. If a lesion is to be excised, the
 cases undergo changes in tidal volume, inspiratory
size of the thoracotomies for portal placement should 
be assessed. For biopsy, small lesions or compres-
pressure and ventilatory rate based on changes in the
patient. Adequate monitoring equipment must be
 sible tissue (e.g. the pericardium), 5 mm or 10 mm
used to detect changes and adjust ventilation as
 portals may allow for extraction of the tissue through
required by the patient.
those sites. Larger lesions may be dissected thoraco-
Thoracoscopy usually requires alteration in the
 scopically, with enlargement of a port site for extrac-
ventilation settings to obtain adequate pulmonary
 tion of the tissue. Very large lesions that would require
 atelectasis for visualization within the pleural space.
a large thoracotomy for extraction may be best
These changes may result in further ventilatory alter-
 approached by standard open thoracotomy. These
 ations within the patient. If the pulmonary atelectasis
 decisions can be made by the surgeon using thoraco-
 gained by the open pneumothorax provided by port
 scopy as a diagnostic tool prior to open surgery.
placement is not sufficient for the procedure, selec-
If possible, it is always prudent to use other non-
invasive modalities to make this determination.
tive single lung ventilation may be desired.
 One-lung ventilation is often used to increase the
Diagnostic techniques
working space within the chest for more advanced
 The chest should first be completely explored and all
procedures. The effect of one-lung ventilation on
abnormalities evaluated. Biopsy of the pleura, lung,
closed-chest dogs in one study (Kudnig et al., 2006)
lymph nodes (sternal, hilar), mediastinum, mass
 consisted of minimal, clinically controllable alterations 
lesions and pericardium may be performed if no abnor-
similar to those identified in open chest bilaterally
 malities are noted. Primary diffuse pulmonary disease 
ventilated dogs. The atelectic lung presumably
can be further assessed by pulmonary biopsy. Mass
undergoes hypoxaemic vasoconstriction, shunting
lesions of the lung, pleura, mediastinum and lymph
 pulmonary blood flow to ventilated areas of the lung,
 nodes may be sampied or removed. Pericardectomy
 and minimizes intrapulmonary shunting or ventilation
can be performed for cases of pericardial effusion,
 perfusion mismatch. The use of one-lung ventilation
and the right atrium may be assessed upon opening
in abnormal patients may be more demanding and
the pericardial sac.
difficult. Monitoring pulse oximetry, end-tidal carbon
 Evaluation of spontaneous pneumothorax and the
dioxide, blood pressure, electrocardiography and 
right atrium may be more challenging. Allung lobes
blood gases is recommended for patients undergoing 
must be evaluated visually, and saline infusion into
thoracoscopy. The addition of s5 cmH2O positive end-
 the thorax may provide a diagnosis of the currently
expiratory pressure (PEEP) has been recommended
leaking site. If a leak is not identified, thoracoscopy
in patients undergoing thoracoscopy with one-lung
 should at least provide information as to the presence
ventilation to decrease the negative effects. Using
 of emphysematous lung, pleural blebs or atelectic
PEEP recruits more alveoli from the ventilated lung,
lung. Thoracoscopy in those cases can aid in
 minimizing ventilation-perfusion mismatch, and does 
identification of the abnormal lung and allow for
 not affect cardiac output or delivery of oxygen to the
surgical planning  should  an open  thoracotomy
tissues (Kudnig et al., 2006).
become necessary. Localizing the pulmonary lesion
 One-lung ventilation can be achieved by selective
via thoracoscopy will allow a single thoracotomy to be
bronchial intubation or by establishing bronchial
 performed if necessaryto remove abnormal pulmonary
blockade of the operated side. Establishment of one-
parenchyma. In cases of spontaneous pneumothorax,
lung ventilation should be done in the operating suite
 abnormal lung may be removed.
Once the side of the lesion is identified, a lateral
during patient transport or positioning. Endoscopic
open approach may be used, thereby avoiding a
guidance is required and there is something of a
 median sternotomy for pneumolobectomy. A median 
learning curve, especially for establishing bronchial
sternotomy is less desirable for pneumolobectomy,
blockade. The blocker must be properly located and
as the pulmonary hilus is displaced dorsally, away
inflation of the balloon must biock the flow of gas
from the surgeon. The right atrium may be evaluated 
without causing inadvertent displacement into the
following pericardial incision, but the use of an angled 
carina or distal trachea. Endotracheal tubes may be
 endoscope and careful manipulation of the pericardium
altered or specialized tubes purchased for bronchial 
 are required for such an endeavour.
intubation  or   blockade.  Selective   intubation
or
bronchial blockade also usually requires use of a
Therapeutic procedures
flexible bronchoscope to  facilitate
The use of a video camera and video monitor is vital
 and confirm
appropriateness of the tube or blocker.
in therapeutic procedures. An assistant may direct the
178
Chapter 12 Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy
telescope while the surgeon performs the procedure.
Without a video camera and monitor, this would not 
be possible. Concurrent viewing by all members of 
the operating and anaesthetic team allows correlation
of the patient's progress with the progress of the
procedure,linking the entire team together, maximizing
the quality of patient care.
Establishing a pneumothorax
A pneumothorax may be established in different 
ways:
A Veress needle (see Chapter 2) may be
inserted via a stab incision through the skin and
the stopcock opened to allow air to enter the
The normal mediastinum seen upon entry via a
pleural space
12.3
paraxiphoid cannula must be opened to explore
Dissection of the thoracic wall and placement of
the contralateral hemithorax.
a blunt trocar and port will also allow air to more
rapidly enter the pleural space
A simple method is to perform a mini-thoracotomy
often adhere to the contralateral lungs until bilateral
and then place a cannula over a blunt trocar.
pneumothoraxhasbeenestablished. The mediastinum
may be fenestrated using two pairs of grasping
Port placement
forceps placed in a poorly vascular section; a fatty
The initial port site on the chest wall should be chosen
mediastinum may require stabilization with grasping
to allow examination of the majority of the pleural
forceps and incision with scissors. Use of electro-
space and to allow for triangulation of subsequent
cautery,radiosurgery
vascular
sealers
is
ports for biopsy or therapeutic intervention.
recommended to avoid haemorrhage that would
In a lateral approach, a skin incision is made that
obscure further visualization.
is slightly larger than the diameter of the port. Blunt
Other portals should be placed after exploration of
dissection of the musculature of the thoracic wall is
the chest. Their placement depends on the expected
carried out until the parietal pleura is penetrated. The
procedures to be done. Triangulation is required for
size of the thoracotomy should be large enough to
accurate and easy operation, and should be planned
allow easy placement of a blunt trocar and cannula.
for. Subsequent portal placement should be done
The entire hemithorax should be examined prior to
under thoracoscopic visualization. The area to be
placement of subsequent ports, which should be done 
entered may be identified by placing pressure on the
under direct visualization with the telescope.
intercostal space and identifying it internally. Mini-
The paraxiphiod port is often placed first in patients
thoracotomies and placement of cannulae with blunt
undergoing thoracoscopy in a dorsal position. The
obturators have been described. Each cannula can
port should be placed with concurrent visualization
be used for examination or passage of operating
through a 0 degree telescope placed inside the port.
instruments. Portals placed for lateral thoracic
A threaded cannula is ideal for such placement. An
procedures may be placed anywhere from dorsal to
initial incision is made in the skin to one side of the
ventral, as long as the site is visualized with the
base of the xiphoid process between it and the costal
telescope. Interference with the movement of the
arch. Port placement is easiest if it is introduced into
pulmonary parenchyma should be considered, along
the ipsilateral hemithorax. It is important to make the
with the intended surgical site. Cannulae placed
incision larger than the diameter of the threaded
cannula to avoid gathering of the skin and subcutis
should be placed ventrally enough to avoid the
upon port advancement. The port should be placed in
pulmonary parenchyma during instrument entry and
the site and slowly advanced, using a clockwise
manipulation. Care should be taken to avoid the
motion, directed toward the ipsilateral thoracic wall
internal thoracic arteries, which should be easily
and somewhat dorsally, to ensure entry into the
visualized. Operating portals should also be spaced
pleural space. A 0 degree telescope is introduced into
widely enough to avoid interference between
 instruments being used and the telescope. Use of a
the cannula as soon as it engages the musculature.
The cannula is advanced under endoscopic guidance
30 degree telescope offers the widest variety of fields
until the diaphragm and diaphragmatic pleura are
of view and the least risk of instrument interference.
penetrated. It is then advanced slightly beyond the
Biopsy
pleura to allow uninhibited insertion and removal of 
the telescope and other instruments through the
cannula. The initial evaluation of the chest through
Pleural
 the paraxiphoid cannula is limited to the hemithorax
 Pleural biopsy is a simple procedure that can be done
entered (Figure 12.3).
during any thoracoscopic exploratory surgery. The
Fenestration of the mediastinum through other
cannulae placed in the ipsilateral intercostal spaces
primarily at the caudal aspect of the ribs should be
will allow bilateral exploration. The mediastinum will
avoided to minimize the risk of life-threatening
179
Chapter 12 Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy
Pre-tied loop ligatures can be used to sample the
distal 2 cm of lung lobes. The pre-tied loop ligature
and grasping forceps are introduced into the thoracic
cavity. The edge of the lung is grasped through the
loop ligature and elevated while the ligature is
tightened. The lung and ligature are stabilized and the
portion of lung excised with Metzenbaum scissors,
cutting off excess suture with hook scissors.
Endoscopic stapling devices can be used to obtain
larger lung biopsy samples and may be fired twice to
 perform wedge excisions of lung.
Ending the procedure
The port site should be closed to achieve an airtight
seal. Closure is usually in two layers, one in the
muscle and fascia, the second in the skin. The
Intercostal vessels (arrowed) seen coursing
12.4
along the caudal border of the ribs shouldbe
subcutis may also be closed. Evacuation of the pleural
avoided during cannula insertion and pleural biopsy.
space via the thoracostomy tube should immediately
follow port closure to assist ventilation of the patient.
haemorrhage. Cup biopsy forceps are inserted under
Intermittent pleural drainage via the tube allows for
thoracoscopic visualization. The rib  should be
early identification of haemorrhage orair accumulation
palpated cranial and caudal to the intended site of
in the pleural space.
pleural biopsy to avoid the neurovascular structures.
This method should avoid the nerves and vessels in
Normal findings
cases in which the thickened parietal pleura obscures
their view. The forceps are opened and samples taken
The normal thorax is easily explored and many
from the parietal pleura; significant force is not
structures are readily visible (Figure 12.5). The
routinely required. Should significant haemorrhage
thoracic wall is easily viewed through the pleura,
occur, electrocautery, radiofrequency, vascular clip
which is normally incredibly thin. Ribs, costochondral
application or open thoracotomy may be required.
junctions, intercostals vessels and nerves should be
Multiple samples of the parietal pleura should be
easy to identify. Depending on the position of the
taken, including multiple abnormal sites, as reactive
patient, other structures may be seen. With the patient
mesothelium is difficult to distinguish from meso-
thelioma or metastatic neoplasia.
in dorsal recumbency, the following can be seen:
sternebrae,internal thoracic vessels, pericardium,
sternal lymph nodes, the lungs and the diaphragm.
Mediastinum
Cup biopsy forceps can be used to sample the
The ventral mediastinum is thin and interlaced with
mediastinal pleura.Alternatively, dissecting forceps,
fat. Upon initial examination it may be readily visible
scissors or sealing devices can be used in cases in
in the central portion of the ventral thorax. Alternatively,
it may be adhered to the contralateral lungs.
which the mediastinum is fatty or well vascularized.
Mass lesions should be evaluated for vascularity prior
to sampling, and large vessels should be avoided.
Haemostatic foam may be inserted into the biopsy
site left by cup forceps. Mass lesions may be dissected
with curved forceps and graspers, followed by
Metzenbaum scissors. Haemostasis may be achieved 
with electrocautery, radiofrequency or vessel sealing
devices.
Sternal lymph nodes may also be sampled. The
lymph node may be partially dissected and sampled
with cup biopsy forceps, or completely excised.
Complete mass or lymph node excision requires
haemostasis with any of the listed devices. Hilar
lymph nodes require superficial dissection for biopsy
and careful dissection for complete excision.
Lung
A view of the caudodorsal thorax at the dorsal
12.5
Pulmonary biopsy can be achieved using three
pleural reflection demonstrates the detail visible
methods: Tru-cut biopsy; pre-tied loop ligature; or
during thoracoscopy.
endoscopic stapling. Tru-cut biopsy needles may be
used to sample lung masses of large enough size as
Once the mediastinum is opened, the lungs on
to not result in trauma to the normal surrounding
both sides of the chest may be examined; they should
pulmonary parenchyma. The needle is directed and
be pink and retract easily (Figure 12.6). The
fired into the mass under thoracoscopic guidance.
pericardium can easily be seen, and the phrenic
180
Chapter 12 Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy
Telescopic view of the middle chest toward the
12.7
thoracic inlet (arrowed) in a dog with chronic
12.6
Endoscopic appearance of normal lung.
pleural effusion.
nerves should be visible at the base of the heart in the
Pneumothorax
fat on the pericardium as the heart is moved by
Cases of spontaneous pneumothorax may be asso-
rotating the patient or upon grasping the pericardium.
ciated with an obvious pulmonary lesion, such as
The heart should be visible through the translucent
subpleural blebs, bullae or emphysematous lung.
pericardium. The pulmonary vasculature is easily
The chest should be filled with saline under direct
identified upon retraction of the lung away from the
visualization in an attempt to identify a source of air
heart. Thymic tissue is readily apparent in the
leakage. Similar evaluation may be done for cases of
mediastinum of young patients. Hilar and dorsal
pulmonary trauma in which persistent air leakage
structures may be more readily viewed via a lateral
has occurred.
 approach. Dorsal structures such as the sympathetic
trunk, thoracic duct(s), azygous vein, mainstem
Pericardial disease
bronchi and hilar lymph nodes should be identified.
The pericardium may be thickened in cases of
pericardial effusion, constrictive pericarditis, cardiac
or heart base tumours, or pyothorax. Opening of the
Pathological conditions
pericardium is difficult if fluid is present,
,and
pericardiocentesis under thoracoscopic visualization
Thickening of the pleura, obscuring the ribs,intercostal
may be used to allow grasping of, sampling of, and
vessels, intercostal nerves or contralateral pulmonary
removal of the pericardium. The heart should be
parenchyma is an abnormal finding. In addition, the
examined for tumours with the pericardium at least
sternebrae and internal thoracic vasculature may be
partially intact, as the pericardium is grasped and
difficult to identify in a severe case of pleural
manipulated to move the heart for complete inspection.
thickening. Small thickened areas on the pleura are
Neoplasms may be readily visible on the right auricular
also abnormal. Thickening of the pleura and
 appendage or heart base.
mediastinum may be associated with any condition,
resulting in pleural effusion.
Thickening may be
Lung disease
generalized with or without concurrent plaque or
Abnormalities of the lung include fibrosing pleuritis, a
nodular pleural lesions. The thickened pleura and
condition in which the visceral pleura thickens and
nodules should be sampled to increase the chance of
limits expansion of the pulmonary parenchyma.
obtaining a diagnosis.
Severe fibrosing pleuritis results in small, rounded
The pleura is usually dramatically thickened with
lung tissue adjacent to the hilus. Lung may also
or without adhesions between the visceral pleura and
appear and feel thick, and may not deflate normally.
surrounding structures in cases of pyothorax.
Lung tumours (Figure 12.8) should be readily visible if
Significant pleural thickening and disease may make
division of the ventral mediastinum more difficult;
they are superficially located, and will become more
haemostasis with electrosurgery or sealing devices
visible when atelectasis occurs. A palpation probe
easily compresses normal lung tissue, making lung
 may be necessary. Significant thickening of the pleura
tumours readily palpable. The appearance of multiple
may also hinder the placement of the paraxiphoid port 
if adequate dorsal angling is not utilized.
masses may represent metastasis, and multiple
It is important to consider thoracocentesis or
biopsy samples may be necessary to obtain a
diagnosis. The pulmonary hilus and hilar lymph nodes
 passing a Poole suction tip into the chest to drain as
much pleural fluid as possible in cases of pleural
must be examined and sampled, or removed in the
effusion (Figure 12.7). Thoracic drainage will allow
case of pulmonary neoplasia. Lung lobe torsion
the lungs to crop ventrally, thereby increasing
presents as a dark, consolidated lung lobe with a
visualization of intrathoracic structures, and will allow
twisted hilus. The condition is usually associated with
more appropriate ventilation of the patient.
a haemorrhagic pleural effusion. Tumours of the
181
Chapter 12 Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy
parenchymal damage. Debridement of the entire
mediastinum is the goal of the procedure. Grasping
forceps and Metzenbaum scissors should be used to
remove all abnormal tissue from the thoracic cavity.
Use of electrocautery, radiosurgery or vessel sealing
devices are strongly encouraged for the entire
procedure, as bleeding will diminish visualization.
Thoracoscopy allows for excellent visualization of
the entire thoracic cavity from the thoracic inlet to the
diaphragm. All abnormal tissue, including the
pericardium if necessary, should be removed. Tilting
the patient to the right and left may assist in
visualization of the dorsal structures. Samples should
be submitted for histopathological examination and
aerobic, anaerobic and fungal culture.
Caudal mediastinal mass in a patient with
12.8
chronic pleural effusion. The diagnosis was
Pericardectomy
lymphosarcoma.
Pericardectomy was the first interventional technique
cranial mediastinum, such as thymoma, should be
used clinically in dogs and demonstrated a decrease in
readily visible. Care should be taken to evaluate
patient pain and stress after surgery when compared
adjacent anatomy (e.g. phrenic nerves, internal
with lateral thoracotomy. The procedure is now wide-
thoracic vessels, cranial vena cava) associated with
spread and is the standard of care for pericardectomy.
the cranial mediastinum prior to attempting removal.
Patients may be placed in either lateral or dorsal
recumbency. lf subtotal pericardectomy is desired,
Diaphragmatic hernias
dorsal recumbency provides access to the entire
Diaphragmatic hernias are readily identified in asso-
pericardium ventral to the phrenic nerves. If the
ciation with abdominal tissues within the thorax.
patient is in dorsal recumbency, the first port is usually
Extreme caution should be taken if a diaphragmatic
the paraxiphoid port. Additional intercostal ports may
hernia is identified during laparoscopy, as insufflation
be placed at the 6th intercostal spaces bilaterally, or
of carbon dioxide into the abdomen will enter the tho-
at the 6th and 1oth intercostal spaces on the right
rax. Entry of a significant amount of carbon dioxide
(Figure 12.9). Alternatively, ports may be placed in
leads to a tension pneumothorax and decreased car-
the paraxiphoid location, and at the 9th intercostal
diac output secondary to decreased venous return.
Right
Left
Pericardiocentesis
Pericardiocentesis
may
be
performed
under
thoracoscopic guidance. A needle is introduced
through the thoracic wall and directed into the
pericardium under direct visualization. Upon entry
into the pericardial sac, fluid is aspirated. The needle
is maintained ventral to the heart.
Pericardiocentesis may be necessary prior to
pericardectomy or pericardial window formation, to
allow grasping of the pericardium for incision. The
intact distended pericardium is as difficult to grasp as
a balloon filled with air. Following pericardiocentesis,
the relaxed pericardium is more easily grasped and
stabilized for manipulation and incision.
PX
Mediastinal debridement
The thoracic cavity may be explored and debrided via
thoracoscopy in cases of pyothorax. The patient
should be positioned in dorsal recumbency for
complete exploration and debridement of both
hemithoraces. The initial evaluation should assess
Port sites for pericardectomy. Sites may be
whether the procedure can be done with the
12.9
adjusted tomatch theanatomyofeachpatient
endoscope. Multiple strong fibrous adhesions are an
The paraxiphoid port (PX) can be used for the telescope
indication for conversion to a median sternotomy, as
with the operative ports placed either bilaterally at the6th
fluid loculation and firm adhesions will require
intercostal space, or at the 6th and 10th intercostal spaces
significant time and give an increased risk of
on the right of the patient.
182
Chapter 12 Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy
space on each side of the chest. Additional ports may
be placed as needed, being careful to place all ports
ventral enough to avoid trauma to the pulmonary
parenchyma. It is important to note that one-lung
ventilation is not required in dogs undergoing
pericardectomy in dorsal recumbency, making the
anaesthesia simpler.
 The lateral approach has been described for a
right or left approach, with the left approach offering
visualization of the right atrial appendage and aortic
root for tumour evaluation. Ports are placed in the
3rd, 5th and 9th, or 3rd, 4th and 5th, or 4th, 6th and
8th or 4th, 6th and 10th intercostal spaces for the
lateral approach.
The procedure is performed with grasping forceps
and scissors. It is desirable to connect scissors to
12.10
Identification of the phrenic nerves (arrowed) is
electrocautery or radiosurgical equipment; electro-
 paramount to subtotal pericardectomy.
cautery or vessel sealing instruments with a built-in
 cutting device are available and decrease the need to
indicated for a more complete pericardectomy.
cauterize and exchange instruments prior to incising
Electrosurgery,radiosurgery orvessel sealing devices
the pericardium. If the pericardial sac is distended
are highly desirable to decrease haemorrhage, which
with fluid, pericardiocentesis under thoracoscopic
would obscure visualization of dorsal structures. The
visualization (see above) will allow for relaxation of
pericardial sac should be evaluated for haemorrhage,
the pericardium and stabilization with grasping
and haemostasis should be complete prior to thoracic
forceps. If pericardiocentesis is not performed, the
wall closure.
distended pericardium can be difficult to grasp.
 Creation of a pericardial window allows fluid to
drain continuously from the pericardial sac into the
Partial and complete
pleural space,preventing cardiac tamponade in cases
pneumolobectomy
of idiopathic pericardial effusion or neoplasia. First,
Partial lobectomy and complete pneumolobectomy
the thoracic cavity is explored to identify and sample
abnormalities, which may represent neoplastic
can be performed with the assistance of endoscopic
spread. Next, the phrenic nerve is identified so it can
stapling devices. Partial or complete lobectomy may
be required for lung tumours, abscess, bullae or
be avoided. The cranial aspect of the pericardium is
identified if performing a pericardial window; the
subpleural blebs.
 pericardium is grasped and incised with scissors. A
Either a lateral orventral approach may be used.
The lateral approach for biopsy of the caudal aspect
pericardial window is typically 3-5 cm and can be
made ventral to the mediastinal fat. Once an opening
of the left cranial lung lobe described ports at the 4th,
is made in the pericardium, it may be easier to
6th, 7th and 9th intercostal spaces; initial thoracic
manipulate the pericardium if one edge of the grasping
exploration and placement of ports triangulated
forceps is placed inside the pericardial sac. The
toward the lobe to be sampled should suffice. A
pericardium should be easily removed through one of
paraxiphoid port and triangulated ports aimed at the
the operating portals. If necessary, a port site is
affected site may also be used if the side of the lesion
enlarged for extraction of the tissue. The pericardium
cannot be determined preoperatively. A pre-tied loop
should be submitted for histopathological examination
ligature may be used for sampling small portions of
 the lung periphery.
and bacterial culture, and susceptibility testing.
Subtotal  pericardectomy  for  constrictive
peri-
Partial lobectomy
carditis, infectious pericarditis or neoplasia is best
done from a ventral approach. Portals may be required
Partial lobectomy requires use of an endoscopic GIA
 on both sides of the chest for adequate pericardial
or linear stapling device. The lungs should be com-
pletely evaluated and appropriate samples taken
excision. The mediastinum is opened with grasping
forceps, or forceps and scissors. Electrocautery,
to assess for spread of the disease as necessary. If
radiosurgery or vessel sealing devices may be needed
the diseased portion of lung is peripheral, partial
in large dogs or where there is a large amount of fat
lobectomy may be performed with endoscopic assist-
in the ventral mediastinum, to decrease blood
 ance. The lungs and lymph nodes should be evalu-
contamination of the endoscope. The thorax is
ated prior to increasing the length of a chosen port
explored and any lesions sampled as dictated by the
site. One port site adjacent to the lesion may be
findings. The phrenic nerves must be identified
extended to a size appropriate to allow exteriorization
bilaterally prior to pericardectomy (Figure 12.10). The
of the affected lung and a margin of normal paren-
subtotal pericardectomy is performed as  for a
chyma. Standard stapling devices or suture tech-
pericardial window but the excision extends more
 niques may then be used to resect the portion of lung,
dorsally, cranially and caudally, taking care to preserve
the remainder of which is then replaced into the
a cuff of tissue around the phrenic nerves. Rarely is
thorax. The procedure should be done without retract-
elevation of the phrenic nerves from the pericardium
ing the ribs, to decrease postoperative morbidity.
183
Chapter 12 Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy
If the procedure is to be done completely endo-
scopically, the affected lung lobe should be stabilized 
and elevated as necessary. A long stapling device is
desired to decrease the need for multiple expensive
disposable cartridges. A 65 mm device is the longest
available. The GlA stapling device compresses and
discharges two or three double-staggered rows of
staples, and divides between the four or six rows. Use
of an endoscopic TA stapler has also been described.
The sample is removed through a port site; enlarge-
ment of the port site may be required for mass lesions.
Ideally, the sample is placed in an endoscopic retrieval
bag to avoid contamination of the pleural space, tho-
racic structures and port site, as infection or neoplasia
could be seeded to other structures upon removal.
The biopsy site should be evaluated for haemorrhage
and air leakage prior to closure of the thoracic wall.
Lateral view of the oesophagus of a dog with a
12.11
persistent right aortic arch prior to dissection.
Complete pneumolobectomy
Complete pneumolobectomy has been described
in the dorsal aspect of the 5th intercostal space is
for clinical management of lung tumours in dogs
also included. An alternative approach is to place
(Lansdowne et al., 2005). The dog is placed in lat-
three ports caudally in the thorax, viewing from cau-
eral recumbency, with the affected lung upwards. An
dal to cranial and dissecting similarly.
endobronchial blocker or selective intubation is
A stomach tube in the oesophagus enhances
required. For caudal lesions, ports are placed in the 
identification of the ligamentum. The lungs are
ventral aspect of the 8th intercostal space and dor-
retracted caudally with a fan retractor and the ligament
sally in the 10th and 7th intercostal spaces. Cranial
identified with a palpation probe. The ligamentum is
lobes are approached with ports in the ventral aspect
isolated with sharp and blunt dissection, using curved
of the 7th intercostal space, the dorsal half of the
dissecting forceps, Metzenbaum scissors and
8th and middle of the 5th intercostal spaces.
Dissection includes the dorsal ligaments using
 grasping forceps (Figure 12.12). Careful dissection is
required, as the ligament may be patent. Vascular
Metzenbaum scissors with electrocautery. An endo-
clips are placed at the dorsal and ventral aspects of
scopic GIA stapling device is used to ligate the lung
the dissected ligament, which is transected between
at its hilus. Lansdowne et al. (2005) recommend
them. The oesophagus is debrided of remaining
a GIA stapling device that provides three double-
fibrous connective tissue until easy passage of a
staggered rows and cuts between the six rows pro-
stomach tube is possible. Alternatively, a balloon
vided by the device. A 60 mm cartridge with 3.5 mm
catheter may be used to assess the size of the
staples was used in that study. Cranial and caudal
oesophageal lumen and to balloon the remaining
lung lobes were successfully removed without trac-
tion of the ribs. The right middle and accessory lung
fibres. Care must be taken to avoid damage to the
muscular layers of the oesophagus while gaining the
lobes present the greatest challenge for removal.
appropriate dissection of any remaining connective
Complications of lobectomies are associated with
tissue bands (Figure 12.13).
inadvertent loss of one-lung ventilation and haemor-
rhage from trocar sites. It is important to assess and
biopsy hilar lymph nodes in every case of possible
pulmonary neoplasia.
Division of the ligamentum
arteriosum
The ligamentum arteriosum causes extraluminal
compression of the cranial oesophagus (Figure
12.11), leading to regurgitation in young animals
with a persistent right aortic arch, which is the
most common form of vascular ring anomaly. The
oesophagus may
beevaluatedwithflexible
endoscopy prior to surgery to ensure compression
of its lumen by a left-sided band. Ligation and divi-
sion of the ligament has been described using
different approaches.
The patient is positioned in right lateral recum-
bency and portals placed at the costochondral junc-
12.12
The ligamentum arteriosum (arrowed) is visible
tion of the 3rd, 5th and 7th intercostal spaces.A portal
after dissection of the mediastinum.
184
Chapter 12 Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy
Portals are placed in the chest with two at the dor-
sal third and one for the telescope in the mid-chest.
Instruments are placed through the cranial and caudal
ports, which are placed in the dorsal third of the tho-
rax, usually in the 8th and 10th intercostal spaces. The 
telescope is placed through a port in the 9th intercos-
tal space (Figure 12.14). Initial dissection is done with
Metzenbaum scissors: the mediastinal pleura is
incised longitudinally at the ventral third of the aorta at
the site chosen for ligation. Care should be taken to
avoid the costal arteries cranial and caudal to the dis-
section (Figure 12.15). Dissection is continued ventral 
to the thoracic duct with curved dissectors while apply-
ing gentle, ventral traction on the aorta, and through
the mediastinum into the left hemithorax. The same
12.13
Appearance of the oesophagus (arrowed)
procedure is done dorsal to the thoracic duct and its
following transection of all fibrous bands.
branches, until the left hemithorax is entered. A 10 mm
endoscopic clip applier is introduced into the caudal
port, and clips applied to all visible branches of the
Occlusion of a patent ductus
thoracic duct during ventral retraction of the aorta.
arteriosus
A partially open and thoracoscopic approach for clip
application to occlude a patent ductus arteriosus
(PDA) was described in five dogs (Borenstein et al.,
4 to 6 months of age. The partially open approach
used a mini-thoracotomy of 2-3 cm at the 4th
intercostal space for instrument passage. A telescope
was placed through a port in the middle of the 5th
intercostal space and a lung retractor was placed
through a port in the ventral aspect of the 4th or 5th
intercostal space. Thoracoscopic clip application was
done with two ports - one dorsal and one ventral - in
the 5th intercostal space, and one port dorsally in the
3rd intercostal space for the telescope.
The duct was palpated, and dissected from lateral
to medial cranially and caudally. Medial wall dissection
was not performed. One of the dogs had residual flow
through the PDA, which was considered clinically
12.14
Port sites for thoracic duct ligation. Ports may
be moved caudally in patients with a deep-
insignificant. It is important to note that 10 mm clips
chested conformation.
were the largest available, limiting the size of a PDA
that can be occluded using this method. The dogs
were also of a size amenable to the 10 mm and 5 mm
portals and instruments used.
Thoracic duct occlusion
The thoracic duct can be identified in dogs via a right
lateral approach and in cats via a left lateral approach
for the treatment of chronic chylothorax. The light and
magnification provided by thoracoscopy enhance the 
visualization of the thoracic duct in most cases.
Visualization is impeded in chronic cases with
thickening of the pleura. The thoracic duct may not be 
visible in those cases, and an en bloc ligation of all
The sympathetic trunk (long arrow) and an
structures dorsal to the aorta and ventral to the
12.15
intercostal vessel (short arrow) arevisible prior
sympathetic trunk may be necessary. The ligation
to dissection of the thoracic duct, which is seen as a grey
should be done in the caudal thorax, caudal to the
linear structure crossing the intercostal vessel.
entrance of the azygous vein into the chest. Placement
of the patient in sternal recumbency usually is all that
Successful ligation may be evaluated with lymph-
is necessary to avoid pulmonary trauma, as the lungs
angiography, via a right paracostal approach to the
will become atelectic, and the procedure can be
abdomen or by injection of contrast medium into a
performed dorsal to them.
mesenteric lymph node, likewise approached via a
185
Chapter 12 Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy
paracostal laparotomy. Clips should be applied until
all lymphatic flow through the chest has ceased.
Concurrent pericardectomy has been recommended
and can be accomplished by placing the patient in
lateral or dorsal recumbency. Pericardectomy should
be subtotal, or a pericardial window may be expanded
from the apex to just ventral to the phrenic nerves
(Figure 12.16).
12.17
Video-assisted thoracostomy tube placement.
wall excursions and ventilation.Local nerve blocks
and systemic opioid analgesics are commonly used
following thoracoscopy. Injection of bupivacaine to
the affected port sites or the adjacent nerves prior
to removing the surgical drapes will usually suffice
to give the local anaesthetic sufficient time for onset
of action.
Recovery following thoracoscopy should be the
12.16
Appearance of the heart through the pericardial
same as that for thoracotomy, but hopefully with less 
windowwith longitudinal pericardial
pain and less ventilatory compromise. It is important
fenestration.
to remember that patients withpleural disease of
unknown origin or idiopathic pericardial effusion may
still accumulate fluid within the pleural space, as thora-
coscopy is therapeutic but not curative. Management
Postoperative care
of those cases should pay close attention to fluid bal-
ance if fluid is being removed from the pleural space.
Any patient undergoing thoracoscopy  should be
Accumulation of significant haemorrhage in the pleu-
treated as for thoracotomy. All surgical sites should
ral space is a clear indication for re-exploration. Air
be
assessedfor
rhaemorrhageand
treated
appropriately. Inability to control haemorrhage is an
accumulation after thoracoscopy may resolve with
intermittent or continuous suction of the pleural space;
indication for open thoracotomy. The lung should be
failure to resolve may require re-exploration.
placed under saline and observed for air leakage.
Specific lung biopsy, partial lobectomy or complete
lobectomy sites should be placed under saline and
Complications
observed for leakage. Air leakage should be treated
Tumour seeding of port sites following thoracoscopy
that technique was initially used or by placement of
has been reported in human patients and in dogs.
more staples following GlA resection of lung.
Care should be taken to avoid this complication but
Haemorrhage is also possible from the port sites.
thediagnosisisnotalwaysknownpriorto
Endoscopic evaluation of the sites after removal of
thoracoscopy, and widespread neoplasia, such as
the cannulae will decrease the risk of unseen
mesothelioma, can affect port sites despite proper
haemorrhage following the procedure.
handling of tissues. The use of endoscopic retrieval
Placementofa thoracostomy tubeisrecommended
bags is recommended for removing samples following
in all cases except those in which solid tissue biopsy
biopsy or mass excision.
was achieved with minimal haemorrhage. The
thoracostomy tube is placed in a normal fashion under
endoscopic visualization (Figure 12.17); grasping
References and further reading
forceps can be used to adjust tube location within the
pleural space. The tube is secured with a purse-string 
Borenstein N,Behr L,Chetboul V et al.(2004)Minimally invasive
and Roman sandal suture pattern, and the thorax
patent ductus arteriosus occlusion in 5 dogs. Veterinary Surgery
33,309-313
wrapped to avoid tube dislodgement. The thoracic
Brisson BA, Geggiti F and Bienzle D (2006) Portal site metastasis of
bandage must not inhibit ventilation.
invasive mesothelioma after diagnostic thoracoscopy in a dog.Journal
Hypoxaemia may occur following thoracoscopy.
of theAmericanVeterinaryMedical Association229,980-983
Brisson HN,Dupre GP,Bouvy BM and Paquet L (2003)Thoracoscopic
Nasal oxygen can decrease the risk following sur-
treatment of bullous emphysema in 3 dogs.Veterinary Surgery 32,
gery and can be discontinued within 12 hours in
524-529
Cantwell SL,Duke T,Walsh PJ et al. (20oo) One-lung versus two-lung
most patients without pulmonary compromise. Pain
management will also ensure more normal thoracic
cardiopulmonaryparametrsVeterinarySurgery9365373
186
Chapter 12 Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy
effects of thoracoscopy in anesthetized normal dogs. Veterinary
performed without pulmonary exclusion in 9 dogs. Veterinary Surgery
Anaesthesia and Analgesia 31, 121-128 
Lansdowne JL, Monnet E, Twedt DC and Dernell WS (2005) Thoracoscopic
30, 21-27
Faunt KK, Cohn LA, Jones BD and Dodam JR (1998) Cardiopulmonary
lung lobectomy for treatment of lung tumors in dogs. Veterinary
 effects of bilateral hemithorax ventilation and diagnostic thoraco-
Surgery 34, 530-535
scopy in dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research 59,
 MacPhail DM, Monnet E and Twedt DC (2001) Thoracoscopic correction
of persistent right aortic archin a dog. Journal of the American Animal
1494-1498
Faunt KK, Jones BD, Turk JR, Cohn LA and Dodam JR (1998) Evaluation
Hospital Association 37, 577-581
of biopsy specimens obtained during thoracoscopy from lungs of
McCarthy TC (1999) Diagnostic thoracoscopy. Clinical Techniques in Small
clinicallynormal dogs.AmericanJournal of VeterinaryResearch59,
AnimalPractice14,213-219
1499-1502
 Isakow K, Fowler D and Walsh P (2000) Video-assisted thoracoscopic
 of North America: SmallAnimal Practice 20, 1341-1352
 aortic arch. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
217, 1333-1336
McCarthy, pp.229-278. Elsevier Saunders, St Louis
 Jackson J, Richter KP and Launer DP (1999) Thoracoscopic partial
 Potter L and Hendrickson DA (1999) Therapeutic video-assisted thoracic
pericardiectomy in 13 dogs. Joumal of Veterinary Internal Medicine
13, 529-533
 Mosby, St Louis
Kovak JR, Ludwig LL, Bergman PJ, Baer KE and Noone KE (2002) Use
 Radlinsky MG, Mason DE, Biller DS and Olsen D (2002) Thoracoscopic
 of thoracoscopy to determine the etiology of pleural effusion in dogs
visualization and ligation of the thoracic duct in dogs. Veterinary
and cats: 18 cases (1998-2001). Journal of the American Veterinary
Surgery 31, 138-146
 Medical Association 221, 990-994
Walsh PJ,RemediosAM,FergusonJF etal. (1999)horacoscopic versu
Kudnig ST, Monnet E, Gaynor JS et al. (2006) Effect of positive end-
 open partial pericardectomy in dogs: comparison of postoperative
expiratory pressure on oxygen delivery during 1-lung ventilation for
pain andmorbidity.Veterinary Surgery 28,472-479
 thoracoscopy in normal dogs. Veterinary Surgery 35, 534-542
Walton RS (2001) Video-assisted thoracoscopy. Veterinary Clinics of North
Kudnig ST, Monnet E, Riquelme M et al. (2004) Cardiopulmonary
America: Small Animal Practice 31, 729-759
187
Rigid
endoscopy: arthroscopy
Rob Pettitt and John F. Innes
Introduction
However, even though the advantages of arthro-
scopy outweigh the disadvantages, the latter are
The use of rigid endoscopy for joint surgery has
worthy of comment. The major disadvantage is the
been the standard in human and equine orthopaedics 
long learning curve associated with arthroscopically
for over three decades. The use of arthroscopy in
assisted surgery. Coordination is required to mano-
small animals for the treatment and diagnosis of
euvre the arthroscope and instruments through the
joint disease has increased dramatically in the last
joint whilst viewing the instruments on a monitor. This
10-15 years due to advances in equipment and
is compounded by the relatively small size of canine
techniques. Numerous benefits of arthroscopy have
joints. Skill and training are required to manipulate the
been cited, including improved viewing and magni-
instruments within the joint without causing iatrogenic
fication of lesions, decreased operative time, minimal 
damage to the articular surfaces. This skill can be
joint trauma, and lower patient morbidity. There is,
improved by enrolment on suitable arthroscopy
however, a considerable learning curve, and these
training courses, especially those that involve cadaver
advantages can only be achieved through practice
 practical sessions. Continued practice using cadavers 
and an understanding and correct selection
of
will facilitate learning and should be continued until
arthroscopic equipment. This chapter provides an
the operator can easily establish the required portals
introduction to small animal arthroscopy through its 
and evaluate the whole joint competently. In the early
indications, ancillary procedures, instrumentation
stages, it is preferable to restrict arthroscopy to those
and current applications.
joints that are more accessible, and the surgeon
 should always be prepared to convert the arthroscopy
to an open arthrotomy if needed. Initially, arthroscopy
Indications
may only be used as a diagnostic aid but, as the
 operator's skill improves, then therapeutic arthroscopy
Although arthroscopy is a minimally invasive surgical
 can be performed. Invariably, arthroscopic surgery
modality, it allows for a thorough and detailed investi-
initially takes longer to perform than a conventional
gation of a number of joints of the dog and some in the 
arthrotomy but as the surgeon's proficiency increases
cat. The ability to perform outstanding joint inspection
arthroscopic procedures often take less time than
and the magnification of intra-articular structures and
conventional surgery.
pathological lesions, combined with the increased field 
Although feasible, arthroscopy of the cat is rarely
of view achieved by moving the arthroscope through
 performed and little is known about the arthroscopic
the joint, increases the diagnostic possibilities.
 management of feline joint disease. The main focus of 
Arthroscopy can reveal early or very discrete lesions
 this chapter is therefore aimed at canine arthroscopy.
when other modalities, such as radiography, fail to
demonstrate  evidence of pathology. Second-look
arthroscopy permits the surgeon to assess the effi-
Preoperative diagnostic work-up
cacy of previous surgery, the progression of disease,
and determination of necessary further clinical inter-
Pre-anaesthetic tests
ventions. However, this increased diagnostic cap-
 Preoperative laboratory work-up should be based 
 ability has brought with it an increase in the confusion
upon the patient's physical status and anaesthetic
surrounding the significance of the lesions noted.
risk. Dogs (and cats) presenting for arthroscopy are
 The advantages of arthroscopy significantly out-
often in good general health and typically have limited
weigh the disadvantages. Decreased postoperative
 or low co-morbidity. Additional blood work, radiographs
pain with arthroscopically assisted surgery in humans
is well documented and the same appears to be true
in older dogs or those with co-morbidity.
for small animals (Hoelzler et al., 2
2004). Small
 Diagnostic imaging
instruments passing through inflamed capsular tissue
 Plain fim radiography is the most commonly used
will transect fewer nerve endings when compared
with a standard arthrotomy. This leads to reduced
modality in the work-up of a lame dog. It is important
postoperative morbidity, increased use of the limb
to take good quality orthogonal (usually craniocaudal
 and, hence, an improved recovery.
 and mediolateral) views centred on the joint of interest;
188
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
additional views may be desired in certain joints (see
capture system. A suitable heavy duty cart is essential
for storage and to facilitate operation of the equipment,
below)However,radiographyisarelativelyinsensitive
although  ceiling-mounted, 
multi-arm equipment
diagnostic modality, especially in elbow and shoulder
pendant in a bespoke endoscopic theatre (Figure
disease. It is not uncommon for joints that are
13.1) is an expensive but desirable option, in that
radiographically normal to have significant pathology
when viewed arthroscopically.
cables are not left trailing on the floor but are routed 
Additional imaging techniques can be employed,
 through pendant arms and ceiling ducts.
such as positive-contrast arthrography, ultrasono-
graphy, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
lish a diagnosis prior to arthroscopy. Diagnostic imag-
ing has advanced dramatically in recent years and
there is much wider access to the more advanced
imaging modalities such as CT and MRl. These
 modalities have allowed the identification and report-
ing of previously unrecognized pathology but have
also increased the confusion regarding the signifi-
 cance of the lesions noted. In any clinical situation,
the clinician should carefully assess the benefits of
using a particular modality to achieve a diagnosis
rather than obtaining unnecessary images. The
reader is referred to the BSAVA Manual of Canine
 and Feline Musculoskeletal Imaging for further infor-
 mation on imaging synovial joints.
Dedicated arthroscopic suite for minimally
13.1
invasive surgical techniques.
Arthrocentesis
Arthrocentesis is an underused technique in canine
Arthroscopes
orthopaedics but one that can be invaluable. This is
An arthroscope is made up of a central series of
especially true in cases of septic arthritis or immune-
lenses, to allow transmission of an image to the
 mediated polyarthritis, or where it might diferentiate
eyepiece, surrounded by optical fibres. These optical
likely diagnoses when other modalities are incon-
fibres pass light from the light post adjacent to the
 clusive or unavailable. Arthrocentesis is a relatively
 eyepiece along the shaft to the tip of the arthroscope
 simple and inexpensive procedure to perform and
for illumination (Figure 13.2). Arthroscopes are
should be included as a routine part of a lameness
 classified based on length, diameter of the shaft, and 
work-up. Aspirates should be submitted for cytological
 angle of the lens.
examination as well as culture and sensitivity testing
if sepsis is suspected. The reader is referred to the
BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Musculoskeletal
 Objective lens
 Disorders and BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline
 Clinical Pathology for further information on the role,
technique and interpretation of synovial fluid aspiration
and analysis.
Fibreoptics
Instrumentation
Good arthroscopy is reliant on the correct selection
 and understanding of equipment and instrumentation.
Sheath
The quality of the optical system is paramount in
 obtaining high-quality images for diagnosis. Good
 accurate inspection of the joint structures is only
Flow area
possible with appropriate fluid flow through the joint 
Arthroscope
during the examination. This requires the correct 
Arthroscope tip, showing the arrangement of
 establishment and maintenance of ingress and egress 
13.2
components.
 portals and the administration of fluids either by
gravity or, preferably, with a fluid pressure system.
It should be noted that the diameter measure-
Successful therapeutic and exploratory arthroscopy
ment is that of the outside diameter of the arthroscope
may also rely on the correct selection and use of
itself, without the accompanying sleeve. Arthroscope
specialized hand, motorized or radiofrequency instru-
diameters used in small animals are 4.0 mm, 2.7 mm,
ments. A more complete discussion of endoscopic
2.4 mm and 1.9 mm (Figure 13.3). The last is very
instrumentation is provided in Chapter 2.
fragile and should not be used by inexperienced sur-
Optical system
geons as it is likely to break. The larger the diameter
The optical system consists of a monitor, light source
of the arthroscope, the greater the field of view (Figure
13.4) and the brighter the transmitted light. Typically,
 and cable, camera, arthroscope and a (optional) data
189
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
light post. On some arthroscopes there is a notch on
the projected image on the monitor to indicate this
direction. With angled lenses, rotating the endoscope
along its long axis allows inspection of a large area of
the joint with minimal movement of the arthroscope,
reducing the risk of damage to the articular surface.
The length of the arthroscope refers to its long
axis and is usually designated “long' or 'short'. Longer
arthroscopes have an increased depth of field (focus)
compared with similar diameter short arthroscopes
but short ones are easier to handle in small joints and
are less susceptible to damage from bending.
Each arthroscope requires a dedicated sheath or
 sleeve for use within the joint to protect it from bending
13.3
1.9 mm, 2.4 mm and 2.7 mm arthroscopes.
and to deliver fluid (see also Chapter 2). At the
proximal end of the cannula is an attachment for a
fluid line with a stopcock. High-flow cannulae are now
available for the smaller arthroscopes and these are
80° field
preferable. Sleeves and accompanying obturators or
of view
trocars are introduced into the joint via a small stab
incision. A blunt obturator (Figure 13.5) is preferable
to a trocar in that it is less likely to cause injury.
30° angle
ofview
 2.7 mm diameter 
(a)
Field of view for a 2.7 mm arthroscope. The
13.4
2.4 mm arthroscope has a similar field of view.
a 2.7 mm arthroscope has a field of view of 80
degrees, compared to 65 degrees with a 1.9 mm 
arthroscope. The advantage of choosing a narrower
diameter arthroscope is minimization of joint trauma
combined with increased mobility within the joint,
especially the elbow and tarsus. This must be bal-
anced against the fragility of the smaller arthroscopes
and the smaller field of view. The larger arthroscopes
have increased durability due to their resistance to
bending but have an increased risk of causing iatro-
genic trauma.
(b)
Lens angle refers to the angle between the long
(a) A 2.7 mm arthroscope plus protective cover,
axis of the shaft and the lens face. Although this can
13.5
be 0, 30 or 70 degrees, the 30 degrees angle is most 
cannula and obturators. (b) Sharp and blunt
 obturator tips.
 commonly employed in canine arthroscopy. This is a
compromise between field of view and amount of
image distortion. A 0 degree arthroscope has no
Accessory instruments
image distortion but the field of view is small.
There are a myriad of instruments available to the
Conversely, a 70 degree arthroscope has a much
surgeon for use in arthroscopy, and initial selection of
larger field of view when it is rotated around its long
appropriate ones may seem daunting. Hand instru-
axis but the image is distorted.
ments for use in small animal arthroscopy must be
With an angled lens, the operator needs to be
small in diameter to minimize iatrogenic trauma
aware of the direction in which he/she is looking. The
and manufactured to high standards for maximum
direction of viewing is opposite to the position of the
reliability. Some basic instruments are essential,
190
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
including probes, grasping forceps, cannulae and
view, a cannula can be introduced over the switching
milling drills (see below). It is advisable to have a sep-
stick, which is subsequently removed. If a larger can-
nula is needed, the switching stick is reintroduced 
arate basic surgical kit that has been modified for use
in arthroscopic procedures. In addition to surgical
 and the cannulae swapped.
instruments, suitably sized sterile hypodermic needles
The disadvantage of using a cannula system is
the relatively restricted diameter of instruments that
syringes, scalpel blades, forceps and needle holders
 can be added when required. An example of a suitable
can be inserted (or fragments removed) and limited 
basic kit used by the authors is shown in Figure 13.6.
 mobility of the instruments when in the joint. It is also
relatively easy to displace the cannula from the joint,
which may lead to extravasation of fluid and compress 
the joint. This problem can be minimized by using
 cannulae that can be screwed into the joint capsule
but these are currently more expensive. Although
 designed for single use only, they can be used on 
 multiple occasions if sterilized carefully.
Hand instruments
Hand instruments are required to explore and palpate
intra-articular structures. A minimum of two pairs of
 grasping forceps, a probe, a milling drill and a curette
are recommended. Instrument sets are available that 
consist of a single handle with interchangeable tips.
Probes (Figure 13.8) are usually right-angled and
to palpate articular surfaces, to move soft tissue
13.6
A basic arthroscopy instrument kit.
structures to improve the view, or to elevate meniscal 
or cartilage defects.
Instrument cannulae
 Inspection of the intra-articular structures may not be
sufficient to evaluate a joint fully and it is often neces-
sary, and advisable, to palpate the soft tissue struc-
tures and the articular surface. Instruments can be
introduced either through a cannula or directly through
the periarticular soft tissues. Cannulae are generally
used for joints with greater sof tissue coverage and
are optional for more superficial joints. Instrument 
 cannulae are available in a range of sizes and facili-
tate ease of instrument introduction and switching.
Suitable sizes for use in canine arthroscopy are
between 2.3 mm and 3.5 mm, with lengths of 3-5 cm.
Small joint cannulae systems are commercially avail-
13.8
A 2 mm 90 degree probe.
able. These consist of a series of cannulae and a
switching stick to permit serial dilation of portals to
facilitate insertion of larger instruments (Figure 13.7).
Grasping forceps (Figure 13.9) come in a range of
After triangulation, using a hypodermic needle, the 
sizes; the grasping surfaces are available as locking
switching stick is introduced through a small stab inci-
 or non-locking types. Most have an internal operating 
 sion in the periarticular tissues. Once in the field of
mechanism that avoids any interference with the
surrounding structures. They need to be small enough 
to fit into the joint but strong enough to remove
osteochondral lesions. Modern instruments are fitted
with an overload protection device which prevents
breakage of the forceps when an excessive force is
applied. Smaller (e.g. 2 mm) forceps are particularly 
prone to breakage. A range of tips are available,
depending on the required purpose of the forceps.
A hand milling drill (Figure 13.10) is a useful tool
for curettage and abrasion of the subchondral surface
following fragment removal. The 2 mm tip is easily
inserted into a joint and a high degree of accuracy
can be achieved with this by using controlled delicate
movements. Large lesions can take a long time to be
milled using a hand drill and in such cases it may be
Instrument cannulae for elbow and shoulder
13.7
arthroscopy, with switching stick (top).
 more suitable to use a motorized shaver.
191
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
Arthroscopic knives are available in forward or
back cutting designs (Figure 13.11). They may be
straight, curved or hooked, and the selection of a
suitable knife is dependent on the procedure being
performed. They are particularly useful for removal of 
meniscal lesions and transsection of soft tissue
attachments to bony structures (e.g. the annular
ligament  attachment  to  a  fragmented  coronoid
process lesion). Disposable versions are preferable
as the knives blunt very quickly, but they are more
 expensive. A range of curettes are available and are
useful for removal of defective articular cartilage and
bony fragments. The tip may be open (eye) or closed 
(a)
(cup), with the former better for cartilage debridement.
Straight curettes are easier to insert through a cannula
 and usually suffice but curved versions may be more
useful for working at awkward angles.
(b)
(a)
(b)
Arthroscopic knives: (a) hook; (b) forward
13.11
(c)
cutting.
Awls, used for microfracture of subchondral bone,
 are available for canine arthroscopic use. An alterna-
tive is to use a small (1.1 mm) Kirschner wire secured
in a Jacob's chuck or power drill.
Power shavers
 These are not essential for canine arthroscopy but in 
certain situations they may expedite surgeries, espe-
(d)
 cially in the removal of hyperplastic synovium and fat 
Grasping forceps: (a) locking and non-locking
pad, treatment of large lesions, or abrasion of ebur-
13.9
handles; (b) locking forceps with grasping
nated subchondral bone. They are used to debride
teeth for large fragment removal; (c) a variety of tips;
cartilage and bone and, in stifles, to facilitate the
(d) close-up of rat tooth tip.
removal of the infrapatellar fat pad. A smalljoint shaver
is required for all canine joints except for the stifle of
medium- and large-breed dogs, where the standard 
handpieces are suitable and more efficient. The shav-
ing unit (see Figure 2.41) can be operated in forward,
reverse or oscillating modes, depending upon the pro-
cedure being performed. Speed control is important 
because different tissues require varying speeds to
optimize removal. A range of shaving heads is avail-
able, designed for removal of either bone or soft tis-
sue. Tips used for soft tissue removal tend to be larger
and have more aggressive cutting toothed heads.
 A 2.0 mm hand burr for curettage of cartilage
Most handpieces come with a suction device. This has
13.10
 and bone.
the benefit of removing the debrided material from the
192
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
joint but also draws the soft tissues into the tip to facili-
13.12
tate further removal. Slower, oscillating speeds are
Hand pressure infusion
more useful when removing the fat pad, as they allow
cuff.
larger amounts of tissue to be drawn into the blade in
the pause between forward and reverse revolutions.
Foot or handpiece controls are used to control the
direction and speed of the shaver.
The disadvantages of using motorized shavers
 are the initial cost and the increased risk of iatrogenic
damage. Extreme care must be taken when using
these instruments to minimize this damage. There
 are few situations in canine arthroscopy where it is
essential to have a motorized shaver, which means
 that the high cost of purchasing a unit does not need
to be incurred by those starting out in arthroscopy.
Fluid management systems
Good quality arthroscopy is reliant upon well controlled
fluid flow through the joint. This is essential:
To distend the joint prior to insertion of the
obturator and sleeve, to minimize the risk of
iatrogenic articular damage
For removal of debris and blood to increase
clarity of view
For joint lavage to remove inflammatory
mediators
To stop/minimize intraoperative haemorrhage
through fluid pressure.
Fluid control is reliant on the establishment and
 maintenance of ingress and egress portals. Failure to
maintain this control will result in a poor view of the
joint and extravasation of the fluid into the surround-
ing soft tissues. The joint will then collapse and hinder
the procedure.
Lactated Ringer's solution (Hartmann's) is the
fluid of choice and can be provided under gravity or
by pressurized systems. Gravity-fed systems supply
fluid via a normal fluid administration set attached to
the arthroscope cannula. The pressure can be
increased by enclosing the fluid bag in an infusion
pressure jacket (Figure 13.12). These systems are
cheap, easy to set up and maintain, and require little
Dr Fritz aiming device for triangulation of
13.13
space but they offer poor control of pressure and
instruments.
require closer attention than automatic fluid pumps to
prevent excessive pressure drops. Fluid pumps (see
and joint capsule until it appears in the viewing win-
Figure 2.34) are able to provide a consistent pressure
dow. The aiming device can then be removed and the
over longer periods of time but may be expensive to
procedure continued as normal using the Kirschner
purchase and require dedicated tubing. The more
wire as a switching stick.
 advanced units are able to maintain a constant intra-
 articular pressure by controlling flow into and out of
the joint. Again, for the beginner, an infusion pressure
Patient preparation and positioning
bag is perfectly satisfactory.
Irrespective of which joint is to be examined arthro-
Aiming device
scopically, the patient is clipped and prepared for an
 open arthrotomy. This allows for arthroscopy to be
This is a piece of equipment (Figure 13.13) that
 greatly facilitates the triangulation of instruments into
readily converted to arthrotomy if needed; this occurs
the viewing window and may be useful to the inexpe-
 most commonly when surgeons begin to learn arthro-
rienced arthroscopist, especially for the shoulder joint.
scopy. As the competence of the clinician increases,
The device is attached to the arthroscope sleeve
 conversion is required less often, minimizing anaes-
(there are specific devices designed for the 2.4 mm
thetic duration and increasing the aesthetic appear-
and 2.7 mm arthroscope). A Kirschner wire is placed
 ance postoperatively. Once clipped, the area should
into the device and advanced through the soft tissues
be prepared as for a standard surgical procedure.
193
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
Several ways of draping the surgical field are
and minimize iatrogenic damage. Custom braces are
available and are at the discretion of the surgeon. The
available (Figure 13.16) and may be useful in
draping technique employed should allow for suitable
supporting the leg in fixed positions. Distraction
mobility of the limb. For maximum manoeuvrability, a
devices are used widely in human arthroscopic
hanging limb preparation with four quarter draping
surgery but less commonly so in small animal
(Figure 13.14) is recommended for joints such as the
arthroscopy, probably due to the wide variety in size
stifle. A further large drape is then placed over the
of veterinary patients requiring a large number of
 dog, leaving only the relevant limb exposed.
 distraction devices.
Multiarm positional aid and stifle brace for
13.16
Multiarm attachment. (Courtesy of Veterinary
Instrumentation, Sheffield)
Four quarter draping of the right elbow for
13.14
arthroscopy. Hanging limb for routine elbow
arthroscopy used for preparation only. The limb is then
laid parallel to the table for arthroscopic procedure.
Anaesthetic considerations
 Pre-anaesthetic evaluation is based upon the patient's
This technique is also advised where the surgeon
 clinical and physical assessment. Most animals pre-
is inexperienced and an open arthrotomy may be
 needed. Where mobility of the joint is less important a
senting for arthroscopy are usually systemically
 healthy, with minimal or no concomitant medical dis-
 single adherent operating drape with a translucent 
 ease and so require minimal preoperative laboratory
window can be used. Whatever technique isemployed,
screening. A standard general anaesthetic protocol
 it is important that the uppermost layer of drapes is
impermeable to fluids to prevent strikethrough and
going arthroscopy unless there are any other anaes-
breakdown of asepsis (Figure 13.15).
thetic considerations.
Analgesia
Pre-emptive and continuous multimodal analgesia is
 essential for all animals undergoing arthroscopy.
Drug groups that can be utilized include: opioids;
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs);
(2-adrenergic agonists; ketamine; nitrous oxide; and 
local anaesthetics.
Particularly useful in arthroscopy is the use of
intra-articular analgesia, in particular using local
anaesthetics. Bupivacaine (1 mg/kg) is commonly
used, as it has a duration of action of 6-8 hours. Mu
(u) receptors in the synovium are upregulated in
Impermeable drape used to prevent
13.15
cases of chronic inflammation and therefore intra-
strikethrough.
articular morphine (0.1 mg/kg) is beneficial in animals 
with more chronic disease.
 Careful positioning of the patient, surgeon and 
Other local anaesthesia  techniques can be
equipment is essential to minimize the technical
employed, including brachial plexus blocks in the tho-
difficulty of arthroscopy. The exact position of the
racic limb (for elbow and distal limb) and extradural
animal depends on the joint being investigated and
(epidural) analgesia for pelvic limb procedures. These 
the approach required. When draped, it can be
 are not normally used by the authors for arthroscopic 
difficult to orientate around a limb, so use should be
procedures alone but are employed when arthros-
 made of ties and sandbags to secure the position of 
copy is performed prior to performing more invasive
the patient. A sandbag can also be used to act as a
procedures (e.g. treatment of cranial cruciate liga-
fulcrum, especially in the elbow, to widen the joint 
ment disease).
194
Chapter 13  Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
 mechanisms are proposed to act in unison, with the
Postoperative care
 active stabilizers being more important when humeral
Postoperatively, analgesia is continued using opioids
head displacement is small and the passive stabilizers
and NSAIDs. Cold therapy may also be employed.
when displacement is large.
Arthroscopy does facilitate day-case surgery but the
authors like to hospitalize patients overnight in cases
Indications
where some form of therapeutic arthroscopy has
The shoulder is a common site of lameness in dogs
been performed, in order to continue postoperative
 but prior to the advent of arthroscopy it was difficult to
opioid analgesia for up to 24 hours. NSAiDs are
diagnose the cause of the lameness accurately.
 Arthroscopy provides an excellent view and permits 
recommended for at least 2 weeks postoperatively.
 palpation of the intra-articular structures of the shoul-
der with minimal trauma (Van Ryssen et al.,1993b).
The shoulder joint
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) is probably the
Arthroscopy is providing a new insight into small
the shoulder but diagnostic arthroscopy can be con-
 animal articular disorders and this is particularly so in
sidered in all cases of lameness attributable to the
the shoulder. Increasing awareness of the potential
shoulder. This is particularly important considering
for arthroscopically assisted surgery and the continued
the number of ligamentous and soft tissue injuries
 advancement in technology have led to many areas
 that can occur around the shoulder. Conditions that
of progress.
are readily diagnosed by arthroscopy include:
Anatomical considerations
OCD (caudal humeral head)
?
The shoulder is a diarthrodial ball and socket joint
Medial shoulder instability (subscapularis tendon
®
(Figure 13.17), which is capable of a wide range of
tears; MGHL tears)
motion - primarily flexion and extension, but also
Lateral glenohumeral ligament tears
?
abduction, adduction, and internal and external
Incomplete ossification/osteochondral
rotation. The canine shoulder joint is not an intrinsically
fragmentation of the caudal glenoid
stable socket joint; normal joint motion is limited by
Biceps brachii tendon of origin rupture (partial or
capsular, muscular, ligamentous and bony restraints.
complete)
Passive mechanisms contributing to shoulder joint
Synovial biopsy
·
stability include the medial glenohumeral ligament
·
Bicipital tenosynovitis.
(MGHL), the lateral glenohumeral ligament (LGHL),
joint capsule, joint conformity, and finite joint fluid and
Instrumentation
 adhesion/cohesion mechanisms. Active mechanisms 
A long 30 degree oblique 2.7 mm arthroscope is most
have been hypothesized to contribute to shoulder
 commonly used in the shoulder, although a 1.9 mm or
joint stability, through the action of the 'cuff muscles
 2.4 mm arthroscope should be considered in small
(supraspinatus, infraspinatus, subscapularis and
dogs and in cats. If diagnostic arthroscopy is all that is
teres minor muscles) and biceps brachi. Selective
required, two portals can be used. It is advisable to
contraction of these muscles increases glenohumeral
palpate all the intra-articular structures of the shoulder
compression and thus resists the displacing forces
 and so, ideally, an instrument portal should also be
acting on the joint. In humans, the active and passive
established. The minimum selection of instruments
required for arthroscopy of the shoulder includes
probes, cannulae (and switching stick),large grasping
forceps (for OCD lesions), milling drill, curette and an
aiming device.
Patient positioning
The patient is placed in lateral recumbency with the
affected limb uppermost. The limb should be held
horizontal to the table or slightly adducted. The limb
 can be draped either as a hanging limb preparation or
with a single drape placed laterally; the latter still
allows manoeuvrability of the limb.
Procedure
Portal placement
The traditional portal for shoulder arthroscopy is the
lateral portal. Usually the egress cannula is estab-
lished craniolaterally, with the instrument portal
caudolaterally (Figure 13.18). However, when prima-
rily interested in the biceps tendon and sheath, the
Shoulder joint. a = Humeral head;
13.17
b = Subscapularis tendon;c = Medial
 authors prefer to use a craniolateral arthroscope por-
glenohumeral ligament; d = Glenoid cavity.
tal; and when particularly interested in the lateral
195
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy:arthroscopy
13.18
inserted into the sleeve. The camera, fluid line and
light cable can then be attached and the optical
Model
equipment turned on.
demonstrating the
If required, an instrument portal is established
position of portals
next. For treatment of OCD, this is usually created
for shoulder
approximately 2 cm caudal to and slightly distal to the
arthroscopy. A =
Arthroscope portal;
acromion. lIt is created in the same way as for the
E=Egress portal;
arthroscope portal.
.The use of a cannula
 is
1=Instrument
recommended for the instrument portal in the shoulder
portal.
due to the depth of periarticular musculature.
The initial view from the lateral portal is usually
cranial to the dome of the humeral head. It is not
uncommon for the arthroscope to be initially more
 medial than required and it may need slow retraction 
until the articular surfaces of the humeral head and
glenoid are visible. It is possible to retract too far and
pull the arthroscope out of the joint, so care should be
exercised. Once the articular surfaces are viewed,
 spatial awareness becomes easier. The initial view
consists of, from top to bottom of the image (proximal 
to distal in the joint), the glenoid, MGHL, subscapularis 
muscle tendon of insertion and the humeral head
(Figure 13.19).
13.19
glenohumeral ligament, the authors place the lateral
portal slightly caudal to the acromion. A craniomedial
Normal
portal is also reported (see later).
arthroscopic
anatomyof medial
The egress portal is established first, using a 20
shoulder joint.
gauge (1.5-2 inch) long needle. This is introduced
a =Glenoid;
midway along the craniocaudal border of the superior
b=MGHL;
ridge of the greater tubercle. It is directed caudally
c = Subscapularis
and medially, at 70 degrees to the vertical, in order to
tendon;
d =Humeral head.
enter the joint. Aspiration of synovial fluid is usually
possible after correct introduction of the needle;
10-12 ml of lactated Ringer's solution (Hartmann's)
can then be introduced in order to distend the joint. If
synovial fluid is not forthcoming but the surgeon is
confident the needle is in the joint, then fluid can still
Examining the joint
be injected. Fluid should be injectable with minimal 
It is important for the surgeon to develop their own
pressure initially. As the intra-articular pressure
increases, back-pressure will be felt on the syringe.
pattern of examining each joint. There are no right or
The syringe is usually left in place initially and pressure
wrong ways as long as the examination is thorough
 maintained by an assistant. Care should be taken not
and methodical. The pattern used by the authors is
 described here. From the initial starting position the
to inject fluid extra-articularly as this will collapse the
camera should be held still and the light post moved
joint making the arthroscopy difficult.
The arthroscope portal is established next. A
ventrally to view the articular surface of the medial
 secondhypodermicneedleisintroducedapproximately
glenoid. The light post is then rotated into the 9 o'clock
1 cm distal to the acromion. Correct placement of the
position and the camera head moved cranially in
needle will result in fluid flow through the needle due
order to view the caudal humeral head (Figure 13.20).
to the pressure on the syringe. A no. 11 scalpel blade
is used to make a small incision through the skin and
13.20
periarticular soft tissues. The blade should not pass
through the synovium as this will lead to extravasation
Normal caudal
of fluid. The arthroscope cannula with an attached
humeral head.
blunt obturator is then introduced parallel to the
needle until it is felt to enter the joint. The limb should
be held parallel to the table when introducing the
cannula with the assistant placing a distal distraction
force on the limb to widen the joint space. This
minimizes the risk of iatrogenic trauma. Confirmation
of correct placement is achieved by opening the fluid
stopcock on the cannula and observing fluid egress.
The obturator is then removed and the arthroscope
196
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
Withminor alterations to thepositionof the lightpost
13.23
 and camera it is possible to examine the medial gutter
Lateral
 (consisting of the caudomedial joint capsule and the 
compartment.
 medial humeral head; Figure 13.21). Advancement of
(a) Origin of lateral
the arthroscope  in a caudomedial direction will 
glenohumeral
facilitate the viewing of the gutter.
ligament.
(b) Normal variant.
13.21
Normal
caudomedial
gutter.
(a)
From here the camera is returned to the neutral
position and the light post is rotated to the 3 o'clock
position to view the cranial compartment. From this
position, the craniomedial joint capsule and biceps
tendon are visible (Figure 13.22). The tendon can be
(b)
seen coursing distally through the bicipital groove.
Flexionof the elbow at thispoint increases the length
of the tendon that is visible. The light post is then
 moved clockwise, to the 4 o'clock position, to view the 
Suspended limb arthroscopy
 origin of the biceps tendon and the supraglenoid
In contrast to the human shoulder, that of the dog
tuberosity. By advancing the arthroscope at this point 
does not have a histologically distinct labrum and,
the cranial aspect of the joint capsule can be examined
therefore, although reported in the literature, tears of
lying cranial to the biceps tendon.
the labrum (so-called Bankart tears in humans) cannot 
The final part of the joint to be inspected is the
exist. One possible reason for the confusion lies in
lateral compartment (Figure 13.23). Care has to be
the fact that it is difficult to view the medial and lateral
 taken when examining this region as it is easy for the
restraints or the rotator cuff muscles accurately from
arthroscope to ‘pop' out of the joint, causing
 a standard lateral portal. A craniomedial portal is
 extravasation of fluid; for this reason this compartment
 preferred and is best established with the limb in a
is inspected last. The camera is moved further
 suspended position (Figure 13.24). A standard lateral
caudally and the light source rotated to view the
portal is established with the limb suspended (slight 
 craniolateral compartment (4-5 o'clock position). The 
adduction shouldbe placed on the limband the table
camera is then moved cranialy, and the light post
lowered until the weight of the dog is suspended
clockwise to the 7-8 o'clock position, to view the
through the shoulder; this will help to distract the
 caudolateral joint capsule.
limb). The joint should be examined thoroughly from 
(a)
(b)
Cranial compartment. (a) Normal origin of biceps tendon and cranial joint capsule. (b) Normal variant of biceps
13.22
tendon. (c) Bipartite biceps tendon.
197
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
13.24
13.25
Positioning of
OCD: in-situ lesion.
the patient for
suspended limb
shoulder
arthroscopy.
Note theposition
of thehead to
facilitateeasy
access to the
craniomedial
aspect of the
shoulder.
(Courtesy of
CDeintt)
Although medical management is an option for
shoulder OCD, surgery is the treatment of choice
(Person, 1989; Van Ryssen et al., 1993a). The disease
is often bilateral and with the use of arthroscopy both
 shoulders can be treated during one surgical session 
if necessary. The area should have a wide clip, in
case of the need to convert to an arthrotomy, although 
with practice, this is very unlikely. A hanging limb
this portal before establishment of the craniomedial
preparation offers the greatest freedom of movement
portal. This can be achieved directly (from the outside
of the limb. A standard lateral arthroscope portal,
in) or indirectly (from the inside out).
using a 2.7 mm 30 degree forward oblique arthro-
scope, and a craniolateral egress portal are used,
Direct examination: With the arthroscope view
with the dog positioned in lateral recumbency. The
being the craniomedial joint capsule, a 20 gauge
instrument portal is established caudolaterally unless
needle is inserted into the joint between the biceps
the OCD lesion has been displaced.
tendon and the subscapularis tendon. The light
After a complete joint inspection, grasping forceps
source can usually be seen through the skin at this
are introduced through the instrument portal. If the
point which will help with triangulation. With the aid
flap is still well attached (typically medially), it is better
of a switching stick, a craniomedial portal is estab-
to elevate it using a probe or fragment elevator to
lished in the normal manner.
facilitate grasping. The OCD lesion is grasped and
gently rolled (Figure 13.26). In situ fragments may roll
Indirect (push-through) technique: The arthro-
up, which aids removal. The surgeon can decide to
scope is advanced until it rests in the desired position
grasp, twist and remove small pieces of the flap or,
against the craniomedial compartment of the shoul-
using larger forceps, grasp the whole flap, twist and
der. The arthroscope is then removed from its can-
remove in one go. Although the latter technique is
potentially very fast, it is dependent on appropriately
nula and replaced with a switching stick which is
pushed through the joint capsule and soft tissues until
sized forceps and runs the risk that the flap may
the skin tents. A small stab incision is made through
becomeloose within thejointifremovalis unsuccessful.
the skin and the switching stick exited through this.
If grasped in toto, the flap is often too large to pass
The arthroscope cannula is then removed from the
through the cannula and extreme care must be taken
lateral portal and replaced craniomedially.
not to lose the flap in the joint to leave a joint mouse.
A loose cartilage flap within the joint can be frustrating
Once the arthroscope is in position the medial
tograsp again because it will usually lodge in the
medial gutter and be relatively inaccessible. The soft 
glenoid recess and lateral compartment can be
tissue surrounding the cannula can be gently widened 
assessed.
using mosquito forceps and the flap, forceps and
Pathological conditions
13.26
Osteochondritis dissecans
Osteochondrosis is a failure of endochondral
OCD fragment
 ossification and, in the shoulder, is most commonly
being grasped.
(Courtesy of B Van
 seen on the caudal third of the humeral head, although
Ryssen)
occasionally the caudal glenoid may be affected (see
below). The classic lesion is an under-run cartilage
flap on the caudal humeral head. The flap may remain 
 in situ (Figure 13.25) or break off and float around the
joint (a so-called joint mouse); it may also be
reabsorbed or mineralize.
198
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
cannula removed as one. The instrument cannula
13.27
can then be re-established using a switching stick.
Incomplete
After complete removal of the flap, the remaining
ossification of the
edges of articular cartilage are curetted back to
caudal glenoid.
healthy cartilage. Ideally, the edges of the cartilage
lesion should be vertical in order to allow the inflow of
the surrounding cartilage matrix. The subchondral
bone surface is then milled using a hand drill or power
shaver. The surface is abraded until it readily bleeds,
though overzealous curettage should be avoided. If
the fluid flow is high then bleeding may not be
observed; temporary cessation of fluid flow will readily
highlight the presence of subchondral bone bleeding.
Microfracture techniques can be employed to release
Medial shoulder instability (MSI)
mesenchymal stem cells and promote the healing
The medial aspect of the glenohumeral joint consists
process: 1-2 mm deep holes, 4 mm apart, are created
of the subscapularis muscle tendon of insertion,
in the subchondral bed using a micropick and mallet
medial glenohumeral joint (Cook et al., 2005a). All
(or a 1.1 mm Kirschner wire secured in a Jacob's
 cases of MSI should undergo arthroscopic examination
chuck). On completion of this, the joint should be
in order to determine the cause of the instability, as
flushed for 5 minutes at a high rate in order to remove
radiography is often unrewarding. Tears to the
as much debris as possible. The portals are then
subscapularis muscle tendon of insertion (Figure
sutured using non-absorbable fine suture material or
13.28) and cranial arm of the MGHL result in MSl.
a skin stapler.
Concurrent capsular tears are sometimes evident.
Occasionally the lesion is no longer attached to
Treatment options can be either arthroscopic, using
the humeral head and is free within the joint. The
thermal capsulorrhaphy, or via an open approach and
lesion most commonly displaces to the caudal joint 
placement of a medial prosthesis (Fitch et al., 2001;
recess where it may cause no pain, and lameness 
Pettitt and Clements 2007).
may resolve. However, occasionally the flap may
lodge in the bicipital groove or, rarely, between the
13.28
MGHL and the joint capsule. These latter scenarios
may result in continued lameness and require
Subscapularis tear.
intervention to remove the flap. For those cases
where the fragment is behind the biceps tendon, a
craniolateral instrument portal should be used. For
cases where the lesion is in the medial position, the
instrument cannula is positioned caudolaterally. The
 fragment can sometimes be drawn towards the egress 
 cannula by virtue of the direction of fluid flow; grasping
forceps can then be introduced to capture the
 fragment. Displaced fragments are often less flexible
(due to mineralization) and therefore do not roll up.
Care must therefore be taken with these to ensure
that the opening in the joint capsule is large enough to
accommodate the fragment during removal.
The prognosis for shoulder OCD is generally
Thermal capsulorrhaphy has been commonly
good, with 75% of dogs regaining full limb function
employed for treating human patients with gleno-
(Rudd et al., 1990). Most dogs should have restricted
humeral instability. It has been reported in dogs as a
exercise for 6-8 weeks whilst the defect fills with
treatment for MSI (O'Neill and Innes, 2004; Cook et
fibrocartilage. Normal exercise can usually be started
al., 2005b). The procedure involves the arthroscopi-
approximately 12 weeks after surgery.
cally guided use of a radiofrequency probe (e.g.
Capsure 3 mm straight wand, ArthroCare) to shrink
Incomplete ossification (IocG)/osteochondral
the capsular and ligamentous structures of the medial
fragmentation (OFCG) of the caudal glenoid
aspect of the joint through thermal denaturation of
Lesions of the caudal glenoid are uncommon.
collagen (Figure 13.29). Capsular shrinkage provides
Sometimes, in young dogs, a separate centre of
a shrunken scaffold for fibrosis during repair. Tissue
ossification is noted on the caudal glenoid on plain
healing following shrinkage shows a rapid reduction
radiographs; this normal variant has a smooth,
in strength by 7-14 days before returning to normal
pretreated levels by 90-180 days.
 non-displaced appearance and should not be inter-
preted as a pathological lesion. Arthroscopy can 
A standard lateral arthroscope portal is used with
be used to identify true lesions and assess the sta-
the instrument portal established craniolaterally. After
bility of the fragment (Figure 13.27). Mobile lesions 
a thorough examination of the joint, the radiofrequency
probe is introduced. This often needs to be through
and those that have failed to respond to conserva-
tive management should be resected (Olivieri et
 an open portal as the diameter of the probe (3.2 mm)
al.,2004).
is too large for most instrument cannulae used in
199
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
13.29
LGHL
13.30
tear.
A3.0mm
Capsure
probe being
used to shrink
the medial
compartment
of the
shoulder joint.
canine arthroscopy. The radiofrequency probe should
An LGHL rupture has been repaired arthroscopi-
be set on its lowest setting and the probe placed
cally by the authors (Figure 13.31). Using a hanging
1 mm away from the tissue. A 5-second burst of
limb position and a craniomedial arthroscopic portal, a 
energy is then applied to the probe and the capsule
suture anchor loaded with Fiberwire suture was
should be seen to shrink. This procedure should be
inserted in the craniolateral scapula just proximal to
repeated in a 'spot welding' or ‘paintbrush' pattern
the glenoid, via a craniolateral portal and under
across the medial aspect of the joint. Islands of viable
arthroscopic guidance. Using an additional caudo-
tissue must be left to allow for repair. Fluid flow is
lateral portal and an arthroscopic lasso instrument,
each strand of the suture was shuttled separately
essential when performing thermal capsulorrhaphy to
prevent overheating of the tissues.
through the ligamentocapsular tissue before being
Postoperative care for these patients is different
returned to the craniolateral portal and tied using an
from other cases of shoulder disease because of the
arthroscopic knot-pusher.
The prognosis for shoulder instability is fair to
initial weakening of the tissues. In humans, careful
rehabilitation is considered to be paramount to the
good. Imbrication or thermal capsulorrhaphy is usually
successful, at least in the short term, but postoperative
success of capsular shrinkage. This is an area where
veterinary surgeons are at a distinct disadvantage.
management of these cases is critical and may be
The authors currently recommend the affected limb is
prolonged. It is common for lameness to resolve but
the condition may recur.
placed in a custom-made, non-weightbearing sling for
at least 6-8 weeks in order to protect the repair.
 Rehabilitation starts when the jacket is removed after
13.31
this time.
Arthroscopic
repair of a
Lateral glenohumeral ligament tears
LGHL tear.
Diagnosing LGHL tears is more difficult than MGHL
(a) Placement of
tears due to the difficulty of viewing this area from a
the suture
lateral portal. If there is any doubt regarding the
anchor. (b)
Advancement of
integrity of the lateral capsule, a craniomedial portal
the suture
should be established. Indeed, if arthroscopic sur-
material intothe
gery to stabilize lateral instability is being considered,
joint,to ensure
then a craniomedial portal is recommended. The
adequate
ligament is usually taut with the limb held neutrally or
visualization.
(continues)
in slight adduction and lax when the limb is abducted.
1
(a)
As for the medial structures, the LGHL should be
assessed for tears (complete or partial; Figure 13.30),
fraying or inflammation. Probing the ligament is diffi-
cult but should be attempted. Instability should be
suspected if the ligament is lax in the neutral or
adducted position or if pathology is evident on inspec-
tion and probing.
Treatment options for tears to the LGHL are similar
to those for MGHL tears. Thermal capsulorrhaphy can
be employed as described in the section on MSl. The
arthroscope portal should be established cranio-
Complete tears to the ligament should be recon-
structed using either an open arthrotomy (Mitchell and 
(b)
Innes, 2000) or arthroscopically, using suture anchors.
200
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
13.31
normal tendon appears as a smooth white structure
with variable amounts of vasculature and some fat
(continued)
Arthroscopic
with  this 
disease include  thickening
and/or
repair of a LGHL
discoloration of the tendon, and synovitis (Figure
tear. (c, d) A
13.33) and adhesions of the tendon sheath. Care
lasso is used to
extract the
must be taken in interpreting this as primary BTS
suture through
because synovial hyperplasia may occur secondary
the capsular
to other pathological processes in the shoulder, such
tissue.
as OCD or MSl. Treatment of the primary cause will
often resolve these changes seen on the tendon and
in the authors' opinion synovitis of the tendon sheath
is merely an extension of generalized synovitis of the
(c)
shoulder due to pathology other than BTS.
13.33
Arthroscopic view
of the biceps,
showing severe
synovial
hyperaemia.
Conservative management, involving strict rest
and analgesia, is recommended for at least 4-6
(d)
weeks. At the end of arthroscopy, long-acting corti-
costeroid (e.g. 1.33 mg/kg methylprednisolone) may
Bicipital tenosynovitis (BTS)
be injected intra-articularly. It is reported that approx-
imately 50% of painful shoulders in adult dogs treated
Before the advent of arthroscopy, BTS was the most 
in this way will respond. In cases where this fails to
commonly diagnosed shoulder injury. The diagnosis
was usually based on history, clinical findings and
resolve the lameness, then tenodesis/tenotomy is
recommended. This can be performed either arthro-
results of radiography or arthrography. Only rarely
scopically or via an open arthrotomy. The authors'
was the diagnosis based on a visual assessment or
preference is to perform an arthroscopic tenotomy
without reattaching the tendon to the proximal
and in the authors' opinion is an uncommon or rare
humerus.Although a tenodesis can be performed by
condition. Ultrasonography has also been shown to
detect pathology of the biceps tendon parenchyma
arthroscopic guidance it is technically more demand-
reliably (Figure 13.32).
ing and may be unnecessary. An arthroscopic teno-
Standard lateral
portal  arthroscopy allows
tomy is a relatively  straightforward procedure
(Holsworth et al., 2002) and seems to produce results
inspection of the biceps brachii tendon of origin. The
comparable to those of tenodesis. A lateral arthro-
scope portal is used, with the instrument portal placed 
craniolaterally.Alternatively, the instrument portal can
be created in a craniomedial position, just over the
proximal bicipital groove. The tenotomy is performed
using an arthroscopic hook knife, scissors or a radio-
frequency probe. It has been shown that sharp
transsection is quicker than radiofrequency but haem-
orrhage may be a problem due to bleeding from the
small vessels in the centre of the tendon.
Biceps rupture (partial or complete)
Partial orcomplete ruptures of the biceps tendon occur
occasionally. Compiete rupture of the biceps tendon
can be confirmed clinically by observing hyperexten-
sion of the elbow when the shoulder is fully flexed
(Figure 13.34). Pain during this manoeuvre may indi-
cate partial rupture of the biceps tendon but this is not
a specific test. Diagnostic arthroscopy is indicated in
Transverse ultrasound image of the biceps
cases of complete rupture to ensure no other shoulder
13.32
tendon, showing a hypoechoic'core' lesion.
pathology is present requiring treatment.
201
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
The elbow joint
Arthroscopy is the current gold standard for diagnosis
 of elbow pain in young dogs. Radiography is insensi-
tive to pathology of the elbow joint and, although CT
and MRl have increased sensitivity and specificity
when compared with radiography, arthroscopy is still
able than CT or MRl and allows surgery to be per-
formed immediately on diagnosis.
The elbow is the most common site of thoracic
limb lameness, especially in young medium to large
(a)
dogs. Arthroscopy provides an excellent view and
allows palpation of the intra-articular structures of the
elbow with minimal trauma. The elbow joint is 
potentially the easiest joint of the dog to arthroscope
due to its superficial position and readily identifiable
landmarks. Arthroscopy of the elbow allows a much
better view of pathology than does an open arthrotomy.
Treatment of pathology within the joint is relatively
 straightforward, especially as the surgeon becomes
more proficient at handling  and  using
the
instrumentation.
Indications
 Indications for use of arthroscopy for elbow disease 
(b)
include:
(a) Normal biceps: with the shoulder in full
13.34
flexion, the elbow cannot fully be extended.
 Diagnosis and treatment of elbow dysplasia
(b) Ruptured biceps: the elbow can be fully extended.
(fragmented coronoid process, FCP), OCD,
ununited anconeal process (UAP)
Partial ruptures may be treated by arthroscopic
Management of elbow osteoarthritis (OA)
tenotomy (Figure 13.35). It is important in cases
 Surgical management of septic arthritis
where rupture is suspected, but not conclusive, that
 Diagnosis of incomplete ossification of the
the tendon is palpated carefully using a small joint
humeral condyle (IOHC).
probe. In the normal tendon the probe should be able
to pass around the complete tendon. The prognosis 
Instrumentation
for partial biceps ruptures treated by tenotomy, or for
A 30 degree oblique 2.4 mm arthroscope is most
complete rupture, appears to be good, with most dogs
commonly used in the elbow of medium to large dogs,
returning to normal function after 6-10 weeks.
although a 1.9 mm arthroscope should be considered
 in small breeds. Three portals should be used (egress,
13.35
arthroscope and instrument) as it is advisable to
palpate all the intra-articular structures. Some lesions
(a) Partial
associated with elbow dysplasia and IOHC are not
rupture of the
obvious until the cartilage is carefully probed.
biceps tendon.
(b) Tenotomy
Instruments required for arthroscopy of the elbow
using
include probes, cannulae (and switching stick),
arthroscopic
various grasping forceps, milling drill, curette and
scissors.
elevators. The use of a power shaver is optional (see
(Courtesy of
below). Other instruments are discussed under the
B Van Ryssen)
 relevant procedures.
(a)
Patient preparation and positioning 
The patient should be clipped as for an open 
arthrotomy. As the surgeon increases in experience,
a small clip on the medial aspect is all that is required.
The patient is placed in lateral recumbency with the
affected limb down. A sandbag is placed under the
elbow to act as a fulcrum. The limb can be draped
either as a hanging limb preparation or with a single
drape placed medially If bilateral arthroscopy is to be
performed the dog can be placed in either lateral or
dorsal recumbency. Lateral recumbency requires the
(b)
dog to be rolled when changing elbows but makes
202
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
viewing the joint easier, especially in more complex
the fluid via another portal. Another 20 gauge
cases. Dorsal recumbency does not require the
hypodermic needle is placed perpendicular to the
 animal to be moved but does require a larger clip, and 
skin, approximately 1.5 cm distal to the medial
the procedure can be more difficult technically.
epicondyle. Slight adjustment of the needle direction
may be needed to enter the joint. Aspiration of synovial
Procedure
fluid from thisportal ensurescorrect placement of the
Various portals for inspecting the elbow have been
 needle. The authors will often adjust the proximo-
reported and include medial, craniolateral and caudal
caudomedial needle when injecting fluid to ensure its
portals. The authors prefer the medial portal (Figure
correct placement. A small stab incision is made
13.36) for inspection and treatment of lesions
through the skin adjacent to the second needle and
associated with elbow dysplasia. The craniolateral
the arthroscope cannula introduced. A coned trocar is
portal is useful for assessing incongruency, especially
always used to minimize damage to the articular
that associated with short radius syndrome, and
cartilage. Internal rotation and flexion over a fulcrum
reduction of humeral condylar fractures. The value of
will widen the joint space and help introduction of the
the caudal portal remains unproven to date.
cannula.
Inspection of the joint from the medial portal allows
visualization of:
 Anconeal process
Caudal joint recess
Medial humeral condyle
?
Lateral humeral condyle
Lateral coronoid process
Lateral joint capsule
Medial coronoid process
Radial head
Craniomedial joint capsule
Annular ligament
Medial collateral ligament.
?
Inspection of the elbow should follow a logical
standardized order (Figure 13.37). The authors
recommended start position is with the light post in
the 9 o'clock position so that the anconeal process is
13.36
Model demonstrating the position of portals for
visualized. The light post is then rotated through 180
elbow arthroscopy. A = Arthroscope portal;
degrees as the medial trochlear ridge of the ulna and
E = Egress portal: I = Instrument portal.
 medial condyle of the humerus are inspected. It is not
uncommon to see a region of the central trochlear
Medial portal
notch to be devoid of cartilage. This is a normal finding
A 20 gauge hypodermic needle, with an attached
 and probably reflects the lack of loading of this region.
10 ml syringe, is inserted into the proximocaudomedial
The underlying subchondral bone appears normal.
joint capsule between the anconeal process and the
This is known as a synovial fossa. In order to visualize
medial supracondylar ridge. Joint fluid is usually
the lateral capsule and lateral coronoid process, the
aspirated when negative pressure is applied to the
 arthroscope is carefully advanced whilst rotating the
attached syringe; 6-10 ml of saline (or lactated
light post slowly in a clockwise direction. External
Ringer's solution) is injected intra-articularly. Correct
rotation of the elbow may help at this point. From this
placement of the needle allows easy injection of the
position the light post is placed in the 2-3 o'clock
fluid and the joint capsule is seen to bulge. Surgeons 
position in order to visualize the radial head. In some
with minimal experience of arthroscopy should identify
cases the camera needs to be moved caudoproximally
the medial epicondyle (used for location of the
to allow the radius to enter the field of view. Further
arthroscope portal) prior to injection of the fluid.
leaning of the camera head allows the medial coronoid
Palpation of the epicondyle may be difficult after the
process to be examined. Advancing the arthroscope
fluid has been injected. The fluid line is then connected
from this position allows a more complete inspection
to the needle to prevent fluid loss.
of the central and cranial aspects of the medial
In some cases fluid is not aspirated from the
coronoid process.
needle. The surgeon has two choices in these
After careful examination of the elbow an instru-
situations. lf they feel that the needle is in the joint,
ment portal should be established cranially to the
then fluid can start to be injected; if the needle is intra-
 arthroscope. The light post should be rotated so that
articular, fluid should enter under minimal pressure.
the craniomedial portion of the joint can be seen. A
Care must be taken to ensure that the fluid is not
 20 gauge needle is inserted approximately 1-1.5 cm
going into the periarticular tissues, as this will cause
cranial to the arthroscope. The needle should be
collapse of the joint capsule and subsequently may
almost parallel to the arthroscope portal in order to
prevent introduction of the arthroscope trocar without
prevent 'crossing over' of the needle with respect
to the arthroscope cannula within the joint. It is easier
203
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
CeTN
CaTN
(a)
(b)
H
CrTN
CrTN
RH
LCP
(d)
(e)
(1)
13.37
process: (b) caudal trochlear notch; (c) central trochlear notch;
(d, e) cranial trochlear notch; (f) lateral coronoid process and radial head; and 
(g) radial head and intercondylar fossa. CaTN = Caudal troachlear notch;
ICF
CeTN = Central trochlear notch; CrTN = Cranial trochlear notch;H = Humerus;
ICF = Intercondylar fossa; LCP = Lateral coronoid process; RH = Radial head.
RH
(g)
to observe the instruments rather than the monitor
Pathological conditions
when trying to triangulate. A useful indicator for place-
mentoftheneedleinmostcanineelbowsistoobserve
Fragmented medial coronoid process
the light under the skin. This is often visible due to the
FCP of the ulna is the most common cause of elbow
minimal soft tissue overlying the joint on the medial
lameness in young, rapidly growing, medium to large
aspect of the elbow and is a good marker for needle 
dogs and leads to OA. Many breeds are affected but
placement. Once the needle is visualized on the mon-
the Labrador Retriever,Rottweiler and Bernese
itor a small stab incision is made in the skin, taking
Mountain Dog are over-represented. It is often a
care not to inadvertently penetrate the joint capsule. A
bilateral disease, although most presentations are for
switching stick is then introduced parallel to the nee-
unilateral thoracic limb lameness. The aetiology of
dle until it enters the joint. The use of an instrument 
the disease is not fully understood and many theories
cannula is at the discretion of the surgeon. A large
exist, including radioulnar incongruency, humeroulnar
incongruency and osteochondrosis. The reader is
ment cannula as the latter can sometimes inhibit the
referred to the BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline
use of instruments such as grasping forceps.
MusculoskeletalDisordersforfurtherdetail.
Careful palpation of the joint, especially the
A complete orthopaedic examination is required in
articular cartilage, using a 2 mm right-angled probe, is
order to rule out other juvenile orthopaedic conditions,
paramount. Some cases of FCP have normal cartilage
such as panosteitis, metaphyseal osteopathy and
overlying large subchondral defects.
septic arthritis. Diagnosis of FCP is not straightforward
204
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
due to the difficulty in visualizing the lesions with radio-
Although medical management is an option for
 graphy. An inference can be made based upon signal-
FCP, surgery is the treatment of choice. The disease
ment, history, clinical findings, presence of secondary
is often bilateral and, with the use of arthroscopy, both 
osteoarthritic changes on radiographs, and the elimi-
elbows can be treated in one sitting. A hanging limb
nation of other known causes of arthritis. The earliest
preparation offers the greatest freedom of movement
change on radiographs is sclerosis of the trochlear
of the limb.
notch. As the disease progresses, osteophytosis of
Positioning of the patient is as previously
the joint is evident. This is initially noted on the dorsal
described. Arthroscopy for FCP (and other causes of 
border of the anconeus. It is uncommon to visualize
elbow dysplasia) is performed through a medial portal.
an FCP lesion directly on radiographs because of the
After placement of the egress needle and injection of
fluid into the joint, the arthroscope portal is established.
superimposition of the coronoid on the adjacent radius.
A “lazy' craniocaudal view of the elbow (where the
A visual examination of the whole joint is performed
elbow is laid on the table in the neutral position) will
initially and the degree of cartilage integrity is graded
skyline the coronoid region and may reveal a dis-
using the modified Outterbridge scale. Other lesions
placed lesion. However, most FCP lesions are only
within the elbow that may be identified in conjunction
minimally displaced, if at all.Elbow dysplasia should
with FCP include: OA of the medial compartment;
still be suspected in these cases, based on the signal-
OCD; and UAP. These other pathologies occur
ment, history and clinical signs. It is not uncommon for
frequently and  their management  is described
significant intra-articular pathology to be present in
separately.
cases where no radiographic changes are evident.
FCP lesions vary in severity from chondromalacia
The advent of arthroscopy means that a minimally
(abnormal softening of the cartilage) through to large
invasive examination of the elbow can be performed
displaced fragments (Figure 13.38). Once the visual
and can be used as a diagnostic tool. Arthrocentesis
examination is complete, an instrument portal is
of the joint may reveal an effusion, with cell counts in
established in order to probe the articular cartilage
the range 2000-5000 cells/μl. CT allows visualization
and facilitate removal of FCP lesions. The instrument
of FCP lesions that may not be evident on plain radio-
portal is established as previously described. The
graphs, and may demonstrate fissuring of the subchon-
coronoid region is carefully probed to assess the
dral bone that may not be evident on arthroscopic
integrity of the articular cartilage. lf chondromalacia is
examination. lf CT is not performed, this may be
present it appears as a soft fragile surface. More
missed at the time of surgery, which explains why
severely diseased cartilage is readily elevated and
careful probing of the articular surface is needed.
the yellow avascular subchondral bone is evident
However, CT is not widely available and it is not nec-
beneath (Figure 13.39). Fragments are often visible
essary to justify arthroscopic examination.
and may remain in situ or become displaced.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Varying degrees of pathology.
13.38
from cartilage fissure to
complete displacement of fragment,
seen with fragmentation of the coronoid
process.
(d)
(e)
205
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
13.39
The prognosis for FCP varies considerably and is
probably dependent upon the severity of the disease
Synovitis
at the time of presentation and postoperative man-
associated with
agement of the dog. About 60% of dogs treated
elbow pathology, in
 arthroscopically may return to normal function (Meyer-
this casea
Lindenberg et al, 2003) without the use of analgesia,
displaced
fragmented
although some (25-30%) remain lame and will show
coronoidvisible
a progressive lameness. Elbow OA may require life-
belowinflamed
long treatment and in very severe cases total elbow
synovium.The
replacement, arthrodesis, amputation or even eutha-
yellow discoloration
nasia may be required.
of the bone is
caused by
Osteochondritis dissecans
necrosis.
The aetiology and pathogenesis of elbow OCD is
poorly understood but the condition is believed to be
Removal of these fragments can sometimes be
due to necrosis around the vascular channels in the
technically challenging. Often they are quite large
articular-epiphyseal region, which leads to a fissure
and the small size of the elbow joint means that it is
 in the articular cartilage (see above). The lesion offen 
not possible to get sufficiently large forceps into the
occurs bilaterally and is seen on the weight-bearing
joint to grasp the fragment. The fragments are
outer surface of the centromedial portion of the
necrotic and disintegrate when grasped; this is
humerus. OCD may be seen concurrently with FCP
usually not a problem as the fragment can be removed
and/or OA.
in a number of pieces, though care should be taken
The presentation and diagnosis are similar to that
of FCP, with radiographs demonstrating secondary
accessible areas of the joint. lIf this does occur, fluid
osteoarthritic changes. On the craniocaudal view of
flow should be increased to try and flush the fragment
the elbow, there may be a radiolucent region in the
back towards the instrument portal. Placement of a
subchondral bone of the medial humeral condyle; the
cannula may facilitate this. Alternatively, an arthro-
film sometimes needs to be taken as a craniolateral-
scopic curette can be pushed past the fragment and
caudomedial oblique view in order to see this. The
used to guide it back into the working window. The
lesions seen radiographically can be subtle and,
annular ligament attaches to the medial and the
once proficiency with arthroscopy is achieved, it
lateral coronoid. Some fragments are well adhered to
may be prudent to examine both elbows in one sit-
this ligament and sharp dissection may be needed in
ting. In cases of long standing, this lesion may
order to remove the lesion. Alternatively, the lesion
become mineralized or displace and lodge in the
can be grasped and rotated several times in order to
caudomedial aspect of the joint. Occasionally, dis-
tear away the soft tissues. Non-displaced fragments
placed bone can continue to grow, forming a linear
may need to be elevated using a curette
or
 osteochondral ossicle. Although CT is well reported
 arthroscopic elevator before they are free enough to
to define the extent of OCD lesions it is not neces-
be removed. Very occasionally, displaced fragments
sary for diagnosis.
may continue to grow and can become very large.
Basic instrumentation is required to treat elbow
These can sometimes be removed in one piece,
OCD and should include curette, milling drill, probe
although it is often easier to break them down. A
and grasping forceps. An instrument portal can be
power shaver is useful in these situations to burr the
 established through the arthroscope portal using a
lesions rapidly and remove the debris through the
switching stick. The authors prefer not to use an
 suction channel; hand milling can be performed but
instrument cannula for cases of OcD as they can be
is usually laborious and lengthy. These situations
difficult to maintain. An open portal is sufficient for the
occasionally need to be converted to an open
therapeutic management of elbow OCD. lf the lesion
arthrotomy when the surgeon is relatively inexperi-
is in situ, forceps can be introduced through the instru-
enced with arthroscopy.
ment portal to grasp the flap. A second instrument,
After removal of any fragments or diseased
such as a probe or small curette, can be introduced at
cartilage, the remaining cartilage and subchondral
the same time and used to elevate the periphery of
bone needs to be treated. The remaining edges of
the lesion gently. Normal cartilage is difficult to
articular cartilage are curetted back to healthy
remove, so minimal further damage is caused by gen-
cartilage. ldeally the edges of the cartilage lesion
tle application of this technique. Once released, the
should be vertical in order to allow the inflow of the
flap can be removed through the portal. Some OCD
surrounding cartilage matrix. The subchondral bone
lesions can be up to 15 mm across and so may require
surface is then milled using a hand drill. The surface
removing in multiple pieces, or the portal may need to
is abraded until it readily bleeds,which can be easily
be enlarged. After removal of the fragment the under-
 observed if fluid ingress is temporarily stopped.
lying subchondral bone is treated as discussed above
After complete removal of the fragments
and
for OCD of the shoulder. Concomitant lesions (e.g.
treatment of the subchondral bone, the joint is lavaged
FCP) should then be treated. The joint is lavaged for
under pressure (40-100 mmHg) for 5 minutes in order
 5 minutes prior to closure.
to remove any debris. Closure is then routine, using
The dog should be placed in lateral recumbency,
non-absorbable monofilament suture material.
with the affected limb nearest the table. The authors
206
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
use the same position forbilateral elbow arthroscopies
13.41
and choose to roll the dog between elbows. An
A non-displaced
alternative is to place the animal in dorsal recumbency,
UAP.
from which position both elbows can be arthroscoped.
A standard medial portal, as described previously, is
used to examine the elbow joint and visualize the
lesion. If an OCD lesion is observed (Figure 13.40) it 
is often adjacent to the arthroscope portal. These
lesions are often large and so it is advisable to move
the arthroscope caudally in these cases to see the
whole lesion. Lesions may appear as a softened
region of cartilage or as an obvious flap.
13.40
Non-displaced
Treatment for UAP includes medical and surgical
OCD lesion of the
options,
althoughmedical  therapyisoften
medialhumeral
unsuccessful. Surgical options include: proximal ulnar
head of the
osteotomy (PUO) (Sjostrom et al., 1995), with or
humerus.
without an intramedullary pin (Turner et al., 1998);
PUO combined with lag screw fixation of the anconeus
(Krotscheck et al., 2000); or fragment removal
(Guthrie, 1989). Lag screw fixation of the anconeal
process can be via arthrotomy or arthroscopy.
Arthroscopy is used to view the fragment during
tightening of the compression screw but its other role
is to diagnose and treat concomitant lesions.
The portal sites for surgical exploration and
The prognosis for elbow OCD, as for other
treatment of UAP are as for other causes of elbow
causes of elbow disease, depends on the severity
dysplasia. In most cases a 2.4 mm 30 degree forward
of the lesion. Cartilage pathology is often more
 oblique arthroscope is suitable. A full exploration of
severe than that seen with FCP, although the
the joint is performed initially and the authors prefer to
underlying subchondral bone often bleeds much
treat any other lesions first. After this, the UAP is
more readily. This releases mesenchymal cells
palpated to assess its stability using a caudal
from the bone, and the lesions readily fill with fibro-
instrument portal. This is established approximately
cartilage. The OA will continue to progress despite
1 cm caudal to the arthroscope portal in the same
the treatment and is often the cause of lameness
way as described previously for other portals. The
seen in older animals that have undergone previ-
authors usually leave the egress needle caudal as
ous surgery.
well, although if this interferes with the procedure the
 egress portal can easily be re-established cranially.
 Ununited anconeal process
For arthroscopic placement of the lag screw, a
The aetiology of UAP is thought to relate to humero-
small Kirschner wire is initially placed from the caudall
ulnar incongruency. UAP is predominantly seen in
ulna through the fibrous tissue and into the anconeal
German Shepherd Dogs and is also prevalent in
process, until it is visualized exiting the process. This 
Bloodhounds and Basset Hounds. A secondary
is very important to ensure the subsequent correct
centre of ossification exists in these three breeds,
which should unite with the proximal ulna by 20
Kirschner wire to exit the fragment laterally and not be
weeks of age. The use of arthroscopy for the direct
 seen. It is preferable to overdrill the Kirschner wire
treatment of UAP has been described (Meyer-
with a 2.5 mm cannulated drill bit to ensure the same
Lindenberg et al., 2006), although its main indication
track is followed. lf a cannulated bit is not available, a
is to assess the stability of the anconeus and to
second Kirschner wire should be placed parallel to
inspect the joint for the presence of concomitant
the first one but 5 mm caudally. The initial wire can
lesions (e.g. FCP).
then be removed and a 2.0 mm drill bit used to create
UAP is readily diagnosable from a flexed medio-
 the pilot hole for the screw. The authors prefer to use
lateral view of the elbow (Figure 13.41). Animals
a 4.0 mm partially threaded cancellous screw for lag
should be at least 20weeks old before a definitive
screw fixation of UAP, although a 3.5 mm fully
diagnosis can be made.A radiolucent line exists
threaded cortical screw, placed as a lag screw, can be
between the proximal ulna and the anconeus, and
used as an alternative. A proximal ulnar osteotomy is
there are often signs of secondary osteoarthritic
then performed. This last procedure is essential if a
changes. Arthrocentesis may reveal an effusion
lag screw has been placed to prevent breakage of the
similar to that seen in other causes of elbow dysplasia,
screw due to shearing forces.
i.e. an increased volume of fluid with a low viscosity.
A distal ulnar osteotomy has been reported as an
Cell counts are approximately 2000-5000 cells/μl and
alternative to PUO. Placement of the pin to stabilize
there is a predominance of mononuclear cells.
the osteotomy is at the discretion of the surgeon; it
207
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
does reduce the morbidity of the surgery in the short
is not as resilient to trauma as normal hyaline carti-
term but is associated with complications of its own.
lage, so it is important to combine any surgery with
The prognosis for UAP is better than that for OCD/
the judicious use of controlled exercise. Some
FCP provided early treatment is performed. In one
authors recommend the use of microfracture tech-
     ( ) s   
niques to release further mesenchymal cells from the
excellent outcome (Sjostrom et al., 1995). Secondary
deeper layers.
OA will continue to progress and may result in
A standard medial portal is used as described
lameness as the dog ages.
previously. The instrument portal is usually created
cranially with respect to the arthroscope, although for
Eibow osteoarthritis
abrasion of the caudal aspects of the joint a caudal
OA (Figure 13.42) is a secondary change seen as a
instrument portal is preferred. An instrument cannula
consequence of a primary disease such as elbow
is not usually used as they are not large enough to
dysplasia. Secondary OA changes probably occur as
accommodate the power shaver blade. A 3.5 mm or,
in larger dogs, a 4.5 mm bone-shaving head is used
a direct result of increased articular loads due to
incongruency. The disease is chronic and can be very
to abrade the remaining cartilage and subchondral
difficult to manage satisfactorily. Most cases of elbow
bone. Extreme care must be exercised with these
dysplasia are biphasic in their presentation. Initially,
instruments as much iatrogenic damage can be done.
the cause of the lameness is the primary lesion but as
The lateral compartment is normal in most cases of
the OA progresses, the secondary changes become
elbow OA and must be preserved. latrogenic damage
a source of pain.
to the radial head must be minimized when using the
shaver in the region of the medial coronoid process.
Microfracture can be performed using a dedicated
13.42
microfracture instrument and mallet, although the
Significant medial
authors prefer to use a small (1.1 mm) Kirschner wire
compartment OA.
held in a Jacob's chuck. Holes of 1-2 mm depth
Note the distinct
should be made into the bone, 3-4 mm apart across
demarcation
the affected region.
between themedial
The prognosis for elbow OA, as for elbow dys-
and lateral
plasia, depends upon the severity of the disease.
compartments of
Radiographic evidence of OA is not linked to severity
the joint.
of disease. Combination of medical and surgical
management is more likely to be beneficial than
either entity singularly. The use of weight manage-
ment, analgesia, controlled exercise and ancillary
aids such as hydrotherapy, nutraceuticals, acupunc-
ture and other such modalities may be beneficial
although, at present, there is little scientific evidence
The intra-articular management of OA is recom-
to support this.
mended in humans but there is little long-term evi-
 dence to support it. Certainly the benefits of removing
Incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle
loose fragments or managing acute trauma cases
IOHC is predominantly reported in spaniels (Marcelin-
that have disrupted the fibrocartilaginous layer are
Little et al., 1994; Butterworth and Innes, 2001) and
obvious in trying to restore the layer. However, in
Labrador Retrievers, although many breeds may be
cases where a precipitating cause is not evident, and
affected.The distal humeral condylehas twoseparate
so unlikely to be addressed, the benefits are less
centres of ossification that should fuse to each other
clear. Inflammatory mediators present in the synovial
by 20 weeks of age. Failure of the two centres to fuse
fluid will be diluted thus offering short-term relief to
resultsin a circumferentialarticular defect which
the patient. The modified Outterbridge scale can be
extends into the subchondral bone. This predisposes
used to assess severity of disease and may help to
the distal humerus to fracture, due to the eccentric
formulate a treatment plan. Full-scale erosions heal,
loads across it. Early diagnosis and fixation is
by the formation of fibrocartilage, more quickly than
indicated to prevent catastrophic failure.
partial thickness erosions and so the surgeon must
Diagnosis  is possible  with  a  craniocaudal
decide on whether there is benefit in developing these
radiograph of the elbow, although multiple slightly
partial thickness erosions. In most cases of chronic
angled views may be needed before visualization of
OA the underlying subchondral bone is often ebur-
the radiolucent defect is possible. A slight increase in
nated and milling of this can be very unrewarding,
the kV setting is often necessary. Care must be taken
especially without the aid of a motorized shaver unit.
not to confuse IOHC with the Mac line that is often
Management of elbow OA using arthroscopy is
seen in rotated craniocaudal views of the elbow joint.
two-fold. Flushing of the joint will remove inflam-
CT is a more sensitive indicator of IOHC but arthro-
matory mediators and provide temporary relief to the
scopy remains the gold standard. The lesion is evident 
patient. Abrasion arthroplasty will attempt to release
as an articular cartilage defect that traverses the
mesenchymal cells from the subchondral bone in
central region of the humeral condyle (Figure 13.43).
Careful palpation of this region is very important,
This layer, whilst offering some degree of protection,
especially in cases where IOHC is suspected but not
208
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
13.43
Instrumentation
For medium- and large-breed dogs a 2.4 mm, 30
Incomplete
degree oblique arthroscope is preferred. For small
ossification of the
dogs and cats, a 1.9 mm arthroscope is mandatory.
humeral condyle.
A circumferential
Small instrumentation is required for all patients.
cartilage defect
(arrowed) can be
Patient preparation and positioning
seenclearlyin the
The limb is clipped from just proximal to the main pad
centre of the
to the mid-antebrachium.The foot is covered in an
humeral condyle.
impervious barrier, such as a plastic bag or used
surgical glove, which is taped in place. The patient is
positioned in dorsal recumbency with the operative
limb suspended. The limb is free draped to allow
manipulation of the limb intraoperatively.
evident arthroscopically. Occasionally, the surface of
Procedure
the cartilage appears normal but palpation exposes
The arthroscope portal is between the common digital
extensor tendon laterally and the extensor carpi
the defect that wouldotherwise be overlooked.
Arthroscopy is also used in cases of IOHC to assess
radialis tendon medially (Figure 13.44). The egress
for concomitant lesions and can be used for
portal can be placed lateral to the common digital
intraoperative assessment of screw placement to
extensor tendon. Because there is limited working
confirm that the screw is not placed intra-articularly.
space in the carpus, if instruments are required, they
As described previously, a medial portal is used to
are placed at the egress portal site.
examine the elbow joint and treat any obvious lesions.
If arthroscopy is used for intraoperative assessment it 
can be left in situ whilst another surgeon places the
transcondylar screw, or it can be removed from the
Common
 joint and replaced after the screw has been inserted.
digital
extensor
Lateral
Sepsis
digital
 In cases of non-responsive septic arthritis it is possible
to flush a joint with a significant volume of fluid in a
relatively short period of time, using a fast flow system
under high pressure. Synovial biopsy specimens can
be taken at the same time and then sent for culture.
Fractures
The use of arthroscopy to assess fracture alignment
is possible, although sometimes impractical. In cases
of humeral condylar fractures (or treatment of IOHC)
where the joint may have been arthroscoped prior to
fracture repair, it is feasible to arthroscope the joint 
 again afterwards to assess alignment.
The antebrachiocarpal joint
The carpus is a three-level hinge (ginglymus) joint.
Only the antebrachiocarpal joint is available for
arthroscopic inspection; the other joints are low-
Model demonstrating the position of portals for
13.44
motion joints with insufficient space for arthroscopy.
 carpal arthroscopy. A1 and A2 = Represent
Carpal arthroscopy is performed infrequently at the
alternative suggested arthroscope portal sites.
current time but the radiocarpal joint is amenable to
arthroscopic examination and there are occasions
The procedure is started with placement of a
when arthroscopic examination may be beneficial for
 hypodermic needle at the arthroscope portal site and
 patient management. These include: assessment of 
 the carpus in fullflexion to open the antebrachiocarpal
intra-articular fractures, such as radiocarpal bone
joint space. The needle should enter the radiocarpal
fracture (Li et al., 2000); assessment of soft tissue
joint space easily. The joint is inflated with 2-5 ml of
injuries; grading of arthritis; and synovial biopsy.
 Hartmann's solution and the needle withdrawn. A stab 
Diagnosis of carpal ligamentous injuries in racing
incision is made with a no. 11 scalpel blade at the
Greyhounds is another potential  indication  for
 arthroscope portal site and this should extend to enter
arthroscopy. Because the carpus is often involved in
the joint capsule. The blade should be oriented
inflammatory joint disease, it is a good location for
vertically to avoid damage to tendinous structures
arthroscopic synovial biopsy if one is required.
either side of the portal. The arthroscope sleeve is
209
Chapter 13  Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
inserted with a blunt obturator locked in place. The
The hip joint
obturator is removed and the arthroscope inserted.
Arthroscopy of the hip is not performed commonly but
Arthroscopic anatomy
is very achievable for the experienced arthroscopist.
The hip is a common site of lameness in dogs, with 
Upon entering the joint, the radial articular surface
hip dysplasia and OA being particularly common. Hip
is seen at 12 o'clock, with the radiocarpal bone at
6 o'clock (Figure 13.45). The arthroscope may be
dysplasia is usually diagnosed using a combination of
moved left or right to inspect the joint surfaces. If the
clinical and radiographic examinations, as is OA.
joint is extended slightly and the arthroscope inserted
Whilst arthroscopy of the hip can be used to stage OA
further, the palmar joint capsule can be observed.
accurately, this is usually not performed at the current
time. However, there is no doubt that arthroscopy is
more sensitive to the early changes associated with
13.45
 OA, such as chondropathy and synovitis.
Normal
arthroscopic view
Indications
of the antebrachial
Indications for hip arthroscopy include:
carpal joint. The
radius is at the top,
ldiopathic hip pain in the absence of radiological
with theradiocarpal
changes
bonebelow.
Biopsy of the synovium
Staging of OA (e.g. during decision-making for
triple pelvic osteotomy)
Diagnosis and treatment of infective arthritis of
the hip.
Instrumentation
Pathological conditions
Choice of arthroscope is dependent on patient size.
The carpus is a complex hinge joint, stabilized
In large dogs, a long 30 degree oblique 2.7 mm
medially and laterally by collateral ligaments. Palmar
arthroscope is used. A 2.4 mm arthroscope should be
stability is provided by flexor tendons, the palmar
considered in small-breed dogs. Although a 1.9 mm
radiocarpal and ulnocarpal ligaments and the palmar
arthroscope could be used in small dogs too, the
fibrocartilage. This latter structure is critical and failure
operator must be very careful not to damage such a
results in a palmigrade stance. The radiocarpal bone
fragile arthroscope through bending in the soft tissues
develops as two separate centres of ossification and
between the skin and the joint. Instruments required
there can occasionally be incomplete ossification of
for arthroscopy of the hip include probes, cannulae,
this bone, resulting in susceptibility to fracture. This is
switching stick and synovial biopsy forceps.
noted particularly in Boxers (Li et al.,2000).Figures
13.46 and 13.47 illustrate some pathological condi-
Patient positioning and preparation
tions of the carpal joint.
The dog is placed in lateral recumbency, with the
affected limb uppermost. To facilitate movement of
13.46
the joint and limb during arthroscopy, a hanging limb
Cases of severe
preparation is recommended. The lower limb is
carpal synovitis
covered with an impervious sterile impervious drape.
can be investigated
arthroscopically.
Procedure
(Courtesy of
J Cook)
Portal placement
Portals for the hip were described originally by Person
(1989).lf one considers thehip as a clock face,for
the right hip the egress cannula is placed at 5 o'clock
(a)
(b)
(c)
Carpal chip fracture. (a) Fracture in situ. (b) Fragment being removed using 2.7 mm grasping forceps.
13.47
(c) Power shaver being used to debride the carpal defect in the subchondral bone. (Courtesy of J Cook)
210
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
and the arthroscope portal at 12 o'clock. Should an
the capsule. The obturator is removed and the
instrument portal be required, this is placed at 2
 surgeon should observe fluid egress from the open
o'clock (Figure 13.48). For the left hip, these portal
 sleeve, confirming the intra-articular position of the 
positions are mirrored.
end of the sleeve. The arthroscope is then inserted.
Arthroscopic anatomy
The hip is a ball and socket joint. External and internal
 rotation of the femoral head during arthroscopy can
allow inspection of the majority of the articular surface
of the femur. The teres (round) ligament of the femoral
head can also be viewed as it emerges from the
acetabular fossa and inserts on the femoral head.
The acetabulum is otherwise covered in hyaline
cartilage and also has a fibrocartilage extension
dorsally, called the labrum. The joint capsule extends
from the margins of the acetabulum to the femoral 
 neck. Normal anatomy is depicted in Figure 13.49.
(a)
13.49
Normal
arthroscopic
CrAR
anatomy of the
right coxofemoral
joint. CaAR=
Caudal
acetabular rim;
CaFH = Caudal
femoral head;
CrFH
CrAR = Cranial
acetabularrim;
CrFH=cranial
femoral head;
jo=
(a)
capsule.
(continues)
?
CaAR
(b)
13.48
Hip portals. (a) Model demonstrating the 
 position of portals for right hip arthroscopy.
A = Arthroscope portal; E = Egress portal; I = Instrument 
portal. (b) Clinical arthroscopy of the left hip (dorsal 
surface uppermost; head is to the left).
CaFH
The egress portal is established with a 20 gauge
(1.5-2 inch) hypodermic needle, depending on patient 
size. The needle is placed immediately cranial to the
(b)
greater trochanter in a similar position to that used for
arthrocentesis. Often the surgeon will feel the needle
puncture the joint capsule. Aspiration may reveal
some synovial fluid but there is often minimal joint
fluid in the hip. The joint is then distended with lactated
Ringer's solution (typically 4-8 ml).
The arthroscope portal is then established. A 20
JC
gauge (1.5-2 inch) hypodermic needle is used to
locate the correct position for the portal, using a 'trial
and error' approach, making sure that the selected
CaFH
location will allow movement of the arthroscope
circumferentially from 9 o'clock to 3 o'clock. Once the
desired location is found, a no. 11 blade is placed
alongside the needle and used to make a stab incision
down to the joint capsule. The arthroscope sleeve
(c)
with the blunt obturator in place is then inserted into
211
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
Infective arthritis
13.49
In common with other joints, infective arthritis of the
Mid acetabulum
(continued)
hip (Figure 13.50) is an indication for the use of
Normal
 arthroscopy, although this is not mandatory. However,
arthroscopic
arthroscopy can be used forjoint lavage and inspection 
anatomy of the
of the joint, as well as biopsy of the synovium for
right
coxofemoral
bacteriological culture and sensitivity testing.
joint. AcF =
AcF
Acetabular
13.50
T
fossa; CaFH =
Caudalfemoral
Septic arthritis in
head;CaJC=
thehip of a dog
Caudal joint
presented for total
capsule;FH =
FH 
hip replacement.
Femoral head;
(Courtesy of
(d)
FN=Femoral
JCook)
neck;TL=Teres
ligament.
Ca acetabulum
AcF
Idiopathic hip pain
Occasionally a dog will present with apparent hip pain
but normal radiographic appearance. The authors
have seen a few patients in this category and have
used arthroscopy for further evaluation. In a propor-
tion of such dogs, chondropathy and synovitis have
been identified. This again illustrates the sensitivity
 of arthroscopy for detection of intra-articular path-
FH
(a) 
develop osteoarthritic changes in the hip without
apparent
osteophytosison plain  radiographs.
However, compared with the elbow joint, this sce-
CaFH
nario appears to be unusual.
Radiographic silent hip pain
Minimally displaced acetabular fractures or soft tissue
injuries of the hip may also be diagnosed using
arthroscopy (Figure 13.51).
13.51
CaJc
Mildly displaced
acetabular fracture
with concomitant
(f)
labral tear.
(Courtesy of
JCook)
Pathological conditions
Hip dysplasia
It is not currently widespread practice to evaluate hip
joints arthroscopically in dysplastic dogs. Holsworth
Other uses
et al. (2005) reported the use of arthroscopy to
Occasionally the clinician may need to biopsy the
evaluate young dogs with hip laxity and pain, which
 synovium of the hip joint (e.g. suspected infective or 
were being considered for procedures such as triple
immune-mediated arthritis, suspected neoplasia,
pelvic osteotomy (TPO); traditional opinion has
osteochondromatosis). However, the need for such a
 indicated that dogs with pre-existing OA should not be
procedure is very uncommon.
considered for TPO. The results indicate that
arthroscopy is more sensitive than radiography for
the detection of intra-articular pathology. However,
The stifle joint
the significance of these arthroscopically identified
lesions with respect to the outcome of TPO is not
Knee arthroscopy is the most common orthopaedic
known at the current time. However, this study has
intervention in human surgery. However, the canine
stifle is a challenging joint for the inexperienced
indicated that arthroscopy is a sensitive modality in
the hip joint.
arthroscopist as it is relatively small and dogs are
212
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
prone to proliferative synovitis once the stifle becomes
13.53
diseased. This hyperplastic synovium (Figure 13.52)
(a) Placement of a
 obscures the surgeon's view and can be problematical
disposable plastic 
and frustrating. The infrapatellar fat pad can also
egress cannula into
obscure the viewing window. For these reasons,
the proximolateral
inexperienced arthroscopists are advised to master
pouch of the stifle.
(b) Femoropatellar
their skills in the shoulder and elbow before taking on
joint space with the
 stifle arthroscopy. That said, stifle arthroscopy is now
patella above. The 
established as a standard procedure for many
egress cannula can
orthopaedic surgeons.
just be seen on the
left side of the
image.
(a)
Hyperplastic
synovium. This may
need removing in
order to visualize
the intra-articular
structures.
(b)
Indications
The stifle is the most common site of lameness in
dogs; many conditions of the stifle can be diagnosed
arthroscopically, and a growing number can also be
distension under increased pressure. Smooth-
treated using arthroscopic techniques. Conditions
surfaced cannulae tend to displace from the joint
that can be diagnosed arthroscopically include:
 during manipulation. The cannula should be attached 
to a suction tube to collect fluid.
Cranial cruciate ligament injury
A motorized shaver system is very useful in the
Medial meniscal injury
stifle joint to debride the fat pad and hyperplastic
Lateral meniscal injury
 synovium. An aggressive full radius cutting blade of
 OA and chondropathy
 an appropriate size is used in oscillate mode at 3000
OCD
rpm. Suction tubing is connected to the shaver
Patellar luxation
handpiece to facilitate synovial tissue entering the
Long digital extensor tendon avulsion
blade tip during the pause between oscillations.
 Caudal cruciate ligament injury
A radiofrequency unit (bipolar or monopolar) can
Popliteal tendon avulsion.
also be very useful in the stifle joint but must be used
with caution. The probe can be used to remove hyper-
Instrumentation
plastic synovium and has the advantage of simultane-
For very small dogs and cats a 1.9 mm arthroscope is
ous haemostasis during use. Some surgeons use an
used and for small dogs a 2.4 mm arthroscope works 
electrosurgery unit for haemostasis. Other probe
well. However, for the majority of patients, most of 
heads can be used to cut or remove meniscal tissue
whom are medium to large dogs, a 2.7 mm arthro-
or debride a torn cranial cruciate ligament.
scope is used. In large- and giant-breeds some
surgeons use a 4 mm arthroscope. The larger
Patient preparation and positioning
The operative limb is clipped from the level of the
field and greater irrigation, both aspects that are
proximal crus to just above the tarsus. The foot and
important in stifle arthroscopy.
distal limb are covered with an impervious barrier
It is very useful to have a fluid pump for stifle
(Figure 13.54) and the limb suspended for aseptic
arthroscopy because the fluid volumes used can be
preparation. The patient is positioned in dorsal
large and positive pressure can facilitate a clear
recumbency, with the operative limb upwards.
viewing window.
An egress cannula is also very useful and in larger
Procedure
 dogs the authors prefer disposable plastic cannulae
with a threaded exterior surface (Figure 13.53). These
Portal placement
The main portals for the stifle joint are craniomedial
cannulae are atraumatic and retain their position in
the joint despite flexion and extension. They also
and craniolateral either side of the patellar ligament
have side holes in the tip which avoid blockage by
(Figure 13.55). Some surgeons prefer to make these
soft tissues, and an on/off switch to allow joint 
portals at the distal end of the patellar ligament but
213
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
femoropatellar joint space to exit the joint capsule
proximolaterally. The stick is pushed so that it 
protrudes and causes the skin to tent. A scalpel blade
is then used to cut down on the stick and the stick is
pushed through the skin incision to exit. The egress
cannula is then placed over the stick and pushed into
the joint. Once the cannula tip is in the joint, the stick
is removed to leave the cannula. The cannula can
then be positioned in the lateral joint space adjacent 
to the lateral femoral condyle and the long digital
 extensor tendon of origin.
The arthroscope sleeve, with blunt obturator
locked in place, is then inserted into the craniomedial 
(a)
portal. Once in the joint, the obturator is removed and 
the arthroscope inserted.
A craniolateral portal is also established as an
instrument portal and this is achieved with a stab
incision using a no. 11 blade. The arthroscope and 
instrument portals are interchangeable and it is
common for the surgeon to swap back and forth
 during a procedure to obtain the optimal positions for
arthroscope and instrument.
Arthroscopic anatomy
The stifle is a complex hinge joint. Although primarily
it acts as a hinge joint, the menisci allow the femoral
(B)
condyle to glide during movement so that the axis of
rotation varies with the degree of flexion. The
(a) Stifle prepared and draped for arthroscopy.
13.54
femoropatellar joint space is best viewed with the joint 
(b) Impermeable plastic drape used to prevent 
 breakdown of asepsis.
in extension because this releases tension on the
quadriceps mechanism. The femorotibial joint is best
viewed in flexion. The stifle has several significant
13.55
soft tissue structures including the cranial and caudal
Model demonstrating
cruciate ligaments, the menisci and the long digital 
position of portals for
extensor tendon of origin (Figure 13.56).
stifle arthroscopy.
A =Arthroscope
13.56
portal;E=Egress
portal;1= Instrument
Origin of the long
portal.
digital extensor
tendon.
The cranial cruciate ligament (Figure 13.57)
 originates on the caudolateral intercondylar region of
the authors prefer to site the portals at the mid-point
the femur and runs distally, cranially and medially to
 of the patellar ligament. The egress portal is placed
insert on the craniomedial tibial plateau. The caudal
either proximolaterally or proximomedially using a
cruciate ligament originates on the craniolateral
push-through technique.
intercondylar region of the femur and runs distally,
The procedure is started by distending the joint
caudally and laterally to insert on the caudolateral
with 5-20 ml of Hartmann's solution using a hypo-
tibial plateau.
dermic needle and syringe. A stab incision is made for
The menisci are attached to each other by the
the craniomedial portal using a no. 11 scalpel blade.
 cranial intermeniscal ligament and each meniscus is
The blade is oriented vertically to avoid damage to
attached to the tibia by the cranial and caudal
the patellar ligament. A switching stick is placed into
 meniscotibial ligaments. The medial meniscus (Figure
the portal and into the joint space.With the joint in full
13.58) has an additional attachment to the medial
extension, the switching stick is pushed through the
collateral ligament.
214
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
13.57
Following CCL injury, particularly complete injury,
the menisci are at risk from degeneration and tearing.
Normal cruciate
The medial meniscus is torn in 40-60% of stifle joints
CaCL
ligament.
with complete CCL rupture. The lateral meniscus
CaCL=Caudal
cruciate ligament;
minor injuries are common.
CrCL=Cranial
cruciate ligament.
The medial meniscus may sustain a variety of
types of tear (Bennett and May, 1991), some of
CrCL
which appear to be more important than others in
terms of the pain caused to the patient. The most
important medial meniscal pathology seems to be a
fold of the caudal horn of the medial meniscus
(Figure 13.59). In reality, this tear is a bucket handle
tear in which the majority of the caudal horn of the
13.58
medial meniscus forms the bucket handle' and a
small peripheral portion of the caudal horn remains
(a) Flounce of 
in situ. The caudal horn injury allows a significant
normal medial
meniscus
section of meniscal tissue to be mobile within the
(arrowed).
joint. During stance phase of the gait cycle this
(b) Normal medial 
meniscal tissue can become displaced and trapped
meniscus
causing pain.
(arrowed).
Arthroscopic inspection of the menisci requires
some practice. The arthroscope is positioned in
the medial or lateral femorotibial joint space and the
light pole is oriented medially or laterally, respec-
tively. The joint is flexed to bring the menisci into
(a)
view. The menisci should be probed, paying particu-
lar attention to the caudal horn of the medial men-
iscus to ensure that it is secure and not torn. In
addition, flexion and extension of the joint whilst
inspecting the menisci can be useful to check men-
iscal stability.
13.59
Medial meniscal
caudal hornfold.
(a) The
(b)
meniscus (M)
appears normal
until the joint is
Pathological conditions
flexed.(b)After
the stifle is flexed
Cranial cruciate ligament injury
the caudal horn
Cranial cruciate ligament (CCL) injury is the most
(CH) is folded
common pathology of the stifle joint and probably the
cranially.
most common orthopaedic problem of dogs that
(continues)
requires surgical intervention. The CCL has three
functions: to limit internal rotation of the tibia with
(a)
respect to the femur; to limit cranial translation of the
tibia; and to limit hyperextension of the stifle joint.
Whilst many cases of CCL injury result in overt
instability of the stifle joint with a positive cranial draw
test, a considerable number involve either partial
tearing of the CCL or insidious pathology that can be
compensated for by periarticular fibrosis. Therefore,
there may not be an obvious cranial draw and the
clinician may require confirmation of CCL rupture.
Although some other modalities such as MRl and
ultrasonography can help in this respect, arthroscopy
CH
probably has the highest sensitivity and specificity for
CCL injury. The CCL is readily inspected arthro-
 scopically but should be probed with a blunt hooked 
(b)
probe to ensure torn fibres are not missed.
215
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
13.59
the medial (Figure 13.60) or lateral femoral condyles.
Dogs with stifle OCD typically present with lameness
(continued)
at 4-6 months of age, with associated stile joint
Medial meniscal
 effusion. Flattening of the femoral condyle is usually
caudal hornfold.
visible radiographically. Arthroscopic confirmation of
(c, d) Treatment 
the diagnosis is usually straightforward, although
with
radiofrequency
some cases have extreme synovial hyperplasia which
ablation.
can limit the viewing window. The use of a motorized
 shaver or radiofrequency unit may assist the surgeon
 obtain a suitable viewing window.
13.60
In situ stifle OCD
(c)
lesion of the
FC
medial trochlear
ridge. FC =
Femoral condyle;
OCD = OCD
lesion.
OCD
Arthroscopic treatment of OcD lesions is achieved
(d)
through a combination of craniomedial and cranio-
lateral portals, with the arthroscope and instruments
A caudal horn tear of the medial meniscus can be
positioned in the respective portals to suit the location
removed under arthroscopic guidance. The authors
of the lesion. The cartilage flap is removed, either as
use a variety of techniques to achieve this, depending
a single piece or in smaller pieces, using suitably
on the exact pathology and the size of the patient. In
sized grasping forceps. Following removal of the flap,
larger joints, the loose meniscal tissue can be grasped
the subchondral defect is subjected to light curettage
with forceps whilst small hook and push knives are
of the margins and/or forage of the defect base. The
used to transect each limb of the ‘bucket handle'. In
latter is aimed at allowing pluripotential mesenchymal 
 smaller patients, forceps can be used to remove small
cell migration through the subchondral bed to form
pieces of meniscal tissue by grasping and rotating the
repair tissue (fibrocartilage) in the defect. This can be
forceps. Repeating this manoeuvre several times can
achieved by micropick technique or by drilling small
remove the desired amount of tissue. Alternatively, a
holes with a Kirschner wire (e.g. 0.9-1.1 mm); both
motorized shaver or radiofrequency probe can be
can be performed under arthroscopic guidance.
used to remove meniscal tissue, although care must 
 be taken to avoid collateral damage to surrounding tis-
Arthroscopically assisted CCL surgery
 sues. Smaller axial tears can be treated using arthro-
Arthroscopic treatment of CCL rupture has not yet 
 scopic forceps, a punch or a radiofrequency probe.
become widely established in veterinary surgery. In
humans a common technique is to use either a graft 
Arthroscopic medial meniscal release
of bone-patellar ligament-bone (B-PL-B) taken from
 Some surgeons prefer to perform medial meniscal
the middle third of the patellar ligament, or a hamstring
release in conjunction with surgical treatment for CCL
tendon graft, and to place this under arthroscopic
injury. It is possible to perform this technique under
guidance in a minimally invasive fashion. The smaller
arthroscopic guidance by guiding a hypodermic
size of dogs has limited such an approach, although
needle into the medial joint immediately caudal to the
B-PL-B allografts have been used and placed
medialcollateral
ligament under  arthroscopic
arthroscopically.
inspection. Once the hypodermic needle is in the
Recently, arthroscopically assisted suture stabili-
desired location, a no. 11 scalpel blade may be guided
zation has been reported for canine CCL injury. The
alongside this needle oriented in a proximodistal
technique appears to have acceptable results from
direction to avoid medial collateral ligament damage.
the limited published information and the authors
The blade can be viewed arthroscopically as it enters
have used this technique in small, medium and large
the joint and the medial meniscus can be sectioned.
dogs. However, the arthroscopic part of the surgery
is the inspection of the joint, and diagnosis and
Osteochondritis dissecans
treatment of meniscal lesions prior to a lateral suture
OCD occurs in the stifle in medium to large dogs but
stabilization performed through limited incisions but 
is uncommon. The lesion is usually located either on
without the need for arthroscopic assistance.
216
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
The talocrural joint (tarsus)
plantaromedial (Figure 13.61). These can be used in
combination, although rarely all at once. Portal selec-
The tarsus is a composite multiple joint consisting of
tion is dependent on the lesion suspected and this is
four separate joints. Only the talocrural joint is available 
often directed by the results of imaging modalities.
for arthroscopic inspection and this allows a slightly lim-
For example, plain radiographs or CT examination
 ited examination of the articular surfaces of the tibia,
may reveal that an OCD lesion is located more dor-
fibula and talus. In addition, part of the calcaneus and 
sally on the medial ridge of the talus; in such a case,
deep digital flexor tendon can also be viewed.
the dorsal portals are utilized. However, if the lesion is
 more plantar, the plantar portals are selected.
Indications
Indications for talocrural arthroscopy include:
Dorsal portals
The patient is placed in dorsal recumbency with the
OCD of the medial talar ridge
pelvic limb extended caudally. The talocrural joint
OCD of the lateral talar ridge
·
space is located dorsally with palpation and 'trial and
OCD of the distal tibia
error'use of a 23 gauge hypodermic needle.Once
Infective arthritis
the joint space is located optimally, synovial fluid is
Synovial biopsy.
aspirated and sent for analysis if required. The joint is
then inflated with 3-8 ml of Hartmann's solution. A
Instrumentation
no. 11 scalpel blade is then used to make a proximo-
The talocrural joint is a small and rather superficial
distally oriented stab incision at the location of the
space and thus a small arthroscope (1.9 mm or 2.4
hypodermic needle. The arthroscope sleeve with a
mm) is required. Small hand instruments are also
blunt obturator is inserted into the joint and the obtu-
required for any operative arthroscopy.
rator removed prior to insertion of the arthroscope.
 An instrument portal is established in the opposing
Patient preparation and positioning
dorsal portal position. A narrow gauge hypodermic
The limb is clipped from the mid-tibia to just above the 
needle is used initially to locate the optimal portal
main pad. The foot is covered in an impervious layer
location prior to a proximodistally oriented stab
 and a hanging limb preparation is performed. Bilateral 
incision to the depth of the capsule. Only small
talocrural arthroscopy  is possible  and  may 
be
instruments can be used and a cannula is not
indicated is some patients (e.g. with bilateral talar
recommended in such a superficial joint cavity.
OCD). Positioning of the patient depends on portal
selection (see below). The patient may be positioned
WARNING
One of the major problems of talocrural
recumbency, or occasionally a hanging limb position
arthroscopy is the small articular space and
(all portals) may be utilized.
 the superficial nature of the joint cavity. It is
very easy for the arthroscope to slip out of the
Procedure
 joint cavity and cause leakage of extracapsular
There are four traditional portals for the talocrural
fluid and consequent joint collapse.
joint:dorsolateral,dorsomedial,plantarolateral,and
Models demonstrating
13.61
portalsfor tarsal
digntal
arthroscopy: (a) dorsal tarsal
portals; (b) plantar tarsal
extensor
extenso
portals.A1 and A2= Represent
alternative suggested
arthroscope portal sites.
snbuol
A1
A2
(a)
(b)
217
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
Plantar portals
13.62
The patient is placed in ventral recumbency with the
pelvic limb extended caudally. The patient needs to
(a) /n situ OCD
lesion on the lateral
be supported with several sandbags or a cradle to
trochlear ridge.
allow the joint to be oriented such that the os calcis is
(b) Synovitis
directed towards the ceiling.
secondary to an
The talocrural joint space is located from a plantar
OCD lesion;the
direction (medially or laterally depending on which
deep digital flexor
portal is required for the arthroscope) with palpation
tendonis totheleft.
lateral trochlear
and ‘trial and error' use of a 23 gauge hypodermic
ridge to the right.
 needle. Once the joint space is located optimally,
(Courtesy of BVan
synovial fluid is aspirated and sent for analysis if
Ryssen)
required. The joint is then inflated with 3-8 ml of
Hartmann's solution. A no. 11 scalpel blade is then
used to make a proximodistally oriented stab incision
at the location of the hypodermic needle. The
arthroscope sleeve with a blunt obturator is inserted
into the joint and the obturator removed prior to
insertion of the arthroscope.
 An instrument portal is established in the opposing
plantar portal position. A narrow gauge hypodermic
needle is used initially to locate the optimal portal
location prior to a proximodistally oriented stab
(b)
incision to the depth of the capsule. Only small
instruments can be used and a cannula is not normally
sometimes necessary to perform a limited arthrotomy
useful is such a superficial joint space.
to remove such large fragments.
Arthroscopic anatomy
Osteochondritis dissecans of the lateral talar
As discussed, the talocrural joint may be viewed from
ridge
a plantar or dorsal perspective but both give a limited
This is a very uncommon condition noted very
view of the articular surfaces. Little more than the
occasionally, particularly in the Rottweiler (Gielen et
articular surfaces can be inspected because of the
al, 2005). The approach to arthroscopic inspection 
tightness and congruity of the joint. Some parts of the
and treatment is as for medially located lesions,
joint capsule can also be seen and, from the
although obviously the positions of the arthroscope
plantaromedial portal, a portion of the deep digital
and instrument portals are reversed.
flexor tendon can be seen.
Synovial biopsy
Pathological conditions
This can be performed using any of the portals,
Osteochondritis dissecans of the medial talar
although the authors prefer the plantar portals as
these provide greater access to synovial tissue. Tarsal
ridge
Careful evaluation of radiographs or CT scans is a
osteoarthritis is a sequelae to primary tarsal path-
ology. Arthroscopy allows this to be graded and also
prerequisite to arthroscopy of the talocrural joint for
OCD of the talus. The location of the lesion in a
allows for cartilage debridement when indicated
(Figure 13.63).
dorsoplantar direction will guide the surgeon as to
 portal selection and patient positioning:
13.63
For dorsally located lesions, the dorsal portals
Tarsal OA with full
are selected
thickness cartilage
The arthroscope is placed dorsolaterally and
loss and twovisible
used to inspect the joint dorsally before settling
wearlines.
on a view of the medially located lesion. A
dorsolateral instrument portal is established and
small grasping forceps are used to grasp pieces
of the loose cartilage and bone
For more plantar lesions, the plantar portals are
selected but the general approach is similar.
In cases of talar OcD the lesions can contain a
 significant amount of bone and can be relatively large
Acknowledgements
(Figure 13.62). Although the bone is often necrotic
and therefore rather soft, it can still be difficult to
The authors are indebted to Mr Alan Bannister, Faculty
grasp with small forceps, or the forceps may be
of Veterinary Science at the University of Liverpool,
for his valuable assistance with the preparation of
placed under undue strain risking damage to, or
breakage of, the pin within the instrument. It is
many of the figures in this chapter.
218
Chapter 13 Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy
Li A, Bennett D, Gibbs G et al. (2000) Radial carpal bone fractures in 15
References and further reading
dogs. Journal of Small Animal Practice 41, 74-79
Marcellin-Little DJ, De Young DJ, Ferris KK and Berry CM (1994)
Barr FJ and Kirberger RM (2006) BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline
Incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle in Spaniels. Veterinary
Musculoskeletal Imaging.BSAVA Publications, Gloucester
Surgery 23, 475-477
diseasenthedogJournalofmallAnimalPractice117
 anconeal process and fragmented medial coronoid process of the
 Butterworth SJ and Innes JF (2001) Incomplete humeral condylar fractures 
ulna in the dog. Journal of Small Animal Practice 47, 61-65
in the dog.Journal of SmallAnimal Practice42,394398
Meyer-Lindenberg A, Langhann A, Fehr M and Nolt I(2003) Arthrotomy
Cook JL, Renfro DC, Tomlinson JL and Sorensen JE (2005a) Measurement 
versus arthroscopy in the treatment of the fragmented medial coronoid
of angles of abduction for diagnosis of shoulder instability in dogs
 process of the ulna (FCP) in 421 dogs. Veterinary and Comparative
using goniometry and digitalmage analysis.Veterinary Surgery34,
Orthopaedics and Traumatology 16, 204-210
463-468
Mitchell RAS and Ines JF (2000). Lateral glenohumeral ligament rupture
Cook JL, Tomlinson JL, Fox DB, Kenter K and Cook CR (2005b) Treatment 
 in three dogs. Journal of Small Animal Practice 41, 511-514 
of dogs diagnosed withmedial shoulder instabity using radiofrequency-
Olivieri M, PirasA,Marcellin-Little DJ et al (2004)Accessory caudal glenid
induced thermal capsulorrhaphy.Veterinary Surgery 34,469-475
 ossification centre as possible cause of lameness in nine dogs.
Danielson KC, FitzpatrickN, MuirP and Manley PA(2006) Histomorphometry
Veterinary and Camparative Orthopaedics and Traumatology 17,
 of fragmented medial coronoid process in dogs: a comparison of 
131-135
affected and normal coronoid processes. Veterinary Surgery 35,
 O'Neill, T and Innes JF (2004) Treatment of shoulder instability caused
501-509
by medial glenohumeral ligament rupture with thermal capsulorrhaphy.
Journal of Small Animal Practice 45, 521-524
 of prosthetic medial glenohumeral ligament repair in the dog (ten
Person MW (1986) Arthroscopy of the canine shoulder joint. Compendium
cases). Veterinary and Comparative Orthopaedics and Traumatology
onContinuingEducationforthePracticingVeterinarian8537
14, 222-228
Person MW (1989) Arthroscopic treatment of osteochondritis dissecans
Frostick SP, Sinopidis C, Al Maskari S et al. (2003) Arthroscopic capsular
 in the canine shoulder. Veterinary Surgery 18, 175-189
shrinkage of the shoulder for the treatment of patients with
 Person Mw (1989) Arthroscopy of the canine coxofemoral joint.
multidirectional instability: minimum 2-year follow-up. Arthroscopy
Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian
19, 227-233
11, 930-935
 Gielen 1, van Ryssen B and van Bree H (2005) Computerized tomography
Petitt R and Clements DN (2007) Journal of SmallAnimal Practice 48(11),
compared with radiography in the diagnosis of lateral trochlear ridge
 625-630
 Rudd RG, Whitehair JG and Margolis JH (1990) Results of management
Orthopaedics and Traumatoiogy18,7782
 of osteochondritis dissecans of the humeral head in dogs: 44 cases
 Guthrie S (1989) Some radiographic and clinical aspects of ununited 
(1982-1987). Journal of the American Animal Hospitai Association
 anconeal process. Veterinary Record 124,661-662
26, 173-178
Guthrie S, Plummer JM and Vaughan LC (1992) Post natal development 
 Scholz J, Kuhling T and Turczynsky T (1992) The advantages of
of the canine elbow joint - a light and electron-microscopic study.
ResearchInVeterinaryScience52,7
Hoelzler MG, Milis DL, Francis DA and Weigel JP (2004) Results of 
 canine arthroscopy. Veterinary Surgery 33, 77-82
 Sjostrom L, Kasstrom H and Kallberg M (1i995) Ununited anconeal process
cranial cruciate ligament deficiency in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 33,
 in the dog - pathogenesis and treatment by osteotomy of the ulna.
146-153
Veterinary and Comparative Orthopaedics and Traumatology 8,
Holsworth IG, Schulz KS and Ingel K (2002) Cadaveric evaluation of 
170-176
 canine arthroscopic bicipital tenotomy. Veterinary and Comparative
Turner BM, Abercromby RH, Innes J, McKee WM and Ness MG (1998)
Orthopaedics and Traumatology15,215-222
 Dynamic proximal ulnar osteotomy for the treatment of ununited
Holsworth iG, Schulz KS, Kass PH et al. (2005) Comparison of arthroscopic
anconeal process in 17 dogs. Veterinary and Comparative
and radiographic abnormaitiesinthehipjointsfjuveniledogs ith
Orthopaedics and Traumatoiogy11, 76-79
hip dysplasia. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
Van Ryssen B and van Bree H (1997) Arthroscopic findings in 100 dogs
227,1091-1094
with elbow lameness. Veterinary Record 140, 360-362
Houlton JEF, Cook JL, Innes JF and Langley-Hobbs, SJ (2006) BSAVA
Van Ryssen B, van Bree H and Missinne S (1993a) Successful arthroscopic
Manual of Canine and Feline Musculoskeletal Disorders.BSAVA
treatment of shoulder osteochondrosis in the dog. Journal of Small
Publications, Gloucester
Animal Practice 34, 521-528
InnesJF (2005)Laboratoryevaluation of joint disease.In:BSAVA Manual
Van Ryssen B, van Bree H and Vyt P(1993b) Arthroscopy of the shoulder
of Canine and Feline Clinical Pathology, 2nd edn,ed. EViliers and L
joint in the dog. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
Blackwood, pp. 355-363. BSAVA Publications, Gloucester
29, 101-105
Krotscheck U, Hulse DA, Bahr A and Jerram RM (2000) Ununited anconeal
Wolschrijin CF, Gruys E and Wejs WA (2005) Microcomputed tomography
process: lag-screw fixation with proximal ulnar osteotomy. Veterinary
 and histology of a fragmented medial coronoid process in a 20-week-
 and Comparative Orthopaedics and Traumatology 13, 212-216
old golden retrieverVetrinary ecord157,383-386
219
An introduction to laser
endosurgery
David Sobel and Jody Lulich
Introduction
(e.g. diodes, holmium-YAG, carbon dioxide, ruby
and garnet) are, for the most part, in a ground state of
The theoretical concept of using light as a substan-
energy (Figure 14.1a). Statistically, at any one point in
tial source of energy was originally hypothesized
time some of them are moving between high and low
by Albert Einstein in 1916, based on the previous
energy states. When energy, in the form of electricity,
works of Neils Bohr. The term laser' is actually an
is applied to the lasing medium, more atoms are
acronym, standing for Light Amplification by the
excited and move to a higher energy state. Specifically,
Stimulated Emission of Radiation. The first workable
atoms move to the higher and much less stable,
experimental laser, a pulsed ruby laser, was devel-
singlet state (Figure 14.1b). As the singlet state is so
oped in 1960 by Theodore Maiman. Medical lasers
unstable, the atoms rapidly return to the more stable,
were first introduced in the mid-1960s, but early
metastable state (Figure 14.1c). Atoms then sponta-
lasers were large, inefficient and prohibitively
neously drop back to the stable ground state. In this
expensive. The 1980s showed renewed interest in
 rapid random return to the lower energy state, energy 
the development of simple, cost-effective, efficient
is lost in the form of a photon. This photon stimulates
lasers for clinical use. The 1990s allowed the
another atom to return to the ground state, emitting
introduction of lasers into veterinary practice,
another photon (Figure 14.1d). This sequence 
with carbon dioxide lasers becoming more and
produces a photon cascade.
more common.
When this process is performed within a laser
e    e m  g
Laser physics
one end of the lasing chamber, and a completely
 A basic knowledge of optical laser physics is useful in
reflective material at the other, a coherent,
understanding the clinical applications of laser energy.
monochromatic light is produced (Figure 14.2). As
The essential element of a laser is the production of 
light travels in waves, the wavelength and frequency
light in the form of a photon. Light simply refers to a
of the cycles are the variables that give a particular
portion of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation.
laser light its individual characteristics. These vari-
How then is a laser different from the light that is
ables are unique to the lasing medium (e.g. carbon
generated by a basic light bulb? A laser stores,
dioxide, helium, argon, gold and ruby). A series of
concentrates and releases its energy in a coherent 
lenses and delivery systems transmit the photons that
 powerful manner.
escape the lasing chamber in a focused, controlled 
Atoms resting within an appropriate lasing medium
and direct manner, to the desired source.
(a) Atoms resting in a
14.1
 ground state of
C
d
energy. (b) When bombarded 
with electrons (electricity),.
atoms move from a ground state
to a singlet state of energy.
(e) When excited, atoms drop 
 from the singlet state to the 
Single
metastable state of energy. This 
change in state results in the 
Metastable
loss of energy in the form of a
state
photon. (d) If a photon collides 
Ene
with a metastable atom as it is 
Ground
dropping to the ground state 
(which invariably happens),
energy is lost in the form of a 
Time
220
Chapter 14An introduction to laser endosurgery
Power supply
Flash
Ruby crystal
lamp
Al2O2+Cr2+
Laser
beam
Diode laser equipment.(Courtesy of Diomed
14.3
Ltd)
of the laser, the time of the pulsed wave, and the
100% silvered
Partially silvered
interval between pulses (if an intermittent mode is
reflective end
reflective end
selected). A red emergency override switch is usually
14.2
Laser optical chamber. The power supply
prominent on the front panel. Buttons allowing the
pumps energy, in the form of electrons, through
operator to choose the operational mode and a ready/
the lasing medium. There is a fully reflective surface at
standby function are also present. The LED display
one end of the chamber and a partially reflective surface
panel contains the main functional menu of the
at the other end. The release of the photons within the
 chamber produces a bright, intense, high-energy
microprocessor, and allows the operator to perform
monochromic light.
many maintenance, set up and control functions. The
rear of the unit has portals for the foot pedal and for a
‘deadman' switch that can be connected to the
Instrumentation
operating theatre door, to automatically shut off the
laser (see Laser safety)
The most commonly used laser in veterinary medi-
Diode fibres consist primarily of a solid quartz
cine is the carbon dioxide laser. These efficient,
core, insulated and sheathed, with an optical lens at
economical and highly effective lasers are excellent
one end, which inserts into the laser aperture, and the
for general surgical use. However, the underlying
operative end, which is available in several different
physics of these lasers means that their use in endo-
tip shapes and sizes (Figure 14.4). The long flexible
scopic applications is limited. Most medical carbon
fibres (Figure 14.5) can be inserted into a variety of
dioxide lasers emit light in the 1020-1090 nm range.
different rigid and flexible endoscopes and sheaths/
This has advantages in that the depth of penetration
cannulae, as well as into handpieces for standard
 of these lasers, assuming the same power output, is
open surgical use. The contact mode tips can be
limited. However, light in this range is highly attenu-
either flat, conical or orb shaped, whilst the non-
ated by water and other fluid media and is poorly
contact fibres have a flat bare end (Figure 14.6). The
absorbed by biological pigments. This makes the use
fibres are available in a variety of diameters, from
 of carbon dioxide lasers for endoscopic applications
involving fluid irrigation and haemorrhage extremely
limited. In addition, the delivery systems, whilst pro-
prietary in nature, usually involve some form of either
hollowsemi-rigid internal reflective tube ora series of
articulated arms using a series of mirrors. These
delivery systems make transmitting the light into
endoscopes and related equipment very difficult.
14.4
Flat bare fibre non-contact laser tip.
By comparison, diodes, emitting light in the
810-980 nm range, are attenuated very little by
water or other fluids and are highly absorbed by
biological pigments. This effect is maximized
at
810 nm, providing an increased thermal effect with
less energy input. Additionally, the fibreoptic delivery
systems are ideal for use with the operating channels
of both rigid and flexible endoscopes.
Diode laser systems
The diode laser systems available for veterinary
clinical use are simple, compact and easy to operate.
The units generally consist of a metal cabinet box
housing the laser and the microprocessor for unit
control, an aperture from which the laser light exits,
and a control foot pedal (Figure 14.3). The dials on
14.5
the front of the instrument control the power (wattage)
Laser fibres.
221
Chapter 14 An introduction to laser endosurgery
(a)
14.6
Optical fibres. (a) Sculpted fibre tips. Top: Conical
tip.This is used for precise, delicate procedures
requiring a fine incision.Bottom: Orb tip.This is used for a
broader incision in vascular tissue. (b) Contact and non-
contact fibres.Top: Bare flat-end fibre.This is used for both
contact and non-contactprocedures.Bottom:Non-contactfibre
(water-or air-cooled).This is used for gastroenterology and
(b)
pulmonary applications. (Courtesy of Diomed Ltd)
400 μm to 1000 μm, which facilitate insertion into a
damage from the laser is encountered (usually within
variety of endoscopes and surgical locales. The fibres
300-600 μm), giving a well controlled surgical effect.
 are designed for single use, but can be either gas
Blood vessels of up to 2 mm in diameter can be
sterilized or soaked in glutaraldehyde (see Chapter
sealed and cauterized.
2). Should fibre tips fracture or break, they can be
In the non-contact mode, the beam is directed
refashioned using a simple fibre stripper and cleaver.
towards the tissue from a distance. As the broader flat
beam contacts the tissue, high localized temperatures
Contact and non-contact modes
create excellent tissue vaporization with a broader
The diode fibre can be used in direct apposition
and potentially deeper margin of coagulation. Using
to the tissue (contact mode) or at a distance from
both variable power and time settings,diferent issue
the tissue (non-contact or free-beam mode). In the
effects can be achieved: less power over more time
contact mode, the diode fibre, coated with a thin
will produce a greater coagulation effect, with rela-
layer of carbon (either from a manufacturing pro-
tively less tissue vaporization. Conversely, as the time
cess or via the process of 'charring'), uses the laser
is decreased and the power increased, a small focal
energy to heat the tip of the fibre. As the tip of
area of tissue is ablated.
the fibre contacts the tissue, the laser heats the fibre
For surgical procedures in which careful control of
tip, creating a thermal tip effect. This hot fibre tip
surgical effect is of paramount importance, the contact
can be used to excise, incise and vaporize tissue.
mode is of greatest benefit. For situations where
The tissue immediately around the tip is vaporized,
larger amounts of tissue need to be vaporized, with
and a well controlled zone of thermocoagulation
good control of haemorrhage, the non-contact mode
provides excellent haemostasis. Minimal lateral
is preferred (Figure 14.7).
High power
Low power
onization
Reverslble
Oedema
Vaporization
Coagulation
(b)
Tissue interaction with non-contact fibres.(a) Light emitted at
14.7
810-900 nm is highly absorbed by haemoglobin andmelanin,and
generates high temperatures at the tissue surface.This results in rapid
vaporization with underlying coagulation of up to 3 mm. (b) The effects of
high power(left) and low power (right) on the surrounding tissue.(Courtesy of
Diomed Ltd)
(a)
222
Chapter 14 An introduction to laser endosurgery
Laser safety
Selection
There are several specific areas of safety that need to
Prior to beginning laser endosurgery, the operator
be considered when using lasers in the operating
 must be familiar both with basic diagnostic endoscopy
theatre. Training of operating room personnel in the
of the particular area of interest and with lasers in a
proper use and care of lasers and in patient care is
surgical seting. Depending on the particular surgical
essential. Proper eyewear is necessary to protect the
procedure to be performed, the veterinary surgeon
eyes of all personnel present in the room. This
should carefully select the appropriate endoscope.
eyewear can be obtained from equipment manufac-
Flexible fibreoptic endoscopes for most gastrointesti-
nal (Gl) and tracheal lesions are standard. Rigid
turers and is specific to the particular wavelength of 
light. Whilst the risk from direct laser exposure is
 greater than when visualized on a video monitor dur-
used for nasal, sinus and lower urinary tract surgery
as well as for thoracoscopy and laparoscopy. All
ing endoscopic surgery, eye protection should be in
endoscopic work is performed under video guidance,
use at all times.
To avoid accidental laser scatter and the resultant
as the larger field of view and distance from the oper-
ative site make the procedures easier and cleaner.
 thermal damage,it is necessary to take care that instru-
However, if an operator is familiar and comfortable
ments used in laser surgery are either specially coated
with a non-reflective surface that will not scatter the 
using the oculus of the endoscope rather than a cam-
beam, or kept well away from the beam. A moistened
era, this is acceptable provided appropriate protective
eyewear is used.
surgical sponge should be kept covering adjacent tis-
The size and type of fibre used is often dictated by
sues to minimize accidental thermal damage. The foot
the size and type of endoscope. Different instrument 
pedal operating the laser should be kept only in the
channels can accommodate fibres of up to 10o0 μm
reach of the foot of the intended operator, and should 
but more commonly 400 μm or 600 μm fibres are used.
be covered with a safety case to avoid accidental step-
 Orb tip contact fibres are often too large to fit through
ping and firing. In addition, whenever the laser is not in
the instrument channels of endoscopes but can be
active use it should be turned off or, if during a proce-
 used in the pleural and peritoneal spaces. It is impor-
dure, placed in standby mode. Flammable (alcohol)
tant to make sure that all fibres used in laser endo-
antiseptics should be avoided during the preparation of 
nsun aun ieun pue paeinsu lm ae habins
the skin and other surfaces for surgery.
channels are intact, by performing a leak test prior to
Flammable anaesthetic gases should be avoided,
use. This will ensure that the endoscope is not dam-
and care should be taken to ensure that there are no
aged by leakage of thermal energy from the laser.
 oxygen leaks present in the anaesthetic lines to the
patient and within the anaesthetic machine. Specially
coated endotracheal tubes are available but it is
Mass resection
 adequate to ensure that the endotracheal tube cuff is
well inflated, and that the tube is covered in saline-
Nasal
soaked gauze sponges if the surgical site is in or
The operator has a choice of either flexible or rigid
 around the oral cavity. Many lasers come equipped to
rhinoscopes to use for nasal mass resection (Figure
 hook up a 'deadman' switch to the door. This means
14.8). As discussed in Chapter 8, rigid rhinoscopy is
that if a person were to enter the room during the use
 preferable with the exception of addressing lesions at
 of the laser, the machine would automatically trip off.
 the posterior nares/choanae, in which case a flexible
These devices are rarely used in veterinary medicine,
endoscope using the J' manoeuvre over the soft pal-
but the door of the operating theatre should be posted
ate, transorally, can be performed. The fibre used is
with a “Laser in Use' sign, stating the specific
dictated by the type and size of the endoscope used.
wavelength in use and instructing those entering to
A right-angle fibre is also useful. If it is not possible to
wear protective eyewear. Local heaith and safety
delineate the points of attachment of the mass, which
regulations should always be consulted as required
is often the case, the fibre can be used in a sort of
 and adhered to.
"interstitial mode'. The fibre is inserted into the interior
Laser surgery does produce smoke, and this
 of the mass and in the short pulse intermittent mode,
vapour does contain potentially toxic materials.
using power up to 15 W, as much tissue as possible is
Infectious materials as well as_ potentially viable
ablated. it is important to bear in mind that the thermal
cellular DNA can be present. This produces the
necrosis that ensues may mean that tissue is not
theoretical risk of disease transmission. The risk of
removed at the time or at surgery, but rather that the
 specific disease transmission from veterinary patients 
tissue may slough over a period of time. Even if clean
is probably substantially less. However, prudence
surgical margins are not reasonable to obtain, the
 suggests exposure to these agents is minimized 
nasal lumen can often be opened up and masses
wherever possible.
.A smoke evacuator vacuum
 debulked to the point that the animal's clinical situation
should be used to ensure that plume does not enter
is dramatically improved. The frontal sinus can be
the operating theatre air, and personnel present in the
m snus au oui busuydan Aa lm s passappe
 operating theatre should wear facemasks designed to
either a Steinmann pin or a Michel trephine, and using
remove particulate matter present in laser vapour.
 the laser to ablate neoplastic tissue within the sinus. If
Consultation  with 
 appropriate
 governmental
the communication between the frontal sinus and the
agencies regarding the safe and legal use of all laser
nasopharynx is closed due to neoplastic disease, the
equipment is advised for all practices.
laser can be very useful in re-establishing patency.
223
Chapter 14 An introduction to laser endosurgery
mass at the base of its attachments if possible, or to
ablate the tissue in a free beam mode. Power at
8-15 W is often necessary, with special care being
taken to ensure that the depth of penetration of the
laser is controlled. Tissue specimens for biopsy, if not
taken preoperatively, should be taken before the
actual resection is attempted.
Lower urinary tract
Whilst the current use of diode lasers in veterinary
medicine does not usually offer the possibility of cura-
tive laser surgery for bladder and urethral tumours,
more often than not masses can be debulked and the
14.8
Nasal mass resection.
clinical effects of the mass lesions mitigated. A rigid
2.7 mm 30 degree or a 4.0 mm 30 degree cytoscope/
Alimentary tract
sheath is usually used for transurethral urethro-
Polypoid masses can often be resected en bloc and
cystoscopy (see Chapter 10). These devices will
diffuse or circumferential masses can be partially
accommodate a 1000 μm fibre. For male cystoscopy,
resected or debulked endoluminally (Figure 14.9). It
a small-diameter endoscope is necessary, mandating
is important that the clinician knows the approximate
at best a 400 μm fibre. Dogs (males) and cats (both
thickness of the lesion to ensure that accidental bowel
sexes) can also be approached using the technique 
perforation does not occur. Selection of the appropriate
of laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy (see Chapter
size fibre is dictated by the size of the endoscope and
11). lf the basal stalk of a lesion can be identified, an
channel, but a conical contact fibre or a right-angle
attempt should be made to remove it at its point of
fibre is often useful. With the laser in continuous
origin (Figure 14.10). Inflammatory polyps can be
contact mode, the operator should attempt to free the
resected in this manner. If this is not possible, the
14.9
Pre-,intra- and
postoperative images of
laser resection of a
colonic adenocarcinoma.
Note the use of a right-
angled fibre. The beam
leaves at a right angle to
the long axis of the fibre.
14.10
Intra- and postoperative
images of laser resection
of a urethral transitional
cell carcinoma. Not the
use of a sculptured
pointed tip fibre, allowing
the surgeon to perform
more delicate tissue
vaporization.
224
Chapter 14 An introduction to laser endosurgery
fibre should be used in contact mode to ablate tissue
could not be delivered through non-toxic fibres and via
focally and facilitate dehiscence. Care must be taken
a suitable medium for urethrocystoscopic procedures.
to avoid perforation of either the urethra or the blad-
However, in 1986 researchers using a 504 nm, pulsed
der. Power up to 15 W may be needed. A urinary
dye laser treated human patients with ureteroliths suc-
catheter is usually left in place for a day or two follow-
cessfully and safely. The holmium-YAG laser is one of
ing this procedure to allow the surgical site to heal.
the newest devices available for clinical lithotripsy.
The mechanism of stone fragmentation with the
Laparoscopy and thoracoscopy
holmium-YAG laser is mainly photothermal, and
The laser can be used during laparoscopic surgery to
involves a thermal drilling process rather than a
debulk tumours, laser adhesions, cut ovarian pedicles
shockwave effect (Razvi et al., 1996). Holmium-YAG
laser energy is transmitted from the crystal to the
therapy of solid organ lesions. A specially designed
urolith via a flexible quartz fibre. To achieve optimum
fibre housed in a laparoscopic cannula can be used,
results, the quartz fibre tip must be guided with the aid
or a fibre can be inserted via a laparoscopic cannula.
of a cystoscope so that it is in direct contact with the
This 1000 μm contact fibre is used with power up to
surface of the urolith.
15 W. In the chest, the laser can be used during
thoracoscopic pericardectomy  to debulk thoracic
Performing transurethral laser lithotripsy
masses or to aid in adhesionolysis.
in bitches and queens
Laser lithotripsy is performed via urethrocystoscopy
in anaesthetized patients (Figure 14.11). Although
Transurethral laser lithotripsy
patient positioning is often the choice of the operator,
bitches and queens tend to be positioned in dorsal
Use of lasers for transurethral lithotripsy is a relatively
new concept. In 1968, investigators first reported in
recumbency. A rigid cystoscope is passed retrograde
vitro fragmentation of uroliths with a ruby laser
into the vestibule and through the urethral lumen to
 allow visualization of urocystoliths. The urinary tract is
(Mulvaney and Beck, 1968). However, because the
lavaged with sterile warm normal saline, and then
fragmentation of stones was associated with genera-
refilled. During lithotripsy continuous irrigation is
tion of sufficient heat that would likely damage adja-
cent tissues, it could not be used to treat patients.
provided to flush urolith debris and fragments from
Likewise, use of carbon dioxide laser energy was con-
the visual field as stones are fragmented, and to
sidered to be unsuitable for clinical use because it
 absorb stray laser energy.
(b)
(a)
cm
(d)
sre)..
(c)
(a) Lateral abdominal radiograph of a spayed 10-year-old Miniature Schnauzer bitch with radiopaque densities
14.11
 in the caudal abdomen. (b) To confirm the location, size and contour of the abdominal radiopaque densities, a
(c) Cystoscopic view of uroliths in the lumen of the bladder after initiation of laser lithotripsy. A 365 μm diameter flexible
after transurethral lithotripsy and voiding urohydropropulsion to remove urolith fragments.The radiograph is consistent with
complete urolith removal. (e) Urolith fragments.The uroliths were composed of 100% calcium oxalate.
225
chapter 14  An introduction to laser endosurgery
Laser energy is delivered via a quartz lithotripsy
the small size of the urethral lumen. To prevent
fibre that is passed through the working channel of
urethroliths from travelling back into the bladder
the cystoscope. The fibre tip is guided with the aid of
during lithotripsy, the urethra proximal to the stone
a cystoscope, so that its tip is in direct contact with the
should be occluded. This can be accomplished by
surface of the urolith. A foot-operated switch activates
inserting a gloved index finger into the rectum and
release of energy from the lithotriptor. The laser
firmly pressing the urethra against the ischium. In
energy selected will vary depending on urolith size
some cases, the distensible balloon of a Foley
and location; however, initial settings to fragment
catheter can be placed transurethrally proximal to
most uroliths have been between 0.5 and 0.7 J at 5 to
the urethral stones (Figure 14.12). Distending the
7 Hz. The energy of the laser can be adjusted for
balloon will occlude the urethra. The very small
efficiency based on operator experience and desired 
diameter of the urethra in male cats prohibits
fragmentation process.
application of transurethral laser lithotripsy.
 Once uroliths have been sufficiently shattered,
 such that they are small enough to pass through the
Potential complications
urethra, fragments can be removed by a variety of
It is logical to question whether or not lasers capable
methods. Larger fragments are initially removed with 
of shattering stones would likely damage the urinary
a stone basket to verify that they are of a sufficiently
tract. Because laser energy is delivered in a pulsed 
small size to pass unimpeded through the urethra. If
fashion and readily absorbed by water, complications 
larger fragments are safely retrieved, continued
are rare, rapidly reversible or clinically unimportant 
removal using a stone basket or voiding urohydropro-
(Figure 14.13). Continuous irrigation of the urinary
pulsion can be performed to evacuate the remaining 
bladder（
 during   lithotripsy   quickly  absorbs  and
pieces (Figure 14.11e).
disperses stray energy. Under these conditions the
In some instances, bladder inflammation and
thermal effect of the holmium laser is localized to
trauma during lithotripsy result in extravasation of
within approximately 1 mm of the laser fibre tip. In a
blood and subsequent clot formation. If the clot
prospective study of 598 human patients with kidney
adheres to the bladder wall and entraps minute stone
fragments, complete urolith evacuation in unlikely. In
complications were observed in only one patient
the author's [JLj experience, blood clots detach within 
(ureteral trauma) (Sofer et al., 2002). These results
24 hours. At that time, residual stone burden can be
 suggest that when properly used, laser lithotripsy can
removed by voiding urohydropropulsion or allowed to
be safely used in dogs and cats.
pass spontaneously during routine voiding.
 Performing transurethral laser lithotripsy
Conclusion
in male dogs
 In male dogs, the size of the os penis and flexure of
The laser can be an important addition to the surgi-
the male urethra limit the size and deflectability of
cal offerings of all small animal practitioners. This
cystoscopes that can be introduced into the urinary
cutting edge technology allows the veterinary sur-
bladder. However, small-diameter (7.5 Fr) flexible
geon to offer clients and patients a safe, painless
endoscopes used for evaluation of human ureters
 and more effective alternative to traditional surgery
pass easily through the urethra of most dogs weighing
in many cases. Clients with increased medical
more than 6-8 kg. It is usually more efficient and
knowledge are aware of these new technologies in
effective to capture bladder stones with a basket and
human medicine, and the veterinary profession is
s  o n  u  
in the enviable position of being able to offer these
Urethroliths are more readily fragmented because
technologies in a cost-effective and medically effec-
their movement out of the laser field is inhibited by
tive manner.
(a)
(b)
D
14.12
 the distal urethra. (b) A Foley catheter was positioned with its balloon proximal to the urethroliths. Inflating the 
ballon prevented the urethroliths and urolith fragments from migrating into the urinary bladder during lithotripsy.
226
Chapter 14  An introduction to laser endosurgery
Complication
Occurrence
Avoidance
Rare
 Bladder perforation is possible during excessive or forced over-distension with fluid, or by direct trauma via
Bladder rupture
iatrogenic trauma even in bladders with pre-existing weakness
 Keeping the size and volume of urolith fragments to a minimum, and ensuring adequate anaesthesia to promote
comleteaxatoniminizenrasiulpereinauaresionfthne
 the bladder wallis questionable,the urolith fragments should be removed with a stone retrieval basket
 Cyanide 
Rare
Thermal decomposition of uric acid to cyanide can occur during lithotripsy. However, attempts to detect cyanide in
 production
 the effluence during lithotripsy of uroliths composed of purines have been unsuccessul. Nonetheless, continuous
irigationof salnand fquent evacuationof thernarybladdeurinthtripyiscmmndd tprevent
 cyanide from potentially accumulating to harmful concentrations 
Mucosal
Common 
Haemorhage bscuresworking visbity naitont stratgiesremmended tomnmize urethal welin,
haemorrhage
lower laser power settings (0.6 J and 6 W) should be used to minimize urolith recoil during fragmentation
Rare 
MucosaleforatonisrareecashomimAG lasrnerysdeliverdin5s pulandiqily
Mucosal
dispersed in the fluid surrounding the tip of the laser fibre. Care should be taken to ensure that the laser is
perforation 
activated only when the fibre is in contact with the surface of the stone. This will avoid urothelia perforation
 Retention of 
Common
Urolih fragments approximately 0.5 mm or less in diameter can become rapped inblood ozing from and
attached to denuded urothelium.If not passed,fragments may serve as a nidus for future uroliths. Voiding
small urolith 
fragments 
u pg  ana do o ns uo si d m u o snu  unddn
some cases, these minute fragments wil spontaneously pass during routine urine voiding 
 Urethral
 Rare 
 Complete obstruction is rare because iregular-shaped fragments are unlikely to form an occlusive seal within the
obstruction
au yonou papion ae suawbe jo jaqunu abiel e uaum anoso ew uoonnsqo geyan anamon uawn leuan
urethra simultaneously. If this occurs, the laser should be used to break up the fragment conglomeration and
reduce fragment size.Ifanticipated, a portion of the fragments canbe rmoved with a stone basket prior to voiding
urohydropropulsion
 Urethral 
Common 
Urethral swelling impedes evacuation of uroliths and increases the likelihood of urethral obstruction. The degree of
swelling 
swelling is proportional tothe frequency with which cystoscopes are passed and urolith fragments rmved
ab passed aq pinous sadoosoua paeni mim uoeoduo su azwuu o uaung leyan au yono
endoscopes with a smallr working diameter than theurethra should be chosen, the stones should b fragmented
into smaller fragments before removal, and any infections should be corrected prior to lithotripsy. If urethral
obstruction is eminent, a short period (24 hours) of continuous transurethral catheterization should be considered 
 until the swelling subsides 
14.13
Potential complications of transurethral laser lithotripsy.
References and further reading
Mulvaney WP and Beck CW (1968) The laser beam in urology. Journal
156, 912-914
of Urology99,112-115
Sofer M, Watterson JD, Wollin TA et al. (2002) Holmium:YAG laser
Razvi HA, Denstedt JD, Chun SS and Sales JL (1996) Intracorporeal
lithotripsy forupperurinary tract calculi in598 patient.Journal of
lithotripsy with the holmium:YAG laser. Journal of Urology
Urology 167, 31-34
227
 Numbers in italic type indicate figures
 Balloon dilation, oesophageal stricture 64
Benign mucosal antral polyp 59
Acetabular fracture 212
Benign nasal polyp 127
Adenocarcinoma
Biceps rupture 201--2
colonic 81
Bicipital tenosynovitis 201
laser surgery 224
Biopsy
gastric 60
in arthroscopy 218
intestinal 61
in bronchoscopy 92
nasal 124-5
in colonoscopy 75 
Aiming device for arthroscopy 193
in duodenoscopy 53-4
Allergic rhinitis 122
in gastroscopy 52
Anaesthesia
in flexible endoscopy 39-41
for arthroscopy 194
forceps 16, 21, 40, 75
for bronchoscopy 97-8
intestinal 43
for colonoscopy 76
laparoscopic 162-5
for endosurgery 97-8
in oesophagoscopy 49
for laparoscopy 159
in otoendoscopy 137
for respiratory tract endoscopy 86-7
in rhinoscopy 116--17, 119-20
for rhinoscopy 98, 114 
in thoracoscopy 179-80
for thoracoscopy 98, 177-8
in urethrocystoscopy 146
for upper Gl endoscopy 48 
Bipartite biceps tendon 197
Analgesia for arthroscopy 194 
Bougienage, oesophageal stricture dilation 64
Antrum 50-1
Brachycephalic airway obstruction syndrome
Arthroscopes 19, 189-90
(BOAS) 94
for the carpus 209
 Bradycardia after Gl endoscopy 71
for the elbow 202
Breeding time assessment in the bitch 154-6
for the hip 210
 Bronchoalveolar lavage 91
sheaths 20
Bronchoscope controis/handling 35
for the shoulder 195
Bronchoscopy/Tracheobronchoscopy
for the stifle 213
flexible
for the tarsus 217
biopsy 92
Arthroscopy
complications 95-6 
 anaesthetic considerations 194
contraindications 85
 analgesia 194
indications 84
carpus 209-10
 instrumentation 85-6
elbow 202--3
normal findings 88, 89, 90
hip 210-12
postoperative care 95
indications 188
procedure 87-90
instrumentation 24, 26-7, 189-93
rigid
 patient preparation/positioning 193-4
 anaesthesia/sedation 97-8
postoperative care 195
Brush cytology
preoperative work-up 188-9
bronchial 91, 92
shoulder 195-8
equipment 16, 85
stifle 212-15
flexible endoscopy 39
tarsus 217-18
Aspergillosis 121
topical therapy 127-30
Cameras 24
Aspiration/lavage catheter 85
Cannulae 19, 20-1
for arthroscopy 191, 213
for laparoscopy 161 
Bacteraemia after Gl endoscopy 71-2
for thoracoscopy 176
Bacterial rhinitis/sinusitis 122
Carbon dioxide lasers 221
228
Index
Carcinoma, gastric 60
comparison with rigid 9
Cardia 51
controls 34-6
 Carpal chip fracture 210
for Gl endoscopy 46-7
Carpal synovitis 210
handling 32, 33-4
instruments 15-16
Carts 27, 30
 Cervical abnormalities 154
for rhinoscopy 114, 117
Cervical catheterization 156
selection 14-15
Cholecystectomy 173
structure 12-13
Cholesteatoma 139
for tracheobronchoscopy 85, 86
for urethrocystoscopy 144, 145
Chondrosarcoma, nasal 125-6
Client education 7
video versus fibreoptic 13-14 
Coagulating electrode 16
history 1-5
Coccidioidomycosis 95
hybrid 86
light sources 21-3
Colitis 79-80
Colonic neoplasia 81
rigid
laser surgery 224
for colonoscopy 75
Colonic vascular ectasia 82
 comparison with flexible 9
 Colonoscope, use in oesophagus 54-5
for endosurgery 99-100
Colonoscopy
handling 100
 anaesthesia/sedation 76
instruments 19-21
for laparoscopy 99-100
biopsy 75
indications 73-4
for proctoscopy 75
instrumentation 74-5
for rhinoscopy 117
normal findings 77-8
selection 18-19 
 patient positioning/preparation 76-7
structure 17-18
for thoracoscopy 99-100, 175-6
procedure 77-9
Constipation 82
for urethrocystoscopy 145
Cruciate ligament injury 215-16
for vaginoscopy 147
Cryptorchidism 170-1
viewing angles 17
Cystitis 152
semi-rigid  18 
Cystoscopes 18, 19
sterilization 29
Cystoscopy
storage 29-30
laparoscopic 171-3
(see also specific scopes)
transabdominal 147
 Endoscopy, basic technique
(see also Urethrocystoscopy)
flexible
Cystostomy tube placement 147
handling/care of equipment 33-4, 37-8
Cystourethroscopes 145
health and safety 31
Cytology brush 16, 85
patient considerations 31-2
preparation 33
record keeping 41
Diaphragmatic hernia 182
 sampling 39-41
 Digital imaging 25--6
rigid
Diode laser systems 221-2
health and safety 97
Disinfection of instruments 29
insufflation 98-9
Dislodger  16 
 patient preparation/positioning 98
 Duodenal biopsy 53-4 
(see also specific procedures)
 Duodenal foreign bodies, removal 63
Endosurgery
Duodenoscopy
 anaesthetic considerations 97-8
 indications 46
closure 107
normal findings 56-7
future developments 9-10
 procedure 52-4
haemostasis 102
 Duodenostomy tube placement 166 
health and safety 97
instruments 99-100
insufflation 98-9
Ear
irrigation 102
 abnormalities 136-9
 knot tying
cleaning/flushing 133-5
extracorporeal 103-104
 complications 140
intracorporeal 104-107
normal appearance 135
laser 223-7
Electrosurgical equipment 26
 patient positioning 100
Empyema, tympanic bulla 139
port placement 100-1
Endometrial disease 154
postoperative care
：107-8
Endoscopes
procedure 101-2
care/cleaning 28, 32
sampling 103
disinfection  29
suction 102
 tissue dissection 102
flexible  11
for colonoscopy 74-5
(see also specific procedures)
229
Index
Enemas 76, 82
Gastropexy 167
Gastroscopes 3, 12, 13, 34-6, 47
Enteritis 61
Enteroscopes 47
Gastroscopy
Eosinophilic colitis 80
indications 45
Eosinophilic enteritis 61
normal findings 56
Ergonomics 28, 36 
procedure 49-52 
theatre set up 28
Gastrostomy tube placement 65-70, 166
“False middle ear' 138
Granulomatous colitis 80 
Feeding tubes see Duodenostomy, Gastrostomy,
Jejunostomy
Haemorrhage
 Fibrescopes
comparison with video-endoscopes 13-14
after biopsy 173
history 4
 in Gl endoscopy 39, 71
in rhinoscopy 119, 130
Fibrosing pleuritis 181
Haemostasis in endosurgery 102, 168
Fine-needle aspiration, flexible endoscopy 39 
Flexible endoscopes see Endoscopes and specific
Half hitch knot 107
Halogen light sources 22
scopes
Hand drill, arthroscopy 191, 192
 Fluid management systems for arthroscopy 193
Hasson technique 
Forceps
161
Health and safety
biopsy 16, 21, 75
ear flushing 133
 grasping 16, 21, 191, 192
endosurgery 97
 Foreign bodies
flexible endoscopy 31
duodenal 63
lasers 223
 gastric 62
Hiatal hernia 58
nasal 122-3
Hip dysplasia 212
nasopharyngeal 121
Hip pain 212
 oesophageal 58, 59
Histiocytic colitis 80
otic 137
 Hypertrophic pylorogastropathy 59, 60
removal
Hysteroscopy 149
 nasopharyngeal 117
tracheobronchial 95
upper Gl tract 62-4
lleocaecocolic junction  78
 Fractures
lleoscopy, indications 46 
 acetabular 212
Incomplete ossification
carpal 210
caudal glenoid 199 
humeral 209
humeral condyle 208-9
Fragmented medial coronoid process (FCP) 204-6
Inflammatory bowel disease 60, 61, 79-80
Friction brakes 36
Instrument channels 12
Frontal sinus exploration 120
Instrumentation
Fundus 51
for arthroscopy
1189-93
elbow 202
hip 210
Gastric biopsy 52
shoulder 195
Gastric dilatation, after gastroscopy 71
stifle 213
Gastric foreign bodies 62
tarsus 217
removal 63
for flexible endoscopy 15-16
Gastric neoplasia 59, 60
for foreign body removal 62-3
Gastric over-distension 71
for haemostasis 102
 Gastric ulcers/erosions 59, 60
for laparoscopy 158-9
Gastritis 59, 60
for laser endosurgery 221-2
 Gastrointestinal perforation 71
for otoendoscopy 131-2
 Gastrointestinal tract
for rhinoscopy _114
laser surgery 224
anterior 117
lower
caudal 115
biopsy 75
for rigid endoscopy _19-21
indications for endoscopy 73-4
for thoracoscopy 175-7
instrumentation 74--5
for tracheobronchoscopy 85-6
 patient preparation/positioning 76-7
(see also Endoscopes and other specific
procedure 77-9
instruments)
upper
Insufflation
 complications 71-2
complications 99
contraindications to endoscopy 46
equipment 23
indications for endoscopy 42-6
in Gl tract flexible endoscopy 12, 37, 48 
instrumentation 46-7
technique 98-9
patient preparation/positioning 47-8
Hasson 161
procedure 48-54 
Veress needle 160-1
(see also specific conditions and procedures)
in vaginoscopy 148
230
Index
Intestinal adenocarcinoma 61
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis 79-80
Lymphoid follicles, reproductive tract 153
Intestinal biopsy 43, 165-6
Intussusception 
Lymphoid hyperplasia 116, 153
 gastro-oesophageal 58
Lymphoma 
ileocolic/ileocaecal 82
colonic 81
Irrigation 12
gastric 60
 in laparoscopy 102
nasal 124
 in otoendoscopy 132, 134
 Lymphoplasmacytic enteritis 61
Irritable bowel syndrome 81
Lymphosarcoma
intestinal 61
mediastinal 182
Jejunoscopy
nasal 121
indications 46
 procedure 54
 Jejunostomy tube placement 70-1, 166
Masses
laser surgery 223-5
otic 136-7
 Knot tying 
(see also Neoplasia)
extracorporeal 103-104
Medial meniscus injury 215-16
intracorporeal 104-107
Medial shoulder instability 199-200
Mediastinal biopsy 180 
Mediastinal debridement 182
Laparoscopes 18, 19
Megaoesophagus 57, 58
Laparoscopy
Melanoma, nasal 125 
 anaesthetic considerations 159
Monitors 24, 25
biopsy 
Myringotomy 138-9
intestinal 165-6
 complications 140
liver 162-4 
pancreatic
164
renal 164-5
Nasal masses 123-7
closure 107
laser resection 223-4
 complications 173-4 
Nasopharyngeal polyps 126-7
endoscope choice 99-100
 Nasopharyngeal stenosis 121-2
history 3, 4-5
Neoplasia
 instrumentation 158-9
colonic 81
 insuflation 99
duodenal 60, 61
Hasson technique 161
gastric 59, 60
Veress needle technique 160-1
nasal 123-27
laser surgery 225
oesophageal 59
 port placement 100-1, 161-2
otic 136-7
for intestinal biopsy
165
pulmonary 181
for liver biopsy 163
urethral 136
 postoperative care 107-8
vaginal 154
procedure 101-2, 162
(see also specific tumours)
suction/irrigation_ 102
surgical approaches 159-60
theatre set up 28
 Oesophageal diverticulum  58
(see also specific surgical procedures)
Oesophageal foreign bodies 59
Laryngeal paralysis 88
removal 62
Oesophageal neoplasia 57, 59 
Lasers 
carbon dioxide 221
Oesophageal stricture 57, 58, 59, 64
diode 221-2
dilation 64-5
health and safety 223
Oesophagitis 57, 58, 63
lithotripsy 225-7
Oesophagoscopy
mass resection 126, 223-4
indications 45
normal findings 55-6
 principles 220
selection 223
procedure
 in urethrocystoscopy 147
flexible 49
Lateral glenohumeral ligament tears 200-1
rigid 54-5
Laxatives prior to colonoscopy 76 
Ollulanus triscuspis 59, 60
Leakage testing 13
 One-lung ventilation 178
Leiomyoma, oesophageal 58
Oslerus osleri 94
Ligamentum arteriosum division 184--5
Osteoarthritis of the elbow 208
Light sources 21, 22-3
Osteochondritis dissecans
Lithotripsy, laser endosurgery 225-7
elbow 206-7
Liver biopsy 162-4
shoulder 198-9
Lung lobe torsion 181-2
stifle 216
Lymphangiectasia 60, 61, 62
tarsus 218
231
Index
Osteosarcoma, nasal 126
Pleural effusion 181
Otic biopsy 137
 Pneumolobectomy
 Otic discharge 133, 137
complete 184
Otic foreign bodies 137
partial 183-4
Otic masses 136-7
 Pneumoperitoneum 98
Otitis externa 133, 136, 138, 140
 Pneumothorax
Otitis media 132, 133, 135, 137, 138, 140
spontaneous 181
Otoendoscopy
for thoracoscopy 98, 179
complications 140
 Polyps
indications 131
 auropharyngeal 121
instruments 131-2
benign mucosal antral 59
 normal findings 135
bladder 172
patient preparation 132
 nasopharyngeal 126-7
postoperative care 140
otic 136, 137
preoperative work-up
132
rectal adenomatous 82-3
procedure 132-135
urinary tract, laser resection 224-5
sampling 133, 134
vaginal 154
Otoscopes 18, 23, 131-2
 Port placement
 Ovarian remnant removal 170
arthroscopy
Ovariectomy 169-70
carpus 209
 Ovariohysterectomy
elbow 203
laparoscopic 167-9
hip 210-11
patient positioning 98
 shoulder 195-6
stifle 213-14
tarsus 217-18
 Pancreatic biopsy 164
laparoscopy 100-1, 161-2
 Paramesonephric septum 153
intestinal biopsy 165
Parasites
liver biopsy 163
 gastric 59, 60
 ovariohysterectomy
167
intestinal 60, 61, 62
pericardectomy  182
(see also individual species)
thoracic duct ligation
185
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), occlusion 185 
thoracoscopy 100-1, 179
 Patient assessment/stabilization 8--9, 31
 Postoperative care
Patient preparation/restraint/positioning 33
after arthroscopy 195
for arthroscopy 193-4 
after bronchoscopy 95
carpus 209
after laparoscopy 107-8
elbow 202-3
after oesophageal stricture dilation 64-5
hip 210
after otoendoscopy 140 
shoulder 195
after rhinoscopy 130
stifle 213
after thermal capsulorrhaphy 200
tarsus 217
after thoracoscopy 186
for endosurgery 98
after urethrocystoscopy 157
for Gl endoscopy 47-8, 76-7
 Power shavers 26-7, 192-3
for otoendoscopy 132
Premedication/sedation
for respiratory tract endoscopy 87
for bronchoscopy_ 97
for rhinoscopy.
for colonoscopy 76
 anterior 117-18
for respiratory tract endoscopy 86
caudal 114-15 
for rhinoscopy 114
for thoracoscopy 177
for upper Gl endoscopy 48
for urethrocystoscopy 145
 Pre-oxygenation for respiratory tract endoscopy
for vaginoscopy
/147-8
86, 98
PEG tubes 66, 67
Pressure valve 13
 contraindications 66
 Probes, arthroscopic 191
indications 66
Proctoscopy
placement 67-9
indications 73
problems 70
procedure 79
removal 70
Prostatic disease 151
use 69-70
Pseudomonas aeruginosa 134, 136
Pericardectomy 182-3
Pulmonary biopsy 180
Pericardial disease 181
Pulmonary oedema 95
 Pericardial fenestration
186
Pumps 23
 Pericardiocentesis 182
 for arthroscopy 24
Peristalsis 50
Pyloric intubation 53
Persistent hymen 153
Pyloric stenosis 59
Peyer's patches 57
Physaloptera 59, 60
Pleural biopsy 179-80
232
Index
Rectal adenomatous polyps 82-3
T-adaptor, swivel tip 86
Rectal stricture 83
Teamwork 27
Red-out 37
Telescopes 17
Remnant hymen 153
Theatre set up 7, 27-8, 189
Renal biopsy 164-5
Thermal capsulorrhaphy 199-200
Respiratory tract
Thoracic duct occlusion 185-6
 anaesthesia 86-7
Thoracoscopy.
indications for endoscopy 84
 anaesthesia 98, 177-8
 instrumentation 85-6
biopsy 179-80
 patient preparation/positioning 87
closure 107
 premedication 86
complications 186
(see also specific conditions and procedures)
indications 175
Rhinitis
instrumentation 99-100, 175-7
 allergic 122
laser surgery 225
 bacterial 122
normal findings 180-1
chronic 121
 patient preparation/positioning 98, 177
foreign body 122-3
port placement 100-1, 179
fungal, topical therapy 127-30
postoperative care 186
Rhinoscope 18
preoperative work-up 177
Rhinoscopy
procedure 102, 178--80
 anaesthesia 98
Tonsillar inflammation  113
 anatomical considerations 109-10
Toxocara 61
Tracheal collapse 93-4
anterior
 biopsy 119-20
Tracheal mass 94
instrumentation 117
Tracheal stent 94
normal findings 118-19
Tracheobronchitis 92
 patient preparation/positioning 117-18
Tracheobronchoscopy see Bronchoscopy/
 procedure 118-19
Tracheobronchoscopy
caudal
Training 8, 31
biopsy 116--17
Transabdominal cystoscopy 147
 Transbronchial aspiration/biopsy needles 86
foreign body removal
1117
 instrumentation 114
Transitional cell carcinoma
normal findings 116
bladder 153
 patient preparation/positioning 114-15
urethral 147, 151
procedure 115-16 
laser surgery 224
rigid 117
Transmissible venereal tumour (TVT) 154
complications 130
Transurethral laser lithotripsy 225-7
indications 110-12
Trichuris vulpis 78, 82
intraoperative work-up 112-13
Trocars  20
laser surgery 223-4
Tympanic membrane
postoperative care 130
absence 137
 preoperative work-up 112
displacement 138
Rigid endoscopes see Endoscopes and specific
normal findings 
135
scopes
rupture 138
Rod lens system 17
Typhlitis 82
Roeder knot 104, 105
Ulcerative rhinitis 119
Scissors 16
Ulcers
Sedation see Premedication/sedation
ear canal 136
Septic arthritis
 gastric 59
elbow 209
Ultrasonic broncho-fibre-videoscope 86
hip 212
Uncinaria 62
Shavers 26-7, 192-3
Ununited anconeal process 207--8
Sheaths 19, 20
Ureteral ectopia 147, 151-2
Snares 16
Ureteroceles 152
Specimen retrieval bags 103
Urethral dys-synergia 151
Spirocerca lupi 57, 59
Urethral neoplasia 147, 151
Squamous cell carcinoma, oesophageal 58
laser surgery 224
Sterilization 29
Urethral obstruction 151
Suction 12
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence (UsMI)
artefact 35
151
in laparoscopy 102
Urethrocystoscopes  148
in otoendoscopy 132, 134
Urethrocystoscopy/urethroscopy
Synovial biopsy, tarsal 218
 anatomical considerations 142-3
biopsy 146
complications 157
233
Index
Urethrocystoscopy/urethroscopy continued
Vaginal hyperplasia 154
indications 143
Vaginal neoplasia 154 
 instrumentation 144-5
Vaginal polyps 154
intraoperative work-up 144
Vaginoscopy
laser techniques 147, 224 
breeding time assessment in the bitch 154-6
normal findings 146
complications 157
patient preparation/positioning 98, 145
endoscopes 147
 postoperative care 157
normal findings
preoperative work-up 144
non-oestrous bitch 149
procedure 145-7
 oestrous changes 149-50, 155
urolith removal 147
patient preparation/positioning 147-8
Urethroliths 226
procedure 148-9
Urethroscopy see Urethrocystoscopy
Veress needle 23
Urinary tract
technique 160-1
infection (UTl) 152-3, 157
Vestibulovaginal stenosis 153-4
lower, laser surgery 224-5
Video-endoscopes
(see also specific conditions and procedures)
comparison with fibrescopes 13-14 
Urocystoliths 225
controls 36
Urolithiasis 153, 225
imaging systems 24-5
Uroliths
structure 13
laser lithotripsy 225-7
Video-otoscopy see Otoendoscopy
removal 147
Xenon light sources 22
234
BSAVA Manual of
Canine and Feline
Endoscopy and Endosurgery
Edited byPhilip Lhermette and David Sobel
Surgery in the human field is
carried out using minimally invasive
techniques wherever possible. The
advantages of these techniques are
considerable: improved visualization
of the surgical field; improved access
to the surgical site; reduced scarring,
morbidity and postoperative pain; and
more rapid healing. People nowadays
expect minimally invasive surgery for
themselves, and are very receptive to
these procedures for their pets.
The BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Endoscopy and Endosurgery
provides a practical guide for general practitioners worldwide who wish
to use minimally invasive techniques. It gives detailed information on the
instrumentation required for different techniques, and practical tips and advice
 on its care. The principles and basic techniques of diagnostic endoscopy and
specially commissioned diagrams.
CONTENTS
 An introduction to endoscopy and endosurgery; Instrumentation; Flexible endoscopy:
basic technique; Flexible endoscopy: upper gastrointestinal tract; Flexible endoscopy:
lower gastrointestinal tract; Flexible endoscopy: respiratory tract; Rigid endoscopy and
Rigid endoscopy: thoracoscopy; Rigid endoscopy: arthroscopy; An introduction to laser
endosurgery; Index.
Philip Lhermette BSc (Hons) CBiol MIBiol BVetMed MRCVS
Philip completed a BSc in animal physiology at the University of
Nottingham in 1977 and graduated from the Royal Veterinary College,
London in 1982.After fiveyears in mixed practice he founded Elands
Veterinary Clinic in Kent.He has studied endoscopy and endosurgery
the USA and has received advanced training in human minimally invasive
minimally invasive techniques including laparoscopic ovariohysterectomy
service. He is a special lecturer in veterinary endoscopy and endosurgery
at the University of Nottingham School of Veterinary Medicine.
David Sobel DvM MRcvS
David began his veterinary training at the University of Glasgow, before
returning to the United States where he received his DVM in 1992. He
received advanced training in human minimally invasive surgery at the
ISBN 978190531902-2
New England Medical Centre in Boston, Massachusetts. He currently
owns and operates Metropolitan Veterinary Consultants,a mobile
service offering diagnostic ultrasound and echocardiography, endoscopy,
endosurgery and laser endosurgery to small animal practitioners across
New England. He is also a consultant at the Veterinary Referal Centre
of New Hampshire. He is fortunate to be able to consult on occasion at
781905319022
Elands Veterinary Clinic in Kent.