FOURTHEDITION
SMALLANIMAL
OPHTHALMOLOGY
AProblem-OrientedApproach
RobertPeiffer
Simon Petersen-Jones
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
We dedicate this book to our families, our pets, and our patients.
For Elsevier:
Commissioning Editor Joyce Rodenhuis
Development Editor Louisa Welch
Project Manager Morven Dean/Jane Dingwall
Designer Erik Bigland
Illustration Manager Kirsteen Wright
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
SAUNDERS
British Library Cataloguing in
ELSEVIER
Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is
 2009, Elsevier Limited. All rights
available from the British Library
reserved.
Library of Congress Cataloging in
No part of this publication may be
Publication Data
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
A catalog record for this book is available
 or transmitted in any form or by any
from the Library of Congre55
means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise,
Knowledge and best practice in this field
without either the prior permission of the
are constantly changing. As new research
publishers or a licence permitting
and experience broaden our knowledge.
restricted copying in the United Kingdom
 changes in practice, treatment and drug
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency.
therapy may become necessary or
 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1T
appropriate. Readers are advised to check
4LP. Permissions may be sought directly
the most current information provided (i)
from Elsevier's Health Sciences Rights
 on procedures featured or (i) by the
Department in Philadelphia, USA: phone:
manufacturer of each product to be
(+1) 215 238 7869. fax: (+1) 215 238 2239,
administered, to verify the recommended
e-mail: healthpermissions@elsevier.com.
dose or formula, the method and duration
You may also complete your request
of ad ministration, and contraindications. It
 on-line via the Elsevier homepage
 the responsibility of the practitioner,
(http:/www.elsevier.com), by selecting
relying on their own experience and
'Customer Support' and then 'Obtaining
knowledge of the patient, to make
Permissions'.
 diagnoses, to determine dosages and the
best treatment for each individual patient,
First published 1989
 and to take all appropriate safety
Second edition 1996
precautions. To the fullest extent of the law.
Third edition 2001
neither the publisher nor the author
Fourth edition 2009
 assumes any liability for any injury and/or
damage.
ISBN: 978-0-7020-2861-8
The Publisher
your source for books,
ELSEVIER
journals and multimedia
in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
ELSEVIER
HRa5Al   Salre Founclalion
The
 publisher's
policy is to use
pa per manufactured 
from sustalnable forests
Printed in China by RDC
Group Limited
Contributors
GBDA Professor of Canine Medicine and Surgery
Royal Veterinary College
Hatfield, UK
Ellen Bjerkas DVM PhD DipECVO
Professor
Department of Companion Animal Clinical Sciences
Norwegian School of Veterinary Sciences
Oslo,Norway
Cynthia S Cook DVM PhD DipACVO
Veterinary Vision
San Carlos, CA, USA
Bjorn Ekesten DVM PhD
Professor of Clinical Neurophysiology
Department of Clinical Sciences
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Uppsala, Sweden
Bruce H Grahn DVM Diplomate ABVP ACVO
Professor of Veterinary Ophthalmology
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Western College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Saskatchewan
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada
R Gareth Jones BVSc CertVOphthal MRCVS
The Park Veterinary Group
Leicester, UK
Olivier Jongh DMV
Clinique Vetérinaire du Val de Saone
Neuville sur Saone, France
vii
RIBUTORS
Mary L Landis MS VMD
Resident in Ophthalmology
Bucks County Animal Ophthalmology
Doylestown, PA, USA
CONTI
Sebastien Monclin DVM
Resident of Ophthalmology
University of Liege
Belgium
Domenico Multari DVM SCMPA PhD
Centro Veterinario Oculisto *Fontane"
Treviso, Italy
Kristina Narfstrom DVM PhD DipECVO
Professor of Veterinary Ophthalmology
Department of Veterinary Medicine & Surgery
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO, USA
Robert L Peiffer Jr DVM PhD DipACVO
Bucks County Animal Ophthalmology
Doylestown, PA, USA
Assistant Professor of Comparative Ophthalmology
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Veterinary Medical Center
Michigan State University
East Lansing, Ml, USA
Peter W Renwick MA VetMB DVOphthal MRCVS
Willows Referral Service
Shirley, Solihull, UK
Serge G Rosolen DVM PhD
Eye Veterinary Clinic
Asnieres,France
Robin Stanley BVSc(Hons) FACVSc
Animal Eye Care
East Malvern, Victoria, Australia
Wendy M Townsend DVM MS DipACVO
Assistant Professor of Comparative Ophthalmology
Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Veterinary Teaching Hospital
Michigan State University
villi
East Lansing, Ml, USA
Joe Wolfer DVM DipACVO
CONTRIBUTORS
VeterinaryOphthalmologist
Animal Eye Clinic
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Mike Woods MVB CertVOphthal MRCVS
Practice Principal & Ophthalmologist
Primrose Hill Veterinary Hospital
Dun Laoghaire, Co Dublin, Ireland
ix
Preface to First Edition
Ophthalmology has blossomed and matured as a recognized, valued specialty
general practitioner is continually improving; and several excellent contempo-
rary comprehensive textbooks are available on the subject.
Then why this text? We have recognized a need by the general practitioner
for an informative source that he or she can turn to as a guide to the manage-
ment of a particular problem. Appropriate management implies two insepar-
able principles - accurate diagnosis and adequate therapy. We have attempted
to address each with equal emphasis. We perceive a need by the student for a
text that condenses a large amount of information into a ‘friendly' manual that
emphasizes problem solving rather than mermorization and that provides more
usable information than lecture notes without the depth of a reference text. We
hope thismanual meets these needs
Why these authors? The profession and the specialty are evolving and chang.
ing. Although I am somewhat reluctant to classify myself as *mature' as a clini-
cal ophthalmologist, I cannot help but be impressed by the energy, enthusiasm,
and ideas of a younger generation of amazingly well-trained ophthalrmologists.
All of the contributors fit this mold, and I hope that they and their colleagues
who follow will continue to probingly question the established as well as
addressing unsolved problems. Experience is almost always tainted by dogma-
Cottrell, and Petersen-Jones to express their ideas and philosophies without
unwarranted respect for sacred cows. The product is exciting.
We have attempted not to reproduce a comprehensive text but to produce
a clinical manual; references are not included. As conditions may present
with more than one presenting sign, there is some repetition; conditions are
discussed in detail under their most obvious or significant sign. We have
discussed in detail only those surgical procedures that are likely to be routinely
perforrmed by the practitioner, and details of these procedures are described
with their pictorial presentation rather than in the text. Emphasis is placed
on techniques that have proven to be rmost valuable and effective for the
authors, and readers should recognize that there may indeed be quite accept-
able alternative approaches to clinical problems.We do hope that this
Xi
PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION
handbook will prove a ready and valuable reference to the general practitioner
presenting with a challenging ophthalmic case and when reviewed in its entirety
will provide a practical overall approach to small animal ophthalmology.
Bob Peiffer
Chapel Hill
1989
xii
Preface to Fourth Edition
When the first edition of Small Animal Ophthaimology: a Problem-Oriented
Approach was published in 1989 1 would not have foreseen struggling with
the Preface to the Fourth Edition alrmost two decades later. The children
have grown and moved away, and a German Shorthair and Redbone Coon
Hound have been replaced by a pair of Labrador Retrievers. The cat, I suspect,
is reincarnate of his predecessors, and the Pennsylvania winters are a bit
Simon Petersen-Jones to share the labor from the second edition onward
and both myself and the text have benefited from his diligence and insight.
While the world has changed, the scope and intent of the text remain constant
- to provide the student or general practitioner with a practical reference
that condenses an ever-expanding base of knowledge in small animal ophthal-
mology into an affordable user-friendly clinical manual that emphasizes
 o        
This was a novel approach at the time, and the fact that the book has been
translated into Japanese, Spanish, and French, and oft mimicked since, speaks
to its utility.
We have maintained the theme of recruiting accomplished contributors who
provide broad, contemporary, and international perspectives. All share a com-
mitment to excellence in the management of their patients that is reflected in
the quality of their work.
As I compare their contributions to those in the first edition I realize that
progress is rmade in small steps; successful management of canine glaucoma is
temporary technologies of laser and implants. Treatment of tear film deficien-
cies still requires long-term managerment and a motivated and educated pet
owner, although the lacrirmostirmulants have obviated the necessity of parotid
duct transposition in many. Technologies and methodologies in imaging, cata-
ract surgery, and retinal detachment repair have remarkably enhanced out-
comes for many of our patients. The potential of molecular medicine beckons
We are grateful for the competence and professionalism of the Elsevier staff
who have provided encouragerment, guidance, and the occasional nudge that
!IX
these projects seem to require. The opportunity to include a CD-Rom allows
EDITIOI
us to expand the visual impact of observation to formulate differential diagno-
FOURTH
proficient in the management of their ophthalmic cases.
Bob Peiffer
Doylestown, Pennsylvania. 2008
PREFACETO
  o   d o  o  of on   
Animal Ophthaimology: a Problem-Oriented Approach. I well remermber over
1
resident visiting Dr Peiffer (as have many aspiring young ophthalmologists
before and after me) when he asked if I would be interested to write a chapter
for the book he was developing. I jumped at the opportunity, never suspecting
that I would join Bob to edit the subsequent editions.
Veterinary ophthalmology has a rapidly expanding knowledge base but the
problem-oriented approach still works well. Our patients present to us with
certain clinical signs that fall into the broad categories of the chapters in the
book, rather than with a diagnosis of, for example, retinal detachment or dis.
tichiasis. It is our job to identify the clinical signs and through a systematic and
thorough eye examination reach a diagnosis. The aim of the book is to help
practitioners achieve this goal.
 In this latest edition we have added a CD-Rom that allows for case presenta-
tions - we hope that this will be useful and educational for our readers.
Simon Petersen-Jones
East Lansing, Michigan. 2008
xiv
Clinical basic science
Cynthia S. Cook, Robert L. Peiffer, Jr
and Mary L. Landis
OCULAR EMBRYOLOGY
The ocular prirmordia appear during the first weeks of gestation as bilateral
evaginations of the neural ectoderm of the forebrain. These optic sulci gradu-
ally enlarge and approach the surface ectoderm as optic vesicles connected to
to forrm the lens placode (Fig. 1.1A,B) occurs as a result of inductive infuences
by the optic vesicle. Invagination of the lens placode occurs concurrently with
that of the optic vesicle to forrm a hollow lens vesicle within a bilayered optic
cup (Fig. 1.1C,D), the inner layer of which will form the stratified layers of
the neural retina and the inner epithelial layer of the iris and ciliary body; the
outer layer becomes the cuboidal monolayered retinal pigment epithelium, the
outer pigmented epithelial layer of the iris and ciliary body, and, in the dog
and cat, the pupillary sphincter and dilator rmuscles (the only muscles in the
body of neural ectodermal origin). The potential space between the two
apposed layers becomes formed and fluid-filled in retinal detachment and uveal
cysts. The stalk attaching the lens vesicle to the surface ectoderrm atrophies
through a combination of cell death and active migration of cells out of the
stalk (Fig. 1.1E,F).
Invagination to form the optic cup occurs eccentrically, with formation of a
slit-like opening called the optic (choroid) fissure located inferiorly (Fig. 1.1F).
The vascular supply to the embryonic eye, the hyaloid artery (or primary vitre-
ous), enters the optic cup through this opening and arborizes extensively around
the lens to form the tunica vasculosa lentis. Embryonic remnants of this vas-
ing Mittendorf's dot, located inferior to the suture junction), persistent tunica
vasculosa lentis, or, rmore significant clinically, persistent hyperplastic primary
vitreous (PHPV). The term persistent embryonic vasculature, or PEV, encom-
passes the entire spectrum. Failure of the optic fissure to close normally rmay
result in congenital defects anteriorly (iridial coloboma) or posteriorly (chorio-
retinal or optic nerve coloboma). Microphthalmos or anophthalmos may occur
as a result of deficiencies in the early formation of the optic sulcus or vesicle,
or from incomplete closure of the optic fissure with failure to establish early
intraocular pressure (Fig. 1.2).
LMOLOGY
ANIMALOPHTHAL
The posterior lens epithelial cells elongate, forming primary lens fibers that
obliterate the space within the lens vesicle. Secondary lens fibers are forrmed by
elongation of cells at the equator (lens bow); these fibers pass circumferentially
around the embryonal lens nucleus. Note that the sutures are associated only
with the fetal and adult lens fibers. This marvellous differentiaton of the young
posterior epithelial cells accounts for the unchanging 3-6 μm thick posterior
capsule (the bane of the cataract surgeon) compared to the more robust ante-
rior capsule, which progressively thickens with age as basement membrane
produced by the lens epithelial cells accumulates.
Thickening of the future neural retina occurs with segregation into inner and
outer neuroblastic layers. Cellular proliferation takes place in the outer neuro-
blastic layer, with migration to form the inner layer. The ganglion cells are the
first to achieve final differentiation, extending axons that form the nerve fiber
layer and collectively form the optic nerve. The horizontal, amacrine, and
Fig. 1.1 Sequential development of ocular structures. These scanning electron
CLINICAL BASIC SCIENCE
micrographs are of mouse embryos on days 10 and 11 of gestation, corresponding to days
17-24 of gestation in the dog. The sequence in most mammals is quite similar. (A) On
external examination the invaginating lens placode can be seen (arrow). Note its position
relative to the maxillary (Mx) and mandibular (Mn) prominences of the first visceral arch.
(B) Embryo of the same age as that in (A). Frontal fracture through the lens placode
(arrow) illustrates the associated thickening of the surface ectoderm (E). Mesenchyme 
(M) of neural crest origin is present adjacent to the lens placode. The distal portion of the
optic vesicle concurrently thickens as the precursor of the neural retina (NR), while the
proximal optic vesicle becomes a shorter, cuboidal layer which is the anlage of the retinal
pigment epithelium (PE). The cavity of the optic vesicle (V) becomes progressively
smaller. (C) The epithelium of the lens placode continues to invaginate (L). There is an
abrupt transition between the thicker epithelium of the placode and the adjacent surface
ectoderm, which is not unlike the transition between the future neural retina (NR) and the
future pigmented epithelium (PE) (periodic acid-Schiff). (D)As the lens vesicle enlarges,
the external opening, or lens pore (arrow), becomes progressively smaller. The lens
epithelial cells at the posterior pole of the lens elongate to form the primary lens fibers
(L). NR = anlage of the neural retina; PE = anlage of the pigmented epithelium (now a
very short cuboidal layer) (magnification x221). (E) External view of the lens pore
(arrowhead) and its relationship to the maxillary prominence (Mx).(F) Frontal fracture
reveals the optic fissure (*) where the two sides of the invaginating optic cup meet. This
forms an opening in the cup allowing access to the hyaloid artery (H), which ramifies
around the invaginating lens vesicle (L). The former cavity of the optic vesicle is
obliterated except in the marginal sinus (S), at the transition between the neural retina
(NR) and the pigmented epithelium. E = surface ectoderm. Arrowhead = stalk of
separating lens vesicle.(Reprinted with permission from Vet. Comp. Ophthatmot.(1995) 5:
109-123.)
Fig. 1.2 Microphthalmia in a merle Australian Shepherd pup. This genetic syndrome
(merle ocular dysgenesis) occurs in dogs with a predominantly white coat color.
Microphthalmia occurs through multiple mechanisms including hypoplasia of the optic
vesicle.
IGY
Muller cells also differentiate in the inner neuroblastic layer. The bipolar cells
MOLO
and photoreceptors develop in the outer neuroblastic layer and form the inner
and outer nuclear layers in the adult. Retinal dysplasia may result from disor-
OPHTHAL
ganized development of the neural retina, with formation of rosettes. The
retinal pigment epithelium is the determining factor for the differentiation of
the layers on each side, namely the retina and the choroid and sclera.
Following detachrment of the lens vesicle from the surface ectoderm, develop-
AL
ANIM
ment of the anterior chamber structures progresses. A specialized population
of the neural ectoderrm called the neuraf crest ceffs migrate between the surface
SMALL
ectoderrm and lens vesicle to form the corneal endothelium, which secretes its
basement membrane, Descemet's membrane. Additional neural crest cells form
the corneal stroma between the surface epithelium and endothelium. The pupil-
ing onto the anterior surface of the optic cup; persistence or dysplasia of the
pupillary membrane results in uveal attachments between the iris and lens
and/or cornea (Figs 1.3 & 1.4). Neural crest cells also forrm the outer two coats
of the posterior globe, the choroid (including the tapetum) and sclera.
OCULAR ANATOMY, PHYSIOLOGY, AND BIOCHEMISTRY
Orbit
The orbit in the cat and dog is formed by contributions of the frontal, pala-
tine, lacrimal, maxillary, Zygomatic, and presphenoid bones. The bony orbit
is incomplete superotemporally, where it is bridged by the dense orbital liga-
ment spanning the frontal process of the zygomatic bone and the zygomatic
process of the frontal bone. The lacrimal gland lies superiorly, under this
the periorbita, which is firmly attached to the orbital margins rostrally. Seven
extraocular muscles innervated by the third, fourth, and sixth cranial nerves
Fig. 1.3Peter's anomaly
in a cat. Note the persistent
pupillary membranes
attached to the anterior lens
capsule with associated
 anterior subcapsular
edo
CLINICAL BASIC SCIENCE
7
Fig. 1.4 Schematic of components of Peter's anomaly (anterior segment dysgenesis)
which result from incomplete or delayed separation of the lens vesicle from the surface
ectoderm. (A) Persistent pupillary membranes: (B) corneal opacity with absence of
endothelium and Descemet's membrane: (C) iris hypoplasia: (D) anterior lenticonus and
anterior polar cataract associated with anterior capsular defects. (Courtesy of Farid
Mogannam.)
control movement of the globe. There is a variable amount of fat between
the periorbita and the bony wall and surrounding the extraocular muscles.
The zygomatic salivary gland is located inferotemporally, deep to the zygo-
matic arch, and may be a site of infection or mucocele formation.
The wall of the bony orbital wall is thinner medially and may allow extension
of infectious or neoplastic processes originating in the nasal cavity or perior-
bital sinuses. Infectious processes involving the roots of the molar teeth may
also extend to involve the orbit.
Space-occupying orbital lesions include both inflammatory and neoplastic
etiologies. Due to the incomplete nature of the bony orbit, both inferiorly and
superotemporally, a space-occupying process may become quite advanced
before exophthalmos and/or deviation of the globe is noted. Diagnosis and
management of such conditions are discussed in subsequent chapters.
Eyelids
The eyelids forrm the initial barrier to mechanical damage to the eye. They also
serve to distribute the tear flm and, through the meibomian glands, provide
an oily secretion to slow tear evaporation. The eyelids consist of:
1.An outer layer of thin, pliable skin
 2. A small amount of loose connective tissue containing modified sweat
glands and the circumferential fibers of the orbicularis oculi muscle
(innervated bybranches of the facial nerve)
3.
The more rigid fibrous connective tissue of the tarsal plate
4.
 The radial fibers of the levator palpebrae superioris (innervated by the
oculomotor nerve) and Muller's (sympathetic innervation via branches of
the trigerminal nerve) muscles
 5. The palpebral conjunctiva containing goblet cells.
5
IGY
Cilia are found on the margin of the upper lid; posterior to these follicles
MOLO
are the openings of the sebaceous (meibomian) glands; these gland orifices
are found along the eyelid margin (Figs 1.5 & 1.6). Dysplasia or metaplasia
OPHTHAL
of these glands results in formation of aberrant hair follicles (distichia or
ectopic cilia), which may contact the cornea and result in epiphora and,
rarely, kera titis.
Surgical manipulations of the eyelids require delicate handling to minimize
AL
ANIM
swelling and careful apposition of surgical or traumatic wound margins. Par-
ticular attention should be paid to maintenance of a smooth eyelid margin.
Closure of full-thickness defects should utilize a two-layer pattern; the tarsal
SMAI
plate has the greatest strength and should be included in the subcutaneous
layer.
Lacrimal system
The precorneal tear film consists of three distinct layers:
conjunctival goblet cells
2.A thick aqueous layer
3.
An outer oily layer produced by the meibomian glands of the eyelids.
The aqueous portion of the tear film is the combined product of the orbital
lacrimal gland and a gland located at the base of the third eyelid. The major
lacrimal gland is located in the superotemporal area of the orbit beneath the
orbital ligarment and supraorbital process of the frontal bone; its secretions gain
access to the conjunctival sac from numerous small ducts in the superior fornix.
The tears are distributed over the surface of the cornea through the action of
the eyelids and exit through the nasolacrimal puncta. These two openings are
located nasally, superior, and inferior to the medial canthus, just inside the
forrm the nasolacrimal duct, which passes through a bony canal in the maxilla
to open ventrolaterally in the nasal cavity
Pupil 
Cilium
Dorsal (superior) 
Limbus
punctum
Lateral
Medial (nasal) -
(temporal)
canthus
canthus
ventral (inferior)
Conjunctiva
 punctum
Thirdeyelid
Iris
Fig. 1.5 External appearance of the canine eye depicting the adnexal structures. With
6
the exception of the pupillary shape, the feline eye is identical.
CLINICAL BASIC SCIENCE
 Orbicularis oculi m.
Levator palpebrae
Palpebral conjunctiva
superioris m.
Bulbar conjunctiva
Miller's m.
Fornix
Tarsal plate
Gand of Zeis
Zonules
 and Moll
Cilium
Retinal
Meibomian
vessels
gland
Tapetum
Lens
 Pupil 
Anterior
Cendo
chamber
nerve
Iris
Myelinated
Iridocorneal
fbers
angle
Optic
disk
Ciliary body
B
A
Stroma
Endothelium
Descemet's
Epithelium
membrane
B
Nerve fiber layer
Inner limitingmembrane
Ganglion cellayer
 Ganglion cell
Inner plexiform layer
Ganglion cell xons
 Inner nuclei layer
forming optic nerve
Outer plexiform layer
 Bipolar cell
Quter nuclei layer
Rods and cones
Outer limiting membrane
 Pigment epithelium 
Nuclei ofphotoreceptors
Choroid-
Sclera ~
Fig. 1.6Schematic anatomy of the canine and feline eye.
IGY
Conjunctiva and third eyelid
MOLO
The conjunctiva is a mucous membrane that covers the globe between the fornix
and the cornea, the third eyelid, and the inner surface of the eyelids (see Fig.
OPHTHAL
1.6). Over the surface of the globe, the conjunctiva blends with Tenon's capsule,
which attaches firmly to the lirmbus. The conjunctiva is a highly vascular, deli-
cate tissue containing many mucus-secreting goblet cells. The vascularity and
MAL
mobility of the conjunctiva can be used to the surgeon's advantage to act as a
ANIM
graft for corneal defects. The stroma is rich in lymphatics and the conjunctiva
is a site of localization of lymphocytes, and provides a reservoir of immuno-
SMALL
competent cells for the globe, playing an important role in the inflammatory
responses of the avascular cornea.
The third eyelid is a mobile, semi-rigid structure located inferonasal to the
globe (see Fig. 1.5). It is covered on both palpebral and bulbar surfaces by
conjunctiva. The third eyelid owes its rigidity to a T-shaped piece of hyaline
cartilage located within its substantia propria. At the base of the cartilage is a
seromucoid lacrimal gland that produces approximately one third of the pre-
corneal tear film. Poorly defined connective tissue attaches the gland and base
of the cartilage to the sclera and periorbita inferiorly. Inadequacy of these
attachments with prolapse of the gland occurs not uncommonly, particularly
gland in such cases is contraindicated as it may predispose to future develop-
as described in Chapter 4 (pp. 88-90).
Cornea
The cornea is the transparent, avascular, anterior portion of the outer fibrous
coat of the eye (see Fig. 1.6A). The cornea consists of surface epithelium, col-
lagenous stroma, and Descermet's membrane, which is the basement mermbrane
produced by the inner endothelial monolayer. As the cornea is avascular, its
 oxygen and nutritional needs are met by diffusion externally from the precor-
neal tear film and internally from the aqueous humor; the peripheral cornea is
also oxygenated by the limbal capillary plexus. Corneal transparency is a
product of several factors unique to corneal physiology. Relative dehydration
of the cornea is maintained by an active Na'-K+ ATPase-associated pump
mechanism within the endothelial monolayer. The regular arrangement of the
collagen fibrils in the corneal stroma minirmizes sca ttered light and thus enhances
transparency. The normal absence of pigment and blood vessels in the stroma
The cornea has remarkable healing capabilities. Sirmple epithelial defects
are covered by a combination of sliding of adjacent cells and rmitosis to restore
normal architecture. Wounds that extend into the stroma heal first by re-
epithelialization, with a longer period of tirme required to fill the stromal
defect. Corneal scarring is a result of the irregular pattern created by replace-
ment collagen fibrils. Vascularization is expected to accompany any corneal
injury or inflammatory condition that persists longer than 7-10 days and
contributes to the granulation tissue that initially fills a deep corneal wound.
Descemet's membrane is elastic and tends to resist tearing during an injury.
Wounds extending to Descemet's membrane (descermetocele) and full-thickness
8
lacerations are indications for immediate surgical management. Some regen-
erative properties are attributed to the canine endothelium, fewer to the
feline.
INICAL
Iris and ciliary body
BASIC:
The iris and ciliary body comprise the anterior portion of the middle, vas-
-   si  I        o io 
SCIENCE
 s n  o  an  o  a go o 
to pass through the lens to reach the photosensitive retina. This variable
aperture is maintained by the sympathetically supplied radial dilator rmuscle
and the parasympathetically supplied circumferential sphincter muscle. Both
muscles are located on the posterior side of the iris, adjacent to the pig-
mented epithelial layer. The iris anterior to these muscles consists of a loose,
vascular connective tissue that is variably pigmented. Full-thickness corneal
wounds often seal with prolapsed iris tissue, which rmust be replaced into
the anterior chamber (if viable) or excised. Surgical manipulations of the
Operative healing.
The ciliary body is the posterior continuation of the iris and consists of an
rior portion called the pars plana. The ciliary body is lined by a bilayered epi-
thelium of which only the inner layer is pigmented. Aqueous humor is produced
by the ciliary epithelium through a combination of passive ultrafiltration and
active secretion involving carbonic anhydrase. The passive production of
aqueous humor is influenced by mean arterial blood pressure. Inflammation of
the anterior uvea will result in reduced active aqueous secretion and thus
lowered intraocular pressure. The stroma of the ciliary body contains the
smooth fibers of the parasympathetically innervated ciliary muscle, which is
important in accommodation of the lens for near vision.
Aqueous hurmor circulates from the ciliary processes into the posterior
within the iridocorneal angle. During this process, metabolites are exchanged
with the avascular lens and cornea.Morphologic or physiologic barriers to
aqueous circulation and outflow are responsible for elevations in intraocular
pressure (glaucoma).
Lens
The lens is a transparent, biconvex structure anchored equatorially to the
ciliary body by collagenous zonular fbers (see Fig. 1.6). Contraction of the
ciliary muscle alters the degree of curvature of the lens, thereby changing its
optical power. The lens is surrounded by an outer capsule; deep to the anterior
cells are metabolically active and undergo mitosis throughout life. As the cells
rmultiply they migrate to the equator of the lens where they elongate and gradu-
ally lose their nucleus and other organelles to form the lens fibers. These fibers
are added in a circumferential arrangerment so that older fbers are within the
deeper portion of the lens. The fiber ends meet anteriorly at the upright Y
suture and posteriorly at the invertedY suture.
the circulating aqueous humor and is broken down anaerobically to lactic acid.
9
GY
Saturation of the normal pathways for glucose metabolism occurs in diabetes
MOLO
mellitus and results in accumulation of sorbitol within the lens. Sorbitol accu-
mulation causes the lens to imbibe water by osmosis, which leads to the forma-
1号日
OPE
Retina
The retina (see Fig. 1.6) is a complex photosensory structure consisting of ten
MAL
ANIM
layers:
1. Pigment epithelium
SMALL
 2. Photoreceptors (rod and cone outer segments)
 3. External limiting membrane (Muiller cell processes)
 4. Outer nuclear layer (photoreceptor nuclei)
 5. Outer plexiforrm layer
6. Inner nuclear layer (nuclei of Muller; amacrine, horizontal, and bipolar
cells)
7. Inner plexiform layer
8. Ganglion cell layer
9. Nerve fiber layer (axons of ganglion cells)
10. Inner limiting membrane (Muller cell processes).
The principal neuronal connections of the retina involve the photoreceptors,
fiber layer and join to make up the optic nerve at the posterior pole. The ama
crine and horizontal cells forrm internal connections between bipolar cells and
may thus exert a regulatory influence. Muller cells are a non-neuronal constitu
ent that forms a supporting matrix and the barriers of the inner and outer
limiting membra nes.
Inherited retinal degenerative processes and sudden acquired retinal degen-
eration (SARD) initially involve the photoreceptors, either rods or cones, or
both. With time the condition usually progresses to involve the other retinal
layers, and diffuse thinning and blindness results.
Tapetum
The tapetum is a modification of the choroid located deep to the pigment epi-
thelium and choriocapillaris. It is composed of a highly organized arrangement
of cells containing zinc and riboflavin, which results in a reflective appearance.
The color of the tapetum ranges from green to blue to yellow and varies with
the species, breed, and age. Thinning of the overlying retina (as occurs in retinal
degeneration) results in a hyper-reflective appearance of the tapetum.
Optic nerve and central visual pathways
The optic nerve consists of combined axons of the ganglion cells and is sur-
disk is the origin of the optic nerve within the globe; its irregular triangular
appearance in the dog is a result of the varia ble quantity of myelin surrounding
the nerve fibers of the optic disk (see Fig. 1.6). The optic nerve exits the orbit
at the optic foramen. The right and left optic nerves meet at the optic chiasm,
10
located rostral to the pituitary gland. In cats and dogs, the majority (65-75%)
of nerve fibers cross in the chiasm to travel as the optic tracts to the contralat-
CLINICAL BASIC :
eral lateral geniculate nucleus. This decussation is responsible for coordinated
bilateral vision as well as the occurrence of a consensual pupillary light reflex
(Fig. 1.7).
The majority of axons in the optic tracts terrminate in the lateral geniculate
nucleus, synapsing on neurons whose axons form the optic radiations and ter-
SCIENCE
minate in the occipital cortex. This pathway is responsible for conscious visual
perception.
The remaining optic tract axons bypass the lateral geniculate nucleus and
terminate in the rostral colliculus of the pretectal area. Parasympathetic axons
 originating here synapse in the oculomotor nucleus of the midbrain, origin of
the oculomotor nerves, whose axons synapse in the ciliary ganglion prior to
entering the globe as the short ciliary nerves to the pupillary sphincter rmuscles.
This pathway is responsible for the direct and consensual pupillary light
responses. The cat has two short ciliary nerves whereas the dog has several.
Visual fields:
R
R
Constrictor
Retina
Dilator
Optic nn.
 Clliary ganglion 
Optic tract
 Optic tract
Chiasm
Cculomotor
nerve
Forebrain
Lateral
geniculate
nucleus
Middle
Midbrain
ear
Cculomotor
Cranial
nucleus
cervical
ganglion
Cervical spinal cord
Cervical
sympathetic
trunk
Thoracic spinal cord T1-T3
Fig. 1.7 Pupillary reflex pathways
1
IGY
Sympathetic control of the pupillary dilator muscle originates in the hypo-
MOLO
thalamus, the axons from which synapse with preganglionic neurons in the first
three or four segments of the thoracic spinal cord. These axons join the sympa-
OPHTHAL
thetic trunk terrminating in the cranial cervical ganglion. Postganglionic fibers
travel to the eye after crossing the roof of the rmiddle ear cavity and are distrib-
uted to the ciliary muscle, pupillary dilator, third eyelid, and the Muller's
muscle of the upper lid. Compromise of sympathetic innervation to the globe
and adnexa results in the classic signs of Horner's syndrome: ptosis (drooping
ANIM
 of the upper lid), miosis (pupillary constriction), and protrusion of the third
SMALL
eyelid.
OCULARPATHOLOGY
The systematic examination of surgical and necropsy-obtained ocular tissue
is essential for optimal patient management, the career-long educational
process, and enhancing understanding of ocular disease in animals. Maximal
benefit is obtained from optimally fixed tissues; in almost all cases, immersion
fixation in 10% formalin is adequate. Fixation should be expedient as the
retina, especially, undergoes rapid autolysis; trimming of periocular tissues
enhances penetration of fixatives, and injection of 0.5 rml of the fixative into
the vitreous cavity with a 27-gauge needle at the equator will minimize neu-
rosensory retinal separation artifact. Otherwise, submit globes intact so that
the pathologist can appreciate the intertissue relationships. Use adequate
fixation to occur.
Ocular response to disease
A detailed discussion of ocular pathology would fill a text of its own; principles
and concepts of importance to clinicians are discussed with particular disease
processes throughout the following chapters. Three related features warrant
note:
1. The propensity of the ocular tissues (especially the epithelium of lens,
uvea, and retina, but also the corneal endothelium and uveal vasculature)
to undergo reactive changes of hypertrophy, hyperplasia, and metaplasia
2.In contrast to the above, the fact that many of the specialized ocular
tissues are post-mitotic, with limited regenerative potential
3.1
Because of the dependence of the ocular tissues on tissue transparency
and intertissue relationships for norrmal function, the devastating effect
that these changes can have on vision. A focus of hepatitis may resolve
with scarring and minirmal, if any, functional significance, while a
comparable process in the eye may lead to blindness.
Fibroplasia in the cornea, for example, will result in scarring and opacifica-
tion. In the anterior chamber, peripheral anterior and posterior synechia and
mermbranes are associated with secondary glaucoma. Iris neovascularization,
also known as rubeosis irides or pre-iridal fibrovascular mem brane, is a common
12
cause of intraocular hemorrhage and secondary angle closure glaucoma.
Hypertrophy, hyperplasia, and metaplasia of lens epithelium are an integral
CLINICAL BASIC SCIENCE
part of cataractogenesis, and the bane of the cataract surgeon who has to deal
with postoperative capsular fibrosis. Vitreous detachment, fibrosis, and neo-
vascularization lead to cyclitic membranes and their dire consequences of
retinal detachment and phthisis bulbi. The clinical ophthalmologist wages
a relentless pharmacologic battle against these processes with anti-inflamma-
tories and antimetabolites, and new approaches will likely play an important
role in the future management of ocular disease.
13
Diagnostics
Serge G. Rosolen, Domenico Multari,
Mike Woods and Olivier Jongh
INTRODUCTION
The ophthalmic examination, combined with history and signalment, provides
the foundation for obtaining an accurate diagnosis. Ophthalmic diagnosis is
achieved by a combination of basic knowledge, the mastering of simple instru-
mentation, and critical observation. The forrmer includes an understanding of
anatomy, physiology, and disease mechanisms. Instrumentation facilitates
nifying loupe, bright focal illumination, Schirmer tear test strips, diagnostic
dyes, cytology, direct ophthalrmoscopy, and Schiotz tonometry should be
readily available in any practice, and in experienced hands will be adequate to
manage the great majority of ophthalmic cases. More expensive and sophisti-
cated instrumentation and technologies, including the slit-lamp biomicroscope,
indirect ophthalmoscope, applanation tonometry, electrophysiology, gonios-
copy, ultrasonography, and other imaging rmodalities, fluorescein angiogra phy,
keratoscopy, and retinoscopy represent the next level of diagnostics and are
available to specialists or to those with a particular interest in the field. A sys-
tematic approach to examination should be followed and modified for each
individual case based upon the history and signs. Technical competency in
diagnostics is achieved simply by practice; rmaking an ophthalmic exarmination
a part of every routine physical examination will hone skills for the occasion
INSTRUMENTS AND BASIC DIAGNOSTICTECHNIQUES
Magnifying loupe
A binocular magnifying loupe of x2 to x4 magnification and a focal length of
o  ns ro os iq sso r o nou in si  
freedom of both hands for manipulation and a loupe-mounted diffuse illumina-
tor facilitates observation.
Focal illumination
A transilluminator provides an excellent light source for external eye exarmina-
14
tion and to evaluate the pupillary light reflexes (PLRs). For the latter, it is
important to use a narrow beam of bright light with a constant source of energy
DIAGNOSTICS
(such as a rechargeable handle) directed toward the posterior pole. One of the
most common causes of abnormal PLRs is a dim light source.
Schirmer tear test (sTT)
This test is used quantitatively to evaluate the aqueous component of the tear
filrm and thus aid in the diagnosis of keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS). The STT
is indicated in all patients with external ocular disease. Individually wrapped
 s e d  u un w o p am w g Ad ann sds
should be undertaken before any other procedures or tests; if there is discharge
in or around the eye, dry cotton swabs should be used gently to clean the area,
avoiding irritation and reflex lacrimation. The strips have a notch near one end
where they are folded prior to use; fold the strip without touching it with fingers
while it is still in the overwrap. Then open the package and, grasping the strip
conjunctival sac approxirmately midway between the medial and lateral canthus
with the short folded end in the fornix and the notch on the eyelid margin (Fig.
2.1). The lower lid can be rolled outward with the thumb to facilitate insertion,
but care should be applied not to compress the eye, which may likewise elicit
reflex lacrimation. The lids may be maintained in an open position, or closed
by gentle pressure on the upper lid if blinking and retention of the strip becomes
a problerm. After 1 min, the moistened distance from the notch in the longer
part is measured. Normal values in the dog are 15-25 mm/min; values lower
than 10 mm/min are suggestive of a deficit in aqueous tear production. Most
clinical cases of KCS have a wetting of less than 5 mm; cats have slightly lower
and more variable normal values. There is a wide range of normal readings,
and results should be interpreted in association with clinical signs. Increased
aqueous tear production may occur if conditions causing ocular irritation are
present.
Fig. 2.1 Schirmer tear test being performed in a feline patient.
15
IGY
Diagnostic stains
MOLO
Fluorescein stain
Fluorescein is a water-soluble dye; owing to its lipid insolubility, it does not
OPHTHAL
penetrate intact corneal epithelium. Epithelial erosions or ulcers, which expose
the hydrophilic stroma, allow penetration and retention of the dye. The barrier
to penetration in the healthy eye resides in the outermost cells of the corneal
ANIMAL
epithelium. As Descemet's mermbrane does not retain fluorescein, descemeto-
celes will not stain. Fluorescein is available as impregnated paper strips or as
a solution; the solution may become contaminated with multiple usage, and
SMALLA
individually wrapped strips are preferred.
Fluorescein staining is indicated in all patients with ocular pain or observ-
able corneal lesions. The tip of the fluorescein-impregnated strip is moistened
with a drop of sterile saline and gently applied to the superior bulbar con-
junctiva. If the patient exhibits severe blepharospasm, local anesthetic can be
instilled but may result in a rmild diffuse positivity that is usually readily
discernible from significant retention. Blinking will distribute the dye over
the corneal surface. The excess dye is immediately flushed with a sterile saline
rinse and the eye is then examined with a focal light and magnification (Fig.
2.2). A cobalt blue filter will facilitate detection of subtle lesions. To evaluate
nasolacrimal patency, apply the fluorescein as described above, but do not
rinse the eye. If the ipsilateral nostril shows dye within 5 to 10 min, the
nasolacrimal drainage system on that side is patent; the absence of dye passage,
however, does not necessarily mean the contrary, and negative passage is
followed by cannulation and irrigation. Dye may be seen in the nasopharynx
related to alternative duct openings.
Biomicroscopic observation of the fluorescein-stained tear film while holding
the lids open enables evaluation of the tear break-up time (BUT) as an indirect
method of evaluating the non-aqueous components of the tear film; mucus
deficiency will result in shortening of the BUT from the 20-30 s norrmally
encountered.
Rose bengal and lissamine green
These dyes stain cells of the cornea and conjunctiva that are not covered
plastic cells as well and may be useful in defining the extent of epithelial neo-
Fig. 2.2 Fluorescein
 uptake by the corneal
stroma associated with a
16
boxer ulcer.
plasia of the cornea and conjunctiva. The dyes are available as solutions or
impregnated strips; as with fuorescein, the latter are preferred. Rose bengal
may cause irritation uponinstillation and persists somewhat longer than fluo-
rescein. It is useful in highlighting dendritic intraepithelial erosions caused by
herpesvirus, which may be difficult to detect with fluorescein, and in the diag-
CS
nosis of tear filrm abnormalities involving the lipid or mucin components of the
fuorescein.
Cytology, culture, and additional diagnostic procedures
Cytologic examination is increasingly utilized in small animal ophthalmology;
over the last decades, it has emerged as a reliable tool in facilitating diagnosis
in a minimally invasive way. Techniques of sarmpling of a smear are outlined
for each of the ocular structures. On the other hand, the microscopic interpreta-
tion of a smear is beyond the scope of this chapter. Routine derrmatologic
techniques can be utilized to obtain scrapings from the eyelid skin for parasitic
and fungal detection. Fine needle aspiration may prove useful for characteriz-
ing proliferative lesions (by using a 23-G needle and a 5 ml syringe). Impression
s
with suspected squamous cell carcinoma. If necessary, biopsy of skin lesions is
performed to evaluate tissue architecture with histopathology.
Conjunctival cytologic evaluation is useful:
1. In the differential diagnosis of acute conjunctivitis (the cellular response
associated with specific conjunctivitis is helpful when performed early in
inflamed conjunctivas, and Gram stain can provide guidelines for
antibiotic selection)
 2.  In the identification of inclusion bodies (chlamydial, mycoplasma, canine
distemper, and leishmania inclusions)
3.To facilitate the diagnosis of conjunctival tumors including
lymphosarcoma, mast cell tumor, melanoma, and squamous cell
carcinoma.
Fig.2.3 Rose bengal
positivity in a punctate
pattern was evident in this
6-year-old Shih Tzu with
a vascularized cornea due
to keratoconjunctivitis
sicca.
17
LMOLOGY
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHAL
Fig. 2.4 A middle-aged mixed breed presented with ulcerated lesions of both eyelids
Fig. 2.5 Impression smears obtained from these ulcerated lesions revealed a
neoplastic population formed by lymphoid cells (Giemsa, original magnification x400).
Mycosis fungoides was confirmed with partial-thickness biopsy of the eyelid lesions.
Cells frorm the conjunctival surface may be harvested using a sterilized
spatula (i.e. Kimura spatula), the blunt end of a sterile surgical blade, or a small
nylon cytology brush; moist sterile cotton swabs are less likely to capture as
many cells. Sterile swabs may be utilized for culture of potentially pathogenic
microorganisms (bacterial and fungal), and a cytology brush is preferred for
the detection of the presence of herpesvirus, calicivirus, or Chlam ydia (Chlamy-
dophila) by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Unfixed and unstained slides
may be submitted for immunofluorescent antibody (IFA) studies. The scraping
should be made from the area most severely involved.
A topical anesthetic may not be necessary in most cases if the animal's head
is firrmly restrained, but greatly facilitates the procedure and is unlikely to affect
culture results. Mucus and exudate are removed prior to scraping. It requires
gentle but firm manipulation to collect an adequate sample (the conjunctiva
18
ferred to a glass microscope slide; gentle spreading will avoid fracturing nuclear
mermbranes. The material is air dried and fixed and can be stained with the
routine stains of value such as Giemsa, Gram, or Wright's.
AGNOST
Corneal cytology is often a rewarding diagnostic method for characterization
of exudative lesions (keratomalacia, keratomycosis) and may aid in the differ-
entiation of proliferative lesions (eosinophilic keratitis or nodular episclero-
ICS
keratitis). Topical anesthesia is usually applied prior to obtaining the sample.
Care rmust be taken not to rupture deep ulcers with pressure. Special stains
for fungi (periodic acid-Schiff) may be useful. Cells can also be harvested by
using a cellulose strip that is gently applied on the corneal surface ('impression 
cytology').
Aspiration of aqueous humor may be undertaken with topical or general
anesthesia, with a 25-27-G hypodermic needle, inserted just anterior to the
lirmbus, bevel up and parallel to the iris surface (Fig. 2.6). Approximately
0.1-0.2 ml of fuid can be collected and is generally safe; remove the barrel
from the tuberculin syringe and allow the fluid to collect by pressure differ-
ential rather than aspiration. Centrifugal cytology ('cytospin') is particularly
well suited for the preparation of small sample volumes and dilute cell suspen-
sions.Aqueous humor cytologymay allow distinctionbetweennon-
granulomatous and granulomatous uveitis, and protein-laden macrophages
are encountered with phacolytic or phacoclastic uveitis. Lymphosarcoma and
feline melanoma cells may exfoliate into the aqueous; if cells are seen with
the biomicroscope, aqueocentesis with cytology may confirm the diagnosis.
Aqueous humor samples can also be collected for culture, PCR, and antibody
level determination.
Tumors of the anterior uvea are candidates for trans-corneal fine needle
aspiration, best performed by those familiar with the technique. Aspiration is
accomplished as described above for aqueous humor as a microsurgical proce-
dure with the needle positioned over the tumor and an attermpt made to aspirate
surface cells. Alternatively the needle may be directed into the tumor. Technical
challenges include obtaining an adequate sample and interpretation may be
problematic. Potential complications of hemorrhage, lens trauma, and tumor
seeding temper the decision to pursue this modality.
Fig. 2.6 Aspiration of aqueous humor with a 25-G hypodermic needle in a cat.
19
IGY
Cytology of vitreous or sub-retinal fluid is indicated for both diagnostic and
MOLO
therapeutic reasons, the forrmer where other diagnostic options have been
exhausted, the latter for intravitreal pharrmacologic cycloablation or in the
OPHTHAL
management of retinal detachments by pneumatic retinopexy. The procedure
is perforrmed transsclerally, usually with general anesthesia and a 25-G needle.
For vitreous aspiration, the needle penetrates the eye 5-6 mm posterior to the
limbus (entering through the pars plana but avoiding the lens) and is directed
AL
ANIM
rated. For withdrawal of subretinal fuid, the needle is gently introduced
SMALL
through the sclera overlying the bullous retinal detachment.
Assessment of orbital disorders using fine needle (23 or 24 G) aspiration
remains a reliable method that can facilitate diagnosis for the clinician, pro-
vided that localization of the lesion allows for accurate sampling. Exophthal-
mos results from a space-occupying lesion in the orbit (benign or malignant
neoplasm, orbital infammation, cystic disease). Palpation, imaging, and the
direction of globe displacement may be used to determine the site of the orbital
lesion. Ultrasound guidance provides optimal assurance of a representative
sample. Several routes for fine needle aspiration biopsy are available, depend-
ent upon location: through the eyelids, conjunctiva, the mucosa caudal to the
last upper molar, or, in the case of posterior orbital lesions, transdermally at
the posterior junction of the orbital ligament and zygomatic arch (Fig. 2.7),
Fig. 2.7 Fine needle
aspiration biopsy
through the mucosa
caudal to the last upper
20
molar in a dog.
Evaluation of the lacrimal drainage system
To evaluate the structure and function of the lacrimal puncta, lacrimal cana-
AGNOSTI
liculi, lacrirmal sac, and nasolacrirmal duct, topical anesthesia, sedation, or
general anesthesia may be required in dogs, dependent on the nature of the
ICS
patient. In cats, general anesthesia is usually required; the lacrimal puncta are
smaller and less accessible. A curved stainless steel lacrimal cannula may be
utilized; 22-23 G works well in dogs, 26 G in cats. Its rigidity allows the opera-
tor easily to identify and enter the opening of the nasolacrimal duct in the lac-
rimal bone after having entered the lower punctum and nasolacrimal sac. The
disadvantage of a rigid cannula is that of possible damage to the rmucous rmem-
branes if the animal is not adequately restrained and anesthetized, or if the
procedure is not performed gently; alternatively a Teflon intravenous catheter
works almost as well. The cannula should be mounted on a 2.5-3.0 rml syringe
filled with sterile saline, or a small saline-filled compressible bottle.
medial canthus, stretching the upper lid superiorly with the index finger to
immobilize and straighten the canaliculus and facilitate cannula penetration.
After the lacrimal punctum is entered, the system is flushed; saline will exit
from the lower punctum. Smooth movements are then used to pass through
the lacrimal sac and locate and enter the opening of the nasolacrimal duct. At
this point, the lower punctum is closed with finger pressure on the adjacent lid.
The nasolacrimal duct is flushed and keeping the nose of the animal angled
downward, the fuid should flow from the ipsilateral nostril. Cannulation with
monofilament nylon suture can be used to localize and attempt to dislodge
obstructions. Radiographs can be helpful in diagnosing nasolacrimal cysts
or obstructions occurring secondary to sinus disorders. Contrast media may
be injected through the upper puncta (dacryocystorhinography) to localize
obstructive lesions.
Direct ophthalmoscopy
The ophthalmoscope has a light source which is directed into the patient's eye
so that the beam is nearly parallel with the line of sight of the exarminer. A
rheostatcontrols thelight intensity while the dimension and thecharacteristics
of the bearm rmay be varied with a series of colored filters (blue to excite fluo-
rescein, green to help differentiate pigment from retinal hemorrhage), a slit (to
help evaluate the elevation of lesions), and a grid (to project onto the fundus
in order to measure lesions). A selection of lenses ranging from + (black) 40 D
 to - (red) 25 D (diopters) is assembled on a rotating wheel which adjusts the
depth of focus into the eye (Table 2.1).
dark room through a well-dilated pupil; 1-2 drops of 1% tropicarmide should
be applied 15-20 min prior to exarmination. Observation with a setting of
around 0 to +1 or +2 D and the instrument held 30-60 cm from the eye allows
critical evaluation of the fundus reflex. The fundus is then observed from a
distance of 2-5 cm and starting with a setting of 0, altered to achieve optimal
focus. Direct ophthalrmoscopy provides magnification of fundic features by 14
to 15 times. The disk is located and evaluated initially, the major vessels are
traced to the periphery, and each quadrant is evaluated systematically to obtain
a mental panorama. The main disadvantages of direct compared with indirect
21
A
examination are the small field of vision, lirmited to about 45 mm of the
LO
fundus, and the risks due to the close proximity to the muzzle of uncooperative
M
patients!
OPHTHAL
There are notable intra- and inter-species differences in the ophthalmoscopic
anatormy of the fundus including color and extent of the tapetum, intensity of
retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) pigment in the non-tapetum, degree of
myelination of the optic disk, location of the disk in relation to the tapetal/non-
AL
ANIM
tapetal junction, and vascular patterns (Fig. 2.8).
Hand lens monocular indirect ophthalmoscopy
The most economical way to perform indirect ophthalmoscopy is by using a
1430 D hand-held lens and a focal light source such as the Finoff transillumi-
Table 2.1Ophthalmoscope settings for examination of
normal canine eyes.
Structure
Ophthalmoscope settings
(diopters)
Cornea
+15 to +20
Iris
+12 to +15
Anterior capsule of lens
+12 to +15
Posterior capsule of lens
+8 to +12
Vitreous
+2 to +8
Optic disk and fundus
+2 to -2
Fig. 2.8 Variations in
 snpuny leuwjou
appearance.
(A)The fundus of a
 sandcoated retriever with
a richly myelinated optic
22
A
disk.
DIAGNOSTICS
B
Fig. 2.8 Variations in
snpuny ewou
appearance.
(B) An Australian
Shepherd fundus: the
tapetum is aplastic, which
allows visualization of the
 underlying choroidal
vessels and sclera.
(C)This Siamese cat
fundus exemplifies the
non-myelinated optic disk
characteristic of felines.
There is absence of
 pigment in the non-tapetal
retinal pigment epithelium 
and choroid to reveal the
radial choroidal
C
vasculature.
nator. Relatively inexpensive glass Nikon or Volk lenses or even less inexpen-
sive +10 to +20 magnifying lenses, 30-55 rmm in diameter, can be utilized. After
dilatation of the pupil and in a dark room, the observer should stand in front
of the animal at arm's length, holding the transilluminator in front of the
observer's own nose and the lens 5-6 cm in front of the patient's cornea (an
assistant is required to restrain the patient's head and retract the lids). The
fundus image is made to fill the entire lens by moving the lens toward or away
from the cornea.
23
IGY
Indentation tonometry
MOLO
Tonometry is the assessment of intraocular pressure (IOP). Digital tonometry
is a very crude technique; two-finger ballottement of the globe through the
OPHTHAL
upper lids can detect a discrepancy between the two eyes, but should not be
used without additional objective measurement. Instrumental tonometry may
MAL
is based on the measurerment of the extent ofindentation of thecornea obtained
ANIM
with a Schiotz tonometer. It is a relatively inexpensive instrument which con-
sists of a plunger that glides through a cylindrical charmber stabilized by a
771
bracket handle, and a footplate that conforms with and is placed on the anes-
SMAI
(5.5 g, 7.5 g, 10.0 g). The depth of indentation is reflected by movement of a
lever, which allows a scale reading to be converted to an estimation of IOP.
Theoretically, the curvature and rigidity of the human cornea differ from those
of the small animal cornea, so species-specifc conversion tables are required
for optimal quantitative accuracy; practically, indentation tonometry only esti-
matesIOP and it is not critical whether the table with human data that comes
with the instrument or a veterinary scale is used. Normal values should be less
than 25 mmHg. As a rule of thumb, with the 5.5 g weight, scale values between
3 and 7 on the Schiotz scale represent normal pressure in the dog; normal values
in the cat are 2-6. Readings of less than 2-3 suggest an elevated IOP and those
greater than 7 a hypotensive eye. Size of the eye (smaller eyes give values higher
than actual IOP), age-related differences in scleral rigidity (young eyes are more
elastic and give higher values as well), and corneal lesions (edematous corneas
will indent more, scarred corneas less) can affect accuracy of results.
Before each patient evaluation, the instrurment should be calibrated on the
convex steel test block; the indicator should read 0. The patient is given a few
drops of topical anesthetic and the instrument is applied to the eye. Because
the plunger is gravity driven, it is essential that the tonometer be held as close
 to perpendicular as possible and that its components are well cleaned and free
moving. The footplate is applied to the cornea, positioning the head of the dog
by elevating the nose toward the ceiling. It is important not to occlude the
jugular veins in order not to artifactually increase the IOP, or to compress the
globe while retracting the eyelids, for the same reason. Occasionally it is easier
to restrain the dog on its back, with the head held perpendicular to the body
axis with the cornea in the horizontal plane. The measurement should be
repeated several times in order to obtain three readings within 1-2 scale units
of each other. The instrument should be placed as centrally as possible on the
corneal surface, as the sclera has a different rigidity. The curved surface of the
footplate should be in perfect and complete contact with the cornea. No force
should be applied on the handle, which should be held gently to allow the
instrument to rest freely on the corneal surface. Readings should be regarded
as estimations of IOP rather than precise determinations. The main disadvan-
Suggestions for reliable use include:
+Calibrate the tonometer before each use
Ensure that the cornea is well anesthetized; most systemic anesthetics and
24
sedatives alter blood pressure and thus IOP, and are ideally avoided
·Do not compress the jugular veins or the globe
DIAGNOSTICS
Keep the cornea horizontal, the tonometer vertical and in the center of
the cornea; avoid the limbus and the sclera as well as the third eyelid (you
can slip the footplate beneath the third eyelid if it protrudes)
Make several measurerments (3-5)
 Always evaluate both eyes
After each use, disassemble and clean the instrument
 Make tonometry a part of your routine physical/ophthalmic examination
to build confidence in your technique.
ADVANCED DIAGNOSTICS
To appreciate fully the anatomic details and pathologic changes of the eye,
special examination techniques and more sophisticated equipment may be
necessary to refine preliminary observation and pursue differential diagnoses.
Slit-lamp biomicroscope
The slit-lamp biomicroscope allows definition and precise localization of lesions
within the adnexa, cornea, anterior chamber, lens, anterior vitreous and, using
an interposed biconvex lens, the posterior segment. These structures can be
examined with high magnification; the beam of light can be controlled
to appear diffuse, pinpoint (to detect subtle flare and cells), or a slit, and rmay
be colored by inserting various filters. Observations of reflected and/or trans-
 mitted light provide a magnified three-dimensional view of the various ocular
structures.
Indirect ophthalmoscope
The monocular hand lens method, already described, can be replaced by a more
sophisticated and expensive instrument, the binocular indirect ophthalmo-
directed into the eye of the animal; the ermergent rays are converged by a 14
30 D biconvex condensing lens placed in the same fashion as described for
monocular indirect ophthalmoscopy. The image is inverted and magnified less
than with direct ophthalmoscopy, dependent upon the dioptric power of the
lens utilized. The indirect ophthalmoscope has three major advantages: both
hands can be used to manipulate the patient's head and eyelids while the exam-
iner is at arm's length from the animal; it is possible to obtain a panoramic
(although inverted) view of the ocular fundus; and bright illumination can
penetrate translucent ocular media. The technique is easily mastered with
practice.
Applanation tonometry
In contrast to Schiotz indentation tonometry, applanation tonometry enables
measurerment of the variable force necessary to flatten a constant small area of
the cornea. The *Tono Pen' and the *Tono Vet' are hand-held tonometers
with several advantages over the Schiotz tonometer, but are rmuch more expen-
sive. Readings are not as subject to the influences of rigidity and other tissue
characteristics as with indentation tonometry although readings are sensitive
25
GY
to artifacts induced by manual lid retraction, which yields spuriously high
MOLO
measurements.With the *Tono Pen', the stainless probe contains a solid-state
strain gauge which converts intraocular pressure to an electrical signal. Every
OPHTHAL
touch on the anesthetized cornea produces a waveform that is translated into
four valid readings the device sounds a prolonged beep and the mean IOP is
displayed. The tip of the instrument has to be covered with a disposable latex
AL
ANIM
protective mermbrane to ensure sterility and prevent exposure to the preocular
fluids. The device is light and fits comfortably in the user's hand and can be
used regardless of the position of the animal's cornea, so minimal restraint is
SMAI
needed.
Gonioscopy
The iridocorneal angle and outflow pathways are not directly visible without
using a refractory lens placed on the corneal surface. In most cases, gonioscopy
can be performed with topical anesthesia. Many different lenses are used in
small animal ophthalmology, with the Franklin, Barkan, and Koeppe lenses
the most popular direct goniolenses; an indirect (mirror) lens facilitates 360°
exarmination sirmply by rotation of the lens. The interface between lens and
cornea is maintained with saline or 1.o% methylcellulose solutions. A coaxial
light source and some magnification are needed for optimal observation (the
biomicroscope is ideal); an otoscope can be satisfactorily used.
The technique is indicated to evaluate glaucoma patients; when the glaucoma
is unilateral, the presence of goniodysgenesis in the contralateral eye is an
important risk factor, as well as suggesting the pathogenesis of the glaucoma
in the involved eye. Cross-sectional and gonioscopic anatomy of the outflow
pathway is depicted in Figure 2.9. Parameters of interpretation are summarized
in Table 2.2.
Retinoscopy
Retinoscopy, also called skiascopy, is a technique by which the refractive state
of the eye can be deterrmined objectively by observing characteristic light reflec-
tions that are created by illuminating the retina with a band or circular beam
of light ermitted from the retinoscope. The nature of these reflexes and how they
are influenced both by the properties of incoming light and by refractive lenses
placed between the eye and the retinoscope indicates the refractive power of
the eye. This technique has been used to define the normal, pathologic, and
surgically induced refractive state of the eye in dogs.
It is necessary to provide basic definitions of refractive properties of the eye
andrefraction.
*Emmetropia is an eye without refractive error where the plus power of
retina.
Ametropia is an eye with a refractive error, generally from variations in
axial length of the eye, astigmatism, or a shift in position or absence of
the crystalline lens.
 Myopia is ametropia due to relatively excessive refractive power, generally
due to a longer than normal axial length; images are formed in front of
26
theplane of theretina.
DIAGNOSTICS
C
sVp
cbol
5
cbil
B
a
Fig. 2.9 Anatomy of the
SI sAemyed mono
b
depicted schematically in
Goss-section in (A) and
 gonioscopically in (B). The
normal gonioscopic
 appearance of the canine
(C)and feline (D)outflow
 pathway is shown. Key for
9
(A): c: cornea; i: iris; pl:
pectinate ligment; cc:
dliary cleft containing
a. Corneal dome
uveal trabecular
b: Superficial band of pigment zone - varies in density
meshwork; cbil: inner
c. Deep band of pigment zone
leaflet of ciliary body: cbol:
d. Individual fibers of the pectinate ligament 
e Ciliary clef (space of Fontana) containing the
outer leaflet of ciliary body;
 Uveal tra becular meshwork 
tm: scleral trabecular
f lris
meshwork; svp: scleral
g. Pupil
venous plexus. (Courtesy
of R.L. Peiffer.)
Hyperopia is a refractive error caused by relatively inadequate refractive
power, generally due to a shorter than normal axial length; images are
forrmed behind the plane of the retina.
Astigmatism is an eye with aspherical ametropia caused when the
refractive surfaces of the eye have different radii of curvature in different
meridians, generally caused by differences in corneal curvature, such that 
an eye has two focal points.
 oq las e o ans a uo a   i a 
corneal meridian is a line forrmed by the intersection with the corneal
surface of an anteroposterior plane passing through the apex of the
cornea and can be horizontal orvertical.
27
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
C
Fig.2.9For coption
D
see previous.
Refraction is the bending of light rays; minus lenses (concave) diverge
light rays and plus lenses (convex) converge light rays.
Diopters are a measure of lens power, defined by the inverse of the focal
length in meters.
·Optical infinity is any distance greater than 6 m.
A retinoscope is characterized by a light projection system and an examiner
observation systerm. The projection system has a bulb that projects a linear
band or streak of light into the patient's eye. The observation system is an
28
aperture that allows the examiner to view ermergent light rays from the eye.
When perforrming retinoscopy, refracting lenses from a trial lens may be used;
Table 2.2 Scheme for classification of gonioscopic observations
DIAGNOSTICS
fridocorneot ongle
●Open (approximately 2 mm)
·Narrow
 Closed (pectinate ligament, ciliary cleft, inner and outer pigment zones not visible
with iris root in contact with peripheral cornea)
Pectinote ligoment
·Normal
Goniodysgenesis (pectinate fibers shortened/thickened to imperforate; flow holes
reduced in number and size: anterior insertion displaced axially)
Ciliary cleft and trabecutar meshwork
·Normal
Compressed
 Collapsed (iris root apposed to inner pigment zone: pectinate ligament not visible)
Obstructed (with inflammatory or neoplastic infiltrates)
  o        s 
contains a series of spherical plus and minus lenses in increments of 0.5 D to
1.0 D. The optimal distance to perforrm retinoscopy is 66 cm between the
 s'i+) e asn oi Aressaou si li aouisip siun ie (saa saaasqo pue siuanid
           
site to or against the motion of the streak, and from a hyperopic eye as diverg
ing rays with a refex moving with the motion of the streak. Some reports have
documented a tendency for the canine population mean toward a slight hypero-
pia, especially for large breeds, while other reports suggest a tendency toward
 slight myopia, especially for small- and medium-size dogs..?2
Computerized topography of the cornea (keratoscopy)
This examination of the curvature of the corneal surface involves projecting
onto it concentric rings of light (Placido's rings), the reflected image of which
    a s  r    si
Optical measurement of corneal curvature is termed keratometry. The results
 are reported in millimeters or diopters; for the dog eye mean corneal curvature
in diopters is 39.94 ± 2.61; mean radius of curvature in mm is 8.46 ± 0.55.3
Mean curvature for large breed dogs is less than that for dogs of medium size
or small breeds, indicating a flatter cornea in larger dogs. This technique allows
evaluation of astigmatism and is requisite for refractive procedures on the
29
cornea.
G
Specular microscopy
MOLO
The specular microscope allows in vivo observation of the corneal endothelium;
endothelial cells of the dog and cat form a regular monolayered mosaic of
OPHTHAL
hexagonal cells at a normal density of about 2000 cells/mm? (Fig. 2.10).4.5
Ultrasonography
Ocular ultrasonography in two-dimensional B-mode with a 10 MHz probe is
SMALL ANIMAL
ideal but very adequate studies can be performed with a 7.5 MHz probe, which
is generally more readily available to practitioners (Fig. 2.11A). The technique
Fig. 2.10 Specular microscopic appearance of the normal canine corneal endothelium
demonstrates a monolayer of regular hexagonal cells
DX
A
Fig. 2.11Ultrasonography
(A) Normal eye (7.5 MHz probe). (B) Pathology. I Exophthalmos/orbital abscess/cellulitis
30
(10 MHz probe). Il Orbital abscess/cellulitis (7.5 MHz probe) (Courtesy of Dr A. Bertoldi)
DIAGNOSTICS
BI
DX
5X
BII
Fig. 2.11 For coption see opposite.
31
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
CI
CII
Fig. 2.11Ultrasonography
(C) Persian cat, iris melanoma: the iris is completely pigmented, irregular, and thicker
than normal (20 MHz probe).
provides the ability to image the inner structures of the eye if alterations
(corneal edema, intraocular hemorrhage, cataract) of the normally transparent
tissues prevent direct intraocular observation. It also allows an evaluation of
the soft and bony tissues of the orbit, making it of particular value in cases of
exophthalmos (Fig. 2.11B). Suspected intraocular disease in the presence of
opaque media, uveal neoplasia, orbital diseases, and retinal detachrment are
the major indications for ultrasonography (Fig. 2.11C,D,E). One-dimensional
(A-mode) ultrasonography can be used to determine biometric parameters of
32
corneal thickness, anterior chamber depth, lens thickness, and axial length
(20.43 ± 0.48 mm), which are useful in the study of the physiologic optics of
the eye (Fig. 2.11F). Most dogs and cats tolerate ultrasound examination very
well with only topical anesthesia (e.g. proparacaine hydrochloride 0.05%); in
some uncooperative patients sedation is necessary. Recently, very high fre-
quency ultrasound with probes ranging from 20 MHz to 60 MHz has enabled
CS
irmages of very high detail and resolution to be obtained (Fig. 2.11G)
Radiology
 Radiology is used in small animal ophthalmology as a preliminary for other
imaging techniques (ultrasound, CT scan, MRI), which generally provide more
sensitive information. Orbital bone, sinus, and skull evaluation are the main
indications. Dacryocystorhinography allows evaluation of the nasolacrimal
duct.
Computed tomography (CT)
Detailed imaging of the orbital contents, including globe, extraocular muscles,
and optic nerve, as well as the adjacent bony skull and sinuses, is invaluable in
the diagnosis and localization of orbital neoplastic, inflammatory, or traumatic
disease.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
This technology magnetizes and determines the concentration of protons in
tissues and offers enhanced projection and resolution of soft tissues compared
with a CT scan. It is of particular value in neurophthalmology.
Electroretinography (ERG) and visual evoked
response (VER) (Fig. 2.12)
The ERG records the total response of the retina to a short light stimulus by
measuring the difference in potential between the retina and cornea through
surface electrodes at the cornea and the lateral canthus. The VER simultane-
ously records the activity of the visual cortex and reflects the integrity of the
entire afferent visual pathway. Two major waves characterize the ERG:
1. The initial negative a-wave reflects the activity of the photoreceptors
(rods and cones)
 2.The following b-wave reflects the activity of the Muller cells/ON bipolar
cells complex.
Other minor waves are elicited, depending upon the conditions of stimula-
tion and recording. The oscillatory potentials (OPs) are a component of the
b-wave that reflect the activity of the amacrine cells in the inner nuclear layer.
The i-wave, a positive deflection following the b-wave, likely reflects the activ.
ity of ganglion cell and/or optic nerve activity. Furthermore, in specific experi-
mental conditions, in addition to the a-, b-, and i-waves, there is a slower second
positive deflection, the c-wave, which is more prolonged and probably arises
from the RPE.
ERG must be conducted under general anesthesia and care must be taken
in electrode positioning to avoid third eyelid protrusion.′ ERG protocols can
be designed to evaluate the individual photoreceptor populations (rods or
33
SMALLANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
DI
Fig. 2.11 Ultrasonography.
(D) Mixed breed dog. iris melanoma:
the iris is pigmented, irregular, and 
DII
thicker than normal (20 MHz probe).
cones) by manipulating the parameters of stimulus and patient status in regard
to dark or light adaptation, stirmulus spectral composition, stimulus intensity,
and stimulus frequency. Patterned stimuli can be projected onto the retina to
assess ganglion cell activity or localized retinal activity (rmultifocal ERG) if
prior refraction has been perforrmed and corrected. This ensures that the stirmu-
lus is projected onto the retina. Waveforms are evaluated by amplitude and
temporal relationship to the stirmulus; anesthesia may affect both of these
parameters.
The electro-oculogram (EOG) measures the standing potential of the RPE
and to date has not proven to be of great value in veterinary ophthalmology
34
because verbal cooperation of the patient is not possible with animals! Record-
DROIT
DIAGNOSTICS
）GAV=dB
78dB
E
Fig. 2.11Ultrasonography
(E) Dog: retinal detachment and vitreous hemorrhage are visible (10 MHz probe)
0%GAUCHE
）GAU=dB
60dB
F
Fig. 2.11 Ultrasonography.
(F) Normal biometry using a 10 MHz probe
ing of ERGs during dark adaptation can provide insights into functional
alterations of the RPE.
The VER is in essence a localized electroencephalogram (EEG) that utilizes
active scalp electrodes placed over the occipital lobe and signal averaging to
evaluate the conduction of impulses from the ganglion cells of the retina to the
visual cortex along the optic nerve, optic chiasm, optic tract, lateral geniculate
body, and the optic radiation. Flash or pattern stimuli (evoked in the same
conditions that were previously described for ERGs) can be used to differenti-
ate between peripheral (retinal) and central processes that cause visual dysfunc-
tion. It is important to note that the amplitude of the VER signal ranges from
5 to 10 microvolts while the amplitude of the ERG signal is generally greater
than 100 microvolts. The VER responses are challenging to record and results
may be difficult to interpret.
35
LMOLOGY
FILEEXAM
. OPHTHAL
SMALL ANIMAL
0P35/50MHzS1 080MH1B,127Yolt
G
Fig. 2.11Ultrasonography.
(G) Dog: glaucoma, goniodysplasia (GD). Note increased contact of the iris with the
anterior lens capsule (35-50 MHz probe). (Courtesy of Dr J. Sapienza.)
Electrophysiology is indicated when critical assessment of the retinal com-
           
more central causes of visual impairment may also be accomplished. ERG is
useful in the detection of inherited retinal degenerations, to evaluate retinal
function in the presence of opaque media that precludes critical direct evalua-
tion, and to study drug effects on retinal function.
Fluorescein angiography (Fig. 2.13)
The ocular vascular systerm and the integrity of the blood-ocular barriers can
be observed by direct ophthalmoscopy using an exciting wavelength of light
(blue) and the appropriate barrier filters (yellow) following the intravenous
injection of fluorescein dye (0.1 ml/kg of a 10% solution). The technique is
useful to evaluate neovascular or inflammatory changes. Serial photography
provides the ability to observe sequentially the choroidal and retinal arteriove-
nous filling.
Hypofuorescence can result from a masking defect (hemorrhage, exudate,
or pigment) or a filling defect (vascular occlusion). Hyperfluorescence
can develop because of a window defect of the tapeturm or RPE, or result
fromincompetency of the blood-ocular barriers due toinflammation or
neovascularization.'o
Scanning laser ophthalmoscopy (SL0)
This contemporary technology utilizes illumination with two laser beams (red
36
and argon) which facilitate detailed and dynamic image recording of the fundus;
DIAGNOSTICS
cel/Miller cell complex (b-wave).Visual evoked cortical potentials (VEPs) reflect the activity of the visual pathways from the ganglion cells to the primary
eUE.
(EOG:basal membrz
Fig. 2.12Electroretinography.
visualcortex.
AJeN
37
LMOLOGY
Flash onset
α : a-wave implicit time
OP
β : b-wave implicit time
OP
OPHTHAL
 : Photopic Negative Response
Amplitude (microvolts)
200
OP
SMALL ANIMAL
100
Bandpass 0.1-70 Hz
Baseline
50
100
Time (milliseconds)
B
Fig. 2.12 Electroretinography.
(B) The parameters and measurements of the flash ERG in diurnal species.
The first negative deflection following the flash onset (flash onset is represented by the
red arrow) is the a-wave. It corresponds to the hyperpolarization of the photoreceptors
due to the closing of the sodium channels. This negative deflection is followed by a
positive wave known as the b-wave (corresponding to the activity of the bipolar and
Muller cells). Oscillatory potentials (OPs) are found on the ascending limb of the b-wave;
the exact origin of these OPs remains unclear and their number can vary between one
and three depending on the intensity of the stimulation used. Approximately 20
 milliseconds later, a second positive wave appears which is known as the i-wave
(corresponding to the function of the ganglion cells and/or of the prechiasmatic optic
nerve). Each wave is characterized by amplitude (in microvolts), peak latency, and implicit 
time, calculated from the flash onset. The amplitude of the a-wave is calculated from the
baseline to the peak of the a-wave, whereas the b-wave is calculated from the peak of
the a-wave to the positive peak of the b-wave. The distance that separates the baseline
from the negative peak of the b-wave is known as the photopic negative response. lt
corresponds to the response of ganglion cells and to the parts of their axons that are still
unmyelinated.
it can be perforrmed through a small pupil or when media opacities obscure
ophthalmoscopic detail. Digital image analysis is utilized to study vascular,
inflammatory, or degenerative disorders of the retina and optic nerve."
Ocular coherence tomography (Fig. 2.14)
Ocular coherence tomography (OCT) is a contemporary high-resolution
(10 μm) non-invasive imaging technique/2 that produces cross-sectional images
without the use of any radiation or contact. The precision of images obtained
by this device is *histologic'. This technique is useful to evaluate the junction
of the vitreous and the retina and to characterize intraretinal changes.
EXAMINATION OF THE EYE
The first step in ophthalmic diagnosis is to collect a thorough history; while
38
doing this, the anirmal should be observed so that an irmpression of alertness,
DIAGNOSTICS
-3.39 log cd.s.m-2
-3.09 log cd.s.m-2
0.81 log cd.s.m-2
50μV
25 ms
-3.39 log cd.s.m-2
 0 min of dark adaptation
 2 min of dark adaptation
 5 min of dark adaptation
10 min of dark adaptation
15 min of dark adaptation
100 μV
 30 min of dark adaptation
25 ms
C
Fig. 2.12Electroretinography.
(C) On left: representative ERG obtained in photopic conditions in dogs. The averaged
responses to 15 flashes at progressively increasing intensities (from -4.89 log cd.s/m? to
0.81 log cd.s/m?) delivered at 13 Hz were taken at the onset (vertical arrow) in photopic
constant background
 On right: representative ERG obtained in scotopic conditions in dogs. The averaged
responses to three standard flashes (intensity: -3.39 log cd.s/m?) delivered at 0.1 Hz were
taken at the onset (vertical arrow) of the dark adaptation process (to) and at regular time
intervals thereafter (t, ts, to. ts., and ty, minutes). Note the gradual gain in amplitude and
in lengthening in the timing of the b-wave of the ERG. The progressive increase in the
39
amplitude of the b-wave during dark adaptation is supposed to reflect the function of the
neural-retinal pigment epithelium junction.
SMALLANIMALOPHTHALMOLOGY
AI
AII
Fig.2.13
Angiography.
(A) Normal angiogram of a dog.
I Fundus photography. 1: Tapetal fund us; 2: arteriole; 3: venule; 4: non-tapetal fundu5.
Il Arterial phase. 1: Retinal arteriole filled with fluorescein; 2: venule; 3: choroidal
40
fluorescence.
DIAGNOSTICS
AIlI
AIV
Fig. 2.13 Angiography
II Arteriovenous phase. 1: Laminar flling; 2: choroidal fluorescence; 3: intervascular area.
IVVenous phase.1: Retinal arteriole: 2: venule totally fluorescent: 3: intervascular area;
4: choroidal fluorescence.
41
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
1
BI
BII
Fig. 2.13 Angiography
(B) Pre-retinal masking of hypofluorescence by hemorrhage (arrow).
IFundus photography. 1:A hemorrhage is visible; 2: venule in proximity to hemorrhage.
 I Arterial phase. 1:A non-perfused retinal vessel emerging over choroidal
42
hypofluorescent area (2).
DIAGNOSTICS
BIII
BIV
Fig. 2.13 Angiography.
IlI Arteriovenous phase.
IVVenous phase.
43
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
CI
CII
Fig. 2.13Angiography.
(C) Hyperfluorescence by window effect and leakage into a tissue (staining).
I Fundus photography. Retinal pigment epithelium dystrophy. Note abnormal pigment in
tapetum lucidum (arrow).
Il Arterial phase. Window effect with visualization of choroidal vessels (arrow).
44
DIAGNOSTICS
CII
CIV
Fig. 2.13Angiography.
IlI Arteriovenous phase. Note leakage from a retinal vessel (arrow).
IVVenous phase. Leakage into retina (arrows).
45
G
MOLO
OPHTHAL
ANIMAL
SMALL
B
Fig. 2.14 0cular coherence tomography
Vitreo-retinal junction in cat: fundus photography reveals a vitreo-retinal junction
abnormality (A). OCT examination (B): between the sclera (Sc) and the vitreous (V). the
neuroretina (NR) is detached from chorio-capillaris (Cc). Two spaces (a & b) are visible
and arrows show vitreo-retinal connections.
visual acuity, and behavior is registered. Ocular examination should be con-
ducted routinely as a part of the general physical exarmination. A systematic
in ambient light, then in a dark room.
Examination with ambient illumination
 The gross appearance of the eye and surrounding structures is observed to
determine the presence of periorbital swelling, lacrimation, abnormal
discharge, and the size and position of the eye. Examination of the
anterior segment of the eye follows. Both eyes must always be considered,
even if only one is obviously affected. In such instances it is preferable to
examine the norrmal (or less obviously affected) eye first. A magnifying
loupe and focal illurmination are used to assess the adnexa and anterior
segment structures. The STT, if indicated, is performed before additional
 manipulations or applications are performed.
 Pupil light reflex (PLR), menace response, blinking, and ocular and
 periocular sensation should then be evaluated. PLR can be tested in
ambient light; repeat the procedure in a darkened room prior to the
instillation of dilating agents if abnormalities are noted. First each eye is
46
directly stimulated with a bright focal light and the cormpleteness and
DIAGNOSTICS
briskness of PLR is noted. This is the direct reflex, while the pupil of the
opposite eye constricts due to the consensual refex. For anatomic reasons
same size as the pupil of the stimulated eye.The menace response should
be tested next, paying attention not to cause air movement toward the
patient's eye and a consequent blink (rmediated by the trigeminal nerve).
Bear in mind that absence of the menace response is normal in very
young anirmals and problematic to interpret in cats. Manipulate the head
and neck to evaluate ocular motility.
Critically evaluate globe size and position, observe the symmetry of the
globes from above, palpate around the orbital rim and the orbital fossa,
and retropulse both globes sirmultaneously. Distinction between
exophthalmos and globe enlargement is critical.
Then consider the eyelids, third eyelid, conjunctiva, sclera, and cornea,
and anterior chamber, iris, lens, and anterior vitreous, using the
magnifying loupe and the focal light.
 If the adnexa is inflamed and there is discharge, STT is indicated, and
cytology and culture should be considered. If a serous discharge is
bilateral without evidence of inflarmmation, or the discharge is
concentrated on the medial aspect and the hyperemia is particularly
evident in the medial canthus, the lacrirmal drainage system should be
these cases palpation over the lacrimal sac may be painful and induce the
expression of exudates through the punctae.
*If the patient exhibits blepharospasm, look for corneal ulcers,
a foreign body, entropion, or ectopic cilia, and stain with fluorescein.
Chronic disorders of the cornea manifested by neovascularization and
melanosis may be associated with trichiasis, distichiasis, lagophthalmos,
lacrimal secretory disorders, or immune-mediated disease.
 If intraocular disease is suspected, based on the presence of episcleral/
scleral injection, corneal edema, aqueous cells or flare, or abnormal PLRs,
tonometry is a requisite. Congestion of episcleral vessels may be
differentiated from conjunctival injection by applying one drop of
phenylephrine; in cases of conjunctivitis the hyperermic pattern will almost
glaucoma,or uveitis.
Because pupillary dilatation is necessary for the remainder of the
ophthalmic exam, one drop of 1.0% tropicarmide should be applied to
each eye at this point; perform the rest of the general physical
mydriasis.
Dark room examination
When the pupils are completely dilated as an effect of the previously
instilled rmydriatic, the lens, vitreous, and the ocular fundus may be
   n   n     n n
47
LMOLOGY
such a way as to shift the incident light and better visualize any opacity
with the magnification loupe.
Using the direct ophthalmoscope with a lens setting between 0 and +2 D
OPHTHAL
and the eye examined from arm's length it is possible to evaluate the
fundus reflex as a relatively sensitive indicator of opacities within the
media, which appear as a dark shadow when using this technique of
distant direct ophthalmoscopy. The fundus should then be examined
MAL
ANIM
using the indirect or direct ophthalrmoscope.
During all steps of the examination, all data should be recorded in the
patient's permanent record and, in case of consultation, transmitted to the
SMAI
veterinary ophthalmologist. Most irmportantly, ocular disease should always be
approached from the whole animal perspective. Detecting unsuspected ocular
conditions in their early stages during the course of a routine exarmination, or
simply reassuring a client of the inevitability and insignificance of nuclear scle-
rosis, will elevate the quality of your service. Ocular signs such as cataracts of
rapid onset in an unlikely breed or vitreous hermorrhage should alert the astute
clinician to rule out diabetes mellitus or systemic hypertension, respectively.
Only in the eye can one directly observe the central nervous system (optic nerve)
and the peripheral vasculature (retinal arterioles and venules). Ocular function
draws from a significant component of the nervous system and this association
should be kept in mind.
REFERENCES
1. Gaiddon, J., Bouhana, N. and
microscopic appearance of the
Lallement, P.E. (1996) Refraction
normal feline endothelium. Am. J.
by retinoscopy of normal,
Ver. Res.42:854855
aphakic and pseudophakic
6. Rosolen, S.G., Rigaudiere F., Le
canine eyes: advantage of a 41
Gargasson, J.-F. et al. (2004)
diopters intraocular lens? Ver.
Comparing the photopic ERG j-wave
Comp. Ophrhalmol. 2: 121-
in different species. Ver. Oprhalmol.
124.
7(3):189-192.
2. Davidson, M.G. (1997) Clinical
7. Rosolen, S.G., Rigaudiere, F.,
retinoscopy for the veterinary
Lachapelle, P. (2002) A practical
ophthalmologist. Ver. Comp.
method to obtain reproducible
Ophrhalmol. 2:128-137.
binocular electroretinograms in
3. Rosolen, S.G., Ganem, S., Gross,
dogs. Doc. Ophrhalmol. 105: 93-
M. et al. (1995) Refractive
103.
corneal surgery on dogs: preliminary
8. Narfstrom, K., Ekesten, B.,Rosolen,
results of keratomileusis using a
S.G. et al. (2002) Guidelines for
193 nanometer excimer laser.
clinical electroretinography in the
Ver.Comp.Ophrhalmol.5:18-
dog. Doc. Ophrhalmol. 105: 83-
24.
92.
4. Stapleton, S. and Peiffer, R.L. (1980)
9. Lescure, F. (1998) Evaluation of the
Specular microscopic observations of
angiograms - semeiology. In:
the clinically normal canine
Fluorescein AngiographicAflas of
endothelium. J. Am. Ver. Med. Assoc.
theSmall Animal Ocular Fundus.
176:249-251
Pratique Medicale et Chirurgicale
5. Peiffer, R.L., DeVanzo, R. and
des Animaux de Compagnie, Paris,
48
Cohen, K.L. (1981) Specular
pp. 75-105.
10. Rosolen, S.G, Gautier, V., Saint-
angiography for clinical and
DIAGNOSTICS
Macary, G. et al. (2000) Eye fundus
toxicological studies on animals.
images with confocal scanning
Invesr. Ophrhalmol Vis. Sei.40:1461
laser ophthalmoscope on dog,
[ARVO abstract].
monkey and minipig. Ver.
12. Puliafto, C.A., Hee, R.H., Schuman,
Ophtrhatmol. 4: 41-45.
J.S. and Fujimoto, J.G. (1996) Oprical
11. Rosolen, S.G., LeGargasson, J.-F.
Coherence Tomography of Ocular
and Saint-Macary, G. (1999) SLO
Diseases. Slack Inc., Thorofare.
49
Therapeutics
3
Bruce H. Grahn and Joe Wolfer
INTRODUCTION
eases; successful medical managerment of ocular disease is based not only on
therapeutics. The purpose of this chapter is to enhance the veterinarian's under-
standing of ocular therapeutics by reviewing the pharmacokinetics and indica-
tions for medications that are commonly prescribed for ocular disorders by
topical, subconjunctival, and/or systemic routes.
The eye may be medicated topically, systermically, or by injection into the
subconjunctival, intraocular, or orbital tissues. There are several compartments
in the eye, separated by semi-permeable barriers. Delivery of systemic medica-
tions to the cornea via the circulatory system is limited to diffusion from the
perilimbal vasculature, and those agents secreted in the tears or that penetrate
the blood-ocular barriers enter the anterior chamber and pass through the
corneal endothelium; topical or subconjunctival medications are appropriate
for most corneal diseases. Diseases of the anterior segment may be medicated
topically, subconjunctivally, or systemically, while most posterior segment,
orbital, and eyelid diseases require systemic medications. Intraocular and intra-
orbital injections have inherent risks, are indicated in specific ophthalmic dis-
eases, and should be performed by an ophthalmologist; these injections will not
be discussed in detail in this chapter.
When an animal is to be medicated at home, owner compliance is an impor-
tant and often forgotten factor. The owner must have the time and ability to
medicate the eye during the specified treatrment period and a sense of what to
expect in terms of improvement or deterioration in the condition. Treatment
instructions should be given to the owner verbally and in written form. Con-
sider the following with regard to owner compliance: topical solutions are
tion. Is the animal manageable by the owner alone and, if not, will an assistant
be available to restrain the animal during medication? Will painful orbital or
medications? If the medications are used for an extended period of time, has
50
the most economical formulation been selected? Are systermic side effects going
to be induced by the long-term topical ophthalrmic medications and is the owner
THERAPEUTICS
adequately informed and prepared for these effects?
PHARMACOKINETICS OF OPHTHALMIC MEDICATIONS
The most commonly used route for ocular therapy is topical. The ocular pen-
etration of a topical medication is dependent on the concentration and kinetics
within the conjunctival cul-de-sac, corneal permeability, and the rate of elimi-
nation of the medication from the conjunctival sac. Tear flow and space within
the conjunctival fornix have a dynamic effect on topical ophthalmic medica-
tions. Commercial droppers deliver 25-50 μl/drop of solution or suspension
and immediate refex tearing occurs after a drop of rmedication is placed on the
eye. The non-blinking eye will retain approximately 10-25 μl (varies with
species) of additional fluid in the conjunctival fornix and tear film, after which
irmmediate overflow occurs. Application of more than one drop at a time will
not increase the amount of available medication because this volume will over-
flow into the nasolacrimal duct or onto the eyelid. It is important to wait at
5 min.2 This rapid reduction is the result of drainage through the nasolacrimal
system and absorption of the medication through the cornea and conjunctiva.
Therefore, if increased concentrations of topically applied medication within
the cornea and the anterior chamber are desired, an increased frequency of
application is useful provided the applications are at least 10 min apart. Most
of the intraocular penetration of topically applied medications occurs via the
cornea. The cornea has a thick hydrophilic stroma which is enveloped by two
thin lipophilic structures: the epithelium and the endothelium. Factors such as
solubility, ionization, and molecular size affect absorption of all pharmaceuti-
cals. Membrane factors including weakness or absence of portions of the cornea
(the epithelial barrier is not present in corneal ulcers, enhancing permeability)
are also important.? The intact epithelium is a significant barrier for hydrophilic
medications, while the underlying stroma is a significant barrier for lipophilic
the intact cornea adequately, topical rmedications require both hydrophilic and
aqueous humor, and vitreous also infuence the availability of medications.
 The protein concentrations in these fuids will increase during infammation
due to disruption of the blood-ocular barriers and significant protein binding
mayoccur.
Topical ophthalrmic pharmaceuticals are available as solutions, ermulsions or
suspensions, and ointrments. Ermulsions and ointments have slightly prolonged
istration to achieve therapeutic concentrations. However, emulsions have the
disadvantage of being less stable and ointments are more difficult to apply,
result in blurred vision, and may elicit rubbing and self-induced trauma. For a
more complete review of pharmacokinetics and corneal penetration of topically
applied ophthalmic pharrmaceuticals, the reader is referred to reports by Shell
and Burstein and Anderson.
51
IGY
Treatment compliance is dependent onprovision of accurate and thorough
MOLO
instructions to the owner, and a demonstration is worth a thousand words.
Bottles of ophthalmic solutions and suspensions should be kept at a safe dis-
tance from the eye during medicating in order to avoid contarmination of the
OPHT
medication on the anirmal's forehead, use the other hand to stablilize head and
retract the eyelids, and to come from behind and above to place one drop onto
AL
ANIM
the ocular surface at a safe distance.Gentle occlusion of the lower puncta for a
few minutes after rmedications are applied will increase the total available medi-
cation by decreasing drainage into the nasolacrimal duct. When ointments are
SMAI
being applied, it is preferable to place a 5 mm strip on a clean fingertip, and
then use the lid margin to scrape the medication onto the lower palpebral con-
junctival surface. This prevents contact and contamination of the ointment
tube and corneal and conjunctival injury. Alternately, the upper or lower lid
can be retracted and the medication applied directly to the conjunctival surface.
therapy. It is important that the practitioner understands the indications and
limitations of their use. Medications, including some of the antibiotics, enjoy
enhanced ocular penetration with bulbar subconjunctival injections. Depot
formulations provide prolonged therapy, and in fractious or aggressive patients
subconjunctival injection under sedation may be the only means of therapy.
The pharmacokinetics of subconjunctival injections are not well understood
and likely vary considerably between classes of pharrmaceuticals and their for-
mulations. Medications injected into the subconjunctival space are thought to
enter the ciliary circulation, thereby gaining access to the anterior segment.
However,some of the injected medication simply leaks through the puncture
site in the conjunctiva and is absorbed directly through the cornea." In the case
of subconjunctival corticosteroids, transscleral penetration has also been
reported.!2 Direct absorption of medication frorm the subconjunctival injection 
site bypasses the epithelial barrier and increases intraocular drug availability
minimizes the need for some of the topical medications during the immediate
postoperative period. Other advantages include increased intraocular concen-
tration of medications that penetrate the cornea poorly, and ensured presence
Subconjunctival injections require the utmost care. Topical anesthesia is
required and occasionally sedation or general anesthesia is necessary to ensure
accurate bulbar subconjunctival injection. A subconjunctival injection is per-
formed by manually retracting the upper eyelid and gently grasping the supe-
rior bulbar conjunctiva with small tissue forceps (i.e. Bishop Harmon). A 25 G
needle (attached to a l rml syringe) is inserted bevel up through the tented
bulbar conjunctiva. Up to 0.5 ml of medication may be slowly injected to form
a subconjunctival bleb. The dosage will vary with the ocular condition and
medication but the total volume per injection site should not exceed 0.5 ml.
Long-lasting (depot) medications should be avoided unless they are required
as they are irritating and may predispose to granuloma formation.'s Subcon-
junctival injections of solutions including antibiotics and atropine need to be
52
therapy and the frequency of topical and systemic medications. Subconjuncti-
val injections of long-lasting steroids, e.g. betamethasone valerate, need to be
HERAPEUTI
granuloma formation, an inability to withdraw medications if necessary, and
rarely inadvertent intraocular injections. Many medications are irritating and
should not be administered subconjunctivally, especially when similar approved
CS
topical medications are available.
Systemic medications may be administered orally, intramuscularly, intrave-
nously, or subcutaneously for therapy of glaucoma, and eyelid, orbital, poste-
rior segment, and optic nerve diseases. Systemic anti-microbials, corticosteroids,
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), hypotensive agents, and car-
bonic anhydrase inhibitors are commonly so administered for these conditions
The blood-ocular barriers are composed of tight junctions of the endothelium
of the iris and retinal blood vessels and the ciliary and retinal pigment epithe-
lium. These barriers are only penetrated by a few lipophilic rmedications of low
molecular weight (e.g. chloramphenicol). However, with inflammatory eye con-
ditions the blood-ocular barriers are compromised, which allows most systemic
be selected initially on the basis of cytologic evaluation of scrapings or fine
needle aspirates from the eye, eyelid, or orbit and re-evaluated when bacterial
cultures and sensitivities are available. Systemic corticosteroids are indicated
in most inflammatory conditions of the posterior segment. Prednisone, pred-
nisolone, dexamethasone, and flumethasone are common choices for severe
posterior segment, optic nerve, or orbital inflammation. Systemic NSAIDs are
frequently administered to control inflammation of the posterior segment or
orbit. Examples include flunixin, carprofen, aspirin, ketoprofen, and indomet-
acin. Contraindications for NSA IDs include platelet disorders, coagulopathies,
some hepatic and renal insufficiencies, and specific hypersensitivities to these
drugs. Systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitors decrease the production of
treatment of acute glaucoma and prophylactic treatment of primary glaucomay
examples of these agents include methazolarmide, dichlorphenamide, and aceta-
zolamide.These medications are contraindicatedwhen acidosis or hypokale
mia is present as they will aggravate these conditions. Clinical manifestations
of acidosis and hypokalemia include panting, vomiting, diarrhea, and collapse.
Because of these adverse effects, the availability of topical carbonic anhydrase
inhibitorshaslargelyobviated their use.
Numerous fixed ratio topical ophthalmic medications are available and fre-
quently prescribed by veterinarians. It is our opinion that many of these medi-
cations (usually an antibiotic and steroid combination) are overused, often
because of a lack of a specific diagnosis. Topical or systemic corticosteroid
therapy does not require the addition of antibiotics, and vice versa. If both are
required for separate purposes then separate formulations are usually more
appropriate to deliver adequa te concentrations of each.
Antimicrobials
Topical antimicrobials (antibiotics, antifungals,and antivirais)
(see Appendix, Tables 1 & 2)
Topical antibiotics may be categorized, based on their intended use, into
primary, secondary, and tertiary types. Primary antibiotics are used to treat
53
bacterial conjunctivitis and simple corneal ulcers. The bacterial fora of the
IGY
normal surface of dogs and cats are a mixed population of predominantly
MOLO
triple antibiotics (neomycin, polymyxin B, bacitracin), gentamicin, or chloram-
Triple antibiotics and gentamicin are bactericidal. Chloramphenicol is bacte-
OPHT
riostatic but penetrates the eye rapidly and achieves high intraocular concentra-
tions. Secondary categories of topical ophthalmic antibiotics are indicated for
AL
ANIM
specific anterior segment conditions. An example is tetracycline, which is the
topical antibiotic of choice for feline Chlamydia or Mycoplasma conjunctivitis
It is bacteriostatic and achieves an adequate concentration in the cornea and
771
SMAI
conjunctiva. The tertiary category of antibiotics should be reserved for septic
conditions including melting corneal ulcers and panophthalmitis. Examples
include some fluoquinolones and aminoglycosides which are bactericidal and
effective against most antibiotic-resistant Gram-negative bacteria including
Pseudomonas. Prudent selection of tertiary antibiotics is encouraged and should
be based on culture and sensitivities. Indiscriminate usage of any antibiotic is
discouraged as development of bacterial resistance is common.
Bacterial infections of the conjunctiva, cornea, or anterior segment require
a minimum of one drop QID with antibiotic solutions or emulsions for 7 days
or until the infection is resolved. When ointments are prescribed, a 5 mm strip
is applied to the conjunctiva a minirmum of three times per day until the infec-
tion is resolved. Fusidic acid, a viscid topical antibiotic drop, is now available
a day and still produce inhibitory antibacterial drug levels.'s Ointments are
contraindicated when the cornea is perforated because they are irritating to the
is perforated as toxic effects on the corneal endothelium and the retina and
ciliary epithelium were found when those tissues were exposed to high concen-
Most antivirals are nucleoside analogs that are similar in structure to nucle-
osides and when they are incorporated into viral DNA or RNA they alter
or disrupt the viral replication. Idoxuridine, adenine arabinoside, and trifu-
and conjunctivitis. Idoxuridine mimics thymidine, thereby altering virus
metabolism. It is available as a solution or ointment and should be applied
frequently (q2h for 2 weeks) and q6 h for 4 weeks. Adenine arabinoside
inhibits virus DNA polymerase. It is available as an ointment and should be
applied q4 h for several weeks to be effective. Trifluridine inhibits viral DNA
synthesis and is available as a solution which is applied q4 h for at least 3
weeks. Trifluridine has the highest in vitro activity against feline herpesvirus.
 Bromovinyldeoxyuridine is a pyrimidine analog of nucleoside thymidine and,
although it is selective for human herpes simplex 1, it is ineffective against
feline herpes virus 1 (FHV-1).?2 Vidarabine is a nucleoside analog of adenosine
and has been used topically to treat FHV-1; however, it is no longer available
commercially.
Ganciclovir is an acyclic analog of guanosine and in vitro potency studies
is a prodrug of ganciclovir. Penciclovir is similar to aciclovir structurally and
54
a moderately high anti-feline herpesvirus 1 activity has been demonstrated in
vitro; and further in vitro studies are required.? Famciclovir is a prodrug of
penciclovir. Cidofovir is an acyclic analog of cytosine and its in vitro efficacy
HERAPEUTI
not been established and topical usage resulted in stenosis of the nasolacrimal
duct in rabbits and humans.223 Foscarnet is a non-nucleoside replication
ICS
herpesvirus activity, and unfortunately is not effective.2
Fungal infections of the dog and cat eye are uncommon and are usually
limited to the cornea (with the exception of systermic mycotic disease with
ocular involverment). Topical antifungal ophthalmic medications including
amphotericin B, natamycin, miconazole, clotrirmazole, silver sulfadiazine, keta-
conazole, itraconazole, fluconazole, econazole, thiabendazole, flucytosine, or
povidone-iodine may be required. Natamycin is the only available cormmercial
topical ophthalmic antifungal and is administered as a solution q6 h until the
corneal fungal infection is eliminated. Miconazole solutions may be admin-
istered topically or subconjunctivally. Clotrirmazole and silver sulfadiazine are
eye.24 Dilute (1 :25) povidone-iodine solution has also been reported as a
useful and readily available topical ophthalrmic antifungal agent.24 There are
many complexities that affect the development of ocular rmycoses, accurate
diagnosis, and the managerment of effective fungal therapy. Therefore referral
of affected animals and consultation with a veterinary ophthalmologist is
strongly encouraged.
Subconjunctival antimicrobiais
Antibiotic or antifungal solutions may be injected under the bulbar conjunctiva
Medications inadvertently placed under the palpebral conjunctiva are not con-
sidered as useful since the blood circulation is away from the eye in this loca-
tion. Gentamicin, penicillin, or cephalosporins are appropriate antibiotics for
antifungal agent. These injections increase the anterior segment concentration
of the drug by absorption into the anterior ciliary circulation and across the
cornea from the injection site. The contraindications for these forms of therapy
commonly observed with this form of therapy.
Systemic antimicrobials
Bacterial infections of the eyelid, orbit, anterior and posterior uvea require
systemic antibiotic therapy. Ideally these antibiotics are chosen on the basis of
culture and sensitivity results; however these are seldom available at the critical
stage of early infection. Cytologic evaluations of fine needle aspirates from
the infected intraocular or orbital tissues should be performed and aerobic
and anaerobic cultures collected as early as possible in the course of disease.
Thorough examination of cytologic specimens from the ocular surface may
aid the clinician in identification of the potential bacteria and assist in the selec-
tion of an appropriate antibiotic. Bactericidal antibiotics that are effective
against aerobic and anaerobic bacteria are appropriate for most of these infec-
tions. Beta-lactams including ampicillin, amoxicillin, or cephalosporins are
55
GY
recommended and they may be administered via oral, intravenous, intrarmus.
MOLO
cular, or subcutaneous routes. The antibiotic initially selected should be recon-
sidered after cultures and sensitivities are available. The prognosis for
OPHTHAL
maintenance of vision is dependent on prompt control of intraocular or orbital
infections. Intravenous therapy is recommended to establish immediate tissue
concentrations. Intramuscular or oral therapy should be continued until the
clinical signs of the infection are gone. It is worth repeating that most systemic
ANIM
antibiotics will penetrate inflamed intraocular tissues well.
Systemic antifungals (including amphotericin B, ketoconazole, fucytosine,
SMALL
itraconazole, thiabendazole) have been reported in the therapy of blastomyco-
sis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, candidiasis, aspergillosis, and histo-
plasrmosis. For a review of the systemic antifungal therapy of ocular and
systemic mycosis, the reader is referred to Noxon et al.? and Ford.26
Aciclovir is a systemic antiviral drug that has been administered to cats with
FHV-1 conjunctivitis and keratitis. Aciclovir is a thymidine kinase substrate
which interferes with viral DNA synthesis. This medication is adiministered
orally at a dose of 2 mg/kg for 21 days. The effectiveness of this rmedication
trolling feline herpesvirus infection and has synergistic activities in vitro with
aciclovir.?,30 However, clinical trials have not been reported to date. L-lysine
has also recently been recommended as an oral supplerment, 250 mg orally every
12 h. This amino acid has been reported to reduce the severity of recrudescent
FHV-1 infection and virus shedding in experirmental cats;31,32 however, its clini-
cal efficacy has not been demonstrated. Valaciclovir is the L-valy ester of aci-
clovir. Although it is more readily absorbed, it induces bone marrow suppression
and hepatic necrosis in cats and has no treatment value in cats. Famciclovir
at a dosage of 31.25-62.5 mg twice daily for 7-14 days has been reported
empirically to be safe and effective, but scientific clinical studies have not been
performed. Systemic antivirals theoretically might be advantageous in rminimiz-
ing recurrences. Nonetheless feline herpetic ocular disorders are difficult to
treat and veterinarians are encouraged to consult with veterinary ophthalrmolo-
gists regarding effective systermic and topical FHV-1 therapy.
Anti-inflammatory medications
Topical anti-inflammatories
Topical corticosteroids and NSAIDs are commonly used to control anterior
segment inflammation and are often used in combination for severe intraocular
inflamma tion. However, indiscriminate use of these potent anti-inflammatories
is discouraged.
Topical ophthalmic corticosteroids (see Appendix, Tables 3 & 4)
Corticosteroids inhibit phospholipase which alters the arachidonic acid meta-
bolic pathway and minimizes inflammation. Corticosteroids decrease vasodila-
ta tion, capillary permea bility, leukocyte infiltra tion, and release of inflamma tory
Corticosteroids are derived from cholesterol and are available in several forms.
The acetate forms are generally more lipophilic which allows for better corneal
penetration when compared to succinates or phosphates. Dexamethasone and
56
prednisone are excellent selections for control of anterior segment inflamma-
tion and are available as suspensions, solutions, or ointments. Less potent
HERAPEUTI
corticosteroids are also available, the most common of which is hydrocortisone
Topical corticosteroids are contraindicated when corneal ulceration is present.
ICS
Local immunosuppression predisposes to or exacerbates infectious disease,
notably fungal and viral infections. Continuous topical corticosteroid therapy
tinuous use is recommended only if other options are not available for preserva
tion of vision.
Topical NSAIDs (see Appendix, Table 5)
These medications inhibit the cyclo-oxygenase pathway and reduce intraocular
decreases the production of prostaglandins, which cause miosis, altered blood-
aqueous barrier, vasodilatation, and increased vascular permeability. NSA IDs
also inhibit leukocyte chemotaxis and movement,"4 and are commonly used to
treat ocular inflammation today. Topical ophthalmic NSAIDs are indicated to
control most anterior segment inflammation; there are several preparations
available including furbiprofen, ketorolac, diclofenac, and suprofen. They
should be used with caution when corneal ulceration is present as delayed epi-
thelial healing, stromal infiltrates, punctate keratitis, and collagenolysis may
 n   n        
pressure. They should be avoided or used with caution in animals with platelet
dyscrasias, as they may decrease platelet aggregation and promote intraocular
hemorrhage. However, despite these cautions, topical NSAIDs remain an
important class of pharrmaceuticals that the veterinarian should consider to
control anterior segment inflammation.
Topicatmastcellstabilizersandantihistamines
Cromolyn sodium solution is a topical mast cell stabilizer which prevents the
release of inflammatory mediators from mast cells. It is useful in the treatment
of inflammatory conjunctival diseases where mast cells predominate, such as
allergic conjunctivitis. However, conjunctivitis associated with inhalant or food
allergies are very uncommon in the dog and cat. When allergic conjunctivitis
is confirmed with cytology or biopsy it may be controlled in the acute stages
with any one of several topical human antihistamines that are available com-
mercially including antazoline, pheniramine maleate, and pyrilamine, as well
as cromolyn sodium.
Subconjunctivalanti-inflammatory drugs
Subconjunctival corticosteroids are indicated to control progressive, poorly
responsive, anterior segment infammation. They provide anti-infammatory
effects to the anterior segment via the ciliary circulation, and by seepage of the
Subconjunctival corticosteroid injections are contraindicated when corneal
ulceration is present. Conjunctival and episcleral inflammation and granulomas
57
IGY
should be discouraged. Prednisone, dexamethasone, or betamethasone sodium
MOLO
phosphate may be recommended as adjunctive therapy for non-responsive
immune-mediated anterior segment inflammation.
1日
Systemic anti-inflammatories
OPHT
Systemic corticosteroids may be required to control severe anterior and poste-
rior segment inflammation. Similar to antibiotics they readily concentrate
A
intraocularly when the blood-ocular barrier has been compromised. They are
ANIM
contraindicated when corneal ulcers are present as they delay epithelialization
and healing. Prednisone and dexamethasone are the most frequently prescribed.
SMAI
They may be administered orally, subcutaneously, intramuscularly, or intrave-
nously at immune suppressive doses for prednisone (2 mg/kg) and dexarmetha-
sone (0.5 mg/kg) or anti-inflammatory doses for prednisone (1 mg/kg) and
dexamethasone (0.125 mg/kg) in the dog and cat.
The commonly used systemic NSAIDs include flunixin meglumine, aspirin,
carprofen, meloxicam, phenylbutazone, aspirin, ketorolac, etodolac, deracoxib,
and ketoprofen. They may be administered intravenously (carprofen, flunixin
meglurmine, rmeloxicam, ketoprofen, ketorolac) or orally (aspirin, etodolac,
deracoxib, carprofen, meloxicam, phenylbutazone, ketoprofen). Flunixin meg-
lumine is often administered to dogs prior to intraocular surgery. It should not
be administered for longer than 3 days." Aspirin, carprofen, ketorolac, etodolac,
inflammation. The recommended dosage for aspirin is 10 mg/kg BID in the dog
and 10 mg/kg q72-96 h in the cat. The recoimmended dosage for carprofen in
the dog is 2 mg/kg q12 h and 4 mg/kg SQ in cats. The recommended dosages
for ketorolac in dogs is 0.5 mg/kg IV, and for cats is 0.25 mg/kg IM, etodolac
15 mg/kg orally, and deracoxib 4 mg/kg orally in dogs. The recommended
dosage for ketoprofen in the dog and cat is 1 mg/kg q24 h. Systemic NSAIDs
are contraindicated in patients with bleeding disorders, impaired renal func-
tion, or pre-existing hypersensitivities and they predispose the animal to gas-
trointestinal ulceration.39
Systemic steroids and NSAIDs are commonly used and provide excellent
anti-inflammatoriy activity. They deserve consideration in most severe ocular
inflammations when contraindications are not present.
Ocular hypotensive medications
These medications lower the intraocular pressure by reducing the rate of pro-
duction of aqueous humor, by increasing the rate of outflow of aqueous humor
by conventional (trans-trabecular) or uveoscleral pathways, or via a combina-
tion of these actions. They are useful in the emergency managerment of acute
glaucoma, as adjunctive medical therapy to surgical procedures, and as pro-
phylactic medications to slow the onset of primary glaucoma. They are availa-
ble in topical and systemic formulations, and as intravitreal injections.
Topical ocular hypotensives (see Appendix, Table 6)
Parasympathomimetics
Parasympathomirmetics may be direct acting (i.e. have their effect directly on
cholinergic receptors) or be indirect acting and inhibit acetylcholinesterase.
These medications lower the intraocular pressure by altering the filtration angle
58
which increases the outflow of aqueous humor.
Direct acting parasympathomimetics  Pilocarpine has been commonly used
in the past to lower the intraocular pressure. Pilocarpine is a potent miotic and
HERAPEUTI
is available as a solution or gel. Pilocarpine should be administered 3-4 times/
day and is usually used in combination with other antiglaucoma drugs includ-
ing beta-adrenergic blockers, adrenergics, and systemic carbonic anhydrase
8
inhibitors. Pilocarpine is seldom used today as an ocular hypotensive agent
because it irritates the ocular surface and induces uveitis, and more effective
medications are readily available. Pilocarpine is also contraindicated in uveitis
and secondary glaucoma because its miotic effect may predispose to posterior
synechiae and pupillary occlusion. A frequently observed side effect after pro-
longed use is conjunctival hypersensitivity which warrants dilution of the pilo-
carpine or discontinuance of this drug. Despite its diminished usage in the
therapy of glaucoma in the dog and cat, topical pilocarpine is still used occa-
sionally in the therapy of neurogenic keratoconjunctivitis sicca, and in the
pharmacologic diagnosis of some parasympathetic ocular neuropathies.
Indirect acting parasympathomimetics Cholinesterase inhibitors are catego-
rized into reversible and irreversible agents. Physostigmine salicylate is a revers-
ible cholinesterase inhibitor with a short duration of activity which lirmits its
use to a diagnostic agent for parasympathetic disorders. Demecarium bromide
is an irreversible carbamate inhibitor that is available as a topical solution. It
is a potent cholinesterase inhibitor that lowers the intraocular pressure and
has a duration of action of approximately 1248 h. Isofurophate and echothi-
ophate iodide are irreversible cholinesterase inhibitors. They are also long-
acting, potent organophosphates that lower the intraocular pressure and are
only occasionally administered today on a q12-48 h basis in the dog.
produce painful spasms of the ciliary and iridial muscles. Systemic toxicity may
also develop and the clinical signs include salivation, vomiting, diarrhea, and
abdominal cramps. These drugs should be used with caution and avoided when
systemic anticholinesterases are being ad ministered.
Adrenergics
understood. However, the outflow facility has been shown to increase and the
tions are administered q8 h. Contraindications include known sensitivities to
adrenergic medications and predisposition to arrhythmias.
Alpha-adrenergic agonists Alpha-adrenergic agonists, notably apracloni
dine hydrochloride and brimonidine, lower IOP by decreasing aqueous produc-
tion in humans and rabbits; the effect is transient and a 1.0% solution may be
of value in the dog in managing the IOP elevations that may occur following
surgical procedures, including cataract extraction and cyclocryosurgery.
Adrenergic antagonists
Numerous topical adrenergic antagonists are available for treating glaucoma,
and betaxalol and timolol maleate are the most commonly used in veterinary
medicine. Limited studies are available regarding their therapeutic efficacy in
the dog or cat. The beta-blocker timolol maleate has been shown to reduce
aqueous humor production in the dog significantly,4 and more so in the cat,
59
IGY
by up to 71%.? Timolol decreases the rate of aqueous humor production by
MOLO
reduction of blood flow through the ciliary processes. It is available as a solu-
OPHTHAL
Betaxalol is a selective β-1 blocker and has been used as a prophylactic to
delay the onset of primary glaucoma in the contralateral eye.43 These drugs are
contraindicated in animals with known sensitivities to beta-blockers, including
MAL
some cardiovascular and respiratory diseases.
ANIM
Prostaglandinanalogs
Several prostaglandin pro-ester topical anti-glaucoma rmedications are avail-
SMALL
able. Latanaprost, unoprostone, and travoprost are currently popular examples
of these prostaglandin analogs. They exert potent and relatively long-lasting
hypotensive effects after topical ocular application in the dog. Latanaprost is
available as a 0.005% solution, travoprost is available as a 0.004% solution,
and unoprostone as a 0.12% solution. These may be applied q12-24 h. These
prostaglandin analogs induce miosis and increase uveoscleral outflow of
aqueous humor, and may decrease aqueous humor production. Long-term
clinical studies are not yet available in dogs. These medications are not as effec-
tive in cats.4445
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors include dorzolamide hydrochloride, a
2% solution that should be applied q8 h, brinzolamide, a 1% solution that may
be administered q8 h, and a dorzolamide (2%)-timolol (0.5%) solution that
may be administered q8-12 h. Topical application avoids the potential acidotic
use is encouraged over oral agents. These medications decrease the intraocular
hypersensivity which is uncommon, there are no other contraindications in
dogs.
Systemic ocular hypotensive medications
Systemic medications that reduce intraocular pressure include carbonic anhy-
drase inhibitors, mannitol, and glycerine. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors reduce
the intraocular pressure by decreasing the rate of aqueous humor production.
Examples of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors include dichlorphenamide,aceta-
zolamide, and methazolamide. Dichlorphenarmide is currently the carbonic
anhydrase of choice as it effectively lowers the intraocular pressure and has the
fewest side effects. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are contraindicated in dogs
or cats with a predisposition to or concurrent acidosis. Topical carbonic anhy-
drase inhibitors are now available and are aimed at avoiding the systemic side
effects of these drugs.
Intravenous mannitol solution and oral glycerine paste reduce the vitreous
volume by osmosis and lower the intraocular pressure. They are indicated
in the emergency management of some cases of canine glaucoma. Water
Glycerine is contraindicated in the vomiting patient and both are contrain-
dicated in patients with congestive heart failure, hypertension, or renal failure.4
60
and success of topical prostaglandins in the emergency management of primary
glaucoma in dogs, oral glycerine and intravenous mannitol are seldom
THERAPEUTI
required today.
Intravitrealhypotensiveinjections
Intravitreal injections of cyclotoxic agents have been utilized as a last resort
ICS
therapy for blind glaucomatous eyes where other forrms of therapy have failed
and surgical therapy (enucleation or evisceration and intraocular silicone pros-
thesis) are not applicable due to significant anesthetic risk or financial consid-
erations. Gentamicin when injected into the vitreous at a dose of 10-25 mg is
cataract and phthisis are frequent sequelae. More recently, intravitreal injec-
tions of the antiviral agent cidofovir (350-500 μg) have been used in dogs with
more predictable cosmetic results. However, intravitreal injections for the
therefore should be used only when all other alternative therapies have been
considered.
Mydriatics and cycloplegics
Mydriasis is dilatation of the pupil, and cycloplegia is paralysis of the ciliary
muscle which results in a loss of accommodative function. Parasympatholytics
paralyze the iris sphincter rmuscle and cause mydriasis. Cycloplegia may develop
depending on the type of parasympatholytic administered. Sympathomimetics
stirmulate the adrenergic receptors of the dilator muscle and may cause
mydriasis.
Parasympatholytics
Tropicamide is available as a topical ophthalrmic solution. Tropicamide has
minimal effect on the ciliary muscles, has a rapid onset of action (20 min), is
short acting (2-4 h) and is the mydriatic of choice for intraocular examinations.
Atropine has a slow onset of action (45 min) and the pupillary dilatation is
accompanied by cycloplegia. Atropine is available as a topical ophthalmic
solution or ointment and as a systemic medication which can be adrministered
subconjunctivally.Topical or subconjunctival atropine is recommended for
mydriasis and cycloplegia when uveitis is diagnosed in the dog and cat. Atro-
pine may be required as often as every 6 h to maintain comfort by control of
the ciliary spasm or as needed on a daily basis when the uveitis is mild. Saliva-
tion is a common side effect of these drugs as they are bitter tasting, reaching
the mouth via drainage through the nasolacrimal duct; this may be a significant
problerm in cats that is minimized by the use of ointments rather than solutions.
Systemic side effects of atropine include tachycardia, decreased gastrointestinal
motility, and reduced tear production.
Sympathomimetics
Phenylephrine and epinephrine are examples of sympathomimetics. They are
available as topical ophthalrmic solutions which have a synergistic effect with
parasyimpatholytics. This synergistic activity is useful in cases of resistant
miosis associated with severe uveitis. Dilute solutions of epinephrine and phe.
nylephrine are useful for differentiation of pre- and post-ganglionic Horner's
syndrome. Intracameral injections of sterile dilute solutions of epinephrine or
phenylephrine are also administered during intraocular surgery to maintain
61
MOLOGY
mydriasis and control capillary bleeding. Adrenergics are contraindicated in
patients with a predisposition to cardiac arrhythmias or known sensitivities to
these drugs.
OPHTHAL
Indirect acting sympathomimetics
Cocaine and hydroxyamfetamine are indirect acting sympa thomirmetics which
may be administered topically to diagnose Horner's syndrome. These medica-
tions are the drugs of choice for confirming the diagnosis of Horner's syndrome
ANIM
and differentiating central and pre-ganglionic from post-ganglionic lesions.$
However, the availability and need for strict control of these potentially addic-
SMALL
tive drugs has limited their use in veterinary medicine.
Lacrimomimetic drugs and artificial tears
ment of immune-mediated keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) in the dog. It is a
T-cell suppressor which decreases lacrimal gland inflammation. In addition this
drug has a direct lacrimomimetic effect and it also reduces corneal inflarmma-
tion. It is available commercially as a 0.2% ophthalmic ointment and has been
compounded as a 1% and 2% solution and as a 1% ermulsion. A quarter of an
inch strip of the ointment or one drop of the solution or ermulsion is applied
to the cornea every 12 h and, if instituted early in the course of immune-medi-
ated keratoconjunctivitis sicca, will reverse the low tear production in the
majority of patients with restoration of norrmal Schirner values in 6 weeks.
Topical ciclosporin is poorly absorbed through the cornea and has minimal
systermic effects. It may be used when corneal ulcers are present and it rermains
the drug of choice for dry eye in the dog.*? In addition it has been reported as
an effective agent in the control of chronic superficial keratitis in the dog.$ The
contraindications for topical ophthalmic ciclosporin include keratomycosis and
Recently, other calcineurin inhibitors sirmilar to ciclosporin have been uti
lized to treat KCS in dogs. These include tacrolimus and sirolimus. However,
most of the information reported at this time regarding these potentially
carcinogenic topical medications is anecdotal and only two conflicting studies
are reported.4.ss Before these medications are utilized further, placebo-
controlled pharrmaceutic studies need to be completed and their safety thor-
oughly assessed.
Pilocarpine has been reported to be an effective lacrimomimetic drug in the
administered with caution to dogs. Signs of toxicity include vomiting
and diarrhea. These clinical signs are often used to ensure an adequate dosing
and, if the tear production is not increased at that time, the pilocarpine is
discontinued.
Tearreplacements
Numerous tear supplerments are available. These include hypertonic, isotonic,
ointrments which provide a longer duration of effect compared to the solutions.
Artificial tears, hydroxymethylcellulose, and polyvinyl alcohols should be
administered frequently and are usually required in excess of q4 h to prevent
62
corneal dehydration. Hyaluronic acid solutions increase the duration of tear
contact and stabilize the tear filrm, and they are useful adjunctive agents in
HERAPEUTICS
and cat.
MISCELLANEOUS TOPICAL DRUGS
(see Appendix, Table 7)
Proparacaine and tetracaine are topical anesthetics that are required prior to
tonometry and to facilitate the ocular examination. Topical anesthetics are
toxic to the corneal epithelium and repetitive or prolonged use is strongly dis-
couraged as it may lead to severe corneal ulceration, or even perforation. The
preservatives that are present are reported to interfere with bacterial cultures.57
Ideally laboratory submissions including bacterial, fungal, and viral cultures,
and cytologic samples should be collected prior to application of any topical
solutions, emulsions, or ointments.
Fluorescein and Rose bengal are stains which are routinely used in ocular
exarminations. Fluorescein is a water-soluble dye which readily penetrates the
conjunctival submucosa or the corneal stroma when the lipophilic epithelium
has been disrupted. It is applied topically during the ophthalmic exarmination
to confirm corneal ulceration. It is available as an impregnated strip or solu-
tion. Rose bengal is available as an impregnated strip. It is a supravital dye
that is used to detect devitalized epithelium. These stains will interfere with
bacterial and viral cultures and imrmunocytology, and therefore those labora-
REFERENCES
1. Mishima, S. (1981) Clinical
considerations. Clin. Pharmacokiner.
pharmacokinetics of the eye. Invesr.
18: 255-269.
Ophrhalmol Vis.Sci.21:504-541.
6. Mikkelson, T.J., Chrai, S.S. and
2. Peiffer, R.L. and Stowe, C.M. (1981)
Robinson, J.R. (1973) Competitive
Veterinary ophthalmic pharmacology.
inhibition of drug-protein interaction
[n: Gelatt, K.N. (ed) Vererinary
in eye fluids and tissues. J. Pharm.
Ophrhalmology. Philadelphia: Lea &
Sri. 62: 1942-1945.
Febiger, pp. 160-205.
7. Mikkelson, T.J., Chrai, S.S. and
3. Regnier, A. and Toutain, P.L. (1991)
Robinson, J.R. (1973) A1tered
Ocular pharmacology and therapeutic
bioavailability of drugs in the eye due
modalities. [n: Gelatt, K.N. (ed)
to drug-protein interaction. J. Pharm.
Vererinary Ophrhalmology, 2nd edn.
Sri. 62: 1648-1653.
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, pp.
8. Shell, J. W. (1982) Pharmacokinetics
162-194.
of topically applied ophthalmic drugs.
4. Doane, M.G, Jensen, A.D. and
Surv. Ophrhalmol.26: 207-218.
Dohlman, C.H. (1978) Penetration
9. Burstein, N.L. and Anderson, J.A.
routes of topically applied eye
(1985) Review: Corneal penetration
medications. Am.J. Ophrhalmol. 85:
and ocular bioavailability of drugs. J.
383.
Ocular Pharmacol.1:309-326
5. Schoenwald, R.D. (1990) Ocular drug
10. Bartlett, J.D. and Cullen, A.P. (1989)
delivery. Pharmacokinetic
Clinical administration of ocular
63
A9
drugs. [n: Bartlett, J.D. and Jaanus,
20.Moller,I, Cook, C.,Peiffer,R.L
LMOLOO
S.D. (eds) Clinical Ocular
et al. (1986) [ndications for and
Pharmacology. Toronto: Butterworth-
complications of the pharmacological
OPHTHALI
Heinemann, pp. 29-66.
ablation of the ciliary body for the
11. Wine, N.A., Gonall, A.G. and Basu,
treatment of chronic glaucoma in the
P.K. (1964) The ocular uptake of
dog.J. Am.Anim.Hosp.Ass.22:
subconjunctivally injected Cl4
319-326.
MAL
hydrocortisone. I. Time and major
21. Nasisse, M.P., Guy, J.S., Davidson,
.ANIM
route of penetration in a normal eye.
M.G. et al. (1989) [n vitro
Am.J.Ophrhalmol.58:362-366.
susceptibility of feline herpesvirus-1
SMALL
12. McCartney, H.J., Drysdale, LO.,
to vidarabine, idoxuridine,
Gornall, A.G. et al. (1965) An
tridfuridine, acyclovir, or
autoradiographic study of the
bromovinlydeoxyuridine.Am.
penetration of subconjunctivally
J.Ver.Res.50: 58-60.
injected hydrocortisone into the
22. Maggs, D.J. and Clark, H.E. (2004)
normal and inflamed rabbit eye.
In-vitro efficacy of ganciclovir,
Invesr. Ophrhalmol Vis. Sci.4:
cidofovir, pencyclovir, foscarnet,
297-302.
idoxuridine, and acyclovir against
13. Lapalus, P. and Garraffo, R.G.
feline herpesvirus 1. Am. J. Ver. Res.
Ocular pharmacokinetics. In:
65: 399403.
Hockwin, O., Green, K.G. and
23. Sandmeyer, L.S., Keller, C.B. and
Rubin, L.F. (eds) Manual of
Bienzle, D.(2005) Effects of cidofovir
Oculoroxiciry Tesring. New York:
on cell death and replication of feline
Gustav Fischer, pp. 119-136.
herpesvirus-1 in cultured feline
14.Fraunfelder, F.T. and Hanna, C.
corneal epithelial cells. Am. J. Res.
(1974) Ophthalmic drug delivery
66: 217-222.
systems. Surv. Ophrhalmol. 18:
24. Severin, G.A. (1995) Severin's
292-298.
Veterinary Ophthalmology Nores,3rd
15. Fisher, C.A. (1979) Granuloma
edn. Fort Collins: Design Pointe
formation associated with
Communications, pp. 88-89.
subconjunctival injection of a
25. Noxon, J.O., Monroe, W.E. and
corticosteroid in dogs. J. Am. Vef.
Chinn, D.R. (1986) Ketaconazole
Med. Ass. 174:10861088.
therapy in canine and feline
16. Murphy, C.M., Lavach, J.D. and
cryptococcosis. J. Am.Anim.Hosp.
Severin, G.A. (1978) Survey of
Ass. 22: 179.
conjunctival flora in dogs with clinical
26. Ford, M.M. (2004) Antifungals and
signs of external eye disease. J. Am.
their use in veterinary ophthalmology.
Ver. Med. Ass. 172:66-68
In: Moore, C.P. (ed) Ocular
17. Gerding, P.A., McLaughlin, S.A. and
Therapeutics. Ver. Clirt. Norrh Am.
Troop, M. (1988) Pathogenic bacteria
34: 669-691.
and fungi associated with external
27. Nasisse, M.P. (1991) Feline
ocular diseases in dogs: 131 cases
Ophthalmology. In: Gelatt, K.N. (ed)
(1981-1986).J. Am.Ver.Med. Ass.
Vererinary Ophrhalmology, 2nd edn.
193:242-244.
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, pp.
18. Van Bijsterveld, O.P., Andriesse, H.,
539-541,
Nielsen, B.H. (1987) Fusidic acid in
28. Weiss, R.C. (1989) Synergistic
tear film: pharmokinetic study of
antiviral activities of acyclovir and
fusidic acid viscous eye drops. Eur. J.
recombinant human leukocyte (alpha)
Drug Meiab. Pharmokiner. 12:
interferon on feline herpes virus
215-218.
replication.Am. J. Ver. Res. 50:1672-
19. Petroutsos, G., Savoldelli, M. and
1677.
Pauliquen, Y. (1990) The effect of
29. Weiss, R.C. (1989) Synergistic
64
gentamicin on the corneal
antiviral activities of acyclovir and
endothelium. Cornea 9: 62-65.
recom binant human leukocyte (alpha)
interferon on feline herpesvirus
tracts of dogs. Am. J. Ver. Res. 51:
THERAPEUTICS
replication. Am. J. Ver. Res. 50:
1131-1138.
1672-1677.
39. Giuliano, E.A. (2004) Nonsteroidal
30. Sandmeyer, L.S., Keller, C.B. and
anti-inflammatory drugs in veterinary
Bienzle, D. (2005) Effects of
ophthalmology. In: Moore, C.P. (ed)
interferan-α on cytopathic changes
Ocular Therapeutics. Ver. Clirn Norrh
and titers for feline herpesvirus-1 in
Arm1. 34: 707723.
primary cultures of feline corneal
40. Gwin, R.M., Gelatt, K.N., Gum,
epithelial cells.Am.J. Res.66:
G.G. et al. (1978) Effects of topical
210-216.
epinephrine and dipivalyl epinephrine
31. Collins, B.K., Nasisse, M.P. and
 on intraocular pressure and pupil size
Moore, C.P. (1995) In vitro efficacy
in the normotensive and
of L-lysine supplementation on ocular
glaucomatous beagle. Am. J. Ver.
shedding rate of feline herpesvirus
Res. 39: 83-86.
type 1. Proc. Am. Coll. Ver.
41. Gumm, G.G., Larocca, R.D., Gelatt,
Ophrhalmol. 26: 141.
K N. et al. (1991) The effect of
32. Maggs, D.J. and Nasisse, M.P. (1997)
topical timolol maleate on intraocular
Effects of L-lysine supplementation
pressure in normal beagles and
on ocular shedding rate of herpesvirus
beagles with inherited glaucoma.
(FHV-1) in cats.
Prog. Ver. Comp. Ophrhalmol. 1:
Proc.Am.Coll.Ver.Ophthalmol.
141-149.
28: 101.
42. Lui, H.K., Chiou, G.C.Y. and Gorg,
33. Nasisse, M.P., Dorman, D.C.
L.L. (1980) Ocular hypotensive effects
Jamison, K.C. et al. (1997) Effects of
of timolol in cat eyes. Arch.
valcyclovir in cats infected with feline
Ophrhalmol. 98: 1467-1469.
herpesvirus 1. Am. J. Ver. Res. 58:
43. Miller, P.E., Schmidt, G.M., Vainisi,
1141-1144.
S.J. et al. (2000) The efficacy of
34. Gayles, B.I. and Fiscella, R. (2002)
topical prophylactic antiglaucoma
Topical non-steroidal anti-
therapy in primary closed angle
inflammatory drugs for ophthalmic
gaucoma in dogs: a multicenter
use: a safety review. Drug Saf. 25:
clinical trial. J. Am. Anim.Hosp.
233-250.
Assoc. 36: 431438.
35. Hendrix, D.V.H., Ward, D.A. and
44.Studer, M.E., Martin, C.L. and Stiles,
Barnhill, M.A. (2002) Effects of anti-
M.J. (1998) The effect of latanaprost
inflammatory drugs and preservatives
0.005% on intraocular pressure in
on morphologic characteristics and
normal feline and canine eyes. Proc.
migration of canine corneal epithelial
Am. Coll Ver. Ophrhalmol. 29:45.
cells in tissue culture. Ver.
45. Wi1lis, A.M. (2004) Ocular
Ophrhalmol. 5:127-135.
hypotensive drugs. In: Moore, C.P.
36. Lin, J.C., Rapuano, C.J., Laibson,
(ed) Ocular Therapeutics. Vet. Clin.
P.R.et al. (2000) Corneal melting
Norrh 4m.34: 755-776.
associated with use of topical
46. Dugan, S.J., Roberts, S.M. and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Severin, G.A. (1989) Systemic
after ocular surgery. Arch.
osmotherapy for ophthalmic disease
Ophrhalmol. 118: 1129-1132.
in dogs and cats. J. Am. Ver. Med.
37. Flach, A.J. (2001) Corneal melts
4ss. 194: 115-118.
associated with topically applied
47. Adams, R.E., Kirschner, R.J. and
nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs.
Leopold, L.H. (1963) Ocular
Trans.Am.Ophrhalmol. Soc.99:
hypotensive effect of intravenously
205-212.
administered mannitol. Arch
38. Dow, S.W., Rosychuk, R.A.,
Ophrhalmol.69:55-58.
McChesney, A.E. et al. (1990) Effects
48. Moller, I., Cook, C.S., Peiffer, R.L.
of flunixin and funixin plus
et al. (1986) [ndications for and
65
prednisone on the gastrointestinal
complications of pharmacological
A9
ablation of the ciliary body for the
54.Berdoulay, A., English, R.V.,
MOLOC
treatment of chronic glaucoma in the
Nadelstein, B. et al. (2003) The
dog.J.Am.Anim. Hosp. Assoc.1986;
effect of 0.02% tacrolimus aqueous
OPHTHALI
22: 319-326.
suspension on the tear film in
49. Bingaman, D.P., Lindley, D.M.,
dogs with keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Glickman, N.W. et al. (1994)
Proc.Am. Coll Ver.Ophrhalmol. 34:
Intraocular gentamicin and glaucoma:
33.
MAL
a retrospective study of 60 dog and
55.Adkins, E.A., Hendrix, D.V.H.,
ANIM
Stuffle, J.L.et al. (2003) An
Ophrhalmol. 4: 113-119.
investigation of the safety and efficacy
3
50. Peiffer, R.L. and Harling, D.E. (1998)
of topical ophthalmic application of
MAI
[ntravitreal cidofovir (Vistide) in the
tacrolimus in dogs. Proc. Am. Coll.
 management of glaucoma in the dog
Ver.Ophrhalmol.34:39.
and cat. Proc. Am. Coll Ver.
56. Rubin, L.F. and Aguirre, G.D. (1969)
Ophthalmol.29:29.
Clinical use of pilocarpine for
51. Scagliotti, R.H. (1998) Neuro-
keratoconjunctivitis in dogs and cats.
ophthalmology. [n: Gelatt, K.N. (ed)
J.Am.Ver. Med.Ass.151:313
Veterinary Ophrhalmology, 3rd edn.
57. Kleinfeld, J. and Ellis, P.P. (1966)
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, pp.
 Effects of topical anesthetics on
1307-1400.
growth of microorganisms. Arch.
52. Kaswan, R.L., Salisbury, M.A. and
Ophrhalmol.76:712-715
Ward, D.A. (1989) Spontaneous
58. Roat, M.E., Romanowski, E.,
canine keratoconjunctivitis: a model
Araullo-Cruz, T. et al. (1987) The
for human keratoconjunctivitis
antiviral effect of rose bengal and
sicca - treatment with cyclosporine
fuorescein. Arch Ophrhalmol. 105:
eye drops.Arch. Ophthalmol.107:
141 5-1417.
1210.
59. da Silva Curiel, J.M.A., Nasisse,
53. Jackson, P.A., Kaswan, R.L.,
M.P., Hook, R. et al. (1991) Topical
Meredith, R.E. et al. (1991) Chronic
fluorescein dye: effects on
superficial keratitis in dogs: a placebo
immunofluorescent antibody tests for
controlled trial of topical cyclosporine
feline herpesvirus keratoconjunctivitis.
treatment. Prog. Ver. Comp.
Prog.Ver.Comp.Ophthalmol. 1:
Ophrhalmol. 1:269-275.
99-104.
66
Abnormal
appearance
Wendy Townsend, Peter Bedford,
and Gareth Jones
The conditions discussed in this chapter are those in which an alteration in the
gross appearance of the eye is the primary presenting clinical feature. Other
signs of disease may also be present and the reader should refer to other chap-
ters in this book in cases where visual impairrment, ocular pain, or ocular dis-
 s no d   s  ns   si 
describes the normal appearance of the eye and adnexa (Figs 4.1 & 4.2). Abnor-
mal appearance is discussed in the second part of the chapter.
NORMALAPPEARANCE
Selective breeding, particularly in dogs, has resulted in a wide variation in
skull shape, globe position, and adnexal conforrmation. Many of these traits
  sxg  r  r u, is  
exophthalmos (globe prominence) and lagophthalmos (failure to blink com-
rmust decide if the noted attribute is an incidental finding or associated
with ocular disease.
The globe
The size of the globe, shape and length of the palpebral fissure, and depth of
the orbit all contribute to the external appearance of the eye. Brachycephalic
animals have shallow orbits and large palpebral fissures resulting in a very
prominent globe. In contrast, dolicocephalic dogs have the globe positioned
deeper within the orbit resulting in a much less prominent globe. In all animals
the globe should be centrally positioned within the orbit and freely mobile.
The extraocular rmuscles provide globe movement and maintain a centrally
directed gaze. Sympathetic innervation of the orbital smooth muscle (muscu-
laris orbitalis) maintains positive tone within the orbit and thereby an anterior
position of the globe. The retractor bulbi muscles function to retract the
globe.
The eyelids
The appearance and position of the eyelids are deterrmined by a number of
factors including the length of the palpebral fissure, physical support by the
67
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 4.1  The normal appearance of the eye and adnexa in the dog. Right eye
Fig. 4.2 The normal appearance of the eye and adnexa in the cat. Right eye.
presence of the globe, and tension at the medial and lateral canthi. The
shape of the cranium and mass of facial skin can alter this relationship,
leading to conforrmational differences between the breeds. An example of an
abnormality required by breed standards is the ‘diamond eye’ conformation
in breeds like the St Bernard and the Bloodhound, where central lower
ectropion and third eyelid exposure can be responsible for chronic conjunc-
tivitis. Similarly Shar Peis have excess facial skin that frequently contributes
to entropion.
In normal animals the eyelids rest on the globe and follow its contour. The
eyelid margins are hairless and distinct. In dogs two to four rows of cilia are
present along the upper eyelid. Varying amounts of sclera are exposed depend-
ing upon breed and facial conformation. Cats have little exposed sclera and no
68
truecilia.
The eyelids protect the globe, remove debris from the ocular surface, and
ABNORMAL
distribute the tear film. The eyelids should move freely and fully across the
corneal surface. The superior eyelid is the most mobile. Regular blinking is an
essential feature. Dogs blink three to five times per minute; cats one to five
tirmes per minute. Brachycephalic animals blink less frequently and less com-
APPEARANCE
pletely (lagophthalmos) due to their exophthalmos and decreased corneal sen-
sitivity. Cats normally demonstrate complete and incomplete blinks.
Elevation of the upper eyelid occurs primarily through the action of the
levator palpebrae superioris muscle that is innervated by cranial nerve II1,
assisted by the smooth rmuscle fibers of Muller's muscle. The orbicularis oculi
muscle innervated by cranial nerve Vll is responsible for closure of the
eyelids.
The third eyelid
The third eyelid (mermbrana nictitans) arises as a fold of ventromedial conjunc-
tiva and lies against the anteromedial aspect of the globe. A T-shaped cartilage
stabilizes the third eyelid. The top of the T runs across the free edge and the
base runs through the center to end in the gland of the third eyelid. The leading
edge of the third eyelid may or may not be pigmented (Figs 4.3 & 4.4). When
lacking pigment, the third eyelid appears more prominent. The position of the
third eyelid is influenced by globe size, position of the globe within the orbit,
orbital depth and contents, and length of the palpebral fissure. Moverment of
the third eyelid is passive in dogs. Retraction of the globe will result in protru-
sion of the third eyelid. In cats, smooth muscle contributes to movement of the
third eyelid and sympathetic stimulation can cause the third eyelid to move
slightly.
The conjunctiva/sclera
The conjunctiva is the transparent mucous membrane that lines the eyelids
(palpebral conjunctiva) and covers the mermbrana nictitans and the anterior
sclera (bulbar conjunctiva). There is little variation between species and breeds.
Fig. 4.3 The normally pigmented leading edge of the membrana nictitans in a 2-year-
69
old German Shepherd Dog. Left eye.
SMALLANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 4.4 Left eye of a dog with a non-pigmented leading edge to the third eyelid.
Fig. 4.5 Comparison of the bulbar, palpebral, and membrana conjunctival surfaces. Left
eye.
Pigmentation may be normal, especially within the palpebral fissure, and is
usually diffuse and irregular. It is important to appreciate the differences in
normal appearance across the conjunctival sac. The bulbar conjunctiva is
loosely bound to the globe and it appears mainly white due to the color of the
sclera beneath. Blood-filled capillaries impart a salmon pink color. Elements
of the underlying episcleral vasculature are not very prominent in the normal 
dog but are more readily seen in the cat. In contrast, the palpebral conjunctiva
is firmly attached and its deep pink appearance is that of the underlying tarsal
tissues (Fig. 4.5). The conjunctiva within the fornix has a similar coloration but
is loosely attached.
Thecornea
The normal cornea is transparent with a glossy and smooth anterior surface.
70
The junction between the cornea and sclera is the limbus. The corneal diameter
varies from 12.5 mm in the dog to 18.0 mm in the cat. The radius of curvature
ABNORMAL
is approximately 8 mm.
Multiple layers comprise the cornea. The tear film is the outerrmost later
which overlies a rmultilayered epithelium and creates a smooth optical surface.
The thickest corneal layer, the stroma, is predorminantly collagen fi brils in regu-
APP
larly arranged lamellae that provide optical clarity. Descemet's membrane is
PEARANCE
the basement membrane of the innermost layer, a single layer of endothelium.
In order to allow transparency, the cornea is avascular; nutrition is supplied
via the aqueous and to a lesser extent by the precorneal tear film, limbal scleral
circulation, and conjunctival vasculature. The stroma must be maintained in a
relative state of dehydration for transparency and both the epithelium and
endothelium are involved in this process. The epitheliurm presents a barrier to
water in the tear film while an active endothelial pump mechanism regulates
cornea to appear cloudy immediately after the palpebral fissure first opens and
before the endothelial ^pump' becomes fully functional.
The aqueous and the anterior chamber
The aqueous is a modifed ultrafiltrate of blood and is normally transparent
due to a low protein and cell content. It is produced by the ciliary processes,
released into the posterior chamber, and fows forward between the iris and
lens through the pupil into the anterior chamber.
The aqueous circulates thermodynamically within the anterior chamber and
drains into the scleral vasculature through the 360° of the iridocorneal angle.
In domestic species, the angle extends into the ciliary body as the ciliary cleft.
The entrance to the cleft is spanned by fibers of the pectinate ligament and the
cleft contains the trabecular meshwork. The pectinate ligament may be visual-
ized with the naked eye in the cat because of the considerable depth of the
anterior chamber. In the dog, the use of a goniolens is required to exarmine the
iridocorneal angle (see Fig. 2.9). Individual variation exists in both the amount
of pigmentation in the scleral shelf and the physical structure of the pectinate
ligament. Those individuals with a wider pigmentary zone are more difficult to
examine. The pectinate ligament should always be visible.
Intraocular pressure (IOP) is maintained by homeostatic mechanisms result-
ing in equilibrium between the rates of aqueous production and outflow. The
normal IOP ranges from 13 to 24 mmHg. In the dog this value can fall to
below 10 mmHgwith age.
The iris
The iris rests on the anterior surface of the lens, imparting an anterior bow to
the iris. Loss of this lenticular support results in flattening of the iridal surface.
a deepened anterior charmber, and iridodonesis (trermbling of the iris) with
ocular moverment. The iris is divided into two areas by the collarette (the area
where the iris changes from a lighter to a darker color): the ciliary zone (periph-
erally) and the pupillary zone (centrally). The pupillary ruff is the edge of the
   n      n   
vessel within the ciliary zone; this vessel is especially easy to visualize in cats
with blue irides. The anterior iris is defined by a condensation of melanocytes
and a pigmented epithelium lines its posterior surface. The stroma of the iris
71
IGY
contains two muscles: the iris dilator (longitudinal rmuscle) and the iris constric-
LMOLO
tor (circular muscle located in the pupillary zone). The iris regulates the amount
of light entering the eye via the constrictor and dilator muscles.
OPHTHAL
Iris coloration is related to the density of coat and skin pigmentation and
consequently demonstrates considerable variation between both species and
breeds. Darker coated breeds of dog will have a dark brown iris while in the
subalbinotic breeds the iris is often blue (Fig. 4.6). Yellow, green, and blue iris
ANIMAL
coloration can all be seen in cats (Fig. 4.7). Heterochromia iridis describes a
difference in color within the same iris and heterochromia irides describes a
SMALL
difference in color between the two irides of the same individual.
Fig. 4.6 A blue iris
demonstrating the
difference incolor density
between the ciliary and
pupillary zones in a 4-
 year-old Siberian Husky.
Left eye.
72
Fig. 4.7 Blue iris color in a 2-year-old cat.
Senile iris atrophy can result in a lace-like appearance demonstrable by
ABNORMAL
transillumination or retroillumination using refection of light from the fundus
to highlight the thinned iris. Atrophy of the sphincter muscle results in pupil
irregularities and reduced pupillary constriction.
APPEARANCE
The pupil
The pupil is round in the dog and a vertical ellipse when constricted in the cat.
A slight exposure of the darkly colored iris pigment epithelium may occur at
the pupillary rim.Abnormal prominence of the iris pigment epithelium may
margin (ectropion uveae) may occur secondary to formation of pre-iridal fibro-
vascular membranes (rubeosis iridis).
The pupil should move freely with maximal dilatation in the dark and brisk
constriction in bright light; this movement is observed when assessing the direct
 irregular scalloped pupillary margin and incomplete constriction in bright light.
Posterior synechia (adhesions between the iris and anterior lens capsule)may
also distort thepupillary margin andpreventfree pupillary movement.
The lens
The lens is a transparent biconvex structure enclosed within its own capsule.
Nutrition is via fuid exchange with the aqueous across the lens capsule. The
lens is normally positioned between the posterior iridal surface and the vitreous
body. Without the use of mydriatic drugs to dilate the pupil, only the axial
portion of the lens is visible. With mydriasis a complete examination of the lens
uted to the absence of blood vessels and the precise arrangerment of the proteins
within the lens fibers. New cortical fibers are forrmed throughout life by the
equatorially positioned lens epi thelial cells.
The anterior Y and posterior inverted Y suture lines mark the meeting of
the ends of lens fbers. In young anirmals increased prominence of the tips of
these suture lines may be present. The continuous cortical lens fiber formation
causes compression of the central nuclear material which results in altered
Nuclear sclerosis is a normal aging change which can be differentiated from a
true cataract using indirect ophthalmoscopy, distant direct ophthalmoscopy,
or distant examination with a transilluminator. The tapetal reflex and detail of
the fundus can be observed through a sclerotic nucleus.
The posterior segment
The fundus is divided into tapetal and non-tapetal areas. The non-tapetal area
occupies the greater part of the fundus and this area is usually darkly colored
due to pigment within the retinal pigment epithelium and the underlying
choroid. The retinal pigment epithelium, which overlies the refective brightly
colored tapetum, is non-pigmented. Tapetal color varies, but most commonly
is yellow, orange, green, or blue (Fig. 4.8). The tapeturm rmay be small or com-
pletely absent, particularly in the toy breeds. A 'red’ reflex is normal in subal-
binotic breeds which may lack a tapetum in addition to having reduced or
absent pigment within the retinal pigment epithelium and choroids (Fig. 4.9).
Edema and/or infiltrates within the vitreous, retina, or sub-retinal space will
73
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 4.8 A yellow-green
tapetal reflex in a 4-year-
old crossbred dog.
Fig. 4.9 The red tapetal reflex due to subalbinism in a 2-year-old Old English
Sheepdog.
reduce the intensity of the tapetal reflex. Where the retina is degenerate or
absent due to complete detachment, tapetal refectivity will be considerably
increased. In the presence of extensive retinal degeneration there will be a loss
of the pupillary light refex, which enhances the appearance of the increased
reflection from the affected eye.
In dogs the optic disk is circular to triangular in shape, the variation due to
varying degrees of myelination. The disk may reside in the tapetal or non-
74
tapetal fundus as the size of the tapeturm varies greatly between individuals.
The dark gray spot in the center of the disk represents the physiologic pit. Three
ABNORMAL
to four large retinal venules anastomose in an incomplete venous circle over
the optic disk. Fifteen to 20 arterioles,lighter in color and more tortuous than
the venules, radiate away from the periphery of the optic disk.
In cats the optic disk is unmyelinated which accounts for its perfectly circular
APPEARANCE
and dark salmon to grey coloration. The disk is always located in the tapetal
fundus. The feline tapetum is more brightly reflective than that of the dog.
Three to five main pairs of retinal arterioles and venules are present. The
venules do not traverse the surface of the optic disk
ABNORMALAPPEARANCE
The eye should never be examined in isolation. The ocular examination should
  l  ae  s ns ns a ss a
 4.1. Each clinical sign listed in Table 4.1 will be discussed in terms of investiga-
tion, diagnosis, and treatment.
The globe
Changes in globe size
Abnormallysmallglobe
Microphthalmos is the presence of a congenitally small globe. Microphthalmos
may be seen alone or in association with multiple ocular anomalies including
nystagmus, persistent pupillary membranes, colobomata, cataract, and retinal
dysplasia. Associated cataracts are usually non-progressive. The degree of
visual impairment depends upon the extent of the abnormalities.
Penetrating sharp trauma or perforation of a corneal ulcer through Des-
cermet's mermbrane may lead to collapse of the globe. A careful ophthalmic
examination should be perforrmed to assess damage while preventing further
trauma to the globe. Prompt repair can be successful depending upon the extent
of intraocular damage. The prognosis for vision following globe rupture from
blunt trauma is usually poor due to more pronounced intraocular damage.
Phthisis bulbi is a previously normal globe that has become irreversibly
damaged, hypotensive, and shrunken. Phthisis bulbi is a common sequela to
severe injury, chronic uveitis, or long-standing glaucoma. Phthisical eyes are
non-visual. If the eye is a chronic source of discomfort, enucleation is indicated.
sarcomas are very aggressive and often metastasize.? Therefore enucleation of
blind traumatized feline globes is recommended.
Enlargedglobe
Buphthalmos is the acquired enlargement of a globe, typically associated with
glaucoma. Buphthalmos must be differentiated from exophthalrmos (rostral
displacement of the globe within the orbit). The cardinal signs of glaucoma are
a dilated non-responsive pupil, episcleral congestion, corneal edema, and an
elevated IOP. Degenerative corneal changes may occur with chronic glaucoma.
Linear breaks in Descemet's rmermbrane (Haab's striae) also indicate increased
globe size (Fig. 4.10). Buphthalmic globes are usually blind due to the associ-
ated ganglion cell degeneration and optic nerve atrophy; exceptions include the
75
A9
Table 4.1Abnormal appearance.
MOLOC
Globe
OPHTHAL
Smoll globe
Globe rupture, microphthalmos, phthisis bulbi
Entorged globe
Glaucoma, neoplasia
AL
Exophthatmos
Arteriovenous fistula (rare), orbital fracture,
.ANIM
retrobulbar space-occupying lesion (e.g.
masticatory myositis, extraocular polymyositis,
SMALL
neoplasia, retrobulbar abscess/cellulites,
Zygomatic mucocele), temporomandibular
osteopathy. traumatic proptosis
Enophthaimos
Horner's syndrome, loss of retrobulbar fat
(debility, senility), orbital fracture,severe ocular
 pain, temporal muscle atrophy, contracture of
extraocular muscles
Eyelids
Alopecio
Bacterial pyoderma. immune-mediated disease,
mycoses, nutritional disease, parasitic
infestation, seborrhea
Swellings/masses
Abscess, allergy, epibulbar dermoid, neoplasia,
ophthalmia neonatorum, trauma
Shope of poipebrot fissure
Coloboma, ectropion, entropion, combined 
entropion/ectropion (diamond eye), laceration,
symblepharon, dermoid, ankyloblepharon,
Horner's syndrome
Membrana nictitans
Prominence
Anterior segment pain, dysautonomia, Horner's
syndrome, retrobulbar lesion, sedation, 'Haw's
 syndrome, symblepharon, systemic disease (e.g.
tetanus)
Distortion
Prolapse of the nictitans gland, scrolling of the
cartilage
Masses
Lymphoid follicles, neoplasia, plasma cell
infiltration
Conjunctiva/sclera
Redness
Conjunctivitis (superficial), ciliary flush/episcleral
congestion, episcleritis (deep), subconjunctival
hemorrhage
Swelling
76
Allergy, conjunctivitis, diffuse neoplasia
Mosses
Cyst, neoplasia, nodular episcleritis
Table 4.1continued
ABNORMAL
Cornea
Opacity
Cellular infiltration (white/gray), edema (white/
blue), pigmentation (black), scarring (blue/gray).
APPEARANCE
vascularization (red)
Mosses
Dermoid, granulation tissue,inclusion cysts,
abscess, infiltrative neoplasia
Vasculorizotion
Superficial and deep keratitis, corneal infiltration
and degeneration, eosinophilic keratitis, healing
ulcer, herpes keratitis, immune-mediated 
disease, sequestrum, trauma
infiltrotion
Calcareous degeneration, corneal 'melting' ulcer,
ipidosis (dystrophy, degeneration, and 
infiltration), neoplasia
Chonge in contour
Bullous keratopathy. corneal abscess, corneal
baceration, descemetocele, inclusion cyst, iris
prolapse
Loss of tissue
Laceration,ulceration, post-corneal nigrum
slough
Anterior chamber
Turbidity
Lipid-laden aqueous, uveitis (flare/hypopyon,
keratic precipitates, hyphema)
Mosses
Foreign body, lens luxation, neoplasia, uveal cyst
Hyphema
Blood dyscrasias, chronic glaucoma, congenital
lesions, hypertension, neoplasia, retinal
detachment, trauma, uveitis
Iris
Discoloration
Chronic uveitis (pigmentation), rubeosis iridis
(vascularization)
Mosses
Neoplasia, uveal cysts
Stronds'
Persistent pupillary membrane, synechiae
Pupil
Diloted
Coloboma, dysautonomia. glaucoma, iris atrophy,
 oculomotor nerve lesion, optic neuropathy,
retinopathy. pharmacologic agents, fear
Constricted
Uveitis,Horner's syndrome, pharmacologic
77
agents
A9
Table 4.1
continued
MOLOC
Distorted
Synechiae, coloboma, iridodonesis, 'D'-shaped
 pupil, iris atrophy
OPHTHAL
Lens
AL
Opocificotion
Cataract, uveitis (anterior capsular pigment).
 SMALL ANIM
nuclear sclerosis, persistent pupillary
membrane, persistent hyperplastic primary
vitreous
Shope
Lenticonus, coloboma
Position
Luxation, subluxation
Posterior segment
Leukocoria(white pupit)
Cataract, intraocular foreign body, neoplasia,
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous, retinal
detachment, vitreous absce55
Increosed reflectivity (+ ditoted pupit)
Retinal degeneration, retinal detachment with
disinsertion
Decreosed reflectivity
Posterior uveitis (vitreal haze), bullous retinal
detachment
Fig. 4.10
Haab's striae
in chronic glaucoma.
Right eye, 6-year-old
78
 Norwegian Elkhound.
globes of young animals where the elastic sclera can allow for globe enlarge-
ABNORMAL
ment with some degree of vision remaining. A sirmilar finding is occasionally
found in dogs where the IOP is only moderately elevated. For permanently
blind eyes options to improve patient comfort include enucleation or eviscera-
tion and irmplantation of an intrascleral silicone prosthesis. An alternative
APPEARANCE
approach is to destroy part of the ciliary body to reduce IOP. Techniques
include cyclocryotherapy, cyclophotocoagulation, and pharmacologic ablation
using intravitreal gentamicin or cidofovir. In every instance the etiology of the
glaucoma should be determined in order to rule out the presence of an intra-
ocular tumor resulting in secondary glaucoma.
Changes in globe position
Exophthatmos(globeprotrusion)
Exophthalrmos is the rostral displacement of a normal sized globe within the
orbit (Fig. 4.11). This displacement will cause widening of the palpebral fissure
 so  a o   nd  
result in exposure keratitis (drying and ulceration of the central cornea) to
develop. A comparison of the position of each globe, particularly when viewed
frorm above, helps to distinguish exophthalmos from buphthalmos. Resistance
of the globe to retropulsion is also helpful to confirm exophthalmos. The direc-
tion of displacerment of the globe can be helpful in localizing the site of the
mass lesion.
The third eyelid is often passively elevated due to displacement by a space-
occupying lesion. Intraconal lesions (within the endorbital muscle cone) often
have minimal protrusion of the nictitating membrane as compared to extra-
Fig. 4.11 A retrobulbar neoplasm causing exophthalmos in a 1-year-old Springer
79
Spaniel.
IGY
conal lesions (outside the endorbital muscle cone but within the soft tissue
MOLO
confines of the orbit).
Historical information concerning chronicity, progression, and association
with trauma may assist in ranking differential diagnoses. The presence of pain,
particularly upon opening the mouth, is highly suggestive of a retrobulbar
abscess, orbital fracture, or masticatory rmuscle myositis. One must perforrm a
careful oral examination with particular attention paid to the area caudal to
AL
ANIM
the last upper rmolar where extension of retrobulbar neoplasia, the draining
sinus of a retrobulbar abscess, or distension due to zygomatic mucocele forma-
SMALL
tion may be observed.
occlusal view of the nasal cavity is important in the investigation of nasal
tumors, which can erode through the orbital wall. Periosteal changes may be
seen in craniomandibular osteopathy. Dental radiographs may reveal fractured
tooth roots and lytic areas along the maxilla. Ultrasonographic exarmination
can confirrm the presence as well as the location of a retrobulbar mass and rmay
techniques such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRl) can be invaluable.6 A fine needle aspirate may allow for a
cytologic diagnosis.7 An exploratory orbitotomy may be necessary to confirm
the exact nature and extent of the orbital pathology.
Orbital abscesses or cellulitis are common, especially in young dogs that
chew on sticks. The lesions are typically acute and unilateral. Marked pain is
often present upon opening the mouth. Upon oral examination a fuctuant
swelling and/or mucosal hyperemia are often noted caudal to the ipsilateral last
molar (see Ch. 6).
Extraocular polymyositis typically occurs in young Golden Retrievers and
causes a bilateral, non-painful exophthalmos with reduced ocular moverment
(Fig. 4.12). Minimal spongy resistance to retropulsion is detected. Ultrasono-
graphic examination or CT will demonstrate the swollen extraocular muscles.
The inflarmmation must be suppressed with systemic corticosteroids and, if
Fig. 4.12Extraocular
polymyositis in a
Golden Retriever. Note
ae a
exophthalmos but no
third eyelid protrusion.
(Courtesy of Dr D.
80
Ramsey.)
required, azathioprine. If untreated, fbrosis and contracture of the muscles
ABNORMAL
may cause the development of strabismus and enophthalmos.
The prognosis for orbital neoplasia is dependent on the nature of the
tumor; the majority of these lesions are primary and malignant. Animals
are usually older with a slowly progressive, non-painful exophthalmos. Only
APPEARANCE
rarely can a tumor be removed via an orbitotomy without an enucleation.
Usually exenteration (removal of the globe and orbital contents) is required
and in many patients even this is not curative. Lateral orbitotomy enables
extirpation of the zygomatic salivary gland when mucocele formation is the
cause of the exophthalmos.
Enophthalmos (globe recession)
Enophthalmos is the recession of a normal sized globe into the orbit. There is
associated elevation of the third eyelid and variable narrowing of the palpebral
fissure. Retraction of the globe as a result of pain is a cormmon cause. If enoph-
thalmos follows trauma, the clinician should check to see if the globe has been
perforated or ruptured, or if there are periorbital fractures. A ruptured globe
will be hypotensive. Ultrasonographic examination may be required to dem-
onstrate the presence of a posterior scleral rupture. Enophthalmos may also
result from loss of retrobulbar fat in cachexic states, the presence of retrobulbar
scar tissue, post-inflammatory contracture of the extraocular muscles or
chronic, post-masticatory rmuscle myositis rmuscle wasting. The history and
clinical signs should make the diagnosis obvious and the treatment is addressed
to the cause.
Horner's syndrome is a common cause of enophthalmos. The other cardinal
signs of Horner's syndrome are ptosis, relative miosis, and elevation of the third
eyelid (Fig. 4.13). As the pain associated with a corneal ulcer or anterior uveitis
o    sn   ss  r  s
ocular examination are indicated. Pharmacologic testing with phenylephrine
Fig. 4.13 Third order Horner's 5syndrome following bullous osteotomy in a 4-year-old
domestic short-haired (DSH) cat. The signs of ptosis, miosis, enophthalmos, and
membrana nictitans protrusion are present in the right eye.
81
IGY
MOLO
whether the lesion is central (first order), preganglionic (second order), or
postganglionic (third order). Pupillary dilatation and third eyelid retraction
OPHTHAL
within 20 min following topical application of 10% phenylephrine is suggestive
of third order Horner's syndrome; responses greater than 20 min suggest first
or second order lesions. Common causes of Horner's syndrome include middle
ear disease, iatrogenic damage sustained during total ear canal ablations, and
A
ANIM
trauma to the neck. Less common causes include polyneuropathy, neoplasia,
and brachial plexus avulsion. A complete physical examination focusing upon
the tympanic membrane, middle ear, cervical, and thoracic regions is indicated.
SMAI
In many instances the etiology remains obscure and clinical signs resolve after
60-90 days. The incidence of idiopathic Horner's syndrome appears to be
increased in the Golden Retriever.!d
Proptosis
Traumatic proptosis occurs when a sudden forward displacement of the globe
traps the eyelid margins behind the globe's equator (Fig. 4.14). Minor trauma
such as scruffing or dog fights may result in proptosis in the brachycephalic
trauma. Various criteria including the absence of the pupillary light reflex and
the degree of ocular damage are used to determine the prognosis for vision.!
Often the eye is blind due to the accompanying optic neuropraxia or damage.
If three or rmore rectus muscles are torn, the optic nerve has been transected;
if the cornea or sclera is ruptured, the globe should be enucleated. In those eyes
deermed salvageable, the cornea must be kept moist until the animal is stable
for general anesthesia. Under anesthesia a lateral canthotormy to enlarge the
palpebral fissure will facilitate globe replacement. A temporary tarsorrhaphy
is then perforrmed to maintain the globe in situ. The tarsorrhaphy is maintained
until the orbital swelling subsides and lid movement is noted; the sutures are
then removed in a staggered fashion. Lateral (divergent) strabisrmus is a
Fig. 4.14 Traumatic proptosis of the right eye in a 5-year-old Cavalier King Charles
82
Spaniel. Complete avulsion of the optic nerve has occurred.
common sequela due to oculomotor nerve damage or avulsion of the medial
ABNORMAL
rectus muscle (Fig. 4.15).
Changes in primary gaze
Strabismus
_APPEARANCE
Strabismus is a deviation in the position of the globe that can be due to a con-
genital anomaly, a neurologic lesion, or abnormality of the extraocular muscles.
Acquired strabisrmus may result from traumatic proptosis or retrobulbar
lesions. Lesions of cranial nerves Ill, IV, and VI will produce specific devia-
tions. A progressive, restrictive ventromedial strabisrmus has been reported in
young dogs, particularly Shar Peis, that appears to result from post-inflamma-
tory changes to the extraocular muscles (Fig. 4.16).12
Fig. 4.15 Acquired strabismus following traumatic proptosis in a 3-year-old Tibetan
Spaniel. Rupture of the medial rectus muscle has occurred. Left eye
Fig. 4.16 Ventromedial
strabismus due to
progressive extraocular
muscle fibrosis in a 2-
year-old Chow Chow
5op
83
IGY
Nystagmus
LO
Nystagmus is an involuntary oscillatory movement of the eyes that consists of
M
alternating slow and fast phases. During the slow phase the eyes move away
OPHTHAL
from the primary gaze position (straight ahead), followed by the fast phase
which recenters the eyes. Normal nystagmus can be induced as a response to
moverment of the head, for exarmple in the oculocephalic refex. Abnormal
MAL
nystagmus is associated with central or peripheral vestibular disease and in
ANIM
some cases only occurs when the animal's head is moved to a particular position
(positional nystagrmus). It may be present without changing head position
(spontaneous nystagmus). Animals with rmultiple congenital ocular abnormali-
SMAI
ties (e.g. microphthalmos, persistent pupillary membranes, and cataract), or
eye moverments of an oscillatory or wandering nature which are described as a
searching nystagrmus. Cerebellar disease can also result in oscillatory eye
movements.
The eyelids
Congenital/neonatal eyelid conditions
A coloboma is a congenital absence of tissue within the eye or its adnexa. In
the cat, colobomas usually involve the lateral part of the upper eyelid and are
bilateral. The absence of the eyelid margin is obvious and haired skin will be
seen fused to the bulbar conjunctiva obliterating most of the dorsal conjuncti-
val fornix. Eyelid closure is not complete and exposure keratitis results. The
associated trichiasis also results in keratitis and discomfort (Fig. 4.17). Blepha-
roplastic techniques are necessary to correct the deforrmity, but success in pro-
ducing an adequate blink response depends on the amount of normal eyelid
present.
An epibulbar dermoid (choristoma) is a congenital mass of haired skin in an
abnormal location. The dermoid may involve the eyelid, the conjunctiva, the
cornea, or all three. The temporal limbus is the most common site of involve-
ment (Fig. 4.18). Treatment is by resection, keratectomy, or blepharoplastic
repair depending upon the location.
Fig.4.17A lateral
upper eyelid coloboma
(eyelid agenesis) in a 2-
year-old DSH causing
trichiasis, corneal
vascularization, and
elevation of the third
84
eyelid. Right eye.
ABNORMAL
_APPEARANCE
Fig. 4.18 Temporal
limbal dermoid in a 6-
 month-old Shih Tzu dog.
Left eye.
Fusion of the eyelids (ankyloblepharon) is normal in kittens and puppies up
surgical separation of the fused lids. Ophthalmia neonatorum is the develop-
ment of a purulent conjunctivitis prior to eyelid opening which results in a
swelling of the fused lids. Early intervention is required to avoid corneal damage
and loss of the eye. The eyelids rmust be opened, the material collected for
culture, and the conjunctival sac irrigated. Broad-spectrum topical antibiotics
are then applied to control bacterial infection and keep the ocular surface rmoist
until tear production is established.
Abnormalities of eyelid conformation are common and often breed related.
An inward rolling of the eyelid margin is called entropion while an eversion
is termed ectropion. In entropion the resultant trichiasis can result in super-
ficial keratitis and corneal ulceration. Surgical intervention is required to
correct the eyelid deformity (see Ch. 6). Ectropion causes chronic exposure
of the ventral conjunctival sac which rmay lead to perrmanent conjunctival
changes. Several techniques involving eyelid shortening and lateral cantho-
plasty are available for the correction of ectropion should this prove to be
saline and periodic use of lubricating ointments. A combination of ectropion
and entropion associated with overly long eyelids and a weak lateral canthal
ligarment is seen in breeds that select for a diamond-shaped palpebral fissure.
Surgical correction is challenging and several procedures have been devised
to shorten and lift the palpebral fssure.4
Acquired eyelid lesions
Traumatic eyelid lacerations require careful surgical repair with minimal
debridement and treatment of any secondary infection. In particular accurate
apposition of the eyelid margin is required for a satisfactory result.
Blepharitis has a number of possible causes including bacterial pyoderma,
immune-mediated disease, rmycotic infection, parasitic infestation, and sebor-
85
IGY
rhea. Obtaining a specific diagnosis depends on skin scrapings, bacteriologic
MOLO
culture, and/or biopsy. Treatment is with systemic antibiotics, antifungals,
corticosteroids, and antiparasitic drugs as indicated. The initial blepharitis is
OPHTHAL
often exacerbated by self-trauma. Measures should be taken to control self-
trauma as part of managing this condition.
Swellings or masses of the eyelids may be due to abscess formation (stye or
hordeolum), chalazion, allergy, epibulbar dermoid, neoplasia, ophthalmia neo-
MAL
ANIM
natorum, and trauma. Hordeola (styes) result from bacterial abscesses involv-
SMALL
the use of systemic antibiotics, hot compresses, and surgical drainage. A cha-
lazion results frorm the retention or blockage of the oily secretions within a
meibomian gland, which ruptures into the surrounding eyelid tissue inciting an
inflammatory response; in dogs they are most commonly encountered associ-
ated with meibomian adenomas. Chalazia are firm, nodular, non-painful,
requires curettage and application of a topical antibiotic and corticosteroid
solution.
Eyelid tumors in the dog are usually benign. The most common tumor is
the meibomian gland adenoma. Benign tumors involving up to approximately
one-fourth of the eyelid length can be treated successfully by wedge resection
and direct two-layer closure. Removal of larger tumors often requires more
elaborate reconstructive procedures. Eyelid tumors in cats are more com-
(Fig. 4.19).
Facial paralysis results in a loss of the palpebral reflex and thereby possible
exposure-induced damage to the ocular surface. If the initial portion of the
facial nerve is affected, the parasympathetic innervation to the lacrirmal gland
and gland of the third eyelid may be disrupted, resulting in reduced tear pro-
duction. Unilateral facial nerve paralysis may be idiopathic or associated with
erosive middle ear disease. Bilateral lesions may be idiopathic although sys-
temic endocrinopathies, such as hypothyroidism, which may be associated with
Fig. 4.19 Upper eyelid
mast cell tumor with a
small central area of
erosion in a 4-year-old
86
DSH. Left eye.
neuropathies, should be considered. Brachycephalic dogs with their prominent
globes and shallow orbits are most likely to develop severe exposure
keratopathy as a result of facial paralysis. In all cases topical tear replacement
should be applied frequently. If the third eyelid does not adequately spread the
tear film during attempted blinks, a temporary tarsorrhaphy can be performed
APPEARANCE
until normal eyelid movement is restored. If the condition cannot be corrected,
coverage.
The epiphora-induced staining of facial hair at the medial canthus indicates
excessive lacrimation, poor tear drainage, or both (Fig. 4.20). Excessive lacri-
mation is suggested by Schirrmer tear test values greater than 25 rmm of wetting
per minute. The clinician must determine the cause of excessive lacrimation to
correct the overflow of tears. Entropion, distichiasis, and trichiasis are all irri-
tating and can thereby induce excessive lacrimation. Epiphora due to an inabil-
acquired blockage or occlusion of the nasolacrirmal system. Management of
epiphora is discussed in Chapter 7.
The third eyelid
Prominence of the third eyelid
Treatment is thus directed towards the cause (see Ch. 6). Other causes of pro-
trusion include sedation, dehydration, *Haw's’ syndrome in cats (often associ-
ated with diarrhea), retrobulbar lesions, symblepharon, Horner's syndrome
(see above), dysautonomia, and systemic disease (e.g. tetanus).
Scrolling of the third eyelid
The third eyelid may be distorted by a scrolling of its cartilage resulting in the
free margin of the membrane rolling outwards (Fig. 4.21). There may be
epiphora due to an inability to pool tears in the medial lacrimal lake and to
Fig. 4.20 Marked facial hair staining due to epiphora in a 2-year-old Burmese cat.
87
MOLOGY
OPHTHAL
ANIMAL
SMALL
Fig. 4.21 Scrolling of
the third eyelid cartilage
in a 1-year-old Bernese
Mountain Dog. Left eye.
complete the blink. Correction requires resection of the scrolled portion of the
cartilage while leaving the cross-bar of the T-shaped structure intact.
Prolapse of the nictitans gland
The base of the third eyelid is enveloped by the nictitans gland which produces
up to 50% of the aqueous portion of the precorneal tear filrm. In dogs with a
genetic predisposition (Beagle, American Cocker Spaniel, English Bulldog,
Boston Terrier) and rarely in cats (Burmese), the nictitans gland can prolapse
subconjunctivally between the posterior surface of the third eyelid and the
cornea. The gland appears as a smooth, ellipsoidal mass at the medial canthus
(Fig. 4.22). Diagnosis is straightforward. Treatment requires surgical reposi-
tioning of the gland either by anchoring it to the ventromedial orbital rim or
by performing a *pocketing' procedure (Fig. 4.23).'s Gland excision should be
avoided as this may adversely affect the precorneal tear film.
Other third eyelid conditions
Other conditions altering the appearance of the third eyelid include lymphoid
follicle hyperplasia, plasmacytic conjunctivitis, and neoplasia. It is normal for
the bulbar surface of the third eyelid to have a roughened appearance due to
the conjunctival lymphoid tissue overlying the nictitans gland. Proliferation
of lymphoid follicles tends to occur in young dogs, apparently as a non-specific
immune response, and is often accompanied by mild irritation and a mucoid
discharge. If the irritation does not improve after a course of topical antibiot-
ics and corticosteroids, careful debridement of the hyperplastic lymphoid fol-
irritation.
 Plasmacytic conjunctivitis (plasmoma) is most common in the German Shep-
herd Dog and may present as the solitary component of the disease complex
 or accompany chronic superficial keratitis. Plasma cells and lymphocytes infil-
88
trate the nictitating mermbrane. The third eyelid becomes thickened, develops
ABNORMAL
_APPEARANCE
Fig. 4.22 Prolapse of the nictitans gland in a 4-month-old Bulldog. Left eye.
an irregular border, and may become depigmented. A serormucoid discharge
may be present. Topical corticosteroids or ciclosporin effectively control this
immune-mediatedcondition.
Tumors involving the nictitating membrane include squamous cell carci-
noma, fbrosarcoma, adenomas or adenocarcinomas, and hemangiomas or
The conjunctiva/sclera
Conjunctivitis is specifically inflammation of the conjunctiva. Causes of con-
junctivitis include allergy, eyelid lesions, foreign bodies, immune-mediated
disease, infection, irritation, precorneal tear film deficiencies, and trauma (see
Ch. 7). Conjunctival tissues may become edematous. Marked chemosis (swell-
ing) may obscure visualization of the cornea (Fig. 4.24).
Differential diagnoses for a 'red eye' include conjunctivitis, uveitis, glau-
coma, episcleritis, and neoplasia. Conjunctivitis is a common misdiagnosis
eye'
Differentiation between conjunctival hyperemia and episcleral hyperemia/
with serious intraocular disease. Several key features assist in differentiation.
The conjunctival vasculature is bright red in color, branches extensively, is
freely mobile as it moves with the conjunctiva over the surface of the globe,
and readily blanches with the application of topical phenylephrine. The epi-
scleral vasculature in contrast is dark red in color, straight, runs at 9o° to the
limbus, is not mobile, and does not blanch when phenylephrine is applied topi-
cally (Fig. 4.25)
Episcleritis is an immune-mediated inflammatory disease of the episclera that
occurs most commonly in dogs. Episcleritis may be a distinct raised pink lesion
(nodular form) or more diffuse (Fig. 4.26). The lesion often involves the adja-
cent cornea. Episcleritis is usually treated with corticosteroids, systemic tetra-
89
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
1
Fig. 4.23 Diagram showing correction of prolapse of the nictitans gland by suturing the
orbital rim. (A) An Allis tissue forceps is gently applied to the periphery of the free margin
of the third eyelid, which is pulled across the eye. An incision is made in the medioventral
conjunctival fornix (at the base of the third eyelid) using scissors. Blunt dissection allows
access to the periosteum of the medioventral orbital rim. A firm bite of periosteum along
the orbital rim is taken using 3/0 polydioxanone swaged (PD5, Ethicon) or monofilament
nylon suture with a swaged-on needle introduced through the previously made incision.
It can be difficult to obtain a bite of periosteum and bring the needle out through the
incision, because access to the area is limited.
(B) The needle is then passed through the original incision dorsally towards the
prolapsed gland so as to emerge from the gland at its most prominent point of prolapse.
(C) With the third eyelid everted. the needle is passed back through the exit hole in the
gland to take a horizontal bite from the most prominent part of the gland
(D) Finally the needle is passed back through the last exit hole to emerge through the
original incision in the conjunctival fornix, thus encircling a large portion of the gland. The
suture ends are tied. This creates a suture loop through the gland which anchors it to the
periosteum of the orbital rim, preventing it from re-prolapsing. The conjunctival incision
can now be repaired using 6/0 polyglactin (Vicryl, Ethicon) or it may be left unsutured.
Postoperatively, topical antibiotic cover is given.
Redrawn with permission from BSAVA: Petersen-Jones, S.M. (1993) Conditions of the
eyelid and nictating membrane. In: Petersen-Jones, S.M. and Crispin, S.M. (eds) BSAVA
Monuol of Smoll Animot Ophthaimology. Quedgeley: B5AVA Publications, pp. 65-90.
90
ABNORMALAPPEARANCE
Fig. 4.24 Marked
chemosis of the
palpebral conjunctiva of
the upper eyelid in a 5-
year-old Beagle.Right
eye.
Fig. 4.25 Acute glaucoma demonstrating episcleral congestion in a 4-year-old Welsh
Springer Spaniel.Right eye.
Fig. 4.26 Raised area of episclera at the lateral limbus with a5sociated lipid deposition
91
in the adjacent cornea in a 2-year-old mixed breed dog.
MOLOGY
cycline and niacinamide, or, if necessary, immunosuppressive drugs such as
azathioprine.
An uncommon conjunctival disease, membranous or ligneous conjunctivitis,
OPHTHAL
has been seen in Dobermann Pinschers and Golden Retrievers.' The ocular
lesion appears as a bilateral yellow-green mermbrane lining any or all of the
conjunctival surfaces. Removal of the membrane leaves a roughened and ulcer-
ated epithelial surface. Exfoliative cytology reveals inflammatory cells with a
ANIM
prominent eosinophilic component. The membrane is composed of epithelial
cells and a proteinaceous exudate. Variably associated systemic signs include
SMALL
proteinuria and ulcerative lesions of the skin and other rmucous membranes,
particularly within the oral cavity. The condition can be controlled in most
cases with topical corticosteroids in conjunction with systemic corticosteroids
and/or azathioprine.
Conjunctival adhesions (symblepharon) are a sequela of severe conjunctivi-
tis. In cats the most common cause is infection with feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV.
1). The chemotic, ulcerated conjunctiva may adhere to itself, the third eyelid,
or the cornea, and may obliterate the conjunctival fornices, interfere with tear
drainage, or obscure vision (Fig. 4.27). Recurrent bouts of inflammation due
to recurrences of the herpesvirus infection are possible. Surgery to break down
the adhesions and reconstruction of fornix and limbus is best reserved for the
most severely affected animals (e.g. those with visual impairment) as adhesions
will often reform after surgery. This tendency to reform adhesions can be
decreased by the postoperative application of a bandage contact lens for 3-4
weeks.
The most common congenital conjunctival mass is the dermoid. Acquired
masses include neoplasia (squamous cell carcinoma, limbal melanocytoma,
conjunctival malignant melanoma, and hemangioma), conjunctival cysts, and
nodular episcleritis. Ocular melanosis, a familial condition in Cairn Terriers,
is characterized by the development of darkly pigmented scleral/episcleral
patches, diffuse proliferation of pigmented cells, and pronounced thickening
of the anterior uvea leading to secondary (melanocytic) glaucoma (Fig. 4.28).
Fig.4.27 Extensive
symblepharon obscuring
the cornea and causing
functional blindness of
the affected eye in a 1-
year-old DSH cat. Right
92
eye.
ABNORMAL APPEARANCE
Fig. 4.28 The
development of darkly
 pigmented scleral and
 episcleral patches in 
 melanocytosis. Nine-
year-old Cairn Terrier.
Left eye. (Courtesy of Dr
5. Petersen-Jones.)
Limbal melanocytomas and staphylomas may affect the sclera as well as the
cornea and are discussed within the corneal pigmentation section of this
chapter.
The cornea
 Loss of corneal transparency is readily diagnosed and may result from fluid
accumulation, pigmentation, vascularization, symblepharon, endothelial
deposits, or stromal lipid deposition.
Congenitalcornealopacities
When puppies' eyelids open there is usually some degree of corneal opacity that
normally clears over the subsequent few weeks. Sometimes there is delayed
corneal clearing usually resulting in a central geographic gray appearance to
the superficial stroma. This will usually clear with time.
With some congenital ocular malforma tions corneal opacities may be present
and persist; examples include anterior segment dysgenesis and the insertion of
persistent pupillary membrane on the corneal endothelial surface.
Corneal edema
Corneal edema occurs if there is a break in the anatormic or functional integrity
of the corneal epithelium or endothelium. It is commonly seen within an area
of corneal ulceration as the loss of epithelium allows the exposed stroma to
imbibe fluid from the tear film (Fig. 4.29). Canine adenovirus I infection (or,
historically, use of live CAV I vaccine) can result in corneal edema due to
corneal endothelium (Fig. 4.30). The immune complexes prevent normal func-
tioning of the corneal endothelial purmps that maintain dehydration of the
corneal stroma. Corneal ederma may also be seen in association with anterior
uveitis or glaucoma. Therefore, when evaluating a patient with corneal edema,
93
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 4.29 Ulcerative
keratitis and corneal edema
due to epithelial dystrophy
in a 4-year-old Boxer. Left
eye.
Fig. 4.30 Blue eye.
Dense corneal edema due
to CAV I infection. Right
eye.
a complete intraocular assessment including tonometry and gonioscopy should
be perforrmed. Severe corneal edema may lirmit one's ability to visualize intra-
ocular structures and ultrasonography may be helpful to assess intraocular
changes. The treatment of corneal edema is directed toward resolution of the
underlying cause. The ederma may be transient and resolve completely if the
underlying cause is successfully treated, but with severe damage the edema can
cially in older animals.
Corneal edema may also result from inherited endothelial dystrophy. This
94
condition occurs in Boston Terriers, Chihuahuas, Dachshunds, English Springer
Spaniels, Miniature Poodles, and occasionally other breeds. Usually rmiddle
ABNORMAL
aged or older anirmals are affected. The condition is typically bilateral and
begins in the dorsotemporal or central regions of the cornea. The progressive
ederma eventually involves the entire cornea (Fig. 4.31). In severely affected
patients, fuid-filled bullae may form and rupture to form superficial corneal
APPEARANCE
ulcers that are painful and often slow to heal. Topical hyperosmotic agents
such as 5% sodium chloride ointment or solution may decrease bullae forma-
tion although they will not coimpletely resolve the corneal edema. The results
of penetrating keratoplasty for this condition may be disappointing due to the
lack of a suitable pool of corneal donors or rejection. The use of a thin con-
junctival flap or therrmokeratoplasty may be palliative in selected cases.
 In the cat an idiopathic severe focal edema with formation of large bullae
has been described and is terrmed “bullous keratopathy'. Some cases have been
associated with a congenital endothelial dysplasia, while others have been
associated with anterior uveitis. Third eyelid flaps are often beneficial in treat-
ing cats with acute bullous keratopathy.
Corneal pigmentation
Acquired pigmentation is often common in dogs and results from the migration
of melanocytes from the limbus; it is often accompanied by superficial vascu-
larization. The pigment typically arises in response to chronic corneal irritation
or inflammation (Fig. 4.32). Common causes include chronic superficial kera-
titis (pannus), deficiencies in the precorneal tear film, lagophthalmos, and tri-
chiasis from entropion or corneal contact with the nasal folds. Brachycephalic
breeds are cormmonly affected. Therapy is directed at correction of the underly-
ing cause.
 Corneal sequestrum is a disease peculiar to cats and is the cause of the major-
ity of cases of brown or black corneal lesions in cats. The characteristic lesions
range from faint brown discoloration of the central cornea to the formation of
a variably sized, dense black plaque (Fig. 4.33). The sequestrum consists of
The condition may be unilateral or bilateral. The amount of pain associated
Fig. 4.31 Diffuse
corneal edema due to
corneal endothelial
dystrophy in a 9-year-
old Dachshund. Right
95
eye.
SMALLANIMALOPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 4.32 Extensive corneal pigmentation and fibrosis secondary to trichiasis, medial
canthal entropion, and lagophthalmos in a 3-year-old Shih Tzu.
Fig. 4.33Corneal
5equestrum in a 4-year-
old Burmese cat.Right
eye.
with the condition varies with the intensity of the inflammatory response. Very
dense plaques will often slough which may leave a full-thickness corneal defect.
The etiopathogenesis remains open to speculation, but infection with feline
-suol jo sane un wog Aunbny esanbs eanou e Aid Aeu snasadiu
standing corneal ulceration. Performing a grid keratotomy in cats has also been
shown to induce sequestrum formation. In Persians and Himalayans, corneal
exposure due to lagophthalmos is likely a contributing factor; therefore the
likelihood of the condition developing bilaterally is greatly increased. While
96
faint sequestra may respond to therapy with topical lubricating ointments,
dense sequestra are often removed by keratectomy and, if the lesion is deep,
ABNORMAL
repaired with a conjunctival pedicle fap or lamellar corneal graft.
Limbal melanocytomas may infiltrate the cornea as well as the sclera and
appear as raised black lesions which tend to be slow growing (Fig. 4.34).
They rmust be differentiated from intraocular melanomas that have extended
APPEARANCE
through the sclera. Their behavior is usually benign. Progressive lesions usually
respond to treatment by excision with or without a graft, laser excision, or
cryosurgery.
Staphylomas are the protrusion of uveal tissue through thinned cornea or
sclera. Staphylormas may initially appear black or slightly brown due to a cover-
ing of fibrin. Subsequent granulation and scar formation rmutes the color to a
vascular gray. Staphylomas may be congenital, traumatic, or secondary to
severe scleritis or chronic glaucoma.
Cornealvascularization
Corneal vascularization is a common feature of corneal disease. Whenever
corneal vascularization is present, the possibility of precorneal tear film defi-
ciency or concurrent corneal ulceration should be considered. Therefore a
Schirrmer tear test and staining the cornea with fluorescein dye are essential
parts of the complete ophthalmic examination. It should be remermbered that
vascularization will occur as a normal component of stromal healing and
should not be inappropriately suppressed. Once the stimulus for vasculariza-
tion is resolved, the corneal vessels will narrow and no longer transmit blood,
and are observed as faint gray lines (ghost vessels') upon close examination
of the cornea.
Corneal vascularization is a common pathologic reaction to a number of
different insults. These include precorneal tear filrm deficiency, eyelid abnor-
malities, trauma, infection, chermical irritants, immune-mediated disease, and
diseases involving adjacent structures such as episcleritis, scleritis, anterior
uveitis, and glaucoma. Differentiation between superficial and deep corneal
vascularization is helpful to deterrmine the underlying cause for the vascular-
ment. Deeper vessels tend to branch less, are darker in color, and their origins
from scleral vessels are obscured by the scleral overhang at the limbus. In
Fig. 4.34Limbal
melanoma and
a550ciated lipid
keratopathy in a mixed
97
breed dog.
IGY
contrast, superficial vessels branch frequently, are lighter red in color, and
MOLO
can be seen crossing the limbus as they arise from the conjunctival vessels.
Chronic superficial keratitis (CSK, pannus) is an immune-mediated condi-
OPHTHAL
tion characterized by progressive, superficial, densely vascularized corneal
inflammatory lesions. CsK occurs bilaterally with the lesions first developing
in the ventrolateral quadrant of the cornea. Lymphocytes and plasma cells
infiltrate the superficial stroma accompanied by vascularization. The lesions
ANIM
progress at a variable rate to produce a thick, superficial, corneal granulation
tissue which may eventually involve the entire cornea resulting in severe visual
SMALL
lesions and in long-standing cases corneal fibrosis (scar tissue) and/or corneal
lipid degeneration is present (Fig. 4.35). Exposure to ultraviolet light is a known
predisposing factor for CSK. Therefore dogs that reside at high elevations are
often more difficult to treat.
Treatment consists of topical immunosuppression with corticosteroids and/
more severe cases or those in which the owners have difficul ty applying medica-
tion. Owners should be aware of the need for lifelong treatment and the likeli-
hood of periods of exacerbation. Treatment with beta radiation may be useful
indoors during peak ultraviolet light levels or using sunglasses (Doggles), can
irreversible corneal changes that limit vision. As the cornea vascularizes quite
rapidly following keratectomy, topical ciclosporin should be continued during
the healingphase.
Eosinophilic keratitis, a condition unique to the cat, is a progressive, super-
ficial, corneal inflammatory lesion with a surface deposit of a white^cottage
cheese-like' material (Fig. 4.36). While any part of the cornea may be involved,
the lesions are often noted dorsotemporally. Exfoliative cytology of the lesion
Fig. 4.35 Chronic superficial keratitis in an 8-year-old German Shepherd Dog. The
98
marked corneal vascularization and pigmentation indicate chronicity. Left eye.
ABNORMAL APPEARANCE
Fig. 4.36  Eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis in a 4-year-old cat.
typically reveals multiple eosinophils as well as mast cells, neutrophils, lym-
tion with feline herpesvirus-1 has been implicated.!7 The disease is controlled
 s  s      
topical ciclosporin. As FHV-1 may be involved, the possibility of causing
reactivation of latent herpetic infections should be discussed with the owners
when employing topical corticosteroids in the treatment regimen. Occasionally
systemic megestrol acetate therapy is utilized, but the clinician must be aware
of the potential side effects, including inducing diabetes mellitus, when using
this drug in the cat. Lesions often resolve completely with treatrment, although
recurrence is common.
whitish/gray mermbrane of conjunctival origin is adherent to the corneal surface.
It has been discussed above with conditions causing abnormal appearance of
the conjunctiva
Corneal lipid and calcium deposition
Lipid keratopathy is the deposition of lipid within the corneal stroma. The
lipid deposition may be due to corneal dystrophy or degeneration or systemic
hyperlipidemia (hyperlipoproteinemia, dyslipoproteinermia).? If the deposition
is marked or progressive, the animal should be investigated for hyperlipopro-
teinemia and/or endocrinopathy.
Crystalline stromal dystrophy is a genetic, bilateral (although not always
a       
crystalline refractile opacities, usually in an oval or circular pattern, imparting
a *ground glass' appearance, in an otherwise normal cornea (Fig. 4.37). Lesions
may slowly alter in size, but generally have no effect on vision and require no
99
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 4.37 Crystalline
stromal dystrophy in a
3-year-old Miniature
Dachshund.
Fig. 4.38 Lipid
keratopathy in a Shetland
 Sheepdog. The lesion
developed 6 months
following cataract
extraction. (Courtesy of Dr
S.M. Petersen-Jones.)
treatrment. A number of dog breeds are affected and the condition has been
shown to be familial in some breeds. Siberian Huskies suffer from a more severe
manifestation of the condition with lipid deposition also occurring deeper in
the cornea.? In Shelties corneal dystrophy may be associated with focal thin-
ning of corneal stroma and overlying recurrent erosions.
Corneal lipid deposition can occur as a degenerative process secondary to
corneoscleral diseases such as keratitis, episcleritis, and limbal melanocytoma.
Lipid leakage frorm blood vessels causes the lipid deposition (Fig. 4.38). The
appearance of the lipid deposit is more variable than with dystrophies; it may
100
be a diffuse white color or appear as a granular deposit or refractile “fakes'.
Lipid deposition as a circumferential ring in the perilirmbal cornea is known as
ABNORMAL
arcus lipoides and in such cases the possibility of a predisposing systemic condi-
tion should be investigated. Lipid crystals may occasionally erode through the
corneal epithelium causing ulceration and pain (Fig. 4.39).
Managerment of lipid keratopathy involves treatment for a possible underly-
APPEARANCE
ing hyperlipidermia. If the lesion is extensive, progressive, or painful, a keratec-
tomy may be required.
Calcareous degeneration is characterized by the presence of dense white,
often needle-shaped, chalky, stromal deposits (Fig. 4.40). These lesions fre-
quently will ulcerate causing discormfort and may become vascularized. This
condition often affects older dogs. Cushing's disease or uremia may be predis-
posing factors. Topical 1-5% disodium ethylenediarmine tetra-acetic acid
(EDTA) may assist in resolution of the lesions by chelating the calcium present
within the corneal stroma. Keratectomy may be indicated if the lesion causes
discomfort or is extensive, but healing may be complicated.
Corneal endothelial deposits
Roundish, usually yellow to gray foci on the corneal endothelial surface are
known as keratic precipitates (KPs) (Fig. 4.41). The keratic precipitates form
as a result of anterior uveitis and represent the deposition of inflammatory cells
on the endothelial surface. The KPs tend to be deposited inferiorly and may
be concealed by an elevated third eyelid. Keratic precipitates are seen more
cormmonly accompany lens-induced uveitis. The KPs will slowly resolve as the
underlying uveitis is treated but may leave a focal endothelial scar.
Fig. 4.39 Crystalline stromal dystrophy and associated vascularization in a 6-year-old
101
Shetland Sheepdog. Left eye.
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig.4.40Calcareou5
degeneration of the
cornea in an elderly
Tossbred dog.(Courtesy
of Dr 5.M.
Petersen-Jones.)
Fig. 4.41 Keratic
precipitates associated with
toxoplasmosis in a 2-year-
old DSH cat. Right eye.
A slowly progressive thin pigment deposit involving the corneal endothelium
and originating from the lirmbal region is sometimes observed. The pigment is
presumed to be due to migration or slow proliferation of limbal pigment. No
therapy is required. Occasionally iris cysts (see below) rupture against the
corneal endothelium leaving an adherent donut-shaped deposit of pigmented
tissue.
Aiterationofcorneal contour
A profound accumulation of fluid in the cornea may cause distortion of the
102
corneal profile, the appearance of which is referred to as keratoconus. Other
possible causes of a misshapen corneal contour include corneal abscesses and
inclusion cysts. Both of these conditions are rare and necessitate keratectomy.
NORMAL
Corneal abscesses are typically painful and consist of a usually central yellowish
stroma opacity with indistinct borders and associated focal edema. They are
typically accompanied by vascularization and conjunctival inflammation.
APPEARA
Corneal inclusion cysts are typically non-painful and are filled with a thick,
cream or tan colored material composed of desquamated epithelial cells; they
RANCE
occur as a sequel to ulceration or traurma, which may be surgical as well as
accidental (Fig. 4.42). Minimal inflammation is present although a few super-
ficial corneal blood vessels may be present.
A deep corneal ulceration will often cause an obvious concavity within the
corneal contour. If such a lesion does not retain fuorescein dye at the base,
this indicates the presence of a descemetocele (see pp. 221-223). A corneal
ulceration that involved the loss of corneal stroma can heal leaving an epithe-
lialized indentation (corneal facet).
A corneal laceration usually causes an obvious alteration in the corneal
contour. Corneal laceration, with or without iris prolapse, requires surgical
repair of the wound, reformation of the anterior chamber, and medical treat-
ment to control possible infection and anterior uveitis.
The anterior chamber and anterior uvea
Congenital lesions of the iris include colobomas, persistent pupillary mem-
branes, and iris cysts. Colobomas of the iris are rare. Their presence may create
 an irregular or false pupil (Fig. 4.43). In older individuals, colobomas rmust be
distinguished from senile iris atrophy (discussed in the normal iris section of
strands of iris tissue that arise from the iris collarette. The strands may be free
floating, insert onto the corneal endothelium (iris to cornea PPM) (Fig. 4.44),
span the iris (iris to iris PPM) (Fig. 4.45), or attach to the anterior lens capsule
(iris to lens PPM). Non-progressive focal opacities of varying extent are associ-
ated with the corneal attachments. The lenticular attachments often result in
focal cataract formation (see pp. 127-128).
Fig. 4.42Epithelial
inclusion cyst in a 12-
year-old Yorkshire
Terrier.
103
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 4.43  Appearance of
 polycoria due to an iridal 
coloboma in a 1-year-old
Siberian Husky. Note that
an iris to iris persistent
 pupillary membrane is 
present as well.
Fig. 4.44 Persistent
pupillary membrane
(PPM) with corneal
 attachment in a 12-
week-old Afghan Hound.
Fig. 4.45  Iris to iris
persistent pupillary
membranes (PPM) in a 2-
year-old Labrador
104
Retriever.
Anterior uveitis
ABNORMAL
Anterior uveitis is inflammation of the iris and ciliary body (see Ch. 6). Acute
 anterior uveitis is typically painful. Animals with a low-grade, chronic uveitis
are often less noticeably painful and may present because the owner has noticed
a change in the appearance of the eye. Clinical signs can include episcleral
APPEARANCE
congestion; corneal changes such as edema, vascularization, and keratic pre-
cipitates; hypopyon (white blood cells) or fibrin within the anterior chamber,
iris color changes, pupillary abnormalities, and lens changes such as posterior
synechia and cataract formation. The potential etiologies of chronic uveitis are
similar to those described for acute uveitis (see Table 6.5 and pp. 245-247).23
Typically, the iris color change consists of darkening with a loss of normal
surface detail, although animals with a blue iris may develop a yellow hue to
the iridal stroma. In some forms of uveitis, predominantly uveoderrmatologic
syndrome, iris depigmentation occurs. A reddening of the iris (rubeosis iridis)
may develop and is most easily noted in animals with a light-colored iris, typi-
cally cats. Rubeosis iridis is due to neovascularization of the iridal surface.
The inflarmmation may result in adhesions between the iris and the anterior
lens capsule (posterior synechiae). These adhesions limit pupillary movement
and often distort the pupillary shape. Extensive posterior synechiae will block
 o   s n   a n s o
bombe) and leads to secondary glaucoma as a result of iridocorneal angle col-
lapse. Lenticular changes include pigment deposits on the anterior capsule due
to transient adhesion of the iris to the lens capsule or adherent pigment contain-
ing rmacrophages, and cataract forrmation. Secondary lens luxation may occur,
particularly in cats with chronic uveitis
Uveodermatologic syndrome is a specific form of immune-mediated uveitis
seen in dogs, most commonly Akitas and the Arctic breeds. Melanocytes are
the immune system's target in uveoderrmatologic syndrome. Therefore severe
anterior and posterior uveitis and a characteristic poliosis (whitening of the
hair) and vitiligo (depigmentation of the skin) around the eyes and muzzle are
seen. Control of the uveitis is challenging; retinal detachment and degeneration
and secondary glaucoma are common sequelae.
Blood-filled anterior chamber (hyphema)
Hypherma may result from inflammatory disease, systemic disease such as
clotting disorders or hypertension, or ocular disease such as persistence of
embryonic blood vessels, neoplasia, retinal detachment, and trauma. Investi-
gation of hyphema requires a thorough ocular and systemic examination,
ultrasonography (to investigate the possible presence of intraocular neoplasia
or retinal detachment), hematology, biochermistry, clotting profiles, and blood
pressure measurerment. Spontaneous hyphema is often associated with pre-
iridal fibrovascular mermbrane forrmation (rubeosis iridis) as the new vessels
on the iris surface are very fragile and hemorrhage easily. Chronic uveitis,
long-standing retinal detachment, intraocular neoplasia, and chronic glaucoma
can all incite formation of pre-iridal fibrovascular membranes. In older animals
for which no other ocular or systemic cause of hyphema can be identified,
hyphema includes decreased activity to discourage re-bleeding, the use of
topical corticosteroids to control any concurrent uveitis, and topical atropine
105
IGY
to prevent significant adhesions. Intraocular pressure should be monitored
MOLO
and increased pressure treated as necessary. Uncomplicated hyphemas will
OPHTHAL
may persist indefinitely.
Mass lesions in the anterior chamber
Mass lesions are readily visualized within the anterior chamber given adequate
corneal transparency. In patients with uveitis, organized fbrin, hypopyon, and
ANIM
corneal endothelium, anterior lens capsule, or iris. Anterior chamber foreign
bodies are usually accompanied by corneal or scleral damage and a uveitic
SMAI
response (Fig. 4.46).
The iris cyst is typically a spherical, often free-floating, structure of vari-
able size in the anterior chamber (Fig. 4.47). On occasion its origin from the
iridal pigment epithelium or ciliary epithelium is indicated by a connecting
strand.2S The thin walls typically transilluminate, but occasionally the pigment
density renders the cyst totally opaque. Iridal cysts are usually of no clinical
significance although on occasion their size and/or nurmber are such that
vision may be obscured. In such cases deflation by needle aspiration or laser
puncture is indicated.
The presence of a luxated lens anterior to the iris is usually heralded by the
sudden onset of corneal edema and glaucoma, particularly in the dog (see Ch.
6). Occasionally in the dog and routinely in the cat, the presence of the lens in
the anterior charmber does not cause glaucoma. However, contact of the lens
with the corneal endothelium can still incite corneal edema. Lens luxation is
discussed further within this chapter under the abnormal appearance of the
lens.
Uveal tumors may be primary or secondary (Fig. 4.48). The primary tumors
include melanoma, adenoma, adenocarcinoma, and medulloepithelioma. The
diagnosis of uveal neoplasia depends on the demonstration of a solid mass
Fig. 4.46 A linear foreign body (a thorn) and attendant anterior uveitis in a 4-year-old
106
Crossbred dog. Left eye.
ABNORMAL APPEARANCE
Fig. 4.47Multiple anterior
 uveal cysts demonstrating
their appearance on
transillumination in a 10-
year-old Dobermann. Right
eye.
Fig. 4.48 Posterior iridal and ciliary body ma55
extending through the pupil into the anterior
chamber in a 5-year-old Newfoundland dog. Right
eye.
involving the iris or ciliary body. Histopathologic confirmation is often not
 perforrmed until the eye has been enucleated.?6 Most primary ocular tumors in
           o 
glaucoma. In an eye that is otherwise normal, owners may request local resec-
tion, although this is a skilled procedure and in many cases enucleation is
eventually perforrmed. Laser photocoagulation has been used to treat uveal
In cats primary tumors are more often malignant. A cat with diffuse iris
aui on pasoddo se sauuo uoeuauaid lepui oi anp suasand Aeu ouau
observation of a distinct mass within the anterior chamber. Metastasis of
 diffuse iris melanoma is not infrequent.28
Although any metastatic tumor embolus may locate in the eye, the most
common secondary uveal tumor is lymphoma. The ocular manifestations of
lymphoma vary considerably and may not be specific for neoplasia. Clinical
signs such as anterior uveitis, glaucoma, and/or intraocular hemorrhage may
107
GY
be the initial presenting features." For the treatrment of secondary tumors,
MOLO
palliative enucleation, chemotherapy, or euthanasia of the terminal patient
represent the treatment options.
10日
Pupillary abnormalities
UHa
Ophthalmic patients may present with anisocoria, a difference in size between
the two pupils (Fig. 4.49). The clinician rmust deterrmine which is the abnormal
pupil by comparing relative sizes in light and dark conditions, checking the
ANIM
direct and consensual pupillary light responses, and performing visual tests.
Possible causes of an abnormally dilated pupil include unilateral iris atrophy,
SMAI
glaucoma, oculomotor and parasympathetic nerve lesions, mydriatic applica-
tion, dysautonomia, severe unilateral retinal disease, and optic neuropathy.
Causes of the unilaterally constricted pupil include anterior uveitis, synechiae
formation, Horner's syndrome, miotic usage, and organophosphate poisoning.
Cranial trauma may result in anisocoria. The prognosis is poor if the anisocoria
progresses to dilated non-responsive pupils. If bilateral mydriasis or miosis is
present the differential diagnoses should similarly consider all those causes
listed for anisocoria. A *D'-shaped or reverse D'-shaped pupil or spastic pupil
syndrome (a static anisocoria) may be seen in cats infected with feline leukermia
virus.? The prognosis for long-term survival is poor.
The lens
Changes in the appearance of the lens most commonly result from a loss of
transparency or because of dislocation from its norrmal position in the posterior
chamber. Gross opacification is obvious, but magnification or the use of slit-
lamp biomicroscopy rmay be necessary to detect small lesions and identify the
position of the opacity within the lens. Distant direct ophthalmoscopy makes
it easy to differentiate between the opacity of cataract and the translucency
of nuclear sclerosis. Cataract results in a black shadow against the reflection
from the fundus whereas nuclear sclerosis presents no barrier to the fundus
reflection. Nuclear sclerosis is a norrmal aging feature due to the compaction
of the nuclear region of the lens. It has little or no effect on vision, but the
 blue-gray appearance of the lens often prompts a misdiagnosis of cataract.
Cataract is simply defined as opacity of the lens and/or its lens capsule (Figs
4.50 & 4.51). There are a number of possible causes including genetic defects,
congenital anomalies, diabetes mellitus, trauma, and accompanying other
ocular conditions (e.g. uveitis, glaucoma, lens luxation, and retinal degenera-
tion). With inherited cataract, the predominant reason for cataract formation
in dogs, the age of onset and the appearance of the opacity are often specific
Fig. 4.49Anis0coria in a 4-
108
year-old Persian cat.
ABNORMAL APPEARANCE
Fig. 4.50Posterior polar
and equatorial cataract in a
7-year-old Labrador
Retriever. Left eye.
Fig. 4.51  Cortical'spoke
wheel cataract in a 9-year-
old Boston Terrier. Left eye.
for the breed. Lens opacity may also be due to the attachiment of posterior
synechiae and any associated pigment migration, the presence of pupillary
 membranes, or the persistence of elements of the primary vitreous.
The reason for presentation of the cataract patient may be the abnormal
appearance of the eye as the owner rmay be unaware of the degree of visual
impairment. If the cataract is progressive or has a significant effect on vision
then the patient should be assessed for possible surgery. This assessment should
involve a complete systemic and ophthalmic exarmination together with elec-
troretinography and ocular ultrasonography to determine if other ocular
disease if present and to assess the integrity and functionality of the retina.
109
IGY
There is no rmedical treatiment for cataract. Surgical extraction can successfully
MOLO
restore sight. Phacoemulsification is the most commonly performed procedure
with a success rate for vision of 90-95%.31
PHTHAL
Primary lens luxation most commonly occurs in the terrier breeds. The lens
or, more commonly, anteriorly into or through the pupil into the anterior
chamber (Fig. 4.52). Its position within the pupil or the anterior chamber
AL
ANIM
together with adherent vitreous produces interference with the transpupillary
flow of aqueous, and acute secondary glaucoma is the usual presenting feature
771
in the dog; the cat's deeper anterior chamber is soimewhat protective against
SMAI
pupillary block and acute IOP elevation (see Ch. 6). Diagnosis is usually
straightforward as one visualizes the lens in the anterior chamber. The elevated
IOP should be relieved followed by ermergency lens extraction."2 A posteriorly
luxated lens does not necessarily require removal, although in some patients
the lens repeatedly moves between the anterior chamber and the vitreous,
causing glaucoma each time it is in the anterior chamber. Conservative long-
term management may be possible using long-acting miotics to maintain the
lens within the vitreous cavity. Secondary lens luxation occurs in both dogs
and cats as a result of conditions such as uveitis, hypermature cataract forma-
tion, and glaucoma. Spontaneous lens luxation occurs infrequently in aged
animals, particularly Siamese cats. An anteriorly luxated lens may become
cataractous. Contact between the anteriorly luxated lens and the corneal endo-
thelial surface may result in pain and an area of corneal edema.
The posterior segment
Leukocoria is defined as white appearance to the pupil. The differential diag-
noses include cataract, neoplasia, persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous, vit-
reous abscess, posterior uveitis, and retinal detachment.
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous is a congenital cause of leukocoria
in which stromal fibrovascular and posterior capsular plaques render the pos-
Fig.4.52 Primary
anterior lens luxation in a
5-year-old Jack Russell 
110
Terrier. Left eye.
terior lens opaque.3,34 The lesions may range from small fibrovascular dots that
minirmally impair vision to severe retrolental and lenticular changes that mark-
BNORN
edly impair vision. Cortical cataract may also be present. The problem may be
MAL
sporadic although it is inherited in some breeds, notably the Dobermann and
Staffordshire Bull Terrier. The presence of retrolenticular vasculature is diag-
APPEA
nostic, although ocular ultrasonography may be needed to demonstrate the full
extent of the involvement, particularly when cortical and capsular cataract is
ARA
RANCE
because it involves the removal of the lens and the anterior vitreous. Hemor-
used for breeding
Severe retinal dysplasia with retinal non-attachment or detachment may
result in congenital leukocoria due to contact of the retina with the posterior
surface of the lens. Cataract formation rmay also be present. This condition is
discussed further on pages 136-141. Labrador Retrievers and Samoyeds are
affected by another inherited condition, oculoskeletal dysplasia. The condition
is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait." Homozygotes demonstrate skele-
tal and ocular abnormalities including cataracts and complete retinal detach-
ment in association with retarded growth of the radius, ulna, and tibia resulting
in a chondrodysplastic appearance. Heterozygotes do not develop the skeletal
abnorrmalities and the ocular lesions are less severe, manifesting often as rmul-
tiple retinal folds.
Animals with bilateral retinal detachment will often present with blindness,
but if the condition is unilateral and the retina is occupying the anterior vitre-
ous or there is vitreal hemorrhage, the resulting abnormal appearance or aniso-
coria rmay be the reason for presentation.? Generally, the prognosis for vision
in retinal detachment is poor due to the late presentation of many of these
cases. The treatment is discussed on pages 155-160.
Hypertensive retinopathy is now recognized commonly in older anirmals,
intraocular hemorrhage (Figs 4.53 & 4.54). The retinal vasculature may appear
for underlying cardiac, renal, and thyroid disease. Treatment with a calcium
channel blocker such as amlodipine besylate can offer rapid and effective
hypotensive therapy preventing the development of further retinal pathology
and allowing retinal reattachment. If the detachment occurred recently, then
 at least partial restoration of vision is possible.37 As hypertensive retinopathy
is fairly common, the systolic blood pressure should be evaluated in all cases
ofserous retinal detachment.
Alterations in the quality of the tapetal refex rmay be the reason for presenta-
pupil due to tapetal hyperreflectivity following retinal degeneration or retinal
detachment with disinsertion. The loss of the pupillary light response exacer-
bates the appearance. The funduscopic changes resulting from retinal degenera-
tion are described on pages 144-147 and 182-186.
Alterations noted upon examination of the posterior segment may include
asteroid hyalosis, tapetal hyporeflectivity, tapetal hyperreflectivity, retinal
vascular tortuosity or attenuation, retinal hemorrhage, and optic neuritis.
Asteroid hyalosis is an innocuous degenerative change of the vitreous. Minute,
111
MOLOG
OPHTHAL
ANIMAL
SMALL
Fig. 4.53  Complete retinal detachment resulting from hypertensive retinopathy
 associated with hyperthyroidism in a 13-year-old DSH cat. Left eye.
Fig. 4.54 Multiple pre-
retinal, intraretinal, and
subretinal hemorrhages
due to hypertensive
retinopathy in an 8-year-
old DSH cat.
spherical, lipid opacities are suspended throughout the vitreous. The condition
is frequently noted in geriatric animals, but may also occur in association
with ciliary body epithelial tumors and previous episodes of infammation.
Areas of tapetal hyporeflectivity indicate areas of thickened neural retina or
subretinal infiltrates. Causes of tapetal hyporefectivity include retinal edema,
retinal dysplasia, retinitis, and separation of the sensory retina from the retinal
pigment epithelium by subretinal fluid or a cellular infiltrate. Areas of tapetal
hyperreflectivity indicate thinning or absence of the neural retina. Causes
include retinal atrophy, retinal degeneration, and dysinsertion retinal detach-
- s n  s   aa r  
sion, hyperviscosity syndrome, polycythemia, and inflammation. The retinal
vasculature may appear thin or attenuated with anemia, progressive retinal
atrophy, chronic sudden acquired retinal degeneration, and chronic glaucoma.
Retinal hemorrhages may occur at different levels in the sensory retina. The
112
hemorrhages may be pre-retinal (between the sensory retina and vitreous),
within the nerve fiber layer, intraretinal, or subretinal. Causes of retinal hem-
orrhage include vasculitis, thrombocytopenia, thrombocytopathy, coagulopa-
BNORMAL
thy, hypertension, anemia, and polycythermia. Optic neuritis causes the optic
nerve head to appear swollen with indistinct margins. Peripapillary hemor-
rhage is often present. Causes include inflammation and neoplasia. For further
APPEARANCE
discussion of the differential diagnoses and treatment options for the above
findings, see Chapter 5.
REFERENCES
1. Gelatt, K. and Mackay, E. (1997)
9. Kern, T.J., Aromando, M.C. and
Distribution of intraocular pressure in
Erb, H.N. (1989) Horner's syndrome
dogs.Trans. Am.Coll.Ver.
in dogs and cats: 100 cases (1975-
Ophthatmol. 28: 13.
2. Dubielzig, R.R. (2002) Feline ocular
369-373.
sarcomas.In: Peiffer, R.and Simons,
10. Boydell, P. (1995) [diopathic Horner's
K.(eds) Ocular Tumors in Animals
syndrome in the Golden Retriever.
and Humarts. Ames: Iowa State Press,
J.Small Anim.Pracr.36(9):382-
pp.283-288.
384.
3. Bingaman, D., Lindley, D.,
11. Gilger, B.C, Hamilton, H.L., Wilkie,
Glickman, N. et al. (1994)
D.A. et al. (1995) Traumatic ocular
Intraocular gentamicin and
proptoses in dogs and cats: 84 cases
glaucoma: a retrospective study
in 60 dog and cat eyes (1985-1993).
206(8): 1186-1190.
12. Allgoewer, L., Blair, M., Basher, T. et
113-119.
al. (2000) Extraocular muscle myositis
4. Ramsey, D.T. and Fox, D.B. (1997)
and restrictive strabismus in 10 dogs.
Surgery of the orbit. Ver. Clin. North
Ver.Ophrhalmol.3(1):21-26
Am.Small Anim.Pracr.27(5):
13. Gelatt, K. and Gelatt, J. (2001) Small
1215-1264.
animal ophthalmic surgery: practical
5. Dziezyc, J., Hager, D.A. and
techniques for the veterinarian. New
Millichamp, N.J. (1987) Two-
York: Butterworth Heinemann, pp.
dimensional real-time ocular
74123.
 ultrasonography in the diagnosis of
14. Bedford, P.G.C. (1998) Technique
ocular lesions in dogs. J. Am. Anim.
of lateral canthoplasty for the
Hosp. 4ssoc. 23(5): 501-508.
correction of macropalpebral fissure
6. Morgan, R.V., Ring, R.D., Ward,
in the dog. J. Small Anim. Pracr.
D.A. et al. (1996) Magnetic resonance
39(3): 117-120.
imaging of ocular and orbital disease
15. Morgan, R.V., Duddy, J.M. and
in 5 dogs and a cat. Ver. Radiol.
McClurg, K. (1993) Prolapse of the
Ulrrasound 37(3): 185-192.
gand of the third eyelid in dogs: a
7. Boydell, P. (1991) Fine needle
retrospective study of 89 cases (1980
aspiration biopsy in the diagnosis of
to 1990). J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc.
exophthalmos. J. Small Anim. Pracr.
29(1): 56-60.
32(11): 542-546.
16. Ramsey, D.T., Ketring, K.L., Glaze,
8. Ramsey, D., Hamor, R., Gerding, P.
M.B. et al. (1996) Ligneous
et al. (1995) Clinical and
conjunctivitis in four Doberman
immunohistochemical characteristics
Pinschers.J. Am.Anim.Hosp. Assoc.
of bilateral polymyositis of dogs.
32(5): 439-447.
Proc.Am. Coll. Ver. Ophrhalmol. 26:
17. Nasisse, M.P., Glover, T.L., Moore,
130-132.
C.P. et al. (1998) Detection of feline
113
A9
herpesvirus 1 DNA in corneas of cats
primary canine intraocular tumors.
MOLOC
with eosinophilic keratitis or corneal
Prog.Ver.Comp.Ophrhalmol.3(4)
sequestration. Am. J. Ver. Res. 59(7):
152-157.
OPHTHAL
856-858.
28. Kalishman, J.B., Chappell, R., Flood,
18. La Croix, N.C., van der Woerdt, A.
L.A. et al. (1998) A matched
and Olivero, D.K. (2001) Nonhealing
observational study of survival in cats
corneal ulcers in cats: 29 cases (1991-
with enucleation due to diffuse iris
MAL
melanoma. Ver. Ophrhalmol. 1(1):
ANIM
733-735.
25-29.
19. Jackson, P.A., Kaswan, R.L.,
29. Krohne, S.G., Henderson, N.M.,
SMALL
Merideth, R.E. et al. (1991) Chronic
Richardson, R.C. et al. (1994)
superficial keratitis in dogs: a placebo
Prevalence of ocular involvement in
controlled trial of topical cyclosporine
dogs with multicentric lymphoma:
treatment. Prog. Ver. Comp.
prospective evaluation of 94 cases.
Ophrhalmol. 1(4):269-275.
Ver.Comp.Ophthalmol. 4(3):
20. Clerc, B. (1996) The treatment of
127-135.
immune-mediated and auto-immune
30. Nell, B. and Suchy, A. (1998) ^D-
 ocular diseases in dogs and cats
shaped’ and ‘reverse-D-shaped' pupil
using cyclosporine A ointment.
in a cat with lymphosarcoma. Ver.
(A literature review and personal
Ophrhalmol.1(1):53-56.
experience).Prarique Medicale
31. Sigle, K.J. and Nasisse, M.P. (2006)
ef Chirurgicale del'Animal de
Long-term complications after
Compagnie 31(1): 73-81.
phacoemulsification for cataract
21. Crispin, S. and Barnett, K.C. (1983)
removal in dogs: 172 cases (1995-
Dystrophy, degeneration, and
infiltration of the canine cornea. J.
228(1): 7479.
Small Anim.Pracr.24:63-83.
32. Glover, T.L., Davidson, M.G.,
22. MacMillan, A., Waring, G., Spangler,
Nasisse, M.P. et al. (1995) The
W. et al. (1979) Crystalline corneal
intracapsular extraction of displaced
opacities in the Siberian Husky.
Jenses in dogs: a retrospective study of
J.Am. Ver. Med. Assoc. 175:829-
57 cases (19841990).J. Am. Anim
832.
Hosp. Assoc. 31(1): 77-81.
23. Crispin, S. (1988) Uveitis in the dog
33. Boeve, M.H., Stades, F.C., van der
and cat.J. Small Anim.Pracr.29:
Linde-Sipman, J.S. et al. (1992)
429-447.
Persistent hyperplastic tunica
24. Nelms, S.R., Nasisse, M.P.,
vasculosa lentis and primary vitreous
Davidson, M.G. et al. (1993)
(PHTVL/PHPV) in the dog: a
Hyphema associated with retinal
comparative review. Prog. Ver. Comp.
disease in dogs: 17 cases (1986-1991).
Ophrhalmol. 2(4): 163-172.
34.Gemensky-Metzler, A.J. and Wilkie,
1289-1292.
D.A. (2004) Surgical management
25. Spiess, B.M., Bolliger, J.O., Gusceti,
and histologic and
F. et al. (1998) Multiple ciliary body
immunohistochemical features of a
cysts and secondary glaucoma in the
cataract and retrolental plaque
Great Dane: a report of nine cases.
secondary to persistent hyperplastic
Ver. Ophrhalmol. 1(1): 41-45
tunica vasculosa lentis/persistent
26. Dubielzig, R.R., Steinberg, H.
hyperplastic primary vitreous
Garvin, H.et al. (1998) Iridociliary
(PHTVL/PHPV) in a Bloodhound
epithelial tumors in 100 dogs and 17
cats: a morphological study. Ver.
369375.
Ophrhalmol. 1(4): 223-231.
35. Pellegrini, B, Acland, G.M. and Ray,
27. Nasisse, M.P., Davidson, M.G.,
J. (2002) Cloning and characterization
Olivero, D.K. et al. (1993)
114
of opticin cDNA: evaluation as a
Neodymium: YAG laser treatment of
candidate for canine oculo-skeletal
dysplasia. Gene 282(1/2): 121-
37.Van de Sandt, RROM, Stades,
ABNORMAL APPEARANCE
131.
F.C., Boeve, M.H. et al. (2004)
36. Hendrix, D.V., Nasisse, M.P., Cowen,
Arterial hypertension in the cat:
P. et al. (1993) Clinical signs,
a pathophysiological and clinical
concurrent diseases and risk factors
overview with the emphasis on
associated with retinal detachment in
ophthalmic aspects. Eur. J.
dogs. Prog. Ver. Comp. Ophrhalmol.
Comp. Anim.Pracr. 14(1): 47-
3(3): 87-91.
55.
115
Visual impairment
Ellen Bjerkas, Bjorn Ekesten,
Kristina Narfstrom, and Bruce Grahn
EVALUATION OF VISUAL FUNCTION
This chapter deals with visual irmpairrment and concerns both diseases prirmar-
ily related to the eyes as well as eye diseases occurring secondary to systermic
conditions. When an animal is exarmined because of visual irmpairrment, careful
questioning of the owner is of utmost importance and may often give an
indication as to the nature of the disease. Essential information to be obtained
from the owner is listed in Table 5.1.
Ophthalmic history
Age
Congenital conditions or malformation are more likely to be diagnosed in
younger animals than in older ones. Puppies and kittens may also be prone
to general infection, which may include ophthalmia neonatorum with accu-
mulation of exudate underneath the fused eyelids in puppies, and upper
respiratory and ocular infection caused by feline herpesvirus-l in kittens.
Both of these conditions may have deleterious effects on vision if concurrent
keratitis is severe. Degenerative diseases, like hereditary rod-cone degenera-
tion (generalized progressive retinal atrophy, PRA) and primary glaucoma
show breed-specific age of onset of clinical signs and most often become
evident in older anirmals.
Breed
Many diseases show a breed-related incidence, and knowledge of such diseases
often makes it easier to establish a diagnosis. However, incidence of breed-
related diseases varies in different parts of the world, which makes local knowl-
edge essential.
General heaith and other clinical signs
Visual impairment may occur as part of a systemic disease, and a general physi-
cal exarmination should always be perforrmed in connection with the ocular
examination. Examples of systemic diseases causing visual impairment are
diabetes mellitus, which causes cataract frequently in dogs, occasionally in cats;
malignant lymphoma with uveal infiltration of neoplastic cells and secondary
116
uveitis; hypertension causing retinal hemorrhage and/or detachment, especially
Table 5.1Essential information to acquire from the
VISUAL
owner.
·Age
_ IMPAIRMENT
·Breed
 General health
Other clinical signs
Onset (sudden or gradual)
Known etiology (e.g. injury, accident)
 Initial clinical signs
Pain/no pain
Vision in daylight/poor light
Duration
the conduction or interpretation of the visual impulse.
Onset
The onset of impaired vision may be sudden, as in injuries, acute glaucoma,
hypertensive retinopathy, and certain inflammatory retinal conditions, or
gradual, as in chronic keratitis, most forms of cataracts and progressive retinal
degenerations (the PRAs). In congenital conditions, the animal may have been
born with reduced vision, or vision loss may develop secondary to the malfor-
mation. Examples of the latter would include retinal detachment or intraocular
hemorrhage caused by collie eye anomaly (CEA), glaucoma related to dysplasia
of the pectinate ligament, or progression of congenital cataract caused by per-
sistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis/persistent hyperplastic prirmary vit-
reous (PHTVL/PHPV or rmore readily referred to as persistent embryonic
vasculature (PEV)).
Known etiologic factors
The owner is usually able to provide information about the occurrence of
an ocular injury. Useful information may also be vaccination status, as corneal
ederma (blue eye) may occur, although very rarely nowadays, after vaccination
with live modified hepatitis virus (canine adenovirus-1) in dogs. In addition
to the risk of direct infection, introduction of a new animal into a household
or a change in environment may impair an animal's immune balance. This
is seen in cats with subclinical infection of feline herpesvirus-1 and may result
in exacerbation of keratitis.
Initial clinical signs
Initial signs may vary frorm ocular hyperemia and discomfort to acute vision
loss, dependent on specific cause. Accidents and injuries most often cause uni-
117
IGY
lateral problems. Early stages of keratoconjunctivitis sicca may present with
MOLO
only moderate signs with conjunctivitis and mucoid discharge, while in chronic
cases dryness of the cornea causes chronic keratitis with neovascularization and
OPHTHAL
pigment deposits. In early stages of lens subluxation, obvious clinical signs may
be moderate with just some ocular hyperermia, while in acute uveitis the clinical
signs rmay be more obvious with the animal showing severe discomfort. One
should remember that animals in their usual surroundings may apparently
ANIM
function more or less norrmally even though visually impaired. Thus, the owner
may not have noticed vision loss until the animal is introduced to an unfamiliar
SMALL
environment. A unilaterally blind animal often shows no noticeable evidence
of blindness until the second eye becomes affected.
Pain
Assessment of pain may sometimes be dificult for the owner. However, if a
condition is painful, the animal will usually try to avoid examination and keep
argy, inappetence, or otherwise altered behavior including bad temper and
reluctance to play or take part in other types of activity. Most congenital condi-
tions as well as retinal degenerations are not painful, while glaucoma, uveitis,
unless secondary lens-induced uveitis is present.
Vision in daylight and in dim light
This information is important when dealing with diseases of the retina. The
PRAs cause initial night blindness, with a later reduction of day vision, while
hermeralopia presents with day blindness. In sudden acquired retinal degenera-
tion (SAR D) both day and night vision are acutely and sirmultaneously impaired.
Animals with axially positioned cataracts may have better vision in dim light
than in daylight, due to pupil dilatation.
Examination of the patient
General examination
This should be an assessment of the animal's general condition including exam-
ination of cardiovascular circulation, respiration, mucous membranes, and
peripheral lymph nodes. The owner should be questioned about appetite, thirst,
and changes in the animal's behavior. Information on the diet should be
obtained; for example, cats fed dog food may develop a taurine-related reti-
nopathy. Medication rmay influence the clinical signs: certain sulfonamides may
be responsible for the development of keratoconjunctivitis sicca, systemic treat-
ment with high doses of enrofloxacin may cause retinal degeneration in cats,
work-up is required, including hematology, serum biochemistry, urine analysis,
sampling (bacteriology, cytology, polymerase chain reaction, serology), blood
pressure measurements, diagnostic imaging, and electroretinography.
Neurologic examination
If a condition affecting the central nervous systerm (CNS) is suspected, a full
neurologic exarmination should be performed.'2 Common causes of blindness
of CNS origin are presented in Table 5.2. The general physical exarmination
118
may already have revealed CNS signs, such as reduced vision, nystagmus,
Table 5.2Some causes of blindness of CNS origin.
VISUAL
·Optic neuritis
IMPAIRMENT
·Trauma to optic nerves
·Hydrocephalus (juvenile or acute, decompensating)
·Hepatic encephalopathy
saseasip aapesauabap Sno jauto pue saseasip abeiois lewososa 
● Brain tumors (meningioma, lymphoma, pituitary tumors, reticulosis)
·Encephalitis (canine distemper, feline infectious peritonitis, toxoplasmosis)
·Meningitis (bacterial, viral, fungal, or algal)
·Cerebrosvascular accident (cats)
●Brain trauma
·Toxicity (lead, ivermectin, levamisole)
●Parasites (migrating larvae)
hearing loss, paresis of facial muscles, head tilt, changes in behavior, or ataxia.
A neurologic examination should at least include testing of the cranial nerves,
the postural reactions, and the spinal refexes. Cranial nerves II (optic) and IH1
(oculomotor) affect the pupillary light reflexes, while IIl, IV (trochlear), and
VI (abducens) control ocular position and movements. It should be noted that
the trigeminal nerve (V) in addition to containing sensory fibers from the
cornea and the skin of the face also has a motor branch to the masticatory
facial rmuscles including most of the muscles of the eyelids. The trigerminal and
The sympathetic nerve supply, which leaves the spinal cord in the Tl-T3
muscles in the periorbital fasciae and eyelids (Müller muscles)
Testing vision
Obstacle course
The easiest way of testing an animal's vision is to set up an obstacle course in
unfamiliar surroundings and carefully observe the animal's movements through
the area. The test should be performed both in normal and in dim light to assess
day (photopic) and night (scotopic) vision. An obstacle course can be set up
with almost anything; a set of small buckets put upside down can be moved
around to create new paths; if unaltered, an animal may learn the path after
one or two attempts, which may lead the examiner to draw the wrong conclu-
119
IGY
younger animals that are easily distracted. Most cats are reluctant to walk an
MOLO
obstacle course, however, and will usually choose to hide under the nearest
OPHTHAL
nose more eagerly, whereas cats tend to feel with their paws.
Cottonball
An additional way of vision testing is to hold up a cotton ball, attract the ani-
ANIM
front of the animal and to its sides to assess central and peripheral vision. Most
animals will follow the movement of the cotton ball, even if vision is reduced
SMAI
However, puppies, lethargic animals, and some cats may show little interest in
the procedure. These animals may be tested by dragging a noiseless object, like
a cotton ball tied to a string, along the floor.
Swinging light
In a darkened room the examiner watches for corresponding head or eye move-
ments while the light bearm from a penlight is swept across the visual axis.
Visual field defects are difficult to assess in anirmals, but an attempt can be made
by repeating the procedures in various planes and with one eye blindfolded.
The optic nerve
The optic nerve is the afferent path for both vision and pupillary light reflexes.
At the chiasm, optic nerve fibers decussate to different degrees amongst species.
As a rule, the more laterally the eyes are placed in the skull, the greater the
degree of decussation. In the cat about two-thirds, and in the dog about three-
quarters, of the optic nerve fibers cross in the optic chiasm to the opposite side
of the brain. Temporal nerve fibers from the nasal visual field remain uncrossed
in the optic tract on the same side, while nasal fbers from the temporal visual
field cross to the opposite optic tract (i.e. the visual field from one side of the
body projects to the opposite visual cortex). This knowledge is important when
assessing visual field defects in humans, but of less irmportance in animals,
where visual field defects are difficult to evaluate.
In the optic tract, 80% of the nerve fibers project via the lateral geniculate
nucleus to the visual cortex of the cerebrum, whereas 20% go to the midbrain.
The midbrain structures handle reflex vision, like dazzle refex and pupillary
light reflexes, and also visual input for balance and gaze fixation.
The function of the optic nerve can be tested in many ways. Practical testing
includes:
·Menace reaction
·Visual placing reaction
·Pupillary light reflexes
·Dazzle reflex.
Note the difference between reactions and reflexes: a reaction involves higher
(cortical) function, whereas refexes are not dependent upon cortical function
and may even be present in an animal with abnormal visual perception associ-
ated with higher lesions
The menace reaction A normal menace reaction requires a normal visual
120
VISUAL
Nucleus(thalamus)
Facial nerve
_IMPAIRMENT
Cortex
Cpticnerve
Optic chiasm
 Fig. 5.1 The menace reaction.A sudden movement in front of the eye produces a rapid
blink. The menace reaction requires normal visual pathways to the visual cortex as well
a5 normal motor pathway to the eyelids.
nerve, the optic chiasm, the optic tract, the lateral geniculate nucleus in the
thalamus, the optic radiation, and the visual cortex. The motor pathway
involves the connection from the visual cortex to the facial nucleus and the
facial nerve (VI1)
The menace reaction is a way of testing whether the animal is visual, as a
positive response (usually expressed by a blink) tells that an image has been
formed in the visual cortex. The animal is threatened by suddenly moving
a hand into its visual field or by opening a clenched fist in front of the eye. It is,
however, important to note that the menace reaction is absent in young
puppies, and can also be absent in animals with cerebellar or facial nerve
lesions, without the animal being blind. Seriously ill animals may also react
poorly to the stirmulus.
The visual placing reactions Normal visual placing reactions require normal
visual pathways to the cerebral cortex, communication from the visual cortex
to the motor cortex, and intact motor pathways to the lower motor neurons
(final common pathway) of the forelirmbs.
Testing in small dogs and cats can be perforrmed by holding the animal in
front of a table. The anirmal is allowed to see the table surface when moved
towards the table edge. Normal anirmals reach for the surface before the carpus
touches the table. Sorme cats and dogs that are accustoimed to being carried
 around may ignore the table and animals with neurologic deficits may perform
the test poorly. Peripheral visual felds can be tested by making a lateral
approach to the table. Larger dogs can be led over a curb or a step.
The dazzie reffex This is a stimulation of the optic nerve by the exarminer
suddenly shining a bright light into the eye of the patient. Normally, this will
make the animal blink. The dazzle reflex (or the retinal light reflex) is not a
reaction, i.e. it is subcortical, mediated by reflex centers in the midbrain with
fibers to the facial nucleus.
The pupillary light reflexes Most important in the evaluation of visual func-
tion is the assessment of the pupillary light reflexes (PLRs) (Fig. 5.2). The
121
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 5.2 The pupillary light reflex arc. Shining light into one eye produces constriction of
the pupil in the stimulated eye (direct pupillary light reflex) as well as in the contralateral
eye (indirect pupillary light reflex). 1: optic nerve (l): 2: optic chiasm; 3: lateral geniculate
nucleus: 4: parasympathetic nucleus of cranial nerve Ill; 5: visual cortex: 6: oculomotor
nerve(ll).
afferent, or sensory, pathway involves the retina, the optic nerve (Il), and the
optic chiasm to the optic tract, where the majority of the fibers continue the
visual pathway to the lateral geniculate nucleus. However, about 20% leave the
optic tract before the lateral geniculate nucleus and course towards the mid-
        s e  
fibers are distributed to the parasympathetic nuclei of the oculomotor nerve
(II1). The efferent or motor pathway extends via the parasympathetic fibers of
the third cranial nerve through the ciliary ganglion (in which the fibers synapse)
to the ciliary body and iris sphincter rmuscle.
Pupillary constriction and dilatation is essentially a balance between para-
122
sympathetic and sympathetic control. The constrictor muscle of the iris, inner-
vated by the parasympathetic fibers of the oculomotor nerve (Il1), is a sphincter
VISU
muscle located at the pupillary border and is more powerful than the dilator
muscle, which runs along the peripheral iris in a radial fashion. The dilator
 rmuscle is innervated by sympathetic nerves. These nerves leave the spinal cord
in the first three thoracic segments and run along the neck in the vagosympa-
thetic trunk, through the middle ear cavity and through the superior orbital
fissure before entering the eye. Before testing the pupillary light reflexes, it is
important to evaluate the size of both pupils, and to note any difference in
pupil size - anisocoria. A dirm light is directed from below and any changes in
pupil size noted. When evaluating anisocoria, it must be remembered that,
because sympathetics dilate the pupils, a sympathetic lesion will be most notice-
able in the dark, as a small pupil stays small. Conversely, the parasympathetics
constrict the pupils. Therefore, in parasympathetic lesions, as the pupil stays
dilated, the difference in pupillary size will be greater in the light.
Also rermermber that an anxious or excited animal may have widely dilated
pupils due to sympathetic stimulation, and that re-evaluation of pupil size after
the animal has relaxed may be necessary. Pupillary light reflexes in very young
rational myelination of the optic nerve.
Testing of direct and consensual pupillary light reflexesIn a darkened room,
a bright light is shone into one eye. Normally this causes a rapid and complete
constriction of the pupil in the stimulated eye, the direct PLR. The constriction
in the other eye, the consensual (or indirect) PLR, is slightly slower. The indirect
PLR is produced because of the decussation of nerve fibers in the optic chiasm
as well as the contralateral connections in the nuclei of the midbrain. By evalu-
ating the direct and consensual PLRs it is possible to localize defects along the
reflex arcs, as well as to evaluate the function of the retina and optic nerve in
an eye where more anterior lesions do not allow inspection of intraocular
structures.
The PLRs are independent of cortical vision but do still provide useful infor-
ways. As the pupillary light reflexes do not involve higher (cortical) structures,
a positive reflex does not necessarily infer that the animal has norimal vision.
It may be noted that blindness with an abnorrmal PLR localizes the lesion
rostral to the lateral geniculate body, while blindness with a norrmal PLR
 reveals the lesion to involve the lateral geniculate body, optic radiation, or
visual cortex.
Refraction
The optical properties of the eye probably play an important role in visual
discrimination in small animals, as well as in people. Refractive errors, e.g.
myopia and hyperopia, are known in dogs and may be breed related. Although
refractive errors may be suspected from the behavior of the patient, the refrac-
tive state of the eye can be objectively determined using a retinoscope and a
series of lenses. The technique is called retinoscopy or skiascopy. Retinoscopy
is easily perforrmed in most dogs and cats. Lenses that correct for the refractive
error and therefore enhance visual perforrmance of the patient can be used to
verify the diagnosis, and contact lenses can be used to adjust visual acuity.
Long-terrm use of contact lenses to correct refractive errors rmay be used in small
123
IGY
animals and contact lenses for aphakic (with no lens) dogs are now commer-
MOLO
cially available.
OPHTHAL
Electrophysiology
Electrophysiologic testing becomes invaluable in animals with visual dysfunc.
tion. Different procedures can be performed depending on the site of a sus-
pected lesion, such as the retina, optic nerve, or the visual cortex. To exarmine
ANIM
visual function clinically, the recording of two types of response is recom-
mended. The electroretinogram (ERG) allows a rapid and objective examina-
SMALL
tion of the outer and inner retina while the visual evoked potential (VEP)
depends on normal optic nerve function and therefore reflects the conduction
of the retinal signal all the way to the brain. Because the area centralis region
is magnified in the optic nerve and brain response, the VEP also provides some
insight into potential visual acuity.
ERG The ERG is a technique for observing the changes of electrical poten-
tial that occur when the eye is stirmulated by light. These voltage changes, gener-
ated in the retina, reflect the responses of several types of neuron summed
across the retina. They are critically dependent on the function of the retinal
photoreceptors, i.e. the rods and cones. The ERG is usually recorded by means
of a corneal contact lens electrode in response to a defined flash of light or
repeated flashes (flicker) and displayed on an oscilloscope or on a computer
screen. General anesthesia, intubation, and continuous monitoring of the
patient are recomrmended during the procedure.
         s
the easiest and most straightforward simply tests whether or not a standard
 n n          
animal with complete cataracts. An ERG is indicated before proceeding to
cataract surgery in order to ascertain that the retina is functional and not
affected by PRA. The second and more sophisticated application is the study
of rod and cone function as a part of research projects or in the early diagnosis
of hereditary retinal dystrophies.
A complex set of processes, Pl, Pll, and PIll, first described by Granit,$
collectively comprise the ERG response, with its a-,b-, and, in some types
of recording, c-waves. Grossly, the a-wave reflects the mermbrane current of
photoreceptors and thus reflects their activity directly. The b-wave is generated
as a complicated interaction, involving potassium movement between the
bipolar and Muller cells, in response to input from the photoreceptors. The c-
of the pigrment epithelium and thus reflects retinal pigrment epithelial cell
function.
The rod photoreceptors mainly function under scotopic conditions, and the
cones mainly under photopic conditions. ERG recordings thus represent
various combinations of rod and cone responses depending on the specific
lighting used as background and/or stimulus. Therefore, it is important that a
fixed protocol is used to obtain meaningful ERGs. In order to interpret the
ERG responses successfully it is, moreover, recommended that a technique be
used that allows for the direct separation of rod and cone contributions to the
ERG. Recommendations regarding how to perform diagnostic ERGs in dogs
124
have recently been published.
The waveforrm of the ERG together with the armplitude and implicit times
VISU
of the a- and b-waves is most often used when evaluating ERGs in a clinical
situation. Comparisons are made of the observed responses with those of
normals or controls. It should be noted that there are species, breed, and
age-related variations in ERG parameters, so comparisons have always to
be made with breed and age-matched animals.
VEP Using active scalp electrodes, VEPs can be recorded in anesthetized
NT
animals using stroboscopic flashes of light and averaging techniques.7 VEPs are
cone dominated and reflect activity in a small part of the central area of the
retina. Fibers from the central area of the retina are projected onto the surface
 of the occipital cortex, whereas fibers from the peripheral areas are projected
to deeper parts of the cortex and are not readily recorded. Apart from the
central area of the retina, VEP rmainly tests function of the post-retinal struc-
tures such as the optic nerve and the visual cortex.
The waveform of the VEP consists of three major positive waves, the P1, P2,
and P3. The characteristics of the VEP recording depend on a complex array
of spatial and temporal conditions of light stimulation including luminance,
contrast, and rate of stimulation. Depth of consciousness, age, visual acuity,
and degree of light adaptation also influence the VEP.
The VEP is currently used most often for research purposes, but the tech.
nique certainly has evolving clinical applications in the assessrment of disease
affecting the optic nerve and central visual systems. VEPs and ERGs can,
moreover, be recorded simultaneously in the anesthetized anirmal, which
makes it possible to evaluate visual function electrophysiologically in a more
complete fashion.
Other
Ultrasonography indicated to define space-occupying lesions, foreign bodies,
scleral tears, and retinal detachment, especially in cases where the fundus
cannot be visualized. Fluorescein angiography is a specialized technique used
to assess the retinal and choroidal vasculature. It requires a fuorescein fundus
camera with filters that are placed in both the illurminating beam and the
observing beam.The exciter filter in theilluminating beam transmits blue-green
light at the peak excitation wavelength for fluorescein, thus making it fuoresce.
The barrier filter (in the pathway for the observing beam) transrmits yellow light
at fluorescein's peak emission range. Fluorescein is delivered by an intravenous
bolus and serial photographs are taken of the various stages of filling and
ermptying of retinal and choroidal vessels.
CONGENITAL DISEASEAND MALFORMATIONS
Anophthalmia, nanophthalmia, and microphthalmia
In anophthalmia, the globe is not present. This is a rare condition caused by a
defect in the formation of the optic vesicle frorm the neuroectoderm, and may
be unilateral or bilateral. Histologic examination of tissue from the orbital
region may often reveal traces of rudimentary optic structures.
Microphthalmia is relatively common in the dog, and may present as a small
but otherwise normal globe; this form of microphthalmia is termed nanoph-
125
thalmia. The term microphthalmia, however, is usually used to describe a small
GY
MOLO
vesicle with associated ocular anomalies that may include cataract, persistent
pupillary membrane, retinal dysplasia, and colobomas.
OPHTHAL
Microphthalmia is seen more frequently in certain breeds, including the
Collie breeds,English Cocker Spaniel,Saint Bernard,and Dobermann Pin-
as well as hereditary factors may cause malformations of the eyes. Microph-
ANIM
thalmia may occur unilaterally or bilaterally, and one or more littermates may
be affected.
SMALL
Clinical findings
nize. Mild cases of microphthalmia or nanophthalmia may cause diagnostic
problerms, however, especially if the condition occurs bilaterally. In certain
breeds, like the Collie and the Shetland Sheepdog, the breed standard demands
small eyes, making differentiation between normal and microphthalmic eyes
          
microphthalmic eye to its fellow normal eye.
+Compare both eyes by inspection from above and in front of the animal
and observe differences in the palpebral fissure, recession of the
microphthalmic eye into the orbit (enophthalmia), and protrusion of the
third eyelid.
Note the exposure of the sclera and the diameter of the cornea.
Closer examination may reveal abnormalities including persistent
pupillary mermbranes, abnormal pupil shape (dyscoria), cataracts, and
 rmultifocal retinal dysplasia or retinal detachment.
+ Colobomas may be present, but are more rarely diagnosed.
·There are often abnormal eye movements such as a ‘searching' nystagmus
or a fine oscillatory nystagmus, which indicates that the visual pathways
are not fully developed.
Differentialdiagnoses
Difference in iris pigmentation between two otherwise normal eyes (hetero-
chromia irides) is not uncommon and should not be confused with abnormali-
ties of the eyes. Phthisis bulbi (shrinkage of the eye) occurs as a result of severe
trauma or as an end-stage of intraocular inflammation. This condition is com-
mia is painless. Microphthalmia as a congenital condition is usually detected
in the young animal, while phthisis bulbi may occur in animals of any age.
Prognosis and treatment
Abnormal development of the eye cannot be treated and the prognosis depends
on the degree of visual impairrment and whether the condition is unilateral or
bilateral. Secondary cataracts may develop as may chronic conjunctivitis due
to poor configuration of eyelids and globe. The conjunctivitis may need daily
cleansing to remove accumulated discharges. Cataract surgery in microphthal-
mic eyes may be rewarding if no other malformations are present. Enucleation
may be recommended if the microphthalimic eye is blind and causes discomfort
126
to the anirmal. The use of the animal for future breeding is not advised, particu-
VISUAL
larly in those breeds where the condition is suspected to be inherited.
Persistent pupillary membrane (PPM)
IMPAIRME
During the embryonal phase before the pupil is formed, the area is covered
by a vascular membrane, the pupillary membrane. The membrane is formed
during developrment of the eye by anastomoses between the tunica vasculosa
NT
lentis, which branches from the hyaloid artery and forrms a meshwork around
the lens, and vascular loops from the annular vessel in front of the lens. Nor-
mally, regression of the pupillary mermbrane starts about 2 weeks before birth,
with the mermbrane no longer present by 24 weeks after birth. Minute rem-
nants of the membrane are frequent in anirmals and are usually of no signifi-
collarette of the iris. The strands may extend from iris to iris across the pupil,
from iris to lens or to cornea or to both, or there may be sheets of tissue in
the anterior chamber extending between iris, lens, and cornea. Where attached
the inside of the cornea may cause focal corneal opacities and edema. A variant
of PPM may be seen as an area of pigmented flecks on the anterior lens
capsule.
Clinicalfindings
PPM is congenital and may therefore be diagnosed in the young animal. The
condition is not painful and there is no history of previous injury to the eye.
With corneal involverment the opacity does not stain with fuorescein, as it
affects the endothelium and the stroma. A genetic disposition has been described
in the Basenji and has been suggested in the English Cocker Spaniel and the
Collie. More than one puppy in a litter is often affected.
Treatment and prognosis
There is no effective treatment for this congenital condition, but, unless the
changes are extensive, vision is not impaired. Severely affected dogs from
breeds where a hereditary disposition is suspected should not be used for
breeding
Congenital lens disorders
These disorders are usually part of other developmental abnormalities of the
eye and may be due to a chance error in embryogenesis. In some cases, however,
the abnormalities have a hereditary background.
Congenital developmental abnormalities of the lens, which often occur in
combination with other malformations of the eye, such as persistence of the
hyaloid vessels or microphthalmia, include:
* Aphakia - the total absence of the lens or the presence of only
rudimentary lens tissue. This is a rare condition.
 Microphakia - smaller than normal lens equatorial diameter. Elongated
are clearly visible when the pupil is dilated. The condition may be breed
related, as in the Miniature Schnauzer, where it is associated with
congenital cataract.
127
LMOLOGY
Spherophakia - an abnormal spherical shape to the lens which is usually
microphakic as well.
Coloboma - where the lens has an equatorial notching (Fig. 5.3). The
OPHTHAL
zonular fbers are either deficient or absent in the affected area. This
condition rmay be associated with congenital cataract and colobomas of
the iris and ciliary body.
 Lenticonus/lentiglobus - a thinning of the lens capsule permitting the
SMALL ANIMAL
cortex to bulge. This causes a conical malformation, most commonly at
the posterior pole. Lentiglobus is more severe than lenticonus. The
capsule in the affected area may show dysplastic or degenerative changes
that influence lens metabolisrm and result in cataract development.
Spontaneous rupture of the posterior capsule may occur. The abnormality
is most often diagnosed in connection with abnormalities of the posterior
hyaloid system, as described in persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
 u (AHd/AHd) sno Ard odad isd s
Doberrmann Pinscher, or in connection with microphthalmia and
cataract. A congenital defect of the lens including cataract, posterior
lenticonus, and sometimes also microphthalmia has been described in the
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel (Fig. 5.4).!
 Cataracts - nuclear and sometimes posterior and/or anterior cortical
Opacification with or without capsular involvement is observed in litters
of several breeds. This type of congenital cataract has been described
specifically in the English Cocker Spaniel.? In the West Highland White
Terrier a specific type of posterior suture line cataract has been described,
as well as congenital complete cataracts.12
Persistent hyaloid artery (PHA)
The hyaloid artery is present in fetal life, but will normally undergo regression
during the first postnatal weeks. Rermnants of the obliterated hyaloid artery
Fig. 5.3 Congenital
malformations of the lens
in a 1-year-old Samoyed
dog: unilateral lens
128
coloboma and cataract.
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
Fig. 5.4 Posterior lenticonus, with rupture of the posterior lens capsule, and bilateral
congenital cataract in the eye of a 12-week-old Cavalier King Charles Spaniel.
which persist without any other abnormalities are referred to as PHA.' The
artery can remain as a curvilinear structure, still containing blood, between the
Optic disk and the lens. Usually, however, only a small connective tissue strand
remains.
Clinical findings
The persistent hyaloid artery can be seen as a white strand adherent to the
posterior lens capsule, below the posterior pole. The vessel remnants extend
back into the vitreous body and move with the eye movements. Occasionally,
the hyaloid vessel arises from an anomalous superficial retinal vessel. Small
vessel remnants do not affect vision, but at the site of adherence to the lens
there may be a focal opacity (Mittendorf's dot). Secondary cataracts may
develop in this area. The condition may occur unilaterally or bilaterally and is
occasionally seen in the dog. A familial disposition has been suspected in the
Sussex Spaniel.
Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis/persistent
hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHTVL/PHPV) or persistent
embryonic vasculature (PEV)
In this disorder, parts of the hyaloid system and primitive vitreous become
hyperplastic and remain postnatally instead of undergoing normal regres-
 the hyaloid artery, and the tunica vasculosa lentis. The hyperplasia and lack of
normal regression are considered to be caused by a disharmony between growth
factors and inhibitors within the eye. In severe cases, secondary cataracts
develop. The condition may be unilateral or bilateral and may occur sporadi-
cally in any anirmal. In the Dobermann Pinscher primarily, but also in other
129
IGY
 gis  p   a a ai s s ss
MOLO
disorder occurs bilaterally, and appears to be inherited by an incomplete domi-
nant mode of inheritance in the Dobermann Pinscher.
OPHTHAL
Clinicalfindings
In the mildest form of PEV, tiny punctuate opacities, residual tissue from the
vascular network, are found on the axial posterior lens capsule. These lesions
AL
do not progress and do not detectably affect vision. They are only seen by use
ANIM
of a slit-lamp biomicroscope, and may be difficult to diagnose in puppies
because of small eye size. The severe forms occur bilaterally and often lead to
SMAI
visual impairment. A plaque of white fibrovascular tissue may be identified on
the posterior capsule. In addition, large remnants of the hyaloid system can
persist and may be accompanied by pigment or blood in and around the lens,
lenticonus, or other lens rmalformations (Figs 5.5 & 5.6). PHTVL may also be
seen as vascular loops anterior to the lens. In the most severe forms, secondary
cataracts are either present at birth or develop early in life.
Diagnosis and differential diagnosis
Since the condition is congenital and can be diagnosed in the puppy, a scoring
system depending on the severity of the disorder has been suggested. The
disease does not include persistent pupillary mermbranes as described earlier,
but small loops of the tunica vasculosa lentis system may be seen adjacent to
the anterior capsule of the lens. Differential diagnoses include congenital cata-
ract and retinal detachment.
Therapy and prognosis
In severely abnormal eyes, lens extraction (see cataract therapy) can be per-
formed together with posterior capsulorhexis and vitrectomy. The prognosis
Fig. 5.5 PHTVL/PHPV in a 9-month-old Dobermann Pinscher. Fibrova5cular tissue
130
and pigmentation are seen on the posterior lens capsule as well as posterior lenticonu5.
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
Fig. 5.6 Intralenticular
bleeding and low-grade
uveitis is seen in
 conjunction with PHTVL/
PHPV in this 1-year-old
Dobermann Pinscher.
for the operation is less favorable than in uncomplicated lens extraction,
because of the increased incidence of intraoperative and postoperative compli-
cations. Dobermann Pinscher puppies can be screened for PHTVL/PHPV at
about 7-8 weeks of age. Severely affected animals should not be used for breed-
ing, while dogs expressing only multifocal pin-point posterior capsular opaci-
ties may be bred to normal-eyed animals.
Congenital vitreous opacification
Vitreous opacification is uncommon and is usually due to hemorrhage associ-
ated with congenital retinal abnorrmalities. These may result from rupture of
blood vessels in a detached retina or from retinal neovascularization.
The congenital diseases most commonly connected with blood in the vitreous
are:
· Collie eye anomaly (CEA) in collie breeds. The hemorrhage usually
occurs sporadically in the young dog, most often before 2 years of age.
Total retinal dysplasia with non-attachment, as seen sporadically in
many breeds and as an inherited condition in the Labrador Retriever,
Sealyham Terrier, Bedlington Terrier, and occasionally the English
Springer Spaniel.
Multiple congenital ocular anomalies may be the result of mating of
two merle-colored dogs and does also occur in the Australian Shepherd
Dog.
 Other conditions including preretinal arteriolar loops and vascular
malforma tions.
Clinical findings
Hemorrhage in the vitreous is diagnosed unilaterally or bilaterally as blood
seen behind the lens. The blood may also pass forward into the anterior segment
of the eye. The condition is usually non-painful unless occurring secondary to
131
IGY
a painful ocular disease. One should remermber that acquired vitreal hemor-
MOLO
rhage is not an uncommon condition and will be discussed later in this
chapter.
1日日
Diagnosis
OPHT
Examination of the fellow eye, if unaffected, may reveal congenital anomalies
important to consider.
ANIM
Differential diagnosis
SMALL
Intralenticular hemorrhage may be seen in connection with PHTVL/PHPV.
The hemorrhage in this disorder, however, is within the retrolental plaque of
tissue and sometimes also within the lens (see Fig. 5.6). Breed incidence must
be considered.
Hyphema (blood in the anterior chamber) may resermble vitreous hemor-
rhage, and may occur from the same disorder (e.g. CEA), but will most often
represent a different condition, like trauma, uveitis, or neoplasia. While
hyphema is seen in front of the lens, hemorrhage from hyaloid vessel remnants
is seen behind the lens.
Hyperviscosity of the blood is usually associated with monoclonal gam-
and hemorrhage. A thorough clinical exarmination should be performed. This
disease, however, is usually diagnosed in older animals.
Treatment and prognosis
Surgical removal (vitrectomy) of congenital intravitreal hemorrhage is rarely
indicated. The condition is serious because it usually indicates a severe disorder
 i s s s   o s s n o
true if the blood remains unclotted, indica ting continuous bleeding. The hemor-
rhage rmay seermingly clear if the dog is inactive for a period, but will return as
soon as the dog is exercised. If, however, the hemorrhage should clear perma-
   m  a o  so a 
traction on the retina with subsequent detachment. More uncommonly, sec-
ondary glaucoma or uveitis may develop.
Congenital malformations of the retina and the optic nerve
The retina can be congenitally malformed in several ways including involve-
ment of all layers of the neuroretina, such as in retinal dysplasia, or specific
cells in the retina being affected, such as rod-cone dysplasia or retinal pigment
epithelial cell dystrophy. In certain defects structures posterior to the retina are
malformed, as well as in posterior segment colobomata. Congenital malforma-
tions are often caused by hereditary factors but sorme are also induced by
maternal infection or X-irradiation, such as retinal dysplasia (see below), or
may occur as a spontaneous malformation. See Table 5.3 for a summary of
hereditary retinal disease affecting specific cells of the neurosensory retina in
the dog and cat.
General treatment
There is usually no effective treatment for congenital malforrmations of the
132
posterior segment of the eye. If the defect is known to be hereditary, preventive
Aq sisoubea
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
ERG
6 wk
6wk
6wk
3 wk
6wk
5 wk
6wk
Y 
YM 
M S
6 wk
5 wk
ophthalmoscopy
 Diagnosis by
0.5-1.5 y
0.75-1y
1.5-5.0 y
0.4-0.5 y
0.4-0.5 y
1.5-3.0 y
S0
15-3.0 y
0.3 y
0.3 y
0.3 y
0.3 y
'spaanq ie pue bop jo siapiosip jodaaiojoud Aewud Aiepajay pazuapeeyp Aeiugp awos jo Aiewwns e's anqel
inheritance
Mode of
AR
张
Photoreceptor degeneration/pd/type A PRA
 Early rod degeneration/erd
Rod-cone dysplasia/rcdt
Rod-cone dysplasia/rcdf
 Rod-cone dysplasia/rcd2
Rod-cone dysplasia/rcd3
Cone-rod dystrophy/crd1
Cone-rod dystrophy/crd2
Early cone-rod dystrophy
 Disease/Gene symbol
Cone-rod dystrophy
 Cone-rod dystrophy
Rod dysplasia/rd
Irish Red & White Setter
Shorthaired Dachshund
Longhaired Dachshund
Cardigan Welsh Corgi
WirehairedDachshund
Norwegian Elkhound
Norwegian Elkhound
Miniature Schnauzer
Breed of dog
Rough Collie
Pit Bull Terrier
 Pit Bull Terrier
Irish Setter
133
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
<14 mo
0W >
6 wk
6 wk
0.5 y
0.5 y
6 wk
ow6
ophthalmoscopy
 Diagnosis by
3.0-5.0 y
0.5-1.0 y
0.5-1.0 y
3.0-5.0 y
2.0y
1-2y
inheritance
Mode of 
X-linked
X-linked
X-linked
AR
0
Dominant progressive retinal atrophy (rhodopsin 
Dominant progressive retinal atrophy (rhodopsin
X-linked progressive retinal degeneration/XL
X-linked progressive retinal degeneration/XL
Progressive rod-cone degeneration/prcd
Cone degeneration/achromotopsia
Cone degeneration/achromotopsia
 Disease/Gene symbol
(bop puejnu
(bop juenu
PRAT
PRA1
PRA2
Table 5.3continued
German Shorthaired
Alaskan Malamute
 Old English Mastiff 
Toy and Miniature
Breed of dog 
Siberian Husky
Mixed breed
Bull Mastiff 
Samoyed
Pointer
Poodle
134
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT 
9mo-1.5 y
2.0-3.0 y
1.5-2.0 y
o6
1.5y
10 mo
1.5 y
8mo
5w
5w
3.0-6.0 y
2.5-3.0 y
3.0-8.0 y
3.0-6.0 y
1.0-1.5 y
1.2-5.0 y
1.0-3.0 y
1.0-2.5 y
<0.3 y
<0.3 y
AR
Progressive rod-cone degeneration/prcd
Progressive rod-cone degeneration/prcd
 Progressive rod-cone degeneration/prcd 
Progressive rod-cone degeneration/prcd
 Progressive rod cone degeneration
 Progressive retinal atrophy
Progressive retinal atrophy
Progressive retinal atrophy
Rod/cone dysplasia
Rod/cone dysplasia
nissaau newosone dt queuuop newosopne o
 English Cocker Spaniel
Portuguese Waterdog
Labrador Retriever
American Cocker
Tibetan Terrier
Breed of cat
Abyssinian
Abyssinian
Spaniel
Papillon
Persian
Akita
135
GY
measures need to be taken in the breeding program. The rule of thumb is not
MOLO
to use affected individuals for breeding. Breeders are also recommended not to
use known carriers of the defect in their breeding, as for example the parents
OPHTHAL
of an affected animal and the affected animal's offspring in an autosomal reces-
sive disorder. There are currently a number of breed-specific molecular genetic
tests available, which should make control or even eradication of specific dis-
MAL
eases possible. For a summary of DNA-based tests for hereditary retinal and
ANIM
neurodegenerative diseases in the dog, see Table 5.4.
Retinal dysplasia (RD)
SMAI
Focal RD and multifocal RD, geographic RD, and diffuse RD are ocular
anomalies caused by an intrinsic abnormality of neural retinal differentiation.3
Morphology includes folding and rosette forrmation mainly of the neuronal
retinal cells with or without retinal detachment/non-attachment. Retinal folds
are included in the definition of focal/multifocal RD. The disease is believed
              os
Shepherd Dog, and the English Springer Spaniel. Dogs affected with focal or
multifocal RD include the Labrador Retriever, American Cocker Spaniel,
and the Golden Retriever. Multifocal RD has also been observed in the cat.
Geographic RD has been recognized in breeds such as the Cavalier King
Charles Spaniel and the Golden Retriever. It appears that the geographic form
of RD is not always congenital, i.e. may appear at or later than the age of 8
been described in the Miniature Schnauzer dog.3s Affected dogs have general-
ized changes in the retina observed as thickened areas or complete retinal
detachment, as seen by ophthalmoscopy. Vitreous opacifications are concur-
rently observed, as well as small white posterior lens capsule plaques. The white
on the optic disk.
Clinical findings
The ophthalmoscopic appearance of RD is typical but may, in some cases, be
difficult to differentiate from focal scarring. In diffuse RD most or all of the
neuroretina is detached (or non-attached). In multifocal RD, verrmiform streaks
optic disk. The lesions are most often bilateral but the extent of the retinal
changes may vary between the eyes. In diffuse RD the eye is blind, while in
rmultifocal R D vision is usually unaffected. Nystagrmus may be present in blind
puppies.Cataracts and skeletal abnormalities in conjunction with RD have
been described in the homozygously affected Labrador Retriever and Samoyed
breeds of dog, as non-allelic defects. The diseases in both breeds have been
termed dwarfism with retinal dysplasia.36
Specific treatment and prognosis
136
may develop neovascular glaucoma and intraocular hemorrhage. Euthanasia
18. www.optigen.com
18. www.optigen.com
 20, www.optigen.com
 VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
17. www.optigen.com
17. www.optigen.com
17, www.optigen.com
17.www.optigen.com
Reference
21, 22
19
Mutation detection
Mutation detection
Mutation detection
Mutation detection
Mutation detection
 Mutation detection
Mutation detection
Mutation detection
Mutation detection
Type of test
Gene on chromosome 9*
Geneonchromosome9t
Gene on chromosome 9*
Gene on chromosome 37f
Gene on chromosome 37t
bop aur ui saseasip anneiauabaposnau pue peuai Aietipaiay loy sisal pasee-na t's angel
Rhodopsin
Gene
RPE65
PDE6A
Congenital stationary night
arPRA- prcd
arPRA-prcd
arPRA- prcd
arPRA- prcd
arPRA-rcd3
Disease
CEA-CH
CEA-CH
dPRA
Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle
American Cocker Spaniel
American Eskimo Dog
Australian Cattle Dog
Australian Shepherd
Cardigan Welsh Corgi
Border Collie
Bull Mastiff
Breed
Retino
137
 SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
17, www.optigen.com
17, www.optigen.com
17. www.optigen.com
17. www.optigen.com
17. www.optigen.com
17. www.optigen.com
26, www.optigen.com
17, www.optigen.com
Reference
24.25
Mutation detection
Mutation detection
Mutation detection
 Mutation detection
Mutation detection
Mutation detection
Mutation detection
Mutation detection
 Mutation detection
Mutation detection
Mutation detection
Type of test 
Gene on chromosome 9t
Gene on chromosome 9t
Gene on chromosome 9t
Gene on chromosome 9t
Gene on chromosome 9*
Gene on chromosome 9*
Gene on chromosome 37t
Gene on chromosome 9t
Phosducin
CNGB3
PDE6B
Gene
arPRA -type A
arPRA- prcd
arPRA- prcd
arPRA- prcd
arPRA- prcd
arPRA- prcd
arPRA - rcd1
arPRA-prcd
arPRA- prcd
Disease
CEA-CH
CD
German Shorthaired Pointer
Chesapeake Bay Retriever
 Entlebucher Sennenhund 
Table 5.4 continued
English Cocker Spaniel
(Swiss Mountain Dog)
Miniature Schnauzert
Finnish Lapphund 
Labrador Retriever
Lancashire Heeler
Miniature Poodle
Chinese Crested
Irish Setter
Breed
138
20, www.optigen.com
17. www.optigen.com
18. www.optigen.com
28. www.optigen.com
18, www.optigen.com
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
17. www.optigen.com
17. www.optigen.com
28
2
 Mutation detection
 Mutation detection
Mutation detection
 Mutation detection
 Mutation detection
Mutation detection
 Mutation detection
 Mutation detection
 Mutation detection
 Mutation detection
Gene on chromosome 9t
Gene on chromosome 9t
Gene on chromosome 37t
Gene on chromosome 37t
Gene on chromosome 37t
Gene on chromosome 9*
Rhodopsin
RPGR+
RPGRt
PDE6B
arPRA- prcd
arPRA- prcd
arPRA- prcd 
CEA-CH
CEA-CH
CEA-CH
adRPA
IPRA
XIPRA
arPRA
Nova Scotia Duck Tolling
 Portuguese Water Dog
 Old English Mastiff 
Shetland Sheepdog
Brain ond retina
Siberian Husky
Rough Collie
Smooth Collie
Toy Poodle
Retriever
Samoyed
Sloughi
139
 SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
 Reference
E
Mutation detection
Mutation detection
 Mutation detection
Type of test
Gene
CTSD
CLN5
CLN8
 aseatsapoudsoud dwg 2noko pou jo lungns eyde ay 6uposua auab = b930
hugum jo au se pausqnd pou jnq pauaaonsp uaaq sey auah jueiny.
Aydoue leugau anissaboud pueujwop ewosonne = tadpe
Disease
NCL
NCL
NCL
Audae peuau aissanoud pau-x= vadix
rcd3 = rod-cone dysplasia type 3
RPGR = RP GTPase regulator
Table 5.4 continued
an  uisdauen = 0
American Bulldog 
Border Collie
English Setter
Breed
140
LL
8
is recommended in bilaterally affected puppies. In multifocal RD vision is often
VISUAL
unaffected and will most often stay so throughout life. An exception is multifo.
areas of the retina can result in severe visual impairment (Fig. 5.7).
IMPAIRMENT
Secondary (non-inherited) RD
Abnormal retinal differentiation with formation of retinal folds and rosettes
occurs spontaneously in dogs and cats. Causes may be maternal infection,
intrauterine trauma, vitamin A deficiency during pregnancy, irradiation, and
idiopathic. Clinical signs are similar to those above. Other ocular signs often
accompany the secondary type of retinal dysplasia such as cataracts, uveitis,
and synechia formation.
Serous retinopathy/retinal pigment epithelial dysplasia
This is a unique multifocal hereditary disease of the outer retina, specifically
 Retinal lesions develop approximately at the age of 11 weeks, gradually over
several years in the peripheral fundus but more quickly centrally, as peripapil-
lary lesions. The latter are serous retinal detachments, seen as blocked fuores-
cence and subretinal pooling of fluorescein upon angiography. There appears
to be no significant progression of retinal degeneration over time.
Optic nerve hypoplasia and aplasia
This refers to an abnormal differentiation of the ganglion cell and nerve fiber
layers of the retina resulting in a paucity of axons in the optic nerve and optic
chiasm. This uncommon condition is either unilateral or bilateral. Histologi-
Fig. 5.7 Multifocal retinal dysplasia may sometimes be severe and cause reduction in
141
visual capacity a5 5een in this 4-year-old English Springer Spaniel.
IGY
cally it is seen as a reduction in the nurmber of ganglion cells and thinning of
MOLO
the nerve fiber layer in the retina. The defect has been reported in several breeds
and is believed to be hereditary in some.9.40
OPHTHAL
Clinical findings
The clinical findings depend on the severity of the defect. If bilateral, the animal
is usually blind, but if unilateral the problem is often not noticed by the owner.
The pupils are typically dilated and the pupillary light reflexes are depressed to
ANIM
absent. In cases of unilateral hypoplasia the affected eye may still show an
indirect (or consensual) response. Ophthalmoscopically the disk is abnormally
SMALL
small and dark, often gray in appearance
Treatment
There is no treatment. In cases of a suspected hereditary background, affected
individuals should not be used for breeding.
Posterior segment colobomas
A coloboma is a congenital tissue defect manifested by a pit, hole, fissure, or
notch. A posterior segment coloboma may affect the retina, choroid, and
sclera, and often affects the optic disk. Colobomas in the Collie breeds are part
of the Collie eye anomaly complex, and hereditary optic disk colobomas have
been reported in the Basenji dog. In cats colobomas of the choroid have been
described with a hereditary background and may be seen associated with eyelid
agenesis. Very extensive colobomas may cause blindness, while small ones
cause no obvious visual problems.
Collie eye anomaly (CEA)
CEA is a common defect with a frequency of over 90% in the Rough Collie in
the USA 25-30 years ago. The prevalence in most countries today is signifi-
cantly lower. The disease is a congenital inherited ocular anomaly originally
considered to be inherited as a simple autosomal recessive trait.4 Etiologic
factors include the failure of normal closing of the fetal fissure during develop-
ment of the eye. The defect results in bilateral changes of variable severity that
may affect the retina, choroid, sclera, and/or optic disk.42 The essential lesion
is choroidal hypoplasia which may or may not be accompanied by other defects
(Fig. 5.8). Affected breeds are the Rough Collie, Smooth Collie, Shetland
Sheepdog, Australian Shepherd, Border Collie, and the Lancaster Heeler.26
Linkage studies of theprimary CEA locus was shown on canine chromosome
the scientific literature.
Clinical findings and significance
Funduscopic manifestations of CEA are variable, even within a single litter,
and often the lesions in the two eyes are dissimilar in severity or distribution
One or more of the following signs can be observed in conjunction with
CEA:
1.Choroidal hypoplasia. This is a lesion found temporal to the optic disk. It
         
142
abnormal choroidal vessels. The lesion is bilateral although the extent
may vary between eyes. Choroidal hypoplasia in its mildest form rmay
VISUAL
have little or no effect on vision, but major defects may cause some
reduced vision due to absence of photoreceptors and reduced rumbers of
IMPAIRMENT
ganglion cells and thinning of the nerve fiber layer of the retina.43 Minor
chorioretinal changes found on examination before 3 months of age can
be masked by later pigrmentation. Affected dogs in which this
phenomenon masks previous lesions are called 'go normals', and the
 condition is prevalent in a significant number of animals.44
2.Cofobomas. This defect is usually found at or in the vicinity of the
optic disk. It is seen as a gray and/or white defect, either small and
difficult to detect or larger with vessels dipping down over the rim.
Small colobomas do not cause visual problems, but large ones, usually
the size of the disk or more, may cause defective vision or blindness.
Large colobomas involving the whole optic disk may predispose to
retinal detachment.
3.
Retinaf detachment. The neural retina has partially or completely
detached and can be observed floating in the vitreous. Large peripheral
retinal tears are present. Detachment usually occurs at an early age,
before 7 weeks, but can also occur later in life, although usually before
the age of 1 year. Vision is always severely affected with resultant
blindness if complete and bilateral. Intraocular hemorrhage is common
in conjunction with retinal detachment. Euthanasia is usually
recommended in the most severe forms of CEA, i.e. dogs bilaterally blind
because of large colobomas or retinal detachments.
Specific treatment
There is no effective treatiment for CEA. It is important to induce preventive
measures for the genetic defect. With a genetic test now available the frequency
of the disease can be significantly reduced on a worldwide basis. However,
Fig. 5.8 Choroidal
hypoplasia and coloboma
of the optic nerve head. a5
seen in this young Collie.
are signs of Collie eye
anomaly (CEA).
143
GY
recommendations in regard to regulatory procedures will most probably vary
MOLO
in different countries.
Early-onset photoreceptor dystrophies
OPHTHAL
The forms of progressive retinal atrophy (PRA) due to photoreceptor dyspla-
sias have an early onset. See Table 5.3.
MAL
Rod-cone dysplasia (rcd)
ANIM
Rod-cone dysplasia is an early-onset retinal cell dystrophy, characterized by
retarded differentiation of the rod and cone photoreceptors, followed by sub-
SMALL
sequent degeneration. Affected breeds are the Irish Setter, Rough Collie, and
the Cardigan Welsh Corgi. In the three dog breeds, specific biochermical abnor-
malities are present that result in elevated retinal cGMP, due to deficient retinal
cGMP-PDE (cyclic guanosine monophosphate-phosphodiesterase) activity.45
The defects have been shown tobe inherited in a simple recessive mode,
although the diseases are caused by genes at different loci. The gene defect
causal for rod-cone dysplasia type 1 (rcd-1) in the Irish Setter has been identi-
fied,4647 and a DNA-based diagnostic test for the presence of the gene mutation
has been developed .46.48 The test can be used to distinguish between dogs that
are normal, heterozygous carriers, or homozygously affected at the rcd-1 gene
locus.49 The gene mutation responsible for early-onset PRA in the Collie (rcd-2)
has not been identified. The gene for rcd-3 in the Cardigan Welsh Corgi has
been identified and is one of the cGMP-PDE subunits. A DNA-based test has
been developed for this form of PRA.22
In cats rod-cone dysplasia has been described in two specific breeds: a strain
of English Abyssinian cats? and Persian cats.$3 The mode of inheritance for
the defect had been shown to be autosomal dominant in the Abyssinian rod-
cone dysplasia cats, while the disease is due to an autosomal recessive defect
in the Persian cat breed.
Clinicalfindings
These include initial night blindness followed by a progressive loss of day vision
as well. Clinical signs are apparent early, usually at 6-12 weeks in dogs, some-
what earlier in cats (2-3 weeks). Blindness is apparent by 1-2 years in the dog
and 12-16 weeks in the cat. Ophthalmoscopically the tapetal fundus is hyperre.
flective, starting peripherally and spreading centrally. Within months there is a
mus and sometimes a slight lateral strabismus may be observed at an early age
in affected animals. Early diagnosis of rod-cone dysplasia is performed by
ERG, abnorrmalities being detectable by 4-6 weeks of age. In affected animals
there are severely reduced, or a lack of, rod and cone responses.
Rod dysplasia (rd)
This disease is characterized by a defective development of the rod photorecep-
tors with secondary degeneration of the cone system. The only breed in which
 the disease has been described so far is the Norwegian Elkhound.54
Clinicalfindings
Initial night blindness (nyctalopia) is detected in affected puppies at 2-3 months,
while day vision is norrmal at this time. Day and night vision deteriorates suc-
144
cessively and affected dogs are blind at the age of 3-6 years. Ophthalmoscopi-
cally a granular and discolored appearance of the tapetal fundus is observed
VISU
 at 6-12 months progressing to tapetal hyperreflectivity and vascular attenua-
JAL
tion within a few years. Electroretinography at 6 weeks is diagnostic for the
IMPAIRMENT
disease, with a lack of rod responses and normal to slightly reduced cone
responses in affected dogs.
Earlyretinaldegeneration(erd)
A recessively inherited retinal dystrophy has been described in the Norwegian
Elkhound." Morphologically there is an abnormal development of both rod
and cone photoreceptors.
Clinical findings
Affected puppies are night-blind at 6 weeks and completely blind at 1-1.5 years.
Ophthalmoscopic signs of the disease may be observed at about 6 months and
synaptic terminals are abnormal. ERG enables diagnosis of the disease by 6
weeks of age: there is an a-wave dorminated response which becomes non-
recordable with age.
Photoreceptor dysplasia (pd)
A progressive retinal atrophy has been described in the Miniature Schnauzer
dog and defined as a photoreceptor dysplasia.$6 The disease is characterized by
unique morphologic and functional deficits during rod and cone development.
The ophthalmoscopic diagnosis is practicable only very late in the disease
process. Morphologically, however, changes are observed early in the photo-
receptor outer segment layer as an area of short profiles of disorganized and
disoriented disk membranes. The mode of inheritance for the gene defect is
autosomal recessive.
Clinical findings
Retinal changes are not seen by ophthalmoscopy until 2-5 years of age. ERG
can, however, provide evidence of disease by the age of 8 weeks. Affected
puppies demonstrate significantly reduced dark-adapted b-wave response
amplitudes to red or white light. There is no treatment for the defect except
Hemeralopia
Day blindness (hemeralopia) is an uncommon disease in the dog, initially
described in the Alaskan Malamute.7 Recently, the German Shorthaired
Pointer was found to be affected by the same genetic defect.$ Day blindness
in the Miniature Poodles as well as in some sporadic cases" showed typical
clinical characteristics.
Clinicalfindings
Clinical signs include blindness or clumsiness in bright, outdoor sunlight, but
normal vision in darkness, often noticed at 2-6 months of age. ERGs are
diagnostic at an early age with abnormal cone responses, including flicker
recordings, while the rod responses are normal. The disease in the Alaskan
Malamute has an autosomal recessive inheritance. It is caused by a partial or
total failure in development of cone photoreceptors. Usually the fundus of
affected dogs has a lifelong normal appearance.
145
Cone-rod dystrophy
MOLO
This is a heterogeneous group of diseases, characterized by sirmultaneous
involverment of cones primarily, then rod photoreceptors. Pit Bull Terriers are
OPHTHAL
affected by the disease as well as Wirehaired Dachshunds.62
Clinicalfindings
In both breeds there are abnormal pupillary light reflexes as initial findings in
ANIM
most affected dogs. Ophthalmoscopic findings vary in their time of appearance
   a  o     o  m
months of age, while in the latter the appearance of changes is more variable
SMAI
and may not be observed until 3 years of age. Fundus changes are generalized
in both breeds but in the Shorthaired Dachshund the non-tapetal fundus
ance. Test breeding of affected Pit Bull Terriers has shown two variants of the
disease that are non-allelic.
In the Longhaired Dachshund, a disease initially described as rod-cone dys-
trophy has been further characterized. Clinically ophthalmoscopic changes
were observed at age 6 months, although there was a marked variation in age
of onset and progression of the disease. ERGs have recently shown that the
and the disease is now categorized as a cone-rod dystrophy.b4
Congenital retinal dystrophy (RPE65 gene defect)
This is a hereditary and congenital disease of Briard dogs with a simple auto-
somal recessive inheritance.6s The gene defect was elucidated and found to be
a 4-base pair deletion in the RPE65 gene. Morphologic studies have shown
changes in the retinal pigment epithelium with an accumulation of large vacu-
oles, so-called lipoid inclusion bodies. Ultrastructurally there is also disorgani
zation of the rod photoreceptor outer segments at an early age with a successive
involvement of the cone photoreceptors a few years later.
Clinicalfindings
Affected Briards are congenitally night-blind and usually have reduced or
severely reduced daylight vision as well. Some affected dogs are both night- and
day-blind. Ophthalmoscopically the fundus appears normal until the dogs are
attenuation are initial changes that appear. Then some gray-white specks may
be observed that spread peripherally with increasing age. The disease has an
extremely slow progression and deterioration of vision is difficult to detect
non-recordable rod ERG responses are found with markedly reduced cone
responses in affected puppies as young as 5 weeks of age.
A 4-base pair deletion has been described in the RPE65 gene, which encodes
for a 61 kD protein, preferentially expressed in the retinal pigment epithelium.
The protein is involved in the retinoid cycle and, in the RPE65 null mutation,
11-cis retinal is not forrmed, which then results in a lack of rhodopsin.66 Treat-
ment for this specific gene defect has been perforrmed and shown amazing
146
results provide evidence that treatrment for hereditary retinal disease is possible
VISUAL
when a precise gene defect is known.
Malformation of the central nervous system
IMPAIRMENT
associated with blindness
This may include any disorder affecting the visual pathways. Exarmination of
the visual pathway has been discussed earlier in this chapter. Detailed descrip-
tions of these disorders are beyond the scope of this book; however, a brief
overview of hydrocephalus is included.
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus may be defined as a dilatation of the norrmally small, fluid-filled
cavities and spaces (ventricles inside and subarachnoid space outside) of the
brain with an increase in the volume of cerebrospinal fluid. In the dog, the most
with norrmal intracranial pressure in breeds with dome-shaped skulls. However,
congenital hydrocephalus may be seen in other breeds as well. Often, few clini-
cal signs are observed in this condition. The hydrocephalus may, however,
become decompensated with subsequent increased intracranial pressure. The
affected animal may be ataxic and show loss of higher functions such as vision,
hearing, and mental capacity. Acquired hydrocephalus may develop second-
arily to brain tumors, trauma, encephalitis, or meningitis in any breed of dog
or cat.
S ss r     s   
to the owner, as little cortical function is demanded for maintenance of basal
functions in a non-working breed of dog. Should, however, the disorder affect
the visual cortex, visual impairment may result. Involverment of the brainstem
may compromise the optic nerve(s) as well as the other cranial nerves necessary
for normal function of the eyes.
Clinicalfindings
The puppy may present only with the complaint of visual impairment.
The pupils are dilated and direct and indirect pupillary light reflexes are
usually absent. The menace response is absent, but this may be difficult to
evaluate even in norrmal puppies. A *wandering’ nystagrmus with rolling of the
usually reveals additional neurologic abnormalities. Open fontanelles and small
skull bones are usually present in hydrocephalic puppies, especially of minia-
ture breeds, and the anterior part of the brain may protrude between the
bones.
Diagnosis
A neurologic examination will support the diagnosis, as will the shape of the
head and the breed of the affected animal. CT scan or other imaging techniques
can be used to confirm the diagnosis.
Treatment andprognosis
placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt have been beneficial in isolated cases.
The prognosis for regaining vision in a congenitally blind animal is highly
unlikely.
147
MOLOGY
ACQUIRED VISUAL IMPAIRMENT - ACUTE ONSET
Acute visual impairment is an occurrence that often makes both the patient
OPHTHAL
and the owner distressed. Although the interest is, understandably, focused
only on the eyes, a detailed history should be taken and a thorough general
physical exarmination of the patient perforrmed, to rule out the presence of
MAL
preceding or concurrent systemic disease and/or medication. It must also be
ANIM
remembered that, even if the owner considers the visual impairment to be of
sudden onset, the condition may have developed insidiously over a longer
SMALL
period of time.
Acute glaucoma
Acute glaucoma (see also Ch. 6) is in many ways the ^epitome of evil' among
eye diseases; it starts suddenly and unexpectedly, the course is accompanied by
pain, and the condition progresses irreversibly and promptly to blindness, if
not treated. Different pathogenic mechanisms causing the high intraocular
pressure (IOP) in acute glaucoma produce similar clinical signs and a thorough
examination is necessary to establish the cause of the condition.
Clinicat signs
The pathologically elevated IOP produces obvious clinical signs in dogs,
whereas the clinical signs in cats are less prominent.
engorged episcleral vessels, corneal edema, and a fixed, mid-sized, or dilated
The iridocorneal angle and entrance to the ciliary cleft usually appear closed
when gonioscopy is performed. Retinal vessels are compressed, whereas changes
in the optic nerve head are usually not detectable clinically in acute cases of
glaucoma. The globe may be enlarged relatively early in the course of the
disease, especially in young animals. The IOP is considerably elevated and
tonometry readings of 50 mmHg or higher are common.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of acute glaucoma is made on the basis of ocular signs, an
elevated IOP being the most important. The firrmness of the globe caused by
the high IOP can usually be detected by palpation, but this is an inaccurate
and unreliable method of estimating IOP. Use of a tonometer is therefore
strongly recommended both to verify the diagnosis and to have an IOP value
to compare with when therapy has been initiated (see Ch. 2). Gonioscopy
angle (pp. 26-28, 229-230), although corneal edema may obscure the gonio-
scopic view. In patients with unilateral glaucoma, gonioscopy should also be
perforrmed on the normotensive eye as part of the attempt to establish the etiol-
ogy of the glaucoma.
Differentiat diagnosis
Episcleritis causes the eye to appear red with prominent vessels; in conjuncti-
vitis, the conjunctiva is diffusely pink or reddish and the individual vessels are
148
not prominent. Furthermore, the conjunctival vessels are easily movable, unlike
the episcleral ones, and discharge is more prominent in conjunctivitis. Orbital
VISU
disease or episcleritis may cause episcleral injection but intraocular disease is
usually not present. However, orbital disease may cause pupillary abnormali-
IMPAIRMENT
ties, and uveitis may occur with episcleritis.
Corneal edema is seen in several other diseases (e.g. ulcerative keratitis,
endothelial dystrophy, and uveitis), but neither dilatation of the pupil nor ele-
vation of the IOP is present in these diseases
Iris atrophy causes the pupil to appear dilated. Dilated pupils, unresponsive
to light stirmulus, can be seen in several other diseases, including advanced
stages of retinal degeneration and optic neuritis. Retinal degeneration also
causes attenuation of retinal vessels, which looks similar to the vessel compres-
sion in acute glaucoma.
Occasionally, the IOP is slightly elevated for a long period of time, sometimes
years, causing very subtle clinical signs that are often neglected by the owner.
In advanced stages of this form of glaucoma, the ciliary cleft is likely to col-
lapse, which causes a sudden increase in the IOP mimicking acute glaucoma.
The possibility of an insidious, chronic glaucoma preceding the acute, severe
elevation in IOP should be considered in patients where signs of an acute glau-
coma and unexpected findings indicative of chronic glaucoma are seen
sirmultaneously.
Treatment and prognosis
Acute glaucoma is an ermergency. The treatment should aim at retrieving vision,
but in cases where vision is already lost, the aim is to keep the animal comfort-
able and pain free.
physiologic level. If the glaucoma is secondary to another disease, the primary
cause has to be treated as well. Repeated tonometry is essential to evaluate the
response to the therapy. If IOP is not lowered suffciently or returns to patho.
s        i    
not leave the clinic before the IOP is controlled. A combination of medical and
prophylactically and to inform the owner of the bilateral potential of the
disease.
Correct diagnosis and successful lowering of the IOP very early in the course
of the condition are essential for a favorable outcome. Markedly elevated IOP
(greater than 50 rmmHg) may cause perrmanent visual loss within 24 h, and
moderate elevation (30-50 mmHg) results in more gradual loss of vision.
Despite rapid diagnosis and considerable efforts to obtain and stabilize the IOP
within the norrmal range, vision is often impaired. Unfortunately, it is not
uncommon that maintaining the IOP under 40 mm Hg, a level at which several
 animals show signs of pain if exceeded, may prove to be difficult long-terrm. In
these patients, the rmain goal is to keep them pain free, which may require
enucleation.
Intraocular hemorrhage
nisms. The extent of blood within the eye, as well as the location of the hemor-
149
IGY
rhage, may vary considerably. Several conditions causing neovascularization
LMOLOO
and/or the leakage of blood from intraocular vessels can be listed:
 Hemorrhage in the anterior chamber
OPHTHAL
trauma
pre-iridal fibrovascular membranes
anterior uveitis
ANIMAL
intraocular neoplasia
coagulation factor disorders or platelet disorders
retinal detachment
SMALL
PHTVL/PHPV
 Hemorrhage in the lens or in a retrolental plaque
PHTVL/PHPV
Hemorrhage in the vitreous cavity or in the retina
chorioretinitis
 coagulation factor disorders or platelet disorders
systemic lupus erythematosus
hyperviscosity syndrome
 diabetes mellitus
hypertensive retinopathy
 retinal detachment
PHTVL/PHPV.
Clinical signs
Hermorrhage in the anterior chamber, hyphema, is easily detectable (Fig. 5.9).
In complete hyphema, the blood turns bluish-black after approximately 1 week.
This is often referred to as eight-ball hyphema (from the color of ball number
8 in pool).
Hemorrhage in the posterior part of the eye may often require use of a slit-
lamp biomicroscope or ophthalmoscope to be clearly visualized. The location
Fig. 5.9 Blunt trauma to
the eye ofthis dog caused
hyphema, traumatic
uveitis, and the
150
development of iris
bombe.
of the hemorrhage within the retina can be established ophthalmoscopically by
VISU
shape and color. Furtherrmore, it is valuable to establish whether the blood is
clotted or not. Clotted blood in the anterior charmber is often seen when the
IMPAIRMENT
cause is anterior uveitis or trauma, whereas hemorrhage caused by coagulation
disorders is unclotted.
Diagnosis
The owners should be asked if the pet may have ingested toxic substances, e.
g. rodenticides containing anticoagulants, or if abnormal bleeding has been
noticed previously. Recurrent hemorrhages are often indicative of a neoplastic
or congenital origin. Breed disposition (e.g. CEA in Collies and PHTVL/PHPV
mia and irmmune-mediated thrombocytopenia), and the age of the patient
(congenital diseases) should be considered.
A general clinical examination including the testing of hematologic parame
ters should always be performed. Coagulation screening can be used to rule
out coagulopathies. Examination of litterrmates may give clues to the cause
when excessive hemorrhage is found in young animals. IOP should be measured
drainage and cause secondary glaucoma. Ultrasonography may be useful to
detect intraocular neoplasia, vitreal hemorrhage, and retinal detachrment in
blood-filled eyes.
Treatment and prognosis
The treatment depends on the cause of the intraocular hemorrhage. Some sug-
gestions on treatment of hyphema are given below:
n o  n  i s   
inflammatory sequelae. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be
used cautiously as these drugs may interfere with thrormbocytic function.
Furthermore, mydriatics should be used with caution in excessive
used. If a secondary glaucoma is elicited, mydriatics should be
discontinued immediately and medical treatrment to lower the IOP should
be started.
* Surgical intervention in hypherma is rarely indicated in patients with
excessive hyphema and elevated IOP; removal of blood elements by
irrigation of the anterior chamber rmay be advantageous. Intracameral
lyze clots and enhance their physiologic removal.
The prognosis for intraocular hemorrhage depends on the cause and the
extent of the intraocular lesions. It is often advisable not to give a prognosis
until resorption of the blood allows inspection of the intraocular structures in
Toxic retinopathy
Assessment of retinal integrity is a routine and essential component in drug
safety evaluations. Several compounds are known to have ocular adverse
effects. Typical for these is that they are characterized by bilateral symmetry.
151
There is often a relationship between adiministration of a toxic compound and
IGY
the onset of clinical signs. The following are some well-known drug-related
MOLOC
retinotoxic compounds:
Azalide?2
OPHTHAL
Chlorochine'3
Closante1?4
Hydroxypyridinethione's
AL
Rafoxanide?6
ANIM
Thiram?7
Quinine?3
SMALL
Specifically in the cat, enrofloxacin has been shown to cause toxic
retinopathy, especially if administered at higher than recommended
dosages (recommended dosage: 5 mg/kg/24 h). Within days after initiation
of oral administration clinical signs of a generalized retinal degeneration
 may occur as well as systemic and neurologic effects.78 
SARD
SARD (sudden acquired retinal degeneration) is a retinal degenerative disease
that occurs acutely in adult dogs. The cause of the disease is unknown.9
Although initially the fundus appearance in affected animals is normal (Fig.
5.10), there are marked morphologic changes; a rapid loss of photoreceptor
layers. No breed is particularly susceptible and crossbreeds have also been
affected by the disease. Most often, the affected anirmal is of middle age and
appears to be in good general health. In some instances there has been a history
 of polyphagia, polyuria, and polydipsia, together with elevations in the levels
of serum alkaline phosphatase (SAP), serum alanine aminotransferase (SAAT),
serum cholesterol, or serum bilirubin. It has been speculated that these changes
Fig. 5.10 The fundus
 appearance is normal in
this acutely blind (for
about 4 weeks) 4-year-old
Dachshund with sudden
acquired retinal
152
degeneration (SARD).
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
ayerofretina
Duter nuclearlayer
photoreceptorcellnuc
Fig. 5.11 Electron micrograph of the outer retina of the dog in Fig. 5.10. Obvious
degenerative changes are observed in the photoreceptor outer and inner segment layer
(Magnification:x2080.)
may be indicative of the physiologic stress associated with the unidentified reti
notoxic factor.
Clinical findings
Affected dogs lose their vision completely and irreversibly within 1-2 weeks.
Clinical examination shows moderately to widely dilated pupils which are more
or less unresponsive to light stimuli. The fundus appearance is norrmal, but the
ERG is non-recordable.After several weeks or months there is ophthalrmo-
scopic evidence of a generalized retinal degeneration.
Differential diagnosis
SARD can be differentiated from optic neuritis by the totally extinguished
ERG. It rmight, in the late stage of the disease, be more difficult to differentiate
153
LMOLOGY
SARD from generalized retinal degeneration of other causes, such as heredi-
tary rod-cone degeneration, in which the ERG is also non-recordable. Another
differential diagnosis is CNS neoplasia, in which sudden-onset blindness may
OPHTHAL
occur. However the ERG is not often extinguished in such cases.
Treatment
There is no effective treatment for SARD.
ANIMAL
Retinal detachment
Retinal detachment is a rather common finding, resulting from a separation
SMALL
of the neural retina from the retinal pigment epithelium, through maldevelop-
ment (as in CEA or RD),vitreal traction, exudation, or transudation (as
in chorioretinitis and hypertension), or associated with retinal tears or holes
that may occur with a hereditary predisposition in brachycephalic breeds, as
sequelae to trauma or atrophy, or as a complication of cataract or lens luxation
surgery. Detachments due to tears or holes are referred to as rhegrmatogenous.
In severe cases the neural retina may be separated over its whole area, remain-
ing attached only at the optic disk and at the ora ciliaris retinae. When the
loosely down from the optic disk (Fig. 5.12). Separation of the photoreceptors
from the choriocapillaris and retinal pigment epithelium causes photoreceptor
degeneration.
Clinical findings
Acute onset of severe visual irmpairment or blindness is a common sequela
of retinal detachment. In partial detachments there are usually no obvious
clinical signs due to the detachment. Pupillary light reflexes are abnormal to
Fig. 5.12 Complete
retinal detachment and
disinsertion in a 2-year-
old Tibetan Terrier. The
hyperreflective and
avascular fundus (without
neural retina) might be
confused with complete
retinal atrophy.
154
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
Fig. 5.13Partial retinal
detachment with a
neuroretinal hole and
elevation of large areas of
the neural retina in
conjunction with
hypertension in a 12-year-
old Persian cat.
normal depending on extent and duration of the lesion. Ophthalmoscopically,
 a grayish veil-like structure is seen floating in the vitreous, with clearly visible
retinal vessels. If the retina is only partly detached, areas become elevated
as flat or bullous regions that are out of focus compared to normal areas and
the optic disk. There may be accompanying signs of systermic disease (Fig.
5.13).
Differential diagnosis
An irmportant differential diagnosis in retinal detachment is end-stage retinal
atrophy. When the retina is completely detached and not fastened at the ora
ciliaris retinae, the neural tissue may not always be easily seen by the examiner,
vessels (see Fig. 5.12).
Treatment andprognosis
Treatrment of early cases and especially partial retinal detachiment is some-
times successful, depending on etiology. Chorioretinitis cases have the most
favorable prognosis where treatrment consists of anti-inflammatory medica-
tion as well as treatrment directed towards the primary cause. Mild to mod-
erate serous detachments often respond to a combination of diuretics and
systermic corticosteroids. Surgical treatment of rhegmatogenous retinal detach-
ments is attempted less frequently in small animals compared to humans
because most cases in animals are not diagnosed early enough. Recently,
however, specialized veterinary ophthalrmologists perform surgeries very
similar to those performed by human vitreo-retinal surgeons. Methods of
surgical treatment include cryopexy of holes and tears, drainage of subretinal
fuid, application of a scleral buckle, and filling the posterior segment with
155
IGY
      sis  s   
.MOLOO
in the dog is poor.
OPHTHAL
THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS FOR RETINAL
DETACHMENTIN DOGS AND CATS
AL
ANIM
To understand therapeutic options for retinal detachments in dogs and cats
veterinarians need a basic understanding of ocular ermbryology and the patho-
physiology of retinal detachments. The retina and the retinal pigrment epithelial
SMAI
interface forrms when the optic vesicle, which is composed of neuroectoderm,
invaginates; the inner layer (destined to be retina) is then juxtaposed to the
outer layer (retinal pigment epithelium). There are no cellular connections
between these layers and the tight junctions of the retinal pigment epithelium
(RPE) and external limiting membrane of the retina maintain the blood-ocular
barrier in this photoreceptor region. The apposition of the rod and cone outer
separated, and when the detachment is complete the affected eye becomes
blind. The outer retina,deprived ofits nutrition from the choriocapillaris and
the metabolic support of the RPE, degenerates progressively after detachment;
not limited to the etiology and type of retina (anangiotic, paurangiotic, meran-
giotic, and holangiotic). Poorly vascularized and anangiotic retinas will become
necrotic and degenerate very rapidly after detachment and, if anangiotic retinal
reattachment is to be sight restoring, therapy would need to be achieved within
hours of detachment. However, dog and cat retinas are holangiotic and the
photoreceptor external and inner segments usually degenerate relatively slowly
over several weeks. Deterrmining the time of onset of retinal detachment is
irmprecise at best. Careful examination by an ophthalmologist and an accurate
history are required to establish potential viability when considering appropri-
ate therapy, and general practitioners are encouraged to refer animals with
retinal detachments promptly. As a general rule successful reattachment and
return of vision is achievable if the retina is reattached within a few weeks,
preferably within 1month of detachmentin most dogs.Retinaldetachments
are diagnosed with direct or indirect ophthalmoscopy. When the detachment
is focal, the raised area of the retina or a hole within the retina is usually
obvious (Fig. 5.14). When the retina is completely detached and torn at the
periphery it will be draped over the optic disk (Fig. 5.15). Retinal detachment
is common and there are many etiologies including trauma (Fig. 5.16), septic
and immune-mediated uveitis, neoplasia, vitreous degeneration and hyalitis,
genetic mutations (Fig. 5.17), and numerous others. Despite a multitude of
etiologies the pathogenesis of retinal detachment is limited to three basic
mechanisms: disruption of the blood-ocular barrier with leakage of fuid into
the photoreceptor-RPE interface (exudative detachment) (Fig. 5.18); vitreous
fibrosis that pulls the retina off the RPE as contraction occurs (tractional
detachments); and retinal holes or tears that allow fuid to seep under the
retina and induce the detachment (rhegmatogenous detachment)(see Fig
156
5.14).
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
Fig. 5.14 Peripheral
retinal tear and focal
detachment in a small
mixed breed dog.
Fig. 5.15  A complete
retinal detachment with
giant peripheral tears in a
dog. Note the retina is
draped over the optic disk.
The therapy of retinal detachrment is selected based on these pathogeneses.
Exudative and serous retinal detachments (Fig. 5.18) are usually treated by
medical therapy that is focused on treating the etiology and reducing the uveitis
and stabilizing the blood-ocular barriers, usually systermic corticosteroids.
When the uveitis is controlled and the blood-ocular barrier is restored, the
cellular pumps in the RPE and the Muller cells within the retina remove the
subretinal fluid and the retina will spontaneously reattach. Functional vision
will usually be regained once the retina is reattached.081
Partial or focal detachments induced by small retinal tears (see Fig. 5.14),
colobomas, and geographic retinal dysplasia are commonly treated by trans-
157
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 5.16 A ventral retinal
detachment that developed
secondary to trauma and
hemorrhage in a mature 
terrier cross dog.
Fig. 5.17 Multiple focal
retinal detachments that
are inherited in Coton de
Tulear dogs.
corneal barrier diode laser retinopexy (Figs 5.19 & 5.20). The diode laser
induces chorioretinal scars as the laser energy passes through the clear cornea,
aqueous humor, and vitreous, and is absorbed by the RPE and choroidal
pigment, inducing focal necrosis and creating focal chorioretinal scars which
seal the hole and prevent further retinal detachment.2,83
Large or complete retinal detachments caused by retinal dysinsertion (dialy-
sis) at the ora ciliaris retinae (see Fig. 5.15) develop presumably secondary to
vitreous traction bands and holes. Veterinary retinal surgeons have been suc-
158
cessful with vitrectomy and surgical reattachment of relatively acute (1-6
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
Fig. 5.18 Serous retinal detachment in a middle-aged German Shepherd cross dog.
The other eye was similar in appearance and the dog was blind. These retinal
detachments are exud ative rather than rhegmatogenous and will reattach over several
days with restoration of vision with immunosuppressive therapy. This is an idiopathic
condition that develops most commonly in large breed dogs.
Fig. 5.19 A focal retinal
detachment in this English
Springer Spaniel developed
secondary to an area of
geographic retinal
dysplasia. A transcorneal
diode laser barrier
retinopexy was completed
to scar the retina to the
 choroid and prevent further
detachment.
weeks) retinal detachments in dogs and cats.4.Bs After the affected animal is
anesthetized the affected globe is proptosed and draped. The sclera is exposed
and three ports are placed through the pars plana (for fuid, light, and manipu-
lation) and the vitreous is removed. The detached retina is reattached by injec-
tion of perfluorocarbon liquid which has a specific gravity that is heavier than
water; this expands and fattens the retina and tamponades it against the RPE.
159
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 5.20 This mixed
 breed dog's retina wa5
SMALL ANIMAL
reattached after a
vitrectomy. perfluorocarbon
gas tamponade, diode laser
endopexy. and silicone oil
transfer. Multiple
dhorioretinal scars are
present around multiple
retinal tears and holes that
were detected during the
surgery. This eye regained
functional vision and had
minimal postoperative
complications.
The edges of the torn retina are then sealed by chorioretinal scars induced by
a diode laser or cryotherapy. The perfluorocarbon is then replaced with silicone
oil and the pars plana ports sutured closed. Vision is often restored even when
detachments have been present for a significant amount of time.86 Complica-
tions are not uncommon and include uveitis, glaucoma, and occasionally retinal
slippage.
Complications related to retinal detachment approach 95% with or without
medical  therapy. These globe-threatening complications usually develop
because pre-iridal fibrovascular mermbranes develop secondary to the release
of fibrovascular inducing cytokines from the hypoxic retina. These membranes
are fragile, and secondary uveitis and glaucoma that ensue are diffcult, if
not impossible, to treat medically;? intractable glaucoma that develops after
chronic retinal detachment may best be treated by enucleation or evisceration
and intrascleral prosthesis.
Hypertensive retinopathy
Hypertensive retinopathy is not an uncommon disease in small animal practice
and occurs most often in older cats.$ In addition to acute blindness or severe
visual irmpairrment, affected animals usually have an elevated systolic arterial
blood pressure (often greater than 200 mmHg), elevated blood urea nitrogen
and creatinine levels, and in some cases cardiac abnormalities as well. It is often
difficult to evaluate which disease process comes first: a primary renal disease,
cardiac and renal abnormalities (Fig. 5.2l). Hyperthyroidism is a common
potential cause in older cats.
Clinical findings
The typical presenting complaint is acute vision loss. Ophthalmoscopically
there are often bilateral severe retinal changes, such as retinal and vitreal hem-
orrhage, elevation or detachment of all or parts of the neural retina, and retinal
160
vascular tortuosity.
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
Fig. 5.21 Bullous retinal
detachment seen through
the pupil in a 10-year-old
Border Collie with primary
renal disease and
hypertension.
Treatment and prognosis
Therapy is directed towards treatrment of the primary disease. Hypotensive
therapy is initiated and, in some cases, diuretics. Early treatrment of less
severe retinal lesions gives return of vision in some cases although the long-
terrm prognosis is poor. Most cases of hypertensive retinopathy are advanced
when diagnosed and treatment is unlikely to be successful. Prognosis for
general health depends on the severity of the underlying systemic abnormali-
ties and their response to treatment.
Optic neuritis
Optic neuritis is an inflarmmation of the optic nerve, either at the level of the
globe or closer to the brain. The potential causes include specific infections,
such as toxoplasmosis, extension of inflammation from adjacent tissues, neo-
plasia, the influence of toxins, and trauma. Immune-mediated causes are often
suspected although the rmajority of such cases are categorized as idiopathic.
Clinical findings
Affected animals usually present with bilateral acute-onset blindness. The
pupils are widely dilated and the pupillary light reflexes are absent. Ophthal-
moscopically the disk may appear swollen and indistinct, and sometimes small
hemorrhages are observed at or in the vicinity of the disk (Fig. 5.22). The
adjacent retina may also be affected. The ERG is usually only somewhat
reduced or may be norrmal. In some cases of optic neuritis, with inflammatory
lesions closer to the brain, the fundus appears normal.
Differential diagnosis
SARD is an important differential of optic neuritis, although in SARD the
ERG is non-recordable and PLRs may be present but sluggish. Central blind-
ness is another differential. In such cases PLRs are often normal, the animal
has other CNS symptoms, and the fundus and optic disk are often normal-
161
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 5.220ptic neuritis
in a 4-year-old Bichon
Frise with acute-onset
blindness.
appearing. Reticulosis (see below) is a further differential. In papillederma, there
is a non-inflammatory swelling of the optic disk, usually associated with com-
pression of the retrobulbar part of the optic nerve by tumor or associated with
systemic hypertension. Vision is not impaired by the simple presence of papill-
ederma, and pupillary light reflexes and ERG are normal; however when caused
by optic nerve compression the central transrmission of visual inforrmation rmay
be im paired.
Treatmentandprognosis
Optic neuritis is treated by systemic corticosteroids at high doses initially (2-3
weeks), then as long-term treatrment at lower levels, every other day for up to
several months. The underlying cause should be treated if possible. In specific
infections, broad-spectrum antimicrobials are indicated. The prognosis is
guarded with recurrence of the disease and progression to optic atrophy is a
common sequel.
Central blindness
Central blindness describes visual impairment with normal ocular findings in
which the lesion can be localized to the visual pathway within the brain. On
neurologic examination signs other than visual disturbance are often present.
Apparent blindness is, however, often the first sign noted by the owner. In
managing a neurologic problerm, the first step is localization of the disease
process. The disorder may be categorized as focal and affecting only one part
of the CNS, multifocal, or diffuse. Some conditions may initially appear as
signs involving the visual pathway are brainstem lesions involving cranial
nerves and cerebral lesions affecting the visual cortex. The major disease cate-
gories producing rmultifocal signs are degenerative, metabolic, neoplastic, nutri
162
tional, infammatory, and toxic disorders.
Reticulosis (granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis)
VISU
This is a malignant inflammatory condition seen in the dog and rarely in the
JAL
cat. The condition is now considered to be part of the granulomatous menin-
IMPAIRMEI
goencephalomyelitis disease. Reticulosis predominantly involves the white
including atrophy or swelling of the optic disk, depending on the degree of
involverment. White matter of the brainsterm, cerebellum, and upper cervical
NT
spinal cord may also be affected. The disease may affect dogs of all ages.
Clinicalfindings
Acute or gradual vision loss in one or both eyes is the main clinical sign when
the optic nerves are affected. The condition does not seem to cause pain unless
the upper cervical spinal cord is involved. Lesions in this area will produce neck
stiffness. In the ocular form of reticulosis, the pupil is dilated and the menace
reaction as well as direct and consensual pupillary light reflexes are absent. The
ERG shows normal retinal function.
Differentialdiagnosis
The most important differential diagnosis is optic neuritis, which clinically is
  sisn  n a o an ro sis  
considered one form of optic neuritis, while not all cases of optic neuritis are
reticulosis.
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration (SARD) also causes acute vision loss.
In this case, the ERG is non-recordable. SARD will not improve on cortico-
steroid therapy, in contrast to reticulosis.
Treatment and prognosis
The disease responds to treatment with corticosteroids, but long-terrm treat-
ment with high doses of steroids or other immunosuppressive agents rmay be
necessary. Recurrence of signs usually occurs when steroid doses are reduced
below therapeutic levels. Thus, the prognosis is considered guarded.
Encephalitis
Inflammation of the brain tissue is referred to as encephalitis and inflarmmation
ously, the disease is termed meningoencephalitis. The condition is caused by
several infectious agents, both viral and bacterial. In cats, the most important
is feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), usually of the non-effusive (dry') form,
causing pyogranulomatous inflammation in the CNS. Ocular signs, notably
intraocular inflammation (uveitis, often with keratitic precipitates), may accom-
pany the CNS findings. In dogs distemper must be included in the differential
diagnosis of any dog with neurologic signs. Accompanying ocular signs of dis.
temper may include conjunctivitis, keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), optic neu
ritis, and retinitis, as well as Horner's syndrome (ptosis, miosis, enophthalmos
and protrusion of the third eyelid) due to lesions of the sympathetic innervation
to the eye and adnexa.
Clinicalfindings
Depending on the site of the lesion within the brain, neurologic signs vary.
There is usually evidence of CNS damage. In lesions involving the visual cortex,
163
MOLOGY
intact, clinical findings may include lack of menace reactions, but with pupillary
light reflexes present. Signs develop over a few days in most infections, but in
FIP onset may be insidious. There is often a slight elevation of body
OPHTHAL
temperature.
Differential diagnosis
Any other multifocal brain disease may produce similar signs. Examination of
AL
cerebrospinal fuid as well as blood biochermistry and serology are important
.ANIM
factors in establishing a diagnosis.
SMALL
Treatment
Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be used when a bacterial infection is sus-
pected. A normal blood-brain barrier may be difficult to penetrate for many
types of antibiotic. When inflammation is present, however, the barrier is
broken down, permitting penetrance of several antibacterial agents. Symptom-
atic supportive treatrment will also be necessary.
intoxicants
CNS signs can result from endogenous (produced within the body) as well as
exogenous (ingested, inhaled, absorbed through the skin) toxins. Hepatic
A history of exposure to a toxic agent is the most important factor establish-
ing the diagnosis in cases of exogenous poisoning. Therefore, the owner rmust
be questioned carefully in an attempt to find a possible source. CNS signs other
than central blindness might be more obvious in exogenous intoxications. For
to textbooks on this topic.
ACQUIRED VISUALIMPAIRMENT - CHRONIC
PROGRESSIVE ONSET
A chronic progressive onset of visual impairment is often difficult to detect by
the owner. It is not uncommon that blinding disorders of this type are eluci-
dated by chance in conjunction with examination or treatment of an animal
for reasons other than ophthalmic problerms. Several disease processes of this
type are breed-related and in many cases hereditary. Many potentially blinding
disorders of chronic progressive onset are revealed when animals are screened
for hereditary eye diseases.
Phthisis bulbi
Phthisis bulbi - a degenerated, shrunken eye - can develop secondary to severe
resultant hypotension. There is commonly a history of severe ocular trauma or
chronic uveitis. The condition develops over a long period of time, usually
months, and the end-stage is a globe of considerably smaller size than norrmal,
with disorganized contents (Fig. 5.23).
Clinical signs
The globe is considerably smaller than normal, the cornea is opaque, and neo-
164
vascularization with pigmentation is present in variable degrees. Phthisis bulbi
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
Fig. 5.23A middle-aged
English Springer Spaniel with
phthisis bulbi of the right eye.
is usually unilateral and the size of the globe diminishes gradually over months.
Signs of intraocular infarmmation may be noticed when the cornea is still
transparent. Vision is lost when the globe has become phthisical.
Differential diagnosis
Microphthalmos is a differential diagnosis to phthisis bulbi. Microphthalmos
is a congenital condition that develops without preceding ocular trauma or
intraocular inflammation.
Treatment
Chronic intraocular inflammation may cause discormfort. The relationship
between the eyelids and the globe is disturbed, and recurrent conjunctivitis is
a common problerm. Furthermore, the cosmesis of a phthisical globe is usually
poor. Enucleation is often the best solution for the animal, but in patients
where the globe is maintained, palliative treatment of conjunctivitis with irriga-
tion and topical medications is necessary. A relationship between primary
ocular sarcomas and concurrent chronic uveitis, which may cause phthisis
bulbi, has been suggested in cats.90 Thus, enucleation is a preferred option in
this species.
Corneal disease
The transparency of the cornea is necessary for normal vision. This transpar-
ency is due to the cornea's state of relative dehydration, avascularity, and lack
of pigmentation, and the regular arrangement of stromal collagen fibrils. In
and function, and the tear film must be normal. In chronic corneal diseases,
the cornea gradually changes appearance. This may be caused by edema, neo-
vascularization, granulation tissue formation, scarring, and pigmentation. A
thorough description of corneal diseases is given in Chapter 4; however, chronic
diseases leading to visual impairrment are briefly mentioned here. These include
165
IGY
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, pigmentary keratitis, chronic superficial keratitis,
MOLO
punctate keratitis, corneal dystrophies, and endothelial dystrophy.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Kcs)
1安日
The condition is caused by a tear deficiency, most often associated with a pre-
OPHT
sumed immune-mediated lacrimal adenitis.? Acute tear deficiency may cause
corneal ulceration and perforation. More common, however, KCS is a chronic
disease with progressive deterioration in vision due to corneal changes.
ANIM
Clinical findings
SMALL
Typically, there is a history of chronic conjunctivitis with an accurmulation of
tenacious rmucus on and around the eye. Conjunctivitis and keratitis develop
when the ocular surface dries and desiccates. Abnormal hypertrophy of the
infamed conjunctiva causes redundant pleating folds. Opportunistic bacteria
can be cultured from the ocular discharge, but their abundance is secondary to
the effect of KCs. Corneal changes include vascularization, scarring, and pig-
mentation, which rmay progress to involve the entire cornea. If the cornea has
normal sensory innervation, marked discomfort is present. However, the
corneal nerves are usually damaged and insensitive in canine KCS, thus the
condition is not associated with severe pain. A Schirrmer tear test will reveal
subnormal values. Treatment is discussed in Chapter 7, but usually includes
daily cleaning, tear replacerment therapy, and/or topical instillation of
ciclosporin.
Pigmentary keratitis
This condition is a corneal response to chronic irritation. Exophthalmic breeds
are most susceptible andseveralfactors canbe responsible for the
pigmentation:
·KCS - even moderately lowered tear production may produce clinical
addition, the quantitative tear film disorders, conditions altering the
quality of the tear film, for instance rmaking the tear flm unstable and
frequently leaving parts of the cornea uncovered, may add to a low-grade
corneal inflammation.
* Lagophthaimos - the animal is not able to close the eyelids completely. On
eyelids only partly closed. A reduced blinking frequency with poor
distribution of the tears may also be present.
·Trichiasis -hairs from the area adjacent to the eye rub on the cornea.
Treatment
Treatment of pigmentary keratitis includes management of the initiating cause.
Medial canthoplasty is effective in dogs with lagophthalmos and/or medial tri-
chiasis. Medical treatment may include topical ciclosporin, topical application
of tear-substituting eye drops, and in some cases also corticosteroids, depend-
ing on the cause of the condition.
Chronic superficial keratitis (csK)
Several names have been used for this disease, including keratitis pigmentosa,
166
pannus, and Uberreiter's disease. The main cause appears to be an immuno-
logic reaction in the cornea, with exposure to sunlight triggering the disease
VISUAL
   ao   a  si    
dogs of any breed, but the majority of the cases are diagnosed in the German
Shepherd and related breeds. A genetic predisposition is considered likely.
The condition occurs bilaterally in middle-aged dogs, with males and females
equally affected. A chronic inflammation of the nictitating membrane, terrmed
plasmacytic conjunctivitis, is often also present in dogs affected with CSK.
Clinicalsigns
Corneal changes include cellular infiltration, extensive vascularization, and
formation of granulation tissue, which may be heavily pigrmented. Initial
changes are often seen in the ventrolateral parts of the cornea, in untreated
cases progressing to involve the whole cornea. Schirmer tear test values are
normal or elevated because of irritation. The surface of the nictitating mem-
brane, especially near the border, may have a cobblestone-like appearance.
Treatment
Trea trment is lifelong and consists mainly of topical application of ciclosporin,
occasionally in combination with steroids. Protection of the eyes from sunlight
may be of benefit. The results of treatment may be remarkably successful, but
the condition will recur if treatment is discontinued.
Superficial punctate keratitis
The term describes a rmultifocal, ulcerative keratitis that is recurrent, bilateral,
and symmetric (Fig. 5.24).94 The condition affects mainly the long-haired
dachshund, but dogs of other breeds may also be affected sporadically. The
disease is considered to be immune mediated, although the pathogenesis is not
completely understood
Fig. 5.24 Punctate keratitis causing severe bilateral corneal cloudiness and partial
167
pigmentation in a 6-year-old Longhaired Dachshund.
IGY
Clinicalfindings
MOLO
The condition may be acute and painful with bilateral epiphora and blepharo-
spasm. More chronic onset, however, is not uncommon. A number of small
OPHTHAL
n i s a as  n  ad sn a  nn ss 
cornea, and some edema may be present. After some days, neovascularization
develops as an attempt at healing of the cornea. As the condition becomes
MAL
chronic, a combination of punctate ulcers, vascularization, and pigmentation
ANIM
can be observed. The changes gradually progress to involve the whole cornea.
Acute episodes with pain and deeper ulcers may occur and occasional desce-
SMALL
metoceles and melting ulcers may aggravate the situation.
Treatment andprognosis
Treatment is lifelong and consists mainly of topical ciclosporin, if required
combined with topical steroids, plus antibiotics topically if secondary bacterial
infection is present. Deep or perforated ulcers may demand surgical
treatment.
Corneal lipid dystrophy and degeneration
Corneal stromal dystrophy is a non-inflammatory, most often bilateral,
condition which may be caused by accumulation of lipid within the cornea.95
The terrm dystrophy is usually reserved for the forms thought to have
an inherited basis. Degenerations may occur secondary to chronic inflam-
matory disease, such as episcleritis or chronic superficial keratitis, or to
hypercholesterolemia, which is frequently associated with hypothyroidism.
The deposits are most commonly present in the central parts of the cornea,
in the outer stromal layers. The epithelium is usually not involved. Typically
vision is unaffected, but in certain patients the entire cornea may be involved
lipoides corneae, where the lipid is located in the periphery, occurs more
rarely.
Clinical findings
The dystrophic area rmay present as a reflective, fairly well demarcated zone in
the middle area of the cornea. Lipid crystals may resemble tiny needles, but in
degenerations they may be denser and occasionally the epitheliurm will ulcerate,
with associated signs of discomfort. If the overlying epitheliurm is intact, the
condition is not painful.
Treatment
If secondary to other disease, this should be identified and treated. Accumula-
tions in the stroma not irmpairing vision do not require treatrment. Deposits
affecting the corneal epitheliurm with recurrent erosions may require lamellar
keratectomy.
Corneal edema and endothelial dysfunction
Corneal ederma in the absence of other findings may be due to a dysfunction
of the endothelial cells.9% The corneal endothelium is a single cell layer and, if
injured, the cells have little regenerative capacity. To compensate, they will
stretch to cover a large area. Endothelial dystrophy has been described as a
168
farmilial disorder in the Boston Terrier (Fig. 5.25), the Chihuahua, and the
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
Fig. 5.25 Endothelial dystrophy in an 8-year-old Boston Terrier.
Dachshund, and probably also occurs in the Airedale Terrier and English
Springer Spaniel. It is seen sporadically in older dogs of all breeds.
Corneal edema may also result from other ocular diseases, such as glaucoma,
uveitis, and ulcerative keratitis. A hazy cornea mimicking corneal edema may
occur in metabolic disorders in the cat.
Clinical findings
 The edematous cornea is opaque, complicating examination of the inner struc-
tures of the eye. The cornea is gray to light blue with a spongy appearance. If
not associated with other painful ocular diseases, the condition itself is painless.
There may or may not be scleral injection, and the cornea is fuorescein nega-
tive. Bullous keratopathy may complicate the disease in advanced stages and
Treatment and prognosis
If secondary to another eye disease, the primary disease rmust be diagnosed and
treated properly. Topical osmotic agents have been used to try to desiccate the
cornea, but with little effect. Thermal keratoplasty or the placerment of perma-
nent thin conjuctival flaps may be of value. Full-thickness corneal transplanta-
occurs. The prognosis for restoration of vision must therefore be considered
guarded.
Chronic uveitis and its sequelae
Uveitis is an inflammation of the vascular tunics of the eye, which can be sub-
divided into iritis, cyclitis, and choroiditis depending on the part of the uvea
that is affected. Anterior uveitis or iridocyclitis refers to an inflammation of
both the iris and the ciliary body. Multiple etiologies are capable of causing
uveitis in cats and dogs (see Ch. 6). Chronic uveitis is a potential threat to both
169
IGY
vision and eye. Cats are more commonly presented with the condition than
MOLO
dogs.
Aspects of thepathogenesis
The pathogenesis of chronic and recurrent uveitis is still poorly understood,
OPHT
but irmrmunologic reactions are involved. Alterations of the vascular structure
and/or permeability of uveal blood vessels may persist after the acute stages of
A
ANIM
an extensive, uncontrolled inflammation. A subsequent tendency for circulating
irmrmune complexes to be deposited in vessels with increased perrmeability has
been reported. Furthermore, the property of the vitreous body in acting as a
SMAI
importance.
Intraoculartumorscausing uveitis
Neoplastic uveitis is more commonly seen in cats than in dogs. Diffuse iridal
melanomas followed by primary ocular (or trauma-associated) sarcomas are
the most common tumors causing uveitis in the cat. Primary and metastatic
uveal neoplasms are less frequent. Feline leukermia virus may cause anterior
uveitis both directly and indirectly.
Diffuse iridal melanomas often involve rmultiple, enlarging areas of the iris,
where the amount of pigmentation slowly increases. The shape and function
of the pupil may become abnorimal. Secondary anterior uveitis and secondary
glaucoma are not uncommon. Uveitis, intraocular hemorrhages, secondary
glaucoma, and visible masses may be observed in cats with primary ocular
sarcomas. Distant metastases are relatively cormmonly seen in cats with diffuse
iridal melanomas or primary ocular sarcomas.
Clinical signs of uveitis
The condition may be unilateral or bilateral. Bilateral involvement is com-
monly seen in patients with systemic infectious or autoimimune diseases,
whereas unilateral chronic uveitis rmay initially be caused by severe trauma to
the eye or unilateral lens disease. Unilateral uveitis may also be the most evident
clinical sign in cats with prirmary ocular or trauma-associated sarcomas or in
patients affected by other tumors involving the uvea.
miosis, aqueous fare, precipitates of cells or fbrin on the corneal endothelial
surface and anterior lens capsule, spongy swollen iris, and lowered IoP (Fig
5.26), but will vary depending upon intensity, distribution (anterior vs. poste-
rior segment), and duration of the inflam-mation. Vitreous infiltrates, chorio-
retinitis, and exudative retinal detachment may accompany posterior uveitis.
Additional clinical signs in chronic uveitis may include
* Neovascularization of the iris with or without engorgement of the iris
vessels. Pre-iridal fibrovascular rmermbranes or rubeosis iridis can be
observed as randomly organized vessels compared to the normal iris
vessels that are arranged in a radial fashion. Neovascularization is usually
more prominent in cats than in dogs.
Changes in iris pigmentation. The iris is usually diffusely hyperpigmented
in the affected eye. Dispersed pigment may be observed on the anterior
170
lens capsule. Pupillary marginal cysts may develop. Iridal lymphocytic
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
Fig. 5.26 Acute uveitis a5 a result of a corneal foreign body of 1 week's duration in a 3-
year-old Pekinese. As well as the corneal defect there is corneal edema, hypopyon, small
and irregular pupil, and obvious swelling of the iris. The intraocular pressure is lowered.
nodules appearing as circular reddish-brown to gray lesions with a
diameter of 1-2 mm are common in chronic uveitis in cats.
Secondary iris atrophy.
Various sequelae including corneal changes, intraocular adhesions
(synechiae), intraocular mermbranes, secondary cataracts, secondary
retinal diseases, or glaucoma.
 Partial visual impairrment or blindness.
Sequelae
A number of vision-threatening conditions may be caused by uveitis (Fig. 5.27).
Thus, early diagnosis and proper treatment of the initial infammation is essen-
tial to prevent or reduce the development of potentially harrmful sequelae.
Corneal changes. Uveitis may interfere with the water-pumping ability of
the corneal endothelium causing corneal edema. Furthermore, keratitis
with pigmentation and neovascularization is not uncommon.
Intraocuiar adhesions form when the infamed iris adheres to other
structures in the eye. The initial fibrinous adhesions are followed by
fibrovascular organization. Adhesions between iris and cornea
peripherally (peripheral anterior synechiae) may irmpair aqueous outflow.
Posterior synechiae (adhesions between iris and lens) are commonly seen
at the edge of the pupil. Posterior synechiae affecting only parts of the
circumference of the pupil may cause distortion of the pupil. If the
posterior synechiae affect the entire circumference of the pupil (seclusio
171
LMOLOGY
.OPHTHAL
SMALLANIMAL
Fig. 5.27 Sequelae of chronic uveitis in a 13-year-old cat: fibrovascular membrane5.
catara cts, and lens luxation.
This implies that the IOP will be higher in the posterior segment than in
the anterior chamber, which results in forward ballooning of the iris (iris
bombe) (see Fig. 5.9). Exudates or blood in the pupil may cause
formation of tissue membranes across the pupil (from iris to iris).
Mermbranes covering the entire pupil will cause an occlusion of
the pupil. High aqueous protein levels, e.g. due to protein exudation or
intraocular hermorrhage, increase the risk of synechiae forrmation.
Cyclitic membranes are fibrovascular membranes extending from the
vitreous body.
Secondary cataracts may forrm, probably as a result of alterations in the
aqueous humor.
 Lens fuxation may occur in eyes with chronic uveitis. Decrease in strength
and subsequent rupture of the lens zonules have been proposed to be a
 Secondary glaucoma may arise from several different mechanisrms in
conjunction with uveitis. Impaired aqueous fow due to inflammatory
cells and debris in the outflow pathways, peripheral anterior
synechiae, and seclusion or occlusion of the pupil may cause elevation
of IOP.
· Secondary retinal degeneration may be caused by extension of choroiditis
to involve both the choroid and the retina (chorioretinitis) or by
inflammatory effects on the choriocapillaris and/or RPE.
Exudative retinal detachment may be seen in patients with choroiditis,
where the retina is elevated by subretinal fluid, or secondary to traction
by intravitreal or cyclitic membranes caused by intraocular inflarmmation
or hemorrhage.
172
+Phthisis buibi. Chronic uveitis may cause severe ciliary body atrophy
VISUAL
10P.
IMPAIRMEI
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of uveitis is based on history and clinical findings. General physi-
cal examination, blood biochermistry, hematology, and serology may be of
N
value, although the etiology is often difficult to establish. It rmust be remem-
ocular disease.
Aqueous, vitreous, or subretinal paracentesis may be indicated for cytology
and microbial isolation. Results are often non-specific and the procedure may
even cause exacerbation of the infammation. However, results of diagnostic
value are most likely to be found in eyes with visible exudates or in lympho-
sarcoma suspects. The risk of hermorrhage rmust be considered before vitreous
paracentesis is performed.
Differential diagnosis
Conjunctivitis causes the eye to look red, but in conjunctivitis the conjunctiva
is pink or reddish and the underlying individual episcleral vessels are not
prominent. Furthermore, the conjunctival vessels are easily moved, in contrast
to the straight perilimbal anterior ciliary vessels, which cause the ciliary Hush
seen in uveitis.
Corneal edema is seen in several other diseases, such as ulcerative keratitis,
endothelial dystrophy, and glaucoma. In chronic anterior uveitis, however,
there are other signs of chronic inflammatory intraocular disease.
  sn      n 
chronic uveitis by the presence of other clinical signs of intraocular inflamma-
tion in the latter condition.
Cataracts rmay cause secondary lens-induced uveitis. The history, breed, and
age of the patient and thorough examination of the lenses of both eyes may
yield useful inforrmation about the cause of the cataract.
Progressive retinal atrophy is a differential diagnosis to chorioretinitis. In
progressive retinal atrophy the changes are always bilateral and symmetrical
and there are no signs of inflammatory disease.
Treatment and prognosis
The primary disease must be treated if the underlying cause of the uveitis can
be established. Otherwise, symptomatic treatiment (corticosteroids and/or non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and mydriatic-cycloplegic drugs) is indi-
cated. The treatment usually has to be continued for a long period of time,
often months. In some cases it is advisable to maintain topical anti-inflamma-
tory treatment lifelong to avoid recurrence of the uveitis and limit the risk of
additional complications. Immunosuppressive drugs, e.g. azathioprine, have
mainly been used in cases unresponsive to conventional therapy, such as uveo-
derrmatologic syndrome in dogs.97,98 In cats with neoplastic uveitis, enucleation
combined with exenteration, if involvement of the optic nerve or orbital tissues
is suspected, should be perforrmed early if no signs of metastatic disease can be
detected.
173
MOLOGY
The prognosis depends on the cause and degree of damage to the tissues.
Long-term therapeutic success should not be expected in most cases. The prog-
1安日
Chronic glaucoma
OPHT
The condition arises when the earlier signs of glaucoma are neglected or unno-
ticed or when therapeutic efforts have been insufficient. The damage to the eye
is usually considerable. Signs of pain may not be obvious and chronic glauco-
ANIM
attitude and behavior frequently improve following therapy.
SMALL
Clinical signs
Chronic glaucomas share several clinical signs, although various initial causes
of the glaucoma are possible. The clinical signs are often less prominent in
cats compared to dogs. Pain is usually not conspicuous in chronic stages of
glaucoma and the eye is held open. However, concurrent uveitis may cause
discomfort.
Ocular enlargement takes months to develop in adults, but may develop in less
than a week in puppies and kittens. It is sometirmes difficult to appreciate slight
enlargement of the globe in cats. Episcleral blood vessels may or may not be
congested, and IOP may vary from normal to elevated. Distended episcleral
vessels and normal IOP are most commonly seen in dogs, where the IOP has
been considerably elevated for a long time. Corneal changes including haziness
and edema caused by corneal stretching as well as white irregular linear opaci-
ties, or Haab's striae, are common. Buphthalmos with or without lagophthal-
mos can cause keratitis and corneal ulcers. The cornea may also be enlarged
(megalocornea) in patients with buphthalmos. Gonioscopy usually shows a
collapsed ciliary cleft or closed iridocorneal angle. Development of secondary
cataracts and subluxation or luxation of the lens may be present. The possibility
  s n     os s  o  o
corneal edema. Visible changes in the posterior part of the eye include liquefac-
tion of the vitreous body, various degrees of retinal degeneration, and cupping
and atrophy of the optic nerve head. Atrophy and cupping of the optic nerve
in the optic nerve.
Diagnosis
Chronic glaucoma is easily diagnosed because the clinical signs are obvious and
easily recognized. The initial cause of glaucoma is often impossible to identify
because of abundant secondary changes within the eye. The possibility of con-
current chronic uveitis or ocular neo-plasia, the two most common causes of
secondary glaucoma in cats, must be considered.
Treatment andprognosis
The aim of treatment in rmost chronic cases is to keep the animal comfortable
and pain-free. Lowering the IOP to less than 30 mmHg is usually sufficient to
avoid pain and enlargement of the globe. If some vision is still present, it is
advisable to try to keep the IOP very low, probably less than 15 mmHg, to
174
is suspected to be the cause of unilateral chronic glaucoma, it is recommended
VISU
that the unaffected eye should be treated prophylactically.loo Furthermore, the
owner should be advised to monitor the remaining normotensive eye thor-
oughly and immediately report signs of (acute) glaucoma.
Exposure keratitis,corneal ulcerations, and mechanical injuries as well as
concurrent, often low-grade, uveitis must be treated symptomatically. Buph-
thalmic eyes rarely respond well to medical treatrment. Procedures reducing
NT
body, or intravitreal injection of gentamicin or cidofovir - may be necessary.
Radical surgical procedures, for example enucleation or evisceration, should
be considered in eyes with marked buphthalmos. Pharmacologic ablation and
the use of evisceration and intraocular prosthesis should not be used in cats
Chronic glaucomatous eyes are usually blind and buphthalmos is a poor
visual prognosticator. The prognosis for vision is generally poor when buph-
rapidly. Perception of light is sometimes present in patients with advanced
chronic changes, and cats and some canine breeds, such as the Norwegian
Elkhound, seem to be more resistant to glaucomatous damage than others.
Cataract
The lens is a clear structure of ectodermal origin, constantly growing through-
out life, as new fibers are formed by elongation of equatorial epithelial cells.
The oldest fibers form the nucleus, while the cortex consists of younger cells.
The lens fibers meet at the poles, in dogs and cats forming an upright Y ante-
riorly and an inverted Y posteriorly. The lens is avascular, which precludes
typical inflammatory reactions. In general, pathologic changes in the lens
include hydropic swelling of lens fibers, lysis of fibers, and attermpted fiber
regeneration resulting in epithelial hyperplasia and capsular thickening.
The term cataract is derived from the Greek word katauraktes (waterfall).
As a medical term, cataract defines every non-physiologic opacification of lens
fibers and/or the capsule, regardless of the etiology.
pupil. The lens opacity will present as a dark and more or less opaque area
against the brighter fundus reflex. More thorough examination of the lens
demands the use of a slit-lamp biomicroscope.
Cataracts can be classified according to stage of development, appearance,
localization, and etiology. The stages of development are termed incipient,
imma ture, mature, and hypermature:
Incipient cataract describes focal opacifications(s) of the lens
and/or its capsule. Vision is not notably impaired. This cataract may or
may not progress.
Immature cataract. The opacity is more or less diffuse, but the fundus can
still be exarmined. Vision rmay or may not be impaired.
complete and dense. Vision is severely impaired. If a mature cataract
undergoes fluid uptake and swelling it is referred to as intumescent.
Hypermature cataract. Lens proteins may liquefy; leakage through an
175
intact capsule can lead to shrinkage and a wrinkling and dimpling of the
LMOLOGY
lens capsule. The nucleus will dissolve to a lesser extent and may migrate
inferiorly in the capsular bag to form what is terrmed a Morgagnian
ca taract.
OPHTHAL
If a cataract is present at birth it is considered congenital. Cataracts develop-
ing after the eighth week are termed developmental. Senile cataracts may occur
in aged animals, but should not be confused with ruclear sclerosis, which is a
ANIMAL
normal aging process of the lens.
Cataracts are caused by several factors, some of which are:
SMALL
 Congenital anomalies
Geneticfactors
Toxins
Radiation
Trauma
Other ocular diseases
·Systemic diseases
·Aging.
Cataracts are also described according to localization within the lens. In
animals cataracts are classified as nuclear, anterior or posterior cortical or
subcapsular, equatorial, or capsular. Nuclear cataracts most frequently occur
in the congenital form. Pulverulent cataract, where the nucleus has a ^cotton
does not progress to disturb vision.
Hereditary cataract
Primary hereditary cataracts are the most commonly encountered cataracts in
dogs; they have been described in many breeds and the list is continually
hereditary cataracts within a breed may differ significantly.Hereditary cata-
      a   n    
Himalayan.103
to determine whether a cataract should be considered hereditary or not.
However, the more of the following criteria that are met in conjunction with
an affected animal, the greater is the likelihood that the cataract is hereditary:
·The cataract occurs bilaterally (exceptions may occur)
+ The age of appearance and the localization of the lens changes correspond
to those described for the breed
+The cataract is progressive, although slowly in certain cases.
Other criteria, including breed incidence and increase in incidence within a
breed over a period of time, are also taken into consideration. The problem
       s    
breed. Examination of the parents, littermates, and offspring should be
performed.
Congenital hereditary cataract
176
In congenital hereditary cataract, the nucleus and perinuclear cortex are most
often affected. Congenital cataracts confined to the nucleus are generally non-
progressive: cortical involverment is a poor prognosticator. Congenital cataract
VISUAL
may occur in combination with other congenital eye abnorrmalities, such as
microphthalmia, retinal dysplasia, PPM, posterior lenticonus/lentiglobus, and
PHTVL/PHPV. Primary congenital cataracts not associated with malforma-
tions of the eye may be seen in breeds like the Staffordshire bull terrier, the
West Highland white terrier, and the Boston terrier.
Congenital cataract associated with microphthalmia is diagnosed, among
others, in the Miniature Schnauzer, English Cocker Spaniel, Cavalier King
Charles Spaniel, West Highland White Terrier, and Old English Sheepdog. In
the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, congenital cataract often occurs in combi-
nation with lenticonus or lentiglobus. The mode of inheritance has been estab-
lished in only a few breeds, and genetic testing is available for the French
Bulldog and the Staffordshire Bull Terrier. It is important to note that not all
congenital bilateral cataracts are inherited.
Inherited developmental cataractMost developmental cataracts begin in the
cortex and may progress to involve the whole lens, including the nucleus. The
rate of progression varies, frorm barely noticeable to rapidly progressing
changes. The triangular posterior polar cataract seen in the Golden and Lab-
rador Retrievers as well as other breeds including Rottweiler and Belgian
Sheepdog is considered developmental as it occurs after 6 months of age in
most cases (Fig. 5.28). The list of breeds with proven or suspected inherited
developmental cataract is long, with local variations. Further information on
hereditary or suspected hereditary cataracts is summarized in Table 5.5340.104
Lens-induced uveitis
Cataract is a common cause of uveitis and may accompany both cataract for-
mation and resorption. While intensity of lens-induced uveitis is reversiblel0S in
rapidly progressing and in hyperrmature cataracts, clinically significant uveitis
may be present. This is most often a chronic condition with episcleral
177
Fig. 5.28 Posterior polar cataracts (bilateral) in a 2-year-old dog with minor visual
problems, according to the owner.
 SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
 Slowly progressive; mature
Progressive; mature by 1.5-2
 Slowly progressive; mature
 Slowly progressive; mature
Progressive: equatorial
Biologic behavior
Slowly progressive
Slowly progressive
 aAissaiboid-uon
cortex spared 
by 2 years
by 2 years
Progressive
by 2 years
years
line vacuoles; extension to
Posterior cortical/suture
Posterior axial opacities
Characteristic early
Nuclear and cortical
Nuclear and cortical
nucleus and cortex
Nuclear and cortical
Nuclear and cortical
Nuclear and cortical
Nuclear and cortical
appearance
Cortical
Congenital to 2 yr
Age of onset
Congenital to
Congenital to
Congenital to
Congenital to
Congenital
Congenital
sow
Sow
Table 5.5 Clinical features of inherited canine cataracts.
Mode of genetic
transmission
Recessive
Recessive
Recessive
Recessive
Recessive
Recessive
Dominant
American Cocker Spaniel (type 1)
Boston Bull Terrier (type 1)
Golden Retriever (type 1)
Staffordshire Bull Terrier
Welsh Springer Spaniel
Miniature Schnauzer
 Old English Sheepdog
German Shepherd
Beagle
178
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
Progressive; mature by 1-3
Very slowly progressive
Usually non-progressive
Usually non-progressive
 Usually non-progressive
Rapidly progressive
Rapidly progressive
Usually progressive
years
subcapsular opacity ±
subcapsular triangular
subcapsular triangular
subcapsular triangular
subcapsular triangular
Equatorial vacuoles 
cortical vacuoles
Posterioraxial
Axial posterior
Axial posterior
Axialposterior
Axial posterior
Equatorial
Cortical
opacity
opacity
opacity
opacity
Congenital to 2 yr 
4 mos to 2 yr
4mos to 2 yr
6mos to 2 yr
9-18 mos
9-18 mos
9-18 mo5
9-18 mos
Incomplete dominant
Incomplete dominant 
Recessive
Recessive
Recessive
Recessive
Golden Retriever (type 2)
 Large Munsterlander
Labrador Retriever
 Belgian Sheepdog
 Standard Poodle
 Afghan Hound
Siberian Husky
Irish Setter
179
 SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
 Often asymmetric; stable or
months to years, then rapid
progression to maturity
Very slowly progressive
Usually non-progressive
slowly progressive for
 Biologic behavior
Slowly progressive
Non-progressive
Progressive
Progressive
Characteristic early
Posterior subcapsular,
Radiating cuneiform
axial or equatorial
(wedgelike) cortical
Equatorial cortex
 Posterior suture
appearance
Fetal nucleus
opacities
Cortical
Cortical
 Age of onset
6mos to 8 yr
Congenital
Congenital
Variable
2-10 yr
4-12 yr
1+yr
incomplete penetrance
Mode of genetic
transmission
Dominant with
Recessive
Recessive
Dominant
Recessive
Recessive
 Chesapeake Bay Retriever
Miniature and Toy Poodles
Boston Bull Terrier(type 2)
American Cocker Spaniel 
Table 5.5 continued
West Highland Terrier
Norwegian Buhund
 Standard Poodle 
Breed
180
hyperemia and moderate discomfort. The iris is not markedly swollen, but the
VISU
chronic condition will eventually result in a darkening of the iris color. The
pupil is slightly constricted and resistant to mydriatics, and the IOP is moder-
IMPAIRMENT
ately lowered. A granulomatous variant seen most commonly in association
with diabetic cataracts is characterized by prominent keratic precipitates and
may be refractory to therapy.
Traumatic cataract
Traumatic cataract can develop as a result of blunt trauma or a perforating
wound with or without rupture of the lens capsule. Small perforations of the
capsule may seal with fibrin and posterior synechiae, with a resultant non-pro-
gressive cataract. Blunt trauma or perforating larger wounds may cause more
extensive changes, progressing to complete cataracts. Rupture of the lens
capsule with release of lens proteins into the aqueous humor usually results in
intense uvei tis.
Toxic cataract
enzyme inhibitors, and certain metals. Cataract formation after long-term
therapy with ketoconazole has also been described. A brand of commercial
milk substitute produced cataracts in orphaned puppies, although this type of
Cataract secondary to other ocular diseases
In a number of other eye diseases, cataract can develop as a secondary entity.
Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA) in dogs (not in cats) often results in second-
ary cataract, obscuring the primary disease. Questioning the owner about onset
and vision in daylight and under reduced lighting conditions, as well as con-
sidering the age and the breed of the dog, is essential to establish a diagnosis.
ERG should always be perforrmed before cataract surgery if the retina cannot
be visualized ophthalrmoscopically
Uveitis, lens luxation, and glaucoma frequently lead to cataract formation,
especially in the cat. These cataracts are caused by an altered composition of
the aqueous humor, which is responsible for lens nutrition.
Cataract secondary to systemic diseases
Diabetes mellitus is a common cause of cataracts and most diabetic dogs even-
tually develop lens changes.lo8,1o9 The cataracts are bilateral, rapidly progres-
sive, and involve the entire lens. A typical finding in diabetic cataracts is broad
and clearly marked suture line separation; rarely, spontaneous rupture of the
the lens from the aqueous. The excess glucose is metabolized via the aldose
reductase pathway, resulting in an increased concentration of sorbitol. Sorbitol
acts as an osmotic agent, drawing water into the lens cells, thus causing swelling
of the fibers and loss of transparency. Excess glucose also affects the lens pro-
the lens.
Treatmentof cataract
Despite anecdotal reports, no effective medical treatment for cataract has been
confirmed. However, continuous studies on the effect of systemic and/or topical
181
IGY
administration of antioxidants are being carried out, as oxidative damage is
MOLO
considered an essential factor in cataract development. There are presently also
studies carried out on the effect of aldose reductase inhibitors and its future
OPHTHAL
use in the prevention of diabetic cataracts.
Surgical treatment with lens extraction provides predictable restoration of
functional vision. The general condition of the patient as to health and behavior
should be considered. Cataract surgery should be left to veterinarians with
MAL
ANIM
special interest in ophthalmology and experience in lens extractions.
There are three basic techniques for removal of a cataractous lens: intracap-
sular lens extraction, extracapsular lens extraction, and phacoemulsification.
SMAI
In intracapsular extraction the lens is removed in toto. That is, the zonular
fibers are broken and the lens is removed from the vitreous. There is a high
risk of complications, and the method is not used in cats and dogs except in
cases of lens luxation. In extracapsular extraction an opening is made in the
anterior capsule and the lens contents are removed. The nucleus of the lens is
taken out via the corneal incision, with subsequent cleaning of the capsular bag
by irrigation and aspiration of residual cortical material. In phacoemulsifica-
tion, the lens material is fragmented by ultrasound and aspirated. The equip-
in terms of incision size and risk of secondary complications. Both phacoermul-
sification and extracapsular lens extraction, however, require careful evaluation
before surgery, as well as close follow-up after surgery. Postoperative rmedica-
tion is indicated for several months. An aphakic (without a lens) animal is
strongly hyperopic (far-sighted) and the use of intraocular lenses in cataract
surgery has gained increased popularity. If placerment of an intraocular lens is
not possible, corneal contact lenses for aphakic dogs are also commercially
available
type of cataract, the skill of the surgeon, the method used, and the cooperation
of the patient; in general, in experienced hands a high success rate should be
anticipated. Frequent, but usually insignificant, complications after cataract
surgery are focal posterior synechiae and capsular fibrosis. Glaucoma, retinal
detachment,corneal edema,and endophthalmitis are critical complications
that may occur.
Inherited retinal degeneration
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)
Classical PRA has been described in a great number of dog breeds as well as
in a few cat breeds.940 The condition has been further clarified through clinical,
biochermical, morphological, and electrophysiological studies in several breeds
of dog and cat.6 Further, through molecular genetic studies specific gene
defects have been described in many canine breeds (see Table 5.4). It is now
clear that classic PRA groups together several diseases at the cellular level
although the clinical manifestations are more or less similar. In these diseases
it is the photoreceptor layer that is primarily involved. The age of onset and
rate of progression of PRA rmay vary between breeds.
PRA has been grossly divided into two main disease types: PRA of early
onset and usually rapid progression (such as rod-cone, rod, or cone dysplasia),
182
and late-onset PRA, usually with a slow progression of the retinal degenera-
tion. In the latter type of PRA, the photoreceptors show normal development,
VISU
but degenerate after the time of retinal maturation, which occurs at about 8
JA
weeks in the dog." A common finding in all types of PRA is that the disease
process is always bilateral and always leads to blindness. Most of the retinal
degenerative diseases in dog and cat breeds have an autosomal recessive mode
of inheritance. In recent years, however, retinal degenerative diseases with X-
linked and autosomal dominant modes of inheritance have also been discoy-
NT
ered. See Table 5.3 for a summary of specific inherited retinal diseases in dog
andcatbreeds.
Progressiverod-conedegeneration
In the Miniature Poodle, classic generalized PRA has been further specified
as progressive rod-cone degeneration." Morphologically, signs of disease
are observed in the Poodle by electron microscopy at the age of 14.5 weeks
and at the age of 30 weeks by light microscopy. A reduced renewal rate of
outer segment lamellae has been reported as well as abnormal relative concen-
trations of phospholipids and free fatty acids in rod outer segments. The retinal
degenerative disease in at least 12 breeds of dog has been described as having
a mutation at the same gene locus, among which are the Toy and Miniature
Poodle, English and American Cocker Spaniel, the Portuguese Water Dog
and the Labrador Retriever. In a press release dated June 1, 2005, Optigen
LLC (www.optigen.com) announced that the gene causing prcd has been iden-
tifed, although at the time of writing the actual rmutation had not been
published.
The Abyssinian cat is also affected by an autosomal recessively inherited
 progressive rod-cone degenerative disease!l2 with similarities to the miniature
poodle model described above. Further studies of this specific disease have
shown a significant reduction in interphotoreceptor retinol binding protein
(IRBP) in affected individuals compared to normals, before signs of retinal
degeneration are observed by morphology. It is not clear yet whether this is
a primary or secondary defect in the photoreceptor disease process.
Clinical findings Regardless of the specific underlying cause and the age of
onset of progressive rod-cone degeneration/generalized PRA, the clinical mani-
festations tend to be rather similar in affected anirmals of different breeds.
gressive loss of day and night vision. The end-stage is always complete blind-
ness. Early ophthalrmoscopic signs are seen as a discoloration of the tapetal
fundus (brown to grayish changes most obvious peripherally) with an altered
tapetal reflectivity and a slight vascular attenuation between the age of 3 and
5 years in the Poodle, somewhat earlier in the American Cocker Spaniel, and
is a great variation in timing of appearance of early retinal changes, between
the age of 2 and 6 years (Fig. 5.29). Progression of disease is variable, but a
bilateral retinal atrophy is usually observed after another 24 years in the
affected breeds. ERG is diagnostic between the age of 6 and 9 months in the
poodle and not until 1.5 years or later in the English Cocker Spaniel and
Labrador Retriever breeds. Electrophysiologic findings include low-amplitude
rod and cone responses, rod responses being more reduced than cone responses
initially.
183
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 5.29 Early signs of hereditary rod-cone degeneration (generalized progressive
retinal atrophy. PRA) in a 4-year-old Labrador Retriever. The dog had slight visual
problems at night, but normal daylight vision still. Funduscopic changes were minimal,
but ERG was non-recordable.
reflectivity and grayish lesions centrally near the optic disk and in the peripheral
tapetal fundus, usually observed between the age of 1.5 and 2.0 years. The
fundic lesions progress to a generalized atrophic fundus with severely attenu-
ated retinal vessels at the age of 3-5 years (Fig. 5.30). ERG is diagnostic of the
cone responses are still more or less normal.
Secondary cataracts are usually found in dog breeds affected with progres-
sive rod-cone degeneration/generalized PRA, but not in the cat.
Differential diagnosis Generalized retinopathy of inflammatory origin is an
important differential diagnosis. In most inflammatory retinopathies, however,
the retinal changes are not bilaterally symmetrical as in progressive rod-cone
degeneration. Furthermore, the ERG is often still recordable but is reduced or
of low amplitude. Drug-induced retinopathy is, however, difficult to differenti-
ate since retinal changes are often bilateral and symmetric, and there is often
a non-recordable ERG. Another differentic, is SARD. In this disease the onset
of clinical signs is acute, with a normal-appearing fundus and a non-recordable
ERG. However several months or years after the onset of SARD it is impossi-
ble to differentiate this disease clinically from progressive rod-cone degenera-
tion/generalized PR A.
Treatment  There is to date no effective treatment for progressive rod-cone
degeneration/generalized PRA in the dog and cat. Preventive measures need to
184
be taken in breeding programs. Affected animals should not be used for breed-
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
Fig. 5.30 Advanced stage of hereditary rod-cone degeneration (PRA) in a 4-year-old
Abyssinian cat.
ing nor should known carriers of the defect (i.e. for the autosomal recessive
disorders, parents of the affected individual and its offspring are in general not
used for breeding purposes). Blood testing can be perforrmed, based on knowl-
edge of specific gene defects.
X-linkedprogressiveretinalatrophy
Two breeds of dog have been shown to be affected by this disease, namely the
Siberian Husky!4 and the Samoyed.28 Clinical signs in both breeds are similar
and include initial night blindness and funduscopic signs of classic PRA,
although at different ages. The disease in the latter is more severe than in the
former. Interestingly, carrier female dogs for both diseases show clinical signs
cells were described, while in the latter female carriers developed a generalized
retinal degeneration. A mutation-based DNA test is available for XLPRA (see
Table 5.4).
Dominant progressive retinal atrophy
 P           
Mastiff and in the Bullmastiff. Through test breeding an autosomal dominant
appearing. However, by 6 months a variably sized and located area of retinal
thinning in the central fundus is observed by ophthalmoscopy. ERGs show
severely reduced b-waves at 12-18 months. A non-uniform degeneration of
photoreceptors was verified by histology in affected dogs. A striking finding is
that environmen tal light appears to contribute to the regional variation of early
retinal disease. It was shown by clinical studies and morphology that modest
185
IGY
light levels accelerated the retinal degeneration in dogs affected with this rmuta-
MOLO
tion.'$ There is a DNA-based test available for the defect.
Retinal pigment epithelial cell dystrophy (RPED)
In this disease the primary defect is in the pigment epithelial cell layer of the
retina. The essential morphologic lesion is hypertrophy of the RPE with accu-
mulation of lipopigments. The defect causes secondary photoreceptor degen-
eration and retinal atrophy. Because of the clinical appearance of the disease,
ANIM
with pigment accumulation and retinal degenerative changes most prevalent
in the central part of the retina, this disease was formerly called central pro-
 gressive retinal atrophy (CPRA).!"6 The disease has been described in several
SMAI
dog breeds, particularly the Briard,? Labrador Retriever, and the Collie. The
disease is still widely recognized as having a hereditary basis although there
are recent indications that other factors may play a significant role in the
development and/or expression of the disease. Specifically, lack of antioxidants,
such as vitamin E, plays a part in the pathogenesis of RPED.
Clinicalfindings
Affected dogs usually lose central vision before peripheral vision, with the
result that moving objects may still be seen while stationary objects are not.
Ophthalmoscopic retinal alterations may be seen from as early as 18 months
of age but in some dogs they are not present until much later in life. They
appear as light-brown pigment foci within the tapetal fundus, usually first
developing temporal to the optic disk. With progression of disease the foci
become more numerous and may coalesce with areas of hyperreflectivity
developing between them. With advancing disease there is vascular attenua-
tion, more severe retinal atrophy, and developrment of some changes in the
absence of non-tapetal changes appears to vary between affected breeds. Sec-
ondary cataract is a common but not consistent finding in older dogs. Usually
the changes are bilaterally more or less symmetric. Affected dogs become
severely visually impaired and some become blind. ERG is not diagnostic in
RPED. At moderately advanced and advanced stages low-amplitude, barely
recordable, or non-recordable ERGs are found.
Differentialdiagnosis
Chorioretinitis can give similar funduscopic changes, although usually not as
bilaterally symmetric as in RPED. In neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis the fundus
appearance may be sirmilar to that of RPED, although in the former disease
produce ophthalmoscopic lesions similar to those of RPED.
Treatment
There is no available treatment to date for RPED. Further studies are needed
in the disease process. Also the hereditary basis for the disease needs to be
clarified. Until this has been done affected individuals should not be used for
breeding purposes.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL)
186
This disease entity comprises a group of recessively inherited progressive
neurodegenerative disease of many species, including humans, dogs, and
cats.!s,l19 The defect is an inborn error of metabolism that causes an accu-
VISUAL
mulation of lipopigments in the brain and, in some breeds, also in the retina.
The retinal lesions are associated with increasing accumulation of autofuo-
rescent and periodic acid-Schiff-positive particles of lipopigment in RPE,
photoreceptors, cells of the inner nuclear layer, and ganglion cells. The term
ceroid lipofuscinosis is derived from the histochemical and fuorescent proper-
ties of pigment that accumulates in neuronal cells. The central nervous system
appears to be the main focus of the pathogenic defect, however.I20 The asso-
ciation between lipopigment storage, cell dysfunction, and cell death has not
yet been elucidated. Clinically affected individuals have neurologic abnormali-
ties including central blindness, tremors, seizures, and premature death. Visual
irmpairment and blindness is due to either central nervous effects, retinal
degeneration, or both. NCL has been described in several breeds of dog (for
a review see: www.caninegeneticdiseases.net), most of which have variable
summary of known causative genetic neurodegenerative defects in dog breeds,
see Table 5.4.
Clinical findings
Blindness, ataxia, and mental disturbances develop at an early age, usually
around the age of 1 year or earlier. The appearance and development of oph-
       a  oa
(PON)2l funduscopic alterations are obvious at the age of 1-2 years (Fig. 5.31),
while in the English Setter ophthalmoscopically detectable lesions are absent.
Results of ERG recordings vary depending on species and age at examination,
from normal to non-recordable ERGs. The most severely affected breed of dog
is the English Setter, in which the disease leads to death within a few years.
Differentialdiagnosis
RPED is the main differential, with ophthalmoscopic lesions rather similar to
the ones observed in neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in some breeds, such as in
Fig. 5.31 Retinal pigment
epithelial dystrophy-like
lesions in the fundus of a
4-year-old Polish
Owczarek Nizinny with
187
neuronal ceroid
lpofuscinosis.
IGY
the PON. Vitamin E deficiency will also produce ophthalmoscopic lesions
MOLO
similar to RPED and neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in some breeds, such as
the PON.
OPHTHAL
Treatmentandprognosis
There is no treatrment for affected individuals and the prognosis is poor. The
breeding of affected individuals and known carriers of the defect should be
avoided.
ANIM
Nutritional retinal degeneration
SMALL
Vitamin E deficiency
Vitamin E is an antioxidant which functions to stabilize cell membranes by the
prevention of lipid peroxidation. Deficiency of this vital vitarmin in animals may
result in pathologic changes in the retina, central nervous system, reproductive
tract, and skeletal muscle. Dogs experimentally fed a diet deficient in vitamin
E from weaning developed night blindness, ophthalmoscopic fundus changes,
and non-recordable ERGs within 4 months.122 Histologically there was an
accumulation of autofuorescent pigment within the RPE and, at later stages,
in all retinal layers. Secondary photoreceptor damage was observed with suc
cessive development of retinal atrophy. There are obvious similarities between
RPED and vitamin E deficiency, which suggests a common etiologic factor.
VitaminA deficiency
Vitamin A is important for norrmal visual function. A deficiency is character-
ized by night blindness in most animals since vitamin A is a precursor of the
clinical situation, although deficiency may develop as a result of systemic dis-
eases that cause impaired fat absorption. Early changes are characterized by
an alteration in color of the tapetal fundus; in a more chronic deficiency there
is complete retinal atrophy.
Taurine deficiencyretinopathy
Taurine deficiency will cause retinal degeneration (and cardiomyopathy) in the
cat.23 Research has established that taurine, which is a sulfur-containing amino
Taurine content is high in milk, liver, and shellfish, but has been present in low
levels in most dog foods. It is not yet clear if all cases of feline central retinal
degeneration (FCRD), the classic name of the disease, are caused by a primary
taurine deficiency. It could be that other factors are also involved, such as
individual sensitivity to taurine deficiency or problems with absorption of
taurine or other required nutrients.
Clinicalfindings
Ophthalmoscopic evidence for the disease develops after the cat has been on a
deficient diet for several months. The signs include bilaterally symmetric dark
grayish lesions in the area centralis. The discolored region enlarges and the
center becomes hyperreflective. With progression the lesion becomes streak-like
and is observed along the areas with a high cone density, on both sides of the
optic disk (Fig. 5.32). Further progression includes a generalized retinopathy
with changed reflectivity and vascular attenuation, and the end-stage is com-
188
plete retinal atrophy. The ERG shows reduced amplitudes and increased
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
Fig. 5.32 A 3-year-old European domestic short-haired (DSH) male cat with a
moderate to advanced stage of feline central retinal degeneration (FCRD).
irmplicit time of the cone-derived responses early in the disease. With progres-
sion of the disorder, the ERG is non-recordable.
Differentialdiagnosis
Generalized retinal atrophy of other causes, such as infammatory or heredi-
tary, is the main differential to advanced cases of FCRD. The disease cannot
be differentiated at this stage since in both cases the animal is blind, pupillary
light reflexes are sluggish or absent, and the ERG is non-recordable. Earlier
cases of FCR D can be differentiated from chorioretinitis or related disease. In
chorioretinitis the lesions are often arbitrarily spread in the fundus and not so
typically located as in FCRD.
Treatmentandprognosis
Treatrment of the disease includes correcting the taurine-deficient diet. If this is
done before there is a generalized retinopathy there will be no progression of
the disorder; once developed, generalized retinal atrophy is not reversible.
Posterior segment inflammatory disease
The retina has an exceptionally high metabolic rate and is nourished from the
choriocapillaris and the retinal vasculature. Many disease processes may result
in decreased circulation and tissue hypoxia. After hypoxia begins, death of
retinal cells follows, intracellular and extracellular edema occurs, and neural
elements disintegrate with resultant atrophy and gliosis of the retina.
The retina has limited regenerative capacity. Changes in the photoreceptor
or other neural elements are often irreversible, limiting the possibilities of treat.
ment of many disorders to prevention of further damage. Lesions of photore-
189
IGY
ceptors result in secondary loss of inner retinal structures as well as of the
MOLO
retinal vasculature. Trans-synaptic degeneration is less marked in the opposite
direction. Chronic lesions of the optic nerve, however, cause degeneration and
OPHTHAL
atrophy of the nerve fiber and ganglion cell layers.
Inflammatory and infectious processes in tissues and structures surrounding
the retina, such as vitreous and choroid, may result in severe retinal damage.
ANIMAL
Examples are autoimmune disorders, and bacterial and viral infections, as well
as neoplastic disorders of the choroid.
The retinal structures react to disease processes as other neural tissues do.
SMALL
In conjunction with inflammation there is an infiltration of inflammatory cells
and edema primarily; thereafter degenerative changes prevail, followed by
 atrophic changes. Ophthalmoscopically these changes appear different depend-
ing on fundal area, retinal structures affected, and stage of the inflammatory
process. Acute inflarmmatory lesions in the tapetal fundus appear indistinct,
grayish, or dark brown if the neural retina is primarily affected (Fig. 5.33).
More chronic alterations at this level give a more distinct dark gray or brown
color change with or without hyperreflective regions (Fig. 5.34). Long-standing
alterations with atrophy of neural retinal structures result in a hyperreflective
tapetal fundus. Acute inflammatory changes in the non-tapetal fundus appear
as indistinct, grayish or whitish lesions if the neural retina is affected. In chronic
'snpuny iadi-uou augo suou pue uouaidap ueu si aaun saueu
Inflammatory changes affecting the retinal pigment epithelium look somewhat
different in that there are always black or dark brown to gray spots in conjunc.
tion with the above described alterations. More chronic alterations affecting
the retinal pigment epithelium in the tapetal fundus result in well demarcated
Fig. 5.33 Active stage of toxic retinopathy in a young laboratory cat. Inflammatory
190
lesions in the tapetal fundus are grayish. The folding of the neural retina in the peripheral
areas is indicative that the inflammation has subsided and that the lesions may be under
organization.
pigmented lesions, often in combination with grayish and/or hyperrefective
VISU
rings around the lesion (see Fig. 5.34). If the retinal pigment epithelium of the
non-tapetal fundus is affected chronically the lesions appear as depigmented
areas.
In conjunction with generalized atrophic changes and lack of neural retinal
cell tissue, there is always an effect on retinal vasculature, starting with a slight
beading of vessels. In generalized disease processes such as in generalized reti-
N
nopathies of inflammatory or hereditary origin, there is a marked or complete
attenuation of retinal vessels.
Chorioretinitis and related conditions
Inflamma tions affecting the posterior structures of the eye usually involve both
choroid and retina concurrently, the choroidal contribution often being pre-
dominant. There are several known causes of chorioretinitis and related condi-
tions including bacterial, fungal, and viral agents, trauma, neoplasia, and
foreign bodies. More specifically for the dog some of the recognized causes are:
distemper, toxoplasmosis, leishmaniasis, toxocariasis, brucellosis, prototheco-
sis, and oculomycosis (blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, cryptococcosis, coccid-
iomycosis, and geotrichosis). For the cat identified causes of chorioretinitis and
related conditions are feline infectious peritonitis, feline leukermia virus, feline
immunodeficiency virus, tuberculosis, toxoplasmosis, and oculomycosis. Ney-
ertheless, many cases of chorioretinitis are idiopathic.
Some causes of retinochoroiditis and chorioretinitis are of public health sig-
nificance.'2s Toxoplasmosis, caused by Toxoplasma gondi, is recognized as a
cause of retinal disease in several species, including humans.? In this proto-
Fig. 5.34 Scarring of the tapetal fundus, an incidental finding in a 5-year-old Poodle
The lesion to the left is a focal region of inflammation that still may be somewhat active.
while the lesion to the right is an inactive lesion with central pigmentation surrounded by
hyperreflectivity ie. pigment epithelial hypertrophy with a rim of neural retinal atrophy.
191
IGY
zoan disease the oocysts are produced by cats and the organisrm has an intra
MOLO
intestinal cycle that occurs in mammals and birds.
Toxocaral retinochoroiditis is caused by visceral larval migrans of an ascarid
OPHTHAL
health significance on account of the possible migration of larvae in humans.
Diagnosisandclinicalfindings
A general physical examination and laboratory work-up is important in all
ANIM
cases of chorioretinitis and related conditions. Affected animals are usually
sighted; irmpaired vision usually results only if the inflarmmatory processes are
SMALL
bilateral and generalized. Pupillary light reflexes and the result of ERG record-
ings may be normal in chorioretinitis and related conditions. The ophthalimo-
scopic appearance of the fundus is indicative of an infarmmatory process. It is
not unusual, in conjunction with routine ophthalmoscopic screening for heredi-
tary retinal disease, to find chronic focal lesions in the fundus (retinal scars)
(see Fig. 5.34), sequelae to low-grade chorioretinitis, with no clinical signif-
cance to the anirmal.
Differentiatdiagnosis
An important differential to chorioretinitis is RPED. In the latter disease,
retinal lesions are generalized and bilateral, which is not always the case with
chorioretinitis. Another differential is multifocal RD, in which the lesions may
be difficult to differentiate from chorioretinitis. In the forrmer disease, however,
the lesions are most often found centrally in the tapetal fundus, often along or
in the vicinity of the larger superior vessels. In mul tifocal R D, the funduscopic
lesions are, furthermore, often curvilinear or small and circular, while in cho-
rioretinitis the changes are often larger and more darkly pigmented, and with
hyperreflective areas or circles around a darkly pigmented spot. The end-stage
of generalized retinal atrophy may also be difficult to differentiate from gener-
alized chorioretinitis lesions.Most often the former is bilaterally symmetric,
while the latter rarely is. Histopathology may help to provide the correct diag-
nosis in such cases.
Treatment
crobials is useful in most instances while corticosteroids may be contraindicated
in cases of active infection. Diuretics may be of value in severe retinal edema
or detachments.
Optic nerve disease
The optic nerve consists of the myelinated axons of the retinal ganglion cells.
of the sclera, they gain a myelin sheath and form the optic nerve head. The
optic nerve may be affected by developmental abnorrmalities, either inherited
or non-inherited, trauma, neoplasia, and inflammatory processes in the nerve
or 1ts adnexa. Primary chronic lesions of the optic nerve, which often result in
atrophic changes in the nerve, also cause retrograde changes such as degenera-
tion and atrophy of the nerve fiber and ganglion cell layers of the retina.
Papilledema
192
Papilledema is a non-inflammatory swelling of the optic disk and is usually
caused by increased pressure on the optic nerve. This occurs in conjunction
with brain tumors in the region of the optic chiasm (Fig. 5.35)/27 and sometimes
VISUAL
also in systemic hypertension. Papilledema itself does not impair vision and
pupillary light reflexes are present; the ERG is normal. Ophthalmoscopically
IMPAIRMENT
the optic disk appears enlarged but there are no infarmmatory components. If
the papilledema is not controlled through treatment of the primary disease, the
optic nerve head will atrophy, which results in blindness.
Chronic neurologic disorders causing blindness
This group of diseases rarely has visual impairrment as the only clinical sign,
 although apparent blindness rmay be the only indication of disease noted by the 
abnormal function. Localization of the site of the deficit in the visual pathway
should be attermpted.
For a thorough description of neurologic diseases causing blindness, the
reader is recommended to read textbooks on neurology. However, the most
important diseases will be briefly mentioned here.
Hepatic encephalopathy
Hepatic encephalopathy is an endogenous intoxication, a complex metabolic
disorder resulting from liver dysfunction. The condition may develop either
because of advanced liver damage, or secondary to portosystemic venous
shunts, which divert portal blood past the liver into the caudal vena cava or
other systermic vessels.2 Potentially toxic products absorbed in the gastroin-
testinal tract are normally detoxified in the liver, but in the present condition
they enter the systemic circulation instead. These toxic products include
ammonia, which is produced by bacteria in the colon and normally converted
to urea in the liver, as well as dietary amino acids usually metabolized in the
liver.Ammonia and certain amino acids may act as neurotoxins to the brain.
Fig. 5.35  Papilledema in
a 2-year-old acutely blind
Norwegian Elkhound. The
dog had no other clinical
193
signs. Autopsy revealed a
tumor in the optic chiasm.
IGY
Clinical findings and diagnosis
MOLO
OPHTHAL
a protein-rich meal. Other signs, such as excitation or confusion, rmay also be
present. Diagnosis is established by blood chermistry, urinalysis, and imaging
techniques for liver tissue and vessels.
Treatmentandprognosis
ANIM
 In chronic liver damage, supportive treatment, including a low-protein diet, is 
recommended. If the condition is caused by vascular abnorrmalities, identifica-
SMAI
tion and closing of the shunting vein(s) before secondary liver disease develops
is the recommended treatment.
Lysosomalstorage diseases
These rare conditions are often genetic and may affect both dogs and cats.29
The condition in the Polish Owczarek Nizinny is described earlier in this
chapter. Lysosomal storage diseases include diseases in which the absence of
 a specific enzyme leads to the accumulation of its substrates with subsequent
cell damage, or diseases that may be a direct result of the metabolic distur-
bance. Many enzymes in cells are contained within small organelles called
lysosomes. The enzymes are involved in a variety of catabolic processes and
Because the retina and retinal pigment epithelium are of neuroectodermal
origin, they can also be involved in these diseases. Fundus changes, due to
accumulation of degraded material, followed by degeneration, may be diag
nosed. Lysosomal enzyme deficiencies fall into several groups: glycogen storage
diseases, glycolipid catabolism diseases, ceroid-lipofuscin storage diseases, and
mucopolysaccharidoses.
Clinical findings
Onset of clinical signs is usually in the first months of life. The diseases are
slowly progressive in nature, most often leading to the death of the animal. The
degenerative changes are diffuse and, as in other CNS diseases, blindness rmay
be the initial complaint. In cats, other findings, including facial abnormalities
and corneal cloudiness, may accompany the CNS signs.
Treatment
No treatment exists for these diseases. As most of them are recessively inher-
ited, affected animals, including offspring and parents, should not be used for
breeding.
Neoplasms
Melanomas are the commonest primary neoplasms of the globe, most often
arising from the anterior uvea, but tumors originating from other tissues within
the eye are also reported.!' Melanocytic neoplasms are locally expansive with
low metastatic potential in the dog, while in cats they may be highly malignant.
While malignant lymphoma is the most common metastatic neoplasm that
involves the eye, any malignant tumor may metastasize to the eye.
Intraocular neoplasms cause blindness by virtue of secondary uveitis and
glaucoma; extraocular neoplasms do so by compression or destruction of the
194
malities are often helpful for localizing intracranial neoplasms. Neoplasms
VISU
M
happens because tumors are space occupying and rmay grow to a certain size
PA
before clinical signs develop. Edema of surrounding tissues is also frequent.
Neoplasms may arise within the tissue of the visual pathway itself, or may be
space-occupying lesions from adjacent structures, compressing vital tissue.
NT
Metastatic neoplasms may have a more acute progression than primary tumors
and may be rmultifocal.
Clinical findings
Many animals may have demonstrated vague signs, such as behavioral changes,
for some time before showing more obvious neurologic signs. When blindness
related to the CNS is suspected, a thorough neurologic examination should be
performed, in particular testing of all ocular reflexes and reactions. In addition
to signs related to the localization of the lesion, signs related to an increase in
intracranial pressure are frequently present, resulting in head pressing and
altered behavior. Papilledema may be seen in some anirmals but if mild can be
difficult to appreciate, especially in dogs, because of the great variation in
myelination of the optic nerve head.
Pituitary tumors may compress the optic nerves, as well as other cranial
nerves. Brainstem tumors are characterized by abnormal gait and cranial nerve
signs, including the cranial nerves associated with vision, eye reflexes, and eye
 moverments. Behavioral changes and seizures do not usually result from tumors
of the brainstem until the mass affects the reticular activating system (the
reticular formation dorsal to the brainstem sending impulses to the cerebral
cortex) or alters intracranial pressure.
Ocular abnormalities associated with brain turmors may present as nystag-
mus, anisocoria (difference in pupil size), central blindness, pupillary light
reflex abnormalities, or abnormal eye movements.
Therapy and prognosis
The signs accompanying brain neoplasms are often temporarily relieved by
corticosteroid and/or anticonvulsant therapy, and some animals with slowly
growing neoplasms may be kept relatively free of clinical signs for several
months with such therapy. Radiation therapy and surgery, when possible, rmay
provide therapeutic options, but the prognosis is often grave.
REFERENCES
1. Farris, B.K. (1991) The Basics of
defocus on visual acuity in dogs.
Neuro-Ophrhalmology. St. Louis:
Am. J. Ver. Res. 58: 414418.
Mosby Year Book.
4. Gouras, P. (1970)
2. Oliver, J.E., Lorenz, M.D. and
Electroretinography: some basic
Kornegay, J.N. (1997) Handbook of
principles. Invesr. Ophrhalmol. 9:
Vererinary Neurology, 3rd edn
557-569.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
5. Granit, R. (1933) The components
3. Murphy, C.J., Mutti, D.O., Zadnik,
of the retinal action potential in
195
K et al. (1997) Effect of optical
mammals and their relation to the
LMOLOGY
discharge in the optic nerve. J.
ophthalmologic screening
Physiol.77:207-239.
examinations of German Pinschers
6. Narfstrom, K., Ekesten, B., Rosolen,
in Finland - a retrospective study.
OPHTHAL
S.G. et al. (2002) Guidelines for
Ver. Ophrhalmol.4:165-169.
clinical electroretinography in the
17.Acland, G.M., Ray, K., Mellersh,
dog. Documenia Ophrhalmol. 105:
C.S. et al. (1998) Linkage analysis
83-92.
and comparative mapping of canine
MAL
7. Sims, M.H., Loratta, L.J., Bubb,
progressive rod-cone degeneration
.ANIM
W.J. et al. (1989) Waveform analysis
(prcd) establishes potential locus
and reproducibility of visual-evoked
homology with retinitis pigmentosa
SMALL
potential in dogs. Am. J. Ver. Res.
(RP17) in humans. Proc. Narl. Acad
50: 1823-1828.
Srf. U/S4 95: 3048-3053.
8. Barnett, K.C. and Knight, G.C.
18. Lowe, J.K., Kukekova, A.V,
(1969) Persistent pupillary
Kirkness, E.F. et al. (2003) Linkage
membrane and associated defects in
mapping of the primary disease
the Basenji. Ver. Rec. 85: 242-249.
locus for collie eye anomaly.
9. Strande, A., Nicolaissen, B. and
Genomics82:86-95
Bjerkas, I. (1988) Persistent pupillary
19. Veske, A., Nilsson, S.E.G.
membrane and congenital cataract
Narfstrom, K. et al. (1999) Retinal
in a litter of English Cocker
dystrophy of Swedish briard-beagle
Spaniels.J. Small Anim. Pracr.29:
dogs is due to a 4-bp deletion in
257-260.
RPE65.Genomics 57: 57-61.
10. Stades, F.C. (1980) Persistent
20. Kijas, J.W., Cideciyan, A.V.,
hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis
Aleman, T.S. et al. (2002) Naturally
and persistent hyperplastic primary
occurring rhodopsin mutation in the
vitreous (PHTVL/PHPV) in 90
dog causes retinal dysfunction and
closely related Doberman Pinschers.
degeneration mimicking human
Clinical aspects. J. Am.Anim. Hosp.
dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Proc.
4ssoc. 16: 739-775.
Narl. Acad. Sci.USA 99:6328-
11. Narfstrom, K. and Dubielzig, R.
6333.
(1984) Posterior lenticonus, cataracts
21. Petersen-Jones, S.M. and Zhu, F.-X
and microphthalmia; congenital
(2000) Development and use of a
ocular defects in the Cavalier King
polymerase chain reaction-based
Charles Spaniel.J. Small Anim.
diagnostic test for the causal
Pracr. 25:669-677.
mutation of progressive retinal
12. Narfstrom,K. (1981) Cataract in the
atrophy in the Cardigan Welsh
West Highland White Terrier. J.
corgi.Am. J.Ver. Res. 61:844846.
Small Anim. Pracr. 22: 467-471.
22. Petersen-Jones, S.M. and Entz, D.D
13.Leon, A. (1988) Diseases of the
(2002) An improved DNA-based test 
vitreous in the dog and cat. J. Small
for detection of the codon 616
Anim.Pracr.29:448-461
mutation in the alpha cyclic GMP
14. Boeve, M.H. and Stades, F.C. (1992)
phosphodiesterase gene that causes
Persistent hyperplastic tunica
progressive retinal atrophy in the
vasculosa lentis and primary vitreous
Cardigan Welsh Corgi. Ver.
in the dog. A comparative review.
Ophrhalmol. 5: 103-106.
Prog. Ver. Compar. Ophrhalmol. 2:
23.Sidjanin, D.J., Lowe, J.K., McElwee,
163-172.
J.L. et al. (2002) Canine CNGB3
15. Leon, A., Curtis, R. and Barnett,
mutations establish cone
KC. (1986) Hereditary persistent
degeneration as orthologous to the
hyperplastic primary vitreous in the
human achromatopsia locus
Staffordshire Bull Terrier. J. Am.
ACHM3. Hum. Mol. Gener. 11:
Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 22: 765-774.
1823-1833.
16. Leppanien, M., Martenson, J. and 
24. Clements, P.J.M., Gregory, C.Y.,
196
Maki, K. (2001) Results of
Petersen-Jones, S.M. et al. (1993)
Confirmation of the rod cGMP
Invesrig. Ophrhalmol.Vis. Sei.32:
VISUAL
phosphodiesterase b-subunit (PDEb)
1492-1498.
nonsense mutation in affected rcd-1
34. Holle, D.M., Stankovics, M.E.,
Irish setters in the UK and
Sarna, C.S. et al. (1999) The
 IMPAIRMENT
development of a diagnostic test.
geographic form of retinal dysplasia
Curr. Eye. Res. 12: 861-866.
in dogs is not always a congenital
25. Petersen-Jones, S.M., Clements,
abnormality. Ver. Ophrhalmol. 2:
P.J.M., Barnett, K.C. et al. (1995)
61-66.
Incidence of the gene mutation
35. Grahn, B.H., Storey, E.S. and
causal for rod-cone dysplasia type 1
McMillan, C. (2004) [nherited
in Irish setters in the UK. J. Small
retinal dysplasia and persistent
Anim.Pracr.36:310-314.
hyperplastic vitreous in Miniature
26. Bedford, P. (1998) Collie eye
Schnauzer dogs. Ver. Ophrhalmol. 7:
anomaly in the Lancashire heeler.
151-158.
Ver. Rec.143: 354-356.
36. Du, F., Acland, G.M. and Ray, J.
27.Zhang, Q., Acland, G.M., Parshall,
(2000) Cloning and expression of
C.J. et al. (1998) Characterization of
type [I collagen mRNA: evaluation
canine photoreceptor phosducin
as a candidate for canine oculo-
cDNA and identification of a
skeletal dysplasia Gene 255:
sequence variant in dogs with
307-316.
photoreceptor dysplasia Gene 215:
37. Grahn, B.H., Philibert, H., Cullen,
231-239
C.L. et al. (1998). Multifocal
28.Zhang, Q., Acland, G.M., Wu, W.X.
retinopathy of Great Pyrenees dogs.
et al. (2002) Different RPGR exon
Ver.Ophrhalmol.1:211-221.
ORF15 mutations in Canids provide
38. Grahn, B.H. and Cullen, C.L. (2001)
insights into photoreceptor cell
Retinopathy of Great Pyrenees dogs:
degeneration.Hum. Mol. Gener. 11:
fuorescein angiography, light
993-1003.
 microscopy and transmitting and
29. Dekomien, G., Runte, M., Godde,
scanning electron microscopy. Vef.
R et al. (2000) Generalized
Ophrhalmol. 4: 191-199.
progressive retinal atrophy of
39.Rubin, L.F. (1989) Inherired Eye
Sloughi dogs is due to an 8-bp
Diseases in the Purebred Dog.
insertion in exon 21 of the PDE6 B
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
gene. Cyrogener. Cell Gener. 90:
40. ACVO Genetics Committee (1999)
261-267.
Ocular Disorders Proven or Suspected
30. Awano, T., Katz, M.L., O'Brien,
fo be Heredirary in Dogs, 3rd edn.
D.P. et al. (2006) A mutation in the
American College of Veterinary
cathepsin D gene (CTSD) in
Ophthalmologists.
American Bulldogs with neuronal
41. Yakely, W.L., Wyman, M.,
ceroid lipofuscinosis. Mol. Gener.
Donovan, E.F. et al. (1968) Genetic
Merabol. 87(4): 341-348.
transmission of an ocular fundus
31. Melville, S.A., Wilson, C.L., Chiang,
anomaly in collies. J. Am. Ver. Med
C.S.et al. (2005) A mutation in the
Assoc. 152: 457-461
canine CLN5 causes neuronal ceroid
42. Wyman, M. and Donovan, E.F.
lipofuscinosis in Border collie dogs.
(1969) Eye anomaly of the collie. J.
Gernomics 86: 287-294.
Am.Ver. Med. Assoc. 165: 866
32.Katz, M.L., Khan, S., Awano, T. et
870.
al. (2005) A mutation in the CLN8
43. Narfstrom, K. and Ekesten, B.
gene in English Setter dogs with
(1991) Diseases of the canine ocular
neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis.
fundus. [n: Gelatt, K.N. (ed)
Biochem.Biophys. Res. Commur.
Texrbook ofVererinary
327: 541-547.
Ophrhalmology, 3rd edn.
33. Whiteley, H.E. (1991) Dysplastic
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, pp.
197
canine retinal morphogenesis.
480483.
A9
44.Bjerkas, E. (1991) Collie eye
53. Rah, H.C., Maggs, D.J.,
LMOLOO
anomaly in the rough collie in
Blankenship, T.N. et al. (2005)
Norway. J. Small Anim. Pracr. 32:
Early-onset autosomal recessive,
OPHTHALI
89-92.
progressive retinal atrophy in
45. Aguirre, G.D., Farber, D.B., Lolley,
Persian cats. Invesrig. Ophrhalmol.
R et al. (1982) Retinal degenerations
Vis. Sei. 46: 1742-1747.
in the dog. Il. Abnormal cyclic
54. Aguirre, G.D. (1978) Retinal
MAL
mucleotide metabolism in rod-cone
degenerations in the dog: I. Rod
.ANIM
dysplasia.Exp.Eye Res. 35:
dysplasia.Exp. Eye Res. 26:
625-642.
233-253.
SMALL
46. Clements, P.J.M., Gregory, C.Y.,
55. Acland, G.M. and Aguirre, G.D
Petersen-Jones, S.M. et al. (1993)
(1987) Retinal degenerations in the
Confirmation of the rod cGMP
dog. [V. Early retinal degeneration
phosphodiesterase beta-subunit
(erd) in Norwegian Elkhounds. Exp.
(PDEβ) nonsense mutation in
Eye Res. 44: 491-521.
affected rcd-1 Irish setters in the
56. Parshall C.J., Wyman, M., Nitroy,
UK and development of a diagnostic
S. et al. (1991) Photoreceptor
test. Curr. Eye Res. 12: 861-866.
dysplasia: an inherited progressive
47. Suber, M.L., Pittler, S.J., Quin, N
retinal dystrophy of miniature
et al. (1993) [rish setter dogs affected
Schnauzer dogs. Prog. Vet. Compar.
with rod-cone dysplasia contain a
Ophrhalmol. 1:187-203
nonsense mutation in the rod cGMP
57. Aguirre, G.D., Rubin, L.F. (1975)
phosphodiesterase beta-subunit gene.
The electroretinogram in dogs
Proc. Narl. Acad. Sei. USA 90:
with inherited cone degeneration.
3968-3972
In vesrig. Ophrhalmol. 14: 840-
48. Ray K., Baldwin, V.J., Acland,
847.
G.M. et al. (1994) Cosegregation of
58.Sidjanin, D.J., Lowe, J.K., McElwee,
codon 807 mutation of the canine
J.L.et al. (2002) Canine CNGB3
rod cGMP phosphodiesterase β gene
mutations establish cone
and rcd 1. Invesrig. Ophrhalmol. Vis.
degeneration as orthologous to the
Sei. 35: 4291-4299.
human achromatopsia locus
49. Petersen-Jones, S.M., Clements,
ACHM3.Hum. Mol. Gener. 11:
P.J.M., Barnett, K.C. et al. (1995)
1823-1833
Incidence of the gene mutation
59. Gropp, K.E., Szel, A., Huang, J.C.
causal for rod-cone dysplasia type 1
et al. (1996) Selective absence of
in Irish setters in the UK. J. Small
cone outer segment beta-transducin
Anim. Pracr. 36: 310-314.
immunoreactivity in hereditary cone
50. Kukekova, A.V., Nelson K.,
degeneration (cd). Exp. Eye Res.63:
Kuchtey, R.W et al. (2006) Linkage
28 5296.
mapping of canine rod dysplasia
60. Hurn, S.D., Hardman, C. and
type 2 (rcd 2) to CFA 7, the human
Stanley, R.G. (2003) Day-blindness
ortholog of 1q32. Invesrig.
in three dogs: clinical and
Ophrhalmol. Vis. Sei.47:1210-1215.
electroretinographic findings. Ver.
51. Petersen-Jones, S.M., Entz, D.D.
Ophrhalmol.6:127-130.
and Sargan, D.R. (1999) cGMP
61. Kijas, J.W., Zangerl, B., Miller, B.
phosphodiesterase-α mutation causes
et al. (2004) Cloning of the canine 
progressive retinal atrophy in the
ABCA44 gene and evaluation in
Cardigan Welsh Corgi dog. Intvesrig
canine cone-rod dystrophies and
Ophrhalmol. Vis.Sci.40:1637-
progressive retinal atrophies. Mol
1644.
Vis.10:223-232
52. Barnett, K.C. (1982) Progressive
62. Ropstad, E.O., Bjerkas, E. and
retinal atrophy in the Abyssinian
Narfstrom, K. (2007) Clinical
cat.J. Small Anim.Pracr.23:
198
findings in early onset cone-rod
763-766.
dystrophy in the wirehaired
Dachshund. Ver. Ophrhalmol. 10:
72.Fortner, J.H., Milisen,W.B.,
VISUAL
69-75.
Lundeen, G.R. et al. (1993) Tapetal
63. Curtis, R. and Barnett, K.C. (1993)
effect of an azalide antibiotic
Progressive retinal atrophy in
following oral administration in
 IMPAIRMENT
Miniature Longhaired Dachshund
beagle dogs. Fund. Appl. Toxicol. 21:
dogs.Br. Ver. J. 149: 71-85.
164173.
64. Turney, C., Chong, N.H.V.,
73.Rubin, L.F. (1974) Arlas of
Alexander, R.A.et al. (2006)
Veterinary Ophthalmoscopy.
Pathological and electrophysiological
Philadelphia:Lea &Febiger.
features of a canine cone-rod
74. Entee, K.M., Grauwels, M., Clerc,
dystrophy in the miniature
B. et al. (1995) Closantel
longhaired dachshund. Invesrig.
intoxication in a dog.
.Ver.Hum.
Ophrhalmol. Vis. Sci.48:4240-
Toxicol.37:234236.
4249.
75. DeLahunt, C.S., Stebbins, R.B.,
65. Narfstrom, K., Wrigstad, A.,
Anderson, J. et al. (1962) The cause
Ekesten, B.et al. (1994) Hereditary
of blindness in dogs given
retinal dystrophy in the Briard dog:
hydroxypyridinethione. Toxicol.
clinical and hereditary
Appl.Pharmacol. 4: 286-291.
characteristics. Prog. Vet. Compar.
76.Brown, W.R.L., Rubin, M., Hite,
Ophrhalmol.4:85-92
M. et al. (1971) Experimental
66. Redmond, T.M., Yu, S., Lee, E
papilledema induced by a
et al. (1998) RPE65 is necessary for
salicylanilide. Toxicol. Appl.
the production of 11-cis-vitamin A
Pharmacol.27:532-541
in the retinal visual cycle. Nar.
77. Maita, K., Tsuda, S. and Shirasu, Y.
Gener. 20: 344-351.
(1991) Chronic toxicity studies with
67. Acland, G.M., Aguirre, G.D., Ray,
thiram in Wistar rats and beagle
J. et al. (2001) Gene thereapy
dogs. Fund. Appl. Toxicol. 16:
restores vision in a canine model of
667-686.
childhood blindness. Nar. Genter. 28:
78.Ford, M.M.,Dubielzig, R.,
9295.
Giuliano, E. et al. (2007) Ocular and
68. Narfstrom, K., Katz, M.L., Ford,
systemic manifestations of high-dose
M. et al. (2003) In vivo gene therapy
oral enrofloxacin in cat. Am. J. Vef.
in young and adult RPE65 -/- dogs
Res. 68(2): 190-202.
produces long-term visual
79. van der Woerdt, A., Nasisse, M.P.
improvement.J. Hered.94:31-
and Davidson, M.G. (1991) Sudden
37.
acquired retinal degeneration in the
69. Narfstrom, K., Vaegan, X., Katz,
dog: clinical and laboratory findings
M.L. et al. (2005) Assessment of
in 36 cases. Prog. Ver. Compar.
structure and function over a 3-year
Ophrhalmol. 1:11-18.
period after gene transfer in
80. Andrew, S.E., Abrams, K.L.,
RPE65 -/- dogs. Doc. Ophthalmol.
Brooks, D.E. et al. (1997) Clinica]
111: 39-48.
features of steroid responsive retinal
70. Acland, G.M., Aguirre, G.D.,
detachments in twenty-two dogs.
Bennett, J. et al. (2005) Long-term
Ver. Comp. Ophrhalmol. 7: 82-87.
restoration of rod and cone vision
81. Gwin, R.M., Wyman, M., Ketring,
by single dose rAAV-mediated gene
K. et al. (1980) Idiopathic uveitis
transfer to the retina in a canine
and exudative retinal detachment in
model of childhood blindness. Mol.
the dog. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc.
Ther.12:1072-1082
16: 163-170.
71. Martin, C., Kaswan, R., Gratzek, A
82. Vainisi, S.J., Peyman, G., Wolf, D.
et al. (1993) Ocular use of tissue
et al. (1989) Treatment of serous
plasminogen activator in companion
retinal detachment associated with
animals. Prog. Ver. Compar.
optic disc pits in dogs. J. Am. Ver.
199
Ophthalmol.3: 29-36.
Med. 4ssoc. 195: 1233-1236.
A9
83.Grahn,B.H.,Szentimrey,D.,Pharr,
Trenton, NJ: Veterinary Learning
LMOLOO
J.W. et al. (1995) Ocular and orbital
Systems, pp. 48-54.
 porcupine quills in the dog: a review
94. Clerc, B. and Jegou, J.P. (1994)
OPHTHAL
and case series. Cart. Ver. J. 36:
Superficial punctate keratitis. [n:
488493.
Cyclosporine:Veterinary Applicarion
84. Vainisi, S.J. and Packo, K.H. (1995)
in Ophthalmic Disease. Trenton, NJ:
Management of giant retinal tears in
Veterinary Learning Systems, pp.
MAL
67-71.
ANIM
491-495.
95. Crispin, S.M. (1993) Ocular
85. Dziezyc, J., Wolf, D.E. and Barrie,
manifestations of
SMALL
KP. (1986) Surgical repair of
hyperlipoproteinaemia. J. Small
rhegmatogenous retinal detachments
Anim. Pracr. 34: 500-506.
in dogs. J. Am.Ver. Med. Assoc.
96. Crispin, S.M. (2002) The cornea.
188: 902-904.
[n: Petersen-Jones, S.M. and
86. Vainisi, S.J. and Wolfer, J.C. (2004)
Crispin, S.M. (eds) BSAVA Manual
Canine retinal surgery. Vef.
ofSmallAnimalOphrhalmology
Ophrhalmol. 7:291-306.
Cheltenham: BSAVA Publications,
87. Peiffer, R.L., Wilcock, B.P. and
pp. 134154.
Yin, H. (1990) The pathogenesis
97. Morgan, R.V. (1989) Vogt-
and significance of pre-iridal
Koyanagi-Harada syndrome in
fibrovascular membrane in
humans and dogs. Compendium of
domestic animals. Ver. Parhol. 27:
Conrinuing Educarion 11: 1211-
41-45.
1218.
88. Crispin, S.M. and Mould, J.R.
98. Yamaki, K., Takiyama, N., Itho, N.
(2001) Systemic hypertensive disease
et al. (2005) Experimentally induced
and the feline fundus. Ver.
Vogt-Koyanaga-Harada disease in
Ophrhalmol. 4: 131-140.
two Akita dogs. Exp. Eye Res. 80:
89.Peiffer, R.L., Monticello, T. and
273-280.
Bouldin, T.W. (1988) Primary ocular
99. Wilcock, B.P., Peiffer, R.L., Jr. and
sarcomas in the cat. J. Small Anim.
Davidson, M.G. (1990) The causes
Pracr. 29: 105-116.
of glaucoma in cats. Ver. Parhol. 27:
90. Dubielzig, R.R., Everitt, J.,
35-40.
Shadduck, J.A.et a1. (1990) Clinical
100.Slater, M.R. and Erb H.N. (1986)
and morphologic features of post-
Effects of risk factors and
traumatic ocular sarcomas in cats.
prophylactic treatment on primary
Ver.Parhol. 27:62-65.
glaucoma in the dog.J. Am. Ver.
91. Kaswan, R.L., Bounous, D. and
Med. Assoc. 188:1028-
Hirsh, S.G. (1994) Diagnosis and
1030.
 medical management of
101. Peiffer, R.L. Jr. (1994) [ntraocular
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. In:
gentamicin in glaucoma. Ver. Comp.
Cyclosporine:Veterinary Applicarion
Ophrhalmol.4:166
in Ophrhalmic Disease. Trenton, NJ:
(Letter).
Veterinary Learning Systems, pp.
102. Gelatt, K.N. and MacKay, E.O.
21-30.
(2005) Prevalence of primary breed-
92. Chavkin, M.J., Roberts, S.M.
related cataracts in the dog in North
Salman, M.D. et al. (1994) Risk
America.Ver. Ophrhalmol.
factors for development of chronic
8:101-111.
superficial keratitis in dogs.
103. Hoskins, J.D. (1995) Congenital
J.Am. Ver. Med. Assoc. 204:
defects of cats. Compenclium of
1630-1634
Conrinuing Educarion 17:385-
93. Clerc, B. (1994) Chronic superficial
405.
keratitis in German Shepherd dogs.
104. Petersen-Jones, S.M. (2002) The
200
In: Cyclosporine: Vererinary
Jens. In: Petersen-Jones, S.M. and
Applicarion in Ophrhalmic Disease.
Crispin, S.M. (eds) BSAVA Manual
ofSmallAnimalOphthalmology
Abyssinian cats homozygous for
VISUAL
Cheltenham: BSAVA Publications,
hereditary rod-cone degeneration.
pp. 204-218.
Cell Tissue Res. 278: 291-298
105. Krohne, S.G. and Krohne, D.T.
114. Acland, G.M., Blanton, S.H.,
IMPAIRMENT
(1995) Use of laser flaremetry
Hershfield, B. et al. (1994) XLPRA:
to measure aqueous humor protein
a canine retinal degeneration
concentrations in dogs. J. Am.
inherited as an X-linked trait. Am. J.
Ver. Med. Assoc.206: 1167-
Med. Gener.52: 27-33.
1182
115. Cideciyan, A.V., Jacobson, S.G.,
106. Martin, C.L., Christmas, R. and
Aleman, T.S. et al. (2005) [n vivo
Leipold, H.W. (1972) Formations of
dynamics of retinal injury and repair
temporary cataracts in dogs given a
in the rhodopsin mutant dog model
dispophenol preparation. J. Am. Ver.
of human retinitis pigmentosa. Proc.
Med. Assoc.161:294-301
Narl. Acad Sci. USA 102:
107. Glaze, M.B. and Blanchard, G.L
5233-5238.
(1983) Nutritional cataracts in a
116. Barnett, K.C. (1965) Canine
Samoyed litter. J. Am. Arnim. Hosp.
retinopathies. III. The other breeds.
Assoc. 19: 951-953.
J.SmallAnim.Pracr.6:185-196.
108. Bagley, L.H. and Lavach, J.D.
117. Bedford, P.G.C. (1984) Retina]
(1994) Comparisons of postoperative
pigment epithelial dystrophy
phacoemulsification results in
(CPRA): study of the disease in the
dogs with and without diabetes
Briard.J. Small Anim.Pracr.25:
mellitus: 153 cases (1991-1992).
129-138.
J.Am.Ver. Med. Assoc.205:
118. Armstrong, D., Koppang, N. and
1165-1169.
Nilsson, S.E. (1982) Canine
109. Basher, A.W.P. and Roberts, S.M.
hereditary ceroid lipofuscinosis. Eur.
(1995) Ocular manifestations of
Neurol. 21: 147-156.
diabetes mellitus: diabetic cataracts
119. Koppang, N. (1992) English Setter
in dogs. Vet. Clin. North Am.(Small
model and juvenile ceroid-
Anim.Pracr.)25: 661-676.
lipofuscinosis in man. Am. J. Med
110. Gum, G.G., Gelatt, K.N. and
Gener. 42: 599-604.
Samuelsson, D.A. (1984) Maturation
120. Rider, J.A., Dawson, G. and
of the retina of the canine neonate as
Siakotos, A.N. (1992) Perspective of
determined by electroretinography
biochemical research in the neuronal
and histology. Am. J. Ver. Res. 45:
ceroid-lipofuscinosis. Am. J. Med
1166-1171.
Gener. 42: 519-524.
111. Aguirre, G.D. and O'Brien, P.
121. Wrigstad, A., Nilsson, S.E.G.
(1986) Morphological and
Dubielzig, R.R. et al. (1995)
biochemical studies of canine
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in the
progressive rod-cone degeneration.
 Polish Owczarek Nizinny (PON)
Investig. Ophthalmol Vis. Sci.27:
dog. A retinal study. Doc.
635655.
Ophrhalmol. 91: 33-47.
112. Narfstrom, K. (1985) Retinal
122. Ris, R., Sheffy, B.E., Loewe, E. et
degeneration in a strain of
al. (1981) Vitamin E deficiency
Abyssinian cats: a hereditary,
retinopathy of dogs. Am. J. Ver. Res.
clinical, electrophysiological
42: 74-86.
and morphological study. PhD
123. Schmidt, S.Y. (1980) Biochemical
fhesis, Linkoping University
and functional abnormalities in
and Swedish University of
retinas of taurine-deficient cats. Fed.
Agricultural Sciences.
Proc.39:2706-2708.
113. Wiggert, B., van Veen, T., Kutty, G.
124. Burger, I.H. and Barnett, K.C.
et al. (1994) An early decrease in
(1982) The taurine requirement of
interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding
the adult cat. J. Small Arim. Pracr.
201
protein gene expression in
23: 533-537.
A9
125. Curtis, R., Barnett, K.C. and Leon,
dogs. J. Small Anim. Pracr. 15:
LMOLOO
A L. (1991) Diseases of the canine
359-386.
posterior segment. In: Gelatt, K.N.
128. Vulgamott, J. (1985) Portosystemic
OPHTHALI
(ed)Vererinary Ophrhalmology,2nd
shunts. Ver. Clin Norrh Am.
edn.Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger,
(Small Anim.Pracr.)15:229-
pp. 461-526.
242.
126. Frenkel, J.K., Dubey, J.P. and
129. Jolly, R.D, Palmer, D.N., Studdert,
AL
Miller, N.L. (1970) Toxoplasma
V.P. et al. (1994) Canine ceroid-
ANIM
gondir in cats: fecal stages identified
lipofuscinoses: a review and
as coccidian oocysts. Srience 167:
classification. J. Small Anim. Pracr.
MALL
893-896.
35:299-306.
127.Palmer, A.C., Malinowski, W.and
130. Dubielzig, R.R. (1990) Ocular
Barnett, K.C. (1974) Clinical signs
neoplasia in small animals. Ver. Clit
including papilledema associated
Norrh Am.(Small Anim.Pracr.)20:
with brain tumors in twenty-one
837-848.
202
Orbital and
ocular pain
Peter W. Renwick and
Simon M. Petersen-Jones
Pain is a common and important feature of many ocular and orbital diseases.
The resulting clinical signs depend on the severity of the pain and include
blepharospasm, increased lacrimation, pawing or rubbing of the eyes, and, in
more severe cases, even depression and inappetence. Some of the differentials
to consider when an animal presents with a painful eye are listed in Table
6.1.
ORBITAL DISEASE AS A CAUSE OF PAIN
The orbit of cats and dogs is only partially enclosed by bone meaning that:
n         
disease due to pressure from the vertical ramus of the mandible on orbital
contents.
The orbit may be accessed for the drainage of retrobulbar abscesses via
the mouth (Fig. 6.1) or for ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of
orbitaltumors.
 Orbital tumors may reach a large size before noticeably displacing the
globe.
Careful examination of an animal with painful orbital disease should guide
the veterinarian to the correct diagnosis. Rostral displacement of the globe
(exophthalmos) is a common feature of several orbital disorders.'2 Exophthal-
mos is most readily appreciated by viewing the head from above and comparing
the position of the corneas in relation to the medial canthi (also valuable in
distinguishing exophthalmos from globe enlargement due to glaucoma). A
comparison of the degree to which the globes can be repelled into the orbit is
helpful in deciding if an orbital swelling or space-occupying lesion is present
(retropulsion of the globe will be painful for animals with orbital inflamma-
 sn a  o   go u  asd a o
trying to localize the site of the swelling, for exarmple a rmedial orbital mass will
tend to deviate the globe laterally. The doll's head refex can be utilized as a
method to evaluate ocular motility, which can be compromised with a
203
A9
Table 6.1  Differential diagnoses of the painful eye.
MOLOC
Orbital disease
HAL
·Orbital cellulitis/retrobulbar abscess
OPHTI
Orbital trauma
ANIMAL
Eosinophilic myositis
Advanced orbital neoplasm
SMALL
Eyelid abnormalities
Entropion
·Blepharitis/eyelid abscessation
Trauma to the eyelids
●Ectopic cilia
·Other cilia abnormalities
Ocular surface disease
1
 Conjunctivitis
 Conjunctival sac foreign body
1
 Corneal ulceration
Intraocular disease
·Acute uveitis
·Endophthalmitis
·Glaucoma (especially acute)
·Anterior lens luxation
·Ocular trauma
1
Penetrating wounds/foreign bodies
204
space-occupying orbital lesion. The presence or absence of protrusion of the
ORBITAL
third eyelid helps to distinguish between masses within the fibrous sheath that
encloses the extraocular rmuscle cone froim those outside the rmuscle cone;
intraconal masses cause exophthalrmos with little or no third eyelid protrusion,
AND OCULAR I
exarmples being extraocular polymyositis or tumors involving the optic nerve,
whereas extraconal lesions tend to cause exophthalmos accompanied by pro-
trusion of the third eyelid.
PAIN
Investigation of orbital disease
A thorough physical examination involving visual inspection of the head, pal-
pation of the superficial orbital area, and close inspection of the oral cavity
should be completed. Several imaging techniques can be used to investigate
orbital disease. Ultrasonography is useful and is usually perforrmed through
the globe (with the probe placed on the cornea) or by using a lateral approach
aspirates of orbital lesions can help in reaching a diagnosis. Radiography is
useful only when sinus or bony changes have developed, where a radio-opaque
foreign body is present, or where the disease has originated from adjacent
structures such as the nasal chambers, frontal sinus or dental arcade. Computed
tomography (CT) is informative in many cases but magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) provides superior detail of the orbital soft tissues. Nonetheless skull
radiographs should be considered an important component of the initial diag-
nostic work-up of orbital disease.
Orbital cellulitis/retrobulbar abscess
Orbital infection may result from penetrating wounds (e.g. via the conjunctival
sac, eyelids, or mouth), extension from adjacent structures such as tooth roots
or frontal sinus, or possibly hematologic spread. The following signs may
result:
+Rapid onset of exophthalrmos
 Pain, especially on opening rmouth (inappetence and depression may
result)
 Pyrexia, often accompanied by neutrophilia with a left shift
Variable facial and adnexal swelling, possibly accompanied by discharging
tracts
Protrusion of the third eyelid
Conjunctival swelling (chemosis) and hyperemia
Hyperermia and swelling of the oral rmucosa caudal to last molar tooth on
the affected side.
investigation
The clinical features are often diagnostic but a complete blood count (CBC)
orbit is useful and may enable localization of abscesses. Radiography may be
unrewarding but should be undertaken if an orbital foreign body is suspected,
or if there are signs that structures adjacent to the orbit are involved. Examina-
tion of the oral cavity for dental disease, areas of infammation, penetrating
wounds, or foreign bodies should be performed, although the pain induced by
205
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
B
Fig. 6.1  (A) A cat with a retrobulbar abscess resulting in exophthalmos, third eyelid
protrusion, and conjunctival hyperemia/congestion and swelling. (B) Draining of the
retrobulbar abscess in the same cat after blunt dissection to the orbit via the oral mucosa
caudal to the last upper molar tooth.
Orbital swelling typically results in filling or bulging of the space caudal to the
last upper rmolar.
Treatment
Retrobulbar abscesses may be drained via a stab incision through the oral
mucosa behind the last molar tooth followed by careful blunt dissection dor-
sally towards the orbit. Discrete abscesses are not always found, but when
present samples should be collected for culture and sensitivity. A course of
broad-spectrum systemic antibiotic is provided and the choice of antibiotic is
reviewed once the bacterial sensitivity results are available. Cellulitis is similarly
treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics. If there is a lack of response to rmedical
206
treatment or recurrence of signs, the possibility of the presence of an abscess
ORBITAL
tent infection of the roots of the upper dental arcade should be considered
Masticatory muscle myositis
ANDOCULA
 Myositis of the masticatory muscles (eosinophilic myositis) is com-monest in
young dogs in breeds such as the German Shepherd and Weimaraner. It ini-
tially results in painful swelling of the masticatory musculature. Exophthalmos
may develop due to swelling of the temporal and pterygoid rmusculature and is
AR
often bilateral. It is accompanied by protrusion of the third eyelid and a
PAIN
reduced range of jaw rmovement.
Investigation
The signalment and clinical signs in acute cases helps in reaching a diagnosis.
In chronic cases atrophy of the musculature occurs with resulting enophthal-
mos as well as further restriction of jaw movement. The blood count in some
dogs reveals a mild leukocytosis, neutrophilia, and eosinophilia, and serum
creatinine kinase may be moderately elevated. Histologic examination of
rmuscle biopsies (the temporalis muscle is readily accessed) aid in the diagnosis.
MRI will reveal swelling of the involved muscle groups.
Treatment
The acute condition is treated with immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids
or other immunosuppressive agents.
Traumatic orbital disease
Injuries affecting the orbit and orbital contents may result frorm blunt or sharp
Proptosis of the globe, which is defined as a forward displacement of the globe
beyond the plane of the eyelids, may result from trauma and is considered on
pp.82-83.
Investigation
A full clinical examination is mandatory, as other injuries may be present. Skull
radiographs may be necessary depending on the degree of trauma, or if a radio-
opaque foreign body is suspected.
Treatment
The treatment required depends on the extent and severity of the lesions.
EYELIDABNORMALITIES AS A CAUSE OF
OCULAR PAIN OR IRRITATION
Abnormal eyelid position
Entropion
Entropion? is an inward turning of the eyelid leading to contact between the
hairy eyelid skin and the ocular surface with resultant irritation or pain and,
potentially, corneal damage. It is relatively common in dogs (Fig. 6.2) but less
so in cats (Fig. 6.3). It may result from anatomic abnormalities of eyelid and
eyelid/globe relationship or it may develop secondarily to blepharospasm due
to painful ocular surface disorders. Anatomic predisposition is often breed
207
SMALLANIMALOPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 6.2 Entropion in a Shar Pei. Although the lids are being held open the tendency for
the lower eyelid to turn in can be clearly seen. Note the superficial ulceration and
vascularization resulting from the abrasion of eyelid hair.
Fig. 6.3Lower eyelid
entropion in a cat.
related and the resultant entropion usually develops in puppies or juveniles. In 
the Shar Pei entropion may occur in young puppies and is related to excessive
facial skin folds. As the puppies grow the tendency towards entropion decreases.
all that is necessary (Fig. 6.4).4
208
ORBITAL:
_ANDOCULARI
PAIN
Fig. 6.4 Temporary eversion of the lower eyelid to treat entropion in a puppy. (A)The
lower eyelid is exhibiting entropion. (B) and (C) Two or three temporary everting sutures
are placed and tightened sufficiently to correct the entropion.
pointers, and setters usually requires permanent correction. If the degree of
l paediue yimoe jo nol e anh seu ls Addnd aun pue pu si uondonua
is possible that a temporary eversion will suffice. The opinion of some breeders
they have reached maturity is not to be encouraged. Delaying surgery can
result in the development of permanent corneal damage, coupled in some cases
with an increased turning in of the lids due to blepharospasm, to say nothing
of the prolongation of the discomfort the condition results in. For these
reasons, at least a tacking procedure should be performed. Entropion in most
young dogs can be readily corrected by everting blepharoplasty. While more
complicated procedures are described in the literature, for the majority of cases
a straightforward Hotz-Celsus procedure will suffice. This technique involves
removing a strip of skin or skin/muscle parallel to and about 3-4 mm frorm
the inverted eyelid margin (Fig. 6.5). When assessing the degree of correction
required (this is perforrmed before sedation or anesthesia), care should be taken
to avoid pulling on the skin of the head and thus altering the eyelid position.
It is also useful to apply a topical anesthetic to the cornea to relieve the
blepharospastic component, thus allowing a more accurate assessment of the
degree of correction required to reverse the anatomic deforrmity. When entro-
pion accompanies more severe lid conformational deformities, such as the
‘diamond eye' conformation, where a combination of entropion and ectropion
may be present associated with an overlong palpebral fissure, a more elaborate
blepharoplastic procedure with lateral canthal tightening may be required.$
of entropion may be seen in some rmiddle-aged dogs such as Chow Chows and
eyes.
Atonicentropion/trichiasis
This condition is most commonly seen in middle-aged and older English Cocker
Spaniels. It results from a loss of elasticity of the skin on the head, a slipped
facial mask and a rolling in of the upper eyelids so that the eyelashes are in
209
SMALLANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 6.5  Diagram of skin-muscle resection for lower eyelid entropion. (A) The degree of
correction has been assessed in the conscious, unsedated animal. Forceps can be used
to tent up' a ridge of skin corresponding to the amount to be excised. (B) and (C) A strip
of skin about 3 mm from the eyelid margin is excised and corresponds to the length of
eyelid that is turning in. The width of skin that needs to be removed is governed by the
amount that the eyelid turns in. (D) 6/0 sutures are used to repair the skin; the knots
should be directed away from the cornea.
Fig. 6.6 Upper eyelid entropion/trichiasis in a middle-aged English Cocker Spaniel.
210
Abrasion from the upper eyelid cilia has caused an area of ulcerative keratitis.
contact with the corneal surface (Fig. 6.6). The more severely affected dogs also
ORBITAL
have a marked lower eyelid ectropion. The condition is often accompanied by
chronic changes including blepharitis, conjunctivitis, and keratitis, and even
corneal ulceration. A reduction in tear production may also develop and con-
ANDI
tributes to the ocular surface pathology and the general discormfort. Surgical
OCULAR
correction is required and the technique described by Stades gives consistently
good results (Fig. 6.7).6
Blepharitis/eyelid abscessation
PAIN
Abscessation of the eyelid skin and acute suppurative blepharitis can cause
considerable discomfort (Fig. 6.8). These conditions rmay result from trauma
or bite wounds, but in some cases there is no obvious cause. The latter cases
are often due to staphylococcal infections (probably with some accompanying
irmmune reaction to staphylococcal toxins) and may involve the glands of the
eyelid that are associated with the follicles of the cilia, the glands of Zeis and
Moll. Blepharitis is discussed further in Chapter 4.
Treatmentofblepharitis
Abscesses should be treated by drainage, warrm compresses, and systermic
broad-spectrum antibiotics. Staphylococcal blepharitis is also treated by warrm
cormpresses and an extended course of beta-lactamase-resistant broad-spectrum
antibiotic combined with systemic corticosteroids. Fitting of an Elizabethan
collar to prevent self-inflicted trauma should also be considered.
：
C
Fig. 6.7  Correction of upper eyelid trichiasis/entropion using the technique described
by Stades.6 (A)A skin incision is made 1 mm dorsal to the meibomian gland openings
50 a5 to include all the hair-bearing skin and extending 3-4 mm lateral to the medial
canthus to 5-10 mm past the lateral canthus. The ends of the incision are joined by a
second, more dorsally positioned, incision creating a strip of skin approximately 15-
20 mm wide. This strip of skin is removed and any remaining hair follicles excised. (B)
The upper skin edge is pulled part way across the wound to approximately the base of
the meibomian glands and sutured into place. (C) A continuous suture pattern finishes
the repair. The uncovered portion of the wound heals by second intention and creates a
narrow strip of hairless skin adjacent to the upper eyelid helping to prevent recurrence
of the trichiasis.
211
MOLOGY
SMALLANIMALOPHTHAL
Fig. 6.8Staphylococcal blepharitis in a Bichon Frise.
Abnormalities involving cilia
Distichiasis
The presence of cilia emerging from the eyelid margin is known as distichiasis.
This is a very common finding in dogs, particularly of certain breeds, but is
rare in cats. The vast majority of dogs with distichiasis show few signs of irrita-
tion. Corneal damage and accompanying pain may occur in a few affected
individuals with thick cilia that are directed onto the cornea. The management
of distichiasis is described on pp. 267-268.
Ectopic cilia (Fig. 6.9)
Ectopic cilia are less common than distichia. Similarly to distichia they arise
from follicles in or adjacent to the meibomian glands. However, in the case
of ectopic cilia they emerge through the palpebral conjunctiva, most commonly
singly and typically midway along the upper eyelid. They almost invariably
cause marked discomfort and often shallow, vertically elongated ulcers.
Usually they occur in young dogs although they may develop in mature dogs,
possibly due to metaplasia of the meibomian gland epithelium. When they
occur in middle-aged dogs it is not uncommon to find multiple ectopic cilia
and associated cysts, particularly in breeds such as the Shih Tzu. Magnification
is usually required to see the ectopic cilium and even then it may be hard to
visualize, particularly if non-pigmented. Treatrment consists of removal or
 destruction of the originating follicle. Destruction may be achieved by cryo-
surgery or electrolysis; alternatively the follicle may be removed by excising a
srmall block of partial-thickness eyelid tissue surrounding the cilium as shown
in Figure 6.10.
212
ORBITALAND OCULARPAIN
B
Fig. 6.9 Ectopic cilia in an English Cocker Spaniel. (A) Blepharospasm and lacrimation
are present indicating ocular pain. (B) A superficial corneal ulcer is present. (C)An ectopic
dlium is emerging through the palpebral conjunctiva of the upper eyelid.
213
SMALLANIMALOPHTHALMOLOGY
C
Fig. 6.9For coption see p. 213.
Fig. 6.10 Excision of an ectopic cilium. A chalazion clamp immobilizes and everts the
upper lid and reduces hemorrhage. A square of partial-thickness eyelid tissue containing 
the offending cilium and follicle is removed and the wound left unsutured.
Othercilia abnormalities
Trichiasis, where facial hairs are misdirected resulting in contact with the
cornea, may result in pain, but usually only when the hairs cause superficial
corneal damage. Nasal fold trichiasis and the presence of medial canthal hairs
commonly cause a chronic low-grade superficial keratitis (usually pigmentary)
214
in brachycephalic breeds but may occasionally result in corneal ulceration and
pain. If treatiment for nasal fold trichiasis is required simple excision of the
ORBITAL
nasal folds can be performed, although the owners should be made aware of
the altered facial appearance that this will cause. Caruncular hairs (hairs arising
from the caruncle at the medial canthus) can cause a medial pigrmentary kera-
AND OCULA
titis, occasional ulcers, or a bothersome tear overflow due to a wick effect.
They may be treated by excision of the dermal tissue; this is often performed
as part of a medial canthoplasty procedure employed to address the medial
AR
canthal entropion and macropalpebral fissure that is often present in the
PAIN
affected breeds (see Ch. 7, Fig. 7.18). Trichiasis can also result from eyelid
scarring or eyelid agenesis; these abnormalities are treated by an appropriate
blepharoplastic procedure. Trichiasis resulting from entropion is considered
above.
OCVLAR SURFACE LESIONS AS A CAUSE OF PAIN
Corneal ulceration
A corneal ulcer is defined as a full-thickness loss of corneal epithelium. Ulcers
may be superficial, i.e. just involving the epithelium, or deeper with stromal
loss and even progression down to Descemet's membrane (a descermetocele),
or may lead to corneal penetration, often with iris prolapse. The anterior
cornea is well supplied with sensory nerve endings and therefore superficial
ulcers may actually be more painful than deeper rmore serious ulcers. The pain
from ulcers is usually manifest as blepharospasm and increased lacrimation.
There are a number of potential causes of corneal ulceration as listed below:?
Trauma
Chermicals - alkalis, acids, detergents
* Infection
 bacterial (possibly following initial trauma)
viral infection (e.g. cats with feline herpesvirus infection)
-fungal infection (rare)
·Tear film abnormalities (see pp. 283-291)
Cilia abnormalities
Exposure keratopathy
brachycephalics with prominent globe/shallow orbit and poor lid
closure
facial nerve paralysis. Most mesocephalic and dolicocephalic breeds
can retract their globes sufficiently to result in a complete spread of
usually inadequate
- trigeminal nerve lesions. Reduced or absent corneal sensation
invariably results in a keratitis affecting the area of cornea exposed
within the palpebral fissure (neurotrophic keratopathy).
 Corneal epithelial basement membrane disease; this results in recurrent
epithelial erosions, indolent ulcers, and superficial chronic corneal
epithelial defects (Fig. 6.11).
 Rupture of epithelial bullae in edematous corneas (e.g. those with
endothelial dystrophy - Figure 6.12; also see pp. 94-95 and 168)
215
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
B
Fig.6.11
The use of fluorescein dye to demonstrate corneal ulceration. (A) A cat with a
painful eye; an area of corneal roughening can be seen. (B) The ulcer is clearly
demonstrated after application of fluorescein.
216
ORBITAL AND OCULAR PAIN
dystrophy. The ulcer has resulted from rupture of a corneal epithelial bulla.
 Epithelial erosion by corneal cholesterol or calcium deposits in patients
with lipid keratopathy (Fig. 6.13) or corneal calcareous degeneration
(Fig. 6.14; also see pp. 101-102)
Investigation ofcornealuiceration
Eyes with deeper ulcers, ruptured ulcers, or corneal penetration should be
treated very gently to avoid exacerbating the problem. For all ulcers as com-
plete an ocular examination as can be safely performed should be carried out
with the aim of identifying any predisposing factors. The eyelid conformation
should be noted and attention paid to the frequency of blinking and the extent
of eyelid closure. The tear film should be assessed early in the investigation and
a Schirmer tear test performed before any fluid is applied to the ocular surface
(see p. 15). This test is not performed if the ulcer is seen to be deep or the cornea
penetrated; in such cases tear production is best evaluated once the cornea has
healed. Palpebral and corneal sensation should be assessed by inducing the
palpebral and corneal blink reflexes respectively; this also enables the extent of
xa a  si  o  o  
corneal lesions and the use of a slit-lamp biomicroscope is particularly helpful
for judging the depth of ulcers. When this instrument is not available a magni-
fying loupe or direct ophthalrmoscope (with a high positive diopter setting) can
be used. Particular attention should be paid to the depth and extent of the ulcer,
the presence or absence of stromal infltrate, and the state of the stroma; the
presence of liquefaction is considered a serious finding.
Use of ophthaimic dyes in investigating corneal disease
Ophthalmic dyes are useful in the investigation of corneal pathology. Fluores-
cein is the most commonly used dye (see Fig. 6.11):
217
SMALLANIMALOPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 6.13 A corneal ulcer in a young Bulldog associated (secondary) to an area of
corneal lipid deposition. Circulating lipid levels should be investigated in such cases.
Fig. 6.14 Corneal ulcer in an elderly crossbred dog secondary to calcareous corneal
degeneration.
218
ORBITAL
impression of staining
Dye will stain corneal stroma if epithelial defects are present
AND OCULAR
Fluorescein does not stain Descemet's membrane (useful for determining
whether a descemetocele is present)
 a    a s o s  s
non-healing superficial ulcers below).
PAIN
Rose bengal is less commonly used in veterinary ophthalmology; it has the
following features:
·Vital dye - stains dead/damaged cells and mucus
 Demonstrates presence of superficial corneal epithelial damage
It is useful for staining epithelial defects in cats due to feline herpesvirus
infection (dendritic ulcers)
Can be irritating.
Laboratory investigation of corneal ulceration
Laboratory investigations are aimed at identifying the presence of causal or
complicating corneal infection and are usually reserved for the more serious
ulcers (deeper, deepening, or with stromal liquefaction). As it takes several days
to get results from culture and other techniques to identify the presence of
microorganisms (immunofluorescence and polymerase chain reaction, PCR),
direct examination of smears is recormmended and is often performed when a
serious or complicated ulcer is present.
Swabs for culture
·Swab ulcers where bacterial infection is suspected or the ulcer is
progressing
 Use of local anesthetic is required to allow active edge of ulcer to be
safely sampled
Swabs for feline herpesvirus culture must be transported to the laboratory
in the appropriate transport medium
 an     ss s n
laboratory for instruction on sampling, handling, and shipping.
Scrapes/smears for histopathology
Sample edge of ulcer with cotton-tipped swab, cytology brush, or sterile
spatula after local anesthesia - aiming to collect some material but being
very careful not to damage the cornea further
 Gently smear on at least two clean microscope slides (alcohol washed)
Dry
Stain - Diff-Quik (Dade Behring) provides a rapid in-house stain and is
useful for both cytology and identifying the presence of bacteria. The
results of a Gram stain help in the selection of an appropriate antibiotic
until culture and sensitivity results are available.
Management of corneal uicers
Superficialuncomplicatedulcers
Simple minor ulcers will normally heal within a few days and topical broad-
219
spectrum antibiotic cover is all that is required.
IGY
Indolentornon-healinguicers(superficialchroniccorneat
MOLO
epithelial defects)
 Ulcers involving only epithelium that have been present for more than 2 weeks
OPHTHAL
are considered to be non-healing or indolent (Fig. 6.15; see Fig. 4.29) (also
known as superficial chronic corneal epithelial defects - SCCED, recurrent
epithelial erosions, or boxer ulcers). These are common in dogs and usually
require intervention to facilitate healing. They are thought to be due to abnor-
ANIM
malities of adherence of epithelium to the basement membrane and of the
basement rmembrane itself.-10 These ulcers have the following characteristics:
SMALL
They are superficial and involve only epithelium
There may or may not be a history of minor trauma
There is little tendency to heal; can persist for months
They are surrounded by a zone of non-adherent epithelium (fluorescein
ulcer)
There is a variable extent of accompanying corneal edema and
vascularization.
Similar non-healing ulcers are occasionally seen in cats and may be associ-
ated with feline herpesvirus infection; they are usually rmanaged in a different
manner to the indolent canine corneal ulcer. Several methods of managing
canine non-healing ulcers have been advocated. One of the simpler and more
effective methods is first to remove all loose epithelium surrounding the ulcer
and then to create shallow stromal wounds in a punctate or grid fashion (Fig.
6.16)!.i2 A cotton-tipped swab or spatula is used to remove non-adherent epi-
thelium, which may cover a large area of the cornea. Multiple shallow anterior
stromal punctures or linear wounds in a grid pattern are then made over the
new extent of exposed stroma using a 25-gauge hypodermic needle. To limit
the depth of the penetration of the needle into the stroma it may be clamped
in a hemostat with just the tip protruding or alternatively a commercially avail-
Fig. 6.15A superficial
non-healing ulcer. This
has been stained with
fluorescein. Note the
characteristic staining
beyond the edge of the
epithelial defect. This is
due to non-adherence of
220
the surrounding
epithelium.
ORBITAL AND OCULAR
PAIN
Fig. 6.16 Treatment for a superficial non-healing ulcer. (A) All surrounding loose
epithelium is removed using a dry swab, a spatula, or a 5calpel blade. (B)A punctate
keratotomy is performed using a hypodermic needle to make multiple superficial wounds
into the anterior corneal stroma.
able device can be used. To perform a grid keratotomy the needle is used to
score the anterior stroma in a crosshatch pattern with about 0.5-1 mm between
the lines. This procedure can be performed in most patients under topical
anesthesia and has a 70-80% success rate. A bandage contact lens can be placed
to make the eye more comfortable. If the cornea does not re-epithelialize within
2-3 weeks the procedure may be repeated. Superficial keratectomy is a very
effective method of managing these ulcers and almost invariably leads to their
technique is usually reserved for those cases where other procedures have
failed.
Deep corneal uicers
Deeper ulcers (Fig. 6.17) may potentially lead to corneal perforation. Lique-
faction of the collagen-rich corneal stroma due to the action of proteolytic
 enzymes released frorm bacteria or neutrophils can result in devastating, rapidly
progressive, or melting ulcers. Animals with such ulcers usually require hos-
pitalization and intensive medical and possibly surgical therapy. Swabs and
scrapes should be taken to investigate possible bacterial infection. Potential
corneal pathogens include coagulase-positive staphylococci, β-hemolytic strep-
tococci, Pseudomonas aeruginosa (notorious as a cause of melting ulcers), and
other Gram-negative bacteria. For progressive or melting ulcers intensive treat-
ment with an appropriate antibiotic should be started. For example, for Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa infections gentamicin, tobramycin, or a fluoroquinolone
(ciprofloxacin or ofoxacin) is a useful antibiotic. The fluoroquinolones can
also be a good choice for staphylococcal infections. When streptococcal infec-
tion is suspected a topical cephalosporin such as cefazolin has been advocated;
a suitable preparation may be made by adding cefazolin for intravenous use
221
. OPHTHALMOLOGY
SMALL ANIMAL
Fig. 6.17 A deep ulcer in
a Pug. Note the red
 appearance of the eye and
the corneal edema. The
dearer center to the ulcer
 Suggests that it deepens to
the level of Descemet's
membrane and is at risk of
perforating.
instances where corneal melting is not a problerm the use of a commercial
stromal is occurring application of topical agents to suppress the action of
collagenases and proteases rmay be considered; a variety of agents have been
used including acetylcysteine, doxycycline, EDTA solution (e.g. obtained by
adding a small amount of sterile saline to a blood collection tube), and autolo-
gous serum (kept sterile and refrigerated). Autologous serum is readily avail-
able and has gained popularity in the treatment of melting ulcers. However,
there are no published studies proving the efficacy of these agents in small
animals. The antibiotic and anticollagenase solution may be applied hourly
in the initial stages of treating the more serious rmelting type of ulcer. Topical
atropine (as a 1% ophthalmic solution initially q6 h) is also applied for its
cycloplegic and therefore pain-relieving effects.
Suturing the third eyelid across the eye (preferably to the bulbar conjunctiva
rather than through the upper eyelid) remains a mode of therapy utilized by
some veterinary practitioners. The major disadvantage of this technique is that
the cornea cannot be observed, so deepening of the ulcer will not be apparent
until perforation occurs. If the technique is used, care should be taken to ensure
that the sutures do not abrade the cornea. When the ulcer is deeper than
approximately one-half the thickness of the cornea a conjunctival flap or
pedicle graft is preferable.
A variety of conjunctival faps have been described. These have the advan-
tage of providing protection and support for the weakened cornea. The blood
supply provided directly to the ulcer site aids in corneal healing and has an
antibacterial and antiprotease action that can help control bacterial infection
and corneal liquefaction. The pedicle fap (Figs 6.18 & 6.19) is useful for the
treatment of deep ulcers, descermetoceles, and even ulcers that have perforated
(Fig. 6.19).I5,16 The placerment of sutures into the cornea is a microsurgical tech-
222
Alternative methods of managing deeper ulcers include techniques such as
corneoscleral lamellar transposition and corneal lamellar grafting (donor
RBITAL
cornea stored frozen in gentamicin solution can be used),' or using graft mate-
rial of non-ocular origin such as lyophilized porcine submucosa (Biosist).!B
ANDI
For perforated corneas a combination of a graft material and a conjunctival
1OCULA
pedicle graft can be utilized. Application of corneal tissue glue (butylcyanoac-
rylate) can be effective in treating ulcers with stromal involverment although
this is not recommended where there is progressive melting of the ulcer. To
PAIN
utilize this technique the ulcer is carefully debrided to remove necrotic material
and then dried thoroughly. The tissue adhesive is painted on in thin layers using
a 25-30-gauge hypodermic needle. The aim is to coat the bed of the ulcer but
not to have excess glue protruding from the surface, as this will cause further
irritation. For obvious reasons the adhesive rmust be allowed to dry before
allowing blinking. The presence of the tissue glue will result in corneal vascu-
larization which aids in healing the corneal defect.
Corneal wounds and foreign bodies
Sharp trauma to the eye will often carry a better prognosis than blunt trauma.
Corneal or scleral ruptures as a result of blunt compressive trauma carry a poor
prognosis as they are usually accompanied by intraocular hemorrhage and
extrusion of ocular contents.
Ocular ultrasonography can be useful in assessing eyes where direct visual-
ization of the intraocular structures is not possible. The ultrasound examina-
tion may reveal changes such as displacerment of the lens, retinal detachments,
intraocular hemorrhage, and, in some instances of compressive blunt trauma,
a split in the posterior sclera adjacent to the optic nerve head. Where there
is an obvious corneal wound or split an ultrasound examination should be
avoided as it may place pressure on the globe and could also introduce ultra-
sound gel into the defect.
The prognosis for sharp trauma to the cornea depends on the extent of the
injury and the involvement of intraocular structures. Simple corneal lacera tions
are usually sealed by prolapse of the iris following the initial collapse of the
anterior charmber. Early specialist treatrment usually results in a favorable
outcome. Replacement of the prolapsed iris following thorough irrigation and
the stripping off of adherent fibrin layers, followed by an accurate water-tight
corneal repair, will usually result in a sighted eye. Careful evaluation of the eye
body should be performed. The repair is best carried out under an operating
microscope with rmicrosurgical instrumentation. Viscoelastic agents can be a
 useful tool in keeping the anterior charmber formed and avoiding iris to cornea
achieved an overlay of a conjunctival pedicle graft can be used. When penetrat-
ing wounds also involve the lens the prognosis is poorer. Large lacerations of
the lens capsule necessitate lens removal at a very early stage, otherwise a
phacoclastic uveitis will result. This form of uveitis is severe and will typically
leaving a focal cataract, although development of a progressive cataract is also
possible. Corneal foreign bodies require removal. Superficial ones are often
223
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
224
Fig. 6.18 Application of a conjunctival pedicle flap for treatment of a deep corneal ulcer.
ORBITAL AND OCULAR PAIN
(A) An initial paralimbal incision has been made and the bulbar conjunctiva is being
undermined by blunt and sharp dissection with scissors. The bulbar conjunctiva is
translucent, allowing the scissors to be clearly visualized. Dissection is continued towards
the fornix. Two divergent incisions are then made towards the fornix. Once these incisions
 have been made and the bulbar conjunctival pedicle has been freed from the underlying
episclera, it is possible to achieve a substantial length of pedicle. A lateral canthotomy
has been performed in this diagram. (B) The conjunctival pedicle graft has been
advanced to overlie the recipient ulcer bed. The base of the pedicle is usually at the
conjunctival fornix. It is necessary to loosen or remove the eyelid retractors to allow the
pedicle graft to be advanced onto the ulcer site without undue tension. (C) The
ventromedial, ventral, and ventrolateral borders of the pedicle graft are sutured to the
recipient ulcer bed with 7.0 or 8.0 absorbable suture. (D) One blade of a pair of scissors is
slid beneath the non-adherent pedicle bridge when the pedicle bridge is to be sectioned
 4-6 weeks postoperatively. Steven's tenotomy scissors are ideal as the ends are slightly
blunted, thereby reducing the risk of corneal damage if the animal moves suddenly while
the pedicle bridge is cut. (Redrawn with permission from Habin, D. (1995) Conjunctival
pedicle grafts. In Proctice 17:61-65.)
A
Fig. 6.19A A ruptured corneal ulcer in a Boston Terrier. The anterior chamber has
collapsed.
225
OPHTHALMOLOGY
ANIMAL
SMALL
Fig. 6.19B The same eye following repair using a conjunctival pedicle graft. The graft
has now been trimmed. The dog had good vision around the residual graft.
Using a 25-gauge needle to pry them out of the cornea can be helpful if there
with fine forceps. If the foreign body has penetrated into the anterior charmber
a fibrin clot adherent to the intraocular portion of the foreign body will often
develop. Eyes with foreign bodies that penetrate through the cornea into intra-
urgent specialist management
Feline herpesvirus keratitis
Classic feline herpesvirus ulcers are superficial branching (dendritic) epithelial
defects (Fig. 6.20) that are readily demonstrated by Rose bengal staining. Her-
pesvirus infection may also be associated with geographic-shaped ulcers and
with some indolent ulcers in cats. Less commonly a more extensive keratitis
may develop characterized by a marked corneal cellular infiltrate (Fig. 6.21),
and in some cases may lead to serious ulceration (probably contributed to by
secondary pathogens). Antiviral therapy using topical trifuorothymidine or
idoxuridine may be effective. Recombinant interferon is suggested to irmprove
the action of some antiviral agents and is often given topically to cats with
herpesvirus infection. Aciclovir, a drug that is effective in treating herpes
simplex virus infections in humans, has been shown to have poor action against
feline herpesvirus in vitro,9.20 although its efficacy may be irmproved by concur-
rent application of topical interferon.? Oral L-lysine at a dose rate of 250-
500 mg ql2 h to impede viral replication has been advocated as a potential
Recently, there has been a report of canine herpesvirus-1 corneal infections
226
in dogs.24
ORBITAL AND OCULAR PAIN
Fig. 6.20 Dendritic ulcers in a cat with herpesvirus infection.
Fig. 6.21  Stromal keratitis in a cat with herpesvirus infection.
GLAUCOMA AS A CAUSE OF OCULAR PAIN
Glaucoma is a pathologic increase in intraocular pressure (IOP) which causes
optic nerve and retinal damage and subsequent blindness. When the IOP
increases rapidly, pain is often a major presenting sign. The reference range of
IOP in dogs is approximately 7-24 mmHg,25 but it is worth noting that obtain-
patient, e.g. by putting pressure on the jugular veins or forcing the eyelids open.
227
GY
MOLO
Sclera
OPHTHAL
Cilliary cleft
ANIMAL
Drainage angle
Pectinate
ligament
Ciliary processes
SMALL
Iris
Anterior
chamber
Cornea
Lens
Fig. 6.22 Aqueous is produced by the ciliary processes. pas5es from the posterior
chamber through the pupil to the anterior chamber, and then leaves the eye via the
drainage apparatus situated in the iridocorneal angle.
The results of IOP assessment should therefore be interpreted against the
background of the clinical findings. Measurement of IOP is considered in
further detail on pp. 25-26.
Aqueous humor is continually produced by the ciliary body, enters the pos-
terior chamber, passes through the pupil, and flows into the anterior chamber.
It then exits the anterior chamber through the drainage apparatus that lies
within the iridocorneal angle (Fig. 6.22). Under normal circumstances the
balance of aqueous production and drainage equilibrates to achieve a physio-
logic IOP. Glaucoma arises as a result of impaired passage of aqueous humor
from the eye; the defect in the drainage pathway may lie at the level of either
the pupil or the iridocorneal angle. Glaucoma may be primary, i.e. arise in the
absence of any antecedent ocular condition, or it may be secondary to other
ocular disease (Table 6.2).
of a congenitally abnormal sheet of tissue at the site of the pectinate ligament
(goniodysgenesis), often with associated narrowing of the entrance to the ciliary
on p. 26. Goniodysgenesis/narrow angle glaucoma occurs with increased fre-
 quency in several breeds of dog (Table 6.3). Differing degrees of severity of
goniodysgenesis are encountered. Dogs with the most severe deformities are
very likely to develop glaucoma, typically in rmiddle age (although in some
breeds it may occur at a younger age),3 whilst those with rmilder abnormalities
may escape the disease altogether. Glaucomatous attacks in affected dogs tend
 to be acute and result in very high IOPs causing severe pain and loss of vision
in the affected eye. The fellow eye is frequently affected months or even years
228
after glaucoma develops in the first eye. The predisposing goniodysgenesis is
Table 6.2 Causes of glaucoma.
ORBITAL AND OCULAR F
Primary
goniodysgenesis/narrow angle
primary open angle glaucoma
Secondary
primary lens luxation - terrier breeds,border collie
Uveitis, including lens-induced uveitis
+
 neoplasia
1
extension of a pre-iridal fibrovascular membrane over the opening
PAIN
into the ciliary cleft - 5econdary to retinal detachment, neoplasia, or
uveitis
intraocular hemorrhage
intumescence (swelling) of a cataractous lens
 ocular melanosis (Cairn terriers) - formerly described as pigmentary
multiple iris cysts and uveitis - golden retrievers
vitreous prolapse after surgical lens extraction
obstruction of the entrance to the ciliary cleft by membranes formed
by proliferation and metaplasia of residual lens epithelial cells
following cataract surgery
Fig. 6.23  Goniophotograph showing a narrow opening to the ciliary cleft and pectinate
lgament dysplasia (goniodysgenesis) of an eye predisposed to primary glaucoma. The
dog's other eye has already developed glaucoma.
animals with moderate or severe drainage angle abnorrmalities should not be
used for breeding.32
Chronic open angle glaucoma, the commonest form of primary glaucoma
in humans, is much less common in dogs than goniodysgenesis/narrow
angle glaucoma. It results in glaucoma with a gradual and insidious onset
229
which typically affects both eyes to a similar degree. The presenting sign in this
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 6.24 Goniophotograph showing a very narrow opening to the ciliary cleft.The
dog's other eye has already developed glaucoma.
Table 6.3 Breed incidence of primary glaucoma associated with goniodysgenesis/
abue mou
Breed incidence of goniodysgenesis/narrow angle
(breed incidence differs between countries)
American Cocker Spaniel
Siberian Husky
English Cocker Spaniel
Flat Coated Retriever
Welsh Springer Spaniel
Golden Retriever
English Springer Spaniel
Labrador Retriever
Basset Hound
 Samoyed
Great Dane
Shar Pei
Dandie Dinmont Terrier
Bouvier des Flandres
condition is often the development of an altered appearance due to globe
enlargerment rather than the presence of obvious pain and visual loss.
Clinical signs of glaucoma3334
When considering clinical signs, glaucoma may be divided into acute and
chronic forms.
Acute glaucoma (also see pp. 148-149)
Acute-onset cases tend to present with signs of a painful eye, i.e. blepharo-
spasm, epiphora, and head-shyness. At very high IOPs (e.g. over 60 mm Hg)
the pain may be so severe as to cause yelping, lethargy, and anorexia. Blindness
may develop rapidly and at higher IOPs can becorme irreversible in a rmatter of
hours. Corneal edema is often seen due to the accumulation of fuid from the
230
aqueous that has not been cleared from the cornea. The ederma generally affects
ORBITAL AND OCULAR PAIN
Fig. 6.25 Corneal edema in a Dandie Dinmont Terrier with primary glaucoma due to
goniodysgenesis. Rupture of a corneal epithelial bulla has resulted in a small corneal
ulcer.
Fig. 6.26 Episcleral and conjunctival vascular congestion in a 7-year-old Basset Hound
with glaucoma. Note the early development of perilimbal corneal neovascularization.
the entire cornea and may range in severity from a subtle, *stearmy’ appearance
through to marked opacity which may render detailed visual inspection of the
intraocular structures impossible (Fig. 6.25). The degree of fuid accurmulation
can be so marked as to result in the development of bullous keratopathy and
val) congestion is a major presenting sign in both acute and chronic glaucoma
cases (Fig. 6.26). This *red eye' presentation can also result from a range of
ocular diseases from which glaucoma rmust be differentiated (see p. 91). These
include conjunctivitis, episcleritis, corneal disease, uveitis, Horner's syndrome,
and orbital disease. The key feature for differentiation of these conditions from
231
IGY
glaucoma is measurement of the IOP. It is worthy of note that a small percent-
MOLO
age of patients develop acute but transitory elevation of the IOP which may be
sufficient to cause temporary pain and visual impairrment (or even perrmanent
OPHTHAL
blindness). However, the IOP may have returned to within normal limits by
the time of presentation. Such IOP spikes can be difficult to detect and diag-
nose, and if the clinician is in doubt then referral to a specialist should be
considered.
ANIM
Increased IOP (especially over 40 mrmHg) leads to paralysis of the iris sphinc-
ter muscle, and the pupil tends to become mid-dilated and poorly mobile.
However, it is important to appreciate that not all patients with glaucoma will
SMAI
present with a dilated pupil - for example, the development of adhesions of the
iris to the lens in some cases of uveitis rmay prevent pupillary dilatation if sec-
ondary glaucoma develops. Acute-onset glaucoma most commonly results
from goniodysgenesis, lens luxation, or uveitis.
Chronicglaucoma
With chronicity the signs of pain may become less obvious, but the capacity
for glaucoma to cause discomfort should never be underestimated.
Chronic cases rmay exhibit some or all of the signs associated with acute
disease, but often to a lesser degree. In addition, the globe enlarges (hydroph-
thalmos or buphthalmos) and this may lead to lens subluxation or occasionally
luxation, breaks in Descemet's membrane which are seen as gray streaks in the
cornea known as Haab's striae (Fig. 6.27; see also Fig. 4.10), and, rarely,
staphyloma formation (blue swelling at the equator of the globe). The cornea
may become vascularized (Fig. 6.28) and pigmented, and with globe enlarge-
ment an exposure keratitis and ulceration may develop. Secondary cataracts
may form in long-standing cases and intraocular hemorrhage is another possi-
ble sequel. Fundus changes which may be seen include cupping and atrophy of
the optic disk and retinal degeneration (Fig. 6.29). The affected optic disk
Fig. 6.27 Gross enlargement of the globe in this Labrador Retriever with primary
232
glaucoma has led to breaks in Descemet's membrane also known as Haab's striae.
These are visible as multiple gray streaks in the cornea.
ORBITAL AND OCULAR PAIN
Fig. 6.28 A Basset Hound with gross globe enlargement due to primary glaucoma.
Secondary corneal neovascularization has developed.
Fig. 6.29 Fundic changes in a Golden Retriever with primary glaucoma. There are
signs of tapetal hyperreflectivity and retinal vascular attenuation. The optic disk is dark
and cupped. The view is hazy due to clouding of the ocular media.
appears circular, darker than normal, and is depressed below the surface of the
surrounding retina. Retinal degeneration manifests as zones of tapetal hyper-
reflectivity and accompanying superficial retinal blood vessel attenuation.
Primary open angle glaucoma, glaucoma secondary to neoplasia, and some
cases resulting from uveitis are most likely to present as insidious, chronic
233
disease. Cats commonly present with chronic glaucoma secondary either to
SMALL ANIMAL
Fig. 6.30  Bilateral glaucoma secondary to chronic uveitis in a 2-year-old DSH cat.
Both globes are grossly enlarged, the pupils are dilated, and dark keratic precipitates can
be seen on the ventral endothelium of both corneas.
low-grade chronic uveitis (Fig. 6.30) or intraocular neoplasia.s They rarely
present with primary glaucoma of any type.
Management
 Therapy may be medical or surgical. Glaucoma often carries a guarded outlook
for vision and all too often results in loss of the globe. Early diagnosis and
aggressive therapy are generally required if vision is to be preserved for a sig-
nificant period. Acute glaucoma (such as that resulting from goniodysgenesis/
narrow angle complex) with elevation of the IOP resulting in blindness is an
emergency and the pressure rmust be reduced to the normal range rapidly if
there is to be any chance of saving vision. Initially hospitalization is required
and treatment is generally commenced with topical prostaglandin analogs (see
below). Should the IOP fail to return to normal within the first 30-60 min then
the use of osmotic diuretics should be considered. Provided that the IOP
returns to normal, treatment is continued with a combination of topical pros-
taglandin analogs and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, plus or minus other
combinations of topical rmedication. The patient should remain hospitalized
while the response to therapy is assessed. Despite maximal medical therapy a
IOP within the normal range. The prognosis for vision in such cases is guarded.
Long-term anti-glaucoma medication (e.g. with topical carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors) for the second, predisposed but normotensive eye should be under-
There is evidence that prophylactic therapy may delay the onset of glaucoma
in the second eye of such cases.36
Chronic open angle glaucoma is much more amenable to medical treatment
in its early stages than the goniodysgenesis/narrow angle glaucomas, although
later in the disease acute rises in IOP may occur.
Management of the secondary glaucomas very rmuch depends on the etiol-
234
ocular tumor. In all cases of glaucoma, investigations should be undertaken
to identify the initiating disease. These should include a detailed ophthalmic
RBITAL
performed on the affected eye if possible, although this may prove difficult
AND
in the presence of significant corneal edema. In addition, gonioscopy should
OCUL
be carried out in the fellow eye as this may provide vital inforrmation in
determining whether the glaucoma in the presenting eye is likely to be due to
AR
goniodysgenesis/narrow angle complex or secondary to some other disease
PAIN
process. Ocular ultrasonography may be indicated if the ocular media of the
presenting eye are clouded and the cause of the glaucoma is in doubt. Where
the globe can potentially be saved, treatment must be directed at controlling
 o  s    n n n  a
of the underlying cause. In view of the requirements for (a) accurate IOP
measurement, (b) the use of advanced diagnostic techniques such as gonios-
coma management, referral to a veterinary ophthalmologist should always be
considered. This is especially irmportant where there is the possibility of pre-
serving vision or where the fellow eye may be involved in the underlying
disease process.
Medical treatment (also see pp. 58-61 and Appendix Table 6)
Osmoticdiuretics
Mannitol 10-20% solution, 1-2 g/kg given i.v. over 20 rmin may be used for
rapid reduction of IOP. It acts by dehydrating the vitreous body; water should
be withheld over the initial period to maintain this effect. Care should be taken
with its use in elderly or sick patients.
at-home treatment for dogs known to be predisposed to primary glaucoma,
although this may induce emesis, and emergency treatment in the home may
be better accomplished with the use of prostaglandin analogs (see below).
Prostaglandinanalogs
Latanoprost, travaprost, and bimatoprost are prostaglandin analogs that are
now available for topical treatment of glaucoma. They act by increasing uveo-
scleral outflow, a drainage route responsible for 15% of aqueous drainage in
normal dogs, and they also cause a profound reduction in the production of
aqueous, at least in norrmal dogs.?' As a result of their rapid onset of action
 and marked effect on the IOP in many patients they are frequently used for
emergency treatment in cases with acute-onset glaucoma. They are usually
applied twice daily, and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors may also be used con-
currently as adjunctive therapy. Prostaglandin analogs cause significant miosis
and rmay exacerbate underlying uveitis. They should therefore be used with care
in cases with pre-existing inflammation or where prolapsed vitreous may
become entrapped in the pupil and lead to pupil block. In view of both the
potency of the prostaglandin analogs, and the miosis which they cause, their
use tends to be reserved for first-line therapy in severe acute cases or in insta nces
where other medical therapy (such as the use of topical carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors) is proving ineffective. This class of drugs has been shown to be inef-
fective in reducing the IOP of normal cats.3
235
IGY
Carbonicanhydraseinhibitors
10LO
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors remain one of the mainstays of medical therapy
W
for glaucoma in dogs and cats. They act by inhibiting aqueous production.
THAL
Various drugs are available (Table 6.4 and Appendix Table 6). Adverse
OPHT
effects to systemic therapy include diuresis, gastrointestinal disturbances,
hypokalemia, and metabolic acidosis. The topical application of carbonic
MAL
anhydrase inhibitors avoids these systermic side effects and is therefore gener-
ANIM
ally the preferred route of administration. This benefit of topical use is par-
ticularly applicable to elderly or sick dogs and also cats, as these individuals
may be especially susceptible to the side effects of systemic carbonic anhy-
SMAI
drase inhibitor use.
β-adrenergic blockers
β-blockers applied topically result in reduced aqueous production. They may
be a useful adjunct to therapy, but their effect is insufficient to warrant their
sole use. Timolol maleate and metipranolol applied ql2 h to q8 h are the most
commonly used agen ts.
Miotics
Where the drainage apparatus is still open, topical miotics such as pilocarpine
(1% or 2% q12 h to q8 h) and dermecarium brormide (0.125% or 0.25% q24 h to
q12 h) cause a reduction in IOP. Their use is questionable when the ciliary cleft
is collapsed or completely obscured, as is true of most longer-standing glau-
coma cases. Where the use of a miotic may be indicated it is generally preferable
Neuroprotective therapy
The systermic use of calcium channel blockers (e.g. diltiazem 1 mg/kg q8 h per
os) in glaucoma cases rmay have a neuroprotective effect by reducing the rate
 of retinal ganglion cell death caused by an excessive influx of calcium.40
Table 6.4  Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors.
Drug
Dosage
Topical
Dorzolamide hydrochloride
2% q8 h
Oral
Ethoxzolamide
4 to 7.5 mg/kg q12 h to q8 h
per 05
Methazolamide
 5 to 10 mg/kg q12 h to q8 h
per 05
Dichlorphenamide
5 to 10 mg/kg q12 h to q8 h
per 05
236
Acetazolamide
10 to 25 mg/kg q12 h per 05
Surgical treatment
ORBITAL
Surgery aimed at preserving vision is not infrequently indicated in the manage-
ment of primary glaucoma and also in some cases of secondary glaucoma,
_AND OCULAR
especially those caused by primary lens luxation. Surgery may be directed at
decreasing the production of aqueous or increasing its outflow.
Cyclodestructivetechniques
Partial destruction of the ciliary body can be achieved using transscleral cryo-
PAIN
of gentamicin or cidofovir.4 Of these, laser therapy is the technique of choice,
especially where vision is to be preserved. Chermical ablation offers unpredict-
able results, both in terrms of IOP control and cosmesis - its use should be
reserved only for blind, painful eyes in which enucleation or evisceration is not
a viable option for management.
Drainage procedures
Scleral trephination combined with peripheral iridectomy is a simple method
of temporarily increasing aqueous outflow. Drainage implants of various
types are currently preferred as they reduce the risk of failure due to scar tissue
formation which prevents resorption of aqueous (Fig. 6.31).46.47 The technique
may be combined with laser cyclophotocoagulation." Fibrosis around the
although methods of managing this complication are under development.49
Enucleation or eviscerationwith intraocular prosthesis
Some blind, painful, glaucomatous eyes cannot be successfully managed by the
techniques outlined above. In these cases, enucleation or evisceration with
insertion of a silicone sphere may be the best option available.
237
Fig. 6.31 A drainage device has been implanted in this eye to drain aqueous to the
periocular tissues.A plastic tube can be seen in the anterior chamber.
MOLOGY
LENS LUXATION AS A CAUSE OF OCVLAR PAIN
Dislocation (luxation) of the lens may occur as a primary or a secondary
OPHTHAL
event.
Primary lens luxation
Primary lens luxation is seen most commonly in rmiddle-aged terrier breeds,
AL
ANIM
and may also occur in other breeds such as the Shar Pei, Border Collie, Lan-
cashire Heeler, and Italian Spitz.-s2 An abnormality of the lens zonule is
believed to lead to a progressive breakdown of the zonular fibers, resulting in
SMALL
subluxation and eventual luxation of the lens.0.53
Pain is often a major presenting feature of anterior lens luxation. The lens
may be visible in the anterior chamber and is most easily recognized by the
presence of a bright, refractile ring which represents the lens equator (Fig. 6.32).
Sub-central corneal edema may result from the luxated lens contacting the
(iridodonesis) and prolapsed vitreous may be seen as grayish strands in the
anterior charmber (Fig. 6.33). The extent of zonular breakdown may be seen
more readily after dilating the pupil (Fig. 6.34).
Secondary glaucoma commonly results from lens luxation due to blockage
of the pupil by the lens or vitreous, or as a result of obstruction of the drainage
Early diagnosis is therefore paramount if the condition is to be successfully
managed; any terrier or other predisposed breed presenting with a red eye
should be specifically assessed for the possible presence of lens luxation and
elevation of the IOP. Glaucoma secondary to anterior lens luxation is uncom-
mon in cats, probably due to the depth of the feline anterior chamber.
Treatrment involves rapidly reducing the IOP (see p. 235) followed by
Fig. 6.32 Primary lens
luxation in a Parson Jack
Russell Terrier. The lens is
positioned in the anterior
chamber and can be
recognized by the refractile
238
ring of the lens equator.
ORBITAL AND OCULARPAIN
Fig. 6.33  Vitreous protruding through the pupil of a Jack Russell Terrier with impending
primarylensluxation.
Fig. 6.34 Lens subluxation (readily seen after the pupil was dilated) due to lens zonule
breakdown in a Tibetan Terrier with primary lens luxation.
239
A
providing that there is potential for preserving vision. The surgery is not
MOLO
without risks of significant complications, e.g. retinal detachment, intraocular
hemorrhage, and postoperative glaucoma. Optimal results are obtained using
OPHTHAL
microsurgical techniques and the procedure should be perforrmed by veterinar-
ians who are expert in performing intraocular surgery. Careful postoperative
management is required, and patients should be monitored at regular intervals
for life in order to optimize the long-term outcome. In animals where the lens
A
ANIM
of the second eye has not yet luxated, lentectormy at that stage is considered
preferable to leaving the eye until the lens luxates, especially if it can be
removed by small incision surgery (phacoemulsification). In cases of posterior
SMAI
lens luxation the use of miotics (e.g. prostaglandin analogs) to retain the lens
in the posterior segment has been advocated. There is the ongoing risk of acute
glaucoma development in such cases, however, as a result of either pupil block
due to vitreous prolapse or inadvertent escape of the lens into the anterior
chamber, e.g. due to medication errors.
Secondary lens luxation
The lens may dislocate due to damage to the zonular attachments resulting
from antecedent ocular disease. The commonest primary event is glaucoma,
which then causes enlargement of the globe and stretching of the zonular fibers,
typically resulting in lens subluxation (Fig. 6.35) and the appearance of an
aphakic crescent, or less commonly complete luxation (Fig. 6.36). Secondary
lens luxation may also result from uveitis,$4 the development of a hypermature
cataract (Fig. 6.37), or severe trauma. Where lens luxation is secondary to other
ocular disease, especially glaucoma, lens extraction is infrequently indicated.
Fig. 6.35  Lens subluxation in a dog with primary glaucoma resulting in globe
240
enlargement and tearing of lens zonular fibers.
ORBITAL AND OCULAR PAIN
Fig. 6.36 Secondary lens luxation in a dog with glaucoma and globe enlargement. The
lens is within the anterior chamber and has become cataractous.
Fig. 6.37 Luxation of a hypermature cataract in a 13-year-old crossbred dog.
Efforts should first be directed towards control of the underlying problern
before considering surgical intervention.
ACUTE ANTERIOR UVEITISASA CAUSE
OF OCVLAR PAIN
Anterior uveitis constitutes inflammation of the iris and the ciliary body.s.56
Acute uveitis can cause intense ocular pain, mainly as a result of ciliary and
iris muscle spasm. Chronic uveitis is dealt with on pp. 169-174.
Causes of anterior uveitis include infection (Table 6.5), trauma (Fig. 6.38),
corneal insult, intraocular neoplasia, and immune-mediated disease (including
241
A9
Table6.5
 Infectious causes of uveitis.
MOLOC
DOG
CAT
OPHTHAL
I
Canine adenovirus
FIP
Rabies
FeLV
FIV
? Herpesvirus
AL
LANIM
Bacterial
Leptospirosis
? Bortonella spp.
Borreliosis (Lyme disease)
Tuberculosis
SMALL
Brucellosis
Miscellaneous
 Miscellaneous infections
infections
(pyometra, tooth root
abscess, etc.)
jebuny
Blastomycosis
Cryptococcosis
Cryptococcosis
Histoplasmosis
Histoplasmosis
Blastomycosis
Coccidioidomycosis
Coccidioidomycosis
Protozoal
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasmosis
Leishmaniasis
Parasitic
Toxocariasis
Dirofilariasis
Angiostrongylus vosorum
Migrating fly larvae
(ophthalmomyiasis
interna)
Rickettsial
Ehrlichiosis
Rocky Mountain spotted
fever
Algal
Protothecosis
FeLV =feline leukemia virus
FIP =feline infectious peritonitis
FIV=feline immunodeficiency virus
the uveo-dermatologic syndrome - pp. 106-107), and lens-induced uveitis due
to lens trauma or cataract. Less commonly it may be associated with granulo-
matous meningoencephalitis, hyperviscosity syndrome, or hypertension. There
is a marked geographic difference in incidence of sorme of the infectious causes
of uveitis, particularly those caused by fungi, protozoa, rickettsia, and algae.
Posterior uveitis may or may not accompany anterior uveitis.
Clinical signs
Acute anterior uveitis may cause combinations of the following signs:
Evidence of pain
 Blepharospasm, enoph thalmos (active retraction of the globe),
photophobia, increased lacrimation and epiphora, protrusion of the
242
third eyelid
ORBITAL AND OCULAR PAIN
Fig. 6.38 Acute traumatic uveitis in the left eye of a cat. A limbal wound has resulted in
hemorrhage, iris swelling. posterior synechia formation with consequent pupil distortion,
and the development of a fibrin clot within the aqueous.
Fig. 6.39 Episcleral hyperemia in an English Springer Spaniel with acute-onset uveitis.
The episcleral vessels are most engorged where they overlie the ciliary body.
Episcleral and conjunctival hyperemia (Figs 6.39 & 6.40)
Miosis (constricted pupil)
Aqueous flare (protein) and cells in the anterior chamber (Fig. 6.40)
Hypopyon (white blood cells in the anterior charmber) (Fig. 6.41)
Hyphema (red blood cells in the anterior chamber) (Fig. 6.42)
Corneal edema (Fig. 6.41)
Deep corneal vascularization
Iris swelling and vascular congestion (Fig. 6.41)
Lowered IOP.
243
LMOLOGY
SMALLANIMALOPHTHAL
Fig. 6.40 Marked aqueous flare in a 10-year-old Labrador Retriever with anterior
uveitis secondary to intraocular lymphosarcoma. Moderate episcleral congestion is als0
present.
Fig. 6.41 Hypopyon, intraocular hemorrhage. intense iris congestion, and corneal
edema in a cat with acute anterior uveitis.
With chronicity other signs may develop (see also pp. 169-174):
+With granulomatous uveitis, keratic precipitates may form on the corneal
endothelium - especially ventrally (Figs 6.30 & 6.43)
Iris neovascularization (pre-iridal fibrovascular membranes) (Fig. 6.43)
* Inflammatory cell nodules on the iris (especially in cats) (Fig. 6.43)
Iris pigmentary changes (Fig. 6.44)
 Synechiae formation (adhesions between iris and lens or cornea) (Figs
6.38 & 6.45)
Iris bormbe (360° posterior synechiae with resultant bowing forward of the
244
iris and secondary glaucoma) (Fig. 6.46)
ORBITAL AND OCULAR PAIN
Fig. 6.42 An Old English Sheepdog with acute uveitis. The normally hypochromic iris of
this patient is severely hyperemic and shows intra-stromal hemorrhage. In addition
there is blood in the anterior chamber (hyphema)
Fig. 6.43  Iris neovascularization and iris inflammatory cell nests in a cat with chronic
anterior uveitis.
Secondary glaucoma, either as a result of iris bombé (see above) or
resulting from pathologic changes within the drainage angle.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of anterior uveitis depends upon assessment of signalment and
history (especially important as associated systemic disease may be present),
and is particularly reliant upon a careful ophthalmic examination. Some signs
245
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 6.44 A 2-year-old Labrador Retriever with cataract of the right eye and resultant
lens-induced uveitis. This has led to darkening of the iris.
Fig. 6.45 Posterior synechiae (adhesions of iris to anterior lens capsule) have occurred
at numerous points around the pupil margin in this Japanese Akita with
Uveodermatologic syndrome.
of acute uveitis, such as aqueous flare and keratic precipitates, may be subtle
and are best detected in a darkened roorm using a focal light source and good
magnification, e.g. a slit-lamp biormicroscope. The use of tonometry is impor-
tant in the assessment of suspected cases of anterior uveitis as (a) lowered IOP
p s doap A n (a) pu ass an jo oiu Aa u aq A
complication of the underlying inflammation. Diagnosis of the cause of uveitis
may involve extensive laboratory work-up and thorough investigation of the
case for evidence of systemic disease,s-i the latter including a full clinical
examination. In many instances, however, the cause of uveitis will not be identi-
fied, despite thorough investigation.62
Numerous diseases may mirmic the signs of anterior uveitis, especially where
246
redness of the ocular coats is a feature. Most notably these include glaucoma
ORBITAL AND OCULAR PAIN
Fig. 6.46 Iris bombe and secondary glaucoma in a cat. The iris is extremely stretched
and almost completely obliterates the anterior chamber.
(which may itself arise secondary to underlying uveitis), episcleritis, keratitis,
conjunctivitis, and retrobulbar cellulitis. In addition, miosis, enophthalmos,
and conjunctival vascular injection are features common to both uveitis and
Horner's syndrome (see pp. 81-82).
Management
The main aims are to remove any underlying cause, control infammation, and
relievepain.
Corticosteroids may be used topically and systemically in the treatiment of
anterior uveitis. The risks of using systermic steroids in the face of possible sys-
temic infection should be borne in mind when treating cases of uveitis; it may
be prudent in selected instances to withhold systemic steroid use until the results
of laboratory investigations have been obtained. Prednisolone acetate or
dexamethasone applied topically both exhibit good intraocular penetration.
Surface-acting topical steroids such as prednisolone sodium phosphate and
betarmethasone should be avoided when treating anterior uveitis. Topical ste-
roids will not achieve sufficiently high drug levels in the posterior segment to
be effective in the treatment of any concurrent posterior uveitis.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) rmay also be used systermi-
cally and topically for treatment of uveitis. Topical treatment is particularly
useful not only before and after intraocular surgery but also for cats, in which
topical steroids carry a greater risk of inducing recrudescent herpesvirus infec-
tion than do NSAIDs. Some of the drugs available for systemic use are indi-
247
A
cated in Table 6.6 (availability and data sheet details vary between countries).
LO
When underlying infection may be present, systemic NSAID therapy has the
advantage, by comparison to systemic steroid treatment, of not compromising
M
1号日
the patient's immune response.
OPHT
In severe cases, and once infectious causes of uveitis have been elirminated,
anti-inflammatory therapy may be supplemented with the use of immunosup-
pressive agents. The drug most commonly ermployed is azathioprine (giving
AL
2 mg/kg q24 h for 5 days and then reducing the dose). It is important that the
patient's hematologic parameters and liver function are regularly monitored
during treatment.
SMAI
Mydriatic cycloplegics
These agents act by (a) dilating the pupil (mydriasis) which reduces the likeli
spasm (cycloplegia) which relieves pain. Topical 1% atropine is generally used
Table 6.6Anti-inflammatory drug5.
Drug
Dosage
Corticosteroids
Topical
Prednisolone acetate 1%
q6 h to q4 h initially (more
Dexamethasone 0.1%
 often in severe cases)
Systemic
Prednisolone
0.5 to 1 mg/kg/day initially
 Methylprednisolone
(or higher doses in
 severe or autoimmune
cases)
Non-steroidals
Topical
Ketorolac trometamol
Various human data sheet
0.5%
 dosage schedules for
Furbiprofen 0.03%
perioperative use
 Diclofenac sodium 0.1%
Suprofen 1%
Systemic - dogs
Carprofen
2 to 4 mg/kg/day initially
Meloxicam
0.2 mg/kg q24 h initially
Flunixin meglumine
0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg q24 h 3
xe sfep
Tolfenamic acid
4 mg/kg q24 h 3 days max.
Systemic - cats
Carprofen
2 to 4 mg/kg/day initially
(long-term use is
unlicensed in cats)
Ketoprofen
1mg/kg q24 h 5 days
Tolfenamic acid
4 mg/kg q24 h 3 days max.
Meloxicam
0.3 mg/kg by single injection
initially (longer term oral
use at a dose of 0.1 mg/kg
248
q24 h is unlicensed)
q6 h initially. Where severe miosis or iris bormbe is present, 10% phenylephrine
ORBITAL
may be used for its additive action. Mid-dilatation of the pupil is desirable as
 maximal dilatation may compromise aqueous drainage and lead to an increase
in 10P.
_AND OCULA
ally reduced over a period of several weeks or months in order to reduce the
likelihood of relapse; an episode of recrudescence can be more difficult to
control than the original bout of inflammation. Careful monitoring, including
PAIN
regular measurerment of the IOP, is required during this period, and therapy
should be adjusted as indicated.
REFERENCES
1. Mould, J.R.B. (2002) The orbit and
J.Am.Ver.Med. Assoc.18:453-
globe. In: Peterson-Jones, S.M. and
460.
Crispin, S.M. (eds) BSA VA Marual
9. Kirschner, S.E., Niyo, Y. and Betts,
of Small Animal Ophrhalmology, 2nd
D.M. (1989) [diopathic cornea]
edn. Quedgeley: BSA VA Publications,
erosions and epithelial dystrophy in
pp. 60-77.
the boxer dog. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
2. McCalla, T.L. and Moore, C.P.
Assoc. 25: 8490.
(1989) Exophthalmos in dogs and cats
10. Bentley, E. (2005) Spontaneous
- part Il. Comp. Cortr. Educ. Pract.
chronic corneal epithelial defects in
Ver.11:911-926.
dogs: a review. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
3.Petersen-Jones, S.M.(2002) The
Assoc. 41: 158-165.
eyelids and nictitating membrane. In:
11. Champagne, E.S. and Munger, R.J.
Peterson-Jones, S.M and Crispin,
(1992) Multiple punctate keratotomy
S.M.(eds) BSAVA Manual of Small
for the treatment of recurrent
Animal Ophrhalmology,2nd edn
epithelial erosions in dogs. J. Am.
Quedgeley: BSAVA Publications, pp.
Arim. Hosp. Assoc. 28: 213-216.
78-104.
12. Morgan, R.V. and Abrams, K.L.
4. Johnson, B.W, Gerding, P.A.
(1994) A comparision of six different
McLaughlin, S.A. et al. (1988)
therapies for the treatment of
Nonsurgical correction of entropion
recurrent epithelial erosions in dogs.
in Shar Pei puppies. Ver. Med. 83:
Prog.Ver. Comp. Ophrhalmol.4:
482-483.
38-43.
5. Bedford, P.G.C. (1998) Diseases and
13. Stanley, R.G, Hardman, C. and
surgery of the canine eyelid. In:
Johnson, B.W. (1998) Results of grid
Gelatt, K.N. (ed.) Vererinary
keratotomy, superficial keratectomy
Ophrhalmology, 3rd edn. Baltimore:
and debridement for the management
Williams and wilkins, pp. 535-
of persistent corneal erosions in 92
568.
dogs. Ver. Ophrhalmol. 1: 233-238.
6. Stades, F.C. (1987) A new method for
14. Baum J. (1986) Therapy for ocular
surgical correction of upper eyelid
bacterial infection. Trans. Ophrhalmol.
trichiasis-entropion: operation
Soc. UK 105: 69-77.
method. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc.
15. Hakanson, N. and Meredith, R.E.
23: 603-610.
(1987) Conjunctival pedicle grafting
7. Nasisse, M.P. (1985) Canine
in the treatment of corneal ulcers in
ulcerative keratitis. Comp. Conr. Educ.
the dog and cat. J. Am. Anirm. Hosp.
Pracr. Ver.7:686-701.
Assoc. 23: 641-648.
8. Gelatt, K.N. and Samuelson, D.A.
16. Hakanson, N., Lorimer, D. and
(1982) Recurrent corneal erosions and
Meredith, R.E.(1988) Further
epithelial dystrophy in the boxer dog.
comments on the conjunctival pedicle
249
A9
grafting in the treatment of corneal
Schiotz tonometry conversion tables
MOLOC
ulcers in the dog and cat. J. Am.
in clinically normal dogs. J Am. Ver.
Arnim. Hosp. Assoc. 24: 602-
Med. Assoc. 201: 1021-1025.
OPHTHAL
605.
26. van der Linde-Sipman, J.S. (1987)
17. Pena Gimenez, M.T. and Farina, L.M.
Dysplasia of the pectinate ligament
(1998) Lamellar keratoplasty for the
and primary glaucoma in the Bouvier
treatment of feline corneal
des Flandres dog. Ver. Parhol. 24:
MAL
sequestrum.Ver.Ophrhalmol.1:
201-206.
ANIM
163-161.
27. Renwick, P.W.(2002) Glaucoma. [n:
18. Lewin, G.A. (1999) Repair of a ful1
Petersen-Jones, S.M. and Crispin, S.
SMALL
thickness corneoscleral defect in a
M. (eds) BSAVA Manual of Small
German shepherd dog using porcine
Animal Ophrhalmology,2nd edn.
small intestinal submucosa. J. Small
Quedgeley: BSA VA Publications, pp.
Anim.Pracr.40:340-342
185-203.
19. Nasisse, M.P., Guy, J.S., Davidson,
28. Ekesten, B. (1993) Correlation of
M.G. et al. (1989) [n vitro
intraocular distances to the
susceptibility of feline herpesvirus-1 to
iridocorneal angle in Samoyeds with
vidarabine, idoxuridine, trifluridine,
special reference to angle-closure
acyclovir, or bromovinyldeoxyuridine.
gaucoma. Prog. Ver. Comp.
Am. J. Ver. Res.50:158-160.
Ophrhalmol.3:67-73.
20. Maggs, D.J. and Clarke, H.E. (2004)
29.Read, R.A.,Wood, J.L.and Lakhani,
In vitro efficacy of ganciclovir,
K H. (1998) Pectinate ligament
cidofovir, penciclovir, foscarnet,
dysplasia (PLD) and glaucoma in Flat
idoxuridine, and acyclovir against
Coated Retrievers. I. Objectives,
feline herpesvirus type-1 Am. J. Ver.
technique and results of a PLD
Res. 65: 399-403.
survey.Ver. Ophrhalmol. 1:85-90.
21. Weiss, R.C. (1989) Synergistic
30. Bjerkas, E.,Ekesten, B. and Farstad,
antiviral activities of acyclovir and
W. (2002) Pectinate ligament
recombinant human leukocyte (alpha)
dysplasia and narrowing of the
interferon on feline herpesvirus
iridocorneal angle associated with
replication. Am. J. Ver. Res. 50:
gaucoma in the English Springer
1672-1677.
Spaniel.Vet.Ophthalmol. 5:49-54.
22. Stiles, J., Townsend, W.M., Rogers,
31.Cottrell, B.D. and Barnett, K.C.
Q.R. et al. (2002) Effect of oral
(1988) Primary glaucoma in the
administration of L-lysine on
Welsh Springer Spaniel. J. Small
conjunctivitis caused by feline
Anim.Pracr.29:185-199.
herpesvirus in cats. Am. J. Ver. Res.
32. Wood, J.L., Lakhani, K.H. and Read,
63: 99-103.
RA. (1998) Pectinate ligament
23. Maggs, D.J., Nasisse, M.P. and Kass,
dysplasia and glaucoma in Flat
P.H. (2003) Eficacy of oral
Coated Retrievers. II. Assessment of
supplementation with L-lysine in cats
prevalence and heritability. Ver.
latently infected with feline
Ophthalmol. 1: 91-99.
herpesvirus. Am. J. Ver. Res. 64:
33. Barnett, K.C., Sansom, J., Heinrich,
37-42.
C. et al. Glaucoma. In: Barnett, K.C.
24. Ledbetter, E.C., Riis, R.C., Kern, T.J.
(ed.) Canine Ophrhalmology, Ist edn.
et al. (2005) Corneal ulceration
London: Saunders, pp. 99-108.
associated with naturally occurring
34. Barnett, K.C. and Crispin, S.M.
canine herpesvirus-1 infection in two
(1998) Aqueous and glaucoma. [n:
adult dogs. Ver. Ophrhalmol. 8: 440.
Barnett, K.C. and Crispin, S.M. (eds)
[Abstract of Annual Meeting of
Feline Ophrhalmology: An Arlas and
American College of Veterinary
Texr, 1st edn. London: Saunders, pp.
Ophthalmologists #21]
104-111.
25. Miller, P.E. and Pickett, J.P. (1992)
35. Wilcock, B.P., Peiffer, R.L., Jr. and
250
Comparison of the human and canine
Davidson, M.G. (1990) The causes of
glaucoma in cats. Ver. Parhol. 27:
complications of pharmacological
ORBITAL
35-40.
ablation of the ciliary body for the
36. Miller, P.E., Schmidt, G.M., Vainisi,
treatment of chronic glaucoma in the
S.J. et al. (2000) The efficacy of
dog.J. Am.Anim. Hosp.Assoc. 22:
_AND OCULAR I
topical prophylactic antiglaucoma
319-326.
therapy in primary closed angle
45. Bedford, P.G.C. (1977) The surgical
glaucoma in dogs: a multicenter
treatment of canine glaucoma. J.
clinical trial. J.Am.Anim.Hosp.
Small Anim.Pracr.18:713-730.
Assoc. 36: 431-438
46. Bedford, P.G.C. (1989) A clinica]
PAIN
37. Ward D.A. (2004) Effect of
evaluation of a one-piece drainage
latanoprost on aqueous humor fow
system in the treatment of canine
rate in normal dogs. Proceeding of rhe
gaucoma.J. Small Anim. Pracr. 30:
36rh Annual Meering ofrhe American
68-75.
College of Vererinary
47. Gelatt, K.N., Brooks, D.E., Miller,
Ophrhalmologisrs.
T.R. et al. (1992) [ssues in ophthalmic
38. Studer, M.E., Martin, C.L. and Stiles,
therapy: the development of anterior
J. (2000) Effects of 0.005%
chamber shunts for the clinical
latanoprost solution on intraocular
management of the canine glaucomas.
pressure in healthy dogs and cats.
Prog. Ver. Comp. Ophrhalmol. 2:
Am.J.Ver.Res.61:1220-1224.
59-64.
39. Regnier, A. (1999) Ocular
48. Bentley, E., Miller, P.E., Murphy,
pharmacology and therapeutics: Part
C.J. et al. (1999) Combined
2. Antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory
cycloablation and gonioimplantation
agents and antiglacuoma drugs. [n:
for treatment of glaucoma in dogs: 18
Gelatt, K.N. (ed.) Vererinary
cases (1992-1998). J Am. Ver. Med
Ophrhalmology. 3rd edn. Philadelphia:
Assoc. 215: 1469-1472.
Lippincot, Williams and Wilkins, pp.
49. Cullen, C.L. (2004) Cullen frontal
297-336.
sinus valved glaucoma shunt:
40. Brooks, D.E., Komaromy, A.M. and
preliminary findings in dogs with
Kallberg, M.E. (1999) Comparative
primary glaucoma. Ver. Ophrhalmol.
optic nerve physiology: implications
7: 311-318.
for glaucoma, neuroprotection, and
50. Curtis, R. (1990) Lens luxation in the
neuroregeneration.Ver.Ophrhalmol.
dog and cat. Ver. Clir Norrh Am.
2: 13-25.
(SmallAnim.Pracr.)20:755-773.
41. Roberts, S.M., Severin, G.A. and
51.Foster, S.J., Curtis, R. and Barnett,
Lavach, J.D. (1984)
KC. (1986) Primary lens luxation in
Cyclocryotherapy. I. Evaluation of a
the border collie. J. Small Anim.
liquid nitrogen system. J. Am. Anim.
Pracr. 27: 1-6.
Hosp. 4ssoc. 20: 823-827.
52. Lazarus, J.A., Pickett, J.P. and
42. Roberts, S.M., Severin, G.A. and
Champagne, E.S. (1998) Primary lens
Lavach, J.D. (1984)
luxation in the Chinese Shar Pei:
Cyclocryotherapy: II. Clinical
clinical and hereditary characteristics.
comparison of liquid nitrogen and
Ver. Ophrhalmol. 1:101-107.
nitrous oxide cryotherapy on
53. Morris, R.A. and Dubielzig, R.R.
glaucomatous eyes.J. Am.Arim
(2005) Light-micro scopy evaluation of
Hosp. Assoc. 20: 828-833.
zonular fiber morphology in dogs
43. Nasisse, M.P., Davidson, M.G.,
with glaucoma: secondary to lens
English, R.V. et al. (1990) Treatment
displacement.Ver.Ophthalmol. 8:
of glaucoma by use of transscleral
81-84.
neodymium: yttrium aluminum garnet
54. Olivero, D.K., Ris, R.C., Dutton,
laser cyclocoagulation in dogs. J. Am.
AG. et al. (1991) Feline lens
Ver. Med. Assoc. 197: 350-354
displacement: a retrospective analysis
44. Moller,I., Cook, C.S.,Peiffer, R.L,
of 345 cases. Prog. Ver. Comp.
251
Jr. et al. (1986) [ndications for and
Ophrhalmol. 1: 239-244.
A9
55.Hakanson, N. and Forrester, S.D
60. Lappin, M.R., Marks, A., Greene,
MOLO0
(1990) Uveitis in the dog and cat. Vef.
C.E. et al. (1992) Serologic prevalence
Clin Norrh Am.(Small Anim. Pracr.)
of selected infectious diseases in cats
OPHTHALI
20: 715-735.
with uveitis. J. Am.Ver.Med. Assoc.
56. Crispin, S.M. (2002) The uveal tract.
201: 1005-1009.
In: Petersen-Jones, S.M. and Crispin,
61. Lappin, M.R. and Black, J.C. (1999)
S.M. (eds) BSAVA Manual of Small
Barronella spp infection as a possible
MAL
AnimalOphrhalmology,2nd edn.
cause of uveitis in a cat. J. Am. Ver.
ANIM
Quedgeley: BSAVA Publications, pp.
Med. Assoc. 214: 1205-1207.
162-184.
62. Massa, K.L., Gilger, B.C., Miller,
3
57. Van Der W.A., Nasisse, M.P. and
T.L. et al. (2002) Causes of uveitis in
MAI
Davidson, M.G. (1992) Lens-induced
dogs: 102 cases (1989-2000). Vef.
uveitis in dogs: 151 cases (1985-1990).
Ophthalmol.5: 93-98.
J.Am. Ver.Med. Assoc. 201:
63. Petersen-Jones, S.M. (1993)
921-926.
Differential diagnosis of the “red eye"
58. Davidson, M.G., Nasisse, M.P.,
in small animals. In Pracr. 15: 55
English, R.V. et al. (1991) Feline
64.
anterior uveitis: a study of 53 cases.
64. Regnier, A. (1999) Clinical
J.Am.Animm.Hosp. Assoc. 27: 77-
pharmacology and therapeutics: anti-
83.
inflammatory agents. In: Gelatt, K.N.
59. Hopper, C. and Crispin, S.M. (1992)
(ed.)Vererinary Ophrhalmology,3rd
Differential diagnosis of uveitis in
edn. Philadelphia: Lippincot,
cats. In Pracr. 14: 289-297.
Williams and wilkins, pp. 308-318.
252
Ocular discharge
Simon Petersen-Jones and
Robin Stanley
Ocular discharge is a common clinical presentation in veterinary practice. Dis-
charge from the eye can result from an overflow of tears, or epiphora, as a
consequence of nasolacrimal drainage obstruction or excess production in
response to irritation. It may also or be inflammatory in nature, and character-
ized as rmucoid, rmucopurulent, or purulent. A systematic approach is required
to investigate the cause of the discharge. In this chapter, tear film anatomy and
physiology will be considered followed by methodology for routine examina-
tion of the lacrimal and nasolacrimal systems, and subsequently consideration
of conditions causing ocular discharge and their management.
THE NORMAL TEAR FILM - ANATOMY
AND PHVSIOLOGY
The lacrimal and nasolacrimal system comprises the structures that produce
tears, the tear film itself, and those structures that drain tears from the ocular
surface.
The precorneal tear film is trilaminar, with an outer lipid layer (from meibo-
mian glands), middle aqueous layer (from lacrimal and nictitans glands), and
 an inner mucous layer (predominantly from conjunctival goblet cells).
Structures that produce the tear film
·Meibomian glands (lipid layer). These are positioned within the tarsal
plate of the upper and lower eyelids and empty their secretions at the
eyelid margin.
 Lacrimal gland (aqueous layer). The lacrimal gland lies under the orbital
ligament on the dorsolateral surface of the globe. The lacrimal excretory
ducts (the lacrimal ducts, not to be confused with the nasolacrirmal duct)
open into the superior conjunctival sac.
Third eyelid gland (aqueous layer). This gland sits at the base of the third
eyelid and provides a significant contribution to the aqueous phase of the
precorneal tear film.' Its ducts open onto the bulbar aspect of the third
eyelid amongst lymphoid tissue that gives a roughened appearance to that
253
IGY
('cherry eye'). Prolapsed third eyelid glands should be surgically replaced
MOLO
topreserveglandularfunction
Conjunctival goblet cells (mucous layer). Goblet cells are at highest density
OPHTHAL
in the conjunctival fornices.
Function of tears
The precorneal tear filrm is vitally important for the health of the cornea. It
provides nutrition to the normally avascular cornea and removes waste prod-
ANIM
ucts. It also protects the cornea by washing away debris, providing some degree
of buffering against noxious substances, and transporting leukocytes, imrmu-
SMAI
noglobulins such as secretory IgA, enzymes, and immunoproteins. Tears also
provide a smooth optical surface to the cornea and lubricate the passage of the
eyelids across the eye. One of the commonest abnormalities involving the tear
pathologic changes of the ocular surface (a condition known as keratoconjunc-
tivitis sicca). Ocular disease also results from abnorrmalities of distribution of
the tear film (such as inadequate eyelid closure during blinking), or can result
from a reduction in the lipid or mucous components of the tear film (conditions
often referred to as qualitative tear film disorders).
Lacrimation or tearing
The norrmal process of lacrimation or tearing occurs as follows:
·A continuous function of lacrimal glands - the basal rate of lacrimation
A reflex action in response to stimulation (e.g. light, wind, cold, foreign
body, nasal and ocular irritation or pain) - reflex lacrimation.
Tear drainage (Fig. 7.1)
The tear drainage systerm consists of:
· Nasolacrimal puncta. There are two openings into the nasolacrimal duct
system in most domestic species: upper and lower. They are usually
positioned in the rmedial aspect of the eyelids just within the eyelid
imperforate puncta, is seen in soime puppies and is discussed further
below.
Nasolacrimal canaficuli and lacrimal sac. The canaliculi are small ducts
that join the puncta to the lacrimal sac. In cats, they are of clinical
significance because they can be easily scarred closed as a result of feline
herpesvirus conjunctivitis. They can also be quite easily ruptured if
excessive force is used to flush the nasolacrimal duct. The lacrirmal sac is a
slight dilatation at their confluence at the origin of the nasolacrimal duct.
*Nasoiacrimaf dtuct. The nasolacrimal duct runs from the lacrimal sac at
the medial canthus of the eye to the nasal cavity, penetrating through the
lacrimal bone to open at the nasal ostium. This duct rmay have
considerable variations in its diameter, and in some brachycephalic breeds
Nasal ostium. This is the distal opening of the nasolacrimal duct and is
usually positioned ventral to the basal lamina of the maxilloturbinate
scrolls. In large breed dogs it is possible to cannulate the nasolacrimal
254
duct via the nasal ostium, allowing for a retrograde nasolacrimal duct
OCULAR
Nasolacrimal puncta
Lacrimal gland
 DISCHARGE
Lacrimal ducts
Canaliculi
Meibomian glands
Gandof the
third eyelid
Nasolacrimal duct
Nasal ostium
Fig. 7.1 Anatomy of the lacrimal and nasolacrimal system. (Reproduced with
premission from Maggs, D., Miller, P. and Ofri R. (2007) Statter's Fundamentois of
Veterinory Ophthoimology. 4th edn. Saunders/Elsevier)
      n      
nasolacrimal puncta.
A proportion of the tear film is lost from the ocular surface by evaporation;
the remainder drains down the nasolacrimal duct system. At any one time a
large portion of the tears is in the lacrimal lake. This can be seen with the naked
eye as a meniscus at the medial and lateral canthus and where the lower eyelid
margin is adjacent to the cornea.From studies in humans it is known that the
entrance of tears from the lacrimal lake through the lacrimal puncta into the
nasolacrirmal duct system is the result of blinking, capillary attraction, and
gravity. When the eyelids close the lacrimal sac walls tense, creating a vacuum
within the sac, which then draws tears in as the lids open. This mechanisrm is
called the lacrimal pump.
Examination of the tear film
A visual assessment of the tear film forms part of every ophthalmic examina-
tion. The reflection of the examining light from the cornea should be clean and
even. Close examination should reveal a tear meniscus between the lower eyelid
 margin and corneal surface. At the medial canthus there is a slightly deeper
accumulation of tears (the medial canthal lake) and often at this site there is
an accumulation of rmucus.
The Schirmer tear test is used to rmeasure aqueous tear production (Fig. 7.2)
A Schirmer tear test should be perforrmed whenever there is any abnormal
ocular discharge, or when corneal or conjunctival disease is present. The test
is perforrmed by placing standardized strips of absorbent paper between the
corneal surface and the lower eyelid to measure both the basal and reflex tears
produced in 1 min (this is known as a Schirmer tear test I; STTl). In most
normal dogs there is over 15 mm of wetting and in cats more than 10 mm. This
test should be performed early in the exarmination before adding any fuid to
255
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 7.2 A Schirmer tear test being performed on a cat. The filter paper strip is
positioned between the lower lid and the cornea where it stimulates lacrimation. The
paper is marked with a scale and has a dye impregnated in it so the measurement can
beeasilyread.
Fig. 7.3 Epiphora in a dog. The overflowing tears have stained the facial hair brown.
the eye or unduly manipulating the eye. A Schirmer tear test I1 is used in some
instances to measure basal tear secretion (see pp. 283-284). Specialized methods
can be used to assess the lipid and rmucous phases of the tear filrm. These are
considered further on pages 298-300.
WATERY OCULAR DISCHARGE (THE WET EYE)
An overflow of tears, often known as epiphora, is a common clinical presenta-
tion. Chronic epiphora can result in unsightly tear staining of the hair ventral
256
to the medial canthus (Fig. 7.3).
A wet eye may result from an increase in tear production (usually in response
OCUL
to irritation) or from inadequate drainage of tears, or a combination of the
two. A careful and thorough eye examination can help to identify the cause of
a watery ocular discharge.
DISCHARGE
Investigating a ‘wet eye
Complete eye examination
A history of blepharospasm may be helpful in distinguishing conditions associ-
ated with ocular irritation from those due to nasolacrimal outflow obstruction.
The adnexa, eyelid position, ocular surface, and conjunctival fornices should
be examined. Conditions such as medial lower eyelid entropion, medial carun-
cular hairs, nasal fold irritation, and trichiasis can contribute to a watery ocular
discharge.
Additionally, an intraocular examination should be performed because con-
ditions such as uveitis and glaucoma can cause ocular discharge.
Examination using magnification
Good illumination is required; to detect some lesions that can cause ocular
irritation and to examine the openings into the nasolacrimal duct system,
magnification is also useful. The biomicroscope slit-lamp (expense tends to
limit it to specialist use), a Welch Allyn LumiView (a headband-mounted bin-
ocular microscope which is useful as it leaves the hands free for manipulations),
loupes, or a direct ophthalmoscope with a high positive diopter setting can be
used. The eyelid margin should be examined for distichia and the conjunctival
surface of the eyelids for ectopic cilia.
The external portion of the nasolacrimal drainage apparatus, the puncta, is
that may be detected by examining the puncta include punctal atresia, micro-
punctum, and abnormal punctal position. If palpation of the lacrimal sac is
painful and results in the expression of exudates from the puncta, dacryocystitis
should be considered.
Fluorescein dye - corneal staining and assessment of
nasolacrimal drainage
Fluorescein can by used to help detect corneal ulcers and also to monitor tear
drainage (Jones test). To test for corneal ulceration a small drop of fluorescein
dye is placed in the conjunctival sac, using a fluorescein-impregnated paper
strip to which a drop of saline is added. Excess fluorescein is flushed from the
ocular surface using sterile eyewash. This is irmportant to avoid excess dye in
dye. The cornea is exarmined to see if there is retention of fluorescein stain
indicating the presence of a corneal ulcer which could be the cause of increased
lacrimation. Examination using a blue light enhances the fluorescence of
fluorescein.
To evaluate nasolacrimal tear drainage fuorescein is applied to the conjunc-
tival sac and the ipsilateral nostril is examined for appearance of the fluorescein
  in s  s   an o A n 
several minutes before the dye appears at the nostril. Negative results do not
necessarily indicate that there is an abnormality in the nasolacrimal duct
257
Fig. 7.4 Fluorescein ha5
been applied to the
ANIMAL
 conjunctival sac of both
eyes of this dog.The
fluorescein has failed to
SMALLA
come through the right
 nasolacrimal duct to the
nostril. The next step in
 investigating this problem
would be to flush the duct.
system; in some brachycephalics, the nasolacrimal duct can have accessory
openings such that fluorescein drains posteriorly and does not appear at the
nostril. The back of the tongue should be exarmined to help identify drainage
of tears to the nasopharynx.
Examination under the nictitans
In any eye with evidence of irritation it is important to examine the recesses of
the conjunctival fornices as well as behind the third eyelid for the presence of
foreign bodies or other lesions. This is readily performed after application of
a topical anesthetic and manipulation with a cotton swab or appropriate
instrument.
Flushing the nasolacrimal duct system
Irrigation of the nasolacrimal duct is useful to evaluate patency where a fuo-
rescein passage (Jones) test is negative. It should also be considered where there
is a chronic rmucopurulent ocular discharge in the presence of normal tear
production because dacryocystitis is a differential for a rmucopurulent discharge
that is refractory to topical medication.
Equipmentforexaminingandcannulating thelacrimaldrainagesystem
Magnification, e.g. Welch Allyn LumiView, Optivisor, or loupes
Lacrimal cannulas: these can be purchased, or you can use a 20- to
22-gauge plastic sleeve from an i.v. catheter - these are easiest to use
if trimmed to about 5-10 rmm in length and the end bevelled
Monofilament 3/0 to 2/0 nylon that can be used to cannulate the
duct
Small forceps, e.g. Bishop-Harmon, to handle the eyelid
+ Nettleship dilators of different sizes. These can be used to dilate the
puncta, and to probe the canaliculi
 5 ml syringe filled with flushing solution, e.g. sterile eyewash
(visualization can be improved by adding fluorescein dye), or if
lushing a systerm with dacryocystitis povidone-iodine solution (not
the scrub, which contains detergent) diluted 1: 50 with saline can be
258
used
* Fine hemostats or needle holders that can be used to hold the nylon
OCULAR
suture material during cannulation.
Technique (Figs 7.5& 7.6)
DISCHA
For all small dogs and cats it is preferable to perforrm the nasolacrimal fush
under sedation or a light general anesthetic. The punctal openings in these
HARGE
animals are quite small and could be damaged if the anirmal struggles. For
larger dogs the system may be flushed just under topical anesthesia, although,
if the animal will not keep still, light sedation may be advantageous.
 os  a     an n   s n  an o
the irrigating solution will run out of the nostril.
A metal or plastic cannula, 20-22-gauge for dogs, or 25-gauge for cats,
attached to a 5 ml syringe, is inserted into the upper punctum, and the naso-
lacrimal duct irrigated with sterile saline or diluted povidone-iodine. If the
it. The lower punctum is then occluded with finger pressure (see Fig. 7.5). The
saline stream should then exit from the nasal ostium and thus the nostril. Irri-
gation by cannulating the lower punctum and occluding the upper punctum
(by finger pressure) is then carried out. Again, a vigorous stream should exit
from the nostril. If there is resistance to flushing, undue pressure should not be
used as it is possible to rupture the duct or propel a foreign body that is occlud-
ing flow further along the duct system.
Cannulationofthenasalostium
In larger breed dogs it is often possible to cannulate and flush from the nasal
ostium. This can be attempted when it is not possible to flush the nasolacrimal
duct from the eye. The dog is anesthetized and the nasal ostiurm visualized using
a speculum to dilate the nostrils (a vaginal speculum of the size used for small
animals is suitable if the tips of the instrument are used) and a small focal light
source. The nasal ostium is usually positioned on the floor of the nasal cavity
(Fig. 7.7). There may be more than one opening. An irrigating cannula can be
introduced into the opening, and the nasolacrimal duct flushed. If required, it
may be possible to cannulate the nasolacrimal duct system by introducing a
until it ermerges from the upper punctum of the eyelid. This will establish the
patency of the nasolacrimal duct, after which irrigation may be carried out.
over the nylon (see p. 282).
Interpretingthenasolacrimalfhush
Exit of saline via the non-cannulated punctum but not the nose suggests that
the lacrirmal canaliculi are patent but the nasolacrirmal duct is blocked.
presence of infection (dacryocystitis).
Saline readily exits from the nose,without resistance,but passage of
fiuorescein has been slow or absent.This shows that the system is patent
system and drain along it is inadequate. This situation is common in
breeds such as Poodles and Maltese Terriers (see below and Figs 7.3 &
7.9).
259
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
B
Fig. 7.5 Method for testing the patency of the nasolacrimal duct system. Cannulation of
the upper punctum, shown in (A) allows one to observe exit of fluid (saline) from either
the lower punctum or the nose. The latter is shown in (B): note that finger pressure is
applied to the lower punctum to force the fluid along the nasolacrimal duct. (Redrawn
with permission from the Post Graduate Foundation and Ms Rosemary Craig. from
Blogg, J.R. and Stanley. R.G. (199O) Discharging eye. In: Common Eye Diseose.
260
Proceedings 158.Post Graduate Committee inVeterinary Science,University of Sydney.
pp.223-236.)
OCULAR DISCHARGE
Fig. 7.6 A metal nasolacrimal cannula has been introduced into the upper canaliculus
via the punctum to irrigate the nasolacrimal system.
Fig. 7.7 Forceps spreading the left nostril to expose the nasal ostium of the
nasolacrimal duct. In the dog.the nasal ostium is located caudal to the opening of the
external nares near the junction of the lateral wall and the floor of the nostril. It is
similarly located in the cat, but, owing to the size of the external nares, it is diffcult to
observe.
261
IGY
Dacryocystorhinography
MOLO
This technique can be used to investigate blockage of the nasolacrimal duct
s
OPHTHAL
present.
Contrast material is injected into the nasolacrimal apparatus to make the
system visible on radiographs. General anesthesia is required, the upper
MAL
punctum is cannulated, the lower punctum occluded, and radiographs taken
ANIM
immediately the contrast media is injected. Care should be taken to avoid the
overflow of contrast rmedia onto the face as this can obscure the view of the
SMALL
duct systems on the radiographs. Lateral and oblique views are recommended
as in the dorsoventral view the teeth may overlie the nasolacrimal duct making
it more difficult to examine.
Epiphora associated with impaired tear drainage
Table7.1indicatesconditionsthatareassociatedwithimpairedtear
drainage.
Congenital anomalies of the nasolacrimal drainage system
Congenital absence of the puncta, canaliculi, and/or nasolacrimal duct results
in epiphora. Golden Retrievers and English and American Cocker Spaniels are
commonly affected by punctal atresia, most typically of the lower punctum.
several weeks or months of age (although the defect is developmental, epiphora
Pie an wm aa aun go toexg (sanddnd no ui pou Ansn ou s
of magnification reveals that the lower opening to the nasolacrimal duct is
iaa aq  sms os y 'tusd si und addn au Ann se
deep to the occluded punctum.
Surgery for punctal atresia (Fig. 7.8)
The patent punctum is cannulated with a 20-22-gauge cannula. Pulse fushing
from the patent punctum causes mucosa overlying the other canaliculus to
              
scissors can be used to incise through the rmucosa overlying the canaliculus and
fine iris scissors used to create a punctum as shown in Figure 7.8; or the rmucosa
can be punctured with a 25-gauge needle and a Nettleship dilator used to
enlarge the new opening. It is unusual for the newly created punctum to close
over, but if that occurs it may be necessary to recreate the opening and place
an indwelling cannula. Alternatively, gelatin plugs or punctal plugs can be
inserted into the newly created punctum.
Enlargementofamicropunctum
A small punctum can be enlarged by dilatation with a Nettleship dilator. This
probe is placed into the punctum and is gently twisted to enlarge the opening.
Correcting a misplaced punctum
A misplaced punctum can be enlarged with a Nettleship dilator with the aim
of improving tear flow.
Tear staining syndrome (Fig. 7.9)
This is a common complaint in dog breeds such as Maltese Terriers and
262
Poodles,and also in Persian cats.Animals with a white coat develop an
Table 7.1Epiphora - causes associated with impaired tear drainage.
OCULAR I
Disease or lesion
Prominentaccompanying
Diagnostic aids
causing epiphora
signs and result of
 DISCHARGE
fluorescein passage test*
Atresia of
Negative fluorescein
Examine site of
 nasolacrimal puncta
pa55age
nasola crimal puncta
with magnification
Micropunctum
Negative or slow
Examine site of
fluorescein passage
nasola crimal puncta
with magnification
Displaced lower
Negative or slow
Examine site of
punctum
fluorescein passage
nasola crimal puncta
with magnification
 Inadequate passage
Often associated with
Examination of eyelid
of tears into or
 medial canthal entropion,
and globe positioning. It
through nasolacrimal
prominent globe, and tight 
is possible to flush
duct system
lower lid with shallow
through the duct
medial canthal lake and
trichiasis from hairs on the
caruncle
Blocked nasolacrimal
Negative fluorescein
It will not be possible to
pnp
pa55age
flush through the duct
Dacryocystitis
Mucopurulent ocular
Mucopurulent or
discharge, often profuse
purulent material can be
expressed out of the
lower punctum by digital
 pressure on the medial
canthal skin over the
lacrimal sac
*This category refers to signs other than epiphora
unsightly brown staining of the hair ventral to the medial canthus. This is
usually a cosmetic problerm and the constant wetness of the skin does not often
result in a moist dermatitis.
In many animals with this condition there is no obvious sign of irritation
and the nasolacrirmal duct system is found to be patent. It appears that the rate
of tear entry into the nasolacrimal duct systern is not sufficient to drain the
lacrimal lake rapidly enough and a tear overfow results. Possible contributory
factors include:
Caruncular hairs acting to *wick' tears onto the face
 Prominent eye with a shallow lacrimal lake
 Medial lower eyelid entropion - results in suboptimal positioning of the
lower punctum.
263
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
凸
Fig. 7.8 Method of correcting punctal atresia. The upper punctum is cannulated and
when flushed 'tenting or ballooning of the mucosa over the lower canaliculus is evident.
a5 shown in (A). The mucosa overlying the lower canaliculus can then be opened; note
that incising the mucosa with scissors, as shown in (B), is not the only means of opening 
the punctum.
Fig. 7.9 Epiphora in a
Poodle. There is brown tear
 staining of the hair medial
and ventral to the right eye.
Fluorescein has been
placed in the conjunctival
sac and has run onto the
tear-stained periocular
hairs.
Management
Correction of any contributory abnormalities detected such as medial canthal
entropion may be of benefit. Some veterinarians advocate the use of tetracy-
clines, tylosine, or metronidazole given orally (generally at sub-therapeutic
264
dosage) to reduce the brown staining. However, indiscriminate use of antibiot-
ics for this typically cosmetic problem is not recommended.
Decreased tear drainage: acquired problems
OCULAR DISCHARGE
 Acquired blockage of the nasolacrimal duct system may be due to
aggregation of exudate within the duct or the presence of foreign bodies.
Exudates may be due to infammatory or infectious processes and grass
seed foreign bodies are a common cause.
In cats obstruction of the proximal portion of the system can be the result
 of symblepharon formation following feline herpesvirus infection (Fig.
7.10)
 Lacerations of the medial eyelids or the canthal area may involve the
nasolacrimal system. Whenever possible an indwelling cannula should be
kept in place until the eyelid has healed in order to preserve tear drainage.
 Inflarmmatory disease in the nose or facial area such as tooth root
infections, dacryocystitis, facial osteomyelitis, rhinitis, and sinusitis.
 Neoplasms impinging on the nasolacrimal drainage system such as eyelid
tumors involving the medial canthal region and nasal or maxillary sinus
tumors.
Creating an artificial nasolacrimal duct
In animals with absence of portions of the nasolacrimal duct system or an
irreversible lack of tear drainage it is possible to create an alternative tear
can be created (dacryocystomaxillorhinostomy) and kept patent while healing
by an indwelling catheter.?
Two techniques have been described to create a tear drainage pathway from
the conjunctival sac. These procedures should only be considered when epiph-
Fig. 7.10 Adhesions (symblepharon) resulting from a previous feline herpesvirus
265
infection. The third eyelid is fixed partly across the eye and the lower conjunctival fornix
is partly obliterated, leading to epiphora.
Table 7.2 Epiphora - painful or irritating conditions associated with increased
A9
9
tear production.
Disease or lesion
Prominent
Diagnostic aids
M
causing epiphora
accompanying signs*
OPHTI
Trichiasis
 Signs of irritation, possibly
Examine eye and adnexa with
keratitis
aid of magnification
AL
Distichiasis
Variable: from no obvious
Examine eyelid margins with
.ANIM
signs to signs of irritation,
aid of magnification
possibly keratitis
3
SMAL
Ectopic cilia (see
Keratitis, conjunctival
Evert lid edge and examine
Ch.6)
hyperemia, corneal ulcer
with magnification
 Eyelid margin lesions:
May be associated with
 Evert lid edge and examine
injuries, inflammatory
keratitis, conjunctival
with magnification
and neoplastic lesions
hyperemia, and possibly a
corneal ulcer
Entropion
 Signs of irritation, possibly
Assess eyelid position while
keratitis
animal is minimally restrained
Conjunctivitis
Superficial conjunctival
Retract lid and look for
hyperemia
thickened conjunctiva in
fornices
Irritation from third
Inflammatory infiltration of
Examine under third eyelid for
eyelid
third eyelid
follicles,infiltration, or foreign
body
Corneal ulcer (see
Corneal edema.rough
Examine corneal surface with
Ch.6)
area of denuded
magnification, fluorescein dye
epithelium, with chronicity
test, and examine under blue
corneal vascularization
light
Perforating corneal
Leakage of aqueous
Apply fluorescein; leaking
woundst (see Ch. 6)
humor out of the wound,
 aqueous humor will stain an
formation of secondary
 intense green (Seidel test)
aqueous showing a5
strands or clots of fibrin on
the cornea
Acute glaucoma (see
Red eye, semi-dilated
Tonometry
Ch. 6)
pupil, increased
intraocular pressure
Anterior uveitis (see
Red eye, miotic pupil 
Use oblique light to detect
Ch.6)
aqueous flare
Orbital space-
Exophthalmos
Compare position or globes
occupying lesions
from above, check degree to
(see Ch. 6)
which globe can be retropulsed
266
into orbit
*This category refers to signs otherthan epiphora
+Epiphora in this case is an overflow of tears ond aqueous humor
 a   o s s       
OCULARI
disappointing.
Conjunctivorhinostomy
 DISCHARGE
 s    o o     n   
the nasal cavity. Polyethylene or Silastic tubing is placed into the new outflow
tract for 6-8 weeks to keep the duct open.3-5
Conjunctivobuccostomy
A tunnel is bluntly dissected from the ventral conjunctival sac downwards until
the oral mucosa can be entered between the lip and upper dental arcade. The
tunnel is then cannulated with polyethylene tubing to ensure epithelialization
and permanent fistulization.
Epiphora associated with ocular irritation
 Table 7.2 lists potential causes of increased tear production due to ocular irrita-
tion or pain.
Irritation from eyelidabnormalities
Abnormalities involving the contact of cilia with the ocular surface, such as
distichiasis, ectopic cilia, trichiasis, and entropion, are common causes of
epiphora. Other sources of irritation that cause epiphora include eyelid neo-
plasia, lacerations, and marginal blepharitis.
Distichiasis
        s    
Many dogs have distichiasis without showing clinical signs because either the
distichia do not contact the ocular surface, or they are fine and foat in the
precorneal tear film. In some cases where the distichia are thick and stiff, even
a single distichium can irritate the eye producing epiphora, focal keratitis, and
Fig. 7.11 Distichiasis in a
Shetland Sheepdog.
267
 OPHTHALMOLOGY
SMALLANIMAL
Fig. 7.12 Distichia at the medial lower eyelid that can be 5een rubbing on the cornea.
Can be a cause of epiphora and in this case a perforated corneal ulcer.
even corneal ulceration (although distichia by themselves are a rare cause of
ulcerative keratitis) (Fig. 7.12). Treatment consists of destruction or removal
of the offending follicles. Destruction is achieved by excision, electrolysis, or
cryoepilation.6
Ectopic cilia
Ectopic cilia are less common than distichia but when present they invariably
cause irritation or pain. In contrast to distichiasis, corneal ulceration is a
common association. They are discussed in more detail on pages 212-214.
Trichiasis
Trichiasis is a condition in which normally positioned hairs are misdirected to
              
Pekinese, Poodle, and Lhasa Apso. Trichiasis from the nasal fold (Fig. 7.13) is
cormmon in breeds such as the Pekinese. Affected dogs often develop a medial
pigmentary kera titis. Applica tion of petroleum jelly to the hair of the nasal fold
may be used temporarily to redirect the hairs that are contacting the cornea.
In severely affected dogs the nasal fold can be surgically excised, either partially
the surgical site is clipped the fold requiring removal is obvious. Owners should
be warned of the change in appearance that results.
Hairs at the medial canthus that contact the cornea may be due to medial
lower eyelid entropion (Fig. 7.15) or from hairs originating from the caruncle
(Fig. 7.16). These abnormalities are cormmonest in breeds such as Lhasa Apso,
Shih Tzu, and the brachycephalic breeds; discharge may be due to irritation or
a ‘wicking’ effect of the hairs. A hairy caruncle can be surgically excised or the
hair roots destroyed by cryoepilation. Medial canthal entropion can be treated
268
by everting the medial lower eyelid in a similar manner to a conventional
OCULAR DISCHARGE
Fig. 7.13  Oblique view to show the corneal contact from nasal fold hair in this Pekinese.
Fig. 7.14 Surgical excision of nasal folds. The site is prepared for surgery.A preparation
5uch as dilute povidone-iodine is used to prepare the skin - as this is close to the eye
avoid detergents or alcohols that could damage the corneal surface. The entire nasal fold
or a portion of the nasal fold is excised. The defect may be closed with simple interrupted
sutures or a mattress suture pattern as shown in the diagram. Care must be taken to
keep knots away from the eye.
entropion correction (Fig. 7.17). Some cases are better managed by a medial
canthoplasty, in particular in dogs that have an overlong palpebral fissure and
develop a progressive medial pigmentary keratitis. For a medial canthoplasty
 a thin strip of the margins of the upper and lower eyelids at the medial canthus
is excised and the rmucosa at the medial canthus also excised (including hair-
bearing tissue of the caruncle). The defect is closed in a two-layer repair and
will result in a narrowed palpebral fissure (Fig. 7.18). Care is taken not to
269
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 7.15 Medial lower
eyelid entropion. This can
result in malpositioning of
the lower puncta and
epiphora.
Fig. 7.16 Long caruncular hairs in a Shih Tzu. These may cause a medial keratitis and
contribute to tear overflow.
damage the nasolacrimal puncta. This surgery should be performed with the
aid of magnification and referral to an ophthalmologist is recommended.
Entropion
Entropion results in contact between eyelid hair and the cornea causing
irritation, lacrimation, and blepharospasm (Fig. 7.19). See pages 207-211 for
further consideration of entropion. Entropion at the medial canthus typically
involves the lower eyelid and is considered above (see Figs 7.15 and 7.17).
Conditions involving the third eyelid
Hyperplasia of the superficial lymphoid tissue on the bulbar aspect of the third
270
eyelid occurs as a non-specific response to chronic antigenic stimulation and
OCULAR DISCHARGE
Fig. 7.17  Correction of lower eyelid medial canthal entropion. (A) The medial lower
eyelid has entropion. (B)A roughly triangular piece of skin is excised. (C) As the defect is
repaired it everts the medial portion of the lower eyelid. (From Petersen-Jones, S.M. and
Crispin, S.M. (eds) (2002) BSAVA Manuot of SmallAnimat Ophthaimotogy. 2nd edn.
271
Quedgeley: BSAVA Publications.)
OPHTHALMOLOGY
can cause mild irritation. Third eyelid deformities such as prolapse of the third
eyelid gland and eversion of the third eyelid cartilage (Fig. 7.20) can also be
accompanied by tearing (see p. 87).
ABNORMAL OCULAR DISCHARGE IN THE PRESENCE
OF NORMALTEAR PRODUCTION
SMALL ANIMAL
Investigation of an eye with an ocular discharge should include a complete eye
exarmination as previously described.
Rightswerenotgrantedtoincludethisfigureinelectronicmedia
Pleaserefertotheprintedpublication.
Fig. 7.18 Diagram of a medial canthoplasty. (A) The affected eye has medial lower
eyelid entropion and a hairy caruncle. The nasolacrimal puncta are identified and
cannulated to avoid inadvertent damage during the surgery (B & C) A strip of eyelid
margin is excised from the upper lid and the incision continued around the medial
canthus to include the caruncle and along the lower lid. (D & E)The defect is repaired in
two layers. This results in a shortening of the palpebral fissure. (From Petersen-Jones, S.
M. and Crispin, S.M.(eds) (2002) BSAVA Monuot of Smoll Animot Ophthatmology. 2nd
272
edn. Quedgeley: BSAVA Publications.)
OCULAR DISCHARGE
Fig. 7.19 Entropion in a dog that had epiphora. Note the entropion invoving the lower
lateral eyelid resulting in contact of eyelid hair with the cornea.
Fig. 7.20 Scrolling of the cartilage of the nictitans leading to eversion. This can result in
epiphora.
Mucoid discharge
Mucus is a normal component of the tear film. Increased mucus production
 rmay result from any ocular surface irritation. Accumulations of mucus appear
as gray jelly-like discharge. When infection is involved the discharge may
become mucopurulent.
Some dogs, e.g. Dobermanns, have deep-set globes resulting in a deep
should not be confused with conjunctivitis and medications are NOT usually
required.
Mucopurulent or purulent discharge
273
OPHTHAL
ANIMAL
SMALL
Fig. 7.21 Deep medial
canthal pocket in a
Dobermann. This tends to
accumulate mucus.
Conjunctival abnormalities
Signs of inflammation of the conjunctiva are the same as those of other tissues:
vascular dilatation (hyperermia), tissue edema (chemosis), and exudation. The
exudate results from vascular stasis, cellular exudation, and leakage of fluid
containing fibrin and irmmunoglobulins from the involved blood vessels.
According to its rmain component the exudate may be described as serous,
mucoid, purulent, or any combination, such as mucopurulent. Conditions may
be acute, subacute, or chronic. Additional changes can include conjunctival
hermorrhage in severe cases and with chronicity follicle formation (the conjunc-
tiva is rich in lymphatics). If the condition causes pruritus, alopecia and exco-
riation of the eyelids and surrounding skin may develop.
Investigation of conjunctival disease
Diagnosis of conjunctivitis is made from the history, clinical ocular examina-
tion, and the general physical exarmination. Laboratory investigations are only
usually perforrmed in severe infections, chronic disease, or when required to
 ds      oa o sio a 
culture, collection of cells (for cytology, polymersase chain reaction tests, and
immunofluorescent tests), and small tissue samples (for histopathology or poly-
merase chain reaction tests).
Sampfes for culture Bacterial culture in dogs with severe conjunctivitis or
chronic conjunctivitis that does not respond to initial treatment should be
or eyelid margin as these sites have a different bacterial flora to the conjunctival
sac. It is useful, when trying to assess the significance of the results, to find out
from the laboratory how heavy the bacterial growth was. Cats are more often
sampled for Chlamydophila culture or herpesvirus isolation. Transport of
samples for Chlamydophila culture or virus isolation must be made in the
appropriate medium.
Samples for polymerase chain reaction tests Polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)-based tests are becoming more widely available. They can be particu-
ism. PCR assays are available for detecting the presence of Chlamydophila and
274
feline herpesvirus DNA.7-2 These assays require that cells or small tissue
samples are collected. The laboratory conducting the assay should be contacted
OCUL
for advice about sample collection and transport.
Conjunctivaf smearsInvestigation of conjunctival surface cytology by col-
AR
lecting surface smears or scrapes and staining with a Romanowski-type stain
DISCH
 a on   si i   e a a  is  
discharges from the eye using a sterile eyewash solution. Topical anesthesia can
ARGE
be used if required. Cells may be collected by a sterile swab, a cytology brush,
a sterile Kimura spatula, or even the handle end (i.e. not the cutting surface)
of a sterile disposable scalpel blade. The collected material is gently transferred
onto a clean microscope slide so as not to damage the collected cells. Several
slides should be made if different stains are to be used. Diff-Quik (Dade
Behring) is a quick in-house Romanowski-type stain that is useful for cytology
and indication of the presence of bacteria. When bacteria are seen on the Diff-
Quik-stained slide one of the other slides should be stained with Gram stain to
further characterize the bacteria. Early in the disease process cytology rmay
show inclusion bodies suggestive of Chlamydophila (cytoplasmic) or feline her-
pesvirus (intranuclear) and may indicate the presence of Mycoplasma spp (seen
on the surface of epithelial cells). Cytology is also useful in the confirmation of
eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis in cats and plasma cell infiltration of the third
eyelid in dogs (although the appearance of the latter is usually pathognomonic).
However, in conjunctivitis caused by other etiologies typically by the time
smears are taken the inflammation is chronic with a resultant mixed inflamma-
smears may also be sent for immunofuorescent antibody tests, e.g. immuno-
fluorescent antibody staining to detect canine distermper virus,4 feline herpes-
virus, and Chlamydophila felis.'$ Always check with the laboratory offering the
service to find out what they require for these tests for optirmurm results.
275
conjunctival epithelial cells, goblet cells, and stained mucus.
MOLOGY
Conjunctivaf biopsies Biopsies may be taken when more detailed histo-
anesthetic over the period of a few rminutes, small conjunctival biopsies may
OPHTHAL
be taken. Fine forceps and sharp iris scissors can be used, taking care not to
crush the tissues. It is useful to place the sample conjunctival surface uppermost
onto a piece of paper before fixation; this prevents it from curling up. It should
be remembered that the normal conjunctival morphology differs between dif-
ANIMAL
ferent portions of the conjunctival sac.
Additional laboratory investigations Serology may be useful in the investiga-
SMALL
tion of some cases. Titers for feline herpesvirus and Chlamydophila may be an
adjunct to the previously mentioned tests, depending on the vaccination status
of the cat.
Conjunctival disease in dogs
There are many possible causes of conjunctivitis in dogs.
Canine conjunctivitis associated with infection (Figs 7.23 & 7.24)
Conjunctivitis is characterized by irritation, hyperemia, and a mucopurulent
discharge. Bacterial conjunctivitis may result either from overgrowth of bac-
surroundings including transfer of organisms from other infected sites (e.g. in
animals with ear or labial fold infections). Gram-positive bacteria are most
commonly involved and there is often a predisposing factor that allows the
Investigation of a dog with conjunctivitis should include an exarmination for
any such predisposing factors, for example a Schirmer tear test and examining
Most cases of conjunctivitis are self-limiting, although treatment with broad-
spectrum antibiotics may expedite resolution. A few cases become chronic;
Fig. 7.23Chronic bacterial
conjunctivitis in a dog.
Coagulase-positive
staphylococci and
diphtheroids were present
276
in large numbers.
OCULAR DISCHARGE
Fig. 7.24 Staphylococcal
 blepharoconjunctivitis in a
5op
these should be re-examined for predisposing factors and sampled for bacterial
culture and antibiotic sensitivity testing.
Rickettsial diseases are seen in some parts of the world and subconjunctival
petechial hemorrhages may be a feature, for exarmple with ehrlichiosis and
Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Viral diseases such as canine distemper and
canine adenoviruses may cause chermosis and seroimucoid to mucopurulent
discharges. Distemper can also cause a reduced tear production. Fungal con-
junctivitis is not cormmon. In Asia parasitic conjunctivitis caused by Thelazia
spp has been reported.'6
Treatment Mild bacterial conjunctivitis in dogs is usually self-limiting and
is generally treated by application of a broad-spectrum topical antibacterial
preparation. In chronic or severe cases when cultures have been performed
initial antibacterial therapy can be chosen based on the Gram staining of
smears while awaiting culture and sensitivity results. Suitable broad-spectrum
preparations include a ‘triple antibiotic pre-paration’ containing neomycin,
polymyxin B, and either gramicidin or bacitracin. Gentamicin, tobramycin,
and ciprofloxacin also have a broad spectrum of action against Gram-positive
ond jo suann a un asn rnd jo ann inq sso aau- pu
monal infections (often associated with progressive corneal ulcers). Where
staphylococci are involved a drug such as fusidic acid (where available) can be
effective. Long-term application of antibiotics in the absence of evidence of
actual infection should be avoided since it rmay lead to antibiotic resistance or
overgrowth of organisms outside the spectrum of activity of the drug.
Hypersensitivity and immune-mediated canine conjunctival disease
-d   a ro  h  s o
moma) is a chronic, probably immune-mediated, inflammatory condition of
the exposed areas of the third eyelid conjunctiva. It may be accompanied by a
seromucoid discharge. It is most prevalent in the German Shepherd Dog and
277
IGY
may occur in conjunction with chronic superficial keratitis - pannus (see pp.
MOLO
97-99 and 166-167). The condition usually improves, and sometimes com-
pletely resolves, after treatiment with topical ciclosporin or corticosteroids,
OPHTHAL
although it may recur if treatment is stopped.
In dogs affected with the pemphigus group of diseases, eyelid margin lesions
AL
ANIM
type I hypersensitivity reaction and is initiated by inhalation of pollens, house
dust, and other allergens. Follicular conjunctivitis, seen as hypertrophied lym-
phoid follicles scattered on the surface of the nictitans and the conjunctival
SMAI
fornices, occurs with chronic antigenic stimulation or even apparently chronic
mechanical irritation in some cases.! It usually affects young dogs and seems
commoner in certain breeds such as the Weimaraner. The presence of multiple
follicles appears to cause mild irritation and discharge even after the initial
stimulus has gone. Management consists of treating any predisposing factors
and then administering a topical corticosteroid preparation. If this does not
relieve the irritation, debriding the follicles may be necessary. A blade used in
a sideways brushing rmoverment to scrape the follicles from the conjunctival
surface followed by application of a steroid/broad-spectrum antibiotic prepara-
tion is usually curative.
Canineconjunctivalneoplasiaandproliferation
Neoplasia of the canine conjunctiva is uncommon. Reported tumor types
include melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma, papillomas, fibrosarcoma, lym-
phosarcoma, lipoma, adenoma, histiocytoma, hemangioma, hemangiosar-
coma, angiokeratomas, angioendotheliomatosis, and mast cell tumors.!
Occasionally inflammatory masses can develop in the perilimbal conjunctiva,
 most commonly this is nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis.9
Conjunctival disease in cats
Infectivefelineconjunctivitis
Feline herpesvirus infection Feline herpesvirus 1 (FHV-l) is a common
cause of upper respiratory tract and ocular surface infection, typically in
young cats. Sneezing, accompanied by nasal discharge and seromucoid to
mucopurulent ocular discharges, typifies the early stages (Fig. 7.25). There is
bilateral conjunctivitis and chemosis, and in severe cases sloughing of the
conjunctival epithelium may occur with resultant symblepharon formation?
(see Fig. 7.10) and there may also be corneal involvement, especially in young
kittens. Secondary bacterial infection may complicate the picture. Chronic
carrier states are possible, with recrudescence occurring during periods of
           
(when seen, dendritic corneal ulceration is very strongly suggestive of a herpes
infection) and confirmed by viral isolation, imrmunofluorescent test, or poly-
of the infection. In kittens with mild infections careful nursing and application
of broad-spectrum antibiotics are all that is required. In rmore severe cases
topically applied antiviral preparations are used. In vitro studies suggest that
trifluridine is the most effective topical agent, followed by idoxuridine, vida-
278
rabine, bromovinyldeoxyuridine, and lastly aciclovir.?′ However, clinical
OCULAR DISCHARGE
Fig. 7.25 Kitten with a unilateral conjunctivitis caused by a feline herpesvirus infection
Note the hyperemia, chemosis, and seromucoid ocular discharge.
studies have not shown any specific antiviral preparation to be superior and
results in general were poor.22 Currently idoxuridine and trifuridine are com-
monly used antivirals in treating feline herpesvirus infection. Assessment of
other antivirals is underway.2-25 Oral antivirals such as aciclovir and famci-
available. Alpha-interferon has shown some efficacy in human patients with
ocular herpesvirus infection and has been used topically in cats with feline
herpesvirus infection as an adjunctive therapy. Recently in vitro studies showed
pathic effect of feline herpesvirus infection.26.27 Some ophthalmologists recom-
mend topical alpha-interferon at a dose of 25 IU/ml several times daily,
although this is a rmuch lower dose than has been used in humans and there
are no published clinical trials to show its efficacy. Orally applied interferon
has also been used in the management of feline herpesvirus infection; a dose
ing cycles is suggested.2B
Oral L-lysine may be useful to inhibit replication of feline herpesvirus.? At
Chlamydophila felis infection Chlamydophila felis (previously Chlamydia
psittaci) is another common pathogen of cats. It primarily causes a conjuncti-
vitis without respiratory infection. The condition often starts unilaterally but
typically becormes bilateral. It results in chemosis (Fig. 7.26) and initially a
copious serous discharge which becomes mucopurulent with chronicity.? Con-
junctival lymphoid follicle formation may also be a feature of chronic disease
(Fig. 7.27). In cats, Chlamydophila infections are best treated with systermic
doxycycline. Doxycyline can be used to eradicate Chlamydophila from the eye
as well as from the respiratory and urogenital tracts, which may be sites of
279
SMALLANIMALOPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig.7.26 Cat with
dhemosis and conjunctival
hyperemia and ocular
discharge as a result of a
Chtamydophila felis
infection.
Fig. 7.27 Cat with follicular conjunctivitis caused by chronic Chlomydophilo felis
infection.
latent infection. Azithromycin has been suggested, but in a clinical trial proved
to be less efficacious in clearing chronic infection than doxycycline." Using a
topical tetracycline alone will only treat the eye, and in some cases recurrences
can be expected. To eradicate Chlamydophila from carrier cats doxycycline at
up to 10 mg/kg/day for up to 4-6 weeks?2 may be required. It is important to
treat all the cats in the immediate environment because latent carrier infections
can occur.
Mycoplasma felis and Mycoplasma gatae infection may result in epiphora,
conjunctival follicle proliferation, chemosis, and pseudomembrane formation.
Hypersensitivity and immune-mediated feline conjunctival disease Eosino-
philic keratoconjunctivitis (see pp. 98-99) is a disease peculiar to cats (although
a similar condition occurs in horses). The condition is characterized by a pro-
280
liferative lesion affecting the conjunctiva and/or cornea with an adherent,
whitish, flocular surface discharge. Characteristically eosinophils are seen in
OCULAR
scrapings from the lesions.
Feline conjunctival masses and neoplasms Neoplasia reported involving
 DISCHARGE
the feline conjunctiva includes squamous cell carcinoma, lymphoma, and
tmelanoma
Dacryocystitis: infection of the nasolacrimal system
Inflammation of the lacrimal sac (the part of the nasolacrimal duct lying within
the orbit) is called dacryocystitis. This condition is characterized by a chronic
mucopurulent ocular discharge, which is often profuse, and rmay also be associ-
ated with irritation and conjunctivitis. Pressing on the medial canthus of an
affected animal usually elicits discomfort and displaces mucopurulent discharge
from the puncta (Fig. 7.28). Always consider the possibility of an underlying
dacrocystitis in patients with refractory ocular discharge. Dacryocystitis can be
confused with a primary mucopurulent conjunctivitis.
Etiology
Dacryocystitis is commonly the result of the presence of a foreign body in the
nasolacrimal systerm.
Management
Trea tment is aimed at removing any foreign material and irrigating the system.
 Usually the upper punctum is cannulated and sterile saline gently irrigated
through it; some of the purulent material flushed out should be collected for
culture and sensitivity (Fig. 7.29). Care must be taken not to force any foreign
bodies into the less accessible portions of the nasolacrimal duct. Enlarging the
punctal opening by cutting open the conjunctival wall of the canaliculus (one
blade of a pair of iris scissors is inserted into the punctum and the canaliculus
wall is cut) may facilitate removal of foreign material in the lacrimal sac.
Fig. 7.28  Dacryocystitis in an English Springer Spaniel. Mucopurulent discharge could
be expressed from the nasolacrimal duct system by digital pressure over the medial
281
canthus.
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Fig. 7.29 Flushing further discharge from the lower punctum of the dog in Figure 7.28.
A metal nasolacrimal cannula is in the upper punctum.
Repeated fushing of the nasolacrimal system with an appropriate antibiotic
solution or dilute (1 : 50) povidone-iodine solution may help control the infec-
tion. In non-responsive cases nasolacrimal catheterization is useful and has the
added advantage of maintaining patency of the system. Catheterization is per-
forrmed by passing monofilament nylon (0 or 2/0), the end of which has been
blunted in a fame, from the upper punctum to the nasal ostium. Some manipu-
lation may be required to encourage the monofilament nylon to exit from the
nasal ostium. Retrograde cannulation from the nasal ostium may be possible
threaded over the monofilament nylon and hemostats are used to grasp the
nylon at either end. Gentle traction is applied to the distal hermostat and the
tubing pulled through the system. Once the nasolacrimal system is catheterized
the monofilament nylon is withdrawn and the ends of the tubing are sutured
at either end to the skin adjacent to the medial canthus and nares. The tubing
is removed after about 3 weeks. In some unresponsive cases it may be necessary
to consider contrast radiographs of the nasolacrimal duct. This may help to
identify the location of an obstruction. Surgical approach to the site of block-
age rmay be required if the system cannot be cannulated.2.3s
Dacryocystitis in rabbits
Dacryocystitis is a common and sometimes frustrating problem in rabbits.
Affected rabbits present with a copious, thick, white, purulent discharge. Pas-
 teurella spp are commonly isolated from affected rabbits.36
Topical medication is not often successful in these cases. Some instances of
dacryocystitis appear to be due to an osteodystrophy and abnormal growth of
result of a low calcium diet.37,3s The roots of the teeth impinge on the nasolac-
rimal duct. Radiographs may be indicated to investigate the possibility of
concurrent dental disease. The condition is managed by repeated flushing of
282
the nasolacrimal duct systerm. Antibiotic solutions can be used as the irrigating
solution. When fushing the nasolacrimal duct it must be rermembered that
rabbits have only one nasolacrimal punctum, which is located at the medial
OCULAR
      a  
Foreign bodies
DISCHARGE
Conjunctival sac foreign bodies are a common cause of ocular irritation and
has penetrated through the conjunctiva the affected animal is likely to have a
chronic mucopurulent discharge. Exploration of the conjunctival sac for a dis-
charging sinus should be performed. Signs of orbital swelling may also be
present. Exploration of the orbit for a rmigrating foreign body can be challeng-
ing and irmaging studies to accurately localize the lesion should be performed.
Sinus, dentat, and orbital disease causing
inflammatory discharge
Retrobul bar or dental abscessation and orbital cellulitis will often cause marked
conjunctival hyperemia, chemosis, and a copious mucopurulent discharge.
ing and globe displacement. Ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT), or
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is useful in the diagnosis and localization
of orbital swellings. Ultrasound or CT-guided biopsies of affected tissue can
be performed (see pp. 79-81). Extension of infection and neoplasia from the
sinuses may give a similar presentation to retrobulbar abscessation. Retention
mucoceles in the frontal sinus can cause erosion of the frontal bone leading to
recurrent drainage of accumulated secretions via the conjunctival sac. The dis-
charge in such cases may be profuse. Imaging studies help reach a diagnosis in
such cases. Treatment is dependent on the etiology.
Other problems causing ocular discharge
Keratitis, either ulcerative, proliferative, or infectious, is a common cause of
ocular discharge. Problems that cause blepharitis may have conjunctival
involvement. Immune-mediated diseases in dogs such as the pemphigus group
ocular discharge. An ocular discharge may also accompany intraocular disease.
REDUCED OR ALTEREDTEAR PRODUCTION
The commonest condition resulting from alterations in the tear film is a reduc
tion in production of the aqueous phase of the tear film (resulting in dry eye -
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, KCS). Alterations in the lipid and mucous layer can
also result in ocular surface disease.
Dry eye - keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Kcs)
Clinical signs and diagnosis
KCS in the dog is most commonly a chronic progressive disorder. It may be
unilateral or bilateral. Dogs with a moderately lowered tear production may
present with a chronic or recurrent conjunctivitis and minimal corneal involve.
ment. The diagnosis is not always obvious at this stage and a Schirmer tear test
(STT) should be performed on all dogs with this presentation. The normal
canine STT reading is in excess of 15 mm/min? while that of the normal feline
283
exceeds 10 mm/min. If the results of the STT are not conclusive then a
OPHTHALMOLOGY
            
production. Following a regular STT (known as a Schirmer tear test I - STTI)
a topical anesthetic is applied to the eye and the conjunctival sac dried with a
sterile cotton-tipped applicator. A Schirmer tear test (STTI) is then performed.
STTlI levels should norrmally be one half or greater those of STTI levels.
As tear production decreases, accumulations of sticky mucoid or mucopu-
SMALL ANIMAL
rulent discharge tend to build up (Figs 7.30 & 7.31). The discharge clings to
the conjunctival fornices and corneal surface and in rmore severe cases may stick
Fig. 7.30Severe KCS in a
West Highland White
Terrier. The corneal surface
is very dry and has
adherent mucopurulent
discharge.
Fig. 7.31 Dog with KCS. Note the profuse adherent mucopurulent ocular discharge
coating the ocular surface. Corneal vascularization can be visualized through the
284
discharge.
the eyelids together. The conjunctiva becomes hyperermic, thickened, and pos-
OCULAR
sibly pigmented. There is a lack of corneal luster accormpanied by a variable
degree of superficial vascularization, pigmentation, and scarring (Fig. 7.32).
Some animals also have a dry nostril on the affected side. Animals with KCS
DISCHARGE
tend to exhibit signs of rmild irritation or discomfort. Corneal ulceration devel-
ops in some cases, particularly those with an acute onset, and this results in
increased discomfort. The ulceration may be progressive or slow to heal because
the dry ocular surface is not an ideal environment for corneal healing. Some
animals may even develop descemetoceles or corneal perforations (Fig. 7.33).
Secondary bacterial involverment exacerbates the problem.
Fig. 7.32 Severe KCS in a
West Highland White
Terrier. The cornea is
heavily pigmented and
there is adherent ocular
discharge.
Fig. 7.33 Severe KCS in a
West Highland White
Terrier.A deep corneal ulcer
has developed and there is
extensive keratitis and an
adherent ocular discharge.
285
2
There is a marked breed incidence for KCS and predisposed breeds include
MOLO
West Highland White Terrier, Cocker Spaniel, Shih Tzu, Lhasa Apso, Cavalier
King Charles Spaniel, Bull Terrier, Bulldog, Miniature Schnauzer, Dachshund,
OPHTHAL
Chihuahua, and Pekinese. The frequency of KCS within each breed appears
    o       
gender on occurrence of KCS exists.4l Older dogs are more predisposed than
younger ones and neutered animals are more predisposed than intact males
ANIM
and females.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca also occurs in the cat, albeit far less commonly.
SMAI
corneal changes develop much more slowly.
Etiologyofkeratoconjunctivitissicca
Glandular aplasia or hypoplasia. This results in congenital KCS. In some
there was perhaps a delayed maturation of the glandular tissue.
Autoimmune adenitis of glandular tissue.4? The majority of cases of
canine KCS probably fall into this category. Histopathologic
exarmination of the lacrimal gland reveals break-up of glandular
structure with duct dilatation and epithelial cell loss, mononuclear
cell infltration, and fbrosis.
·Trauma. KCS due to trauma may be the result of damage to the
parasympathetic supply to the lacrimal glands. In some instances normal
lacrimal secretion may return over 1-2 months.
*Neurogenic KCS results from denervation of the tear-producing glands.
Causes include trauma, infection, neoplasia, and surgical intervention.
The ipsilateral nostril may also be dry. Lesions that also involve the
 motor branch of the facial nerve (V1l) result in facial paralysis, including
an inability to blink
Iatrogenic causes include glandular damage induced by administration of
sulfa drugs, e.g. sulfadiazine, sulfasalazine,4 and trimethoprim/
on all dogs prescribed longer courses of sulfa drugs. Atropine and
atropine-like substances reduce tear production* and local and general
anesthesia results in decreased tear volume.4 Acute KCS may therefore
follow a surgical procedure where atropine and general anesthesia have
been given. Etodolac administration has been reported to be associated
with KCS in some dogs.4' Surgical removal of the nictitans gland as a
with KCS later in life.48
+KCS secondary to chronic conjunctivitis with obstruction of secretory
ductules. A common example of this is the older English Cocker Spaniel
Correction of the eyelid disorder, with treatment for KCS, usually leads
to a marked improvement in lacrimal function. KCS in the cat sometimes
follows feline herpesvirus infection.
Distemper-associated KCS Distemper can cause a dacryoadenitis with
286
resultant destruction of theglandular tissue
Management of Kcs
OCULA
Dry eye is more responsive to therapy whilst there is still some functional lac-
rimal and third eyelid gland tissue present. Eyes that present with an initial
AR
STT of 5 mm/min or more, and those who have had dry eye for less than 6
DISCHARGE
months, have a much better prognosis as they are more likely to respond to
medical therapy.
 Management of KCS consists of medications to reduce immune destruction
of lacrimal and nictitans glandular tissue, to stimulate tear production, to
reduce ocular surface pathology, and to replace tears combined with nursing
care to remove discharges. If the medical approach fails to control the condi-
tion then surgical options can be considered.
Immunemodulatorsandanti-infammatoriesinthetreatmentofKCS
The topical immunomodulator ciclosporin has been used in the management
T-helper cells and thus reducing immune destruction of lacrimal and nictitans
glandular tissue, ciclosporin also acts to stirmulate tear production possibly
through prolactin receptors. Tacrolimus? and pimecrolimus? are similar drugs
that have more recently been shown to be effective in the management of KCS
and have a similar mode of action to ciclosporin. Ciclosporin is available as a
commercial ointment and as various preparations through compounding phar
macies while tacrolimus and pimecrolirmus are available through compounding
in an improverment in Schirrmer tear test levels. In addition to the action on the
lacrimal and nictitans glands their action directly on the cornea may also help
to reduce the degree of keratitis in affected dogs. Topical corticosteroids have
also been advocated for use in KCS and help to reduce inflaimmation in the
tear-producing glands and reduce the degree of keratitis and conjunctivitis.
However, in view of the risk of corneal ulceration in KCS corticosteroids
shouldbe usedwithcare.
Parasympathomimetic drugs (e.g. pilocarpine) have been used in the treat-
ment of dry eye to stirmulate tear production. They are given orally but only
seem to be effective in anirmals with neurogenic dry eye, where presumably the
glandular tissue is more responsive to the effects of parasympathormirmetics due
food at an ermpirical rate of 1 to 4 drops twice daily depending on body size.
Tear production should be monitored for signs of irmprovement and the animal
diarrhea, bradycardia).
Tear substitutes
Dry eye is a common problerm in people so there are many different artificial
tear preparations available. In selection of a tear substitute it is important to
consider the severity of the dry eye, the likely duration of corneal contact time
of the preparation, and the frequency of administration that is feasible for the
client. Preparations come as aqueous artificial tears, gels, and ointments. The
ents of the aqueous and gel preparations include hypromellose, polyvinyl
287
alcohol, polyethylene glycol, and propylene glycol. More recently hylauronate-
IGY
containing preparations have been introduced. Hylauronate is a viscoelastic
MOLO
agent that has a prolonged corneal contact time and seems a useful addition
to the range of available products. Artificial tear ointrments (such as those
OPHTHAL
containing lanolin or petrolatum) are useful for veterinary patients because of
their long corneal contact time. They can be applied last thing at night or when
the anirmal is to be left untreated for a while.
Many preparations contain preservatives and frequent application of prepa-
ANIMAL
rations containing preservatives may be detrimental to the corneal epithelium.
In view of this, and potential hypersensitivity to preservatives, some prepara-
tions that are preservative free (usually as single-dose preparations) or contain
SMAI
a 'vanishing' preservative are available.
It rmay be necessary to try a few different preparations before finding one
that seems to suit the individual animal the best.
Surgical options for managing dry eye disease
Parotid duct transpositionParotid duct transposition is reserved for chronic
KCS that has not responded to intensive medical therapy and despite treat-
ment remains uncomfortable with progression of corneal changes. In general
a parotid duct transposition should not be performed if the Schirmer tear test
I level is greater than 1 or 2 mm/rmin. In the majority of cases it results in an
improverment in comfort level and over time a reduction in the degree of
corneal vascularization and pigmentation (if these changes had developed).
Dogs with excessive saliva production tend to have more complica tions, includ-
ing mineral deposits around the eyes that can result in blepharitis (Figs 7.34
& 7.35). Regular cleaning of the face and keeping the facial hair short can
help to prevent the development of blepharitis. Corneal mineral deposition
that results in discomfort or irritation can be more difficult to manage. Topical
EDTA application may help dissolve rmineral deposits.
Fig. 7.34 A dog with KCS
that has had a parotid duct
transposition. Salivary
deposits coat the periocular
region.
288
OCULAR DISCHARGE
Fig. 7.35 Blepharitis
resulting from overflow of
saliva in a dog that has had
a parotid duct transposition.
For the eyes with excessive salivary secretions surgery can be performed to
narrow the parotid duct. This is best left to those with experience in dealing
with this complication.
Punctal occfusion Punctal plugs are commonly used in humans who develop
dry eye. The airm of a punctal plug is to impede the drainage of tears from the
eye. They are made out of silicone, and are removable. In absolute dry eye they
will only help by reducing the run-off of artificial tears that have been applied
to the eyes. This may reduce the frequency with which artificial tears will need
to be applied." Permanent surgical punctal closure has also been advocated.
Shortening the paipebral fissureShortening the palpebral fissure by medial
or lateral canthal closures helps to reduce corneal exposure and irmprove the
stability of the precorneal tear film. Medial canthal closure can also be helpful
by reducing irritation to the already dry cornea by removing the medial carun-
venting nasal fold trichiasis when present.
Ocular surface disease resulting from inadequate
distribution of the tear film
Inadequate tear film distribution may result from the anatomic characteristics
of the anirmal, from exophthalmos, as a result of congenital or acquired eyelid
deformity, or as a result of reduced blinking due to sensory or motor deficits.
Factors that contribute to inadequate spreading of the tear film include:
*A wide palpebral fissure can reduce effective eyelid closure, so that the
spreading of the tear film and stability of the tear flrm between blinks is
im paired.
It is common for brachycephalic breeds to have an overlong palpebral
fissure, prominent globe, and limited third eyelid movement.
289
2
 Exophthalmos due to orbital space-occupying lesions can result in an
LMOLOO
 Colobomatous congenital eyelid defects and acquired eyelid defects can
OPHTHAL
also prevent adequate corneal coverage by the lids. Cicatricial contraction
of eyelid wounds can lead to keratitis in a defined area. Iatrogenic eyelid
dysfunction is commonest as a result of overzealous entropion repair.
LANIMAL
Surgical correction of such deforrmity is usually successful
A lack of blink due to impaired facial nerve (cranial nerve Vll) function
may be of central or peripheral origin. Lesions of the facial nerve
SMALL
 ao o   g a jo n i on p
parasympathetic supply to the lacrimal gland resulting in KCS in addition
 n     q     o
outer eyelids.$4 The maintenance of a healthy cornea, in the presence of
of the third eyelid in spreading the tear film. Where the nictitans has
limited moverment (brachycephalics, exophthalmos, reduced retractor
oculi rmuscle function, or innervation), discharge, corneal clouding, and
Inadequate corneal sensation due to lesions involving the ophthalmic
portion of cornea exposed within the palpebral fissure. This is partly due
to reduced blinking and therefore to inadequate spreading of the tear
film.
These factors can by thermselves result in a rapid break-up of the tear film
over the central cornea with dry spot forrmation, epithelial damage, and the
a reduced tear production.
Qualitative tear film disease
As well as disease resulting from inadequate production of aqueous tears or
inadequate distribution of the produced tears, changes in either the lipid or
mucous phases of the tear film can also cause ocular surface disease. These
conditions are rarely diagnosed.
A deficiency of goblet cells leads to instability of the tear film." This results
a notable lack of mucus associated with the ocular discharge. An assessment
of the tear break-up time (BUT) will deterrmine adequacy of tear flm mucins.S6,57
The tear BUT is assessed by holding the lids open after applying fluorescein to
the tear film and observing the eye under a cobalt blue light looking for the
     n   n     
Normal BUT is approximately 20 s. Mucin-deficiency BUT is less than 5 s.S$,57
Conjunctival biopsy will show markedly reduced goblet cell numbers. The
fornix should be sarmpled as this is the region that normally has the greatest
ratio of goblet cells to epithelial cells. The number of goblet cells is compared
to the number of epithelial cells."* The norrmal goblet cell index is 0.30, i.e. three
or less.ss
         
290
infammation may reduce production of the lipid phase of the tear film resulting
in tear filrm instability and ocular surface disease. Lipid layer assessment requires
OCUL
   si  (o  )  
able but suspicion increases with lid margin disease or meibomian adenitis
AR
DISCHARGE
where acini are blocked with white oily secretion.
REFERENCES
1. Helper, L.C., Magrane, W.G.,
screen for feline herpesvirus-1 and
Koehm, J. et al. (1974) Surgical
Chlamydophila spp. in mucosal swabs
induction of keratoconjunctivitis sicca
from cats. New Microbiol. 27:
in the dog. J. Am. Ver. Med. Assoc.
287292.
165:172-174
10. Stiles, J., McDermott, M., Bigsby, D.
2. Giuliano, E.A., Pope, E.R.,
et al. (1997) Use of nested polymerase
Champagne, E.S. et al. (2006)
chain reaction to identify feline
Dacryocystomaxillorhinostomy for
herpesvirus in ocular tissue from
chronic dacryocystitis in a dog. Ver.
clinically normal cats and cats with
Ophrhalmol. 9: 89-94.
corneal sequestra or conjunctivitis.
3. Grahn, B.H. (1999) Diseases and
Am. J.Ver.Res.58:338-342
surgery of the canine lacrimal and
11. Dean, R., Harley, R., Helps, C. et al.
nasolacrimal diseases. In: Gelatt, K.
(2005) Use of quantitative real-time
N. (ed.) Veterinary Ophrhalmology,
PCR to monitor the response of
3rd edn. Philadephia: Lippincott,
Chlamydophila felis infection to
Williams & Wilkins, pp. 569-607.
doxycycline treatment. J. Clirt.
4. Long, R. (1975) Relief of epiphora by
Microbiol.43:1858-1864
conjunctivorhinostomy.J. Small
12.Stiles, J., McDermott, M.,Willis, M.
Anim.Pracr.16:381-386.
et al. (1997) Comparison of nested
5. Covitz, D., Hunziker, J. and Koch,
polymerase chain reaction, virus
S.A. (1977) Conjunctivorhinostomy: a
isolation, and fluorescent antibody
surgical method for the control of
testing for identifying feline
epiphora in the dog and cat. J. Am.
herpesvirus in cats with conjunctivitis.
Ver.Med. Assoc.171:251-255
Arm. J. Ver. Res. 58: 804-807.
6. Wheeler, C.A. and Severin, G.A
13.Lavach, J.D., Thrall, M.A.,Benjamin,
(1974) Cryosurgical epilation for the
M.M. et al. (1977) Cytology of
treatment of distichiasis in the dog
normal and inflamed conjunctivas in
and cat. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc.
dogs and cats. J. Am. Ver. Med.
20: 877-884.
4ssoc. 170: 722-727.
7.Volopich, S., Benetka, V.,
14.Valencia,M.(1987) Contribution to
Schwendenwein, I. et al. (2005)
the study of canine distemper. 1.
Cytologic findings, and feline
Direct immunofuorescence and
herpesvirus DNA and Chlamydophila
detection of inclusion bodies in live
felis antigen detection rates in normal
animal smears.Medicina Vererinaria
cats and cats with conjunctival and
4: 211-218.
corneal lesions. Ver. Ophrhalmol. 8:
15. Nasisse, M.P., Guy, J.S., Stevens, J.B.
25-32.
et al. (1993) Clinical and laboratory
8. Helps, C., Reeves, N., Egan, K. et al.
findings in chronic conjunctivitis in
(2003) Detection of Chlamydophila
cats: 91 cases (1983-1991). J. Am.
felis and feline herpesvirus by
Ver. Med. Assoc. 203: 834
multiplex real-time PCR analysis. J.
837.
Clin. Microbiol. 41:27342736.
16. Peng, C.G. and Jiang, J.S. (1983)
9. Marsilio, F., Di, M.B. and Di, F.C.
Treatment of ocular thelaziasis in
dogs. Chin. J. Ver. Med. 9: 18-19.
291
(2004) Use of a duplex-PCR assay to
A9
17. Glaze, M.B. (1991) Ocular allergy.
27. Sandmeyer, L.S., Keller, C.B. and
LMOLOG
Sem. Ver. Med. Surg.(Small Anim.)
Bienzle, D. (2005) Effects of
6: 296-302.
interferon-alpha on cytopathic
OPHTHAL
18. Hendrix, D.V. (1999) Diseases and
changes and titers for feline
surgery of the canine conjunctiva. In:
herpesvirus-1 in primary cultures of
Gelatt, K.N. (ed.) Vererinary
feline corneal epithelial cells. Am.
Ophrhalmology, 3rd edn. Philadelphia:
J.Ver.Res.66:210-216.
MAL
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, pp.
28. Stiles, J. (2000) Feline herpesvirus.
ANIM
619-634.
Ver. Clin Norrh Am.(SmallAnim.
19. Paulsen, M.E., Lavach, J.D., Snyder,
Pracr.) 30: 1001-1014.
SMALL
S.P. et al. (1987) Nodular
29. Stiles, J., Townsend, W.M., Rogers,
granulomatous episclerokeratitis in
Q.R. et al. (2002) Effect of oral
dogs: 19 cases (1973-1985). J. Am.
administration of L-lysine on
Ver. Med. Assoc.190: 1581-1587.
conjunctivitis caused by feline
20. Nasisse, M.P. (1982) Manifestations,
herpesvirus in cats. Am. J. Ver. Res.
diagnosis and treatment of ocular
63: 99-103.
herpesvirus infection in the cat.
30. Maggs, D.J., Nasisse, M.P. and Kass,
Comp. Cont. Educ. Pracr. Ver. 4:
P.H. (2003) Efficacy of oral
962-970.
supplementation with L-lysine in cats
21. Nasisse, M.P., Guy, J.S., Davidson,
latently infected with feline
M.G. et al. (1989) [n vitro
herpesvirus. Am. J. Ver. Res. 64:
susceptibility of feline herpesvirus-1 to
37-42.
vidarabine, idoxuridine, trifluridine,
31.Sykes, J.E. (2005) Feline
acyclovir, or bromovinyldeoxyuridine.
chlamydiosis. Clin Tech Small Anim.
Am. J. Ver. Res. 50: 158-160.
Pracr. 20: 129-134.
22.Stiles, J. (1995) Treatment of cats
32. Owen, W.M., Sturgess, C.P.,
with ocular disease attributable to
Harbour, D.A. et al. (2003) Effcacy
herpesvirus infection: 17 cases (1983-
of azithromycin for the treatment of
feline chlamydophilosis. J. Feline
599-603.
Med. Surg. 5: 305-311.
23. Maggs, D.J. and Clarke, H.E. (2004)
33. Sparkes, A.H., Caney, S.M., Sturgess,
In vitro efficacy of ganciclovir,
C.P. et al. (1999) The clinical efficacy
cidofovir, penciclovir, foscarnet,
of topical and systemic therapy for
idoxuridine, and acyclovir against
the treatment of feline ocular
feline herpesvirus type-1. Am. J. Vef.
chlamydiosis.J. Feline Med. Surg. 1:
Res.65: 399-403.
3135.
24. van der Meulen, K., Garre, B.,
34. Pentlarge, V.W. (1991) Eosinophilic
Croubels, S. et al. (2006) [n vitro
conjunctivitis in five cats. J. Am.
comparison of antiviral drugs against
Ani. Hosp. Assoc.27: 21-28.
feline herpesvirus 1. BMC Ver. Res. 2:
35. Pope, E.R., Champagne, E.S. and
13.
Fox, D. (2001) Intraosseous approach
25. Sandmeyer, L.S., Keller, C.B. and
to the nasolacrimal duct for removal
Bienzle, D. (2005) Effects of cidofovir
of a foreign body in a dog. J. Am.
on cell death and replication of feline
Anim. Hosp. Assoc.218: 541-
herpesvirus-1 in cultured feline
542.
corneal epithelial cells. Am. J. Ver.
36. Petersen-Jones, S.M. and Carrington,
Res. 66: 217-222.
S.D. (1988) Pasreurella dacryocystitis
26. Siebeck, N., Hurley, D.J., Garcia, M.
in rabbits. Ver. Rec. 122: 512-514.
et al. (2006) Effects of human
37. Harcourt-Brown, F.M. (1995) A
recombinant alpha-2b interferon and
review of clinical conditions in pet
feline recombinant omega interferon
rabbits associated with their teeth.
on in vitro replication of feline
Ver. Rec. 137: 341-346.
herpesvirus-1. Am. J. Ver. Res. 67:
38.Harcourt-Brown, F.M. and Baker,
292
1406-1411.
S.J. (2001) Parathyroid hormone,
haematological and biochemical
48. Morgan, R.V. (1993) To excise or not
OCULAR
parameters in relation to dental
to excise. Prog. Ver. Comp.
disease and husbandry in rabbits. J.
Ophrhalmol. 3: 109-110.
Small Anim. Pracr. 42: 130-136.
49. Martin, C.L. and Kaswan, R.L.
 DISCHARGE
39. Rubin, L.F., Lynch, R.K. and
(1985) Distemper-associated
Stockman, W.S. (1965) Clinical
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. J. Am.
estimation of lacrimal function in
Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 21: 355-359.
dogs. J. Am. Ver. Med. Assoc. 147:
50. Kaswan, R.L., Salisbury, M.A. and
946-947.
Ward, D.A.(1989) Spontaneous
40. Veith, L.A., Cure, T.H. and Gelatt,
canine keratoconjunctivitis sicca. A
K.N. (1970) The Schirmer tear test in
useful model for human
cats. Mod. Ver.Pracr.51:4849.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca: treatment
41. Kaswan, R.L., Salisbury, M.A. and
with cyclosporine eye drops. Arch.
Lothrop, C.D. (1991) [nteraction of
Ophrhalmol. 107: 1210-1216.
age and gender on occurrence of
51. Berdoulay, A., English, R.V. and
canine keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Nadelstein, B. (2005) Effect of topical
Prog.Ver.Comp.Ophrhalmol.1:
0.02% tacrolimus aqueous suspension
93-97.
on tear production in dogs with
42. Kaswan, R.L., Martin, C.L. and
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Vef.
Dawe, D.L. (1985)
Ophrhalmol.8:225-232
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca:
52. Nell, B., Walde, I., Billich, A. et al.
immunological evaluation of 62
(2005) The effect of topical
canine cases. Am. J. Ver. Res. 46:
pimecrolimus on keratoconjunctivitis
376383.
sicca and chronic superficial keratitis
43. Slatter, D.H. and Blogg, J.R. (1978)
in dogs: results from an exploratory
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs
study. Ver. Ophrhalmol. 8: 39-46
associated with sulphonamide
53. Williams, D.L. (2002) Use of punctal
administration. Atusr. Ver. J. 54:
occlusion in the treatment of canine
444446.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. J. Small
44. Morgan, R.V. and Bachrach, A.
Anim. Pracr. 43:478-481
(1982) Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
54. Scagliotti, R.H. (1999) Neuro-
associated with sulphonamide therapy
ophthalmology. In: Gelatt, K.N. (ed. )
in dogs. J. Am. Ver. Med. Assoc. 180:
Vererinary Ophrhalmology, 3rd edn.
432-434.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams &
45. Ludders, J.W. and Heavner, J.E.
Wilkins, pp. 1307-1400.
(1979) Effect of atropine on tear
55. Moore, C.P. and Collier, L.L. (1990)
formation in anesthetized dogs.
Ocular surface disease associated with
J.Am. Ver. Med. Assoc. 175:
loss of conjunctival goblet cells in
585-586.
dogs.J.Am.Anim.Hosp. Assoc.26:
46.Vestre, W.A., Brightman, A.H.,
458466.
Helper, L.C. et al. (1979) Decreased
56. Moore, C.P., Wilsman, N.J.,
tear production associated with
Nordheim, E.V. et al. (1987)
general anaesthesia in the dog.
Density and distribution of canine
J.Am. Ver. Med. Assoc. 174:
conjunctival goblet cells. Invesr.
1006-1007
Ophrhalmol.Vis.Sci.28:1925-1932
47. Stiles, J. (2004) Warning of an
57. Moore, C.P. (1990) Qualitative tear
adverse effect of etodolac. J. Am. Ver.
film disease.Ver. Clin. Norrh Am
Med. Assoc. 225: 503.
(SmallAnim.Pracr.)20:565-581.
293
Appendix:
ophthalmic formulary
B.H. Grahn and J. Wolfer
Table 1  Topical ophthalmic antibiotics and their formulations.
Antibiotic
Formulation
Bacitracin, neomycin,
Bacitracin zinc 400 IU, neomycin sulfate 3.5 mg. &
polymyxin B
polymyxin B 5000 IU/g ointment
Neomycin 3.5 mg. polymyxin B sulfate 10000 IU, &
bacitracin zinc 400 IU/g ointment
Polymyxin B sulfate 10 000 IU, neomycin sulfate 5 mg. &
bacitracin zinc 400 IU/g ointment
Bacitracin, neomycin
Bacitracin 500 IU & neomycin 5 mg/g ointment
Bacitracin, polymyxin B
Bacitracin 500 IU & polymyxin B 10 000 IU/g ointment
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol 10 mg/g ointment
Chloramphenicol 4 mg/ml solution
Chloramphenicol 5 mg/ml or 25 mg/ml solution
Chlortetracycline
Chlortetracycline hydrochloride 10 mg/g ointment
hydrochloride
Ciprofloxacin
Ciprofloxacin hydrochloride 3.5 mg/ml solution
Erythromycin
Erythromycin 5 mg/g ointment
Framycetin
Framycetin sulfate 5 mg/ml solution
Framycetin sulfate 15 mg/g ointment
Fusidic acid
Fusidic acid 10 mg/ml slow-release solution
294
Gentamicin
Gentamicin sulfate 3 mg/ml solution
Table 1continued
APPENDIX:
Antibiotic
Formulation
Gentamicin 3 mg/g ointment
 OPHTHALMICI
Neomycin, polymyxin B,
Neomycin 75 mg. polymyxin B 10000 IU, & gramicidin
gramicidin
0.025 mg/ml solution
Polymyxin B sulfate 10 000 IU, gramicidin 0.025 mg. &
neomycin sulfate 2.5 mg/ml solution
FORMULARY
 Neomycin, polymyxin B
Neomycin 3.5 mg. polymyxin B sulfate 10000 IU/ml
solution
Nitrofurazone
Nitrofurazone 2 mg/g powder
 Norfloxacin
Norfloxacin 3 mg/ml solution
Ofloxacin
 Ofloxacin 3 mg/ml solution
Oxytetracycline, polymyxin B 0xytetracycline 5 mg & polymyxin B 10 000 IU/g ointment
Quixin
Levofloxacin 0.5% solution
Sulfacetamide
Sulfacetamide sodium 10 mg/ml solution
Sulfacetamide sodium 100 mg/g ointment
Tetracycline
Tetracycline 10 mg/g ointment
Tobramycin
Tobramycin 3 mg/g ointment
Tobramycin 3 mg/ml solution
Vigamox
Moxifloxacin 0.5% solution
Zymur
GatifloxacinO.3%solution
295
IGY
Table 2  Topical antiviral ophthalmic medications and their
MOLOC
formulations.
Antiviral
Formulation
OPHTHAL
Aciclovir
 Aciclovir 30 mg ointment
Idoxuridine
Idoxuridine 1 mg/ml solution
. ANIMAL
Trifluridine 10 mg/ml solution
SMALL
Vidarabine
Vidarabine 30 mg/g ointment
Table 3Topical ophthalmic steroids and their formulations.
Dexamethasone
 Dexamethasone sodium phosphate 0.5 mg/g or1 mg/g
ointment
Dexamethasone sodium phosphate 1.0 mg/ml solution
Dexamethasone sodium phosphate 1 mg/ml suspension
Fluorometholone
Fluorometholone acetate 1 mg/ml solution
Fluorometholone 1 mg/ml or 2.5 mg/ml solution
Fluorometholone acetate 1 mg/g ointment
Medrysone
Medrysone 10 mg/ml solution
Prednisolone
Prednisolone acetate 1 mg/ml or 1.25 mg/ml solution,
 or 10 mg/ml suspension
Rimexolone
Rimexolone 10 mg/ml solution
296
Bacitracin zinc 400 IU, neomycin sulfate 5 g. polymyxin B 5000 IU, & hydrocortisone acetate
APPENDIX: OPHTHALMIC FORMULARY
byb g aeane auosjosoipay 8 ni ooo 0l aenns g uixauAod bw ol losuaydueioy
Framycetin sulfate 5 mg. gramicidin 0.05 mg/ml, & dexamethasone 0.5 mg/ml solution
Bacitracin 400 IU, neomycin 3.5 mg. polymyxin B sulfate 10 000 IU, & hydrocortisone
Bacitracin zinc 400 IU, neomycin sulfate 5 mg, polymyxin B sulfate, 5000 IU, &
Chloramphenicol10 mg & prednisolone acetate 2.5 mg/g ointment 
hydrocortisone 10 mg/g ointment 
10 mg/g ointment
10 mg/g ointment 
Formulation
ointment
Table 4  Ophthalmic antibiotic/steroids and their formulations.
 Chloramphenicol, polymyxin B sulfate, hydrocortisone acetate 
Bacitracin, neomycin, polymyxin B, hydrocortisone acetate 
 Bacitracin, neomycin. polymyxin B, hydorcortisone
Framycetin, gramicidin, dexamethasone
Choramphenicol, prednisolone
Gentamicin, prednisolone
Antibiotic/steroid
297
 SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Neomycin sulfate 3.5 mg, polymyxin B sulfate 10 000 IU, & dexamethasone 1 mg/ml solution
uaulo b/bu l auoseypauexap 8 'l ooog aneyns g uixAukjod bu s'e aenns upAwoan 
aosoopy g ioo uenieg i ooot ans guixuod bu ge upoan
Neomycin 3.5 mg. polymyxin B sulfate 10 000 IU, & hydrocortisone 10 mg/g ointment 
Neomycin 3.5 mg, polymyxin B sulfate 6000 IU, & dexamethasone 1 mg/ml solution 
juapuo ju/bu ot aneiane auoosiupaid g luybw g uejuag
Gentamicin 3 mg & betamethasone 1 mg/ml solution
 juawpuo bybw I auopaidnyos! g bw g upAuoan
10 mg/g ointment 
Formulation
Neomycin, polymyxin B,bacitracin, hydrocortisone acetate
Neomycin, polymyxin B, bacitracin, hydrocortisone
Neomycin, polymyxin B sulfate, hydrocortisone 
Neomycin, polymyxin B, dexamethasone
Gentamicin, betamethasone
Neomycin, isoflupredone
Table 4 continued
Antibiotic/steroid
298
APPENDIX: OPHTHALMIC FORMULARY 
: prednisolone acetate 5 mg/ml solution
0000 IU, & flumethasone 0.10 mg/ml solution
hydrocortisone acetate 15 mg/ml suspension
 Sulfacetamide sodium 10 mg/ml & prednisolone acetate 2.5 mg/ml solution
 acetate 2 mg/ml solution
 Sulfacetamide sodium 10 mg/ml & prednisolone acetate 5 mg/ml solution
Tobramycin 3 mg & dexamethasone 1 mg/ml suspension 
 Neomycin 3.5 mg & dexamethasone 0.5 mg/g ointment 
1mg/mlsolution
Tobramycin 3 mg & dexamethasone 1 mg/g ointment 
Tobramycin 3 mg & dexamethasone 1 mg/ml solution 
1000010.&
prednisolone
Neomycin 3.5 mg & dexamethasone 11
aers
sulfate
buu
Sulfacetamide sodium 10 mg/ml 8
Neomycin 3.5 mg, polymyxin B s
Neomycin 3.5 mg, polymyxin B
Oxytetracycline hydrochloride
buu
10
 Sulfacetamide sodium 1
Neomycin, polymyxin B sulfate flumethasone 
Sulfacetamide sodium, fluorometholone 
Neomycin, polymyxin B, prednisolone
 Neomycin, dexamethasone 
Sulfacetamide, prednisolone
Tobramycin, dexamethasone
299
SMALL ANIMAL OPHTHALMOLOGY
Table 5  Topical non-steroidal ophthalmic medication5
and their formulations.
Medication
Formulation
Flurbiprofen
Flurbiprofen 0.3 mg/ml solution
Ketorolac
Ketorolac tromethamine 5 mg/ml solution
Diclofenac
Diclofenac sodium 1 mg/ml solution
Table 6 Topical anti-glaucoma medications and their formulation5.
Medication
Formulation
Apraclonidine
Apraclonidine hydrochloride 5 mg/ml or 10 mg/ml
solution
Betaxolol
Betaxolol hydrochloride 2.8 mg/ml or 5 mg/ml solution
Betaxolol hydrochloride 2.5 mg/ml suspension
Brimonidine
Brimonidine tartrate 2 mg/ml solution
Brinzolamide
Brinzolamide 10 mg/ml solution
Demecarium bromide
Demecarium bromide 1.25 mg/ml or 2.5 mg/ml solution
Dipivefrine
Dipivefrine hydrochloride 1 mg/ml solution
Dorzolamide
Dorzolamide hydrochloride 20 mg/ml solution
Echothiophate iodide
Echothiophate iodide 0.3 mg/ml, 0.6 mg/ml, 1.25 mg/ml
or 2.5 mg/ml solution
Epinephrine
Epinephrine 5 mg/ml, 10 mg/ml, or 20 mg/ml solution
Epinephryl
Epinephryl borate 5 mg/ml or 10 mg/ml solution
lsoflurophate
Isoflurophate 0.25 mg/ml solution
Latanaprost
Latanaprost 50 μg/ml solution
Levobunolol
Levobunolol hydrochloride 2.5 mg/ml or 5 mg/ml
solution
uebium
Bimatoprost 0.03% solution
 Physostigmine
Physostigmine 5ulfate 0.25% ointment
300
Table 6continued
APPENDIX:
Medication
Formulation
Pilocarpine
Pilocarpine hydrochloride 2.5 mg/ml, 5 mg/ml, 10 mg/ml,
20 mg/ml, 30 mg/ml, 40 mg/ml., 50 mg/ml, 60 mg/ml,
 OPHTHALMIC 
80 mg/ml, or 100 mg/ml solution
Pilocarpine hydrochloride 40 mg/ml gel
 Pilocarpine, epinephrine
Pilocarpine 10 mg/ml, 20 mg/ml, 30 mg/ml, 40 mg/ml, or
FORMULARY
60 mg/ml & epinephrine 5 mg/ml solution
Timolol maleate
Timolol maleate 2.5 mg/ml or 5 mg/ml solution
Timolol, pilocarpine
Timolol maleate 5 mg/ml & pilocarpine hydrochloride
20 mg/ml or 40 mg/ml solution
Travatan
Tavoprost 0.004% solution
Xalacom
Latanaprost/timolol (0.5%)
Table 7 Miscellaneous topical medications including tear stimulants, mydriatics,
 miotics, anesthetics, and mast cell stabilizers and their formulations.
Medication
Formulation
Atropine
Atropine sulfate 5 mg/ml or 10 mg/ml solution
Atropine sulfate 10 mg/g ointment
Carbachol
Carbachol 0.1 mg/ml or 15 mg/ml solution
Cyclopentolate
Cyclopentolate hydrochloride 5 mg/ml, 10 mg/ml,
or 20 mg/ml solution
Cyclopentolate hydrochloride 2 mg/ml &
phenylephrine hydrochloride 10 mg/ml solution
Ciclosporin A
Ciclosporin A 2 mg/g ointment
Homatropine
Homatropine bromide 20 mg/ml or 50 mg/ml
solution
Homatropine 20 mg/ml or 50 mg/ml solution
Lodoxamide
 Lodoxamide 1 mg/ml solution
 Olaptadine
Olaptadine nitrate 1 mg/ml solution
 Phenylephrine
Phenylephrine hydrochloride 25 mg/ml solution
Phenylephrine hydrochloride 12 mg/ml or
 25 mg/ml solution
301
IGY
Table 7
continued
MOLOC
Medication
Formulation
OPHTHAL
Phenylephrine hydrochloride 50 mg & tropicamide
8 mg/ml solution
Proparacaine
Proparacaine hydrochloride 5 mg/ml solution
. ANIMAL
Sodium chloride
Sodium chloride 50 mg/ml solution
SMALL
Tropicamide
Tropicamide 5 mg/ml or 10 mg/ml solution
Tropicamide, hydroxyamfetamine
Tropicamide 2.5 mg/ml & hydroxyamfetamine
hydrobromide 10 mg/ml solution
302
A
Anophthalmia (anophthalmos), 1,
Abscesses
125-127
corneal, 103
Anterior chamber,7
eyelid, 211
abnormal appearances, 77, 103-108
retrobulbar/orbital, 80, 205-206
embryology, 4
Abyssinian cat, 135, 144, 183, 184, 185
hemorrhage see Hyphema
Acetazolamide,236
mass lesions, 77, 106-108
Aciclovir,56,226,296
normal appearance, 71
Adenine arabinoside, 54
Anterior segment dysgenesis
Adenocarcinoma, uveal, 106-107
(Peter's anomaly), 4, 5
Adenoma, uveal, 106-107
Anterior uvea
Adhesions, intraocular see Synechiae
 abnormal appearances, 103-108
Adrenergic agents, 59
tumors, 106-108
Adrenergic antagonists, 59-60
Anterior uveitis, 105
Afghan Hound, 179
acute, 105, 241-249
Age, 116
clinical signs, 242-245
Akita, 135
diagnosis, 245-247
Alaskan Malamute, 134, 145
management, 247-249
Alopecia, 76
chronic, 105, 169-174
Alpha-adrenergic agonists, 59 
corneal edema, 93-94
American Bulldog, 140
epiphora,266
American Cocker Spaniel
keratitic precipitates (KPs), 101
cataracts, 178, 180
see also Uveitis
punctal aplasia, 262
Anti-glaucoma medications see
retinal disorders, 135, 136, 137, 183
Ocular hypotensive
American Eskimo Dog, 137
medications
Ametropia,26
Anti-inflammatory medications, 56-58
Aminoglycosides, 54
anterior uveitis, 247-248
Amlodipine besylate, 111
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 287
Amoxicillin, 55-56
Antibiotic/steroid combination
Ampicillin, 55-56
preparations, 53, 297-299
Anatomy, ocular, 4-12
Antibiotics, 53-56, 297-299
Angiography, fluorescein, 36, 40-45, 125
conjunctivitis,277
Angle, iridocorneal see [ridocorneal
corneal ulcers, 221-222
angle
subconjunctival, 52, 55
Anisocoria, 108, 123
systemic, 53, 55-56
Ankyloblepharon, 85
tear staining syndrome, 264
303
X
topica1, 53-55, 294295
Biometry, ultrasonic, 32-33, 35
口
triple preparations, 54, 294, 295
Biomicroscope, slit-lamp, 25
Antifungals, 55, 56
Biopsy, 17, 276
Antihistamines, 57
Blepharitis, 85-86, 211, 212
Antimicrobials, 53-56
after parotid duct transposition, 288,
subconjunctival, 55
289
systemic, 55-56
tear film problems, 290-291
topical, 53-55, 294296
Blepharoplasty, everting, 209, 210
Antioxidants, 182
Blepharospasm, 47
Antiviral agents
Blindness see Visual impairment
feline herpes virus infections, 226,
Blinking, 69
278-279
Blood hyperviscosity, 132
systemic, 56
Blood-ocular barrier, 53
topical, 54-55, 296
Bloodhound, 68
Aphakia, 127,182
Border Collie, 137, 140, 142
Appearance, ocular, 67-115
Boston Terrier, 9495, 168-169, 178, 180
abnormal, 75-113
Boxer ulcers, 16, 220-221
normal, 67-75
Brachycephalic dogs, 67, 69
Apraclonidine, 59, 300
corneal pigmentation, 95, 166
Aqueous (humor), 9, 228
corneal ulceration, 215
cytology, 19
nasal fold trichiasis, 214215
drainage procedures, 237
tear film problems, 289
flare, 243, 244
Brain tumors, 194195
normal appearance, 71
Brainstem tumors, 195
Arcus lipoides corneae, 101, 168
Breed, 116
Artificial tears, 62-63, 287-288
Briard, 137, 146-147, 186
Aspirin, 58
Brimonidine, 59, 300
Asteroid hyalosis, 111-112
Brinzolamide, 60, 300
Astigmatism, 27, 29
Bromovinyldeoxyuridine, 54
Atopy, 278
Bull Mastiff, 134, 137, 185-186
Atropine, 61, 301
Bullous keratopathy, 95, 169, 231
ocular side-effects, 118, 286
Buphthalmos, 75-79, 174, 175, 232
subconjunctival, 52, 61
uveitis, 248-249
C
Australian Cattle Dog, 137
Cairn Terrier, 92, 93
Australian Shepherd Dog, 136, 137, 142
Calcareous corneal degeneration, 101,
Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog, 137
102,217, 218
Azalide, 152
Calcium channel blockers, 111, 236
Azathioprine, 173, 248
Canine adenovirus (CAV 1) infections,
Azithromycin, 280
93, 94, 277
Canine herpesvirus-1, 226
B
Carbachol, 301
Bacitracin, 294,297,298
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, 236
Bacterial infections, 53-54, 55-56
systemic, 53, 60, 236
Basenji, 127, 142
topical, 60, 236
Beagle, 136, 178
Cardigan Welsh Corgi, 133, 137, 144
Bedlington Terrier, 136
Carprofen, 58, 248
Belgian Sheepdog, 179
Caruncular hairs, 215, 268, 270
β-adrenergic blockers (beta-blockers),
Cataracts, 13, 108-110, 175-182
59-60, 236
congenital, 128, 176-177
Betamethasone, 58, 298
developmental, 176, 177
Betaxolol, 59-60, 300
diabetic, 10, 181
Bimatoprost, 235, 300
electroretinography, 124
304
Biochemistry, ocular, 412
hereditary, 176-177, 178-180
hypermature, 175-176
Chronic superficial keratitis (CSK)
INDEX
immature, 175
(pannus), 98, 166-167
incipient, 175
Ciclosporin, 62, 98, 287, 301
lens-induced uveitis, 173, 177-181
Cidofovir, 55, 61, 237
lens luxation, 240, 241
Cilia, 6
mature, 175
abnormalities, 212-215
in microphthalmia, 126-127, 177
ectopic, 212, 213-214, 266, 268
nuclear, 176
Ciliary body, 7, 9
pulverulent, 176
destructive surgery, 237
secondary, 172, 181, 232
embryology,1
senile, 176
Ciliary cleft, 27, 29, 71
surgical techniques, 182
Ciliary ganglion, 11
toxic, 181
Ciliary muscle, 9
traumatic,181
Ciprofloxacin, 294
treatment, 181-182
Clinical basic science, 1-13
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, 128,
Closantel, 152
129, 136, 177
Clotrimazole, 55
Cefazolin, 221
Coagulopathies, 151
Central blindness, 162-164
Cocaine, 62
Central nervous system (CNS)
Collie breeds, 126, 127, 142, 186
disorders causing blindness, 119,
Collie eye anomaly (CEA), 131, 142-144
162-164, 193-194
DNA-based tests, 137-139
 malformations causing blindness, 147
Colobomas, 1, 126, 128
tumors, 195
eyelid,84
Central progressive retinal atrophy
iris, 103, 104
(CPRA) see Retinal pigment
posterior segment, 142, 143
epithelial cell dystrophy
Combination medications, fixed ratio, 53,
Central visual pathways, 10-12
297299
Cephalosporins, 55-56
Compliance, owner, 50-51, 52
Chalazion, 86
Computed tomography (CT), 33, 205
Chemosis (conjunctival swelling), 76, 89,
Computerized topography of cornea, 29
91
Cone-rod dystrophy, 133, 146
Cherry eye see Nictitans gland prolapse
Congenital disease/malformations, 116,
Chesapeake Bay Retriever, 138, 180
117, 125-147
Chihuahua, 94-95, 168-169
Congenital retinal dystrophy (RPE65
Chinese Crested, 138
gene defect), 137, 146-147
Chlamydophila felis (Chlamydia psirraci)
Conjunctiva, 8
conjunctivitis, 279-280
abnormal appearances, 76
diagnosis, 274, 275, 276
biopsies, 276
treatment, 54, 279-280
bulbar, 7, 69, 70
Chloramphenicol, 54, 294, 297
cytology, 17, 19, 275
Chlorochine, 152
diagnostic stains, 16-17
Chlortetracycline, 294
goblet cell1s, 254, 290
Cholinesterase inhibitors, 59
hyperemia, 243
Chorioretinitis, 172, 191-192
masses/neoplasia, 76, 92-93, 278, 281
differential diagnosis, 186, 192
normal appearance, 69-70
retinal detachment, 154, 155
palpebral, 5, 7, 69, 70
Choristoma, epibulbar, 84
pedicle grafts, 222, 224226
Choroid, 4
redness/hyperemia, 76, 89
Choroidal hypoplasia, 142-143
sampling methods, 17-19, 274276
Choroiditis
swelling (chemosis), 76, 89, 91
chronic, 169-174
Conjunctivitis, 89, 274281
sequelae, 172
allergic (hypersensitivity), 57, 277-278,
305
Chow Chow, 209
280-281
X
bacterial, 53-54, 276-277, 279-280
Corneal endothelium, 30, 71
ON
cats, 278-281
deposits, 101-102
chronic, 68, 126, 166,286
dysfunction, 168-169
differential diagnosis, 173
Corneal epithelial basement membrane
dogs, 276-278
disease, 215
epiphora,266
Corneal epithelial defects see Corneal
feline herpetic see Feline herpes virus 1
ulcers
(FHV-1) infection
Corneal epithelium, 16
follicular, 278, 280
Corneal facet, 103
immune-mediated, 277-278, 280-281
Corneal grafts, 169, 223
infectious, 276-277, 278-280
conjunctival pedicle flap, 222, 224-226
investigation, 274276
Corneal lipid dystrophy, 99-100, 168
membranous/ligneous, 92
Corneal opacities, 77, 93-102
in microphthalmia, 126
congenital,93
phthisis bulbi, 165
Corneal stroma, 8, 71
plasmacytic (plasmoma), 88-89, 167,
Corneal (crystalline) stromal dystrophy,
277-278
99-100, 101,167
Conjunctivobuccostomy, 267
Corneal ulcers, 103, 215-223
Conjunctivorhinostomy, 267
deep, 221-223, 224-225
Contact lenses, 123-124, 182
dendritic,226,227
Cornea, 8-9
epiphora,266
abnormal appearances, 77, 93-103
feline herpesvirus, 226, 227
abscesses, 103
glaucoma, 174, 175, 231
anatomy, 7, 8
indolent or non-healing, 220-221
calcareous degeneration, 101, 102, 217,
investigation, 16, 217-219
218
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 285
chronic diseases causing blindness,
management, 219-223
165-169
melting, 54,221-222
computerized topography, 29
ruptured, 222, 223, 225
contour alterations, 77, 102-103
simple (superficial uncomplicated), 53-
cytological examination, 19
54, 219
diagnostic stains, 16-17
superficial chronic (boxer ulcers), 16,
embryology, 4
220-221
foreign bodies, 223-226
Corneal vascularization, 77, 97-99
inclusion cysts, 103
acute uveitis, 243
lacerations, 103
chronic glaucoma, 232, 233
lipid deposition, 99-101, 168, 217, 218
Corticosteroids, 297-299
normal appearance, 70-71
antibiotic combination preparations,
penetration of topical medications, 51
53, 297299
perforation, 222, 223, 225, 266
chronic superficial keratitis, 98
pigmentation, 95-97, 166
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 287
sequestrum, 95-97
subconjunctival, 52-53, 57-58
wound healing, 8-9
systemic,53, 58
wounds, 223-226
topica1, 56-57, 296
Corneal curvature, 29, 71
uveitis, 247, 248
Corneal edema, 93-95, 168-169
Cotton ball test, 120
acute uveitis, 243, 244
Cranial nerves, 119
chronic uveitis, 171
Cromolyn sodium, 57
differential diagnosis, 149, 173
Crystalline stromal dystrophy, 99-100,
glaucoma, 93-94, 174, 230-231
101, 168
ulcer development, 215, 217
Culture, microbiological, 17-20, 274
Corneal endothelial dystrophy, 9495,
Cushing's disease, 101
168-169
Cyclitic membranes, 172
306
corneal ulcers, 215, 217
Cyclitis see Anterior uveitis
Cyclodestructive surgery, 237
Doxycycline,279-280
INDEX
Cyclopentolate, 301
 Drugs see Medications
Cycloplegia, 61
Dry eye see Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Cycloplegics, 61-62, 248-249
Cytology, 17-20
Early retinal degeneration (erd), 133, 145
D
Echothiophate iodide, 59, 300
Dacryocystitis, 263, 281-283
Ectropion, 85
diagnosis, 257, 258, 259
Ectropion uveae, 73
management, 281-282
Ehrlichiosis, 277
in rabbits, 282-283
Electro-oculogram (EOG), 3435
Dacryocystomaxillorhinostomy, 265
Electrophysiology, 33-36, 124-125
Dacryocystorhinography, 21, 33, 262
Electroretinography (ERG), 33-36, 37-
Dark room examination, 47-48
39, 124-125
Day blindness see Hemeralopia
Embryology, 1-4 
Dazzle reflex, 121
Emmetropia, 26, 29
Demecarium bromide, 59, 236, 300
Emulsions, 51
Dental disease, 282, 283
Encephalitis, 163-164
Deracoxib, 58
English Cocker Spaniel, 127, 128, 262
Dermoid
atonic entropion/trichiasis, 209-211
conjunctival,92
retinal disorders, 135, 138, 183
epibulbar, 84, 85
English Setter, 140, 187
Descemetocele, 8, 103, 215
English Springer Spaniel, 136, 141
treatment,222-223
Enophthalmos, 76, 81-82
Descemet's membrane, 4, 8, 71
Enrofloxacin, 118, 152
breaks in see Haab's striae
Entlebucher Sennenhund, 138
Dexamethasone, 248, 296, 297
Entropion, 85, 207-211
systemic,58
atonic, 209-211
topica1,56-57,298-299
cicatricial, 209
Diabetes mellitus, 10, 116, 181
epiphora, 266, 270, 273
Diagnostics, 14 49
management, 208-209, 210
advanced, 25-38
medial 1ower eyelid, 263, 264, 268-270,
basic, 1425
271
Diamond eye, 68, 209
Enucleation, 237
Dichlorphenamide, 60, 236
Eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis, 98-99,
Diclofenac, 57, 248, 300
280-281
Diff-Quik@ stain, 219, 275
Eosinophilic myositis, 207
Diltiazem, 236
Epinephrine, 59, 61-62, 300, 301
Diopters, 28
Epinephryl, 300
Dipivefrine, 59, 300
Epiphora, 87, 253, 256-272
Discharge, 0cular, 47, 253-293
impaired tear drainage, 262-267
mucoid, 273
investigations, 257-262
mucopurulent/purulent, 273-283
ocular irritation, 267-272
with normal tear production, 272-283
Episcleral injection/hyperemia, 47, 89, 91
watery,256-272
acute anterior uveitis, 243, 244
Distemper, 163, 277, 286
glaucoma, 174, 231-232
Distichiasis, 212, 266,267-268
Episcleritis, 89-92, 148-149
DNA-based tests, 137-140
Episclero keratitis, nodular
Dobermann Pinscher, 111, 128, 129-130,
granulomatous, 278
131, 273, 274
Erythromycin, 294
Dolicocephalic dogs, 67
Esotropia, congenital, 83
Doll's head reflex, 203-205
Ethoxzolamide, 236
Dorzolamide, 60, 236, 300
Ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid
307
Dorzolamide-timolol, 60
(EDTA), 101
?
Etodolac, 58,286
Fixatives, tissue, 12
Evisceration, 237
Flumethasone, 299
Examination
Flunixin meglumine, 58, 248
eye see Ophthalmic examination
Fluorescein
patient, 118-125
angiography, 36, 40-45, 125
Exophthalmos, 76, 79-81
corneal ulcer staining, 16, 216, 217-219
brachycephalic dogs, 67
nasolacrimal drainage assessment,
diagnostic evaluation, 20, 31, 32
257-258
painful, 203205
stain, 16, 63
tear film problems, 290
Fluorometholone, 296, 299
Exposure keratopathy, 79, 87
Fluoroquinolones, 54
chronic glaucoma, 174, 175
Flurbiprofen, 57, 248, 300
corneal ulceration, 215
Focal illumination, 1415
Extraocular polymyositis, 80-81
Foreign bodies
Eyelashes see Cilia
anterior chamber, 106
Eyelids, 5-6
conjunctival sac, 283
abnormal appearances, 76, 84-87
corneal, 223-226
abnormal position, 207-211
nasolacrimal duct system, 265, 281
abscessation, 211
orbital, 203
acquired lesions, 85-87
Formulary, 294 302
coloboma, 84
Foscarnet, 55
congenital/neonatal conditions, 8485
Framycetin, 294, 297
defects causing tear film problems,
Fundus
290-291
examination, 21-22, 23,25,48
fusion, 85
normal appearances, 22, 23, 73-75
lacerations, 85, 265
photography, 36, 40
normal appearance, 67-69
Fungal infections, 55, 56, 277
painful/irritating disorders, 207-215,
Fusidic acid, 54, 277, 294
266, 267-270
skin scrapings, 17
G
swellings/masses, 76, 86
Ganciclovir, 54
tumors, 86
Gatifloxacin, 295
see also Third eyelid
Gaze, changes in primary, 83-84
Gene therapy, 146-147
F
Genetic (DNA-based) tests, 137-140
Facial nerve paralysis, 86-87, 215, 286,
Gentamicin, 54, 237,294-295
290
intravitreal injections, 61
Famciclovir, 55, 56
steroid combinations, 297-298
Feline central retinal degeneration
German Shepherd, 98, 167, 178, 277-278
(FCRD), 188-189
German Shorthaired Pointer, 134, 138,
Feline herpes virus 1 (FHV-1) infection,
145
278-279
Glaucoma, 227-237
corneal ulcers, 219, 220
acute, 148-149, 230-232, 234, 266
diagnosis, 274-275, 276, 278
buphthalmos, 75-79, 174
keratitis, 99, 226, 227
chronic, 174175, 232-234
symblepharon, 92, 265
clinical signs, 230-234
treatment, 5455, 56, 278-279
corneal edema, 93-94, 174, 230-231
visual impairment, 116
gonioscopic evaluation, 26, 27, 28, 29
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), 163,
Haab's striae, 75, 78
164
lens luxation, 240, 241
Feline leukemia virus, 108, 170
management, 234-237
FHV-1 see Feline herpes virus 1
medical therapy see Ocular hypotensive
308
Fine needle aspiration, 17, 19-20, 205
medications
Finnish Lapphund, 138
narrow angle see Goniodysgenesis
primary, 228-230
Horner's syndrome, 12, 81-82
INDEX
primary open angle, 229-230,233-
distemper, 163
234
sympathomimetics, 61, 62
secondary, 12, 229, 234-235
Hotz-Celsus procedure, 209, 210
chronic uveitis, 172, 233-234,
Hyaloid artery, 1, 128
244245, 247
persistent (PHA), 128-129
hyphema, 151
Hyaluronate solutions, 62-63, 287-288
Jens luxation, 110, 238
Hydrocephalus, 147
retinal detachment, 160
Hydrocortisone, 57, 297, 298, 299
surgical treatment, 237
Hydrophthalmos, 232
ultrasonography, 36
see also Buphthalmos
Globe
Hydroxyamfetamine, 62, 302
 abnormal appearances, 75-84
Hydroxypyridinethione, 152
abnormally small, 75, 76
Hyperlipidemia, 99
enlarged, 75-79
Hyperopia,27, 29
normal appearance, 67
Hypersensitivity, conjunctival, 277-278,
 penetrating trauma, 75
280-281
position changes, 79-83
Hypertension, 116-117, 160
protrusion see Exophthalmos
retinal detachment, 154, 155
recession see Enophthalmos
Hypertensive retinopathy, 111, 112,
rupture, 75, 81
160-161
size changes, 75-79
Hyperthyroidism, 160
Glycerine/glycerol, 60-61, 235
Hyphema, 77, 105-106, 150
Goblet cells, conjunctival, 254, 290
acute uveitis, 243, 245
Golden Retriever, 80, 136, 177, 178,
differential diagnosis, 132
179, 262
eight-bal1, 150
Goniodysgenesis, 26, 29, 228-229, 230
treatment, 151
Goniodysplasia, 36
Hypopyon, 105, 243, 244
Gonioscopy, 26, 27, 28, 29
Hypotensives, ocular see Ocular
Gram stain, 17, 275
hypotensive medications
Gramicidin, 295, 297
Hypothyroidism, 86-87, 168
Granulomatous
meningoencephalomyelitis
(reticulosis), 162, 163
[doxuridine, 54,278-279, 296
Granulomatous uveitis, 244
llumination, 14-15, 46-47
Great Pyrenees, 141
[mmunosuppressive drugs, 173, 248, 287
[mpression cytology, 19
H
[mpresson smears, 17, 18
Haab's striae, 75, 78, 174, 232
Infections
'Haw's' syndrome, 87
acute uveitis, 242
Health, general, 116-117
antimicrobial therapy, 53-56
Hemeralopia, 118, 145
conjunctivitis, 276-277, 278-280
Hemorrhage
corneal ulceration, 215, 219, 221-222,
anterior chamber see Hyphema
226
intralenticular, 131, 132, 150
eyelid,211,212
intraocular, 149-151
orbital, 203, 205-207
Hepatic encephalopathy, 193-194
Infinity, optical, 28
Herpes virus, feline see Feline herpes
Inflammatory disease, posterior segment,
virus 1
189-193
Heterochromia irides, 72, 126
[nflammatory retinopathy, 184
Heterochromia iridis, 72
[nstruments, diagnostic, 1425
History, ophthalmic, 116-117
Interferon α, 56, 226, 279
Homatropine, 301
Intoxicants, 164
309
Hordeola, 86
[ntralenticular hemorrhage, 131, 132, 150
X
Intramuscular administration,
Irritation, ocular
口
antibiotics, 56
epiphora, 257, 266, 267-272
[ntraocular hemorrhage, 149-151
eyelid abnormalities, 207-215,
Intraocular injections, 50
267-270
[ntraocular lens, 182
[soflupredone, 298
[ntraocular pressure (IOP)
Isoflurophate, 59, 300
acute glaucoma, 148, 149
assessment, 2426, 227-228
chronic glaucoma, 149, 174
Jones test, 257-258
medications lowering see Ocular
hypotensive medications
K
normal values, 24, 71
KCS see Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
transitory elevations, 232
Keratectomy, superficial, 221
Intraorbital injections, 50
Keratitic precipitates (KPs), 101, 102,
[ntravitreal hypotensive injections, 6]
244
[OP see Intraocular pressure
Keratitis
[ridal melanoma, 32, 34, 107, 170
chronic superficial (pannus), 98,
[ridocorneal angle, 7, 71, 228
166-167
gonioscopic evaluation, 26, 29
chronic uveitis, 171
[ridocyclitis see Anterior uveitis
eosinophilic, 98-99, 280-281
[ridodonesis, 71,238
feline herpetic see Feline herpes
Iris, 7, 9
virus 1
abnormal appearances, 77
ocular discharge, 283
colobomas, 103, 104
pigmentary, 95-97,166
coloration, 72
pigmentosa see Keratitis, chronic
congestion, uveitis, 243, 244
superficial
cysts, 102, 106, 107
superficial punctate, 167-168
discoloration, 77
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS),
embryology, 1, 4
283-289
inflammatory cell nodules, 170-171,
clinical signs/diagnosis, 15, 17, 118,
244, 245
166, 283-286
masses, 77, 106-108
congenital, 286
neovascularization see Rubeosis iridis
etiology, 286
normal appearance, 71-73
jatrogenic, 286
pigmentary changes, 170-171, 244, 245,
management, 62, 287-289
246
neurogenic, 286
prolapse, 223
Keratoconus, 102-103
‘strands', 77,127
Keratometry, 29
ultrasonography, 32, 34
Keratoscopy, 29
Iris atrophy, 149
Keratotomy, punctate or grid, 220-221
secondary to uveitis,171, 173
Ketoconazole, 181
senile,73
Ketoprofen, 58, 248
Iris bombe, 105,150, 172, 244, 247
Ketorolac, 57, 58, 248, 300
[ris constrictor (sphincter) muscle, 9, 72,
122-123
L
atrophy, 73
Labrador Retriever
embryology, 1
cataracts, 177, 179
glaucoma,232
retinal disorders, 135, 136, 138, 183,
neural control, 11, 12
184, 186
[ris (pupillary) dilator muscle, 9, 72, 123
Lacrimal drainage system see
embryology, 1
 Nasolacrimal drainage system
Irish Red & White Setter, 133
Lacrimal gland, 4, 6, 8, 253
Irish Setter, 133, 138, 144, 179
aplasia or hypoplasia, 286
310
Iritis see Anterior uveitis
autoimmune adenitis, 286
Lacrimal lake, 255
Lodoxamide, 301
INDEX
Lacrimal sac, 254
Longhaired Dachshund, 133, 146, 167
Lacrimal system, 6, 253-254, 255
Loupe, magnifying, 14
infammation see Dacryocystitis
Lumigan see Bimatoprost
trauma, 265, 286
Lymphoma, 107-108, 116, 194
Lacrimation, 254
L-Lysine, 56, 226, 279
increased, 87, 266,267-272
Lysosomal storage diseases, 194
reduced, 166, 283-289
Lacrimomimetic drugs, 62
M
Lagophthalmos
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
brachycephalic dogs, 67, 69
33, 205
corneal pigmentation, 95,96, 166
Magnifying loupe, 14
exophthalmos,79
Mannitol, 60-61, 235
Lancashire Heeler, 138, 142
Mast cell stabilizers, 57, 301-302
Large Munsterlander, 179
Masticatory muscle myositis, 207
Laser therapy, 158, 159, 237
Medial canthal entropion, 263, 264,
Lashes see Cilia
268-270, 271
Latanaprost, 60, 235, 300, 301
Medial canthoplasty, 269-270, 272
Lateral canthus, 6
Medial canthus, 6
Lateral geniculate nucleus, 11, 120
closure, 289
Lens, 7, 9-10, 175
Medications, 50-66
abnormal appearances, 78, 108-110
adverse ocular effects, 118, 151-152,
coloboma, 128
286
congenital disorders, 127-128
combination, 53, 297-299
dislocation see Lens luxation
owner compliance, 50-51, 52
embryology, 1, 2, 3
pharmacokinetics, 51-63
examination, 47-48
routes of administration, 50
extraction techniques, 182
Medrysone, 296
hemorrhage within, 131, 132
 Medulloepithelioma, uveal, 106-107
induced uveitis, 173, 177-181
Megalocornea,174
normal appearance, 73
Megestrol acetate, 99
nuclear sclerosis, 73, 108
Meibomian glands, 6, 7, 253
opacification, 78, 108-110
adenoma, 86
position change, 78
inflammation, 290-291
shape change,78
Melanocytomas, limbal, 93, 97
Lens capsule, 2
Melanoma, 194
lenticonus, 128, 129
iris, 32, 34, 107, 170
traumatic puncture, 223
uveal, 106-107
uveitis, 105, 170
Melanosis (melanocytosis), 92, 93
Lens luxation, 110, 238-241
Meloxicam, 248
anterior, 106, 110
Membrana nictitans see Third eyelid
primary, 238-240
Menace reaction, 47, 120-121
secondary, 172, 240-241
Meningitis, 163
Lenticonus, 128, 129, 130
Meningoencephalitis, 163
Lentiglobus, 128
Meningoencephalomyelitis,
Leukocoria, 78, 110-111
granulomatous (reticulosis),
congenital, 111
162, 163
Levator palpebrae superioris muscle,
Meridian, 27
5, 7, 69
Merle ocular dysgenesis, 3, 131
Levobunolol, 300
Methazolamide, 236
Levofloxacin, 295
Methylprednisolone, 248
Limbus, 6, 70
Metipranolol, 236
Lipid keratopathy, 99-101, 168, 217, 218
Miconazole, 55
311
Lissamine green, 16-17
Microphakia, 127
X
Microphthalmia (microphthalmos), 75,
Neomycin, 294,295,297,298-299
口
125-127
Neoplasms see Tumors
cataracts, 126-127, 177
Neural crest cells, 3, 4
differential diagnosis, 165
Neural retina
mechanisms, 1, 3
detachment see Retinal detachment
Micropunctum, 262,263
dysplasia see Retinal dysplasia
Miniature Poodle, 134, 138, 145, 180, 183
embryology, 1, 2-4
Miniature Schnauzer, 127, 133, 136, 138,
tapetal hyperreflectivity, 112
145, 178
Neurologic disorders, causing blindness,
Miotics, 236, 301-302
119, 162-164, 193-194
Mittendorf's dot, 1, 129
Neurologic examination, 118-119
Moll, gland of, 7
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL),
Monoclonal gammopathies, 132
140, 186-188
Mouth opening, pain on, 80, 203, 205
Neuroprotective therapy, 236
Moxifloxacin, 295
Neurotrophic keratopathy, 215
Mucoceles, 283
Nictitans (third eyelid) gland, 253-254
Mucopurulent discharge, 273-283
Nictitans gland prolapse (cherry eye), 8,
Mucus, tear film, 273, 290
88, 89, 253-254
Miller's muscle, 5, 7
sequelae of surgery, 272
Mycoplasma infections, 54, 275, 280
surgical correction, 88, 90
Mycoses, ocular, 55, 56
Nictitating membrane see Third eyelid
Mycosis fungoides, 18
Night blindness, 118
Mydriasis, 47, 61
hereditary disorders, 144, 146, 185
Mydriatics, 61-62, 248-249, 301-302
nutritional deficiencies, 188
Myopia,26,29
Nitrofurazone, 295
Myositis, masticatory muscle, 207
 Nodular granulomatous
episclerokeratitis,278
N
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Nanophthalmia, 125-127
(NSAIDs)
Nasal folds
systemic, 53, 58
surgical excision, 268, 269
topical, 56, 57, 300
trichiasis, 214-215, 268, 269
uveitis, 247-248
Nasal ostium, 254-255
Norfloxacin, 295
cannulation, 259, 261
Norwegian Buhund, 180
Nasolacrimal canaliculi, 6, 254
Norwegian Elkhound, 133, 144, 175
Nasolacrimal drainage system, 254-255
Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever, 139
congenital anomalies, 262
Nutritional retinal degeneration, 188-189
disorders, 262-267
Nyctalopia see Night blindness
evaluation,21, 257-259
Nystagmus, 84, 126, 147
fushing, 258-259, 260-261, 282-283
inadequate passage of tears, 263
0
neoplasms, 265
Obstacle course, 119-120
traumatic injuries, 265
Ocular coherence tomography (OCT), 38,
Nasolacrimal duct, 6, 254, 255
46
blocked, 263, 265, 281
Ocular hypotensive (anti-glaucoma)
creating an artificial, 265-267
medications, 58-61, 234, 235-236
evaluating patency, 16, 21, 257-259
intravitreal injections, 61
Nasolacrimal puncta, 6, 254, 255
systemic, 53, 60-61
atresia,262,263,264
topica1, 58-60, 300-301
examination, 257
Ocular surface disease
misplaced, 262,263
painful, 215-226
small (micropunctum), 262, 263
reduced/altered tear production,
therapeutic occlusion, 289
283-291
312
Natamycin, 55
Oculomotor nerves, 11
Oculoskeletal dysplasia, 111
differential diagnosis, 204
INDEX
Ofloxacin, 295
eyelid abnormalities,207-215
Qintments, 51, 52
glaucoma, 227-237
Olaptadine, 301
lens luxation, 238-241
Old English Mastiff, 134, 139, 185-186
ocular surface lesions, 215-226
Old English Sheepdog, 178
orbital disease, 203-207
Ophthalmia neonatorum, 85, 116
Palpebral fissure
Ophthalmic examination,14,38-48
abnormal shape, 76
ambient illumination, 46-47
shortening, 289
dark room, 47-48
wide, tear film problems, 289
Ophthalmic history, 116-117
Panmus (chronic superficial keratitis), 98,
Ophthalmoscopy
166-167
binocular indirect, 25
Panophthalmitis, 54
direct, 21-22
Papilledema, 162, 192-193, 195
hand lens indirect, 22-23
Papillon, 135
Optic chiasm, 10-11, 120
Parasympathetic nerve supply, 9, 11,
tumors, 193
122-123
Optic cup, 1, 2-3
Parasympatholytics, 61
Optic disk, 7, 10
Parasympathomimetics, 58-59, 287
chronic glaucoma, 232-233
Parotid duct transposition, 288-289
coloboma, 143
Pathology, ocular, 12-13
normal appearance, 74-75
Pectinate ligament, 27, 29, 71
Optic fissure, 1, 2-3
dysplasia see Goniodysgenesis
Optic nerve, 10-12
Pemphigus, 278, 283
aplasia, 141-142
Penciclovir, 5455
congenital malformations, 132-147
Perfuorocarbon tamponade, 159-160
disease, 192
Periorbita, 4
embryology, 2
Persian cat, 135, 144
hypoplasia, 141-142
Persistent hyaloid artery(PHA),128-129
testing function, 120-123
Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
Optic neuritis, 113, 161-162, 163
lentis/primary vitreous (PHTVL/
Optic tracts, 11, 120
PHPV) or persistent embryonic
Optic vesicle, 1, 2-3
vasculature (PEV), 1, 110-111,
Optical infinity, 28
129-131, 132
Orbicularis oculi muscle, 5, 7, 69
Persistent pupillary membranes (PPM), 4,
Orbit, 4-5
5, 103, 104, 127
Orbital cellulitis/retro bulbar abscess, 80,
Peter's anomaly, 4, 5
205-206
Phacoemulsification, 182
Orbital disease
Pharmacokinetics, 51-63
exophthalmos, 80-81, 203
Phenylephrine, 61-62, 249, 301-302
investigations, 20, 31,32, 33, 205
Photography, fundus, 36, 40
ocular discharge, 283
Photopic vision, testing, 119-120
painful, 203-207
Photoreceptor dysplasia (pd), 133, 145
space-occupying lesions, 5, 203-205,
Photoreceptor dystrophies, early-onset,
266
133-135, 144147
Orbital neoplasia, 81, 203
Photoreceptors, 10
Orbital trauma, 82-83, 207
Phthisis bu1bi, 75, 126, 164165, 173
Oscillatory potentials (OPs), 33, 38
Physiology, ocular, 412
Osmotic diuretics, 60-61, 235
Physostigmine, 59, 300
Oxytetracycline, 295, 299
Pigmentary keratitis, 95-97, 166
Pilocarpine, 59, 62, 236, 287, 301
P
Pimecrolimus, 287
Painful eye, 118, 203-252
Pit Bull1 Terrier, 133, 146
313
acute anterior uveitis, 241-249
 Pituitary tumors, 195
?
Placido's rings, 29
dilated, 77, 232
Plasma cell producing tumors, 132
distorted, 78
Plasmacytic conjunctivitis (plasmoma),
normal appearance, 73
88-89, 167, 277-278
white see Leukocoria
Poliosis, 105
Pupillary dilator muscle see Iris dilator
Polish Owczarek Nizinny (PON), 187,
muscle
194
Pupillary light reflexes (PLR), 121-123
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
examination, 46-47, 123
274275
pathways, 11, 122
Polymyositis, extraocular, 80-81
testing equipment, 14-15
Polymyxin B, 294, 295, 297, 298,299
Pupillary membrane, 4, 127
Portuguese Waterdog, 135, 139
persistent see Persistent pupillary
Posterior segment
membranes
abnormal appearances, 78, 110-113
Pupillary sphincter muscle see Iris
colobomas, 142, 143
 constrictor muscle
congenital malformations, 132-147
Purulent discharge, 273-283
decreased reflectivity, 78, 112
hemorrhage, 150-151
Q
increased reflectivity, 78, 112
Quinine, 152
infammatory disease, 189-193
Quixin, 295
normal appearance, 73-75
Posterior synechiae,73, 105, 171-172,
R
243, 244, 245
Radiography, 205
Povidone-iodine solution, 55
Radiology, 33, 205
 Pre-iridal fibrovascular membranes see
Rafoxanide, 152
Rubeosis iridis
Red eye, 89, 231-232
Prednisolone, 247, 248, 296, 297, 299
Refraction, 28, 123-124
Prednisone, 57, 58
Refractive errors, 123-124
Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)
Reticulosis, 162, 163
cataracts, 181
Retina, 10
central (CPRA) see Retinal pigment
anatomy, 7, 10
epithelial cell dystrophy
congenital malformations, 132-147
differential diagnosis, 173, 192
embryology, 1, 2-4
DNA-based tests, 137-139
inflammatory processes, 189-190
dominant, 137, 139, 185-186
scars, 191, 192
early-onset, 133-135, 144-147, 182-183
Retinal degenerations, 111
generalized, 182-185
chronic glaucoma, 232-233
history taking, 117, 118
chronic uveitis, 172
inherited, 182-186
detached retina, 156
late-onset, 182-183
early (erd), 145
X-linked, 139, 185
early-onset photoreceptor dystrophies,
Progressive rod-cone degeneration
134-135, 144-147
(prcd), 183-185
feline central (FCRD), 188-189
Proparacaine, 63, 302
history taking, 117, 118
Proptosis, 82-83, 207
inherited, 182-188
Prostaglandin analogs, 60, 235
nutritional, 188-189
Prosthesis, intraocular, 237
sudden acquired see Sudden acquired
Puncta, nasolacrimal see Nasolacrimal
retinal degeneration
puncta
see also Progressive retinal atrophy
Pupil, 7, 9
Retinal detachment, 13, 154160
abnormal appearances, 77-78, 108
clinica1 findings, 154155
constricted, 77, 243
Collie eye anomaly, 143
constriction, 122-123
complete, 154, 156, 157, 158-160
314
dilatation, 47, 122-123
complications, 160
differential diagnosis, 155
Rough Collie, 133, 139, 142, 144
INDEX
focal or partial, 156, 157-158, 159
RPE65 gene defect, 137, 146-147
hyphema, 105
RPED see Retinal pigment epithelial cell
leukocoria, 111, 112
dystrophy
pathogenesis, 156
Rubeosis iridis (iris neovascularization),
prognosis, 155-156
12
rhegmatogenous, 154, 155, 156
anterior uveitis, 105, 170, 244, 245
serous and exudative, 156, 157, 159,
ectropion uveae, 73
172
treatment, 155-156, 157-160
5
ultrasonography, 32, 35
Samoyed, 134, 136, 139, 185
Retinal dysplasia (RD), 4, 136-141
Sarcoma
diffuse, 136
post-traumatic, 75
focal, 136
primary, 165, 170
geographic, 136, 157-158
SARD see Sudden acquired retinal
leukocoria, 111
degeneration
multifocal, 136, 141, 192
Scanning laser ophthalmoscopy (SLO),
secondary (non-inherited), 141
3638
specific breeds, 133-135
Schiatz tonometer, 24
total, with non-attachment, 131
Schirmer tear test (STT), 15, 255-256,
Retinal dystrophy, congenital (RPE65
283-284
gene defect), 137,146147
Sclera
Retinal folds, 136
 abnormal appearances, 76
Retinal hemorrhages, 112-113, 150-151
embryology, 4
Retinal light reflex, 121
normal appearance, 69-70
Retinal pigment epithelial cell dystrophy
Scotopic vision, testing, 119-120
(RPED), 186
Scrapings, 17, 18-19, 219, 275
differential diagnosis, 186, 187, 192
Sealyham Terrier, 136
fluorescein angiography, 44
Seclusio pupillae, 171-172
Retinal pigment epithelial dysplasia, 141
Serology, 276
Retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), 156
Serous retinopathy, 141
embryology, 1, 2-3
Serum, autologous, 222
infammatory processes, 190-192
Shar Pei, 68, 83, 208, 209
normal appearance, 73
Sheltie, 100
Retinal tears, 157-158
Shetland Sheepdog, 126, 139, 142
Retinal vasculature
Short ciliary nerves, 11
abnormal appearances, 112
Shorthaired Dachshund, 133, 146
infammatory lesions, 191
Siberian Husky, 100, 134, 139, 179, 185
Retinopexy, transcorneal diode laser,
Signs, initial clinical, 117-118
158, 159, 160
Silver sulfadiazine, 55
Retinoscopy, 26-29, 123-124
Sinus disease, 283
Retrobulbar abscess/orbital cellulitis, 80,
Sirolimus, 62
205-206
Skiascopy see Retinoscopy
Rickettsial diseases, 277
Slit-lamp biomicroscope, 25
Rimexolone, 296
Sloughi, 139
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 277
Smears, 17, 18, 219, 275
Rod-cone degeneration, progressive,
Smooth Collie, 139, 142
183-185
Sodium chloride, 302
Rod-cone dysplasia (rcd), 133, 135, 144
Solutions, ophthalmic, 51, 52
Rod degeneration, early (erd), 133, 145
Sorbitol, 10, 181
Rod dysplasia (rd), 133, 144-145
Specular microscopy, 30
Romanowski-type stain, 275
Spherophakia, 128
Rose bengal, 16-17, 63, 219
St Bernard, 68
Stades technique, 211
315
Rottweiler, 136
?
Staffordshire Bull Terrier, 111, 130, 178
infammatory lesions, 190-191
Stains, diagnostic, 16-17
normal appearance, 73-74
Standard Pinscher, 130
Tarsal plate, 5, 6, 7
Standard Poodle, 179, 180
Taurine deficiency retinopathy,
Staphylococcal infections, 211, 212, 277
188-189
Staphylomas, 93, 97, 232
Tear break-up time (BUT), 16, 290
Steroids see Corticosteroids
Tear fil1m, 6, 71, 253-256
Strabismus, 83
examination, 255-256
Styes, 86
inadequate distribution, 289-290
Sub-retinal fluid cytology, 20
layers, 6, 253
Subconjunctival injections, 50, 52-53
qualitative disease, 290-291
anti-inflammatories, 57-58
structures producing, 253-254
antimicrobials, 55
Tear production see Lacrimation
mydriatics and cycloplegics, 61
Tear staining syndrome, 262-264
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration
Tear stimulants, 301-302
(SARD), 10, 152-154
Tears
clinical findings, 118, 153 
artificial, 62-63, 287-288
differential diagnosis, 153-154, 161-
drainage see Nasolacrimal drainage
162, 163, 184
system
Sulfacetamide, 295, 299
function, 254
Sulfonamides, 118,286
Tenon's capsule, 8
Sunglasses, 98
Tetracaine,63
Superficial chronic corneal epithelial
Tetracycline, 54, 280, 295
defects (SCCED) (boxer ulcers),
Thelazia spp, 277
16, 220-221
Therapeutics, 50-66
Superficial punctate keratitis, 167-168
Thiram, 152
Suprofen, 57, 248
Third eyelid, 8
Suspensions, ophthalmic, 51, 52
abnormal appearances, 76, 87-89
Sussex Spaniel, 129
conditions causing epiphora, 266,
Swabs, 18, 219
270-272
Swinging light test, 120
distortion, 76
Swiss Mountain Dog, 138
examination behind, 258
Symblepharon, 92, 99, 265
in exophthalmos, 79-80
Sympathetic nerve supply, 12, 119,
gland see Nictitans gland
122-123
lymphoid follicle hyperplasia, 88
Sympathomimetics,61-62
masses, 76, 88-89
Synechiae (intraocular adhesions), 171-
normal appearance, 69, 70
172, 244
plasma cell infiltration see Plasmacytic
peripheral anterior, 171
conjunctivitis
posterior see Posterior synechiae
prominence, 76, 87, 205
Systemic disease, visual impairment,
scroling of cartilage, 87-88, 272, 273
116-117
suturing across corneal ulcers, 222
Systemic medications, 50, 53
Tibetan Terrier, 135
anti-inflammatories, 58
Timolo1, 59-60, 236, 301
antimicrobials, 55-56
Tissue glue, corneal, 223
mydriatics and cycloplegics, 61-62
Tobramycin, 54, 295, 299
ocular hypotensives, 60-61
Tolfenamic acid, 248
Tono Pen@, 25-26
T
Tono Vet?,25-26
Tacrolimus, 62, 287
Tonometry, 24-26
Tapetal reflex, 73-74, 111
applanation, 25-26
Tapetum, 10
digital, 24
hyperreflectivity, 78, 111, 112, 190
indentation, 2425
316
hyporeflectivity, 78, 112
Topical anesthetics, 63, 301-302
Topical medications, 50
U
INDEX
anti-inflammatories,56-58
Uberreiter's disease see Chronic
antimicrobials, 53-55
superficial keratitis
application technique, 52
Ultrasonography, 30-33, 34, 35, 36,
fixed ratio combination, 53
125
formulary, 294-302
ocular trauma, 223
miscellaneous, 63
orbital disease, 31, 32, 205
mydriatics and cycloplegics, 6]
Ultraviolet light exposure, 98
ocular hypotensives, 58-60
Unoprostone, 60
pharmacokinetics, 51-52
Uremia, 101
tear supplements, 62-63
Uvea, 9
Toxic cataracts, 181
anterior see Anterior uvea
Toxic central nervous system disorders,
Uveal tumors, 106-108
164
Uveitis
Toxic retinopathy, 151-152, 190
acute see untder Anterior uveitis
Toxocaral retinochoroiditis, 192
anterior see Anterior uveitis
Toxoplasmosis, 102, 192-193
chronic, 169-174
Toy Poodle, 134, 139, 180
clinical signs, 170-171, 244-
Trabecular meshwork, 27, 29,71
245
Trans-corneal fine needle aspiration,
diagnosis, 173
19
differential diagnosis, 173
Transilluminator, 14-15
pathogenesis, 170
Transscleral fine needle aspiration, 20
sequelae, 171-173, 233-234
Trauma
treatment and prognosis, 173-
acute uveitis, 241, 243
174
cataracts, 181
granulomatous, 244
corneal,223-226
lens-induced, 173, 177-181
eyelid lacerations, 85, 265
neoplastic, 170, 173
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 286
phacoclastic,223
nasolacrimal system, 265, 286
retinal detachment, 157
orbital, 82, 207
Uveodermatologic syndrome, 105,
penetrating,75
173, 283
retinal detachment, 158
Travatan see Travoprost
V
Travoprost, 60,235, 301
Valaciclovir, 56
Trichiasis, 214-215
Valganciclovir, 54
atonic entropion,209-211
Vidarabine, 54, 296
corneal pigmentation, 95, 96, 166
Vigamox, 295
epiphora, 266, 268-270
Visceral 1arva migrans, 192
nasal fold, 214-215, 268, 269
Vision
Trifluridine, 54, 278-279, 296
in daylight and dim light, 118
Trigeminal nerve lesions, 215, 290
evaluation, 116-125
Triple antibiotic preparations, 54, 294,
testing, 119-125
295
Visual evoked potentials (or response)
Tropicamide, 47, 61, 302
(VEP or VER), 33-36, 37, 124,
Tumors
125
causing blindness, 194-195
Visual field defects, 120
causing uveitis, 170
Visual impairment, 116-202
fine needle aspiration, 19
acquired, 148-195
glaucoma secondary to, 233-234
acute onset, 148-164
Tunica vasculosa lentis, 1
chronic progressive, 164-195
persistent see Persistent hyperplastic
congenital disease/malformations,
tunica vasculosa lentis/primary
125-147
317
vitreous
evaluation, 116-125
?
Visual pathways
W
central, 10-12
Welsh Springer Spaniel, 178
neoplasms affecting, 194195
West Highland White Terrier, 128, 180,
testing, 120-123
284, 285
Visual placing reactions, 121
Wet eye, 256-272
Vitamin A deficiency, 188
see also Epiphora
Vitamin E deficiency, 186, 188
White pupil see Leukocoria
Vitiligo, 105
Wirehaired Dachshund, 133, 146
Vitrectomy, 158-159, 160
Vitreous
X
cytology,20
Xalacom see Latanaprost
hemorrhage, 35, 131-132, 150
opacification, congenital, 131-132
Z
 persistent hyperplastic primary
Zeis, gland of, 7
see Persistent hyperplastic
Zygomatic salivary gland, 5
tunica vasculosa lentis/primary
mucocele, 283
vitreous
Zymur, 295
318