SMALL
ANIMAL
OPHTHALMOLOGY
SECRETS
QUESTIONSYOU
WILL BE ASKED
on rounds
in the clinic
on oralexams
RONALDC.RIIS,DVM,MS,DACV
Publisher:
HANLEY & BELFUS, INC
Medical Publishers
210 South 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19107
(215) 546-7293; 800-962-1892
FAX (215) 790-9330
Web site: http://www.hanleyandbelfus.com
Nofe to the reader: Although the information in this book has been carefully reviewed for cor-
any legal responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be made. Neither the publisher nor
 the editor makes any waranty. cxpressed or inplied, with respect to thc malcrial contained hercin.
mation (package inserts) for accepled indicalions, absolute dosage recommendations, and other
inforrmation pertinent to the safe and cffective use of the product described.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Small animal ophthalmology secrets / edited by Ronald C. Ris
p. cim. - (The Sccrets Series@)
ISBN 1-56053-407-9 (alk. paper)
1. Veterinary ophthalmology--Examinations, qucstions, etc.
1. Riis, Ronald C.
SF891.S55 2001
636.7'08977—dc21
2001024761
SMALLANIMALOPHTHALMOLOGYSECRETS
ISBN 1-56053-407-9
O2002 by Hanley & Belfus, Inc. All rights rescrved. No part of this book may bc reproduced,
rcused, republished, or transmitted in any form, or storcd in a data basc or retricval systeim, with-
out written permission of the publisher.
Last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
小尾巴宠物健康中心http:///tahc.laobao.com
CONTRIBUTORS
Kenneth L. Abrams, D.V.M., DACVO
Veterinary Ophthalmology Services, lnc., Warwick, Rhode Island
Gary L. Blanchard, D.V.M., M.S., DACVO
Veterinarian inPrivate Practice,Hoslett, Michigan
Dennis E. Brooks, D.V.M., Ph.D., DACVO
Professor of Ophthalmology. Dcpartment of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, University ol
Florida College of Veterinary Medicine, Gainesville, Florida
Jane O. Cho, D.V.M., DACVO
Staff Ophthalimologist,Veterinary Referral Centre, Little Falls, New Jersey
Michael G. Davidson, D.V.M., DACVO
Professor of Ophthalmology, Departmenl of Clinical Sciences, North Carolina State Univcrsity
Coilege ofVelerinary Medicine,Raleigh,North Carolina
Alexander deLalunta, D.V.M., Ph.D., DACVLM
ames Law Protcssor of Anatomy. Dcpartmcnt of Biomcdical Scienccs, Cormcil University
College of Vcterintary Medicine, Ithaca, New York
Thomas F. Evans, D.V.M., MRCVS
Ark Veterinary Centrc, l.cxden, Colchester, England
Jeanette S. Felix, Ph.D.
Prcsidcnt. OptiGen. LLC, Ithaca, New York
Craig A. Fischer, D.V.M., DACVO
Animal Eye Clinics of Florida, Clearwater, Florida
James E. Gaarder, D.V.M., DACVO
Veterinarian in Private Practice, Anchorage, Alaska
Bruce H. Grahn, D.V.M., DACVO, DABVP
Professor of Ophthalmology, Departmcnt of Small Animal Clinical Scicnces, Western College
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada
M. Kohle Herrmann, D.V.M., DACVO
Gulf Coast Animal Fye Clinic, Houston, Texas
Amy M. Knollinger, D.V.M.
Animal Eye Associates, Maitland, Florida
Seth A. Koch, V.M.D., M.M.Sc., DACVO
Adjunct Assistant Professor of Veterinary Ophihalmology, Dcpartiment of Clinical Studics,
University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine,Philadelphia,Pennsylvania;Animal
Eye Clinic of Maryland, Silver Spring, Maryland; Animal Eye Clinic of Vermont, Shelburnc,
Vermont
X
Contributors
Ellfis R. Ioew, Ph,D.
Professor of Physiology, Department of Biomedical Scicnces, Cormell Univcrsity College of
Veterinary Medicine, Ithaca, New York
Annajane B. Marlar, D.V.M., DACVO
Animal Ophthalmology Clinic, Dallas, Texas
Robert I. Munger, D.V.M., DACVO
Animal Ophthalmology Clinic, Dallas, Texas
Mary Lou Norman, B.S., HT(ASCP)
Departmenl ol Clinical Sciences, Comell Univcrsity Collcge of Vcteninary Medicine, Jthaca.
New York
Dennis K. Olivero, D.V.M., DACVO
Veterinary Ophthalinology Specialty Practice, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota
Robert L. Peiffer, Jr., D.V.M., Ph.D., DACVO
Professor, Dcpartments of Ophthalmology and Pathology, University of North Carolina School
of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; Staff Ophthalmologist, Animal Eye Care, Winston-
Salem, North Carolina, and Hickory, North Carolina: Ncedham Animal Hospital, Wilmington,
North Carolina; Animal Ophthalmology of North Carolina and Virginia, Durham, North Car-
olina; Peninsula Vetcrinary Emcrgency Medicine Hospifal, Newport News, Virginia
Simon M. Petersen-Jones, DVetMed, Ph.D., DVOphthal, DECVO, MRCVS
Assistant Professor, Departmcnt of Small Animal Clinical Scicnces, Michigan Stale Univcrsily
College of Veterinary Medicine. East Lansing, Michigan
Cynthia C. Powell, D.V.M., M.S., DACVO
Assistant Professor. Departnient of Clinical Sciences, Calorado State University Collegc of
Velerinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Fort Collins, Colorado
Daniel R. Prichs, D.V.M., DACVO
Animal Eye Associatcs, Maitland, Florida
David T. Ramsey, D.V.M., DACVO
ences, Michigan Statc Univcrsity College of Veterinary Medicine; Michigan State University
Veterinary Clinical Ccnter, East Lansing. Michigan
Ronald C. Riis,D.V.M., M.S.,DACVO
Associate Professor of Comparativc Ophthalmology, Department of Clinical Sciences, Cornell
University College of Veterinary Mcdicine; Conell University Hospital for Animals, lthaca.
NewYork
Jeffrey S. Snith, BVSc, FACVSc, DACVO
Visiting Lecturer, Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies, University of Sydney; Animal
Refcrral Hospital. Eye Clinic for Animals, Sydney, Australia
James F.Swanson,D.V.M.,M.S.,DACVO
Gulf Coast Animal Eye Cliuic, Houston, Texas
Contributors
John Sykes, D.V.M.
Univcrsity of Pcnnsylvania School of Vctcrinary Medicine, Philadelphia. Pennsylvania
Samuel J. Vainisi, D.V.M., DACVO
Univcrsity of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, lllinois, Animal Eye Associates, Wheeling, Illinois
Alexandra van der Woerdt, D.V.M., M.S., DACVO, DECVO
Thc Animal Mcdical Center, New York, New York
David A. Wilkie, D.V.M., M.S., DACVO
Associate Professor and Head, Comparative Ophthalmology, Departinent of Veterinary Clinical
Sciences, Ohio Stale University College of Velerinary Medicine, Columbus, Ohio
A.Michelle Willis,D.V.M.,DACVO
Staff Ophthalmologist, Rowley Memorial Animal Hospital, Springfield, Massachusetts
PREFACE
Veterinary ophthalmology has no dcficicncy of textbooks or atlascs, and the availablc titles
are all very good. However, Small Animal Ophuhalnology Secrets is different from the othcr text-
books in the field. The format of The Secrcts Series@ rclies on thc authors to posc a question that
is conmonly askcd onl exams or in the clinic and thcn follows up with an answer that is founded
on years of the authors' experience. The goal of this text is not. to be all-inclusive; the standard
texts serve that purpose. The format and thc content oft this texi providc key informalion in a way
that will save readers time and cnergy conccrning lopics that they nced to know.
It is my hope that The Secrct Scries? will expand to include other veterinary ophthalmology
titles, such as large animal species and exotic species, because ophthalmology still turns me on.
lt has been enjoyable working with my colleagues to completc this text, and their contributions
are much appreciatcd. In addition, we are all indebted to our animal patienls, clients, students, in-
terns, residcnts, and, last but certainly not least, veterinary technicians.
Ronald C.Riis,DVM,MS,DACVO
xili
*
FIGURE 1. Dog nictitans. Diagnosis: follicular hyperplasia.
FIGURE 2.Pigeon iris. Diagnosis: normal *eye sign."
FIGURE 3. Dog iris with focal pignentation. Diagnosis: iris nevus.
FIGLRE 4. Cat cornca with central pignent and ncovascularization. Diagnosis: sequestrum.
水
FIGL RE 5. Iog eye with lens opacity. Diagnosis: cortical and pcrinuclear cataract.
FIGL RE 6. Dog iris bulging pigemented tumor. Diagnosis: anterior uveal melanoma.
FlGURE 7. Cat cornea with neovascularization infiltrate. Diagnosis: stromal abscess.
FlGURE 8. Cat iris. unusual shapc. Diagnosis: typical iris coloboma.
10
2
FIGURE9.
 Cat iris with stromal rarification. Diagnosis: senile iris atrophy.
FIGLRE 10.
.Dog comea with exlensive neovascularization. Diagnosis: keratoconjunetivitis sicca.
FIGLRE 11.  Dog iris, swolleni and disfigured. Diagnosis: ocular manifestation of lyimphoma.
FIGURE 12. Dog lens opacity. Diagnosis: congenital inherent calaracts.
13
15
16
FIGURE 13.
Chocolatc Labrador rctrievcr fundus. Normal variation. Notc choroidal vesscls (*) and sinall tapetal
islands (**).
FIGURE 14.
Tri-collie fundus. Diagnosis: small optic disc coloborma (*)
FIGURE15.
.Dog fundus. Diagnosis: uveitis associated with pyomelra (*).
FIGURE 16.Dog fundus with hemorrhage.Diagnosis:hemorrhage secondary to thrombocytopenia.Note:
henorrhage is located in the intraretinal and photoreceplor layers, vitreal haziness over disc secondary to plas-
Tmoid effusion.
7
18
19
20
FIGLRE 17. Merle collie fundus. Diagnosis: subalbinotic with small optic disc coloboma (*) and choroidal
hypoplasia (**).
FIGURE 18.
Golden retricvcr. Diagnosis: normal variant.Note cxccssive myclination of optic disc (*) (pseudo-
papilledema).
FIGURE19.
Cat fundus with large areas of altered reflectivity (*). Diagnosis: choriorctinal scars. Rule out
toxoplasmosis.
F1GLRE20.
Cat fundus with linear scars (*). Diagnosis: ophthalmomyiasis (larvae tracks)
21
22
光
**
***
23
24
FIGURE 21.
Cocker spaniel fundus with linear scars (*). Diagnosis: relinal folds or retinal dysplasia
FIGURE 22. Portltguesc water dog tapetal fundus showing vascular attenuation and hypcrreflectivity. Diagnosis:
progressive retinal atrophy.
FIGURE 23.  Labrador retriever fundus with taperal hypcrreflctivity (*), vascular atteruation (**), and nontapetal
pigmcntation (***). Diagnosis: progrcssivc rctinal atropby.
dysplasia.
25
26
27
28
29
30
FIGURE25.
Siberian husky with an albinotic tigroid fundus. Diagnosis: Bergineistel's papilla (*) (pearl-gray spherical body in cenler of optic disc).
FIGURE26.
Springer spaniel fundus. Diagnosis: retinal dysplasia (*) and optic disc hypoplasia.
FIGURE27.
German shepherd fundus. Diagnosis: flat retinal detachment (*).
FIGURE 28.
Dog fundus. Diagnosis: bullous retinal detachment (*).
FIGURE29.
Owl fundus. Diagnosis: retinal hemorrhage (*) adjacent to and involving pecten secondary to trauma.
FIGURE 30.Catfundus.Diagnosis:rulifocal retinal detachments secondary to atitifreeze loxicity.
**
31
32
33
34
35
36
FIGURE31,
Sable collie fundus. Diagnosis: Iargc optic disc coloboma (*) and choroidal hypoplasia (**)
FIGURE32.
Dog fundus. Diagnosis: choroidal heimorrhagc sccondary to hypertension.
FIGURE 33.
Dog fundus. Diagnosis: focal retinal detachment (*).
FIGURE 34.
Chinchilla fundus.Diagnosis:normal.
FIGURE35.
Dog fundus. Diagnosis: multiple retinal scars secondary to disteinper.
FIGU!RE36.
I.General
1.ELECTRICAL ACTIVITV OF THEVISUAL
SYSTEM: THE ERG AND THE VER
Ellis R. Loew, Ph.D.
1. What is the electroretinogram (ERG)?
The first step in the process of vision is the absorption of light by the primary receptor cells
and the transduction of this event into a membrane potential change. This change in potential is
called the receplor potenlial. The primary receptor cells (i.e., photoreceptor ceils) of the visual
systeni are the rods and cones. 'They are derived from ciliated cells and respond to a light increase
with a membrane hyperpolarization duc to thc closing of Na+ channcls. There is also a rcdistri-
bution of ions in the inter- and intracellular spaces that results in extracellular currents. The mem-
of neuronal clemcnts proximal to the photoreccptors. These suhsequent changcs also producc cx-
tracellular currents in the retina. In the end, stimulation of the ganglion cells leads to the produc-
tion of action potentials thal move over the inner retinal fiber layer and exit the eye via the optic
is graded. By measuring the changes in relinal activity in rcsponse to known stimuli, one can de-
duce many of the characteristics of rctinal processing underlying the visual process.
2. What is the electrical basis of the ERG?
There arc always ions flowing within the retina because of thc action of pumps, mermbrane leak-
agc and oiher potential differcnces. Moving charges are called a current, and a current ilowing
through the resistance provided by thc retinal structure prcduces a voltage according to Ohm's law
(E = IR wherc F is voltage, I is current, and R is rcsistance). To mcasure voltage, place two clcc-
tance. If the line joining the electrodes is parallel to the current path, the full ohmic voltage is mea-
sured. If the line joining the electrodes is normal to the path, and the current flow is uniform along
thc path, then no voltage is measured. The magnilude of the measured voliage is a sine function of
thc clectrode axis relative to thc current path. This is of grcat inporlance in mcasuring neuronal po-
tentials becausc it points out the importancc of clcctrode geometry in making accurate measurermcnts.
The electrical events recordable from the relina are of two types. Intracellular rccordings make
measlred is the transmembrane meinbrane "battery." Extracellular recording measures the poten-
tial differences that arise betwccn different parls of a cell or between cells. In thcsc cases, the elec-
Irodes do not pierce the cell membrane, and, in facl, the electrodes can be quile largc and renmote
from the cclls of interest. Extracellular measurements of retinal activity take advantage of the geom-
etry of the rctina, the location of *voltagc sources,"' and the presence of a resistive layer (remeimber,
current flowing through a resistor produces a voltage—that is Ohim's law). Remember that there is
a continuous extracellular dark-current flowing from the inner segment to the outer segment of rods
and cones. This current is moving in a radial direction. Electrodes placed af the cnds of the pho-
torcceptor cell would record a voltage that was proportional to the current and the cxtracellular re-
sistance (from Ohm's faw!). 1f the electrodes were placed on either side of the ouler segment, no po-
2
ElectricalActivityof theVisualSystem:TheERG and theVER
tential difference would be recorded. If we imaginc a layer of parallcl outer scgmcnts with thc clec-
trodes "bridgcd" to the cnds of all thc cells using a conductive solution, thic voltage we mcasure
would be the sun of the contributions from all the cells. This is called a mass-cell potenlial. The
concept to be gained from thc above cxaimple is that those cells having currents flowing radially il
the eye can be recorded with the electrodes placed across the rctina, whereas the cells whosc cxtra-
cellular currents flow in the plane of the retina will not be measured. Also, the potential scen by dis-
tant electrodes represents the sum of ali the radial currents flowing through the retinal resistance.
3. How is the ERG performed?
The vertcbratc ERG takcs advantage of the above gcometrical consideralions so that ihe re-
sponse of the retina or whole eye can be recorded using exfernal electrodcs. In practicc, a referencc
electrode is placed on somc part of thc animal unresponsive to light but closc to the eyes (c.g., the
forchead or thc bridge of thc nose), whilc a second, active electroxde is placed in conlacl with the
cormea. Because the eye is filled with conductive solution and also sits in a conductive ^"pocket,"
thcse clectrodcs are effectively rccording across the whole retinal layer. The active and reference
electrodes arc connected to a differential amplifier whose ouiput is the differcncc belween these
two inpurs. In this way, any signals such as motiou artifacts or power line noisc are minimizcd or
eliminaled since signals comnmon to the two inputs will canccl each other cut. A third, common or
 ground electrode placed on the ear or nape of thc ncck establishcs the zero lcvcl of the systcim.
4. What are the ERG components?
The retina responds to a flash of light with a scrics of electrical changes rcprcsenling thc pas-
sage of the stimulus through thc rctinal circuitry. As cells in the information pathway change their
electrical state,they contribute lo the overall current flowwithin and across the relina.The record
ing electrodes surm these changes in space and time so that thc potential mcasured at any instant
in time represents the activity of all the cell types electrically active at that time. This leads to the
appcarance of a coimplex waveform of varying amplitude and polarity recorded under the corneal
clectrode (Fig. 1). In order to undersland what is happcning in the retina in response to a stimu-
lus, it is neccssary to asccrtain how each contributing current gencrator in the retina responds sep-
arately. Theorctically, if onc knew the response charactcristics of cach cell type in isolalion, the
complex ERG waveform could be reproduccd by simple summation. There are three main coin-
tion of Granit (for a more detailed discussion of thcse and a number of minor componcnts the
reader is dirccted to reference 3). Pl is a slow, cormea positive wave that appears to be generated
by the pigment epithclium. It is not normally used in veterinary ERG diagnostics and will not be
further considered. Pll is a fast cornea positive wave localizcd to the bipolar and Millcr cclls. PIl1
is a cormea negative wave issuing from the photoreceptors
5. How do the components sum to produce the multiphasic ERG?
Figure I demonstrates how these components sum. The generation of the ERG proceeds from
the absorption of a photon lrain (a flash of light) by the photoreceptor cell outer segments. This
leads to activation of Plll, which pulls the cormeal potential negative resulting in the initial nega-
tive deflection of the ERG. The electrical changcs in the photoreceptors, rcflccted in PI1, lcad to
a change in transmitter release that, after a tine delay, result in changes in bipolar and horizontal
cell activity as well as changes in extracellular ion concentrations activating Pll. Thc horizontal
cell currents flow mainly in the plane of the retina and thus contribute litfle to thc ERG. Thc rise
toreceptors and the morc proximal cells. This leads to a rapid increase in comeal posilivity and a
resulting negative peak in the ERG, producing thc a-wave. Pll pcaks rapidly and with its dccay
produces another peak and identifiable wave, the b-wave. Bccause the decay of PIl is faster than
be unequivocally correlated with the activity of a single cell type is the dcsccnding limb of the a-
wave, which is a plre photoreceptor cell.
Electrical Activity of the Visual System: The ERG and the VER
+
+
PHOTORECEPTORS
BIPOLAR CELLS
MULLER CELLS
Figure 1. Coimponent analysis of the vertcbratc ERG. As scen, the negative monophasic wave gencratcd by
the photoreceptor cells sums with thc positivc monophasic wave generated by the Muller/bipolar cclls to pro-
ducc thc multiphasic ERG at the top.
The waveforms and amplitudes of the cormponents depend on the intensity, duration, and
wavelength of the stimulus as wcll as adaptation state. As for all sensory responses, risc times and
amplitudes are proportional to the log of the stimulus intensity (i.e.. as the stimulus intensity in-
creases response amplitude increases and the time-to-peak decreascs). For thc ERG, this means
that the amplitudes of the a- and h- waves will inc rease as the stirmulus intensity tncreases and thcir
line-fo-peak or implicit times will decrease. These changes can be seen in Figure 2. Over a de-
fined range, stimulus duration multiplici by stimulus amplitude is a constani. However, with in-
creasing duralion, there is the risk ot initiating adaptational processes thal can affect FRG wave-
form. Wavclength affccts rcsponse characteristics because of the spcctral scusitivity of the
photoreceptors as determined by their contained visual pigments.
6. What kinds of stimuli are best for eliciting the ERG?
Although the retina can follow slowly changing stimuli, a rapid rise time stimulus such as
thal produced by a plhotographic strobc, fast shuttcr, or light emitting diode (LED) ensurcs a rapid 
activation of the transduclional cascade and good temporal segmentation of the ERG waves. The
geometry of the stimulus is also importan1. The ERG is a mass cell response. Therefore, the best
responses will occur when the entire retina is stimulated. This is best achicved by placing the eye
in an integrating sphere ensuring that the visual field is filled with a uniform stimulus (a Ganzfeld
stirmulator). A uniformly irradiated, frosted conlacl lens covering the pupil is a good approxima-
tion of a true Ganzfeld. Sources 1hat do not stimulate the entire retina can also be used success-
fully as long as they stimulate a largc rctinal arca. Intraocular scatter will ensure that arcas not di-
rectly stimulated will ultimalely conirnibule to the ERG (this is particularly true for lapelal
animals)
4
Electrical Activity of the Visual System: The ERG and the VER
L0DD
avolt)
ERG
H.l...l.u.ul...........li.
aot
002
300
400
500
Figure 2. The effect of increasing stimulus intensity on the canine ERG (brightest at top). Note the a- and h-
wave aimplitude increases and decrcases in implicit times. The stimulus was a S0-msec flash from a 470-nm
blue LFD
7. What are the minor ERG components?
 A mumber of minor cornponents and ERG features may be of diagnostic significance in cer-
tain situations:
The c-wave. This is a slow, positive wave arising from PI and is believed to be due to changes
in RPE activity. It is best produccd using long duration stimuli on the order of seconds. It is also
sensitivc to adaptation state. Becausc it is a slow wave, it is best rccordcd using a direct currcnt
(DC) amplifier or onc with a long time constant --both of which require stable preparations.
Thc d-wave. This is an off effect again sccn with long slimuli. lntcrestingly, it usually has
thc same polarity as the normal "on' ERG cvent and is thereforc not a typical rebound effect. This
may come from the fact that on and off responses are carricd by different retinal pathways and
show different response properties. The d-wave shows the same changes with stimulus amplitude
as the on cvcnt.
The e-wave. This is a late event coming many seconds afier an appropriatc stimulus. Unlikc
other waves, the implicit time of the e-wave increases with increasing slimulus intensity. It has
been associatcd with afterimage activity as thc rcsult of bright flashes given under defined adap-
lationstates,
Oscillatory potentials (P waves). Under conditions of fast rise times and bright stimuli, os-
cillations may be seen on thie ascending linb of the b-wave extending over the peak. These arise
froni local feedback circuits operating between the retinal layers.
 8. What parameters are measured in the clinical ERG and how do they relate to retinal
abnormalities?
In order to tise the ERG diagnoslically, it is necessary lo establish noymal valucs for 1he ERG
paramefers most likely to be affected by fetinal pathologies. 'This means generating ERGs with
ElectricalActivityof theVisualSystem:TheERGand theVER
5
known and acccpted stimuli and cataloging associated wavefoim paraneters. The most obvious
parameters to record are thc amplitudes and implicit times of the ERG wavelets. These can be
used to gencratc slopes, which in somc cases may be more useful than their parent parameters.
For example, fhe slope of the descending limb of the a-wave is sensitive to changes in the irans-
ductional cascadethat are often associatedwithprimaryphotoreccptor cell degcnerations.Before
proceeding. it should be remeimbered that in somc cascs it is only important to determine that the
is most commonly uscd for cvaluation of prospective cataract extraclion palients.
Some cxamplcs of possible ERG abnorinalities can illustrate the utility of the test:
· Because the ERG is a mass cell response, it will be affected by a decrease in the nuniber
of stimulated cells or by changcs in their response characleristics. In the case of priimary
photoreccptor cell dcgcncrations, such as canine PRA, abnormal transduction and degen-
erative changes lead to a decrease in PIII for a given stimulus intensity. This would bc sccn
as decreased a-wave amplitude, increased implicit time, and decreased a-wave slopes. Be-
causc activation of PHl dcpends on PllI, the b-wave is also affected with decreasing slopes
and amplitudes and increascd implicit times. However, a-wave changes often may precede
s o ss   ln  e g a sn n  s 
· Processcs such as optic ncuritis may differentially affecl the inner and outer retinal layers.
 In some cases this can lead to decreases in PiI with a sparing of Pfll. This leads to a "ncg-
ative ERG with only PllI contributing substantially. As thc ncuritis rcsolves, the ERG may
relum to normal with the retum of Pll. Increased intraocular pressure may also isolatc PIlI
as the blood supply to the inner layers is rcduccd. Transient or early glaucoma can producc
the negative ERG waveforim.
● PIH activatcs PlI so that anything interfening with ihis aclivation will lead to a decrease in
b-wave with an increase in negativity. This kind of pattern is seen in some forms of con-
genital stationary night blindness where there is a defect in synaptic transmission.
· The ERG results from retinal currents flowing through the retinal resistance (following
Ohm's law). A decrcasc in retinal resistance would lead to decreased ERG amplitudes with
tmplicit times slaying norinal. Changes in retinal resistance can be produced by structural
defects or melabolic changes in the resistive elements, such as the retinal pigmcnt cpithc-
lium (RPE). One way to differentiate bctwccn amplitudc dccrcascs due to pholoreceptor
cell pathologies or resistive changes is to calculate the a- to b-wave ratio and compare it to
normalvalues.
● One may stimulate the eye and get no recordable ERG as is sccn in sudden acquired reti-
nal dcgcncration (SARD) and advanced progressive retinal alrophy (PRA). Simply put, no
photoreceptor cells. no ERG!
9. What are the linitations of thc clinical ERG?
Although the ERG can be used to differentiate among a number of retinal pathologies, it can-
not be used to diagnose blindness. For example, imagine a situation wherc 90% of the relina has
been wiped out with only a small central 1o% area remaining. With such a sinall number of cells,
the ERG could be lost in the noise and yield no response even though the animal can still func-
tion visually. It is also possible to have a perfectly normal ERG in a functionally blind animal.
Remembcr that thc usual ERG is ani outer layer fetinal phenomenon. A pathology of the ganglion
cells or their axons (i.e., optic neuritis) could stop information flow and cause blindncss. Obvi-
ously. ceniral lesions could also produce blind animals with normal ERGs. The lesson herc is that,
for the ERG to be useful in all but tlhe all-or-none situation, it should be evaluated in the light of
other factors such as pedigrce, ocular exam, and behavior.
10. Whiat is the visual evoked response (VER)?
VER. also known as thc visual cvoked corlical polenlial (VECP or VEP), represents the ac-
tivity of cortical arcas rcsulting from retinal stimulation
6
Electrical Activity of the Visual System: The ERG and the VER
11. How is the VER measured?
cipital region and referencc this to an elcctrode placcd at the vcrtcx or nasion. Stimuli fron a
strobe laimp, an ultrabright LED, or pattern stimulator are presented to the eyes and the responses
avcragcd over a sccond. The VFR is seen as a scries of waves occurring after the main ERGi com-
poncnts, which arc usually prescnt as an artifact.
12. How is the VER used diagnostieally?
In human rmedicine, VER is used to confinn thc patcncy of thc visual pathways, measure vi-
sual acuity, check for albinism, and measure progression of mulliple sclerosis by using dclays in
the appcarance of VER peaks. Howcver, in coupanion animals, the VER norinally is used only
lo test for visuai pathway patency
13. Why is the VER not a standard diagnostic tool for companion animals?
Although it is casy to obtain a VER from a companion animal, standardization and the de-
vclopment of norimal patterns to bc used diagnostically are probleimatic. The measurenenl of the
VER is not as straightforward as the ERG because of large variations in the geoimetry of the skull
and the three-dimensional nature of the VER “generator'. -the visual cortcx. Variations among
brccds have not been cataloged nor have there been adequate age studies. The lack of quantila-
tive data limits thc uscfulness of the VER. Therc is also the problem of electrode placement stan-
dardization. In humans, the standard I0--20 EEG positions are used with the electrodes over thc
visual cortcx (O, and O2) being succcssively connected to onc side of an amplifier whereas ref-
erence electrodes are attachcd to the othcr. Standardization is possible because head dimensions
vary very little when expressed as percentage distanccs bctween landmarks such as the inion and
nasion and preauricular depressions. However, this is not the case for dogs and cats where dif-
ferent breeds can have radical difcrcnces in hcad dimensions and placement of the head relative
to the rcst of the body. This makcs it almost impossible to develop a standard for dogs or cats. In
addition, interfcrcnce fron the ERG is a probleim. In some breeds the relationship bctween skull
shape and eye placeiment makes it difficult to distinguish bctween latc ERG componcnts and thc
VER, cspecially when bright flashes are used as stimuli. Although late VER waves can usually
he detected, any value of the early components is lost because of this uncertainty.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Armington JC: The Electroretinogram. New York, Academic Press. 1974.
 2. Fishman GA: The Electroretinogram and ElectrooculogTam in Retinal and Choroidal Disease. Rochester,
NY. Aimerican Academy of Ophthalmology. 1975.
3. Hcckenlivelly JR, Arden GB (cds): Principles and Practice of Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision. St.
Louis. Mosby, 1991.
2. COLOR VISION IN ANIMALS
Ellis R. Loew. Ph.D
1. What is color vision?
Light illuminating an object can be reflected, transmitted, or absorbed, Thcse interactions im-
part information about the object onto the light field ihal emanales froni the object. The visual
dctcct, rccognizc, and distinguish such objects from other objects and from the background. Dif.
ferences between objects and backgrounds integrated over the spectral bandwidth of the illumi-
nating light subserve brightness detection and discrimination. Spectral changes in the illuminant
due to interactions with objects are interpreted as color. Color vision is the ability to recognize
and distinguish objects based on their spectral reflectance as opposed to their relative broad-band
intensity variations.
2. What are thc rcquirements for color vision?
Thc most fundamenial requirement for color vision is thc prescncc of at lcast two photore-
ceptor cell populalions (usually cones) differing in spcctral scnsitivity. I laving two different vj
sual pigment opsins expressed in cach of the populations safisfies this requirement. However,
spectral scnsitivity may also be adjusted by interposing filters in front of the outer segmenis (e.g.,
oil droplets as in birds and reptiles) or through oplical means (e.g-, wave-guiding). In addition to
the two spectrally different detectors, there must be a neural network capable of comparing the
outputs of thesc two detector classes anid extracting color or chromaticity signals from them
Lastly,there must be interpretive centers that can"paint” the color information onto the percep-
tual map of the visual world.
3. Why is color vision adaptive?
This is actually a question of the evolution of color vision by a spccics, which must improve
the probability that an individual having thc capability will survive to reproduce, The need for
chroinatic discrimination may not cxtend over the whole of the available speclrum bul may only
 have to be active over a particular speciral region of particular importance 1o the organism. We
often hear that this or that animal has color vision but it is not as "good" as ours. This is a mean-
ingless stateiment since “good"' can only be judged within the countex1 of 1he visual world in which
the organisn in question lives.
4. How does one determine if an aninal has color vision?
requisite for color vision. Given this, it imight be lhought that if one could confirn the presence
of two or more classes. color vision could be assumcd. Unfortunatcly, this is not thc casc for it is
possible to have sensitivity in different speclral regions without extracting the infonnalion nec-
essary to name colors. Nonetheless, finding more than one class is certainiy suggestive of color
visjon and oftcn points the way toward experiments that can confirm color vision.
The rwo most cominon ways tof checking the retina for different spectral classes of photore-
in thc dark and the cclls dispersed by maceration. Microbeams are shown through the outer seg-
ments of thc rods and cones and the contained visual pigmcnt mcasurcd. The absorption spectrum
of thc visual pigment, together with any pre-outer segment filtcrs, scts the spcctral sensitivity of
the cell. Once the visual pigment complement has been identified, the capabilities of a color vi-
sion system based on these pigments can be modeled.
Electrophysiologic methods can be applied at any point in the visual pathway to measure
spectral sensitivity that can be referred back to the retinai photoreceptors. The paradigm is one in
7
8
Color Vision in Animals
which stimufi that differ in color are used to excite thc systen, and the response is analyzcd in
terms of the spectral nature of the stimulus. Constant response criteria are prefcrred, but constant
stimulus intensity series are also usefil. If done at the level of the photoreceptor with cither in-
tracellular or suction electroxlcs, the data should bc similar to that obtaincd using MSP, which
-      e  ss      i   
mation about color capabilities is still possible. Rccently Jacobs and his collaborators have used
a flicker mcthod to isolate and number the spectral sensitivity channcls in a number of vertebrates
including companion animnals. The paradigm involves alternating a colorcd stimulus with a broad-
rcsponsc to the white stimulus?" This is done for a series of colored stimuli from the red to the
near ultraviolet (UV). The serics is then repeated, only this timc in the presencc of a background
light chosen to desensitize red-sensitive celis. If such cells are present, there will be a change in.
the spectral sensitivity curve, and by subtracting one from the other the spectral sensitivity of the
rcd channel can be calculated. In this way, Jacobs has found evidence that the majority of mam-
mals are dichromats -- they have two spectral sensitivity channcls. Trichromacy, as secn in hu-
Inans and sevcral other primates, is rclatively rare.
 Most reccntly. molecular techniques havc been used to check for color vision. Starting with
thc excellent studics of Nathans (1986) on the human color vision system, steady progress has
been made in examining many other spccies. Thc basic tcchniquc involvcs detcrmining the opsins
(the protein imoiety of the visual pigment) expressed in the retina by isolating mRNAs, making
cDNAs, using probcs to pick out likely opsin candidatcs, and obtaining their nucleotide se-
quences. These can be translated into amino acid sequences. Once the amino acids present at spe-
cific "*tuning" sitcs are known, the spectral absorption of the visual pigment that uses lhe opsin
can bc caleulated, It is also possible to inscrt a constructed opsin gene into an expression system
Thc absorption spectrum of the rcconstituted visual pigment can be measured directly. This tech-
 Of course, the best test for color vision is to demonstrate it behaviorally. That is, can an an-
imal discriminate among objects based oaly on spectral characteristics as opposed to brightness
differences? In a typical test, animals would be trained to always go to a red card verscs a whitc
card using classical conditioning techniques. Once the animal was operating at a reasonable con-
fidcnce lcvel, it would be asked to discriminate thc red card from cards of other colors and bright-
nesses. The whole process would then be repeated after training to another color. In this way a
color space could be constructed indicating which colors could be discrininated and how differ-
ficulties. Training the aninial is difficult, and there arc problcms controlling for othcr cues such
as texture, position, or evcn odor. Only a few cascs of behavioral testing have been unequivocal
in demonstrating color vision.
5. What about color vision anomalies?
It is well known that humans can suffer from alterations to their color vision system ren-
dering thcm incapable of making color discriminations in particular spectral regions —that is.
they are color blind. It is now known for certain that color blindness results when one of thc
normaly present visual pigments is absent due to a mutation that eliminates one of the opsins.
For exanple, a person lacking the opsin for the red photorcccptor cannot distinguish between
reds and greens and is called a protanope. Loss of thc green or blue opsins lcads to discrimi-
nation loss in other spectral regions. It is to be expected that such mutations would bc prescnt
in nonprinatcs. However. bchaviotal color blindncss has not bccn confirmed in any other
specics.
Of grcater interest are mutations that alter the opsin at the sites that spectrally tune the visual
pigment. In thesc cases the normal number of opsims are present, but they are not in the "normal?"
spectral position. This leads to a distortion of the color spacc meaning that fhcse individuals would
Color Vision in Animals
9
lead to conditions such as protanomaly and deuleranonaly. There is behavioral evidence that this
occurs in animals, particularly primatcs.
6. What do other aninals scc?
This is a common question and one that captures the imagination of animal owners and prac-
titioners. If asked witlhin the context of television, it can be said with certainty that our color tcle-
vision scts do not "work" for dogs and cats. Color television is designed specifically around the
speciral sensitivities. This docs not meau that animals cannol recognize things on a television
screen, only tha1 they cannol use color as a recognition cue. If one knew enough about the color
vision system of an aninal, a true color telcvision system could be made that would provide the
full richness of color we expect from our systcm. Only for the honeybcc has such a system been
 the void and offer a pet color tclevision system complcte with synthesized color movies for the
pet's cnjoyment. Cal and horse television cannot be farbehind!
7. What about color vision in other vertebrates?
Remembering the minimu requirements for color vision, it is not surprising that nonmam-
malian vertcbrates also have color vision systems. Among the besl studied are fish, reptiles, and
birds. However, whereas three color channcls appears to bc the maxiimum number for mamimals,
it is not uncommon for other aninals lo have four, five, or even six color channels. A good ex-
ample from fish is the goldfish, which has four visual pigments in four separate classes of cones
including double cones. There are three concs scnsitive in the human visiblc range as wcll as an
ultraviolet sensitive cone. In fact, most diumal nonmammals have an ultraviolet cone leading to
the potential for quadrachromatic vision at higher order color vision systems. The goldfish is also
interesting because inslead of using vitamin A, as the chromophore for making visual pigment,
it uses vitamin A, Thc substiution of vitamin A, for vitamin A, shifis the absorption spectrum
for visual pigmcnts toward the red end of the spectrum. ln general, freshwater fish use vitamin A2
A, in humans would push the long-wave pigment from a ^max of 565 nm to approximately 625
nm. As a consequence, the spectral range ovcr which the goldfish color vision system opcratcs is
 greater than for hunans and other inanimals, extending from the ultraviolet to the infrared. The
same is true for many lropical coral reef fishi.
However, it is in reptiles and birds whcrc vertebratc color vision rcally expands. Diurnal
reptiles not only have up to five visual pigments, some using vitamin A, as the visual pigment
chromophore, but they also can have a varicty of highly colored oil droplets in their cones that
act as filters that change their spectral sensitivity (Fig. 1). These droplets act as cut-off filters
that can improve the spectral resolution in certain spectral regions. The combinations of pig-
ments and dropleis can lead 1o as many as six different chromatic channels before chromophore
type evencomes inioplay!
The presence of so many color channcls in other vertcbrates begs thc question of what we are
missing by having only trichromatic color vision that excludes the ultraviolet and infrared parts
of the spectrum. Spectroradiomctric measurements of many natural objccts show reflcctance dif-
ferences extcnding into the UV and the infrared. For example, inany fruits have substantial UV
refectance that not only could improve contrast, but also could add to the already availabie colo1
information in the visible spectrum to increase recognifion cues for frugivores. It is also known
 that many animal parts, such as the fcathcrs in hirds and the dewlaps in lizards, show variable UV
refleciance. At the other end of the spectrum, chlorophyll-containing plant parts arc highly re.
flective in the infrared with the spectral character of this reflectance dcpcnding on such factors as
chlorophyll concentration, age, prior light exposure (plants can tan!), or disease. We can only
guess at how rich in color the world would appear if we could look at it through the cyes of other
animnals.
10
Color Vision in Animals
Figure l. Oil droplets froin thc cye of
a lizard (Anolis cristatellus).There
are four classes of oil droplet in al-
most all fully diurnal lizards: a yel-
low, a grccn. and two colorless
droplcts, one of which absorbs in the
ultraviolct. These arc placcd immedi-
atcly in fronl of the outcr segments
and act as filters (800x).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Boynton RM: Human Color Vision. New York, Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1979.
2. Cronly-Dillon JR, Gregory RL: Evolution of the Eye and Visual System. Boca Raton, FL., CRC Press.
1991.
3. Jacobs GH: Comparative Color Vision. New York, Academic Press, 1981.
4. Jacobs GH: Photopigments and seeing: I.essons from natural experiments. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
39:2205-2216.1998.
5. Loew ER: Determinants of visual pignent spectral location and photoreceptor cell spectral sensitivity. In
Djamgoz MBA, Archer SN, Vallrga S (eds): The Outer Retina. London. Chapman & Hail, 1995. pp
57-78.
6. Lythgoe JN: The Ecology of Vision. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1979.
dol, 1983.
8.Nathans J. Thomas D,Hogness DS: Molecular genetics of human color vision: The genes encoding blue,
grecn, and red piguments. Science 232:193-203, 1986.
9. Simythe RH: Vision in the Animal World. London, MacMillan, London, 1975.
3. OPHTHALMIC IMAGING
David A. Wilkie, D.V.M., M.S., and A. Michefle Willis, D.V.M.
1. What imaging tcchniques are available for imaging the eye and orbit?
Many varied imaging modalitics can be applied in ophthalmology to assess the architectural
structure of the globc, adnexa, orbit, and visual system. Traditional imaging modalities include ra-
 computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are becoming routine
procectures in thc assessiment of clinical patients. In addition, newer imaging modalitics are allow-
ing access to in vivo ultrastructure and multidimensional views of the globe to permmit a better un-
derstanding and earlier diagnosis of ocular disease. The clinician must remember that ocular imag-
ing is an addition to. not a replacement for, routine ophthalmic and physical examinalion.
RoutineYmaging Modutities
New Imaging Modalities
Radiographs
Ultrasound bionicroscopy
Plain
Color Doppler ultrasound
Contrast studies
Confocal microscopy
Lltrasonography
Confocal scanning lascr ophthialinoscopy
MRI
Nerve hber analyzcr
CT scan
Optic coherence tomography
Fluorescein angiography
Fundus photography
2. How do I decide which imaging technique to use?
The decision on the imaging modality depends on sevcral factors. Availability and cost are of-
quire sophisticated and expensive equipment and diagnostic expertise in the interpretation of re-
sults. The area of anatomic intcrcst is also a factor. Imaging of thc anterior and posterivr aspects
ot the globe require the ability to view soft tissue with high resolution whilc having a differcnt rc.
quirement for depth of axial resolution. Alihough B-scan ultrasound can image the entirc globe and
 Orbital contents, the axial resolution of ultrasound biomieroscopy and confocal microscopy is linm-
ited in imaging the anterior-most aspcct of the globe. Imaging of thc adnexa and orbit varics dc-
pending on whethcr the sofi tissue or bony structures are of inlerest. ln general, radiographs and
C'T' scans are preferred for evaluation of the bony orbit and nasal and sinus cavities whicreas MRI
and ultrasound are superior for the globe and orbital soft tissuc, and MRI is best for central ner-
vous systerm cvaluation. Evalualion of the nasolacrinal apparatus and vascular anatomy can be per-
tography is used to documcnt retinal vascular and optic ncrve head changes for future comparison.
When combined with the technique of fundus pholography, fuorescein angiography allows visul-
alization of retinal arlerial and venous blood flow and opticnerve and choroidal bloxd flow (Fig.
I ). Areas of delayed filling, nonperfusion, leakage, and blockcd fluorescence arc evaluated.
Selection of an orbital imaging technique requires a thorough understanding of perlinenl
anatomy applied to relevant clinical history and detaifed ophthalmic examination. 'The clinical
findings should direct the clinician to the imaging study that provides rmaximum information and
Darrows diagnostic considerations for thc individual patienl.
3. Which imaging modalities are clinically applicable and which are research tools?
In axddition 1o a routine ophthalmic examination, ocular ultrasonography is perhaps the most
useful diagnostic imaging modality, allowing for rapid examination of the globe and orbit with-
11
12
Ophthalmiclmaging
Figurc I. Late-vcnous phase fluores-
ccin angiogram of a nonnal canine
retina.
evaluating orbital and sinus disease. In recenl years, MRI and CT scan have become more read-
ily available and are considered routine in most specialty practices.
While currently only available in limited facilities, the newer imaging inodalities are offer.
ing insight into disease pathogenesis and allowing accurate evaluation of extent of damage. U1-
trasound biomicroscopy and confocal microscopy are applicable for anterior segment disease, and
the nerve fiber analyzer. confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscope, and optical coherence tomog-
rapher examine the posterior segimncnt and are most applicable in the understanding of glaucoma-
thalmic and orbital blood vessels to assess blood velocity and vascular resistance. This has
applications in diseases with altered hemodynarmics such as glaucoma and diabetes melitus.
4. What is the goal of performing ophthalmic imaging?
'The goal of the clinician should be to assess intraocular and periocular struclures not visible
by routine biomicroscopy or indircct ophthalmoscopy. to evaluate thc extent of intra- and ex-
traocular involvement in a discase process, and to cxaimine structures that relate to the visual
process such as optic nerve, optic chiasm, optic tracts, and visual cortex that cannoi be adequately
cvaluated by routine examination. In addition, imaging techniques may hiclp ohtain a diagnosis,
formulate a treatment plan, or give a more accurate prognosis of outcome.
 5. What are the indications for skull radiographs in ophthalmology?
Radiographs of thc skull are indicated to cvaluafc orbital trauma, lo cvaluatc nasal, sinus, and
oral disease with periorbital or intraorbital extension, and to look for bony destruction (Fig. 2).
The variation in the inter- and intraspecies (especially canine) anatomy of the skull combined with
the superimposition of structures often makes interpretation difficult. Use of lateral, dorsoventral,
venfrodorsal, obliquc, skylinc, and open-imouth views is oftcn requircd to fully cvaluate the orbital
and periorbital anatomy.
Ophthalmic Imaging
13
Figurc 2. A, Plain radiograph of a 10-
year-old canine witli a swelling ven-
tral to the right cyc. Lucency sur-
rounding rostral and caudal roots of
rightmaxillaryPM4.compatiblc
with apical abscessation is notcd. B,
Close-up of abnormal right rostral
and caudal roots of maxillary PM4.
C, Closc-up of normal left premolars.
(Courtesy of J. Reichle.)
B
6. When do I choose contrast as compared to plain radiographs?
 Plain radiographs are indicated to evaluate the bony orbit, nasal and sinus cavities, and skull
(Fig. 3). They are oblained following head trauma, with exophthalmos and orbital disease, to eval-
uate nasal and sinus cavity disease resulting in or affected secondarily to orbital disease and to
14
Ophthalmic Imaging
Figure 3. Plain lateral radiograph of a
dolicocephalic dog. A circular area of
bony sclerosis is visible anlerior to1
the orbit abovc thc molars.
evaluate for radioopaque foreign bodies such as pellets. General anesthesia is ad vised, and dor-
sal. lateral, and oblique views should be obtained. Evaluate the radiographs for fractures, bony
lysis/proliferation, and increased soft tissue density
Following plain radiographs, contrast radiographs can be used to evaluate the nasolacrimal
apparatus, performing a dacryocystorhinography, and the vascular anatomy, using orbital
punctum and slowly injecting 1.-2 ml of a radiopaque contrast agent into the nasolacrinal ap-
contro! if possible. In general, use of other contrast fadiographic lechniques to further evaluale
thc orbit has been replaccd by CT and MRI. In addition, CT and MRI are bctter suited to ascer-
tain thc extent of involvement of nasal, sinus, and orbital ncoplasia prior to surgical or radiation
therapy.
Figure 4. Contrast material has been
used to perforni a dacryocystorhino-
gram of the dog in Figure 3. The ra-
diopaque contrast agent is pooling inl
theareaofpreviouslynotedbony
sclerosis, identifying a cystic dilation
of the nasolacrimal duct.
7. What are the indications for ophthalmic ultrasonography?
Ultrasonography is an inexpensive, noninvasive, safe procedure that allows evaluation of the
intraocular and retrobulbar tissue without sedation or general anesthesia. Ocular ultrasonography
is indicated whenever opacity of the transmitting media of the eye (cornea, aqucous humor, lens,
vitreous hunor) prevents a complete ophthalmic examination. Ultrasound aids in evaluation ot
intraocular mass lesions, differentiation bctween solid and cystic structures, evaluating the extenl
Ophthalmic Imaging
15
and examination of retrobulbar orbital slructures. The most conmon clinical indicalions for ocu-
lar ultrasound are to evaluate for the presence of a relinal delachment in eyes with a cataract, to)
trauma, and to cvaluate intraocular structurcs in cycs with sevcrc coneal opacification. In addi-
tion, orbital evaluation can bc pcrformcd in instanccs of cxophthalmos or orbital trauma. New ul-
trasound technologies include thrce-dimensional imaging, tissue characterization, and very high
frequency (50 MHz) ultrasound biomicroscopy. For a further discussion of ocular ultrasonogra-
phy, please see Chapter 4.
8.What is ultrasound biomicroscopy?
Ultrasound biomicroscopy is similar lo a conventional B-scan ultrasound, but uses an oper-
ating frequency of 40-1o0 MHz to provide a high-resolution image of the cormea and anterior
segmen1. The axial resolution is 2-5 mm, but the image resolution is similar to a histopathologic
section. lhe comea, sclera, limbus, iris, anterior chamber, iridocomeal angle, lenticular zonules.
and ciliary processes are all imaged. This tcchniquc is most useful in cvaluation of the iridocomcal
angle in glaucoma and assessment of antcrior uveal neoplasms, and it may provc uscful in the dc-
termination of the depth of corneal involveiment of squamous cell carcinoma or other infiltrativc
corneal diseases.
9. What is the difference between CT and MRI?
C'T, or CAT, stands for computer axial zomography. In gencral, CT scans provide high de-
lail cross-sectional images with excellent contrast resolution compared with conventional radi-
ographs. ln addition the infornmation can be manipulated to view the anatomy in any desired plain
of section. Like radiographs, CT scans rely on a radiation source to transmit x-rays, but do so by
rotating the source to create cross-sectional, two-dimensional scans. The data is then digitized and
analyzed to create a gray-scale reconstructed image. The lighler the appearance of the area im-
aged (e.g., bone, muscle) the greater the absorption of x-rays; conversely, the darker the image
(e.g., fat, liquids), thc lowcr thc x-ray absorption. CT scans are cxccllent for cvaluation of thc or-
bit, nasal, and sinus cavitics and arc good for the intraorbital portion of thc optic nervc. CT is not
as good as MRI for sofl tissue (globe, oplic nerve) or inlracranial examination. CT is most oflen
used to evaluate the exlent of neoplastic involvenment of the orbit and adjacent structures prior to
surgical and radiation therapy (Figs. 5 and 6).
Figure 5. A CT scan of an I1-year-
old canine with progressive exoph-
thalmos and strabismus of the left eye
of I montl churation. A soft tissue
nass with bone production and dc-
stnrctiou is evident in the left
orbit/nasal cavity. Diagnosis: chon-
lrosareoma. (Courtesy of J. Reichle
and Colorado State University.)
16
Ophthalmic Imaging
Figurc 6. A CT scan of a 13-ycar-old
canine. A soft tissuc mass arising
from right nasal cavity with bonc de-
stralction and invasion into orbit and
is evident. Diagnosis: probablc nasal
adenocarcinoma (Courtesy of J. Re-
ichle.)
MRl like CT allows inforimalion to be reformatted and viewed in any plain of section. Con-
trast and spatial resolution arc excellcnt and permit differentiation of soft tissue and fluid. MRI
images are obtained using a slrong, slatic magnetic field thal causes hydrogen protons to align
with the magnetic field. Radiofrcquency pulscs are then applicd, changing the axis of rotation of
the protons, which then return to their previous alignmcnt when the pulse is discontinued. This
ton-relaxafion dynamics represeniative of the chemical and physical tissue properties. With MRI,
proton-density, T I-weighted, and T2-weighted images are used with proton-density best for dis-
criminating between gray and white matter, T1-weighted images better for anatomic detail and
contrast enhanceinent, and T2-weighted for identifying masses, edema, and other fuids. T2 im-
 ages of the globe are easily identified by the white, high-density vitreous signal. In addition, con-
trast enhancement using gadolinium-diethylcnetriaminepentaacetic acid (Gd-D'TPA) may help fo
highlight areas of bloot-brain barrier brcakdown.
AppearanceonMRI ofVariousTissues
GRAY
HIIHA
LENS
WATHR
MATTER
MATTER
FAT
BONH
CORNEA
CAPSULH
LENS
VITREOUS
T1
Black
Light gray
Medium gray
White
Black
Gray
White
Black
Light gray
T2
White
Dark gray
Dark gray
Whitc
Black
White
Not seen
Black
White
10. When do I choose CT versus MRI?
CT is preferred for evaluation uf orbifal tralma, foreign body detection, and evaluafion of os-
seous, cartilaginous, or calcified structurcs. CT is most often uscd to cvaluate the extent of neo-
plastic involvement of the orbit and adjacent structures prior lo surgical and radiation therapy.
MRI is better suited for assessment of sof tissues (Fig. 7). It is indicated to assess extraocular cx-
tension of an intraocular neoplasm; evaluate orbital soff lissue, optic nerve, and optic chiasm, and
examine for intracranial disease (neoplasia, inflammatory). Use of fat-suppression and contrast-
cnhancemcnt techniqucs makes MRl a superior technique over CT for intraocular and optic nerve
images. MRI is generally considered to be contraindicated when a metallic foreign body is sus-
 pccted. An additional difference is that CT is generally significantly less expensive than MRI and
morc widely available.
Ophthalmic Imaging
17
Figure 7. MRl of a 5-year-old canine,
blind in the left cye with peripapillary
rctinal scparation and retinal hemor-
rhagc. Enlargenent and increased in-
tensity of the left optic nervc on the
dorsal (coronal) vicw is seen. (Cour-
tesy of J. Reichle and UC Davis.)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Brooks DLi: Ocular imaging. ln Gelatt KN (cd): Veterinary Oplthalmclogy. 3rd cd. Philadelphia, Lip-
pincott Williams & Wilkins, 1998. p 467-482.
2. Byrne SF, Green RL.: Ulrasound of the Eye and Orbi1. St. Louis, Mosby, 1992.
3. Kuplin RS, Gersten M, Hodes B: Rcal Time Ophthalmic Ultrasonography and Biomctry: A Handbook
of Clinical Diagnosis. Thorofare, NJ, Slack, 1985.
4. Morgan RV, Daniel GB, Donnell Rl.: Magnetic resonance imaging of the nornal cye and orbit of the
dog.VetRadiol Ultrasound 35:102 -108,1994.
5. van dcr Woerdt A. Wilkie DA, Myer CW: Ultrasonographic abnormalitics in thc cycs of dogs with
cataracts: 147cases (1986.1992).J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:838-841,1993.
6. Wilkie DA, Gilger BC: Equine diagnostic ocular ultrasonography. In Rantanen NW, McKinnon AO
(cds): Equinc Diagnostic Ultrasonography. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1998, p 637-643.
7. Williams J. Wilkic DA: An altcrnate modality for the cxanination of opaque eycs: Ophthalmic uitra-
sonography. Comp Cont Lduc 18:667. 677, 1996.
8. Williamson TH, Harris A: Color Doppler ultrasound imaging of the eye and orbit. Surv Ophthalmol
40:255-267. 1996.
4.OPHTHALMIC ULTRASONOGRAPHV
David A. Wiikie, D.V.M.. M.S., and A. Michelle Willis, D.V.M.
1. What are the indications for ophthalmic ultrasonograplly?
Ultrasonography is a noninvasive, safe procedure that allows evaluation of the intraocular
and retrobulbar lissue without sedation or general anesthesia. Ocular ultrasound is an addition to.
nol a replacement for, routine ophthalmic examination.
Ocular ultrasonography is indicated whenever opacity of the transinitting media of the eye
(comea, aqueous humor, lens, vitreous humor) prevents a complete ophthalmic cxamination. U]-
 trasound aids in evaluation of intraocular mass lesions, differentiation between solid and cystic
structures, evaluation of the extent of damage following ocular trauma, cxamination for a forcign
body,axial length determination, and examination of retrobulbar orbital strnclures
The most common clinical indications for ocular ultrasound arc to evaluate for thc presence
for the presence of a foreign body following trauma, and to evaluate intraocular structures in eyes
with scvcre corncal opacification. In addition, orbital cvaluation can be performed in instances of
cxophthalmos or orbital trauma.
New ulirasound technologies, including three-dimensional imaging, tissue characlenization,
and very high frcquency (50 MHz) ultrasound biomicroscopy, have become available recently.
2. What type of ultrasound probe do I need?
When performing ocular ultrasonography, it is desirable to have high resohulion, but il is not
diameter (footprint) to facilitate optimal placement on the cornea. Transducer probes arc avail-
able in a range of frequencies. A low-frequency transduccr (5 MHz) gives grcater tissuc penetra-
tion but poor near-lield axial resolution, and a high-lrequency transducer (10 MHz) gives lower
tissue penetration but high near-ficld axial rcsolution, In simple tcrms, the higher the transducer
frequency the betier the visualization of superficial slructures such as those found within the eye.
The optimal ophthalmic transducer is a 10-15 MHz with a focal range of 3-4 cm. This probc will
provide adequatc depth of penctration to visualize thc retrobulbar structures, enhanced resolulion,
and abilily to visualize thc anterior intraocular struclures such as the iris, ciliary body, and ante-
rior and posterior chambers. Alternately. a 7.5-MHz transducer will give good ophthalmic images
of the lens, posterior segment, and retrobulbar structures, but the antenior segment will be lost in
the ncar-field reverberation artifact. To overcome the near-field loss a sland-off device, using in-
Creased sterile coupling gel or performing the ultrasound examination through closcd eyelids may
hclp when using a 7.5-MHz transduccr.
3. What is the gain setting?
Gain is measured in decibels and is also known as the sensiivity setting. In cffecl, incrcas.
ing gain is similar to turning up the volume on a radio. By increasing the gain, you alter the in-
tensity of the returning ccho that is displaycd on the scrccn, but do not alter thc energy signal that
is emitted. This allows amplification of weaker signals such as those in the vitreous. Increasing
the gain setting too high will amplify background noise and resuit in false interpretation of struc-
tures such as the vitrcous. Dccreasing the gain allows only the strong echoes to remain and ef-
fectivcly increases axial and latcral resolution and dccreases depth of sound penetration because
deepcr, weak echoes are not displayed.
4, How do I perform an ophthalmic ultrasound?
Topical anesthesia of the comea (proparacaine O.5% Alcaine, Alcon Lahoratories]) and man
ual restraint is usually all that is required for ultrasonographic ophthalmic examination in most
81
Ophthalmic Ultrasonography
61
small anirnal patients. Sterile ultrasound coupling gel or K-Y Jelly is placcd on the transducer tip
or on the cormeal surface. Cellulose-based coupling gels should be avoided because they may
cause corneal irritation. The transducer is placed directly on the cornea, or thc scan may bc pcr-
formed through closed eyelids Or an offset device.Performing the examination through the eye
lids or an offset device will facilitate examination of the anterior portions of the globe, whereas
direct corneal contact provides a superior image of the posterior segment and orbit. When imag-
nificant reverberarion artifact may occur from air in thc offsct or that is trappcd under thc hair.
The globe is imaged in both the horizontal and vertical planes through the visual axis. Oblique
 positioning of the prohe should also be used for a complete examination. A temporal approach
has also been described that entails placing the probe caudal to the orbital ligamcnt and dirccting
it ventrally to evaluate the retrobulbar structures. This tcchniquc allows superior visualization of
the optic nerve, extraocular muscles, and orbital fissurc. At the complction of thc study thc cou-
pling gel should be irrigated from the eye and conjunctiva using stcrile cyewash.
The image is projected to and viewed on a built-in imonitor and can be output to a television,
VCR, therimal printer, computer, or other inmage capture device.
5. What does a normal ultrasound look like?
In general, ultrasonographic images are described as hyperechoic, hypoechoic, and ancchoic.
capsule, posterior lens capsule, and the retina/choroid/sclera (Fig. 1). When ultrasound energy
travels across these interfaccs, cncrgy will bc refccted back to the transducer in the form of an
echo and will be seen as an cchodensity. The iris, corpora nigra, ciliary body, oplic nerve, orbital
fat, muscles, and other orbital structures may generate additional echodensities. The optic nerve
 head or lamina cribrosa appcars as a hyperechoic structure with the optic nerve iiself seen as a hy-
poechoic structure extending posteriorly from the optic nerve head. Thc orbital musclc conc ap-
pears as an echodensity extending posteriorly from the equatorial region of the globe and con-
verging toward the urbital apex. The anterior and posterior chambers, lens cortex and mucleus,
and vitreous chamber are normally anechoic.
6. What is the difference between A and B scan ultrasonography?
brightness-mode (B-scan) ultrasound. In veterinary ophthalmology, B-scan ultrasound providcs
a two-dimensional, cross-sectional, real-time imagc and is thc most common mode of ultrasound 
FREEZE
dB
Figure I. I0-MHz B-scan (top) and
A-scan (botrom) ultrasound of a nor-
mal canine eye. The B-scan echodent-
sities, from leff to right、 are comea.
anterior lens capsule, posicrior lens
capsule. and posterior cyc wall. Cor-
responding A-scan peaks are evident
below. A portion of the anterior uvea
(itis, ciliary body) and retrobulbar
tissues are also evident.
20
30
20
OphthalmicUltrasonography
uscd in a clinical setting to cbtain architectural information. A-scan is a one-dinensional, time
amplitude display and is used to dctcrmine axial length measurements, calculate intraocular lens
powcr for lens replacemcnt surgery, and quantify the echodensity (lissue characterization) of a
structure. Most dedicated ophthalmic ultrasound units will display A-scan and B-scan images si-
multaneously (see Figure 1).
7. What features are evaluated during the ultrasound examination?
Thc cye should be cxamined fron antcrior to postcrior in both the horizontal and vertical
planes. The examiner evaluates the image in real-time allowing a mcntal threc-dimensional com-
posite to be crcatcd. First, determine that all normal structures are present, in normal position and
capsule, vitreous. posterior cye wall, optic ncrvc, and orbital tissues. Evaluate for the presence of
echogenic material in a normmally anechoic space such as the anterior chainber, lens cortex and
nucleus, and vitreous cavity. Determine the axial length of the lens and globe. Is the position of
thc lens normal with respect to thc iris and posterior eye wall? Interpretation of orbital tissues is
more difficult, but the contralateral orbit often can be used as a control, thereby aiding in the
interpretation.
8. How is ultrasound used in the preoperative cataract patient?
 Prior to catarac1 surgery, an ocular ultrasound should bc performed to cvaluate the axial
length of the lens and the posterior scgment. Specifically, lens resorpiion, vitreous degencralion,
retinal detachment,persistent hyperplaslic primary vitreous,and persistent hyaloid remnant may
be noted. When cataractous, the entire lens circuimference is visible and intermal cchos are sccn
(Fig. 2).
 In one retrospective study, the combination of cataract and retinal detachment was present in
13% and cataract and vitreous degeneration in 21% of dogs evaluated prior to cataract surgery.
Retinal detachment was sccn in 7% of thc cycs with immature cataract, in 9% of the eyes with ma-
Iure cataracl, and 19% of the eyes with hypermature cataract (Fig. 3). Vitreous degeneration was
seen in 7%. 20%, and 28% of eyes with immature, mature, or hypermature cataract, respectively.
A-scan is also used to measure the axial lcngth of the globc, which is rcquired for intraocu-
lar lens power determination. This is more common in human cataract surgery.
OORSAL_
Figure 2. Llirasoundl (7.5 MHz) of a
canine eye with a mature cataract.
9. How is ultrasound used in hyphema?
Hyphema can be the result of trauma, hypertension or hyperviscosity, bleeding disorders, in-
traocular neoplasia. congenital abnormalities, and anterior uveitis. If the hyphema is severe
enough to prevent a complete ophthalmic examination, ultrasound imay aidl in determination of
the etiology and the prognosis. Hemorrhage in the posterior segimcnt or a retinal dctachrment are
Ophthalmic Ultrasonography
21
Figure 3. Ultrasound (7.5 MHz) of a
ORSAL
caninc eye with a cataract and a coin-
plete retinal detachmcnt. This is the
contralateral eye of the dog un Figure
2. Note the subretinal space is ane
choic.
水
both negative prognostic indicators for vision. Intralenticular ccho indicates a cataract. The eye
should be evaluated for the presence of a foreign body or mass lesion suggcsting a ncoplasm. It
10. How is ultrasound used in retinal detachment?
The diagnosis of retinal detachment is made based on the presence of an echodense linear
stricture in the posterior segment. Many of these remain attached at the opfic disk and ora ciliaris
retinae. During B-scan ultrasonography, a waving motion of the detached retina may be noted af.
ter the eye has stopped moving. termed aftermovement. The presence of echogenic material in
the subretinal space suggests hemcrrhagic or exudative detachment (Fig. 4).
Figure 4. Ultrasound (7.5 MHz) of a
canine eye with a complete relinal
detachmcnt secondary to intraocular
blastomycosis. Note the exudative
material in the subretinal space.
11. How is ultrasound used in orbital disease?
Uitrasound examination of the orbit is best performed using a 7.5-MHz probe, which
allows deeper tissue penetration than is obtainable with a 10-MHz probe. Typically, orbital
uitrasonography is performed in instances of exophthalmos to examine for retrobulhar space-
occupying lesions, to evaluate the optic nerve (Fig. 5), or following orbital trauma to assess
type and extent of damage. If an orbital mass lesion is prescnt on ultrasonography, an attempt
is made to characterize it as cystic or solid and to dctermine its location within the orbit. If a
mass lcsion is detectcd, it is possible to then obtain an u!trasound-guided fine-needle aspirate
or biopsy to assist in diagnosis, A temporal approach may be of benefit in evaluating orbital
disease.
22
Ophthalmic Ultrasonography
DORSAL
Figure 5. Oplic ncuritis with intravil-
rcal projcction of the optic nerve
headl and widening of the optic nerve
shadow.
12. How is ultrasound used in intraocular neoplasia?
Lltrasound can be used to diagnose a mass lesion in eyes with hyphema or other opacitics of
the transmitting media. With ultrasound, the extent of a mass can be determnined and the imagc
used to help owners understand what is happening inside the eye. In addition, many ultrasound
units will allow arca and volumc calculations of the mass. This information is used to assess re-
sponse to therapy. such as laser photocoagulation, or progression of an untreated tumo1.
13. What do vitreous echoes indicate?
Liquefaction of the vitreous (syneresis) occurs in vitrcous dcgeneration. The liquefaction
may be variable within the vitreous cavity resulting in tissues with different acoustic impedance.
Therefore. multiple echogenic lines or areas will be seen ultrasonographically in the vitreous cav-
ity. The detection of vitreal syneresis depends on the gain setting of the ultrasound probe. By in-
creasing the far field gain, subtle differences in echogenicity will be more pronounced, making
vitreous syneresis easier to detect. If the ocular examination is not performed at various gain lev-
els, vitreous degcneration may go unnoticed.
Asteroid hyalosis is the accumulation of calcium and phospholipid particles. It is more com-
mon in older dogs. in association with diabetes mellitus, retinal degeneration, and intraocular neo-
reous (refer aiso to Chapter 45).
Vitreous hemorthage may be seen in association with ocular trauma, hyphema, retinal dc-
tachment, and hypertension (Fig. 6). It is a negative prognostic indicator hecause it indicatcs morc
severe ocular damage and may progress to fibrosis of the vitreous with resulting contraction and
rctinal detachmcnt.
DORSAL
Figure6.Trauma with hyphcnia and
intravitreal echodensity suggestive of
 intravitreal hemorrhage.
OphthalmicUltrasonography
23
14. When is ultrasound indicated in ocular trauma?
Ultrasonography helps to determine the extent and severity of the injury, evaluate position
of the lens, assist in treatment selection, and allow the clinician to give a more accurate progno-
sis. In many instances, ultrasonography is the only cxamination method of value in an eye thal
is otherwise severely painful and opaquc. In instanccs of scvere cyclid sweiling, lhe examina-
tion can be performed directly through the eyelids, Care should bc taken to avoid further tral-
matizing the globe through excessive pressure exerted on thc globe by the ultrasound probe. In
addition, avoid exposure of intraocular contents to the coupling gel in instances of corncal lac-
eration or uveal prolapse.
Scquclac of pcnetrating trauma include shallow anlerior chamber, fibrin in the anterior cham-
ber. lens capsule rupture, hyphema. rctinal detachment, vitreous hemorrhage, and possibly pos-
terior eye wall rupture. Blunt or concussive trauma causes a rapid increase in the intraocular prcs
sure and often results in an expulsivc rupture of the wcak areas of the globe such as the limbus or
posterior pole. Such an expulsive rupture will expel intraocular contents (lens, uvea, vitreous, and
vitrcous hcmorrhagc, rctinal detachment, cataract, lens (sub)luxation and rupture, and choroidal
dctachment can all occur with blunt trauma. It is imporlanl to assess the posterior eye wall in eyes
15. What is ultrasound biomicroscopy?
Ultrasound biomicroscopy is similar to a conventional B-scan ultrasound, but it uscs all op
crating frcqucncy of 40-100 MHz to provide a high-resolulion inage of the comea and anterior
segmcnt. The axial resolution is 2-5 mm, but the image resoluion is similar to a histopathologic
section. The cormca, sclera, limbus, inis, anlerior chamber, iridocormeal angle, lenticular zonules,
 and cilitary processes are all imaged. This technique is most useful in evaluation of the iridocorneal
 angle in glaucoma and assessment of anterior uvcal ncoplasins, and it may prove useful in the dic-
corneal diseases.
16. Are artifacts or false readings possible?
Thc normal lens acts to refract the sound waves from the transducer, resulting in a faster pas-
sage of sound through the periphcral comparcd with the central lens. This fact may rcsult in thc
posterior cyc wall appcaring to be closer to the probe and will he seen as two discrete retinal el-
evations at the retinal surface, the size of which will vary with the scan angle. This artifact has
been termed "Baum's bumps.
Reduplication echoes result from the echo passing from an intraocular structure to the trans-
ducer and back again. Becausc it will take longer for this ccho to rcach thc probe and retum into
the cye to be imaged, the artifact always appears deeper in the globe than the tissue of origin. The
 pears as linear hyperechodensities in the mid to posterior axial vitreous and can be confused withl
vitreous hemorthage, inflammatory debris, or degeneration.
body results in an acoustic shadow. This occurs because of the almost complete reflection of
sound from the dense structure with little or no sound passing beyond to image the decpcr tissucs.
This appears as an anechoic area some distancc postcrior to thc hyperechoic structure and can bc
confused with a mass lesion.
Additional artifacts occur whcn thcrc is a failurc to use adequate coupling gel resulting in a
gap between the transducer and the eyelid or cormea.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
        n     1
pincott Williams & Wilkins. 1998,pp 467482.
24
Ophthalmic Ultrasonography
2.Byme SF. Grecn RL:Ultrasound of the Eye and Orbit.Mosby.St.Louis, 1992.
3. Koplin RS, Gersten M, Hodes B: Real Time Ophthalinic UItrasouography aud Bionietry: A Handbook
of Clinical Diagnosis. Thorofare, NJ, Slack, 1985.
4. Penninck D, Daniel GB, Brawer R. et al: Cross-sectional imaging techniques in veterinary ophthalnology.
Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 16:22-39. 2001.
 5. Stuhr CM. Scagliotti RH: Retrobulbar ultrasound in the mesaticephalic and dolichocephalic dog using a
temporal approach. Vet Comp Ophthialmiol 6:91-99, 1996.
6. van der Woerdt A, Wilkie DA, Myer, CW: Ultrasonographic abnornalitics in the eycs of dogs with
cataracts: 147 cascs (1986-1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:838841,1993.
7. Wilkie DA, Gilgcr BC: Equinc diagnostic ocmlar ultrasonography. in Rantanen NW, McKinnon AO
(eds): Equine Diagnostic Ultrasonography. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1998, pp 637-643.
sonography. Conip Cont Ed 18:667-677, 1996.
I1. Cornea and External
5. THE RED EYE
Daniet R. Priehs, D.V.M., and Amy Knollinger. D.V.M
1. What is the most conumon clinical sign of oeular disease recognized by the owner?
The red eye. Most cases of the red eye are benign. However, some cases can be vision threat-
2. What are the main causes of the "rcd eye'"?
Conjunctivitis
Keratitis
Episcleritis
Scleritis
Uveitis
Erosions/ulcers
Glaucoma
Hyphema
3. Is localization of the redness inportant?
Yes, the redness may be focal or generalized. It may involve the eyelid, conjunctiva, epis-
clera, sclera or corneal tissue. It may also involve the intraocular structures (Fig. 1).
aa i, e a ssnd ea  ho e m ds isy au si yea t
 A thorough history and physical examination is mandatory. Important questions to ask in-
clude:
+ Is thcre any history of trauma?
● Has there been any medication administered or change in current medication?
· Is there any illncss to which your pct is currently bcing lreatcd for?
·Any history of known or potential toxin exposurc?
+ Any history of previous eye surgery (niclitans gland rcmoval, entropion, or eyclash
surgery)?
·Has thcre been any significant bchavior changes?
· Any significant mcdical problems (nose blccd, blood in the feces or urine, gencralized
malaise)?
Figure 1. Acute FHV-1 conjunctivi-
tis/keralitis in a kitlen. Note the hy-
peremia and intense chenosis.
25
26
The Red Eye
5. What is the next step?
A complete ocular examinalion is warranted. Localization of the redness is very important.
· Is it a focal or generalized problerm?
● Does it involve the adnexa and/or is the redness intraocular?
Once the area involved is localized, a differential diagnosis can be made and further diag.
nostics and thcrapeutic modalities can be initiated.
Muss
Episcierat Vesseis
 I'rolapsed nictitans gland
Low IOP
Normal 1OP
High IOP
Nodular fascitis
+
+
Neoplasia
4
Anterior uveitis
Episcleritis/
Glaucoma
seleritis
RED EYE
Generalized
Hemorrhage
Canjunctivat Vesseis
Trauna
Allergic conjunctivitis
Hyphema
Viral conjunctivitis
Bacterialfungal conjunctivilis
Fyelid abnormalities
Eyelash abnormalities
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Cornealulceration
Orbital disease
Figure 2. Algorithn for Dctcrimining the Causc of a Rcd Eye in the Dog or Cat
 6. How can I tell if the redness involves the conjunctival or episcleral vessels?
The conjunctival vessels are generally smaller and less intensely red. They are more mobile
than the episcleral vessels and blanch when 1%: epincphrine or 2.5% phenylcphrine is applicd.
traocular disease, and episcleral vessel engorgement is associaled with intraocular disease.
7. What are the most common causes of conjunctivitis in the feline?
Conjunctivitis is usually infectious in the cat. Many times there will he a history of or con-
current upper respiratory infcction (URI). The most common causc of conjunctivitis is fcline
herpcsvirus-1 (FHV-1), although Chlantydia and Mycoplasma may be thc offending pathogcn
(Figs. 3 and 4).
Figure 3. Chronic and severe FHV-1
infection in a kitten.
TheRed Eye
27
Figure 4. A grass awn was located in
the bulbar surface of the nictitans, al-
though ihis case presented as bacter-
ial conjunctivitis.
8. How is FHV-1 diagnosed?
FHV-1 should be suspectcd any time a cat has conjunctivitis. FHV-1 is usually observed in
lem. The presence of dendritic comeal ulccrations is highly suspicious of FHV-1, but these are
not conimonly observed. Many times the history and prcscnce of conjunctivitis that is nonre-
sponsive to antibiotics are all the clinician has to use to make at clinical diagnosis.
9. Are therc any laboratory tests that can be done to diagnose FHV-1?
Vinus isolation, immunofluorescence assay (IFA), and scrology are all available diagnostic
tests. Virus isolation is inpractical and cost-prohibitive in thc clinical sctting. IFA has been proven
lo be insensitive for FHV-1 and therefore not usually used. Serology is also not practical bccause of
lack of predictable rising lilers and cross-reactivity to antibodies that are produced by vaccination.
10. Are there new testing techniques available?
Ycs. polymcrase chain reaclion (PCR) testing is becoming more available to clinicians. PCR
has high sensitivity and specificity for viral DNA and should be the test of choice for diagnosing
FHV-1. Conjunctival swabs or corneal or conjunctival scraping are simplc diagnostic procedures
 and all that are needed for testing. As more laboratories perfect this technique and make this test
available, FHV-l will be an easy and accurate diagnosis.
11. How is feline conjunctivitis treated?
In thc cvent of an acute case, treatment starts with topical antibiotics administered thrcc times a
day. Tetracycline and chloramphenicol are the first-line antibiotic therapies. If there is no response
to this medical managemcnt after 3-4 days, consider concurrent use of antiviral imedications such as
trifluridine (1 % (Viroptic), a commercially available topical anliviral medication. This medication is
expensive and can cause some irritation aftcr application. Additionally, this medication needs to be
applied 5. -6 times a day during an acute outbreak. Another antiviral medication is idoxuridine (O. 1 %),
which must be coinpounded by a pharnacist. This medication is more cost-cffcctive and causes less
conjunctival irritation. Although some laboratory evidence suggests that trifluridine is tmore cffec-
tive, it is preferable 1o start with 0.1% idoxuridine administered 46 timcs daily. Vidarabine mono-
hydrate 3% (Vira A) ointment is also available and may be applied topically 3-4 times a day. Oral
 antiviral medications appear to be effective with human and rabbit herpes virus outbreaks, but fhcy
do not seem to have the same effect over FHV-1. Acyclovir shows the most promise for control of
FHV-1, but at this time it is not approved for use in felines because the full spectrum of side effects
12. Are there any good oral supplements that can be used?
Somc cvidcncc suggests that the oral supplementation of L-lysine (250 mg capsule, every 12
hours) mixed in the food may lessen the severity of the hcrpctir lcsions and lcngthcn the tiine be-
28
TheRedEye
tween recurrenccs. L-lysinc is an arginine inhibitor that slows the replication of FHV-1. This
13. If after using these medications, the eyc has not rcsponded, what should be done next?
FHV infections can be very frustrating for the clinician, the owncr, and thc animal. Refrac-
tory or nonresponsive cases should be rcferred to a veterinary ophthalmologist. New antiviral
medications along with thc use of oral or topical interferon may provide some control of FHV- 1.
Although it is recommended never to administer topical or systemic corticostcroids with FHV-1
infections, some forms of stromal herpetic keratitis require anti-inffammatory thcrapy or non-
steroidal anti-inflamimatory solutions
14. Conjuncfivitis is present, but white plaques hiavc formed on the conjunctiva and cornea
of a cat.What should I do?
A conjunctivial or corncal scraping is waranled. This is a common presentation of an
eosinophilic conjunctivitis and kcratitis. The predominate cell type is usually the cosinophil, al-
15. What causes this and how should it be trealed?
The ctiology of cosinophilic conjunctivitis/keratitis is unknown: however, a large pcrcentage
of these cats are positivc for FHV-1. Allergics and othcr viruses have been inplicatcd but neveI
ical corticostcroids (0. I % dexamcthasone phosphatc) may be all tha1 is nccded to control thc in-
flammation. Treatment should bc started cvery 8 hours anld tapered by the response. Coucurrent
FHV-1 must be monitored, and, if suspectcd, anfiviral medications may need to be administered.
If the infilirates are nonresponsive to therapy, give 20 mg of methylprcdnisolonc (Depo-Medrol)
subcutancously, and a dramatic response is seen, Occasionally, systemic megestrol acetate can be
used at the dosage of 5 mg PO every 24 hours for 5 days and then tapered. Megestrol acetate is a
last resort for control of felinc eosinophilic conjunctivitis/keratitis because of the systemic effects
caused by long-term usage, such as diabetes mellitus and pyometra
16. Is canine conjunctivitis as difficult to treat as it is in the feline patient?
No. Vary rarely is canine conjunclivitis associated with a viral infection. Bacterial and fun-
gal conjunctivitis is uncommon and usually secondary to cyclid abnormalities and keratocon-
junctivitis sicca. Allergic conjunctivitis is also commonly seen and is oftcn associatcd with atopy.
The use of a topical antibiotic and corticostcroid solution (neomycin-polymixin-dexamethasone)
is usually sufficient to control inflammation. Of course, it is nccessary to rule-out a corucal ul-
ceration with a fluorescein stain test before application of a topical corticosteroid. Corneal cul-
tures may be warranted if infectious conjunctivilis is suspected. Other causes of conjunctivitis in
the dog need to be explored.
The ocular examination is very inportant. Any conformational eyclid abnormality such as en-
correction is walranted. The presence of distichiasis, trichiasis, or ectopic cilia will cause signifi-
cant irritation. Very close ocular cxamination is needed bccause these cilia are diffcult to visual-
izc. The use of Rose Bengal stain is helpful in the localization of the offending cilia. Rose Bengal
a positivc Rose Bcngal stain. Always he careful not to overlook a cunjunctival foreign body. Grass
awns or other plant matetial hide behind the nictitans and cause an intense hiyperemia (Fig. 4).
17. Excessive mucoid discharge is present. In fact, the owners reports that they need to
clean the discharge from the eye hourly. What should I do?
A Schirmer tear test (STT). An STT of less than 10 mum/min for dogs and less than 5 mm/min
for cats is diagnostic of keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS). Many breeds such as cocker spaniels.
West Highland white terriers, bulldogs, shih tzus, and Lhaso apsos are predisposed and KCS
TheRedEye
29
should be considercd in any red eye problem. Treatment of topical cyclosporine (Optimmune)
should be siarted. Adjunct therapy of tear supplementation, antibiotic, or antibiotic-corticosleroid
combination therapy should be used as indicated by the severity of the inflammation.
18. Are there any other causes of KCS?
Yes. Iatrogenic causes of KCS include the systemic use of sulfonamides and the surgical re-
moval of the lhird eyelid. Systemic disease such as hypothyroidism, diabeles mellitus, Cushing's
syndrome, caninc disteimpcr, and chronic blcpharoconjunctivitis should be considered. Systemic
nonsteroidal anti-inflanmalory medication has recently been implicated as a cause of KCS. Fur-
19. Along with the red eye, the globe appears to be pushed forward. What should I do?
Exophthalimos is an indication of orbital disease. A common mistake is to confusc exoph-
thalmia with buphthalmia (enlargement of the globe). If the globe itself is normal, the possibility
of retrobulbar disease needs to be explored. Anatomic variations can give the appearance of ex-
ophihalmos and must be considered in the brachycephalic breeds. Lagophthalmia can also con-
tribute to this variation.
20. What diagnostic tests should be done?
A complete ophthalimic cxainination is nccdcd to asscss the extent of the pathology present.
lncreased resistance on digital retropulsion indicates an orbital mass, Pain obscrved on manual
opening of the oral cavity may indicate a relrobulbar lesion. A 1horough examination is nccded
t0 evaluate the soft palale especially in the area of the second molar. Ocular or orbital ultra-
sonography will help to define the retrobulbar lesions. Radiographs, MRl, and CT scan may be
warranted (see Chapter 3).
21. What are the major categories of the orbital disease?
Inflammatory, cystic, and neoplastic causcs should be considered. Orbital abscesses can cause
a red, exophthalmic globe. Oncc the diagnosis is obtained, appropniate thcrapy should be initiated.
As pre viously discussed, orbital neoplasia needs to be considered. Although rare, conjuncti-
val neoplasia is possible, and any mass idenlified should be biopsied and resected. Appropriale
adjunc1 therapy should be considered as determined by the type of neoplasia. Neoplasia of the nic-
third cyelid bccause tlhc gland is responsible for 20-30% of tcar production. Thcrefore, thc rc-
moval of the third eyelid could prcdispose the animal to KCS (Fig. 5).
Figure 5. A melanorma located at the
leadingedgeol the nictating mem-
brane.
30
TheRedEye
23. Neoplastic cells were not reported on my conjunctival biopsy. A diagnosis of cpiscleritis
was given. What docs it mcan?
Infarminatory diseases of the episcleral tissue are rare and can be difficult to define. The first
thing to do is to elininate other causes of episcleral tissuc inflammation.Kcratitis,uveitis,and
glaucoma must be ruled out. Episcleritis is thought to be an underlying autoimmunc disordcr al-
though the etiology is frequently rol determined. Episcleritis is defined as generalized, necrotiz-
ing, or nodular. Generalized episcleritis is usually responsive to topical corticosteroids. NecrO-
tizing episcleritis is cxtremely chailenging, rarc, and a topic unto itself. Nodular cpiscleritis is
more difficult to treat and is characterized by raised nodules usually at the limbus. Many names
such as nodular episcleritis, nodular fascitis, fibrous histiocytoma, and others have been given to
this condition. The criteria for naming this condition can be confusing. and the typc and numbe
of cell typcs (plasma cells, histiocytes, lymphoytes, and fibroblasts) are uscd to classify thc lesion
 It is possible that all these lesions arc essentially the same, just at differcnt stages of developiment
(see Chapter 48).
24. Although naming the condition of episcleritis is important, how do you trcat it?
immunosuppressive medications are warranted. Topical 0.1% dexamethasone can be used 3-4
times daily along with a tapcring dosc of oral prcdnisolonc (1 mg/kg evcry 12 hours for 4 days,
than I mg/kg every 24 hours for 4 days, and then 1 mg/kg every oiher day). If the inflammalion
by response to the medicarion (Fig. 6).
25. It appears nodules could just be surgically resecled. Is medical treatmcnt necessary?
For isolated nodules. the inflainmatory tissue can be dcbulked surgically followcd by usc of
liquid nitrogen to freeze the area of concerm. Howevcr, systemic immunosupprcssive incdication
should still be uscd in conjunction with the surgery. Rcoccurrence is commonly observcd, and
multiple cryosurgcry procedures may need to be perforimed (Fig. 7).
26. What is scleritis?
Scleral inflammation is associated with the stromal elements of the sclera.This has a deep
comfortable and, when the necrotizing form is presenl, quite devastating to the eye. Etiology is
cussed with episcleritis (Fig. 8).
27. Are engorged, deep episcleral or scleral vessels always considered scleritis?
No. Glaucoma and uveitis are also possibilitics 1hat nced to bc considcrcd. Thc redness can
be intcnse and associatcd with considerable discomfort with both of these discase processes. The
Figure 6. Episcleritis in a maturc cat.
It was partially responsive to topical
corticostcroid therapy.
TheRed Eye
31
Figure 7. Nodular episcleritis in a
collie.
Figurc 8. Generalized sclcritis in a
I ahrador retriever.
measurement of intraocular pressure (IOP) is critical to differentiate uveitis from glaucoma. Glau-
coma is associated with IOP > 22-25 mmHg. Corneal cdema, epiphora, and light scnsitivity can
be associated with both disease processes. However, the presence of a dilated nonresponsivc pupil
is usually indicative of glaucoma. The measurement of 1OP in conjunction with clinical signs
should help you to key in on your clinicaf diagnosis. (For further discussion on glaucoma and
uveitis, scc Chapters 13-15.)
28. Are there any other external ocular causes of a red eye?
Of coursc, we cannot forgct to discuss the most common corneal problem. Corneal abrasions
Or ulceralions are very comimon and can cause an intenscly red and painful cyc. Thc use of fluo-
rescein stain wifl help to aid in this diagnosis. The type of ulceration is inportant to disccrm so
appropriate therapy can be startcd. Ulcers that arc refractory to treatment and do not heal within
32
The Red Eye
Figure 9. Indolent ulceratiou in a
 boxer. Note the epithelial lipping pre-
senf.
Figure l0. Infecled corneal ulcera-
tion in a canine.Pseudomonas aerug-
inosa was cultured.
5-7 days may be considered an indolent ulcer or erosion. Indolent ulcers require epithelial de-
bridement and a superficial punctate keratotomy to be performed to help stimulate healing.Ap-
propriate antibiotic and anticollagenasc mcdication may be ncccssary for trcatment of infected ul-
cerations (see Chapter 7) (Figs. 9 and 10).
29. What is hyphema?
Hyphema, or blood within the eye, will definitely cause the eye to appcar red. Hyphcma can
rcsult from trauma, retinal detachmcnt, coagulopathies, or vasculitis from uveitis or neoplasia
Rctinal detachmcnt as a scquela to systemic hypertcnsion can result in hypheina. A vcry thorough
physical examination is warranted to evaluate for other systeinic problems. If systemic problems
are identified, propcr treatment should be started immedialely. Ocular treatmcnt is focuscd on de-
creasing any existing uvcitis to prcvcnt secondary glaucoma (see Chapter 35).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Gelart KN (ed): Veterinary Ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Philadeiphia, Lea & Febiger, 1999.
2. Hendrix DV: Differential diagnosis of the red eye. In Bonagura J (ed): Kirk's Currcut Veterinary Ther-
apy. 13th ed. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, 2000, p 1042.
3. Murphy CJ: Disorders of the cormea and sclcra. In Bonagura J (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy.
I Ith ed. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, 1992, p 1101.
4. Nasisse MP: Feline herpesvirus ocular disease. Vei Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20:667. 1990.
5. Nasisse MP: Ocular feline herpesvirus-1 infection. In Bonagura I (etl): Kirk's Current Veterinary Ther-
apy, 13th ed. Philadclphia, W.3. Saunders, 2000, p 1057.
6. CORNEAL DYSTROPHIES
Alexandra van der Woerdt, D.V.M., M.S
1. What arc the clinical characteristics of corneal dystrophy?
Comeal dystrophy is usually a bilateral, symmetrical, familial, noninflammatory corneal dis
case that is not associatcd with systemic discasc.
2. What is the most comimon owner complaint?
Owners will often notice a "white spot' in the cornea without ocular discomfort.
3. Deseribe the clinical appearance of corneal dystrophy in general.
Corncal dysirophy usually appears as a very focal, well-demarcated, while, crystalline or
mctallic-like lesion in the (para) central cornca. The lesion is oflen in the anterior stroma, and the
epithelium covering the dystrophic area is usually intact. Affectcd dogs do not cxperience any oc
ular discomfort if the epithelium is intact. It is usually bilatcral. One eye may bc affected prior to
thc other eye bccoming affccted (Figs. 1 and 2).
4. How do I distinguish corneal dystrophy from corneal fibrosis?
Corncal fibrosis has a diffuse gray-whitish appearancc and is always the result of somc sort of
insull to the cornea such as trauma, previous ulceralion, or chronic Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
(KCS). These lesions usually havc neovascularization. Corneal dystrophy has an intense white ap-
pearance and consists of multiple little crystal-like opacities rather than a diffuse opacity (Fig. 3).
5. How do I distinguish corneal dystrophy from corneal edema?
Corncal edema may be either focal or involve thc cntire comea. Comeal dystrophy is always
al focal lcsion. An edcmatous cornea has a hazy, bluish appearance, and a grid paltern can be seen
with magnificalion. The dystrophic arca in the cornca has a bright white appearancc, and multi-
ple crystal-like stnctures can be seen on close inspection. Cormeal edema is often associaied withi
other (intra)ocular diseases such as glaucoma, anterior uveitis, lens luxation, and corneal ulccra-
tion, Corneal dystrophy is not usually associated with othcr intraocular discases.
6. In which layers of the cornea is the dystrophic material located?
The subepithelial stroma is most commonly affected. In the beagle and Siberian husky.
deeper layers of the stroma may be affected as well.
Figure I. Circular supcrficial tipid
corneal dystrophy. This lesion was
found in both cycs by the owncr. No
discomfeorl was noted.
33
34
Corneal Dystrophies
Figure 2. Elliptical (race track) su-
perficial lipid comeal dystrophy. No
neovascular response, which is typi-
cal of these dystrophies.
7. What is the biochemical composition of the infiltrate in corneal dystrophy?
The infiltrate in the cornea consists of a combination of cholesterol, cholesterol esters, phos-
pholipids, and neutral fat.
Figure 3.Mmliple punctatc lipid
cormeal dystrophy.
Comeal Dystrophies
35
8. What additional diagnostic tests should be performed?
A biochemistry profile including cholcstcrol, high-density lipoprotein, low-density lipopro-
tein, and triglycerides is recomrmended. Evaluation of adrenal and thyroid function may be indi-
cated as well. Addressing any abnormalities found tmay help arrest the dystrophy.
9.Describefhe treatment for corneal dystrophy.
Medical treatment is usually not cffcctivc in corneal dystrophy. A superficial keratectomy
 may be used to remove the affected area of the cornea. Excimer laser therapy has been used to
trcat sclccted cases of corneal dystrophy.
 Somc supcrficial epithelial dystrophies exfoliatc the outer layers of the cornca cuough to
cause hypersensitivity to the sensory nerves, inducing squinting and possibly teating. These cascs
 heal in a matter of days. Artificial tears used frequently rcduces thc sensitivity and aids in the heal-
ing proccss.
10. Which breeds of dogs are most commonly affccted?
Although this disease has been reported in imany breeds, the breeds in which this disease has
been described in most detail are thc bcagle and the Siberian husky. Other breeds include the Shet-
land shccpdog, Cavalier King Charles spanicl, and Airedale terrier.
Corneal Dystrophy in the Dog: Affected Breeds6.10
BREEID
AGEOFONSET
L.OCATION IN CORNEA
INHERITANCE
Airedale terrier
6-11 months
Axial, all laycrs
Sex-linked,recessive
Alaskan malamute
> 2 years
Similar to bcaglc
Beagle
3.5 years
Nebular: anterior stroma
Race track: all laycrs
White arc: stroma and
subepithelial plaqucs
Bcarded collie
>1 year
Subepithelial
Bichon frisc
>2years
Subepithelial
Cavalier King
2-5years
Anterior stroma
Charles spanicl
Collie (rough)
1. 4 years
Anterior stroma
English toy spaniel
2-5years
Stroma
German shepherd
1-6 years
Golden retrievcr
<2years
Antcrior stroma
Lhasa apso
Subepithclial
Mastiff
Subepithelial
Miniature pinscher
1-2 years
Subepithelial
Pointer
Similar to Sibcrian husky
Poodlle (miniature)
>year
Epithelial
 Suspect recessive
Samoyed
5months-2 ycars
Shetland shecpdog
4 months
Subcpithclial, superficial stroma
Siberian husky
0.42 years
All layers of comea
Autosomal recessive
Ring-shaped
Variablc cxpression
Weimaraner
1-8 years
Suhepithelial
Whippet
3--5 years
OtherBreedsAffected6.10
Afghan hound
Chinese shar pei
Labrador retiever
Basenji
Cocker spaniel
NovaScotia duck tollingretriever
Belgian sheepdog
Curly coated retriever
Rottweiler
Boston terTier
Dachshund
Standard schnauzer
Boykin spaniel
English setter
Vizsla
Boxer
English springer spaniel
Yorkshire terrier
Briard
German pinschcr
Chesapeake Bay retriever
Irish wolfhound
36
Corneal Dystrophies
The lesions arc oval. horizontal and on average 3 X 5 mm in size. Three clinical types havc
been described
1. The nebular form is located in the antcrior third of the stroma and has a uniform ground
glass appearance.
2. The race-track form involves thc stroma full thickness and has a dense ouler ring sur-
rounding a lighter center.
3. In the white-are form, white plaqucs locatcd subepithelially arc ovcrlying a nebular or
race track form lesion. The epithelium is usually intact.
The opacities may progress from nebular hrough race-track to white-arc paterns.
12. What is the clinical appearance of corneal dysfrophy in the Siberian husky?
Corneal dystrophy in the Siberian husky can manifest itself in five different pafterms de-
pending on the location within the corneal stroma. The infiltrate may be present (1) in the anterior
in the posterior stroma, (4) as a combination of both anterior and posterior slroma, or (5) as full-
ihickness corneal dystrophy (the most severe form). The infiltrales are present in a doughnul-
shaped patterm (Fig 4).
13. Why is corneal dystrophy in the Shctland sheepdog differcnt from corneal dystrophy
in most other breeds of dogs?
ilar rings I-3 inm in diameter that are initiaily located in the (para)central cornea. Recurren1
cormcal erosions may occur associated with the dystrophic lesions, making llis a potentially
painful disease. Distichiasis, decreascd tcar film break up time, low T4 lcvcls, and abnormal lipid
profiles have been reported in affected dogs. Treatiment consists of treating thc corncal ulcerations
associated with the dystrophy using topical antibiotics with or without atropine, cyclosporine, or
hyperosmotic agents. These ulccrs may behave as imdolent ulcers and additional trcatments such
etiology has bcen suggested, but not proven, to be present. Antiviral therapy, such as idoxuridine,
has been suggesied in treatrment of this disease.
14. Do dogs go blind from corneal dystrophy?
Corneal dyslrophy rarely results in visual impairment with the possible exception of the
Siberian husky and the Airedale terricr. The dystrophy can involvc a large area of the cornca in
these breeds resulting in visual impairment.
15. Is corneal dystrophy inherited?
There appears 1o be a genetic predisposition in certain breeds. Ii is presumed to be caused by
Figure 4. Siberian husky cormeal dy-
strophy. This dystrophy is deep stro-
nal and a little morc difficult to visu-
alize.
Corneal Dystrophies
37
inherilance has been suggested in the Airedale terrier. A recessive mode of inheritance is sus
pected in the miniature poodle.
16. Do I need to recommend against breeding a dog that has corncal dystrophy?
The Canine Eye Registration Foundation (CERF) in cooperation with the American College
of Veterinary Ophthalimologists has establishcd guidelines for brecding advice for each individ-
ual breed of dogs. Contacl you1 velerinary ophthalnmrologist for further details on specific breeds
17. What are the characteristics of corneal degeneration?
Corncal degenerafion may affect one eye or both eyes. It is a secomdary changc in the coymea.
ll is oftcn asymmetrical if it involvcs both eyes. It is usually associaled with inflammation in the
cornea, and it may bc associated with systcmic discases. In addition to lipids and cholesterol, cal-
cium may be present in corncal degeneralion as wcll. Corneal ulccration and vascularization of
the affected area is common.
18. Name a few systemic diseases thal may be associated with corneal lipid or calcium in-
filtration.
Hypothyroidism
Hyperlipoproteinemia
Cushing's discasc
Diabetes mellitus
Pancrcatitis
Hypcrcalccmia
Uremia
Hypervitaminosis D
19. What is the treatinent for corneal lipid infiltration?
Diagnosis and treatment of the underlying disease may or may not result in spontaneous res-
olution of the lipid infiltration. Cormeal lipid infiltralion secondary to hypercholestcrolcmia may
respond to a fat-restricled diel.
20. What is endothelial dystrophy?
Endothelial dystrophy or endothelial dcgcncration refers to thc premature loss of endothelial
cells 1hat is most commonly seen in the Chihuahua, Boston terrier, and dachshund. The loss of
nonhealing cormcal ulccrs (Figs. 5 and 6)
21.How doyou determine that endothelial dystrophy is the cause of cornealedema?
This is a diagnosis by cxclusion. Other important causes of cormcal cdema such as glaucoma
antcrior uvcitis, anterior lens luxation, or cormcal ulceration need to bc cxcluded. Diagnostic tests
include measurcmcnt of the intraocular prcssure, fuorescein staining of the cornea, careful ex-
Figure 5. Boston terier with endothe-
lial dystrophy. The graying of the
comea is st1omal edema. Note the
clear (norinal) zone ventrally.
38
Comeal Dystrophies
Figure 6. This endothelial dystrophy
causcd so much cdcina centrally that
the cornea bulged forward (kerato-
conus). Also prcsenl are multiplc blis-
ter-like areas (bullous keratopathy).
Some resolution was obtained by tlhe
usc of hyperosmotic ointincnts.
amination of the eye for thc presence of signs of anterior uveitis (i.e., conjunctival hypcrcmia.
aqueous flare, miosis), or lens luxation (lens in tlie anterior chambcr, dccp anterior chamber if the
lens has luxated posteriorly). Specular microscopy may reveal a decreased number of endothelial
cells,but this is not usually available in a clinical sctting.
Examination tip: Globe digital pressurc applied through the lids will temporarily cause hy-
pertension within the globe to increase the density of the corneal edema if endothelial degenera-
tion is present).
22. What is the treatment for endothclial dystrophy?
There is no treatment for the disease itsclf. The loss of endothclial cells is permanent. The
secondary comcal cdema can bc treated using hypertonic solutions or ointimcnts (2.5--5% NaCl
ointments). Comeal ulcers associatcd with the cormeal edema will oftcn behave as indolent ulccrs
and may need to be treated as such (see Chapter 7). Thermokeratoplasty may be bcneficial in ad-
vanced stages of the disease. Penetrating keratoplasty is the treatment of choice in human beings.
Its usc ini veterinary ophthalniology is limited, mainly bccause of donor cormca availability.
 23. What is posterior polymorphous dystrophy and in which breed of dog does this occur?
This is a focal dysfunction of corneal endothelial cells resulting in multifocal posterior
corneal opacities. This has been reported in the American cocker spaniel.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Cooley PL, Dicc PF: Corncal dystrophy in thc dog and cat. Vet Clin North Am Small Anin Pract
20:681-692. 1990.
2. Crispin SM, Bamett KC: Dystrophy, degeneration and infiltration of the canine cormea. J Small Anim
Pract 24:63-83, 1983
 3. Ekins MB, Waring GO, Harris RR: Oval lipid corncal opacities in beagles. Part I: Natural history over
four years and study of tcar function. J Am Arim Hosp Assoc 16:601-605, 1980.
4. Genetics Commitee, American College of Veterinary Ophthalrmologists: Ocular Disorders Presumed to
bc Inheritcd in Purebred Dogs, 3rd cd. city, ACVO, 1999.
5. Linton LL, Moore CP, Collicr LL: Bilatcral lipid kcratopalhy in a boxer dog: Cholesterol analyses and
dietary management. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 3(1):9-14, 1993
6. MacMillan AD, Waring GO, Spangler WL, et al: Crystalline corncal opacitics in the Siberian husky. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 175:829-832, 1979.
7.Ward DA, Martin CL,Wciscr I: Band kcratopathy associated with hyperacrcnocorticis in the dog.J
Ain Anim Hosp As50c 25:583-586, 1989.
8.Waring GO. MacMillan A. Reveles P: Inheritance of crystalline comeal dystrophy in Sibcrian huskics. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:655-658, 1986.
9. Waring GO, Muggli FM. MacMillan A: Oval cormeal opacities in beagles. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
13:204208, 1977.
10. Whitley RI. Gilgcr BC: Diseases of the canine comea and sclera. In Gcllat K (ed): Vcterinary Ophthal-
mology, 3rd ed. Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999, pp 635-674.
7. CORNEAL EROSIONS (INDOLENT ULCERS)
Alexandra van der Woerdt, D.V.M., M.S.
1. What is an indolent ulcer?
An indolent ulcer is a nonhealing superficial cormeal ulcer or erosion with nonadhcrent ep-
ithelial cdges.
2. Name a few other terms that are used to describe an indolent ulcer.
Boxerulcer
Recurrent erosion
Refractory comeal ulcer
Rodent ulcer
3. In how many days does an uncomplicated ulcer usualy heal?
An uncomplicated cormeal ulcer should hcal within 3-5 days. Erosions arc called persistent
if they have been present for more than I4 days.
4. In which species have indolent ulcers been reported?
Dogs, cats, and horses.
The boxer is the breed in which this condition has been most extensively studied. Other
springer spaniel, golden retriever, Labrador retriever, miniature poodle, miniature schnanzer, and 
Wcish corgi. The averagc age of affected dogs is approximately 9 ycars.
6. Describe thc histopathologic abnormalities in a cornea with an indolent corneal ulcer.
Ultrastructural examination of affected corneas has revealed abnormalities in the basal cell-
bascment membrane complex with a lack of hemidesmosomes and a thickcned and irregular
cormeal epitheliat basement membrane. A thin superficial acelfular zone of hyalin coflagen, which
may act as a barrier to epithelial adhesion, has also been shown to be present in affected areas.
7. What are the most common complaints of owners of dogs with an indolent ulcer?
chronic discharge from the eye, and mild blepharospasm. If the dog has already bcen treated by
another veterinarian, owners may indicate a lack of response to treatment with topical antibiotic
ointment or solution with or without atropine. A dog with an indolent corneal ulcer may show sur-
prisingly little discomfort considering the size of the ulcer.
8. How are indolent ulcers diagnosed?
An indolent ulcer is diagnosed by clinical signs and cxclusion of other ctiologies of a non-
healing superficial ulccr. The lear proxduction should be meastured using a Schimer tear test to rulc
out keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS). A careful exaimination of the conjuncliva and eyelids should
be performed looking for the presence of distichiae or ectopic ciliae. The conjunctival cul-de-sac
should be inspccted for the prescnce of a foreign body. After application of a lopical anesthetic,
the loosc epithclium can casily be rcmoved from the cdges of' thc ulcer using a dry cotton swab.
9. List the niost common ophthalmic abnormalities in an eye with an indolent ulcer.
Ophthalmic examination may reveal the following abnorrnalities:
Mild blepharospasm
Mild epiphora
39
40
Corneal Erosions (Indolent Ulcers)
Conjunctival hyperemia
Superficial comeal ulcer with redundant cpithelial cdgcs
A reflex miosis of the pupil usually docs not occur in dogs with an indolent ulcer, and the
pupil is usually of normal size. Fluoresccin stain may migrate under the loose epithelial edges. In
general, indolent ulcers are supcrficial and do not involve the stroma, and therc is no cellular in-
filtration inlo the ulcer. Cytology may be normal or show nonscptic inflammation (Figs. 1-3).
 Figure 1. Corneal erosion showing
the inregular edges of the cpithelial
exfoliation.
Figure 2. A cormeal erosion showing
the Foughcned cpitheliumat the
edges of a fluorescein-stained lesion.
Notc the stain is posilive bcyond the
edges of the loosencd epithclium.
Oncc the loose epithelium is re-
moved, the original erosion is made
considcrably larger.
10. What is the differential diagnosis of an indolent ulcer?
Other causes of nonhealing ulcers include:
Decreascd tear production
Exposure kcratitis
Goblet cell deficiency
Lagophthalmos
Distichiae
Neurotrophic keratitis
Ectopic ciliac
Presence of a foreign body
Other eyelid abnormalities (c.g..
 Infection
entropion. eyelid tumors)
Endothelial cell degeneration with secondary cormeal edema predisposcs the cornca to thc de-
vclopmcnt of bullous keratopathy (blisters), which may progress to superficial comcal ulccrs.
11. What additional diagnostic tests should be performed?
Tear production should be measured. The conjunctival cul-de-sac should be carefully inspccted
for the prcsence of abnormal hairs or foreign bodies. Evaluate a thyroid panel. Approximately 44%
Corneal Erosions (Indolent Ulcers)
41
Figurc 3. An crosion stained with fu-
orcscein showing the stain uptake un-
der thc visible edges of the lesion.
8-1-00
of the erosions evaluated in boxcrs also had hypothyroidism. Supplemenlal thyroxine decreased
healing linc and prevented either recurrence or the opposite eye from developing an erosion.
12. How is an indolent ulcer treated?
The loose epithelium needs to be debrided using dry cotton swabs after application of topical
anesthetic to the cornea. Afier dcbniding the cormea, the resulting ulcer is usually significant larger
than the original ulccr. Aftcrcarc cousists of topical antibiotic solution or ointment three lo four
times a day with or without topical atropine. (Thcrapy tip: Keep in mind that some antibiotics, es-
Additional procedures that can aid in healing of thcse ulccrs include a grid kcratotony using
a 25-gauge nccdle or punctate kcratotomy using a 20-gauge needle and placement of a soft con-
tact lens or collagcn shicld. The dog may experience some discomfort after these procedures,
which can be treated with an oral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) such as buffcred
aspirin at a dosc of 10 mg/kg/body weight once or twice daily.
Additional medications that have been used to aid in hcaling include 5% NaCl ointmcnt or
solution if significant comeal edema is present, autogencus plasma or serum, fibroncctin, aprotinin,
epidermal growth factor, and polysulfated glycosaminoglycans. Ophthalmic tissue adhesives and
superficial kcratectomies have also bccn used in the imanagement of these lesions (Figs. 4 and 5).
An Elizabethan collar is indicated if excessive rubbing of the eye occurs.
13. Describe thc mechanism of action of aprotinin in treatment of an indolent ulcer.
Aprotonin inhibits thc cnzymes (chymo)trypsin, plasmin, and kallikrein. Excessive plasmin
levels have bcen shown to be present in animals with persistent corneal erosions
42
Corneal Erosions (lndolent Ulcers)
Figure 4. A central ulcer being
strengthencd by tissue adhesivc (N-
butylcyanoacrylate).Note that ihe
adhesive should be a thin ovcrlay al-
lowed to extend to the edges of the
erosion.
Figure 5. Tissue adhesive in place over an crosion. Ap-
proximately 2-3 weeks are required for healing and re-
jection of the glue.
dogs with an indolent ulcer?
oflacrimal fuid in eyes with an indolent ulccr has been shown to be significanfly higher in a high
percentage of affected dogs than the proteolytic activity of lacrimal fiuid of normal eyes.
15. Explain the heneficial effect of epidermal growth factor on healing of indolent ulcers.
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulates mitosis in the corncal epithelium. Topical appli-
cation of FGF resulted in resolution of an indolent ulcer in 8 out of 10 affected dogs within 2
weeks, compared to 2 out of 10 dogs treated with a placebo.
16. How is grid keratotomy performed?
Topical anesthetic is applied to the cornea, and the abuormal epithelium is removed using a
dry cotton swab. A 25-gaugc needle is used to make multiple supcrficial microincisions
(scratches) into the cornea in a grid pattern, l-2 rnm apart. The grid should cover the entire ulcer
 and extend a few millimeter into normal cornea.
Corneal Erosions (lndolent Ulcers)
43
17. What is a punctate keratotorny?
Punctate keratotomies can be performed with a 20-gauge needle or a Yag lascr. Prepare the
fracturing the collagen. The needle technique supericially penctrates thc stroma from a 45-60°
angle then exits the stroma at 90°. This produces a ticking sound. Each site leaves a stellatc white
abrasion, which serves as an anchor site for migrating epithelium to adhcre onto. The entire area
should be treated. Once healed, these punctate sites become imperceptible except on slit lamp ex-
amination (Fig. 6).
18. Which surgical procedures have been used in the management of indolent ulcers?
Chemical cautcrizalion, temporary larsorrhaphy, nictitans and conjunctival flap procedures
and superficial lamellar keratectomy have all been reported in the management of indolent ulcers.
A nictitans flap was found to have no beneficial cffect in one study. A superficial keratectomy
may be highly beneficial in refractory cases, with the disadvantage of requiring specialized
equipment and general anesthesia.
19. What is the reported success rate of debridement with a cotton swab only?
In one large retrospcctive study, 84% of indolent ulcers healed with onc or more debridemenn1
procedures of the comea in an average of 23.4 ± 11.1 days. Sixteen percent needed additional
surgical procedures to heal.
Figure 6. Punctate kcratotomy proce-
dure,
44
Corneal Erosions (lndolent Ulcers)
20. What is the reported success rate of debridcment followed by grid keratotomy?
In onc large rctrospective study. all ulcers treated with dcbridement and grid keratotomy
hcaled. although 1 7% of cascs requircd more than one procedurc. Average healing time was 13.4
± 5.1 days. Similar findings were obtained with pumctate keratotomy.
21. What is the reported success rate of superficial keratcctomy?
one treatmcnt in an average ot 9.3 ± 3.9 days.
22. Explain the mechanism throngh which grid keratotomy and superficial keratectomy en-
courage healing of an indofent ulcer.
Abnorrnal hyalin collagen is present in the corneal stroma in the area of an indolent ulcer that
acts as a barrier to epithelial adhesion. Both gnid keratulony and superficial keratotomy will dis-
rupt this barrier, allowing migrating coimeal epithelial cells to be exposed to the subepithelial type
I collagen. This will lead to a more cffective attachment belwecn the epithelium and the stroma
23. Why might an ulcer appear to be hcaled but then recur?
basement membrane and stroma. This may givc the impression that thic ulcer has healed, but thc
in fact the original ufcerhas never healed properly.
24. What can be done to prevent these ulccrs from recurring?
There has been little information reporled in the lierature regardting prevention of indolent
comcal uicers. Application of a lubricating ophthalmic ointiment twice daily may help to protect
the cornea from environmental irritants and may help to decrease the forces applied to the cortiea!
Geographic corneal ulcers associated with felinc herpes virus type 1 may bchave as indolcnt
corneal ulcers.
26. Is the treatment of an indolent ulcer the same for dogs and cats?
No. The use of a grid kcratotomy has bccn associated with the development of a corneal sc
questrum in cats. Repeated debridemcnt of the cormea using a cotton tippcd applicalor is indicatcd
in the treatment of a nonhcaling ulccr in the cat. Antiviral thcrapy is indicaled when hcrpes virus
is suspected to be an etiologic factor.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Champagne ES, Munger RJ: Multiple punclate keralotomy fot the trealment of recurTent epithelial eTo-
sions in dogs. I Ani Anim Hosp Assoc 28:213-216, 1992.
2. Chavkin M, Ris RC: Management of persistent corneal erosion in a boxer dog. Cornell Vet 80:347-356,
1990.
3. Cook C. Wilcox B: A clinical and histological study of canine persistenl superficial corneal ulcers. Proc
Am Coll Vet Ophthalmol 26:139,1995.
4. Cooley PL. Wyman M: Indolent-like comeal ulcers in 3 horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:295-297, 1986.
5. Gelatt KN, Samuelson DA: Recurrent corneal erosions and epithelial dystrophy in the boxer dog. I Am
Amin Hlosp Assoc 18:453-460, 1982
 6. Kirschner SF. Niyo Y. Bctts DM: Idiopathic persistcnt comeal erosions: Clinical and pathological find-
ings in 18 dogs. 1 Ani Anim Hosp Assoc 25:84-90, 1989.
7. Kirschner SL: Persistent comeal ulcers: What to do when ulcers won't heal. Vet Clin N Am Sinall Anim
Pract 20(3):627-642. 1990.
8. Kirschner SE. Brazzell RK. Stern MF, et al: The use of topical epiderinal growth factor for treatment of
nonhealing corneal erosiuons in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:449-452, 1991.
Corneal Erosions (Indolent Ulcers)
45
9. La Croix NC, van der Woerdt A. Olivero D: Nonhcaling corncal ulccrs in cats: 29 cascs. Proc Am Coll
Vel Ophthalmol 30:84, 1999.
91:916-922, 1996.
and cats. Vet Coump Ophthalniol 4:38-43, 1994.
[2. Pickett JP: Treating persistent corneal erosions with a crosshatch keratonomy techniqute. Vel Med
90:561-572. 1995.
13. Stanley RGi. Hardman C. Johnson BW: Results of grid keratotomy, superficial keratectouny and dehnide-
ment for the managcrnent of persistcnt corncai erosions in 92 dogs. Vet Ophthaimol 1 :233-238, 1998.
14. Willeford KO. Milier WW, Abrams KL, et al: Modulation of proteolylic activity associatcd with persis-
tent comeal ulcers in dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 1:5-8, 1998.
8. FELINE CORNEAL SEQUESTRUM
Ronald C. Ris, D.V.M, M.S.
1. What is unique about feline corneal sequestrum?
s
2. What othcr names have bcen given to this condition?
Corneal mummiication
Corneal nigrum
Corneal necrosis
Necrotizing keratitis
Cormeal sequestrum.
3. What are the characteristie clinical signs?
A dark brown-to-black spot in the central or paracentral cormea. Dcpending on chronicity, the
cornea may or may not have neovascularization. The surface of the sequestrum has no epithelium.
Fluorescein stain does not light up sequcstra, only around the scquestra. Sequestra usually pre-
sent with minor blepharospasm and little mucopurulent discharge but with brownish tcars. They
are usually initiaily unilateral with the opposite eye at high nisk. Recurrence is also possible. The
highest incidence of occurrencc of sequcstra is found in brachycephalic cats (Figs. 1-4).
Figure 1. Cental comeal sequestrum
with assuciatcd diffuse cormeal edena.
Fluorescein stain is positive only
around the pigmenl.
4. What is the etiology of these sequestra?
Corneal scquestra have not been reproduced in experimental studies. Prolonged exposure
of the central comea from causes such as neuroparalytic or neurotrophic conditions and sicca
have bcen suggested. Sequestrum following a bout of rhinotracheilis (FVH-l) has been re-
ported clinically and expcrimentally: polymerase chain reaction (PCR) herpesvirus DNA have
been found in keratectomizcd samplcs.
 5. What is the treatment for sequestra?
Rermoval by superficial keratectomy is recommended. It is difficult to judge the depth of
the sequestrum prior to surgery. Therefore, the keratectomny may begin as a superficial procc-
dure and end with a more radical procedure if the majority of the corneal thickness has 1o be
rcmoved. Becausc more radical procedures involve many options, it is much easier to keratec-
tomize small, superficial scquestra than to wait and see if the cornea will vascularize to reject
the sequestrum.
46
Feline Comeal Sequestrum
47
Figure 2.Large superficial scquestrun
that was not noted by owner; however, thc
dark discharge was a complaint,
Figure 3. Large superficial and deep se-
questrum present for 6 months. Note the
neovascularization and scaring. Surgical
keralectomy required a free Tenon's grafts
to support the compromiscd cornca.
Figure 4. Sequestrum thal was finally exlruded afler
 9 months. Note the darmagc to the cormea gcncrated
by months of reaction as cvidenced by ncovascular-
ization and scarring.
48
Feline Corneal Sequestrum
6. What other procedures may be necessary to remove sequestra?
If the surgical site nceds to be supportcd with additional tissues, the options are numerous.
Conjunctival Hlaps ( 180-360? and pedicle), Tcnon's free graft, sliding corncal conjunctival graft.
corneal grafts, and surgical adhcsives all do the job. If donor corneas are available, both full-thick-
ness and lamcllar kcratoplasties give postsurgical results that have clear central cormcas as do thc
sliding corneal-conjunctiva grafis. Leukomas are usually the sequelae of grafts Irom Tenon's cap-
sule, flaps, and glues (Figs. 5-8).
Figure 5. Deep kcratcctoiny of a cen-
tral comeal sequcstrum showing the
incision extending away from the se-
qucstrum into the conjunctiva.
Figure 6. Ihe sequestrum is remioved
by lamellar undermining with a Mar-
tinez. spatula. The corneal spliting is
carried beyond the limbus into thc
conjunctiva.
Figure 7. The split corneal layers are repositiomed te appose
together into thevoid leli by theexcisedsequestrun.
Feline Corneal Sequestrum
49
Figure 8. The sliding conjuncti-
val-comeal grafl is sutured to the
adjaccnt cornca with 8o Vicryl.
Note tlhe central comea now has
clcar fissuc, but the periphery of
thc graft is opaque from the con-
junetiva.
 7. Following the surgical procedure elected, is it necessary to medicate the cyc topically?
Ycs. most ophthalmologists prcfer to medicate a comeal wound with a broad-spectrum an-
libiolic. Culture and sensitivity fests from the surgical site should be submitted on all keratectomy
tibiotics presurgically. Those that have resulted in positive culiures have a high incidence of Mi-
crococcus, which usually will rcspond to antibiotics, such as tobramycin (Tobrex) or ciprofloxacin
s sr  s sl    d ae so (o)
also be treated with 0.2% cyclosporine (Optinmune) twicc a day for 3-6 months, depending on
acceptance of the graft. In addition to the above, topical corticostcroids (dexamethasone) should
S. Should atropine be uscd postoperatively?
lnitially, tmydriasis is indicated, so a dose of 1% atropine prc- and postoperatively usually
lasts 3-5 days. If atropine solution is uscd frcquently and over days to weeks, thc mcdicalion
causcs adversc cffects that outweigh the desired cffects.
9. If some pigment remains in thc decp stroma after the keratectomy, is that bad?
The incoimplcte reinoval of the stromal pigment docs not have adverse long -term conscquences.
A faint lint of brown may be the worst remaining consequence, but the healing will progrcss.
10. Where does the pigment come from?
ll is not known for sure. It may arise from the lacrimal gland or from the conjunctival flora.
The pigment, whatever its source, can be noted in the tears. It can stain the hairs around the cyes;
it can be absorbcd onto tissuc papcr; and, if you treat an ulcerated comea with a soft contact lens,
it will densely stain the contact. Attempts to identify thc stain have proven the pigment to be a
protein (Fig. 9).
11. ln which cat breeds are sequestra most prevalent?
The breeds of highest incidence of sequestrum occurrence arc the Burmese, Himalayan, alnd
Persian. These breeds all have shaflow orbits and protruding cycs, which make their corneas par-
eases of the adnexa.
12. Is there anything that can be done to prevent recurrence if the diagnosis of sequestra-
tion has been made and surgical treatment instigated?
Although there are no guarantees, it is helpful to start a topical antiviral at the first indication
of corneal irritation and confirmation of an ulcerative process. Also, vaccines should be main-
50
FelineCornealSequestrum
Figure 9. Contact lens rcmoved from
a posikeratectomized cal's comea
after only 2 days of placemcnt. The
pigment absorbed into the contact on
the left with such affinity that it could
not be washed away.
Figure 10. Champion Persian with
unilateral sequestrum.
Figure Il. Champion Persian close-
up of the lefl eyc sequestruun shown
inFigurc 10.
tained faithfully to keep the titer high. Supplemental oral lysinc can be considercd. Antivirals can
be used in conjunction with antibiotics. Even Champion Persians are susceptiblc (Figs. 10 and 11).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Andrew SE, Tou S, Brooks D: Comeoconjunclival transposition for the trcatinent of feline corneal se-
 2. Blogg JR. Stanley RG, Dutton AG: Use of conjunctival peclicle grafts in the management of feline kerati-
tis nigrun.J Small Anim Pract 30:678-684,1989.
3. Gimcncz MTD, Farina IM: Lamellar keraloplasty for the treatment of feline comeal sequestrum. Ve1 Oph-
thalmol 1:163-166,1998.
Feline Corneal Sequestrum
51
4. Morgan RV: Feline corneal sequestralion: A retrospectivc study of 42 cases (1987-1991). J Am Anim
Ilosp Assoc 30:24- 28, 1994.
5. Nasisse MP, Guy JS. Davidson MG, et al: Experimcntal ocular herpesvirns infcction in thc cat. Lnvest Oph-
thalmol Vis Sci 30:1758-1768, 1989.
6. Pentlarge VW: Corncal sequestration in cats. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vct I1:24-32, 1989.
7. Schinidt GM, Whitley RD: Management of feline comeal sequestration: Medical therapy and surgical ther-
apy. Vet Med Report 1:258-261, 1989.
8. Startup FG: Corneal necrosis and sequestration in the cat: a review and record of 100 cases. J Small Anim
Pract 29:476-286. 1988.
9. Wilkic DA. Whittaker G: Surgery of the cornea. Vet Clin N Am Small Anin Pract 27: 1067-1107, 1997.
9. FELINE PROLIFERATIVE
KERATOCONJUNCTIVITIS
Ronald C. Riis, D.V.M, M.S.
1. Is tbe feline species the only species to acquire proliferative keratoconjunctivitis?
No, the equine species also has a similar syndrome.
2. Have these syndromes been identified?
Collectively, they have been called eosinophilic keratitis.
3. Why is that tcrm used?
The typical lesion is pink to white and is proliferative, from the surface of the cornea, con-
junctiva, or nictitans. It is irregular on the surface and in shape. Transillumination of thc eye dis-
plays dense neovascularization reacting to the involved areas. If cytology is perforimed from the
lesions that are whitish and raised, the cellular response has high nurmbers of eosinophils among
a mixed population of other inflammatory cells (Figs. 1-5).
Figure I. Note the pruliferalions al
the limbus. This is an early nanifes-
talion of the syndrome.
 4. What factors might confuse the interpretation of the cytology of proliferative kerato-
conjunctivitis?
Inflammatory cells and high numbers of frec rod-likc bodics sometimcs appcar similar to rod
bacteria. Comparing the intact numbers of eosinophils found with olher cells will clarify whether
52
 Feline Proliferative Keratoconjunctivitis
53
Figurc 2. This pink thickcning of the
medial cornca is a rather smooth in-
ilration of proliferative keratitis.
Figure 3. Thic proliferative compo-
nent  of  this  keratoconjunctivitis
looks severe, but complete resolution
was obtained with treatnenl.
Figure 4. 'The appearance of' this le-
sion is raised enough to rmle out in sitt
ncoplasms. but cytology confirmed
lrenendous numbers of eosinophils.
 The response to treatment was excel-
lent.
54
FelineProliferativeKeratoconjunctivitis
Figure 5. Electron microscopy of feline proliferative keralopathy. The inflammatory cells on the surface are
eosinophils with their characteristic cytoplasmie granules (7,117X),
Figure 6. Electron microscopy at the edge of a lesion of feline proliferative keratopathy. Epithelial degener-
ation with vacuolation at the basement membrane and stromal collagen disorganization (1 15,300×).
Feline Proliferative Keratoconjunctivitis
55
this traumatic fracture of the cells; a genlle blotting or rolling of the material gathered usually
yields morc intact eosiuophils.
5. Are the eye manifestations in any way related to the dermatologic syndromes?
No,the ocularlesion is unique
 Usually, the condition presents as a unilateral problem; however, it has been seen bilaterally.
Previously diagnosed cases can re-present with the oppositc cye involved. There is no breed o1
sex prcdilection.
7. What is the etiology of proliferative keratoconjunctivitis?
The etiology is unccrtain, however, one study found PCR-positive results against fcline
herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) in 76.3% of the surgical samples taken from proliferative lesions. To add
to the uncertainty. this author has diagnosed and treated spccific-pathogcn free (SPF) cats with
proliferative keratoconjunctivitis,
8. What is the treatment for proliferative keratoconjunctivitis?
Thc lesions respond to corticosteroids. Depending on how aggressive you choose to be, top-
ical, subconjunctival, and oral medications all are effectivc. If the cat is difficult to treat and the
lesions are large, all three routes can be used. Initially, give 0.1 ml of 40 mg/ml of mcthylpred-
nisolonc (Depo-Medrol) subconjunclivally. Oral megestrol acetate should be prescribcd: 5
and tapcring off affter 6 weeks. Minor lesions need to be treated only with thc topical mcdicalion.
9. Are there concerns over the use of megestrol acetate?
Yes, owners should be warned about possible polydipsia-polyuria signs. Most cais lose these
adverse signs once the dose is reduced or stopped. Some weight gain has also becn noted on Ov-
aban, which is now off the market.
10. Causing a fare-up of FHV is a concern with corticosteroids use. Do nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatories work?
Topical 0.1% diclofenac, 0.03% Hurbiprofen, 1.0% indomethacin, and 1.0% Suprefen all rc-
duce thc neovascularization and, therefore, slow the proliferative course of thc disease. Thcse
 medications need to be used 4-6 tirmes per day for several imonths, but the results still may not bc
as good as with corticosteroids. Another drawback is that cats become tired of frequent, long-tem
eye medications, and their owncrs feel thcy cause a bonding loss with this ritual.
11. Can a different therapy approach he used other than corticosteroids?
Yes, immnnomodulators have been used.
12. Which immunomodulator hias worked?
Interferon alfa-2a has been successful when used at an oral dose of 1000 IU/day/week, fol-
lowed by no trealment for I week, then again back on imedication. This alternating schedule is
continued as necessary, but eventually the lreatment is completely cancelled. In severe cases, oral
interferon is supplemcntcd with topical sleroids
13. How is the interferon prepared?
Interfcron alfa-2a (Roferon-A Roche Pharrmaceuticals) is sold in units containing 3 million
IU. Aliquots are madc up with I0,00K) 1U/ml and dispensed with directions to give oral 0.1 ml
(1000 IU)/day.
56
Feline Proliferative Keratoconjunctivitis
14. Are there any adverse effecis from interferon in cats?
The only reported side effeci is a redhced whiie blood cell level, which returns once the in-
terteron is stopped. The aiternating weekly dose helps keep the white blood cell level.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Bedford P, Cotchin E: An unusual chronic keraloconjunctivitis in 1he cat. J Small Anim Pract 24:85, 1983.
2. Larocea RD: Eosinoplhilic conjunctivitis, herpesvirus, and mast cell tumor of the third eyelid in a cat. Vet 
Ophthalmol 3:221-225,2000.
3. Nasisse M. Luo H, Wang Y, et al: The role of feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) in the pathogenesis of comeal
sequestralion and eosinophilic keratitis. Proc Am Coll Vet Ophthalmol 27:80, 1996.
4. Pentlarge VW, Ris RC: Proliferative keratitis in a cat: a case rcport. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:477, 1984.
6. Prasse K, Winslon S: Cytology and histopathology of feline eosinophilic keratitis. Vet Comp Ophthalmol
6:74. 1996.
10. KERATOCONJUNCTIVITIS SICCA
Seth A. Koch, V.M.D., M.M.Sc., and John Sykes, D.V.M
1. What is Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)?
KCS (kerato means "cornca" and sicca means "dry") is a disease in which the primary
lacrinal gland has, for a variety of reasons, stopped functioning. The primary lacrimal gland sup-
plies the aqueous portion of the precormeaf tear filin.
 2. Describe the portions of the precorneal tear film.
Of the three parts of the precorneal tear film, the aqueous layer is the most copious, the lipid
layer and the inucin layer are produced by the tarsal glands and the conjunctival goblet cells, re-
spectively. lhe aqueous layer is 1esponsible for causing KCS.
3. What is the primary lacrimal gland?
Thcrc arc two lacrimal glands in thc caninc and feline. The primary lacrimal gland is locatcd
bathe ihe corneal surface. The secondary or accessory lacrimal gland, or gland of the third eye-
lid. is responsiblc for about 30% of the total aqueous tcar production, This gland can be negli-
gently or mistakcnly reinoved when it becomes swollcn ("chcrry cye"). Removal of this gland
may rcsult in significant decrease in tcar production. In susceplible patienis (breed relatcd), thcrc
will be a rcsultant "dry eye" syndrome. A numbcr of acccpted surgical techniques should be used
to ensure appropriate cosmesis and continued function of the gland. For discussion of the various
surgical tcchniqucs see Chapter 12.
4.Whichbreeds are susceptible to KCS?
spaniel. Pekingese, West Highland white terrier, schnauzer, and Yorkshire terrier are the most
common brccds observed with the syndrome. The Yorkshirc tcrricr has beccn reported to have con-
genital acinar hypoplasia as a genetic defcct, and KCS is, therefore, seen in the young "Yorkic."
 5. What are the clinical findings of KCS?
As with many other ocular irritativc discases involving the conjunctiva and cornca, thc pa-
ticnt will cxhibit discomfort, photophobia (discomfort in bright light), blepharospasm (blinking),
ulcers, and keratinization (pigmcnt dcposition) (Figs. I and 2)
6.This sounds just like a conjunctivitis. Where's the sicca?
conjunctivitis seen in practicc should have a Schirmer tear test perlormed to distinguish KCS from
the other conjunctivitides.
7. What is the Schirmer tear test?
ease of reading. The strip of paper is bent at the indicated crease and inserted into the inferior con-
junctival cul-de-sac at the lid margin. The amount of wetting that occurs in l minule is the
recorded result. The conjunclival cul-de-sac should be cleansed with a dry cotton-tipped applica-
tor to rennove the debris prior to doing the test.
8. What's a normal reading for the Schirmer tear test?
Using the dye-impreguatedi sirips, a finding of 12-15 mm of wetting in 1 minute is consid-
ered normal.
57
58
Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca
ligure 1. Dog cyc with classical m-
copurulent discharge. Note the dry-
ness of the cornea allowing the dis-
charge to stick to thc surfacc and
accumulate in the medial canthus.
Figure 2. Dog cye with chrunic kera-
toconjunctivitis sicca. ‘The comea is
densely pigmented with a central
leukoma. The eye is very red and the
dischargc mucopurulent.
9. Does the disease occur only in dogs?
No. KCS occurs in cats as well. In fact, any casc of conjunctivitis in the cat should have a
Schimmer tear test performcd. The normal Schirmer tcar test for a cat is 10 mm/l minute.
Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca
59
10. What causes KCS?
There are many etiologies. The most commonly stated is immunc dcficicncy disease. Othe1
ther by drug-induced disease (sulfa class of drugs) or by removal of the secondary gland (*cherry
eye") (30% of the tear film production); trauma; neurologic; endocrinopathy (thyroid, Cushing's,
diabetes); and, of course, neoplasia.
11. How is KCS treated??
If the primary etiology can be determined and it is trcatable, then obviously it should he
treated. For example, KCS from thyroid disease may resolve with ihyroid therapy. In addition or
if the etiology is not known, the eye must be kept moist. The modalities for a “wet eye" are arli-
ficial tears, cyclosporine, pilocarpine, anlibiotics, and corticosteroids.
The consensus is that rnany KCS cases are immune related, and cyclosporine is the modal.
ity of choice for this etiology. Cyclosporine stinulates the lacrimal gland by its action as a T-cell
immunosuppressanl.
Artificial tears have an effcctive life of 8-10 minutes, so it takes a lot of applications to keep
an eye moist. If both "mom" and "dad" are working 8 hours a day, not much is accomplished with
artificial tears. Topical antibiotics and antibiotic-corticosteroid combinations are used to rc-
duce infection and inflammation wherever appropriate (if there is an accompanying corneal ulcer,
antibiotic-corticosteroid is contraindicated).
Pilocarpine is a parasympathomimetic that can stimulate the lacrimal gland to function, if
there is any gland to stimulate. It must be given in high cnough doses to have a systcmic effect,
advocated its use topically as an irritant to cauise refex tearing and as a direct parasyinpath-
omimetic. These authors are opposed to pilocarpine for KCS treatment.
12. Is KCS a hard disease to treat?
It takes a lot of work: clean-up, treating, and "staying on top of it." A 60-iay trial period of
topical therapy will be enough 1o determine the efficacy of the therapy. If, at the end of 60 days,
in60days.medicationmust be continuedindefinitely.Cyclosporine is only effective for shor pe
riods of time and must be given continuously. Other supportive therapy is also necessary.
13. Are some KCS cases just not responsive to cyclosporine treatment?
A few breeds of dogs seem lo be unresponsive. The German shepherd, samoyed, and West
Highland tcrricr top the list.
CONTROVERSIES
14. Is cyclosporine indicated when the etiology of KCS is known nor to be imunune deficiency?
15. Is surgery a good option for KCS?
Suigery to treat KCS involves transposing the parotid gland duct (PDT) from the mouth to
the inferior cul-dc-sac so the animal in cffcct "spits"” in the eye. This kceps the affected eye "wet."
o p e r leg ros Iad y aa a, issanxa ue sj 's  nsh a
that needs constant medication? Many authors say that the surgery has insurmounlable side ef-
fecis. Others, including these authors, believe it is better to deal with the minimal problerns of a
wet eye than hiaving to deal constantly with a fionresponsive dry eye. This applies to the cat as
well. Beforc thc advent of cyclosporine, PDT surgery was frequently pcrformed. Because cy-
closporine is not the "wonder drug" it was once thought to be, surgery is once again being per-
formed with some degree of regularity
60
Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca
BIBLIOGRAPHY
2.1
Moorc CP: Qualitative tcar film disease. Vet Clin N Am Smal Anim Pract 20:565-581, 1990.
3. Morgan R, Duddy IM. McClurg K: Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid in dogs: A retrospective study
of 89 cases (1980-1990). J Am Anin Hosp Assoc 29:56-60. 1993.
4. Salisbury MA, Kaswan RI.、Ward DA, et al: Topical application of cyclosporine in the mranagement of
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:269-274, 1990.
11. OCULAR PROPTOSIS
Dennis K. Olivero. D.V.M.
1. Define proptosis.
Proprosis is the roslral displacement of the globe with entrapment of the eye forward of the
eyelid margins. Subsequent orbicularis oculi muscle spasm rapidly compromises blood supply to
the displacedi eye.
2. What causes proptosis?
Trauma frequcntly is involvcd in the dcvclopment of ocular proptosis in animals. Blunt
Irauma to the head and neck causes forward displacement of the globe. Small dogs grasped by the
neck and shaken by largcr dogs have dcvelopcd unilateral or bilatcral proptosis. Excessive rc-
straint of brachycephalic breeds of dogs can rcsult in proptosis. but most proptosis cascs result
from injury from other animals or people or contact with moving automobiles.
3. Are certain breeds predisposcd to proptosis?
Brachycephalic breeds of dogs comprisc the majority of thc cases of ocular proptosis.
Macropalepbral fissure and shallow orbits otfer little resistancc to forward displacement of the
 globc with blunt injury to thc lhead or meck. When proptosis occurs in dolichocephalic brecds of
dogs or in cats, severe trauma is involved and the palient should be carefully evaluated for other
injuries not involving the eye.
4. What is the most important first-response measure following proptosis?
staff should stress the iniportance of preventing exposure and dessication of the cornea. lf saline
is available in the home, a soft towel or gauze sqluiares can be soaked in saline and gently piaced
around the cye during transportation. Any antibiotic or tear replacement eyc ointment can also be
uscd to prevent drying of the cornea. Even pctrolcum jelly (Vasolene) can be applied on the cye
if no ocular lubricating agents are available.
If the globe has not been hnbricated, liberally apply antibiotic or tear replacement ointment
to the exposed ocular tissues. Nexl, cvaluate the patienl as a wholc. Remcmber, in dolichocephalic
hreeds of dogs and in cats, excessive trauma is required to displace the globe from the orbit, If an
automobile accident caused the injury, carefully evaluate the neurologic, cardiovascular, and pul-
paticnts will not bc immcdiatcly ready for ancsthesia and globe rcplaccment, dcpending on the
cxtent of their other injuries.
6. What is the prognosis for vision following proptosis of tlhe globe?
sis with minimal trauma and sometimes as a complication ot excessive restraint. If thc globe is
immediately repositioned,vision is gcnerally not affected.In most paticnts,however,more sc-
vere traurma is involved in globe displacement, and this affccts the prognosis for vision (Fig. 1).
7. When is the prognosis for vision favorable?
A favorable prognosis for vision is offered for patients when the eye is displaced for a very
short period of time and thosc in which the displacemcnt was associated with minimal trauma.
61
62
Ocular Proptosis
Figure 1. This 7-year-old female shih
lzu dog suffered proptosis of the left
globc after bcing attacked by a largcr
dog. Laleral deviation of the glohe is
cvident with imcdial rcctus musclc
avulsion, but the anterior segment is
clear and there is minimal orbital he
but was not visual.
These patients show intact pupillary light reflexes or a miotic pupil in the affected eye with an in
dircct pupillary response to the contralateral eye. Minimal or no hyphema and minimal orbital hc-
morrhage are present in patients who continue to have useful vision following proptosis. Intact
visual responses with a normal-appearing fundus confer a favorable prognosis.
8. When is the prognosis for vision grave?
When severc trauma resultcd in globc displaccment and it is accompanicd by marked hy-
phcina. vitreal hemorrhagc, or rctinal dctachmcnt, the prognosis for future vision is grave.
9. Are there any ancillary tests that can be done to determine the prognosis for vision?
Most vcterinary referral centers provide ultrasound imaging of the globe and orbit. Hyphcma
in thc absencc of marked vitreal hemorrhage and retinal detachimcnt would suggest a hetter prog:
proptosis, however, is frequently the result of optic nerve injury. Visual evoked polentials can be
mcasured with spccializcd equipment, indicating the transmission of clectrical signals from thie
retina to thc occipital (visual) cortex. This type of tcsting rcquires a clear ocular mcdia and is rarely
considercd in the cmergcncy situation, but it can be useful in combination with electroretinogra-
10. Is it always possible to salvage the globe?
Some patients present with sevcre tissue damagc to thc globe and orbit. Paticnts with rupturc
of the cormea, collapse of the globe, completc loss of extraocular muscle attachmcnts to the orbit
(Fig. 2), or excessive comeal injury associated with drying and exposure are often scheduled for
Figure 2. This 8-year-old male York-
shire terricr dog was attackcd by a
Gcrman shcpherd dog rcsulting in
proptosis of the left cye. No cxtraoc-
ular muscle attachments remained in-
tact. and warked orbital hemorhage
is evident. Thc eye was enuclealed
shortly after presentation.
Ocular Proptosis
63
enucleation as soon as the patient is able to withstand general ancsthesia. Enuclcation can be con-
sidered at any time during the course of treatment, howcver, and bccause of this most clinicians
attempt initially to salvagc the globe. The prognosis for vision should be discussed wih clients,
because some will prefer cnucleation to rapidly resolve the medical situation if there is no hope
for future vision. Evcn if the globe is salvaged, chronic medical treatment may be necessary to
kcep thepatieatcomfortable.
11. Is there any danger of injury to the contralateral cye?
Mosi dogs with proptosis of the globe exhibit unilateral injury. There are case reports of
blindness in the contralateral eye that shows no visihle evidence of displacement or traumatic in-
jury. It is assumed that optic nerve tearing at the level of the optic chiasm results in contralateral
injury. Excessive traction on ocular tissues, especially in cats, can result in further optic nerve in-
jury with potential involvement of the second eye. Some degree of vision loss in the contralateral
eye may occur more frequently than is realized because there is no easy way to assess partial vi-
sion loss in vcterinary patients.
12. What steps are taken to reposition the globe into the orbit?
General ancsthesia is requircd in most cases to reposilion the globe. If proptosis develops as
a rcsult of restraint, the hairs can be grasped on the lids and pulled oul away from the globe, al-
 lowing the eye to fall back into the orbital space. In this situation, anesthesia may not be neces-
rhage will complicaie globe repositioning and nccessitate chemical restraint. Blcod and debris are
removed from the periocular tissues prior to globe replacement.
When excessive tissue swelling and orbital hemorrhage are evident, a lateral canthotomy not
only will ease repositioning of the eye but also will imumediately relieve vascular stasis to the
globe. Various techniques have been described for globe replacemcnt. Esscntially thc cyelid mar-
 gins must be elevated and rotated away from the globe while gcntle pressure is placed on the
cornea. Stay sutures can be placcd in the cyelid tissue near the lid margin to allow manipulation
 of the eyelids, or tissue clamps (Allis) can be used. Split-thickness mattress sutures of 3-0 to 40
nonabsorbabfe matenial supporled with stents are preplaced and graduafly tightened to close thc
lids around the displaced globe. Caution is used while placing sutures to avoid needle contact with
fornices using sterile saline. Most clinicians leave a gap medially or laterally for placciment of an-
tibiotic and atropine ophthalmic ointments. If a lateral canthotomy is made, it is closcd routinely
after eyelid closure and stabilization of the globe.
13. Should there be supportive medical treatment after closure of the eyelids?
patients with proptosis can be released for home care soon afler replacement of the globe. An Eliz-
abethan coilar is oflen necessary and recommended to prevent self-injury or removal of the su-
tures.Supportivc medical care should include rest,oral antibiotics,and oral corticosteroids.Cor-
ticostcroids are used at the anti-inflarmmatory level to help resolve panuveitis and optic nerve
injury in addition to orbital inflammation and swclling. If an opening was left between the eye-
times daily and atropine ophthalmic ointment is applied 1 or 2 times daily to control pain associ-
ated with ciliary spasm and anterior uveitis. Atropine ointment should be used judiciously because
it will contribute to sicca, which is frequently a complicalion of proptosis in dogs.
If the cornca is ulccrated at the timc of globe replacemcnl, evaluation of the ocular discharge
cmerging from the mcdial or lateral eyelid opening is an important way to monitor for secondary
shows excessive and progressive discomfort, the sutures can be teinporarily removed to further
asscss ihe condition of the comea. Microscopic evaluation of debris collecled from the ulcer bed
can categorize he inflammation and aid in appropriate changes in antimicrobial therapy.
64
Ocular Proptosis
14. How long should the eyelids be left closed after repositioning of the globe?
In general, thc eyclids should be left closcd for at Jcast 2 weeks. Clicnts should be instructed
lo) cvaluate the lid closurc daily. As tissuc sweiling resolves, gaps may develop betwcen the up-
 per and lower eyelid margins, allowing suture contact with the cornca. This may neccssitate al-
lering the tension on the sutures or replacing lhein. After 2 weeks, the sutures are removed and
the globe is asscssed for vision and any other irreversible injury that is evident. If excessive
lagophthalmos and cxophthalmos pcrsist, tlhie lids should be closcd again for an additional 2 weeks.
15. Wliat complications are commonly encountered after thie eyelids arc opened several
weeks following the injury?
Common complications following ocular proptosis include strabismus associated with ex-
traocular muscle injury. both ulcerative and nonulcerative keratitis, keraloconjunctivitis sicca
agophthalmos, and blindness. Traumatic cataract, iris bombe glaucoma sccondary to hyphema,
retinal detachment, and phthisis bulbi can occur additionally.
16. Why does strabismus occur following proptosis?
Thc mcdial rcctus muscle frequcntly is tom from the globe at its insertion when the eyc is ac-
celeraled forward. This results in laleral strabisinus in most dogs following proptosis. Reportedly,
the strabisimus inproves with time. presumably associaled with readjustment of teusion on the
remaining viable extraocular muscles (Fig. 3). Although clients have requested reattachment of
the mcdial rectus muscle, finding and reattaching fragments of torm muscle is not likely to be suc-
cesstul following proptosis injury.
Figure 3. This 3-year-old female
Pekingesc dog suffered proptosis of
the right eyc 6 wccks prior to this pho.
tograph. The final oulcome of treat-
mcnt is cvident with lateral strabis-
mus but a quiet, coniforlable eye. The
srabisnius will probably partially rc-
solvc in thc following months.
17. Why is keratitis frequently a problem following proptosis?
Ulcerative keratitis develops rapidly secondary to cxposure after injury. Following treatment
of proptosis using a tcmporary tarsorrhaphy, keratitis can rcsult from poor tear production and
lagophthalimos. Poor tcar production can result fron dircct injury to lacrimal glands or as a result
of nerve daimagc or vascular damage supplying these structures. Treatment with ophthalmic cy-
closporine ointmcnt (Optinmunc) may or may not improve tear production because sicca fol-
lowing traumatic proptosis of the globe is frequently neurogenic in origin.
Anesthesia of the cornca is common following proptosis. presumably associated with loss of
function of the cranial nervc five sensory endings in the cornea. This also contributes to lagoph-
thalmos and sicca because blinking and tcaring arc at lcast partially controlled by reffexes origi-
naling in the corneal stroma. Lack of sensation in the cornea in addition to exposure and sicca will
promote ulcerative keratitis, referred to as neurotropic keratitis. Ulcers associated with anes-
Ocular Proptosis
65
18. Are there any steps that can be takcn to prevent proptosis?
Dogs that experience proptosis with minor trauma frequently have exaggerated brachy
cephalic anatomic featurcs that provide little support or protection for the globe. Reduction of the
cxccssivc palpebral fissure sizc with lateral or medial canthoplastic proccdurcs can rcduce the
chances of proptosis in the future. After loss of vision in one cye, many velcrinary clicnts will
CONTROVERSIES
19. Should the medial rectus muscle be reattachcd during globe replacement to minimize
postoperative strahismus?
For repair of the medial rectus muscle: Repair of the melial rectus muscle prior to globe re-
placement can minimize or resoive sirabismus, which is cominon following proptosis injury in
animals. After induction of general anesthesia, a lateral cantholomy can be inmediately per-
forned to reduce vascular stasis to the globe. Medial rectus muscle is reattached to the sclera at
its insertion prior to performing the temporary tarsorrhaphy.
Against repair of the medial rectus muscle: Traumatic proptosis of the globe in animals is
lsually associaied with marked orbital edema and hemorrhage, which prohibils identification of
mcdial rectus fragments for atteimpted repair. It is questionable whether or not the extended anes-
thctic time required for extraocular muscle repair and further manipulation of an already trauma-
tizcd eye is warranted when rcpositioning of the globe and stabilizing of the patient are of para-
mount importance. Emcrgency clinic veterinarians and primary care veierinarians are more likely
to initially manage ocular proptosis cases than specialists, and these individuals are not likely to
have available spccializcd surgical instrumentation for strabismus surgery.
20. Should every effort be made 1o salvage the globe for a cosmetic appearance?
For salvage of the globe whenever possibte: Emergency clinic and primary care veterinarians
initially manage the majority of cases of ocular proptosis in animals. If the eye is ireversibly dam-
agcd, enucleation is discussed and recommended. In all other situations the eye is replaced in the of-
bit in hopes of future vision. Spccialists later become involvcd in case management, and with more
sophisticated cquipment the prognosis for vision can be clearly established. Emergency and primary
care vctcrinarians are reluctant to rccommend enuclcation in the absence of such information.
Against salvage of the giobe when blindness is inevitabte: Most veterinary ophthalmology ref-
erences indicate that evcry effort should be made to salvage the globe even if enucleation may be
Icccssary at some later point. This advice may be hard to justify in light of the overall poor prog-
nosis for vision in most cases of traumatic proptosis of thc globe. The rccommendation becomcs
even more difficul1 to justify when consideration is made of the time ol patient discomfort follow-
ing salvage versus cnucleation and when medical expenses are considered for the various ap-
proaches to trcatment. Obviously, cnucleation is not rccomrmended if there is any hope for vision.
but cnucleation perhaps should be considered early on lfor lhopelessly blind eyes when clicnts are
more concerned with patient discomfort and/or medical expenses than the final cosinctic appcar-
ance. Following enucleation of the globe, most animals have fully recovcrcd from infammation
and discoinfort 5 days after surgery. Traumatized eyes may be infamed and painful for wceks Or
 months after injury. Most veterinary clients are not well informed on the usual appcarancc of sal-
vaged globes, and the "cosmetic" appearance of laterally deviated and oftentimes phthisical eycs
can be debated. Afler induction of general anesthesia 1o replace the proptosed globc, ultrasonog-
raphy can be perforrmed quickly. If this shows excessive ocnlar henorhage and retinal detachment,
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Fritsche. J. Spiess BM. Ruchli MG, ct al: Prolapsus bulbi in small aninals: A retrospcctive study of 36
cases. Tierarztl Prax 24:5561, 1996.
66
Ocular Proptosis
2. Gilger BC, Hamilton HL, Wilkie DA, et al: Traumatic ocular proptoses in dogs and cats—84 cases
(19801993). I Am Vet Med Ass0c 206:1186-1190. 1995.
3. Kerm TI: The Canine orbit. In Gcllatt K (cd): Vetcrinary Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Lea &
Febiger, 1991, pp 243-244.
4. Lindley DM, Ringle M. Moorthy R, et al: Efficacy of lateral canthotomy and cantholysis in orhital hem-
orrhage. Vet Pathol 29:473, 1992.
5. Ramsey DT, Fox DB: Surgery of the orbit: Surgical management of ocular disease. Vet Clin North Am
27:1244-1247, 1997.
6. Slatter DH: Ocular emergcnces. In Fundancntals of Vcterinary Ophthalmology. Philadclphia, W,B. Saun-
ders, 1990, p 538.
7. Spiess BM, Wallin-Hakanson N: Diseases of the canine orbit. In Gellatt K (ed): Veterinary Ophthalrmol-
ogy, 3rd ed. Phitadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999, pp 520-522.
12. NICTITANS ABNORMALITIES
AND THERAPIES
James F. Swanson, D.V.M., M.S., and M. Kohle Herrmann, D.V.M.
1. Some owners notice a pigment hand on the dorsal bulbar conjunctiva of their pets' eyes.
What are they seeing?
At times, the third eyelid will extend dorsally. Owners may think that there is a tumor or some
other disease process. By manually prolapsing the third eyelid, one can see the exlension of this
slructure (Fig. l). It does not cause any problems and the owners should be reassured that this can
be normal. This is not a fault in show dogs. The American cocker spanicl seems to be the most
common breed with the encircling third eyelid.
Figure 1. American cocker spaniel;
note linear pigment outlining the dor-
sal encirclement of the thitd eyelid.
 2. Are there any problems with a nonpigmented third eyelid?
A nonpigmented edge of thc third cyelid may be unilateral or bilateral. The hair coat color has
a bearing on the degree of pigmentation. Dogs that havc white hair coats or a merling factor have
the highcst incidence. Usually a nonpigmcnted third cyclid does not cause any problems. Own-
tions. Dogs' and cats' nictitans may be at increased risk for squamous cell carcinomas when the
third eyelid is not pigmentcd.
3. Can dermoid cysts occur on the third eyelid?
Dermoid cysts of the third eye lid are rarc but do occur. Dermoids are found in both dogs and
cals with Burmese cats exhibiting the highest incidence. Dermoids can cause chronic irritation
due to cilia rubbing on the cornea. These lesions should to be excised, and the conjunctiva sutured
rior surface of the third eyelid. Suture such as 60 Vicryl works well.
4, If the third eyelid has been lacerated, what should I do?
If the iear is small, involving only the edge, and no cartilage exposed, the defect may be
trimmed or just left in place. When lacerations are more extensive or involve the carlilage, the de-
fect should be repaired. Make sure the conjunctiva is positioned, and suture to cover any exposed
cartilage. All knots should be buricd, as in a suhcuticular pattern, or brought to thc antcrior sur-
face of the third eyelid. Again, 6- Vicryl suture is preferred
67
68
Nictitans Abnormalities and Therapies
5. Do eosinophilie granulomas involve the third eyelid?
Fosinophilic conjunctivitis may affecl the third eyelid. Most of the time thcre is concomitant
conneal involvement. Feline herpesvirus infection may be the underlying cause for this lesion in
cats. Cytology will reveal eosinophils and, at times, mast cells. Topical corticosteroids can be used
first if thcre are no herpetic lesions on the cornea. Oral steroids can bc used in rcsistant cases.
Mcgcstrol acetate can also be uscd and works vcry well (see Chapler 9),
6. What does a prolapsed third eyelid mean?
Usually there is an underlying disease process. This could include a retrobulbar mass, hem-
ofrhage, myositis, ocular pain, telanus, loss of orbital fat, or a neurologic disorder.
With a retrobulbar mass the globe will not retropulse back into the orbit. Ocular retropulsion
is accomplished by gently pressing on the globe lo deterrmine if it will recede back into the orbit.
Always compare both eyes. In painful orbital conditions such as orbital celhulitis, the animal ex-
hibits pain when the globes are retropulsed or the mouth is opened.
If there is orbital hemorrhage, the globe often does not retropulse normally. Examine the mu-
cus meimbranes for evidcncc of petechiation or pale coloration as would bc seen with clotting
disorders.
lnfammalion of the extraocular muscles and temporal mmscle myositis can cause the third
eyelid to prolapse (Fig. 2). Usually there is swelling and sometirmes pain noted in the muscles of
 mastication. Opening the mouth is oftcn painful, also.
Ocular pain can cause the animal to retract the cye and prolapsc the third eyelid. This can bc
seen with corneal ulcers. glaucoma, and uvcitis
Loss of orbital fat in older animals or animals with chronic orbital cellulitis can cause thc
globe to sink into the orbit, allowing the third eyelid to prolapse. Although various implants have
been used to rcvcrsc the signs of cnophthalinos, to date all have met with only limited success.
Systemic disease, such as tetanus, can cause the animal to have clcvatcd third cyclids. Usu-
ally the ears wili be upright and the animal will have a wide palpebral opening. There is often his-
tory of a wound or injury.
 Neurologic disorders such as Horner's syndromc, idiopathic prolapse of the third eyelid of
cats. and gcneralized dysautonomia may cause the third cyelid to bc clevated (Fig. 3). Horner's
syndromc is caused by prcganglionic or postganglionic sympathetic nerve injury. The most com-
mon is a postganglionic lesion originating at the craniocervical ganglion or abovc. Lesions may
involve thc cavernous sinus, middle car, or orbit. Thc middle ear sccims to be the most comimon
site of involvement. By using 10% phenylephrine drops, one can test for pre- or postganglionic
lesions. It usually takes 40 minutes or more to dilatc thc pupil in a prcganglionic lcsion. Only
about 20 minutcs are needed to dilate the pupil with a postganglionic lesion. The third cyclid will
phrine can be used (see Chapter 24).
Figure 2. Mixcd breed dog with tcm-
poral myositis cxhibiting teimporal
muscle swelling and third eyelid pro-
lapse.
Nictitans Abnormalities and Therapies
69
Figure 3. Third cyclid protrusion and
miosis caused by Hormer's syn-
drome.
Cats may have an idiopathic protrusion of thc third cyclid refenred to as "haws." Rarcly is the
cause known, and it is usually bilatcral with no pupillary involvement. Sometimes there is a his.
tory of gastrointestinal problcims. A drop of 2.5% phenylephrine will cause the third eyelid to 1e-
turn to its noninal position and can be used 24 times a day if visual problems are occurring.
Gieneralized dysautonomia or Key-Craskell syndrome in cats can cause a protrusion of the
third eyelid. The pupils are usually dilaled and unresponsive to light. There is also a decrease in
tear production. Other systemic signs are seen with this disease.
7. Is thcre any reason to rcmove the third eyelid?
The onlyreason to remove the third eye lid is neoplasia.Thc most common third eyelid tu
mors we see are tmelanosarcoma (Fig. 4), adenocarcinomas, hcmangiomas, hemangiosarcomas,
and squamous cell carcinomas of the gland of the third eyelid (Fig. 5). It is advisable to rule ouf
mctastasis before excising the tuinor. When the third eyelid is reinoved, be sure to suture the bul-
bar conjunctiva to the palpebral conjunctiva. This will close off the space leading to the retrobul-
bar area.
Occasionally a portion of the third eyelid may be removed when it has interfered with vision.
leaving the gland of the third eyelid. These cases were older animals that were enophthalmic or
had long-standing Hormer's syndrome.
Figurc 4. Malignant melanoma of thc
third cyclid in a dog.
8.How does a foreign body of thc third eyclid present?
The animal will most often exhibit sudden onsct of lacrimation and blepharospasm. Thc third
eyelid can be prolapsed and thickened. A corneal ulccr may be present along with a mucopuru-
lent discharge. Always be sure to use a topical anesthetic and look bchind the third eyelid. Grass
70
Nictitans Abnormalities and Therapies
Figure 5. Squamous cell carcinoma
of a nonpigmented third cyelid in a
cat.
awns and plant material seem to be the most common foreign bodies. Pieces of porcupinc quills
Or cactus thorns may also be lodged in the third eyelid.
9. Are third eyelid flaps of any benefit?
Third eyelid flaps can be helpful when treating corneal ulcers in the cat. In some cats there is
 a loss of corneal sensation and a superficial ulcer develops. Prolection of the cornea by a third
cyelid flap often speeds healing. Third eyelid flaps may also be beneficial in the treatmenl of non-
melting midstroinal ulcers. When performing a third eyelid flap, be sure to scarify the bulbar sur-
face to create some bleeding. The resulting serum exuded helps to heal the ulcer more rapidly.
Size 5-0 nylon suture is used in a matress pattern to place up the flap. The sutures are brought
out close to the upper fornix, and a stint (intravenous tubing or rubber band) is used to take ten-
sion off the sutures to prevenf pulling through the upper eyelid. Usually thrce sutures are used and
are left in place for at least 2 weeks. Topical medication can slill be placed in the eye.
10. What does a thickened, meaty-looking third eyelid indicate?
 If the dog is a German shepherd or a greyhound, the condition is probably a variant form of
pannus (Fig. 6). Cytologic examination reveals primarily plasma cells along with fewcr numhers
of lymphocytes. The condition can be controlled with topical steroids or cyclosporine. Another
eyelid looks like raw hamburger meat (Fig. 7). The etiology is not known but could be a form of
chionic low-grade infection or allergic reaction to pollens. Treatment is symptomatic using cor-
ticosteroid-antibiotic combinations. If the follicles persist, sedation and debridement of the af-
fected surface with a gauze sponge usually bring improvement.
Figure 6. Depigmentation and folli-
cle formmation on the third eyelid of a
 German shcpherd affected with atyp-
ical pannus.
Nictitans Abnormalities and Therapies
71
Figure 7. Severe follicular conjunc-
tivitis affecting the inner aspect of the
thirdeye.
11. How is a prolapsed gland of the third eyelid treated?
The gland of the third eyelid contributes a significant proportion of the aqueous tear film,
therefore the gland should be preserved. Prolapse of the gland is dne to a lack of the connective
tissue band that fixes the gland to the periorbital tissues or frorn pressure due to an inflamed and
swollen gland. This appears to have an inherited basis and is seen in the beagle, bulldog, cocker
spaniel, great dane, Lhasa apso, Pekingesc, and shih tzu. Burmese cats with this condition have
been cbserved with severe keratoconjunctivitis sicca when the gland has been excised, so the
gland should be surgically replaced.
Surgery is the treatment of choice, because the glands will not normally go back to their posi-
tion at the base of the carilage with medication. In dogs, removing the gland can be considered, but
the owners need to be informed that the animal runs the risk of developing dry eye (keratoconjunc-
tivitis sicca) if the third eyelid is entirely removed. Surgical repositioning of the gland is recom-
and is used when the gland is not excessively swollen. Be sure to separate the conjunctiva from the
 Dr. Gross's technigue anchors the gland to the inferior sclera, and this procedure can be uscd when
the giand is cnlarged. At timcs, a combination of these two tcchniques works best. Another frc-
quently used procedure is Kaswan and Martin technique. Our suture of choice is 6-0 Vicryl with a
tapered needle to avoid cutting the conjunclival or scleral tissue. Be sure to bury your knots.
12. Are there any anatomic defects that occur with the cartilage of the third eyelid?
The third eyelid has a T-shaped cartilage that gives definition to the third eyelid. This carti-
lage can bend due to trauma or a congenital defect (Fig. 8). When thc cartilage bends away from
the globe (eversion) the inner surface of the third eye lid is exposed and can become inflamed and
 infected. The animal may develop a mucoid ocular discharge. It is best to remove the dcformed
vertical portion of the cartilage to ailow the third cyc lid to resume its normal position. As long
as the cartilage is exposed, you must suture the conjunctiva. In the larger brecds of dogs, it is ad-
eyelid gland. For suturing, 60 Vicryl can be used to close the conjunctiva. At times, the cartilage
can be sutured together.
Some animals will have a slight bend in thc horizontal portions of the T cartilage (the horis),
It is rarely necessary to treat this defect. Some veterinary ophthalmologists wil trim these arcas.
It is not usually necessary to do any suturing.
72
NictitansAbnormalitiesand Therapies
Figure 8. Deforimcd stem of thc carti-
lage in the third eyelid.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
I. Gross SL .: E[fectiveness of a niodification of the Blwgg lechnique for replacing the prolapsed gland of the
canine third eyelid [abstract]. Proc Aim Coll Vct Ophthalmol 14:38-42, 1983.
 2. Kaswan RL. Martin CL: Surgical corrcction if third cyelid prolapsc in dogs. J Am Vet Mcd Assoc 186:83,
1985.
Medicine, 1996. pp 207-221.
5.Ward DA: Diseases and surgery of the canine nictitating membrane.In Gelatt KN (ed): Veterinary Oph-
thalmology. 3rd. Philadelphia. Lippincott Williaims & Wilkins, 1999. pp 609-618.
IIl.Glaucoma
13. GLAUCOMA OVERVIEW
Seth A. Koch, V.M.D., M.M.Sc., and Iohn Sykes, D.V.M
1. What docs the word glaucomu mcan?
The word iiself comes from the Greek (glaukoma) and means "blue" or "glazed." It was the
appearance of the pupil that prompted the word. It took a while for the ancients to distinguish
glaucoma from cataracts. Cataract was a fixable entity; glaucona wasn1't.
2. What is glaucoma?
The answer to this question is complex. Glaucoma is not merely an increase in inlraocular
pressure, it is a disease of multiple etiologies that results in destruction of ocular structure and
function.
3. If glaucoma isn't a pressure disease, then what is the problem?
in intraocular pressure.
4. What do you mean by “glaucomatous optic neuropathy"?
The optic nerve is really a continuation of the axons of the ganglion cells of the retina. Glau.
coma is a degeneration of the ganglion cells and because of this change we can consider the dis.
ease to be of the optic nerve.
5. So what is the ultimate cause of glaucoma?
We don'1 know. Risk factors other than change in intraocular pressure play a role in the patho-
gcnesis. What is clear is that the optic nerve is damaged independently of the level of the in-
traocular pressurc. Thie current thought is that apoptosis of the retinal ganglion cells occur. The
mechanism triggering the apoptosis is still uuknown.
6. Well, whhat about all we've learned about intraocular pressure?
At some point in thc development of thc discase there rmay or may nol be a change in the in-
traocular pressurc (IOP). ln humans, pcripheral visual field loss and an observed change in the
appcarance of the optic ncrve occur with or without a change in the IOP. In the domestic species
wc do not currently have a way of assessing peripheral visual field loss. We also do not appreci-
atc a minimal changc in the appearancc of thc optic nerve. We rely on increases in IOP to reach
a diagnosis of glaucoma. We miss the initial changes detectable in humans and may not make a
diagnosis until wc obscrvc the pressure changc. In cases where therc may be glaucoma without a
change in IOP, wc may even sce an animal with just unexplaincd visual loss.
7. How is IOP measured?
There are two ways. The first method is Schiotz tonometry in which a fixed amount of weight
is applied to thc cornca and indentation is mcasured. The second method is applanation tonome-
73
74
Glaucoma Overview
try where a known force is applied to the cornea and thc resistance to change is measured. Ap-
planation tonometry is morc reliablc, is easicr to use, and can be used in all species
8. What is normal IoP?
The mean is around 20 mm Hg, and pressure above 30 mm in the dog is considered to be ab-
nomal.
9. What are we realy measuring?
IOP represents a balance between aqueous production and outflow. IOP is the ocular tension
maintained by globe connective tissue and the intraocular fluids within.
10. What is the iridocorneal angle?
Figure 1. The iridocorneal angle of a cat. The trabecular fibers fomi a meshwork betwccn the iris on the bot-
tom and the cormea ou the top. Scanning electron microscopy
11. Can we see the angle?
A special lens called a goniolens is used to view the angle, which is at the anterior aspect of
the ciliary cleft and the peripheral base of the iris. This arca communicates with the anterior cham-
ber and contains the trabecular meshwork that allows the fluid to flow through it. The width of
dicate susceptibility to glaucoma or it may be meaningless (Figs. 1-4).
12. What makes the eye susceptible to glaucoma?
 Probably the most important factor is genctics. A number of brccds arc prone to the discase
because of angle deformities or other causal factors. The breeds most commonly affected with
Glaucoma Overview
75
Figure 2. A goniolens used to view
the iridocorncal angle. This lens is
applied to the cormeal surface after
topical anesthesia. Mcthylcellulose is
uscd to protect the comea.
Figure 3. A view through the g0-
niolens of an open angle in a dog.
76
GlaucomaOverview
Figure 4. A view through the g0-
niolens of a closed angle in a dog.
primary glaucoma are the cocker spaniel, basset, beaglc, Boston terrier, dalmatian, iminiature po0-
dle, Norwegian elkhound, and chow chow.
13. What is primary glaucoma?
Glaucoma is classified as either primary or secondary. Primary glaucoma comprises those
normal inu appearance.
14. What is secondary glaucoma?
Secondary glaucoma is attributed to some other inciting cause. Trauma, uveitis, and lens Iux-
ations are some examples of secondary causes.
15. What is the prognosis for vision in patients with glaucoma?
Terrible. Diagnosis and managemenl in the domestic species has focused on IOP. Howeve1,
pressure slows down the degenerative process but does not halt i1. The end point is incvitable. Thc
underlying ganglion cell degeneration has already preceded the pressure changes and is irre-
versible,which may very well be the reason the disease is so difficult to manage.
16. Why is pressure control important?
If the pressure is reduced by a substantial amount early in the course of the disease, the pro-
17. What is the relationship among IOP, angle deformity, and the rcality of the ganglion
cell degeneration?
This remains an unanswered question. What causes the ganglion cell degeneration? What is
the real meaning of IOP? If the ganglion cell degeneralion is the real cause for the visual loss, can
GlaucomaOverview
77
we really ever cure glaucoma? All of these questions require answers, and unlil we have 1hem,
glaucoma will remain the number one cause for blindness in both man and animals.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Brooks DE: Glaucona in the dog and cat. Vet Clin North Ain Simalf Anim Pract 20:775-797, 1990.
2. Collaborative Normal-Tension Glaucoma Study Group: Comparison of glaucomatous progression be-
traocular prcssurcs. Am J (Ophthaltnol 126:487—497, 1998.
3. Gclatt K. MacKay E: Distribution of IOP. Vel Ophthalnnol 1: l09114, 1998.
4. Roberts SM: Glaucoma in companion animals: Currcnt managemen and new trends. Calit Vet 48:9-16,
1994.
5. Wax M. Tezel G, Edward PL: Clinical and ocular histopathological findings in a paticnt with norrmal-pres-
sure glaucoma. Arch Ophthalmol 116:993-1001, 1998.
14. SECONDARY GLAUCOMA
James E. Gaarder, D.V.M
1. How is secondary glaucoma distinguished from primary glaucoma?
Glaucoma occurs when elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) impairs normal function of the
eye. In canine and feline glaucoma, IOP is tlevated due to the reduced or absent egress of aque-
ous from the anterior chamber. Glaucoma destroys vision by killing ganglion cefls with the direct
effects of increased pressure and the indirect effects of impaired intraocular circulation. Unlike
primary glaucoma, secondary glaucoma is associated with concurrent and identifiable ocular dis-
ease such as inflammation (uveitis), neoplasia, hemorrhage, and lens luxation, Careful examina-
tion of the anterior and posterior segments with a focal light source, magnification, and indirect
Or direct ophthalroscopy wifi usually identify these underlying disorders.
 2. Why is it importanf to distinguish these two types of glaucoma?
Primary glaucoma is, by definition, ultimatcly bilateral. Therefore, the normal fellow eye is
at risk and the owner needs to be aware of this. Primaly glaucoma in dogs is an incurable disor-
 der that, at best, can be managed effectively for variable periods of time. fi is also an inherited
disease, and affected dogs shouid not be used for breeding.
Secondary glaucoma is usually a nnilateral disease and can somelimes be succcssfully treated
with preservaton of vision if the underlying cause can be identified and correcled. Therefore, the
prognosis as well as the goal of treatment differs depending on the primary diagnosis, both for the
affected eye and the fellow eye.
 3. How does uveitis cause secondary glaucoma?
 Glaucoma secondary to uveitis results from decreased aqueous outflow due lo peripheral an-
terior synechiae, posterior synechiae, or iridocorneal angle occlusion with inflammatory debtis. It
(Schiotz) tonometry is essential for evaluating any red eye without an cbvious corneal defect. If
there are signs of active anterior uveitis, such as ciliary injection, miosis, aqueous flare, or photo-
phobia, one would expect to find an IOP significantly lower than that in the normal eye (usually
less than 10 mrmHg). A notmal or elevatcd IOP in an actively inflamcd eye should alert thc clini-
cian to thc possibility of the developmcnt of secondary glaucoma. The eyes must be closely inon-
itored, and immediate medical therapy should be imstituted should the pressure bccomc clevated.
4. How do intraocular tumors cause secondary glaucoma?
Secondary glaucoma can occur when an intraocular tumor grows anteriorly to a size that im-
pedes aqueous outflow or when exfoliated tumor cells obstruct thc iridocormeal angle. The most
common intraocular tumor resulting in secondary glaucoma in dogs and cats is thc melanoma.
These pigmented tumors are often not diagnosed until they are quite large because they are not
obvious to the owner and do not cause ocular pain or redness until secondary glaucoma occurs.
 If diagnosed early, they can sometimes be effectively treated or cured with surgical excision or
laser surgery. If not diagnosed until after the development of secondary glaucoma, usually the
only option is enucleation.
5. Is secondary glaucoma a concern when hyphema is present?
Yes, because free blood can also obstruct thie drainagc apparatus. Intraocular pressure must
be carefuUy monitored in eyes with anterior uvcal hemorrhaging, and topical atropine should he
used judiciously in these cases because pupillary dilation can further impede aqueous outfow in
dogs and cats. The fwo most common causes of hyphema are ocular trauma and intraocular tu-
78
Secondary Glaucoma
79
mors. Other causes of hyphema include coagulopathies, severe uvcis, and retinal detachment
(see Chapter 35).
6. Does lens luxation cause glaucoma or does glaucoma cause lens luxation?
Although lens luxation does cause glaucoma, glaucoma can also causc lens luxation. As with
glaucoma, lens luxation can be divided into primary and secondary categories. Primary lens lux-
ation occurs in certain predisposed breeds (e.g., terTiers, Norwegian elkhounds, Brittanies, Welsh
springer spaniels, poodles, beagles). Although this form of glaucoma is usually considered sec-
ondary to lens luxation, several characteristics of this syndrome in these breeds resemble primary
glaucoma. First, although the diagnosis of glaucoma in these breeds offen coincides with lens lux-
ation, removing the luxated lens in most cases does not cure glaucoma and glaucoma often pre-
cedes ovcrl anterior lens luxalion. Second, primary lens instability or luxation, like primary glau-
coma, is an inherited disease. Third, and most importantly, primary lens instability or luxation is
a bilateral disease, and the normal, unaffected eye is at risk. ln contrast, in most nonterrier breeds.
lens luxation is secondary to zonular disinsertion in a buphthalmic globe with chronic glaucoma
(Figs. 1 and 2).
Figure 1. Fox terricr with bilaterally
luxated lenses causing acute glau-
coma. Transillumination helped de-
finc the lens in the anterior chambcr
despite the comeal edema.
Figue 2. Luxated lens—always pos-
ing the question whether glaucoma
caused the luxation or the luxation
caused the glaucoma.
7. How does a luxated lens cause glaucoma?
Most often, a lens huxates anferiorly. producing a pupillary block. Aqueous, which is pro-
duced posterior to the iris in the ciliary body, is then preventcd from gaining access to the ante-
Tior chamber. Alternatively, the anteriorly luxated lens can fill the anterior chamber and directly
80
Secondary Glaucoma
block the iridocorneal angle. Whereas posleriorly luxaled lenscs and lens subluxations arc warn-
ing signs of an impending problem, the anterior lens luxation is an acutc mcdical and oftcn sur-
gical cmergency. Usually. these lenses must be surgically removed in order to successfuly man-
agc this typc of glaucoma.
 8. What are the clinical signs that distingnish acute anterior lens luxation causing sec-
In most cases of acute anterior lens luxafion, the lens is clear, the eye is very red (ciliary injec-
tion and episcleral congestion), and the eye is very painful (blepharospasm and photophobia). Thc
optic nerve and refina are initially normal ophthalmoscopically. There is usually an intact. consen-
sual pupillary light response (PLR) from the affected eye to the normal eye, and the lens can be
viewed clearly in the anterior chamber. When these clinical signs are apparent, this should be con-
sidered an ocular emergency, and medical treatnent should be instituted to lower lOP while dis-
cussing refcrral to a vcterinary ophthalmologist for lenscctomy. With lens luxation secondary to
chronic glaucoima, the cye is markedly enlarged (buphthalmic) and blind. Ocular pain is less obvi-
ous, and there is neither an intact direct nor indirccl/consensual PLR, An aphakic crcsccut can of-
ten be seen in addition to stretched and displaced lenticular zonules and a deep anterior chamber.
The lens is more coimunonly subluxated or posteriorly luxated than anteriorly luxated in these cases.
 and the lens is often cataractous or opaque. This type of lens luxation is nol an ocular emergency.
9. What factors are most important when assessing a glaucomatous globe?
After cstablishing a diagnosis of glaucoma with objective tonomctric measurements, the vi-
sion potential of the affccted eye must be determined before appropriate therapy can be em-
ployed. Eycs with chronic glaucoma are usually irreversibly blind and uncomfortable. Blind eyes
with: acute glaucoma may still have potential for vision provided thc IOP can be normalizcd in a
timely manner and the disease is still in its early stages. Bccause grcally clevated IOP can causc
inreversibie damage to the visual potential of the eye within hours, acute glaucoma, whether pri-
 mary or secondary, is an ocular emcrgency.
10. What are the most common clinical signs associated with acute glaucoma?
Early in its course. glaucoma causes acute blindness, ocular pain, conjunctival and episcle-
ral vascutar congestion, and diffuse corneal edema. The pupil is usually dilated and urespon-
sive or sluggishly responsive to direct light stimulation. In addition. proteinaceous aqueous flare
and ciliary injection, an intraocular space-occupying mass, hemorrhage, and lens lisplacement
are also secn if the glaucoma is secondary to uveitis, neoplasia, hemorrhage, or lens luxafion. Al-
 though these clinical signs are vcry suggestivc, it is important to renembcr that thcre are no
pathognomonic signs of acue glaucoma (in contrast to chronic glaucoma).Thcrefore,tonomctry
is essential for accurate diagnosis (Figs. 3 and 4).
11. How can it be determined whether an affected eye has vision potential?
Careful assessnent of the direct and cspecially the consensual pupillary light response
(from the affected eye to the normal eye) is very helpful. The dazzle reflex can be used in eval-
uating the optic ncrve, A vcry strong light source (c.g.. a fibcr optic or Finhoff transilluminator)
when directed into the eye at closc range should produce a rapid blink rcferred to as the dazzlc
reflex. With acute glaucoma, these initial tests should be pcrforined and rcpeatcd when IOP is nor-
 malized. Sometimes a simple test such as blindfolding the normal fellow cye and assessing func-
tional vision using an obstacle course can be helpful. In acute glancoma, the fundus, whcn it can
be seen, is usually normal.
FAVORABLEPROGNOSTIC SIGNS FORVISION
LNFAVORABLE PROGNOSTIC SIGNS TOR VISION
Norimal direct and/or consensual PLRs
Absent direct and/or consensual PLRs
Norimal dazzle reHex
Abscnt dazzle rctlex
Normal menace or functional vision
Lack of detectable functional vision or history of
blindness for more than 3-5 days
Secondary Glaucoma
81
Figure 3. Acute glaucoma in a bea-
gle. This breed call prescnt with nor-
mal pupils despite elevatcd 1OP. This
row.
Figure 4. Tonometry being per-
formcd with a Schiotz tonormeter. In-
strumental tonometry is essential for
the diagnosis and management of
glaucoma.
12. How is chronic glaucoma distinguished from acute glaucoma?
The classic and pathognomonic clinical signs of chronic glaucoma include buphthalmia,
cormeal striae, and optic disk “cupping." Buphthalmia occurs due to the stretching and thinning
of collagcn fibers that compose the cornea and sclcra. With buphthalmia, the cornea stretches and
linear tears occur in Descemet's membrane, allowing aqueous to enter the corneal stroma. These
linear breaks or tears are referred to as corneal striae, Descemet's striae, or Haab's striae and ap-
82
Secondary Glaucoma
 pear as single or multiplc parallel lines or bands decp within the cornea, usually spanning the en-
tire corncal diameter. Optic nerve hcad cupping appears as a dark and dcpressed or recessed op-
tic disk due to axonal degeneration and posterior displacement of the lainina cribrosa. This change
lt should be emphasized that by thc time IOP has bcen elevatcd long enough to cause buphthalmia.
irreversible damage has been done to the retina and optic nervc. Therefore, the big eye is almost
always a blind eye (Figs. 5 and 6).
Figure 5. A buphthalmic globe with
an aphakic crescent laterally. The op
tic disc was cupped. This was a blind
eye poorly responsive to antiglau-
coma medication.
Figure 6. Buphthalmic globes are
candidatcs for many complications.
This eye had ulcerative keratitis sec-
ondary to exposure.
13. Are there any exceptions to the “"big eye, blind eye” rule?
An exception to this rule is occasionally seen in puppies. In the juvenile dog, buphthalmia
can occur within days duc to the marked clasticity of the cormea and sclcra in young animals. In
puppies, this elasticity may protect the retina because the eye can enlarge with even moderale in-
creases in IOP. This makes IOP alone an unreliable indicator of glaucoma in young aninals.
Buphthalmia in puppies may be rcversible if IOP is normalized. Glaucoma is rclatively uncom-
mon in young dogs. Additional exceptions to this rule are occasionally seen in Chinese shar-peis,
chow chows, and hcagles diagnosed with comcal striae and buphthalmia in sighted eyes affccted
with primary glaucoma. This prescrvation of vision in cnlarged eyes may bc due to mucinosis of
collagen fibrils in the former two breeds, increasing the elasticity of the sclera and cornea and the
SecondaryGlaucoma
83
insidious nature of primary open angle glaucoma, which almost exclusively affects thc latter
breed.
14. What are some common diagnostic considerations when presented with a uveitic and
glaucomatous eye?
With secondary glaucoma, it is most important to identify and treat the underlying cause. For
glaucoma secondary to uvcitis, the intraocular inflammation must be addressed to control the
glaucoma. A complcte physical examination and routine laboratory work (CBC, serum chemistry
profile, urinalysis) must be performed to look for systemic illness. Radiographs and ultrasound
can aiso be helpful. Depending on the geographic location and animal's travel history, infectious
discases must be considered. For dogs, leptospirosis, brucellosis, ehrlichiosis and the systemic
mycoses are important considerations. In cats, feline leukemia virus (FeL V), feline immunodefi-
cicncy virus (FIV), fcline infectious peritonitis (FIP), toxoplasmosis, and the systemic mycoses
should be considered. Despite extensive diagnostic testing, etiologic determination can prove elu-
sive. Symptomatic therapy to control intraocular inflammation and elevated lOP is imperative.
15. How does medical therapy for glaucoma secondary to uveitis differ from medical ther-
Therapy for uveitis involves using topical and systemic corticosteroids and nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory medications. Comeal epithelial integrity (fuorescein dye testing) must be assessed
before using topical corticosteroids. The drugs selected, dosages, frequencies, and routes of ad-
ministration will vary with severity of the inflammation. Some drugs that can be useful for pri-
acting cholinergic miotic, echothiophate iodide (Phospholine Iodide, Wyeth-Ayerst), and
demecarium bromide (Humorsol, Merck) should not be used in uvcitic cyes because they poten-
tiate the breakdown of the blood aqueous bartier and can intcnsify concurrenl uveitis. In addition,
atropine, a strong mydriatic and cycloplegic agent that is generally recommended as adjunctive
therapy for uveifis, should not be used in hypertensive eyes because pupillary dilation will fur-
16. Is glaucoma secondary to an intraocular tumor treatable?
If an intraocular tumor has grown large encugh to occlude the iridocormeal angle and cause sec-
ondary glaucoma, surgical rcsection with prescrvation of vision is impossiblc. The key to successful
management of these cases is early detection and rcferral to a veterinary ophthalmclogist. Some uveal
mclanomas exfoliatc cells that can occlude the iridocormeal angle. Remission and even cure is pos-
sible in some cases using transcomeal laser (diode or Nd: YAG) surgery. Sector iridectomy or irido-
cyclectomy has been successful in curing sorme intraccular neoplasms. These procedures are usually
applicable to tumors in their early stages, before sccondary glaucoma has devcloped. Unfortunately.
in the majority of glaucoma cases sccondary to an intraocular neoplasm, enucleation is thc only treat
ment option. It is critical to have the cnucleated globe examined by a vetcrinary pathologist in thcse
cases to further quanlify the nafure of the tumor and the potential for recurrence or mctastasis.
17. What are special considerations when treating hyphema and secondary glaucoma?
The underlying causc of the hemorrhage must be determined. Ocular trauma and ocular tu-
mors are the two most common causes. However, hyphema may also be sccondary to thrombo-
cytopenia, coagulopathies, severe iritis, congenital ocular anomalies (e.g.. retinal detachment,
retinal dysplasia), and chronic glaucoma. Ocular ultrasonography is valuable in assessing the in-
matic treatment of hyphema is similar to that of anterior uveitis except that systeinic nonsteroidal
anti-infiammatory agents such as aspirin, flunixin meglumine, and topical ccular nonsteroidals
plegic agcnts such as atropine should not be used. Topical corticosteroids such as prednisolone
acctate and dexamethasone are useful in controlling related inflammation. For traumatic hy-
phema, once the intraocular bleeding has stopped and a stable clot has formed, intracameral tis-
84
Secondary Glaucoma
sue plasiminogenl activator (tPA)-—a fibrinolytic agent—can be useful. Surgical rcmoval of thc
blood is also used in sclcct cascs but should be pcrformed by a vctcrinary ophthalmologist.
18. When is lensectomy indicated as part of the treatment regimen for glaucoma secondary
to lens luxation?
Surgical managcnent of sighled or potentially sighted eycs with early lens luxation/subluxa-
lion is controvcrsial. There is little doubt that acute anlerior lens luxation in a sighted cye requires
emcrgency therapy consisting of medications to reduce IOP and intracapstlar lenseclouny to relieve
the associated pupillary block glaucoma. There is controversy among veterinary ophthalmologisis,
howevcr, regarding the managcment of ihe subluxated lcns remaining in thc patcllar fossa posteriot
to the iris. This author believes that intracapsular lenseclomy in these eyes has an unacceptably high
complication rate, including vitreous presentation due to adhesion of the anterior vitreous to the pos-
lerior lens capsule and secondary retinal detachment. These eyes remain sighted for longer periods
of time with conservative mcdical treatmcnt with miotic antiglaucoma medications to dccreasc the
access of the lens to the anterior chamber than with early lenscctomy. Despite mcdical therapy, many
of thesc lenses evcntually luxatc into the antcrior chamber and miust be surgically reinoved.
19. What types of medical therapy are appropriate for managing blind and painful eyes due
to chronic secondary glaucoma?
Medical therapy has no place in the long-term management of blind and painful glaucoma-
use. More jmportantly, all antiglaucoma medications, including topical drugs. have thc potential
for systcmic toxicity anti side cffects. The oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are the miost effec-
tive antiglaucoma drugs, but they aiso have thc greatest potcntial for scverc sidc cffects such as
polyuria/polydipsia, melabolic acidosis, depression, anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea. Many hu-
mans receiving pilocarpine therapy complain of a brow-ache and blurred vision. 'Topical beta-
blockcrs can cause cardiovascular and respiratory compromise.
as therc is vision or at lcast potential for vision. However, if thc eyc is irrcversibly blind anld
painlsl,the animal and the owner are bettcr served by a salvage procedure to make the cye com-
fortable and climinate thc need for chronic medications.
20. When should surgery be performed and what types of surgery are available for blind,
end-stage glaucomatous eyes?
Salvage surgical procedures for the blind glaucomatous globe include enucleation, intraocu-
icin. Not all of these options are indicated, howevcr, in cyes thal arc blind and painful due to sec-
ondary glaucoma. Pharmacologic ciliary body ablation is only appropriate for blind cyes affectcd
with primary glaucoma. It should be used with caution in eyes that have any aclive inflammiation
bccausc it can exacerbate uvcitis. It should never be used in eyes with intraocular tunors or eyes
with glaucoma of an undetermined cause (oftcn the case with secondary glaucoma). Intraocular
evisceration-implantation offers a high success rate and rcsults in a rclatively cosmetic and very
comfortable globc that usually requires no further thcrapy. The implant procedure produces a high
rate of client satisfaction, and complications arc rarc. It should not be used in eyes with a known
intraocular lumor. When the procedure is perforrncd in a blind glaucomatous cye of undctermined
cause, it is essential for thc uveal tract and lens to be submitted for histopathologic examination
because neoplasia cannot always be definitively diagnosed preopcrativcly. When blind painful
eyes with secondary glaucoma are removed, it is always important to have thc globc examined
histopathologically by a veterinary pathologist because these findings can often have systemic im-
plications and implications for the fellow cye (sce Chapter 17).
BIBLIOCRAPHY
1. Gelatt KN, Brcoks DE: The canine glaucomas. In Gelatt KN (ed): Veterinary Ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Bal-
timorc, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore. 1999, pp 701-754.
15. MEDICAL TREATMENT OF GLAUCOMA
Iames E. Gaarder, D.V.M.
1. What are the major considerations when evaluating an eye affected with glaucoma?
Choosing the proper therapy depends on accurale and thorough diagnostic evalualion. It
must first be determincd whethcr the eye is affecled with primary or secondary glaucoma be-
cause primary glaucoma is, by defuition, ultimately bilateral and the normal feilow eye is at risk.
Primary glaucoma is also an incurable disorder that, at best, can be effectively managcd only for
variable pcriods of timc. Secondary glaucoma is usually a unilateral discase and can somelimes
be treatcd and even cured with preservation of vision if the underlying cause can be idenlifed
and corrccted. Secondary glaucoma is associated with concurrenl ocular disease such as inflam-
mation, neoplasia, hemorrhage, and lens disorders. Vision or potential for vision of the affected
eye must be assessed before appropriate therapy can be employcd. Eyes afflicted with chronic
glaucoma are usually irrcvcrsibly blind and uncomfortable. Blind cyes with acutc glaucoma may
still havc polential for vision provided the intraocular pressure (IOP) can be normalized in a
timely manner and the disease is still in its carly stages. Because greatly elevaled IOP can cause
irreversiblc damagc to the visual potential of the eye within hours, acutc glaucoma is an ocular
cimergency. By the timc the signs of chronic glaucoma arc cvident, the vision potcntial of the
cye isusually lost.
2. What is a reasonable therapeutic goal for the treatment of primary glaucoma?
disease is mmch rnore common in dogs) is not a curable disorder. The goals of therapy are to main-
tain vision and ocular comfort for as long as possible using medical or surgical therapy and, if
unilateral, to prevent or dclay occurrcnce in thc fellow eye. Multiple drug therapy is oftcn re-
quired. Onc should be aware that most antiglaucoma drugs losc their efficacy over timc. When
the pressure bcgins to risc despite mcdical therapy, surgical intcrvcntion is indicated. Whcn the
cye becomes irreversibly blind and paiuful, a salvage procedurc (enucleation, intraocular cvis-
 3. What is the therapeutic goal for treating secondary glaucoma?
The underlying cause must first be identified and corrected if possible. For glaucoma sec-
ondary to uvcitis, aggressive anti-inflammatory thcrapy (topical, systemic or both) is critical and
should be combined with antiglaucoma therapy. The various etiologies of uveitis in dogs and cats
should also be invcstigated. Whcn glaucoma is secondary to a primary intraocular tumor, med-
ical therapy is usually ineffective. Eyes affected with glaucoma secondary to metaslatic neopla-
sia can sometimes be managed in conjunction with treatment of the systemic disease (lym-
phosarcoma is a common example). Surgical lensectomy is usually required for managing
glaucoma secondary to antcrior lens luxation. Thercfore, the thcrapeutic goal for treating sec-
ondary glaucoma depends on the primary cause and the ability to treat it.
4. What are the initial therapcutic goals for treating sighted or potcntially sighted eyes?
sure by shrinking the intraocular volume, decrease aqueous production, or increasc aqueous outflow.
Osmotic agents are uscful in thc cmergency trcafment of acutc glaucoma bccause thicy rapidly
dehydrate thc vitreous and decreasc intraocular volume. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, β-blockers,
and prostaglandin analogues inctease aqueous outflow.
85
86
Medical Treatment of Glaucoma
 5. How do osmotic agents work and when should they be used?
Hyperosmotic agents include intravenous mannitol and oral glycerol and are used in acute
severe elevations of IOP in sighted or potentially sightcd eyes. Hyperosmotic agents incrcase
 plasma ostmolality, producing an osmotic gradient between the ocular vasculature and intraocu-
lar fuids (primarily the vitreous). Hyperosmotics are the most potent medical therapy available
in terms of reducing severe IOP elevations, and they usually produce ocular hypotension lasting
≥ 5 hours within 30 minutes of administration. They are useful in emergency situations but lose
 their effectiveness after the second or third administration making osmotherapy ineffective for
chronic therapy. Mannitol should be administered intravenously at a dosage of 1-2 gin/kg over
n    n (       
so warming the solution in a water bath to dissolve the crystals and administering the solution
through a blood filtration set are indicated. Mannitol is never the sole agent used for treating
glaucoma. An oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitor should be given during or before mannitol ad-
ministration along with one or more topical agents. Glycerol (50%) is an oral osmotic diuretic
and also produces ocular lhypotension. It is not as potent as mannitol and often produces vomil-
ing. Gilyccrol should not be used in diabetics because it can cause hyperglycemia. Water should
be withheld for a minimum of 4 hours after hyperosmotic administration to maintain intraocu-
lar dehydration.
Hyperosmotic Agents
LSP OR
TRADE
ONSET/DURATION
NF NAME
NAME
PREPARATION
DOSF
ROUTE
OF ACTION
COMMENTS
MannitolOsmitrol
25%
0.5-2 g/kg
JV
3060 min/6 hr
Useful in emergency
therapy of acute
glaucoma in
potcntially visible
eyes
Glyccrol
50%
1-2 gm/Kg
PO
May cause vomiting
Do not use in.
diabetic dogs
For acute glaucoma, after the IOP is normalized and maintained, rcferral to a veterinary oph-
thalmologist should be discussed with thc client. If IOP docs not normalize within 68 hours af-
ter instituting therapy, cmergency referral to a veterinary ophthalmologist should more strongly
bc considered.
6. How do carbonic anhydrase inhibitors lower IOP?
Oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (CAIs) are the mainstay of veterinary medical therapy for
glaucoma and are the only systemic agcnts used in long-term management. Carbonic anhydrase
catalyzes the combination of carbon dioxide and water to form carbonic acid. The CAls decrease
the production of aqueous by blocking this process. Because CAIs reduce thc production of aque-
 Cus, they are useful in managing al forms of glaucoma. Therapeutic effect of orally administered
CAls begins 2-3 hours after administration, the maximum effect occurs within 4-8 hours, and
IOP is usually reduced by 20-30%. Alihough oral CAIs are the most potent medical agent fo1
long-tcrm control of IOP and are the foundation for ihe medical management of giaucoma, they
also have the greatest incidence of side effects.
7. Why do oral CAIs have so many side effects?
The carbonic anhydrase enzyme is present in many nonocular tissues, ineluding the kidney.
pancreas, central nervous system, red blood cells, and lungs. Becausc of the ubiquitous nature
Medical Treatment of Glaucoma
87
of carbonic anhydrase, side effects of CAIs are expecled and include polyuria/polydipsia, meta-
bolic acidosis, depression, confusion, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, and rarely bloxod dyscrasias.
In humans, these side effects are scvcrc cnough in 40-50% of paticnts to require the discontin-
uation of therapy. Potassium cxcretion is increased by oral administration of CAls, and hy-
pokalemia is a potential sequela of chronic use. Supplemenialion with oral potassium is recom-
are not uncommon in the canine patient. Sirnilar to the pain of glaucoma, these side effects may
be subtle and not easily appreciated by the owner or veterinarian until discontinnation of ther-
apy produces notable change in the animal's altitude, activity level, and appetite. When severe
side effects are noted, reducing the dosage, substituting another oral CAI, or discontinuing oral
CAI therapy is recommended. Most dogs appear to tolerate dichlorphenamide and methazo-
lamide better than acetazolamide. Currently, only methazolamide and acetazolamide are readily
available, because the production of dichlorphenamide has been discontinued. If the side effects
are mild and the animal remains sighted, continued CAI therapy is warranted. If thc sidc cffects
are severe or the animal is permanently blind and in pain, other options are available. In contrasl
t0 dogs, cais appear to poorly tolerate systemically administered CAIs. When warranted, met-
hazolamide is the CAI of choice in cats because it is available in 25-mg tablets for more accu-
rate dosing.
Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors
ONSET/DURATION
USP UR NF NAME
TRADE NAME
PREPARATION
UOSF
OF ACTION
Acctazolanide
Diamox
125-, 250-mg tablets
2.2 mg/kg q 12 hr
2 h4/4-6 hr
500-mg (timed-release)
capsules
Available
125-,250-mg tablcts
generically
Acetazolamide
Diamox
500 mg
5-10 min/2 hr
sodium
Parentcral
Brinzolamide
Azopt
1% ophthalmic
12 timcs/day
suspension
Dichlorphenamide
Daranidc
50-mg tablets
2.2 mg/kg q
30 min/6 hr
8-12 hr PO
Dorzolamide HCI
dosm
2% ophthalmic
2-3 times/day
一
solution
Methazolamide
Glauctabs
25, 50 nig lablets
2-4 mg/kg
2 hr/4-6 hr
(maxinum dose:
46 mg/kg)
MZM
25, 50 mg tablets
q8-12h PO
Neptazane
25、50 rmig tablets
Availablc
25, 50 mg tablets
gencrically
8. How do topical CAIs compare to oral CAIs?
Topical CAIs are relatively new additions to the ophthalmologist's armamentarium. Cur-
rently, three are available: dorzolamide (Trusopt, Merck), brinzolamide (Azopt, Alcon), and a
combination of dorzolamide and timolol (Cosopt, Merck). Preliminary clinical resuits have indi-
cated that these agents may be effective and bencficial in some cases of canine and feline glau-
coma. Although these agents are not as effective in reducing IOP as oral CAls, the side effects
appear to be minimal. Because of a similar mechanism of action, there is generally litle benefit
from using a topical CAI in conjunction with anl oral CAI. The main disadvantage of topical CAIs
is that they, like oral CAIs, are expensive. Topical CAIs do not have as many systemic side ef-
fects as oral CAIs.
88
Medical Treatment of Glaucoma
InternetAntiglaucoma MedicationPriceComparison*
DRUGSTORE.COM
PLANETRX.COM DRLGEMPORIUMCOM
AMERICARX.COM
Timolol(5%)
5 ml
$11.24
$11.85*
$16.15
N/A
15 ml
$17.36
$34.15
$13.87
Trusopt (2%)
5 ml
$24.10
$22.53
V/N
$23.50
10 ml
$45.10
$45.95
N/A
$43.75
Cosopt 2 (0.5%)
5 nl
$40.12
$41.60
N/A
$38.25
10 ml
$77.07
$78.69
N/A
$76.50
Neptazanet
25 mg
$39.72/60
$13.39/60
$26.95/60t
$15.00/60
50mg
$58.85/60
$18.57/60
$38.95/60t
$21.00/60
Xalatan (0.005%)
2.5 ml
$42.10
$44.01
$50.95
$40.05
*Pricc as of 2000.
Generic drug.
 9. What are the indications and contraindications for using a miotic agent as part of the
treatment for glaucoma?
Topical miotic agcnts producc pupillary constriction, contraction of the ciliary musculature,
and increased outflow of aqueous through a configurational change in the trabecular meshwork.
Pilocaupine is a direct-acting cholinergic miotic available in sevcral conccntrations; 2% appears
most effective in the dog. Theoretically, pilocarpine is mos1 effective in treating primary opcn-
angle glaucoma (POAG), thc lcast comimon form found in dogs. Most forms of canine glaucoma
are duc 1o narrowing or closure of the iridoconical angle, not the trabecular meshwork, making
the effectiveness of pilocarpine qucstionable for closcd-angle glaucoma (CAG), the morc com-
Imon form found in dogs. Advantagcs of pilocarpine include its cffectivencss for some forms of
glaucoma and its relativcly inexpcnsive cost. Disadvantages include its topically irritating quali-
ties and the frcquency of administration (3-4 times daily). A 4% pilocarpinc gcl (Pilopine HS.
Alcon) is available and has thc advantagc of oncc-daily administration. Because it can potentiate
brcakdown of the blood aqucous barricr, pilocarpine should not be used whcn uveitis is present
Or when treating secondary glaucoma. Indirect-acting miotics include echothiophatc iodide
(Phospholine Iodide, Wycth-Ayerst) and dcmecarium bromidc (Hunorsol. Merck) and act by in-
 hibiting cholinesterase, thus increasing endogenous acetylcholine. These agents are lcss irritating
and longcr-acting than pilocarpine but are more cxpensive. As with pilocarpine, they can activate
latent uvcitis and intensify concurrent uvcitis. Thus, they arc most uscful in primary glaucoma.
They are especially useful in primary glaucoma with carly lens luxalion or subluxation bccause
they produce miosis and discourage a luxated lens from gaining access to the antenior chamber,
resulting in acute pupillary block glaucoma, which necessitates surgical iutervention.
10. Which of the β-adrenergic blocking agents are commonly used in veterinary ophthal-
mology and when are they useful?
Although topical β-blockers are the most frequently prescribed agents for treating glaucoma
in man, their efficacy in dogs and cats is controversial. β-blockers reduce IOP by decreasing aque-
ous production. The most commonly used drug is 0.5% timolol maleate (Timoptic, Merck). Tim-
olol is uscful in both primary and secondary glaucoma and unlike topical miotic agents, does not
potentiate uveitis. Because β-blockcrs decrcase aqucous production by a mechanism othcr thau
CAIs, their ocular hypotensive effect when used togeiher with CAls is additive. Timoiol is most
commonly used as an adjunctive therapy and combined with oral CAIs. Although it is nol ade-
quate as the sole agent when treating a glaucomatous eye, it may be useful in prophylactic thcr-
apy for the fellow eye in cases of primary glaucoma. Timolol is also available in an ophthalmic
gel forming solution (Timoptic-XE, Merck) that allows for once daily dosing. Bc careful to dis-
Medical Treatment of Glaucoma
89
pense or prescribe timolol in thc 0.5% conccntration as the 0.25% conccntration that is also avail-
ablc is ineffective in dogs and cats. A common side effect of timolol (a nonsclective β-blocker)
 in humans is bronchoconstriction and bronchospasm (predominantly in patients with preexisling
 bronchospastic disease). Although this side effect is uncommon in animals, betaxolol (Betoptic.
Alcon), a sclcctivc β-blockcr has fcwcr sidc cffects and can bc uscd as an alternative. Betaxolol
docs not appcar to bc as potcnt as timolol in reducing IOP.
B-Adrenergic Blocking Agents
GENERIC NAME
TRADENAME
CONCENTRATION
DOSE
SIZE(S) (ML)
Bctaxolol hydrochloride
Betoptic-S
0.25%
2 timcs/day
2.5, 5,15
Betoptic
0.5%
2.5,5,10,15
Carteolol hydrochloritle
Ocupress
1%
1-2 times/day
5.10
Levobunolol hydrochloridc
Akbcta
0.25%.0.5%
12times/day
5,10.15
Betagan
0.25%,0.5%
1-2 times/day
2,5,10,15
Availahle genenically
0.25%,0.5%
12 times/day
5,10, 15
Metipranolel
OptiPranolol
0.3%
1-2 times/day
5,10
Timolol hemihydrate
Betimol
0.25%.0.5%
I-2 tines/day
2.5,5, 10,15
Timolol maleate
Timoptic
0.25%,0.5%
1-2 times/day
2.5,5,10,15
Available generically
0.25%,0.5%
5, 10. 15
Tinokol maleate (gel)
Timoptic-XE
0.25%,0.5%
1 times/day
2.5,5
11. How do sympathomimetic agents reduce IOP?
Adrenergic compounds decrease IOP by stimulating a-receptors and increasing aqueous out-
fow, and by stimulating β-rcceptors and decrcasing production. As with β-blockers, they are
minimally effective when used as sole agents but can be useful adjumcts when combined with
other classes of drugs. Topical epinephrine and epinephrine-pilocarpine combinalions are avail-
able. Dipivefrin hydrochloride (Propine, Allergan) is an epinephrine prodrug that is converted 1o
epinephrine in the anterior chamber. Dipivefrin hydrochloride is the drug of choice in this group
because it is less irritating, has better intraocular penetration into ocular tissues, and has more po-
tency and less toxicity. However, it is more expensive than either epinephrine or epinephrine-pi-
locarpine combinations.
Sympathomimetics
GENERIC NAME
TRADE NAME
CONCENTRATION (%)
DOSE
STZE(S) (ML)
Dipivefrin hydrochloride
Akpro
0.1
1 -2 timcs/day
5,10,15
Propine
0.1
1-2 tines/day
5,10,15
Availablc gcnerically
0.1
5, 10, 15
Epinephryl borate
Epinal
0.5,1
1-2 times/day
7.5
Eppy/N
1
7.5
Epinephrine hydruchloride
Epilrin
0.5,1,2
1-2 times/day
5, 10,15
Glaucon
1, 2
10
12. What are prostaglandin analogues?
 Prostaglandin analogucs (prostanoids) arc a ncw class of topical glaucoma medications de-
vclopcd fo1 once-daily usagc in humans. The prototype in this class is latanaprost 0.005% (Xalatan,
Pharmacia and Upjohn). Sevcral similar drugs curently are bccoming availablc. Prostaglandin
 analogues reduce IOP by increasing aqueous outflow by the unconventional or uveoscleral route.
 The mechanism of action is different from that of other antiglaucoma medications. In dogs and
cats, the uveoscleral outflow has bccn considcrcd a less important avcnue for normal aqueous loss
than thc convcntional outflow pathway through the iridocormcal angle. However, latanaprost has
bination withi convcntional hypcrosmotic and oral CAI thcrapy). Although this particular
prostaglandin analogue has not been extensively evaluated for eficacy in animals, topical appli-
90
MedicalTreatmentofGlaucoma
cation of prostaglandin F2。 (PGF2) and similar drugs was shown to causc significant lOP reduc-
tion in rabbits, cats, dogs, and monkeys. The recommended dosage in humans is once daily al
bedtime, and the most common side effect is an iris color change with long-term use. The iris
color change has not yet been noted in animals. I.atanaprost, in addition to its antiglaucoma ef-
fects, is also a very potent miotic and often produces profound pupillary constriction in cats and
dogs. It is usually administercd once or twice daily in animals. It is expensive but can be very use-
ful in sclected cases.
a-Selective Agonists andProstaglandin Analogues
GENERIC NAME
TRADE NAME
CONCENTRATION
DOSE
SIZE(S) (ML)
Aprachlonidinne
lopidine
0.5%
23 times/day
5
1.0%
Single use bottle
Brimonidinc
Alphagan
0.2%
2 times/day
5, 10, 15
Latanoprost
Xalatan
0.005%
1 times/day
2.5
Travoprost
Travatan
0.004%
1 timc/day
5
I3. What is acute glaucoma?
Acute glaucoma results from a rapid increase in IOP over a course of several hours. Clinical
diffuse corneal edema. The pupil is usually dilated and unresponsive or sluggishly responsive
to bright light stimulation. The combination of these clinical signs is very suggestive of acute
glaucoma but they are not pathognomonic. Because any or all of these signs can be seen in other
ocular disorders, tonometry is esscntial for accuratc diagnosis. When in doubt about the visual
 potential of the eye, institute emergency therapy to reduce IOP. If the eyc is irrcversibly blind,
this will become apparent soon (seeFigure 1).
Figure l. Acutc glaucoma in an
American cocker spaniel. The in-
traoculat pressure was 60 mmHg
Also note the cataract, which is in-
significant to the glaucoma.
14. How should emergency treatment of acute glaucoma be approached?
A complete ophthalmic examination including tonometry is the fist step. The clinician
should look closely for any sign of underlying intraocular disease such as uveitis, hemorrhage, or
intraccular tumor. lf primary glaucoma is diagnosed (no undcrlying abnormalities) or if a cause
of secondary glaucoma is addressed, the focus of therapy should be on rcducing IOP as rapidly
as possible. Permanent ganglion celi and optic nerve damage can occur within hours following
 marked elevations in IOP. Therefore, rapid intervention is crilical. Emergency medical treatment
should consist of the administration of a hyperosmotic agent such as intravenous mannitol or oral
glycerol. Mannitol is preferred because it is more potent and has fewer side effects. Hyperosmotic
agents are the most poteni medications available for the acute rcduction of IOP. In addition, an
Medical Treatment of Glaucoma
16
oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitor such as methazolamide or dichlorphenamide should be admin-
istered. These oral CAIs begin to reduce IOP 2-3 hours after administration. 1OP should be mea-
sured every hour unlil it normalizes. Mannitol can be repeated in 46 hours if nccessary. Metha-
z0lamide ordichlorphenamide are continued al a dose of 2-4mg/kgevery 8-12 hours.Referral
to a veterinary ophthalmologist should be considered.
15. Which topical drugs are useful for acute glaucoma?
There is a wide variety of topical medications. Topical β-blockers such as tinmolol or Betax-
olol are useful becauase they can be used in all forms of glaucoma and provide an additive effect
cause they only reduce IOP by 5-10 mmHg. Pilocarpine is useful for primary open-angle glau-
coma and in some cases of primary closed-angle glaucoma, but it should not be used in cases of
secondary glaucoma because it can worscn uveitis. A sympathomimetic agcnt such as dipivefrin
can be used in conjunction with a topical β-blocker if necessary. The prostaglandin analogue la-
tanoprust is also very useful in breaking high-pressure attacks of primary glaucoma in affected
dogs when used alone or in conjunction with intravenous mannitol and an oral CAI.
16. If immediate referral to an ophthalmologist is impossible, whiat are the best medications
for treating acute glaucoma?
 For acute primary glancoina, adminisier topical latanoprost and oral methazolamide and
techeck IOP in 30-60 minates. If IOP is not significantly reduced (to less than 30 mmHg), begin
intravenous mannitol. Add 0.5% timolol (b.i.d.), dipivefrin (b.i.d.), and/or 2% pilocarpine if nec-
essary. If latanoprost is unavailable, begin mannitol administration immediately. For acute sec-
ondary glaucoma, avoid latanoprost and pilocarpinc and use topical and/or systcmic anti-inflam-
and pilocarpine) shouid not be used in cases of glaucoma due to anterior lens luxation.
17. Which medications are most useful after IOP has normalized?
There is not a single correct method for long-term medical management of the visual but
of mcdications that will control IOP and result in the fewest side effects. In some cases, topical
administration of one agent is sufflicient. ln olhers, muliple medications are required. If fOP re-
mains controlled for several weeks, the drug dosages or frequency of administration can be grad-
ually reduced. Long-term medical management is challenging and requires frequent and careful
monitoring, dosage adjustments, and drug changes. Most patients are best mianaged with an oral
CAI and onc or more topical agents of diflerenl classes. Remember that most antiglaucoma med-
ications lose their efficacy over time and eventually surgical intervention becomes necessary. If
the eye is irreversibly blind and painful, a surgical salvage procedure is indicated. Glaucoma-
months.
18. What is the prognosis for acute glaucoma?
the long-term prognosis for preserving vision in most cases is guarded to poor. Initial response to
therapy can be a useful indicator of future success. With aggressive medical or surgical intcrven-
cessful manageinent of the IOP, glaucoma is almost always progressive and incurable. Fortu-
and alleviate the need for chronic medication.
19. When is surgery indicated for glaucoma?
There is considerable controversy within the veterinary ophthalmology community rcgard-
ing when surgical intervention is appropriate. Some ophthalmologists prefer to manage glaucoma
in the visual eye medically until medical management begins to fail. Others advocate early sur-
92
Medical Treatment of Glaucoma
gical intervention in hopes of alleviating thc need for chronic medical managcment and prolong-
ing vision in the affected eyc. It remains to be sccn which method works best. The surgical modal.
ities employed all have potential complications, are expensive, and have risks. As with medical
anagcmenl, they can prolong vision in an aflected eye but do not cure the disease.
20. Can primary glaucoma be prevented from developing in the fellow eye?
Prinary glaucoma always has bilateral potential. In at least 50% of cases, thc initially nor-
motensive fellow eye becomes overtly glaucomatous within 6-12 months aftcr the onsel of dis-
ing a topical β-blocker, sympathomimetic, or miotic is effcctive in prolonging the period of time
until the fellow eye becomes affected, but does not necessarily prcvcnt glaucoma. In addition,
 prior prophylactic therapy imay makc glaucoma—if it occurs —-easicr to managc.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Gclatt KN. Brooks DL: The caninc glaucomas. In Gclatt KN (cd): Veterinary Ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Balti-
more, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. 1999. pp 701-754.
16. GONIO1MPLANTS
Dennis E. Brooks D.V.M., Ph.D.
—
1. Is there an optimal way to mcdically and surgically manage cases of canine glaucoma?
each of the different types of primary glaucomas in dogs. Medical treatment usually provides a
few months of effective control of intraocular pressure (lOP). Traditional surgical therapies for
caninc glaucomas may also provide short-terrn lOP control.
2. What is the cause of elevation of intraocular pressure?
The basic mechanism for the elevation in IOP found in the primary canine glaucomas in-
volves progrcssive accumulation of biochemical substances in the aqueous ouiflow pathways
such that aqucous humor is unable to exit 1he globe and the IOP levels become harmful to the in-
iraocular structures. This outflow obstruclion may also be associated with inherent microcircula
tory disturbances to the retina and optic nerve. As this progressive iridocorneal angle closure oc-
clrs, the choice of medical, suirgical, or most frequently a combination of both therapeutic
modalities to maintain IOP at "safe" levels in canine glaucomas must change.
Eyes with glaucoma eventually become refractory to medical therapies to rcduce IOP. Sur-
gical treatment is thus iimportant im maintaining IOP at physiologic levcls in glaucomatous dogs
with iridocorncal angles that are narrow or closed. Unfortunately oldcr surgical treatmcnts of pri-
mary glaucomias in the dog such as iridencleisis, corneoscleral trephination, cyclodialysis, com-
4. What arc gonioimplants?
-    s  pns ae s  ss  n
termate pathway of aqueous humor drainage around the obstructed, nonfunctioning iridocorneal
angle. Aqueous humor is rcdirected by a tubc in thc anterior chamber that is connected to a platc
sitting on the sclera. This scleral plate or cxplant induces formafion of a fibrous capsule permc
able to the aqueous humor. Aqueous humor thus moves through the tube to the sclerai explan1 to
be absorbed beneath the conjunctiva. A subconjunctival swelling or "blcb" is notcd to form over
the scleral explant when thc gonioimplant is functional.
5. Which eyes are the best candidates for gonioimplantation?
Thc optimal caninc candidates for the antiglaucoma surgeries are visual patients with early
glaucoma, no iridocyclitis or lens subluxation, and normal-appearing optic discs. Paticnts with vi-
sion and IOP that is incrcasing despite maximum levels of medical therapy arc also good candi-
control are probably going to be less successful and require different strategies. In 1he author's
practice, the anterior chamber shunts thus are reserved for glaucomatous eyes that are visual or
have the potential to regain vision.
Higher shiccess rales may result when the filtering techniques and the gonioimplants for the
parently higher success rate include: (1) there is slill some reinaining aqueous hurnor outflow; (2)
93
94
Gonioimplants
damage to the retina and optic nerve hcad is not advanced and vision is present; (3) the likelihood
of lens subluxation, buphthalmia, peripheral anterior synechiae, and ciliary cleft collapsc is rc-
duced; and (4) the complications of concurrent iridocyclitis, preiridal rubeosis, and vitreous within
the posterior or anterior chamber are reduced. In addition, the aqueous humor of humans with pri-
mary glaucomas, as well as with uveitic glaucomas, sceins to stimulatc proliferation of the sub-
conjunctival fibroblasts morc than normal aqueous humor, and this may be related to previous glau-
coma drug administration and higher lcvels of growth factors in chronically affected eyes.
7. What preoperative treatment is needed for gonioirnplantation?
Preoperative considerations in the treatment of primary glaucoma include: (1) preoperative
control of IOP to near normal; (2) suppression of any concurrent iridocyclitis with topical corti-
costeroids and nonsteroidals; (3) maintcnance of the desired pupil size; and (4) dehydration and
reduction in the size of the vitreous with osmotic agents. IOP must be reduced to 15-20 mmHg
with medical therapy. A sterile Schiotz tonometer can be used to estimate IOP immediately be-
fore entry into the anterior chamber. If IOP is 30 mmfHg or higher, paracentesis is recormmended
to prevent anterior vitreous prescntation, retinal detachment, and expulsive choroidal hcmor-
Thage. Many typcs of canine glaucoma also exhibil concurrent iridocyclitis. Topical and systemic
and reducc inflammatory cclls and proteins in the aqueous humor. Thesc exudates can compro
mise short-term and long-tcrm aqueous humor outflow through the new surgical filtration site.
IOP lowering medications are continucd till bleb patency is assured.
8. Are there different types of gonioimplants?
Gonioimplants are divided into those with unidirectional valved systems designed to permit
aqueous humor passagc at about 10-12 nmHg and those with bidirectional nonvalved systems
that have no pressure regulatory devices, except for the limited resistance in thc shunt's lubing.
In the early I980s the silastic Krupin-Denver valve was evaluated in the beagle dog with inher-
ited glaucoma, This small implant consisted of a small tube placed in the anlerior chamber, a valve
mechanism to prevent hypotony, and a short tube lthat extended a few millimeters into the sub-
conjunctival spaces. Without a broad area for the reabsorption of aqueous humor to occur, thc exit
opening of this implant became scarred and occluded in 50% of the dogs by 6 months. A modi-
fied (nonvalved) silicone Joscph implant was cvaluated in 15 dogs (2l eycs) with primary gfau-
coma with encouraging resnits. Additional reports have evalualed silicone Ahmed, Baerveldt, and
other anterior chamber shunts in dogs. Without effective antifibrosis therapy, IOP rises about 3-6
weeks postoperatively from the fibrous capsule that forms around the extrascleral implant. The
presence or abscnce of the valve mechanism in the anterior chamber shunt influences the imme-
term function of the implant. The Ahmed valve has been evaluated in an in vitro system at flow
rates that approximate the rate of aqueous turnover in the dog (Fig. 1).
9. Why do some gonioimplants have valves?
Clinical utilization of a valved or nonvalved system affects the inmmediate postoperative clin-
ical management. Valved or unidirectional systems maintain a minimal IOP, which prevents oc-
ular hypotony and collapse of the anterior chambcr immediately after surgery. The nonval ved or
bidirectional flow-systcms in the immediate postoperative period may result in ocular hypotony
(≤ 5 mmHg), but rarely a shallow anterior chainber and disruption of the blood-aqueous barrier.
Aftcr the fibrous capsule forms around all extrascleral implants several weeks postoperatively, re-
sislance develops to increase IOP. In the long terin, there is no difference in IOP control between
valved and nonvalved implants.
10. What is the surgical procedure for installation of anterior chamber shunts?
A120-140° fornix-based dorsal bulbar conjunctival fap is prepared using mainly tenotomy
scissors and alternating sharp and blunt disscction. This is continucd posteriorly between Tenon's
Gonioimplants
95
Figure 1. Ahmed gonioimplant with
scleral strap attached to increase the
surface area of the subconjunctival
bleh.
3
capsule and sclera and betwcen the dorsal and latcral or dorsal and mcdial rectus muscle inscr-
tions. The implant is usually positioned at or just posterior to the cquator, its rostral end about
 10-12 mm from the limbus. The anterior border of the implant should be posterior of the dorsal
Iectus muscle insertion. The episcleral or main portion of the anterior chamber shunt is placed be-
twecn the dorsal rcctus and medial rectus muscles or the space between the dorsal rectus muscle
and the lateral rectus muscle. Once the surgical site has been adequately dissected and excessive
epibulbar fascia excised, the area may be treated with a sterile surgical cellulose spear soaked with
mitomycin-C (0.25-0.5 mg/ml) to impedc the fibrosis that develops about this basc. After expo-
surc of thc tissues to the intraoperative mitomycin-C for 5 minutes, the area is flushcd profuscly
for an additional 5 minutes with lactated Ringer's solution. Mitomycin-C should not have access
to the anterior chamber or to the leading edges of the conjunctival wound. All anterior chamber
shunts are checked prior to placcment for function and patency. A 25-27-gauge hypodermic nee-
dle is cannulated into the end of the anterior chamber tubing, and sterile lactated Ringer's solu-
tion is injected. With the shunt systcim filled with fuid, it is "prirmed” and ready for implantation.
 The device is carefully positioned into the sub-Tenon's capsule space, making certain that the im-
plant borders are in contact with the sclcra, Oncc the device is properly positioned, it is secured
to the sclcra and Tenon's capsule by 24 nonabsorbable 7-0 sutures, usually placed at the anle-
rior border and near the extraocular muscle insertions (Fig. 2). The overall length of the anterior
chamber silicone tubing is carefully measured. If cut too loug, it may contact the posterior sur-
face of thc comca and produce focal edema. However, if cu1 too short, the tubing lumen can be-
come obstructed by the base of the iris or preinidal inflammatory membranes. Once in the ante-
rior chamber, the tubing should not touch either the inis or cornea and should avoid crossing the
center of the pupillary axis. The tip of the tubing is usually cut in a slightly beveled position to
facilitate insertion into the anterior chamber. A limbal-based partial-thickness 5 X 8 mm scleral
hinge is prepared by a scalpel to prevent tube erosion through the conjunctiva due to upper lid
pressure. Entry into the canine anterior chamber is usually at about the 12 o'clock with a 20-22-
gauge hypodermic needle (Fig. 3). The hypodermic needle is quickly removed and the beveled
silicone tubing inserted. Manipulation of the tubing with spccial silicone tubing thumb forceps is
recommended to prevent damage to the soft silicone tubing. Aqueous humor will gencrally be
noted flowing through the device. Provided little aqueous humor has escaped through the anterior
chamber needle track, IOP should be about 10 mmHg. The corners of the scleral hinge are ap-
posed to the underlying host sclera with four simple interrupted 60 to 7-0 absorbable sutures.
7-0 absorbable suture. To minimize developiment of fibrin in the aqueous humor and within the
implant postoperatively, 25 μg of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) is usually injected into the
anterior chamber at the limbus.
96
Gonioimplants
Figure 2. lmplant being atlached to
the sclcra intraoperatively.
Figurc 3. ‘Tube prcscnt in anterior
chambcr of a dog.
11. What is needed for postoperative management?
The gencral postoperative management includes:
· Control and resolution of the iridocyclitis with topical and systemic corticosteroids and
nonstcroidal anti-inflammatory agents
· Moderate pupillary dilatation and encouraging pupil movement with careful use of mydri-
atics, such as 1% tropicamide
Gonioimplants
97
· Prevention of infection with topical and systemic antibiotics
· Maintenance of normal levels of IOP with carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and, if necessary,
β-blockcr adrcnergics; and
+ Maintenance of a patent anterior chamber tubing (intracaneral injections of 25 μg tissue
plasininogen activator). Digital massage may be perfonned daily.
12. What IOP is expected postoperatively?
Successful anlerior chamber shunts will provide IOP, immediately afler surgery, of about 5
mnHg with the nonvalved shunts and 8-12 mmHg with the valvcd shunis. Occasional spikes of
I0 mmltg or higher may develop in the firs1 few weeks as the shunt tube is temporarily plugged
with fibrin. With development of the capsule aboui the base of the scleral shunt explant in 3-6
weeks. 1OP will gradually increase to 12-20 mmHg several weeks postoperatively.
13. What if tube occlusion occurs?
Anterior chamber shunt tubing may occasionally become occluded to cause an elevation in
IOP, and yet exaimination of the anterior chamber portion of the system may appear normal. Ul-
trasonography through the upper eyelid over the area of the shunt will demonstrate no surround
ing aqueous humor "poo!* or bleb if fhe tube is occluded. In these patients, either digital massage
or the intracameral injection of TPA will often cause in a rapid decrease in lOP and re-establish-
men1 of patency.10 Presumably, a fibrin clot within the tubing has produced a temporary occlu-
sion of the system (Fig. 4)
Figure 4. Subconjunctival bleb pre
sent over thc scleralimplant3
months postopcrativcly.
14. What if a loss of bleb patency occurs?
Long-term failure of antcrior chanber shunts is usually associated with development of an irn-
permeable capsule about thec episcleral base of the device. Aqueous humor may contain a nuinber
thicker or less permeable, and IOP gradually increases over weeks or several rmonths. Surgical re-
moval of the capsule on the lop and sides of thc implanl, which is not fisturbed, will immediately
-t mm nomnq shoonhe 'ruedun ay woy paddns si ainsdea ai sy dol yo slaaet jesou arsa
mediately How into the incision, and IOP will decrease to ahout 10 rnmHg with the valved sys-
thus result in incrcased IOP, Topical corticostcroids, such as 1% prednisolone, are instilled post-
Operatively for several months to impede capsulc formation about the antcrior chamber shunt base.
15. Are there complications of using anterior chamber shunts?
Therc is a learming curve with anterior chamber shunts as with any new surgical proccdure.
Evcry attempt should be made to control uvcitis before surgical entry into the anterior chamber
98
Gonioimplants
etration into the anterior chainber, further stimulation of a preexisting iridocyclitis, or the initia-
tion of a new iridocyclitis by the presence of the tube. Any fibrin or blood in the anterior chan1-
bcr may occludc the anlerior chamber tubing cither temporarily or perrmanently. If fibrin is de-
tected in fhe tip of thc tubing, injcction of tPA will usually digcst the clot, but higher levcls of
corticosteroids and nonsteroidal anti-inflanmatory agcnts are also indicated to resolve the irido-
cyclitis for the long tcrm. Infectious or stcrile endophthalmilis is also an unusual but possible com-
plication of gonioinplants. Use of mitomycin-C may predisposc to endophthalmitis, which may
Occur months after the surgery and require cnucleation.
16. What are the surgical results of gonioimplantation?
Strategy for placement of anterior charmber shunts in dogs is still evolving, but some guide-
lines have emerged. Optimal canine candidates for gonioimplants are visual patients with early
glaucoma, no iridocyclitis or lens subluxation, and normal-appearing optic discs. An implant with
successful. Anterior chamber shunts without valved systems and perhaps with a fairly large di-
ameler anterior chamber fubing and episcleral implant may be the choice for thcse patients.
At this time, thc success for anterior chamber shunts is encouraging. but additional im-
the modified Joscph shunt, 20 eyes were normotensive at 4 weeks, and 17 eyes wcre still nor-
motensive at 9-15 months.2 About 50% of these eyes were also receiving oral dichlorphcnainide
daily (1.6-2.5 mg/lb). Of the 9 eyes with vision preoperatively. 8 were stil1 visual at 9 months. A
larger study involving 83 eyes and 65 dogs compared four different Ahmed anterior chamber
shunts for treatment of the primary glaucormas.5 Thc criteria for succcss were maintenance of vi-
sion and levels of IOP ≤20 mmHg. The median time that IOP began to increase postoperatively
depended on the shunt and ranged from 4 to 15 months. The median time for vision loss to de-
large Ahmed shunt attached to a silicone band. Only 18% of all of the operated eyes were still vi-
sual l year postoperatively.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Bedford PGC: Use of a one-piece drainage system in the trcatmcnt of a closed angle glaucoma in a dog.
J Sinall Anim Pract 29:231-237, 1988.
2. Bedford PGC: A clinical evaluation of a one-piece drainagc systcn in the treatment of canine glaucoma.
J Smal1 Anim Pract 30:68 -75, 1989.
3. Bentley E, Nasissc MP, Glover T, ct al: lmplantation of filtering devices in dogs with glaucoma: Prelim-
inary results in 13 eyes. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 6(4):243-246, 1996.
4. Cook CS: Surgery for glaucoma. Vet Clin N Arm Small Anim Pract 27: 1109-1130, 1997.
 5. Garcia-Sanchez GA, Brooks DE, Gelatt KN, et al; Evaluation of valved and nonvalved gonioimplants in
83 cyes of 65 dogs with glaucoma. Anim Eye Res 17(1-2):9.-16, 1998.
Philadctphia, Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 1999, pp 701-754.
7. Gelalt KN, Brooks DE, Miller TR, et al: Issues in ophthalinic therapy: The development of anterior
chamber shunts for the clinical managenent of the canine glaucoinas. Prog Vei Comp Ophthalrnol
2(2):59-64,1992.
8. Herrera HD: Glaucoma surgery in dogs with a simplified implant [abstractl. Proc Aunu Meet Am Coll
Vct Ophthalmol 26:16, 1995
9. Sherwood MD: Complications of silicone tube drainagc devices. In Sherwood MD, Spaeth GL. (eds):
Complications of Glaucoma Surgery. Thorofare, NJ, Slack, 1990, pp 307-326.
10. Sidoti PA, Morinelli EN, Heuer DK, et al: Tisue plasminogcn activator and glaucoma drainage inplants.
J Glaucoima 4:258, 1995
11.Strubbe DT,Gelatt KN, Mackay EO: In vitro flow characleristics of thc Ahined and self-constructcd an
terior chambcr shunts. Am J Vct Rcs 58(11): 1332 1337, 1997.
thalinol 4(2):77-84, 1994.
17. THE BLIND BUPHTHALMIC
EYE OF GLAUCOMA
Kenneth L. Abrams, D.V.M.
1. How do you differentiate the buphthalmic eye of glaucoma from a rctrobulbar disease
causing protrusion of the globe?
 Is thc cyc actually larger (i.e., buphthalmic) or is it exophthalmic from a retrobulbar mass --
that is the question. This question can bc difficult to answer in subtle cases. Two techniques can
help answer this question.
1. The corneal diamcter can be measured and compared to thc oppositc cyc; if it is larger,
the globc is probably larger.
 2. Digital pressure applied directly posteriorly through a closed upper eyelid can help deter-
minc if thcrc is a retrobulbar mass causing protrusion of the globe. Simultaneously compare each
eye by using the index fingers to retropulse the glohes.
2. How do you determine if the patient is blind from glaucona?
Several findings during the eye exam can indicate whether the patient has lost vision in the
problcim cye. Certainly. when the cye is scvcrcly buphthalmic with severe corneal pathology, we
know that the eye is blind. Abnormalities associated with chronic glaucoma include buphthalimos,
luxated lens, Haab's striae (cormeal endothelial stretch lines), optic nerve cupping and atrophy,
and retinal degeneration. Some shar-pei. chow chow, and beagle dogs seem to maintain vision
longer even with severc buphthalmos and associated chronic changes. The reason for this clini-
cal observation is unknown.
 3. Is the menace response helpful in dctermining whether the patient is blind in the glau-
comatous eye?
Careful evaluation of the mcnacc rcsponsc comparing your findings to the sighted eye can
help delermine whether vision is still prescnt. The response involves a threat gesture made by the
blink and possibly head motion away from the threatening gesture. An intact menacc rcfcx rc-
quires clear cornea and ocufar media, opfic nerve function cranial ncrve II [CN2l, cortical func-
gesture, and therefore thc age of paticnt is important when perforrming this test. Also. patients with
facial merve palsy will have a negative response unless they retract thc globc causing third eyelid
ing the cyclids to elicit a bink.
 4. What specific changcs are associatcd with optic ncrve disease and retinal degeneration
in glaucoma?
Indirect or direct ophthalmoscopy techniques are used to view thc postcrior segment of the
cyc; thc comca, lens, and fluid media have to be clear in order to see the fundus. Glaucoma causes
many abnormalities can be found on thc fundus. Optic ncrve cupping is a depression of the nerve
head behind the level of the sclera and classically was thought to hc caused by simple mechani-
cal damagc from the elevated intraocular pressure. However, more current informalion about the
pathogcnesis of glaucoma indicates possible chemical or vascular alterations may be responsible
for the optic nerve daimage. Thc discascd optic ncrve hcad will be less vascularized when com-
parcd to thc normal eye and will first appear more pale, then finally very dark in the end stages of
99
001
The Blind Buphthalmic Eye of Glaucoma
case prrcess, Retinal degcneration changcs associatcd with the buphthalmic eye include lapetal
hypcrreflectivity, vascular attenuation, and dcpigmentation of the non-tapetum.
5. Could a tumor cause the problem?
Intraocular tumors such as lymphoma,iris and ciliary body adenomas and carcinomas.
melanomas, and metastatic carcinomas often calse secondary glaucoma. Two issues should be
considered in these patients. First, if the glancoma is thought to be caused by a tnmor evidcnced
by direct viewing of thc intraocular mass or other clinical indications of neoplasia, a coimplete
medical work-up should be performcd to help make an overall treatment plan package. Socond,
ical managcmcnt or evisccration. Evisccration and prosthesis may be considered risky in an eye
with a tumor sincc some tumor cclls may bc left behind with this proccdure.
6. Is a buphthalmic eye painful, even if the patient seems to have normal bchavior at
auou
It is oftcn difficult to dctermine the degree of discomfort in patients with a chronically large
globe. Howcvcr, once the cyc is surgically reinoved, clicnts report that the patient becomes much
more activc. and they admit that they had no indication that the pet was previously uncomfortable
with the large eye. We can, therefore, assume thiat the buphthaimic globe is a painful condition.
7. Can you treat a hlind or glaucomatous patient with medication?
Often times clients are surprised to learm that their pet is blind in the affccted eyc since the
lime to accept the blindness in their pel's glaucomalous cyc. It is best to use medications as a tem-
porary measure unless there are specific reasons not lo procced surgically such as financial and
patient age or health issues. Most of the topical glaucoma mcdicalions approved for humans re-
duce the intraocular pressure around 5-7 mmHg, which 1nay be crucial for early detected glau-
coma in people, but the dog or cat with a buphthalmic globe often has an intraocular pressure in
thc 50-70 nimHg range and these mcdications are not very useful. There are many new topical
 glaucoma medications including topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and latanoprost, but these
drugs are very cxpensivc and are probably a waste of the client's money for the blind or buph-
thalmic eye.Syslemic carbonic anhydrase inhibikors such as methazolamidc (Neptazanc,
Glauctabs) and dichlorphenamide (Daranide) are more effective atreducing the IOP but can have
short- and long-term side effects such as vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia. panting, neurologic signs,
and hypokalemial.
 8. If medical treatment is chosen, docs it have to be given for life?
Something is better than nothing. Some clients will never consider a surgical option for the
big, blind eye, and in these patients medical treatment may havc to be given for thc lifc of the pa-
tient. Periodic rechecks with intraocular pressure evalualion should be pcrformed to monitor
 progress, and some chronic buphthalmic globes eventually dcgenerate and bccome smaller (ph-
thisis bulbi) over a long period of time. If the globe becoines phihisical, medications can be
9. What are the surgical options for managing the buphthalmic eye?
Some clients immediately accept the concept that the eye will never be useful to the pct and
cold develop secondary complications such as corneal ulcers from exposure, whereas other
clicnts may need time to get used to thc idea that the buphthalmic eye will never be useful to the
patient. Oncc the client understands that the patient will never sce out of the eye. some type of
removal of the globe should be discussed with ihe owner. There are three ways to renlove anl
rounding soft tissue structures as would be performed with an orbital tumor and is usually not nec-
The Blind Buphthalmic Eye of Glaucoma
101
structures by incising cxtraocular muscles ncar thcir insertions at the globe and lcaving bchind
of an intrascleral silicone prosthesis for maximal cosmetic outcome. Enucleation and evisceration
bral or subconjunctival approach depending strictly on surgeon preference. Some surgeons will
place a silicone prosthesis into the orbit before closing so that the skin over the orbit does nol sink
in, but closure of the orbital septum arising from the orbital rim usually prevents "sinking" with-
out having to place a space-occupying sphere.
ManagementoftheBuphthaimicGlobe
TREATMENT METHOD
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
Enucleation
No need for further concerns
Emotion for client
Pain-free patient immediately
Jnitial cost
Less costly long-term
Requires surgical experlise
Cosmetic concens
Evisccration/prosthesis
Cosmetic outcome
May be contraindicatcd —- sizc?
Pain-free patient
Initial cost
Less costly long-tcrm
Requircs surgical cxpcrtisc
Corncal conccrns long-term
Medical management
Lower short-lerm costs
High long-tenmm costs
Timc for client to considcr othcr options
Patient may renain painful
Avoids anesthesia
L.aser or cryotherapy
Shorl procedure
Potential side effects
Possibly discontinue thc mcdications
May nol be cffectivc
Altermative option to medications
Postoperative concems
and rcmoval options
10. Do you leave the orbit open with enucleation?
No! After removal of the buphthalmic globe, the superior and inferior orbital septa arising
from the orbital rims are sutured together. The septum is isolated by placing forceps over the int-
ner and outer aspects of the orbital rim and then “dragging" them to the edge to grab the tissue.
You'll know you havc thc scptum and not just conjunctiva if youl can start to lift the paticnt's hcad
the remaining skin sutured together.
11. Are all glaucoma patients candidates for cosmetic evisceration and prosthesis?
No, again! In fact. in order for this procedurc to be successful with a good cosmctic outcome,
the cornea, sclera, and globe should he relativcly normal, Buphthalmic globes with cxposure ker-
cedure. In this proccciure, a prosthesis approximatcly the size of the patient's globe must be
placed, and thc conca is preserved. Therefore, any lagophthalmos-related exposure problcms.
is only mildly to moderately enlarged without corneal pathology, the prosthesis surgery can be
performed using a slightly smallcr prosthesis than the globe size so that over time the sclera and
cornca decrease in size to mcct the prosthesis. Measure the limbal diameter of the normal cornca
12. With a cosmetic prosthesis, does the owner have to takc it ont and clean it? Will it fall out?
The evisceration procedure involves a scleral incision, removal of all intraocular contents
(aqueots. vitrcous, lens, and retina), followed by placement of the silicone sphere to fit inside the
inside the globc for life. Tlhe proslhesis is nevcr touched again and should ncvcr bc found on the
102
The Blind Buphthalmic Eye of Glaucoma
client's dining room floor. This type of prosthesis differs from a painted prosthelic shell that fits
under the eyelids in humans after enucleation.
13. Are there any other surgical options besides removing the globe?
Removal of the buphthalimic globe is the most logical way to deal with such a blind eyc. How-
cver, some clients cmotionally or financially may need more time to consider removal, or the pa-
tient may have medical issues that need to be considered for general anesthesia. Other surgical
options include laser cyclophotocoagulation or cryothcrapy to rcduce intraocular pressure by de-
creasing aqueous humor production, drainagc procedures using various types of aqueous humor
shunts, and pharrmacologic ablation of the ciliary body (gentamicin injcction). These proccdures
still requirc general ancsthesia but sincc most of theim arc generally quicker and less invasivc than
removal methods, certain patients with buphthalmic globcs may bcncfi from one of thcse procc-
dures (Figs. I and 2).
Figure 1. Diode lascr instruncntation
by lris Medical Instruments used for
cyclophotocoagulation of thc ciliary
arca.
Figure 2. Cryotherapy ou a blind
buphthalimic globe. Multiple sitcs are
frozcn dorsally and vcntrally to dc-
stroy aqueous production and stimn-
lale uveitis.
14. Will the eye rupture if it gets too large?
It is amazing how large the globe can strerch without rupturing! As thic globe cnlarges, the
sclera and cornea becomme thinner, and the black uveal tract will begin to show through the thin
sclera just posterior to the limbus. However. it is fairly unusual for the glohe to rupture unless
thalmic with obvious blindness and the owner, totally unaware of medical anecdotal humor, rc-
lates, "Doc, it just started 2 days ago . . "
The Blind Buphthalmic Eye of Glaucoma
103
15. Will the glaucoma spread to the other eye?
Thcre arc many causes of glaucoma including primary, brccd-rclatcd glaucoma, and sec-
ondary glaucomas such as infammatory, neoplasia, and trauma. Primary glaucoma in purcbrcd
dogs such as the cocker spaniel, basset houmd, poodle, beagie, Samoyed, and several other brccds
is a concerm for glancoma to happen in the second eye. The disease does nol spread to thc othcr
eye, but those patients are at risk of developing the disease in the second eye. Recent information
longs the inlerval before the second eye develops the disease from an average of 8-30 months.
16. If treatment had been started sooner, could vision have been saved?
The bottom line is that glaucoma causes blindness in millions of human and veterinary pa-
tients each year. It is simply a bad disease that needs more questions answered before we really
know how to best dcal with this problem. The disease is often dctcctcd much carlier in humans
than in domestic animal species; therefore, the disease is often undelected for a longcr period of
lime in dogs and cats. By the time the disease is noticed, the eye is blind and buphthalmic. Fvcn
when glaucoma is detected earlier, as is oflen the case for the remaining eye, the disease results
 in a blind and buphthalmic eye,
17. If the second eye becomes blind and buphthalmic, does the owner have to consider eu-
thanasia?
Palients adjust extremely well to complete blindness, probably by fine luning their already keen
senses of smell and hearing. Acute blindness can resuit in some anxiety and confusion in the patient,
but by the time a patient develops bilateral buphthalimos thcy have had time to get accustomed to
their handicap and pcrform very well. Many owners will readily agrec to rcimovc a singlc buph-
thalmic globe when the other eye is nomal but have difficulty in considering bilateral removal even
though the patient will only feel better after surgery (Fig. 3).
Figure 3. The cosimctic appearance of
a I0-year-old basset following a bi-
lateral evisceration/ intrascleral sili-
cone prosthesis.
A sccond pct in thc house is often hclpful in guiding the blind patient around its environment
      i     s     
BIBLIOGRAPHY
roregeneration. Vet Ophthalmol 2:13-25, 1999.
1 04
The Blind Buphthalmic Eye of Glaucoma
2. Cook C. Davidson M. el al: Diode laser transscleral cyclopholocoagulation for the treatnent of glaucoma
in dogs: Results of 6 and 12 month follow-up. Vet Comp Ophthalmol 7:148-154, 1997.
3. Levin C: I.iving with Blind Dogs. Oregon City, OR, Lantem Publicalions, 1998.
4. Lcvin C: Blind Dog Stories: Tales of Triunph. Humor, and Heroism. Orcgon City. OR, Lantcrn Publica-
tions,1999.
5. Miller PE. Schmidt GM, Vainisi SJ. et al: The efficacy of topical prophylactic therapy in canine primary
glaucoma: A multicenter clinical trial. Proc Am Coll of Vet Ophthainol 29:15. 1998.
18. OCULAR MELANOSIS IN CAIRN TERRIERS
Simon M. Petersen-Jones, DVetMed, Ph.D.
1. Is ocular melanosis an inherited disease?
Undoubtedly, ocular melanosis is a hereditary condition. Howevcr, the pedigree information
to conclusively prove a mode of inheritance has yet to be asseinbled.
2. At what age can ocular mclanosis be detected?
The agc at which signs typical of ocular melanosis develop varies considerably. Some dogs
develop changes that are typical for ocular melanosis at 4 or 5years of age while others can pre-
sent with the early changes as late as I2 or 13 ycars of age. The occurrence of dogs with a late
onsct of signs complicates attempts to screcn potential breeding dogs prior lo their use, and it also
means that dogs cannot be considered to be free of ocular melanosis unless they remain ophthal-
3. What are thhe early changes to look for?
The early stages of the disease are characterized by the presencc of a bilateral hyperpigmen-
tation of the irides with a marked circumferential thickening of the iris root (Fig. I). This thick.
cning causes thc pcriphcral one-third of the iris to protrude into the anterior chamber. Somctimcs
al this early stage, careful slit-lamp examination rcvcals the presence of a few pigmented cells
floating in the aqueous. At this stage, pigmentation of the sclera or episclera may not necessarily
havc developed. As the condition progresses, this thickening of the inis becomes less apparent.
Figure 1. Early stages of ocular
mclanosis. Photuograph taken through
goniolens showing a circumferential
thickening of the iris rool, which pro-
trudes into the antcrior chamber.
105
106
Ocular Melanosis in Cairn Terriers
 4. What will gonioscopy show in ocular melanosis-affectcd eyes?
 In the early slages, the pronounced thickening of the peripheral jris may partly obscure visu-
d A  e p  i     g  po 
mented, and as the condition progresses, deposited pigmcnt cells appear as a dusting on the pecti-
nate fibers and also deeper within the ciliary cleft obscuring visualization of the trabccular
meshwork (Fig. 2). Eventually the ventral drainage angic is completely obscured by deposited
pigment (Fig. 3), which partly fills the ventral anterior chamber and can be sccn extcrnally as a
pigment band lining the peripheral ventral cormea. The dorsal parts of the drainage angle arc less
severely affecicd. Once glaucoma becomes established the resulting corneal changes makcs ex-
aimination of the drainage angle more difficult.
Figurc 2. Goniophotograph of early-
stagc ocular rmclanosis. Pigment js tje-
 posited within the trabccular mesh-
work and on the pectinate fibers.
Individual pectinate fibers arc still
clearly visible.
Higure 3. Goniophotograph of the
ventral drainage angle of a preglau-
comatous eye. A mass of deposiled
pigmented cells is cbscuring the
opening into thc ciliary cleft and the
peclinate fihers,
 5. When do the characteristic scleral/episcleral pigmented patches develop?
Although they are not the first indicators of the condition, pigment deposits within the sclera
and cpisclcra develop during thc early stages. Thcy first appear as smal spicule-shaped, black-
colored patches 3-5 mm posterior to the limbus (Fig. 4). Thesc patches are readily differentiated
circumfcrence of the sclera overlying the ciliary body region. As the condition progresses, the le-
sions bccome larger (Figs. 5 and 6) and may cvcntually appear to bulge from the surfacc of the
globe (Fig. 7). The more ventrally positioned lesions tend to be larger in size.
6. How long does it take for secondary glaucoma to devclop?
T'he time taken for sufficient blockage of the aqueous drainage pathways to cause secondary
Ocular Melanosis in Cairn Terniers
107
Figure 4. A srmall patch of scleral pig-
ent in a cairn tertier with carly stagc
discasc.
Figurc 5. A preglaucomatous eye with
ocular melanosis. There are largc
scleral/episclcral pigment patches and
pigimcnt lincs the vcntral corneal en-
dothelial surface sufficiently to show
from under the scleral overhang. Pig-
mcnted particlcs can be seen sus-
pendcd in the aqueous.
Figure 6. An cyc with ocular
melanosis and secondary glaucoma.
There is a very large pigmented patch
in thc vcntral sclera/episclera. A wide
band of pigment deposited on the
ventral comeal endothelial surface
can be seen.
108
Ocular Melanosis in Caim Terniers
Figure 7. An eye with ocular melanosis
and secondary glaucoma. The pig-
mented patch shown is raised froin the
sufface of the globe. The pigmented
sclerais thinnedand istherefore
bulging as a result of the raiscd in-
lraocular pressure.
glaucoma varies considerably belween affected dogs. Some dogs will develop glaucoma as carly
as 7 years of age. Dogs with late-onset, slowly progressive ocular melanosis may never develop
glaucoma
 7. Ocular melanosis can lead to secondary glancoma, but are therc any other problems as-
sociated with it?
Glaucoma with a slow insidious onset is the major problem secondary to ocular melanosis.
Some affected dogs do dcvelop attacks of acule antenior uveitis associaled with release of large
armounts of pigment into the aqueous.'This may result in depigmentation of patchcs of the ante-
rior iris surface. The anterior uveitis usually rcspondis wel to topical stcroid therapy. lris airophy
may becomc a feature prior to a sustained clcvation in intraocular prcssure. A progrcssive pig-
ment deposition also affects the fundus and, some dogs devclop supcrficial pigment dcposits on
the surface of the optic nerve head (Fig. 8). Following sustained glaucoma, complications typical
of chronic glaucoma may develop, including severe buphthalmos, exposure keratitis, and phthi-
sis bulhi.
Figure 8. A spicule-shaped pigment
deposit is present on the optic nerve
head of this cairm terrier with ocular
melanosis.
8. How should I manage the condition?
We have not yet identified a method of slowing down or preventing thc proliferation of pig-
ment thal characterizes this condition. Affected dogs should have thcir intraocular prcssure mon-
itored on a regular basis, particularly as the pigmentation progresses. Conventional antiglaucoma
inedication may slow down the development of irreversible glaucomatous damage of the optic
 ncrve head and retina. However, the development of an intractable glaucoma is inevitable in the
dogs that develop ocular inelanosis at a younger age. Only dogs with later onset and slow progres-
Ocular Melanosis in Cairn Terriers
109
sion may maintain useful eyesighl up until death. Laser cyclopholocoagulation is not recom-
mended bccause the sclera of affected dogs is already thinned and weakened considcrably: therc-
fore. staphylomas can develop following this mcthod of glaucoma managemen1. Glaucoma
drainage shunts have bccn used with moderate succcss iu the short terim.
9. Can I do anything to help the research into the etiopathogenesis of ocular melanosis?
The author has an active research program supported by the Cairn Terricr Cluh of Amcrica
aimed at eventually identifying the genc mutation responsiblc for this condition. Sending a blood
sample for DNA extraction, a pedigrec, clinical descriptions, and any cnucleaied eyes will help
torward this research.
10. Are other breeds affected with ocular melanosis?
There are anecdotal reports of a condition of similar appcarance in othcr breeds. Ocular
conclusive evidencc that the conditions reported in other breeds are identical to ocular melanosis
in cairm terriers is lacking.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Covitz. D. Barthold S, Diter R, ct al: Pigmentary glaucoma in the caim terrier. Proc Am Coll of Vet Oph-
thalmol 115:246-250, 1984.
2. Pctersen-Jones SM: Abnormal ocular pigment deposition associated with glaucoma in the caim terrier. J
Small Anim Pract 32: 19-22. 1991.
 3. Peiersen-Jones SM. Mould IRB: Pigmcnt dcposition resulting in sccondary glaucoma in the cairn terricr
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 34(suppleiment):2354, 1992.
IV. Cataracts
19. OVERVIEW OF CATARACTS
Jane O. Cho, D.V.M
1. What is a cataract?
A cataract is defined as a lens opacity. It may be small and focal, taking up only a small part
does not allow light to pass through it. (This is distinguished from translucent, where light rays
do pass through but are benl at different anglcs such that objects on one side arc visiblc from the
other, but not clcarly [c.g-, frnsted glass].) The opacity that comprises a cataract represents an area
of disafray of the lcns fibers, which normally havc a very regular arrangemcnt within the lens to
maintain clarity. Other cellular (fibroblastic cells) or noncellular (collagcn, lens proteins) ele-
mcnts may be involved in lens opacity as well.
2. How are cataracts classified?
Cataracts may be classifed in various ways: by stage of maturity, eliology, location/shape,
or timc of onset. These catcgorics may overlap.
The classic stages of cataract maturation include:
· Incipient (small, incomplete, and not affecting vision)
● Immature (more developed than incipien1, reducing vision, but still incomplete)
* Mature (complete and opaque whitc)
+ Intumescent (lens fibers are swollen, the lens iiself may bc cnlargcd and "clefts" are of-
ten prcsent al the sutures)
·Hypermature (undergoing resorption or dissolution of lens proteins, with a subsequent re-
duction in lens size)
● Morgagnian (a stage of hypermaturity where the entire lens cortex is rcsorbed and the nu-
cleus has seitled to the bottorn of the lens capsule)
Not all cataracts will progrcss through all stages, although cataracts at later stages have likely
gone through the preceding stagcs. Some types are more typical of certain etiologies. For exam-
pcl, cataracts due to diabetes mcllitus are often nature and intumescent (Figs. 1-10)
A cataract may be metabolic, senile, inflammatory, or traumalic (e.g., lens puncture) in ori-
gin, or it may be a primary breed-relaied condilion. Other less likely causes of calaracts include
nutritional deficiencies, electric shock, and periocular radiation therapy. It is important to test for
diabetes mellitus in dogs with a sudden onset of bilateral cataracis.
Cataracts may be at any location in the lens and can be described as being nuclcar, cortical
tral visual axis), paraxial (off-center), peripheral, or any combinalion of the above. Shape le-
scriptions that havc bccn uscd to characterizc cataracts include lamellar (flat and shcet-like).
humans and has a diffusc pale brown coloration duc to the presence of uroclhromcs.
Cataracts may be congenital (developing before birth), juvenile (developing in young to mid-
dlc-agcd animals). or scnilc (developing inl aged animals, concurrent with nuclear sclerosis). The
111
112
Overview of Cataracts
Figure l. An immnature cataract lux-
aled aniteriorly and medially. An
aphakic crescent allows a good view
of thc posterior segmcnt dorsally and
lalerally.
Figure2.
An immature cortical
cataract.
Figure 3. A congenital-inherited cor-
tical cataract in an 8-month-old pug.
Overview of Cataracts
113
Figure 4. A perinuclear cataract in a
9-ycar-old American cocker spaniel.
Figurc 5. A imature cataract in a 16-
year-old bichon frise.
Figure 6. An 8-ycar-old mixcd brced
dog with diahetes mellitus. Note the
suture "clefts." This is an intumcs-
cent cataract.
114
Overviewof Cataracts
Figure 7. This mature cataract is lux-
aied into the anterior chamber.
Figurc 8. This cataract is hyperma-
ure with resultant uveitis. "The me-
dial aspect of the cataract is anteri-
orly subluxated.
Figurc 9. This nuclear cataract is what
remains of this hypermature lens. It is
 terincd a morgagnian cataract. This
was an I I-year-old poodlle.
Overview of Cataracts
115
Figure l0. Thc opacity noted is min-
eraliz.ation on αl wrinkled lcns cap-
sllc.all that. remains of a hyperma-
turc cataract following dissolution
cause it contribules little in specilying the ctiology of the cataract.
 3. What is the differencc bctween primary and sccondary cataracts?
As witlh other conditions, priniary cataracts arc sccn in the absence of other ocular or sys-
temic abnormalities (such as microphthalmia, persistent hyaloid artcry [ PHA], retinal dysplasia,
or diabetes mellitus). Primary cataracts in purebred dogs are oflen a heritable, autosomal reces-
sive. breed-relatcd condition, although the exact pattern of heritability in imost cases is unknown.
Mixed-brecd dogs may also devclop primary cataracts.
Secondary cataracts are those caused by other ocular or systemic abnornalities. Other than
thosc listed above,ocular conditions that may lead to the development of secondary calaracts in-
[PRA]]. Cataracis occur with these conditions hecause of thc prcscnce of an abnormal intraocu-
lar metabolic environment. Put sinply, the lens depends on thc physiologic stability of its milieu
 to 1maintain clarity; when these strict conditions are allered, lens opacity may develop.
lt can be difficult to differentiate a secondary cataract from a primary cataract with sequelac
to the cataract. A full ophthalmologic examination and physical examination are necessary to rule
out other causes.
4. What is nuclear sclerosis?
Nuclear sclerosis, also called (senile) nuclear sclerosis or lenticular sclerosis, is a normal
aging change of the lcns. It is characterized by a hardening (sclerosis) of the nucleus of the lens
at aboul 7 years of age. This hardening represents the comprcsion of lens epithelial cells (lens
fibers) into the center of the lens as the nitotic activity of the peripheral lens cpithclial cclls pro-
gresses throughout life. Grossly, it is seen as a uniforrn pearly grey transhuccncy (the nucleus)
within the pupil, and if the pupil is dilated, the round border of the lens nuclcus within the lens
cortex may be distinctly visiblc, particularly when thc cye is viewed in retroillumination. This
condition is always bilaleral, and the fundus should be visiblc through such nuclei via ophthal-
moscopy. Nuclear sclerosis alone does no1 cause visual impairment thal is readily disccmable in
aninials. In humans, presbyopia (thc farsightedness of age) accompanies nuclear sclerosis, but
such fine changes in visual ability arc not cominonly obscrved in the behavior of animals with nu-
clear sclerosis.
5. How can nuclear sclerosis be differentiated from cataracts?
To distinguish cataracts from nuclear sclerosis, the technique of retroillumination can be
tics. The pupils are dilated (in nonglaucomatous animals, use 1 drop of I% tropicamidc OU and
116
Overview ot Cataracts
wait 10-15 minutes for dilation), and the animal is examined in a darkened room wiih focal illu-
mination. Nuclear sclerosis will reveal a visible nuclear border with a clearer periphery. The fun-
dus should bc visible using direct or indirect ophthalmoscopy; the densc nuclei should not block
the path of light to the back of thc cye.
Keep in mind that cataracts imay exist in addition to nuclear sclerosis.
6. Is the location of focal cataracts significant?
Information regarding progression can sometimes be gained by properly identifying the lo-
cation of a cataract within the lens. Without thc aid of a slit-lamp biomicroscope, lens opacities
can be distinguished from vitreal opacities, and thc location of cataracts can be asccrtained by ex
amination in a darkened room with the patient's pupil lilated (see above). The patient and exam-
aminer. Thc light sourcc is moved slowly from sidc to side into the paticnt's eye from about 6-12"
while the observer remains stationary; the localion of the opacitics as they arc silhouettcd by thc
tapetal reflection (retroilluminated) are thcn observcd carefully as they appcar to move from sidc
to side. Focal opacities in the lens will appear to move in the same dircction as the lighf source;
those in thc vitreous will appear to move in thc opposite direction. Opacities in the anterior half
of the lens will move further and more rapidly than those in the posterior half. This technique uti-
 lizes the concept of Purkinje-Sansom images, and is based on the principles of parallax and the
fact that thc nodal point of the eyc is located at the posterior pole of thc lens.
Cataracts that are strictly nuclear arc more likely to be devclopmental, congenital, and non-
progressive; those in the cortex of the lens arc acquired and typically progressive and may even-
 tually includc the whole lens. Posterior polar cataracts, particularly if associated with blood, may
             
 are often very slowly progressive. Small, triangular, suture-tip opacilies seen in the lenses of some
puppies may resolve with time. Bilateral, small, pinpoint, diffusely scattered opacities may be due
to hypocalcemia.
7. What are the consequences of having a cataract?
Of course, sone vision loss is to bc expected with cataracts that arc large enough or axial
cnough to obstruct the passage of light to the rctina. Howcvcr, the degrce of vision loss may be
highly variable, and it can bc vcry difficult to correlatc degrees of bchavioral vision loss with oph-
thalmic examination findings. Ii may also be diffculi fo coimpare degrees of vision loss belween
individual animals.
An important sequela to hypermature cataracts is uveilis. Lens-induced uveilis is causcd by
the leakage of antigenic lens material from the lens into the anterior chamber. Hypennature
cataracts are the most likely type of cataract to incite anterior uveitis due to the dissolution of lens
material. Anterior uveitis is characterized by blepharospasm, conjunctival hypereimia, imiosis,
vere cases of lens-induced uveitis may have keratic precipitatcs, clots of fibrin, or, rarcly, sterilc
hypopyon in the anterior chamber. Secondary glaucoma, retinal detachmenl, or phthisis bulbi may
also result from chronic, severe, untreated lens-induced uveitis, leading to permanent blindness.
Because some of the signs of uvcitis are similar to those of glaucoma, it is essential that 1he IOP
be measured when either uveitis or glaucoma is suspected.
Eyes with lens-induced uveitis should be treated for uveitis until the cataracts can be surgi
cally removed. lf no corneal epithclial defects are present, topical steroids and atropine are often
 effcctive al stabilizing the blood-aqueous barrier, rcducing uvcitis, and increasing ocular comfort.
If the IOP is elcvated, topical or systemic antiglaucoma drugs arc also nccessary (scc Chapter 16),
and mydnatics should not bc used.
8. What are common dog breeds that develop primary cataracts?
As mcntioned above, primary cataracts may be seen in both purebred and mixed-breed dogs.
Overview of Cataracts
117
Chesapcake Bay retricvers, cocker spaniels, Dobcrmman pinschers, dachshumds, Fnglish springer
spaniels, German shepherds. golden rctrievers, lrish selters, Labrador rctricvers, Lhasa apsos,
Norwegian elkhounds, Old English sheepdogs, poodles (toy, minialure, and standard), rottweil-
ss
New brccd predispositions for cataracts are noted every year by veterinary ophihalmologists
in the United States and throughout the world. Lists of these predispositions (for both cataracts
and other ocular conditions) are printed in a publication by the American Collegc of Vcterinary
OphthalmologistscntitledOcularDisordersPresunedtobeInheritedinPurebredDogs.
9. Are there any specific brceding recommendations for dogs with cataracts?
Thc genetics of primary cataracts in most dog brccds have not been fully characterized or
tcsted. In a number of brccds, primary cataracts havc been found to be autosomal rcccssive in in-
heritance; in a few they are known to be autosomal dominant. Unknown degrees of penetrancc
make the elucidation of the genetics of canine cataracts even more difficult. However, familial
tendencies and the possibility of a heritable component to primary cataracts often cannot be ruled
out in an individual case. Consequently, breeding of any dog with even suspected primary
calaracts is gcncrally not recommended.
Conditions that can lcad to secondary cataracts may or may not be hcritable. Breeding rec
 Ommendations in thesc cases should bc made on a case-by-case basis dcpcnding on the cause.
10. Can cats develop cataracts?
Both domestic shorthair and various brccds of purehred cats have occasionally hccn scen with
origin, somelimes associated with multiple ocular abnorimalities. This author has seen several
brecd cats and kittens.
Lcns diseases in adult cats arc more commonly secondary to other ocular disease and are of-
ten due to long-standing anterior uveitis of any origin. Thus they may be accompanied by clini-
cal signs of acute or chronic uveitis. Diagnostics and treatmen1 for uvcitis should be initiated if
these are suspecled.
11. What treatments are available for cataracts?
Although medical therapics have been attempted to trcat and prevent cataracts throughout
history, none havc beenl proven to be widcly succcssful.
Cataracts are most appropriately trealed with surgical removal. However, no1 ail eyes with
cataracts are acceptable surgical candidates (see Chapter 20). Eyes that have cataracts secondary
to retinal disease (e.g.. PRA) arc not considered appropriate cataract surgery candidates. If meta-
 bolic disease, trauma, or inflammation is the cause of cataracts, these conditions should be as-
sessed, treated, and stabilized before cataract surgery.
In some cases, vision loss due to focal axial calaracts may be trcatcd tcmporarily with phar-
macologic mydriasis. if a cataract is small and in the axial lens, it may reduce vision, especially
for light to reach the retina if the peripheral lens is still clear. The entire lens should be examined
(afler pupillary dilation), and the lOP should be measured as normal bcforc rccommcnding this
treatment. Pharmacologic mydriasis will not prevent progression of an established cataract. It is
addition, recall that parasympatholytic mydriatics (such as atropine) are also cycloplcgics, which
prevcnt ciliary muscle activity and accommodation of thc lens. Thus, visual acuity may theoreti-
cally be reduced by parasympatholytic therapy duc to the loss of accommodation. This is partic.
ulariy true in eyes in which accommodation plays a significant role in vision (e.g., humans) and
-e  q    s p so  n   o 
 priate for this type of therapy.
20. CATARACT SURGERY
lane O. Cho, D.V.M.
1. When is cataract surgery indicated?
Cataract surgery is generally indicated when cataractous lenses obstruct the palh of light to
cnd, successful cataracl surgery requires that other intraocular structures (most importantly the
retina) be functional. Cataractous lenses may also be removed when they are thc causc of other
problems, including chronic lens-induced uveitis (c.g., when calaracls are hypermature or when
iniumcscent lens, which pushes the iris root forward, lnarrowing the iridocorneal drainage angle.
and reducing outfow of aqucous), and cataractous anterior lens luxation {potentially causing
acute pupillary block glaucoma). Howevcr, the most common indication for calaract extraction
is vision loss due to the obstruction of light.
2. Are all eyes with cataracts candidates for cataract surgery?
No. Cataract surgery is an elective procedure, and preoperative conditions should be made
as close to ideal as possible for the best success.
Eyes with active uveitis or any of its scquclae gencrally make poorcr candidates for cataract
surgcry than those without uveitis. Uveilis should be medically controlled before cataract surgery
can be considered. If a cause of uveitis other than a lens-induced ctiology is suspccted (such as a
systemic infectious diseasc or ocular ncoplasia), this possibility must be explored first.
Certain typcs of cataracts, such as those due to retinal disease, are not appropriate cataract
surgery candidates. Many breeds of dogs that are predisposed to cataracts are also predisposed to
progressive retinal atrophy (PRA). Because cataracts that develop due to PRA may be clinically
indistinguishable from primary cataracts, additional diagnostics (electroretinogram | ERG| and ul-
trasound) rmust be used to rule out rctinal disease.
Cataracts due to a persistent hyaloid artery (PHA) or persistent hypcrplastic lunica vasculosa
lentis/persistent hyperplastic primary vitrcous (PHTVL/PHPV) may be associated with a patent
hyaloid artery. The hyaloid artcry is an embryonic vesscl that is associated with the primary vit-
reous and travels from the optic disc to the posterior pole of the lens, supplying blood to the oth-
erwise avascular developing lens. This vcssel may fccd a network of vcssels (the tunica vascu-
losa lentis) that surrounds thc lens. Thesc vascular structures are present in the normally
devcloping cye, bul should be almost fully alrophied by 14 days of age. Pcrsistcnce of a hyper-
plastic hyaloid artery or tunica vasculosa lentis may cause lens opacity, particularly at the poste-
rior pole of the lcns. Cataract surgery may be particularly difficult in cases of patent lcns vascu-
lature because of to the risk of intraocular bleeding. Waiting for regression of these structures may
permit less complicated surgery.
3. How should one decide when cataract surgery should be performed?
Becausc the goal of cataract surgery is improvement of vision, the degrec to which a cataract is
currently causing visual deficits is important when considcring the timing of surgery. There is much
surgery can be considered necessary or helpful. Whercas some fecl that a significant visual deficit
due to the cataract should be present (c.g., completcly ophthalmoscopically obscured fundus, absent
with a focal cataract and little visual deficit (e.g., mostly visiblc fundus, intacl menace response, lit-
tle or no hesitation in navigating unfamiliar surroundings) to be acceptable as long as a detcctable,
potentially progressive cataract was present. (Note that even an eye with a mature, blinding cataract
will usually have an intact pupillary light response as long as the retina is functional.) Thc owncrs
118
CataractSurgery
119
should bc involvcd in thc decision to proceed with cataract surgcry and be made aware of the ad-
vantages and disadvantages of each option. The visual status of the dog before surgery will have an
inpact on the impression of degree of visual improvement after surgery (Fig. 1).
Figure 1. A 12-year-old chocolatc
l.abrador retriever with nuclear scle-
rosis and mullifocal cortical opaci-
tics. This Labrador is visual, and
cataract surgery at this stage may not
result in clinically evident. visual im-
provement.
4. When a dog has a complete cataract in one eye and a small or no cataract in the other
eye, should cataract surgery be performed?
In addition to the discussion above regarding the degree of preoperative visual deficit in a
single eye, when considering the whole aniimal, regard musl also be given to the degree of visua!
cormpensation that the fellow eye provides when considering surgery. As described above, much
debale exists as to when cataract surgery is indicated in cascs of asymmetrical cataract formation.
 Beforc phacocmulsification techniques for cataract removal (see question 6) bccame wide-
spread, older lens extraction techniques (extracapsular lens removal) required cataracts to bc al-
 ,                
surgery. Now that newer lens removal techniques are widely available, cataracts of any degree of
Arguments for the early bilateral removal of such asymmetrical cataracts include a potcntial
sual impairmcnt. However, the early removal of a mostly normal lens would result in the loss of
any accommodative abifity that thc normal parts of the lens might still be able to provide. The op-
tical effects of aphakia may be rcduccd by the implantation of an intraocular lens (see question
 possible lens removal later) include a greater improvement in post vcrsus preoperative vision and
the possibility of avoiding surgcry altogether in the less affected eye.
 Unilateral cataract surgery has bccn performed in dogs with a significant vnilateral cataract
and no or a simall nonprogressive cataract in thc fcllow cye. Issues to be considcrcd in unilateral
unilateral surgery), number of anesthetic cpisodes, number of postoperative/recuperation periods,
cataracious eye (lens-induced uveitis, glaucoma, or retinal dctachmcnt) while monitoring pro-
gression in the fellow cyc.
As mentioncd abovc, these issues should be discusscd with the owner so that an informed de-
cision can bc made.
If monitoring for progression of the fellow eye is the chosen plan, the owner should be in-
formed to watch for signs that might indicate that complications are developing. These include
120
CataractSurgery
gencralized whiteness to the cormca obscuring the iris (comeal edema), and globe enlargement
(buphthalmos duc to chronic glaucoma).
With the above cavcats in mind, the ideal cataract surgery patient:
· Has vision loss solely duc to thc presencc of cataracts
·Has lenses that are in place (nonluxated)
·Has no other ocular disease such as uveilis, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, glaucoma, or
comeal opacities of any type
· Is tractable and will tolcrate topical medication
● Is systemically as normal as possible (well-controlled diabeles, well-controlled hyperlipi-
demia) and can lolerate general anesthesia
● Has an owner or caretaker who is willing to administer multiplc topical mcdications, po-
tentially for long periods of time
● Has an owner or caretaker available to present the aniinal for recheck examinalions
● Has an owner or carelaker who understands the risks and financial responsibilities required
While some of these characteristics are more important than others, it should be emphasized that
cataract surgery is an elcctive procedure.
6. What are the techniques used for cataract surgery?
Currently in both animals and humans, cataracts can generally be removed using three tech-
niques: intra- and extracapsular extraction and phacoemulsification. Laser technology for initial
cataract extraction is experimental at this timc and is not routincly used in animals.
Intracapsular cataract extraction (ICCE) or inlracapsular lens exiraction (lCLE) involves
removal of the entire lens intact. Thc zonules holding thc lens in placc arc brokcn down or dis-
solved before the lens can be removed using this technique. This is accomplishcd by thc use of
enzymatic zonulolysis (such as with a-chymotrypsin) or mechanical zonular rupfure. Because the
entire lens is cxtracled whole, a rclatively large comeal incision must be made to accommodate
the lens. This technique often disrupts the anterior vitreous face and may potentially dislocate the
rest of the vitreous body and retina. The resulting aphakic eye ideally has vitreous behind the
pupil, and the vitreous body is held in place by its peripheral attachments to thc posterior ciliary
body and rctina, which are relatively wcak.
Extracapsular cataract extraction (ECCE) or extracapsular lens extraction (ECLE) re-
quires an initial removal of the central portion of the anterior lcns capsule. This anterior capsulo-
tomy is ideally a continuous curvilincar capsulorrhexis (CCC), formed by tcaring ("-rhexis") of
the capsule. A corneal incision is made large cnough to accommodate thc lens nuclcus. Thc hard
lens nucleus is then delivered using a broad instrument outsidc thc eye to push thc nuclcus onto
a second spatula-type instrument. Fibers of the lens cortex (whichi are adherent to the interior of
the lcns capsule) are thcn irmigaled and aspirated oul of the capsule. This technique ideally pre-
serves the poslerior capsule within the eye, leaving the vitreous undisturbed.
Phacoemulsification (PE) utilizes ultrasound encrgy delivcred directly to thc lens through a
hollow needle-like probe. This probe is insertcd into the lens through relativcly smal incisions in
the cornca and lens capsule. Ultrasound energy is used to liquefy (or emulsify) the lens fibers, and
the resulting fiquified material is aspirated. A CCC is pcrformcd hefore or after pliacoemulsifica
tion. After emulsificatioil of the hard nucleus, rcinoval of tlhe adhcrcnt cortical lens fibers is pcr-
usually prcserved with this tcchnique, and the postenior scginent of the eyc remains untouchcd.
Phacoemulsification is made possiblc by a machine that supplics clectrical power to generatc ul-
trasound energy, creates a vacuum enabling aspiration, and controls flow of irrigation fuids. This
is currently the preferted technique for renoval of most cataracts in both humans and animals
shaped object'").
CataractSurgery
121
 7. What is viscoelastic material?
Viscoelastic (often referred to as "visco") is a clear, gel-like material used for many purposes
 in intraocular surgery. It is used to maintain depth and normal anatomy of the anterior chambcr,
to provide a protective coating for intraocular structures, to atraumatically manipulate structures
    e  sn an  n ' s  sn   
fihers, and to tamponade hemorrhage. Its specific rheologic properties (viscosity, elasticity.
pseudoplasticity, surface tension) make it ideal for thcsc purposes. Various matcrials arc used for
visco, including hyaluronic acid, chondroitin sulfale, and hydroxypropylmethylcellulose. Differ-
ent coinbinations of these substances in different concentrations provides a variety of visco prod
ucts with a range or rhcologic propcrtics.
Visco is typically supplied in syringes and is injected through a blunt-tipped cannula.
 8. Why is the anterior lens capsule removed in cataract surgery?
The interior surfacc of thc anterior lens capsule is lined with a monolayer of viable lens ep-
ithelial cells. The lens epithelial cells located in the periphcry (at thc lens bow) normally undcrgo
 mitosis throughout the animal's life, with individual cels clongating and migrating centrally
within the lens with maturation. Lens epithelial cells retain mitotic capabifity even after pha
coemulsification. If left behind, they can proliferate and form clumps of lens-like material (called
lentoid). This lentoid can both optically obstruct ihe pupil, mimicking a cataract, and serve as a
continuing source of lens-induced uveitis. By removing a largc arca of anterior lens capsule.
production.
Renoval of the antcrior lens capsule will also allow the placement of an intracapsular in-
traocular lens (IOL). In this case, the anterior capsulotomy should be large enough to enable pas-
sage of the IOL into the capsule, but small enough to kcep it there. The circular shape of an an-
terior CCC allows for imaximal flexibility and stretch of the opening without tearing of the
capsule.
9. Why is the posterior capsule left in place in cataract surgery?
Following routine extracapsular cataract procedures, the posterior capsule is lcft in place as
a physical barrier between anterior and posterior scgments. The presence of this capsular "di-
aphragm" can provide stability to the posterior segmen1 of the eye, specifically the vitreous and
the retina. An opening in the posterior capsule may allow vireous to herniate into the anterior
chamber, especially if the vitreous is degenerate and liquified. Anterior vitreal displacemcnt may
facilitate retinal delachmcnt duc to traction on the anatomic adhcsions between the vitreous and
Despite these advantagcs, in somc cascs an opening in the axial postcrior lens capsule is madc
on purpose at the end of cataract surgery. This is generally donc to trcat or prevent axial posterior
capsular opacities (PCOs), or opaque plaque-like areas in the center of the posterior lens capsule.
These PCOs, if dcnse enough, can effectively mimic a cataract. They may be present at the time
of cataract surgery or develop at any tine after surgery. If severe cnough at the time of primary
surgery, removal of PCOs is performed at that time in ordcr to improvc optical clarity of the cye.
10. Why are IOLs used?
Prosthetic IOLs arc uscd to improvc the optics of an aphakic eye. An eye without a lcns is
the retina. The image formed in an aphakic eye is focuscd at a plane behind the rctina. In general,
aphakic canine eyes are approximately + 14 diopters (D) hyperopic. When an intraocular lens is
uscd, incoming light rays arc refracted such that this focal point is at ihe retinal plane (a condi-
tion called emmetropia), producing sharper images and a corresponding improvement in vision.
 In humans, preoperative ineasurements are rnade of the globe and cornea, and the proper optical
strcngth rcquired for an IOL for that particular eye is computed. Refractive studies have shown
that most dogs requirc an JOL. of approximately 41 D to cstablish emimetropia or ncar-
122
Cataract Surgery
vision for its job.
Another advantage to using IOLs is that they may reduce thc degrec of postopcrative PCO
formation. By directly contacting the axial posterior capsule, IOLs can reduce the amount of ax-
ial fibrous pseudometaplasia from migrating residual lens epithelial cells, thereby decreasing sub-
sequent capsular folding and opacificalion.
Eyes with implanled lOLs are termed pseudophiakic.
11. Are there any disadvantages to using IOLs?
Despite their great theoretical benefits, IOl. use may bc associated with some drawhacks. Ini-
planting IOLs increases the cost and duration of cataract surgery. lf an IOL eventually becomes
displaced (decenirated) within the eye or remains mobile within the eye, any optical advantage
 the IOL once providcd may be considerabiy rcduced because the IOl. may thcn producc distorted
images on thc retina. Current IOL tcchnology in dogs requircs 1hat thc initial corneal incision be
significantly enlarged to place an IOL; a wider cormcal incision can incrcase risk of both intra-
and postoperative complications. Intraocular lenses that are placed in the anterior chamber (used
sometimes in humans) or those that luxate from the posterior into the anterior chamber directly
contact the anterior iris face, potentially leading to irritation and mechanical chafing of the iris.
In addition, some ophthalmologists believe that the use of IOLs inay lead to chronic postopera-
tive uveitis. This uveitis may be so severc as to ncgate any benefit from the original cataract
surgery. As a foreign body implanted within the cye, IOLs may inducc chronic infammation that
are necessary when the IOLs become either cxcessively irritating or displaccd.
Figure 2. An IOI, with a cloudy ap-
pearancc. Cloudiness may bc due to
the presence of cells, proteins, and
minerals on the IOL surface and opac-
ity and wrinkling of the lens capsule.
In this case, the fundus can still be vi-
sualized despite the opacity.
12. What do IOLs look like and what are they made of?
The basic design of IOLs includcs a central optic, or lens, and peripheral supporting devices
callcd haptics. The optic is a lens- or lentil-shaped clear structure that is to be placed in the pupil-
or C-shapcd) arms to angled (V-shaped) arms to flat trapezoidal plates. Both haplics and optics of-
ten have small circles or loops cut into them to aid in proper IOL placement. The eventual location
of the IOL (anterior chaimber, intracapsular or "in-the-bag,“ciliary sulcus" or posterior chamber)
and fixation method (sutured or sutureless) all determine the haptic shape and orientation (Fig. 3).
CataractSurgery
123
Various clear synthetic materials have been used to make 1OLs, including polymcthyl-
methacrylate (PMMA), acrylic and silicone. Lenses made of PMMA are nigid. Only thin struc-
tures made of PMMA (e.g., thin J-shaped haptics) can bend to any degree, but these will break if
they are excessively slresseu.Acrylic and silicone lenses are softer and potentially bcndable.
Some IOLs are made of two different materials (the optic of one malerial and thc haptics of an-
other) to take advantage the benefits of cach
Intraocular lenses with optics madc of PMMA rcquirc cormcal incisions large enough to ac-
commodale them, usually 5-7 mm, about iwice the size of the incision required to do pha-
coemulsification. Both silicone and acrylic are flexible, allowing bending or folding of the optic.
 n s p  t) s n  s  od s s
  si  s  s a s sus i   s  u 
techniques for their use ad vance.
Figure 3. An IO1. 19 months afier
surgery. The 1OL is nicely centerect
in the lcns capsule. There is no rcac-
tion to the lOL, and the owners claim
thal the dog has very good vision
13. Do all eyes that have cataract surgery have an IOL placed?
Not nccessarily. All the considcrations discussed above should be weighed for thc individ-
ual casc. Surgcon preference is also vcry important. In addition, the question of which cyes are
mechanically able to properly hoid an IOL must be addrcsscd.
The majority of IOLs placed in animals are intracapsular IOLs, so conditions of the lens
capsule must be appropriatc for ideal 1OL placement. Secure and proper placement of intra-
capsular lOLs requires that the anterior capsular opening is the correct size and shape to both
allow insertion of an IOL and retain the IOL after surgery. Becausc thc haptics hold the lens in
the capsule and keep the optic in the center of the capsule, the intcgrity of the lens zonules is
iniportant for keeping the capsule and IOL in an axial localion. lf an 1OL is placed in a sub-
luxated lens capsule (i.e, lens zonules are torn), the IOL will be corrcspondingly subluxated as
well. The posterior lens capsule should be clear (or rcmovcd axially) to derive the full visual
benefit of the IOl.
Removal of a lens via ICLE results in an cyc with no lens capsule. In this case, a sutured
ciliary suleus IOL may be placed. This type of IOL is securcd with haptics that are suturcd to
the sclera in rwo sites 180° apart just behind the iris and in front of the ciliary body. Risks of
this procedure include hemorrhage, shifling/nonaxial optic positioning, and retinal detach-
ment. Other methods of improving visual acuity in aphakic dogs (e.g., laser in situ
spread use.
124
CataractSurgery
14. What is the typical postoperative medical regimen following cataract surgery?
The specific medical regimcns used after cataract surgery are as varicd as thc surgeons do-
ing the procedure.
· Anti-inflammatorics, usually topical steroids, and less frequently topical nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), are given after cataract surgery. These can be supple-
mented with systemic or subconjunctival anti-inflammatories. Anti-inflammatory drugs
are given to counteract the anterior uveitis that invariably results from canine cataract
surgery. Sutured surgical corneal wounds gcncrally appcar to heal well in the facc of top-
ical or systemic anti-inflammatory drug administration. However, these drugs should be
as possible afier the ulcer heals.
· Antibiotics. Broad-spectrum topical or systcmic antibiotics arc usually given routinely
during and after cataract surgcry becausc of the invasive nature of cataracl surgery. Though
· Mydriatics/cycloplegics. Topical mydriatics such as atropine or tropicamide are some-
barrier, relieve painful ciliary muscle spasm, and reduce the possibility of posterior
synechia development, particularly small-pupil posterior synechiae.
● Antiglaucoma medications. Topical or systemic antiglaucoma medications are occasion-
ally prescribed to relievc an elevatcd postopcrative IOP thal results from postsurgical
uvcitis. If IOP elevation is not a primary condition (i.e., the animal does not havc primary
glaucoma). antiglaucoma mcdications may not nccd to be administered indefinitely. How-
cver, thc decision as to when to discontinue antiglaucoma medications alter calaract
surgery should be left to the surgeon.
ceived improvement often depends on the degree of preoperativc visual impairmcnt, whethcr the
dog is aphakic or psendophakic, the individual dog's personality, activitics. and lifestylc, and the
dog's use of other senses. Then ability to judgc a dog's vision is (by necessity) subjcctive at best
and can be strongly inffucnced by cxtemal circumstances.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Glover TD, Cunistantincscn GM: Surgery for cataracts. Vct Clin North Am Small An Pract 27:1143- 1173.
1997.
2.Jaffe NS,Jaffe MS,Iaffe GF: Cataract Surgery and Its Complications, 5th ed. St.Louis, Mosby,1990
3.Miller TR.Whitlcy RD,Meck LA,et al: Phacofragmentation and aspiration for cataract extraction in dogs:
56 cases (1980-1984). J Am Vet Med Assoc 190: 1577-1580, 1987.
4. Nasissc MP, Davidson MG, Jamieson VE: Phacocimulsification and intraocular lens implantation: A study
of tcchniquc in 182 dogs. Prog Vet Camp Ophthalmol 1:225-232, 1991.
21.COMPLICATIONSOFCATARACT SURGERV
Jane O. Cho, D.V.M
I. What intraoperative complications might he scen with cataract surgery?
Complicalions that occur during cataract surgery (phacoemulsification, extracapsular lens
extraction) may be classified as minor or major.
Minor types of intraoperative complications include conditions that might make surgery dif-
ficult but not impossible, minimally change the postopcrative results, and may be treatable in
surgery. These include intraoperative miosis, lens subluxalion, inappropriate lens capsular lears,
minor bleeding, minor iris prolapse through the corneal incision, and vitreous expansion. Major
complications include those that inay substantially and advcrsely affect visual prognosis and pos-
sibly the prognosis for keeping the eye. Thesc include lens fragmcnt loss into ihe vitreous and ex-
pulsive choroidal hcmorrhage.
 2. Describe the different types of minor intraoperative complications and some ways to
treatthem.
 Minor intraoperative complications, which are often responsive to treatment, inclnde the fol-
lowing:
· Miosis limits the surgcon's visibility of thc lcns fibers and capsule. This makes lcns re-
 moval more difficult and increases the risk of damaging the posterior capsule and iris. In-
traoperative application of mydrialics (e.g., 0.1 ml of 1:10,000 cpincphrine) into thc antc-
rior chamber may alleviate this.
· Lens subluxation can coruplicate surgery if the one-handed method of phacoemulsiica-
tion is being used, because this technique relies on the physical immobility of the lens in
the globe. Conversion to a two-handed tcclnique (or extracapsular lens extraction (FCLE)
may bc ncccssary if the mobility is severe.
● Inappropriate lens capsular tears can make the lcns capsule unsuitable for proper in-
traocular lens (IOL) prosthcsis insertion or may prcdispose to lens fragment loss or antc-
much more difficult, and can eventually lcad to pupillary block glaucoma, rctinal dctach-
ment, or cormcal edema.
· Minor bleeding, such as that which occurs when a conjunctival vessel is pierccd in the
process of sururing an incision at the limbus, usually causes minor hyphema that resolves
spontaneously with time. Rarely, this bleeding may be more marked and require the use of
wet-field cautery or intracameral (i.e., injection into the anterior chamber) vasoconstrictor
drugs.
  n  s a s     r  s 
the iris to herniate out thc wound. This can bc controlled by shortcning the incision lcngth,
applying intracameral miotic agents (e.g-, carbachol), or utilizing viscoelastic material in
a stralegic manner.
· Vitreous expansion is a phenomenon in which the volume of the vitreous presumably in-
creases and causes a forward pressure on the lens and lcns capsules from behind thc lens.
This pressure tends to displace the intraocular structures in the direction of the incision and,
again, make surgery hazardous. Some have advocatcd the intraoperative use of intravenous
mannitol or highly viscous viscoelastic material for this problem. This condition usually
resolves wlicn the wound is closed.
 3. What are the major surgical complications that can occur during cataract surgery?
Lens fragment loss is one potential complication of cataract surgery. If the lens is nnstable,
125
126
ComplicationsofCataractSurgery
into the vitreous, Most cataract surgeons operate with the paticnt in dorsal rccumbency, with the
iris plane approximately parallel to the floor. Thus, if the vitrcous is liqueficd, thesc fragimcnts
 may settle to the dependent position at the posterior-most aspect of the globe, on the retina. Such
fragnents can be very diffcult or impossible to remove safely through the typical approaches used
for calaract surgcry and with standard cataract surgery instrumcnts, When this occurs in humans,
referral is made to a vitreoretinal subspecialist for vitrectomy and fragment removal. Unfortu-
nately, few in veterinary ophthalnology are cquippcd or experienccd in pcrforming such proce-
durcs. Large fragmcnts that are left in the vitreous may bc a source of chronic, rcfractory inflam-
mafion and may lead to retinal detachment and other sequelae of posterior uveitis. Somelimcs
small lens fragments isolated in forrmed vitreous remain inactive and uninflained for long periods
of time.
Expulsive choroidal hemorrhage is a very rare, but for obvious reasons, very serious in-
traoperative complication. This sudden, unpredictable, massive bleeding from the posterior seg-
ment imakes further surgery on the lens impossible and may lead to blindness.
Fortunately. serious intraoperative complications are very unusual in roulinc calaract
sUFgCry.
 4. How can the incidence of intraoperative complications be minimized?
Proper choice of surgical candidates can reduce the incidence of surgical complications.
Dogs withou1 active uveitis. luxated lenses, 0r corneal disease are better candidales than those with
these conditions (see Chapter 2l); thcse animals should be treated for these coinplicating condi-
agents can help control against excessive intraoperative infamination and miosis.
Control of patient positioning can also reducc the incidence of surgical complications.
Proper positioning of the patient under tie operating microscope is critical to a good outcome.
Position of the hcad must be changed as surgcry is performed on cach eye, and an experienced
surgical nursing staff can facilitate this intraoperative adjustment. Adequate skeletal muscle paral-
exlernal pressure on the opened eye, is most easily achievcd with full paralysis (using agcnts such
 as iniravenous atracurium or pancuronium). Canthotomy, stay surures, and other globe immobi-
lization techniques may also be helpful.
 Proper surgical equipment and an experienced surgeon and staff can make a consider-
able difference in the prevention and management of complications. Adequate lighting, an oper-
ating microscope with excellent optics that can be adjusted by the surgeon, high-qualily instru-
mentation (including the ability to perform vitrectomy), appropriatc viscoelastic materials, and
As with any surgery. preparation for the most likely complications is prudent. Itcms such as
injcctablc epinephrine, mannitol, and cautery arc useful to kccp in stock in case of emergcncy.
 5. What are the most common immediate postoperative complications of cataract
surgery? How are they treated?
and hypotony or surgical wound leakagc.
eralive anterior uveitis. This develops for several reasons. One of the most commonly cited is
 the predisposition of the canine anterior segment to iritability. particularly when compared with
the human anterior segment. Very little intraocular disturbance is required to incitc anterior
ple paraccntesis of a small ainount (o.I ml) of aqueous. In addition to the dog's tcndency for
uveitis. the mcchanical trauma of surgcry—thc insertion and reimoval of instruments into and out
of the eye. the applicalion of ultrasound, and the large amount of fuid circulatcd into the eyc by
Complications of Cataract Surgery
127
uveitis. Good surgical technique minimizes uveitis. Postoperative uveitis is treated routinely by
thc use of topical, subconjunctival, and systemic anti-inflammatory drugs.
Corneal edema may develop around the surgical wound as fluid is imbibed by the stromal
lameilae that have been exposcd by incision.Mild diffuse corneal edema may also develop due
to the generalized mechanical trauma of cataract surgery to the corneal endothelium. These forms
of corneal edema are common following cataract surgery. They are typically transient and require
no specific treatment.
Postoperative bypertension (acutely incrcased intraccular pressure [IOP] after surgery) is
 theorized to develop secondary to (1) a temporary alteration in the anatomy of the drainage angle
the angle. Depending on the IOP, this condition may or may not be lreated. Topical and systemic
antiglaucoma medications, intracameral tissue plasminogen activator to break up fibrin that may
be blocking aqueous drainage, intracamcral miotics to increase aqueous cutflow, and sometimes
the mechanical removal of fluid froin the anterior chamber have been used to treat cxtreme post-
operative pressure spikes. Judicious monitoring of lOP after surgery is always warranted.
Corneal erosions or ulcers may develop as an unwanted rcsult of general anesthesia and ex-
posure, the effects of which arc cxacerbated by the use of muscle paralytics. Self-trauma and the
use of presurgical topical medications (which may be locally irritating or inhibit corneal healing)
 may also contribute. Surgeons must be mindful of this possibility and take preventative action
wherevcr practical. Fortunately, thesc crosions tend to hcal rclatively quickly when treated ap-
propriately (i.e., avoidance of topical steroids).
Hyphema (blecding into the anterior chamber) may rcsult from excessive activity, barking,
self-trauma (rubbing, head shaking), neck trauma, uveitis, or retinal detachment. Postoperatively,
cataract surgery patients should wear Elizabethan collars that are fited appropriatcly, and should
be kept quiet.
Hypotony (excessively low IOP) may be due to surgical wound leakage. This situation is
best prevented by proper wound closure, but occasionally it is difficult to avoid. Flattening of the
anterior chamber. a visibly leaking wound, or a positive Seidel test arc tclltale signs of wound
leakagc. Identiication of wound leakagc is facilitated by the use of dry cellulose sponges placed
 at the sutured wound edge. lf leakage is detected, another attempt at suture placement or a con-
anesthetic episode. Altematively, some have advocated the injection of a very small amount of
saline or other fluid into the comeal stroma at the wound sitc in an effort to create enough sweiling
and cormeal edema to seal the wound.
Figure l. American cocker spaniel
presenting sevcral months aftcr phaco-
cmulsification  and IOL placement
surgcry. Apparently uveitis resulted
infibrinformation,which lnxated the
I0l, (lateral view).
128
Complications of Cataract Surgery
Figure 2. Same case as Figure 1 shrwing the
frontal view.
Figure 3. The IOL. was extracted and
the pupillary adhesions severed, giv-
ing an improved aphakic vision.
6. How is a Seidel test performed?
A Seidel test is performed by applying conccntrated fuorescein dye to the comca without ir-
rigation, then observing the area in question with a bluc light for fluoresccin strcaming. Visual-
face indicates leakage.
7. How common is infection following cataract surgery?
globe) as a resuit of cataract surgery is very rare in both dogs and humans. Despitc the routine use
of stcroids before and aftcr surgcry and the high incidence of diabetic and genialric cataracl pa-
tients, there are very few cases of documented iatrogenic infection. This has been attributed to pe
Tioperativc anlibiotic use, effective local immunity, small potential inoculum size, low virulence
sule (preventing posterior segment contamination).
8. What are the major long-term postoperative complications of cataract surgery?
The more common long-term complications (≥ 36 months) after surgcry include uveitis,
 posterior capsular opacity, secondary glaucoma, and retinal dctachment. Uveitis may manifest in
Complications of Cataract Surgery
129
a wide variety of ways. Corneal edema, kcratic precipitates, anterior or posterior synechiae, uvcal
pigment dispersion in the anterior chambcr, optically significant pupillary membranes and cap-
sular opacities, pupillary seclusion, iris bombe, IOl. luxation, and vitreal dcgcneration may rcsull
from chronic anterior or postcrior uveitis (Figs. 1-3). Both retinal detachment and cspecially scc-
ondary glaucoma can develop due to chronic uveitis. Postoperative retinal detachment may also
be a result of small preexisting retinal tears, which can be difficult to identify before surgery, as
well as instability of the posterior segiment (vitreous + retina) in the aphakic or pseudophakic eye.
Removal of thc lens contributes to this instability.
Overal., the short-term success rate for cataract surgery as pcrfonmed by phacoemulsification
has bccn quoted as 90. 95% succcssful (favorable visual outcome al 45 wceks). This pcrcentage
of success tends to decrease with length of postoperativc time considered.
9. Do cataracls ever grow back or re-form?
Once cataract surgery has been performed, a cataract does not regfow to form an entire new
lens per sc. However, lens remnants may proliferate and form an opacity that ullimately has the
same optical effect as a cataract. Posterior capsular opacities (PCOs) may form whcn residual lens
epithelial cells undergo fibrous pseudomctaplasia, accumulate, or cause wrinkling of the capsulc
These cells and the wrinkled capsule together can grossly appear to be transluccnt to opaquc
white, obstructing the path of light in the visual axis. Lcns capsular opacification ("aftercataract")
is the most common complication folilowing cataract surgcry in humans, often requiring surgical
intervenllon.
Icns cpithelial cells may also proliferatc and accumulatc to form a gray. globular material
called lentoid. This material may also block the visual axis. Lentoid accumulation is more likely
aspirated from the lens capsule. Lentoid may build up in the periphcry between thc anterior and
posterior lens capsules, forining either clumps ("Elschnig's pearls") or a doughnut shape ("Soem-
mering's ring'). If exposed to the iniraocular environment, it may be a source of chronic uveitis
lhat will only be resolved by its rcmoval. Howcver, if it evcntually becomcs sealed off to the in-
traocular cnvironment in the contracting anterior and posterior lcns capsule, it is less likely to in-
citelens-induced uveitis or obstruct thevisual axis.
10. What can be done about PCOs and lentoid?
Significant PCOs that causc noticeable visual inpairmcnt have been trcatcd with both laser
and surgical capsulolomy. The goal of these procedures is to create an optical clearing in the vi-
sual axis. Laser capsulotomy is commonly performed using an Nd:YAG laser as a noninvasive
procedure. Laser energy is directed through thc clcar ocular mcdia to any point in three-dimcn-
sional space. Each application of energy causes a focal dissolution of tissue, and laser spots can
and orientation. Surgical capsulotomy is performed by using an intraocular needle or scissors to
cut the capsule and move the PCO away from the axis. The PCO may then be fully cxcised and
rermoved from the eye. If lentoid is causing uveitis or visual impairrment, it is often readily re-
movable with irrigation/aspiration. Thorough lentoid removal is simplified if the lentoid is not
sealed off hy lens capsule or blockcd from surgical access by an lOL.
11. Does IOL inplantation change the rate of complications?
The complication rale of cataract surgery in dogs without IOLs was not noted to be signifi-
cantly different from tha1 with 1OLs in one study, but detailed comparison in large-scale, long-
term studies have not been perfonned.
Potential complications specifically associatcd with IOL usc include IOL dccentration, iris
capture, and uveitis. Deccntration, or a shift of the IOL's position from the visual axis, is not un-
common in humans. The IOL may tilf, luxate or subluxate, or come out of the capsular "bag."" or
a haptic or the optic may get caughit in the pupil (iris capture). Dcccnfration may be exacerbatcd
by changcs in the lcns capsule that occur after surgcry. Sutured-in IOLs (that havc been placcd in
130
Complications of Cataract Surgery
the ciliary sulcus after intracapsular lens cxtraction) are lcss likely to luxate, bul may tilt or rotale
in place since they are securcd at only two sites. Such alterations in the IOL position can be vi-
sually distorting in humans, but seem to be rarely behavioraly significant in animals. Chronic
uveitis may arise whcn an IOL is used, rcgardless of how unreactivc the IOL material or surface
is (see Chapter 20). Deposits of pigmcnted and unpigmented cclls on the IOL surface, fibrinous
or fibrous membranes on the IOL, and posteriot synechiae are soine of the morc cominon poten-
tial sequelae to such uveitis. As noted in the prior chapter, IOL usc may also reduce the incidencc
of some coimplications; IOI s may decrcasc the amount of PCO formation, because the IOl. con-
tacts the lens capsule and thus redhces the migration of lens epithelial cells (see Chapter 20, ques
tion I 1).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Glover TD. Constantincscu GM: Surgcry for cataracts. Vet Clin North Am Small An Pract 27: I 143-I 173.
1997.
2. Jaffe NS, Jaffe MS, Jaffe GF: Cataract Surgery and lts Complicalions, Sth cd. S1. Lonis, Mosby, 1990.
 3. Miller TR, Whitley RD, Meek LA, ct al: Phacofragmentation and aspiration for cataract extraction in dogs:
56 cases (1980-1984). I Am Vct Med Ass0c 190:1577-1580, 1987.
4. Nasissc MP, Davidson MG, Jainieson VE, et al: Phacoeimuisification and intraocular lens inplantation: A
study of technique in 182 dogs. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1:225-232, 1991
 5. Nasisse MP, Davidson MG, Jamieson VE, et al: Phacocmulsification and intraocular lcns implantation: A
study of surgical results in 182 dogs. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmnl 1:233-238, 1991.
6. Simith Pl, Brooks DE, Lazarus JA. et al: Ocular hypertension following cataract surgery in dogs: I39 cases.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:105-111, 1996.
V. Neuro-ophthalmology
22. NYSTAGMUS
Alexander deLahunta, D.V.M, Ph.D
1. What is nystagmus?
 Nystagmus is an involuntary novement of the eycs associatcd with vestibular or visual stinm-
uli. The oscillations can be horizontal, rotatory, or vertical. The excursions can be cqual in extcnt,
which is called pendular nystagmus, or they can consist of a fast and slow phase, which is a jerk
nystagmus. The latler is the most common.
 2. What does a right nystagmus mean?
Nystagmus is defincd by the direction of the fast phase of the jcrk nystagmus.
3. Is nystagmus always abnormal?
No. Norimal vestibular nystagmus occurs when you move your head in any direction. When
the head is moved in a horizontal plane to the right, the eyes wili stay focused on an object in their
visual field, and as the head moves out of that field, the eyes wili suddenly jerk in the direction of
thc hcad movemcnt. This is referred to as physiologic or vestibulo-ocular nystagmns.
4. Will this vestibulo-ocular nystaginus occur in a blind dog?
Yes. The anatomic pathways involved do not include the visual pathways
5. What is the anatonic pathway involved?
 The vestibular portion of the cighth cranial nerve carries impulses generated in the hair clls
Of the maculac and cristac ampullaris of the membranous labyrinth of the inner ear that constantly
monitor the position and movement of the head. Vestibular neurons responsible for eye move-
 ments synapse in the vestibular nuclei of the pons and medulla. Neurons in these vestibular nu-
clei project rostraily in the medial longitudinal fasciculi of each side to synapse on the extraocu-
lar somatic efferent neurons in the abducent, trochlear, and oculomotor nuclei. Testing this normal
nyslagmus serves to evaluate both this vestibular pathway and the somatic efferent neurons. In
thc horizontal nystagmus that results, the ocular abduction is a function of the medial rectus (ocu-
lomotor nerve), and the abduction is a function of the lateral rectus (abducent nerve).
6. Are there any other ways to stimulate normal nystagmus?
Yes. Nystagmus can be generated by the convection cuirents in the cndolymph thal results
from the irrigation of the extermal car canal with cold or warm water. This is callcd caloric nys-
tagmus. Postrotatory nystagmus is the bricf nystagmus that occurs after an animal has bccn
spun rapidly in a circle and then stopped. When the spinning stops the cndolyoiph contimues to
flow for a brief period, and this stimulates a jerk nystagmus dircctcd to the side opposite to the di-
rection of the spin. Optokinetic nystagmus can be generated by the visual stimulus oni observ-
ing a rotating striped drum. Caloric and optokinetic nystagmus are impractical in veterinary med-
icine as is the postrotatory in a patient that is too large to be picked up.
181
132
Nystagmus
7. What is an abnormal nystagmus?
Thc prcscnce of a continual jcrk nystagimus wifh the head motionless in any position. This is
a spontancous or resting nystagmus. Positional nystagmus is that which occurs with thc head
placcd in positions other than thc normal resting posture. It may be brief or continuous in these
positions. Positional nystagmus is usually looked for with the head held with the neck flexed 1o
either side and in extension or with the animal held in dorsal recumbency. The exlenl of these ob-
servations will be limited by the size and tolerance of the patient.
8. What is the cause of this nystagmus?
There is a conslant transmission of impulses from the epithelial receptors to the vestibulal
interruption can be al the level of the veslibular nerve or the nuclei in the brain stem or the cere.
bellarstructures thatfunclion withthevestibularsystem.
9. Students agonize over trying to remember what the direction of tlhe nystagmus means.
How can this be simplified?
Thc only constant is that when the disorder involves the periphcral portion of the vestibular sys-
tem, the nystagmus will always be directcd to the side opposite to the lesion. In other words, with a
left head tili and loss of balance to the lefl, the nystaginus will be horizontal or rotatory to the right.
10. How do I tell the direction when it is rotatory and especially with the round pupil of thc dog?
Estimate the 12 o'clock position of the iris and deteriminc the direction of the fast movement
from thcrc.
11. If the lesion is on one side of the brain stem or cerebellum what will the direction be?
Any direction! Often it wil bc opposite of the side of the lcsion, and therefore you must look for
 other reasons to inplicate the central components of the vestibular system in your anatomic diagnosis.
If the nystagmus is directed toward the side of the lesion, is vertical, or changes direction with
different positions of the head, the lesion is in the central components ol the vestibular system.
12. Does the abnormal nystagmus always affect both eyes?
Usually. lt is very rare to see only one eye alfecled, but somefimes 1he nystagmus is less in
onc eyc.
13. When does a pcndular nystagmus occur?
Most often this is a congenital disorder that is idiopathic or is related to an abnormal devel-
opment of the visual pathways. Many Siamese cals have more than the normal number of oplic
 nerve fibers that cross in the chiasm and therefore havc a different architecturc of thc lateral genic-
ulate nuclei. These cats sporadically exhibit a finc pendular nystagmus. An inherited failure of
crossing of thc optic nerves occurs in Bclgian shcepdogs. These achiasmatic dogs have a sevcrc
constant pendular nystagmus.
14. Is pendular nystagmus ever acquired?
Only as part of a diffuse whole body tremor such as occurs with numerous poisonings or in
the severc form of the canine " shakcr syndromc." which is an immunc-mediated central ncrvous
15. Is there ever a situation when no nystagmus (normal or abnormal) can occur?
Yes. When the vestibular reccptors in both inner ears do not form, undergo abiotrophy carly
in life, or are destroyed by a progressive lesion such as bilateral otitis interna.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. deLahutmta A: Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology. 2nd cd. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, 1983.
23. THE PUPIL
Ronald C. Riis, D.V.M., M.S
1. What is the most obvious pupil clinical sign?
The normal pupil symmctry in all lighting intensities is the characteristic we are all comfort-
norrnal pupils are those showing asymmctrical sizc in similar lighting intensities or asymmeiri-
cal rcactions tolight challenges.
2. What controls the size of the pupil?
Animal pupils are influenced by smooth musclc to cither dilatc or constrict the pupil, The inis
dilator muscle causcs pupillary dilation and is innervaled by the sympathelic nervous syslem. The
iris sphincter rmuscle causes pupillary constriction and is innervated by the parasympathctic ner-
vous systcm. These muscles can balance one another or override one another. When sympathetic
lone is increased, the pupil is larger. When parasympathetic tone is increased, the pupil is smallcr.
Avian and rcplile pupils are influenced by skeletal rmuscle.
3. What is the light reflex pathway for the positive pupillary retlex?
The pupillary light response begins with the rods and cones of the retina. Aiferenl pupillo
body to entcr thc brain stem. Pupillomotor fibcrs synapse in thc pretectal nuclei, which ihen pro-
the third cranial nerve (CN ill) into the orbit where they synapse at the ciliary ganglion. Post-
 ganglionic tibers innervate the iris sphincter and cause pupillary constriction when slimulated.
4. What is the pathway for dilation or sympathetic pupillary reflex?
The first-order neurons began in the hypothalamus. The fibers travel caudally to terminatc in
the intermedial latcral cell column of the cervical and thoracic spinal cord. Pupillomotor fibers
cxit from the spinal cord at T1-T3 and ascend thc syimpathetic chain to synapsc in the superior
cervical ganglion, constituting the second-order neuron. The third-order neuron begins with post-
ganglionie fibers of thc superior crvical ganglion. Thcsc fibers ultimatcly reach the orbit's cil-
iary hody and dilator muscle via the ciliary nerves.
5. What is an afferent pupillary defect and how should you examine for it?
In animals, use the swinging flashlight test lo elicit a relative afferent pupillary defect (rAPD).
If you shinc a light into onc cyc of a normal animal, both pupils consaricl to the same amount. If
you swing the light over the other cye, the pupils stay the same size or consirict minimally. In an-
imals with an rAPD, the affected cyc behaves as if it perceives a dirmmer light than thc normal
eye; lherefore, both pupils constricl to a lesser degree when the lighl is shone in the affecied eye.
strict. If you swing the light to the left cye, it is perccived as dimmer and thc pupils dilate. Notc,
however, that if both eyes are equally abnormal, there may be no rAPD.
6. Can the swinging flashlight test differentiate lesion locations for causes of anisocoria?
A positive swinging flashlight tcst is pathognomonic for unilatcral rctinal discasc, unilaleral
pupil will dilate slightly during direct light stimulation but only after the initial contraction from
the stimulus. This pupillary escape is a nonnal response resulling from adaptation of the stimu
lated retina, and it should not be confused with the pathologic dilalion resulfing in a "positive'
133
134
The Pupil
swinging flashlight tesl when direct light is shifted from the good eye to the bad eye. Nor should
pupillary escape be confused with hippus.
7. If an animal presents with an afferent pupillary defect, where is the lesion?
The lesion could be anywhere in thc afferent pupillary pathway to cause a rAPD. You must
rulc out retina, optic ncrve, optic chiasm, and optic tract (pupillary fibers cxit thc optic tract prior
to the latcral gcniculate body; thcrefore, lesions posterior lo the lateral geniculate body don't
cause rAPD). A large relina lesion causes rAPD. An optic nerve lesion causes rAPD in the ipsi-
lateral eye. A lesion in the optic chiasm may cause an rAPD if one optic nerve is affected more
rAPD in the eye with the most visual field loss. A mass lesion of the optic tract produces rAPD
in the ipsilateral eye, but an ischernic lesion causes rAPD in the contralateral eye. A lesion in the
 brain stem in the area of the pretectal nuclei may cause rAPD without visual defects.
8. What is the diagnosis of an animal with unequal pupils or asymmetrical pupils?
Anisocoria. which is a difference in size bctween the two pupils. The question is, which pupil
is normal?
9. How should anisocoria be explored?
  q u  s ese a  i  e  o ui ais ynd a ax
larger pupil is abnormal and constricts poorly —- usually bccausc of a defect in parasympathctic in-
nervation. If the anisocoria is greater in dim light, the sinaller pupil is abnormal because it dilates
poorly—-usually because of a defect in sympathetic inncrvation. If the difference in size remains the
cats, don't forget the spastic pupil syndrome as a differential. Thcse cats may havc pupils altcrnating
in size between their cyes, with or without intervals of normal pupils with equal appearance. This syn-
drome results from a viral neunifis and has been reported associated with: feline leukemia complex.
10. What are some rule-outs for a unilateral dilated, poorly reactive pupil?
· CN IHI lesion
● Pharmacologic paralysis (anticholinergic block from medications such as atropine or tropi-
camide)
· Adie's pupil
· Anatomic lesion (adhesions—anterior or posterior synechiae sccondary to trauma or in-
fammation; scnile iris atrophy; congenital anomalies such as colobomas)
● Relinal detachmenl-- pattial or incomplele
· Giaucoma
· Anteriorly luxated lens
11. What is an Adie's pupil?
Adie's pupil is a postganglionic defect in thc parasympathetic innervation to the pupil. These
animals present with a dilatcd pupil that may havc a slightly irregular shape that shows segmen-
redilation phases, This condition is generally benign and thought to be a denervation.
12. How do you test for an Adie's pupil?
An Adie's pupil constricts with dilute pilocarpine (0. 125%), whereas a normal pupil does not.
This confirns a denervation hypersensitivity.
13. How do you treat an Adie's pupil?
Usually, the chronic condition requires no treatment because tolerance seems develop. The acute
conditions may present with photophobia and tearing especially in bright lighting circumstances. Mi-
The Pupil
135
14. What are some causes of a unilateral, constricted, poorly reactive pupil?
Horner's syndrome
Synechia
Pharmacologic stimulation
 Persisteni pupillary mcmbrancs
Corneal lesion
Uveitis
Neoplasia
Brain stcm lcsion
15. What is included in thc differential diagnosis for bilateral, widely, dilated unresponsive
pupils?
Optic neuritis
Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)
Central nervous syslem lesion
Luxatcd lcnscs
Sudden acquired retinal dcgeneration
Glaucoma
(SARD)
Mydriatics
Detached relinas
Dysautonoimia
16. Is there a pupillary abnormality in poorly pigmcnted animals?
In the dog and cat, white hair coat, bluc iris, and deafness have bcen studicd. A white hair
coat in the cat and other species results from a doininant gene W. Cats with unilatcral blue irides
and albinotic fundus have larger pupillary apertures in that eye. In a group of 185 white cats, 125
(68%) had blue irides, and 101 (55%) were deaf, whereas 68 (32%) had yellow inides and jus1 13
(2%) were deaf. Electrorctinograms from these cats were normal, suggesting 1he anisocoria was
an anatomic difference. Dogs with blue irides do not have anisocoria unless accompanicd by iris
colobomas, persistent pupillary membranes, inis cysts, dyscorias, or corectopia (Figs. 1-3). Blue
Figure I. Grcat Dane showing an iris
colobma that must be differcntiatcd
fron polycoria (two or more pupils in
onc iris).
Figure 2. Dug iris dyscoria (an ab-
normality in the shape of the pupil)
caused by a ciliary and iris mass.
8
136
The Pupil
Figure 3. Toy fox terrier with cotec-
topia(an ecccntnic location of thc
pupil).
irides associated with partial or complete albinism or imerle hair coat have bccn attributed to an
incomplete dominant gene or a recessive trait with incomplete penctrance, respectively.
17. How and where can the most brisk pupillary reflex be elicited from a dog or cat?
Use a focal bright light sourcc directed into the tcmporal fundus from the medial canthal area
ofeacheye.
18. What is the consensual or indirect pupillary light reflex?
The consensual or indirect reflex is the constriction of the pupil not stimulated by light but
 generated by the opposite illuminated eye.
Figure 4. Cal pupil with dlyscoria
caused by an antenior uveitis. Note
the nodular dliscolorations within 1hc
iris stroma. Toxoplasimosis was the
etiology.
The Pupil
137
19. Does a positive direct or indirect pupillary reflex imply normal vision?
No. Only a few functioning photoreccptors are neccssary to activate the pupillary light reflex.
20. Does that mean the pupillary light refex in bilateral cataract cases is not a reliable way
to predict normal retinal function?
Retinal function should be evaluated with electrorelinograms, especially whcn the relinas
cannot be ophthalmoscopically examined and the animal is blind. This is a mandatory preopera-
tive evaluation for all cataract patients (Figs. 4-8).
Figure 5. Cat pupil with dysconia sec-
ondary to a luxatcd lens with forward
displacement of lens and vireous
causing an cxtrenely narrow anterior
chamber.
Figure 6. Dog with D-shaped pupil
caused by infiltrating lyinphosar-
coma cells.
138
The Pupil
Figure 7. Cat dyscoria causcd by a
melanoma prolifcration of the iris.
Figure 8. Dog miosis secondary to a
uveal melanoma.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Canton DD, Sharp NIH, Aguirte GC: Dysautonomia in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1293-1296, 1988.
2. Coulter DB, Martin CL., Alrarado TP: A cat with white fur and onc bluc cyc. Calif Vct 9:1l, 1980.
3. Scagliotti RH: Comparative neuro-ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN (ed): Veterinary Ophthahmology, 3rd ed.
Philardelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1999, pp 1307-1400.
4. Tumer P, Robinson R, Dyte CE: Blue-eycd albino: A new albino allclc in the domestic cat. Genctica
56:71,1981.
24. OPTIC NEUROPATHIES
effrey S. Smith, BVSc. FACVS
1. What does a blink response to the menacing gesture test indicate?
There is nmore to this test than a crude assessment of vision.
The response is initiated by the animal visualizing the gesture and interpreting it as threaten-
ing. This requires afferent input from the rctina, the optic nerve, and its radiations to 1he visual
cortex. Fibers from the cerebral cortex travcl via the cerebellum to the nucleus of the seventh cra-
nial nerve (CN VIl). The efferent facial nerve travels through the pelrous temporal bone to in-
nervate muscles of facial cxpression, such as the orbicularis muscle closing the eyelids together.
Rcmcmber, the aninal must rcgard the gesture as menacing. Very young animals will not
blink becausc they havc litule ncgative expcrience associated with this challenge. Similarly, de-
pressed or trusting animals may not blink, giving a misleading interpretation.
Disturbing tactile hairs around the eyes by touch or air movemcnt when pcrforming the ges-
ture will initiate a blink response (CNV and Vl1).
 2. Upon assessment of an animal withi a hyperinetric gait and other signs of cerebellar dis
ease, you judge the animal visual and able to blink but not in responsc to a menacing ges-
ture. How do you explain thesc findings?
As previously mentioned, thc cerebellum is a conduit for mcssages from visual cortices to fa-
cial nuclei. Cerebellar diseases such as ncoplasia or cerebellar hypoplasia are possibilities (Fig. 1).
Figure 1. MRI demonstrating a unilateral cerebellar mass lesion right side. Thc dog did not blink in response
Clinic.)
 3. Which cranial nerves are involved in the eye preservation blink refex following tactile
stimulus?
Air puffer (syringe) or touch will stimulate CN-V afferenls, which comumunicate with the fa-
cial nuclei in the medulla. CN- VII responds by inducing lid closure (as wel as reflex tearing).
139
140
Optic Neuropathies
ring. Touching the cornea with a coftton swab fails to elicit a blink response. Is this likcly a
problem in the afferent or efferent arm of the reffex?
Brachycephalics have fewer afferent CN- V sensory nerve endings in the comea than dolicho-
cephalics. This results in reduced frequency of blinking, reduccd tear film sprcad, and chronic kcr-
alitis.These complications lessen the compromised corneal sensitivity to conipound thc prohlem
(i,e., both arns ol the rellex are involved).
5. A persistent superfcial corneal ulcer in a middle-aged dog will resolve only partially
with your treatment for indolcnt ulceration. Blcpharospasm, an indication of corneal pain,
is surprisingly absent. Hlave you checked the response to tactile stinmulation?
Thc dog blinks whcn under observation but not im rcsponse to touching the cornea. Sinmilarly.
eyeball rctraction is not mitiated by touch. Concludc a sensory CN-V lesion. The cornieal epithelium
is dependent on normal CN-V inncrvation. Denervation can result in a nonhealing ulcer. It is im
portant to provide added lubricafion to the cormea until the problem resolves or the cause of the deficit
is determined. Tarsorrhaphy is also an option. Deterimine sensory function ol ihe other divisions of
CN-V (e.g., the lateral canihus and nares, tesling the maxillary branch). Look for evidence ol othcr
neuropathies slich as facial palsy or cerebellar signs, which ponl to cenlral verses penipheral diseasc
6. Can the lesions responsihle for failure of the efferent arm of the hlink refex (i.e., lesions
of CN-VIl, the facial nerve) be localized?
In thcsc cases, scnsation (afferent CN-V) is normal. Thc animal will retract the cye (CN-VI)
and perhaps withdraw iis head, but it will fail to blink. The extent of tlie facial paralysis must be
determined, Check for ear and lip droop (Fig. 2). Check for taste sensation with atropine applied
t0 the rostral part of the tongue on 1he affected side. Taste buds are inncrvaled by special branches
of the facial nervc. Chcck for normal tcar production alld nostril wetting (see Chapter lo). Con-
comitant hypalgesia indicating CN-V involvement points to a ccntral (brain) location of lesions.
Figure 2. Lamub with ear and lip droop
bccause of facialpalsy
                
ysis in the dog?
 The facial nerve courses through the petrous temporal bone giving off branches to the
lacrimal gland and salivary glands en route to the stylomastoid foramen from where il exits 1he
skull to innervate muscles of facial expression, Inner or imiddle ear disease such as infcctions and
petrous ostcitis can impair CN.VlI function. Many cases of otitis media-interna are low-grade,
chronic infections that may not carry obvious clinical signs, and facial paralysis is written off as
idiopathic. Otitis cxterma may not be prcsent. All cases of facial paralysis (and Horner's syn-
drome)shouldbegivena carefulevaluation of themiddle ear,this imcludes radiography of the
petrous tenporal bone. Increased yawning may be an adlded sign exhibited. Vestibular signs (e.g-,
Optic Neuropathies
[4]
nystagmus) may be present as a result cither of inner ear involvcmcnt or of a lesion in the brain
stem (central vestibular signs).
 8. Can retinal and optic nerve function be assessed despite the presence of dense
cataracts?
This problem confronts the ophthalmologist frequcntly. The definitive test of relinal function
is the clcctroretinogram (ERG). No matter how densc the cataract, light will pass through the lens
crated by a norimal retinu can be recorded. Thc ERG may be nonnal despite optic ncrvc disease.
9. How should a brisk eyelid closure in response to a very bright light be interpreted?
In this tesl, called the dazzle response, a very bright light elicits an aversion responsc sccn as
a bfink of varying speed and iutensity in dogs. Humans witl avcrt thcir gaze, turn away, and cvcn
sneeze.This test is not sensitive enough to detect carly retinal dcgenerative disease. Thc reflex is
subcortical. It can be elicited through a cataract. A brisk response is an encouraging sign.
10. Which cranial nerve supplies parasympathetic visceral effercnts to the lacrimal gland?
Abranch of thc facial nerve (CN-Vll).
11. What causcs neurogenic keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)?
One of thc many pathogeneses of KCS is denervation of the gland by a lesion of the facial
nerve. Depending on the location of the lesion, other branchcs of CN-VII and sometimcs CN-V
tmay be involved, with clinical signs consistent with these.
12. How do you interpret the finding of a dry nostril in conjunction with KCS?
Nasal moisture arises primarily from the lateral nasal gland, a scrous secreting gland locatcd
in the lateral nasal mucosa. Like the lacrimal gland, the nasal gland rcceives its innervation from
a branch of the facial nerve. This branch separates from that to the lacrimal gland at the level of
the pterygopalatine ganglion, ventrolatcral to the orbital cone and dorsal to the pterygoid mus-
in thc petrous temporal bone.
13. Why is it necessary to assess sensation in the lateral canthus area in cases of KCS?
to thc lacrimal gland travel to thc gland with branches of CN-V, no1 with CN-VI1. These CN-V
conduits are sensory to the lateral canthus arca. Hypalgesia or anesthesia in the latcral canthal
skin, in combination with KCS, enables location of a neuropathy to a peripheral site susceptiblc
fo injuries. Remember not all cases of KCS are neurogenic. Howcver, the finding of a CN-Vll
neuropathy in association with KCS confirms neurogenic KCS.
14. What are the ocular signs of sympathetic denervation (Horner's syndrome)?
Assuming that the Horner's syndrome is unilateral, as il is in most cases (Fig. 3), signs in-
:apnio
● Miosis in the affected eye. T'he pupil constriction is relative to the normal cye and is rel-
alively less marked in brighi light.
* Enophthalmos. The affected eye recedes into the orbit when the snooth muscle tone of
thc periorbita is reduced (i.c., "squeezc" on the eyeball is reduccd). Ihus sign is the imost
variable one that is scen.
·Narrowing of the palpebral fissure with loss of tone of upper and lower cyelid smooth
muscle. This sign will exaggerate the appearance of enophthalmos
· Third eyelid protrusion. This is mainly passive or secondary to cnophthalmos in the dog:
it is a dircct effect of loss of smooth muscle tonc in the cat
142
Optic Neuropathies
Figure 3. Left-sided Horncr's syn
droine in a cal. Miosis and a nar-
rowcd palpcbral fissure arc thc obvi-
ous signs in this photograph.
15. What is meant by pre- versus postganglionic sympathetic denervation?
The term refers to the site of a lesion in relation to the cranial cervical ganglion. an impor-
tant structure in the understanding of Horner's syndrome
+ The cranial cervical ganglion is thc location of the ccll bodies from which postganglionic
sympathetic axons stream forth to innervate all smooth musclc in ihe head area.
· The cranial cervical ganglion is located deep to the tympanic bulla.
· Preganglionic fibers arise in the hypothalamus and descend in the cervical spinal cord to
levels T1, T2, and T3. After synapsing at this level, the second-order ncuron enters the tho-
rax. joins the vagal trunk, and ascends the neck in the jugular groove to synapse in the cra-
nial cervical ganglion.
crTous sinus, and then utilize the ramifying fibers of CN-V as a conduit.
16.What are some of the better documented lesions of the first- and second-ordcr neuron
(i.e, preganglionic lesions) accounting for Horner's syndrome?
* Hypothalamic neoplasia
+ Cervical cord compression
·Brachialplexus avulsion Orneoplasia
* Anterior mediastinal space occupying lesions
· Trauma to the jugular groove area including iatrogenic needle stick injuries
17. What are some of the documented post-ganglionic lesions accounting for Horner's syn-
dromc?
Middle ear disease including iatrogenic injury with bulla osteotomy.
·Otitismedia should notbeoverlooked,
● Ear examination, despite the common lack of external signs, should be conducted.
● Orbital lesions affccting the ophthalmic division of CN-V traveling through the orbital
cone combined with the sympathelics
18. Define strabismus, enophthalmos, and exophthalmos.
Strabismus refers to a deviation of the eyeball from the normal visual axis. It is causcd by
abnormal neurologic innervation of extraocular muscles (CN-III, IV, and VI ), primary muscle
function disturbances, or space-occupying lesions of the orbit. Remember the vestibular appara-
tus plays an cssential role in the control of eyeball position through its input into the nuclei of CN.
II, IV, and VI.
Enophthalmos refers to sinking of the eyeball into the orbit. It should not be confuscd with
active retraction. Thc most common ncurologic cause is Horner's syndrome.
Exophthalrmos refers to abnormal protrusion of the cye. This may bc passive, as with shal-
low orbits. or active, as with a space-occupying lesion in the orbit. Apparent exophfhalinos oc-
Optic Neuropathies
143
curs in ihe dog where the animal is blind with widely dilated pupils. A combination of apprehen-
sion-increased sympathetic lone in the orbitat fascia plus the “staring" attitude of a blind dog con-
tributes to the exophthalmic appearance.
19. How would you expect the eye to deviate with a unilateral lesion of the oculomotor nervc
(CN-I1I)?
Onc should expect latcral strabisrmus with an inability to fix the gaze medially, dorsally, or
ventrally. Bilateral strabismus of this nature is called exotropia. Ptosis (drooping) of the upper
eyelid owing to lcvator palpebrae dencrvation may or may not accompany the strahisinus of ocu
lomolor nerve dysfunction. Similarly invoivcment of the pupils would depend on the location and
extent of the CN-IlI lesion.
20.What are the neurologic implications for a dog with a unilateral inahility to retract the
cyeball?
Eyeball retraction can be induced as a prescrvation response to noxious stimuli of the cye (af-
fercnt CN-V). Usually manual or chcmical rcstrictiou of simultaneous eyelid closure is necessary.
The withdrawal of the cye occurs vja the abducens-innervated rctractor muscle bundle. The third
cyelid will passively protrude. Loss of thc retraction response indicates an afferent CN-V or ef-
ferent CN-VI lesion. A CN-V1 lesion will be associatcd with medial strabismus.
21. What advicc can bc given to the worried owner of a cross-eyed cat?
The Siamesc breed is relatively prone to this trait although domeslic shorthairs are affected
   ss     s n  e s u  
tagmus may bc sccn also. Vision is not normal but adequate. The basis of the syndrome relates to
tialbinocularvision.
22. What is the oculocardiac reflex?
'Tension on extraocular muscles or retropulsion of the eyc will rcsult in slowing of the heart
in the norimal animal. Orbital space-occupying lesions or manipulation (c.g., during eyc rcmoval)
can initiate the reflex.
23. Which cranial nerves comprise the oculocardiac refex?
Affercnt impulses are carried by the ophthalmic branch of CN-V to the sensory nucleus in
thc medulla. Thc effercnt arm belongs to the vagus nerve (CN-X). Vagal slimulation induces
bradycardia and can imduce cardiac alrest.
Review ofcraniulnerves invotvedineyereffexes
REFLEX
AFFERENT CRAN1AL NERVE
EFFHRENT CRANIAl. NERVH
Menace
Vfi
Tactileblink
V
VII
Tactile relraction
V
V1
Dazzle
I1
VI1
 24. What is the differential diagnosis for an cye that is blind since birth despite appearing
normal with routine examination?
fhe problem rmost likely involves the retina or optic ncrve and may be unilateral or bilatcral.
Retinal dysplasia including dctachmcnt. This is secn as an inheritcd trait in somc breeds (e.g.
rough collie (scc Chapter 38). Retinal dysplasia may also be thc result of an intrauterine insult to
thc developing eye (e.g., viral infections, tcratogcnic drugs). Thc detached retina looks like a gray
veil behind the lens
 Optic nerve hypoplasia. The opic disc is very small, usually indicating an hypoplastic op-
tic ncrve (Fig. 4).
144
Optic Neuropathies
Figure 4. Fundus photograph depict-
ing a vcry simall optic disc in a blind
puppy.
25. What is the differential diagnosis for sudden blindness in the dog?
Pupillary light reflexes are reduced but seldom absent in the carly-presenting case. Retinal ex-
anination may be nornal or show subtlc abnormalities in early stagcs, progressing to tapetal hy-
perreflectivity with time. The dog oftcn cxhibits polydipsia and polyphagia. Blood cortisol levcls
arc clevated. The dog, however, is not a long-term hyperadrenocorticoid case and coes not require
thcrapy for hyperadrenocorticism. Pathogenesis of SARD is not known. Electroretinography
(ERG) indicales generalized retinal dysfunction.
Optic neuritis (papilledema). Vision loss is drainatic although not necessarily equal in each
eye. Pupils are widely dilated and vcry poorly or not responsivc. Thc prcscntation is similar to
SARD in that regard. On fundus examination, however, thc optic disc is often swollen with relinal
vessels climbing up over the protruding disc. The retina may detach and *tent up' around thc disc.
These fealures may not always be present and depcnd on ctiology. ERG indicatcs normal relinal
function unless the dog has a concomitan1 relinitis, in which case the ERGi may bc suppressed.
26. List the causes of optic neuritis in the dog.
Granuloinatous meningoencephalomyelitis (GME) is the most common cause. This multifo
cal central nervous systen disease has a high likelihood of optic nerve involvement (Fig. 5). GME
may present initially with signs referable to optic nerve disease only (i.e., sudden blindness with
11o other neurologic deficil).
·Distcmpcr
·Cryptococcosis and more rarely other mycoses
Optic Neuropathies
145
Higure 5. Fundus photograph of a swollen optic disc
consistent with optic neuritis.
· Toxoplasmosis
● Neoplasia in the orbit, chiasm, or base of brain (e.g., pituitary gland)
● Trauma. Considcr skull fractures around the basisphenoid, forcign bodies, and iatrogenic
Hypertensive retinopathy with retinal detachments and retinal hemorrhage is seen in the old cat
with blood prcssure lcvels usually excccding 200 mmHg (Figs. 6 and 7). Funduscopic examination
reveals vascular explosions and a billowing relina. The retinopalhy is not always bilatcrally syim-
Figures 6. Retinal detachimenl with hemorrhages in a
cat with blood pressure rccorded at 300 mmHg.
146
Optic Neuropathies
Figure 7. Ultrasound appearance of
the reinal detachmenl with the typi-
cal "bird-wing" featurc.
metrical. Affccted cats may remain relatively more visual in one eye. Therapy directed at blood
pressure reduction may preserve vision or even restore vision at times.
28. What are some of the causes of optic neuropathy in cats?
●Cryptococcosis
● Toxoplasmosis
· FIP
FoqduA] ▪
One should expect signs of retinitis and uveilis with these diseases.
GME does not occur in the cat.Note:Optic disc edcmais not a common sign of optic neu-
ropaihy in the cal.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Acheson GH: The topographical anatomy of the smooth muscle of the cat's nictitating 1meinbrane. Anat
Rec 71:297-311. 1938.
2. Acland GM, Irby NL, Aguirre GD, et al: Sudden acquired rctinal dcgcneration in thc dog: Clinical and
mouphologic characterization of the *silent rctina” syndrome. Traus Am Coll Vet Ophthalmol 15:86,
1984.
3. DeHaas EBH: Dessication of cornca and conjunctiva after scnsory denervation. Arch Ophthalmol
67:79-92, 1962
4. de Lahunta A: Veterinary Ncuroanatomy and Clinical Ncurology. Philadelphia, W.B. Sauntders, 1963.
5.Kalil RE, Jhaveri SR, Richards W: Auomalous retinal pathways in the Sianese cat: An inadequate suh-
strate for normal binocular vision. Science 747:302.1971.
6. Miller ME: Anatomy of the Dog. Philadelphia, W,B. Saunders. 1964.
7. Scagliotti RH: Comparative neuro-ophthalmology. In Gclatt KN (ed): Veterinary Ophthalmology.
Philadelphia, Lippincott Willians & Wilkins, t999, p I 346.
8. Whitchcad JE: Oscillation of feline eyes. Mod Vet Pracl 40:56. 1959.
VI. Oculoplasties
25. EPIPHORA
Dennis K. Oftvero, D.V.M.
I. Define cpiphora.
Epiphora is a gcneric tenn used to indicate tcar overflow onto thc face or cheek without rcf-
crence to a spccific cause.
2. Where are tears produced in dogs and cats?
The tear filin is composed of three layers. An inner laycr of mucus produced by goblet cells
of the conjunctiva provides adherence of the tears to the epithelial cells of the cornea. An outer
laycr of oil is produced by the mcibomian glands, and this prcvents rapid tear film evaporation.
Berwecn the inner mucus and outer cil layer is the aqueous or watery tears.
Thc aqucous tear layer is produced by two glands. The orbital gland lies in the periorbita of
the dorsolateral orbit and empties tear fuid into the adjacent conjunctival fornix. T'he third eye-
lid tear gland, located at the base of the T cartilage of the nictitans, secretes tears into the ventral
conjunctival fornix. The orbital gland produces approximately 65% of the total tear volume with
the other 35% provided by gland of the nictitating membrane.
3. What function do tears provide for the eye?
The tears provide lubnication and protection to the surface cells of thc cye. Mechanically,. the
tears cleanse the ocular surfacc,removing environmental debris. Nutrient and waste exchange oc-
curs betwccn the tcar fiim and the cormeal epithclial cclls. The tcar film can also provide a limited
immune response with surface antibodies, complement, lactoferrin, and other proteins.
4. After lubricating and cleansing the ocular surface, where do the tears drain?
The nasolacrimal system drains tcars to the nostril or mouth. Along the eyelid imargin and
2-5 mm lateral from the mcdial canthus, thc nasolacrimal puncta open. The puncta provide
drainage into the upper and lower canaliculi, respectively, which later converge in the lacrimal
fossa of the lacrimal bone as the lacrimal sac. A single duct drains the tears from the lacrimal sac
to the nostril. Fifty percent of dogs and cats have an accessory opening of the nasolacrimal duct
in the oropharynx. Orbicularis oculi muscle movements alter pressure gradients in the canaliculi,
Sixty percent or more of the tear volume drains through the inferior branch to the lacriral
sac,making this scgment of the systcni most important in terms of tear outflow.
5. What is the clinical approachi to epiphora?
It is helpful to categorize patients that presenl with tearing into thrce groups. One group of
patients have epiphora because they are producing tears at an exccssive levcl, overwhclming the
capacity of the nasolacrimal system. A second group of patients demonstrate epiphora due to de-
velopmental or acquircd conditions causing partial or coinplete closure of the drainage systein
a scemingly patent and functional nasolacrimal system. These patients are often referred to as hav-
ing“idiopathic epiphora"(Fig. 2).
147
148
Epiphora
Figure 1. A 3-year-old Amenican
cocker spaniel dog presents [or
cpiphora. Notc the inpcrforate lowcr
puncta with marked distention of the
lowercanaliculi
Figurc 2. A 6-month-old femalc toy
poodle presents for epiphora. The
epiphora" and marked tear staining
are evidenl.
 6. What are the clinical features of patients that overproduce tcars?
These patients show obvious signs of ocufar discomfort with conjurctival hypcreinia and
squinting. High Schirimer tear tests with saturation of the tear strip in less thcn 1 minutc confirins
lacrimation. Fluorescein dye passage is confirmed at thc nostril or in thc mouth in 2-3 minutes,
indicating patcncy and function of the nasolacrimal system. Thc cause for lacrimation can be iden-
tiffied with evaluation of the ccular adnexa and cormea. Common causes for epiphora include en-
Iropion, ectropion, distichiasis, trichiasis, ectopic cilia, conjunctivitis, and ulcerative keratitis.
 7. How is epiphora managed in paticnts with lacrimation?
Epiphora resolves when the primary problem is treated. This can include plastic surgical pro-
ccdures to correct cyelid confortnational problems, removal of irritating hairs in contact with the
cormea, and medical or surgical treatmcuts for conjunctivitis and ulcerative kcratitis
8. What are the clinical features of patients with nasolacrimal system closure?
· Normal Schirrer tear tests
· No obvious signs of ocular iritation
● Fluorescein dye passagc tests arc negative after 5 minutes on the affectcd side
● Nasolacrimal drainage failure is confirmcd with attemptcd flushing of the systcm
9. What does a negative fluorescein dye test indicate with respect to nasolacrimal patency?
If fluorescein dye is noied at the nostril after 5 minutes or less in animals, patency and func-
lion of the nasolacrimal system are confirmed (positivc test). Lack of dye prcscnce (ncgativc test)
means nothing with respect to function or patency of the system. Fifty pcrcent of normal animals
Epiphora
[49
will have a negative fuorcscein dyc test to the nostril, many of thcse having an accessory duct
that drains into the oropharynx. A negative fluorescein dye test necessitales nasolacrimal fush-
ing for further evaluation of the system.
10. Describe the technique used for fushing the nasolacrimal system.
Nasolacrimal systein flushing usually can be performed in the absence of general ancsthesia
Or sedation. Topical anesthetic (0.5-1.0 % proparacaine HCl) drops are placed on the ocular sur-
face repeatecily for 2 minutes prior to flushing. Topical ancsthctic can then be placed on a cofton
swab and held on the superior puncta to furthcr reduce sensalion. The supcrior puncta is cannu-
canaliculi through the nasolacrimal sac. As soon as saline is noted exiting the lower puncta, the
cxamincr applies gentle pressutc ovcr the inferior puncta, and fushing is continued until saline
drains from the nostril or swallowing is notcd. The ease ot flushing and character of initial matc-
rial exiting the inferior puncta or nostril should be noted,
11. What conditions can result in nasolacrimal system failure?
Imperforate puncta is the most common condition that results in drainage failure. This con-
bccause gravity promotes drainage predominantly through the inferior puncta. Iimperforale puncta
is noted most frequcntly in American cocker spanicls, Bedlingion leniers. golden retricvers, po0-
dlcs. and Saimoyeds. Improved drainage is noted afier a thin vcil of conjunctiva is removed over-
Iying lhe nost proximal aspect of the uppcr or lower canalicuili on thc eyclid margin.
Aplasia or displacement of the canaliculi or duct is rarely reporled in animals. In this situa-
drainage pathway into the nasal or oral cavily eslablishcd.
Trauma or scarring in the medial canthal region can result in cicatricial injury to the proxi-
mal drainage systcm. Fractures of the nasal bone with cxcessive callus formation or aggressive
nasal tumors or intections (fungal) can result in loss of function of the lower aspect of thc naso-
lacrinal system.
(dacryocystitis) occurs occasionally and is imost coinmonly noted in hunting dogs. Foreign bodies fre-
quently arc trappcd in the nasoiacrimal sac, and thorough flushing from the supcrior puncta oftenl will
produce the foreign material at the dilated inferior puncta. Chronic secondary infection of the naso-
lacrimal system can subsequcntly bc treated with cannulation of the system with silicone or plastic
tubing. Topical and systeimic antibiotics are administered for sevcral weeks while the lube is in place.
12. What ancillary tests are avaitable to further define nasolacrimal system failurc?
When nasolacrimal system fushing is unsuccessful and the system cannot be cannulaled, the
extent to which the cannula can bc advaniced indicates the point of blockage. Conlrast material
can be injected into the nasolacrirmal system, and radiographs or Hnoroscopy can be perforrmed to
idcntify the exact location of the blockage (dacryocysiorhinography). Advanced imaging tech-
niques (Computed Tomography or Magnctic Resonance limaging) can be used to determinc the
level and cause of nasolacrimal syslem blockage when necessary.
13. What are the clinical features of patients with idiopathic epiphora?
These patients show no obvious signs of ocular discomfort or irritalion and norrnal or high
normal Schirmer tear tests. Despite overflow of tears onto the face, the fluorcscein dyc passage
lest is frequently positive, and, when ii is not, the system can be readily cannulated and flushed
to drainage of tears onto the face than throughi the nasolacrimal system.
14. ls any breed predisposition known for idiopathic epiphora?
Toy breeds of dogs including the poodle, bichon frise, Maltese, and Yorkshire terrier fre-
quently present with thc complaint of tearing. Brachycephalic breeds of cats often demonstrate
overflow of tcars onto ihe skin of thc mcdial canthus. The vast majority of paticnts that prescnt
150
for clinical evaluation have white or lightly colored hair coat. Dogs with darker hair coats can tear
excessively, but the associated brown stain of epiphora is not obvious lo thcir owners.
15. What causes the brown stain associated with epiphora in dogs and cats?
Many thcories havc bccn advanccd explaining the brown color associated with tearing in-
cluding the prescnce of porphyrins in thc tears o1 that the brown stain represcnts a by-product of
bactcrial digestion of tear constituents on thc skin. The cxact naturc of the hrown stain associated
with epiphora in animals, however, is not known.
16. Are there any simple remedies for idiopathic epiphora?
A number of treatments have been advanccd, but unfortunately a uniformly successful treat-
those that are not are variably successful. Veterinarians spend considerable time convincing own-
cosmctic problem. Some clients wil be satisfied with this explanation and will leam to clcan the
mcdial canthal area daily. With time, thc brown stains are evcntually considered "norimal for
their dog or cat. Othet clients will continue to seek remedies for cpiphora staining in thcir pets.
Both medical and surgical options have been described.
Dogs with epiphora staining have been successfully trcated with tetracycline and metronida-
zole. By unknown mechanisms, both of these drugs, when given daily at low lcvcls, result in res-
olution of brown staining on the hair coat. Tear production is not altcred, and thc skin in the me-
dial canthal region remains wet. These agcnts may affect porphyrin production by thc tcar glands
Of altcr local bactcrial flora on the skin. As soon as the antibiotic agents arc withdrawn, brown
stainingreappears.
Oral antihistamincs decrease saliva and tear production in people and animals. Variable re
sponses have been noted in dogs with epiphora after treatment with topical or oral antihistamine
drugs.
18. What are the surgical options for idiopathic epiphora?
When the goal is to improve tcar drainage, thcre are two options. One approach involves im-
proving drainage through the exisfing nasolacnimal systcm, and the other approach involvcs cre-
19. Describe procedures used to improve drainage through the existing nasolacrimal
drainagesystem.
Several sccmingly minor anatomic fcatures promote tear drainage onto the skin of the me-
its thc lacrimal lake volume and may excessively bend or kink the inferior canaliculus, medial
lower eyelid entropion, or nasal folds that tend to roll the lid margin toward the globe with mar-
ginal tissue folding over the inferior punctal opening, and hairs growing on the carunclc gland in
the medial canthus that provide a "wick" for tear movement onto 1he skin of the face. Dogs with
cpiphora often show a "creasc" in the skin in the mcdial canthus, which may act like a trough, si-
 phoning tears onto the skin with each blink. This crcase results from attachment of the medial can-
thal skin to thc medial canthal tendon on the nasal bone and mild lower cyelid medial entropion.
Patients variably show improved nasolacrimal tear drainage with removal of 1he caruncle
tion of the medial canthal tendon to reduce lension on 1he lower eyelid, which relieves compres-
sion on the inferior canaliculi. Entropion corrections can be used alone or in addition to nasal fold
rcduction or rcscction to improvc drainagc via the interior puncta. In certaiu cases, mcdial cantho-
plastic procedures can be employed to elevate the upper and lower cyclid from thc nasal bonc and
recreate thc rmedial canthus in the absence of a crcase creatcd by the medial canthal tendon.
Epiphora
151
Approximately 50% of patients show marked improvement in tea1 staining after the above
no change.
21. Describc proccdures used to create alternative drainage of tears?
Several procedures have been described toredirect tears from thc mcdialcanthal skin indogs
with cpiphora. One procedurc involves crcating a conjunctival-lined fistula from the venfral con-
junctival fonix into the nasal passage (conjuctival rhinostoimy) or inaxilary sinus (conjunctival-
maxillary sinusotomy).Asecondprocedare involvesreroutinglearsviaaconjunctivalormucosal
lined fistula under the facial skin from the ventrolateral conjunctival fornix to the mouth
(conjunctival buccostomy). These procedurcs can also be considercd in patients with irreversible
damage to thc nasolacrimal system secondary to trauma, neoplasia, or retained foreign body
 22. Can tear production be decreased surgically in dogs with idiopathic epiphora?
Surgical reduction or removal of the third eyelid tear gland has becn advocatcd by some for
troversial,
CONTROVERSIES
23. Should chronic administration of low dosages of tetracycline by mouth be used to alle.
viate tear staining in dogs?
tear staining to seek professional advice imay not be salisfied when told to ignore the unsightly
dark stains. These clients appreciatc the improvcd appcarancc of thcir animals when treatiment
with oral tetracycline is inslituted. Iow dose chronic antibiotic trcatment with tetracycline is not
frequenily associated with complications. The trcatment is conservative, does not involve surgi-
cal procedures, and is reversible. Tetracycline is not ordinarily used to treat lifc-threatening bac-
terial diseases in dogs or cats.
Againsf chronic oral antibiotic therapy: Chronic antibiotic treatment always carries risk of
mon antibiotics. Devclopmcnt of resistant strains of resident bacteria could later threaten the
health of thc patient.
24. Should alternative tear drainage to the nasal cavity be considered in patients with a non-
functionalnasolacrimalsystem?
For establishment of drainage into rhe nasat passage: Tears normally drain to thc nostril or
will rapidly alleviatc tearing and tcar staining.
Against establishment of drainage into the nasat passage: The nostril and oropharynx as well
t0 clean debris from air as it progressively passcs from the upper to the lower airway. Drainage
of tears and mucus material from the ocular surface into the more distal nasal passagcs may re-
sult in bacterial rhinitis.
25. Should toy breeds of dogs with epiphora have the third eyelid tear gland removed?
Yes. Patients with idiopathic tear staining syndrome frequently show high normal tear pro.
duction. Although the nasolacrinal system is intact and functional it cannof accommodate the vol-
ume of tcars and staining develops. Removal of the tear gland of the third eyelid, reduces tear pro-
duction by up to 35%, thereby alleviating excessive drainage of tcars onto the skin.
 No. Third eyelid gland removal has been studied thoroughly in dogs with prolapscd gland of
the nictitans or "cherry cye." One study shows a 37 times increased incidence of keratoconjunic-
152
Epiphora
tivitis sicca in dogs that have the gland removed versus those in which the tear gland is surgically
replaced. Although epiphora is bothersome lo clients and unsightly, it is not vision thrcatening.
Dry eye, on the other hand, can be vision threatening particularly in cascs unresponsive to topi-
cal cyclosporinc. Third cyelid gland removal is irrcversible.
Classification of Patients with Epiphora
GROUP
GENERAL MECHANISM
CAUSES
TREATMENT
Overproduction of
Conjunctivitis
Treat prinary problem
lears (lacrimation)
Entropion/ectropion
Distichia/trichiasis
Ectopic cilia
Llceralive keratitis
Foreign body
II
Nasolacrimal system closed
Congenital defects
Establish patency when
(drainage tailure)
Trauma
possiblc
Retained foreign body
Establish alternativc
trainagc if desired
0un
Infection
111
Imperfect nasolacrimal system
Medial canthal
Coitect predisposing
entropion
analomic features (r
epiphora")
Nasal folds
establish alternativc
Tight lowcr eyelid with
drainage if desired
shallow lacrimal lake,
medial canthal crease
Catuncle hairs“wick"tears
Micropuncta
High normal tear production (?)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Baimetl KC: 1mperforate and microlacrimal puncta in the dog. JI Snall Anim Pract 20:482-490, 1979.
2. Covitz D, Hunzikcr I, Koch SA: Conjunctivorhinostomy: A surgical mcthod for rhe control of epiphora
in the dog and cat. J Aim Vet Mcd Assoc 171:251-255, 1977.
3.Filipek ME、Ruhin LF: Effect of metronidazole on lacrimation in the dog: A negative report. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 13:339 341, 1977.
4. Gale VG: Use of metronidazole iu treating tear staining in the dog. Vet Rcc 14:98, 1976.
5. Gelatt KN, Cure TH, Guffy MM, et al: Dacryocystorhinogiaphy in the dog aud cat. J Small Anim Pract
13:381-392. 1972
6. Goldberg RA, lHeinz GW, Chiu L: Gadolinuim magnetic resonance imaging dacrocystography. Ain J
Ophthaimol 115:738-741, 1993.
7. Grahn BH: Diseases and surgery of the canine nasolacrimal system. In Gelatt K (ed): Veterinary Oph-
thalmology, 3rd cd. Philadelphia, Lippincott Willians & Wilkins, 1999, pp 569-581.
8. Kcrspack RW. Kerspack WR: Thc orbital gland and tcar staining in the dog. Vet Med Surg Small Anirn
Clin 61:121-124. 1966.
9. Lavach JD. Scverin GA, Roberts SM: Dacryocystitis in dogs: A rcview of 22 cascs. J Am Anit Hosp
Assoc 20:463-467,1984.
10. Loftus WK, Kcw J, Mctrciweli C: Nasolacrinal duct opacity on CT. Br J Radiul 69: 630-631, 1996.
11. Long RD: The relief of epiphora by conjunctivorhinostomy. J Small Anim Pract 16:381. 386. 1975.
12. Morgan RV, Dudd IM. McClurg K: Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid in dogs: A retrospcctive
study uf 89 cases (1980-1990). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:5661, 1993.
13. Murphy IM, Severin GA. Lavach JD: Nasolacrimal catleterization for treating chronic dacryocystitis.
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 72:883-887. 1977.
14. Peiffer RI., Gwin RM, Gelatt KN: Correction of inferior medial entropion as a cause of cpiphora. Canine
Pract 5:27-31. 1978.
15. Seo KM, Nam TC: Tear fornation. the patency and angle of hend of nasolacrimal duct in poodle dogs
with tcar staining syndrome. Korcan J Vet Rcs 35: 383-390, 1995.
[6. Thun R. Ahraham RS. Helper LC: Effect of tetracycline on tear production in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 11:802-804. 1975.
17. Yakely WI.. Alexandra JH: Dacryocystorhinography in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 159:1417-1421, 1971.
26. BLEPHAROPLASTIC PROCEDURES
Robert I. Munger, D.V.M
1. Is a blepharoplastic procedure permittcd on a show animal?
two issues. The first is the cause of thc defcct or problem that warrants thc procedure, and the sec-
ond is the intended use of the animal afler the surgery. Certainly, it is appropriate to perform whal-
ever surgery needs to be done to preserve structure, health, and function of the eye. If the patient
is to be used for show and the defect to bc corrcctcd is unrelated to inhcritcd causcs (e.g., it is as-
sociated with trauma, neoplasia, or other discasc), no conflict exists and thc procedure may be per-
forincd without reservations or conditions. Howevcr, if the surgery would disguisc or resolve an
inhcrited condition, the agcncy rcgulating the showing of animals of that breed should be consulted
and the owner should be advised when such surgery would disqualify the aniimal from showing
Above all, the welfare of the animal must not be conpromised, and surgery should be performmed
to alleviate pain or potential loss of vision even when such disqualification would occur.
2. What breeds of dogs are predisposed to entropion?
Chowchow
English bulldog
Norwegian elkhound
Rottweiler
Chinese shar-pei
Labrador retniever
St. Bemard
Golden retriever
English springer spaniel
Toy and tminiature poodles
English and American cocker spanicls
Mastiffs
3. What breeds of dogs are predisposed to ectropion?
The bloodhound, St. Bermard, Great Danc, Ncwfoundland, mastiff, bassct hound, and many
of the spaniel brccds are predisposed to ectropion. Thc common denominator in these breeds is
the excessive amounis of facial skin and large palpebral fissures, so any dog with such features
regardless of breed should be regarded as being at risk of having or developing sorne degree of
cctropion. Such dogs may also have areas whcrc the lids are entropic as wcll, cspccially those with
the diamond or pagoda-shaped palpebral fissures. These dogs may well require combincd or mul-
tiple procedures for correction.
Generally, when only the correctivc surgery is considered, it is idcal to wait until a patient
has achievcd full growth and the conformation of the face and lids has rcached its mature ap-
 pearance. Many clinicians arbitrarily set 4. 6 monihs as the agc at which surgery should bc con-
sidered. However, no rule is hard and fast, and the mosl compclling things to consider are whether
thc condition is causing harm or pain and whether delaying the surgery will result in undue risk
l0 vision or function. Whenever such dclay would be harmful, surgery is indicated. When per
 rass a sind o ra i    ban ay e ris asns 
pion, such as in the Chinese shar-pei, lid tacking with vertical mattress sutures or other such tem
porary procedures may be performed to see if thc puppy will outgrow the condition. If the con-
dition persists or worsens, a modifed Hotz-Celsus proccdure or other permanent correction may
be considered superior to repeated temporary measures.
5. What are the causes of entropion and ectropion and how can they be cvaluated?
contribute to cyelid position. The relationships bctwccn the orbit, eyelids, and globe affect the po-
153
154
BlepharoplasticProcedures
sition of thc lids, and the coinplexily of these relationships is at best difficull to define genelically.
the lids. For example, atrophy of orbital fat or musculature can result in cnophthalmos that pre.
disposes to entropion. Injuries, either acute or chronic, can result in scarring or blepharospasm
that also can cause defects in lid position. Thcrcfore, the clinician must approach each case with
careful evaluation of both conformation of the lids, eye, and orbit and any othcr factors that arc
present. When blepharospasm is present in association witi ocular pain, topical local anesthesia
can be applied to evaluate the true degrec of cntropion when pain is not present. In some cases,
the discomfort may bc so scvere that blepharospasm in not eliminated by topical anesthesia. When
that occurs. local anesthetic can be injected to perform a palpebral nerve block 1o eliminale the
daut. Manipulation of the lids usually allows the clinician to judge the anount of correction
needed to eliminate cxccssivc skin and lid margins.
 6. When performing lid surgeries what are the most critical anatomic considerations with
respect to lid function and position?
The eyelids may be divided into two basic layers; the skin and muscle layer and the tarsocon-
junctival laycr. Dissection and apposilion of these layers must be carefully attendcd during rccon-
struclive surgery. The tarsal plate is thin in dogs and cats so the shape and support of their lids is
greatly depcndcnt on the lid margins. Preservalion of the lid margins is, thiercforc, of grcat impor-
tance for proper lid shapc, mobility. and retention of tears in the lacrimal sac. The blood supply arises
mainly from the medial and latcral canthal arcas. Therefore, dissections imust strive to preserve this
blood supply. When flaps are fashioned from thc lids, the medial or lateral pedicle should be 46
lid covers the majority of the cornea during blinking and is more imporlant than the lower lid for
protection of the globe. The lower lid is more important for prevenlion of tear overflow onto the
face. The medial and lateral canthi must remain well anchored and stable to allow the best approx-
imation and function of thc upper and kower lids with respcct to their position and joint function.
Whenever possible it is important to preserve the upper and lower puncta in thc mcdial aspcct of the
lids, but the lower punctum functions io drain the majority of the tears because they are moved me-
dially by blinking. Thus, its prescrvation should takc precedence over the upper.
 7. Which surgical instruments should be included in a basic surgical pack for lid surgcry?
General soft tissue instruments arc appropriate for handling the periocular skin, but a pack
should also include certain essential ophthalmic instrumenits.
· Strabismus or tenotomy scissors should be included for cutting tissues and suture.
● Delicate serrated and toothed forceps such as Bishop-Harmion forceps or 0.3 mm I × 2
Castroviejo scissors are excellent for handling the eyelids.
● Smaller toothed forceps such as Colibri or 0.12 mm Castroviejo forceps are excellent for
handling the conjunctiva.
· Scalpel blades should be smal (Bard-Parker nos. 1 1 and 15 or Beaver nos. 64 and 65), and
suitable handles for these blades should beincluded
● Eyelid specula of appropriate size and rigidity are useful and are a mattcr of surgcon's prcf-
crence.
· A Barraquer wire cyelid spcculum is appropriate for smaller delicate eyelids, but larger
 more rigid specula are usually needed for larger palpebral fisstires.
● An ophthalmic needle holder such as a Derf or large Castroviejo needle holder is essential
for handling the delicate needles and suture used in eyelid surgery.
· A Jaeger lid plate is useful as a backing for making lid incisions, although a sterile tongue
 depressor may be used if this instrument is not available.
lizing and stabilizing the lids during procedures.
Blepharoplastic Procedures
155
8. Which sutures should be kept on hand for blepharoplastic procedures?
Suture prefcrencc varies widely among surgeons. In general, ihe suturc and needle that should
 bc chosen is that which causes minimal trauma on passage with mninimal tissuc reaction and scar-
ring. Closurc of the tarsoconjunctiva and subcutaneous tissues is best performcd with 40 to 60
absorbable suturcs such as chromic gut, polyglycolic or polyglactic acid, and polydioxanone.
When placcd in the tarsoconjuncliva, thc knots should be wcll buried to avcid irritation, and
smallcr suture size is preferable becausc migrafion or crosio of larger knots through the con-
junctiva may cause corneal irritation and ulceration. Closure of the skin should be performcd with
4-0 to 6-0 nonahsorbable sulurc, depending on the skin thickncss and thc required placement of
sutures. Smallcr sutures are generally used in thinncr skin and around the lid margins. In the past
silk sutures have been the norm, but modern monofilamcnt materials such as polypropylene and
nylon are less reactive and are more commonly used in today's surgeries. The monofilament su-
tures are more likcly to be irritating if they contact the cornea, so extreme care imust be observed
with their placemenl. Silk sutures are belter lolerated in the event of comeal contacl, and the dis-
advantage of thcir tissue reaclivity and potential for wicking, which allows bacterial invasion, can
 of sutures requires protection of the incision to prevent dehiscence.
 9. How can notch defects of the Hid margin be prevented when closing defects that involve
the margin?
 Because of the mobility of the lids, stabilization of the lid margin presents a special challenge
to the surgeon. If a suture is not placed across the margin, a notch in the margin can develop, but
tied to other sutures. A cruciate or figure-8 suture allows stabilization of thc margin with thc knot
tied away from the margin. The figure below shows the passagc of the suture to achieve thc de-
sired resulis. lnially the needle passes through the skin adjacent to the margin then across the
defect to the subcutaneous tissue at thc lid margin. From there it passes outward, exiting the lid
-ns ayi ix (.a na, ar) ses r a no shsdo pnp s yo jaai an e 
ture passes across the defect to enter the margin at the gray linc pass to the cpposite side of the
incision througlh thc subcutaneous tissuc and out through the skin opposite the initial cntry point.
Thus, when the suture is tied, the knot is in the upper koop of the figure 8 while the lower loop of
the 8 stabilizes the lid margin (sec Figure 6).
Hemorrhagc in lid procedures can usually bc controlled with fine-point cautery whenever
such cautery, but ligatures arc rarcly needed except possibly with construction of faps in some of
the 1nore extensive blepharoplastic procedures.
11. Why does entropion occur in an older animal when it has been fine all its life and no in-
jury or other problems occur?
Because the lids of dogs and cats lack a tarsal plate, contact with the globe is extreinely im-
frank entropion may deveiop and can be dificult to manage because persistent loss of support
from the globe can allow for enough lissue shift to allow later recurrence of the entropion. Any
orbital discase that results in atrophy or scarring of orbital structures can result in enophthalmos
mimicking that is age related.
12. How is the Hotz-Celsus procedure performed and when is it used?
The Hotz-Celsus procedure is the siimplest, most versatile, and most often used blepharo
plaslic procedure. l1 or one of its modifications may be used to treal congcnital, devclopmenial.
normal. Thc procedure may also be applied in the managemcnt of distichiasis in order to evert the
156
Blepharoplastic Procedures
lid margin enough to shifi the exira lashes away from the cornea. This latter application works
best in patients without cxcessivc amounts of skin thal predisposes to postoperalive shifling that
can negate the cvcrsion of the margin (shar-peis and the exophthalmic breeds with excessive nasal
fold skin). Eversion of the medial lid margin may also bc used to evert thc medial lower lid mar.
gin to rotate thc lower lacrimal punctum up and out to improve tcar drainage in cases of epiphora.
The basic technique relies on thc removal of a crescent-shaped strip of skin aud underlying or-
bicularis oculi muscle adjacent to the lid margin. The initial incision is usually made parallel to
and within I-2 mm of the lid margin. The second incision is made distal to the first and connects
the medial and latcral aspects of the first incision (Fig. iA). The width of the incision is deter-
 mined by thc degrcc of entropion that exists (delermined prior to anesthesia) and should allow for
0.5 I mm of additional eversion that can occur during postoperative hcaling. Suturing of the de-
fect may be performmed with simple interrupted sutures or with an inverse running pattern to cn-
sure there is no shifting of the incision edges. The positions of the incisions on the lid depend on
whicli parts of the lid are entropic. T'wo crescents may be reimoved when the lateral and medial
aspects are entropic but the ceutral lid margin is in nonnal position (Fig. IB). In the event the lat-
eral canthus is affected, the procedure can be modified with the crescent cenlered at 1he canthus
and its arms extcnding ovcr the upper and lower lids (Fig. IC). When ithe lateral aspecis of the
upper and lower lids are primarily involved with minimal entropion of the canthus itself, thc pro-
cedure may be further modified to crcate an arrowhead shapcd defect (Fig. ID). The apcx of the
defect is closed primarily with and inlerupted suture followed by closure of the upper and lower
arms of the arrowhead. This modification allows corrcction of the entropion with minimal length-
cning of the palpcbral incision. In patients with atonic or excessively long or redundant lids, other
 procedures must be uscd either alone or in combination with the modificd Hotz-Cclsus procedure
to achieve optimal correction and lid position.
A
B
D
Figure I. Variations in thec modified Hotz-Cclsus procedure. A. Classic procedure. B, Modification of Hotz-
laleral canthal entropiou. D, Arrowhcad modification for correction of lateral entropion of upper and lower
lids with minima! canthal involvenent.
BlepharoplasticProcedures
157
13. When only mild entropion of the central Iid exists, is there an alternative to thc modi-
fed Hotz-Celsus procedurc?
The Y-to-V blepharoplasty may bc used fof correcting mild central lid cniropion. The arms
of the Y are place within 1 mm of the lid margin and their span should encompass and bc cen-
tercd on the entropic purtion of the lid margin. The incisions extend through thc skin to the depth
of the orbicularis oculi muscle and the vertical stem of the Y is of sufficient length to corrcci thc
enlropion. The triangular flap of skin and muscle is elevated and separated from the underlying
thenn sutured to the bottom of the Y with a simple intcrruptcd nonabsorbablc suturc. Thc sides of
the ffap are then closed with similar interrupted sutures to produce the characterisic V closure
(Fig. 2).
A
B
Figurc 2. Y-to-V blepharoplasty. A, Prcparation of initial Y incision adjacent to entropic lid margin. B, Skin-
musclc flap clevatcd for shift and closure. C, Resullant V jncision closed.
14. What is the best way of dealing with the severe entropion and excessive facial folds in
the Chinese shar-pei?
 'The correction of this severe entropion in the shar-pci may be accomplished cither by com-
bined modified Hotz-Celsus procedurcs and removal of the excessivc folds of skin around the eyes
frontalis suspension surgery used in humans with severe blepharoptosis. It has the advantages that
it is less invasive, involves less suturing, and preserves the skin folds that are typical for the con-
formation of the Chincse shar-pei. The procedure was first described in modern veterinary med-
icine by Dr. Susan Kirschner, and a serics of cases was later reported by Dr. A. Michelle Willis
et al. It is wcll suited for dealing with thc redundant brow and forchead skin folls that are conl-
 mon in thc shar-pei, chow chow, bloodhound, basset hound, bulldog, and St. Bernard. The tech-
nique involves the usc of buried braided polyester mesh or sulure (such as Mersilene) to lense and
 support the lids. After surgical preparation of the forehcad and brows, two to thrcc rows of inci-
sions are madc over cach cyc. The first row of incisions is locaied al least 5 cm dorsal to the or-
bital rim, and the second is performed over the orbital rim itself. A third incision may bc per-
formed 2-3 mm dorsal to the upper cyelid margin (Willis modification) to aid in further clevation
 and eversion of the upper lid margin. The frontalis muscle (and the underlying periosteum of the
cisions. At its closest approach to the lid rmargin, thc needle travcrses horizontally parallel to the
eyelid margin and is then rcdirected subcutaneouisly to the original incision. Once correct tcnsion
has been achievcd to create the needed suspension, the strip or suture is tied in place. Ihe skin in-
cisions are closed with interrupted 5-0 to 60 nonabsorbable sutures. Usually two slings are
placed per eyelid, one medially and one laterally. When only two incisions are used (omitting the
incisions adjacent to the lid margins), a modified Hotz-Celsus procedure or other entropion
surgery may be used if needed to evert the lid margin and lashes (Fig. 3).
158
Blepharoplastic Procedures
Mersilenemeshonneedle
Incisions at eyelid margin
N
A
B
Figure 3. Brow-sling procedure. A, Passage of Mersilene mesh or suture from dorsal brow incision subcutaneously
to eyelid margin and back with anchoring to the frontalis muscle. B, Two slings are used for cach upper lid.
15. Describe the best way to cope with recurrence of entropion.
When simple undercorrection causes the recurrcnce, repeating thc surgcry to removc morc
skin may be all that is requircd. Howevcr, when the entropion is severe and unassociated with
other lid deformities (macrohlepharon, etc.), a central tarsal pedicle can be constructed using the
technique of Wyman and Wilkie to compliment and reinforce an additional Hotz-Celsus proce.
trate as deep as the orbicularis oculi musclc. At the level of the most extensive entropion, two par-
allel incisions perpendicular to the lid margin are made in the orbicularis oculi muscle and thc
tarsus with a scalpel. The sharp dissection is continucd to free the pedicle from thc skin and thc
deeper palpebral conjunctiva, leaving its base attached to the lid margin. Next, a tunncl as widc
as the pedicle and long enough to correct the culropiou is prepared with tenotomy scissors under
the distal skin cdge. Using a double-armed 5-0 nonabsorbable suture, a cruciatc stitch is passcd
through the pedicle and then extended through the tunnel. Thc stitch is passcd through thc skin
and tied through a stcnt, thus correcting the entropion. The redundant skin can now be excised
creating the typical crescent of the Hotz-Celsus procedure, and the skin is closed with an inter-
ruptcd or inverse running patterm of 40 to 60 nonabsorbable suture. Multiple tarsal pedicles can
be creatcd when large or multiplc areas of the lid are alfecied (Fig. 4).
16. When the lateral canthus is unstable, is there a simple way to corrcct the attendant lat-
eral canthal entropion?
Whcn the size of the palpebral fissure is normal, Wyman's lechnique remains ainong the best
for correcting lateral canthal instability and entropion. It may also correct ectropion of the central
shaped portion of tissue is removed as described for the modified Hotz-Celsus procedure
around the lateral canthus. The width of the crescent created by the two elliptical skin incisions
 is determined by the amount of the corcction for the laleral canthal entropion. The orbicularis
oculi is exposed and sharply dissected to create upper and lower pedicles atlached at their base to
the lateral canthus. The fwo pedicles are united with a cruciate 50 nonabsorbable suture that is
then passed laterally through the periosteun of the lateral orbital rim or the zygoinatic arch. As
the suture is tied, the tension is adjusted to achieve the desired ainount of lateral retraction and
eversion of thc lateral canthus. The skin incisions are closed with interrupted nonabsorbable su-
tures. Onc or two nonabsorbable 2-0 sutures may be used instead of the dissected orbicularis oculi
muscle pedicles to create lateral tension to evert the lateral canthus. In this variation the suture is
passed through the lateral canthus and the periosteum of the zygomatic arch, and tension is tight-
ened as the knot is tied prior to the closure of the skin (Fig. 5).
BlepharoplasticProcedures
159
B
D
Figure 4. For thc central tarsal pediclc for entropion, a tarsal pedicle anchored at thc eyelid margin is com-
bincd with the Hotz-Cclsus procedure. A, The initial skin incision is about l-2 inrn from the eyelid margin.
B. A tarsal pediclc is constrncted by scalpel with its base at the eyelid margin at the sitc of most cxtensive cn-
tropion. C, Through a subcutaneous tunnel made by scissors, a 5-0 nonabsorbable cfuciate suture attachedf to
the tarsal pedicle is secured with a stent below the surgical wound. D, The second skin incision of thc Hotz-
Celsus method is performed, and the cresccnt of skin is reimoved with tenotomy scissors. The width of the
crcscent depends on thc extent of the entropion. E, The skin wound js closed with 5-0 nonabsorbable simplc
intcrnupted sutures. (From Gelatt K (ed): Handbook of Small Animal Ophthalmic Surgery. Tarrytown, NY,
Elsevier, 1994. with permission.)
A
B
D
Figure 5. Wyman's lateral canthoplasty and construction of lateral canthal ligament. A, Two eliptical incisions
are performcd with the width of the crcscent of tissue to he removcd sufficiently lo cotrect the enlropion present.
B. Two orbicularis oculi myotomies are performed to create two strips of muscle with their bascs at the lateral
canthus that will act as the new lateral canthal ligament. C. After subcutaneous dissection with tenotony scis-
sors, a cruciatc 5-0 nonabsorbable suturc is used to anchor the orbicularis pedicle (arrow) to the periostcun of
the zygomatic arch. P, The skin is closed with 40 to 5-0 interrupted nouabsorbable sutures. (From Gelatt K
(ed): Handbook of Sinall Animal Ophthalinic Surgery. Tarrylown, NY,Elsevier, 1994, with permission.)
160
Blepharoplastic Procedures
17. If inmediately after entropion surgery the lids appear to be ectropic, should further
surgery be performed to roll the lid inward again?
Ai the end of surgery it is not uncornmon for swelling to result in mild to moderate ectropion (the
more reactive the lid skin and conjunctiva, the rnore ectropion may be apparent). Commonly, the lidl
will return to the appropriate position as the swelling subsides as long as the amount of correclion
perfornned is consistent with that measured prior lo the surgery. Therefore, resist any temptation to
modify the results, and wait for several weeks after suture removal to evaluate the final results.
18. What techniques are most often used for the correction of ectropion?
Simple wedge resection
Modifications of the Kuhnt-Szymanowski proccdute
Kuhnt-Helmbold procedure
The V-Y or Wharton-Jones blcpharoplasty is indicated for the correction of cicatricial ectropion.
19. When is the wedge rescction technique indicatcd for the correction of cctropion and
what factors are critical in performing this procedure?
The wedge excision procedure is a full-thickness resection usually performed adjaccnt to thc lat-
eral canthus in order to avoid thc lacrimal punctae and third cyelid present at the more hcavily an-
chored mcdial canthus. The surgeon should usually undercorrect the ectropion because postopera-
tive contraction of the tissues may account for an additional O.5-1 mm of correction. Closure occurs
in two layers, using 50 or 60 absorbable sutures in a continuous pattern to close the tarsoconjunc-
tiva and 5-0 to 6-0 nonabsorbable sulures in an interrupted patterm to close the skin. A nonabsorbable
ified Hotz-Celsus procedure may be performed concurrently if needed to correct any entropion ad.
jacent lo the wedge resection. With lids that are excessively long, the wedge resection can be per-
formed on both the upper antd lower lid, but a rhoinboid canthoplasty imay be superior, especially in
cases complicated by lateral canthal cntropion. Knots placed in the tarsoconjuncliva should be well
buried to prevent inritation tof the coimea, and the cye should be monitored closely after surgery for
initalion associated with knot migration as the sutures are absorbed in the lissues (Fig. 6).
A
B
C
Figurc 6. Stablc suturing of a lid margin defect. A. Removal of a lateral wedge of lid. B. Enlarged view of
placement of a cruciale sulurc at thc lid margin aftcr initial closurc of thc palpebral conjunctiva with an ab-
sorbable continuous suture. C, Closure completed. The knot of the cruciate suture is away from the lid mar-
gin and cannot irritate the cormea,
BlepharoplasticProcedures
161
20. What is the difference between a V-shaped resection and a pentagonal or four-sided
full-thickness resection of the lid?
 Thc pentagonal or four-sided full-thickness resection is superior to the V-shaped resection
for larger rcsections because it provides a larger surface area for distribution of tension and thus
provides for bctter apposition and cosmesis.
21. When is the V-to-Y technique indicated in the correction of ectropion?
This technique should be reserved for corrcction of cicatricial entropion. It is basically a re-
verse of the Y-to-V technique described above for enfropion, and, unless the lid margin is rc-
sected, it does not result in any shortening of the eyelid.
22. What is the difference between the Kuhnt-Szymanowski and Kuhnt-Helmbold proce
Both procedures involve an extensive splitting of the lid margin to create an outer triangular
skin-muscle Hap and an inner tarsoconjunctival flap. 'The lid shortening with both techniques is
achieved by a central wedge rescclion of the tarsoconjunctiva and a more lateral wedge resection
of the skin-muscle flap. The difference is that the Kuhnt-Szymanowski (K-S) procedure carries
the triangular flap dorsafly and beyond the lateral canthus and the wedge of skin-muscle is re-
moved from thc lateral aspect. With the Kuhnt-Helmbold (K-H) proccrlurc, the wedge rcmoved
from the skin-muscle is medial to the lateral canthus. The advantage of both procedures over the
simple full-thickness wedge rcsection technique is that the resected portions are separatcd and
thus lcss susccptible to dehiscence. The advantage of the K-S procedure over the K-H procedure
applies to lids that lack tone and arc in need of the grealer suppon. Carrying the triangular skin.
muscle flap beyond the latcral canthus crcatcs a sling effcct that supports the lid and rcstores tonc
to the lid. The disadvantage of both procedures is that they split a significant portion of the lid
margin along the gray line introducing a significant potential for complications associated with
scarring of the margin and its structures (Figs. 7 and 8).
A
B
D
Figure 7. The Kuhnt-Szynianowski procedure supports thc lid and improves tonc. (From Gclatt K (ed): Hand-
book of Smali Animal Ophthalmic Surgery. Tarrytown, NY, Flsevier. 1994. with permission.)
162
BlepharoplasticProcedures
人
Figurc &. The Kuhnt-Humbold procedure. A. Splitting of the lid margin. B, Dissection of the skin-musclc fap
of thc incisions is completc. (From Gelart K (cd): Handbook of Snuall Anirnal Ophthalmic Surgery.Tarry-
town, NY, Elsevier. I994, with permission.)
23. What sutures are used and how are they placed with these procedures?
e soo u m p  pius  eon i m si aaa u
tcrn of 5-f0) or 60 absorbable suture. A few absorbable interrupted sutures may be placed belween 
the lap and the tarsoconjunctiva lo climinate deadt spacc. The skin flap should bc closed with sim-
ple interrupted sutures of 4-0 to 60 nonabsorbable sutures.
24. How is thc Munger-Carter modification different from the K-S procedure and what is
its advantage?
The Munger-Cartcr modification has the advantage of not splitting the lid rmnargin since the
incision to create the skin-muscle fap is 1-2 mm distal to the lid margin. This preserves thc lid
margin and allows for combination of the procedure with the modified Hotz-Celsus proccdure
when concomitant entropion is present. In that event. a crescent of skin can also be removed from
the cdge of skin-muscie flap adjacent to the margin to evert the margin and correct ihe entropion.
The defect in the lid margin created by thc wedgc rcsection is closcd with a cruciate nonab-
sorbable suture. Knots in the skin sutures along the margin are less likely to initatc the cornca
than tliose with the K-S and K-H procedures (Fig. 9).
A
B
D
E
Figure 9. Munger-Carter imodification of the K-S procedure. A, Initial skin incision and skin-muscle flap. B.
Wedge resection of the lid margin and tarsoconjunctiva. C, Closure of the lid margin and tarsocunjuncliva. D). Re-
moval of a triangular wedge equal in width to the tarsoconjunctival wedge fron lateral aspect of the skin-muscle
fap. E, Final closure. Note that the lid margin is noil disturbed and the suture knots are not adjacent to the cornea
Blepharoplastic Procedures
163
25. Deseribe how to correct a diamond- or pagoda-shaped palpebral fissure with significant
laleral canthal entropion when shortening of the palpebral fissure is desired.
A rhomboid or diamond lateral canthoplasty may be uscd to concurrently cvert the lateral
canthus and shorten the palpcbral fissure (Fig. IO). The lid margin to be removed is mcasured
from the lateral canthus to the point on the margin appropriatc to achieve the desired shorlening
of the palpebral fissure. Both the upper and lower lids are incised perpendicular to their margins 
and the incisions extended dorsolaterally (for the upper lid) and ventrolaterally (for the lower lid).
The length of each incision is approximately 1-2 times the width of the margin to be cxcised de-
pending on the desired degree of entropion correction. These two incisions form the medial arms
of the rhombus or diamond. From the ends of these incisions, two more incisions are made per-
pendicular to the first to intersect in a right angle latcral to the lateral canthus. The incisions de-
fine the diamond-shaped area of skin and tarsoconjunctiva excised to create the typical rhomboid
 defect. The cut end of the upper and lower lid margins are then joined with a 5 0) to 6-0 nonab-
sorbable suture using a cruciale pattem to recreate the lateral canthus. The conjunctiva is next
closed with a continuous pattcrm of 5 ·0 to 60 absorbable suture. The laleral canthus is then ap
posed to the lateral corner of the diamond with an intertupted subcutaneous absorbable suture.
The subcutaneous tissue is closed with a continuous pattem of absorbable suture, and the skin is
closed with interrupted nonabsorbable sulures. The result is a curved sutured incision that tenses
the lateral canthus laterally, and the procedurc has shorlened thc palpcbral fissurc.
A
B
D
Figure 10. Rhomboid canthoplasty. A, Delinealion ol the tissuc to be excised in thc rhonboid canthoplasty.
B.lnitial clostre of the lateral lid cdgcs to reforn the latcral canthus.C. Closurc of the conjunctiva and sub-
cutaneous tissucs with continuous absorbable suture. D, Final curvilinear skin closure resulling in narrowed
palpebral lissurc and resolution of the latcral canthal cntropion and ectropion.
26. What techniques can be used to deal with lagophthalmos?
Lagophthalmos associated with transienl ocular or orbital swelling may be countered by a
icimporary tarsorrhaphy using 1-3 nonabsorbable mattress sutures passed though the lid margins
at the level of the gray line. When there is little tension on the lids, the sutures may be placed with-
164
Blepharoplastic Procedures
out stents. When lagophthalmos is associated with a permanent condition (e.g., macropalpebral
fissure, conforrnational exophthalmos, lid paralysis), permancnt canthoplasty may be performed
either laterally or medially depending on fhe area of the giobe and comea most exposed and which.
placerment will best preserve lid function.
 27. In brachycephalic breeds with exophthalmos and lagophthalmos or pigmentary ker-
atitis, what options are available to protect the globe?
Because the cyes of the brachycephalic breeds are usually soincwhat exotropic, the medial
sclera is often more exposed than the lateral. Therefore, a partial medial tarsorrhaphy or so-called
medial canthal closure not only protects the eye and reduces exposure, it also is superior cosinet-
ically becausc the pupil is then better centered in the palpebral fissure than with a lateral canthal
closure. In addition, the medial canthal closure allows removal of hairs associated with the
lacrimal caruncle and eliminates contact between the comea and hairs of ihe medial lower lid and
 nasal folds. Medial canthoplasty or canthal closure is ltsually performed by one of two techniques.
The simplest involves thc removal of the medial lid margiu and adjacent skin while avoiding the
lacrimal punctac. The skin can then be closcd in two layers. The tarsoconjunctiva is closed with
a continuous pattcrm of 5-0 to 6-0 absorbable suture, and the skin is closed with 40 1o 6-0 non-
absorbable interrupted sutures. This procedure allows preservation of boih lacrimal punctae, bu1
the closure is thinner and morc subjcct to stretching than the pocket-fap technique dcscribed by
lacrimat punctum thus preserving its function. A triangular tarsoconjunctival flap from the upper
lid is sutured into the pocket in the lower lid using a 4O nonabsorbable sumure. The suture is
passed through the skin into the ventral aspecl of the lower lid pocket, up though the pocket, and
then through the tip of the triangular flap. It is then passed back down into the pocket, oul through
the skin, tightened to pull the flap into the pocket, and tied. The outer margins of the split lids are
renoved and the skin closed with 40) to 5-0 interrupted nonabsorbable sutures, While the supc-
tior puncfum is sacrificed, the resulting closure results in superior support of the medial canthus.
Figures 1l and 12 illustrate the technique and cosmetic appearance that can result.
B
C
Figure Il. The Jcnsen techniquc for mcdial canthal closure to narrow the patpebral fssure. A, Splitting of the
medial upper and lower lids to create the pocket and tarsoconjunctival Hlap for closure. B, Passage of the sulure
from the pocket to draw and anchor the fap into the pocket. C', Final closure narowing the palpebral fissurc.
Blepharoplastic Procedures
165
YyY
Figure 12. Mcdial canthal closurc prolects the globe while narrowing the palpebral fissure and masking the
Mcdial canthal closure to narrow the palpebral fissure (extcnt indicated by the dashcd linc) not only protccis
thc globe but also inprovcs the cosmctic appcarancc.
28. Is there a simple way of dealing with mcdial canthal trichiasis?
The simplest and perhaps most effective way to resolve rnedial canthal trichiasis is to use
'The tissue should be frozen twice, separating each freeze by a slow thaw. In patients with lagoph-
thalmos in which a partial medial tarsorrhaphy is contcmplatcd, the lacrimal caruncle and other
structures from which the hairs arise may be removed prior to closure.
 29. When confronted with removal of large lid tumors, how much of the lid may be removed
and still allow simplc apposition and closure?
The mnle of thumh is that up lo one-fourth of the lid may be removcd by a simplc wedgc re-
scction without requiring more than simple closure. Howevcr, all rulcs havc exceptions, and more
lid may be removed in dogs with more expansive or elastic periocular skin and lids. Figure 13
 presents a good example from a cocker spaniel with a largc sebaccous adlenoma on the upper lid.
A penlagonal, full-thickness resection is used to renove the tumor, and because thc upper lid is
long, primary closure can bc achieved. While thc resultant upper lid shortening narrows the palpe.
bral fissure, the elasticity of thc tissuc has allowcd closurc, and gradual stretching allows the
palpebrae to assume a more norrnal and quite acceptable appcarancc by thc time of suture re-
moval. Futher remodeling and reshaping will continue with time.
30. What is an H blepharoplasty and how is it performcd?
H-plasty uses a sliding skin flap to move adjacent skin vertically inlo a lid defecl. The tissue
removed at the lid margin represents the first section of the H, and the fap of skin to be mobilized
represents the second. Once the full-thickness resection of the lid lesion has bcen performed, wo
slightly diverging incisions arc extcnded away from the defect.These incisions should beiwicc
thc height of the lid defcct, and two trianglcs of equal size (Burow's triangles) are removed from
the skin adjacent to the distal extent of the sliding llap. The flap is then dissccted frec from the
subcutancous tissue and advanced. closing the triangles. The deep surface of the fiap may be cov-
cred by adjacent palpebral and fornix conjunctiva, conjunctiva from the opposite lid, or a firee
graft from the buccal mucosal. The skin flap is advanced to 0.5-I.0 mm beyond the adjacent lid
margins to compensate for postoperative contraction of the grafft. Thc sides of the skin flap are
apposcd with 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted nonabsorbablc suturcs. The conjunctiva or rnucosal
graft is attachcd to thc flap with conlinuous 5-0 to 60 absorbable sutures using either a contin-
of the flap to avoid contact with the cornea (Fig. 14).
position of the edges) can be repaired to preserve optimal lid function.
Bccause the upper lid covers the majority of thc cornca during blinking, preservation of its
function is extremely imporlant for optimal lid function. Preservation of upper lid mobility and
166
BlepharoplasticProcedures
D
Figure I3. Simple closure of a largc cyelid defect. A, Preoperativc appearance of largc schaccous adcnoma. B,
Pentagonal defect at time of resection. C, Checking apposition. D, Imnediatcly after closurc. E, Close-up ap-
pearancc at I I days postoperativcly aftcr suturc removal. F, Comparison with fellow eye 1l days postoperatively.
A
B
C
D
Figure 14. H-plasty. A, Initial incisions for removal of mass and forrmation of sliding skin-muscle flap. B, Lid
defect and Burow's triangles perfortned in preparation of sliding of the fHap. C, Skin-muscle Hap stiding into
position with collapse of the Burow's triangles. D, Final closure with flap advanced 0.5-1.0 mm beyond lid
margins to allow for pustoperalive contraction of the skin. (Frotm Gelatt K (cd): Handbook of Small Animal
Ophthalmic Surgery. Tairylown, NY, Elsevier. I994, with perrmission.)
provision for a good lid margin are critical factors that cannot be achievcd with advanccment
and rotational flaps. Mungcr and Gourlcy describe a cross lid flap that uses a lower lid flap to re-
construct the upper lid, thus providing for both a lid margin and mobility for the upper lid. The
width of the fap troum the lower lid is 3/4 of the width of the defect in the vpper lid because the
adjacent upper lid tissue can be stretched to fill 1/4 of thc defect. The pediclc of thc fap must hc
at least 4 mm wide to prescrvc blood supply to the fap. The pedicle may be either medial or lat-
Blepharoplastic Procedures
167
eral. bnt 1he lower lacrirmal punctum rmust be preserved in either case. The flap is rotatcd 180°
into the uppcr eyclid defect, and closure is accomplished in two layers using 5-0 to 60 inter-
rlptcd absorbable sutures for the conjunctiva and subcutaneous tissues and 5-0 to 6-O inter-
rupted nonabsorbable sutures in thc skin. A cruciate suturc is uscd to appose the margins. After
14-21 days. when vascularization of the flap is ensured, thc pedicle is resectcd, rotated up. and
sutured to reform the lid margin. The lower lid defect is then closed cither by primary closure
(when sufficient lower lid remains) or by advancement skin Hap from the infraorbilal skin tissuc
(Fig. 15).
C
A
B
D
E
Figure 15. Cross lid flap for repair of large upper cyelid defecis. A, Diagrarn of a large upper eyelid tumor.
B. Fuli-thickness pedicle llap is constucted from the lower lid with thc imargin. It is the full depth and threc.
eyclid defect. C, The cross lid flap has been rotatcd across the palpebral fissure and sutured tn place. Point
c in the flap would be somewherc in the vicinity of point d.D,Afler I421 days, the second stage is per-
has been performcd hcre to closc the lowcr lid defect and can bc lincd with conjunctiva or mucosal from
the nasal or oral cavity. E, Final closure illustrating the rcconstruetcd uppcr lid margin frorn the lower lid
margin.
 32. When reconstructing lid lacerations that involve the lacrimal canaliculi, how can the
canaliculus be identified and restored?
A pigtail probe is an excellent instrument for use in reconstructing the lacrimal canaliculus.
The probe is passed through the lacrimal punctum and canaliculus of thc opposite lid and rotated
out through the medial aspect of the severed canaliculus. A 3-0 to 40 monofilamcnt nonab-
sorbable suture is passed through the "cye" in its tip so that when thc probe is withdrawn it pulls
thc suture through thc canaliculi and out the punctum. The probe can next be passed through the
lacrimal punctum on the injured lid and out through the lateral severed end of the canaliculus. The
suture is then reengagcd and pulled back through the punctum. Silastic tubing is passed over the
end of the suture that is thcn clamped inside the tubing with a hemostat. By gentle traction on the
suture, the silastic tubing can then be pulled through the lacrimal canaliculi and left in place un-
til hcaling of the laceration is complete. The silastie tubing may be sutured in place after passing
it through or ovcr each lid or it may be tied in place in the medial canthus (Fig. 16).
168
Blepharoplastic Procedures
Figure 16. Repair of laceration of
lacrimal canaliculus using a pigtail
probe. A, Pigtail probe passed [rom
the supcrior punctum into mcdial
lower canaliculus. Note suturc passcd
through eye of probe that will be re-
tracted out through superior punc-
tum. B. In thc next stage, the probe is
passed through the lower punctum
and oul through the lacerated cana-
liculus. The suture is thenn passed
through the eye and retracted (out
through the lower punctnm. Silastic
tubing passcd ovcr the suture and
clanped to the suture with a hemostat
(ff) can thcn be pulled through the
system. C, Silastic tubing in place. D,
Closurc coinplctc with silastic tube
tied in the mcdial canthus.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Gelatt KN, Gelalt IP: Surgery of the eyelids. In Handbook of Small Animal Ophthalinic Surgery. Vol 1:
Extraocular Proccdures. Tarrytown, Elscvier Scicnce, 1994, pp 69-124.
2. Jensen JE: Canthus closure. Comp Cont Educ 1:735-741, 1979.
3. Munger RI, Cater JD: A further modification of the Kuhnt-Szyinanowski procedure for correction of atonic
ectropion in dogs. ↓ Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:651-656, 1984
4. Munger RI, Gourley IM: Cross lid flap for repair of large upper eyelid defects. I Am Vel Med Assoc
178:45-48, 1981.
5. Wyman M: lateral canthoplasty. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 7:196-201, 1971
1979.
7.Wynan M,Wilkie DA: New surgical procedure for entropion correction: Tarsal pedicle technique.I Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 24:345-349, 1988.
27. EYELID NEOPLASMS
Annajane B. Marlar. D.V.M
1. How common are lid tumors in dogs and cats?
Lid tumors are quite common in dogs. By contrast, in cats, lid tuimors are rare and make up
bincd comprised 25%, but in 1eality the figure is probably even lower.
 2. When do most lid tumors arise and in what location?
The avcrage age of onset for lid tumors in dogs is 9 years. Malignant neoplasms tend to de-
velop in dogs older than average, whercas benign tumors such as histiocytomas havc a tendency
t0 develop in younger patients. The central portion of the upper and lower lids is the usual loca-
tion for turmors with the upper lid being slightly more common than the lower. Canthal involve-
ment is uncoimmon. In cats, the age of onset is greater, and the medial canthus is a more common
location than in the dog-
3. What are the most cornmon types of tumors in dogs?
Most lid tumors encountered in the dog will be benign. The most freguent types cncountered
include scbaccous adenomas, papillomas, and mclanomas. If the lesion is pigmcnted and smooth,
it is fikely a melanoma. Benign behavior is typical of eyelid melanomas, although sometimes
these tumors can be more aggressive. When malignancies occur, the lid lesion is usually the pri-
mary sitc, and metastasis from the eyelid is gencraly slow. Of the malignancics that can develop
in this arca, sebaccous adenocarcinoma, mast cell tumor, squamous cell carcinoma, and basal cell
carcinoma seem to be most common. Mescnchymal tumors of the eyelid are uncommon. Gener-
structed: skin, sebaceous glatds, conjunctiva, etc. (Figs. 1-3).
4. How does this differ in the cat?
Although benign lid tuimors can occvr in the cat, malignant types are more frequent and com-
prise 75% of eyelid neoplasms. The most common type of lid tumor is squamous cell carcinoma.
particularly in patients with light coat color or with whitc fur around the face. One benign proccss
described is xanthoma, which presents as a focal or multifocal, ycllowish mass within the lid and
Figurc 1. A typical sebaceous ade-
noma of the lid margin. Note thc
involvement of the conjunctival
surface.
169
170
Eyelid Neoplasms
Figure 2. A melanoma on the up-
per lid. Thesc are locally invasivc
bul usually do not metastasize.
Figure 3. A squamous cell carci-
noma of the lower lid. Thesc can
bc achallcnge(see Chapter 27).
conjunctiva. Other tumor types that have becu reportcd include meibomian gland adenoma and
adenocarcinoma. basal cell tumor, melanoma, mast cell tunor, and fbroma/fibrosarcoma (Figs.
4 and 5).
5. Are all mass lesions neoplastic?
Sorme conditions of the eyelid may be dlifficull to distinguish from neoplasms (e.g.: gTanuloma,
chalazion, and even some acute lesions such as marginal inffammalory conditions). Patient history
can be hclpful in the identification because most lid tumors tend to grow gradually rather than rapidly.
A lesion that is bilatcral and symmetric is unlikely to be neoplastic. Eyelid lesions that are associ-
aled with pruritus are less likely to be neoplastic (mast cell tumor may be the exception). If all lids
are affected with nodules, consider immune-mediated blepharitis or sterile pyogranulomas as a pos-
sible eliology. The diagnosis is best made with histopathology of an area of affected lid margin.
6. How can I tell if a tumor is benign or malignant?
Histopathology is recommended for all lid tumors. Without it, you cannot bc 100% sure
whether you are dealing with a benign or malignant process. However, several characterislics
point to malignant neoplasms and may prove useful tools during examination of the eyelids.
Eyelid Neoplasms
171
MALIGNANT
BENIGN
Deslruction of hair follicles
Hair follicles intacl
Lesion is ulccrative
Lesion is not ulccrative
Rapidly growing
Lcsion is slow growing
7. If the mass is not irritating to the cornea, why remove it?
As discussed earlier, although many lid tumors will be benign. it is not always possible 1o
differentiate their behavior based on examination only, and many benign lid tumors will still cause
cxtensive local destruction of tissue if left untrcatcd. For many patients requiring extensive re-
construction, early intcrvcntion may have prcvcnted procedures that provc to be more uncom
fortable for the patient and more costly to the client. Therefore, it is becoming widely accepted
Figure 4. Multiple conjunclival
tumors which were diagnoscd as
melanosarcomas
Figure 5. A large lower lid papilloma.
172
Eyelid Neoplasms
that lid masses shouid be rcmovcd or treatcd prior to onset of clinical symptoins. At the earlier
stage, it may bc possible to retain both functional and cosmetic lid margin.
8. When is it appropriate to biopsy a mass before excision?
If the mass is extrcmcly ulceratcd and extcnding away from the lid margin, consider biopsy
prior to definitive surgery. The diagnosis may alter the treatiment options. An examplc of this is a
large squamous cell carcinoma that may be amenable to therapies other than surgery. If the lesion
is less than one-third the length of thc eyclid, it is more appropriate to perform an excisional
biopsy or biopsy and cryotherapy.
9. How should the tissne he processcd?
Tissue that is removed should bc placed in an appropriate container with 10% formalin as
fixative. If the mass is small, microcassettcs can be used to better preserve the tissue and make it
 seo s i pe s a sads as a ii a si s ssod  ris
the laboratory that tissue was misplaced! Even with a treatiment nodality other than surgical ex-
cision, submitting a sample for pathology is still recommendcd.
10. What are the anatomic considerations when choosing a trealment plan?
There are two main goals to consider when considering treaiment alternatives. The firs1 is 10)
preserve mcchanical lid function and normal glandular function. Maintaining the lid margin as a
less importanl to normal lacrimal fow than the inferior punctum. The latter should be preserved
if at all possible to prevent chronic epiphora.
11.What is the most common method of mass removal?
For lesions that constitute less than 25-30% of the lid length, a full-thickness, four-sided
(wedge) resection is the standard technique and provides a functional and cosmetic result by pre-
serving the lid margin completely. The incision is closed in two layers. The subconjunctiva should
be closed with an absorbable suture such as 6-0 Vicryl with knots buried. The skin can be closed
with a number of suture patterms of 5-0 or 6-0 nonabsorbable suture; generally, an interrupted
pattem provides the best resulis. In darkly pigmented patients, a colorcd suture such as Prolenc is
a good choice becausc it is easy to sce. It is jmportant that thc lid margins are aligned correctly
during this closure and that the suture ends and knots cannot contact the comea to prevent irrita-
tion. An Elizabcthan collar is suggested to prevcnt scif-trauma, and suture reinoval is performed
after 2 wecks.
12. What instrumentation do you need for this type of surgery?
A basic set of ophthalmic instruments are ideal for lid surgeries.
· Mosquito hemostats X 2
· Castroviejo needle holder
+Steven's tenotomy scissors
· Tissue forceps or Bishop Harmon forceps
● Magnification (either head loop or glasses)
· Optional: Jaeger lid plate, chalazion clamp
13. How do I choose a reconstructive technique if I need one?
In human rcconstructive tcchniques, planning involvcs consideration of relaxed skin tension
lines (RSTl.) and lines of maximuni extensibility (LME). In vcterinary ophthalmology, attention
is paid to skin biomechanics, but there is another factor to consider: the direction of hair growth.
Particularly whcn using fap techniqucs, it is important to plan with attention to normal hair di-
rcction.For inferior lid defects, the primary techniques that havc been describcd include H-plasty
Eyelid Neoplasms
173
and several rotational Haps. For superior lid defects, there is an increased likclihood of corneal ir-
ritation from lid margin, and, therefore. marginal reconstruction becomes more important. Many
of the flap technigues that have been described oniginate in the human litcraturc and have been
im which they may be helpful.
TECHNIQUH
SUPERIOR LID
INFERIOR LID
Wedge resection
+
HI-plasty
十+
++
Sliding rotational
Transposition
+
+
Lip to lid
+
Cross-lid flap
+
一
Buckct handle
+
一
Z-plasty (canthal)
+
!
14. What other sorgical modalities are available for eyelid neoplasms?
For many ycars, the only other surgical modality used in the treatment of eyelid neoplasia
to ablate both normal and abnormal tissue. Recently. however, more and more clinicians are us-
ing laser technology to treat lid conditions including neoplasia. The carbon dioxide lascr has in-
creased in availability and is now used on a routine basis. The carbon dioxide laser provides not
only sharp dissectioil capability but also generalized ablative funclion.
15. How does cryosurgery work?
The freezing of tissue causes evcnts at a cellular levcl that occur in threc phases: immedi
ate, delayed, and late. During the immediate phase, cells are destroycd because of dehydration
with concentration of toxic solutes, formation of both intracellular and extracellular icc crys-
tals, denaturation of proteins, and direct thermal shock. In the delayed phase, cellula1 destruc
tion occurs because of vascular stasis resulting in thrombosis, ischemia, and ccll death. Finally,
 in the latc phase, therc may be an immunologic, response to frcezing with formation of anti-
bodies to lhe altered tumor ceils. Normal cells tend to show increascd resistance to the above
effects, and, thereforc, there is a sparing effect of normal tissue. Isolation of the local blood
supply will incrcase the effcctiveness of this tcchnique particularly in highly vascular tissues
such as the cyclid.
16. How is cryosurgery performed?
The most common cryogen used in veterinary mcdicinc is liquid nitrogcn which has a tcm-
perature of - 195.8°C. The most conmon delivery device is a hand-held unit such as thc Cryo-
gun (Brymill Corporation), but others are also available. There are a variety of probes available.
Both spray and solid probc tips cao be used, although spray tips will often result in more rapid
freezing of tissue. If solid tips are used, thc size should be approximately the sizc of the lesion to
ensure a rapid freeze. In general, the goal is to freeze the tissue to --80°C or below for a duralion
 of 1 minute or imore to induce cryonecrosis. A rapid freeze and slow thaw are optinal. If possi-
ble, the lesion should bc dcbulked (often tissuc for biopsy is removed during this process). Thc
lesion sliould be treated for two to three freeze/thaw cycles. Thermocouples are ideal to measuirc
tissue temperaturc. One can also use the size of the ice ball to gauge the depth of freeze. The vi-
 sual advancing of the ice ball only represents O°C, and therefore only 75% of the visible ice ball
is likely to be at optimal tempcrature. In general, an area of 5-10 mm of norinal tissue would bc
desirable for most malignancies. Remcmbcr that the ice ball formation is thrcc dimensional and
the depth of freezc should be monitored closely in order to prevent freezing the tissue too much
Or too littlc. Prohe freezing is lcss lethal but casier for persons inexperienced with these tech-
niques. Thc probe can be applied directly to thc tumor for contact freezing. If thc lesion is circu-
174
Eyelid Neoplasms
lar. a biopsy can be taken from the center of the mass with the probe introduced into the lesion to
achicve a circular freezing pattern.
Another commonly used cryogen is nitrous oxide. Spray tips of this cryogen are nol very ef-
fective. However, gas supercooling a probe is very effective. Probe lip termperatures of -89°C
can be achieved. Its use is usually restrictcd to masses smallcr than 2-3 cm. After care ineludes
topical antibiotics, Elizabethan collar, and sometimcs the use of systemic anfibiotics and anti-jn-
lammatory drugs (Figs. 6 and 7).
17. How is laser technology utilized?
In recent ycars, laser technology has become morc available to thc veterinary profession. Thc
carbon dioxidc laser is receiving soine altention as a useful tool in ophthalinic adnexal surgery.
 The carbon dioxide lascr operates at wavclcngths of 10,600 nn, which is in the far-infrared por-
tion of thc light spectrum. It is invisible to thc naked eye, and therefore, a coaxial red helium or
tion. The carbon dioxide laser has higher water absorplion, which rminimizes the depth of pene-
tration making it a precise cutting tool. It can be used in both cutting and ablative modalities. With
regard to eyclid ncoplasia. somc clinicians use it to remove simall lesions by shaip disscction and
lacking in the veterinary ophthalinic literaturc as to the advantages and disadvantages of one sur-
gical modality over the other and of specific protocols.
18. What about chemotherapy?
Systemic chcnotherapy is of little value in trcating most eyclid ncoplasias unless the lid tu-
mor is not a prinary lesion. Intralesional chemothcrapy has hccn used primarily for squamous
u oi ssnn s a ig iado yo nd e s q p n an  g an
trogen gas cylinders for the cooling source of the hand piece.
Eyelid Neoplasms
175
frigitrenics
Figurc 7. A close-up of a land piece containing sensors for temperature. The monitor in thc background shows
temperature in celsius and cylinder pressure.
cell carcinoma. Cisplatin, carboplatin, and 5-fluorouracil (5Fu) have been used mostly in feline
dition, some anecdotal reports exist of nsing intralesional injection of distillcd watcr as a treat-
ment modalily of mast cell tumor.
19.Are there any other lreatmcnt modalitics available?
Yes. Radiation therapy, brachytherapy, and radiofrequency hyperthermia are all acceplable
treatinent modalities, although thcir use has dcclined in recent years, inost likely because of ear-
licr diagnosis and treatment of eyelid neoplasms. Radiation therapy, in particular, can causc sc-
vere ocular damage; iis use should be considered carefully, and it is indicated only in the event o!
aggressive neoplasms that are difficult to reat with other rmodalities (e.g., fbrosarcoma). Pholo-
systemicalty and preferentially retained by the fumor. The site is then irradiated with wavelengths
ahsorbed by the chemical. This technique can be used only ia superficial tumors and is stilf in
early slages of clinical use.
20. Should cnuclcation cver bc considered when treating eyelid neoplasia?
The goal of any trcatmcnt should be to prcscrve the function and cosmesis of the eye when-
evcr possiblc. Howcvcr, if a tumor is malignant and too large in size to allow for sparing of ocu-
lar function. then enucleation should be considered in an attempt to prevent systemic disease.
 Such a decision should not be made without a diagnosis of the mass and possibly evaluation by a
specialist. particularly if thc paticnt is monocular. The most common tumor requiring enucleation
that this author has seen is eyelid fibrosarcorna becalse often radiation thcrapy will be rcquircd.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Gelatt KN: Veterinary Ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Willians & Wilkins, 1998, PP
558-567.
2. Hamilton HL, Whitley RD, McLaughlin SA, ct al: Basic blepharoplasty techniques. Comp Cont Educ Pract
Vet 21:946 952. 1999.
3. Robeits SM. Severin GA, Lavach JD: Prevalence and treatment of palpebral neoplasms in the dog: 200
cascs (1975 1983). J Am1 Vet Med Ass0c 189:1355-1359. 1986.
4. Ruslander D, Kaser-HJotz B. Sardines JC: Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma in cats. Comp Cont Educ
Pract Vet 19: 1119-1129. 1997.
VII. Uveal Disease
28. UVEITIS IN GENERAL
Cunthia C. Powell, D.V.M.. M.S.
1. What is the uvea or uveal tract?
The structure of the cye consists of an outer wall (comea and sclera), inncr retinal layer, and
the uvea, a highly pigmcntcd, vascular laycr sandwiched belween the sclera and retina. The uvea
consists of the iris, ciliary body, and choroid. The iris and ciliary body are collectively referred to
as the anterior uvea. The posterior uvea is the choroid. Although thc anatomic regions have dif-
ferent names, the tissues are basically continuous with each other.
2. How is the uvea different from thc uvula?
In contrast to the ocular uvea, the term uvula stems from a Latin word that means "littlc
grape." The palatine uvula is a small, pendulous, fleshy mass hanging froin the postcrior soft
palate edge above the root of the tongue in humans. Other structures associated with the term
uvufar include the bladder (uvula vesicae, a rounded elevation at the bladder fleck) and cerebel-
Ium (uvula vermis. part of the cerebellum vermis between the pyramis and nodulus).
3. What is uveitis?
Uveitis is inflammation of onc or morc of the uveal tissues. Inflamimation that involves a sin-
gle tissuc is termcd iritis, cyclitis, or choroiditis if the iris, ciliary body, or choroid is inflamed, re-
speclively (Fig. 1).
Figure 1. Dog with uveitis. Notc thc congestcd conjunctival
vasculature and thc swollen iris with miotic pupil.
177
178
Uveitis in General
4. What is anterior uveitis?
Inflammation of both the inis and ciliary body.
5. What is posterior uvcitis?
Choroidal inflammation.
6. Can infammation involve the anterior and posterior uvea simullaneously?
The division of the uvea into anterior and posterior does not imply a physical barrier betwcen
thc two regions. Inflammation often involves both anterior and postcrior portions. The terms
uveitis, endophihafmitis, and panophihafmitis are uscd to describe diffuse uveal inflammation,
7. What is endophthalmitis?
Inflammation of the entire uveal tract is called endophthalmitis. Because of the close appo-
sition of the choroid and retina, choroidal infiammation rarely occurs without retinal involvement
(i.e., chorioretinitis). Thus, the prognosis for vision with endophthalmitis is poor (Figs. 2 and 3).
Figure 2. Cat with endophthalmitis.Note the vascular response with hemorrhage and fibrin.
Figure 3. Dog with endophthalmitis. This is a very painful disease.
Uveitis in General
179
8. What is panophthalmitis?
Uveal tract inflainmation coupled with scleral and corncal inflammation is termed panoph
thalinitis. It is difficult to maintain a normal-appcaring globc with inflammation of this severity
and distribution. Preserving vision is hopeless (Fig. 4).
Figure 4. Chronic panophthlamitis in a dog. Note
the scvere neovascularization of the cornea and thc
perjocular inflammation.
9. What are the major clinical signs of uveitis?
Anterior uveitis typically causcs a painful cye with conjunctival and episcleral hyperemia,
imiosis, aqueous flare and cell accuinulation, corneal edema, iris swelling and hyperemia, and re-
creased severity or duration of inflammation. An ophthalmoscope is required for assessment of
ment, subretinal transudalion or exudalion, and loss of relinal pigmenl epithelial cell and
choroidal pigmeniation. Posterior uveitis almost always also involves the retina (choriorefinitis)
and may causc blindness.
10. Can the clinical signs be used as an indication of chronicity, severity, or prognosis?
The spectrum and magnitude of signs depend on the severity of insult. The Table differenti-
ates acutc versus chromic antenior uveilis based on clinical signs. lf trauma, vasculitis, or bleed-
ing disorders are underlying causes of uveitis, byphema and anterior chamber fibrin clots are com-
mon. Septic or ncoplastic disorders also can induce the above changes and are often bilateral with
varying degrces of hypopyon (white blood cells within the aqucous humor) or keratic prccipitates
(whitc blood cells and fibrin adhereni to the comeal endothelial surface). Posterior liveitis war-
rants a guarded prognosis for vision. Acule signs include retinal edema, retinal hemorrhage, loss
 of norinal tapetal color, subretinal fluid accumulation, and decreased vision. Chronic signs con-
sist of hypertellectivc areas in the tapelal fundus (caused by relinal atrophy and thinning), abrupt
color changes of the tapetum, and pigment proliferation or loss (Figs. 5-7).
180
Uveitis in General
ACUTE ANTERIOR UVEITIS
CHRONIC ANTTRIORIVEITIS
Mild conjunctival hyperemia
Decp corncal vascularization
lris swelling
Iris hyperpigmentation
Aqueous flare
Inis neovascularjzation
Mild episcleral hyperemia
Synechia fonnation
Miosis
Cataract
Photophobia
Secondary glaucoma
Figure 5. A cat with chronic ante-
rior uveitis. Note the hazy iris and
the fine kcratic prccipitates (KP)
on the cormeal cndothelium.
Figure 6. Cat with chronic uveitis.
Note the inis color. Multifocal
Bodules give the surface a wotled
appcarancc. Ventrally the cornca
is less clcar bccausc of hypopyon
(fibrin) in the anterior chamber.
Figure 7. Cat with relinitis showing
retinal ederna and lat dctachmcnt
secondary to postcrior uvcitis.
Uveitis in General
181
I1. What is the significance of aqueous humor fare and cell accumulation?
The blood-ocular barrier maintains thc low total protein contcnt (0.15-0.55 mg/dl in the cat)
increased amount of protein and infux of cclls within the aqucous humor. The increased protein
causes light directed into the eye to back-scaller, thus imparting a turbid characteristic to the aque-
froin U to 4 1 (0 = norimal and 4+ = fibrin clot formation). Thc accumulation of cellular maier-
ial may consist of white blood cells, red blood cells, pigment, or lumor cells as wcll as pigment
granules. The presence of increased amounts of aqueous protein indicates infammation (with thc
severity approx imating the magnilude of the flare reaclion). Likewise, cell accumulation indicates
inflanimation but suggests a more severe inflammatory response. Flare and cells (including hy-
popyon) may be the result of sterile inflammation or infcctiou.
12. Which is morc coinmon, anterior uveitis or posterior uveitis?
Anterior uveitis is more common, cspccially considering the propensity for lhe globe lo suf-
fer trauinatic injury. The anterior segment (comea, iris, ciliary body, and lens) is more frequently
damagcd than the posterior segment (vitreous, retina, oplic nerve, and choroid) in ocular trauma.
The posierior location of the choroid within the orbit gives the choroid considerable protection,
tion are both common with other causes of uveilis.
13. What are the common causes of uveitis?
Uveitis is a component of most intraocular discasc processes and a frequent result of trauma
lo the globe. Despite the casc withi which uvcitis can bc rccognized clinically, most cases are clas-
sified as idiopathic. Many cndogcnous causcs of uveitis have becn recognized (see Table). Com-
mon causes of uveitis in companion animals prcscnted for cmcrgency care include blunt trauma,
corTcal ulccration, and perforation of the cornea or globe.
Causes of Endogenous Uveitis in Dogs and Cats
CANINE UVEITIS
FELINE UVEITIS
Algae
Fungal
Prototheca spp.
Blastomyces dermatitidis
Bacterial
Candida albicans
Brucella canis
Coccifioides immitis
Borrelia burgdorferi
Cryptococcus neoforman
Fungal
Histoplasma capsutatum
Blastomyces dermaritidis
Parasite
Coecidioides inmitis
Cterebra larva
Crypirococcus neoformans
Dirofilaria inmitis
Histoplasma capsuiarum
Metastrongylidae nematodes
Parasitic
Diroftaria immitis
Toxoptasma gondit
Diptera spp. (lly larvae)
Viral
Ocular Iarva migrans (Toxecara and Bayfisascaris spp.)
Heline immunodeficiency virus
Proto7oan
Feline infectious peritonitis
Leishnanite donovani
Feline leukemia vinus (1umor formalion)
Foxoplasma gondi
Idiopathic
Rickettsial
Trauma
Lhrlicftia canis or ptarys
Neoplaslic disorders
Rickettsia ricketrsil
Fibrosarcoma
Viral
Primary tumor (melanorna)
Adcnovirus
Secondary tumor
Distemper (lymphosarcoma)
Herpesvirus
(Tablecontinued on next page.)
182
Uveitis in General
Causes of Endogenous Uveitis in Dogs and Cats (cont'd)
CANINE UVEITIS
FEI INE LVEITIS
Idiopathic
Trauma
Toxcmia (e.g.- pyomctra, pancreatitis)
Ulcerativekeratitis
Neoplastic and paraneoplastie disorders
Hypcrviscosity syndromc
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis
Primary neoplasia (ocular melanoma, adenocarcinoma)
Secondary neoplasia (lymphosarcona most comrnon)
Metabolic disorders
Diabetic cataract (lens-induced uveitis)
Misccllancous causes
Coagulopathy
Immune-mediated disorders
Immune-mediated vasculitis
Lens Irauma (phacoxclastic uveitis)
Cataract (lens-induced uveitis)
Uveodermatologic syndrone
14. What signifcance can be attributed to anterior uveitis?
Anterior uveitis indicates injury to the anterior uveal tissue resulting from either an exoge-
nous causc. such as trauma or surgery, or an endogenous cause, such as systemice infection. Bi-
lateral uveitis is more likely to result from systemic disease. Although the presence of uveitis is
 not necessarily an indication of infection, infectious causes should be considered. However, any
to antigenic material, released as a result of the inflammation, can propagatc thc inflammatory
 process and contribute to the development of chronic uveitis. Chronic anterior uveitis often leads
to development of syncchia. When extensive, synechia can obstruct aqueous humor outflow,
causing secondary glaucoma.
15. Can a prognosis be determined in emergency cases with uveitis?
Obviously, the prognosis depends on the actual condition or injury. However, the prognosis
for vision in cases with mild-to-moderate degrees of uveitis is favorablc. Severe cases have a
guarded prognosis. Within 2448 hours of treatmen1 iniliation, lhc prognosis needs to be reeval-
uatcd and possibly upgraded or dowagraded. In cases of endophthalmitis or panophthatmitis, ihe
prognosis for vision is poor, and the prognosis for globe salvagc is guarded to poor. If secondary
conditions develop as a result of uveitis (e.g., hyphena, glaucoma, intensified pain), a guardcd-
to-poor prognosis is warranted.
16. How should anterior uveitis be treated in an emergency setting?
lf not contraindicated by the patient's overall condition, nonspecific anti-inflammatory ther-
anti-inflammatory drugs(NSAlDs) canbe used as an altcmative to corticosteroidswhen ncces-
sary. NSAIDs should be avoided in cases associated with coagulopathics or intraocular hemor-
rhage. Topical preparations should be used with caution in cases of globe pcrforation, becausc thc
dnig. vchiclc. or preservatives may damage iniraocular tissues. If an infectious cause is suspected,
triple antibiotic ophthalmic solution and systemic first-generation cephalosporin is appropriatc.
Uveitis in General
183
Initial Therapy for Uveitis by Grade of Severity
INFLAMMATION
GRADE
DESCRIPTION
TREATMENT
DOSE
Mild
Suhlle to promounced
Topical corticosteroids
3 tines/day
miosis, subtlc flare,
Topica NSAIDs
3 times/day
photophobia
Topical cycloplegics
Every 24 hr
(e.g.、atropine)
Molerale
Aqueous flare and
Systemic
1 mg/kg/day
cells. inis swelling:
corticosteroids
hlepharospasm, comeal
(e.g., prednisone)
edema
Topical corticosteroids
4 timcs/day
(e.g., 1% prednisolone or
0.1% dexamethasone)
Topical NSAIDs
4 times/day
Cycloplegics
2 times/day until
mydriasis occurs
Severe
Hyphema. hypopyon.
Systeimic corticosteroid
30 mg/kg IV over
aqucous fibrin, irregular
pulse-therapy
2030min
pupil shape and iris
initially (c.g,
swelling
methylprednisolone
sudium succinate)
Systcimic corticosteroids
2 mg/kg/day in piacc
(e.g.. prednisone)
of or 6-12 hours
after pulsc-thcrapy
Topical corticosteroids
Lvcry 1 2 hr
(e.g., 1% prednisolone
until improved,
or 0.1% dexamcthasone)
then 4 times/day
Topical NSAIDs
4 times/day
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Aguirre GL, Gross SL: Ocular manifestations of selected systemic diseases. In The Compendium Col-
lection: Ophthalmology in Small Aniinal Practicc. Trcnton, NJ, Veterinary Leaming Systems, 1996,
Pp 89-98.
2. Bistner S, Shaw D, Ris RC: Diseases of thc uvcal tract (part I, part ll, and part II). In The Compendium
Collection: Ophthalmology in Small Animal Practice. Trenton, NJ, Veterinary Lcaming Systems.
1996. pp 161-185.
3. Bistmer Si: Recnt devclopmcnts in cornparalive ophthalmology. Comp Cont Educ 14:1304-1323, 1992.
4. Davidson MG, Nasissc MD, Jamicson VE, et al: Trauimatic anterior lens capsule disruption. J Am An
Hosp Assoc 27:410-414, 1991.
5.Hakanson N, Forrester SD: Uveitis in the dug and cat. Vet Clin North Am Small An Pract 20:715-735,
1990.
6. Kural E, Lindley D, Krohne S: Canine giaucoma: Medical and surgical therapy. In Ihe Conpendium Col-
lection: Ophthalnology in Simall Animal Practicc. Trenton, NJ, Veterinary ILeaming Systens, 1996,
Pp 226 233.
7. Rathbone-Gionfiddo J: The causes, diagnosis, and treatment of uveitis. Vet Mcd 90:278 -284, 1995.
8. Roberts SM: Assessment and managerment of the ophthalmic emergency in cats and dogs. In The Com-
pendium Collection: Ophthalinology in Small Animal Practice. Trenton, NJ, Vctcrinary Learning Sys-
tems, 1996, pp 252-267.
9. Schmeitzel LP: Recognizing thc cutaneous signs of imrmune-mediated diseases. Vet Med 86:138-163.
1661
10. Serevin GA: Anti-inflammatory drugs. In Scrcvin's Vctcrinary Ophthalmology Notes, 4th ed. Fort
Collins, Co, University of Colorado, 2001, pp 91-97.
11. van der Wocrdt A: Lcns-induccd uveitis.Vet Ophthalmol 3:227-234, 2000,
29. UVEITIS: OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF
SYSTEMIC DISEASE IN DOGS
Craig A. Fischer, D.V.M., and Thomas Evans, D.V.M.
1. Can one look into an eye and diagnosc a systcmic disease?
Not usually. As with most things in medicinc, pathologic changes within thc eye such as
uveitis often confribute to a piece of the diagnostic pie that can ultimately lead to a definitivc di-
agnosis. it is best for the clinician to have a thorough grasp of thc patient's history and clinical
definitivc clinical and etiologic diagnosis (lable). There are some syslemic disorders in which
uveitis is expected (e.g.. systemic mycoses) and others whcrc it occurs only occasionally (c.g-.
(cular filariasis-canine heartworm disease).
Clinicat Signs of Uveitis in Dogs
ANTERIOR
INTERMEIDATE UVEITIS
U!VEITIS (IRIS AND
(PARS CILIARIS RETINAE
POSTERIOR 1UVEITIS
CILIARY BODY)
AND PERIPHERAI. CHOROIN)
(CHOROID)
PANUVEITIS
Aqueous Hlare
Cataract (posterior capsular)
Fundic hyperpigmentation
One or more of the
Cataract
[ntraocular prcssure
(tapetal region)
signs of antcrior.
Conjunetival/
decrcasc
Fundic hypopigmentation
immediate, and
episcleral
Vitreal opacification-
(nontapctal region)
posterior uvcitis
hyperemia
anterior (accumulation of
Granuloma(s) (focal
arc present
Coineal cdeima
inflammatory components
or mulifocal)
Comeal ncovasculari-
in anterior vitreous and
Optic neuritis
zation (dccp)
 onto posterior lcns
Rctinal detachment.
Fye pain
capsule)
(usually exudative)
Hypheina
Retinal hemorrhagc
Hypopyon
Vision dectease
lntraoxcular pressure
Vitreal opacification
decrease
(prerctinal)
lris color change
(usually darker)
Iris swelling
Keratic prccipitates
Miosis
Phthisis bulbi
Rubcosis iridis (or
prciridal fibro-
vascular menbrane
formatiun)
Secluded pupil and
iris bombe
Secondary glaucoma
Visjon dccrease
 2. What is uveitis and its significance in relation 1o systemic disease?
Uveitis in a complex inflammatory process characterized clinically by altered vascular per-
meability and cellular infiltration of the uveal tracl and intraocular spaces (anterior chamber.
posterior chamber. vitreous, and subretinal space). In most cases the basic pathophysiologic
characteristics of the systemic diseasc proccss are present in the uveal tract as well as in other
tissues.
184
Uveitis: Ocular Manifestations of Systemic Disease in Dogs
185
3. What spccific characteristics of uveitis can a clinician use to match it with a specific sys-
temic diseasc?
The location within the uvea (anterior, intermediate, poslerior) where the inflammalion oc-
curs is often specific to certain systemic diseases (e.g-, anterior uveilis with canine adenovirus I,
posterior uvcitis and rctinitis with canine distemper virus). The presence or absence of blood
within the eye is inportant. Other characteristics includes whcthcr the inflammation is unilatcral
or bilateral, sudden or insidious, seif-limiting or chronic, recurrent or continuous, and nongranll-
lomatous or granulomatous. In addition, coinplications such as cataracts and glaucoma are help-
ful in differentiating one systemic disease from another.
Basic Characteristics and Incidence of Uveilis in Selected Systemic Diseases in Dogs
INCIDENCE
DISEASE
BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF UVEITIS
OF UVEITIS
Infectious
Borreliosis
Anterior, intermediate, and/or postcrior uveitis, hlood common
Uncommon
Brucellosis
Anterior and intermediatc uvcitis,blood cominon
Uncommon
Leplospirosis
Anterior, intermediale, and/or posterior uveitis, hlood common 
Uncommon
Lndogenous gram-
Anterior, intermediatc, and/or postcrior uvcitis
Uncomnon
negative bacterial
infcctions, cndotoxin-
associated (c.g.
E. coli in pyometra)
Septiceinia
Anterior, intemediate, and/or posterior uveitis, blood common
Common
Canine adenovirus I
Anterior vveitis, comeal edema
Canine distemper
Posterior uveitis, retinochoroidinis, optic neuritis
Common
Toxoplasmosis
Anterior, intemediate, and/r posterior uveitis,
Common
retinochoroiditis, optic ncuritis
Leishmaniaisis
Anterior and interinediatc uvcitis
Uncommon
Ehrlichiosis
Anterior, intermediate, and/or posterior uveitis, blood common
Common
Rocky Mountain
Anterior, intermediate, and/or posterior uveitis, blood common
CoTTITon
spotted fever
Blastomycosis
Panuveitis, exudative retinal detachment
Common
Coecidioidomycosis
Panuveitis, exudalive retinal detachiment
Cominon
Histoplasnosis
Panuveitis, exudative retinal detachment
Uncommon
Cryptococcosis
Panuveitis, exudativc rctinal dctachmcnt, optic ncuritis
Common
Noninfectious
 Diabetes mellitus
Anterior uveitis, cataract induced
Granulomatous mening-
Posterior uveitis, optic ncuritis
Common
(encephalitis
Neoplasia-infiltralive
Anterior, intermediate, and/or posterior uveitis, blood conimon
Common
(e.g., lymphosarcoma)
Systemie hypertension
Posterior uveitis, serous rctinal dctachimcnt, blood common
Common
Uveodennatological
Panuveitis
Common
syndromc (similar to
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada
syndrome in humans)
4. What are the pathophysiological mechanisms in which systemic infections can lead to
uveitis?
Direct destruction of the uveal tissues by infectious agents is one mechanism (e.g., toxoplas-
mosis). Immune-mediated events associated with infectious agcnts. including all four of the clas-
sical hypersensitivity responses (I, I, II, and IV), have been proven to occur within the uveal tract
of the eye. Where immunc-inediated uveitis is present in systemic infections the organism is often
not locatcd in the cye hut iu a distant tissue(s). Also cytokine-induced inflammation within the
uveal tract has been associated with endotoxemia related to graim-negative infections such as seen
with E. cofi in canine pyometra patients. Other possible foci of gram-negative bacterial infections
 that may lead to uveitis include the heart, kidneys, prostate, and gingival or dental regions.
186
Uveitis: Ocular Manifestations of Systemic Disease in Dogs
 5. What is the significance of the presence of blood in thc eye along with uvcitis in relation
to systemic diseases?
Blood in the eye is ofteu associatcd with uvcitis, and its presence can be suggestive of some
systemic diseases (e.g., tick-bornc rickcttsial discascs, brucellosis, systemic hypertension).
Uveitis leads to cormpromise of the blood-ocular barrier, which can lcad to Jcakage of red blood
cells particularly if othcr hcmostatic-inhibiting mechanisms are associated with the syslemic dis-
case process. These include vasculitis, thrombocytopenia, thrombocytopathy, coagulopathy, sys-
temic hypertension, hyperviscosiiy, ancmia, intraocular neoplasia, and intraocular neovascular-
ization. Also red blood cells and their breakdown products further promote uvcitis and, whcn
prcsent in the vitreous, have been found to be retinoloxic
Figure 1. Relinochoroidal lesions in the tapetal (A) and nontapetal (B) regions in the fundus of a young dog
with concurrent acute neurologic signs associated with canine distemper.
Uveitis:Ocular Manifestations ofSystemicDisease inDogs
187
Figure 2. Subacute anterior uvcitis with rnild byphcma (A) in the right eye and multifocal peripapillary retinal
hemorrhages (h) in the left eye in a dog with ehrlichiosis.
188
Uveitis: Ocular Manifestations of Systemic Disease in Dogs
6. Besides the usual diagnostic lests used to difterentiate one systemic disease from an-
ofher, what ocular diagnostic modalities can be used in patients with uveitis to further bring
about a detinitive diagnosis?
Ocular ultrasonography is often hclpful to discern changcs jn the posterior segment of the
cye, particularly if the ccular Huid is cloudy or if there is a signifcant cataract present. Changes
such as detached retina, posterior segmenl granulomas, accumulation of intravitreal blood, and
centesis can be done to determine cytologic fcatures, scrologic testing, and microbial culture. In
cases of posterior uveitis with exudaiive retinal detachment, vitreocentesis or subretinal aspira-
7. What infectious systemic diseases that cause uveitis havc geographic preditections?
The systemic fungal diseases tend to be geographically endemic. Blastomycosis is seen more
in the mid west regions of the United States than any other location. Coccidividomycosis is mainly
seen in Mexico. the southwest United States, and California, particularly in the San Joaquin val-
ley regiou. Histoplasmosis is classicaly scen in the Ohio and Mississippi river valley regions of
the U.S. Cryptococcosis appears to be more geographically ubiquitous. The filanentous fungal
diseases, such as aspergillosis, are inore concentrated in the deep south of the U.S. Borreliosis is
more likely diagnosed in thc northeast United States.However,its incidence is increasingly seen
in othcr parts of thc United States as well as the tick-borne rickettsial diseases. Old World leish
maniaisis (f.eishrmrnia donovani) is scen in the Mediterranean area, Africa, and Asia. New World
leishmaniaisis (Leishmania donovani chagasi) is found in certain parts of the United Statcs and
Central and South Anerica.
Bccause of thesc geographic predilections, the clinician should always question the owners
bout prcvious travcl and living locations of the affccted patient. In addition, it should also be kept
in mind that some infcctious ageuts might bc harbored in a subclinical form. When these patients
drugs. debilitating disease, old age), the hidden infection may have become clinically evidenl.
8. What is the treatment for uveitis in a patient with systemic disease?
The basic treatiment is 1o rmaintain the functional visual capacity of the cye. Thereforc, drugs
thal control inflammation are fundamental. Of course, specific therapy is also instituted for the
systemic disease process if it is identilied initially.
Corlicosteroids are the most conumon group of drugs used to control uveitis. Evcn jn cascs
of infeclious systemie diseases where the uveitis is mainly initiated and promoted by immune-
mediated events, corticosteroids are used along with appropriate antimicrobial drugs. Thc cx-
ceptions for their use would be in cases such as systemic mycoses and septic endophthalmitis in
which the eye pathology is caused principally by the direct destructive prescnce of the organ-
isms and inimunosupprcssion by corlicosteroids is to be avoided. Also, corticostcroids may be
agnosis can only be based on serologic, cytologic. or microbial findings that are nor initially
available. In these cases other forms of systemic anti-inflarnmatory therapy may be initialed un-
til the definitive diagnosis is established.
(anti-intlammalory dose) to 2 mg/kg/day (immonosuppressive dose). To achieve rapid bloud lev-
els of corticosteroids.an initial injection of dexamethasone sodium phosphate al 1 mg/kg may be
given intravenously. In addition, fiunixin meglumine (although not labeled for use in dogs) may
bc given at 0.2 mg/kg IV. Depcnding on the initial response of thc uveitis to corticostcroids and
the chronicity of the disease proccss, the oral corticosteroids may be tapered from I to 2 mg/kg
per day for 3-5 days to 1 to 2 mg/kg every other day for 10 days and then 0.5 to 1.0 img/kg every
othcr day for another I0 days, and so on.
Uveitis:OcularManifestationsof SystemicDiseaseinDogs
189
A
B
Figure 3. Exudative retinal detachment (A) and a suhretinal granuloma (b) associated with diffuse choroidi-
tis in a dog with blastomycosis (arrows).
190
Uveitis:OcularManifestationsofSystemicDiseaseinDogs
In those noninfectiuus immune-mediated systeimic diseases that are characterized by their
prolonged naiure, such as uveodermatologic syndrome (similar to Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease
in humans), anti-inflammatory or immunosuppressive drugs such as azathioprinc are often used.
T'he usual dosage is 2 mg/kg/day for 5 days, then I mg/kg/day for 10 days, then 0.5 mg/kg/day
thereafter for maintenance. Oral cyclosporine (5 mg/kg/day) is beginning to be used morc frc-
quently as well. For whatever reason, if systemic corticostcroids cannot be used to control uveitis,
flammalory dosage rate of I5 mg/kg three times daily.
 Most cases of uveitis associated with systemic diseases include the iris and ciliary body (an-
terior uveitis). Topical ophthalmic medications are formulated in such a way that they enter, to
some extent. the anterior and posterior charmber strlictures. Thereforc. topical anti-inflammato
ries. particularly dexainethasone O.1% and prednisoione acetatc 1%, are usually used. Depending
On the intensity of the anterior uveitis they may be uscd as frcquently as 4 timcs daily. In the case
of preexisting corneal ulceration, direct intraocular invasion by systemic mycotic agents, or other
situation where topical corticosteroids are contraindicaled, topical NSAIDs may be used. Avail-
able topical NSA1Ds include diclofenac 0.1%, flurbiprofen 0.03%, ketorolac 0.5%, indomethacin
1 %.and suprofen 1%. In addition. in cases of marked anterior uveitis. a coinbination of both top
ical corticosteroids and topical NSAIDs may bc used.
Mydriatics, such as alropine sulfate 1%, have often been advocated to treat antcrior uveitis
to prevent posterior synechiae formation and to inhibil eye pain. The use of mydriatics, howcver.
because mydriatics may actually promote increases in intraocular pressure (glaucona). Glaucoma
sccondary to antcrior uveitis is particularly cominon in certain breeds that have an inherited prc-
dispositionfor glaucoma such as the Ainerican cocker spaniel.Incaseswhcreglaucoma isprc-
sent or prcsumed to be likely, topical antiglaucoma therapy such as carbonic anhydrasc inhibilor
onpod iouny snoanbe ssanddns on pasn aq Aeu (%I apiueozuq *%7 apiurelozop) shnp
at a dosagc of 1 drop threc times daily.
Topical antimicrobials notoriously have poor antcrior chainbcr pcnctration capabilities. Usu-
ally systermic antimicrobials have a greater abilily to enter the intraocular structures through a
compromised blood-ocular barrier that occurs with uveitis. Subconjunctival administration of cer-
tain antimicrobials such as gentamicin (10-20 mg) and cefazolin sodium (100 mg) may be given.
Also, intracameral (into the anterior chamber) delivery of certain antimicrobial drugs, such as fu-
conazole in the case of systemic mycotic infections, have also been used.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. AquiTe GL, Gross SL: Ocular manifestations of sclected systemic discascs. In Compendiurm Collection:
Ophthalmology in Small Animal Practice. Trenton, NJ, Veterinary Lcarming Systeims, I996, pp 89.-98.
2. Bistncr S. Shaw D. Riis RC: Discases of the wvcal tract (Parts I-II). In Compendium Collection: Oph-
thalmology in Small Animal Practice. Trenton, NJ, Veterinary Lcarning Systcms, I996, pp 16!-185.
3. Collins BK, Moore CP: Diseases and surgery ot' the canine anterior uvea.In Gelatt KN (ed): Veterinary
Ophthalmology、 3rd ed. Baltiniore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999, pp 755-795.
4. Gilger BC: Ocular manifestations of systemic infectious diseases. In Bonagura JD (cd): Kirk's Current
Veterinary Therapy: Small Animal Practice,13th ed. Philadelphia,W.B.Saunders, 2000,pp 276279.
 5. Hakanson N, Forrester SD: Lveitis in the dog and cal. Vet Clin North Aim Small Anini Pract 20:715-735.
1990.
6. Jolnson BC. Miller WW: Recognizing 0cular signs of systermic diseases in dogs. Vet Med 85:1076-1090.
0661
7. Kern TI: Canine uveitis. In Bouagura JD (ed): Kirk's Currcnt Veterinary Therapy: Small Animal Praclice,
12th ed. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, 1995. pp 1248.-1253.
8. Komaroiny AM, Brooks DE, Kallberg ME, et al: Hyphema. Pan I. Pathophysiological consilerations.
Comp Cont Educ 21:1064-1069. 1999.
9. Khrone SD. Vestre WA: Ocular use af anti-inflammatory drugs in companion animals. In Compcndiun
Collcction: Ophthalmology in Small Animal Practice. Trenton, NJ, Veterinary Leaning Systeims,
1996. pp 252-278.
Uveitis: Ocular Manifestations of Systemic Disease in Dogs
161
10. Martin CL: Ocular manifestalions of systeimic discase. Parl I. The dog. ln Giclat KN (cd): Vcterinary
Ophthalmology, 3rd edl. Balimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999, pp 1401 1448.
I1. Martin CL, Stiles J: Ocular infcctions. In Greene CE (ed): Infcctious Discases of the Iog and Cat, 2nd
ed. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, 1998, pp 658-672.
12. Rathbone-Gionfriddo J: The causes, diagnosis and treatment of uveitis. Vet Med 90:278-284, 1995.
1 3. Stilcs J: Canine rickettsial infcctions: Infectious diseases of the cyc. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
30:1135-1149.2000.
14. Ward DA: Oculomycosis. In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy: Small Animal Prac-
ticc, 12th ed. Philadeiphia, W.B. Saunders, I995, pp 1257 ·1261.
15. Willis AM: Canine viral infections: Infectious diseases of the eye. Vet Clin North Anmt Sumall Anim Pract
30:1119-1133, 2000.
30. UVEODERMATOLOGIC SYNDROME
Ronald C. Ris, D.V.M., M.S
1. What is unique about uveodermatologic syndrome?
This syndrome combines eye, hair, and skin involverment. Althongh not necessarily all in uni
syndrome has a human countcrpart known as Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome, named
for the authors who first described it.
Figure 1. Threc-year-old black Labrador retricver with predominant eye and facial skin and hair involvcnient.
2. Is there any sex or age predileetion?
The nean age is 2.8 ycars, and there is no scx predilection.
3. Is there a breed predilection?
Ycs, the northcrn Asian brecds lead the list, but others have been reported. These include the
Akita, chow chow, Samoyed, and Sibcrian husky. Lcss frequently, the Australian shepherd.
golden retrievcr, Irish setter, Labrador retriever, Old English sheepdog, St. Bcrmard, anti Shetland
sheepdog.
4. How do these dogs usually present?
Thc ocular manifestatios are usually the chief conccn. Thesc include bilateral anterior
veitis or panuveitis; both showing aqueous flare and depigmentation of the iris and nontapeial
fundus. Secondary glaucoma is frequenlly a part of the syndrome as is retinal dctachment- both
causes of blindness. Recurrent episodes of the uveitis generally damage the lens with synechiae
and cataract sequelae (Figs. 2-5).
5. What dermatologic manifestations accompany the oeular signs?
Or any of the mucocuianeous junctions. Relmarkable hair color loss is possible. Piginenlation loss
of the llose, footpads. and scrotum. The loss or rcturn of skin and hair pigment is frcqucntly the
casicst clinical sign for the owners to monitor. They beconc the baromctric gaugc of when thc
medications are controlling the syndromc (Figs. 6..8).
192
Uveodermatologic Syndrome
193
Figure 2. Three-year-oldi Sheland sheepdog
with typical uveitis and lid margin depig-
mentation.
Figure 3. Threc-year-old Sherland sheepdog
withacutcuvcodermiatologicsyndrome
m
showing thie multifocal nontapetal depigmen-
tatin.
Figure 4. Siberian husky at 2 1/2-years-old
with acute uveodermalologic syndrome.
Note the hazy fundus view through a flare but
still able to make out thc imultifocal depig-
mentations.
Figure 5. Sane Siherian husky as Figure 4 af-
ter 2 wecks on irmmumotherapy.
194
Uveodermatologic Syndrome
Figure 6. Samc Shetland shcep-
dog as Figure 2 showing lip dc-
pigmentalion
I'igure 7. Same Shetland sheep-
dog as Figure 2 showing early
nasal planutn depiginentation.
6. Is there a known ctiology for the syndrome?
No. but melanin is highly suspected as being a part of this syndrome, both in humans and
dogs. Antimelanin antibodies have been dermonstrated, and the syndrome is responsive io immunc
shppression therapy.
7. What is the treatment for this syndrome?
Both topical and systcmic corticosteroids are recommended, bul long-term use has typical un-
desirablc side effects. Initially, use prednisolone (I mg/kg rwice a day), but taper the dose systemi-
cally while adding azathioprine (2 mg/kg/day) for 1 wcek and reduce the daily frequency to cvery
other day; over the course of weeks reducc cven further to every third day. Every 2 weeks, monitor
Uveodermatologic Syndrome
195
Figure 8. Shetland sheepdog as a puppy (A), as
a 2-year-old (B), as a 3-ycar-old (C). and at 3
years showing complete loss of nasal inis. and
montapctal piginent but still visual (D).
(Courtesy of Dr. D. Walton.)
196
Uveodermatologic Syndrome
thc white blood cell count whilc on azathioprine (lmuran). If the count falls to ≤ 20o0, discontinue
owners will monior lid or lip pigmentation and eye comfor signs. If the uveitis is severe, give 0.1
ml of 40 mg/ml methylprednisolone (Depo-Medrol) subconjunctivally. After topical anesthesia, the
injection is given into the dorsolateral fornix. The subconjunctival injection may be repeated in 23
wceks. t1 nccessary. lopical antibiotic-corticosteroids are also uscd as is cyclosporine.
8. How sllccessful is treatment?
Resolution of most sigus are possible, but just when things look guod a recuurrence may hap-
pen. The prognosis for long-term control is poor. Many paticnts can be mainlained on Imuran
9. What are the histopathologic findings in eyes lost to this syndromc?
These eyes show severe granulomatous panuveitis. Within the iris and choroid are inliltratcs of
chronic inflamimatory cells, histiocytes, and macrophagcs containing melanin granulcs consistent
with antimclanocytic autoimmumity.Destruction of the vascular choroid by thcse infiltratcs leads to
retinal detachment as well as retinal infilirates. A breakdown in thc blood-retinal bamier and expo-
sure fo retinal-specihc antigens leading fo antiretinal antibodies compounds tlie lveitis coimplex.
10.Does the skin histopathology aid the diagnosis?
Yes, biopsies of the lips at the mucocutaneous junctions show lichenoid pathology with his-
tiocytic cells. plasma cells, and chronic inflammatory cells.
11. Are other species known to develop this syndrome?
Yes, ineluding Arabian. Camerguc, Lippezan, and Percheron horses, Sinclair minipigs, and
Dam chickens.
12. What are the current etiology hypotheses?
Autocytotoxic
Immune or autoimmune
Neurochemical
13. Have any other tlierapies been tried besides immunosuppression?
Yes. Immunomodulators have bcen tried when the paticnt has bccome intolerant to convcn-
tional therapy. The most success has been with tetracycline and niacinainide given orally thrcc
times a day over extended lime periods (6-9 months). The dosing is rather broad for dogs: (dogs
≤ 50 pounds, 250 mg of tetracycline and niacinamidc three times per day; dogs > 50 pounds,
500 mg of both three timcs per day).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.Asakukra I: Vogt-Koyanagi-Hlarada syndrone (uveitis diffusa acuta) in the dog. Jpn J Vet Mcd
673:445-455. 1977.
2. Gwin RW. Wyman M, Ketring K, ct al: Idiopathic uveitis and exudalive relinal detachment in the dog. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:153-I 70, 1980.
case. Am J Ophthalmol 131:607--614. 2001
4. Ken TI. Walton D, Ris RC,et al: Uveitis associated with poliosis and vitiligo in 6 dogs. J Am Anin Hosp
Assoc I87:408-414. 1985
5.Murphy CJ, Betlhom RW, Thirkill C: Antiretinal antibodies associatcd with Vogt-Koyanagi-HIarada-likc
syndrumc in a dog. J Aim Anim Hosp Assoe 27:399402, 1991.
6. Rcad RW, Rechodouni A. Butani N, ct al: Complications and prognostic faclors in Vogt-Koyanagi-Hlarada
disease. Am I Ophthalmol 131:599-606. 2001
7. Read RW, Holland GN, Rao NA, et al: Revised diagnostic critcria for Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease: Rc-
31. THOUGHTS ABOUT PIGMENTARY UVEITIS
IN GOLDEN RETRIEVERS
Ronald C. Riis, D.V.M., M.S
1. How does pigmentary uveitis in golden retrievers generally present?
U'sually without the knowlcdge of the owner. On routinc ocular cvaluations, one iris color
may be darker brown than the opposite. This heterochromic characteristic may be noticed by the
owner. Depending on the chronicity, the pupil may be adhered to the lens capsule, so pupillary
reflexes can be asymmetrical.
2. What does the term "pigmentary uveifis" imply?
The uveitis componcnts fit most of the applied uveitis signs of hypotonia, flare. photophobia,
tearing, and conjunctival hypercmia. However, an additional sigu of "pigmentary" applics to thc
deposits of pigment on the lens capsnle and corneal endothelium. The pignent is within
macrophages that most probably arose from the anterior uveal tract (Fig. 1).
Figure 1. This golden retriever de-
veloped uveitis folluwed by glall-
coma. Pigmcnt adhesions and de-
positls are located predominanlly
on the anterior lens capsule.
3. Other than the pigment and uveitis, what other signs have been noticed?
The smoldering uveitis many timcs cncouragcs a good deal of fibrin to accumulate in the ann-
 erior chumber. Plasmoid aqueous from dilated iris vasculature is rich in fibrinogen. Clotting puts
clumps of fibrin onto iris, lens capsule, and cornea.
4. What can be done to clear the fibrin accumulation?
Treat the ulveitis with corticosteroids or nonsteroidal anti-inffamimatories. In addition, if the
thc anterior chamber to dissolve the clot (tPA dose: 25-40 μg injcction with a 30-gauge necdile).
5. Is this disease assoeiated with any other systemic abnormalities?
So far it has not becn associatcd with other abnormalities. Usually tlhc pursuit of an etiology
cenlesis for culture are negative, and cylology may yield mononuclear inflammation (ANA titers,
Brucella and Leptospira titers negative). The hunt for a ncoplastic antigen (i.e., radiographic
and/or ultrasound evaluation of thc chest and abdomen) is lsually nonproductive. Becausc so
197
198
Thoughts about Pigmentary Uveitis in Golden Retrievers
much rnoney has been spent trying to find an etiology to no avail, this diseasc has becomc recog-
nized as a possible immune-mediated uveilis unique to the breed.
6. So the disease can self-destruct the eyes?
Ycs. The uveitis may be unilatcral at first, but usually bccomes bilateral. Thc chronic uvcitis
matous globes usually end up enucleatcd or eviscerated.
7. What would the outcome bc if the eyes were prophylactively treated for glaucoma in
the initial uveitis stages?
prevent the occlusion of the drainage angles. If the medication is dircctcd at the aqueous produc-
tion. a balance of outflow versus produclion may bc maintained for a while. Unfortunately, 1he out-
come Is al ways the same in the long run despite anti-inHammatory and antiglaucoma medication.
8. To what extent has the treatment of the uveitis been explored?
prednisolone, azathioprinc, and cyclosporine. Thcse medications cach havc positive effects but
also their own adverse effecls. lsually because of the latter, the dose frequency is tapercd off, and
that is when a recurrence of the uveitis causes more damage. To avoid this, start with prednisolone
creasing the prednisolone. Topically, the frequency of dexamethasone and cyclosporine admin-
istration should depcnd on the need and comfort
9. Iris cysts are commonly seen in golden retrievers; are thcy related to this disease?
Iridociliary cysts are often scen along with pigmentary uveitis. They are also seen frequently
in golden retricvct glaucoma (13 out of 18 cases in one study), leading to the conclusion that they
may be important in the pathogenesis of glaucoma. Although giancoma and pigmentary liveitis
have cysts in conmon and most pigmentary uveitis cases end up with glaucoma, a direct rela-
10. Has histopathology given any clues to this syndrome?
No. Thc rolc of histopathology should be to permit a diagnosis that clinical exaininaiions
were unable to make. Flowever, most eyes sectioncd arc those that have end-stage glaucoma
both topically and systemically. Recently, this author evaluated the uveal tract from a golden re
triever with this history. The uveal tract showed few cellular infiltrates (lymphocytes and plasma
cclls), indicating that the medications were doing their job. Special stains of IgA, IgG, lgM,
CD7u BI.A36 and CD, wcre essentially unhelpful. A revicw of other patient files for cases of pig-
cellular responses.
11. Explain the theory behind use of these special stains.
Immunophenotypic analysis uses antibodies 1hat speciically bind to markcr molecules on the
cell surface membrane, cytoplasm, or nuclens. The major applicalion of this typc of analysis has
bcen to classify lymphomas based on the cell origin (i.e., B-cells or T-cells). Vcterinary re-
scarchers attempt to use the markers to diagnose and stage lumors and monitor the response. CD,9
stains mcimbrane markers of B-celI differentiation. CD, and CD, stain membrane markers of T-
cell differentiatjon.
An inimune theory is presumed for the etiology of pigmcntary uvcitis in goldcn retricvers
mainly because some relief is obtained by the symptomalic trealmenl results. Bccause lympho-
cytes and plasma cells are involved with inmunoregulation, cel-mediated iinmunity, antibody
mune activities. thelr prcsence Is expected in pigmentary uveitis.
Thoughts about Pigmentary Uveitis in Golden Retrievers
199
Figure 2. A typical fnding in a golden re-
triever: a free-floating iris cyst in the anleriot
chamhcr as wcl! as several attached cysts in
thc postcrior chamber.
12. What is the best way to classify this uveitis?
The etiology of pigmentary uveitis in golden retrievers is unknown. Histopathology does not
bring us more precision on the etiology, at least not yet. Therefore, the preferred classification
based on thc clinical signs rather than the pathologic signs prevails.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Deehr AJ, Dubielzig RR: Glaucoma in golden retrievers. Trans Am Coll Vct Ophthalmol 28: 105. 1997.
2. Ocutar Disorders Presumed to be Inhcritcd in Purcbred Dogs, 2nd ed. West I afayette, IN, Gcnctics Com-
miltee of the American Coltege of Veterinary Ophthalrnology, 1996.
3. Sapienza JS. Sim6-Domenech FI, Prades-Sapienza A: Golden rctricvcr uvcitis: 75 cases (19941999). Vet
Ophthalmol 3:241-246, 2000.
32. FELINE TOXOPLASMOSIS
Cunthia C. Powell, D.V.M., M.S.
1. How are cats infected by Toxoplasma gondit?
Cats are infected most commonly by ingestion of lissue cysts in prey species, but they may
also be infected in utero or lactationally from an infected queen or by ingeslion of sporulated
oocysts that have been shed in the feces.
 2. How do humans usually gct toxoplasmosis?
Humans can be infected with T. gondi by ingesting sporulated oocysts or tissue cysts o1
transplacentally. Cars only shed oocysts in the feces 1-3 weeks afer they become infected. The
0ocysts are unsporulated when shed and require I-3 days in the environment to sporulate: how-
ever. the oocysts can livc in the cnvironment for months to years. Tissue cysts are usually ingested
in undercooked meats, especially pork. Transplacental infcction is the result of primary cxposurc
of the mother during pregnancy.
3. What are the clinical signs of gencralized toxoplasmosis in cats?
The clinical signs of toxoplasmosis depend on the organ system involved. Fever, anorexia,
and lethargy are common findings. Dy spnea is frequent in cats with pneumonia, abdominal pain
and jaundice are common in cats with hepatitis, and various neurologic signs are reported with
central nervous system (CNS) involvement. However, in cats, most infections with T. gondii are
subclinical.
4. What are the clinical signs of oeular T. gondi infection?
Histopathology from cyes of cats with generalized toxoplasmosis shows that the organism
invades the uveal tract, retina, and optic nerve. Thus, the clinical signs of ocular toxoplasmosis
include anterior uveitis, posterior uveitis, and optic neuritis. Aqueous flare, keratic precipitates.
iritis, hyphema, retinal hemorrhages, focal or diffuse chorioretinitis, decreascd pupillary light re-
fexes, and blindness are common findings (Figs. 1-9).
Figurc 1. An 1 I-ycar-old doimcstic
shorthair prescnting with uveitis
and glaucoma. Aqucous flare,
inegular iris surface, and hazy.
velvety-appearing keratic precipi-
tates were armong the clinical signs
of ocular toxoplasmosis.
007
Feline Toxoplasmosis
201
Iigurc 2. Right eye of a 7-year-old domestie
shorthair with a fibrinous clot in the anlerior
chamber. Uvcitis coinpromiscd thc blood-
eye barricr, allowing thc formation of plas-
moid aqucous and an organizing fibrin clot.
Figure 3. Left eye of the cat with ocular toxo-
plasnosis in Figure 2 showing a slightly
more chronic nature to the uveitis. The clots
are darker and adhere to thc lens capsulc.
Figurc 4. Note the nodula1 appearance of the
iris. This was clinically diagnosed as nodular
iritis. which was biopsied to show granulo-
matous lesions with loxoplasmic cysls.
202
Feline Toxoplasmosis
Figure 5. Fundus view of retinitis caused by
toxoplastnosis.
Figure 6. A subalbinotic fundus with retinal
edema and fat retinal detachment secondary
to toxoplasmosis.
Figure 7. A domestic shorthair showing CNS
signs and a color changc to thc tapetal fun-
dus. Edcma and multifocal chorioretinitis arc
present,
Figure 8. The periphery of the eye in Figure
7. A large area of inflammalion within the
rctina sccondary to toxoplasmosis.
Feline Toxoplasmosis
203
Figure 9. Choricoretinal scar's, inost hikcly scc-
ondary to toxoplasmosis.
5. Is it possible for cats to have ocular toxoplasmosis without having generalized disease?
The role that T. gondii plays in causing ocular discasc in cats that show no evidence of other
organ involvenent is controversial. Ocular histopathology from cats with uveitis and thal are
seropositive for T. gondti rarely identifes the Toxoplasma organism. This hias led some to believe
are oiherwise healthy. However, some studies have shown that uveitis is more prevalent in sys-
lemically heafthy cats that are seropositive for Z. gondi than in healthy cats from the general pop-
ulation. Thus, it is likely that T. gondi does cause uveitis in soine cats that show no other clini-
cal sigils of toxoplasmosis. Also, there is evidence that different strains of thc organism vary in
their ability to cause ocular diseasc. This heips to explain why there are so inany cats with posi-
tive serology for T. gondii but so few with ocular dliseasc.
6. How do you determinc if ocular disease is caused by I. gondii infection?
A definitive diagnosis of ocular toxoplasmosis is difficult to make. Serum IgG antibodies de-
velop approxinately 2 weeks postinfection and may remain elevated for years, even in healthy
animals. Although positivc titcrs for T. gondti have been detected in as many as 74% of cats with
lar toxoplasmosis.
7. Are there any other tests that will help confirrm the diagnosis?
An increasing IgG titer (four-fold incrcasc over 2-3 weeks) indicates recent or active infcc-
tionl and correlates better with disease tlhian a stable titcr. Seruin IgM against T. gondii also can be
clinical ilness because it is rarely detected in the background population of healthy cats (1.2%).
Detection of 7. gondli antibody production in the aqueous humor is also used to support thc di-
agnosis of ocular toxoplasmosis in cats.
8. How does the aqueous humor antibody test work?
This test uses an enzyme-linkcd imumunosorbent assay (ELISA) to detect antibodics to T.
gondi in both serum and aqueous humor. The Goldman- Witmer coefficient (C-value) is calculated
to adjust for antibody leakagc from thc scrum. A C-value greater than 1 indicates T. gondii-spc-
cific antibody is being prrxduced in thc cyc. Bccausc IgM production has only been delected in the
aqueous humor of cats with uveitis, delection of IgM might indicate disease due to the organisn.
9. If the diagnosis of ocular toxoplasmosis is so difficult to make, when should a specific
anti-Toxoplasma drug be used?
Systemically il, T. gondii-scropositive cats should always be treatcd with an anti-
Toxopfusmu drug. In cats with uveitis alone, treatment with an anti-Toxoplasma drug can be jus
204
Feline Toxoplasmosis
tified in T. gondii-scropositive cats when other causes of uveitis have been ruled oul, particularly
if therc has bcen a failure to respond to glucocorticoid therapy.
10. What drugs arc commonly used to treat T. gondi infection?
Clindamycin is the drug of choice for lreating clinical toxoplasniosis in cats. Reconnended
dosages are 8-17 mg/kg orally or intramuscularly every 8 hours or 10-12.5 mg/kg orally or in-
tramuscularly cvery 12 hours for 4 weeks.Liquid oral clindamycin,adininistered cold (4°C),is
hours for 2-4 weeks) also can be used for treatment of toxoplasinosis, although it is less suitable
becausc of the potential side effects of folic acid deficiency in cais. Frequent monitoring for men
tal deprcssion, anemia, leukopenia. and thrombocytopenia are required especially if treatmcnt is
longer than 2 weeks. Azithromycin is a potential alternale choice for cats intolerant of clin-
damycin or sulfa drugs: however, the most appropriate dose has not been determined.
11. How should thc cyes be treated when T. gondii infection is suspected?
Anterior uveitis should be trcated with a topical glucocorticoid, such as 1% prednisofone ac-
ctate. to control inflammalion. and a parasympatholytic, such as l% afropine sulfate, to relieve
ciliary and iris muscle spasm and to avoid formation of posterior synechia. Chorioretinitis is best
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Burncy DP. Lappin MR, Cooper C. et al: Detection of Toxoplasma gondi-specific IgA in the serum of
cats. Aim J Vet Res 56:769-773, 1995.
2. Chavkin MJ. I appin MR. Powcll CC, ct al: To.woplasmu gondi-spccific antibodics in thc aqucous lhumor
of cats with toxoplasmosis. Am J Vet Res 55:1244 -1249. 1994.
3. Lappin MR, Roberts SM. Davidson MG, et al: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays for the detection of
Toxopiasma gondi-specific antibodies and antigcns in thc aqucous humor of cats. I Am Vet Med As-
soc 201: 10101016, 1992.
4. Lappin MP, Cayatte S, Powcll CC, ct al: Dctection of Foxoplasma gondii antigen-containing immune com-
plexes in the serum of cats. Am J Vet Res 54:415419, 1993
5. Powell CC. Lappin MR: Clinical ocular toxoplasmosis in neonatal kiltens. Vet Ophthalinol 4:87-92, 2001.
33. PHACOLYTIC UVEITIS
Bruce H. Grahn, D.V.M
1. What is phacolytie uveitis?
Phacolytic uveitis is one of two forms of uvcitis induced by the lens. The othcr forn is pha
coclastic uvcitis. Phacolytic uveitis is a mild uvcitis, and it develops sccondary to progressive
 catauracl devclopmcnt. This is a common syndrome, and most advanccd cataracts in the dog are
associated with soine degrcc of phacolytic uveitis. Phacolytic uveitis is presumed to develop sec
ondary to leaching of soluhle lens proteins through an intact lens capsule. Exposure of the uvea
to minimal conccntrations of lenticular protcins induccs an immune tolerancc; howcver, increased
cxposure to soluble crystallinc and insoluble albumcn induces a breakdown of the anterior uveal
blood-ocular barier (i.e., 1he tight junctions of the iridal endothelinum, and the ciliary epithelium).
This allows plasma proteins to seep in1o the aqueous and vitreous huimor and lymphocytcs and
plasma cells to accumulate in the anferior uvea (Fig. I).
Phacolytic Uveitis
Figure I. Thc rcleasc of lenticular proteins from a
hypermaturc cataract and pathogenesis of pha-
colytic uveitis. The soluble proteins pass through the
lens capsule. and thc incrcascd concentration of
these proteins induces a breakdown in the antcrior
uveal blood-ocular barier. This allows plasima pro-
teins to leak into the aqueous and vitreous humn
and lyrnphocyles and plasma cells to collect in the
iris and ciliary hody.
Piasmacelis
Lymphccytes
Plasmaproteins
Noutropthils
Macrophagos
2. What are the clinical manifestations of phacolytic uveitis?
Phacolytic uvcitis has two clinical presentations, a mild and severe form. The mild form, which
 is subtle. is the most comnon. It presents as mild miosis, subtle aqueous flare, increased iridal pig-
mcntation, and resistancc to pharmacologically induccd mydriasis (Fig. 2); when the condition is
form of phacolytic uvcitis is less comnon and manifests as marked uveitis, hypopyon, keratic pre-
cipitates, miosis, marked aqueous flarc, postcrior synechia, hypotony, and hyalitis (Fig. 3).
 3. How is phacolytic uveitis diagnoscd?
The clinical diagnosis of phacolytic uveitis is a diagnosis of exclusion. It is an anterior uveitis
that is always associated with a cataract. Most comimonly, the cataract will bc hypermature
(shrunken, wrinkled lens capsule, liquefied corlex); however, imnaturc, mature, and intumesccnt
205
206
Phacolytic Uveitis
Figurc 2. Note thc hazy heimorrhagic
iris surface secondary to a reaction to d
cataracl thal was intumescent.
Figure 3. A rniniature schnauzer with
diabetes showing severc lens-induced
uveitis. The plaques on the inside of the
cornea are keratic precipitates made up
of inflammatory cells.
cataracts may be accompanied by phacolylic uveitis as well. Phacolytic uveitis is common, and
it is prudent to assume that it is present with mos1 mature and hypermature cataracts or even im-
mature cataracts when the ophthalmic examination reveals subtle miosis and loss of the thrce dis-
tinct color bands in the iris, bypotony, mild aqueous flare, and a resistance to papillary dilatation
with a mydriatic. Unfortunately, therc is no definitive way 1o confirm the diagnosis, and several
differential diagnoses need to be ruied out.
4. What is the diffcrential diagnosis for phacolytic uveitis? How are the other diagnoses
excluded?
The clinical manifcstations of phacolytic uveitis are not spccific. A cataracl will always ac-
company phacolytic uveitis, and usually only the anterior uvea is affected, The differcntial diag-
noses include only thosc disordcrs that inclnde a calaract and uveilis. However, cataracts and
uveitis also develop secondary to a nuptured lens capsule, which is prescnt in phacoclastic uvcitis
(Fig. 4). Phacoclastic uveitis is usually a fulminant uveal diseasc in the dog, and the confrming
manifestation is a ruptured lens capsule.
Nonseptic or scplic endophthalmitis may develop from primary ocular disorders or devclop
secondary to systemic diseases. It is prudent to consider systemic diseases as a cause for bilai-
eral uveitis that is accompanicd by incipient subcapsular cataracts, especially when a choroidi-
tis is present. Posterior uveitis (choroiditis) is an infrequent accompanimenl to phacolytic uveitis
and warants a careful exanination for syslemic diseases. Bilateral panuveitis should always be
accompanied with a thorough physical cxamination with assessment of a complete blood count,
serum biochemical profile, urinalysis, and serum for cvaluation of liters to comnon infective
Phacolytic Uveitis
207
agents based on the geographic location of the animal. Chest and abdominal radiographs, ultra-
sonography, or other advanccd imaging may bc rcquired 1o rule out systemic diseases.
with phacolylic uveitis
Uveitis frequently devclops secondary to ulcerative keratitis. Commeal ulcers are confirmed
with fluorescein staining.
Figure 4. Histopathology of pha-
cophagocytosis with lens fibers infil-
trated following a capsule break.
Uveitis and glaucoma developcd as a
rcsult of this rcactive process (40X).
5. Why does phacolytic uveitis require therapy?
Although phacolytic uveitis is usually subtle and may not be accompanied by overt mani
feslations of discomfort (blepharospasm, severe miosis, marked aqueous flare), it is a progressive
disease with ongoing 1nononuclear cell infiltration of the uvca. These inflammatory cells are very
long lived, and the inflammation requires lifc-long mcdical managcmcnt to prevent further infil-
tration of mononuclear infiltrates, synechiae, preiridal or lenticular fibrovascular membranes, vit-
Iong-term topical anti-inffammatory therapy.
6. How is phacolytic uveitis treated?
Because phacolytic uveitis is usually mild and predominately involves the anterior segment
(of the eye, topical ocular therapy with sleroids or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drus (NSAIDs)
is usually adequate. The anterior segment inflammation responds to topical stcroids (1% pred-
nisolone acetate or O.1% dcxamethasone) or NSAIDs (ketorolac, dichlorofenalac, or fhurbupro-
fen) applied every 8-I2 hours for a few days lo weeks. Once the clinical manifestations are sup
 pressed, prophylactic maintenance therapy on a once-a-day, altermale-day basis is usually required
as long as the cataract is present.
7. What is the prognosis for an eye with phacolytic uveitis?
With appropriale medical management, phacolytic uveitis usually has a good prognosis.
However, life-long medication is required, and referral for cataract assessment and rcimoval is rec-
ommended (Fig. 4).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
I. Fischer C: Lens-induccd uvcitis in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 8:39, 1972.
2.Paulson M, Lavach J, Severin G, el al: The effect of lens-induced uveitis on the success of extracapsular
cataract extraction: A retrospective study of 65 lens reriovals in the dog. J Am Anin Hosp Assoc
22:49.1986.
3. van der Woerdt A: Lens-induccd uveitis. Vct Ophthalmol 3:227-234, 2000.
4. Wilcock B. Peiffer RL: Pathology of lens-induccd uvcitis in dogs. Vct Pathol 24:549, 1987.
34. ACUTE OCULAR TRAUMA
Cunthia C. Powell. D.V.M.. M.S
1. What are fhe major considerations in evaluating acute ocular injury?
Overall patient condition is the first consideration with acutc trauma. Oncc the patient is sta-
ble, aftention then should be focused on the eye. Prognosis and thcrapeutic options vary depend-
ing on cause and duration of injury and ocular structures involved. If other injuries preclude im-
mediate evaluation and attention to the injured eye,it should bc protected from further damage
with lubricants and a protective collar if necessary. In cases of cheinical injury, thc globe should
be examined to determine its integrity, and lavage should be institutcd immediately.
2. Are certain injuries more threatening to vision or the integrity of the globe?
Ocular proptosis and injuries that rupture or perforate the globe ofien result in vision loss or
require enucleation and carry a guarded prognosis. In general, blunt traumatic injury carries a
worse prognosis than sharp penetrating inljury because of the increased incidcnce of retinal de-
tachmenl and broader scope of uveal damage. Alkali chemical burns, such as those due to am
monia, lye, lime, and magnesium hydroxide, arc more likcly to cause globe or sight-threatening
injury than acid chemical burns.
Most acids coagulate cormeal epithelial and stromal proteins, forming a barrier and lirmiting
corneal penetration. Alkalis, howevcr, saponify plasma mcmbrane lipids, denature collagcn, and
4. How are chemical burns of the eye treated?
Copious irrigation to decrease contact time and concentration should be instituted immcdi-
ately if a chemical burn is suspected or confirmed. Continuous lavage with a stcrile solution of
lactated Ringer's and 5% dextrose in water or saline can be delivered through a standard IV set.
During irrigation, the conjunctival and corneal surfaces should be inspected and cleaned of chem-
ical residue. Lavage should be continued for 30 minules or until the pH of the ocular surface re-
lums to nornial range (7.3-7.7). After irrigation, the eye should be trcated for corneal ulccration,
uveitis, and glaucoma, if present.
5. Do any specific therapies for alkali burns help treatrment and improve prognosis?
Alkali comeal burns decrease aqueous and corneal ascorbic acid levels and may result in
ascorbate applied every 1-2 hours and high doses of oral ascorbate, 30 mg/kg 4 times/day, may
decrease the incidence (but not progression) of sterilc stromal ulceration after alkali chemical
injury. Treatment is continued at this level for 1 weck at which tinie the lopical medication is
decreascd to 4 times/day. Both topical and systemic mcdications are continued until thc cornca
is reepithelialized. Topical sodium citrate 10% inhibits neutrophil activity and decrcases stcrile
ulceration and should be uscd every 2 hours for thc frst 10 days afler injury. Tetracycline de
rivatives inhibit ncutrophil and collagenase activity and can be administered both topically and
systemically.
6. What are some of the long-term sequelae of chemical burn?
Long-term complications of chemical burns include corneal scarring, uvcitis, glaucoma, ker-
fornation are also possible.
208
Acute Ocular Trauma
209
7. What causes proptosis of the eye?
Trauma to the head either from a car accident or from a dog fight is the most common injury
 8. What clinical signs indicate the extent of ocular injury?
Physical ocular trauma imay be blunt or sharp, perforating or nonperforating, The degree of
injury depends on the force of the injury, depth of penetration, and involvement of intraocular
often is accompanied by severe uveal herniation, hemorrhage, and retinal delachment. Penetrat-
tion, collapsed anterior chamber, severe hyphema (more than one-third of the anterior chamber
full of blood), inability to visualize the iris due to corneal edema or anterior chamber opacity.
9. How can you tell if the eye has been perforated?
Large perforating scleral wounds result in severe hypotony and often marked subconjuncti-
val and intraocular hemorrhage. Small perforating scleral wounds are harder to detect because
chemotic conjunctiva obscures the point of entry and intraocular pressure may be affected only
mildly. Large, full-thickness corneal lacerations result in anterior chaimber collapse and iris in-
carceration in the wound. Small, full-thickness lacerations may self-seal as a fesult of swelling of
rating corneal injuries.
10. What is the procedurc for the Seidel test?
A sterile fuorescein strip is moistened with sterile saline or eye wash, and a drop is adnin-
istered to the wound area. As aqueous fluid mixes with fluorescein, a bright green stream of fluid
will form. If the animal is under gcncral anesthesia, gcntlc digital pressure can be applied to the
 cormea to check for wound lcakagc.
11. What is the significance of a perforating wound if it has already sealed?
 Eyes with full-thickness lacerations or perforations are at risk for endophthalmitis and should
bc treated aggressively with a broad-spectrum, systemic antibiotic. In addition, perforating in-
juries may involve intraocular damage not easily detccted, such as lens rupture or retinal tear. If
the cause of the injury is not known, radiography or ultrasonography to look for a metallic for-
eign body (BB or pellet)is warranted.
12. What treatment should be provided by the emergency care clinician?
 port the wound, and to prevent sequelae by controlling intraocular inflammation. If perforation of
 in some degree of anterior uveitis and should be treated with topical or systemic nonsteroidal anti-
s
should be avoided in the presence of ulcerative keratitis, and ophthalmic ointments should not be
used if the globe is perforated.
1. To control or prcvcnt infection:
· If not perforated, topical antibiotic ointment or solution
● If perforated, syslemic antibiotic (e.g., cefazolin) with or without topical antibiotic so-
lution
 2. To protect and support wound:
· Suture, if > half-thickness laceration of comica
· With or without conjunctival graft
210
Acute Ocular Trauma
3. To control intraocular infammation:
● Corticosieroids: systemic (e.g., prednisolonc, dexamcthasone)
· NSAIDs: topical (e.g., diclofenac [Voltaren], suprofen [Profenal], furbiprofen [Ocufen])
· Cycloplcgic: topical (e.g., atropine, tropicamide)
13. What kinds of protection and support should be used?
Partial tarsorrhaphy decreases the paipebral fissure size and thus helps to protcct the cormea
and maintain an adequate tear film. This is especially important in cxophthalmic or lagophthalmic
animals. A nictitans flap should be used with caution bccause it interferes with topical medica
tion of the cornea and prevents observatiou of the wound. If sclf-trauma is a consideration, a pro-
lective collar should be used. Other methods of support include a conjumctival graft or flap, tis-
sue adhesive, and collagen shields.
14. When should a corneal laceration be sutured?
Small corneal lacerations (< 3-4 mm) of less than half thickness may be treated as a corneal
ulcer with topical antibiotics and mechanical support (see Chapter 7). Larger or deeper lacera-
tions should be closed with 7-0 to 9-0 suture. If the iris is incarccrated in the wound, it should bc
amputated or replaced into the anterior chambcr before closure. A conjunctival graft placed ovcr
the sutured wound may be used for added support if nccessary. Bcfore suturing a laceration that
has perforated the cornea, the integrity of the lens should be evaluated. Lens capsule perfcration
necessitates lens removal, preferably at the time of comcal repair. If this is not possible, referral
for lens removal should be made as soon as possible to avoid severe uveitis associated with lens
rupture (Fig. 1).
Figure 1. Lacerated cormea sutured
with 60 Vicryl. The sutures are not
fullthickness but rather two-thirdis
thickness. Thcy will be rcjccted in ap-
proximately 3-4 weeks.
15. When should a conjunctival graft or flap be used?
Conjunctival faps not only provide mechanical support and surfacc protection to the cornca
but also furmish blood supply. Leukocytes, antibodies, anticollagenases, antiproteases, and nutri-
ents for healing and wound repair are thus broughi directly to the injury. Laccrations witlh loss of
deep stromal tissue that prevent adequate primary closure and lacerations in which the viability of
the sutured tissue is in question should be supported with a conjunctivai flap (Figs. 2, 3, 4, and 5).
16. How can the collapsed anterior chamber be reformed?
In a healthy eye, the aqueous humor reforms at a ratc of 2.5 μl/min in dogs and 15 μl/min in
and cats. If the eye is not severely damaged, thc aqueous production rate may be sufficient to re-
form the anterior chamher within several minutes after the eye has been sealed. Usually, howcver,
the anterior chamber is reformed with lactated Ringer's or balanced salt solution. A 25- or 27.
Acute Ocular Trauma
211
Figure 2. A free graft of Tenon's tissue
taken from the dorsal area of the globe.
Figurc 3. A pedicle graft covering a
large ulcerative wound.
  i si in a e d s a on aed su a e pas s au aia
store the anterior chamber to its normal depth withiout creating high intraocular prcssure (IOP).
The IOP should be in the low-normal range (10-15 mmHg).
17. How and when should the entrapped iris be amputated or replaced?
When a prolapsed iris should be exciscd rather than repositioned is controvcrsial. Recommen-
dations are based on the time it takes for the exposed iris to bccome sufficiently contaminated to
cause infection if replaced. Recommendcd times rangc from I to 24 hours. It is safe to assumc that
smaller prolapses take longer to pose a 1hreat of infection. Magnification is essential if iris ainputa-
tion or replacement is allempted. Tissue 1o be excised should be grasped genily with fine forceps
and cut flushwith the cornea.A dilute solution of epinephrine (1:10,000 in lactated Ringer's or bal-
anced sali solution) aids hemostasis. To replace the iris, it is carefully frecd from fibrinous corneal
atachmenfs with an iris spatula or irigating cannula or dissectcd with viscoclustic material. After
the iris is frecd fron the cormca, the anterior chamber is rcformed with viscoelastic matenial (1%
sodiun hyalurouate or 2% hydroxypropylmcthylcellulosc). Care must be taken to avoid trauma to
thc corneal endothelium, iris, and lens. Just before placing the last suture, the viscoelastic material
can be gently flushed from the antcrior chamber or left in place. This procedure is difficult for in-
212
Acute Ocular Trauma
Figure 4. A healing corneal perforation
covered with a conjunctival fap.
Figure 5. Cormeal transplant into a de-
generativc cornca.
18. What type of suturc pattern should be used in the cornea?
Simple interrupted sutures are the easiest to place correctly. If you experience a lot of ten-
sion, horizontal mattress sutures may be placed first, followed by interrupted sutures. Correct su-
ture placement is important to avoid intermal wound gape (too shallow). wound override (sutures
(of unequal depth and length on each side of the wound), and intraocular contamination (too deep).
Sutures should be approximately 75-90% of corneal depth, 1.5-2 mm in length, of equal depth
 On each side of the wound, and I-I.5 mm apart.
Acute Ocular Trauma
213
19. What are the common types of foreign body-related injuries?
acutely red and painful eye. Linear abrasions of the cornea are an indication for eversion of the
lid to examine for forcign material lodged in the upper palpebral conjunctiva. Superficial cormeal
foreign bodies may present with variable amounts of discomfort and usually can be dctccted with
may have the appearance of a puncture wound and are harder to detect without the usc of a slit
lamp. Foreign body penetration into deeper ocular structures is often associated with BB-pellet,
bird shot, and glass. Involvement of orbital structures, inis, lens, retina, or vitreous humor is pos-
sible, and the prognosis is affected accordingly.
20. How should foreign bodies involving the ocular surface be treated?
Superficial foreign bodies can be removed with topical anesthesia in many cases, but some
needle (25- or 27-gauge) is used 1o elevate the foreign body from the ocular surface. If loosened
foreign material remains on the eye, it can be picked up with a moistened cofton-tippcd swab. Hy-
podermic needles should be heldl al a shallow angle to the cornea to avoid perforation. After re-
A single applicalion of I % atropine sulfate is given if the pupil is miotic.
21, What should be done to manage an intraocular foreign body?
Management of intraocular foreign bodies dcpcnds on how long the foreign body has been
in the eye, its location, and what it is made of. The potential for damagc during removal should
if not removed soon after penetration. Some metals and glass, however, may cause little reaction
and located in the anterior chamber, it should be removed through a limbal incision. Surgery to
remove a foreign body from the posterior segrment often results in complications leading to a blind
 to control infeclion. Topical corticosteroids, cycloplegics, and oral corticosteroids (anti-inflam-
matory dosages) or NSAIDs may be used to treat uveitis. Corticosteroids should be uscd with cau-
tion because of the potential for sepsis.
TYPE OF FOREIGN BODY
POTENTIAL FOR DAMAGE
REMOVAL NECESSARY?
Organic
Rcactive; scpsis possible
Early removal essenlial
Nonfenrous metal. glass.
Minimal; becomes walled off by fibrin
Removal not necessary
or plastic
and fihrous lissue
Ferrous metal
Highly rcactivc; toxic to intraocular tissue
Early removal tecommended
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Feathcrstonc Hl, Sansom J, Hcinrich CL: The use of porcine small intestinal submucosa in 10 cases of fe-
line corneal disease. Vet Ophthalmol 4:147-153, 2001.
2. Morgan RV: Ocular emergencies. Comp Cont Educ Ve1 4:37-45, 1982.
3. Roberls SR: Assessment and managemenl of thc ophthalmic cmcrgency in cats and dogs. In The Com-
pendium Collection: Ophthalmology in Small Animal Practice. Trenton, NI, Veterinary Learning Sys-
tems, 1996, pp 252-267.
4. Wilkie DA. Whittaker C: Surgery of the cornea. Vet Clin North Aim Small Anin Pract 27:1067-1107,
1997.
35. OCULAR HEMORRHAGE
Cynthia C. Powell. D.V.M., M.S.
1. Name the common causes of ocular hemorrhage.
Trauma, coagulopathies, thrombocytopenia, vasculitis, and neoplasia are potential causes for
Ocular hemorrhage. Trauma-related hemorrhage is probably the most common cause of ocular he-
morrhage presented as an emergency.
2. What forms of ocular hemorrhage have emergency significance?
All formus of ocular hemorrhage have the potential to be associated with life-threatening sys-
temic disease. If the cause of hemorrhage is not known, patienls should be evaluated for systemic
diseases, especially those causing clotting abnormalitics and vasculitis. Although the ocular he-
morrhage may not require emergency treatment, the disease associatcd with hemorrhagc might.
Intraocular hemorrhage alone or related to other diseases (e.g., uvcitis or hypertension) can
of intraocular hcrmorrhage that cause vision loss include glaucoma, cataract, retinal detachment,
retinal degeneration, and phthisis bulbi.
3. Why is blunt trauma so potentially damaging to intraocular tissues?
Tremendous tissue distortion results from blun1 ocular 1rauma, The four phases of blunt in-
jury that induce tissue damage are:
1. Compression
2. Overshooting
3. Decompression
4. Oscillation
The initial anteroposterior globe compression at the cornea causes equalorial expansion and
shortening of the globe along the anteroposterior axis so that the cornca may touch the inis and
lens. As the momentary force of deformation is removed, the anteroposterior globe diameter in-
creases, whereas the equatorial diameter decreases. The tissues overshoot so that the anteropos-
terior diameter becomes mornentarily greater than normal and the equatorial diameter less than
normal. The globe subsequently oscillates between these maximums and minimums with de-
creasing amplitude for a brief time. This extremc strctching of the ocular tissues causes injury lo
the choroid, lens, optic nerve, retina, and vitrcous gel (Fig. 1).
Figure 1. Five days after blunt trauma
to the eye of a German shepherd police
dog. Clotting and resorplion underway,
but mild uveitis nceds to be treatcd.
214
OcularHemorrhage
215
4. Describe the implications of hyphema.
Hyphema is the presence of blood within the antcrior chamber. Blunt or sharp trauma to the
globe is the most common cause. However, hyphema may be due to thrormbocytopenia, coagu-
lopathies, iritis, intraocular neoplasia, congenital ocular anomalies, chronic glaucoma, and hyper-
tension. Initial examination should determine whether the globe has been penetrated. Hyphema
often canses little damage to the eye itself but may result in glaucoma, anterior uveitis, iris adhe.
sions secondary to clot contraction, and capsular cataract formation. Anterior chamber bleeding
may not clot completely because the iris produces fibrinolysin. Maximal clot integrity requires
47 days. Hyphema should be trcatcd as a clinical sign, and its canse should be determined as
soon as possible (Figs. 2 and 3).
Figurc 2. Unclotted hyphema fills the
anterior chamber in this dog with a clot
ting factor deficiency.
Figure 3. Recuring hyphema from coll-
stant barking folowing this dog's
cataract extraction.
 5. What clinical parameters should be evaluated in cases of hyphema?
A complete eye examination should be pcrformed, and the entire animal must be evaluated
should be estimated based on the degree of menace when bright light is suddenly directed into the
eye. Assuming that the cxamination light penetrates to the posterior part of the globe, the con-
sensual pupillary light reflex indicates whether the retina and optic ncrve arc functional. If a globe
rupture is not prcscnt, intraocular pressure should be measured. Finaly, thc hyphema should be
graded by the antcrior chainber volume occupied by the blood. The grading system is helpful
prognostically because it indicates the severity of hemorrhage and the degree of intraocular tis-
216
OcularHemorrhage
suc damage in trauma cascs. Hyphcma of grade 1 severity generally clears in less than 1 week.
Grades 2 and 3 take several wceks or longer to resolvc. Gradc 4 hyphcma oftcn is associated with
globe alrophy (phthisis bulbi).
GRADE
AMOUNT OF BLOOD IN ANTERIOR CHAMBHR
1
Less than one-third
2
One-lhtird to one-half
3
One-half to nearly total
4
Total
6. How should hyphema be treated?
If a primary cause other than trauma is determined, initial treatment must address the under-
lying problem. All animals with hyphema should be kept quict and subdued, possibly by usc of
sedation. Many medical treatments have been proposed, but no studies have evalualed their ef-
fectiveness. Interest in soine treatments continues, whereas others remain conlroversial. Basically
the trealtments can be separated into the following categories:
Cycloplegics
Antifibrinolytic agents
Miotics
Fibrinolytic agents
 Adrenergic agonists
 Surgical intervention
Corticostcroids
7. What cycloplegics may be useful and why?
ter smooth muscles. Thus, the ocular accoinimodation by thc ciliary body is prevented, and the
pupil dilates. Prevention of smooth muscle spasm may enhancc patient comfort and facilitate fun-
dus cxamination. Topical atropine, 1% solution oncc or twicc daily, is sufficient. Once mydriasis
(pupil dilation) cccurs, the frequency of trcatment may be rcduced and the drug uscd to effect.
8. What miotics are useful and why?
Parasympathomimetic agcnts are miotics that induce spasm of the ciliary body and iris
sphincter smooth muscles. In theory, use of a miolic such as pilocarpinc 1 % should opcn the fil-
ration angle. However, miotics also tend to increase intraocular inflammation, so when pupil size
is dccreased, the chance of pupil obstruction by fibrin is incrcased. No scientific cvidence sug-
gests that they enhance the clearance of blood from thc anterior chambcr. In thc author's opinion,
miotics should not be used to treat hyphema.
9. What adrenergic agonists have been advocated and why?
Sympathomimetic agents such as topical epinephrine 1 % and phenylephrine 2.5% have been
advocated to decrease anterior chamber hemorrhage by way of vasoconstriction. Such trcatment
may be helpful with evidence of ongoing hernorhage but usually provides little effect. It is rarely
10. Which corticosteroids are best to use?
Invariably, traumatic hyphcma is associated with anterior uveitis ranging from mild to se-
vere. Thus, topical sferoids such as prednisolone aceiaie, prednisclone sodium phosphale, and
dexamethasone ophthalmic drops are used 4 times/day. Their efficacy in improving outcome is
unproved. Systemic steroids are more controversial but commonly used. Certainly any concur-
rent anterior uveitis will be lessened, and theoretical evidence suggests that steroids may enhance
clot stabilization. Controlled studies, however, are lacking.
Ocular Hemorthage
217
11. When is antifibrinolytic treatment indicated?
cases of traumatic hyphema. Rebleeding may result from premature clot lysis inediated by the fib-
for the damaged blood vessels to hcal. In humans,the current recominended dosage is 50 mg/kg
orally every 4 hours for 5 days. Antifibrinolytic drugs are contraindicated in cases of intravascu-
lar clotting disorders, pregnancy, and cardiac, hepatic, or renal disease.
12. What is the purpose of fibrinolytic treatment?
Hyphema typically progrcsscs from frce blood to varying degrees of blood clot formation 1-7
agents such as tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). Clinically, tPA is used by injecting 25 μg in
a 100 μl volume into the anterior chainber. Clot lysis typically occurs within 30-60 minutes of
injection. As clot lysis occurs, rcd blood cell clearance is facilitated. Topical application of tPA
is alsopromising
13. What surgical interventions are used for hyphema?
If hypheima persists bcyond 5-10 days or intraocular prcssure increases, surgical rcmoval
may be necessary. All antcrior chamber wash-out is the simplcst and safest surgical procedure to
clear free blood from thc antcrior chainbcr. Removal of the clotted blood is not required, only
evacuation of loose blood cells and debris. A 30-gauge needle or cannula is used to irrigate a bal-
anced salt solution into the anterior chamber, and a second 2-mm incision is made to allow fluid
egress. Removal of the entire clot is possible but may result in lens, iris, and corneal endothelial
trauma. Other surgical proccdurcs are available but should bc performed by someone expcricnced
and equipped for intraocular surgery.
14. What drugs may be contraindicated in cases of hyphema?
Based on the antiplatelet effect of the cyclooxy genase inhibitors, nonsteroidal anti-infammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) such as aspirin, flunixin megulamine, and topical ocular NSAIDs should be
avoided. Although cycloplegics such as atropine are advocated for medical management of hy-
phema, a small percentage of paticnts develop glancoma associatcd with use of atropine.
15. How can vitreous hemorrhage be recognized?
Disorders of the posterior segment (ocular tissues posterior to the lens) are more difficult to
detect and characterize becausc dircct cxamination must be pcrformcd through the pupil, or indi-
rect imaging techniques slich as ultrasound must be used. Direct examination is impaired with
 disease of the anterior segment and cornea. Dilation of the pupil, if possible, grealy facilitates
evaluation of thc posterior globe. If vitreous hemorrhage is near the lens, it may be visible with a
penlighit or transilluminator. Otherwise, an indirect ophthalmoscopic examination is the best way
to evaluate the vitreous cavity. Vitreous hemorrhage appears as strands, sheets, or diffuse areas
of blcod accumulation. If the hemorhage is preretinal (between the vitreous and retina), it may
resemble a "boat keel" because of gravitational settling of the eryihrocytes (Figs. 4 and 5)
16, Does vitreous hermorrhage have special implications?
The most common causc of vitrcous hemorhage is trauma-induced rupture of uvcal or reti-
nal blood vessels. The animal should be evaluated closely for rupture of thc comea or sclera.
Causes of vitreous hemorrhage may be grouped as follows (Fig. 6):
· Tearing of a blood vessel in a congenital or acquired retinal detachmenl
● Retention of the fetal hyaloid artery system
● Widcsprcad ccular disease (inflammation of the choroid and retina, optic neuritis, chronic
glaucoma, and intraocular neoplasia)
218
Ocular Hemorrhage
Figure 4. Vitreal hemorthage from reti-
nal vessels in the this domestic shorthair
cat with a monoclonal gammopathy
Figure 5. Prerctinal hemorrhagc and fo-
cal retinal detachment in a dog follow-
ing an automobilc accident.
17. How is vitreous hemorrhage treated?
Other than dcaling with the underlying ccular or systemic disorder associated with vitreous
hemorrhage, no simple treatment is availablc. If hermorrhagc occurs into the solid vitrecus gel,
hesion. Infiltration of neutrophils and macrophagcs hasten clot removal but cause further vitreous
gel breakdown and inflammation. Preretinal hemorrhagc clots poorly. Concurrent use of topical
and systemic corticosteroids is appropriatc and may ameliorate the inflammatory reaction. If an-
Ocular Hemorrhage
219
Figurc 6. Rctinal hemorrhage in a dog
with thrombocytopenia.
terior uveitis is present, the use of topical atropine as a cycloplegic is appropriate. Depending on
the hemorrhage area and density, resolution may take many months.
18. What does retinal hemorrhage look like?
The appearance of retinal hemorrhage depends on the retinal layer involved. Because of the
relatively loose attachment betwccn thc rctina and vitrcous gcl and the rctina and retinal pigment
cpithelium, hemorrhage of large size may develop in either space. Preretinal hemorrhage (be-
tween the retina and vitreous ) frequently has a boat keel shape because of gravitational setfling
of the erythrocytes. Intraretinal hemorrhages primarily are aligned vertically; their cnd on ap-
pearance is round, and the hemorrhages are smal. Nerve fiber layer hemorrhagcs are typically
feathered or striated and flat, because the hemorrhage follows the path of the nerve fibers. The
retinal depth of a focal hemorrhage may be estimated based on which structures are positioned
19. Explain the significance of retinal hemorrhage.
 Retinal hemorrhage indicates disruption or inflammation of the vasculature. If there is no
clcar history or physical evidence of trauma, systermic disorders must be considered. Infectious
diseases capable of causing vasculitis or retinitis must be considered. Disorders that may be im-
mediately life-threatening are coagulopathies, severe anemias, and blood dyscrasias. Chronic dis-
rhage. Although not irmmediately life-thrcatening, such conditions may cause ocular signs that
 blood count, serum chemistry profile, and clotting profile if retinal hemorrhage is noted. A por-
tion of the serum should be saved for potential serologic testing (see Figures 2 and 3).
220
Ocular Hemorrhage
Figure 7. Retinal hemorrhagc in thc
nerve fiber layer of a cat.
Figure 8. A 10-year-old basset hound
with intraretinal hemorrhagcs secondary
lo hypertension. These hemorrhages
are localed within the layers of the pho-
torcceptors, outcr nuclear, outer plexi-
forrn, inner nuclear, or inner plexiform.
Figure 9. A 7-year-old Norwcgian elk-
hound with retinal hemonhage and de-
tachment secondary to renal discasc.
These hemorthages arc both preretinal
and intraretinal.
Ocular Hemorrhage
221
20. Is there any specific treatment for retinal hemorrhage?
No. lf an underlying systemic disorder is identified or suspected, appropriatc trcatment is in-
dicated. Severe subretinal or preretinal hemorrhage can be surgically removed or lysed with in-
tracameral injection of tPA, but these procedures must be performed by someone well-versed in
 intraocular and posterior segment surgery.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
I. Aguirre GL., Gross SL: Ocular manifestations of selected systeimic discases. In The Compendium Collcc-
tion: Ophthalmology in Small Animal Practice. Trenton, NJ, Vetcrinary Learning Systems, 1996, pp
89-98.
2. Collins BK, Moorc C: Diseases and surgery of the canine anterior uvea, In Gelatt KN (ed). Veterinary Oph-
thalmology. Philadelphia, Lippincot Williams & Wilkins, 1999, pp 755. 795.
3. Lane IF, Roberts SM, Lappin MR: Ocular manifestations of vascular disease: Hypertension, hyperviscos-
ity, and hyperlipidemia. I Am Aninal Hosp Assoc 29:28-36, 1993.
4. Roberts SM: Assessment and management of the ophthalmic emergency in cats and dogs. In The Com-
pendiuin Collction: Ophthalmology in Small Animal Practice. Trenton, NJ, Veterinary Learning Sys-
tems, 1996, pp 252-267.
36. ENDOPHTHALMITIS
Bruce H. Grahn, D.V.M
1. What is endophthalmitis?
 Endophthaimitis is an inflammation of the contents of the globe. Extension of the infamma-
tion through the sclera and into the orbit is panophthalmitis. Endophthalnnitis develops when there
is disruption of the corneal, conjunctival, scleral, and blood-ocular barriers. Endophthalmitis af-
fects both the anterior and posterior ocular segments. The ctiology of endophthalmitis is diverse
and may be septic and involve infectious agents that arrive from outside the eye. These agents
may enter the eye through thc ocuiar blood supply, through the central nervous system via the
central spinal fluid and optic nerve, or by perforation of the cornea or conjunctiva and sclera. Non-
septic endophthalmitis may develop secondary to blunt trauma, cataracts, ruptured lcns capsulcs,
 or other varied disruptions of the blood-ocular barriers.
2. What are the clinical manifestations of endophthalmitis?
Endophthalmitis is manifested by a variety of nonspecific signs of uveitis including miosis,
aqueous fare, hyphema, hypopyon, hypotony, synechiae, cxudative retinal detachments, and
hyalitis (Fig. 1). Cataracts, ruptured lens capsules, and corneal or scleral pcrforations also may be
present. When endophthalmitis arises from a systemic disease, therc is often an accompanying
general malaise, hyperthermia, altered respiration, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Endophthalmitis
Figure 1. Septic endophthalmitis that is developing
secondary to cormcal perforalion. Note the neutrophil-
rich inflammatory infiltratcs throughout the inside
of theeye.
3. What are the fwo types of endophthalmitis?
Septic and nonseptic.
4. How is septic endophthalmitis diagnosed?
The classic clinical manifestations for this acute progressive uveitis include hypopyon, hy-
phema, hyalitis, and exudative retinal detachments. Once the vitrcous becomes infectcd, the fum-
dus usually cannot be visualized because of cellular and protein infiltrates. Detection of the
222
Endophthalmitis
223
exudative retinal detachments may require ultrasonography or other advanced imaging tech-
niques. The diagnosis of septic endophthaimitis is confirmed by oculocentesis and cytologic ex-
amination of a vitrcous and aqueous humor aspirate. Cytology or bacterial cultures will revcal a
 marked ncutrophilic inftammatory infiltrate and may reveal infectious agents. Fortunately septic
cndophthalmitis is an uncommon diagnosis.
5. What is the treatment for septic endophthalmitis?
This is a fulminant disease, and the prognosis for saving the eye is poor even when the diag-
nosis is cstablished within hours of onset. Septic endophthalmitis requires aggressivc therapy in-
cluding surgery (vitrectomy or enucleation) combined with systemic and topical medical therapy.
This condition is an emergency and requires immediate systemic therapy with antibiotics chosen
on the basis of cytologic identification of the infections agent. If vision salvage is alempled, a
surgical vitrectomy is required to reduce contamination of the vitreous and allow reattachment of
thc detachcd rctina. Intrathecal antibiotics are indicated to eliminatc the remaining infectious
agents, and nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should bc implcmented to stabilize
thc blood-aqucous barrier. When chronic endophthalmitis has destroyed the globe or financial
conditions preclude a vitrectomy, an enucleation should be completed immediately to prevent ex-
tension of the scptic proccss into the central nervous systcm through the optic ncrvc and meningcs.
eral days (Fig.2).
Figure 2. Endophthalmitis and orbital
cellulitis. Usually these animals are in
severe pain.
6. How is nonseptic endophthalmitis diagnosed?
Nonseptic endophthalmitis is usually not as fulminant as septic endophthalmitis. The diag-
nosis is also confirmed with fine-needle aspiration of aqueous and vitreous humor. Cytologic ex.
amination of the aspirates will reveal a neuirophil-rich infilirale; however, microbiologic culture
will fail to reveal infective agents. Many eliologies need to be considered in the case of nonsep-
tic endophthalmitis including trauma, phacoclastic or phacolytic uveitis, lens luxations, retinal de-
tachments, and immune-mediated uveitis. The etiology may be confirmed with a thorough phys-
ical and ccular examination, and appropriate data collection (complete blood count serology.
urinalysis, ultrasonography) is required.
7. What is the treatment for nonseptic endophthalmitis?
Nonseptic endophthalmitis is usually treated medically with systemic and topical nons-
teroidals, steroids, and cycloplegics. Topical and systemic antibiotics are given prophylactically
while the microbial culmures from the aquecus and vitreous humor aspirates are completed. When
the comea, sclera, or lens capsule is perforated or the lens is luxated, surgical management is also
indicated to repair the cornea and sclera and remove the lens. Postoperative management is rec-
ommended with NSAiDs, steroids, and cycloplegics until the endophthalmitis is controlled.
224
Endophthalmitis
Figure 3. Feline doimestic shorthair with
  s o
bombe, fibrin, and hypopyon.
Figurc 4. Felinc domestic shorthair with
septic endophthalmitis secondary to a
cal claw perforation.
8. What is the prognosis for septic and nonseptic endophthalmitis?
ical and surgical management. The eye with nonseptic endophthalmitis has a slightly better prog-
nosis, provided that the diagnosis is established early and appropriate therapy is instituted for an.
appropriate lengtlh of time (Figs. 3 and 4).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.Smith PJ: Surgery of the canine posterior segmcnt. In Gclatt KN (ed):Veterinary Ophthalimology,3rd ed.
Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999, pp 935-980.
VIll. Retina
B7.ACOUIRED DISEASES OF THE FUNDUS
Michael G. Davidson, D.V.M.
1. What is a fundus?
The term fundus literally mcans the internal surfacc of an organ, farthest away from its open-
ing. The fundus of the eye is thcrefore the intenal, postcrior section of the eye that is scen with
an ophthalmoscope. In small animals, the fundus is a coinposite of several diffcrent tissues in-
cluding the optic nerve, sensory rctina (and retinal blood vessels), choroid, tapetuin (which is part
of the choroid), and sclera.
 2. What is the best way to examine the fundus?
with either a direct method or an indirect method after the pupil is dilated with tropicamide. The
direct method uses a direct ophthalmoscope headpiece and givcs thc cxaminer a highly magnificd
view but only of a very small portion of the fundus (< 2% of the surface area). The indirect
 method uses a light source and an indirect ophthalnoscopy lens that is held in front of the eye,
which gives the examiner a less magnified, but much larger field of view.
3. Which method of ophthalmoscopy is the best?
Although the direct method is technically easier, it is not possible to exarmine the fundus ad-
equately with the direct method because of the small field of view, so the indirect method is pre-
felred. However, the indirect method is technically more difficult to perform because the image
viewed, called a "virtual image," is upside down and reversed. Thus, a lot of practice is required
to become proficient at the indirect mcthod.
4. When should I examine the fundus of my patients?
Ophthalmoscopy should bc a part of a complete eyc cxam in patients with ocular discase of
any type, pupillary light reficx deficits, or vision loss, It should also be rontinely performed in an-
imals wifh undefined systemic illness or those with infectious, vascular, or neoplastic diseases,
because many times thcsc conditions affect thc tissues of the fundus.
 5. When I look at the fundus of a dog or a cat, how can I tell if it is normal or if a lesion is
present?
Interpreting the appearance of the fundus can be challenging and requires a basic under-
standing of the layers of the fundus (see question 1) and the normal variations (Fig. 1). The most
common variations of normal are those relating to the amount of pigmcnt in the tissues of the fun-
mology atlas helps in recognizing these normal variants, but mostly it requires experience and
looking at a lot of normal animals.
6. What are the most common types of funduscopic lesions?
In the tapetal area of the fundus (which is usually the dorsal one-third to one-half), lesions
are characterized as being either hyporeflective if they are darker or grayer than the surrounding.
225
226
Acquired Diseases of the Fundus
Figure 1. Normal canine fundus. Note
wcll-developed tapetum, pigmenled
nontapetal arca, myelinated oplic nerve
head, and retinal vasculature.
normal tapetum or hyperreflective if they are brighter. These lesions correspond to either a thick-
ening of the retina (hyporeflective lesion —the thick retina blocks some of the light reflecting from
the tapetum) or a thinning or degeneration of the retina (hyperreflective -the thin retina allows
more reflected light off the tapetum). These identical lesions appear differently in the nontapetal
fundus (ventral two-thirds to one-half) and appear as either a fuffy white lesion with indistinct
margins (thickening of the retina) or a white to gray lesions with distinct margins (thinning, which
is caused by loss of pigment in one of the retinal layers called thc retinal pigment epithelium).
 Other common lesions include certain pigmented lesions and hemorrhage. Lesions are gcnerally
easier to visualize and understand in the tapetal fundus.
7. What is the significance of the hyporefective lesion in the tapetum or the fluffy white
lesion in the nontapetum?
viewed against a different background (i.e., the tapetum versus pigmented background) and are
caused by thickening of the retina (Figs. 2 and 3). The most common mechanisms by which the
retina becomes thickened are:
● Congenital thickening (retinal dysplasia)
● Edema or inflammatory cells
●Neoplaslic cells
8. What is the significance of the hyperreflective lesions in the tapetum or the depigmented
lesions in the nontapetal fundus?
These lesions are also analogous to each other and are caused by a thiuning of the retina (Figs.
4 and 5). They are almost exclusively caused by atrophy or degeneration (this is thc way the retina
Figure 2. Multifocal areas of tapetal hy-
poreflectivity in a young _ domestic
shorthair cat. In this case, the lesions
are causcd by cxudate accumulation in
the sensory retina caused by corona-
virus of feline infectious peritonitis in-
fectian.
Acguired Diseases of the Fundus
227
Figure 3. Multifocal areas of exudate adja-
fundus of a young donmestic shorthair cat with
relinitis
Figurc 4. Two largc hyperrefective lesions,
with pigmented center, in the tapetal fundus
of a dog. These lesions are caused by sensory
retinal thinning or atrophy. and thc pig-
nented lesion results from tapetal destruc-
 tion and pigment proliferation.
"'scars"' or responds to insult, because it can't undergo a regenerative repair like most other tis-
 sues). This degeneration may be caused by a number of different diseases with different mecha-
nisms including inflammation, ischemia, malnutrition, or an inherited type of degeneration called
 progressive retinal atrophy. Focal lesions resulting from infammation of the retina can be though1
of as an inactive lesions.
228
Acquired Diseases of the Fundus
Figure 5. Multifocal depigmented le-
sions in the nontapetal fundus of a dog
with inactive chorioretinitis.
9. What diseases should be considered if a hyporeflective lesion is seen in the fundus of a
dog or a cat?
Remember that if the lesion is not due to dysplasia, then thickening of the 1etina is due to
inflammatory cells, neoplastic celis, or edema. Inflamnation involving the retina is commonly
caused by a systemic microbial infection and less commonly by trauma or an immune-mediated
inflammation or hypersensitivity. Any systemic infection has the capability of affecting the fun-
dus in this way. When the retina is the primary tissue affected, this is referred to as a retinitis or
retinochoroiditis, and when the choroid is the predominate tissue affectcd, it is callcd a chori-
 oretinitis. It is useful to think about the different microbial agcnts in broad categorics that in-
clude:
Bacterial
Fungal
Protozoal
Rickettsial
Viral
These hyporeffective lesions can also be caused by edema alone (with cells). When this oc-
curs, the vascular system of the fundus is pathologically affected and leaks fluid into the retina.
This often results from:
· Systemic hypertension
●Disease causing hyperviscosity syndromc (e.g., multiple myeloma or ehrlichiosis)
●Profound anemia and hypoxia of the vcssels
Lastly, the hyporeflectivc lesions can be caused by neoplastic cells. Thc most comnon type
of neoplasia affecting the fundus in this manner is lymphosarcoma. However, any malignant neo-
plasia is capable of metastasizing to the tissue of the fundus, and this should also be considered,
Acquired Diseases of the Fundus
229
10. How can dysplasia be distinguished from these other causes of hyporeflective lesions?
Dysplasia affects certain breeds of dogs. American cocker spaniels, English springer
spaniels, King Charles spaniels, Labrador retrievers, and beaglcs arc some of the common breeds,
time. Dysplastic thickcning of the retina often produccs focal or multifocal linear lesions, whereas
inflammation tends to cause multifocal circular lesions. If thcrc is a systemic disease present that
might cause inflamimation, neoplastic imfiItrate, or vascular insult to the retina, the hyporeflective
lesion probably is not dysplasia. (See Chapte1 40.)
11. If dysplasia is ruled out as the cause of a hyporeflective lesion, what should be done
next?
Because there really are very few distinguishing or pathognomonic features of the dlifferent
diseases that cause these lesions, the diagnosis cannot be made by ophthalmoscopy alone. The Dc
ular exam has simply provided a clne that a systemic disease process is occurring. Therefore, fol-
low the normal diagnostic steps including a thorough physical cxamination and a differential di
12. What causes hyperreflective lesions (or depigmented lesions in the nontapetal fundus),
and what is their significance?
These lesions are caused by atrophy or degeneration of the sensory retina. Characterize the
lesions as focal (or multifocal) or more diffuse. Causes of diffuse hyperreflectivity include:
* Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA), an inherited retinal degeneration occurring mostly in
pure-bred dogs
● Sudden acquired rctinal dcgcncration (SARD), an idiopathic retinal degcneration affecting
mostly older, fentale, pure-bred dogs. Note that the funtus initially will appear normal with
acute SARD; only after several weeks to months will the hyperreflectivity appcar.
● Diffuse retinitis or diffuse vascular insult that has Tesolved
● Rarely, nutritional deficiencies such as chronic taurine deficiency in cats or vitamin E dc-
ficiency in dogs
Focal or multifocal hyperreflcctive lesions are most commonly causcd by either an inflam
 mation or a vascular insult that has now rcsolved, causing a scarring of the rctina. As with hy-
porcfective lesions, there is no pathognomonic appearance to these lesions suggesting one spe-
cific type of disease, In fact, these lypes of multifocal, degenerative lesions are often incidental
findings and do not require any diagnostic evaluation (because the insult by which they were
causcd has already resolved).
13. If a hemorrhage is seen in the fundus, what does this imply?
As with most fundus lesions, there is nothing specific about the presence of a hemorrhage,
and both ocular and systemic diseases can cause this (Fig. 6). Examples of ocular disease thal
cause fundnscopic hcmorrhage include:
· Inflammation (chorioretinitis)- look for the other lesions of this syndrome
* Retinal dctachment
Systcmic diseases that cause fundus hcmorrhage are the same conditions causing bleeding
anywhere else in the body:
* Hypertension
* Coagulopathies such as clotting disorders, disserminated intravascular coagulopathy,
thrombocytopenia
· Profound anemia (from hypoxia of the retinal blood vessels)
Thus, once again, the funduscopic findings often characterize the ocular condition or indicate
based on ocular and physical examinalion findings.
230
Acquired Diseases of the Fundus
Figure 6. Multifocal intrarctinal hcmorrhage
in a dog with thrombocytopenia.
14. What if, instead of a hyporefective lesion, a darker lesion that looks like melanin or
some other pigment is seen? What can cause this?
pigmented lesions, which have a dark brown to black color. There are several mechanisms by
which melanin or other types of pigment may become deposited in the tissues of the fundus. Most
commonly, this is seen with focal or multifocal retinal and choroidal degeneration or atrophy. This
(RPE) following inflammation or vascular insult. Typically, these lesions would be chronic and
"inactive," with no current infammation. For example, a pigmentcd center is often seen in hy-
perrefective lesions from these mechanisms. Also, pigment clumps are often seen in depig-
mented, inactive lesions in thc nontapetal fundus.
Although vcry tare, nelanomas arising from the choroid can cause pigmented, raised lesions
 Remember that patchy clumps of pigment in the tapetal fundus can be a normal finding, caused
by focal areas wherc the tapetum did not develop. Thercfore, look for other Icsions such as thc ap-
pcarancc of hyperreflectivity or depigmentation beforc considering the pigmcnt abnormal.
 Rarely, other types of pigment besides melanin may be deposited in the rctina. For cxamplc,
systemic vitamin E deficiency in dogs may cause an accumulation of lipofuscin, a golden-brown
pigment, in the RPE.
15. What is a retinal detachment?
Retinal dctachment is actually a separation of two layers of the retina: the sensory retina andl
the RPE, rather than a separation of the retina from the underlying choroid. Fluid accumulates in
the potential space between these two layers of the retina, referred io as the subretinal space.
16. What causes a retina to detach?
1. Exudative detachment is caused by edema or cells effusing into the subretinal space. This
is generally causcd by jnfiammation in the choroid (or a chorioretinitis) or a profound vascular
insult to the retinal or choroidal vessels (e.g., severe systemic hypertension).
Acquired Diseases of the Fundus
231
 2. Rhegmatogenous detachment resulls from a tear in thc rctina, usually peripherally, that
allows liquefied vitreous to leak through the tear and into the subretinal space. This tear often is
 n  n       s d  
cataracts and other lens diseases, and following intraocular surgery.
3. Tracfional retinal detachment results from blood or fibrin clots (or rarely from anomalous
vesscls) in the vitreous that are attached to the retinal surface. As the clot retracts, it pulls 1he
detachment. Tractional detachments are uncommon in veterinary patients.
17. How does retinal detachument appear on ophthalmoscopic exam?
Because fluid collects in the subretinal space and in front of the tapetum (or the pigmented
RPE for the nontapetum), retinal detachments often appear as large areas of hyporeflectivity in
thc tapetal fundus or as whitish, indistinct arcas in the nontapetal fundus (Fig. 7). Hemorrhage in
the retina or even in the vitreous also can be seen, and occasionally this hcmorrhage will migrate
anteriorly into the anterior chambcr, producing hyphema. Because the retina is displaced forward
into the vitreous, the surface is out of focus to the ophthalmoscopic lcns and observer and appears
fuzzy and indistinct. If the rctina if detached forward to a great extent, the retinal blood vessels
may be seen clcarly and in focus without thc usc of an ophthalmoscope, simply by looking through
the pupil with a focal light source.
Figurc 7. Total, bullous retinal de-
tachment in a cat with systcimic hy-
pertension.
18. Is there aay treatment for a retinal detachment? Can the cye regain vision?
The specific treatment and prognosis for retinal detachment depend largely on the mecha-
nism (exudative versus rhcgmatogenous) and duration of the detachment. Exudative detachments
are managed by treating the specific disease process (i.e., antimicrobial agents if infectious in-
flammation; anti-inflammatory agents if traumatic or immune-mediated inflammation; antihy-
treated surgically by sealing the tear, generally with laser or cryoprobe and various other adjuvant
surgical techniques. The cye has an cffctivc mcchanism to pump the subretinal fluid out, so if
the underlying problem is correcled, relinal reaftachiment and recovery of some vision are possi-
ble. Howcvcr, because the retina becomes ischemic, retinal detachment of > 1 week duration is
unlikely to become functional again. Unfortunately, most relinal delachmenis in animals are not
recognized in a timely fashion, and the visual prognosis is relatively poor (see Chapter 42).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
2. Barmen KC, Crispin SM: Feline Ophthalmology: An Atas and Tex1. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, 1998.
3. Ketring K, Glaze MB: Atlas of Breed-Related Canine Ocular Disordcrs. Trcnton, NJ, Vetcrinary LearT-
ing Systems, 1998.
38. INHERITED EYE ANOMALIES OF
AUSTRALIAN SHEPHERDS, COLLIES
AND SHETLAND SHEEPDOGS
Ronald C. Riis, D.V.M., M.S.
1. At what age should collies, Shetland sheepdogs, and Australian shepherds be examined
for eye anomalies?
The eye size and coopcration of the puppy have a lot to do with a successful evaluation of
the fundus, regardless of the expertise of the examiner. Ideally, puppics that arc 7-8 wccks old
should be examined, but 6-9 weeks of age should be a sufficient window of time lo accommo-
date the variables.
2. Are the anomalies progressive?
No, generally, not, but there are exceptions.
3. Which are not progressive?
· Colobomas of the iris, ciliary body, and retina (Australian shepherd)
● Colobomas of the optic disc (small to mcdium)
● Choroidal hypoplasia
Scleral ectasia
4. Which anomalies are progressive?
Large colobomas may prcdispose to retinal detachment, Small or incomplete retinal detach-
ment may enlarge to generalized or bullous detachmcnts.
5. Which anomalies cause vision problems?
Large colobomas have related visual impairment, bnt complete retinal detachment causes
blindness.
6. What does the breeder term *go normal mean?
When puppies are examined at the recommended age and a finding of snall or trace choroidal
colored dogs. The maturing rmigrating pigrment of the retinal pigment epithelium disguises thc un
derlying choroid, and the hypoplasia appears to resolve. Aithough the choroidal hypoplasia re-
7. What is the importance of a “go normal" evaluation?
Evaluations done in the 6-9-week window allow minimally affected animals to be classified
correctly as phenotypically affected.
8. What breeding recommendations produce the best eye evaluations?
Obviously, the mating berween two genotypically normal-eyed dogs is ideal. However,
breed standards dictate other qualitics that allowfor minor anomalics in ordcr to exprcss other
physical desirable traits.
 9. What is allowable in eye anomalies for a breedabte trait?
In order 1o breed away from undesirable traits, use a mate with extreme minimal traits (i.e.,
breeding a dog with mrnor choroidal hypoplasia with a normal-eyed dog).
232
 [nherited Eye Anomalies
233
10. Does this breeding guarantee good eye examinations?
That dcpcnds on thc brceder's interpretation of “good." Usually, any eye found with a trace.
bred with this degree ol choroidal hypoplasia may produce offspring with colobomas and retinal
11. When is breeding not recommended?
 Dogs affected with colobomas and retinal dctachments should not be bred. Poorly pigmented
dogs, such as whites and merles, that arc brcd together produce offspring with multiple sensory
deficits and ocular anomalics.
12. What is a scleral crescent?
A white elliptical characteristic adjacent to the optic disc. This is a patch of sclera without
overlying choroid (i.e., a focal choroidal hypoplastic area)
13. What is a staphyloma?
In association with these breeds, it is a protrusion of sclcra postcriorly, lined with uveal tis-
sue.It is also called scleral ectasia.
14. Is an eye with choroidal hypoplasia blind in the area affected?
No, the overlying retina is norinal. Even though the vasculature of the choroid is deficient in
these areas, the retina has its own vascular sources.
15. Is retinal dysplasia (folds) a manifestation of choroidal hypoplasia, coloboma, and reti-
nal detachment?
No, retinal dysplasia may be seen along with the other conditions or by itself. It is not thought
to be inheritcd as a manifestation related to the othcrs (sce Chapter 40),
16. Is optic nerve hypoplasia a manifestation of choroidal hypoplasia, coloboma, and reti-
nal detachment?
anomalies, but rarely.
17. Is microphthalmos a manifestation of coloboma, choroidal hypoplasia, and retinal de-
tachment?
No, microphthalmos is on a separate gene. Although the breed standard for collies and shel-
ties states an alrmond eye is desirable, a globe that is asymmetrically smaller than the opposite eye
18. What other ocular abnormalities are seen in these breeds?
Cormeal dystrophies, persistent pupillary membranes, retinal dcgcncrations, lid deficits, gran-
ulomatous pro fiferations, and cataracts.
19. Is the incidence of coloborma, choroidal hypoplasia, and retinal detachment decreasing?
Somewhat. Over the last 30 ycars, more animals have been examincd and certified as frec
from anomalies, but the percentage of affected collies with choroidal hypoplasia remains high.
Qiher anomalies are relatively low, mainly through the efforts of conscientious breeding.
234
Inherited Eye Anomalies
Incidence of Optic Disc/Nerve Coloboma, Choroidal Hypoplasia,
andRetinalDetachment,1991-1999
AUSTRALIAN SHEPHERD
COLLIE
SHETLAND SHEEPDOG
Optic disc/nerve coloboma
0.27%
8.75%
0.79%
Choroidal hypoplasia
0.22%
66.7%
0.39%
Retinal dctachment
0.13%
1.88%
0.05%
Data fron Canine Eye Registration Foundation, West Indianapolis, IN.
20. If a retinal detachment is diagnosed, is thcre anything that can be done?
Possibly. A partial detachment in an eye with pigment can be treated with laser surgcry. Some
success at arresting the detachment and even rcattaching the flat detachments has been achicved.
A subalbinotic or albinotic fundus absorbs the laser energy poorly, and success is less likely.
Therefore, cryosurgery may be the treatment of choice.
21. If a nonvisual eye is diagnosed in a puppy, is it necessary to surgically enucleate or evis-
cerate the globe?
Surgical intervention is necessary only if the globe has other complications causing dis-
comfort to the dog. Generally, an inherited blind eye is wcll-tolerated by the dog for the dura
tion of its life. Visually, the dog compensates with one eye. Ironically, the expression of severe
or extreme colobomas and retinal detachments are rarely bilaterally symmetrical.
22. What othier breeds of dogs have excessively white hair coats and inherited ocular and
otic defects?
By breeding two merle-coat color patterns together, litters of puppies have been produced
with variable degrees of ocular anomalies, microphthalmia, and hearing deficits. These breeds in-
clude border collies, dachshunds, fox hounds, Great Danes, and Norwegian dumkerhounds.
23. Because breeding merle-coated animals results in undesired traits, can the fundic ex-
amination identify subtly merled dogs such as the sable merle?
Yes, the retinal characteristics can distinguish solid-coat dogs from merle-coat dogs. The
solid-coat dogs will have a normal tapetum and fundic pigment, whercas merles will be subal-
binotic or albinotic. In the fundus of a merle, there is partial or complete absence of pigment in
the uveal tract, so that choroidal vessels can be seen as well as the retinal vasculature. Choroidal
vessels are broader, paler red, and parallel, inspiring the name ^tigroid fundus" to the describe the
striped effect. Thinner retinal vessels run over or on top of the choroidal vessels. The tapetum is
faint or absent. Grossly, there is a very red reflex from the merle fundus; this also occurs in other
albinotic or subalbinotic animals such as the Siberian husky,Samoyed, whitc cat,Siamcse cal,
Appaloosa horse, and albino or partial albino cattle.
 24. Should the merle eye anomaly be considered different from the collie eye anomaly?
Yes. The eye anomaly of the homozygous merle has been confused with the collic cye anom-
aly because the two conditions are similar in some fespects. Both are inhenited, have variable
severity of fundic lesions, and may result in blindness. Both anomafies have been documented in
the Australian shepherd, border collie, collie, and Shetland sheepdog. In these breeds, the differ-
ential diagnosis is bascd on a few dissimilarities.
25. What are these dissimnilarities?
In nearly all cases, homozygous merles arc products of merle-to-merle breeding, and the coat
colors are whiter than their littermates. Collie eye anomaly can be found in all coat colors.
The homozygous merle condition is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait linkcd to the
incompletely dominant coat color—merle. The mechanism of linkage involves a transposable
Inherited Eye Anomalies
235
genetic element. Collie eye anomaly has been reported to be inheritcd through scvcral gcncs, onc
or more of which may be dominant, No linkage of collie eye anomaly to other traits has been
jdentified.
Microphthalmia is not associated with collie eye anomaly, although collies frequently appear
symmetrically and mildly microphthalmic. Microphthalmia in collies is inherited independently
of collie eye anomaly. Severe or asymmetric microphthalmia is a prominent feature of the ho-
mozygousmerle anomaly
The lcsions of collie eye anomaly involve the sclera, choroid, retina, retinal vessels, and op-
tic disc only. No uveal or lens changes are associated with collie eye anomaly. In the homozy-
gous merle, the lens and inis are frequently invol ved.
Funduscopically, focal choroid hypoplasia is common in collie eye anomaly. The hypoplas-
tic area has a characteristic location tcmporal to the optic disc. Choroid hypoplasia in the ho-
mozygote mcrle is multifocal or diffuse.
Colobomas in collie eye anomaly occur most commonly in the optic disc and occasionally in
the peripapillary area as scleral ectasia. Colobomas in the homozygous merle are most frequently
cquatorial (i.e., iris and ciliary body). Ocular examinations of merle puppies should always in-
clude a predilaticn as well as postdilation evaluation of the iris.
26. Has the incidence of merle eye anomaly decreased?
Yes, dramatically over the last 30 years. Occasional inadvertcnt brceding results in affectcd
puppies, but thc word is being spread that merle eye anomaly can be eliminated only by not breed-
ing merle to merle.
Figure 1. Collie puppy fundus showing
white sclera with anomalous choroidal
vessels (i.e., choroidal hypoplasia).
Figure 2. A nomal blue merle fundus.
This eye was albinotic and displayed
thc choroidal vascular patterns.
236
Inherited Eye Anomalies
Figure 3. An albinotic fundus with
choroidal hypoplasin and slight optic
disc depression.
Figure 4. Choroidal hypoplasia, small coloboma at
6 o'clock within thc optic disc, and a scleral crcs-
ccnt around thc disc from 3 o'clock to 9 o'clock.
Figure 5. An albinotic fundus with
choroidal hypoplasia.
Inherited Eye Anomalies
237
Figure 6. Varying degrees of choroidal
hypoplasia and optic disc coloboma in-
volving most of the disc area
Figure 7. Large choroidal hypoplasia
and a small optic disc coloboma at 3
0'clock.
Figure 8. Very large optic disc coloboma
(*) and associated retinal clevation (X).
238
Inhenited Eye Anomalies
Figure 9. Optic disc coloboma, choroidal hy-
poplasia, and scleral ectasia in an Australian shep-
hcrd dog.
Figure 10. A collic with a focal retinal detachmcnt
adjacent to the optic disc at the 10 o'clock to 12
o'clock position (*).
Inherited Eye Anomalies
239
Figure ll. A Shetland sheepdog with unilateral
sclcral crescent and faint choroidal hypoplasia.
COLLIE   EYE
ANOMALY
ORA SERRATA
SCLERA-
CHOROID
RETINA
PIGMENTEDEPITHELIUM
CHOROIDAL
AND CHOROID
HYPOPLASIA
RETINALDETACHMENT
COLOBOMA
POSTERIORSCLERAL
ECTASIA
OPTIC NERVE
Figure I2. Artist's interpretation of thc collie eyc anomaly showing anatomic abnormalities as they relate to
the normai ocular layers.
240
inhenited Eye Anomalies
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Acland G, Aguirre GD. Chader GI, ct al: Canine carly onsct hercditary rctinal degencrations: Genetic and
biochemical distinction of 3 diseases. Proc Am Coll Vet Ophthalmol 1l:1, 1980.
2. American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists Genetics Committee: Ocular Disoiders Presumed to
Indianapolis, IN.
 3. Barnet KC, Staades FC: Collie eye anomaly in the Shetland sheepdog in the Netherlands. J Small Anin
Pract 20:321, 1979.
4. Freeman HM, Donovan RD, Schepens CL: Retinal detachment, choriorctinal changcs, and staphyloma
in the collie. I. Ophthalmoscopic findings. Arch Ophthalmol 76:412, 1966.
5.Gelatt KN,Powell NG, Huston K: Inherilance of microphthalmia with coloboma.Am J Vet Res 42:1686.
1981.
6.Roberts SR: The collie eye anomaly.J Am Vel Med Assoc 155:859,1969.
7. Rubin LF, Nelson EI, Sharp CA: Collie cye anomaly in Australian shepherd dogs. Prog Vct Comp Oph-
thalimol l:105, 1991.
8. Sponenberg DP: Germinal revision of the merle allele in Australian shepherd dogs. J Hered 75:78, 1984.
9. Wallin-Hakanson B, Wallin-Hakanson N, Hedhammar A: Collie eye anomaly in rough collie in Sweden:
Genetic ransmission and infuence on offspring vitality. J Small Anim Pract 41:254-258, 2000.
I0.Wallin-Hakanson B,Wallin-Hakanson N, Hedhammar A: Influence of seleclive breeding on the preva
lence of chorioretinal dysplasia and colobona in the rough collie in Sweden. I Smal Anim Pract
41:56-59, 2000.
11. Yakely WL: Collie eye anomaly: Dccreased prevalcnce through selective brccding. J Am Vct Mcd As-
soc 161:1103, 1972
39. RETINAL DEGENERATIONS
Ronatd C. Riis, D.V.M., M.S.
1. Is generalized retinal atrophy always bilateral?
Yes, and usually very symmctrical.
2. Does generalized retinal atrophy lead to blindness?
Yes, but the blindness is varied in its completion depending on the breed. Thc visual loss is
progressive, hence the name progrcssive retinal atrophy (PRA).
 3. What is the earliest complaint from the owners of a PRA dog?
Nyctalopia or impaired vision in reduced lighting. Keep in mind that dogs kept in familiar
surroundings do very well despite their diminishing vision. Therefore, their visual deficits may
not be noticed until something changes in their environinent or their routine,
4. Is PRA painful?
No. Animals show no ocular signs of pain.
5. What are the ophthalmic signs of PRA?
The signs depend on the stage of degeneration. Advanced PRA is thc casiest to diagnosc be-
cause the entire tapetum is hyperreflective with attenuated vasculature. The nontapetum is de-
pigmented, sometimes in patterns. The optic disc is darker and smaller (Figs. 1-7).
Moderately advanced PRA will show cithcr a well-demarcatcd color change or a gradual
color change between the normal and degencratcd tapetal areas. The vasculature afttenuates most
Figure 1. Advanced PRA in a Germau shepherd.
241
242
Retinal Degenerations
Figwre 2. Advanced PRA in a cockel spaniel.
Figure 3. Advanced PRA in an Akita.
Figure 4. Advaneccd PRA in an Old English shccp-
dog
Retinal Degenerations
243
Figure 5. Advanced PRA showing avascularity in
the tapetal-nontapetalperiphery.
Figure 6. Advanced PRA in the nontapctal fundus
of a standard poodle.
Figure 7. Advanced PRA in the nontapetal fundus
of a toy poodle.
244
Retinal Degenerations
significanlly within the degenerated zones and espccially the periphery. Hyperreflectivity is de-
pendent on the incidence of light so it is variable from being dull to bright with an indirect oph-
thalmoscopic evaluation. A slight decrease in pigimentation may be notcd in the nontapetum.
Changes in the optic disc are slight and may be hard to document unless a normal eye is close by
to compare (Figs. 8 and 9).
Figure &. Moderately affected PRA fundus with
Figure 9. PRA in a miniature poodle. Moderately
attenuated peripheral vasculature.
Early PRA is sometimes difficult lo diagnosc. Slight peripheral tapetal color changes can be
misleading, especially if the dog is darkly pigmented where diffusion of pigment into thc periph-
eral tapetum appears gray. If it is PRA, the vasculature will show attenuation of thc vessel diam-
eters especially in the periphery and circumciliary vessels. Vessels in the mid periphery may havc
variable wall diametcrs (called "boxcarring" or "beading"). Usually, the nontapetal arca and op-
tic disc look pretty good (Figs. 1013)
Retinal Degenerations
245
Figure 10. Moderately attcnnated pcripheral vas-
culature and thinning of the pcripheral retina (note
change in reflectivity).
Figure 1 i. Early PRA in an English cocker spaniel.
suspicion of PRA diagnosis.
Figure 12. Farly PRA showing vascular attcnua-
tion.
Figure 13. Larly PRA fundus changes in the lateral
tapetal fumdus. Note the vascular changes.
246
Retinal Degenerations
6. How can the diagnosis of PRA be confirmed?
Thc electroretinogram (ERG) and the DNA blood test are both diagnostic (see Chapters 1
and 41).
7. What if the owner doesn't give consent for those tests?
mind that most dogs can see normally far better than we can in the darkncss. Schedule future ophl-
thaimoscopic examinations, which may show the progrcssive character of the degeneratxon as
well as the visual impairment.
8. What should the owners of PRA dogs be advised concerning breeding?
Becauase most PRA is passed as an autosomal recessive trait, dcfinitely advise against breeding
9. If PRA is in the early-to-midstage of development, should the dog be dietarily supple-
mented?
Studies have been done in both humans and animals withvitamin A,E,and long-chain fatty
acids to boister the diet with these supplements since it is known that thcse are vital to the hcalth
of the retina. Unfortunately, the course of the degeneration is not altercd, and blindness is not cur-
tained. In fact, vitamin A supplements seem to hastcn the degcneration (i.e., supplcments arc not
recommended).
10. What other ocular abnormalities occur in PRA?
Thc pupillary reflex becomes more sluggish as PRA progresscs. In advanced PRA, the rest-
ing pupil is often wider than in normal-aged matched dogs. In some dogs, the major complaint
PRA in some breeds
11. Why do cataracts develop in some PRA breeds?
The exact etiology has not been proven, but several theories make sense. The preferred the-
ory is that the lens environment is no longer conducive to lcns health. The degcnerating retina
contaminates the fuids of the eye, affecting the lens fibers. Thc analogy is similar to fish in a pond;
polluted water eventually destroys the fish (Fig. 14)
Figure 14. Caturacts stcondary to PRA in an
American cocker spaniel.
12. Are central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA) cases different than PRA?
Yes, the degcnerated rctinas look different. The CPRA retinas have multifocal discolorations
throughout the tapetum with hyperrcfective areas in between. The vasculature attcnuates similar
to PRA, and the optic disc undergoes changes similar to PRA in the advanced stages. Histopatho
logically, the lesions differ predominantly by the accumulation of lipopigment material within the
retinal pigment cpithelium; hence, the prefcrred term is now retinal pigment epithelial dystro-
phy (RPED). The lipopigment is responsible for the multifocal discoloration (Figs. 15 and 16).
Retinal Degenerations
247
Figure 15.Central fundus of RPED.Note the mul-
tifocal dark areas in the tapetum.
Figurc 16.Pcriphcral tapctal fundus of RPED.
Note the vascular absence and the multifocal ac-
cuimulations throughout.
13. Are there dissimilarities within PRA?
Yes, PRA seems to fall into 2 broad categories: developrmental or abiotrophy and degenera-
tive diseases of the photoreceptors. Within these categories, more unique differences have and will
be discovered at the ccllular and molecular levels, ultimately identifying each with gene symbols.
14. How can I keep these categories straight in my mind?
The degcncrativc catcgories are those retinas that were normal at some earlier point in time
and progressed to photoreceptor cell death. Thc abiotrophy or dcvclopmental categories eucom-
 pass retinas that are structurally or biochemically abnormal before the retinas becomc maturc.
  s  da a    d pa s q aag
sooner.
15. Is there any other way to think about these categories?
Yes, the developmcntal category has also been given the description cf photoreceptor dys-
plasias, because the condition becomes clinically cbvious beforc the first 1-1 1/2 ycars of lifc.
248
Retinal Degenerations
PhotoreceptorDysplasias
PRIMARY
PHYSIOIOGIC AND
DYSPLASTIC
OPHTHIALMOSCOPY
HISTOPATHOI OGIC
CELL
BREED
DIAGNOSIS
INHTRIIANCE
ABNORMALITY
Cone
Alaskan
Small
Autosomal recessive
6weeks: ERG -
malamute
cone-, rod N
Rod and cone
Belgian
11 weeks
Unknown
4weeks: ERG-
shepherd
rods and cones
Rod and cone
Collite
16 weeks
Autosomal recessive
6weeks: ERG-
- poj'↑ auo
Rod and cone
Lrish settcr
16 wccks
Autosoimal reccssivc
6weeks: ERG-
cone √,rod -
Rod and cone
Miniature
1.55 years
Autosomal reccssive
6wccks: ERG-
schnauzcr
↑spo1·↑uo
Rod and cone
Norwegian
1.0-1.5 years
Aufosomal tecessive
6weeks:ERG-
elkhound
cone N/↓, rod-
16. What are some examplcs of PRA photoreceptor degeneration?
PRIMARY
PHYSIOLOGIC AND
DYSPLASTIC
OPHTHIALMOSCOPY
IHISTOPATHOLOGIC
CELL
BREED
1IAGNOSIS
JNHERITANCE
ABNORMALITY
Unpublishcd
Akita
[3 years
Autosornal rcccssive
1.5-2.0 ycars: ERG-
↑↑ po1^↑ auos
Rods thcn
American cocker
2.53 ycars
Autosomal rccessive
9 months: ERG-
cones
spaniel
↑↑spo↑ auo0
Rods then
English cocker
3-8 years
Autosomal recessive
2-3 years: ERG-
cones
spaniel
↑ ↑ p01'↑ au0o
Rods then
Labrador retriever
3-6years
Autosomal recessive
1.5 ycars: ERG
cones
↑↑po1*↑ ouo3
Rods then
Miniature long-
6 months
Autosomal recessive
4 1nonths: ERG
cones
haired dachshund
↑↑ po1‘↑ ouos
Early rods
Norwegian
9-12 months
Autosomal recessive
5 weeks: ERG-A
then cones
elkhound
wave dominatc.
conc √:rod↓
Unpublished
Papillon
1.5-5 years
Autosomal recessive
9 months-1.5 years:
ERG-cone√,
↑↑poJ
Rods then
Portuguese water
36 years
Autosomal recessive
1.5 years: ERG,
cones
aop
↑↑ po^↑ uo
Unpublished
Sibcrian husky
2 years
X-linked
I year: ERG-
↑↑ po‘↑uo
Unpublished
Tibetan spaniel
3.-5 years
X-linked
1.5 years: ERG
↑↑por‘↑ ouo
Unpublished
Tibetan tcrricr
1-1.5 years
X-linked
10 months: ERG-
↑↑po1'↑ auo
Rods then
Toy and miniature
3-5 years
X-linked
9 mionths: ERG-
cones
poodles
↑↑p
17. What does prcd stand for?
 Progressive rod-cone dcgeneration indicatcs a PRA that affects the 1ods prinmarily and then
the cones. It is always bilateral histopathologically. lt may vary slightly clcctrophysiologically
and ophthalmoscopically in the early and moderate stages.
18. List the purebred dogs that have been diagnosed with retinal degeneration.
Akita
Irish setter
Alaskan malamule
ltalian greyhound
Australian cattle dog
Labrador retrievcr
Retinal Degenerations
249
Australian shepherd
Lowchen
Basenji
Mastiff
Bcaglc
Miniature schnauzer
Belgian shcepdog
 Norwegian elkhound
Border collie
 Nova Scotia ducktolling retriever
Borzoi
 Old English sheepdog
Briard
Papillon
Cardigan Weish corgi
Pekingese
Chesapcakc Bay retrieve
Poodles
Cocker spaniel (American and English)
 Portuguese water dog
Collie
Rottweiler
Dachshund
Samoyed
English springer spaniel
Shetland sheepdog
 German shepherd
Shih tzu
German shorthaired pointer
Siberian husky
Golden retriever
Tibelan spaniel
Gordon setter
Tibetan terrier
Great Dane
Weish springer spaniel
Greyhound
Yorkshire terrier
19. Does retinal degeneration develop in the cat?
Yes, with a similar classification as found in dogs. Known classifications are abiotrophies,
degenerations or atrophies, infections, metabolic, nutritional, and toxic (Figs. 17 and 18).
20. What is known about the retinal abiotrophies in cats?
 The most significant reports are in Persian cats that have a photorcceptor dysplasia that is au-
 tosomal recessive. Abyssinian cats have been reported to have a rod-cone dysplasia that is auto-
Figure 17. Cat rctinal dcgcncration. Notc thc vas-
cular attenuation. ‘The hyperreflective character
was so intense that a green iller was used to pre-
vent overexposure.
250
Retinal Degenerations
Figure I8. Cat with retinal and optic disc degener-
ation. Generalized hyperreflective tapetum and a
darker than normal oplie disc. The retinal vessels
are just about absent.
somal dominant. Mixed breed domestic shorthair cats with a rod-cone dysplasia with possible au
tosomal dominance are also reported. These retinal lcsions are diagnostic ophthalmoscopically at
an early agc.
21. What is known about retinal atrophy as an inherited disease?
The Abyssinian cals have an autosomal recessive rod-cone degeneration that is progressive.
Mixed breed domestic shorthair cats with gyrate atrophy have been diagnosed to havc an ornithinc
aminotransferase deficiency that is inherited as autosomal recessive.
22. What are the infectious causes of retinal lesions in cats?
Kittens infected with panleukopenia virus 7 days beforc birth through 7 days postbirth are
known to develop retinal dysplasia or cerebcllar hypoplasia. Those kittens are ncurologically
ataxic and hypernetric. They are usually presented for these signs between the ages of 3 and 4
(Fig. 19).
Figure 19. Young kitten with retinal degenerative
areas throughout secondary to panleukopenia
virus infection.
 23. What are the nutritional causes of retinal atrophy in cats?
Any cat breed is likely to develop a degcncrative retinopathy if its diet is deficicut in tau-
rine. The early stages are classical as the degeneration is zonal within the area ccntralis pro-
gressing horizontally from the central retina toward the periphery. Advanced degenerations look
like any other end-stage retinal atrophy. These lesions are known as feline central retinal de-
generation (FCRD). Since taurine was discovered as a required amino acid in cat diets, the pet
food industry has dramatically reduced the incidence of this retinopathy by taurine supplemen-
tation (Fig. 20).
Retinal Degenerations
251
Figure 20. Feline central retinal degeneration sec-
ondary to nutritional causes (i.e., taurine defi-
cicncy). The well-demarcated zones of hyper-
reflectivity on either side of the optic disc are areas
of degeneration (*). At this stagc, the cat is slill vi-
sual.
24. What are some of fthe causes of retinal toxic degenerations?
Liver disease and gallbladder stones have an ocular manifestation of retinal degeneration. Re-
cently, Baytril, given at the recommended systemic dose, has been reported to cause retinal de-
generation in cats (Fig. 21).
Figure 21. Retinal dcgencration thought to be secondary to cn-
rofloxacin (Baytril) administration. (To prevcnt retinal coniplica-
tions, do not exceed 5 mg/kg/day.)
25. Are there blood tests available for cat retinal degeneration?
No. DNA-based tesis are not currently available to identify cats that are affected, are carri-
ers, or are genetically normal for PRA or other inherited retinal diseases.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Acland GM, Aguinre G, Chader GJ, et al. Canine early-onset hereditary retinal degeneration; genetic and
2. Acland GM. Blanton SH, Hershfield B, et al: XL-PRA: A canine retinal degeneration inheried as an X-
linked trait. Am J Med Genet 52:27-33. 1994.
3. Aguirre GD: Inherited retinal degenerations in the dog. Trans Am Acad Ophthalmol Otolaryngol
81:667-676, 1976.
4. Aguirre GD: Rctinal dcgcncrations in the dog. 1. Rod dysplasia. Exp Eye Res 26:233-253, 1978.
 5. Curtis R, Barnett KC: Progressive retinal atrophy in miniature longhaired dachshund dogs. Br Vet I
149:71-85, 1993.
 6. Gelat KN, Van der Woerdt A, Ketring KL, et al: Enrofloxacin-associated retinal degeneralion in cats.
Vet Ophthalmol 4:99-106.2001
 7. Hakansson N, Narfstrom K: Progressive retinal atrophy in papillon dogs in Sweden. A clinical survey.
Vet Comp Ophthalmol 5:83-87, 1995
 8. Narfstrom K, Ehinger R, Brunn A: Imniunohistochemical studies of core photoreceptors and cells of the
inner retina in feline rod-cone degeneration. Vet Ophthalmol 4:141—145, 2001.
in miniature schnauzer dogs. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1:187-203, 1991
10. Ray K, Baldwin V, Acland G. et al: Molecular diagnostic tests for ascertainment of genotype at the rod-
cone dysplasia 1 (rcd 1) locus in Irish setters. Curr Eyc Rcs 14:243-247, 1995.
I1. Sandberg MA, Pawlyk BS, Berson EL: Full-field clcctrorctinograms in miniature poodles with progres-
sive rod-cone degeneration. Invest Ophthalmol Sci. 27:1179-1184, 1986.
40. RETINAL DYSPLASIA
Ronald C. Riis, D.V.M., M.S
1. What is the definition of retinal dysplasia (RD)?
RD is an abnormal developmenl of the retina,
2. What causes the abrormal development?
RD lesions in puppies have bccn caused by adenovirus and herpesvirus infections and in kit-
tens by panleukopenia virus. Some RD lesions are associated with genetic traits such as a simple
recessive in Bedlington terriers, golden retrievers, and Labrador retrievers and as recessive in
American cocker spaniels, beagles, collics, corgis, English springer spaniels, and Sealyham
teTTiers.
In addition to RD, other ccular lesions have becn diagnosed, such as cataracts, colobomas,
persistent pupillary membranes, retinal detachments, hemorhage, and microphthalmia.
The most noted breeds with RD and other anomalies include (* = most common):
Akita*
American cocker spaniel*
Australian shepherd*
Beagle
Bassel griffon Veudeen (pelite)
 Bedlington terrier
 Belgian Malinois
Border collie
Bull mastiff
Collie*
Cavalier King Charles spaniel
Chow chow
Clumber spaniel
Doberman pinscher
English springer spaniel*
Field spaniel
German shepherd
Golden retriever
Gordon settcr
Labrador retrievcr*
Mastiff
Norwegian elkhound
Old English sheepdog
Pembroke Wclsh corgi
Rottweiler
Samoyed*
Sealyham terrier
Yorkshire terrier
3. Has RD heen referred to by other naines?
RD was once called “vermiform streaks" because ophthalmoscopically the lesions looked
like worms imbedded in the retina. Because the pathology of RD may take on the appearance of
rctinal roscttes or uplifting folds away from the retinal pigment cpithelium, “'retinal folds" became
a popular term, especially if the dysplasia was linear, with and without branching.
4. Are there degrees of RD?
Yes, the linear dysplastic lesions (folds) are usually the least serious. When the linear lesions
become numerous and fuse together, a larget area of retina is scarred. Thesc areas takc on yari-
Ous shapes with some appearing like states or countries on a map, thus the name “geographic RD"
(Figs. 1-8).
Figure 1. Yellow Labrador puppy with multiple
linear retinal folds in the nontapetum and focal
scars in the developing tapelum.
252
Retinal Dysplasia
253
Figure 2. Young American cocker spaniel with
retinal folus.
Figure 3. Nontapetal rctinal folds. Note venulcs
crossingrctinal folds.
254
Retinal Dysplasia
Figure 4. Six-month-old beagle with many nontapctal
rctinal folds that are fading wih pigiment from the reti-
nal pigment epithelium.
 Figure 5. A 6-week-old Australian shcpherd puppy
with elongaled retinal folds.
Figure 6. A 4-month-old Akita puppy with focal and lincar reti-
nal tlysplasia.
Retinal Dysplasia
255
Figure 7. A 6-month-old bull mastiffl puppy with
mullifocal retinal dysplasia.
Figure 8. An adult springer spanicl with multiple
tapetal scars dorsal to the disc. Pigmcntation lhas
proliferaled among thc hypcrreflectivc arcas.
5. Can RD lesions heal
Yes and no. The first answer is yes because the retina will compensate in various ways. The
simall linear lesions (folds) take on a gray or hyperrcfcctive appearancc within the lapetal fundus,
whereas thc same type of RD lcsion may pigmcnt with melanocytes in the nontapetal fundus.
These areas never heal to become functional, but do scar to form pathologic thin areas of the
s a i sisl r s nq es ose  ssi a desi ae a 
cated with detachment.
Sone of the infectious RD lesions take on punctuate or circular appearances in both the cat
though the RD may have becn severe and only a few scars remain, the owner may comment about
some visual impairment.
6. When should the retinas be examined for RD?
Most conscientious brecders present their puppies for evaluation before they are placed in
homes. Between 6 and 9 weeks of age which is a good time to rule out RD in the “"fold" category.
256
Retinal Dysplasia
However, examination at this age does not guarantee the puppies will be free of all types of RD.
Therefore, it is recommended to have examinalions perforrmcd betwecn the ages of 6 and 9 weeks
and again at 6-9 months.
7. If an animal is diagnosed with RD, should it be bred?
It depends on the type of RD and breed. The minor linear fold RD lesions are thought to be
nonprogressive and not visually impairing. Usually, thesc lesions are left to the breeder's discre-
 tion when rating animals for show and breeding quality.
The larger geographic RD lesions are serious enough that animals with them should not be
bred. RD is often associated with infectious or anomalous development and not genetic causes.
so these animals could be bred. However, it is difficult to judge etiology in oldcr, scarrcd retinas,
so caution shovid be taken (Figs. 9-14)
Figure 9. An adult springer spaniel with non-
tapetal retinal dysplasia and focal detachmcnt.
Figure 10. A springer spaniel puppy with retinal
detachment and generalized retinal folds ovcr the
entire fundus,
Figure 11. Retinal dysplasia adjaccnt to thc optic
disc with associated retinal detachment.
Retinal Dysplasia
257
Figure I2. An adult beaglc with multifocal coa-
lescent rctinal folds causing retinal dctachment 
dorsal to the optic disc.
Figure 13. A gevgraphic retinal dysplastic lesion
in an American cockcr spaniel.
258
Retinal Dysplasia
Figure 14. A very large geographic retinal dys-
plastic lesion,
8. What is the most severe RD presentation?
Blind puppies with retinal detachment secondary to the dysplasia. These puppies usually
have a rotary nystagmus. The leukocoria present is the retina dislocated just behind the lens. Some
of these puppies also have microphthalnia or intraocular hemorrhage. Ironically, the severe pre-
sentation does not always happen bilaterally.
9. What is the least severe RD presentation?
Those eyes that are entirely normal with the exception of a few small linear or dot retinal
scars.
10. If the minor RD lesions were reevaluated at an older age, couldn't they be potentially
normal?
 The RD areas may fill in with pigment, especially if they were noted only in the nontapetal
fundus. Evaluation rccords have documented that animals do go from phenotypic affected to phe-
 notypic norrmal. Howcver, the earlicr evaluation determines whether the animal is geneotypically
affected, and the inherited traits will be passed on.
11. Is it difficult to exarmine eyes for RD lesions?
good restraint, maximally dilated pupils, expertise with ophthalmoscopic tcchniques, and pcrsis-
tence for a good view of the fundus periphery.
12. Should all puppies be referred to a diplomate of the American College of Veterinary
Ophthalmologists (DACVO) for the carly evaluation?
 Not necessarily. If a veterinarian feels comfortable evaluating the puppies, referral may not
be rcquired unless a lesion is questionable or a second opinion is recommended. If the breeder or
owner desires certification by the Canine Eye Registration Foundation (CERF), it is nccessary to
refer lo a DACVO member because CERF only accepts their evaluations.
Retinal Dysplasia
259
13. ls there a DNA test for RD?
Not yet.
14. Has RD been classified any other way?
RD has becn classified histopathologically by the rosette architecture. Three layer rosettes
indicate a mature retina that has detachcd and in which folds have developed. Two layer rosettes
and one layer rosettes arisc from either the outer or inner retinal layers. These are examples of
true dysgenesis (Figs. 15 and 16).
Figurc I5. Histopathology of a rctinal told (forma-
lin fixed). Note photoreceptor and outer nuclear
layer fold. 10X.
Figure I6. Histopathology of a large retinal fold
(formalin fixed). Note roseite of outer nuclear
layer.40x.
CONTROVERSY
15. Should animals with RD fold scars be bred?
For: Many breed organizations have takcn a stand on this question. Becausc RD fold scars
are a minor flaw and all other characteristics about the animal may be highly desirable, it is irra-
tional to cull the animal for this trait alone.
260
Retinal Dysplasia
Against: Top dogs are especially popular for breeding, and somc have had RD. The incidencc
of RD in several breeds has increased dramatically over the last 25 ycars. This high incidence
would not be a factor today if having RD had been discrinmatcd against when breeding.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. CaTig CB, Spouenberg DP, Schtmidt GM, et al: Inheritance of associated ocular and skeletal dysplasia
in Labrador retrievers.I Am Vet Med Assoc 293:1269,1988.
2. Genetics Committee of the Ainerican College of Veterinary Ophthalimologists: Ocular Disorders Prc-
sumed to be Inherited in Purcbred Dogs, 2nd cd. West Indianapolis, IN, ACVO and Canine Eye Reg-
istration Foundation, 1996.
3. Holle DM, Stankovics ME, Sarna CS, et al: Thc gcographic form of retinal dysplasia in dogs is not al-
ways a congcnital abnormality. Vet Ophthalmol 2:61, 1999.
4.Lahav M, Albert DM,Wyand S: Clinical and histopathological classification of retinal dysplasia. Arm J
Ophthalmol 75:648, 1973.
75:381, 1985.
6. Lewis DG, Kelly DF, Sansom J: Congenital microphthalmia and other developmental ocular anomalies
in the Doberman. J Small Anim Pract 27:559, 1986.
7. MacMillan AD, Lipton DE: Heritability of multifocal rctinal dysplasia in American cocker spanicls. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 172:568, 1978.
8. Meyers VN, jezyk GD, Aquirre G, et al: Short-limbed dwarfism and ocular defects in the Samoycd dog.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:975, 1983.
9. Nelson DL, MacMilan AD: Multifocal retinal dysplasia in ficld trial Labrador retrievers. I Ami Anim
Hosp Assoc 19:388, 1983.
ctoscopy of the postnatal lesions.Vet Pathol 20:298,1983.
41. GENETIC TESTING FOR PROGRESSIVE
RETINAL ATROPHY
Jeanette S. Felix, Ph.D.
1. Are there molecular genetic tests for inherited forms of progressive retinal atrophy
(PRA)?
The number of DNA-based tests for canine PRA is growing. Because various forms of PRA
are caused by various genetic defects, tests are developed specifically for each form. Most formms of
canine PRA are inherited as autosomal recessive conditions, although at least two breeds have an
X-linked form. Onc autosomal doininant form of PRA is known. Several of the mutant genes re-
sponsiblc for PRA are detectable by DNA-based direct mutation tests or by marker/linkage tests.
Research on PRA is ongoing, so up-to-date information should be sought whenever you have a need.
2. Which forms of canine PRA can be detected and in which breeds?
At the time of this writing, seven gcnctic tests are available for rctinal degencrative discases,
involving a total of thirteen breeds. Congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB) is included in this
list because it is a nonprogressive retinal disease that can be confused with PRA. Because a brccd
can cxhibit more than onc type of PRA (inhcrited or acquired), one needs to be specific about the
tcst used and its results. A dog that is normal by tne test could be at risk for another fom of PRA.
DISEASE
BREED
GENE
GENETIC THST
Congcnital stationary night
Briard
RPE6S
Mutation
blindness (CSNB)
Dominant PRA
Mastiff
Unnamed
Mutation
Type A PRA
Miniature schnauzer
Unnamed
Mutation
 Progressivc rod conc
Chesapeake Bay retriever
Unknown
Marker
degeneration (prcd)
English cocker spaniel
Labrador rctricver
Poodle
Portuguese water dog
Rod coue dysplasia l (rcd!)
lrish settcr
PDE6B
Mutation
Sloughi
Rod cone dysplasia 3 (rcd3)
Cardigan Wclsh corgi
PDE6A
Mutation
X-linked PRA
Siberian husky
Uanamed
Mutation
Samoyed
3. Are there genetic tests for canine retinal dystrophies or retinal dysplasias?
Not so far, but if a disease is inherited in sitmple Meundelian fashion, it is just a matter of work
and time (and funding for the research) before a lest is developed (see Chapter 39).
4. Why is a genetic test done and when?
preventing the disease. Through DNA-based genctic tests, this can bc achieved with a high de-
gree of reliability not possible with pedigree analysis or clinical examination. Genetically clear
(homozygous normal) dogs can be bred to another dog of any genctic stalus (clear, carrier, or af-
fected) and not produce the discase. Offspring can be tested to identify carriers, and repeated se-
lection for clear animals evcntually will decrease the frequency of the mutant gene in the breed.
Genetic testing should be done before the owner uses the dog for breeding and whenever the
information is beneficial for diagnosis and decision-making. Testing can be done at any age, as
soon as a small blood sample or other useful tissue sample can be obtained.
261
262
Genetic Testing for Progressive Retinal Atrophy
5. Is a genetic test useful if information fronl a clinical examination is already available?
A genetic tcst reveals the dog's genotype for the disease in qucstion, thereby confirming its
normal status or revealing the affected status. In many cases, a gcnctic test providcs information
not available otherwise. A normal clinical examination cannot always rule out PRA even after the
rules out that form of PRA. If the dog appears suspicious for PRA on clinical examinafion, the
confirm a clinical diagnosis of PRA, because many times PRA is incorrecily diagnoscd.
6. Is a clinical examination useful if information from a genetic test is already available?
Examination by a certified veterinary ophthalmologist is always useful and is generally rec-
ominended for dogs of all ages on an annual basis to look for a variety of inheniied and acquired
eye conditions in addition to those for which genelic tesis are available, In the United States, Ca-
nine Eye Registration Foundation (CERF) exaininations by a diplomate of the American College
of Veterinary Ophthalmologists (ACVO) and, in Europe, cxaminations by a diplomate of the Eu-
ropean College of Veterinary Ophthalmology (ECVO) lead to eye exainination certificates used
for registration purposes. lf a dog is genctically normal or a carrier for a specific form of PRA, an
electroretinogram (ERG) will give no additional information about inheritcd PRA status. How-
evel, when there is a possibility of a false-positive rcsuli (see question I3), and thc dog in ques-
tion is wel beyond the typical age of onset, an ERG can be useful.
  e     s q     s  a 
 Most cormmercial marker and mutation tests make a diagnosis on an individual dog. without
information on other mcmbers of the pedigree. Research on a new test couid depend on fracing
markcrs and the diseasc gene through a pcdigree. In that case, a linkage tcst is done on a set of
samples including at least the test dog, its dam and sire, and one affected and one unaffected dog
from the same parentage.
8. What is the difference between a mutation test and a marker/linkage test?
A mutation test identifes the specific DNA abnormality responsibie for the disease. The ab-
norimality might involve all altered DNA sequence, a substitution in the sequence, Or a deletion
ease is known for the breed being tested. For example, the precise mutation in the RPE65 gene
that causes CSNB in briards is known and forms the basis of its test. Because different breeds can
have different mutations that cause the same clinical disease, the specific causc must be discov-
ered for each brced.
In contrast, when a disease gene and its mutations are not known, it is sometimes possible to
develop a genetic test using DNA sequence markers closely linked to the gene. Genetic linkage
can be established without knowing the specific gene or mutation causing the disease. Instead,
DNA sequences that are always inherited with the disease gene (ie., linked) are defined. By trac-
ing such markers in a pedigrce, conclusions are made ahout inheritance of thc mutant discasc
gene. Because rccombination betwccn these markers and the disease gene can occut, the proba-
bility of such recombination must be factored into the value and interpretation of the lest. The
good news is that some 1markers are so close to the gene that no recombination between the mark-
ers and gene can be detected. Tests using such tighily linked markers allow greater accuracy than
tests with markers located farther from the gene. The prca-PRA marker test uses inarkers that
never recombine with the prcd gene (see question 13).
9. Is the frequency of PRA disease and the frequency of the mutant gene known for each
breed?
Vcry few thorough studies have been donc to establish the frequency of PRA or the frequcncy
reliability, a direct mutation test applied to a large cross-sectional sampling of the breed is needed.
Genetic Testing for Progressive Retinal Atrophy
263
               
for the rcd I-PRA mutant gene in the United States. As more testing is done and the results shared
through breed club registries, more information on mutation frequency will accumulate.
10. Are new mutations frequent and do they impact test accuracy?
Thc probability of a ncw mutation is much lcss than I chance in several million meioses.
Thus, ncw mutations at any singlc gene are extremcly infrequent, and there is no practical impact
on genetic test accuracy. The mutations causing the various forins of PRA are very old, most pre-
dating modern dog brecds.
11, Does a normal test result certify that there is no risk for PRA in the tested dog?
It is important to remember that thc test result applics only to the specific disease gene bcing
tested. Because there are multiple forms of PRA, sometimcs more than onc form inl one breed, the
test result must be interpreted only for the gcnc being tested. For example, a dog determined to
be clear by DNA test for the prcdl-PRA mutation could still be at risk for a different form of PRA
known to affect that breed, The genetic tests currently available are for the predominant causes
of PRA in the test breeds.
Of course, vision loss can be due fo conditions other than PRA. Although PRA is by far the
 predominanl cause of retinal degeneration in those breeds currently being tested, there could be
other uncommon types of PRA, or vision could be affected by rctinal dysplasias, cataracts, in-
flammatory conditions, infections, or trauma. Genetic testing allows diagnosis and control of a
specific cause of blindness, but not for all possible causcs of vision loss.
12. What tissue is sampled for a genetic test and how is the test actually done?
A small (1-3 ml) unclotted blood sample, obtained by a vcterinarian or veterinarian techni-
cian, is the most reliable sourcc of DNA for testing because the dog's identity can be verified at
 the time of drawing and contamination from other dogs can be avoided. Although it is easier to
take chcck scrapings, these can be contaminated by variables such as contact with other animals
and food. DNA can be prepared from other fresh or frozen tissues, such as, scmcn or liver, but
testing of thcsc tissues is not done routincly in a service lab.
DNA is extracted and processed to amplify the targeted gene through the use of specific DNA
primers and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology. This amplified DNA is run on an elec-
trophoretic gel under conditions that will scparate and distinguish the mutant gene (or markers)
 from the normal. The DNA patterns on 1he gel arc revealcd by use of stains and ultraviolet illu-
mination. If the precise sequence of the gene is knowu, automatcd sequencing technology can be
used to analyze the amplified DNA.
13. How are the results reported to the owner?
For mulation-based tests, results are reported as:
● Normal —clear, homozygous for the normal gene; no mutant gene is present
· Carrier—carrier of the disease with one normal and onc mutant gcne copy
· Affected—-homozygous for the mutant gene; no normal gene is present
With linkage tests, thc above results would be qualified further to indicale the probability of
a recombination between the linked marker and the disease gene in the tested dog. A recombina-
tion event could yield a falsc-negative or false-positive result. A good linkage test will have a very
low probability of recombination.
With marker-based tests, such as the original test for prcd-PRA, the markers arc so close
to the disease gene that no recombination between ihem and the gcne has ever been obscrved.
This test gives a definitive result for normal/clear prcd status of a dog. However, carrier sta-
ably affected) are qualified becausc of possiblc presencc of a false-positive allele. This com-
plexity will be resolvcd either with an improved marker lest or with a direct mutation-bascd
test.
264
Genetic Testing for Progressive Retinal Atrophy
ln each case, the laboratory performing the lest should provide sufficient informmation and ex-
planation to interpret the results.
14. How are the results used?
Reliable identification of clear dogs thal do not carry a mutanl disease gcnc is the key to clim-
inating diseases. Specific brceding recommendations depend on whether the discasc gene is au-
tosomal recessive or X-linked. The breeder can use test information 1o avoid producing affected
 pups and to control the frequency and occurrence of the mulant gene in their line.
15. Outline the expected results for various hreeding strategies with PRA,
ExpectedResultsofBreedingStrategies
UsingDNA-Based TestsforAutosomalRecessivePRA
PARENT2
PARENT 1
NORMAI.
CARRIER
AFFECTED
Normal
All = Normal
1/2 = Normal
All = Carrier
1/2 =Caier
Carricr
1/2 = Normal
1/4 = Normal
1/2 = Carrier
1/2 =Carrier
1/2 =Carier
1/2 =Affcctcd
1/4 = Affected
Affected
All = Carricr
1/2 = Camier
All =- Affected
1/2 =Affected
ExpectedResultsofBreedingStrategies
Using DNA-Based Testsfor RecessiveX-Linked PRA
1AM (XX)
SIRF (XY)-NORMAL
SIRE (XY).--AFFECTED
Normal
All = normal
All females = carrier
All malcs = normal
Carrier
1/2 females = normal
1/2 fcimalcs =- carrier
1/2 females = carrier
1/2 females = affected
1/2 males = normal
1/2 males = nornal
1/2 males = affcctcd
1/2 malcs = affected
Affected
All females = carricr
All- affccted
All males = affcctcd
16. What breeding strategies are recommended based on DNA test results?
This is straightforward for autosomal recessive diseases: the breeder shonld always select one
parent that has tested clear for the disease in question. The other parent can be untested, carrier,
or affected, becausc the offspring can be testcd beforc planning the next gcncration.
For X-linked diseases, breeding is more restricted. 'The breeder should select only normal fe-
males but can select either normal or affected rmales because no affected offspring will be pro-
duced in these matings. For autosomal dominant diseases, the breeder should select only normal
 male and female dogs, because all dogs with either one or two mutant genes will be affected.
17. Is the goal of canine genetic testing to eliminate the recessive disease or to eliminate the
recessive mutant gene?
A reasonable short-term goul for breeders is to avoid producing affected dogs by using one
parent that tested clear for the recessive mutant disease gene. With this approach, carrier and
even affected dogs of excellent quality for other traits can be kcpt in breeding schemcs. and
Genetic Testing for Progressive Retinal Atrophy
265
there is little risk of unduly restricting the gene pool of the line or brecd. The longer term goal
of reducing the frequency of the recessive mutant disease gene, or climinating it from the breed
altogether, must be pursued over many generations, making choices to retain the preferrcd qual-
ities of the breed represented. Using this approach for the longer terrn goal will avoid coinci-
dentally increasing the frequency of a recessive mutation for a different inherited disease and
pethaps even a new disease for the breed.
18. What if a champion dog is diagnosed with autosomal recessive PRA by both clinical and
genetic test criteria? Should the owner exclude it and its offspring from further breeding?
No, even though this dog is homozygous for a form of PRA and its offspring will be at least
These clear dogs can be bred to any mate—even to an affccted or carrier dog—and no affected
pups will bc produced. By brccding subscquent generations to clear dogs, not only will affected
dogs be prevented, but the mutant gene eventually will be eliminated from the line. And, the fine
qualities of this champion dog will be retained.
19. What if a valuable and unaffected dog comes from a pedigree with known PRA carri-
ers or affecteds? Should it be pulled from brecding?
Not if more information can be obtained. Careful analysis of the pedigree might give use
ful information for a brceding plan. Better yet, if the form of PRA in question can be DNA
tested, this dog shculd be tested. Even if the dog carries an autosomal-recessive form of PRA,
it can be bred to a gcnctically norimal dog with no risk of producing affected offspring. If the
 PRA is X-linkcd and thc dog is a genetically normal female, it can be bred to cither a normal or
strategles.
20. An 18-month-old Labrador retriever presents with severe PRA-like symptoms, but the
DNA test has shown at least one parent is genetically normal for prcd-PRA. How can this be
explained?
Dogs tentatively diagnosed with PRA, especially with an atypical clinical presentation at a
very young agc, might have a nongcnetic form of retinal diseasc or might have a gcnetic form that
is not delected by the DNA test used. To date, no false-negative result for the prcd gene tesl has
been verified. That is, every dog diagnosed clinically with the form of PRA that fits the standard
description of prcd-PRA for age of onset, progression, and dcgree of scverity also is hoimozygous
for the mutant prcd DNA markers. Each dog would have reccived onc mutant sct of markcrs from
each parent. Therefore, for an explanation of this affected dog with a genelically norrmal parent,
several issues must be pursued:
1. ls the clinical diagnosis solid? Is this PRA?
 2. If it is PRA, is it prcd-PRA or another retinal condition?
 3. If it fits the criteria for prcd-PRA, genetic tcsting should be repeated and cxtended to more
fanily members to determine if thcrc was a technical or procedural error or if this case is due to
genetic recombination or false-negative resull.
 4. Has parcntage of the dog bccn verified? The possibility of mistakcn parentage should be
ruledout,
21. What if a dog tests normal and clear for the prcd-PRA mutant gene or for another PRA
gene, but the owner reports the dog has PRA?
Because the prcr-PRA test resull is completely accurate when it detects the normal, clear
genotype, this dog definitely does not have the prcd form of PRA. The same is true for the other
PRA genetic tests. It must have another forn of PRA, retinal dysplasia, retinal dystrophy, or an
other cause for the retinal diseasc. Consultation with an expert in caninc retinal conditions should
be obtained.
266
Genetic Testing for Progressive Retinal Atrophy
22. A 6-year-old-dog has normal CERF and ERG examinations, yet the prcd-PRA marker
test gives a test result of pattern C --highi risk to be affected. Why?
This is difficult to resolve using the prcd-PRA marker test (available as of this writing) be-
cause of detection of a false allcle. As discussed in queslion 13, some dogs can be homozygous
for a set of markers that can segrcgate either with the prcd mutation or the normal gene. This sta-
tus is designated pattern C with the prcd test. It is possible this dog actually is a carrier of prcd or
is clear of the mutation. Unfortunately at this time, the frequency of the prcd false allele is not
known.
The likelihood that the dog will not be affected with prcd increases with the dog's age, If it
is beyond the latest known age of onset for the breed, false alleles probably were detected. Also,
if the pedigrees of both parents are clear of prcd-PRA for several prcceding generations, likeli-
hood of the false allele increases. Finally, one must takc into account the variable age of onsct
among different breeds. Most cases of prcd in Chesapeakc Bay retrievcrs, Labrador retrievers,
been diagnosed as latc as l1 years of agc with the early ophthalmoscopic lesions of PRA.
23. Does coat color of the dog affect the use or interpretation of the test result?
Based on current experience, neither coat color itself nor color lines within a breed impact
use or interpretation of test results. The prcd test applies to all color varieties of the breeds listed
above. The same is true for the rcd? test in Irish sctters (solid rcds and red/white have thc same
PRA disease gene and mutation) as well as the other PR A genetics types.
24. Will more breeds have genetic tests for PRA in the future?
Some form of PRA is recognized in more than 70 breeds, and usually thc gcnelic typc of PRA
cannot be predictcd based on the clinical picture of the condition. Several of these brceds are be-
ing studied to determine whether the marker-based test for prcd-PRA will detect their form of
PRA. Based on genetic and breeding studies. we know that other breeds have non-prcd forms of
PRA. Development of tests for these diseases waits for discovery of the responsible genes or use-
ful markers. Examples of breeds for which PRA is a major concern include:
BREED
DISEASE
Alaskan malamute
Conc degeneration (cd)
American cocker spaniel
pred
Australian cattle dog
PRA (specific form under study)
English springcr spanie!
PRA (specific form under shudy)
ltalian greyhound
PRA (specific form under study)
Norwcgian elkhound
Early retinal degeneration (erd)
Nova Scotia duck tolling retricvcr
prcd
Papillon
PRA (specific form under study)
 Poodle, toy and miniature
paud
Rough collie
Rod-cone dysplasia 2 (rcd2)
Tibetan terrier
PRA (specifiec form under study)
25. Is it surprising that there are so many genes cansing PRA?
There are many parallels between canine and human inherited diseases, PRA in particular.
Human retinal degenerations, akin to canine PRA, also result from mutation in any one of a grow-
ing collection of genes whose functions are important to the retina. Given this experience, the
multitude of PRA-causing genes is not unexpectcd, and in fact, more such genes undoubtediy wili
be discovered.
26. Are the chromosomal locations of the PRA genes of significance or of interest?
The spccific chromosomal location of a gene is irrelevant diagnostically unless the disease is
consequences outlined above in question 15. For research purposes, knowing the gencral gene lo-
Genetic Testing for Progressive Retinal Atrophy
267
cation is necessary for eventual cloning and sequencing of the gene, The location also gives clues
to candidatc disease genes based on parallels with the human genome.
27. Have the American Kennel Club (AKC) and individual breed clubs set standards for
genetic testing?
Genetic testing, as a powerful tool for canine breeding strategies and health management, is
an emerging field. As morc cxpcricnce is gained, it is expcctcd that health and breeding standards
will include certain genetic qualities as goals.
28. Is there a registry for genetic testing results?
In the United States, several AKC parent clubs have established breed-specific genetic reg-
istries, either independently or as part of CERF's Canine DNA Registry or Orthopedic Founda-
Aion for Animals (OFA) registry. Several European kennel clubs have registries in place. Owners
should be encouraged to contact theirparent club for information about registries and topartici-
pate in developing a befter brecd bascd on shared genetic informatiun.
29. How are genetic tests obtained?
Currently, DNA tests are not performed in private veterinary practice or clinic settings be-
Most of the genetic tests for canine PRA are available exclusively from OptiGen, LLC, a veteri-
nary genetic service laboratory (www.optigcn.com). Other companies offcr tests for a growing
variely of diseases. The AKCCanine Health Foundation maintains a list of genetic tests on their
Web site (www.akcchf.org).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
sive rod-cone degeneralion (prcd) establishes potential locus homology with retinitis pigmenlosa
(RP17) in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:30483053, 1998.
2. Aguire GD: DNA tcsting for inhcritcd caninc discases. ln Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary
Thcrapy. 13th ed. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, 1999, p 909-913.
3. Aguirre GD: Mechanism of photoreceptor disease and dcgcncration. Great Basin Vis Sci Symp ll:6-21,
1996.
4. Aguirte GD, Baldwin V, Pearce-Kelling S.el al: Congcnital stationary night blindness in the dog: com-
mon mutation in thc RPE65 gcnc indicates founder effect. Mol Vis 4:23, 1998.
5. Dekomien G, Runtc M, Godde R, ct al: Generalized progressive retinal atrophy of Sloughi dogs is due to
an 8bp insertion in Exon 21 of the PDE6B gene. Cytogen Cell Gen 90:3-4, 2000.
6. Langston A, Mellersh C, Wiegand N, et al: Towards a framework linkage map of the canine genome. J
Hered 90:7-14, 1999.
46:326-336.1997
8. OptiGen, LLC: www.optigen.com.
9. Petersen-Jones SM, Entz DD, Sargan DR: cGMP phosphodicstcrasc-a inutation causes progressivc reti-
nal atrophy in the Cardigan Welsh corgi dog. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 40:1637-1644, 1999.
ing allele-specific polymerasc chain rcaction. Curr Fye Res 15:583-587, 1996.
11.RetNet—Retinal Information Network:www.sph.uth.tmc.cdu/RetNel.
12. Werner P, Mellersh C, Raducha M, ct al: Anchoring the caninc linkagc groups with chromosome-specifc
markers. Mamn Gcnomc 10:814-823, 1999.
[3. Zeiss CI, Ray K, Acland GM, et al: Mapping of X-linked progressive retinal atrophy (XLPRA), the ca-
ninc homolog of retinitis pigimentosa 3 (RP3). Human Molec Genct 9:531-537, 2000.
42. RETINAL DETACHMENTS
Samuel J. Vainisi, D.V.M.
1. What is a retinal detachment (RD)?
A retinal detachment is the separation of the neurosensory retina (rods, cones, and inner lay-
ers) from the retinal pigment epithelium. This rcsults in the accumulation of fuid bctween the two
layers. RD is classificd as a rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD) if there is a break or tear
allowing vitreous to separate the retinal layers. A traction RD results if ihere is a pulling force
euep on Arpuosss ping Kq posneo si aa aanepnxa ue pue snoania au un (auquau 'puea)
to the blood barrier (choroiditis, hypertension)
 2. What are the factors responsible for rhegmatogenous retinal detachments?
The most common cause is cataract surgery, especially if the RD is complicated by a tear in
the posterior lens capsule, viltreous loss, retained lens fragments, intraocular henorrhage, or prior
lens-induced uveitis. Brceds with inherited retinal dysplasia, especiafly if there is retinal thinning
disposed to RRD. Dogs with excessive vitreous degeneration, cspecially if thcy are violent head
shakers with toys. are prime candidates for RRD (shih tzus, Boston terricrs, poodles). Trauma due
to penctrating injuries or with associated vitreous hemorrhage is also a cause of RRD.
3. What are the main causes of exudative retinal detachments?
Exudative RDs are due to the accumulation of fluid in the subrelinal space. Conditions such
as choroiditis or hypertension may result in an exudative or serous RD. lmmune-mediated dis-
eases are frcquent causes of this type of RD (Vogt-Koyanagi-flarada, sclerouvcitis). However,
fungal, bacterial, or rickettsial infections that cause panuveitis also can causc this type of RD.
Choroidal tumors and optic nerve colobomas also may result in exudative detachments.
4. What does a retinal detachment look like?
For many gcncral praclilioners, the diagnosis may be difficall, especially if the RD is associ-
ated with panuveitis and there is considerable inflammation. Ultrasound is helpful in the diagno-
sis. If the media is clear, anterior displacement of the rctina may be fairly obvious. With large
scrous or exudative rctinal detachments, the relina may almost be in contact with the poslerior lens
capsule (Figs. 1). If therc is a large tear or retinal dialysis, the retina may appear as a gray curtain
floating loosely in the vitreous (Fig. 2), or the detached retina may appear as a blur while the at-
tached retina is in focus (Fig. 3). If the tear or dialysis is approaching 360°, the retina will be at-
tachied only at the optic disc and the tapetum lucidum will be extremcly hyperreflectivc (Fig. 4).
5. What is the treafment for retial detachments?
Treatment will vary depending on the etiology. Exudative detachments will frequently re-
spond to appropriale drug therapy: immune-imediated diseascs to anti-inflammatories and infcc-
 asscciated with hypertension usually responds well to antihypcrtcnsive drugs unlcss there is a reti-
nal break. Rhegmatogenous and traction retinal detachments always need somc form of surgical
 inlervention to repair or to prevent progression of the RD.
6. Why does lens-induced uveitis (LIU) predispose to a retinal detachmcnt?
When cataracts develop rapidly or bccome hypermature, there is some leakage of the altered
lens protein out of the lens capsule. This altered lens protein elicits an inflammalory reaction in
the uvea that manifests clinically as episcleral inflammation and aqueous flare (Fig. 5). Sevcral
268
Retinal Detachments
269
Figure I. Serous retinal delachment. A, Note retina
against poslerior surface of the lens (infcriorly). B.
Note retina against posterior surface of the lens
(circumferentially). This is a bullous retinal de-
tachment.
B
Figure 2. Retinal dialysis. Note edge of retina
(gray retinal band) folded on itsclf.
270
Retinal Detachments
Figurc 3. Vertical rctinal detachment. Note normal
retina in focus, dctached retina out of focus (*).
Figure 4. Giant retinal tear (360"). Retina is al-
tachcd only at optic ncrve. Tapetal area is hyper-
reflective.
Retinal Detachments
271
Figure 5. Hypermature cataraci with lens-induced
uveitis. Note episcleral congestion.
sequclae from this inflammation may produce a RD: (1) vitreons retraction and degeneration, (2)
obliteration of peripheral retinal vessels with secondary retinal thinning and weakness, (3) for-
mation of retinal cysts, and (4) transient glaucoma altacks with intermitten1 stretching of thc globe
and further insult on the peripheral retina. Certain breeds (bichon frise, Siberian husky, Ameri-
 The association of LIU and RD with resorbing cataracts or postcataract surgery has bccn reported
to be 10-30%.
 7. Is there any prophylactic treatment prior to cataract surgery for cases with LIU?
Because of the common occurrence of RD following cataract surgery where prior LIU has
domized studies comparing RDs in eyes with or without prior retinopexy are not available. The
 procedure can be performed 3 wecks prior to removing the cataract. It is important to do an ul-
trasound at the time of thc retinopexy surgery to be sure a small detachment does not already ex-
ist. Retinopexy is also indicaled in eyes whcre the fellow eye has detached either from pricr
cataract surgery or from severe vitreous degeneration. Retinopexy inay benefit ccrtain animals
with retinal dysplasia where the dysplastic area is very thin and the vitreous has degenerated (bar-
rier treatmcnt around the dysplastic area). Laser retinopexy can be done either before, if possible,
 or after luxated lens surgery.
8. What is the treatment for rhegmatogenous retinal detachments?
Thc surgical procedure depends on the type and extent of 1he RD. Small localized tcars or
holes may be treated by barrier laser photocoagulation or cryothcrapy (Fig. 6). If the RD is a ver-
tical dialysis and no vitreal traction bands are present, then demarcation Jaser retinopexy may be
hclpful. If the RD is a small superior tear, then pneumatic relinopexy (inert gas) may cure the prob-
Figure 6. Retinal holc treated by barrier laser
retinopexy.
272
Retinal Detachments
sive surgery such as scleral buckling or pars plana vitrcctomy. ln the dog. pars plana vitrectomics
may be more successful than scleral buckling. In the former, three sclcrotomy openings arc made
at the pars plana: one for the infusion of fluids. onc for a vitrector, antd one for a fiber-optic light.
After removal of the vitreous strands, vitreous, and any other debris, a perfluorocarhon liquid is in-
jected to flatten the retina back to normal position. Then, endolaser coagulation is done to form
chorioretinal scars. This fluorocarbon liquid is then replaced with silicone. It is a lengthy proce-
dure, but has given this author the best results to date—approximately 72% success rate (Fig. 7).
Figurc 7. Giant retinal tear rcpair in
the dog. Prcopcrative and postopcr-
ative fundus photograph
Preop-360deg.Tear
Postop-Attached
9. What is demarcation retinopexy?
This is an attcmpt to halt a RD in progress. In humans, it has been helpful in stopping tem-
poral rhegmatogenous detachments before the RD extends to the macula. This “salvage
retinopexy" in the dog cann be used for a vertical dialysis, either nasal or temporal, moving toward
the optic disc. If several rows of laser coagulation are mnade along the lcading edge of the RD (Fig.
8), there is a fairly good chance of stopping the dctachment. It aiso has been helpful in horizon-
tal RDs if the break is inferior, but not supenior because gravitational forces seem to overcome
the adhesions.
10. What is pneumatic retinopexy?
Pneumaric retinopexy involves injecting air or an inerl gas into the vitreous cavity in an at-
position against the choroid. Because the gas bubble tends to rise to the top of the eye, this pro-
cedure has becn very helpful for trcating small breaks in the superior retina (8-4 o'clock). Prior
 cryotherapy or postsurgery laser coagulation is done on the dctached area. In ordcr for pneumatic
retinopexy to work, the bubble must be kept against the detached area. Humans must position their
head several hours a day unlil the retina has reattached. This can be a problem with dogs for ob-
vious reasons. The inert gases sulfur hexafluoride (SF,) and perfluoropropane (C§Fg) are the most
common used. SF, will cxpand 2-3 times and remain in thc cyc approximately 2 wccks, whereas
CFs expands 4 times and remains about 4 weeks. Air will last 2-3 days. This author has used
CFg for small superior tears in the dog with a 60% succcss rate.
11. What are the predisposing factors for tractional retinal detachments?
In the dog, the most frequent cause is a mermbrane in the vitreous pulling on the retina. Pen-
ctrating wounds, vitreous hemorrhage, and vitreous disruption during surgery are common causes
 of membranes forming in the vitreous and exerting traction on the retina. In dogs that have severe
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV), especially with persistent hyaloid vessels,
cataraci formation with traction detachments is not uncommon. Proliferative vitreoretinopathy
(PVR) results in tractional membranes due to the prolifcration of retinal pigmcnt epithelial cells,
Retinal Detachments
273
Figure 8. Nasal retinal dialysis treated by three
rows of laser photocoagulation along leading edge
ofdetachment.Eye stillvisual7yearspost-treal-
Inent.
fibroblasts, and glial cells on the anterior and posterior surface of thic retina. PVR is usually as
sociated with rhegmatogenous retinal detachments and are seen rmore in man than in dogs. Most
cascs occur with long-standing retinal detachments, especially in Labrador retrievers and English
springer spaniels with retinal dysplasia.
12.What is the treatment for tractional retinal detachments?
Treatment is always surgical and is dcpcndcnt on rclcasing the traction. Pars plana vitrec-
tomy with excision of the traction band in some cases is sufficient; however, many cascs also rc-
 Usually also required are a posterior capsulorrhexis to relieve traction from the PHA and an an-
terior vitrectomy and cautery to any paticnt hyaloid vesscls. Laser retinopexy is sometimes
needed 1o firmly attached tlhe retina. Surgcry for PVR is much more involved and difficult, re-
quiring complete vitrectomy with stripping, pcaling, or cutting of all membranes attached to the
retina and the use of fuorocarbon liquid, laser, or cryosurgery and gas or silicone oil tamponades.
Although thc succcss rate for surgical reattchment in man varies from 60% to 80%, the visual re-
13. ls there a window of time for reattaching a retina with hopes of some vision?
If thc retinal detachment is the exudative type, then the naturc of the subretinal fuid and the
height of thc dctachment play a factor in the rapidity of photoreceptor death. Exudative detach-
ments with considerable inflammatory debris or hemorrhage give a poorer prognosis than serous
types. This is evident clinically because it is more imporian1 to resolve more quickly an cxuda-
tive relinal detachment with inflaimmatory debris than one with serous fluid if somc visual rcturn
is the goal. Some serous RDs that have been elevaled for as long as 3 months gradually rcattach
with the return of some vision, whereas some inflammatory type RDs may reattach in 2-3 weeks
with no visual recovery.
274
Retinal Detachments
Regarding rhegmalogenous RDs, several expcrimenlal studics in animals including dugs
death begins immediately; however, it tends to vary among the different specics. In the dog, thcre
nuclei appear to be preserved for a much longer period. In clinical cases of dogs withi giant reti-
nal tears (360°), this author has had visual return in many patients that have been clinically blind
for 6-8 wccks. Most of these cases have rcquired 3-4 weeks before vision is detectable. It would
thus seen reasonable to assume that some inner and outer segment regeneration has taken place.
It appears that if there is still a moderate pupillary responsc, then there is some possibility for vi-
sual return. The electroretinogram has not becn found to he a valuable indicator. Obviously, thc
sooner feattachmcnt can be achieved, the grealer the chance of vision.
 13. Are there breeds of dogs with a higher genetic predilection for spontaneous detach-
ments?
 In a series of 200 cases with spontaneous RDs, the most frequent patient has been in a brced
with significant vitreous degeneration. Shih tzus accounted for almost 40% of surgical cases
Other breeds are toy and miniature poodles, Boston terriers, Lhasa apsos, Yorkshire and silky tcr
riers, and Italian greyhounds. Almost all of these animals wcre violent head shakers with toys
Labrador retrievcrs and English springer spaniels with large areas of retinal dysplasia are also at
nisk for spontaneous retinal detachment.
14. Once the retina has reattached, what are the possibilities for redetachment?
It is not uncommon for exudative RDs to redetach once therapy is decreased or stopped. Thus,
hesion. However, several possibilities will lead to rcdetachmen1. Retinal tears or holes that were
inadequately scaled may loosen and allow fluid to migrate subretinally. This may also happen
with new holes or tears. Prolifcrative vitreoretinopathy may provide mcmbranes that cause lrac-
tion of the retina. Incomplete removal of vitreous or vitreous bands, uveitis, glaucoma, postoper-
alive trauma, or hemorrhage are all possible causes of redetachment. Removal of silicone oil be-
fore the retina has firmly adhered is also an occasional causc.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
I. Hilton GF, Kelly NE. Salzano TC, ct al: Pneumatic retinopexy: A collaborativc report of the first 100 cases.
Ophthalmology 94:307-314, 1987.
2. Hilton GF, McLcan EG, Brinton DA: Rctinal Detachmcnt: Principals and Practice. Ophthalmology Mono
graph Scrics. San Francisco, Amcrican Academy of Opbthalmology, 1995.
3. Michels RG, Wilkinson CP. Rice TA: Retinal Detachment. St. Louis, Mosby, 1990.
4. Ryan SI: Retina. ln Geaser BM (ed): Surgical Retina, 2nd edi. Vol 3. St. Louis, Mosby, 1994.
 5. Smith PA: Surgery ot the canine posterior segment. In Gelatt KN (ed): Veterinary Ophthalmology, 3rd cd.
Baltimore, Lippincott Willianis & Wilkins, 1999.
6. Vainisi SJ, Packe) KH: Management of giant retinal tears in dogs. J Aim Vet Mcd Assoc 206:491-495,
1995.
7.Vrabec TR.Baumal CR:Demarcalion lascr photocoagulation of selected macular-sparing rhegmato
43. SUDDEN ACQUIRED
RETINAL DEGENERATION
Seth A. Koch, V.M.D., M.M.Sc., and John Sukes, D.V.M.
1. What is sudden acquired retinal degeneration (SARD)?
disease has not been reported in thc cat. SARD probahly cxisted prior to the date it was firsl re-
porled but had not been recognized as an entity in itself.
2. What breeds of dog are affected?
All breeds in general are affected, but the schnauzer and the dachishund have been cited more
than otherbreeds.
3. Is there an age or gender specificity?
4. Is there a body condition unique to the disease?
Yes. Most of these dogs are pudgy or Rubenesque.
 5. What are the clinical signs?
The most profound clinical sign is suddcn loss of vision. Thcsc dogs are visual one day and
blind the next. Some other associated signs are present that generally can be elicited.
6. What are these associated signs?
Most of the dogs will exhibit polyuria and polydipsia. The most striking sign is a tremendous
down their food and often even exhibit pica, Drinking often becomes cxccssive, and urine vol-
ume increases concurrently.
7. What are the ophthalmoscopic abnormalities?
None.
8. How can there be no ophthalmoscopic abnormalities?
In 1he initial stages of the disease, there are no ophthalmoscopic abnormalities. There may be
pupillary dilation that may be responsive, but it usually is a diminished response.
9. Is the diagnosis based on history then?
Not entirely. However, the history, the visual loss, and the lack of any ophthalmoscopic find
ings put the index of suspicion very high.
10. What else is in the differcntial diagnosis?
The two entities that must immediately come to mind are acute optic neuritis and cortical o
optic chiasmal blindness. Other entities that should be considered are glaucoma, progressive reti-
nal atrophy (PR A), retinal detachment, neoplasia, ard meningoencephalitis.
11. Why consider optic neuritis?
Optic neuritis is generally characterized by acute visual loss as well. With optic neuritis, there
275
276
Sudden Acquired Retinal Degeneration
high levels of systemic corticosteroids with restoration of vision in 3-5 days. It becomes, in sim-
ple terms, a diagnosis of exclusion.
12. How about the other diseases in the differential?
 PRA is characterizcd by gradual loss of vision. Glaucoma has many other clinical signs be-
sidcs visual loss. Retinal detachment does occur suddcnly and causes an acute visual loss, but the
detachment is observed ophthalmoscopically. Meningoenccphalitis usually has othcr clinical
signs as does neoplasia.
13. How do you differentiate SARD from cortical disease?
Because SARD is a disease of the retina, one can distinguish i1 from cortical disease by means
of an electroretinogram (ERG)
14. What is an ERG?
An ERG mcasures retinal response primarily from the retinal photoreceptors (rods and
With cortical disease or optic neuritis, where there is no retinal degeneration, the ERG will be
normal.
15. Are there any other clinical signs besides the visual loss and polyphagia?
Yes. Polyuria and polydipsia occu1 on occasion, and laboralory findings oftcn show enzyine
abnormalities relatcd to livcr pathology that initially rcscmbles Cushing's syndrome.
16. So these dogs have Cushing's disease?
No. They have Cushing's-like signs, but the findings are not consisient, Some of the indica-
tors for Cushing's are the same (e.g., high ALKP activity and polyuria, polydipsia and polyphasia),
but they are inconsistent. A fill compliment of cortical tesling (urine, cortisol/creatinine, ACTH
slimulation, low-dose dexamethasone suppression) will usually distinguish SARD patients as not
truly cushingoid.
17. What causes SARD?
The eliology remains an unknown. Theories and suppositions abound. Among those bandied
about are abnormal fat metabolism, hepatopathy, excitotoxins, autoimmune disease, and the cur-
18. What's next on the horizon?
The answer probably will be found in the world of immunocytochemistry or endocrinology
if we don't find that great toxin somewhere out there.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Acland G: Differentiation of retinal disease in small animals by clectroretinography. Semin Vet Mcd Surg
3:15-27.1988
quired retinal degeneration syndrome. Am J Vet Res 59:149-152, 1998.
3. Millichamp N: Retinal degeneration in thc dog and cat. Vet Clin North Am 20:799-831, 1990
4. Riis RC: EM obse1vations of a SARD case. Proc Am Coll Vet Ophthalmol 21:112-113. 1990.
 5. van der Woerdt A, Nasisse M, Davidson M: Sudden acquired retinal degcncration in the dog. Prog Vct
Comp Ophthalmol 1:11-18,1991.
44. FELINE HYPERTENSION
CAUSING OCULAR LESIONS
Ronald C. Riis, D.V.M., M.S.
1. What constitutes a diagnosis of hypertension in cats?
Systolic blood pressure > 170 mmHg
2. What are the causcs of hypertension in cats?
Chronic renal failure is the most common cause; however, diabetes mellitus, chronic anemia,
hyperthyroidism, and diets high in salt also have been indicated.
3. How frequently are ocular lesions seen in hypertensive cats?
Many studics suggest that 80-100% of hypertensivc cats have ocular lesions.
4. What are these ocular lesions?
Retinal detachment (Figs. 1 and 2)
Hemorrhage
 Intraretinal hemorrhage or edema (Fig. 3)
Subretinal hemorrhage or edema
Blindness
Figure 1. Retinal detachment of the right cyc. Notc
the asymmetry of the retinal reflex.
Figure 2. Retinal delachment of the cat shown in
Figure 1. The dorsal retinal vasculature is easily
focused because of its close proximity to the lens.
The cause of this hypertensive cat was mesothe-
lioma.
277
278
Feline Hypertension Causing Ocular Lesions
Figure 3. Hypertensive retinopathy with massive
intraretinal and subretinal hemorhages. The blood
pressure varied around 250 mmHg
5. How do hypertensive cats usually present?
In one study, the primary complaint (68%) was suddcn blindness or rctinal dctachment, hy.
phema, or retinal or vireous hemorrhage diagnosed by the referring veterinarian. Thc remaining
22% had a variety of clinical findings including:
Heart murmur
Renal failure
Heterochromia
Rccumbency
Neoplasia
Weight loss
Neurologic signs
6. What neurologic signs are associated with hypertension?
Disorientation
Paraparesis
Ataxia
Tremors
Cervical ventroflexion
Vestibular signs
 7. What are the cardiac auscultatory abnormalities found in hypertension?
· Systolic heart murmurs
● Cardiac gallop and sinus tachycardia
8. Do diagnostic imaging studies help with the diagnosis of hypertension?
One study used thoracic radiography or echocardiography and found 85% of the hyperten-
sive cats had cardiomegaly. Abdominal radiography or ultrasonography may show hyperechoic
small kidneys, renal calculi, or renal cysts. Ocular ultrasound is very helpful in defining retinal
detachments in globes with hyphema (Fig. 4).
9. What are the findings for renal function io hypertensive retinopathy cases?
One study fouud 54 of 69 cats had elcvations in blood urea nitrogen (BUN) or creatininc.
10. When is hypertensive retinopathy predietably seen?
Usually when the systolic blood pressures excced 200 mmHg.
11. When should blood pressure be reevaluated after treatments have been instituted?
Indirect blood pressure measurements should be chccked within 5-10 days after treatment
has begun. A good response to medication is achieved if the systolic blood pressure decrcases
20% or to less than 170 mmHg. The decrease may take 1 month with a response range of 1 week
 to 6 months. A relapse in hypertension is when the blood pressure increases by 20%.
Feline Hypertension Causing Ocular Lesions
279
Date:May 23,1996
Tiaei1:40p.
Diagnostic
8-scan
Figurc 4. Ocular ultrasound
showing a detachimcnt with B-
age ode:
VECT:-128
FREEZ
scan. Note the typical “flying sea
Eye:right
guil" pattem. In this case, the
retina remained attached at thc
optic disc and ora. With antihy-
pertensive thcrapy, thc enlire
Telina reattached.
12. What antihypertensive drugs are used for cats?
DRUG
DOSE
Atenolol
6.25.-12.5 mg every 24 hr
Propranolol
2.5-10 mg ever 8-12 hr
Enalapril
1.25-2.5 mg every 24 48 hr
Captopril
3.125-6.25 mg every 8-12 hr
Furosemide
3.0-012.5 mg every 8-12 ht
Amlodipine besylate
0.625-1.25 mg cvery 12-24 hr
13. What antihypcrtensive drug has given the best results?
Amlodipine. Blood pressures fall within a more rcspectable range and the retinopathy usu-
ally resolves. A study using amlodipine had ocular improvement in retinal lesions in one or both
eyes in 18 of 26 cats. 1n this group, 20 of 46 eyes with retinal detachment had less subretinal fuid,
partial-to-complete retinal reattchment, or both. Eyes that had retinal cdema or hcmorrhage with-
out detachment (14 of 26) had partial to complete resolution of retinal lesions. In the amlodipinc
treated cais, 30 eyes were blind on initial evaluation, and 4 eyes with complete rctinal dctachment 
had reattachment and some visual recovery following trcatment.
14. Do cats recover their vision if the blood pressure is controlled?
Not always. Even if the retina reattached, it may be too late and the retina maybe degenerate.
15. Why do ocular lesions develop in hypertension?
It is thought that the retinopathy results from a failure in vascular autoregulation of the retinal
arterioles. Increased bloxod pressure causes the arteriolcs to vasoconstrict, resulting in a compen-
smooth muscle allow for plasma leakagc into the vesscl wall, causing hyalinization with smooth
musclc necrosis. Leakage results causing retinal edema, hemorrhage, and retinal detachment.
16. Is hyperthyroidism contributory to hypertension?
With hyperthyroidism, increased β-adrenergic activity can result in tachycardia, increased
myocardial contractility, systemic vasodilation, and activation of the renin-aldosterone-angiotension
system, resulting in hypertension. In onc study, mild-to-moderate systolic blood pressure increases
were detectcd in 34 of 39 hyperthyroid (87%) cals.
280
FelineHypertension CausingOcularLesions
17. Do hyperthyroid cats have ocular manifestations?
Mosl cats with hyperthyroidism do not develop retinopathy or hypertensive-associaled ocu
lar manifestations. In a large group ( 13 1) of hyperthyroid cats, obvious ocular manifestations such
as blindness were not reported. Another prospective study of hyperthyroid cats found 1 of 13 to
havefunduscopicretinal lesions.
18. When diagnosing hemorrhagic retinopathy in a cat, what other organs should I worry
2inoqe
Most cats with retinopathy that includes hemorrhage and detachmenl have one or more ab
normal renal function tests. Rule out kiuney disease first. Although conilicting information is
available on the prcvalence of retinal lesions in cats with chronic renal failure, a clcar association
19. Is it possible that a cause for hypertension cannot be found?
Once kidney discase and hyperthyroidisin are ruled out, other causes such as pheochromo-
cytoma,hyperadrenocorticism,byperaldosteronism, and rcnal arterial stenosis must be ruled out.
freatment ol the hypertension is advocated despile the etiology. Amlodipine besylate freatment
gives satistactory resultswithout clinically evident adverseeffects.After reductionin bloodpres
sure, approximately 70% have improvement in ocular signs.
18. How many treated hypertensive cats with retinopathy recover their visual function?
Rccovery of visual function in cats with retinal reattchment is dcpendent on several factors.
The most important factor is duration of detachment prior to diagnosis and treatment. Retinal de-
generation is a common finding in cats with retinal reattachment, espccially if detached 24
wecks. Approximatcly 50% of the cais with multifocal retinal edema and hemorrhages and con-
 trolled hypertension with amlodipine either lack progression of these retinal lesions or have par-
tial rcsolution of these retinal lesions. Early rccognifion of hypcrtensive rctinopathy prior to reti-
 nal detachment offers thc best prognosis for vision once antihypertensive trcatmcnl is institutcd.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
2001.
 2. Henik R, Snyder P. Volk L: Trcaiment of systemic hypertension in cats with amlodipine besylatc. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 33:226-234, 1997.
3. Maggio F, DeFrancesco T. Atkins C, et al: Oeular lesions associated with systemic hypotension in cats:
69 cases (1985- [998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:695-702, 2000.
 4. Sansom J, Bamett K: Ocular disease associated with hypotension in 16 cats. J Small Anin Pract
35:604-611, 1994.
Interm Med 12:157-162, 1998.
6. Stiles J, Polzin D, Bistner S: The prevalence of retinopathy in cats with syslemic hypcrlension and chronic
renal failure or hyperthyroidism. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:564572, 1994.
45. ASTEROID HYALOSIS AND
SYNCHYSIS SCINTILLANS
Ronald C. Ris, D.V.M., M.S.
1. What is asteroid hyalosis?
of lipid-mineral embedded in an amorphous vitreous framework. Asteroid boxdies shimmer as col-
ored balls whcn illuminated from the side and as white balls with direct illumination (Figs. I and 2)
Figure I. Asteroid hyalosis in an
Boplnpe
Figure 2. Asteroid hyalosis diag-
nosed bilaterally in a 10-year-old
Labrador retriever. The dilated pupil
allows a more complete assessment.
2. What is the mineral component of asteroid hyalosis?
The human literature states the composition of mineral to be predominanlly calcium and
phosphorus. Analysis of dog asteroid hyalosis found calcium and other ninerals such as iron,
phosphorus, lead, nickle, copper, and zinc as well (Fig. 3).
281
282
Asteroid Hyalosis and Synchysis Scintillans
Vireous
Figurc 3. Microanalysis of vitreous
mineral content, comparing norimal
toaffectcdvitrcouswith astcroid
hyalosis. Analysis by radiographic
fluorescence spectrophometry
Asteroid
Porticles
3. What is synchysis scintillans?
Synchysis scintillans are degenerative bodies unattached to the vitreous framework. These
bodies are within the vitreous chamber, but the vitreous is liquificd. The bodies are free floating;
therefore, when the eye moves, they also move and then settle inferiorly when the eye is station-
ary. These bodies are reminiscent of snow globe paper weights.
4. What is the analysis of synchysis scintillans?
s
Grossly, they appear brownish or golden with dircct oblique or retroillumination. Syncbysis scin-
tillans is also known as cholesterolosis bulbi. This tcrm is preferred becausc of the kuown com-
position, but also it is easier to say and remember.
 5. Does the presence of asteroid or synchysis bodies indicate the eye has had other prob-
lems?
Asteroid hyalosis is most commonly seen in older dogs and most wifhout a history of ocular
inflammation or trauma. Very little visual disturbance secms to be typical. Asteroid hyalosis is
rarely diagnosed in cats. Synchysis scintilans frequently follows intravitreal hemorrhage or iri-
docyclitis. It is rarer than asteroid hyalosis. Insults to the vitreous can result in liquification of the
vitreous without development of cholesterolosis bulbi.
6. How are these conditions of the vitreous usually diagnosed?
 Usually these are noted on routine eye examinations. Many times they are diagnosed during
a precataract evaluation. Prcoperative electroretinogram (ERG) and ultrasound examinations
should be part of the evaluation. Ultrasound identifies both asteroid hyalosis and choleslerolosis
bulbi (see Chapter 4). Their presence should be discussed with the owner presurgically. It is not
(Fig. 4).
 7. Is there any evidence of asteroid hyalosis being iuherited?
Thcre is no published pcdigree information, but owner comments suggesting that related
dogs also have been diagnosed with asteroid hyalosis suggest that it may be possible.
8. What age is asteroid hyalosis usually seen in the dog?
Asteroid hyalosis is unusual in dogs younger than 8 years of age. Dogs over 12 years of age
with dense asteroid hyalosis usually compound their visual impairmen1 with nuclear sclerosis or
cataracts. Lens removal aids these dogs despite the presence of vitreal asteroid hyalosis.
Asteroid Hyalosis and Synchysis Scintillans
283
Tie:2:58p.
Diagnostic
Ieageaode:nor
VECT:127
6ainlevel:58.9dB
Figure 4. An ultrasound ol the globe
Eye:right
FRE24E
showing dense asteroid hyalosis in
the vilreous cavity. The anterior seg-
menl of the cye is at the apcx on the
lcft. The hyperechoic area is asteroid
hyalosis(*).
9. What are the histologic features of asteroid hyalosis?
 Asteroid bodies are casily recognized in thc vitreous as spherical bodies of approximatcly 0.1
mm in diameter. They stain weakly with hematoxylin and eosin, PAS, and acid mucopolysac-
charide positive (Fig. 5). All lipid stains are positive. When examined with bright field or polar-
izcd light, they appear crysialline (Fig. 6).
Figure 5. Histoscction of vitreous af-
fected with asteroid suspended in a
collagen matrix. This seclion was
from an 18-year-old cat (100x H&E
stain).
284
Asteroid Hyalosis and Synchysis Scintillans
Figure 6. Dog asleroid hyalosis bod-
ics magnificd 64X. Slight polarized
light,cxtension onc-quarter wave-
lcngth out,showing uniquc crys-
talline character,
10. What does scanning electron microscopy tell us about asteroid hyalosis?
The scauning clectron microscopy of asteroid bodies ironically looks just like miniature me-
tcoroids. The surface is pock-marked and smooth. Each body is hcld in placc by strands of vitre-
ous collagen (Fig. 7).
Figure 7. Dog asteroid hyalosis bod-
ics magnificd with scanning clectron
microscopy.
11. What does transmission electron microscopy tell us?
The electron microscopy of astcroid hyalosis shows the bodies to bc porous. The matrix is a
homogeneous granular texture fillcd with a stippling of clear holes. Very high magnification
shows filamentous structures (Figs. 8 and 9)
Figure 8. Dog asteroid bodies sec-
tioned for transmission electron mi-
CToscopy and magnified (62,500×).
Asteroid Hyalosis and Synchysis Scintillans
285
Figure 9. Transmission electron mi-
croscopic section of an asteroid body
magnified (2,750.000X).
12. Diagnostically, what is the challenge?
Both asteroid hyalosis and cholesterolosis bulbi are findings that rcquire positive location
within the vitreous (i.e., differentiating the opacities from lenticular densities or rctiual infiltra-
tions or Drusen). By concentrating on their location with good illumination or a slit lamp, nole
any movement. Slight suspcnded movement identifies the opacitics as asteroid hyalosis. Free-
floating movement identifies 1he opacilies as cholesterolosis bulbi (Figs. I0 and 11).
Figure 10. A funduscopic appcarancc
of asteroid hyalosis. Note thc optic
disc ventrally al 6 o'clock (out of fo-
cus).
286
Asteroid Hyalosis and Synchysis Scintillans
Figure 1l. A funduscopic view of
concenfrated asteroid hyalosis in the
ventral vitrcous allowing a clear
tapctal view dorsally.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Ris RC: What is new with asteroid hyalosis? Proc Am Soc Vet Ophthalimot Intcrn Soc Vet Ophthalnol
pp 153-159, 1982.
2. Rubin LF: Asteroid hyalosis in the dog. Am J Vct Res 24: 1256-1262, 1963.
IX. Ocular Tumors
46. INTRAOCULAR TUMORS
Robert L. Peiffer, Ir.. D.V.M., Ph.D.
1. What is the epidemiology of ocular tumors in the dog and cat?
There is sparse data regarding the incidence of intraocular tumors in dogs and cats. Although
not common, they are not rare and in general tcnd to be underdiagnosed. Based on ohservations
from a comparative ocular histopathology laboratory of globes enuclcated over a 20-year period,
primary intraocular tumors are more common than secondary or metastatic tumors in the dog: in
thc cai, the relatively high incidence of ocular involvement with lymphosarcoma narrows the dif-
ference belween incidence of primary and secondary ocular neoplasia. The most common in-
traocular neoplasms in dogs are those of melanocylic origin, occurring two to three times more
frequently than those arising from the ciliary body epithelium. In the cat, diffuse iris melanoma
is the most common primary intraocular tumor, followed in decreasing frequency by primary oc-
ular sarcomas, nodular melanomas, and ciliary body epithelial neoplasms. Othcr primary in-
traocular tumors may occur in either species and theorelically may arise from any of the ncural,
connective tissue, vascular, or epithelial tissues that are normally encountered within the eye, but
they are quite rare.
 In both species, lymphosarcoma is the most common sccondary intraocular turmor, followed
by mctastatic carcinoina. The eye itself is devoid of lymphatics; however, rich capillary networks
and the anatomic and physiologic features that scquester the eye somewhat from the immtne sys-
tem likely make it a preferential spot for the developmcnt of metastatic lcsions from primary sites
elsewhere in the body.
Ocular neoplasia is most commonly seen in animals of middle or old age; there are excep-
tions, however. Mcdulloepitheliomas, which arise from the primifive neuroepifhelium, are typi-
cally scen in younger animals. In the dog, melanocytic lesions of the uvea have becn docuimentcd
 in animals as young as 4 months of age. No breed or sex predisposition has heen definitively doc-
 umented, but there is a suggestion that golden and Labrador retrievers and German shepherds may
be at greater risk for the development of melanocytic neoplasia of both the uvca and limbus, and
the possibility of an inheritcd anterior uveal melanoma has been proposed in the Labrador 1e-
triever. Diffuse bilateral uvcal melanocytosis is seen in older lerriers, especially cairms, and cases
in Geman shepherds and boxers havc bccn documentcd.
2. What are the clinical signs of ocular neoplasia?
The clinical signs of ocular neoplasia are variable and are based on location, extent, and na-
ture of the particular process. With the exception of ocular melanocytosis, primary ocular nco-
 plasia is always unilateral; secondary intraocular neoplasia may involve one or both eyes. In gen-
eral, rale of progression refiects biologic behavior; benign processcs progress over months to
If located in the antcrior segment, the patient may present with a noticeable changc in the ap-
pearance of the cye. With regard to nodular proliferations, degree of pigmentations and vascu-
larization may provide some insight into the naturc of the disease; pigmentation of melanomas
tends to be golden-brown to black, although amelanotic variants may inisguide clinical diagno
287
288
Intraocular Tumors
sis, Ciliary body cpithelial tumors tend to be gray, richly vascularized lesions, but those that arise
from the pigmented epithelium of the iris or ciliary body may retain features that make il chal-
lenging to distinguish from a melanoma on clinical examination. Medulloepitheliomas are white
have satellite lesions related to seeding of neoplastic cells. Metastatic lesions lend to be smaller
in size (1-3 mm) with variability both in vascular supply and coloration, from white to gray to
lesions may include the anterior chamber, iris, or the ciliary body; those that involve the ifis 1o0t
may represent anterior extcnsion of ciliary body lesions. Nodular ciliary tunors may extend into
the postcrior chambcr, between the posterior surface of the iris and the anterior surface of the lens.
or, less coumonly, grow inlo the anterior vitrcous to appcar as retrolental lesions. Ciliary body
adenomas tend to demonsirate this endophytic pattern of growth, whereas adenocarcinomas tend
to invade the iris root. Tumor growth can occur along the inncr surface of the cornea or through
thc sclera, gencrally along the routes of vessels and nerves as they enter the eye, to appear as epis-
cleral nodules. Uveal melanomas or tmelanocytosis may present with nodular or diffuse inter-
calary brown pigmentation related to intra- or trans-scleral extension. The nodular lesion of lim-
bal uveal melanocytoma most commonly occurs in the superior quadrants.
3. What complications do intraocular tumors cause?
Tumors of the anterior or posterior segments of the eye may be accompanied by complicat-
ing factors of uveitis, spontaneous intraocular hemorrhage, or secondary glaucoma. Not uncom-
monly, these complicating factors are the presenting cause, and by virtue of their effects on the
Figure l. A posterior choroidal
melanocytoma in an Australian shep-
hcrd is characterized by transscleral
cxtcnsion with a nonpigmentcd ex-
trascleral nodule. The dog presented
with acute intraocular hemorrhagc.
Intraocular Tumors
289
Figurc 2. A metastatic transitional
cell carcinoma of the bladder de-
tected by careful abdominal palpa-
tion was the causc of retinal and pre-
retinal hemotrhages in this cartine
paticnt.
- sn e   o u n s    si ss
cular supply, with resulting tumor necrosis. Ocular lymphoma may demonstrate a uveilis related
the result of vascular occlusion and crosion by metastatic emboli or, more commonly, as a con-
sequence of the formation of fragiie neovascularization on the anterior surface of the iris. Either
own blood supply. Thcse soluble factors can diffuse through the aqueous media of the globe to
stimulate other vascularized tissues, especially the iris, to produce new blood vessels, which typ-
ically elaborate on the anterior iris surface as a preiridal fbrovascular membrane. Thesc vcssels
lack anatomic fortitude and may blecd spontaneously.
Glaucoma can occur by threc mechanisms in association with intraocular neoplasia. The first,
and probably most common, is due to the proliferation of preiridal fibrovascuiar meinbranes
across the pectinate ligament with resultant obstruction of aqueous outflow cither by the mem-
brane itself or by associated periphcral anterior symcchia. Ciliary body cpithelial neoplasms are
nolorious for their propensity to cause glaucoma by this mechanism. Second, tumor cclls may
directly invade and obstruct the cifiary cleft and trabecular meshwork; this is the most common
pathogenesis of glaucoma scen with diffusc feline malignant melanoma, caninc anterior uveal
melanoma, and ocular melanocyiosis. Lastly, a large space-occupying posterior segment neo-
plasm can result in anterior displacement of the lens and inis with resultant shallowing of the an-
terior chamber, closurc of the ciliary cleft, and anterior synechia.
 4. What additional diagnostics are recommended if an ocular tumor is suspected?
Clinical diagnostics ideally should determine the presence of the neoplastic process;, allow
determination of whether the neoplasm is primary or secondary; if prirnary, determine whether
With this data in hand, the clinician should be able to offer a course of management and prog?
nosticatc with reasonable accuracy both for the health of the eye and the general we being of the
patient.Few cascs arc ideal,however,and it is nol unusual for definitive diagnosis to be obtained
only after enucleation and histopathologic evaluation.
290
intraocular Tumors
A thorough ophthalmic examination is requisite of hoth involved and fellow eye, including
lonometry, gonioscopy, and dilated examination of the posterior segment, Imaging techniques in-
cluding ultrasound, CAT scan, or MRI are particularly valuable in dlelermining the presence of a
proliferative lesion in the presence of opaque media due to such factors as severe corneal edema
or intraocular hemorrhage. Imaging modalities also can be useful in determining if therc is in-
volvement of the ciliary body or peripheral choroid, which can be difficult to directly visualize.
A thorough physical examination is indicatcd with emphasis on palpation of the regional nodes
(while the eye itself lacks lymphatics, the conjunctiva docs and ihe orbit may possess them) and
might have mctastasized to the eye or a potentially maligmant primary ocular tumor that has spread
beyond the globe. lf there is a clinical suspicion of a malignant ocular tumor, chest radiographs
5. Can a biopsy be taken of an intraocular tumor?
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the aqueous or vitrcous cavitics or of observable ocular tu-
mor masses has both its critics and its advocates and in general is likely underuilized as a diag-
nostic tool. Some neoplasms, such as lymphoreticular tumors and melanomas, tend to have non-
cohesive cells that are shed into the aqueous or vitreous and can be obtaincd by aqueous or
vitreous centesis. Uveal lymphoma is one tumor that is likely to lead to an accurate cylologic di-
agnosis following a fine-needle aspiration of the mass itself. Other tumors are more likely to pro-
vide samples that are low in cellularity and to be problematic for critical interpretation even by
experienced cytopathologists. Putting needles into eyes is not an innocuous procedure and can be
accompanied by complications such as hemorrhage, rupture of the lcns capsulc, and potential
sceding of ncoplastic cells (Figs. 3-5).
Incisional biopsy likewise has the potential for significant intra- and postoperative compli-
cations. In some instances, biopsy may provide an indication of tumor morphology at the time of
biopsy but is not predictive of future transformation. Diffuse iris melanoma in cats, for example,
the iris surface that at a future point in time can undergo transformation to a malignant invasivc
neoplasm. A few intraocular tumors, those that are confined to the iris stroma or the ciliary body
processes, may lend themseives to excisional biopsy (see question 7).
6. What is the prognosis for ocular neoplasia?
Prognosis depends on the nature of the neoplasm and stage of tumor development. Two ques-
tions need to be addressed: what is the prognosis for the globe both in terms of visual potcntial
and cosmesis? and what is the prognosis for the general wel-being of the patient? In general, eycs
that harbor secondary intraocular tumors shonld be considered within the perspeclive of the whole
animal. Less aggressive mcans shouldl be used to control ocular complications; topical and sys-
Figure 3. Ocular lymphoma in a ca-
nine and feline; the left eyc of this
dog shows a dyscoria related to a
space occupying iridal stromal lesion
and liffuse thickcning of the bulbar
conjunctiva of the third eyclid.
Intraocular Tumors
291
Figurc 4. The gray vascularized su-
perior anterior chamber mass demon-
slrated is shownwith a fibrohemor-
rhagic anterior chamber reaction.
Figure 5. Iris intrastromal thickening
seen in the temporal quadrants of the
right eye of a feline patient. The di-
agnosis was malignant melanoma
temic corticosteroids can control uveitis, and hypotcnsive agents should be used to trcat glau-
coma. The majority of canine melanocytic neoplasms—roughly 90%-are benign in terms of
their morphology. Of the remaining 10% that have morphologic features of malignancy, proba-
 bly only about half actually metastasize. Both nodular and diffusc inis melanomas in cats are ag-
gressive, with metastatic rates as high as 50% reported. Whereas metastatic disease tends to man--
periods prior to detectable metastasis have been documented), latency up to 2 years following
enuclealion is characteristic of diffuse iris melanomas in cats, When it occurs, mefastatic disease
in either species can affect any of the body's organ systems (Figs. 6 and 7).
 In the dog, benign and malignant tumors of ciliary body epithelium occur with approximately
equal frequency. In the cat, the majority demonstrate worrisomc histologic fcatures. However, al-
though malignant tumors of the ciliary body epithelium do possess malignant potential, actual
metastasis has been documented rather infrequently in both species (Figs. & and 9).
Primary ocular sarcomas in cats arc very aggressive neoplasms, with mortality rates ap-
proaching 100%. These tumors typically wil invade the optic nerve 1o gain access to the cenlral
nervous system, extend through the sclera into the orbil and beyond, and commonly melastasize
to distant sites.
lesistance and result in complications that cause ocular pain or blindncss. Preiridal fibrovascular
membranes may form associated with benign and malignant neoplasms. Even limbal melanocu-
dogs with diffuse mclanocytosis. Thus, as a rule of thumb, ocular neoplasia, either benign or ma-
lignant, carries a guarded prognosis for the involved eye.
292
Intraocular Tumors
Figure 6. Diffuse malignant melanoma
of the left iris in a cat.
Figure 7. Melanomas most com-
monly present as a diffuse velvety
thickcning of the anlerior surface of
the iris.
Figure 8. Ciliary body epithelial tu-
mors. Ciliary body adenomas typi-
cally present as proliferative lesions
exlending inlw the poslerior segment
or antcrior vitrcous as evidcnced in
thc nasal quadrant of this paticnt.
(Pholograph courtesy of Dr. RiE
Smith).
7. What are the management options for ocular neoplasia?
Management options are limited to observation; excisional biopsy, laser ablalion, enucle-
ation, and, if the tumor has extended beyond the glove, exenteration. Localized lesions in eyes
without tumor-associated complications may be managed by excisional biopsy, if amenable, or
by observation over time in order to gain a sense of their biologic behavior. Tumor size should be
carefully documented by photography or drawings. Notable increase in size ovcr a relativcly short
period of time (weeks) suggests more aggressive biological behavior and deimands intervention.
In addition to excisional biopsy, laser ablation of tumors has been proposed as an effective means
IntraocularTumors
293
Figure 9. Adenocarcinomas tend to
invade the iris root as seen in the tem
poral quadrants in this Brittany
spaniel.
of trcatment for these tumors. and some success has been reported using transscleral diode laser
ating microscope attachmcnt. A disadvantage of laser ablation is the failure to obtain a specific
tissue diagnosis, without which it is impossiblc to uncquivocally recommend managerment op-
tions. In addition, sone neoplasms, Dotably diffuse iris melanomas in cats, may "sced" by shed
ding cclls into the aqueous that become entrapped in the trabccular meshwork, bcyond thc reach
of laser energy and excisable only by enncleation. Observation of slow-growing lesions in eyes
withoul lumor-associated complications might also be indicatcd in an elderly canine patient or a
onc-cycd canine patient. In this species, the odds are favorable that conservative thicrapy is not
likely to adversely affect general health and well-being. In gcncral, cat cycs with diffuse primary
iris hypcrpigmentation or nodular pigmented lesions that demonstrate rapid incrcase in size
should be enucleated. Some controversy exists as to whether cats can acquire a benign diffuse
primary iris hyperpigmentation that never undergoes malignant transformation; the data that has
transformation is likely inevitable at some point in time. Until proven otherwise, the axiom that
early enucleation will minimize the metastatic potential should be adhcred to. Canine eyes with
rapidly growing lesions or eyes that have experienced tumor-associated complications should be
enucleated. Cat eyes with suspected primary ocular sarcoma, based on history of prior trauma,
change of appearance in a blind or phthisical, or the observation of a gray to white vascularized
tumor mass, should be promptly enucleated or exenteratcd, although prognosis for general health
is bleak. Indeed, the aggressive nature of this tumor and the strong association with ocular trauma
provide suggestions for prevention that are likely to be much morc cffcctivc than trcatment. Blind
phthisical eyes in cats should be enucleated, and cosmelic globc sparing proccdurcs such as phar-
macologic ablation of the ciliary body with intravitreal Cidofovir or gentamicin and evisceration
with an intraccular prosthesis are, in the opinion of the author, contrainlicaled in cats. Once thc
tumor is characterized by pathology, consult with an cncologist regarding additional treatments
available.
294
IntraocularTumors
8. Are limbal melanomas different?
Limbal melanocytomas in dogs and cats are benign lesions in terrns of potential for metasta-
tic disease, even though they may increase in size relatively rapidly and on occasion may extend
through the sclera to involve the anterior uvea with a potential for tumor associated complica-
tions. Options for treatment include laser or cryoablation with or without debulking of the tumor
and full-thickness eye wall resection and subsequent allografting. Unlcss complications occur,
which is an uncommon event, these eyes should not bc enucleatcd (Figs. 10 and I1).
Figure 10. Limbal melanocytoma in
the left cyc of a golden retricvcr.
There is intracormeal extension with a
leading cdge uf lipid degencration.
Figure 11. Nodular iris melanocy-
toina is prcsent in the left eye of this
middle-aged German shepherd dog,
involving the temporal quadrants and
extending to the iris root.
9. Is diffuse melanosis unigue?
Diffuse ocular melanocytosis is a particularly challcnging disease to manage because of the
insidious and relcntless nature of the cellular proliferalion and the secondary glaucoma that it
causes. Tumor involvement of the sclera rmakes the surgical manipulations used to trcat glaucoma
such as gonio implantation, diffcult if not impossibie to perform. Cycloablative procedures with
Intraocular Tumors
295
either cryo or laser theorelicaily should be effective but more often fhan not fall short in terms of
controlling intraocular pressure and preserving vision. Topical and systemic hypolensive agents
arc likewise likely to be unsuccessful in controlling the glaucoma, and visual prognosis in these
eyes should be guarded (Figs. 12 and 13).
Figure 12. L'veal melanocytosis is a
bilateral condition seen in elderly
cairn terriers. In this patient, the left
eye demonstrates diffuse inis hyper-
pigmentation, intercalary hyperpig-
mentation of the sclera, and pigment
flecks on the anterior lens capsule.
Figure 13. In the fellow eye, chronic
secondary glaucoma is present.
10. What type of follow-up is indicated in a patient with an ocular tumor?
All tissues obtained at surgery should be submitted for histologic interpretation, and mor-
phology can provide guidelines for prognostication. Uveal melanocytomas in dogs have an ex.
cellent prognosis and have not been demonstrated to recur even if the tumor has extended transs-
clerally into the orbit. Transscleral extension and involved surgical margins in malignant tumors
are orminous harbingcrs of either locally rccurrent or metastatic disease. The tendency for some
of these tumors to demonstrate long latency prior to metastasis has been discussed, and rcgular
follow-ups should be conducted over a 2-year pcriod before the animal can be pronounced
"cured"' of this discase. One-eyed animals function quile well withi an excellent quality of life, but
cnucleation or exenteration places a premium on the remaining fellow eye, and pet owners should
be instructed about the sensitivity of the globe to insult and to seek attention promptly at the ear-
liest suspicion of any problems with the remaining cyc.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Cello RM, Hutcherson B: Ocular changes in malignant lymphoma of dogs. Cornell Vel 52:492, 1962.
2. Collinson PN, Peiffer RL: Clinical presentalion, morphology and behavior of primary choroidal
melanomas in 8 dogs.Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 3:158, 1993.
3. Corcoran K, Peiffer RL, Koch S: Histopathology of felinc ocular lymphosarcoina: 49 cascs. Vet Comp
Ophthalmol 5:35--41, 1995.
296
Intraocular Tumors
4. Dubielzig RR: Iridociliary epithclial tumors in 100 dogs and 17 cats: A morphological study. Vct Oph-
thalimol 1:223, 1998.
5.Dubielzig RR,Everitt J, Shadduck JA,et al: Clinical and morphologic features for post-traumatic ocular
sarcoimas in cals, Vet Pathol 27:62-65, 1990.
 6. Peiffer RL: Ciliary body epithelial tumors in the dog and cat: A report of 13 cases. J Small Anim Pract
24:347-370, 1983.
7. Peiffer RL, Monticello T. Bouldin Tw: Primary ocular sarcomas in the cat. J Small Anim Pract
29:105-116, 1988,
8. Peiffer RL, Wilcock BP: Morphology and behavior of primary ocular Imelanoimas in 91 dogs. Vet Pathol
23:418, 1986.
in domestic animals. Vet Pathol 27:41, 1990.
47. IRIS AND CILIARY CYSTS
Ronaid C. Riis, D.V.M., M.S.
1. What is the identifying characteristic of an iris cyst?
Iris cysts are in the anterior chamber, attachied to the iris, or in the posterior chamber. The cyst
may be black or clear depending on whethcr the origin was from thc pigmcnted or nonpigmentcd
iris epithclium. Cysis are usually tound to oblong. Their presence is usually nol visually impair-
ing. Owncrs usually present their pets for consultalion when cysts are noted (Figs. I and 2).
Figure 1. Multiple free-floating iris
cysts in the anterior chainbcr of a
dog. The tapetal reflex helps transil-
lumitate the cysts.
Figure 2. Two large iris cysts stuck
bctween the cornca and lens. Thcse
cysts intcrfered with vision, cspc-
cially when the pupil was smal. De-
flation helped this dog's vision.
2. How is a ciliary body cyst different than an iris cyst?
Ciliary body cysts are similar in their appearance, but usually are attached behind thc iris. If
they should bccome free foating, they tend to locate into the antcrior chamber but occasionally
stay in the posterior chamber. Ciliary body cysts go unnoticed by owners if thcy are in the poste-
rior chamber (Figs. 3 and 4).
3. What is the differential diagnosis for cysts?
Cysts must be differentiated from intraocular tumors. An easy differenliation is possible with
a strong focal light source, dirccted from an oblique angle to illurninate the cyst enough to define
297
298
Iris and Ciliary Cysts
Figure 3. An elongated pigmented
ciliary cyst in a cat.
Figure 4.A ciliary cyst protruding
into the anterior chamber of a 13-
year-old dornestic shorthait cat.
its translucency (Fig. 5). Cysts are filled with aqueous fluid. The cyst walls are only one or two
layers thick, so they transilluminate nicely. Another differentiating method is with ultrasound us-
ing a standoff gel or water in a surgical glove between the probe and cornea. Diffcrentiation is
necessary to rule out malignant mclanoma.
4. Are cysts diagnosed frequently in dogs and cats?
The dog is much more frequently diagnoscd with cysts than the cat.
5. Are cysts inherited?
Cystic characteristics are thought to be inherited in humans. Some dog owncrs have com-
mented about related dogs having cysts. A documented pedigree identifying cysts has yet to hc
published, bu1 inheritance probably is a factor in some breeds. A recent publication identified an
affected male golden retriever related to many affected offspring.
       a      
Small cysts need not be removed. Their presence may concern owners, but your assurance of
monitoring their size and location until they become obviously a problcm is helpful.
Inis and Ciliary Cysts
299
Figure 5. An iris/ciliary cyst adherent
al the inis pupillary margin in an adult
cal. Note the light passing through thc
pigmented cyst to rule out melanoma.
7. How are cysts treated?
Before laser treatment, cysts were deflated with a fine needle. The needle technique usually
was not as successful as you wished. Successful deflation is always gratifying with the laser. It is
like "star wars" to shoot the cyst wall and visualize the results,
8. What laser is used?
The neodymium:ytrium aluminum-garnet (Nd: YAG) laser is ideal. These lasers have a tar-
geting laser of helium and neon allowing you to synchronize the exact site for energy to explode
the cyst wall. Low energy of approximately 1 MHz is used.
9. Is the procedure of cyst deflation comiplex?
No, not at al. Most dogs and cats allow the procedure to be completed without tranquiliza-
tion. Because most Nd:YAG lasers are designed for human use, the focal length of the laser is
closer than many long-nosed dogs are comfortable with, thereby requiring some restraint in un-
usual positions. Once the position is obtaincd, the treatment is transcorneal. No topical anesthe-
sia is required; however, topical lubrication is recommended if the lids are retracted for several
 minutes. Lubrication helps clearly arget the cyst wall through the cornea. The target point for de-
flation should not be directly adjacent to the cornea or lens capsule because these sites allow for
for potential breeding.
10. What happens to the deflated cyst?
Once a hole is made, the deflated cyst sinks to the ventral iridocormieal angle.
11. Among dog breeds, are some notorious for cysts?
Yes, the golden retriever outshines the rest of the breeds. Uvcal cysts (i.e., those associated
300
Iris and Ciliary Cysts
Figure 6. Multiple cysts deflaled by
Nd:YAG lascr in a dog. Notc the
holes made hy the laser as well as the
deflated position. The remnants of
the cyst will rcmain in his undesir-
ablc site permanently.
12. Are uveal cysts associated with any other ocular abnormality?
Uveal cysts often have been diagnosed in conjunction with pigmentary uveitis in golden re-
trievers. A pathologic study of 18 glaucomatous eyes from golden retrievers revealed iridociliary
cysts in 13.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Deehr AI, Dubielzig RR: Glaucoma in golden retricvers. Trans Am Coll Vet Ophthalmol 28:105, 1997.
 2. Genetics Committee of the American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists: Ocular Disorders Prc-
sumed to be Inherited in Purebred Dogs, 2nd ed. Little Falls,NJ,ACVO, 1996.
3. Sapienza JS, Simo-Domenech FJ, Prades-Sapienza A: Goldcn rctriever uveitis: 75 cases (19941999). Vet
Ophthalmol 3:241-246, 2000.
48. ORBITAL INFLAMMATIONS
AND NEOPLASMS
David T. Ramsey. D.V.M.
1. What are the primary clinical signs of orbital disease?
Clinical signs of orbital disease are divided arbitrarily into primary and secondary categories.
Primary signs are referable only to the globe-orbit relationship and denote three-dimensional
changes in position, placement, or alignment of the globe within the orbit. There are four primary
signs of orbital disease. Exophthalmos and enophthalmos are terms applied to anterior and pos
terior displacement of the globe along the orbital axis. Strabismus is the tern applicd to invol-
untary deviation of the globe from the normal optical axis. Shift is the term used to describe dis-
placement of globe posilion in the horizontal (lateral, medial) or vertical (dorsal, ventral) mcridian
or a combination thereof (oblique). Oblique shifts in position are designated as a combination of
the two directions in which the globe is displaced (e.g., dorsolateral oblique displacement).
2.What are the secondary clinical signs of orbital disease?
Secondary signs of orbital disease occur as a result of exophthalmos, enophthalmos, slrabis-
mus, or shift. Secondary signs include changes in anatomy or function of the globe, eyelids, or-
bital structures, or surrounding tissues. These imclude alterations in vision, globe, ocular move-
ments, cyelid and nictitating membrane position, pupillomotor function, sensation (pain or
numbness), globe indentation, vascular engorgement (conjunctiva, episclera, fundus), cormeal or
conjunctival exposure, and pain during (or limitation of) mandibular excursion.
3. How do you localize the mass effect within the orbit to a specific location?
Lesion localization within the orbit may be broadly divided into three orbital compartments:
intraconal (within the endorbital muscle cone), extraconal (outside the cndorbital muscle conc
but within the soft tissue confines of the orbit) and extraendorbital (beneath the periosleum).
When an orbital mass cffcct is prcsent, the direction of globe displacement is generally opposite
 the location of the mass or directly away from the mass lesion and along the path of least tissue
rcsistancc. The tahle below summarizes fhe direction of globe displacement and localization of
the mass.
DIRECTION OF GLOBE DISPLACEMENT
LOCATION OF ORBITAL MASS
Lateral displaccmcnt
Medial mass effect
Medial displacement
Lateral mass effect
Dorsal displacement
Ventral mass cffect
Ventral displacement
Dorsal mass effect
Dorsolateral displaccment
Ventromedial mass effect
Dorsonedial displacement
Ventrolateral mass effect
Ventrolateral displacement
Dorsomedial mass effect
Ventromedial displacement
Dorsolatcral mass effect
Axial anterior displacement
Posterior mass effect
Intraconal mass lesions cause axial exophthalmos, minimal or absence of protrusion of the
nictitating membrane, and minimal strabismus (unless extensive in volume). Exiraconal and ex-
 traendorbital mass lesions are characterized by exophthalmos, protrusion of the niclitaling mem-
brane, shift in globe position, and strabismus.
4. How are exophthalmos and buphthalmos differentiated?
Buphthalmos is absolute enlargement of the globe secondary to glaucoma. Both buphthal-
mos and exophthalmos result inl a widened palpcbral fissure. In most instances, buphthalmos will
301
302
Orbital lnflammations and Neoplasms
amination may show cupping and atrophy of the optic papilla and peripapillary or dliffuse retinal
degeneration. Exophthalmos attributable to orbital mass effect may have moxderalely increased
may be measured and compared between eyes to differenliatc buphthalmos from exophthalmos.
 5. What are the major considerations when thc eye recesses or *sinks" into the orbit?
 Occur from a mass effect. Enophthalmos occurs most frequently as an active retraction response
to ocular pain. It aiso may occur with sympathetic dcnervation to the eye (Horner's syndrome) o1
when there is loss of orbital mass (soft tissue, bone) in a disease process. Disease processes caus-
ing loss of orbital mass include severe dehydration, weight loss, cachexia, orbital neoplasia, se-
(tetanus), or restrictive myopathy (trauma, extraocular polymyositis) of the extraocular musclcs
(Fig. 1).
Figure 1.Enophthalmos of the right
eye with prominent elevation of thc
nictitating membrane sccondary to
loss of orbital mass.
6. Does protrusion of the third eyelid signify an orbital mass effect?
The base of the nictitating membrane (third eyelid) lies within the orbit. It has passive move-
Inent in the dog but can actively be protruded in the cat. Protrusion of the third eyelid may occur
with exophthalmos (orbital mass effect displacing the base of third eyelid) or enophthalinos
(globe volume and extraocular muscle contraction displacing the base of the third eyelid). Pro-
trusion of the third eyelid does not invariably signify orbital mass effecl as the cause. Sympathetic
innervation to the third eyelid is primarily responsible for keeping the third eyelid retracted. Loss
of sympathetic innervation to the cye (Hormer's syndrome) results in protrusion of the third eye
lid. Globe retraction also may occur in response to ocular pain (voluntary contraction of extraoc-
ular muscles) or tetanus (involuntary contraction of extraocular muscles).
7. Does the rate of onset of clinical signs correlate with the type of orbital disease?
As a general rule, a history of rapid onset of clinical signs is most likely attributablc to an in-
flammatory orbitai disease process. The opposite correlative is that slowly progressive signs of
orbital disease are most consistent with orbital neoplasia or cystic orbital disease. However, some
neoplastic orbital diseases (lymphoma, mast cell sarcoma) have an associated inflammatory com-
ponent that can result in rapid onset of clinical signs and pain. Other neoplasms may have rapid
periods of growth or volume expansion and entarge in mass rapidly, thcreby cxceeding their blood
supply and nutritional rcquiremenls, and result in necrosis of tlhie neoplasm. When this occurs, an
and pain may become more conspicuous suddenly.
Orbital lnflammations and Neoplasms
303
8. How do you differentiate neoplastic, iufammatory, and cystic classifications of orbital
disease?
Orbital neoplasia gcnerally affccts older animals (mcan age for dogs, 8 years; mean age for
cats 8.9 years), resulting in slowly progtessive clinical signs ovet a period of weeks to months,
and usually does not cause pain untit the neoplasm is of considerabie size. Orbital inflammation
can affect cats and dogs at any age but most often affects younger animals. Inflammatory orbital
disease usually has a history of sudden onset of clinical signs, pain whcn opening the mouth, and
chemosis, and the animal may be febrile. Cystic orbital disease may have a slow or rapid onset of
clinical signs, and pain is usually absent or minimal. When history and clinical signs direct your
index of suspicion toward a specific classification of orbital disease, diagnostic tests are jndicatcd
plastic, or cystic orbital disease (see Chapters 3 and 4) (Figs. 2-5).
Figurec 2. Exophthalanos with dorso-
lateral displacement indicalive of a
ventromedial mass that tumcd out to
be an adenocarcinoma.
Figure 3. Exophthalmos with lateral
displaccment indicativc of a mcdial
mass that turned out to be a heman-
giosarcoma.
9. What is an orbital abscess?
An orbital abscess is a localized septic or nonseptic inftammatory response composed of pu-
rulent exudate (primarily dead white blood cells and products of inflammation). Orbital abscess
occurs most frequently secondary to periodontal or endodontic diseasc in the dog and cat. It may
also occur from hematogenous, transscleral, or transmucosal (conjunctiva, nasal, oral, sinus) in-
304
Orbital (nflammations and Neoplasms
Figurc 4.Exophthalmos with dorso-
lateral displaccment secondary to or-
bital sarcoma.
Figure 5. Exophthalmos with axial
antcrior displacement seconiary to a
posterior orbital intraconal mcnin-
gioma.
jury or disease fesulting in inoculation of the orbital space with infectious organisms. When an
orbital abscess is suspected, orbital ultrasound should be done. When an orbital ultrasound clearly
shows an orbital abscess, surgery is indicated. However, the causc of orbital abscess should bc
putsued. The oral cavity should be examined under general anesthcsia. The caudal maxillary teeth
should be evaluated using a pericdontal probe and dental cxplorer, and radiographs of the cauda!
maxillary teeth should be made. The conjunctival fornices and oral cavity should be examined
closely for abnormalities (Figs. 6 and 7).
Figure 6. Orbital abscess causing sig-
nificant swelling. Note the asyimmetry.
Orbital inffammations and Neoplasms
305
Figurc 7. Orbital abscess (same case
as Figure 6) shown froin a lateral
view.Fistulization of the absccss
through  the ventral conjunctival
fornix is somctimes a natural routc.
10. How do you treat an orbital abscess?
Surgical drainage must be established. Whcn concurrcnt dental disease is cvident by direct ex
amination or radiographically with orbital abscess, transalveolar drainage of the abscess is indicated.
Extraction of the offending tooth to establish transalveolar drainage and treatmient with orally ad-
ministercd broad-spectrum antibiotics are indicated after extraction. When dental disease is not ev-
ident as the cause of the abscess, transmucosal surgical drainage may be done using ultrasound to
select the most approptiate surgical approach. A small incision is made in the oral mucosa caudo-
medial to the maxillary second molar tooth. A sterilc blunt instrument is then introduced into the in-
cision, forced gently through the medial pterygoid muscle using a short finger stop so that damage
to the globe does not occur. Punilent exudate should be collected for cytology and culture. The sur-
gical wound should be allowed to drain on its own or with a drain positioned into the orbital space.
11. How do you differentiate an orbital abscess from orbital cellulitis?
Making a distinction between orbital abscess and cellulitis based on clinical signs and phys-
ical examination is virtually impossible. Ultrasound of the orbit should be done to differentiale
orbital cellulitis from abscess. Diffuse orbital cellulitis produces a generalized loss of definition
Of thc orbital tissues, tesulting in the optic nerve and extraocular muscles being difficult to visu-
alize when compared with the opposite cye. Cellulitis also may produce focal mass lesions that
 may be mistaken for a neoplasm. Abscesses are variable in appearance, but most are recognized
as a hypocchoic arca within a well-defined hyperechoic wall. The abscess wall may not be seen
with ultrasound in all cascs. When an orbital abscess is not cvident ultrasonographically, broad-
spectrum oral antibiotic and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be administered and the
 animal monitored closely for improvement of clinical signs. Frequent orbital ultrasound is rec-
ommended to deterrmine if cellulitis is resolving, unchanged, or transformed into an abscess cav.
 s  ss s   sss   n    
tion is indicated (see abscess) (Figs. 8 and 9),
12. What causes masticatory myositis?
Masticatory myositis is immune-mediated infammation and swelling of the muscles of mas-
tication (temporalis, medial pterygoid, and masseter) that has been reported in dogs. Cellular and
humoral mediated destruction of type IIM myofibers (comimon to masticatory muscles) is thought
to cause masticatory myositis. Because these muscles define the medial, ventral, and lateral bor-
ders of the orbit, inflammation imposes upon and compresses orbital structures, resulting in ante.
rior displacement of orbital contents (exophthalmos and/or protrusion of the third eyelid) (Fig. 10)
13. How is masticatory myositis diagnosed?
 Dogs with masticatory myositis may have either the acutc or chronic form of the disease. Acute
myositis is typified clinically by pain on opening the mouth, difficulty eating, swelling of the mas-
306
Orbital lnflammations and Neoplasms
Figurc 8. Orbital cellulitis from a dor-
sal view. Much pain is elicited upon
opening the mouth, which stems
from impingement of the coronoid
process of the mandible on inflamed
orbital soft tissue.
Figure 9. Orbital cellulitis (same case
as Figure 8) from a frontal view.
Retropulsion of the globe is usually
restrictive.
Figure 10. Myositis causing cxoph-
thalmos and strabismus with lateral
shift.
Orbital Inflammations and Neoplasms
307
ticatory muscles, unilateral cr bilateral exophthalmos, protrusion of the thirl eyelids, and conjunc-
tival hyperemia and chcmosis. Infrequently, vision may be compromised. Atrophy and loss of mas-
ticatory muscle mass, enophthalmos, protrusion of the third eyelid, pain or reluctance to open the
jaw, and trismus typify the chronic forn. Mean age of affccted dog is 3 years; 1nale and female dogs
are affected equally. Definitive diagnosis is based on histologic evalualion of frozen muscle biop-
 sies scnt to specialized neuromuscular laboratories. Serum from affected dogs may also be submit-
ted to these laboratories to determine if circulating antitype M antibodies are present.
14. What is extraocular polymyositis?
 Extraocular polymyositis is a rare, immune-mediated inflammatory myopathy that is limited
to the extraocular muscles in dogs. Young, female golden rctrievers are affected most frequently
(median age of 8 months). An antecedent "stressor" (ovariohysterectomy, estrus, castration,
boarding at a kennel) occurred within 14 days of the onset of clinical signs in 43% of affected
dogs. The mononuclear cell infiltrate of extraocular muscies is composed primarily of CD3+ T
lymphocytes and macrophages directed against fine extraocular myofibers. Affected dogs have
axial exophthalmos, retraction of the upper eyelid, and absence of third eyelid protrusion, and
dogs are not in pain. This disease responds to a prolonged course of topical and oral corticos-
teroids (Fig. 11).
Figure I1. Extraocular polymyositis
with the classic "bug eyes." Although
this condition is usually seen in
golden retrievers. it is also scen in
other breeds such as this young rot-
tweiler.
15. Are masticatory myositis and extraocular polymyositis the same disease?
Extraocular muscles do not contain type IIM myofibers. Type IM myofibers are found only
in specific muscles innervated by the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve. Although both
diseases have similar inflammatory cell infitrate within affected muscles, cellular and humoral
immunity is directed at distinctly different musclc antigens. Age, breed, and gender predilections
also exisl and are different for both diseases. Therefore, these two diseases are distinctly differ-
ent immunologically and clinically.
16. How is zygomatic mucocele differentiated from zygomatic sialoadenitis?
The fioor of the orbit, in most animals, is formed by the zygomatic salivary gland. A zygo-
enitis is inffammation of the zygomatic salivary gland. Zygomatic mucocele and zygomatic
sialoadenitis may or may not have signs of ocular involvement, depending on sevcrity of disease.
transilluminatcd. It also may appear as a fuctuant swelling beneath the lower eyelid or as a pro-
trusion beneath the oral mucosa caudal to the maxillary molar teeth. Mucoccle is usually non-
painful or minimally painful; however, clinical signs of pain similar to sialoadenitis may be pre-
308
Orbital lnflammations and Neoplasms
sent if mucocele has associated iaflammation. Fine-needle aspiration of a imucoccle will prodnce
a thick, tenacious, clear or rust-colored mucoid substance. Animals with zygomatic sialoadenitis
exhibit signs of pain when the mouth is opened and may or may not have swelling along thc sidc
of the face ventral to the palpebral fissure. Affected animals frequently have thick, tcnacious, mu-
coid saliva emanating from the zygomatic salivary papillae. Orbital ultrasound is useful to dif-
ferentiate mucocele (hypoechoic or anechoic cavity) fron sialoadcnitis (diffuse hyperecho-
genecity) (Fig.12).
Figure 12. Zygomatic mucocele that
was stubbornly recurrent aftcr rc-
peated surgeries.
17. How should zygomatic mucocele and sialoadenitis be treated?
Although surgical removal of zygomatic mucocele by orbitotomy is recommended in stan-
dard surgical textbooks, treatment with a broad-spectrum antibiotic resolves zygomatic mucocele
in many instauces. Culture and susceptibility testing of material collected from mucocele (aspi-
rate) and sialoadenitis (collected from zygomatic papillae) should be donc. When clinical signs
do not improve within several days of medical treatment, surgical inlervention may he neccssary
for the resolution of mucocele. Zygomatic sialoadenitis also should be treated with a broad-
spectrum antibiotic or the antibiotics specified by culture and sensitivity. When exophthalmos is
present, the cornea and conjunctiva should be treated topically with an ophthalmic ointment to
prevent exposure and desiccafion.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Gilmour MA, Morgan RV, Moorc FM: Masticatory myopathy in the dog: A retrospcctivc study of 18
cases. J Am Anim Hosp Ass0c 28:300-306, 1992.
 2. Hendrix DVH, Gelatt KN: Diagnosis, treatment, and outcome of orbital ncoplasia in dogs: A retrospeclive
study of 44 cases. J Small Anim Pract 41:105-108, 2000.
3. Ramscy DT: Exophthalmos. In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy, 13th ed. Small An-
inmal Practice. Philadelphia, W.B. Saundeis, 2000, pp 10861089.
4. Ramsey DT. Manfra Marretta S, Hamor RE, et al: Ophthalmic manifestations and complications of dcn-
5. Ramsey DT, Fox DB: Surgery 0f the orbit. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 27:1215-1264, 1997.
49. THE ULTIMATE OCULAR HISTOPATHOLOGY
Ronatd C. Ris, D.V.M., M.S., and Mary Lou Norman, B.S., H.T. (ASCP)
1. From a pathologist's standpoint, is an cye an unfortunate mixture of tissue?
Yes, because the sclera is a dcnse fibrous tissue through which fixatives permeate slowly
Uvcal retinal tissues have high metabolic characteristics which deteriorate rapidly and must be
fixed quickly. If thesc important factors are nol addressed, then histopathology of rhc eye is a
study of postmortem artifacts
2. What is the first secret of meaningful results?
First and foremost, the eye must be removed rapidly after death, at necropsy, or rapidly at
surgery. Trim off extraocular adnexa, fat, muscle, and promptly immerse in a fixative.
 3. Is there anything special about enucleation techniques?
Although the enucleation mmst be done quickly, it must be done carefully 1o minimize the
production of artefacts. It is particularly easy to produce an artifactual retinal detachmenf. Al-
though this can be determined histologically from an antemortem lcsion, it is bettcr to view and
analyze the photoreccptors intacl and not around artifacts.
4. What is the best fixative for a globe?
Zenker's fixative (containing mercury) is the best considering the tissues being evaluated
T'he fixative requires adding glacial acelic acid just before use, and this can be sccn as inconve-
nient, Bouin's fixative has been used with good results and compliance from tecropsy. David-
son's fixative is also among those that penetrate rapidly into the cye for cxcellent resuits.
5. What should be the fixative to globe ratio?
This is a very important point. The volume of fixative should be 20 times the volume of the
tissue being fixed.
6. Once the globe is rapidly removed, trinmed, and immersed in fixative, what is required
txau
The globe will float in Zenker's glacial acetic acid and Bouin's fixatives only until the fixativc
penctrates equally into the globe chambers. Once the globc sinks to the bottom, it is fixed.How
ever, it is not recommended to leave it in the fixative for more than 24 hours. The globe should be
the alcohol yellow. Changes of alcohol are recommended until the alcohol remains clear.
7. Can the globe be kept in fixative until processed?
This is not ideal because prolonged exposure to Zenker's or Bouin's fixatives causes the lens
to become rock hard, adding another artifactual challenge to the sections. The exceplion to this is
10% neutral buffered formalin.
8. What about cutting a hole in the globe to allow fixatives to enter or injecting fixative
into the globe?
Both the procedures are unnecessary if Bouin's or Zenker's fixatives are uscd, lt is actually
harmful to do either one of these because it adds an iatrogenic lesion that may be noted.
9. What fixative cani be used if Zenker's or Bouin's are not available?
cornea and lens, but terrible for the retina. [f forrnalin is all that is available, it can be injected into
60
015
TheUltimateOcularHistopathology
the vitreous to expedite retinal fixation. Artifactual changes of the retinal architecture limits the
retinal evalnation due to formalin.
10.Many timeswehave no control over the time of death andfixation,Whatharm has been
done?
The histologic examination of eyes from animals that have been dead for several hours is of-
ten a useless exercise. Considerable artifact becomes prominent within the lens and retina in a
very short time. The only exception may be eyes infiltrated with tumors.
11. Can anl eye be sent to any pathology laboratory for proeessing?
It is recommended sending the globe in 70% alcohol (after being in Bouin's or Zenker's fix-
afive) or 10% formalin to a laboratory of notable ocular experienice. The processing, embedding,
 and sectioning after proper fixation involves considerably more expcrtise than other tissues. The
analysis of the final slide shouid be completcd by an individual trained in veterinary ophthalmic
pathology.
12. What time frame should be expected to receive an answer back after submitting a fixed
globe?
Generally, a period of 2 wecks is required for globc sections. If tumors arc attached to the
13. Can frozen globe sections be done for a quicker diagnosis as is done with other tissues?
 No, globe sections cut at frozen thickness are approximately 10-15 μm. These sections are
too thick for retinal evaluation. The nature of the globe dictates paraffin infiltration to support the
14. What are the formulations of the fixatives discussed for light microscopic histopathology?
FIXATIVE
INGREDIENTS
AMOUNTS
DIRECTIONS
Zenker's stock
Distilled watcr
1L
Stir all ingredients until dissolved;
fixative
Mercuric chloride
50 g
add 5 ml of reagent-grade glacial
Potassium dichromate
25g
acetic acid to 95 ml of stock
Sodium sulfate
10 g
solution just beforc nse to
prevent turbidity and a dark
brown precipitate (due to the
toxicity of mercury, zinc chloride
can be substituted without
compromise).
Bouin's fixative
 Saturated picric acid in
distilled water (21 g in 1 L)
1500 ml
Formalin (37-40%)
500 ml
Glacial acetic acid
100 ml
Neutral buffered
Formalin (3740%)
100 ml
formalin (10%)
Distilled water
900 ml
 Sodium phosphate, monobasic,
monohydrate
4.0g
Sodium phosphate, dibasic,
anhydrous
6.5 gm
15. Can the above fixatives be used if the tissue requires transmission electron microscopy?
Transmissionelectron microscopy fixatives must be madefresh according to the require-
ments of the laboratory. The above fixatives arc not ideal for electron microscopy.
The Ultimate Ocular Histopathology
311
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Pciffcr RL Ir,Wilcock BP, Dubielzig RR, et al: Fundamentals of vcterinary ophthalmic pathology. In
Gelatt KN (ed): Veterinary Ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999,
Pp355-425.
Press,1980.
3. Yanoff M, Fine BS: Ocular Pathology: A Color Atlas. Baltimore, Lippincott Williams & Wikins, 1988.
4. Yanoff M, Fine BS: Ocular Pathology: A Text and Atlas, 3rd ed. Baltimore, Lippincott Wiliams &
Wilkins, 1989.
50. MYTHS AND MISCONCEPTIONS IN
VETERINARY OPHTHALMOLOGY
Gary L. Blanchard, D.V.M., M.S.
To paraphrase Voltaire, vetcrinarians are people who treat diseasc of which they know little;
with drugs of which they know less; in patients of which they know nothing. The practice of med-
icine has many limes been described as both an art and a science. The result of which has been
many anecdotal treatments and inlerventions from which clients expect to receive benefit for their
pet. The client also has developed some curious, amusing, and entertaining misconceptions of
medicine. These perceptions are very prominent in velerinary ophthalmology as a result of the
mystique of the cye and human's own grcat depcndence on this sensory organ. These pcrceptions
are not only in the mind of the lay person, bul also in that of the professionals. The following are
some of the classic misconceptions and misguided comments overheard in the clinic:
All cocker spaniels have red eyes.
 Both his parents are normal. How can he have progressive retinal atrophy [insert your fa-
vorite inheritcd disease]?
Do you usc lasers for cataracts?
My dog has only 90% vision; hc only catches 9 out of 10 cookies. [hcard aftcr cataract
surgeryl
Will the vision leak out bccause of the corneal perforation?
His favorite color is red.
She doesn't like white coats.
He has never bitten anyone cxcept his doctor.
Can you transplant a new eye?
Retinal atrophy is related to light exposure due to his dilated pupils.
Since his cyes are so big [buphthalmia], can he sce better?
He's overweight because he can't see.
Brown tears are normmal in the Persian [Himalayan, ctc.|.
The cye medication didn't work, so I stopped using it.
I didn't give him his glaucoma medication today so you can see him without it.
My brother is a doctor lor nurse, EMT, animal lechnician, fireman, school teacher-—add your
favoritel, and he said it's . . ..
My breeder says his animals never had PRA [cataracts, etc. ] in their lines.
Will he have dry eye if you treat him for glaucoma?
My doctor said blue eyes are normal.
Will my PRA dog sce better if I leave the lights on?
He can see the neighborhoxod cal [squirrel, etc.], but he constanlly humps into things
Shar-peis are supposed to havc small cyes.
He doesn't like television anymore; can he still see?
She has always had wet cyes [tearing], so I guessed she would have glaucoma.
Dogs with blue irises see better.
Could my cat have caught herpes from me [or vice versa]?
Cats with crooked tails are always cross-eyed.
He's such a good watch dog, he even sleeps with his eyes open.
My diabctic can't see; that's why we can't regulatc his insulin.
His mother had cataracts when she was four. We want to breed him before he goes blind.
He'll be able to see with the "new" Lprosthetic] eye, won't he?
When she's in the car, my dog sces everything, cspecially with hcr head out the window.
312
313
"REMEDIES'
The various therapies for ocular and medical conditions add to the mystique of medicine. The
Egyptians once distilled sacred bull urine as a treatment for cataracts. Vitamin E and selenium
elixirs and beef liver extracts have also been recommended to trcat cataracts.
Dr. Louis Dor of Lyons (La Clinique Ophthalmologic, 10 Janvier 1911) published a cure of
incipicnt cataracts in man with an jodine salt, as recommended by Bodal.Hebased his investi
gations on the well-established idea that cataract is produced by a ferment that passes into the
aqueous humor, when it ought to remain in the blood. The ferment, which is a hydrating onc, de-
terrmines the hydration of the albumin of the lens. With a view to thc destrucfion of this ferment,
Dor experimented with many drugs and combinations and proposed the following as thc best:
Desiccated sodium iodide — 5 gm
Crystallized calcium chloride—5 gin
Distilled water— 400 gm
He averred: "With this solution, one can check the progress at least eight cataracts out of ten,
can cure one, and can cxpcct failure in thc tenth. It is used in the form of an eye bath and should
be continued over a long period, dropped, and then recommenced."
 In 1914, Gray slated, “the differenl methods of surgical intervention employed in human
cataract practice have all been used in dealing with animals (i.e., discission, reclination or "couchh-
ing." depression, or displacement and extraction); and it must be admitted that all who have at-
to success than in tnan.'
 Killed typhoid bacillus was once injected and utilized as "fever"' therapy for uveitis. It is now
known that this stimulated ACTH release and hencc a nonspecific stcroidal anti-inflammatory re-
sponse. Phlebotomy (bleeding) was once popular therapy. Today, this somctimes parailcls what
is called "diagnostics" by internists. While some therapies and concepts appear quaint, archaic,
investigation."
A TRIBUTE TO DOGS' EYES
*"Far more than by his bark a dog communicates through his eyes --from a soulful half-raised
eyebrow when denied a special treat to the wide and sparkling 'Yippee! We're going for a walk!'
Perhaps nothing can wrench the heart of a dog lover morc fhan the pitiful, hardly-daring-to-bc-
hopeful gaze of an abandoned dog waiting to be adopted." (J.R.E.)
"One of the saddest sights is to see a Dane ill. Their big eyes are a picture of misery, for make
ill."(Barbara Woodhouse, 1910-1988)
"It is by muteness that a dog becomes for one so utterly beyond value; with him one is at
peace, where words play no torturing tricks . . .. Those are the moments that I think are precious
ing of him." (John Gaisworthy)
 Page numbers in boldface type indicatc complete chapters. Page numibers in italics indicate figures.
Abscess, 0rbital, 29,303-305, 304, 305
Antibiotic-corticostcroid combinations
differentiated from orbital cellulitis, 305
as keratoconjunctivitis sicca treatment, 59
as optic neuropathy cause,145
as uveodematologic syndrome 1reatment, 196
Abyssinian cat,rod-cone dysplasia in, 249250
Antibiotic prophyiaxis, in cataract surgery patients,
Acetazolamide,87
124
Acid injuries, 208
Antifibrinolytic treaiment, for hypherna, 217
Acyclovir, as feline herpesvirus-related conjunctivitis
Antiglaucoma medications, 84, 8s92, 93
treatment,27
cost of.88
Adenocarcinoma
post-cataract surgery use of, 124
as exophthalmos cause, 303
Antihistanitrcs,as idiopathic epiphora reatmen,150
of eyelid, 170
Antihypertensive drugs, for cats, 279
of iris root, 293
Anti-inflammatory drugs. See also Nonsteroidal anti-
of nictitating membrane.69
inffammatory drugs
sebaceous, 169
as acute 0cular trauma treatment, 209, 210
Adenoma
post-cataract surgcry use of, 124
of ciliary body, 288, 292
Antimelanin antibodies, 194
as glaucoma cause,100
Antiviral agents, as feline herpesvirus-related conjunc-
of eyelid,166
tivitis treatment, 27
of iris, as glaucoma cause, 100
Apoptosis
of meibomian gland, 170
as glaucoma cause,73.76-77
sebace0us, 169, 169
 as sudden acquired retinal degeneration cause,
Adhesives, tissue
276
as acute ocular trauma treatment, 210
Appctite increase. See Polyphagia
as comeal sequestrum teatment, 48
Aprachlonidine,90
as indolent corneal ulcer treatment, 44
Aprotinin, as indolent coneal ulcer treatment, 41
Adie's pupil, 134
Aqueous ffare
Adrenergic agents, as hyphema reatment, 216
endophthalmitis-related,222
Afghan hound, corneal dystrophy in, 35
toxoplastmosis-related, 200
Aftermovement, 21
uveitis-relatcd, 179, 181, 183, 205, 206
Airedale temrier, cormeal dystrophy in, 35, 3637
Aqueous humor antibody test, for Toxoplasma gondii
Akbeta,89
detection, 203
Akita
Arteriography, orbital, 14
progressive retinal atrophy in, 242, 248
Artificial tears, as keratoconjunctivitis sicca treatmcnt,
retinal degeneration in, 248
59
retinal dysplasia in, 252, 254
Ascorbate, as alkali burnt treatmcnt, 208
uveodermatologic syndrome in,192
Asian dog breeds. See also specific breeds
Alaskan malamutc
uveodeimatologic syudrone in, 192
corneal dystrophy in, 35
Aspergillosis, as uveitis cause, 188
progressive retinal atrophy-related photoreceptor
Aspirin, hyphema as contraindication to, 217
degeneration in, 248
Atenolol, as feline hypertension treatment, 279
retinal degeneration in, 248
Atropine
Alkali chemical burns, 208
as glaucoma cause,217
Alphagan, 90
as byphema treatment,83,216,217
American Collegc of Vetetinary Ophthalmologists, 37,
postoperative use of, 49
258
as uveitis trcatment
American Kennel Club, 267
in systemic disease,190
Aminocaproic acid, as hyphema treatment, 217
in toxoplasmosis, 204
Amlodipine, as hypertension-related ocutar lesion
Australian cattle dog, retinal degeneration in, 248
teatment, 279, 280
Australian shepherd
Anemia, chronic, as feline hypertension cause,
inherited eye anomalies in, 232-240
277
posterior choroidal melanocytoma in, 288
Angingraphy,fluorescein, 1l, 12
retinal degeneration in,249
Aniscoria, 133134, 135
retinal dysplasia in,252, 254
Anorexia, toxoplasmosis-related, 200
nvecdermatologic syndrome in,192
Anterior chamber
 Autoimmune diseases, as sudden acquired rctinal de-
blood within.See Hyphema
geheration cause, 276
collapse of
Autosomal reccssive diseases, breeding strategy in,
reformation of, 210-211
264
trauma-related, 219
Azathioprine
foreign bodies in, 213
as uveitis treatmcnt, 190, 198
Anterior chamber shunts. See Gonioimplants
as uveodematologic syndrome freatment, 196
315
316
fndex
Azilhromycin, as fcline toxoplasmosis treatment, 204
Blepharoplastic procedures (conf.)
Azopt, 87
V-Y blepharoplasty, 160, 161
Y-to-V blepharoplasty, 157, 157
Bacterial infections. See also specific bacteriat
Blepharospasm
infections
comeal sequestra-related,46
as uveitis cause, 181
indolent comeal ulcer-rclated, 39
Barking, excessive, as hyphema causc, 127,215
keratoconjunclivitis sicca-related, 57
Basal ccll carcinoma/tumor, of cyelid, 169,170
uvcitis-related, 183
Basenji
Blindness
cormeal dystrophy in. 35
acute ocular traurma-related, 208
retinal degeneration in.249
animals' adjustment to, 103
Basset griffon Veudeen, retinal dysplasia in, 252
cataract-related,116
Basset Jound
congenital, differential diagnosis of, 143
entropion in,153
corneal dystrophy-related, 36
glaucoma in, 74, 76, 103
glaucoma-related, 76, 80, 84, 85, 90, 99-104
intrascleral silicone prosthesis in, 103
as indication for euthanasia, 103
"Baum's bumps." 23
progrcssive retinal atrophy-relatcd, 247
Baytril,as rctinal degeneration cause.251,251
proptosis-related,61 62,65
BB-pellets, as ocular foreign hody, 213
in contralateral eye. 63
Beagle
rctinal arophy-rclated, 241
cataracts in,116-117
retinal detachment-related,231
comeal dystrophy in, 35,36
retinal dysplasia-related, 258
glaucoma in1.74,76,79,81,82.103
sudden, differential diagnosis of, 144
lens luxation in, 79
toxoplasmosis-related, 200
prolapse of nictitating menbrane gland in, 71
uveitis-related, 179, 182
retinal degeneration in, 249
uveodermatologic syndrome-related, 192
retinal dysplasia in, 229, 252, 254, 257
Blink rcsponses
Bearded collie, corneal dystrophy in, 35
dazzlc response, 80, 141
Bedington terrier
cranial nerves involvcd in, 143
imperforate puncta in, 149
to menacing gesture, 139, 139
rctinal dysplasia in. 252
cranial ncrvcs involved in, 143
Belgian Malinois,retinal dysplasia in, 252
for determination of glaucoma-rclatcd blindness, 99
Belgian sheepdog
to tactile stimulus, 139
cormeal dystrophy in,35
cranial ncrves involved in, 143
progressive retinal atrophy in. 248
for facial paralysis evaluation, 99
retinal degeneration in, 249
Blood urea nitrogen, feline hypertensive retinopathy-
Bcta-blockers, as glaucoma treatment, 85, 88-89
related incrcase in, 278
Betagan, 89
Blunt injury, as globc rupture causc, 208, 209
Betaxolol, 89. 91
Body fat, magnctic rcsonance itnaging of, 16
Betimol,89
Bone, magnetic resonancc imaging of, 16
Betoptic, 8y
Border collie
Bichon frise
inherited ocular and otic defecis in, 234
cataracts in,/13
retinal degcneration in, 249
corneal dystrophy in,35
retinal dysplasia in,252
idiopathic epiphora in, 149
Borreliosis,as uveitis cause,185、188
lens-induced uveitis in, 271
Borzi, retinal degeneration in, 249
"Big eye, blind eye" rule. 82-83
Boston terrier
Biomicroscopy, ultrasound, 15, 23
cataracts in, 116117
Biopsy
cormeal dystrophy in,35
conjunctival,29, 30
endothelial dystrophy in, 37, 37
of eyelid tumors,172, 173-174
glaucoma in, 74, 76
of intraocular tumors,290,292-293
spontaneous rctinal detachment in, 274
Birds, color vision systen! of. 9
Bouin's fixative, 309, 310
Bladder cancer, metastatic, as rctinal hemorrhage
Boxer
cause,289
corneal dystrophy in, 35
Blastomycosis, 21
indelent comeal ulcers in, 40-41
as uveitis causc, 185, 188, 189
Boykin spanicl, comeal dystrophy in, 35
Blepharoplastic procedures.153-168
Brachycephalic brccds
anatomic considerations in, 154
corneal insensitivity in, 140
basic surgical pack for, 154
comeal sequestrum in, 46
brow-sling procedurc. 157, 158
idiopathic epiphora in, 149
for ectropion corection, 160-162
medial canthal closure in, 164, /64
for entropion correclion, 153-160
proptosis in, 61
H blepharoplasty, 165, 166
Brachytherapy, for eyelid tumors, 175
Hotz-Celsus procedure, 155-157, 156, 158, /59, 160
Breeding
suturing of lid margin defects, 155, 160
in autosomal recessive diseases, 264
Index
317
Breeding (conr.)
Cataracts (cont.)
contraindicalions to
classifcation of,111,115,112115
cataracts.117
complications of,116
colobona,233
definition of, 1!!
progressive retinal atrophy, 246
differentiated from nuclear sclerosis, 115-116
retinal dysplasia, 256, 259260
lens protcin leakage from, 205
for elimination of mutant genes, 264265
as retinal detachment risk factor, 268, 271, 271
in X-linked discases, 264
lucation of, 116
Briard
luxation of,114
corneal dystrophy in, 35
medical treatment of, 117
progressive retinal atrophy in, genctic test for, 261
morgagnian, 111, 114
retinal degcneration in,249
ovcrview of, 111-117
Brimonidine, 90
phacolytic uveitis associated with, 205-207
Brinzolamide, 87
primary, differentiated from secondary, 115
 Brittany spaniel
progressive retinal atrophy-related, 246
lens luxation in, 79
retinal and otic nerve function evaluation in, 14 1
ocular adenocarcinoma in, 293
retinal dctachment-related, ultrasonographic evalua-
Brucellosis
tion of, 15
as glaucoma cause, 83
secondary, differentiated from primary, 115
as uvcitis cause,185,186
ultrasonographic evaluation of, 2021, 20, 21
"Bug eyes,”" extraocular polynryositis-related, 307
Cataract surgery, 117. 118-124
Bulldog. See English bulldog
complicalions of, 125-130
Buphthalmos
hyphcma,215
differentiated from exophthalmos, 29, 301-302
imtraoperative, 125-126
glaucoma-related,81,82.82,99104
postoperative,126-130,127,128
in puppies,82
retinal detachment, 268, 271
surgical treatment of. 100-102, 102
contraindications to, 118
Burmese cat
indications for, 1 18-120
comeal sequestra in, 49
intracapsular intraocutar lens (IOLs) placemcnt fol-
nictitating membrane dermoid cysts in, 67
lowing,121-123, 122, 123
prolapse of nictitating mcmbrane gland in,71
paticnt positioning for, 126
Burn injuries, chenmical-related, 208
postopcrative medical regimen of. 124
as retinal detachment cause, 268, 271
Cairn terrier
techniques of, 120-123
diffuse bilateral uveal melanocytosis in, 287
timing of, 118-119
ocular melanosis in, 105-109, 105, 106, 107, 109
unilateral versus bilateral, 119-[20
Cairn Terrier Club of America, 109
Cats.Seealso names of specific breeds
Calcium
brachycephalie breeds
as asteroid hyalosis component, 281, 282
corneal sequcstrum in, 46
comeal infilration by, 37
idiopathic epiphora in, 149
Canine Eye Registration Foundation, 37, 258, 262
cataracts in, 117
Canine DNA Rcgistry of, 267
chronic uveitis in, /80
Canthoplasty
ciliary cysts in,298,298
fo1 lagophthalmos correction, 164
conjunctivitis in,25,26,26,27-28
rhormboid, 163, J63
comeal sequestrum in, 46-51, 47, 50
Wyman's lateral, 158, 159
with diffuse corneal edema, 46
Canthotomy, lateral, as proptosis treatment, 63
rermoval of, 48-49,48, 49
Canthus, latcral, in keratoconjunctivitis sicca-rclaied
cross-eyed,143
neuropathy, 141
diffusc itis melanoma in, 287, 290, 292, 293
Capsular opacities, posterior, 129, 130
episcleritis in,30
Captopril, as feline hypertension trcatmicnt, 279
eyclid tumors in, 169-170
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, as glaucoma treatment,
hypertcnsionin
85,86-87
diagnosis of, 277
in acute glaucoma, 90-91
drug therapy for, 279
in combination with beta-blockers, 88
as ocular 1esion cause, 277-280, 277, 278, 279,
oral, 84.87
280
side effects of, 84, 86-87, 100
in older cats, as retinopathy cause, 145-146
topical compared with oral, 87
indolent corneal ulccrs in, 39, 43
Carcinoma, intraocular. See aiso Tumors, intraoculal
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in, 58
as glaucoma cause,100
niclitating membrane protrusion in, 69
Cardiomegaly, hypertension-related, 278
oider, sudden blindncss in, 145.-146
Carteolol hydrochloride. 89
proliferative keratoconjunctivitis jn, 5256, 52,
Cataracts, 90
53.-54
bilateral, pupillary light rcflex in, 137
retinal degeneration in, 249-250, 249. 250
inn cats,↓17
retinal hemorrhage in, 220
chemical burn-related, 208
retinitis in,180
318
Index
Cats (cont.)
Cocker spaniel (conr.)
toxoplasmosis in, 200-204, 200, 207-202, 203
glaucoma in, 74,76.90, 103
vitreal hemorrhage in, 218
imperforate puncta in, 149
Cavalier King Charles spaniel
jntracapsular intraocular lens-related hypotony in,
comeal dystrophy jn,35
127-128
retinal dysplasia in, 229, 252
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in, 2829, 57
Cefazolin sodium, as uveitis treatment, 190
lens-induced uveitis in, 271
Cellulitis, orbital, 306
g u Kydonsp snououklod rouaisod
differeniated from cellulitis, 305
progressive retinal alropby in, 242. 245
cndophthalmitis-related,223
cataracts associated with, 246
pain associated with,68
genetic testing for, 261
Cerebellar disease,lack of blink refex in,139,39
photoreceptor degeneration in, 248
Chemical bums, 208
prolapse of nictitating membrane gland in, 71
Chemotherapy, for eyelid tumors, 174175
rctinal degencration in,249
"Cherry cye," 57, 59
retinal dysplasia in, 229, 252, 253, 257
nictitating membrane gland removal in. 151--152
Collagen shiclds, for acute ocular trauma, 210
Chesapeake Bay retriever
College of Veterinary Ophthalmology diplomates, eye
cataracts in, 116117
examinalions by, 262
comeal dystrophy in, 35
Collie
progressive retinal atrophy in, genetic test fo, 261
comeal dystrophy in, 35
retinal degeneration in,249
inhcrited eye anomalies in, 232-240
Chihuahua, cndothelial dystrophy in, 37
progressive retinal atrophy in, 248
Chlamydia,as conjunctivitis cause,26
retinal degeneration in, 249
Chloramphenicol, as feline herpesvirus-related con-
rctinal dysplasia in, 252
junctivitis treatment, 27
Collie cyc anomaly, 234235, 239
Cholesterolosis bulbi (synchysis scintillans), 282,285
Colohoma, 135
Chondrosarcoma, computed tomographic scan of, 15
in Australian shepherds, collies, and Shetland sheep-
Chorioretinitis, 228, 228
dogs,232,233,234,235,236,237,238
toxoplasmosis-relatcd, 200, 202. 204
as contraindication to brecding, 233
uveitis-related.179
Color television, animals' perception of, 9
Choroid,225
Color vision, 7-10
hypoplasia of
anomalies of, 8-9
in. Australian sheepdogs, colies, and Sheuland
testing for. 7-8
sheepdogs, 232-234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239
Computed tomography (CT), 11, 12
"go normal" evaluation of, 232
differentiated from magnetic resonance imaging,
Choroiditis
15-16
definition of, 177
Conjunctiva
diffuse, blastomycosis-related, 189
foreign bodies in, 213
phacolytic uveitis-related, 206
lumors of, 169, 171
Chowchow
Conjunctivitis
catropion in,153
allergic,28
glaucorma in,74.76,82
eosinophilic,28
retinal dysplasia in, 252
as epiphora cause, 148
uveodermatoiogic syndrome in.192
feline herpesvirus-related, 25,26,26, 27-28
Cilia,ectopic, 28, 39, 148
follicular, 70, 71
Ciliary body
as "red eye” cause, 25
cysts of.297-300, 298, 299.300
Contact lens, removal from postkcratormized cornea, 50
epithelial tumors of, 292
Copper,as asteroid hyalosis component,281,82
in cats,287
Cornea
clinical signs of, 288
ahrasions of
as glaucoma cause, 289
foreign body-related, 213
maligmant, 291
as "red eye”" cause, 31
pharmacologic ablation of, in blind glaucomatous
chcmical buns of, 208
eyes,84
degencration of,37
Clindamycin, as feline toxoplasmosis treatment, 204
edena of
Clumber spaniel, retinal dysptasia in, 252
cataract surgery-related,127,129
Coagulopathy
with comeal sequestrum, 46
as hyphema cause,79
differentiated from coreal dystrophy. 33
as ocular hemorrhage causc, 214
endothclial dystrophy-retated.37-38.37.-38
Coccidioidomycosis, as uveitis cause, 185, 188
glaucoma-related,80,90
Cocker spaniel
uveitis-reJated,179,183
anterior uveitis-related glaucoma in, 190
fibrosis of, differentiated from cormeal dystrophy. 33
cataracts in,113,116117
foreign bodics in, 213
dorsal extension of nictitating menbrane, 67
insensitive, in hrachycephalic breeds, 140
entropion in, 153
lacerations of,210,210
epiphora in,148
magnetic resonance imaging of, 16
Index
319
Comea (cont.)
Cushing's disease-like signs, of sudden acquired retinal
neovascularizalion of, in keraloconjunctivitis sicca,
degeneralion,276
57
Cyclitis, definition of, 177
 postoperative wound care for, 49
Cyclooxygenase inhibitors, hypherma as contraindica-
in proptosis
tion to, 217
anesthesia of. 64
Cycloplegics
protection of, 61
as hyphema treatment, 216
sequestrum of, in cats, 4651, 47, 50
post-cataract surgery use of, 124
with diffuse cormeal edema, 46
topical, as acute ocular travma treatment, 209
rermoval f,4849, 48,49
Cyclosporine
sutures and suturing techniqucs for, 210, 211, 212
as keratoconjunctivitis sicca treatment, 59, 64
ulceration of
as pigmcntary uveitis treatment, 198
alkali burm:-related, 208
as uveodermatologic syndrome treatiment,196
cataract surgery-related, 127
Cysts
in cats, 70
dcrrnoid, of nictitating meinbrane, 67
comeal degeneration-related, 37
iris/ciliary,297-300,298,299.300
indolent.3945,40.41,42.43
relationship with pigmentary uvcitis, 198. 799
keratoconjunctivitis sicca-related,57
toxoplasmic, 201
nictitating membrane foreign body-rclated, 69
proptosis-related,63
Dachshund
as "red eye" cause. 31-32, 32
cataracts in, 116-117
Cormeal dystrophy,3338,33,34,35,36,37,38
endothelial dystrophy in, 37
Corneal striae, 81-82
inherited ocular and otic defects in, 234
Comeal transplant, into degenerative cornca, 212
miniature long-haired, progressive retinal atrophy in,
Cortical disease,differentiated from sudden acquired
248
retinal degeneration, 276
retimal degeneration in, 249
Corticosteroids
suddcn acquired retinal degeneration in, 275
as anterior uveitis treatment, 182. 183
Dacryocystorhinography, 14, 14. 149
as eosinophilic granuloina of nictitating mcrmbrane
Dalmatian, glaucoma in, 74, 76
teatment, 68
Daranide,87
as episcleritis 1reaument, 30. 30
Dazzle reflex, 80, 141
as hyphema trcatment, 83,216
cranial nervcs involved in, 143
a8 oplic neuritis reatment. 275-276
Deafness, in poorly pigmented animals, 135
as pigmentary uveitis trcatment. 197
Debridement, of indolent corneal ulcers, 42, 43
as proliferative keratoconjunctivitis treatment, 5
Demercarium bromide, 88
as uveitis treatmcnt,188,290-291
Depigncntation, uveodermatologic syndrome-related,
as uveodermatologic syndrome treatment, 196
192, 193, 194, 195
as vitreal hemorrhage treatment, 218
Descemet's striae, 81-82
Cosopt,87,88
Dexamethasone, as uveitis treatment, 188, 207
Cranial ncrve(s),involved ineye refexes,139,143
Diabetes mellitus
Cranial nerve II (oculomotor nerve), unilateral lesion
megestrol acctatc-rclated,28
of,143
ophthalmic manifestations of
Cranial nerve V (trigeminal nerve)
astermid hyalosis.22
cormeal connections of, in brachycephalic breeds,
cataracis,113
[40
corneal lipid or calcium infltration, 37
in eye preservation blink refex, 139
hypertension-related, 277
lcsions of, 140
uveitis, 185
Cranial nerve Vll (facial nerve)
Dialysis, retinal, 268, 269, 272, 273
anatomic course of, 140
Diamox,87
in eye preservation blink refex. 139
Dichlorphcnamide, 87, 90-91
as lacrimal gland innervation, 141
side effects of, 100
Creatinine, feline hypertensive retinopathy-related in-
Dichromacy,8
crease in,278
Diclofenac, as proliferative keratoconjunctivitis treat-
Cross-eyed cats, 143
ment,SS
Cryosurgery/cryotherapy
Dipivefrin hydrochloride, 89
for buphthalmic eye, 101, 102, 102
Distcmper
equipment for,174,175
as kcratoconjunctivitis sicca cause, 59
for eyelid tumors, 173-174
as optic ncuropathy cause, 144
for rhegmatogenous retinal detachnent,271
as retinochoroidal lcsion cause, 186
Cryptococcosis
Distichiasis,28,148
as optic neuropathy cause
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) testing
in cats, 146
for ocular melanosis, in cairm teriers, 109
in dogs, 144
for pr0gressive retinal atrophy. 246, 261-267
as uveitis cause, 185. 188
 Doberman pinscher
Cushing's disease, as corneal lipid or calcium infiltra-
cataracts in,116117
tion cause,37
retinal dysplasia in, 252
320
Index
Dog fights,as proptosis causc,61,62,209
Emergency treatument (cont.)
Dogs.See aiso specific hreeds of dogs
for anterior uveitis,182-183
Asian breeds.uveodermmatologic syndrome in,192
for septic cndophthalmitis, 223
astcroid hyalosis in, 281-286
Emmetropia, 121-122
brachycephalic breeds
Enalapril, as feline hypertension treatmen1, 279
comeal insensitivity in,140
Fndodontic disease, as orbital abscess cause, 303
medial canthal closure in, 164. 164
Endophthalmilis, /78, 206, 222-224
proptosis in, 61
definition of, 178
conjunctivitis in、28-29
iatrogenic, following cataract surgcry, 128
corneal dystrophy in,35
nonseptic,222,223,224
eyelid tumors in, 169
perforated wound-related, 209
indolent cormeal ulcers in, 39, 43
prognosis for, 182, 224
sudden acquired retinal degeneration in, 275-276
septic,222-223,222,224
toy brccds, nictitating membrane tear gland reinoval
Fndothelial dystrophy, 37-38, 37-38
in, 151-152
English bulldog
Dolichocephalic breeds, proptosis in, 61
entropion in,153
Dorzolamide, 87
kcratoconjunctivitis sicca in, 28-29, 57
"Dry eye" syndrome. 57, 152
prolapse of nictitating membrane gland in,71
Dysautononia,generalized,69
Dyscoria
English toy spanicl, cormeal dystrophy in, 35
anterior uveitis-related.136
Enophthalmos, 302,302
of iris,135,138
definition of, 142, 301
iris melanoma-related, f38
Hormer's syndrome-rclated, 141, 142
luxated lens-relatcd, 137
Entropion
Dysplasia
causes of, 153-154
of photoreceptors,247-248
chemical bun-related, 208
retinal. See Retinal dysplasia
cicatricial.16l
Dyspnea, toxuplasmosis-related, 200
as epiphora cause, 148
Dysirophy
in older animals, 155
cormeal,33-38,33.34,35.36.37, 38
recurence of,158
endothelial,37-38.37-38
surgical correction of, 153-160, 161
posterior polymorphous, 38
with Holz-Celsus procedure, 155-157, 156, 158,
retinal pigment epithelial (RPED), 246
159. 160
with Y-to-V blepharoplasty, 157, 157
Echothiophate iodide. 88
Enucleation
artifacts caused by, 309
causes of, 153-154
of blind glaucomatous eye, 84, 101
as epiphora cause, 148
bilatcral, 103
surgical correction of, 160-162
as eyelid tumor treatnent,175
Edeima, corncal. See Cornea, edema of
as feline ocular tumor treatment,293
Ehrlichiosis
follow-up of, 295
as glaucoma cause, 83
as proptosis treatment, 62, 6263
as uveitis cause,185,187
of ruptured or perforated globe,208
Electrical activity, of the visual system, 1-6
as septic endophthalmitis treatment, 223
Electron microscopy, in asteroid hyalosis, 284, 284,
Eosinophils
285
conjunctivitis/kcratitis-associatcd,28
Electrophysiology, of color vision, 7-8
proliferative keratoconjunctivitis-associated, 52, 53,
Electroretinography (ERG), 1-5, 276
54.55
for asteroid vr synchysis bodies diagnosis. 282
Epidermal growth factor, as indolent comeal ulcer
c-waves of, 4
treatment, 4]
definition of, 1
Epincphrine, as hyphcma treatment, 216
d-waves of, 4
Epincphrine hydrochloride, as glaucoma treatment, 89
elcctrical basis of, 1-2
Fpinephryl borate, 89
e-waves of,4
Epiphora, 147-152, 148
Jimitations of. 5
brown stain associated with, 150
multiphasic,23
idivpathic, 149-150, 152
oscillatory potentials (P waves) of. 4
indolent cormeal ulcer-related, 39
performance of, 2
Episclera, melanosis-related pigment in, 105, 106, 107
for progressive retinal atrophy diagnosis,246
Episcleral vessels, engorged, 3031
in retinal abnormalities, 45
Episclcritis
for rctinal and optic nerve assessment, with dense
necrotizing, 30
cataract, 141
nodular,30,31
"Elschnig's pearls. 129
as “rcd eye” cause, 25. 30
Emergency treatment
treatment for, 30, 30
for acute glaucoma, 90-91
Esotropia, 143
for acute ocular trauma, 209-210
Euthanasia, of blind animals, 103
Index
321
Evisceration, of buphthalmic eye, 101, 103
Fhuorescein dye test (cont.)
Excitotoxins, as sudden acquired retinal degencration
negative, inmplication for nasolacrimal patency,
causc.276
148-149
Exenteration
Flurbiprofen, as proliferative keratoconjunctivitis teat-
of buphthalmic eye, 100-101
ment, 55
follow-up of. 295
Foreign bodies, 213
Exophthalmos
metallic,209
computed tomogiaphic scan of,15
in masolacrimal system, 149
definition of,142-143,301
in nictitating menmbrane, 69-70
differentiated from buphthalmos, 29. 301-302
Formalin, as globe fixalive, 309-310
intraocular tumor-related, 303
Fox hound, inhcrited ocular and otic defects in, 234
myositis-related, 306
Fox terrier
orbital intraconal meningioma-related, 304
glaucoma in, 79
orbital sarcoma-related, 304
toy, corectopia in,136
ultrasonographic evaluation of, 21
Fractures
Extraocular muscles
of nasal bone, 149
 inflammation of, as nictitating membrane prolapse
of skull, as optic neuropathy cause, 145
cause, 68
polymyositis of,307, 307
acquired diseases of, 225-231
Eycball, unilatcral inability to rctract, 143
hyperrcflective lesions,225-226、227
Eyelid
hyporeflective lesions, 225-226,229
defects of, surgical correction. See Blepharoplastic
albinotic, 135,236
procedures
definition of.225
third. See Nictitating membrane
examination of, 225
Eyelid surgery. See Blepharoplastic procedures
in merle-coated dogs, 234, 235
Eyelid tumors, 169-175
hemorrhage in, 229, 230
benign differentiated from malignant, 170-171
melanin deposition in,108,230
removal of, 165, 166, 171-175
normmal,225,226
in progressive retinal atrophy, 244, 245
Facial nerve. See Cranial ncrve VII
in toxoplasmmosis, 202
Facial paralysis. 140-141, 140
Fungal infections. See aiso specific fungal infections
evaluation of,99
as optic neuropathy cause, 144
Feline central retinal degencration, 250, 251
systeinic,as glaucoma cause,83
Feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1)
as uveitis cause, 181, 185, 188
as conjunctivitis cause, 25, 26, 26, 2728
Furosenide, as feline hyperlension treatment, 279
diagnosis of, 27
as eosinophilic granuloma of nictitating membrane
Gait, hypermetric, 139
cause.68
Ganglion cells, retinal, apoptosis of, 73, 7677, 78
as indolent comeal ulcer cause, 43
Genetic lests
as keratoconjunctivitis sicca cause, 29, 55
for progressive retinal atrophy, 261-267
Feline immunodefciency virus, as glaucoma cause,
rcgistries of, 267
83
sources of,267
Feline infectious peritonitis, as optic neuropathy cause,
Gentamicin, as uveitis treatment, in systemic disease.
146
190
Felinc leukemia vinus, as glaucoma causc, 83
Gcrinan shepherd
Fever, toxoplasmosis-related, 200
cataracts in, 116117
Fibrin deposition. in pigmentary uvcitis, 197
corncal dystrophy in, 35
Fibrinolytic treatment, for hyphema, 217
cyclosporine-resistant keratoconjunctivitis sicca in,
Fibroma, of eyelid, 170
59
Fibrosarcoma, of eyelid, 170, 175
nodulat inis melanocytoma in, 294
Fibrosis, corneal, differentiated from cormeal
ocular blunt trauma in, 214
dystrophy.33
oculat melanocytic tumors in, 287
Field spaniel, retinal dysplasia in, 252
pannus in, 70
Fixatives, for globe, 309-310
retinal degencration in, 249
Flaps
retinal dysplasia in, 252
conjunctival
German shorthaired pointer, retinal degeneration in,
in acutc ocular trauma, 210,212
249
in corneal sequestrmin,48
Glass, as ocular foreign body, 213
cross lid, 166167, 167
Glaucoma,275
sliding skin-imuscle, 165, 166
acute, 90-91
third eyelid (nietitating 1nembrane), in cats, 70
differentiatcd from chronic. 81-82
Flunixin meglurmine
prognosis for,91
hyphema as contraindication to, 217
acute pupillary block, prevention of, 88
as uveitis rcatment, 188
atropine-rclated, 217
Fluorcscein dye tesl. See also Seidel test
as blindncss cause, 99-104
in comeal sequestrum, 46
buphthalmic eye treatment in, 99-104
322
index
Glaucoma (conr.)
Globe (cont.)
chemical burn-related, 208
salvage of, in proplosis, 62-63, 65
chronic,80
shift of, 301
color Doppler ultrasonographic evaluation of. 12
trauma-related nupture 0r perforalion of, 208, 209
contralateral eye in, 78. 84
Glycerol, for intraocular pressure control, 86
definition of,73
Glycosaminoglycaus, polysulfated, as indolent cormeal
differentiated from sudden acquired retinal degener-
ulcer trcatment, 41
ation,275,276
Golden rctriever
differentiated from uveitis, 30-31
cataracts in, 116-117
diffuse ocular melanocytosis-related, 294-295, 295
comeal dystrophy in. 35
cntropion in.153
with, 30-31
imperforate puncta in, 149
evaluation of, 85
iris/ciliary cysts in, 298, 299
genetic factors in, 74,76
relationship with pigmentary uveitis, 198, 199
gonioimplant treatmcnt for,93-98,95, 96,97
limbal melanocytoma in, 294
intraocular pressure in, 30-31, 73, 76-77, 100
Ocular melanocytic tumors in, 287
in acute glaucoma, 90
ocular melanosis in, 109
in blind eyes, 85
pigimentary uveitis in, 197-199
causes of, 93
retinal degcneration in, 249
gonioimplant treatment for,9398
retinal dysplasia in, 252
pharmacologic management of. See Antiglau-
uveal cysts in, 299, 300
coma medications
pvcodermatologic syndroine in, 192
in secondary glaucoma, 78, 82
Goldfish, color vision system of, 9
in young animals, 82
Gonioimptants, 93-98
intraocular tumor-related,288,289
Goniolens, 74, 75, 76
medical treatment for, 84, 8592, 93
Gonioscopy, of ocular melanosis, 105, 106, 106
after cataract surgery, 124
Gordon sctter
cost of, 88
retinal degeneration in, 249
overview of. 73-77
retinal dysplasia in, 252
phacomorphic, 118
Grafts
photocoagulation treatment for,102,102
conjunctival, in acute ocular trauma, 210
contraindication in melanosis, 109
corneal-conjunctival, in cormeal sequestrum, 48, 49
primary.76
pedicle grafts, for ulccralive wound coverage. 211
bilateral, prevention of, 92
Tenon's
differentiated from secondary glaucoma, 78
for acute ocular trauma repair,211
spread to contralateral eye, 103
for corncal sequestrum, 47, 48
therapeutic goal in, 85
Granuloma
as “red eye” cause, 25
eosinophilic,of nictitating memhrane,68
secondary,76,7884,85
subretinal, 189
"big eye, blind eye" rule of, 82-83
Gray matter, magnetic resonance imaging of, 16
cataract-related,116
Great Dane
cataract surgery-related, 128
cntropion in,153
differentiated from primary glaucoma, 78
inheritcd ocular and otic defects in, 234
intraocular tumor-related, 100
prolapse of nictitating membrane gland in, 71
melanosis-related, 106, 107, 108109
retinal degeneration in, 249
nveitis-relaled,32,78, 190, 198, 206
Greyhound. See also Italian greyhound
uveodermatologic syndrome-related,192
pannus in, 70
surgical treatment for, 93, 100-102
retinal degeneration in, 249
indications for, 91-92
tansient, as retinal detachment cause, 271
Haab's striae, 81-82, 99
vision prognosis in, 76, 80
Hair color loss, uvcodermatologic syndromc-related,
Glauctabs, 87
192
Globe
"Haws.,”69
blunt trauma to,214,215
Hearing impairment, congenital, 234
in brachycephalic breeds, medial canthal closure
Hearl murmmur, hypertension-related, 278
protection for,164,164,165
Hemangioma, of nictitating membranc, 69
buphthaimic
Hemangiosarcoma, ocular
assessment of, 80
as exophthalmos cause,303
removal of,100-102,702
of nictitating membrane, 69
rupture of, 102
Hermorhage, ocular, 214-221, See aiso Hyphema
displacement of
during blepharoplastic surgery, 155
anterior. See Exophthalmos
cataract surgry-related,125,126
posterior. See Endophthalmos
expulsive choroidal, cataract surgery-elated,126
fixatives for, 309310
fundal, 229, 230
infammation of, See Endophthalmitis 
intravitreal, asteroid or synchysis bodics associated
repositioning of, in proptosis, 6364
with, 282
Index
323
Hemorrhage (conr.)
Hyphema (cont.)
orbital, as nictitating meinbrane prolapse cause, 68
severity grading of, 215-216
retinal, 145, 145,219,219, 220, 221
surgical treatment of, 217
feline hypertension-related, 278, 278, 280
toxoplasmosis-related, 200
hypertensive retinopathy-related,145,45
trauma-related,78-79
magnetic resonance imaging of, 17
ultrasonographic cvaluation of, 20-21, 22
tuxoplasmosis-related. 200
uveitis-related, 183, 187
uveitis-related,179,787
Hypokalemia, carbonic anhydrase inhibilors-related,
spontaneous, intraocular tumor-relared, 288, 289
L8
uveitis-related,178,179,187
Hypopiasia
vitreous,22.22,217-219,278
acinar, congenital, 57, 59
trauma-related,209
choroidal, *go normal" evaluation of, 232
Hexafuoride, use in pneumatic retinopexy, 272-273
Of optic nerve, relationship with other inherited eye
Himalayan cat, comeal sequestra in, 49
anomalies,233
Hippus, 134
Hypopyon
Histopathology, 0cular, 309-311
endophthalmitis-related,222,224
Histoplasmosis, as uveitis cause, 185, 188
uveitis-related, 180, 181, 183
Homer's syndrome, 140, 141, 302
Hypothyroidism
left-sided, 142
as comcal lipid or calcium infiltration causc, 37
 as nictitating membrane prolapse cause, 68, 69, 69
indolent comeal ulccrs associated with, 4041
Horses
Hypotony
indolent corneal ulcers in, 39
cataract surgery-related. 127. 127-128
proliferative keratoconjunctivitis,52
endophthalmitis-related, 222
Hotz-Celsus procedure, 155-157, 156, 158, 159, 160
perforating sclcral wound-relatcd, 209
Hyalitis
uveitis-rclated, 179, 205,206
cndophthalmitis-related,222
phacolytic uveitis-related,205
Idoxuridine, as feline herpesvirus-related conjunctivitis
Hyaloid artery, persistent, as cataracl cause, 115,118
treatment, 27
Hyalosis,asteroid,22,281286,281286
Imaging, ophthalmic, 11-17. See aiso Computed to-
Hypercalcemia, as corneal lipid or calcium infiltration
mography; Magnctic resonance imaging; Ultra-
cause,37
Adegouos
Hyperemia
new modalities of, 11, 12
indolent comeal ulcer-related, 40
Immunoglobulin G, as toxoplasmosis indicator, 203
uveitis-related,179
Immunoglobulin M, as toxoplasmosis indicator, 203
Hyperlipoproteinemia, as corneal lipid or calcium infil-
Immunomodulator therapy
tralion cause,37
for proliferative keratoconjunctivitis, 55-56
Hyperosmotic agents, 88, 90
for uveodermatologic syndrome, 196
Hiypertension
Immunophenotypic analysis, of pigmentary uveitis,
cardiac auscultatory abnormalities associated with,
198
278
Imrmunosuppressive therapy
feline
for uvcitis
diagnosis of, 277
pigmentary uveitis,198
drug thcrapy for, 279
in systemic disease, 190
3s 0cular lesion cause,277-280,277,278,279
for uveodermatologic syndrome, 194
in older cats, as retinopathy cause, 145-146, 145
Imperforate puncta, 149
as fundus heinorhage cause, 229
Indomethacin, as proliferative keratoconjunctivitis
neurologic signs of.278
reatmcnt,55
as retinal detachment cause, 32
Inflammation, orbital, 303
systemic, as hyporefective fundus lesion cause, 228
Inherited eye anomalies, in Australian shepherds, col-
Hyperthermia, radiofrequency, as eyelid tumor treat-
lies, and Shetland shecpdogs,232-240
ment,175
[nner ear,in facial paralysis,140141
Hyperthyroidism, as feline hypertension cause, 277,
Interferon
279,280
as proliferative keratoconjunctivitis treatment,
Hypervitaminosis D, as comeal lipid or calcium infil-
55-56
tration causc, 37
side effccts of, 56
Hyphema,215-217
Intracapsular intraocular lens (10Ls), 121-123, 122,
cataract surgery-related, 127
123
conjunctivitis-related, 25
effect on cataract surgery complication rate,
defnition of, 32, 215
129-130
drugs contraindicated in, 217
haptics of, 122
endophthalmitis-related,222
luxation of, 127, 129-130
as glaucoma cause,78-79,83-84
sutured ciliary sulcus, 123
intraocular tumor-related, 78-79
Intraocular evisceration-implantation, of blind glauco
intravitreal hemorrhage associated with, 22
malous cycs, 84
as “red eye” calise, 25, 32
Intraocular prcssure
severe,209
after cataract surgery, 124
324
lndex
Intraocular pressurc (conr.)
Keratitis (cont.)
in anterior chamber reformation, 210-211
ulcerative
in buphthalmic eye, 100
as cpiphora cause.148
excessively low. See Hypotony
as uveitis cause,207
in glaucoma.3031,73,76-77,100
Keratoconjunctivitis, feline proliferative, 52-56, 52,
in acute glaucoma,90
53-54
in blind eyes, 85
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca,28-29,5760,6
cause of, 93
chetnlical bum-relatcd, 208
gonioinplant treatmcnt of, 9398, 95.96,97
definition of.57
pharmacologic management of. See Antiglau-
following removal of nictitating membrane gland,
cona medications
71
in secondary glaucoma, 78, 82
iatrogenic, 29
in young animals, 82
neurogenic,141
measurement of.73~74
Schirmer test for, 39, 57, 58
normal.74
surgical treatment for, 59
IOLs. See Intracapsular intraocular lens
Keratopathy,bullous,38
Iopidine, 90
Keratoplasty. as cormeal scqucstrum treatiment, 48
Inidectomy, sector. 83
Kcratotomy, as indolent corncal ulcer treatment, 32,
Iridocorneal anglc
43, 43
definition of.74
Key-Gaskell syndrumc, 69
in glaucoma.74,75. 76,76-77.93
King Charles spaniel. See Cavalier King Charles
lridocyclectomy. 83
spaniel
Iridocyclitis
Kittens, retinal degeneration in, 250, 250
asteroid or synchysis bodics associated with, 282
Kuhnt-Helmbold procedure, 160, 161, 162, 162
gonioimplant-related,97-98
Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure, 160, /67
Iris
Munger-Carter modification of, 162, 162
benign hyperpigmentation of, in cats. 293
blue. pupillary abnormalities associated with,
Labrador retricvcr
135-136
cataracts in, 116--117,779
cataract surgery-related prolapse of, 125
entropion in,153
cysts of,297-300, 297,299,300
ocular melanocytic tumors in,287
hemorrhagic,cataract-relatcd,206
progressive retinal atrophy in
melanoma of, 738
with genetically normaf parent, 265
melanosis-related thickening of, 105, 105, 106
genetic tcst for,261
 prolapsed, amputation or replacement of, 211
photoreceptor degeneration in, 248
lris bombe, cataract surgery-related, 129
retinal degeneration in, 249
Irish seiter
retinal dysplasia in,229.252,252
cataracts in, 116117
scleritis in, 31
progressive retinal atrophy in
uveodcrnatologic syndrome in,192, 192
genetic test for, 261,263,266
Laccrations
photoreceptor degeneration in, 248
of comea,210,210
retinal degeneration in, 248
ds endophthalmitis cause, 209
uveodermatologic syndrome in, 192
uf eyelid
Iritis
jnvolving lacrimal canaliculi, 167, 168
definition of, 177
of nictitating membrane, 67
toxoplasmosis-relatcd,200.201
Lacrimal canaliculi, laceration rcpair of, 167, 168
Iron, as asteroid hyalosis component, 281, 282
Lacrimal gland, 57
Lmigation, of chemical ocular buns, 208
innervation of, 141
Italian greyhound
Lagophthalmos, 29
retinal degeneration in, 248
propiosis-related, 64
spontaneous relinal detachiment in, 274
surgical corrcction of, 163-164
Laser ophthalmoscope, confocal scaring, 12
Jcnsen technique, for medial canthal closure, 164, 164,
Lascr therapy
16.5
for buphthalnic eye, 101, 102
for eyclid tumors, 174
Keratectomy
instrumcntation for, 102
as corncal sequestra treatment,46,47,49
for intraocular tumor-related glaucoma, 83
stromal pigment in, 49
for intraocular tumors,292293
Keratinization, keratoconjunctivitis sicca-related, 57
for iris/ciliary cysts, 299, 300
Keratitic prccipitates
for retinal detachment, 271,272,273
anterior uveitis-related,180
as retinopexy, 271, 271
cataract surgery-relatcd, 129
Latanoprost, 90
Keratitis
I.cad, as asteroid hyalosis component, 281, 282
eosinophilic, 28,52
Leishmaniasis, as uveitis cause,188
neurotropic, proptosis-related, 64
Lens
as "red eye" cause, 25
cataract surgery-relatcd fragment loss of,125-126
Index
325
Lens (conr.)
Megestrol acctate (cont.)
magnetic resonance imaging of, 16
as proliferative keratoconjunctivilis treatmcnt,55
side effects nf, 55
antcrior,removal in cataract surgery,121
Meibomian gland, adenoma of, 170
cataract surgery-related tears of,125
Melanin
Lensectomy, as lens luxation-related glaucoma Teat-
deposition in fundus, 230
ment, 84, 85
in uvcodermatologic syndrome, 194
Lens luxation
Melanocytoma, ocular
cataract surgery-rclated, 125
limba1, 291, 294
as dyscoria causc, 137
posterior choroidal,288
as glaucoma cause, 79-80, 79, 84, 85
Melanocytosis, ocular
trauma-retated, 209
diffuse, 291
Lenticular proteins, leakage from cataracts, 205
uveal, 288, 295
asretinal detachmenl risk factor,268,271,271
Melanoma, ocular
Lentieula1 sclerosis, 115
clinical signs of, 287-288
Lentoid, 121, 129
of eyelids, 169, 170, 170
Leptospirosis
as glaucoma cause, 100
as glancoma cause.83
of iris,138
as uvcitis cause, 185
in cats,287,290,292
Levohunolol hydrochloride, 89
limbal, 294
Lhasa apso
of nictitating membrane, 29, 69. 69
cataracts in, 116-117
nodular, in cats, 287
corneal dystrophy in, 35
uvcal, 288
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in, 28-29
as miosis cause, 138
prolapse of nictitating mermbrane gland in, 71
Melanosarcoma,ocular
spuntaneous retinal detachment in, 274
conjunctival,171
Lipids, corneal infiltration by. 37
 of nictitating mcmbranc, 69
Lipofuscin, 230
Melanosis
Lizards, color vision system of, 9, 10
in caim terriers, 105-109, 105, 106, 107, 109
Lowchen, retinal dcgeneration in, 249
diffuse ocular, 294295
Lymphoma, ocular, 290
glaucoma associated with,106, 107,108109
as glaucoma cause,100
Menace reflex, 139, 139
as optic ncuropathy cause, in cats,146
Cranial nerves involved in, 143
uveal, 290
for dctermination of glaucoma-rehated blindness, 99
as uveitis cause, 289
Meningioma, posterior orbital intraconal, 304
Lymphosarcoma, ocular, 287
Meningoencephalitis
clinical signs of, 288
differcntiated from sudden acquired 1etinal degener-
as glaucoma cause, 85
ation, 275,276
pupillary, 137
granulomatous, as optic neuropathy cause, 144, 145
L-l.ysine, as feline herpesvirus-related conjunctivitis
Merlc-coated animals
treatment,27-28
inherited eye anomalies in, 234-235
nonpigmented nictitating membrane in, 67
Magnctic resonance imaging (MRI), 1i-12
pupillary abnormalities in, 135-136
differentiated from computed tomography, 15-16
Mescnchymal tumors, of eyelid, 169
Maltese dog, idiopathic cpiphora in, 149
Metals, as ocular foreign body, 213
Mannitol
Mctastatic cancer, intraocular, 287
as glaucoma treaiment, 86,88, 91
clinical signs of, 288
for intraoperative vitrcous cxpansion managemcnt,
as glaucoma cause,100
125
Methazolamide,87, 90-91
Marker/linkage test, differentiated from imutation test,
side effects of, 100
262
Methylprednisolone, as uveodermatologic syndrome
Mast cell tumors, of eyclid, 169, 170
trealmcnt, 196
intralesional distilled water therapy for, 175
Metipranolol, as glaucoma treaimenl, 89
Mastift
Metronidazole, as idiopathic cpiphora treatment, 150
cormeal dystrophy in,35
Micrococcus,49
entropion in,153
Microphthalmos,relationship with other inherited eye
retinal degeneration in, 249
anomalies,233,235
retinal dysplasia in, 252, 255
Microscopy, confocal, 12
Medial canthal closure technique, 164, 164
Microspectrophotometry, 7. 8
Medial canthal trichiasis, 165
Minerals, as asteroid hyalosis component, 28 1, 282
Medial rectus muscle, proptosis-related injury to, 64. 65
Miniature pinscher,corncal dystrophy in,35
Medulloepithelioma, 0cular, 287,288
Miosis
Megestroi acctate
as calaract surgery complication, 125
as eosinophilic conjunctivitis/keratitis treatment, 28
endophthalmitis-relatcd, 222
as eosinophilic granuioma of nictitating membrane
Hornet's syndrome-related, 141, 142
treatment,68
uveal melanoma-related, 138
326
Index
Miosis (cont.)
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (conr.)
uveitis-related, 179, 183, 205
as uveitis treatment
Miotics
in anterior uveitis, 182, 183
as glaucoma treatment, 85, 88
in phacolytic uvcitis, 207
as hyphema treatment,216
in pigmentary uveitis, 197
Motor vehicle accidents
in systermic disease, 190
as prerelinal hemontage cause, 218
 Norwegian dunkerhound, inherited ocular and otic
as proptosis cause,209
defects in, 234
Mucoccle, zygomatic, 308
Norwegian elkhound
dlifferentiated from zygomatic sialadenitis, 307-308
cataracts in, 116117
Mucopwrulent discharge, keratoconjunctivitis sicca-
entropion in,153
related, 57, 58
glaucoma in, 74, 76
Mutation test, differentiated f1om marke1/linkage test,
lens luxation in, 79
262
progrcssive retinal atrophy in, 248
Mycoplasma, as conjunctivitis cause, 26
retinal dcgeneration in, 249
Mydriatics
retinal dysplasia in, 252
as symptomatic Ireatment for cataracts.117
Nosrils,dry,in keratoconjunctivitis sicca,141
use after cataract surgery, 124
Nova Scotia ducktoling retricver, retinal degeneration
as uveitis treatment, in systemic disease, 190
in,249
Myositis
Nuclcar sclerosis, 115-116
masticatory,305,306,307
Nyctalopia, progressive retinal atrophy-related, 241
of temporal muscle, as nictitating membrane pro-
Nystagmus,131132
lapse cause,68,68
abscnce of, 132
convergcnt strabismus-rclated.143
Nasal bone, fractures of, 149
definition of, 131
Nasal gland, innervation of, 141
Nasolacrimal duct
Obesity,in dogs,sudden acquired retinal degeneration-
accessory opening of, 147
rclated,275
cystic dilation of, 14
Oculocardiac reflex, 143
Nasolacrimal system
Oculomotor nerve.See Cranial nerve II1
closure of, as epiphora cause, 147, 148. 148-149,
Ocupress, 89
150-151,152
Ohm's law,1
Hushing of, 149
Old English sheepdog
Neovascularization, comeal, keratoconjunctivitis sicca-
cataracts in,I16-117
related, 57
progressive retinal atrophy in, 242
Neptazane, 87,88
retinal degeneration in,249
Neuritis, optic
retinal dysplasia in, 252
differentiated from sudidcn acquircd retinal dcgener-
uveodermatologic syndrome in, 192
ation,275-276
One-cycd animals, 295
toxoplasmosis-related, 200
Ophthalmoscopy, for fundus examination, 225
ultrasonographic evaluation of, 22
Opsins, 8
Neuropathies, optic, 139-146
Optic nerve
glaucomatous optic. 73
enlarged, maguctic resonance imaging of, 17
Newfoundland dog, entropion in, 153
functional assessment of,in dense cataract,141
Niacinamide,as uveodermatologic syndrome treat-
glaucoma-related damage to,99-100
ment,196
hypoplasia of
Nickel, as asteroid hyalosis component, 281, 282
as congenital blindness cause, 143, 144
 Nictitating membrane
relationship with other inherited eye anomalics,
abnormalities of, 67-72
233
cartilage defects of, 71. 72
toxoplasrmosis of, 200
Homer's syndrome-related protrusion of. 141
Optic nervc head
lacerations of, 67
“cupping”of,in glaucoma,81,82,99
neoplasia of, 29, 29
 melanosis-related pigment deposition in, 108
nonpigmented.67
Optic neuropathy
prolapsed, 68-69.69, 302, 302
causes of
prolapsed gland of. 71
in cats, 146
removal of, 6970
in dogs, 144-145
tear gland of, 147
as sudden blindness cause, 144
Nictitating membrane tcar gland, 147
OptiPranolol, 89
Night blindness, congenital stationary, 261
Orbicularis oculi muscle, proptosis-related spasm of,
Nitrous oxide, use as cryogen, 174
61
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Orbital disease, 301-308
hyphema as containdication to, 217
abscess, 303-3015, 304, 305
as keratoconjunctivitis sicca cause, 29
differentiatcd from orbital cellulitis, 305
as proliferative keratoconjunctivitis treatment,55
as optic neuropathy cause.145
as septic endophthalmitis treatment,223
clinical signs of, 301, 302
Index
327
Orbital disease (cont.)
Photocoagulation thcrapy (cont.)
cystic,303
contraindication in melanosis, 109
as exophthalmos cause, 29
for retinal detachmcnt, 271, 272, 273
inflammatory,303
Photodynamic therapy, for eyelid tumors, 175
localization of, 301
Photophobia
neoplastic,303, 304
keratoconjunctivitis sicca-related, 57
as nictiating membrane protrusion cause, 302, 302
uveitis-related, 183
ultrasonographic evaluation of, 21, 22
Photoreceptors, 1, 3
Orbital gland, 147
dysplasia of,247-248
Orbitotomy, as zygomatic mucocele and sialadenitis
Phthisis bufbi, calaract-related, 116
treatment,308
Pica, sudden acquired rctinal degcneration-related,
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals, genetic testing
275
registry of, 267
 Pigment deposition. See aiso Melanin
Osteitis, petrous, as facial paralysis causc, 140
piginentary uveitis-related,197
Otitis
Pilocarpine
interna, bilateral, absence of nystagmus in, 132
contraintlication in secondary glaucoma, 91
media-intema,140
as keratoconjunctivitis sicca treatment, 59
side effecls of, 84
 Pain, ocular
Pilocarpine gcl, as glancoma treatmen1, 88
cntropion-rclated,154
 Plant material, as ocular foreign body, 213
glaucoma-related,80,84,85,90,100
Pointer, comcal dystrophy in, 35
as nictitating membrane prolapse cause,68
Poliosis, uvcodcrmatologic syndrome-related, 192
orbital cellulitis-related, 306
Polycoria,135
septic endophthalmitis-related,223
Polydipsia
uveitis-rclated.178,179
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors-related, 8687
Palpebral fissure
megcstrol acetatc-related. 55
diamond- or pagoda-shaped, correction of, 163, 163
 sudden acquired retinal degeneration-related, 144,
Horner's syndrome-relatcd narrowing of, 141
275, 276
Jensen tcchnique for narrowing of, 164,164,165
Polymerase chain rcaction tesl, for feline herpesvirus-
 Pancreatitis, as comeal lipid or calcium infiltralion
1,27
cause,37
Poly methyImethacrylate, as intracapsular intraocular
Panleukopenia virus infection, as retinal degeneration
lens material, 123
cause, 250, 250
Polymyositis,extraocular,307,307
Pannus, 70,70
Polyphagia, sudden acquired retinal degencralion-
Panophthalmitis
relatcd, 144,275,276
chronic, 179
Polyuria
definition of, 178, 179
carhonic anhydrase inhibitors-related, 8687
prognosis for vision in, 182
megestrol acetate-related, 55
Panuvcitis
sudden acquired retinal degcneration-related, 275,
bilateral, 206
276
clinical signs of, 184
Poodle
retinal detachment-related,268
glaucoma in,103
uveodermatologic syndrome-related. 192, 196
idiopathic epiphora in, 149
Papilloma, of eyelid, 169, 171
impcrforate puncta in, 149
Papillon
lens luxation in, 79
progressive retinal atrophy in, 248
miniatwe
retinal degeneration in, 249
corncal dystrophy in,35
 Parasitic infections, as uveitis cause, 181
entropion in, 153
Pedicle grafts,for ulcerative wound, 211
glaucoma in, 74, 76
Pekingese
progressive retinal atrophy in, 244, 248
corneal insensitivity in, 140
spontaneous retinal detachment in, 274
keratoconjunctivitis in,57
retinal degeneration in, 249
 prolapse of nictitating menbrane gland in, 71
standard
proptosis in, 64
cataracts in, 116-117
retinal degcneration in, 249
progressive retinal atrophy in, 243
Perfluoropropanc, use in pneurmatic retinopexy,
Ao
272-273
cataracts in, 116117
Perforations, ocular, as endophthalmitis cause, 209
cnlropion in, 153
Periodontal diseasc, as orbital abscess cause, 303
epiphora in,/48
Persian cat, corueal sequestra in, 49, 50
progressive retinal atrophy in, 243, 248
Phacoemulsification, of cataracts, 120
spontaneous retinal detachment in, 274
short-term success rate of, 129
Portuguese water dog
 Phenylephtine, as hyphema treatment, 216
progressive retinal atropby in, 248
Phospholine iodide, 88
genctic tcst for,261
Photocoagulation therapy
retinal degeneration in, 249
for baphthalmic eye, 102
PRA. See Retinal atophy, progressive
328
prced marker tesl, for progressive retinal atrophy, 265,
Rctinal abiotrophies (conr.)
266
in dogs, 247
prcd (progressive rod-cone degeneration), 248
 Retinal atrophy
Prednisolone
as blindness cause, 241
as hyphema trcatnent, 216
in cats, 250,251
as uveitis Teatment
progressive. 229, 241,245, 246-251
in phacolytic uveitis, 207
advanced, 241, 241, 242-243, 244
in pigmentary uveitis,198
bilaterality of, 241
in toxoplasmosis-related uveitis, 204
ccntral,246,247,251
as uveodermatologic syndrome treatmcnt, 196
differentiated from sudden acquired retinal
Prednisone, as uvcitis treatnent, 188
degeneration, 275, 276
Prcgnancy.in humans,toxoplasmosis during,20H0
early,244,245
Progressive rod-cone degeneration (prcd), 248
genetic testing for, 261-267
Propranolol, as feline hypertension treatment,279
implication for brccding,264265
Proptosis, 0cular, 61-66, 62, 64
photorcccptor dysplasia in,247-248
definition of. 61
prcd marker test for. 265,266
prevention of,65
 prcd (progressivc rod-conc degeneration)-type,
trauma-related, 209
248
as vision loss cause. 208
Retinal degeneration, 241-251
Prostaglandin analogues, as glaucoma treatment, 85,
after retinal reattachment, in cats, 280
89-90
asteroid hyalosis associated with, 22
Prosthesis, cosmctic, as buphthalmic globc replace-
in cats, 249250, 249, 250, 280
Iment,101-102,103
glaucoma-related,99,100
Protozoan infections, as uveitis cause, 181
sudden acquired. 144, 229, 275-276
Pseudomonas qeruginosa, as corneal ulcer cause, 32
toxic,251,251
Pseudophakic eye, 122
Retinal detachment, 268-Z74
Pug,congenital cataract in, 772
apptarance of,268
Pupil. 133-138
blunt traumatic injury-relatcd, 208
abnormalities of,133-135
cataract-rclated,116
acute glaucoma-relatcd,90
ultrasonographic evaluation of, 15
afferent defects, 133,134
cataract surgery-rclated, 129
in poorly pigmented animals, 135-136, 135
causes of,230-231
dilated nonresponsive, in glaucoma, 31
coloboma-related, 232, 233
D-shaped, in lymphosarcoma,137
as contraindication to breeding, 233
Pupillary escape, 133--134
cryosurgical treatiment of, 234
Pupillary light refexes. 80,133-134, 136, 137, 215
definition of,230,268
in cataract patients,118
differentiated from sudden acquired relinal
conscnsual (indirect), 80, 137
degeneration,275,276
in hyphema,215
exudative,230,268,273.274
in progressive retinal atrophy, 246
blastornycosis-rclated, 189
 in sudden acquired retinal degeneration (SARD), 144
cndophthalmitis-relatcd, 222-223
in toxoplasmosis, 200
hypertension-related,32
Puppies
in cats, 146146, 277, 277. 278,279, 279, 280
blindness in, 143, 144, 234
as hypheina cause,79
buphthalmia in, 82
hyphema-related,32
entropion or ectropion surgery in, 153
lens-induced uvcitis-related,268,271,271
retinal dysplasia in,254,255-256,255.256,258
ophthalmoscopic appearance of, 231
Pyometra, megestrol acetate-related, 28
lecurrence of, 274
retinal dysplasia-rclated, 257
Radiation therapy, for cyelid tumors, 175
rhegmatogethous, 231, 268, 273
Reconstruction, of eyelid, 172-173
causes of, 268
"Red eye," 25-32
treatment for, 271-272, 271, 272, 274
localization of,25-26
serous, 268,269
ocular foreign body-related, 213
spontancous, genetic predilection for, 274
Renal failurc, cluronic. as fcline hypcrtension causc,
total bullous, 23 /
277
tractional,231,268,271-272,273
 Renal function, in feline hypertensive retinopathy, 278.
trauma-related, 209
280
treatment for,231,268
Reptiles, color vision system of, 9. 10
ultrasonographic evaluation of, 21, 21, 146
Retina
uveitis-1elated, 179
functional assessment of, in dense cataract, 141
uveodermatologic syndrome-relatcd, 192
hemorthage in, 219.219. 220, 221
vertical,270
large tears of, 268, 270, 274
Relinal dysplasia, 252-260
light response of, 2
as congenital blindness cause, 143
Retinal abiotrophies
definition of, 252
in cats,249-250
rclationship with choroidal hypoplasia, 233
xapul
329
Retinal dysplasia (cont.)
Scleritis,30-31,31
relationship with coloboma,233
as "red eye” cause, 25
relationship with retinal detachmcnt, 233
Selcrouveiris,268
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED), 246
Sealyham terricr, retinal dysplasia in, 252
Retinal separation, peripapilary, magnetic resonance
Seidel fest, 128, 209
jnaging of、17
Sequestruin, cumcal, feline, 46-51, 47. 50
Retinitis, 228
with diffuse comeal edema, 46
diffusc, 229
rcnxoval of, 4849,48, 49
uvcitis-related,180
Shar-pci
Retinochoroiditis, 228
entropion and excessive facial fold corrcction in,
Retinopathy
157,158
diabetic, color Doppler utrasonographic evaluation
entropion predisposition, 153
of, 12
glaucoma in,82
hypertensive, in cats, 278. 278, 279, 280
Shetland sheepdog
in older cats,145-146,145
corncal dystrophy in, 35, 36
Retinopexy
inherited eye anomalies in, 232-240
demarcation,272
retinal dcgeneralion in, 249
laser,271,272,273
uvcodermatologic syndromc in,192,193,194, 195
pneumatic.272-273
 Shih tz.
prior to cataract surgcry, 271
cataracts in, 116117
Retraction reflex, cranial nerves involved in, 143
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in, 2829
Retrobulbar disease, differentiated from buphthalmic
 prolapse of nictitating membrane gland in, 71
cye of glaucoma,99
proptosis in, 62
Rhinotracheitis, as corncal sequcstra causc, 46
retinal dcgeneration in, 249
Rickettsial infections, as uveitis cause, 181, 186, 188
spontaneous rctinal detachment in, 274
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, as uveitis cause, I185
Rotlweiler
Sialadenitis, zygomatic, differentiated from zygomatic
cataracts in. 116-117
mucocele,307-308
entropion in,153
Siamesc cat, cross-eyed trait in, 143
retinal degeneration in, 249
Siberian husky
retinal dysplasia in, 252
calaracts in,116117
corncal dystrophy in,35,36,36
St. Bemard
lens-induced uveitis in, 271
entropion in,153
progrcssive retinal atrophy in
uveodermatologic syndrome in, 192
genetic tcst for, 261
Salt, dietary, as feline hypertension cause, 277
photoreceptor degeneration associatcd with,248
Samoyed
retinal degeneralion in, 249
corncal dystrophy in, 35
uveodermatologic syndrome in, 192, 193
cyclosporine-resistant keratoconjunctivitis sicca in,
Silky terricr, spontaneous retinal detachment in, 274
59
Skull fractures, as optic neuropathy cause, 145
glaucoma in,103
Sloughi, progressive retinal atrophy in, genetic test for,
imperforate puncta in, 149
261
progressive retinal atrophy in, genetic tcst for, 261
Sodium ascorbate, as alkali bum treatment, 208
retinal degeneration in, 249
Sodium citrate, as alkali burn treatment, 208
Ielinal dysplasia in,252
"Soemmering's ring,” 129
uveodenmatologic syndrome in,192
Springer spaniel
Sarcoma, ocular, in cais, 287, 291, 293
English
Scarring, chorioretinal, toxoplasmosis-related, 203
cataracts in,116-117
Schiotz. tonometry、73, 8!
dysplasia in, 229
Schirmer tear test, 28-29, 39, 57, 58, 148
entropion in,153
Schnauzer
retinal degeneration in, 249
keratoconjunctivitis in, 57
retinal dysplasia in, 252
miniature
retinal dysplasia in,252,256
cataracts in, 116-117
Welsh
phacolytic uveitis in, 207
lens luxation in, 79
progressive retinal atrophy in
retinal degeneration in, 249
genetic tcst for,261
 Squamous cell carcinoma
photoreceptor degeneration associated with, 248
of eyelid, 169, 170, 174175
retinal degcneration in,249
of nictitaling membrane, 67, 69, 70
standard, cataracts in, II6—117
Staphyloma,233
sudden acquired relinal degeneration in, 275
laser cyclophotocoagulation-related, 109
Sclera, melanosis-related pigment in, 105, 106, 107,
Strabisrnus
108
 computed tomographic scan of, 15
Scleral crescent, 233, 239
convergent, 143
Scleral ectasia, 233
definition of, 142, 301
Scleral vesseis, engorged, 30-31
myositis-related, 306
330
Index
Strabismus (cont.)
Tibetan spaniel
proptosis-related,64,64, 65
progressive retinal atrophy in, 248
Striae
retinal dcgcncration in, 249
cormeal,81~82
Tibetan termier
Descemet's, 81-82
pIogressive retinal atrophy in, 248
Subretinal space, 230
retinal degeneration in, 249
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration,144,229,
Timolol, 87, 88-89, 91
275-276
side effects of, 89
Sulfa drugs, as keratoconjunctivitis sicca causc, 59
Timoptic, 89
Sulfonamides, as keratoconjunctivitis sicca cause, 29
Tissue plasminogen activator
Sutures and suturing procedures
as hyphema treatment, 83-84, 217
for blepharoplastic procedures, 155, 160, 162
Tissue plasminogen activator, 83-84
comeal,210,211, 212
as relinal hemorrhage treatment, 221
Symblepharon, chemical burn-related, 208
Tomography. See also Computed tomography
Sympathetic denervation. See Horner's syndromc
optical coherencc,12
Synpathomimetic agents, as glaucoma treatment, 85,
Tonometry
89
for acwtc glaucoma diagnosis, 90
Synchysis scintillans (cholesterolosis bulbi), 282,
applanation,73..74
285
Schiotz, 73, 8/
Synechiae
Toxoplasma gondi,200, 203-204
chemical burn-related,208
aqueous humor antibody test for, 203
endophthalmitis-related,222
Toxoplasmosis
posterior
in cats, 200-204, 200, 201-202, 203
cataract swgery-relatcd, 129
as optic neuropathy cause, 146
phacolytic uveitis-related,205
subclinical, 200
Systemic disease
treatment of, 203-204
as nictitaing membrane prolapse cause, 68
in humans, 200
as uveitis cause, 184-191, 206
as optic neuropathy cause
in cats,146
in dogs, 145
as fundus component,225
as uveitis cause, 185
hyperreflective lesions of,225-227,229
Trauma, ocuiar
hyporefective lesions of, 226, 226. 230
acute,208-213
uveitis-related color changes in, 179
cmergency treatment for, 209-210
Tarsorrhaphy
as hemorrhage cause, 214
 partial, for acute ocula trauma repair, 210
as hyphema causc,78-79
temporary,for lagophthalmos correction,163
as optic neuropathy cause.145
Taurine deficiency, in cats
as proptosis cause,61-62,62
as fundal lesion cause, 229
as rhegmatogenous retinal dctachment causc, 268
as retinal atrophy cause,250,251
ultrasonographic evaluation of, 23
Tear fikm, precorneal, 57
as uvcitis cause, 207
'Tears
Tricbiasis. 28
function of, 147
as epiphora cause,148
overproduction of, as epiphora cause, 147, 148,
medial canthal, 165
151-152
Trichromacy,8
production of,147
Trifuridine, feline herpesvirus-relatcd conjunctivitis
'Television, color, animals² perception of, 9
treatmcnt,27
Temporal bone, petrous, in facial paralysis, 140
Trigeminal nerve. See Cranial nerve V
Temporal muscle, myositis of, 68, 68
Trimethoprim-sulfonamide, as feline toxoplasmosis
'Tenon's tissue grafts
trcatment, 204
for acute ocular trauma repair, 217
Trusopt, 87,88
as comeal sequestrum treatment, 47, 48
Tumors
Telriers. See aiso specifc terrier breeds
of eyelid, 165, 166, 169-175
lens luxation in, 79
intra0cular,287296
Tetanus, as nictitating membrane prolapse cause, 68
asteroid hyalosis associated with, 22
Tetracycline
clinical signs of, 287-288
as alkali bum treatment, 208
complications of, 288-289
as feline herpesvirus-related conjunetivitis treat-
differentiated from iris/ciliary cysts, 297-298
ment,27
cpidemiology of, 287
as idiopathic epiphora treatment, 150, 151
as glaucoma cause, 78, 83, 100
as uveodermatologic syndrome treatment, 196
as hyphema cause, 7879
‘Thermokeratoplasty. as endothelial dystrophy trcat-
managcmont of, 292-295
ment, 38
metastatic, 291, 295
Third eyelid. See Nictitating mcinbrane
as optic neuropathy cause, 145
Thrombocytopenia, intraretinal hcmorrhage associated
prognosis for,290-291
with.230
as "red eye”" cause, 29, 29
Index
331
Tumors (cont.)
Uveitis (cont.)
ultrasonographic cvaluation of, 22
as retinal dctachument risk factor,268,271,271
as uveitis cause, 181, 182
phacoclaslic, 205,206
Tunica vasculosa, persistent hyperplastic, as cataract
phacolytic,205207,205,206,207
cause,118
pigmentary
in golden retrievers, 197-199
Ulcers, cormcal
uveal cysts associated with, 300
alkali burn-related, 208
posterior, 179, 181
cataract surgery-related, 127
clinical signs of, 184
in cats, 70
dcfinition of, 178
comeal degcneration-rclated, 37
prognosis for vision in, 182
comeal edena-related, 38
rcd blood cell lcakage in, 186
indolcnt, 39-45,40,42,43,44
as "red eye'" cause, 25
keratoconjunctivitis sicca-related, 57
systemic disease-related, 184191
nictitating membrane foreign bodiy-related, 69
treatrnent for,188,189
proptosis-related, 63
toxoplasrmosis-rclated, 200, 200. 201, 203-204
as "red eye”cause, 31-32.32
treatment for, 204
Utrasonography, 11, 18-24
Tauma-related, 207, 214
artifacts or false readings in, 23
ulcerative keratitis-related,207
A-scan differentiated from B-scan, 19-20, 19
uveodermatologic syndrome-related,192,193,196
for asteroid or synchysis bodies diagnosis, 282, 283
vitreous hemorrhagc-related, 218-219
color Doppler,12
Uvcodermatologic syndrome, 192-196
for hypertensive rctinal detachmcnt evaluation, 278,
uveitis associated with, 185, 190
279
Uvula, 177
indications for,14-15,18
performance of, 1819
Vasculitis, as ocular hcmorrhage causc, 214
preoperative, in cataract patients, 20, 20,21
Venography, orbital, 14
for uvcitis diagnosis, 188
VER.SeeVisual evokedresponse
lUtrasound phacoemulsification, of cataracis, 120
Vermiform streaks.See Rctinal dysplasia
short-term success rate of, 129
Vidarabine monohydrate, as felinc herpesvirus-rclated
Urermia, as corneal lipid or calcium infiluation cause,
conjunctivitis teatment, 27
37
Viral infections. See also specific viral infections
Uvea
as uveitis causc, 181
anatomy of, 177
Viscoelastic (*"visco") malerial, use in intraocular
anterior, 177
surgery,121,125
melanocytic lesions of, 287
Vision loss. See Blindness
posterior, 177
Visual evoked cortical response (VECP). See Visual
Uveitis, 177-183, 177
evoked rcsponse (VER)
anterior, 179,181,182
Visual evoked rcsponse (VER). 56
acute, 180
Visual system, electrical activity of, 16
cataract surgery-related, 126-127
Vitamin E defciency, 229, 230
chronic,180
Vitamin supplementation, conlraindication in progres-
clinical signs of, 184
sive retinal atrophy, 246
defitition of, 178
Vitiligo, uvcodermalologic syndrome-rclated. 192
dyscoria-related,/36
Vitrectomy
ocular melanosis-related,108
pars plana, 271-272
treatment for, 190
as septic endophthalmitis treatment,223
cataracts-related, 116
Vitreous
calaract surgery-relatcd, 126-127, 128-129
cxpansion of, cataract surgery-related, 125
chemical hurn-related, 208
liquefaction (syneresis) of, vitreous degeneration-re-
chronic,/80
latcd,22
clinical sigms of, 179, 180
magnetic resonance imaging of,16
common causes of, 181-182
persistent hyperplastic primary, 118, 273
corticosteroid treatmcnt for, 290-291
"'snow bal' opacities of, 28I
definition of, 177, 184
synchysis scintitlans of,282,285
differentiated from glaucorma, 30-31
Vitreous degeneration
endophthalmitis-related,222
calaract surgery-related, 129
engorged episcleral or scleral vessels associated
as retinal detachment cause,268,271
with, 3031
vitreous liquefaction associated with, 22
foreign body-related, 213
Vitrcous echoes,22
as glaucoma cause,32,78,80.83
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, 185, 190, 192, 268
hemorrhage associated with, 187, 218-219
as hyphema cause, 79
Wedge rcscction techmique, 160, 160, 162
 intracapsular intraocular lens-related, 122
Weinaraner, corneal dystrophy in, 35
intraocular turmor-related,288,289
Welsh corgi
lens-induced, 118
progressive retinal atrophy in, genelic test for, 261
332
Index
Weish corgi (conr.)
Xeromyctcria, in keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 141
retinal degeneration in, 249
X-linked diseases, breeding strategy in, 264
rctinal dysplasia in, 252
X-rays, 11-12
Welsh springer spaniel
plain versus contrast,13-14, 14
lens luxation in, 79
of skull,7.3
rctinal degeneration in. 249
indications for, 12
West Highland white terrier, keratoconjunctivitis
sicca in, 28-29, 57
Yorkshire terrier
cyclosporine resistant, 59
calaracts in, 116-117
Whippet, corneal dystrophy in, 35
idiopathic epiphora in, 149
White-coated animals
keratoconjunctivitis in, 57, 59
idiopatic epiphora in, 149-150
proptosis in, 62
inherited eye anomalies in, 234
retinal degeneration in, 249
nonpigmented mictitating membrane in,67
retinal dysplasia in, 252
pupillary abnormalitics in, 135-136
spontaneous retinal detachment in, 274
White matter, magnetic resonance imaging of, 16
Wounds, perforatcd, 209
Zenker's fixative, 309, 310
Zine, as asteroid hyalosis conponent, 281, 282
Xalatan. 88, 90
Zygomatic salivary gland, mucocele or sialadeniris of,
Xanthoma, in cats, 169-170
307308