HANDBOOK
OF
Poisoning
in
Dogs and Cats
ALEXANDERCAMPBELL
&MICHAELCHAPMAN
ll
Handbook of poisoning
in dogs and cats
Dedications
To the memory of Sylvia A. Campbell and Lynne M. Grundy - AC.
To my parents - MC.
Handbook of poisoning
in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Blackweli
Science
 2000 A Campbell and M Chapman
DISTRIBLTORS
Blackwell Science Ltd
Marston Book Services Ltd
Editorial Offices:
PO Box269
Osney Mead, Oxford OX2 OEL
Abingdon
25 John Street, London WC1N 2BL
Oxon OX14 4YN
23 Ainslie Place, Edinburgh EH3 6AJ
(Orders:Tel:01235 465500
350 Main Street, Malden
Fax: 01235 465555)
MA 02148 5018,USA
54 University Street, Carlton
USA
Victoria 3053,Australia
Blackwell Science, Inc.
10, rue Casimir Delavigne
Commerce Place
75006 Paris, France
350 Main Street
Malden, MA 02148 5018
Other Editorial Offices:
(Orders:Tel:
800 759 6102
781 388 8250
Fax:781 388 8255)
Blackwell Wissenschafts-Verlag GmbH
Kurfurstendamm 57
Canada
10707 Berlin, Germany
Login Brothers Book Company
324 Saulteaux Crescent
Blackwell Science KK
Winnipeg, Manitoba R3J 3T2
MG Kodenmacho Building
(Orders:Tel:204 837-2987
7-10 Kodenmacho Nihombashi
Fax: 204 837-3116)
Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104, Japan
Australia
Blackwell Science Pty Ltd
The right of the Authors to be identified as
54 University Street
the Authors of this Work has been asserted
Carlton, Victoria 3053
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs
(Orders: Tel: 03 9347 0300
and Patents Act 1988.
Fax: 03 9347 5001)
All rights reserved. No part of this
A catalogue record for this title is available
publication may be reproduced, stored in a
from the British Library
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
ISBN 0-632-05029-2
form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise,except as permitted by theUK
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988,
For further information on
without the prior permission of the
Blackwell Science, visit our website:
publisher.
www.blackwell-science.com
First published 2000
Typeset and produced by Gray Publishing.
Tunbridge Wells, Kent
Printed and bound in Great Britain by
The Alden Press, Osney Mead, Oxford
The Blackwell Science logo is a
trade mark of Blackwell Science Ltd,
registered at the United Kingdom
Trade Marks Registry
5
Contents
Acknowledgements
Introduction
Alexander Campbell and Michael Chapman
1
Gastric decontamination
Michaei Chapman
 Laboratory sampling and analysis and sending samples by post
Michnel Chapman
12
Cats
Benzalkonium chloride
Nicola Bates
17
Dichlorophen
Alexander Campbell
20
Ethylene glycol
Nicola Bates with Alcxander Campbel!
22
Ivermectin
Alexander Campbell
27
Paracetamol
Alexander Campbell
31
Piperazine
Alexander Campbell
39
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids
Nicola Bates
42
Cats and dogs
Benzodiazepines
Mark Colbridge with Alexander Campbel!
47
Petroleum distillates/ White spirit/ Kerosene
Alexander Cambell
52
Poinsettia/ Euphorbia puicherrina
Alexander Campbell
55
 Silica gel
Nicola Bates
57
6
Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats Tv
Contents
Thermometers
Nicola Bates
58
Dogs
Allopurinol
Alexander Campbell
59
Alphachloralose
Alexander Campbel!
61
Anticoagulant rodenticides
Alexander Campbel!
64
Baclofen
Alexander Campbell
Batteries
Alexander Campbell
77
Blue-green algae/Cyanobacteria
Alexander Campbell
80
Borax
Alexander Campbell
86
Calciferol/Vitamin Dz and Cholecalciferol/Vitamin D3
Alexander Campbel!
89
Cannabis/Marihuana/Hashish
Alexander Campbel!
97
Carbamate insecticides
Nicola Bates
101
Chocolate/ Theobromine
Alexander Campbel!
106
Corticosteroids
Nicola Bates
111
Cotoneaster species
Alexander Campbel!
112
Cyanoacrylate adhesives
Alexander Campbell
114
Daffodil
Alexander Campbell
116
Diclofenac sodium
Alexander Campbe!!
119
Dieffenbachia
Alexander Campbell
126
7
vi I Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats
Contents
 Ethylene glycol
Alexarder Campbell
127
Fertilisers
Alexander Campbel!
133
Glyphosate
Nicoia Bates with Alexander Campbell
135
Holly/ llex aquifolium
Alexander Campbel!
139
Honeysuckle/ Lonicera species
Alexander Campbell
141
Horse chestnut/ Aesculus hippocastanum
Alexander Canpbell
143
Hymenoptera
Alexander Campbell
145
Ibuprofen
Alexander Campbell
148
Indomethacin
Aiexander Campbel!
156
Iron and iron salts
Alexander Campbell
163
Ivermectin
Alexander Canpbell
167
Laburnum species
Jennifer Butler
174
Loperamide
Alexander Campbell
177
Metaldehyde
Aicxander Campbel!
181
Methiocarb
Nicola Bates
186
Mistletoe / Viscum aibum
Alexander Campbell
190
Naproxen
Alexander Campbel!
192
Organophosphate insecticides
Nicola Bates with Alexander Campbell
199
Paracetamol
Alexander Campbell
205
8
Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats I vii
Contents
Paraquat
Nicola Bates
213
Phenolphthalein
Alexander Campbell
218
Phenoxy acid herbicides
Nicola Bates
219
Plastic explosive compounds
Aiexander Campbell
222
Pyracantha
Alexander Campbell
226
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids
Nicola Bates
228
Rhododendron and related plant species
Jennifer Butler
231
Rowan/ Sorbus aucuparia
Alexander Camybel!
234
Salbutamol
Alexander Campbell
235
Salt/sodium chloride
Nicola Bates with Alexander Campbell
238
Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor antidepressants
Alexander Campbel!
242
Sex hormones
Nicola Bates
245
Terfenadine
Alexander Campbell
247
Tricyclic antidepressants
Alexander Campbelt
250
Vipera berus berus/European adder
Alexander Campbell
254
Yew/ Taxus baccata and related plant species
Alexander Campbel!
258
9
vili  Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats
Contents
General bibliography and references
261
Appendix 1: Recommended holding for drugs used in
management of poisoning cases
262
Appendix 2: Case reporting
264
Appendix 3: Normal values for cats and dogs
267
Index
269
10
Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats  ix
Acknowledgements
This book was planned and written over a considerable period of time and
there have been many people involved in its preparation. As editors we
would fike to thank afl those who have made a valuable contribution to the
work.
First, we would like to thank Nicky Bates, Jennifer Butler and Mark
Colbridge, all members of the National Poisons Information Service (NPIS)
in London, for their help in writing some of the monographs in this
handbook. Nicky Bates deserves special thanks for her large contribution
and for lending her wisdom and experience in matters of book production,
indexing and editing. We would also like to thank all the other present and
past poisons information specialists of the NPIS in London for their help in
testing' the book and its contents while cheerfully handling the ever-
increasing numbers of veterinary enquiries received over the last 8 years.
Their useful comments, suggestions and constructive criticism have been
invaluable.
The staff at the sister Veterinary Poisons Information Service in Leeds has
been very supportive and we acknowledge in particular the help of
Marianne Dawson, Lynne Hodgson, Jane Marsh and Alan Judd.
Thanks are also due to Helaina Checketts, the librarian of the Medical
Toxicology Unit, for her help in tracking down and obtaining many of the
references used in the preparation of the book.
Nick Edwards, the manager of the NPIs in London and Glyn Volans, the
director of the Medical Toxicology Unit, also earn our gratitude for their
e op se yooq aun go uogeiedad au gunp juawaenosua pue poddns
the members of the VPIS's Veterinary Poisons Information Advisory
   s      am 'd  
Gibson, one of the founders of this committee, for his sterling efforts in
keeping the issue of poisons information provision for the veterinary
profession alive until the issue was resolved. Without him, the VPIS, and
certainly this handbook, would probably still not exist.
Finally, we would like to thank both Richard Miles and Antonia Seymour
of Blackwell Science for ensuring that our text was finally produced as this
book.
AC
MC
11
x Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats
Handbookof Poisoning in dogsandcats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  2OOO A Campbell and M Chapmain
Introduction
About this book
This book is intended as a handbook to help veterinary clinicians and their
 asnd are tr s pue sop ui osiod go saso a on 
d  sa r d o sd p sad n
poisonings received from concerned pet owners. In writing the book,
approximately 15 000 past enquiries received by the Veterinary Poisons
Information Service in London (VPISLn) have been reviewed in an attempt
to provide information on the agents that are commonly implicated in
 poisoning or potential poisoning cases in small arimals. In addition, there
are a small number of entries for agents where poisoning cases are less
frequent but where the agent may be very toxic, the clinical effects of rapid
     m  n  
complicated.
Each agent - or group of agents such as'anticoagulant rodenticides' - has a
separate chapter covering its effects in either the cat or the dog. A few
chapters combine the information for both species where the clinical effects
and management are identical. Each chapter is designed to provide all the
information that should be necessary for the immediate management of a
particularcase withoutthe needtorefer elsewhereforadditional
information. Hence, for example, the information regarding emetics and
absorbents is repeated in each chapter. Thus, cross-referencing has
deliberately been kept to a minimum.
Each chapter follows a similar format to enable the user to locate the
information required quickly once they are familiar with the layout. This
structure is that used for all the major entries in the VPIs 'in-house′
database. It has gradually evolved though our experience of handling
poisons information enquiries from both the veterinary and medical
professions for over three decades.
The work of the VPlS
In April 1992 a veterinary poisons information service was officially
launched by the London and Leeds centres of the UK National Poisons
Information Service (NPIS). Like ali the centres of the NPIS, prior to this
veterinary profession to the best of their ability. However, from the mid- to
late-1980s, an increasing demand for veterinary information from these two
centres indicated a need for a poisons information service providing
animal-specific advice for the veterinary profession.
LZ
Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats  
Introduction
Discussions between the London and Leeds centres of the NPIs, the British
Veteninary Association, the National Office for Animal Health, the British
Agrochemicals Association, other animal welfare organisations and
the issue of animal toxicology and the provision of poisons information.
Several studies were initiated and carried out. These concluded that most
veterinarians who had used the existing NPIS facilities had found the
information provided helpful in managing poisoning cases. It was also
considered that expansion of the NPIS remit to cover veterinary toxicology
service, since the infrastructure was already in place and the centres had
long experience of providing such a service to the medical profession.
However, as the NPIS is largely funded by the Department of Health to
serve health service professionals only, it was clear that if the service was to
continue providing information to the profession, then separate funding
would need to be found,
In the spring of 1992 it was decided that the VPIS would be set up to
operate from the Leeds and London NPIS centres. The service was
advertised as a subscription service to which veterinary practices would
need to register on an annual basis and has continued operating in this
way. On payment of a small annual fee each practice is offered unlimited
access to either centre 24 hours a day. The fee is dependent on the number
Of veterinary surgeons working in the practice. The service is not public
access and is offered only to veterinary surgeons, animal welfare
organisations, industry and those involved in veterinary research.
At the start of each enquiry a subscriber number is requested to identify the
caller and then the enquiry will be handled. The enquiries are answered by
trained information specialists and pharmacists with ready access to a wide
variety of sources. These include veterinary toxicology textbooks, past case
reports from the literature, and the results and findings of animal
 au sn d ro p  pd m ro
also human toxicology databases that contain some animal data and there is
a database of past cases reported to the VPIS. Additionally, as part of the
NPIS, the VPIS has access to a large library of data sheets provided by
manufacturers throughout the UK. These are held in commercial
confidence but they do provide information about the composition,
packaging, physicochemical characteristics and, in some cases, toxicological
characteristics of a wide variety of commercially available products or
preparations. Access to these data therefore allows the VPIS staff to make
The VPIS also has a number of experts to whom referrals can be made
when the need arises, and the laboratory facilities of the NPIS are also made
available to theVPIS subscribers.Referral to the laboratory is made through
the information service staff.
13
2Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats
introduction
Each enquiry made to the VPIS is recorded at the time of enquiry on a
specially designed individual report form. The information collected from
the caller would normally cover:
●the source of the enquiry
·t
the animal concerned (breed, sex, age and also if lactating or pregnant)
the agent (name, manufacturer, package details, composition)
the incident (route of exposure, circumstances of exposure, time since
exposure)
the clinical effects (those already present and their timecourse)
any treatments already instituted
results and findings of anylaboratory or other investigations
performed
● the owner's details (name, address) or any case reference.
This 'snapshot of a case at this particular point of time is vital in allowing
some risk assessment to be made belore information is provided from the
sources mentioned above.
For the majority of the enquiries received the callers are then asked to
provide written follow-up information about the cases. Case questionnaires
are dispatched within 14 days of the initial information request, together
 n  n sg  adaa dn e 
the incident and allow verification of the information recorded at the time
of the original enquiry. They also allow outcome of the case to be
documented and provide valuable information about how the incident was
handled after the VPIS consultation. It is these data that are used to build
the 'in-house' database of past case reports that has proved so valuable in
ofthisbook
When a large number of reports about a specific agent in a specific animal
are collected, the information is used, together with what is available in the
literature, to compile the type of monograph found in this book. These
represent a distillation of the data that are currently available on the agent
experience. The sections for each entry allow information on the relevant
aspect of the case, whether clinical effects, potential fatal dose, management
or kinetics, to be accessed and delivered rapidly. The callers will therefore
usually be provided with information within minutes of telephone contact.
Loosely categorised, the sections cover the following.
The ogent(s)
This section covers description and classification of the agent where
appropriate. For animals and plants the common location may be
described. For drugs, household products and pesticides, there will be
information about the usual presentation and composition of the products,
a nnoqe uo an u ahi aae suns u
Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats  3
Introduction
the recommended dosage.
Incidenceofpoisoning
This section outlines the number of enquiries that may be received by the
VPIS about the agent per annum. This is to provide some idea of likely
occurrence. There may also be some outline information about the number
of cases with a fatal outcome or those that remain asymptomatic.
Recommendeddosage
This provides the recommended dosage regimen for drugs that have
veterinary application in the species under discussion.
Toxicity
These sections outline what is known about the toxicity of the agent. They
will usually include some LDso or [owest fatal dose data from the literature,
together with similar information from past VPIS cases. There may be also
some case reports from the VPIS database or the literature. These will be
Mechanism of toxicity
Where included, this section will outline the mechanism of toxicity in the
species in question.
Kinetics and metobolism
This section is included to provide data on the absorption, metabolism and
elimination of the agent. This may be useful in determining how long the
animal may need to be observed or treated, and also in determining
whether certain management protocols should be instituted.
Clinicol effects
This section describes the likely clinical effects resulting from exposure.
poisonings. In some cases, there may be some information on common
post-mortem findings.
Treatment
These sections outline a suggested management protocol. There will
usually be some guidelines as to what would constitute an exposure that
necessitated some form of treatment. Dose regimens for emetics and
adsorbents will be detailed where appropriate. Where other drugs or
4 I Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats
Introduction
antidotes are used in treatment, the indications and dosage regimens will
be provided. There may be some suggestion for minimum observation times.
Where laboratory analyses may be useful in determining treatment, these
will be provided.
References
These sections provide details of the literature papers and articles that have
been used in the compilation of the monograph and provide a useful
reading list for those wishing to pursue further study or investigation into a
particular topic.
Review of work to date
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992, the two branches of the service have
give an indication of the types of poisonings that are relatively common-
place and those that are more rare but that are potentially serious when
they do occur. Sadly, no national statistics on the occurrence of poisoning
cases in animals are collected and the full extent of the problem is therefore
unknown. These VPIS data probably do not refiect the national occurrence
for the following reasons. First, not all practices in the UK use the VPIS.
Second, those that do probably do not contact the service about all the
poisoning or suspected poisoning cases that present to their premises.
Many will only call about more complex cases, those where there are
unexpected or serious clinical effects or those where data are lacking from
other sources. However, when compared with one another, the experience
of each centre is very similar.
In 1992 the VPIS London centre received a total of 951 enquiries. By 1998
the total enquiries handied per annum had reached 4292. A total of 68% of
these enquiries involve exposures or potential exposures in dogs and 17%
in cats. The remaining ernquiries concern exposures in horses, livestock,
miscelaneous and other species.
The most common enquiries received during this time are listed in order
below.
 Ibuprofen ingestion by dogs
 Difenacoum ingestion by dogs
Bromadiolone ingestion by dogs
$
Paracetamol ingestion by dogs
●
Metaldehyde ingestion by dogs
 Unknown agent exposures in dogs
+
 Oral contraceptives ingestion by dogs
Salbutamol exposures in dogs
Borax ingestion by dogs
●Adder bites to dogs
16
Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats I 5
Introduction
Permethrin exposures in cats
Chocolate ingestion by dogs
Glyphosate exposures in dogs
1
Diclofenac sodium ingestion by dogs
 Bone meal ingestion by dogs
 Paraquat exposures in dogs
Coumatetralyl ingeshion by dogs
 Unknown agent exposures in cats
Fertiliser ingestion by dogs
●
Alphachloralose ingestion by dogs.
As can be seen, many of these common enquires concern pesticides
including anticoagulant rodenticides (e.g. difenacoum, bromadiolone.
coumatetralyl), molluscicides (metaidehyde), and insecticides (permethrin).
Drugs commonly encountered in the home environment including the
analgesics or anti-inflammatory drugs ibuprofen, diclofenac sodium and
paracetamol are the other common type of enquiry.
The broad group 'medicines' comprises the largest category of enquiries each
year, accounting for approximately 30% of calls. Agrochemicals are the next
most numerous category representing 26% of the total calls. Of these
  1  -s s ai  s p
total calls. Other calls relate to industrial chemicals (12%), household products
(11%), plants and fungi (13%), and the remainder concerm animal bites or
Between 3% and 6% of the VPISLn enquiries concern cases later reported
to have fatal outcomes. The agents most commonly implicated in these fatal
cases are:
Metaldehyde in dogs
 Paraquat in dogs and cats
+
 Anticoagulant rodenticides in dogs (e.g. difenacoum, brodifacoum and
bromadiolone)
 Blue-green algae in dogs
 Paracetamol in cats.
All these agents are covered by monographs in this handbook
The increasing usage of the VPIS centres by veterinary surgeons in the UK
demonstrates that the service continues to provide a valuable and reliable
source of information on animal toxicology. With increased usage it is
possible for more case data to be routinely collected and therefore for the
Asuoo paaondu pue paepdn aq mn papiaoid uogeoui su jo Aenb
The continued surveillance of all enquiries undertaken by both centres
places the VPIS in a unique position to alert the veterinary profession,
industry, regulatory authorities and other interested parties about agents
that are causing concern. It also allows trends in animal poisoning and its
management to be monitored.
17
6 I Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  200O A Campbell and M Chapmain
Gastric decontamination
Introduction
The removal of any unabsorbed poison from the patient is an obvious and
logical step. Specific entries in this book deal with the cases, perhaps
exceptional, where it is necessary to decontaminate the exterior of the body
(e.g. the skin, eyes). The gut lumen is obviously both more problematic to
remove a poison from and yet likely to require at least the consideration of
emptying in the majority of cases.
Techniques have been developed for removing material from all the
various portions of the alimentary tract, but it is the possibility of emptying
the stomach of as yet unabsorbed material that is of the greatest potential
benefit and that also requires prompt action on the clinician's part. (For a
discussion of techniques for other portions of the gastrointestinal tract, see
Chapman and Campbell, 2001.) While emptying the stomach of any burden
of unabsorbed poison may be obvious and logical, it has been the subject of
recent intense debate in human medicine. Snodgrass (1996, p. 971) states:
'Published clinical trials of [human] patients with oral overdose ingestions
do not show that induced emesis (usually with ipecac syrup; much less
frequently used is apomorphine or a mild liquid detergent) improves
patient outcome compared with the use of oral or gastrically instilled
if not in all veterinary species, the dangers from aspiration do not in
od          r 
as 'pathological in the majority of cases. Also, consideration (in the absence
 of formal trials specific to veterinary species) has to be given to the relative
ease with which vomiting can be induced in the dog and the cat, compared
 ae p     a  
mixtures.
Gastric emptying
Two methods are available, the choice likely to be forced to a large extent
by the patient's clinical condition.
Both methods obviously aim to prevent or reduce further exposure to the
toxicant by removing it from the body. The success of the method will
a uo pue guaidua sseg pue togsasun uaamaq Aerap ai uo puadap
nature of the poison.
There is no agreement amongst authors as to when gastric emptying
Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats 7
Gostric decontamination
moved on into the duodenum and, if not yet absorbed from the
gastrointestinal tract, will be beyond the reach of gastric emptying.
Obviously, this may not apply to larger material. However, the mechanical
objects described in this text (thermometers, batteries) are not ones that
would indicate gastrotomy for their removal, nor is the accumulation of
large amounts of poorly chewed plant material usually a problem in the cat
or dog
There is general agreement that up to 2 hours after ingestion a significant
amount of material is likely to be still present in the stomach and to justify
attempts at its removal. Between 2 and 4 hours, a clinical judgement has to
be made upon the basis of the suspected toxicant, its physical form and the
amount likely to have been ingested.
As a very general rule of thumb, the induction of emesis should be
considered until at least 3 hours after ingestion. On the other hand, the
   h  a ssni e  a  go s
unconscious) careful consideration should be given as to whether its
benefits are likely to outweigh the risks after 2 hours. However, for each
 as aas  a a s p e e a
chapters).
The physical form of the poison (large tablets as against a solution, for
example) will affect the time ingested material is available in the stomach to
be recovered. The chemical nature of the toxicant contained in the poison
may also have its affect. Local anaesthetics (e.g. cocaine) tend to pass from
the stomach slowly, while other compounds (e.g. alcohol) can be absorbed
directly from the stomach.
Emesis
Emesis is contra-indicated:
●If the patient is unconscious, is very depressed or has a poor swallow
reflex. Consideration should be given to the time that may elapse
before the emetic takes effect and the apparent speed of deterioration
of the patient's consciousness, if the latter is obvious.
●If the patient is susceptible to seizures.
 If the poison was corrosive or caustic. Not only may the poison cause
more damage as it retransits the oropharynx and oesophagus, but the
act of vomition may rupture these already weakened tissues.
●If the poison is of low viscosity, or in a low-viscosity vehicle; e.g.
petroleum distillates.
The following points may influence the choice of emetic, or how emesis is
induced:
19
8 IHandbook of poisoning in dogs and cats
Gastricdecontamination
Apomorphine can have an additive effect in opiate poisonings.
However, reversing agents specific to this opiate effect are readily
available. A suitable reversing agent should be held for use if necessary
following apomorphine, e.g. naloxone.
 Xylazine is also sedative. Again, a specific reversing agent is available
should this prove to be a problem, i.e. atipamezole. A suitable reversing
agent should be held for use if necessary following xylazine.
The using of'a crystal' of washing soda (see for example Humphreys, 1988,
p. 13) seems to be almost apocryphal both in veterinary texts and among
the praclising veterinary profession. The author, and many of his
colleagues were all well aware of the method but reported no experience
of it, preferring to use the surer administration of an injectable emetic. The
method has been retained in this text as there seems no clear evidence of its
lack of efficacy; washing soda is still relatively commonly available; and, of
all the 'household remedies' (detergent, mustard, etc.) it is at least one that
does not have major questions about its safety. Washing soda may also be
kept more readily available in visit bags, etc. than controlled substances
(caustic soda - sodium hydroxide - must obviously not be administered, and
baking soda - sodium bicarbonate - will have little effect).
Syrup of Ipecacuanha (ipecac syrup) is generally considered without the
major hazards associated with the 'household' emetics discussed above.
However, it is rarely available outside a practice setting, and has few if any
advantages over the injectable agents. Indeed there are two possible
adverse effects associated with its use that should be considered. First, it
can cause CNS depression (especially if the dose has to be repeated).
Second, it can cause diarrhoea, risking dehydration of the patient if
untreated. Additionally, there is often an appreciable delay before the
emetic actions are observed.
Gastric lavage
Gastric lavage is contra-indicated:
If emesis can be safely carried out and there is no indication for
administering activated charcoal. (The effects of emetics will delay the
opportunity for administering an absorbent, whereas activated
during) gastric lavage.)
 The following points may influence the choice of gastric lavage, or how it is
carried out:
+
following the ingestion of caustic or corrosive poisons.
 In smaller or younger animals with vigorous use of lavage, considera-
 o go  on  a rs n
Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats | 9
Gastricdecontominotion
Gastric lavage should be performed in the unconscious patient. Thus,
general anaesthesia may be required.
Water, saline, or a charcoal slurry may be used. The latter prevents good
visualisation of what is being removed from the stomach, but has the
advantage that if any stomach content is forced on beyond the stomach
(into the duodenum) it will be combined with activated charcoal.
The steps are as follows:
1.A cuffed endo-tracheal tube should first be inserted and the cuff
inflated.
2. While, theoreticall, a double bore tube might be used for gastric
lavage, these are not commonly available, not least in the range of sizes
necessary. Instead the widest bore single tube available should be used.
This should have side openings to reduce the risk of blockage.
3. The animal should be measured from the tip of the nose to the
xiphisternum and this length marked clearly on the tube. The tube
should then be introduced up to that mark.
4.Lavage fluid should then be introduced down the tube. This must be
done gently as excessive pressure will force poison into the duodenum.
The simplest way of controlling pressure is to attach a funnel to the end
of the tube and fill this so that fluid enters under the effects of gravity
alone. As a rough guide 10 ml/kg body weight of fluid should be
measured out for each wash, and as much of this used as is clinically
appropriate.
Tilting the animal (nose downwards) or lowering the head relative to
the body (partially over the side of the table) once the tube is in, but
before lavage, will further reduce contamination of the oropharynx and
thus the entry to the trachea.
 5. Lowering the exterior end of the tube will then cause emptying by
gravity. Suction can be used if required and available.
6.
fluid coming out should be clear and free of any particulate matter.
7.
Consideration should be given to then using the same tube to place a
slurry of activated charcoal in the stomach (see next section)
8. Care should be taken on withdrawing the tube, and the rear of the
mouth cleaned manually if necessary,before removal of the endo-
tracheal tube.
Absorption
Activated charcoal will absorb many (though not all) poisons. Specific
advice is given in the relevant chapters of this book; for example, that
Animals may be'drenched’ with a slurry of charcoal if conscious, though
this is neither easy, nor usually accomplished without much of the slurry
being shaken over attendant and ,the surrounding area. In paediatrics,
[0  Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats
Gastric decontamination
mixtures of charcoal and ice cream have been used, and proprietary
apparently  no  published method  demonstrating  improved charcoal
palatability in animals.
A slurry should be made by mixing 10-20 g of activated charcoal in 100 ml
of tap water.
Following gastric lavage, charcoal may easily be administered by stomach
tube. It may be administered following emetics provided 'anti-emetic cover?
is given to counteract the effect of the emetic.
The use of activated charcoal is contra-indicated if it is desired to give
medication immediately by the orai route - the charcoal will absorb most
medicines, rendering them ineffective. Where this is a factor in specific
treatment protocols, this is dealt with in individual chapters.
is likely to cause gastric stasis, is one that will undergo enterohepatic
recirculation, or has a low volume of distribution.
Activated charcoal is manufactured by the destructive distillation of
(vegetable) organic matter. Ten kilogrammes of activated charcoal have
surface area of around 1 km². It is essential that chemically activated
charcoal is used to ensure that the product has the maximum ability to
absorb toxicants.
General considerations
decontamination has been carried out, it is essential to ensure that further
ingestion of the (suspected) poison is prevented. Vomit should be cleared
away to prevent re-eating or eating by another animal. Access to the
original source of poison should be stopped (for the patient and for other
potential patients!). It may be necessary to prevent self-grooming (or
  si  p  ( o q 
easily achieved by use of an 'Elizabethan collar'.
Consideration should be given to the retention of samples of vomit and/or
stomach contents as these are produced by the animal (see chapter on
'Laboratory Sampling and Analysis').
References
Chapiman MJ and Campbell A (2001). Veterinary Toxicology. Oxford: Blackwell Science
(in press).
Hunphreys DJ (1988). Veterinary Toxicology (third edition). London: Bailliere Tindall,
PP. 13-14.
Snodgrass WR (1996). Clinical Toxicology. In CJ Klaassen (ed.), Casareit and Doull's
Toxicology - The Basic Science of Paisoys, London: MeGraw-Hill, pp. 969-986.
Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats l I1
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2000 A Campbelland M Chapmai
Laboratory sampling and analysis and sending
samples by post
Introduction
Appropriate laboratory tests are discussed in individual chapters of this
book.For a discussion of investigation of cases where the agent is unknown
see Chapman and Campbell (2001).
Obtaining suitable specimens for submission is generally no different from
 s  r   rd    ss 
submission of induced vomitus for analysis. This, however, will generally
be produced secondary to the induction of emesis as a prophylactic
measure. Methods of inducing emesis are detailed in the chapter on gastric
decontamination.
Personal safety must also be kept in mind. Significant amounts of poisons
are unlikely to be present in body fluids or tissues, but it is possible. The
most likely sources of large amounts of toxicants are in the case of skin
contamination of an animal and if the original poison or its packaging have
to be handled.
The two major issues to be borne in mind are legalistic ones. First, it is
always wise to presume that any suspicion or accusation of poisoning may
lead to ltigation, and thus sampling and analysis should be capable of
withstanding forensic scrutiny. Second, while practitioners do routinely
submit samples to laboratories by post, in poisoning cases the nalure of the
samples and the laboratories used will tend to vary from the routine and
thus some reflection on the relevant regulations regarding transmission of
pathological specimens is in order.
Sampling
Samples must be taken, stored and transported so that their provenance is
not only known but can be proved to be known.
As those involved might be called to give oral evidence before a court, the
number of people involved should be minimised. (It is always worth
u woy uone on pea ke jeun arnpad e un das Aue umana
adversarial‘gamesmanship’point of view.It is unlikely,and would be
considered time-wasting, to call everyone who had handled a sample,
to penalise a party calling so many witnesses by ordering costs against
them. The one situation where this would be worthwhile would be where
it became impossible to prove the'continuity of the evidence'. There was a
Z3
[2  Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats
Laboratory sampling and analysis ond sending samples by post
gap in the record of it being handled. Thus it is never wise to presume that
is thin!) In many situations there will be no necessity for more than two
people to be directly involved. The clinician can take a sample and before
leaving the room seal that sample in a packet. This can be sent, in outer
packaging. to the laboratory. There the final sealed container can be
entered by the laboratory scientist who is to perform the analysis. For this
to work smoothly requires several precautions.
the minimum, with - if space allows - a date. A list can then be drawn
up with the sample reference details and a more precise description of
the sample.
● The law is slow. Always give full dates (including the year). However
later.
'Contemporaneous' notes carry great weight. That is what was written
at the time, without the benefit of reflection. Thus hand-written
observations may be of greater value than a perfectly edited typescript.
Record the time notes are taken. It is better that they are a precise time
after the event than'nearly’ at the same time.
 Samples may become mislabelled. It is even easier to suggest that they
have become so. Never label the part of the container (e.g. the screw-
bottle top) that is least associated with the sample (e.g. the bottle
contents).
y meip pue Aissod e iseal ie si uoneam ien nq 'aides a
  an sn 'as, a sans pn n a og ra
used to this, it will be best to discuss it by telephone to ensure that the
matter is fully understood.
   ad au tapd a m ad o,  
'sealed' by sigring across it. The addition of a practice rubber stamp
and/or date stamp across the tape will facilitate identification and
 assure as to authenticity. Always presume the outer packaging will be
opened by someone other than the intended final recipient!
If litigation seems likely, in fairness you must work as far as possible to
concerning heavy metal poisoning and half a litre of vomitus is
available for analysis, of which only a few tens of millilitres will be
required, then there is no reason not to submit a 100 ml sample,
dividing the remainder into a second (identical) 100 ml sample and the
residue (of say 300 ml). The latter two samples can then (after sealing)
be frozen. The second 100 ml is there to be ‘taken up' by the other
party if they wish to have it analysed. The residue can be used if the
two independent laboratories come to contradictory results. At the
24
Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats I 13
Laboratory sampling and onalysis and sending samples by post
other extreme, blood samples from a neonatal kittent are likely to be all
any surplus sample.
asking advice from the laboratory you will submit material to,
professional associations, any prosecuting authority, the client (if
relevant) and your professional defence society/insurer
Posting
In the UK letter post' and ‘parcel post’ are operated by separate entities.
There are also a multitude of organisations offering courier services. Thus,
it is no longer possible to cite 'the postal regulations'.
Specific contact should be made with the intended carrier as to whether,
and if so under what conditions, they are willing to carry samples. Couriers
not be forgotten that similar considerations apply to ‘informal courier
methods (bikes, taxis, etc.).
A member of the public must not send any pathological specimen except
under the instructions of a veterinary surgeon or recognised laboratory, in
Consideration of the following points will usually lead to only one likely
solution:
●Are fhc samples thiemseloes a toxic linzard? It will rarely be the case that
padsns aun 'aaamou ' 'aidues e un uosod paadss po juno
poison itself is to be submitted, then different considerations may
apply. lf, for whatever reason, it is considered that there is a significant
toxic hazard, then specific advice on packaging must be sought.
Are samples likely to carry infection? While the answer to this is probably
‘no' (and could even be made'no', by, for example, fixing tissues), it is
 e   s, si rm a e d o  
as carrying some risk.Though not mandatory,in the post-HIV era,it is
now reassuring to carriers to achually clearly mark samples as of
veterinary origin!
Is any fikely infecfion in WHO group 4? If it is, then material must not be
sent by post or similar methods. (Group 4 agents are of marked
pathogenicity and will rarely be associated with suspected small animal
poisonings.)
Internationalregulations on the transport (both domestic and interna-
tional) of pathological specimens (including group 1 to group 3 pathogen
material) by air are being applied to UK carriage by the Civil Aviation
Authority (CAA) and the International Air Transport Association (IATA).
(All major airlines are IATA members.)
山
I4 | Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats
Laboratory sampling andanalysis and sending samples bypost
Aq Ao  re Aq pdsuen aq pino aoed osaop Aue Aea sy
accidental misdirechion), and a surprising number actually are, then these
regulations form a useful if stringent minimum. That minimum is
compliance with U.N. 602 packaging requirements. The Royai Mail wil
supply a list of approved U.N. 602 packaging suppliers on request. The
basis of the requirement is that:
'The system consists of three layers as follows:
Primory receptocle
A labelled primary watertight, leak-proof receptacle containing the
     e i d  s
absorb all fluid in the case of breakage.
Secondory receptacle
A second durable, watertight, leak-proof receptacle to close and protect
placed in one secondary receptacle. Sufficient additional absorbent
material must be used to cushion multiple primary receptacles.
Outer shipping package
protects it from outside influences, such as physical damage and water
while in transit. Information concerning the sample, such as data forms,
letters and other types of information that identify or describe the
sample, should be taped to the outside of the secondary receptacle.
The regulations are being introduced in the UK at the time that this book
goes to press. However, it scems likely that:
purpose-made clinical sample containers should in general comply as
primary receptacles
‘enough absorbent material’ should be self-explanatory
 a sealable plastic bag is likely to satisfy the requirement for the
'secondary receptacle'
● sufficient wadding/packing must then be used in the outer container
●a tough cardboard box should satisfy the requirement for the‘outer
shipping package'.
Previous guidance, which remains valid, is that:
●individual containers should not exceed 50 m!
● the outer packaging must be clearly labelled
0‘TVETERINARY] PATHOLOGICAL SPECIMEN - FRAGILE WITH
CARE
Owith the sender's address
Qwith contact telephone numbers for sender and addressee
· all regulations change - always gheck with your local carrier.
26
Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats  15
Laboratory sompling ond analysis and sending samples by post
Conclusion
In the words of Lorgue et al. (1996, at p.25):
Laboratories can only operate effectively if they receive high quality sanples
in good conditions and of sufficient quantity, accompanied by complete and
accurate documentation.
References
Science (in press).
Lorgue G, Lechenet J and Riviere A (1996). MJ Chapman (ed.), Clinical Veterinary
Toxicology. Oxford: Blackwell Science, pp. 25 (translated from French).
27
16  Handbook of poisoning in dogs and cats
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht @ 2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Benzalkonium chloride
Type of product
Benzaikonium chloride (BAC, alkyldimethylbenzylammonium chloride) is
a quaternary ammonium compound (QAC), which is classified as a cationic
 uu pasn are au auo aun ls e p von xdo a
disinfectants and rarely as simple cleaning agents.
Presentation
 In past VPIS cases the benzalkonium chloride-containing product to which
cats are most commonly exposed is Dettox (Reckitt & Colman), which
contains 2-3.5%. Less commonly, Zoflora" (Thornton & Ross) is the agent
involved. This contains benzalkonium chioride at a concentration of 3.8%.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992 the VPIS has received over 20 enquiries per year concerning
accidental exposure of cats to disinfectant or multi-surface cleaner products
containing benzalkonium chloride. These cases usually occur when the
animals accidentally walk across treated surfaces or fall in buckets of the
cleaners. There are cases where cats have drunk quantities of the undiluted
solutions.
They often develop the signs of buccal irritation as a result of grooming
themselves after derrmal exposures.
Toxicity
The primary effects of benzalkonium chloride are due to its irritancy.
Systemic effects are uncommon.
According to the literature:
contact on broken skin. Chemical burns have been reported following
the use of an undiluted 17% solution of benzalkonium chloride as an
electrical conductant during normal ECG monitoring in cats and dogs
(Bilbrey ct al., 1989).
In the experience of VPISLn:
● No fatal cases have been reported.
 One 2-year-old 2 kg domestic short-haired cat consumed 2 ml of a
disinfectant. Within 12 hours&the animal had salivation, anorexia,
Cats 17
Benzalkonium chloride
pyrexia, abdominal tenderness and severe oral ulceration. The cat was
managed supportively with intravenous fluids, corticosteroids and
(VPISLn case 94/31849).
●A 4-month-old domestic short-haired cat fell into a bucket of
disinfectant. The animal evidently consumed some of the fluid and
also inhaled some. It became drowsy, anorexic and pyrexic. It had
severe lung congestion, severe ulceration of the mouth and tongue and
the skin was red and inflamed. After washing it was given steroids,
antibiotics, frusemide and intravenous fluid support and made a full
recovery (VPISLn case 94/125099).
Clinical effects
 Onset of effects is usually within 12 hours, but will be more rapid following
exposure to more concentrated solutions.
Ingestion or oral exposure following grooming after dermal exposure may
       's 
tongue and oral mucosa (which may be severe). Dehydration and anorexia
may occur. In more severe cases there may be depression, pyrexia and
         s n 
ulceration, hair loss and contact dermatitis. Concentrated solutions may
cause chemical burns.
Benzalkonium chloride is also irritant to the eyes and can produce severe
injury.
Treatment
Emesis is best avoided because these products are usually foamy and there is a risk
of foam aspiration if vomiting occurs. Adsorbents may be given if the exposure was
recent. However, endoscopic evaluation of injury to the gastrointestinal tract may
be required and in these cases adsorbents should not be given.
Adsorbents:
(a)  Activated charcoal  Dose:
2 g/kgbodyweight orally
(b)BCK granules"
Dose:
The animal should be thoroughly washed and then collared to limit self-grooming
and further ingestion of benzalkonium chloride. The eyes should also be irrigated.
appropriate.
Treatment thereafter is symptomatic and supportive. Rehydration may be
required and a bland diet is recommended. Antibiotics and steroids may also be
given. Atropine may be administered if there is severe salivation. The animal
should be monitored for developmept.of respiratory effects.
18lCats
Benzalkonium chloride
References ond further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 98/13298.
Bilbrey SA, Dulisch ML and Stallings B (1989). Chemuical burns caused by
benzalkonium chloride in eight surgical patients.Journal of the Arnerican Animal
Hospital Association 25,31-34.
Coppock Rw, Mostom MS and Lille LE (1988). The toxicology of detergents,
bleaches, antiseptics and disinfectants in small animals. Veterinary and Human
Toxicology 30(5), 463-473.
Kore AM and Kiesche-Nesselrodt A (1990). Toxicology of household cleaning
products and disinfectants. Veterinary Clinics of Norti America: Simall Animal
Prartice 20(2). 525-537.
Trapani M, Brooks DL and Tillman PC (1982). Quaternary ammonium toxicosis in 
cats.Laboratory Animal Science 32(5).520-522.
30
Cats19
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Dichlorophen
Type of product
Anthelmintic used for the treatment of Dipylidiun and Taenia infection in
cats and dogs.
Presentation
This is usually available in tablet preparations only. Strengths of tablets
available are 250 mg, 500 mg, and 750 mg.
 Some preparations contain piperazine in combination.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992 the London centre has received
cats and dogs. Over 75% of these cases involve cats. All cases reported have
had occurred at therapeutic doses and had therefore caused some concern.
Recommended dosage
200 mg/kg body weight for management of Dipylidium and Taenia infection.
Use is contra-indicated in cats less than 6 months of age.
Toxicity
According to the literature:
● No fatal dose has been reported.
●A dose of 69.4 mg/kg body weight produced hyperaesthesia, drooling.
ataxia and anorexia in one cat.
●Some animals exhibit signs of toxicity at the therapeutic dose.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
·Effects have been seen at doses as low as 62.5 mg/kg body weight.
● One fatal case attributed to dichlorophen alone. A 16-year-old cat had
one750 mg tablet. Within12 hours the animal developedataxia,
hyperaesthesia and excessive salivation. The animal was treated
supportively with fluids and atropine and after apparent recovery.
relapsed and was euthanased (VPISLn case 94/125078).
●Poisoning has aiso arisen from dosing of 500 mg/week for 2 weeks
(VPISLn case 92/95921),
31
20Cats
Dichlorophen
Clinical effects
Onset of effects is usually within 3 hours buf sometimes up to 12 hours.
Duration of effects may be 2-3 days.
Common effects are vomiting, salivation, ataxia, incoordination, anorexia,
tachycardia, lethargy, pyrexia, hyperaesthesia and in: severe cases collapse.
Other less commonly observed effects include inappetence, hyperventila-
tion, dilated pupils, borborygmi, dyspnoea and disorientation.
Treatment
Gastric decontamination should be considered for any excess of the therapeutic
dose (200 mg/kg). Although a small number of animals become unwell with doses
below this, there is ro method of identifying susceptible individuals.
administer adsorbents.
Emetics:
(a)  Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m.
(b) 1pecacuanha
Dose:
1-3 ml/kg body weight orally
(c) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a)  Activated charcoal  Dose:
I.-3 g/kg body weight orally
(b) BCK granules*
Dose:
6-18 g orally.
Treatment is essentially symptomatic and supportive as there is no specific
antidote. It is essential to monitor the body temperature and institute cooling
measures if necessary.
Atropine may be given for hypersalivation, but is best avoided in pyrexic animals.
References and further reading
VPIs (London) past cases up to 97/107258.
Edwards HG (1987). Adverse reactions to dichlorophen in cats. Vetcrinuary Record
121(6), 136.
Goodwin JL (1987). Adverse reactions to dichlorophen in cats. Veterinary Record
121(7), 23-24,
32
Cats  21
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht @ 2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Ethylene glycol
Type of product
Ethylene glycol is most commonly encountered in antifreeze, screenwash
Or, more rarely, de-icers. Most antifreezes available contain ethylene glycol
or methano!.
Presentation
Antifreeze is available as a liquid to be adided to water in engine radiators to
prevent freezing and improve hot weather performance, the usual final
dilution being I:3 or 1:4.
Occurrence of poisoning incidence
Since 1992 the VPIS has received a small number of enquiries regarding
ingestion of ethylene glycol by companion animals. Approximately 10% of
these cases involved cats. In these feline cases, all presented with severe
clinical effects and outcomes were fatal in all but 8% of cases.
B         
monthis,
Toxicity
According to the literature:
●The lethal dose of ethylene glycol in cats is 1.5 ml/kg body weight.
●In 25 cases of ingestion of ethylene glycol in cats the mortality rate was
96% (Rowland, 1987).
Mechanism of toxicity
d n pou si d g a  je i  
compound but the metabolites produced by the action of alcohol
dehydrogenase on the parent compound. Alcohol dehydrogenase converts
ethylene glycol to glycoaldehyde. This is then metabolised to glycolic acid,
which appears to be the principal cause of the acidosis. One of the
metabolites of glycolic acid is oxalate, which causes renal damage and
hypocalcaemia by binding to calcium to form calcium oxalate, crystals of
which appear in the urine. The aldehydes (glycoaldehyde, glycolic acid and
glyoxylate) may inhibit oxidative phosphorylation and respiration. Glycolic
acid is metabolised to glycine, which is metabolised to hippurate.
22Cats
Ethylene glyco!
Kinetics
Ethylene glycol is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. The half-
life of ethylene glycol in cats is shorter than in dogs and the onset of the
lower fatal dose and higher mortality in cats compared to dogs.
Clinical effects
Stage 1 (30 minutes-12 hours): central nervous system signs, including
vomiting, ataxia, tachycardia, weakness and convulsions. Also polydipsia,
polyuria, dehydration, tachypnoea, acidosis and hypothermia.
Stage 2 (12-24 hours): cardiopulmonary signs including tachypnoea)
convulsions.
Stage 3 (24-72 hours): renal system signs including oliguria, azotaemia and/
or uraemia, vomiting, anorexia and severe depression. Renal failure
indicates a poor prognosis.
   s s  ' a    s
irreversible renal tubular damage.
The longer the time to freatment, the less favourable the prognosis.
 n s  r    r  g
have a favourable prognosis. However, in most cases unless the ingestion
was witnessed, animals usually present in the third stage of poisoning and
in these animals the prognosis is poor.
Laboratory findings
(a)  Increased osmolality (normal 280-310 mOsm/kg). An osmolality raised
d po aa go  si  pg s  e q
7/bgu 0g-0t< de8 uonue uy (7/bgu Z1-01 jeuou) de3 uonue paseaou1 (q)
is typical of ethylene glycol poisoning.
(c) Acidosis, pH usually <7.3. Urine pH usually <6.5.
calcium oxalate crystals (may appear within 5 hours of ingestion),
proteinuria, glucosuria, haematuria and albuminuria. Calcium oxalate
crystals are light yellow, arranged in rosettes, sheaves or prisms and are
birefringent (transmit light unequally in different directions) in
polarised light.
(f)  Neutrophil leucocytosis, eosinopaenia (Johnson et al., 1979)
(g) Raised ethylene glycol concentrations in blood and urine.
(h) Hippurate and oxalate detected in urine.
34
Cats  23
Ethylene glyco!
Post-mortem findings
(a)  Gastrointestinal tract: gastric mucosa haemorrhagic and hyperaemic
(b)Pulmonary hyperaemia and oedema.
(c)Kidney: pale, swollen with grey or yeliow streaks, particularly near the
corticomedullary junction. Oxalate crystais are usually present in the
kidney. In animals that survive, regenerating renal tubules are dilated
and fined with flattened tubular epithelium.
Diagnosis
Ethylene glycol poisoning may be mistaken for head trauma, encephalitis,
acute gastroenteritis, pancreatitis, ketoacidotic diabetes mellitus and acute
renal failure from other causes. Diagnosis is based on history, clinical signs
euai o anp inyued aq Keu uogedied jeujopay 'eep Xioeoqel pue
Oedema. Ethylene glycol poisoning should be suspected in any animal with
the following:
(a) acute onset of signs
(b)  raised urea, creatinine and other nitrogenous compounds in the blood
(azotaemia or uraemia)
(  e )  s  x o  ()
Treatment
Therapy for ethylene glycol is principally aimed at blocking the action of alcohol
dehydrogenase to prevent the formation of the toxic metabolites. This is achieved
by administration of the preferred substrate, ethanol, which allows renal excretion
of the unmetabolised parent compound.
4-Methylpyrazole (4-MP, fomepizole), a direct inhibitor of the enzyme alcohol
dehydrogenase,has been suggested as an alternative therapy to ethanof on the
grounds of a lack of adverse effects and slower elimination. Clinical reports suggest
that 4-MP is successful in treating ethylene glycol intoxication in dogs, but it has
been shown to be less effective than ethanol in cats poisoned with ethyiene glycol
and istherefore not recommended.
If within 2 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage.
Adsorbents are not useful.
Emetics:
(a) Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m.
(b) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
1-3 ml/kg body weight orally
(c) Soda crystal.
Monitor pH and renal function. Correct acidosis with sodium bicarbonate (see
below). Fluids should be given to ensure adequate hydration and a good urine
output. Central venous pressure and renal output should be monitored in cats
with renal dysfunction because ofthe risk offluid overload and subsequent
24  Cats
Ethylene glycol
pulmonary oedema. Mannitol can be used in a well-hydrated animal to produce an
osmotic diuresis and reduce renal oedema.
Dose: 0.250.5 g/kg body weight, i.v.over 5-10 minutes.
Peritoneal dialysis is recommended in acidotic cats with oliguria.
Antidotal theropy
Ethanoi is a specific antidote (see above for mechanism) and should be given in any
syrmptomatic case presenting within 24 hours: however, it is probably most
effective if given within 12 hours of ingestion. Note: there is no point in giving
ethanol to block metabolismif the ethylene glycolhas been metabolised.
Unfortunately. cases often present late, by which time such antidotal therapy is no
longer of use, Management in these cases is supportive. Also, ethanol shouid not
be given to cats with renal failure.
Ethanol regimen
5 ml/kg body weight 20% ethanol in saline. i.v. every 6 hours for 5 doses, then
every B hours for 4 doses.
laboratory, the ethanol given as treatment is given either orally or intravenously. In
these cases the recommended doses for 5% and l0% ethanol solutions are
identical whatever the route of administration. Therefore, if ethanol in a form
suitable for injection is not readily available an equivalent dosing to the above,
interim measure, e.g. 0.5 ml/kg body weight per hour of a 40% spirit suitably
diluted.
Use of ethanol-containing preparations such as methylated spirits or surgical
spirits is not recommended as these preparations both contain small quantities of
methanol (about 5%)
Bicarbonote regimen
The aim is to keep the urine pH at between 7.5 and 8.0.
(a)With known laboratory analyses:
base deficit x 0.5 × body weight [kg)
mmol (mEq) of bicarbonate required =
2
Give slowly over 3-4 hours i.v. Re-check blood gases and assess the clinical status
of the animal.
(b) If blood gases are not available, give 0.5-1 mmol/kg body weight i.v. slowly
over 30 minutes.
Cats may eat and drink during treatment, although those on ethanol therapy may
36
Cats 25
Ethylene glycol
Calculations
anion gap = (Na+ + K+) - (HCO + CI-)
calculatedosmolality(mOsmol/kgHzO) =
(1.86 × [Na in mmol/L]) + (urea in mmol/L) + (glucose in mmol/L)
0.93
References ond further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/26018.
Clarke P, Henkel K and Swenson C (1997). What is your diagnosis? Journal of Small
Animal Pracficc 38, 433, 450451.
Dial SM, Thrall MAH and Hamar DW (1994). Comparison of ethanol and 4-
methylpyrazole as treatments for ethylene glycol intoxication in cats. Americau
fournal of Veterinary Research 55(12), 1771-1782.
    )       
treatment of ethylene glycol intoxication in dogs.American fourual of Veterinary
Research 55(12), 1762-1770.
Grauer GF and Thrall MA (1982). Ethylene glycol (antifreeze) poisoning in the dog
and cat. Journal of the American Hospital Association 18, 492-497.
Herd P (1992). Poison - Ethylene Glycol. In Practice 14(6), 298-299.
Johnson SE et al. (1979). Current status of ethylene glycol toxicity in dogs - a review.
Minnesota Vet 2,32-34.
Proudfoot AT (1993).Acute Poisoning.Diagusis and Management (second edition).
Oxford:Butterworth-Heinemann,Pp.120-123.
Toxicology 29(1), 41-44.
Thrall MA, Grauer GF and Mero KN (1984). Clinicopathologic findings in dogs and
cats with ethylene glycolintoxication.journal ofthe AnericanVeterinary Association,
184(1), 37-41.
37
26  Cats
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
Copyright  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
lvermectin
Type of product
Ivermectin is an antiparasitic agent and is one of the avermectins. These are
natural or semi-natural macrocyclic lactone disaccharides that are fermen
tation products of Streptomyces aoermitilis and Streptornyces cyamogriseus.
Ivermectin is a mixture of about 80% 22,23-dihydroavermectin Bja and 20%
22,23-dihydroavermectin Bib. It is active against mature and immature
nematodes and arthropods.
It has veterinary use for the control of mites in cats; migrating heartworm
(Dirofilaria immitis) larvae in dogs; control of gastrointestinal roundworms
and lungworms in horses, ruminants and pigs; Type Il ostertagiasis in
ruminants; horse bots; some lice and mites on cattle and pigs; warble fly
larvae in cattle; and, nasal bots in sheep.
Presentations
s s r s au i e ae sd 
ivermectin is not officially licensed for feline use in the UK.
In other animals ivermectin may be given orally, subcutaneously or as a
o pue spimbi ro saised aq Ke suedand ieo uonnde uo-no
injection are available at 10 mg/ml strength and pour-on solutions at
strengths 5 mg/ml. Some modified release ruminal preparations for cattle
are available, designed to release 1.72 g over 135 days.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992 the VPIs London centre has received a small number of
enquiries each year regarding iverrmectin exposures in cats. One fatality has
adult cats that have displayed clinical effects are documented.
Recommended dosage
Ivermectin is not licensed in the UK for use against feline mites, although
off-license′ dosage recommendations are given in some formularies.
Dose regimens: Octodetes mites - 200-300 μg/kg body weight s.c. or i.m.,
repeated after 3 weeks if needed; Notoedres mites - 400 μg/kg body weight
s.c.
38
Cats 27
lvermectin
Toxicity
According to the literature:
●A 4 mg oral dose to a cat was associated with severe toxicity with
neurological effects.
 Singie or multiple oral or subcutaneous doses of 0.2-1.33 mg/kg body
weight were reportedly well tolerated in cats.
 0.2 mg/kg body weight given to cats by s.c. injection resulted in no
observable adverse effects.
● 0.4 mg/kg body weight of a preparation intended for cattle given s.c. to
cats resuited in dilated pupils, incoordination and hyperaesthesia
within 12 hours. The cats recovered within 36 hours.
● A dose of 0.3 mg/kg body weight of a preparation intended for use in
cattle given by s.c. injection to a cat resulted in fatality.
Kittens appear more susceptible to the effects of ivermectin.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
 2 mg/kg body weight given s.c. to a l-year-old male neutered cat
produced no adverse effects.
ul pansan na pio-yuouz e Aq paisalu Agunb umouun uy
depression, severe ataxia and death (VPISLn case 97/101602).
 pa  a prg e q psa   u
delayed onset ataxia, incoordination, tremor, diated pupils, hyper-
aesthesia and blindness. The animal made gradual recovery over 4 days
(VPISLn case 87/24355).
Mechanism of toxicity
Avermectins interfere with parasite nerve transmission by increasing
release of the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) from pre-synaptic nerve terminals and enhancing binding to
post-synaptic receptors. This leads to the opening of post-synaptic chloride
u n ss e  u n s
function. They may aiso act on chloride channels independent of GABA
receptors. In invertebrates, where GABA receptors are found in the
of the animal. In mammals, where GABA receptors are located in the CNS,
the result of excess GABA release and post-synaptic binding wouid be
diffuse cerebellar and cerebral cortex dysfunction.However, in mammals
avermectins do not readily cross the blood-brain barrier and so toxicity is
reduced,
Kinetics and metabolism
Ivermectin appears to be well absorbed folowing both oral and parental
Si pue 'sinou s's inoqe ie paaaoe slaaal yead um uogensupe
28 Cats
Iverrmectin
concentrated in the fat and liver. In high doses it crosses the blood-brain
barrier.
Ivermectin is metabolised in the liver into methyl alcohol and mono-
saccharides and the majority of the metabolites are excreted in the faeces,
with only 0.5-2% being excreted in the urine. It is also excreted in the milk
of lactating animals.
Clinical effects
Onset of effects is usually within 1-10 hours of oral exposure.
These can be vocalising, disorientation, aggression, anorexia, weakness,
lethargy, drowsiness, severe ataxia, blindness, head-pressing, loss of
 menace reflexes, tremors, dilated pupils and incomplete pupiliary response
to light.
 In more severe cases, bradycardia, hypothermia, respiratory depression,
pale mucous membranes, hyporeflexia, retinal atrophy, evidence of
multifocai impairment of the thalamus, cerebral cortex and vestibular
apparatus, coma and death can occur,
Post-mortem findings
At post-mortem there are no diagnostic lesions observed in ivermectin-
poisoned animals.  In experimental cases mild pulmonary congestion/
Oedema and focal CNS haemorrhage were found. However, these findings
were not conclusively linked to ivermectin exposure.
Treatment
If exposure was by ingestion and the cat is presented to surgery within 3 hours,
induce vomiting or consider gastric lavage, and then administer adsorbents.
Emetics:
(a)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.y.:
0.5-Img/kg body weight i.m.
(b)Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I--3 ml/kg body weight orally
(c) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoalDose:
I-3 g/kg body weight orally
(b)BCK granuies* Dose:
6-18 g orally.
Treatment thereafter is essentially symptomatic and supportive. In particular, the
monitoring of electrolytes and fluid balance, blood pressure. heart rate, body
Cats | 29
Ivermectin
Contra-indicated drugs
Benzodiazepine use is best avoided in cases of ivermectin toxicity as they also
enhance CNS GABAergic activity, owing to ivermectin causing an increased afinity
of benzodiazepines for the GABA receptor-chloride channel complex.
Investigations
Plasma levels may be useful in confirming ingestion and toxic exposures.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/101602.
Campbell WC and Benz GW (1984). Ivermectin: a review of efficacy and safety.
Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics 7, 1-16.
Hsu WH et al.(1989). The safety of ivermectin. Compendium of Continuing Education:
Small AnimalPractice 11(5),584589.
Kieran P (1987). Toxicity associated with anthelmintics. In Veterinary Clinical
Toxicology, Proceetings No 103 (Proceedings of a conference held at the University
of Sydney Australia, 24-28 August, 1987), Pp. 443-476.
Lewis DT, Merchant SR and Meer TM (1994). Ivermectin toxicosis in a kitten. fournai
of the Anerican Veterinary Medical Associatiorn 205(4),584-586.
Lovell RA (1990). Ivermectin and piperazine toxicoses in dogs and cats. Veterinary
Clhnics of Northr America: Small Aimal Practice 20(2), 453468.
Paradis M (1998). Ivermectin in small animal dermatology. Part 1. Pharmacology and
toxicology. Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practising Veterinaria
20(2), 193-200.
Roder JD and Stair EL (1998). An 0verview of ivermectin toxicosis. Veterinary and
Human Toxicology 40(6), 369-370.
41
30Cats
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Paracetamol
Type of product
Paracetamol is a non-narcotic anaigesic with anti-pyretic properties similar
to those of aspirin but without anti-inflammatory properties. It has a good
Presentation
Paracetamol is widely available in the UK as an ‘over-the-counter
medication for human use. It is sold under many brand names in both
tablet and liquid suspension preparations.
The dose of paracetamol in tablet preparations is variabie but the most
common strengths encountered are 120 mg and 500 mg. Liquid suspen-
sions are also marketed under a variety of brand names and in varying
strengths, though the most commonly encountered strengths are 120 mg/
5 ml and 250 mg/5 ml.
Many preparations on the market contain paracetamol in combination with
other analgesic drugs, such as aspirin and opioids. Paracetamol may also be
found in preparations containing antihistamines, decongestant drugs and
caffeine.
Note: In the USA and Canada, paracetamol is called acetaminophen.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992 paracetamol has been among the most
common drugs about which the London centre has been consulted. Until
1996 some 1.9% of enquiries involved paracetamol, with this percentage
then rising to 2.5%. Approximately 18% of these enquiries usually involve
cats, with 80% involving dogs. The feline cases are usually more serious,
with about 25% resulting in fatality. In cats, poisoning most often resuits
fever and other perceived non-specific ailments.
Recommended dosage
In the UK, the drug is supplied for use in humans only.
There are no indications for use of this drug in veterinary medicine. In cats,
snoasuep Aik Aeuaod si asn si 'ejnnred
Cats  3I
Paracetamo!
Toxicity
Cats are very sensitive to paracetamol. In partlicular, they may develop
methaemoglobinaemia, haemolytic anaemia, Heinz body formation and
hepatic necrosis.
According to the literature:
Doses of 50-100 mg/kg body weight may cause signs of toxicity to
develop.
●
 173 mg/kg body weight resulted in severe clinical effects. The cat
survived after treatment.
●143 mg/kg body weight proved fatal in one case.
ss Aueu 0n jeney aaoid Kew Su 0og-osz jo uoysau aluis y●
● If one dose has produced no apparent ill effects, a further dose taken
within 4-24 hours can be fatal.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
●A dose of 70 mg/kg body weight in one 18-month-old cat produced no
clinical effects (VPISLn case 97/3737).
·A dose of 93 mg/kg body weight in an 8-month-old cat produced signs
of severe toxicity and death at 12 hours post-ingestion, despite therapy
with N-acetylcysteine, diuretics, and supportive treatment (VPISLn
case 96/2227).
●Administration of single 500 mg tablets in several cats has resulted in
severe clinical effects and fatalities, despite prompt antidotal therapy
and other treatments (e.g. VPISLn cases 91/45619 and 92/110161).
● A total dose of 1.6 g of paracetamoi administered in divided doses over
48 hours to a l-year-old cat resulted in signs of severe toxicity and
death, despite aggressive therapy that included use of N-acetylcysteine,
ascorbic acid, i.v. Hartmann's solution and whole blood transfusion
(VPISLn case 91/45676).
●A dose of 214 mg/kg body weight in one 7-month-old Burmese cat
produced severe facial swelling. cyanosis, depression and pyrexia,
which responded favourably to administration of N-acetylcysteine,
cimetidine, steroids and i.v. fluids (VPISLn case 96/121414).
Mechanism of toxicity
Compared with other species, cats have a limited ability to metabolise
paracetamol to non-toxic metabolites.
In all species, paracetamol is metabolised in the liver by glucuronidation,
sulphation and oxidation. The glucuronide and sulphate conjugates are
non-toxic and are excreted in bile and urine. ln the metabolism of
while glucuronidation is the major pathway. However, cats have a
restricted ability to conjugate with glucuronic acid as they have low levels
32Cats
Paracetamol
of glucuronyl transferase, the enzyme that catalyses the final step of the
glucuronidation pathway. Hence, unlike other species except rats,
sulphation is the primary route of excretion and the products of the
minor oxidation route become more significant.
saturated as, like glucuronidation, it is a capacity-limited process. This
results in more paracetamoi being metabolised by the restricted gluc-
uronidation route and by oxidation.
At low paracetamoi doses some 5% of the drug undergoes oxidation. This
by spontaneous formation of N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine, a highly
reactive metabolite. Normally this is conjugated with reduced glutathione,
then further metabolised to cysteine and mercaptopuric acid derivatives
that are non-toxic and which are excreted in urine. At low dosing this can
be aneffective and efficientdetoxificationpathway despite the fact that cats
have low glutathione levels.
At higher paracetamol doses when the glucuronidation and sulphation
routes are saturated and paracetamol levels in blood and liver rise, the
oxidation pathway increases in activity. This results in increased produc-
tion of N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine, causing glutathione depletion in the
liver and subsequently in red blood cells as the detoxification pathway is
used. As glutathione becomes depleted the reactive N-acetyl-p-benzo-
quinoneimine binds covalently with amino acid residues of cellular macro-
molecules and proteins with subsequent cellular necrosis.
At higher doses paracetamol also inhibits glutathiore synthesis, further
s     se    
Alternative metabolic pathways also allow accumulation of oxidising
metabolites that may induce methaemoglobin formation, Heinz body
formation and denaturation of erythrocyte membranes. Heinz bodies are
denatured chains of haemoglobin with oxidised sulphydryl groups. They
precipitate and migrate towards cell membranes where, perhaps due to
and spleen may result. Feline haemoglobin is particularly susceptible to
oxidative damage as it possesses eight sulphydryl groups per molecule.
Methaemoglobinaemia reduces oxygen carrying capacity. It is unclear
whether methaemoglobinaemia is directly related to Heinz body formation.
In the presence of glutathione, methaemoglobin will be reduced to
haemoglobin. However, when paracetamol levels are high glutathione
will be depleted and its synthesis reduced and hence insufficient quantities
will be available for this reduction. Methaemoglobin accumulation occurs
and as it cannot bind oxygen tissue hypoxia will result. Methaemoglobi-
naemia further pushes the oxidation dissociation curve to the left,
impairingunloadingofoxygen
further exacerbaling the anoxia.
44
Cats 33
Porocetamol
Methaemogiobinaemia normally only cccurs when oxidative stress over-
whelms erythrocyte capacity.
and Heinz body formation. It can be seen that increased metabolism of
paracetamol via the oxidative pathway is causative of the clinical picture
seen in cats following paracetamol administration. The characteristic
Death usually occurs from progressive methaemoglobinaemia or, more
rarely, from severe hepatic necrosis.
Kinetics and metabolism
Paracetamol is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract under
normal conditions. Clinical manifestations of paracetamol ingestion are
normally apparent within 4 hours.
The various metabolic pathways are discussed in the above section on
mechanism of toxicity. As the elimination pathways are capacity limited,
lives have been recorded at 0.6 hours for a paracetamol dosing of 20 mg/kg
body weight, 2.4 hours after 60 mg/kg body weight and 4.8 hours at
120 mg/kg body weight.
At the low dosing of 20 mg/kg body weight the paracetamoi is largely
metabolised by sulphation, with 5% metabolised by oxidation and 1% by
dosing of about 60 mg/kg body weight. At 120 mg/kg body weight
sulphation drops to 57%, oxidation rises to 12% and glucuronidation to
16%.
A paracetamol dosing of 60 mg/kg in cats produced a methaemoglobinae.
mia of 21.7% in 4 hours; 120 mg/kg produced a 45% level.
Clinical effects
Clinical effects usually occur within 4-12 hours.
Prognosis is related to the severity of methaemoglobinaemia that results
from the paracetamol ingestion.
Early effects
Within 14 hours there may be progressive cyanosis, tachycardia,
methaemoglobinaemia. Depression, vomiting, inappetence, anorexia, facial
(mainly submandibular) and paw oedema, pale mucous membranes,
pruritus and hypothermia may also be evident. Rarely, the animals may
be hyperthermic. Haematuria, anaemia, and evidence of haemolysis may
be present.
45
34 I Cats
Porocetomol
Less common effects include ataxia, lethargy, dilated unreactive pupils,
nystagmus, photophobia, salivation, lacrimation, abdominal tenderness,
hyperaesthesia and twitching.
Later effects
From 2-7 days there may be haemoglobinuria, intravascular haemoiysis,
icterus and other evidence of liver damage (raised alanine aminotransferase
and bilirubin). Coma, convulsions and pulmonary oedema are sometimes
reported and are poor prognostic signs. Hepatic necrosis is reported but is
not the principal cause of fatality, which in cats is from excessive
methaemoglobinaemia.
  sd d      s
Oliguria is an occasional finding. Death usually occurs between 2 and 6
days post-ingestion.
Laboratory diagnosis
There may be raised alanine aminotransferase, total and direct bilirubin,
and elevation of other liver enzymes indicative of icterus. Decreased
packed cell volume, methaemoglobinaemia (chocolate blood colour of
blood samples) and Heinz body formation may be evident. Haemoglobi-
nuria, proteinuria, and bilirubinuria (dark brown urine colour) have all
been reported.
Biochemical abnormalities may take up to 3 weeks to return to normal.
Post-mortem findings
Pulmonary congestion and oedema are sometimes noted. Haemorrhagic
congestion, oedema and petechiae of the liver and kidneys are common.
mononuclear cell infiltrates, bile duct proliferation, biliary stasis and
presence of vacuolated hepatocytes. Renal tubular degeneration is
occasionallyevident.
Unclotted plum/chocolate-coloured blood indicative of methaemoglobi-
naemia will be present
Treatment
Treatment is recommended if a dose of 20 mg/kg body weight has been exceeded.
Effectively, this means that treatment is needed for ingestion of any commercially
available preparation.
If within 2 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage, and ther
administer adsorbents.
46
Cats  35
Paracetomo!
Emetics:
(a)  Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m.
(b) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
1-3 ml/kg body weight orally
(c) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal  Dose:
1-3 g/kg body weight orally
(b) BCK granules
Dose:
6-18 g orally
Note: Adsorbents should not be given where antidotes are to be administered
orally because it may reduce their efficacy.
If the animal is cyanosed, then oxygen should be administered. In addition, there
Antidotal therapy
Probably the most widely used antidote in paracetamol poisoning is N-
variety of mechanisrms.First, it is a precursor of glutathione. On administration it is
hydrolysed to form L-cysteine which provides substrate for glutathione synthesis
in red blood cells and the liver. Glutathione cannot be given directly as it is not
readily taken up by cells. Second, it acts directly on the reactive metabolite
resulting from the cytochrome P4so mediated oxidation of paracetamol, N-acetyl-
p-benzoquinoneimine, to form an acetylcysteine conjugate, which can be excreted,
although this reaction is slow. Third, it is oxidised in the liver to form sulphate,
thereby increasing the capacity of the sulphation pathway.
Methionine is a precursor for glutathione and sulphate and has some use. It may be
given where N-acetylcysteine is unavailable or used in conjunction with N-
acetylcysteine therapy.
Ascorbic acid can be given to reduce methaemoglobin to haermoglobin as it is a
good non-enzymatic reductant, although the reaction does occur slowly. There is
before it binds to proteins, possibly reducing it back to paracetamol. This certainly
happens in vitro, though there is debate as to whether it happens in vivo. It may be
given in combination with the other antidotes.
increasing capacity of the sulphation route of metabolism. lt may be used in
combination with the other antidotes.
In cases of severe methaemoglobinaemia methylene blue may be used. This drug
increases reduction of methaemoglobin. It is reduced to leucomethylene blue by
reduces the oxidised haem iron to its normal state. However, it should be used
with caution as high doses can thermselves cause methaemoglobinaemia or
haemolytic anaemia.
47
36Cats
Porocetomol
Cimetidine is a potent inhibitor of cytochrome P4so metabolism in the liver and
theoretically administration couid result in inhibition of the oxidation pathway. Its
efficacy has not been established for paracetamol poisoning cases in cats.
Regimens for antidotes:
(a) N-acetylcysteine
Dose:
Either 140 mg/kg body weight orally,
wait 6hours, then 70 mg/kg body weight
orally every 6-8 hours for 36 hours or
more dependent on the clinical condi-
tion of the animal (some sources state it
can be given for up to 72 hours)
injection over 6 hours, than 70 mg/kg
body weight orally every 6-8 hours for
36 hours or more dependent on the
clinical condition of the animal(some
sources state it can be given for up to 72
hours).
Note: The second method should be employed if adsorbents have previously been
given,
(b)Methionine
Dose:
70 mg/kg body weight orally every 6-8
hours, up to 24 hours.
Note: If adsorbents have previously been given,a 6-hour period should efapse
before administration is started.
(c)Ascorbic acid
Dose:
3040 mg/kg body weight i.v. every 6-8
hours until no cyanosis is present.
(d) Sodium sulphate
Dose:
1.6% solution; 50 mg/kg body weight i.v.
every 4 hours, up to 24 hours,
(e) Methylene blue
Dose:
I -5 mg/kg body weight by slow intra-
venous injection.
(f)Cimetidine
Dose:
2.5-5 mg/kg body weight i.v.,i.m. or
orally two-three times daily.
Other care
 Managerment is otherwise symptomatic and supportive. with particular care being
taken to ensure adequate hydration and maintenance of body temperature. Use of
Urea, electrolytes and blood gases should be checked if possible and corrected
where necessary. The animal should also be monitored for evidence of liver
darmage, anaemia and haemolysis. lf there is evidence of severe haemolysis.
significart decrease in packed celi volume, or severe anaemia, then whole blood
transfusions rmay be required.
48
Cats  37
Paracetamol
It is recommended that blood counts are monitored for at least I week post-
therapy.
References and further reading
VPlS (london) past cases up to 97/11295.
Brown F (1985). Paracetamol poisoning in cats. Veterinary Record 116, 275
Davis MR (1985). Paracetamol poisoning in a cat. Veterinary Record 116, 223.
Hjelle JI and Grauer GF (1986). Acetaminophen-induced toxicosis in dogs and cats.
fournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociafion188(7).742-746
Hormfeldt CS (1992). Distinction made between toxicoses caused by acetaminophen
Medical Association 201(9), 1318-1319.
Ilkiw JE and Ratcliffe RC (1987). Paracetamol toxicity in a cat. Australian Veterinary
Journal 64(8), 245-247.
Judson DG (1985). Paracetamol poisoning in cats. Veterinary Record 116, 355.
Kolf-Clauw M and Keck G (1994). Paracetamol poisoning in dogs and cats. Europea
fonrnal of CompanionArimalPractice 4,85-92.
Kore AM (1997). Over-the-counter analgesic drug toxicoses in small animals.
Veterinary Medicine 92(2), 158-165.
Lorenzana RM (1985). Paracetamol poisoning in cats. Veterinary Record 117, 135.
Lugten PC (1985). Paracetamol poisoning in cats. Veterinary Record 116, 424.
Malley AD (1987). Paracetamol poisoning in a cat. Veterinary Rccord 121, 528.
Marcella KL (1983). Acetaminophen poisoning in cats and man. Jouruai of the American
Veterinary Medical Associafion 183(8), 836.
Mayer S (1991). Poison - Paracetamol. In Practicc 13(1), 37.
Nicol RG {1981). Treatmert of paracetamol poisoring in cats. Veterinary Record 109, 291.
Prasuhn LW (1983). Tylenol poisoning in the cat. Journal of the Ainerican Veterinary
Medical Association 182(1), 4-5.
Savides MC et al. (1984). The toxicity and biotransformation of single doses of
9 'tz ood pddy pun oopoxo se pue shop ui uaudouae
    a  d     
  se    z e    
156-161.
Walker PD (1985). Paracetamol poisoning in cats. Veterinary Record 116, 301.
49
38Cats
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  200O A Campbell and M Chapmai1
Piperazine
Type of product
Piperazine is an anthelmintic used for the treatment of roundworms in cats,
dogs, horses, pigs and poultry.
Presentation
Piperazine is commonly available in tablet and syrup formulations. Paste
and powder formulations for oral administration are aiso available.
Preparations use a variety of piperazine salts, but commonly the citrate,
phosphate, hydrate or adipate.
Strengths of citrate-based tablet preparations are 125 mg, 220 mg, 275 mg
3/u 0sz sased pue pu/suu 001 1o qu/lu 0g suogeuedaid dniAs hu 00s pue
 gi p  tt ae sad pn ps-asod go s
Strength of the hydrate-based syrup preparation is 58 mg/ml. Strength of
the adipate-based tabiet preparation is 500 mg.
A measure of 100 mg of piperazine hydrate is equivalent to:
120 mg piperazine adipate
125 mg piperazine citrate
 104 mg piperazine phosphate.
There are a few preparations combining piperazine with other anthelmin-
tics, such as dichlorophen.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS, between five and 25 enquiries per year have
been received regarding piperazine ingestion or administration to cats and
dogs. Over 80% of the enquiries concern cats. Four cases with a fatal
outcome are documented, one involving a dichlorophen combination
preparation, but in all these cases the dose ingested was unknown.
Recommended dosage
This is 80-100 mg/kg body weight orally for Toxocara or Toxascaris infections
to a maximum of 250 mg in animals less than 2.5 kg body weight; 120-
Use is contra-indicated in animals, with renal impairment.
Cats  39
Piperazine
Toxicity
Piperazine is of relatively low toxicity, but may cause transient neurotoxi-
city in some individuais. It is not known why some individuals are
susceptible to piperazine toxicity.
According to the literature:
● Doses of >800 mg/kg body weight are likely to produce neurotoxicity.
● Clinical effects have been seen at therapeutic doses.
 In the experience of the VPISLn:
●A dose of 76 mg/kg body weight produced transient ataxia and
          
recovery.
Mechanism of toxicity
Piperazine blocks acetylcholine and acts as a GABA agonist, causing
hyperpolarisation of parasite muscie cells. This temporarily paralyses
the target worm causing its release from the gut wall and subsequent
expulsion from the body in the faeces. The toxic effects appear to be due to
the anticholinergic actions of the drug, but possibly also its GABA-ergic
effects.
Clinical effects
 Clinical effects usually occur within 24 hours but may have a duration of 2
4 days.
Commonly reported effects are vomiting, diarrhoea, anorexia, dilated
hyperventilation and convulsions.
Treatment
Treatment is recommended foringestions >240 mg/kg body weight for hydrate.
>288 mg/kg body weight for adipate. >300 mg/kg body weight for citrate and
>250mg/kgbodyweightforphosphate.
Note: These doses are given only as a guide; some animals may exhibit toxicity at
lower doses.
If within 2 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage, and then
administer adsorbents.
Emetics:
(a) Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.y.;
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m.
(b) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
1-3 ml/kg body weight orally
(c) Soda crystal.
51
40  Cats
Piperazine
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal  Dose:
I-3 g/kg body weight orally
(b)BCK granules?
Dose:
6-18 g orally.
Treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Keeping the animal in a quiet, dark
place may be of benefit. There is no specific antidote.
Diazepam may be used for sedation or the control of convulsions. Dose: 0.5 mg/kg
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/116526.
Darke PGG (1987). Piperazine toxicity. Veterinury Record 120, 507
Goddard PC and Johnston AM (1986). Piperazine toxicity in a kitten. Veterinary Record
119(25-26), 625.
Gray AK and Millar JE (1987). Piperazine toxicily in a kitten. Veterinary Record 120(2),
48.
 e p  x za (a I 
Howroyd PC (1984). Side effects from piperazine. Veterinary Record 115(6), 136.
Lovell RA (1990). Ivermectin and piperazine toxicoses in dogs and cats. Veterinary
Clinics of North America:Small Animal Practice 20 (2), 453468.
Swift BJ (1984). Side effects from piperazine? Veterinary Record 114(25), 623.
52
Cats I 4l
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids
Type of product
Pyrethrins (jasmolin I and I1, cinerin I and II, pyrethrin I and Il) are
naturally occurring esters of chrysanthemic acid and pyrethric acid, which
are extracted from the flowers of Chrysanthemum cinerariaefolium.
Pyrethroids (allethrin, alphacypermethrin, bioresmethrin, cypernethrin,
deltamethrin, fenvalerate, permethrin, phenothrin, resmethrin, tetra-
methrin) are synthetic pyrethrins.
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids are used as insecticides for the treatment of
ectoparasitic infestation. They are used in cats, dogs, sheep, cattle, poultry,
horses, goats and humans.
Presentation
Pyrethroids and pyrethrins are used on cats for the control of fleas, biting
flies and lice. Preparalions are available as dusting powders, shampoos and
sprays.
Note that cats may also be exposed to agrochemical preparations not
s    n n     s
including other insecticides and solvents. Piperonyl butoxide is often
added to the insecticide preparations as a synergist (it delays the
metabolism of the insecticide and increases the toxicity).
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992 the London centre of the VPIS has received between 10 and 50
 n s  sd  n d ss
Approximately 65% of these involve cats. Intoxication either occurs as a
result of ingestion of products or through over-zealous applicalion of
insecticide preparations to the coats of the cats. Many of the feline cases
arise as a result of dermal application of products intended for use in dogs.
These contain similar ingredients as the feline products but often in higher
concentrations.
Toxicity may result from self-grooming of treated fur. Occasionally, toxicity
may arise from animals being in close association with or grooming treated
animals.
Recommended dosage
This varies with the individuai preparation.
42 Cats
Pyrethrins ond pyrethroids
Toxicity
 In the experience of the VPISLn:
 A 1-year-old female domestic short-haired cat consumed a permethrint-
containing insecticide. Within 2 hours the cat hadtachycardia
salivation, hyperpnoea, ataxia, tremors and convulsions. The cat was
given atropine and supportive care and the effects resolved after 9
hours (VPISLn case 92/68353).
A three-and-a-half-year-old 4.5 kg cat was accidentally treated with a
permethrin-based insecticide intended for canine use. The animal
developed convulsions, tachycardia, hyperaesthesia, dilated pupils and
 mild trismus. The cat was given diazepam, washed and then collared to
a lap peg-mol e pue are aanoddns uaa pue gu puanaid
animal had recovered fully within 48 hours (VPISLn case 95/164979)
●A 4 kg cat was treated with a flea spray containing permethrin and
piperonyl butoxide. Within 5 hours the animal had profuse salivation,
hyperaesthesia and convulsions. The animal died, despite supportive
care (VPISLn case 94/152472)
Mechanism of toxicity
The toxic effects of pyrethroids and pyrethrins are due to alteration of the
kinetics of voltage-dependent sodium channels in nerve membranes,
which causes repetitive discharges or membrane depolarisation. Some
 pyrethroids may also inhibit gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors.
This inhibits the GABAa-receptor mediated chloride ion influx, the
physiological function of which is to induce presynaptic inhibition. Loss
of this inhibition can lead to hyperexcitability of nervous tissue and may be
the mechanism by which these compounds produce convulsions.
In mammals pyrethrins and pyrethroids are rapidly biotransformed and
detoxified by ester hydrolysis or oxidation. As a result, these compounds
and the greater toxicity in insects may also be an effect of the lower body
temperature of insects.
 )  a      s  s
 particularly <1 year), but the reason for this is unclear. Dermal exposure is
the most common route in cats. There is probably some dermal absorption
but there may be some ingestion of the chemical due to grooming.
Occasionally, toxicity may arise from animals being in close association
with or grooming treated animals.
The feline liver is relatively inefficient at glucuronide conjugation. This
leads to slow excretion and accumulation of metabolites and may be the
Cats 43
Pyrethrins andpyrethroids
pyrethrins are lipophilic and if repeatedly administered can accumulate in
fatty tissues.
Note: Non-specific plasma esterases are important for detoxification of
  e  s   
Organophosphorous insecticides inhibit these enzymes and simultaneous
exposure to these insecticides will increase the toxicity of pyrethrins and
pyrethroids.
Clinical effects
Onset usually occurs within 1-3 hours, sometimes up to 12 hours, duration
1-3 days.
Note: Simultaneous exposure to organophosphate insecticides may
butoxide, often added as a synergist to delay metabolism and increase
toxicity in insects, produces effects similar to that of pyrethrins and
pyrethroids.
Vomiting, diarrhoea, safivation, ataxia, tremor, incoordination, twitching.
hyperpnoea, muscle weakness and fasciculations and convulsions have all
been reported. Respiratory distress, probably due to weakness of
respiratory muscles, may occur.
Some compounds cause paraesthesia, for example shaking of feet when
they are dry.
Treatment
If within 2 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage, and then
administer adsorbents.
Emetics:
(a)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight i.m.
(b) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-3 ml/kg body weight orally
(c) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a)  Activated charcoal  Dose:
1-3g/kgbody weight orally
(b) BCK granules* Dose:
6-18g orally.
Treatment is essentiaily symptomatic and supportive. If the exposure is dermai,
the cat should be washed with lukewarm water and detergent. The use of very
warm water should be avoided as this increases dermal perfusion and may result in
increased dermal absorption. Copious amounts of detergent should be used
because pyrethrins and pyrethroids arg not soluble in water.
44  Cats
Pyrethrins ond pyrethroids
Diazepam or pentobarbitone may be used to control twitching. fasciculation or
convulsions. Diazepam dose: 0.5 mg/kg body weight i.v. repeated every I0 minutes
up to three times if needed; Pentobarbitone dose: 3-15 mg/kg body weight by
slow intravenous infusion.
Care should be taken to maintain hydration and body temperature. Atropine rmay
be given for hypersalivation. lf temperature rises due to muscle fasciculation,
cerebral oedema may result, which can lead to continued convulsions.
Fatty foods should not be given because these wil enhance absorption.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/129997 (permethrin), 97/134900 (pyrethroids)
Nicholson SS (1995). Toxicity of insecticides and skin care products of botanical
origin. Veterinary Dermatology 6(3), 139-143.
Powers KA et al.(1988). An evaluation of the acute toxicity of an a insecticidal spray
containing linalol, D-limonene and piperonyl butoxide applied topically to
domestic cats. Veterinary and Human Toxicology 30(3), 206-210.
Valentine WM (1990). Pyrethrin and pyrethroid insecticides. Veterinary Clinics of
North Anerica:Small Animal Practice 20(2),375-382
Compendium 17(4),489-492.
56
Cats  45
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  200O A Campbell and M Chapmai1
Benzodiazepines
Type of product
Benzodiazepines are mainly used as hypnotics/sedatives, but also have use
as anxiolytics, anticonvulsants and premedicants. There are 16 available
benzodiazepines in the UK. Of these, five are listed in the veterinary
formularies for use in veterinary practice: alprazolam, clonazepam,
clorazepate, diazepam and midazolam,
Presentation
The benzodiazepines are available in tablet, capsule, liquid and injectable
forms at a variety of strengths. Some of the benzodiazepines intended for
human use are also available as rectal tubes and suppositories.
Alprazolam
250 μg, 500 μg tablets
Bromazepam
1.5 mg, 3 mg tablets
Chlordiazepoxide
5 mg, 10 mg, 25 mg tablets; 5 mg, 10 mg
capsules
Clobazam
10 mg tablets
Clonazepam
0.5 mg, 2 mg tablets; 1 mg/ml injection
Clorazepate
7.5 mg, 15 mg tablets
Diazepam
2 mg. 5 mg. 10 mg tablets; 2 mg/5 ml, 5 mg/
5 ml oral solutions; 5 mg/ml injection; 10 mg
suppository; 2 mg/ml, 4 mg/ml rectal tubes
Flunitrazepam
1 mg tablets
Flurazepam
15 mg, 30 mg tablets
Loprazoiam
1 mg tablets
Lorazepam
1 mg, 4 mg tablets; 4 mg/ml injection
Lormetazepam
0.5 mg, 1 mg tablets
Midazolam
1 mg/ml, 2 mg/ml, 5 mg/ml injection
Nitrazepam
5 mg tablets; 2.5 mg/5 ml oral solution
Oxazepam
10 mg, 15 mg, 30 mg tablets
Temazepam
10 mg, 20 mg tablets; 10 mg, 15 mg, 20 mg.
30 mg capsules; 10 mg/5 ml oral elixir.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992 the VPIS has received between 15 and 40 enquiries per annum
regarding exposure of companion animals to benzodiazepine drugs. Cases
involving dogs predominate and almost all involve pets inadvertently
consuming their owners' medication. Nitrazepam, temazepam and
  o        s
have been reported.
57
Cats and dogs  47
Benzodiazepines
Recommended dosage
Diazepam
Status epilepticus: 0.5 mg/kg body weight i.v. bolus, repeat after 10 minutes
if necessary.
Appetite stimulant (cats): 0.5-1 mg/kg body weight i.v.
Spraying (cats): 1.25-2.5 mg/cat 8-12 hourly.
Scotty cramp (dogs): 0.5-2 mg/kg body weight i.v., then orally every 8 hours.
Aiprazolam
Anxiety (cats): 0.125-0.25 mg/cat, 2-3 times daily
Clonozepam
Clorazepate
Midazolam
Sedation: 66-200 μg/kg body weight i.v.
Toxicity
therapeutic doses, both the cardiovascular and respiratory effects are
shop un uaqoid e uoias si sn inq 'ino Aru uogexean aiosn rer
and cats. Benzodiazepines can cause disinhibition, leading to paradoxical
hyperachivity or aggression. In debilitated animals or in overdose,
respiratory depression may become clinically significant and necessitate
ventilation.
The long-term use of benzodiazepines has been associated with liver
damage in both dogs and cats.
According to theliterature:
+
The Centre National d'lInformations Toxicologiques Veterinaraires
(CNITV) followed up cases of benzodiazepine poisoning in animals
between 1991 and 1994. There were 463 calis relating to dogs and 49 to
cats. The common clinical effects were ataxia, hyperactivity, muscle
58
0 5ue se  84
Benzodiazepines
many benzodiazepines are shorter in dogs, they are less toxic. No
deaths were reported (Berini et al., 1995).
to coma, tonic and clonic convulsions with extensor rigidity and
pulmonary haemorrhage. Both animals were euthanased. Flurazepam
was detected in the urine of one dog (Beier and Bischoff, 1997).
 Eleven cases of fulminant hepatic failure were reported in cats. Clinical
signs developed within 5-1l days of initial oral treatiment with
ug 4ep aim Su g'z on Aep Sw 1 uoy paluea asesoa 'undaz
cats died 7-15 days after initial treatment. The authors considered the
hepatotoxicosis idiosyncratic as all but one cat were treated within the
established dosage range (Center et al., 1996).
am Apoq 8y/8 z< si s8op ui wndazuuo, 1oy 0a7 eio au1
+
The oral LDso for temazepam in dogs is quoted as 3.62 g/kg body weight.
The oral LDso for flurazepam in cats is quoted as 250 mg/kg body weight.
+
The parenteral LDso for diazepan in dogs is >800 mg/kg body weight.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
No fatal cases reported.
A dose of 8.3 mg/kg body weight of clonazepam in a dog caused
hyperaesthesia, salivation, ataxia and tremors (VPISLn case 92/84883).
1 mg/kg body weight of diazepam in a dog caused respiratory
depression (VPISLn case 92/53570)
+
eixeje pasneo soop ui 1yliam Apoq 8y/au zz on dn wudazuy jo sasod
and lethargy only.
Diazepam at a dosing of 40 mg/kg body weight in one dog caused
prolonged sedation, hypotension and hypothermia (VPISLn case 94/
101681).
2.2 mg/kg of nitrazepam in a dog caused drowsiness, salivation and
5evere ataxia (VPISLn case 95/100903). Higher doses in other animals
produced drowsiness only.
A temazepam dose of 1.3 mg/kg body weight in a dog produced
drowsiness in one case (VPISLn case 93/80648), whereas doses up to
5.5 mg/kg in other animals produced no effects.
40 mg/kg body weight of temazepam in one dog produced drowsiness
only (VPISLn case 96/22554).
Mechanism of toxicity
Benzodiazepines act by enhancing the effect of the inhibitory neurotrans-
mitter gamma-amino-butyric-acid (GABA). GABA binds to a specific
receptor complex located in the CNs. This causes chloride ions to move
from the extracellular to the intracellular space. Increased flow of chloride
ions leads to hyperpolarisation of the cell and inhibition. This receptor
complex also contains binding sites for benzodiazepines, enhancing the
effect of GABA. An overdose will increase this inhibition, resulting in
greater sedation.
59
Cats and dogs I 49
Benzodiazepines
Kinetics and metabolism
Benzodiazepines are rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. They
are metabolised in the liver, some to pharmacolgically active intermediates
and are excreted via the kidneys. Benzodiazepines are usually classed as
short-, intermediate- or long-acting, dependent on their half-lives.
Clinical effects
Clinical effects usually occur between 30 minutes and 2 hours following
ingestion.
Commonly occurring effects include ataxia, drowsiness, muscle tremors,
vomiting, hypothermia and coma. In severe cases respiratory depression
    e se   
agitation, aggressiveness, hyperactivity and hyperthermia.
Chronic exposures may result in liver damage, the initial signs of which are
non-specific and inchude variable anorexia, vomiting, lethargy, dehydra
tion, hypothermia and jaundice.
Treatment
If the animal presents to surgery within 2 hours of ingestion, then adsorbents
should be given. For massive overdose gastric lavage may be considered as may
use of emetics. provided the animal is not too drowsy.
Adsorbents:
(a)  Activated charcoal   Dose:
2 g/kgbody weight orally
(b)BCK granules**
Dose:
6-18 g orally 2-3 times daily.
Emetics:
(a)Apomorphine
Dose;
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.;
0.I mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b) Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)lpecacuanha
Dose:
1-2 ml/kgbody weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Note: Apomorphine use is contra-indicated in cats.
The animal should be observed for a minimum of 4 hours post-ingestion.
Management is essentially symptomatic and supportive. Cooling/warming mea-
sures should be instituted as appropriate. In severe cases, ventilation may be
necessary.
A specific benzodiazepine receptor antagonist called flumazenil is available. In
human medicine it is licensed for reversal of sedative effects of benzodiazepines in
anaesthetic, intensive care and diagnostic procedures only. Its use in anirmals has,
to date, been limited. Doses of 03-30 mg/kg body weight have been used
50  Cats and dogs
Benzodiazepines
experimentally in mice and cats to successfully antagonise the central effects of
some benzodiazepine agents. A suggested dose for dogs and cats is 0.1-0.2 mg/kg
body weight given i.v., i.m. or s.c.
in cases of suspected liver damage foflowing chronic exposures, liver function tests
should be carried cut.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 98/154230.
Bertini S et al. (1995). Benzodiazepine poisoning in companion animals. Veterinary and
Human Toxicology 37(6), 559-562.
Human Toxicology 39(6), 352-354.
Center SA ct al. (1996). Fulminant hepatic failure associated with oral administration
of diazepam in 11 cats. Jotirnal of the American Veterinary Medical Associafion 209(3),
618-625.
Bogden RN and Goa KL (1991). Flumazenil, a reappraisal of its pharmacological
properties and therapeutic efficacy as a benzodiazepine antagonist. Drugs 42,
1061-1089.
61
Cats and dogs  51
Handbookof Poisoningin dogs andcats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  200O A Campbell and M Chapmain
Petroleum distillates/White spirit/ Kerosene
Type of product
Petroleum distilates are usually complex chemical mixtures derived from
the distillation of crude oil. They include both aliphatic and aromatic
hydrocarbons.
White spirit is a mixture of aliphatic hydrocarbons Cg-C12 naphthalene and
higher aromatics. Kerosene is a mixture of aliphatic hydrocarbons Cg-C16
olefins and aromatics, including naphthalene.
Presentation
They are usually liquid and have characteristic strong odours. Examples are
petrol, paraffin, diesel, solvents for paints (especially gloss paints),
varnishes, glues, glass cleaners, lamp oils, barbecue lighter fluids and
sometimes as a liquid vehicle for pesticides, wood preservatives, and
industrial chemicals.
White spirit is usually a colourless volatile liquid commonly found in the
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992 the London centre of the VPIS has received between 20 and 60
enquiries per annum regarding petroleum distilate or white spirit
 aa s  p  ao so n s  sxa
spirit or turpentine substitute, as these are the most likely products to be
found in the home. Three fatal cases are documented, two in cats and one
in a dog.
Toxicity
According to the literature:
● Aspiration of as little as 5 ml of refined petroleum distillates may result
in fatal aspiration pneumonia.
In the experience of VPISLn:
●A 3 kg domestic short-haired cat had access to the spilled contents of a
large bottle of white spirit for some hours. It was assumed the animal
had inhaled the vapours and had also waiked through the spill. Oral
exposure had occurred through grooming. The animal had severe skin
burns, abdominal tenderness, severe buccal irritation and gradually
deteriorating respiratory fungtion over 2 days. Despite aggressive
6Z
52  Cats and dogs
Petroleumdistillotes/White spirit/Kerosene
therapy with analgesics, fluids and antibiotics the animal died. Cause of
death was attributed to severe pulmonary 0edema {VPISLn case 92/
88577). A similar exposure and outcome occurred in another 4.5 kg cat
(VPISLncase94/109826)
●A 13-year-old Setter drank an unknown quantity of white spirit from a
spilled 1 litre container whilst unminded. The animal was found
wheezing, and ataxia. The animal was sedated, and given steroids,
antibiotics and adsorbents but was later euthanased as no significant
improvement was apparent (VPISLn case 97/130559).
Mechanism of toxicity
Petroleum distillates and white spirit are generally irritant to skin and
mucous membranes, but also may calise CNS depression if inhaled at high
The most severe clinical problems associated with exposure are due to
aspiration pneumonia. The more volatile or highly refined the petroleum
distillate mixture, the greater the risk of aspiration and development of
pulmonary oedema. This is owing to the low surface tension, which allows
involved.
Clinical effects
Onset of effects is usuaily between 1 and 8 hours post-exposure.
Ingestion or oral exposure following grooming after dermal exposure may
cause salivation, severe and protracted vomiting, local irritation and
ulceration of the mouth and throat,abdominal tenderness, diarrhoea,
inappetence and anorexia.
Signs of systemic toxicity include tachycardia, ataxia, tremor, weakness
excitability and agitation.Convulsions,tachypnoea,hyperaesthesia and
pyrexia are reported for more severe exposures.
Aspiration pneumonia is an occasional complication of ingestion where
coughing or vomiting has occurred. It also occurs following inhalation.
Clinical effects include coughing,fever,dyspnoea,cyanosis and,in severe
cases, CNS depression and pulmonary oedema.
Petroleum distillates are irritant to skin and eyes. Blisters, inflammation and
burns have been reported following dermal exposures and corneal damage
63
Cats and dogs I 53
Petroleumdistilfates/Whitespirit/Kerosene
Post-mortem findings
The most common finding is that of severe pulmonary oedema. The lungs
necrosis are occasional findings.
Treatment
Use of emetics and gastric lavage is contraindicated owing to the risk of aspiration.
Adsorbents are of limited benefit. They reportedly bind aromatic distillates and
longer chain aliphatic hydrocarbons and therefore may help to reduce absorption
of distillate mixtures such as kerosene.
Adsorbents:
(a)Activated charcoalDose:
 2 g/kg body weight orally
(b)BCK granules
6-18 g orally.
Oral fluids should be encouraged.
Where dermal exposure has occurred, the animal should be thoroughly washed.
Petroleum distillates are not very miscible with water so non-solvent-based
detergents or commercially available hand degreasers, e.g. Swarfega", may need to
be ermployed, Where possible the animal should be collared to prevent further
grooming and further ingestion of the distillate.
Contaminated eyes should be irrigated with water or saline, and then stained with
fluorescein and examined for corneal injury.
Treatment thereafter is symptomatic and supportive.Bland diets are recom-
mended if there is evidence of severe buccal irritation. Care should be taken to
ensure adequate hydration and nutrition. Atropine may be given for excessive
salivation.
An observation period of 12 hours is recommended.
The animal should be assessed for respiratory effects. Aspiration pneumonia
severe cases positive end-expiratory pressure ventilation (PEEP) may be
considered, though it should be used with caution as pneumomediastinum and
pneumothorax are potential complications.
The use of antibiotics to prevent secondary lung infections is recommended.
References
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/130559.
Dorman DC (1990). Petroleum distillates and turpentine. Veterinary Clinics of North
Amcrica: Small Animal Practice 20(2),505-513.
Owens JG and Dorman DC (1997). Common household hazards for small animals.
Veterinary Medicine 92(2), 140-148.
64
54  Cats and dogs
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Poinsettia/ Euphorbio pulcherrimo
The plant
The common name for Euphorbia pulcherrima is poinsettia. The plant
belongs to the Euphorbiaceae family.
 o  h sd  s na  ar a
30-40 cm in height, and have bright red-coloured bracts, though some may
be pink or off-white-coloured
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIs the centre in London has received a small
and is used as a festive decoration.
Toxicity
This plant is considered of low toxicity.
According to the literature:
● One case with a fatal outcome is described where a cat developed
severe gastrointestinal upset, pyrexia and died after consuming leaves
from a poinsettia plant.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
· Ingestion usually results in mild gastrointestinal effects only.
 In one case, a Burmese kitten who ate a large leaf showed severe buccal
irritation and endoscopy revealed severe oesophageal irritation
(VPISLn case 96/191501).
Mechanism of toxicity
The plant, like most Euphorbia species, contains diterpene esters, but
 principal effects of ingestion would be irritant ones.
Clinical effects
These can be vomiting, salivation, diarrhoea, abdominal tenderness and,
rarely, pyrexia.
65
Cats and dogs  55
Poinsettia/Euphorbiapulcherrima
Treatment
Gastric decontamination using gastric lavage, emesis or adsorbents is not
Management shouid otherwise be supportive, particularly ensuring that the animal
is well hydrated.
Reference
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/43709.
66
56  Cats and dogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2OOO A Campbell and M Chapman
Silica gel
Type of product
Silica gel is a commoniy used desiccant.
Presentation
Small packets of silica gel are often found in the packaging of electrical
goods, shoes, cameras and containers for drugs.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Every year the VPIS receives numerous enquiries abut the potential toxicity
 Of silica gel to domestic pets. In the cases reported, no serious clinical effects
have resulted in either cats or dogs.
Toxicity
Silica gel is inert and not toxic; however the packets are often misleadingly
labelled with a skull and cross bones and the words 'Do not eat'. As a result,
silica gel is a frequent cause of unnecessary concern.
Clinical effects
None are anticipated.
Treatment
No treatment is necessary, even for very substantial ingestions.
Reference
VPIS (London) past cases up to 98/154124.
67
Cats and dogs  57
Handbookof Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2000 A Campbell and M Chapman
Thermometers
Type of product
Instruments for the measurement of temperature, both clinical thermo-
meters for body temperature measurement and thermometers for
determining ambient temperature, are available.
Presentation
They usually consist of a glass tube with a bulbous end containing a liquid,
which changes in volume depending on the temperature.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
The VPIS receives a small number of enquiries each year regarding
ingestion of mercury thermometers by dogs. No serious cases have arisen.
Toxicity
Clinical thermometers contain about 1 g of elemental mercury (approxi-
 on g a w paqse gou si y s u a  io e
great extent, therefore systemic toxicity is unlikely to occur from ingestion
of the contents of clinical thermometers.
Thermometers for the measurement of ambient temperature (both indoor
and outdoor) usually contain 0.3-0.5 ml of triethyl phosphate, toluene,
thermometers is not significant.
Clinical effects
intestinal irritation until all the mercury is passed in the faeces.
Treatment
following ingestion of a mercury-containing thermometer but no treatment is
required.
Often the only real risk following ingestion of a thermometer is from the glass.
The mouth should be checked for cuts and any glass fragments removed.
Reference
58 I Cats and dogs
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Allopurinol
Type of product
Allopurinol is a xanthine oxidase inhibitor with veterinary use in the
prophylactic management of recurrent uric acid uroliths and hyper-
uricosuric calcium oxalate urolithiasis. It has human use in prophylactic
management of idiopathic gout and prevention of calcium oxalate and uric
acid renal stones.
Presentation
Allopurinol is widely available in the UK as a prescription medicine for
 s d sna    a 
available. Most preparations are in tablet form and are of 100 mg or 300 mg
strength.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992 there have been up to 10 enquiries per
year concerning allopurinol ingestion by dogs. No fatal cases have occurred
of cases the animals consumed tablets intended for use by their owners,
Recommended dosage
The recommended dose for dogs is 10 mg/kg body weight orally every
8 hours for one month, followed by 10-20 mg/kg body weight orally per
day.
Toxicity
According to the literature:
1o1 Aep 1ad yyaiam Apog Syau 0g yo ssaoxa ui sasop Sualaoa1 ssoa
1 year developed renal xanthine deposits.
● Daily doses of 2-4 g have been survived in dogs.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
●Acute doses as high as 750 mg/kg body weight have not caused any
clinical effects.
e Aq a si yo uogsaut o paxu sem eisdipiod pue oue pae
small dog (VPISLn case 92/102518).
● 4 g reportedly caused a period of excitability in a Dalmatian (VPISLn
case 96/111279).
69
Dogs 59
Allopurino!
Mechanism of toxicity
Allopurinol decreases the formation of uric acid by inhibiting xanthine
oxidase, which catalyses the conversion of hypoxanthine to xanthine and of
xanthine to uric acid. Long-term use may lead to xanthine deposits forming
in the kidneys.
Kinetics and metabolism
Allopurinol is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal ract under normal
conditions.
'snu /z aq on paoda si sop un u loundoe jo a-ji a
The half-life of the major metabolite, oxipurinol, is unknown.
Clinical effects
Vomiting, diarrhoea and abdominal tenderness would be anticipated
following ingestion of large doses. Excitability and polydipsia have been
reported in previous VPISLn cases.
Treatment
Gastric emptying is unlikely to be necessary unless huge quantities (>I g/kg body
weight) have been ingested and the animal presented to surgery within I hour. Use
of adsorbents is not indicated.
sia o as si a  on pe ss si 
vomiting, use of metoclopramide may be considered.
Dose: 0.5-I mg/kg body weight orally, s.c. or i.m. every 6-8 hours: I-2 mg/kg
body weight per day by slow i.v. infusion,
Intravenous fluids may be considered to ensure that the animal remains well
hydrated.
References
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/55047.
Ling GV ef af. (1997). Pharmacokinetics of allopurinol in Dalmalian dogs. fournaf of
Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics 20(2), 134138.
70
60Dogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht @ 2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Alphachloralose
Type of product
Alphachloralose is used as a rodenticide (particularly for mice) and for the
Aq jl oy laisea paiapuai pue pasqowui are Aay) spnq jsad yo jouon
other means, or die from hypothermia and/or inanition).
Presentation
Some are presented as impregnated wheat or bran granules with an
alphachloralose concentration between 2% and 4% w/w. These are often
available in small sachets for easy use. One 5 g sachet of a 4% w/w strength
will provide 200 mg of alphachloralose.
concentrations. Some manufacturers colour their products green for
identification purposes.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992 the VPIs has handled an average of 20 enquiries per annum
concerning accidental ingestion of alphachloralose. Over 85% of these cases
Toxicity
According to the literature:
uiam Apog dy/su 01g jo sasop aniains 0l patiodar uaaq aaey stoa 
●
 660 mg/kg body weight or more may cause fatality.
●The LDso for dogs are quoted in the range 100-600 mg/kg body weight.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
 Ingestion of 73 mg/kg body weight in a cross-bred puppy resulted in
weakness, tremors, hyperaesthesia and sedation. The animal recovered
with supportive care (VPISLn case 93/48161).
 208 mg/kg body weight ingested by a 6 kg Jack Russell terrier resulted
    s   s s 
required diazepam and then anaesthesia, but recovered within 24 hours
(VPISLn case 95/72705).
71
Dogs I 61
Aiphachioralose
Mechanism of toxicity
Alphachloralose causes selective depression of neurones in the ascending
reticular formation, thereby suppressing the normal arousal response. In
produce a characteristic CNS depression.
Kinetics and metabolism
Alphachloralose appears to be readily and rapidly absorbed and is reported
to be metabolised to chloral and then to trichloroethanol and trichloroacetic
excreted in urine.
Clinical effects
Onset of effects is usually within 1-2 hours. Duration of effects is variable.
but cases with effects lasting between 24 and 48 hours have been reported
Ataxia and hyperactivity are common in the early stages of poisoning.
There may also be salivation, weakness and drowsiness, and in severe
cases, hypothermia, shallow respiration, weak pulse, coma and convul-
sions. The usual cause of death is respiratory failure.
Poisoned animals appear to lose sensitivity to pain, but become
hypersensitive to touch, sound and electrical stimuli. Dogs have been
literature reports describe apparent blindness in dogs.
Treatment
Treatment is necessary for 20 mg/kg body weight, which is equivalent to:
0.5 g bait/kg body weight for a 4% w/w product.
If within 2 hours of ingestion, inouce vomiting or consider gastric lavage. Oral
adsorbents are not useful,
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.;
0.I mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.;
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)  Ipecacuanha
Dose:
1-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Treatment thereafter is supportive. Observation for a minirnum of 4 hours is
recommended.
72
62 T Dogs
Alphachloralose
acepromazine may be given.
aayn on dn sannuw 0l Aaaa paneada 'v! lyalam Xpoq a/au s'o asop wedazeya
times if needed.
i.m., or s.c.; 0.03 mg/kg body weight by slow i.v. injection. If these fail, then general
anaesthesia may be considered for a short while.
Provision of artificial/supplemental heat may be necessary for hypothermia and in
severe cases respiratory support may be required.
References
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/80130.
Foster D (1995). Poisons - Alphachloralose. In Practice 17(8), 381.
73
Dogs 63
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Anticoagulant rodenticides
Type of product
The anticoagulants are usually derivatives of either 4-hydroxycoumarin Or
indane-1,3-dione and are the active constituents of many pesticides
 preparations for control of infestations of rats and mice.
They are usually of ‘first generation' or ‘second generation' types
ugeanp ialuoi yonu e aaey uogeiauag puooas se paisse spunoduo
of action.
Substances include:
Brodifacoum
Second generation  Coumarin type
Bromadiolone
 Second generation  Coumarin type
Chlorphacinone
Second generation  Indandione type
Coumatetralyl
Second generation  Coumarin type
Difenacoum
Second generation  Coumarin type
Diphacinone
Second generation  Indandione type
Flocoumafen
Second generation Coumarin type
Warfarin
First generation   Coumarin type.
Presentation
Anticoagulants are formulated as ready-to-use baits of variable concentra-
tions. Impregnated powders, grains, seeds and wheat grains are usually of
a strength between 0.005-0.01% w/w (equivalent to 50-100 μg anti-
coagulant/g preparation (ppm).
Paste, block, gel and liquid preparations tend to be stronger, with
concentrations of 0.01-0.25% w/w (equivalent to 100 μg-2.5 mg anti-
coagulant/g preparation).
Frequently, the preparations are dyed for identification purposes. Many
companies use blue or green colours to denote anticoagulant rodenticides,
but this is not universally true. In the UK some are coloured purple or red.
In some, anticoagulants may be combined with calciferol of cholecalciferol
(see relevant section)
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992 the London centre has received more
enquiries about the anticoagulant rodenticides than any other type of
product. 117 enquiries were received in 1992 and 268 in 1997. Calls about
these products therefore account,for 7.5-9% of the total enquiry number.
64 T Dogs
Anticoagulantrodenticides
Over 85% of all these enquiries involved dogs. Difenacoum and
bromadiolone are the agents for which most enquiries are received, but
this is probably a reflection of the fact that there are more products
containing these active ingredients available on the market. Enquiries about
Toxicity
As most rodent bait formulations contain a very small concentration of
designed to kill rodents after one exposure only, and so substantial
 ingestions by dogs may result in severe toxicity.
rodents) have been reported, and are more likely from second generation
anticoagulant-based baits.
According to the literature:
Brodifacoum
● LDso values for brodifacoum in dogs are quoted in the range 0.25-
3.5 mg/kg body weight.
Assurming fatal dose of 0.25 mg/kg body weight and a bait of 0.005%
w/w strength, a fatal dose is calculated as 5 g bait/kg body weight in
dogs.
Bromadiolone
● LDso values in dogs are quoted in the range 6.3-15 mg/kg body weight.
●Assuming a fatal dose of 6.3 mg/kg body weight and a bait of 0.005%
w/w strength, a fatal dose is calculated as 126 g bait/kg body weight.
● Dogs can tolerate repeat doses of 0.5-1.0 mg/kg of bromadiolone for
several days.
● Lowest fatal dose reported for bromadiolone is 10 mg/kg.
Chlorphacinone
● LDso values in dogs are quoted in the range 50-i00 mg/kg body
weight.
Assuming a fatal dose of 50 mg/kg body weight and a bait of 0.005%
am Apoq Syieq y 1 go asop leiey e 'yuas m/m
Coumatetraly!
●LDso value in dogs is quoted as 35 mg/kg body weight.
●Assuming a fatal dose of 35 mg/kg body weight and a bait of 0.005%
w/w strength, the fatal dose equivalent in dogs is 700 g bait/kg body
weight.
75
Dogs I 65
Anticoagulontrodenticides
Difenacoum
●LDso value for difenacoum in dogs is 50 mg/kg body weight.
●Assuming a fatal dose of 50 mg/kg body weight for difenacoum and a
bait of 0.005% w/w strength, a fatal dose in a dog could be as little as
1 kg bait/kg body weight.
Diphacinone
●LDso values in dogs are quoted in the range 1-7.5 mg/kg body weight.
m/m %o00 jo 1eq e pue 1uaiam Apoq y/lu 1 yo asop piey e Sunssy
strength, a fatal dose can be caiculated as 20 g bait/kg body weight
Flocoumafen
●LDso value for dogs quoted as 75 μg/kg body weight.
Assuming a fatal dose of 75 μg/kg body weight and a bait of 0.005% w/w
Worfarin
·LDs values in dogs are quoted in the range 50-300 mg/kg body
weight.
●Assuming a fatal dose of 50 mg/kg body weight and a bait of 0.005%
strength, then a fatal dose of 1 kg bait/body weight can be calculated.
● Lowest fatal dose is reportedly in the range 20-50 mg/kg body weight
In the experience of VPISLn:
Brodifacoum
●An 8-year-old Retriever admitted with lethargy, coughing, clotting
deficiency, abdominal bleeding was managed with vitamin K1.
antibiotics, plasma expanders and blood transfusion. The animal was
found to have liver failure and was euthanased (VPISLn case 94/28809).
●A Jack Russell terrier was admitted with severe vomiting,bruising and
renal failure. Vitamin K, fluid therapy and peritoneal lavage were
given, but the animal died (VPISLn case 96/39725).
Bromadioione
●A 12-year-old female Border Collie was admitted with posterior paresis,
fatigue, tachypnoea, tachycardia, anaemia, intra-abdominal, intestinal,
retinal and subcutaneous haemorrhage. She received vitamin K,
therapy, i.v. fluids, diuretics and, two blood transfusions, but died
after 7 days (VPISLn case 91/93238).
● One case of a pregnant bitch presented having eaten a large bag of
bromadiolone-based rodenticide. Vitamin K, therapy was instituted
and the animal delivered a healthy and apparently unaffected litter
(VPISLn case 97/41330).
76
66  Dogs
Anticoogulantrodenticides
Chlorphacinone
 In general, many more cases presented to veterinarians showing
clinical effects.
● Nine fatal cases reported.
A 15 kg Cocker Spaniel presented with pallor, abdominal tenderness
 r  go  y d p
over 3 weeks. Despite vitamin K and blood transfusions the animal
died (VPISLn case 92/23941)
●A 10 kg Terrier cross-bred presented with pale mucous membranes,
hyperpnoea and collapse. The dog was given i.v. fluids and vitamin K1.
The animal died (VPISLn case 96/12263).
●A 40 kg Retriever presented 9 days after ingestion of chlorphacinone-
containing bait. It was dull and lethargic, hyperpnoeic and tachycardic,
had a weak pulse, It was given i.v, fluids, antibiotics, analgesics and
died as Vitamin K, was being administered (VPISLn case 96/43122)
Coumotetraly!
● No canine fatal cases reported.
● All cases with clinical effects responded well to standard therapies of
i.v. fluids, prolonged vitamin K administration, and in some cases
blood transfusion.
Difenocoum
● This is the anticoagulant about which VPISLn receives most enquiries.
● Many cases with clinical effects responded well to standard therapies of
i.v. fluids, prolonged vitamin K administration, and in some cases
blood transfusion.
●A 22 kg cross-bred dog was presented with pale mucous membranes,
and elevated PT, and evidence of thoracic haemorrhage. There was
significant bleeding from site of venepuncture for collection of sample
for PT measurement. The animal received blood transfusion, and
prolonged vitamin K; and made a full recovery over 4 weeks (VPISLn
case 94/16088).
 Several cases have involved animals who were fitting. In these cases.
the preparations ingested all contained calciferol as a co-ingredient.
Diphocinone
●A 5 kg Jack Russell terrier presented having collapsed. It had pale
mucous membranes, dyspnoea and tachypnoea. Despite prompt
vitamin K; administration the animal died (VPISLn case 96/61359).
Flocoumofen
● Few cases reported.
77
Dogs  67
Anticoagulant rodenticides
All cases were asymptomatic. Some received emetics and prophylactic
vitamin K.
Warfarin
● Onset of clinical effects in cases is more rapid, as expected
●No fatal cases reported to VPISLn.
 All cases with clinical effects responded well to standard therapy of i.v.
fluids and prolonged vitamin K, administration.
Mechanism of toxicity
Anticoagulants are absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and act by
inhibiting hepatic vitamin K, epoxide-reductase, the enzyme responsible
for conversion of vitamin K epoxide to vitamin K. This results in the
gradual depletion of the body stores of vitamin K needed to convert
precursor coagulation proteins to their activated forms. Hence there is a
reduction ia Factors II (Prothrombin), Vfl, IX and X and therefore inhibition
of prothrombin synthesis within the liver. The anticoagulants achieve this
  m       y an
inactive anticoagulant-coenzyme and displacing vitamin K. Since the
reaction is essentially an equilibrium one, administration of vitamin K, as
therapy willresult in increased levels of the vitamin K pro-enzyme (active),
hence increasing rate of prothrombin generation and therefore clotting
The delay to onset of the clinical effects is due to the fact that there is a
supply of circulating prothrombin and other vitamin K-dependent clotting
factors, which would have to be depleted before clinical effects manifest
themselves.
Kinetics and metabolism
Warfarin and the second generation anticoagulants have a relatively slow
absorption from the gastrointestinal tract. Over 95% of an ingested warfarin
dose is absorbed and approximately 90% absorption occurs for the second
generation type.
Warfarin has a plasma half-life in dogs of approximately 14.5 hours. That of
the second generation anticoagulants is variable and longer, as they bind
strongly to plasma proteins. For example, the plasma half-life of
diphacinone is 4-5 days and that of bromadiolone and brodifacoum
uncommon for residual effects to be evident some 15-20 days or more post-
ingestion, even with antidotal treatment.
Oxidases to form inactive metabolites, which are excreted in the urine.
68IDogs
Anticoagulantrodenticides
Clinical effects
Clinical effects may be delayed for up to 1-5 days, though are usually seen
within 1-3 days of exposure. Duration of effects may be as long as 12-15
days.
Clinical effects include persistent bleeding from the nose, gums, bowel and
any wounds, although external bieeding is not always present. Pale
mucous membranes, depression, lethargy, weakness, inappetence, anor-
exia and anaemia are frequent signs. Abdominal tenderness, haematemesis,
haematuria and melena are occasionally reported in severe intoxications
and are indicative of gastrointestinal haemorrhage. Rarely, respiratory
distress (inspiratory and expiratory wheezing) and tachycardia may be
noted.
Lameness may occur as a resuit of sweiling around the joints. Pulmonary
blood-tinged froth around the nose or mouth.
Sites of venepuncture may bleed excessively.
Haemorrhage into the peritoneal and/or pleural cavities, mediastinum and
the cerebral vasculature may occur and subcutaneous swellings, petechial
and ecchymotic haemorrhages of the sclera, conjunctiva, and mucous
membranes may be seen.
Haemorrhage into vital areas can precipitate rapid fatality (commonly if
bleed is into pleural cavity, lung parenchyma, or the pericardia! space).
Hypovolaemic shock may occur after rapid blood loss. If the loss is severe,
paresis, ataxia, collapse, convulsions and death may occur. Hepatic failure
necessitating euthanasia following a serious brodifacoum ingestion, after
apparently successful initial management that included blood transfusion,
has been reported in VPISLn case 94/28809.
Post-mortem findings
  s o   s
subcutaneous tissues, peritoneum, thorax, lungs, bladder, periarticular
areas) are characteristic post-mortem findings. A flaccid rounded heart with
sub-epicardial and sub-endocardial haemorrhages may be seen. Severe
Laboratory assay of clotting factors or for anticoagulant in biological
specimens (ideally liver sample, unclotted blood, stomach and intestinal
contents, faeces, spleen and kidney) may help in confirming diagnosis but
delay between consumption and the manifestation of effects compounded
    
detect.
79
Dogs I 69
Anticoaguiant rodenticides
Treatment
i n aie r m  ab  aas  se
undergoing treatment.
Treatment is required for any definite or suspected ingestion of more than the
following doses or equivalent of the various anticoagulants by a dog:
Brodifacoum
3 g/kg body weight of a 0.005% w/w bait
Bromadiolone
100g/kgbodyweight of a0.005%w/wbait
Chlorphacinone
750 g/kg body weight of a 0.005% w/w bait
Coumatetralyl
500 g/kg body weight of a 0.005% w/w bait
Difenacoum
750 g/kg body weight of a 0.005% w/w bait
Diphacinone
15 g/kg body weight of a 0.005% w/w bait
Flocoumafen
I g/kg body weight of a 0.005% w/w bait
Warfarin
750 g/kgbody weight of a 0.005%w/w bait.
Simple blood tests can confirm diagnosis - clotting or prothrombin time (PT)
would both be significantly elevated. PT is the most useful indicator as it measures
clotting factor Vll, which has the shortest half-life of the affected clotting factors.
Care must also be taken when taking samples for PT determiration, as the site of
venepuncture may bleed excessively. The smallest possible needle should be used.
Ideally. samples should be taken prior to antidotal therapy with vitamin K.
If the animal is presented within 2 hours of the ingestion,induce emesis, if this can
be achieved safely. Ideally, follow this with adsorbent administration.
Ermetics:
(a)  Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/k body weight i.v. or i.m.:
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)  Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c) ipecacuanha
Dose:
1-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a)Activated charcoal Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally
(b) BCK granules a
618 g orally 2-3 times daily.
If the animal is symptomatic. then a blood sample for determination of PT should
be taken and then vitamin K; administered. Dose: 2-5 mg/kg body weight i.m. or
s.C. at multiple injection sites.
80
70  Dogs
Anticoogulont rodenticides
Notes
1.Intravenous administration of vitamin K is best avoided untess ingestion was
very recent, as the site of venepuncture may bleed excessively. For all
parenteral administrations, the smallest possible needle should be used.
2. Some vitamin K; preparations are reported to induce anaphylactic reactions
upon intravenous administration. Care should be taken to check instructions
for vitamin K; preparation used.
3. Synthetic vitamin K compounds that require metabolic modification before
they are active should not be given.
4. Pregnancy is no contra-indication to vitamin K, therapy. In one literature
report (Hornfeldt and Phearman, I996) and one VPISLn case (97/41330) it has
been given to pregnant bitches with potential poisoning with no adverse
outcome.
5.Vitamin K is phytomenadione.
Vitamin K; administration should start to reverse any hypoprothrombinaemia
within an hour or so, with a full effect being noticeable at about 4-6 hours. If
possible check PT at least 46 hours after the initial vitamin K, dosing.
In ALL cases the PT should be measured on a daily basis for a minimum
of3 days.
In asymptomatic animals,if the PT remains normal for 3 days after exposure, then
further treatment is unlikely to be required.
If the PT is elevated, then parenteral vitamin K, administration should be started
or continued on a daily basis at a dosage of 2-5 mg/kg body weight im. or s.c. at
multiple injection sites until PT normalises.
Once PT has normalised, the animal should continue to receive vitamin K, orally
for 2-3 weeks at an initial dosage of 2--5 mg/kg body weight in divided doses,
week). Ideally, some reassessment of the coagulation status should be made after
2-3 weeks and before the treatmenc is discontinued and also 3 days after
treatment has ceased to ensure no relapse occurs.
Severe intoxications:
If the animal has severe anaemia associated with dyspnoea but without pulmonary
bloodvolumeandlevelsofclottingfactors,
Regimen recommended is 20 ml/kg body weight - administer half this dose rapidly
and the remainder by slow i.v. drip. The whole blood must be fresh, as factors V
andVllarelabileonstorage.
If dyspnoea is related to haemorrhage within the pulmonary or thoracic area, then
bleeding sites need to be identifed apd thoracentesis considered.
8
Dogs|71
Anticoagulantrodenticides
Hypovolaemic shock requires fluid replacement and may also require blood
transfusion, and maintenance of renal output.
Supplemental iron and vitamins, particularly Vitamin Bi2, may be needed.
References and further reading
VPIs (London) past cases up to 97/156004.
Clark AM (1981). Rat bait poisoning. Veterinary Record 109(18), 413.
Cranna GR (1987). Toxicity associated with insecticides - a perspective. In Veierinary
University of Sydney, Australia, 2428 August 1987), Pp. 63-83.
Dorman DC (1990). Anticoagulant, cholecalciferol and bromethalin-based rodenti-
cides.Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Aninal Practice 20(2),339-352.
DuVall MD et al. (1989). Case studies oni second generation anticoagulant rodenticide
toxicities in non-target species. journal of Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation 1,
66-68.
Hornfeldt CS and Phearman S (1996). Successful treatment of brodifacoum poisoning
ina pregnant bitch.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 209(10),
1690-1691.
Kammermann-Luescher B (1978). Cumarinvergiftung bei Hund und Katze. Schrweizer
ArchivfurTierheilkunde120,231-244.
Lewis DC et al. (1997). Thrombocytopaenia in dogs with anticoagulant rodenticide-
induced hemorrhage: eight cases (1990-1995). fournal of the American Aninal
Hospital Association 33,417-422.
MeSporran KD and Philips CA (1983). Brodifacoum poisoning in a dog. Neu Zeaiand
Veterinary Journal 31, 185-186.
Maver S (1990). Poison - coumarin derivatives. In Prachice 12(4), 174-175.
Mount ME (1988). Diagnosis and therapy of anticoagulant rodenticide intoxications
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Smali Animal Practice 18(1), 115-130.
Mount ME and Feldman BF (1983). Mechanism of diphacinone rodenticide toxicosis
in the dog and its therapeutic indications.American fournal of Veterinary Research
44(11), 2009-2017.
Neff-Davis CA et al. (1981). Warfarin in the dog; pharmacokinetics as related to
clinical response. jourual of Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics 4, 135-140.
Oehme FW (1987).Agricultural peshicide toxicity in domestic animals. In Veterinary
Clinical Toxicology, Proceedings No.103 (Proceedings of a conference at the
University of Sydney,Australia,24-28 August, 1987), pp. 429-440.
Oehme FW (1987). Clinical toxicology in small animals. In Veterinary Clinical
Toxicology, Procedings No. 103 (Proceedings of a conference at the University of
Sydney, Australia, 24-28 August, 1987), Pp. 443-476.
Schulrman A et al.(1986).Diphacinone-induced coagulopathy in the dog.fournal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association 188(4), 402-405.
AmericanVeterinary Medical Association 182(8),817-818.
Talcott PA and Dorman DC {1997). Pesticide exposures in companion animals.
72 | Dogs
Anticoagulantrodenticides
Veenstra GE et al. (1991). Metabolic and toxicological studies on the anticoagulant
rodenticide,flocoumafen.Archives ofToxicology 14(suppl.), 160-165.
Woody B] et al. (1992). Coagulopathic effects and therapy of brodifacoum toxicosis in
dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 6, 23-28.
83
Dogs73
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapmain
Baclofen
Type of product
Baclofen is a skeletal rmuscle relaxant derived from the inhibitory
medicine as a treatment for chronic muscle spasm or control of muscle
spasticity due to, for example, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injuries and
cerebral paisy.
Presentation
Baclofen is available in the UK in both tablet and liquid forms. Tablets are
commonly of 10 mg strength and the liquid of 1 mg/mi. It is a prescription-
only medicine.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992 there has been an average of 10
enquiries per year concerning baclofen ingestion in dogs. There have also
been a few isolated feline cases. In all canine cases bar one the animals have
shown severe clinical effects, often despite low dosings. Several fatal cases
have been documented.
Recommended dosage
In the UK the drug is supplied tor use in humans only
Toxicity
Baclofen toxicity usually causes sudden rapid onset of clinical effects, which
are usually severe and may have a duration of well over 48 hours.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
A dose of 1 mg/kg body weight produced ataxia, profound sedation,
salivation, hypothermia and collapse. The animal survived (VPISLn
case 87/37030).
 In two cases between 24 and 30 mg/kg body weight of baclofen was
oddns aassaile adsap 'shnsan perey hhm 'shop Aq pansa
therapy. Both animals were tachycardic, tunresponsive, tachypnoeic
aaaas padonaaap Sop auo pasdeos Aenuana pue guyeaesiaday
fitting (VPISLn cases 93/14178 and 95/31610).
One dog consumed a potential 80 mg/kg body weight dose of baclofen.
 Despite drowsiness, bradycargia with subsequent collapse, coma and
74 I Dogs
Baciofen
    m     
72 hour period (VP1SLn 94/40332).
Mechanism of toxicity
The clinical effects seen in poisoning cases can be atributed to inhibition of
CNS reflexes. Its effects are most pronounced in the spinal cord. Baclofen
has little activity on GABAA receptors but binds well to presynaptic GABAg
receptors, thereby reducing transmitter refease, perhaps by a reduction in
presynaptic calcium ion influx. It has some possible post-synaptic action
control of neuronal excitability.
Kinetics and metabolism
Little animal data are available. It would appear that the drug is rapidly
absorbed in dogs and that the drug has a long elimination half-life.
Baclofen is excreted in the urine.
Clinical effects
The onset of clinical effects is often very sudden and usually within 1 hour
of ingestion. Recovery from clinical effects may take from 36-96 hours.
The most conumon features reported are early excitability, salivation,
constricted or pin-point pupils,weakness, ataxia,twitching, tremor,
bradycardia, pale mucous membranes, drowsiness, loss of swallowing
reflexes and collapse. In severe cases cyanosis, coma, convulsions, shock,
hypothermia, tachycardia and respiratory distress may occur. In many
cases reported to the VPIS the animals were vocalising markedly.
Treatment
Treatment is necessary for any amount.
If within 2 hours of ingestion induce vomiting, after ensuring there is an adequate
swallowing reflex. Then administer adsorbents.
Where the swallowing reflex is reduced or absent, give adsorbents only.
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.;
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c,
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)lpecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maxirnum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
85
Dogs  75
Baclofen
Adsorbents:
(a)  Activated charcoai
Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally
(b)BCK granules*
Dose:
618 g orally 2-3 times daily.
Treatment thereafter is supportive. Observe for a minirmurm of 4 hours.
Diazepam or aceprommazine may be given for muscle tremor or to control
routes, Diazepam dose: 0.5 mg/kg body weight i.v. repeated every 10 minutes up
to three times if needed; acepromazine dose: I-3 mg/kg body weight orally: 0.03-
0.1 mg/kg body weight i.m., or s.c.: 0.03 mg/kg body weight by slow i.v. injection.
Atropine rmay be given for severe bradycardia. Atropine dose: 30--100 μig/kg body
weight s.c. or i.m.: 20 μg/kg body weight i.v.
Provision of artificial/supplemental heat may be necessary for hypothermia.
Doxapram has been used in a few past VPIS cases as a respiratory stimulant. Dose:
2-10 mg/kg body weight by i.v, injection.
Reference
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/170000.
86
76 I Dog5
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  200O A Campbell and M Chapmain
Batteries
Presentation
This varies. The types of batteries most commorly implicated in animal
poisoning incidences are the miniature ceil or button battery or the small
AA or AAA devices used for charging calculators, electronic games,
watches, hearing aids, photographic equipment, remote controis, portable
telephones and pagers.
Most batteries contain either strong acids, e.g. sulphuric acid, or strong
alkalis, e.g. potassium hydroxide, as the conducting medium and many
have a significant metal content. Some button batteries stil contain
mercury as mercuric chloride, a soluble salt.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992 an average of 10 cases per year
machine they supply, e.g. mobile phones. No fatal outcomes have been
reported, although some animals have displayed signs consistent with
exposure to the corrosive contents of the cells.
Toxicity
Small batteries, if ingested, are capable of producing both corrosive and
toxic effects, which may be multifactorial in origin. While the majority of
batteries traverse the gastrointestirnal tract uneventfully, complications may
arise if the battery becomes lodged. In man this occurs most commonly in
the oesophagus, but has been reported at other sites.
Mechanisms of toxicity
 e e u 'n a u in  s a a o aa
gastric acid and/or electrolytic attack due to its own electrical properties,
causing leakage of the contents. Leakage and/or production (by hydrolysis
of water) of corrosive conducting media may cause severe caustic injury,
while leakage of metal salts may result in systemic toxicity. A single
potential lethal dose for a small dog.
Tissue damage may also occur from prolonged contact at a single site as the
electrical activity of the battery causes local short circuit through the tissues,
as well as a rise in pH.
87
Dogs  77
Batteries
Theoretically, used batteries pose less of a hazard since they are less likely
to leak or cause electrical damage and in spent mercury batteries the
mercuric chloride will be largely reduced to harmless elemental mercury.
However, it is important to remember that batteries that do not drive their
intended appliances may still retain some residual charge and, in the case
Of mercury batteries, some unreduced mercuric salt.
Clinical effects
In most symptomatic cases reported to the VPIS (London) the animals
show evidence of having bitten through the battery casing and therefore
have local irritant and corrosive effects to the mouth and oesophagus.
Oesophageal impaction may result in irritability, difficulty in swallowing.
salivation, vomiting and, in theory, local burns. Clinical effects from
corrosion or perforation may be delayed.
stools, and abdominal tenderness.
In the case of mercury batteries, signs of mercury intoxication, initially
Treatment
Emesis and gastric lavage are not recommended, since these procedures are
lodge in oesophagus. Use of adsorbents is not routinely advocated as they are of
limited benefit and will obscure detection of the batteries and discolour the stools.
The brand and type of battery should be determined where possible. Spare
batteries may be kept at home and maybear an identifying code that poisons
inforrmation centres use to identify the type involved.
X-rays should be taken where practicable to confirm ingestion and to determine
the position of the battery. The condition of the battery may also be deterrmined
as contents are radiopaque.
If the battery is still in the oesophagus prompt removal is advocated. by endoscopy
where possible.
promote transit through the gastrointestinal tract. Ideally. X-rays should be
repeated to monitor the passage of the battery through the gut until passed in the
stools. Surgical removal is indicated when there is no movement of the battery in a
48 hour period, the battery shows evidence of leakage, or if there is clinical
evidence of significant gastroenteritis or discoloured stools.
88
78 Dogs
Botteries
References ond further reoding
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/115955.
Campbell A, Bates N and Farrow C (1997). Button batteries. In Bates, N, Edwards, N,
Roper J and Volans G (eds), Pnediatric Toxicology. London: Macmillan, pp. 103-108.
89
Dogs79
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  200O A Campbell and M Chapmai1
Blue-green algae/ Cyanobacteria
Description and occurrence
Blue-green algae are primitive plants/organisms with many characteristics
of both bacteria and algae. They are capable of photosynthesis, the
chlorophyll giving them the observed blue-green colour in many cases,
and some are also able to fix gaseous nitrogen.
Blue-green algae are found in fresh, brackish and marine waterbodies
existing. The type(s) present in any waterbody depend on many factors,
Macroscopically, blue-green algae have a granular appearance but they
grow as single cells, cell clusters and filaments, often surrounded by a
mucinous sheath.Under favourable conditions, when the weather is
sunny, temperature of the water high, and water nutrients, especially
y Ae ae uaan-anq au 'ueunqe are 'snondsoud pue uaon
massive growths or blooms. These are either floating, 'planktonic', or
bottom-dwelling or 'benthic'. These blooms occur most commonly in late
spring, summer and early autumn.
 se  ao    e a 
possess intracellular air/gas filled vesicles or vacuoles by which they control
their density, thereby remaining in the area of optimum growth conditions.
are present or if water is disturbed, they lose this ability and may float to
the top forming scums or sink to the bottom. This may also occur if the cell
growth rate becomes too high and cells reaching less favourable water
areas die. The scums vary in colour, ranging from green to blue-green but
also from red to brown or black.
Under Iess optimal conditions of light, nutrients or temperature, the cells die
or deteriorate and release their toxins. Often winds blow the algal scums that
form on waterbody surfaces to the shore, concentrating them and making
them more accessible to the animals who may be at risk from exposure.
Genera include:
Microcystis
freshwater planktonic
Anabaena
freshwater planktonic
Aphanizomenon
freshwater
 planktonic
Gloeotrichia
freshwater
Nodnlaria
freshwater planktonic
Nostoc
freshwater planktonic
Oscillatoria
freshwater planktonic/benthic.
90
80 I Dogs
Blue-green algae/ Cyanobacteria
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992 the VPIS London centre has received a small number of
predominantly dogs. Although the number of enquiries is small, except in
fatalities in the animals concerned.
Toxicity
Many blue-green algae contain or produce a variety of toxins, although not
all are toxic. There are more than 40 toxic species documented. Exposures in
where the algae have bloomed. In dogs, exposures have occurred as a
result of the animals swimming in such locations and also from grooming
after skin exposures. The toxins produced by the blue-green algae have a
high acute toxicity and exposures frequently result in fatality. Death is
usually very rapid. Blue-green algae have also caused fatalities in sheep.
cattle, and birds. Animals may occasionally be found dead at the water's
edge.
It is calculated that concentrated scums at waterbody shores or edges
present a toxic or lethal dose of blue-green algal toxins in fluid volumes far
less than the daily fluid requirement of the animals who may drink the
water there.
Mechanism of toxicity
The mechanisms of toxicity of the various blue-green algae are dependent
on the species to which the animal has becomes exposed, as well as that of
the animal that has been exposed. Toxicity is also dependent on dose
ingested, as well as the stage of decomposition of the algae.
Some species contain or produce hepatotoxins. These are usually cyclic
peptides, which cause dysfunctional phosphorylation of cellular keratins,
thereby disrupting normal cytoskeletal structure. This leads to rounding of
also occur. Depletion of coagulation factors and also nephritis have been
variety. Fatalities resulting from exposure to this type of algae normally
Occur as a result of hepatic necrosis, haemorrhage and hypovolaemic shock.
Some of the hepatotoxins are potent tumour promoters as wel, which may
have implications for animals that survive the exposure.
  ss   as  pd s as
been well studied and characterised. They are cyclic heptapeptides and are
named microcystins. These are released on cell death. Those produced by
species of Nodularin are cyclic pentapeptides called nodularins.
Dogs|81
Blue-green aigae / Cyanobacteria
Other blue-green algae contain or produce neurotoxins. Some of these
have been isolated and characterised.Anabaena and Oscillatorin species both
produce a bicyclic secondary amine alkaloid called anatoxin-a (previously
called VFDF, very fast death factor), which is a depolarising agent. It is a
structuralanalogue of cocaine.It acts at nicotinic receptors causing
respiratory paralysis. These species, together with those of the Aphanizo-
mcnon genera may also produce an unstable cholinesterase inhibitor, with
aln organophosphate struchure, named anatoxin-a(s). This produces
salivation and increase in mucous secrefions, tremors, convulsions, ataxia,
cyanosis and respiratory failure. The Aplhanizomenon genera also produce
two similar neurotoxins called saxitoxin and neosaxitoxin, as well as three
related compounds of similar structure. Saxitoxin and neosaxitoxin are fast
acting sodium channel blockers. Saxitoxin is the agent of paralytic shellfish
poisoning.
Additionally, the cell walls of many of the blue-green algae species contain
lipopolysaccharide endotoxins. These are irritant to mucous membranes
and skin. It is thought that some of the gastrointestinal clinical effects may
be in part due to the irritant nature of these endotoxins.
Clinicaleffects
Onset of ciinical effects may be within 15 minutes of exposure, and usually
  o    s  h  
minutes of the onset of clinical effects and usually within 24 hours of the
original exposure.
Gastrointestinal upset is often the primary presenting sign whatever
species of blue-green algae are involved, and often preludes development
Of more severe effects. The common gastrointestinal features are acute
vomiting, haematemesis, abdominal tenderness and, more rarely, diar-
rhoea,which may be haemorrhagic.
The other clinical effects are wide-ranging as they depend on the type(s) of
simultaneously.
Common features observed include salivation, pale mucous membranes,
lapse, hyperaesthesia, muscle fasciculation, tremors, convulsions, brady-
cardia, dyspnoea, tachypnoea, cyanosis and coma. Often development is s0
rapid that respiratory distress, collapse, convulsions and death may be seen
within 15 minutes of exposure.
Aaea yixeday ae jo aee uaa-aa oi pasodxa taag aaey se soa
           
evidence of haemorrhage, hypotension or hypovolaemic shock and icterus.
Liver failure and also nephritis may develop. There may be elevated liver
enzymes (ALT, Gamma GT, aspartate aminotransferase, alkaline phospha-
82|Dogs
Bluegreen aigoe/ Cyanobacterio
tase), elevated bile acids and evidence of renal impairment (elevated
creatinine and urea). Some animals have developed photosensitisation.
Post-mortem findings
exposed.
Those exposed to the neurotoxin-producing variety who succumb rapidly
uo un uana si aau suisn ssr nds nou Ae
cyanosed mucous membranes and central nervous system congestion.
Cyanobacteria may be isolated in stomach contents.
and haemorrhagic liver, fluid or blood-filled body cavities, petechial
and dissociated hepatocytes and centrilobular  to  hepatic necrosis.
Cyanobacteria may also be isolated in stomach and intestinal contents.
Treatment
Speed is essential.
The animal should be removed from the source of exposure and either given a
gastric lavage or emesis should be induced. Adsorbents should be given if
practicable.
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.
0.I mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b) Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a)  Activated charcoal  Dose:
 2 g/kg body weight orally
(b)BCK granules*
6-18 g orally 2-3 times daily.
Once the animal has been stabilised, the coat should be thoroughly washed and
the animal collared to prevent grooming.
Management is thereafter largely supportive. The dogs should be kept adequately
hydrated and electrolytes checked and corrected if symptomatic. In some cases,
antibiotics have been administered and glucose, calcium and magnesium
supplementation instituted. The animals should be kept out of direct sunlight.
uesinos jo suume aosnu anaaas si anau j uaaig aq pinous wedazeia
dn sainusw ol Araaa paieada x! sualam Xpog sy/sw s'o rasop wedazela iaie
to three times if needed.
93
Dogs  83
Blue-greenalgae/Cyanobacteria
If the animal is exhibiting cholinergic signs, then use of atropine may be considered.
In theory, since the neurotoxin causing these signs is an organophosphate
poisoning. may be considered as an adjunct to atropine therapy.
Atropine dose: 0.2-2 mg/kg body weight to effect (one-quarter of dose given i.v.
Ansn) painban se paeadau ag keu asop aul (o's jo wr! apwan ayn pue
every 45-90 minutes initially). Large doses rmay be required.
Pralidoxime dose: 20-50 mg/kg body weight by slow i.v.injection (over 2 minutes
at least and at a dose no more than 5o0 mg/minute) or i.m. or s.c. Recovery will
not be immediate but over a 24-48 hour period.
In general, use of morphine, succinylcholine, barbiturates and phenothiazines
should be avoided because their effects will be enhanced by organophosphate
presence.
Investigative
Where possible. monitor liver and kidney function by measurement of liver
 aoy o ai sl aa l a pee ean e sa
clotting profle should be checked.
Cyanobacteria may be identified in scums from coats or in vomitus. This may be
useful in confirming exposure.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/104889.
National Rivers Authority (1990). Toxic blue-green aigae, Water quality series, Vol. 2.
London: National Rivers Authority.
Corkhill N et al. (1989). Poisoning at Rutland Water. Veterinary Record 125(13), 356.
Edwards C et al. (1992). Identification of anatoxin-a in benthic cyanobacteria (blue
green algae) and in associated dog poisonings at Loch Insh, Scotland. Toxicon
30(10), 11651175.
Elder GH et al. (1993).Hazardous freshwater cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). The
Lancer 341, 1519-1520.
Gunn GJ (1992). Poison - cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). In Practice 14(3), 132-133.
Gunn GJ et al. (1991). Additional algal toxicosis hazard. Veterinary Record 129(17), 391.
Gunn Gj et al. (1992). Fatal canine neurotoxicosis attributed to blue-green algae.
Veterinary Record 130(14), 301-302.
Harding WR et al. (1995). Death of a dog attributed to the cyanobacterial (blue-green
algal) hepatoxtoxin nodularin in South Africa. Journal of the South African
84I Dogs
Blue-green algoe/ Cyonobacteria
Henriksen P et al. (1997). Detection of an anatoxin-a(s)-like anticholinesterase in
natural blooms and cuitures of cyanobacteria/blue-green algae from Danish lakes
Mahmood NA et al. (1988). Anticholinesterase poisonings in dogs_ from a
AmericanfournalofVeterinary Research 49(4),500-503.
Tyagi MB et al.(1999).Cyanobacterial toxins: the current status.Journal of Microbiology
and Biofechnology 9(1), 9-21.
95
DogsT85
Handbookof Poisoningin dogs andcats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2OO0 A Campbell and M Chapman
Borax
Type of product
Borax (sodium borate) is a constituent of many liquid ant or cockroach killer
preparations. Borates have some use in mouthwashes, contact lens
solutions, liquid medical preparations such as eye drops, and some soaps
and detergents.
Presentation
Liquid ant or roach killers are usually sugary solutions containing borax at a
concentration of 5-7%. The sugary nature of the liquids makes the
insecticides palatable and attractive to pets.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992 the London centre has received
between 20 and 30 enquiries a year concerning borax insecticide ingestion
by dogs. Less than 20% of the animals involved developed any clinical
effects.
Toxicity
The toxicity of borax is unclear. Ingestion of borax insecticides rarely results
in more than mild gastrointestinal effects. Few fatal cases are documented,
and those that are provide limited data.
According to the literature:
Lowest published lethal dose for dogs is 3 g/kg body weight.
    o sa  ou on sd 
from 1.54-6.51 g/kg body weight.
Mechanism of toxicity
The mechanism of toxicity is unknown, but concentrated borax solutions
are irritant to skin and mucous membranes.
Kinetics and metabolism
Borax is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and across mucous
membranes and abraded skin. It is concentrated in kidneys and slowly
excreted unchanged in urine. Approximately 40-60% wil be excreted
86 Dogs
Borax
Clinical effects
Serious cases are rare. Clinical effects usually have an onset of about 2
hours at most.
Commonly occurring signs are those of buccal and gastrointestinal
irritation, particularly vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal tenderness and
salivation. Shivering, shaking, tremors, ataxia, drowsiness and depression
have been reported in several VPISLn cases. In a few cases pyrexia,
polydipsia, fitting and collapse have been reported. Skin exposures may
result in erythema.
In the literalure, the following effects have been reported in smail animal
exposures: generalised muscle weakness, coma, Cheyne-Stokes respiration,
convulsions, acidosis and electrolyte imbalances, disseminated intravascu-
lar coagulation, shock, and renal impairment characterised by olguria or
anuria.
Post-mortem findings
Few data are available, but in theory congestion of gastrointestinal tract,
kidneys and liver would be anticipated. There may be evidence of cerebra!
oedema.
Treatment
Emesis is probably not necessary following ingestion of ant or cockroach killer
liquids containing borax at concentrations up to l0% in strength. Following
ingestion of more concentrated products, emesis shouid be induced if the animal
presents to surgery within 2 hours.
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.:
0.I mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)  Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.y.:
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)Ipecacuanha
Dose:
1-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Borates and borax bind poorly to activated charcoal and therefore the use of
adsorbents is not advocated.
Treatment thereafter is supportive with fluid replacement, washing of exposed
skin where appropriate, and use of anticonvulsants such as diazepam if necessary.
Diazepam dose: 0.5 mg/kg body weight i.y. repeated every 10 minutes up to three
times if needed.
In severe cases, if the animal is oliguric or anuric、 renal function should be
monitored.
97
Dogs  87
Borox
Investigative
In cases where severe clinical effects are observed then electrolytes, blood gasses
and renal function should be monitored.
Boric acid can be detected in urine and blood, which could be used to confirm a
diagnosis of borax ingestion.
A boron blood level above 50 μg/ml would be considered toxic.
References ond further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/57816.
Coppock RW ef af. (1988). The toxiciry of detergents, blcaches, antiseptics and
disinfectants in small animals.Veterinary and Human Toxicology 30(5), 463473.
Kiesche-Nesselrodt A and Hooser SB (1990). Boric acid. Veterinary Clinics of North
Armerica: Small Animal Practice 20(2),369-373.
Talcott PA and Dorman DC (1997). Pesticide exposures in companion animals.
Veterimary Medicinc 92(2), 167-181.
98
88Dogs
Handbookof Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2000 A Campbelland M Chapmai
Calciferol /Vitamin Dz and Cholecalciferol/
Vitamin D3
Type of product
Calcifero! (vitamin D2) is found in vitamin preparations, cod liver oil, in
parturient paresis (hypocalcaemia after birth). It has occasionally been used
  an e s h 'uod  'sop u d ym e s
rodenticide either on its own or in combination with second generation
anticoagulant compounds such as brodifacoum, bromadiolone and
difenacoum (see anticoagulant rodenticide entry). The rodenticides
produce delayed toxicosis - they are designed to cause death in rodents
1-3 days after a single ingestion.
Cholecalciferol (vitamin Ds) is the glycoside of 1,25-dihydroxycholecalci-
ferol, the metabolite of calciferol. It is found naturally in the plants Solamum
matacoxylon, Trisetum flavescens and Cestrum diuruum. Cholecalciferol also
has use in rodenticide preparations.
Both calciferol and cholecalciferol may also be found in feed additives.
Presentation
Calciferol exists in its natural state as colourless prismatic crystals;
and soluble in most organic solvents. Both are slightly soluble in vegetable
oils.
In rodenticide preparations the strengths usually range between 0.1% w/w
in combination preparations to about 4% w/w in preparations with
calciferol or cholecalciferol alone. These presentations vary considerably
0 'ssq no uet ym aix ro spinb aq Aeu Aau 'aueiadde u
exist in seed or grain impregnated with the compound prior to sale.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992 enquiries about rodenticides
containing calciferol or cholecalciferol as an ingredient have risen from
six in 1992 to 17 in 1997, representing about 0.6% of the annual enquiries on
average. All these enquiries have involved dogs.
o u e yn jd no p e s a ua noe su
have remained more or less constant, with less than 10 enquiries handled
per year.
99
Dogs  89
Calciferol/Vitamin Dzond Cholecolciferol/ VitominD3
Only the anticoagulant combination preparations have resulted in clinical
effects.
Toxicity
When the calciferol and cholecalciferol rodenhicides were introduced,it was
claimed that they were less toxic to non-target species than some of the
other rodenticides available. Subsequent clinical experience has shown that
these compounds pose a significant threat for both dogs and cats.
Excessive use of growth promoters in large-breed dogs has led to toxicosis.
 In overdose or folowing accidental ingestion and absorption, hypercalcae-
 io sap uoo sr a r s san A e
failure. Also soft tissue receptors respond to one of the metabolites, 1,25-
tissue mineralisation. Critical tissues affected are the renai tubules and small
to medium arterioles.
High concentrations of active cholecalciferol/vitamin D, may cause direct
cellular degeneration and necrosis.
According to the literature:
 The acute oral LDso in dogs for calciferol is quoted as 85 mg/kg body
weightt.
The acute oral LDso in dogs for cholecalciferol is quoted as 88 mg/kg
body weight.
 Clinical reports indicate toxicosis at ingested doses of 0.5-5 mg/kg body
weight.
4 mg/kg body weight.
weight are documented.
Gradual accumulation from prolonged exposure to lower doses may lead to
toxicity.
Dogs with pre-existing kidney disease are predisposed to calciferol
cholecalciferol toxicosis.
Conversions
Vitamin D 1 mg = 41 000 IU approx.
Mechanism of toxicity
Calciferol and cholecalciferol are rapidly absorbed and metabolised. The
parent compounds and the intermediate metabolites have some limited
pharmacological action but the major toxic effects are due to the major
90  Dogs
Calciferol/Vitamin D2and Cholecaiciferol/ VitaminD3
absorption of calcium from the gut, intestinal calcium transport and
hypercalcaemia and toxicity.
Kinetics and metabolism
Absorption of caiciferol/cholecalciferol is rapid and complete in the small
intestine. A high lipid diet will increase absorption. It is carried in plasma to
the liver and kidneys. It is metabolised in the liver to 25-hydroxychole-
calciferol (25-hydroxyvitamin D), which is converted to the physiologically
active 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D),otherwise
called calcitriol, in the kidney.
Calciferol/cholecalciferol metabolites are excreted primarily via bile and in
the faeces. Less than one-third is excreted in the urine.
Serum half-life of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol(25-hydroxyvitamin D) is
quoted as 10.67 days.
Case report
VPiSLn case report 94/28405.
A dog was re-presented to surgery some 4 days after ingesting a
rodenticide assumed to be of an anticoagulant type, having been on
Vitamin K; since its initial presentation on day 1. The dog displayed
marked polydipsia in the absence of any other clinical effects. Management
4.02 mmol/L (equivalent to 16.3 mg/dl). The normal upper limit is usually
quoted as 3 mmol/L (approximately equivalent to 12.1 mg/dl). This
biochemical finding combined with an altered history from the dog's
owner, led to a diagnosis of ingestion of a calciterol-type rodenticide. An
glucose/saline infusions was made. One day later calcium had fallen to
3.2 mmo/L (12.9 mg/dl) but urea had elevated, indicating renal damage.
The dog was, by this time, very anorexic and was subsequently transferred
to the Royal Veterinary College for tests. Renal dysfunction, inappetence
and severe weight loss were reported. The animal remained hypercalcae-
mic, although levels fluctuated.
Aggressive treatment followed, including use of saline infusions, clodro-
nate, frusemide, prednisolone, cimetidine and sucralfate.
The serum calcium levels normalised and stabilised. The intravenous fluids
were stopped, but later re-started when the animal became azotaemic and
s sa  a  s n  n p
discharged with clodronate, cimetidine and sucralfate to be administered
over the following week. The animal eventually made a full recovery.
Dogs I 91
Colciferol /Vitamin D2and Cholecoiciferol / Vitamin D
Clinical effects
Signs usually develop within 12-36 hours of ingestion and include
depression, lethargy, anorexia, polyuria, polydipsia, profuse vomiting
clinical effects. As the calcium concentrations rise above 12 mg/dl the
clinical effects become more severe, this increase usually occurring 24-36
ataxia, arching of the back, muscle spasms, twitching and convulsions
Some animals have pale mucous membranes, dyspnoea and tachypnoea
Haematemesis and haemorrhagic diarrhoea may occur as a result of
calcification in the gastrointestinal tract and pulmonary haemorrhage has
also been reported. It is important to recognise that in the absence of
positive history such signs could lead to misdiagnosis for anticoagulant
rodenticide intoxication.
In severe cases hypercalcaemia, hyperphosphataemia, and deposition of
calcium in tissues may cause initial tachycardia, then bradycardia and renal
insufficiency characterised by polyuria, azotaemia and hyposthenuria, or
renal failure. Leucocytosis is occasionally reported. Cardiac abnormalities
 pd as  ps  'a o as a 
interval and ventricular arrhythmias. Hypercalcaemic cardiac failure may
occur if the serum calcium level exceeds 14 mg/dl. Shock and fulminant
puimonary oedema are common causes of fatality.
Laboratory diagnosis
● A serum calcium concentration higher then 12 mg/dl is characteristic.
An elevated serum phosphorus level (>5.2 mg/dl) may precede the
hypercalcaemia by 12 hours and could serve as an early non-specific
indicator.
● Urine specific gravity may range from 1.002-1.006.
There is elevated BUN (Blood Urea Nitrogen), i.e. >25 mg/dl in severe
cases.
 There are elevated creatinine levels in severe cases.
● X-rays (chest/abdominal) may show mineralisation of stomach and
upper gastrointestinal tract.
● There are excessive active 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (1,25-di-
and few laboratories will offer this test routinely.
Unit conversion for calcium - 1 numol is equivalent to 40.46 mg
Post-mortem findings
Calcification of soft tissues and blood vessels occurs.
92  Dogs
Caiciferol/VitominD2 and Cholecaiciferol/VitaminD
tract, roughened raised plaques on the intima of the great vessels and on
the surface of the lung and abdominal viscera.
Microscopic lesions include mineralisation of kidney tubules, coronary
arteries, gastric mucosa, parietal pleura, pulmonary bronchioles, pancreas
and urinary bladder. The renal tubules may be degenerative or necrotic.
The liver will show centrilobular congestion. The myocardium may also
show evidence of necrosis.
Treatment
Treatment is advised if potentially more than 0.5 mg/kg body weight of calciferol/
cholecalciferol (equivalent to 2] 0o0 JU/kg vitamin D) has been ingested by the
Bop
Hence treatment is needed if more than:
●500 mg/kg body weight of a 0.1% w/w calciferol bait; or
●25 mg/kg body weight of a 2% w/w calciferol bait: or
+
12.5 mg/kg body weight of a 4% w/w calciferol bait concentrate has been
ingested.
Some of the rodenticides that have low concentrations of calciferol or
cholecalciferol may contain potentially toxic leveis of anticoagulant rodenticides.
This should be taken into consideration when deciding whether treatment is
necessary following accidental ingestions by dogs (see anticoagulant rodenticide
chapter).
Prognosis should be guarded if signs are severe or advanced. Severely poisoned
If within 3 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage. and then
administer adsorbents.
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.;
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
1-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal  Dose:
 2 g/kg body weight orally
(b)  BCK granules* Dose:
6-18 g orally 2-3 times daily.
To reduce enterohepatic cycling repeated doses of activated charcoal may be
administered. A dose of 2 g/kg body weight can be given every 4 hours until the
charcoalappears in the stools.
103
6 s8o0
Colciferol/ Vitarmin D ond Cholecolciferol / Vitamin D
If there is severe or persistent vomiting then anti-emetics should be administered.
If adsorbents have been administered this may reduce efficacy of orally
Either metoclopramide or acepromazine may be used; the latter has a longer
duration of action,
(a)  Metoclopramide   Dose:
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight orally, s.c. or
i.m. every 6-8 hours; I-2 mg/kg body
weight per day by slow i.v. infusion
(b)  Acepromazine
Dose:
0.03-0.I mg/kg body weight i.v., i.m., or
s.c. (use lower dose if giving i.v.);
I-3 mg/kg body weight oraily.
General care
Ensure adequate hydration and good urine output. In some cases, particularly
those where the animal has pre-existing renal insufficiency, dopamine may be
necessary to increase renal perfusion (dose: I-3 μg/kg body weight per minute as
constant i.v. infusion).
If possible, the following should be measured/monitored:
●Serum calcium (daily for 3 days, even in asymptomatic cases)
·BUN
Creatinine
● Urine specific gravity
●ECG.
Diazepam may be given if there is convulsant activity (dose: 0.5 mg/kg body weight
i.y., repeated every I0 minutes up to three times if needed).
Administration of cimetidine and/or sucralfate may help prevent damage to the
gastric rmucosa. Cimetidire reduces gastric acid and pepsin secretions reducing
risk of ulcer formation. Sucralfate is an ulcer-coating agent that binds to proteins at
'sawazua pue pie ssea Aq yee hauny woiy waan susanoid 'sanis jain
Cimetidine
Dose: 5-10 mg/kg body weight i.v.,i.m. or orally every 68 hours.
Notes
I. If adsorbents have been administered, then parenteral routes should be
ermployed in the initial stages.
2.  If i.v. route is to be used then administer by slow i.v. injection over 30 minutes
to reduce risk of hypotension and arrhythmias.
 3.  If metoclopramide has been used or sucralfate is to be used, then a period of
2 hours should elapse before cimetidine is administered.
4. Adverse effect - cimetidine blocks liver microsomal enzymes and therefore
hepatic drug metabolism.
104
94 | Dogs
Caiciferol/Vitamin D ond Cholecolciferoi/ Vitamin D:
Sucralfate
Dose: in dogs <20 kg body weight 500 mg/dog orally every 6-8 hours; in dogs
>20 kg body weight I g/dog orally every 68 hours.
Notes
I.  Where adsorbents have been administered a period of 2 hours should elapse
before sucralfate is administered to minimise charcoal binding to drug.
2.  If cimetidine is to be used, then sucralfate should be given 2 hours beforehand
 as it requires an acid environment for maxirmum efficacy.
3.Idealy sucraifate should be administered on an empty stomach, at least I hour
prior to food.
Hypercalcaemia
If the anima! is hypercalcaemic (level >12 mg/dl), then calciuresis should be
attermpted using 0.9% saline and administration of frusemide (dose: initial bolus of
5 mg/kg body weight given i.v., followed by a constant rate infusion of 5 mg/kg
body weight/hour). The frusemide may also help to prevent onset of pulmonary
oedema,
Corticosteroids may be given to limit resorption of calcium from bone, decrease
prednisolone given at a dose of I-2 mg/kg body weight orally every I2 hours).
Additionally. Salcatonin*, a synthetic salmon calcitonin compound that inhibits
bone and intestinal resorption of calcium, may be given. Dose: 4-7 IU/kg body
weight s.c., every 6-8 hours. (ln the USA this dose would be given every 2-3 hours
if needed.) Ideally, administration should be continued until serum calcium
stabilises at <12 mg/dl. In some severe cases. this has been required for a period
Of 3-4 weeks. Unfortunately, anorexia is a common side-effect of this drug, which
may prove problematic in dogs that are already anorexic. Dogs tend to regain their
appetite some I8 hours after calcitonin administration is ceased.
If available, clodronate.a bisphosphonate that inhibits osteociast action and
suppresses calciurm release from bone, may be given. Infusions were used in one
aeuoupo 'shep / doy kep Aaaa Aleno sw ot s! asop paasasns y asen SidA ased
should be given at least I hour after food and at least 2 hours either before or
aftercimetidineadministration,
Frusemide and corticosteroids should be continued for 2-4 weeks and, if possible,
the serum calcium concentration and BUN should be monitored at 24, 48. 72
hours and 2 weeks after cessation of treatment.If the animal is still hypercalcaemic
repeated therapy, as above, should be considered.
105
Dogs I 95
Calciferol/Vitamin Dond Cholecalciferol/VitaminD
Notes
hypercalcaemia,
2. Care must be taken to ensure that hypokalaemia does not result from
prolonged use of frusemide. This is a potential result of co-administration with
corticosteroids. (In some cases, potassium supplementation may be required).
3. The dosage of prednisolone should be tapered off if used for more than
2 weeks, to prevent adrenocortical insufficiency.
Renal insufficiency
If the animal is in renal failure, continuous peritoneal dialysis may be considered.
Long term management
Calcification of soft tissues is irreversible, but its severity may be limited by
preventing access to sunlight and restricting calcium intake. Diets high in fluid and
salt and low in calcium and devoid of milk and dairy products are strongly
advocated,
References ond further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/37546
Buronfosse F, Buronfosse T and Berny P (1998). Cholecalciferol poisoning in dogs.
Veterinary ad Hman Toxicology 40(3), 173.
Cumming C (1991). Suspected vitamin D rodenticide poisoning in a dog. Veterimry
Record 128(5), 600.
Dorman DC (1990). Anticoagulant, cholecalciferol, and bromethalin-based rodenti-
cides.Veterinary Clinics of North America: Sinafl Artimal Practicc 20(2), 339-352.
El Bahri L ef al. (1990). Poisoning in dogs by vitamin D, containing rodenticides.
Compenetirm o Contining Edcation 12,14141417.
Fooshee SK and Forrester SD (1990). Hypercalcaemia secondary to cholecalciferol
rodenticide toxicosis in two dogs. Journal of thte American Veterinary Medical
Assuciation1 196(8), 1265-1268.
Gunther R et al. (1988).Toxicity of a vitamin D rodenticide to dogs. Journal of the
Arerican Vefcrinary Medical Associatio 193(2),211-214.
Nesbitt T (1988). Comuments on toxicity of a vitamin D; rodenticide. fourual of the
American Veterinary Medical Associafion 193(7),757.
Ross LA (1988). Comments on toxicity of a vitamin D, rodenticide.Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association 193(7), 757.
Studdert VP et al. (1990). Toxicity of cholecalciferol-containing rodenticides for dogs
alid cats. Australian Veterinary lournal 67(6), 218.
Talcott PA ct al. (1991). Accidental ingestion of a cholecalciferol containing rodent bait
in a dog.Veterinary and Human Toxicology 33(3), 252-256.
106
96 Dogs
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2OO0 A Campbell and M Chapman
Cannabis / Marihuana / Hashish
The agent
Cannabis is the collective term for all psychoactive substances derived from
the dried leaves and flowers of the plant Caumabis sativa or hemp.
Marihuana refers to any part of the plant used to induce effects and hashish
is the dried resin from the flower tops.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992 the VPIS centre in London has received approximately 10
by the police or Customs who had inadvertently ingested the drugs during
training or normal work. In all cases, the animals have shown effects as a
result of exposure but all made a complete recovery.
Toxicity
In animals, ingestion is the common route of exposure, although
apocryphal cases of inhalational poisoning occurring in dogs due to their
Often the preparalions that are obtained ‘off the street' are impure and
other effects may be seen due to other constituents.
According to the literature:
●A minimum lethal dose of more than 3 mg/kg body weight for dogs is
quoted.
Toxic doses are quoted in the range 50-100 mg/kg body weight for the
plant.
o c  a a  s g 
In the experience of the VPISLn:
No fatal cases reported.
However, all cases referred have exhibited clinical effects.
Recovery can take up to 4 days.
Mechanism of toxicity
The plant may contain between 1 and 6% by weight delta-9-tetrahydro-
cannabinol (THC), which is the principal toxic constituent. THC is most
concentrated in the leaves and flower tops of the plant. In'recreational' use
in man, marihuana is smoked or ingested in doses of 5-10 mg of THC. In
1U7
Dogs T 97
Cannobis/ Marihuana/ Hoshish
man, about 10-50% of an inhaled dose is absorbed and about 6% of an
ingested dose. Cannabis appears to have similar effects in dogs as in man.
The exact mechanism of action of the THC and other metabolites is not
clear. The actions may be linked to changing levels of biogenic amines in
the CNS.
Kinetics and metabolism
Absorption and onset of effects is usually rapid following both ingestion or
inhalation. The THC undergoes enterohepatic recirculation, resulting in
sustained levels and production of a variety of active metabolites. 6 to 20%
of an ingested dose may reach the systemic circulation. THC is highly
lipophilic.
Clinical effects
Onset of effects is usually within 1-3 hours, and total recovery lsually
within 24-72 hours. In some VPIS cases, complete recovery has taken 4
days.
Effects usually include weakness, ataxia (often pronounced in the hind
urinary and faecal incontinence, and hyperaesthesia. Behavioural changes
occur including aggression, agitation and barking. It is possible that the
s jo asuas paaiay e doaap on redde so aun se
and hearing and may obsessively investigate sights, sounds and odours.
The animals may later develop deep depression, stupor, bradycardia, and
analgesia.
There may also be conjunctival injection, vomiting, excessive salivation,
ventilation, shaking, twitching and, rarely, convuisions.
Post-mortem findings
No findings definitively attributed to cannabis or marihuana have been
determined.
Treatment
Treatment is recommended for any amount. Emesis may be induced within I hour
of the ingestion, provided the animal is asymptomatic. Emetics may not always be
effective, as THC can have an anti-emetic action.
Use of absorbents is also recommended. Repeated doses (every 4 hours) may be
effective in reducing levels as the THC yndergoes enterohepatic recirculation
108
98 I Dogs
Cannabis/Marihuana/Hashish
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.:
0.I mg/ikg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal
Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally.
Repeat 4-hourly, if required, until charcoal appears in the stools.
(b)BCK granules
Dose:
6--]8 g Orally 2-3 times daily.
Treatment thereafter is largely supportive. A minirmum observation period of
2 hours post-exposure is recommended.
Sedation using diazepam may be given where necessary. Diazepam dose: 0.5 mg/kg
body weight i.v. repeated every l0 minutes up to three tirmes if needed.
Where possible, the animal should be kept in a relatively quiet dark environment
Body temperature should be monitored, as provision of artificial/supplemental
heat may be necessary. Intravenous fluid may be required in animals that become
hypotensive.
Investigative
THC can be detected in both blood and urire and such tests can be used to
confirm exposure.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/114004.
Dumonceaux GA and Beasley VR (1990). Emergency treatments for police dogs used
for illicit drug detection.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
197(2), 185-187.
Frost RC (1983). Marijuana toxaemia. Veterinary Record 112, 441.
Frye FL (1968).Acute cannabis intoxication in a pup.Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association 152(5), 472.
Godbold JC et al. (1979). Acute oral marijuana poisoning in a dog. Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association 175(10), 1101-1102.
Godwin RLG (1992). Unusual poisoning in a dog. Veterinary Record 130, 335-336.
Henney SN and Coleman MJ (1984). Canine cannabis intoxication. Veterinary Record
114, 436.
Jones DL (1978). A case of canine cannabis ingestion. New Zealand Veterinary lourmal
26, 135-136.
109
Dogs | 99
Connobis / Marihuana / Hashish
Kisseberth WC and Trammel HL (1990). Ilicit and abused drugs. Veterinary Clinics of
North America:Small Animal Practice 20(2).405418.
Schwartz RH (1989). Comments on cannabis intoxication in pers. Veterinary and
Human Toxicology 31(3), 262.
Schwartz RH and Riddile M (1985). Marijuana intoxication in pets. Journal of the
America Veterinary Medical Association 187(3), 206.
Silverman 」 (1974). Possible hashish intoxication in a dog. Journai of the American
Animal Hospital Association 10(5), 517-519.
Thursby-Pelham C (1996). Peculiar drug poisonings in pets. in Practice 18(10), 478-
487.
Valentine ] (1992). Unusual poisoning in a dog. Veterinary Record 130, 307.
110
s800001
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Carbamate insecticides
Type of product
Carbamate insecticides are widely used as garden and household
pesticides, and in agriculture.
Presentation
 Formulations inciude liquids, sprays and powders, which may be used as
Shampoos, aqueous and alcoholic lotions are also used as human
pedicullicides and scabicides.
fleas.
Many agricultural preparations contain carbamates in combination with
organophosphates.
Substances covered include aldicarb, bendiocarb, carbaryi, carbofuran, propoxur.
See separate cntry for methiocarb.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992 the VPIS London centre has received between 20 and 60
enquiries per year about the various carbamates. The majority of cases
reported involve bendiocarb-containing ant kilers and methiocarb slug
baits. No fatal cases involving bendiocarb, carbaryl, carbofuran or propoxur
have been reported to the VPISLn, although some animals have exhibited
severe clinical effects.
Toxicity
Toxic doses for many of the carbamates in dogs have not been established.
According to the literature:
Aldicarb
●The LDsu for aldicarb in dogs is 5-10 mg/kg body weight.
Carbory!
● The LDso for carbaryl in dogs,is, 250-795 mg/kg body weight.
Dogs T101
Carbamote insecticides
Carbofuran
● The LDso of carbofuran in dogs is 15-19 mg/kg body weight
In the experience of VPISLn:
Aldicarb
● One fatal canine case has been reported. A Border Collie ingested an
unknown quantity of an agricultural insecticide containing aldicarb.
Within 2 hours the animal had collapsed, and displayed excessive
salivation, pin-point pupils, tremors and fitting. Emesis was induced,
and the animal given atropine, diazepam and diuretics, but died
shortly afterwards (VPISLn case 92/9957).
Bendiocarb
● Many cases of ingestion of bendiocarb-containing products have been
reported. However, none have had a fatal outcome. Those involving
ingestion of ant or woodlice killers, where bendiocarb is usually
present in concentrations of about 0.5%, rarely exhibit more than
gastrointestinal discomfort. Ingestion of products intended for agri-
cultural use has resulted in ataxia, tremors, fitting, salivation and
constricted pupils, with skin iritation evident after dermal exposures.
With symptomatic and supportive care all made a rapid recovery.
Carbofuron
Two canine cases with significant clinical effects have been reported.
Both had salivation, vomiting, tremors, incoordination and pyrexia.
With symptomatic care both animals made a good, if slow, recovery
(VPISLn cases 87/22286 and 94/8893).
Mechanism of toxicity
Like organophosphates, carbamates bind to and inhibit acetylcholinester-
ase. This results in accumulation of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine and
activation of nicotinic receptors at skeietal muscle end plates, autonomic
ganglia and within the CNs, and of muscarinic receptors at smooth muscle
myoneural junctions and exocrine and endocrine secretory systems.
Therefore,both nicotinic and muscarinic effects occur, although nicotinic
secondary to excessive acetylcholine stimulation of muscle.
Compared with the phosphorylated enzyme that results from organophos-
phate poisoning, the carbamylated acetylcholinesterase is less stable, and
spontaneous reversal to the carbamate and acetylcholinesterase occurs. As a
result, the effects resulting from carbamate poisoning tend to be of much
shorter duration compared with those of organophosphate poisoning and
102|Dogs
Carbomote insecticides
Atropine acts as a non-competitive antagonist by blocking the effect of the
muscarinic receptors on target organs.
Kinetics and metabolism
Carbamates are generally highly lipophilic and may be absorbed from the
gastrointestinal tract, through the skin and following exposure to high
Clinical effects
Onset of effects is usually from within 30 minutes to 3 hours.
Mild to moderate effects normally include salivalion, bronchial hypersecre-
tion, ataxia, diarrhoea, constricted pupils, muscle fasciculation, tremors and
twitching, weakness, shaking, hyperaesthesia, pyrexia, restlessness and
urinary incontinence.
cyanosis and coma may occur.
Myopathy occurs rarely following recovery.
Carbamates do not cause the delayed neurotoxicity observed after some
organophosphate poisonings. This is due to the lack of ageing with
carbamates.
Laboratory findings
phokinase (CPK). Elevated serum amylase may be noted.
Post-mortem findings
There are no characteristic lesions observed in carbamate insecticide
poisoned animals. Pulmonary changes may be observed, including
bronchoconstriction, increased bronchial secretions and pulmonary
Oedema. Pancreatitis may be present.
Treatment
If the ingestion has occurred within 2 hours, vomiting may be induced, or perform
gastric lavage and then administer adsorbents.
Emetics:
(a)Aponiorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.;
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
113
Dogs I 103
Corbamote insecticides
(c) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
1-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a)Activated charcoal Dose:
2g/kgbodyweightorally
(b) BCK granules"*Dose:
6-18gorally 2-3 times daily.
If there is a risk of dermal exposure the animal should be thoroughly washed with
a mild detergent.
Further management is largely symptomatic; in particular, body temperature
should be maintained, and blood gases and electrolytes monitored ard corrected.
Rehydration may be required.
y3lam Xpog By/Bu s'o rasoa uaaia aq keu wedazeip uaua painbat s! uoepas jl
i.v. repeated every I0 minutes up to three times if needed.
Atropine shouid be given to reverse cholinergic effects. Dose: 0.2-2 mg/kg body
weight (one-quarter of the dose given i.v, and the remainder s.c. or i.m.). repeated
effect.
Atropine has no effect on nicotinic receptors and will not counteract skeletal
muscle tremors, weakness or neuromuscular paralysis. However, effects from
carbamates such as methiocarb are generally short-lived and cholinesterase
reactivators such as pralidoxime are not required. In cases of poisoning with an
organophosphate-carbamate mixture, pralidoxime shouid be given if required (see
Organophosphate chapter).
Contra-indicated drugs
Phenothiazine sedatives and succinylcholine should be avoided because of the
neuromuscular blocking activity, since they will exacerbate the toxicity of
neomycin, kanamycin), polypeptides (e.g. polymixin A and B) and clindamycin
should also be avoided, since they may have neuromuscular blocking effects.
Benzodiazepines, opioids and barbiturates should be used cautiously because of
their CNS depressant effects.
Laboratory investigations
Cholinesterase activity determination may be considered. It is advised that whole
blood from unaffected animals should aiso be submitted as a control. Although not
a uniformly reliable indicator, a decrease of 50% or more of normal activity
generally indicates significant inhibition and in many cases the cholinesterase
activity is less than 25% of normal. In cases of carbamate poisoning. whole blood
samples must be rapidly collected, frozen and transported to the laboratory
104|Dogs
Carbamate insecticides
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 98/12409.
Fikes JD (1990). Organophosphate and carbamate insecticides. Veterinary Clinirs of
NorthAmerica:Small Aninal Practice20(2),353-367.
McEntree K et al. (1994). Acute polymyopathy after carbamate poisoning in a dog.
Veterinary Rrcord 134, 88--89.
Talcott PA and Dorman DC (1997). Pesticide exposures in companion animals.
Veterimmry Medicine 92(2), 167-181.
115
Dogs 105
Chocolate / Theobromine
The agent
Theobromine is a methylxanthine .occurring as the major alkaloid in
chocolate and cocoa powder.Chocolate is derived from the roasted seeds of
the plant Theobroma cacao. Cocoa solids account for some 30-70% of
chocolate,
Presentation
The concentration of theobromine from various sources commonly
implicated in poisoning incidents is shown below. Chocolate also contains
a small amount of caffeine (also a methylxanthine).
Source
Theobromine content per g of product
White chocolate
0.009 mg (9 ppm)
Drinking chocolate (dry)
）0.5 mg
Milk chocolate
1.5-2.2 mg
Plain chocolate
4.5-16 mg
Cocoa powder
5.3-26 mg
Cocoa beans
11-43 mg
Cocoa shell mulches
14-30 mg
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992 the VPIS has received a significant number of enquiries con-
cerning theobromine intoxication in dogs, resulting from a variety of
sources. In 1997, 53 enquiries were received, representing some 1.6% of the
total enquiry number. Several deaths have been reported.
Toxicity
According to the literature:
+
 Fatal doses of theobromine for dogs are quoted in the range 90-250 mg/kg
body weight.
A dose of 130 mg/kg was lethal in a dog.
The LDso is quoted as 300 mg/kg body weight.
12 mg/kg caused no visible ill effects.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
 Several fatal cases reported.
These usually result from ingestion of cocoa powder or cocoa shell
mulches.
116
[06Dogs
Chocolote/Theobromine
Mechanism of toxicity
    sd s   s
CNS stimulation with cardiac and respiratory hyperactivity. Theobromine
directly stimulates both the myocardium and the CNS.
Methylxanthines exert their effect by a variety of mechanisms. They
competitively antagonise cellular adenosine receptors, resulting in CNS
stimulation, vasoconstriction and tachycardia. They also inhtibit cellular
phosphodiesterase, causing an increase in cyclic AMP, increased release of
catecholamines, increased entry of calcium and inhibition of calcium
sequestration by the sarcoplasmic reticulum, causing increased muscular
contractilityinbothskeletalandcardiac muscle.Theobromine also
competitively inhibits benzodiazepine receptors in the brain.
Kinetics and metabolism
In dogs, absorption is slow compared with that in man. It is reported to
take some 10 hours to be fully absorbed. Theobromine is metabolised in
the liver by microsomal mixed-function oxidases, N-demethylation and
conjugation, with the products being excreted in urine. As the metabolic
products are alkaline they are more rapidly excreted if the urine is acidified.
Theobromine also undergoes enterohepatic recircuiation.
Clinical effects
Onset of clinical effects is generally within 24 hours, usually within 4 hours.
Duration of effects may be as long as 72 hours.
Vomiting, abdominal tenderness, polydipsia, haematemesis, restlessness,
clinical effects.
In severe cases, there may be muscle rigidity, tachypnoea, diarrhoea
urinary incontinence, haematuria, cyanosis, hyperthermia, tremors,
convulsions and arrhythmias (classically ventricular premature beats).
Occasionally, renal dysfunction has been reported.
Fatal outcomes are usually associated with severe convulsions and acute
circulatory failure.
Post-mortem findings
Often gross evidence of chocoiate or cocoa in the gastrointestinal tract is a
finding.
Hyperaemia of the gastric and proximal duodenal mucosa, diffuse
and petechial and ecchymotic haemorrhaging in thymus have all been
commonly reported. Microscopic changes reported include presence of
Dogs | 107
Chocoiate/Theobromine
pyknotic nuclei in distal renal tubular epithelium, and cytoplasmic hyaiine
droplets, with pyknosis and karyorrhexis in epithelium of renal convoluted
tubules.
 In one fatal case involving ingestion of cocoa post-mortem revealed diffuse
pulmonary congestion.
Treatment
Treatment is recommended for ingestions of more than 20 mg/kg body weight of
theobromine or equivalent
 y uai ag pinous saqospe pue sasa ue yog 'se dase ul
ingestion occurred within the previous 3 hours. Where the animals are hyper-
active or excitable, emesis is best avoided and adsorbents alone given.
Repeated doses of adsorbents may be useful in enhancing elimination. as
theobromine undergoes enterohepatic recirculation
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.:
0.I mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)  Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 mt/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal
Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally.
Repeat 4 hourly. if required, until
charcoal appears in the stools.
(b)   BCK granules
Dose:
6-18 g orally two or three times daily.
If there is severe or persistent vomiting then anti-emetics shouid be administered.
If adsorbents have been adrministered, this may reduce efficacy of orally
administered anti-emetics. In such cases, parenteral administration is preferable.
Either metoclopramide or acepromazine may be used; the latter has a longer
duration of action.
(a)  Metoclopramide
Dose:
0.5--I mg/kg body weight orally, s.c. or
i.m. every 6-8 hours; I-2 mg/kg body
weight per day by slow i.v. infusion
(b)  Acepromazine
Dose:
0.03-0.1 mg/kg body weight i.v, i.m., or
s.c. (use lower dose if giving i.v.):
I-3 mg/kg body weight orally.
Diazepam may be administered if the animal is hyperactive or has convulsions.
Where this proves ineffective, owing to the blocking of benzodiazepine receptors.
then use of barbiturates such as pentpbarbitone may be considered.
108|Dogs
Chocolate/Theobromine
Doses recommended:
(a) Diazepam
0.5 mg/kg body weight i.v. repeated every I0 minutes
up to three times if needed.
(b) Pentobarbitone
3-15 mg/kg body weight i.v. slowly until effect.
Monitor temperature and ensure adequate hydration. lf possible, monitor ECG
and renal function.
Some authors have suggested cacheterisation of the animal to prevent re-
absorption of theobromine across the bladder mucosa.
Where tachycardia is severe or other arrhythmias are present some authors
Suggest use of propranolol, metoprolol or idocaine.
Doses recommended:
(a)Lidocaine
I4 mg i.v. over 2-3 minutes as a Joading dose.
followed by infusion of 0.1% solution at a rate of
25-75 μg/kg body weight per minute.
(b) Propranolol
0.02-0.15 mg/kg body weight i.v. over 2-3 minutes or
0.1 mg/kg body weight orally every 8 hours
(c)Metoprolol
0.04-0.06 mg/kg body weight by slow i.v, injection
every 8 hours.
Notes
I. Use of propranolol may slow renal excretion of theobromine.
2.Care should be taken when using all of the above three drugs as severe
body weight i.v.
Investigative
Theobromine may be measured in blood samples.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 98/36540.
Drolet R, Arendt TD and Stowe CM (1984). Cocoa bean shell poisoning in a dog.
Journal of the Aerican Veterinary Medical Association 185(8),902.
Veterinmry Medical Associafion 161(2), 198-199.
Ainerican Animal Hospital Association 19(2), 246-248.
Hovda LR and Kingston RL (1994). Cocoa bean mulch poisoning in dogs (abstract
76). Veterinary and Human Toxicology 36(4), 357.
Kisseberth WC and Trammel HL (1990). Illicir and abused drugs. Veterinary Clinics of
North America: Small Animal Practice 20(2), 405-418.
1.9
Dogs l 109
Chocolote/Theobrormine
Owens JG and Dorman DC (1997). Drug poisoning in small animals. Veterinary
Medicine 92(2), 149-156.
Sutton RH (1981). Cocoa poisoning in a dog. Veterinary Record 109(25-26), 563-564.
Strachan ER and Bennett A (1994). Theobromine poisoning in dogs. Veterinary Record
134(11),284.
120
I0TDogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2OOO A Campbell and M Chapmarn
Corticosteroids
Type of product
This is a large group of drugs used for a variety of disorders including
allergic and immune-mediated diseases, cardiogenic and septic shock,
trauma and oedema.
Presentation
Corticosteroids are available as tablets, syrups, parenteral preparations, and
creams or ointments for dermal application.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Every year the VPIS receives a number of enquires regarding the potential
toxicity of corticosteroid preparations in domestic pets. Most of these
 preparations intended for human use. No serious cases have been reported.
Recommended dosage
This varies, depending on the specific drug and the indication.
Toxicity
These drugs are considered of low toxicity in acute overdose.
Clinical effects
There are usually none, but vomiting and diarrhoea may occur, particularly
following ingestion of a cream or ointment.
Treatment
No treatment is necessary. even for very substantial ingestions.
Reference
VPIS (London) past cases up to 98/134769.
121
111 s80a
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Cotoneaster species
The plant
Cotoneaster sinonsi. The plants belong to the Rosaceae family.
Cotoneaster is an evergreen or deciduous low-growing shrub or tree with
horizontally growing stems and branches that may grow to heights of
about 5 m. It is commonly encountered in public parks and private
gardens.
The plant has small, oval, green leaves, which are dark and shiny on the
upper side and pale on the underside. The plant bears small white or pale
pink flowers from May to August and an abundance of round, bright red
berries from june or July onwards. There are species where the berries are a
white or yellow colour. The berries are usually about 5-8 mm in diameter,
o  a saa 'sps a o dn u pe dnd i e an
the plant until winter.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIs, the centre in London has received a small
number of enquiries each year regarding ingestion of cotoneaster berries by
dogs. No fatal cases in dogs have been reported, and many of the cases
 reported to the VPIs have been asymptomatic.
Toxicity
Exposures usually occur in gardens or in woodland areas, often when the
animals are exercising. In general, the plant is considered to be of low
toxicity, although if huge quantities were ingested then clinical effects
might occur. One paper in the literature describes how an 18 kg dog was
starved for 24 hours and then fed blended cotoneaster fruit at a dosing of
10 g/kg body weight mixed with its normal feed. No clinical effects were
observed in the following 24-hour period (Tidwell et al., 1970).
Mechanism of toxicity
Cotoneaster species contain cyanogenic glycosides. Prunasin is found in
the bark, leaves and flowers, and both prunasin and amygdalin are found
in the fruit. The glycosides in the fruit appear to be concentrated in the
and amygdalin varies greatly from species to species, and varies according
to the ripeness of the fruit.
122
[2|Dogs
Cotoneaster species
Clinical effects
The principal effects are those of gastrointestinal upset. In the cases
reported to the VPiSLn the clinical effects commonly observed are
salivation, vomiting and diarrhoea, which may be bloody. Excessive fluid
loss may lead to dehydration. Hypothermia has been reported in one
VPISLn case (93/111269).
Treatment
Gastric decontamination using gastric lavage or ermesis is not necessary as the
berries are of low toxicity and vomiting usualy occurs spontaneously. Use of
metoclopramide may be considered if vomiting is severe.
Metoclopramide dose: 0.5-l mg/kg body weight orally. s.c. or i.m. every 6-8
hours; I--2 mg/kg body weight per day by slow i.v. infusion.
Ensure that the animal is well hydrated. Warming methods (e.g. a heat pad) may be
necessary for hypothermia.
References
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/139666.
Tidwell RHef al. (1970). A study of the cyanogenetic content and toxicity of the fruit
of selected species of Cotonenster. Econownic Botamy 24, 47-50.
123
Dogs113
Handbookof Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2OOO A Campbell and M Chapmart
Cyanoacrylate adhesives
Type of product
Rapid setting adhesives for household use. So-called ‘superglues’ are
usually cyanoacrylate adhesives.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992, up to 15 enquiries per year have been
received about canine exposures to cyanoacrylate glues. In about one-third
of these, the exposures were either to the eye or to the ear, as a result of
mistaken administration by the owners.
Toxicity
Cyanoacrylate giues are non-toxic by ingestion.
On setting heat may be produced, which can cause local irritation. There is
also the risk of obstruction if large, solid lumps are swallowed.
Cyanoacrylate glues in the ear can cause occlusion of the ear canal and
may be difficult to rermove. These glues are often applied to the ear or eye,
being mistaken for ear or eye drops.
Clinical effects
Ingestion
Ingestion may result in localised irritation, vomiting, ‘coughing’ and
salivation. It is very difficult to swallow cyanoacrylate glues as they set very
quickly. Occasionally the glue may adhere strongly to the gums, teeth and
tongue. Theoretically, obstruction could orcur if large lumps of solidified
glue are swallowed.
Eye
Applications to the eyes of dogs has resulted in apparent pain and
irritation. Any lumps of glue stuck under the eyelid may abrade the cornea.
Occasionally the eyelids of dogs have been glued together.
Eor
Applications into the ear canal cause apparent pain, burning and ulceration
114| Dogs
Cyanoacrylate adhesives
Skin
Dermal exposures usually result in mild irritation only, although animals
to the skin.
Treatment
Ingestion
Oral fluids may be given. Lumps of glue that are firmly stuck to the teeth or
lining of the mouth should not be removed. Saliva lifts and removes the
glue within 12-48 hours. However, there is the risk of choking if large
lumps detach. Any loosened lumps of glue should be gently removed.
Eye
The affected eye should be irrigated with saline or water and the eyelids
separated surgically if necessary. Management is otherwise supportive. Use
of commercialy available ‘superglue′ removers is not recommended as
these contain solvents, which may further irritate the cornea.
Ear
The ear should be irrigated with warm water or saline. Manual removal of
the glue should be attempted where possible, although complete removal
of all the glue may not be possible at once and may have to be achieved
over several days. Use of commercially available 'superglue' rermovers is
not recommended. Topical antibiotics may be needed to minimise the risk
of infection.
Skin
Where possible, the affected areas should be washed and loose glue
particles should be detached. If necessary, areas that remain glued shouid
be bandaged or the animal collared to prevent damage through self-
grooming.
Reference
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/167648.
125
Dogs T115
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  200O A Campbell and M Chapmain
Daffodil
The plant
Common species are: Narcissus pseudonarcissus (Wild daffodil, Lent lily) and
Narcissus poeticus (Poet's daffodil, Pheasant's eye daffodil).
They are perennial plants, which grow from a fleshy white bulb that is
surrounded by a dark flaky skin. They have long, erect, green leaves and a
pale green hoflow stem, which when broken exudes a clear sticky sap. The
fruit is a small, green capsule filled with minute black seeds. The plant
flowers from March to April with characteristic white or yeliow trumpet-
shaped flowers. They grow both wild and cultivated.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS, the centre in London has received a small
   o s   r s o 
these enquiries involve dogs. All but three have developed clinical effects.
Four cases with severe poisoning have been reported, of which one died
and one was euthanased. Effects have ranged from mild gastritis to severe
dehydration.
Toxicity
In most cases, it is the bulbs that have been ingested by dogs but poisoning
has been reported following ingestion of daffodil flowers. Mild poisoning is
 si s q a sas  a  r  s
According to the literature:
● A portion of one bulb may be toxic or lethal to small animals.
● Lethal dose is 15 g of buibs.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
●A 4-month-old Cocker Spaniel ate 12 flower heads. It developed
profuse vomiting and drowsiness I hour post-ingestion. The animal
made a spontaneous recovery (VPISLn case 86/9476).
An 8-month-old Golden Retriever ate an unknown quantity of bulbs.
Within 3 hours the animal had weakness, pale mucous membranes,
bradycardia, hypothermia, hyperglycaemia and vomiting. The animal
was treated with i.v. fluids, dexamethasone, insulin, adrenaline and
diazepam and recovered (VPISLn case 92/22188).
1Z6
s800  911
Daffodil
●A 6-year-old cross-bred dog ingested an unknown number of bulbs. It
presented with severe abdominal pain, hypersalivation, pale mucous
membranes, and watery diarrhoea. Investigations revealed elevated
urea and creatinine. The animal deteriorated rapidly and was
euthanased at the owner's request (VPISLn case 93/105033).
Mechanism of toxicity
Daffodils contain alkaloids and glycosides, which are responsible for the
clinical effects observed. These agents are present in all parts of the plant
but are most concentrated in the bulbs. The alkaloids are all phenanthridine
derivatives and include narcissine,narciclasine,galanthamine and lycorine
of which lycorine, occurs at the highest concentration. The glycosides
include scillitoxin. Calcium oxalate crystals are also present. Lycorine and
the alkaloids have irritant, emetic and purgative actions and calcium
oxalate acts as a mechanical irritant.
Clinical effects
Onset from 15 minutes to 24 hours has been reported to VPISLn.
Common clinical effects include vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal tender-
ness, anorexia, salivation, pyrexia, lethargy and pale mucous membranes.
In severe cases following ingestion of large amounts, ataxia, collapse,
caemia and dehydration would be anticipated. Tremors or convulsions are
theoretically possible. Deaths are rare.
Pruritis and erythema may occur following contact with the sap.
Post-mortem findings
Findings are non-specific. There may be evidence of severe gastroenteritis
and plant material present in the gastrointestinal lumen.
Treatment
Vomiting may be induced in the unlikely event that it has not already occurred and
if the animal is presented within 2 hours of ingestion. Alternatively, gastric lavage
may be considered.
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.:
0.I mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)  Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 rmg/kg body weight i.v.;
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
127
Dogs 117
Doffodil
If there is severe or persistent vomiting, metoclopramide may be given. Dose: 0.5-
I mg/kg body weight orally, s.c. or i.m. every 6-8 hours; I-2 mg/kg body weight
per day by slow i.v. infusion.
Intravenous fluid support should be given to maintain hydration.
Reference
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/47994.
128
18Dogs
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2O0O A Campbell and M Chapman
Diclofenac sodium
Type of product
Diclofenac sodium is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) with
antipyretic and analgesic activity.
Presentation
Diclofenac is available in the UK as a ‘prescription only’ medicine for
e d o    n o so m 's
inflammation in rheumatic diseases, gout, musculoskeletal disorders, and
un pos si h ud jeuap pue ued aannadosod go su oj
various brand names in tablet, capsule, gel and suppository preparations. A
liquid preparation for injection is also available.
Some tablet preparations contain diclofenac in combination with miso-
prostol. The rationale for the formulation of this compound preparation is
given below.
The dose of diclofenac sodium in tablet and capsule preparations varies but
is commonly 25 mg, 50 mg, 75 mg and 100 mg. Some of these are modified
release preparations. Those in combination usually contain 200 μg of
misoprostol.
Suppository preparations contain 12.5 mg, 25 mg, 50 mg. or 100 mg of
diclofenac sodium. Gel preparations contain the diethylammonium salt of
diclofenac in strengths equivalent to 1 g diclofenac sodium per 100 g of
product.
The preparation for injection contains 25 mg/ml of diclofenac sodium. It is
available in 3 ml ampoules.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
the VPIS London centre.Since 1993, between 10 and 32 enquiries per year
have been received, with almost all of these cases occurring in dogs. These
enquiries represent approximately 0.8% of the total enquiries made. Only
One fatal case has been reported to the VPiS London centre. However,
many dogs are presented to veterinary practices with moderate clinical
effects.
Recommended dosage
Diclofenac is not licensed for veterinary use in the UK
129
Dogs  119
Diclofenoc sodium
Toxicity
It is well known that dogs are particularly sensitive to the propionic acid
group of NSAIDs, but there is less documentation about phenylacetic acid-
derived NSAIDs such as diclofenac sodium. It would appear that this group
of NSAIDs is likely to cause dogs to develop severe gastric ulceration and
intestinal irritation, as does the propionic acid-derived variety. It would
receive high doses.
According to the literature:
alam Apoq 8y2uu 6s se patonb s! ssop u1 0(7 ·
In the experience of the VPISLn:
●Doses as high as 90 mg/kg body weight have not resulted in any
clinical effects. However, single doses of 30 mg/kg body weight or more
frequently result in mild gastrointestinal effects, such as vomiting and
diarrhoea.
One dog received a dose of 2.5 mg/kg body weight and deveioped
vomiting and abdominal tenderness over 24 hours. The animal was
treated with ranitidine and metoclopramide and recovered (VPISLn
case 97/9205).
●A 6-month-old Whippet ate 50 mg/kg body weight. Within 8 hours the
a'l ym eaouep pue shmses araaas pey pue passandap sem sop
fluid support and cimetidine, metoclopramide, sucralfate and ampi-
cillin the animal made a slow recovery (VPISLn case 95/61427).
●A 9-year-old Cocker Spaniel received a total dose of 38.5 mg/kg body
m s    p  e  s   m
presented with melena, vomiting, pale mucous membranes and
dehydration. The animal was treated with i.v. fluids, cimetidine,
sucralfate and antibiotics and made a slow recovery (VPISLn case 95/
96911).
 A Doberman puppy accidentally ate a dose equivalent to 800 mg/kg
body weight. The animal was presented with haematuria, bloody
renal impairment. The animal received i.v. fluids, steroids, cimetidine
and antibiotics but died (VPISLn case 96/68838),
Mechanism of toxicity
Like other NSAIDs, diclofenac sodium competitively inhibits the cyclo-
Teduction in levels of PGIz and PGE2 can account for the major effects seen
in poisoning cases.
In the gastrointestinal tract, prostaglandins have a cytoprotective function
s   s  s  d  n ss
130
120Dogs
Diclofenac sodium
by causing vasodilatation. Deficiency will result in increased gastric acid
secretion and reduction in mucous production and mucosal blood flow.
These effects and the acidic nature of the drug itself all increase risk of ulcer
formation.
In the kidneys, prostaglandins maintain afferent arteriolar dilatation,
regulating renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate. They also have
a role in the controi of renin release and maintenance of water balance.
NSAID inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis will result in reduction of
renal blood flow and disrupt normal renal function and homeostatic
mechanisms. Constriction of renal arterioles may result in renal papillary
necrosis. These effects may be more evident in animals that are dehydrated
or volume depleted.
Kinetics and metabolism
u go jasuo se slop u pqiosqe aeai aa o readde pnm oua
effects is usually within 2-3 hours of ingestion.
Clinical effects
The initial clinical effects following acute exposures usually occur within 3
hours. With more prolonged dosing, effects may be delayed for 4 days or
more.
Cinical effects include persistent vomiting, haematemesis, diarrhoea,
melena, abdominal tenderness and anorexia. Mucous membranes may be
pale or congested. Weakness, ataxia, incoordination, lethargy, collapse,
dehydration, depression and drowsiness are sometimes noted.
Dyspnoea, hyperventilation, tachycardia, vocalising, agitation, hyperactiv-
ity, hyperaesthesia, tremors, twitching or convulsions have been reported
following ingestion of other similar drugs and could be anticipated. There
is a risk of perforation of the gut.
From 12-24 hours post-dose onwards, evidence of severe gastrointestinal
irritation and renal impairment may occur. There may be protracted vomit-
ing, pyrexia, anorexia, polyuria, polydipsia, dehydration and collapse.
Renal impairment or failure should be anticipated if large doses (greater
than 150-200 mg/kg body weight) have been ingested. This would be
characterised by oliguria, azotemia, and elevated creatinine and BUN.
Renal failure car theoretically occur and may be delayed. Hypotensive or
dehydrated animals are potentially at greater risk from renal effects, as are
those with pre-existing renal impairment.
LDL
Dogs T121
Diclofenac sodium
Post-mortem findings
Evidence of gastrointestinal congestion and/or haemorrhage, gastric
ulceration or perforation and renal tubule papillary necrosis would be
anticipated.
Treatment
Treatment is advocated if a dose of l0 mg/kg body weight has been exceeded
(5 mg/kg body weight in animals who are dehydrated, hypotensive or have pre-
existing renal insuffciency).
If within 3 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage and then
administer adsorbents.
Emetics:
(a)Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.:
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)   Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.;
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)  Ipecacuanha
Dose:
1-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal  Dose:
2g/kg body weight orally
(b)BCK granules*
Dose:
6-I8 g orally two or three times daily.
If there is severe or persistent vomiting then anti-emetics should be administered.
if adsorbents have been administered this may reduce efficacy of orally admini-
stered anti-emetics. in such cases, parenteral administration is preferable. Either
metoclopramide or acepromazine may be used; the latter has a longer duration of
action.
(a)Metoclopramide
Dose:
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight orally, s.c. or
i.m. every 6-8 hours; 1-2 mg/kg body
weight per day by slow i.v. infusion
(b)  Acepromazine
Dose:
0.03-0.I mg/kg body weight i.v, i.m., or
s.c. (use lower dose if giving i.v.);
I-3 mg/kg body weight orally.
Gastric effects
In oll cases where treatment has been necessary the anirmals should be
administered ulcer-healing or ulcer-preventing drugs.
The Hz-receptor blocking drugs cimetidine, ranitidine and famotidine reduce
gastric acid and pepsin secretions, reducing the risk of ulcer formation and
allowing ulcers to heal. Omeprazole inhibits the proton pump responsible for
auol e sey pue suanod auow s! ll 'sljas eaued aun Aq uosnpoid pie slnsee
[22|Dogs
Diclofenac sodium
       
receptor blockers and its use should be reserved for anirmals who are not
responding to other therapies,
Sucralfate is an ulcer-coating agent that binds to proteins at an ulcer site,
protecting it from further gastric acid and pepsin attack.
prostaglandins whose production is inhibited by diclofenac. Administration shortly
gastric acid secretion and increased mucous production, thereby preventing ulcer
formation.Its use is contra-indicated in animals who have already developed ulcers
following NSAID ingestion.
Note: Some preparations present diclofenac sodium in combination with
misoprostol,
Suggested regimen
The following treatment protocol is recormmended for a I4-day period:
Either
Cimetidine
Dose:
5-10 mg/kg body weight i.v., i.m. or
orally every 6-8 hours.
Notes
1.If adsorbents have been administered then parenteral routes should be
employed in the initial stages.
2.If i.v.route is to be used then administer by slow i.y.injection over 30 minutes
to reduce risk of hypotension and arrhythmias.
3.
If metoclopramide has been used or sucralfate is to be used then a period of 2
hours should elapse before cimetidine is administered.
Adverse effect - cimetidine blocks liver microsomal enzymes and therefore
hepatic drug rmetabolism.
Or
Ranitidine
Dose:
0.5-4 mg/kg body weight i.v., s.c. or
orally every I2 hours.
Notes
1.If adsorbents have been administered then parenteral routes should be
employed in the initial stages.
2. If metoclopramide has been used or sucralfate is to be used then a period of 2
hours should elapse before ranitidine is administered.
Or
Famotidine
Dose:
500μg/kgbodyweightorallyevery
I2 hours.
133
Dogs 123
Diclofenac sodium
Notes
1.Where adsorbents have been administered, a period of 2 hours should elapse
before famotidine is adrministered, to minimise charcoal binding to drug.
2.If sucralfate is to be used then a period of 2 hours should elapse before
famotidine is administered.
Where ingestion was recent and >I0 mg/kg body weight of diclofenac sodium
may have been ingested, also give
Misoprostol
Dose:
1-5 μg/kg body weight orally every
68 hours for 24 hours.
Notes
I. If a combination product that contains misoprostol was ingested then
administration is not indicated.
2.  Where adsorbents have been administered, a period of 2 hours shouid elapse
 before misoprostol is administered. to minimise charcoal binding to drug.
3. If ulceration is already suspected or confirmed. misoprostol should not be
given and sucralfate given instead.
4.  Adverse effects - misoprostol may cause vomiting, diarrhoea and abdominal
tenderness and abortions in pregnant anirnals.
Where >10 mg/kg body weight diclofenac sodium may have been ingested and
ulceration is either suspected or confirmed.give:
Sucralfate
Dose:
in dogs <20 kg body weight 500 mg/dog
orally every 6-8 hours; in dogs >20 kg
hours.
Notes
1.Where adsorbents have been administered,a period of 2 hours should elapse
before sucralfate is administered to minimise charcoal binding to drug.
2.If cimetidine,ranitidine or famotidine are to be used then sucralfate should be
given 2 hours beforehand as it requires an acid environment for maximum
efficacy.
 3. Ideally, sucralfate should be administered on an empty stomach, at least I
hour prior to food.
If the animal does not respond to the above therapies then administration of
omeprazole may be considered. The recormmended dose is 0.5-1.5 mg/kg body
weight orally every 24 hours.
Other care
Managerment is otherwise largely symptomatic and supportive. Ensure adequate
hydration and good urine output. In some cases, dopamine may be necessary to
increase renal perfusion and to minimise renal insufficiency (dose: I-3 μg/kg body
weight per minute as constant i.v. igfusign).
124| Dogs
Diclofenacsodium
lIf possible, blood gases and eiectrolytes should be checked and corrected.
especially if there is evidence of renal dysfunction and/or oliguria. Bicarbonate
 saedioad auedop - uonnn suasaud y! sisoie aos cn uanit ag pinoyss
bicarbonate solutions, so these fluids should not be administered together. If the
animal is hyperkalaemic then this should be corrected using dextrose (dose: 20%
solution given I ml/kg body weight i.v.) together with insulin if available (dose:
0.5 units/kg body weightj.
Diazepam rmay be given if there is any convulsant activity (dose; 0.5 mg/kg body
weight i.v. repeated every I0 minutes up to three times if needed).
Bland diets are recommended.
Investigative
Blood levels are not helpful in management, except as confirmation of ingestion.
Interpretation of levels is difficult and case management is better based on clinical
condition of the animai. In any event, such anaiysis is not routinely offered by many
laboratories.
In severe cases radiography, or gastroscopy may be employed to assess gastric
mucosal damage.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/66762.
Giannoukas AD et al. (1996). Protection of the gastroduodenal mucosa from the
effects of diclofenac sodium: role of highly selective vagotomy and misoprostol.
World Journal of Surgery 20(4), 501-505.
Jones RD et al. (1992). Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug toxicosis in dogs and
cats: 240 cases. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 201(3), 475478.
Kore AM (1990). Toxicology of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Veterinary
Clinics of North America: Snall Animg! Practice 20,419-429.
Kore AM (1997). Over-the-counter analgesic drug toxicoses in: small animals.
Veterinary Medicine 92(2), 158-165.
Lascelles D and Balmer T (1997). Are all NSAIDs the same? Veterinary Times 24(4),
34-37.
Vollmar AM (1993). Clinico-toxicologic aspects of non-steroidal anti-inflaramatory
agents in the dog and cat. Tierarztiche Praxis 21(2),149-152.
135
Dogs I 125
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht @ 2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Dieffenbachia
The plant
Common names include: Leopard Lily, Dumb Cane and Mother-in-Law's
Tongue. These plants belong to the Araliaceae family.
Common as houseplants, they may grow up to 2 m in height. They bear
large, variegated leaves of 10-25 cm length, ranging in colour from dark
green to pale green or yellow and flower occasionally. Varieties commonly
found in the UK do not usually produce fruits.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIs, the centre in London has received a small
The majority of these enquiries involve dogs. Most have displayed mild to
moderate clinical effects only and all have made a full recovery.
Mechanism of toxicity
The plant contains high concentrations of calcium oxalate needles and
oxalic acid, both of which are very irritant to mucous membranes and may
aiso result in histamine release. Other plants from this family also contain
proteolytic enzymes, which may further exacerbate the irritant effects.
Clinical effects
Onset of clinical effects in small animals is usually within 4 hours.
Common effects include hypersalivation, vomiting, severe diarrhoea,
membranes. Some animals have exhibited marked abdominal tenderness,
colic and depression.
Treatment
Gastric decontamination is unnecessary.
e ro ie yo ad o sse siee aua moe 'aodns si suaa
si Suams anaaas jo suais soy ansuon pue esonw jelo jo uoeniea 'suonsasu
recommended.
Reference
VPIS (London) past case up to 97/75144.
136
126 | Dogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogsand cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  200O A Campbell and M Chapmai1
Ethylene glycol
Type of product
Ethylene glycol is most commonly encountered in antifreeze, screenwash
or, more rarely, de-icers. Most antifreezes available contain ethylene glycol
or methanol.
Presentation
Antifreeze is available as a liquid to be added to water in engine radiators to
prevent freezing and improve hot-weather performance, the usual final
dilution being 1:3 or 1:4.
redde 'ennred un 'sop pue aqeed pue us-laams Auaedde si 1
to like to drink it.
Occurrence of poisoning incidence
Since 1992, the VPIS has received a small number of enquiries every year
[   o a s  o  a s 
cases are reported. In the most severe case, a 3-year-old St Bernard drank
from a bucket of liguid drained from a car radiator. By 36 hours the dog had
ataxia, lethargy, continuous vomiting and renal failure. The dog was
euthanased after 7 days of supportive care (VPISLn case 84/35372).
Ethylene glycol poisoning is more commonly reported in the winter
months.
Toxicity
According to the literature:
●The quoted lethal dose of ethylene glycol for dogs is 6.6 ml/kg body
weight.
70.4% (Rowland, 1987).
Mechanism of toxicity
The major toxic agent in ethylene glycol poisoning is not the parent
compound but the metabolites produced by the action of alcohol
dehydrogenase on the parent compound. Alcohol dehydrogenase converts
ethylene glycol to glycoaldehyde. This is then metabolised to glycolic acid,
which appears to be the principal cause of the acidosis. One of the
metabolites of glycolic acid is qxalate, which causes renal damage, and
L3/
Dogs I127
Ethylene glycol
hypocalcaemia by binding to calcium to form calcium oxalate, crystals of
which appear in the urine. The aldehydes (glycoaldehyde, glycolic acid and
glyoxylate) may inhibit oxidative phosphorylation and respiration. Glycolic
acid is metabolised to glycine, which is metabolised to hippurate.
Kinetics
Ethylene glycoi is quickly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.
Clinical effects
Stoge I (30 minutes-I2 hours)
Central nervous system signs including vomiting, ataxia, tachycardia,
weakness and convulsions; also polydipsia, polyuria, dehydration,
tachypnoea, acidosis, hypothermia
Stage 2 (l2-24 hours)
Cardiopulmonary signs including tachypnoea, tachycardia, pulmonary
     s   
followed by anorexia, severe depression, coma and convulsions.
Stage 3 (24-72 hours)
Renal system signs including oliguria, azotaemia and/or uraemia, vomiting.
anorexia and severe depression. Renal failure indicates a poor prognosis.
Recovery may take 34 weeks; however, in some cases there may be
irreversible renal tubular damage.
The longer the delay before initiation of treatment, the less favourable the
prognosis. Animals that have improving clinical signs after 10-16 hours of
treatment have a favourable prognosis. However, in most cases unless the
ingestion was witnessed, animals usually present in the third stage of
d si sisouoid au steun asaun ui pue Suuosiod
Laboratory findings
(a) Increased osmolality (normal 280-310 mOsm/kg): an osmolality raised
by as much as 60 mOsn/kg is typical of ethylene glycol poisoning.
7bg 0s-t< d uue ue :(1gu z-on reou) d uoe pasaou (q)
is typical of ethylene glycol poisoning.
(c) Acidosis: pH usually <7.3, urine pH usually <6.5.
(d) Renal damage: raised urea and creatnine, low urine specific gravity,
proteinuria, glucosuria, haematuria and aibuminuria. Calcium oxalate
crystals are light yellow, arranged in rosettes, sheaves or prisms and are
polarised light.
138
128 T Dogs
Ethylene glyco!
()Neutrophil leucocytosis, eosinopaenia (Johnson et al., 1979)
(g) Raised ethylene glycol concentrations in blood and urine.
(h) Hippurate and oxalate detected in urine.
Post-mortem findings
(a) Gastrointestinal tract: gastric mucosa haemorrhagic and hyperaemic.
(b)Pulmonary hyperaemia and oedema.
(c) Kidney: pale, swollen with grey or yellow streaks, particularly near the
corticomedullary junction. Oxalate crystais are usually present in the
kidney. In animals that survive, regenerating renal tubules are dilated
and lined with flattened tubular epithelium.
Diagnosis
Ethylene glycol poisoning may be mistaken for head trauma, encephalitis,
acute gastroenteritis, pancreatitis,ketoacidotic diabetes mellitus and acute
renal failure from other causes. Diagnosis is based on history, clinical signs
and laboratory data. Abdominal palpation may be painful due to renal
Oedema. Ethylene glycol poisoning should be suspected in any animal with
the following:
(a) acute onset of signs;
(b) raised urea, creatinine and other nitrogenous compounds in the blood
(azotaemia or uraemia);
(c) low or fixed urine specific gravity (Grauer and Thrall, 1982).
Treatment
Therapy for ethylene glycol is principally aimed at blocking the action of alcohol
dehydrogenase to prevent the formation of the toxic metabolites. This is achieved
by the administration of the preferred substrate,ethanol, which allows renal
excretion of the unmetabolisedparentcompound.In untreated dogs the half-life
of ethylene glycol was about 6 hours, but this was doubled in dogs treated with
ethanol. 4-Methylpyrazole (4-MP,fomepizole) a direct inhibitor of alcohol
dehydrogenase, has been suggested as an alternative therapy to ethanol on the
grounds of a lack of adverse effects and slower elimination. Clinical reports suggest
that 4-MP is successful in treating ethylene glycol intoxication in dogs. It is
currently undergoing clinical trials in the USA and Europe for the treatment of
ethylene glycol poisoning in humans.
If within 2 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage.
Adsorbents are not useful.
Emetics:
(a)  Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.y. or i.m.;
0.I mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.,
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.rm. or s.c.
139
Dogs 1 129
Ethylene glyco!
(c) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
12 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d)Soda crystal.
Monitor pH and renal function. Correct acidosis with sodium bicarbonate (see
below). Fluids should be given to ensure adequate hydration and a good urine
output. Central venous pressure and renal output should be rmonitored inr dogs
with: renal dysfunction because of the risk of fluid overload and subsequent
pulmonary oedema. Mannitol can be used in a well-hydrated animal to produce an
osmotic diuresis and reduce renal oederma.
Dose: 0.25-0.5 g/kg body weight i,v. over 5-10 minutes
Peritoneal dialysis is recommended in acidotic dogs with oliguria.
Antidotaltherapy
Ethanol is a specific antidote (see above for mechanism) and should be given in any
symptomatic case presenting within 24 hours: however.it is probably most
effective if given within I2 hours of ingestion. (Note: There is no point in giving
ethanol to block metabolism if the ethylene glycol has been metabolised.) Cases
often present late, by which time antidotal therapy is no longer of use. Manage-
ment is supportive. Ethanol should not be given to dogs with renal failure.
Ethono! regimen
Either: 5.5 ml/kg body weight 20% ethanol in saline i.v. every 4 hours for five doses
then every 6 hours for four doses:
or: a loading dose of 1.4 ml/kg body weight of 20% ethanol i.v. over 15 minutes,
foflowed by an i.v. infusion of 0.62 ml/kg body weight/hour for 48-56 hours.
Note: in human poisoning cases, once diagnosis has been confirmed by a
laboratory, the ethanol given as treatment is given either orally or intravenously. In
these cases, the recommended doses for S% and I0% ethanol solutions are
identical whatever the route of administration. Therefore, if ethanol in a form
suitable for injection is not readily available, an equivalent dosing to the above,
suitably diluted, could be given orally (ideally by tube direct into the stomach) as an
interim measure, e.g. 0.5-0.7 ml/kg body weight per hour of a 40% spirit suitably
diluted.
Use of ethanol-containing preparations such as methylated spirits or surgica!
(about 5%) of methanol.
4-MP regimen (if availabie)
Loading dose: 20 mg/kg body weight as a 5% solution i.v., then 15 mg/kg body
weight at 12 and 24 hours. followed by 5 mg/kg at 36 hours. If ethylene glycol is
still detected in the blood then 5 mg/kg should be given every I2 hours.
130 Dogs
Ethylene gtycol
Bicarbonate regimen
The aim is to keep the urine pH at about 7.5-8.0.
(a)  With known laboratory analyses:
base deficit x 0.5 x body weight (kg)
mmol (mEq)of bicarbonate required =
2
Give slowly over 3-4 hours i.v. Recheck blood gases and assess the clinical
status of the animal.
(b) If blood gases are not available:
give 0.5-1 mmol/kg body weight i.y. slowly over 30 minute5.
Dogs may eat and drink during treatment, although those on ethanol therapy may
have CNs depression and may therefore require parenteral or tube feeding.
Calculotions
anion gap = (Na* + K") - (HCO - + CI)
calculated osmolality (mOsmol/kg H2O) =
(1.86 × [Na in mmol/L]) + (urea in rmmol/L) + (glucose in mmol/L)
E6'0
References
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/186001.
Beckett SD and Shields RP (197l). Treatment of acute ethylene glycol (antifreeze)
toxicosis in dogs. Joural of the American Veterinary Association 158(4), 472476.
Dial SM, Thral MAH and Hamar DW (1989). 4-Methylpyrazole as treatment for
Veterinary Association 195(1), 73-76.
Dial SM, Thrall MAH and Hamar DW (1994). Efficacy of 4-methylpyrazole fo1
Rescarch: 55(12), 1762-1770.
Fox LE et al. (1987). Reversal of ethyiene glycol-induced nephrotoxicosis in a dog.
Journal of the American Veterinary Association 191(11),14331435.
Grauer GF and Thrall MA (1982). Ethylene glycol (antifreeze) poisoning in the dogs
and cat.JournaloftheAmericanAnimalHospital Association 18,492497.
6 9     - 1 (  
johnson SE et al. (1979). Current status of ethylene giycol toxicity in dogs - a review.
MinnesotaVeterinarian 2,3243.
Proudfoot AT (1993). Acute Poisoning. Diagnosis and Management (second edition).
Dogs 131
Ethylene glyco!
Toxicology 29(1), 41-44.
Tarr BD et al. (1985). Low-dose ethanol in the treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning
Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapy 8, 254-262.
Thrall MA, Grauer GF and Mero KN (1984). Clinicopathologic findings in dogs and
catswithethyleneglycolintoxication.Journal of theAmerican VeterinaryAssociation
184(1), 37-41.
142
132Dogs
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  2O0O A Campbell and M Chapmai
Fertilisers
Type of product
Presentation
A variety of amateur and professional products are available. Both indoor
and outdoor domestic fertilisers tend to be 'NPK' based; that is, the primtary
constituents are nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium. To these may be
fertilisers are usually liquid preparations, diluted before use, although
tablets and sticks are also available. Outdoor fertilisers may be powder,
jo  aui u aq Aeu snodsoue pan aensn ue pinbi no snuen
animal bone (bone meal) or phosphorous pentoxide.
Note: Some fertilisers contain a high concentration of iron (usually iron
sulphate), which may cause iron poisoning - see iron and iron salts
chapter. Lawn fertilisers may also contain small quantities of herbicides
and/or fungicides.
Occurrence ofpoisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPiS, the centre in London has received up to at
Aq sid rasa yo us ai ra aad sa s i
2.8% of the total enquiries. These enquires predominantly involve dogs.
Toxicity
Fertilisers are generally of low toxicity. In most cases, only gastrointestinal
irritation is reported.
According to the literature:
 Dogs fed 10 mg/kg of a herbicide/fertiliser mixture did not exhibit
clinical signs of toxicity. The doses of the constituents given in mg/kg
0xide 66, 2,4-D 6.51, MCPP 3.26, dicamba 0.55 and bensulide 60.93. The
dosing regimen used was equivalent to ingestion of 0.06 m² lawn/kg
body weight, with the fertiliser mixture applied at the recommended
application rate. This exceeds the quantity of grass that animals
typically ingest, which is abqut 5-10 g.
143
Dogs T 133
Fertilisers
In the experience of VPISLn:
● Over 150 cases are on file, where follow-up data are available. In over
55% of these cases the animals were asymptomatic.
● One fatal case is docurmented. The dog developed severe gastro-
intestinal discomfort, with blood-stained diarrhoea. It is possible that
the preparation ingested contained ferrous sulphate (VPISLn case 94/
136580)
Mechanism of toxicity
It is considered that most clinical effects following ingestion of fertilisers
result from the irritant nature of the constituents.
Clinical effects
Onset of effects is usually between 2-10 hours post-ingestion. Duration of
gastrointestinal effects has been 12 hours in some past VPISLn cases.
Vomiting, diarrhoea, salivation, polydipsia, lethargy and abdominal
tenderness are the most likely effects.
Rarely reported effects include shivering, transient hindleg stiffness,
swelling of the muzzle, uricarial rash formation and itching. Two dogs
developed altered behaviour (hiding and lying in the rain), which was
attributed to the ingestion.
Treatment
Gastric emptying and adsorbents are unlikely to be required.
Treatment is symptomatic and supportive、particularly ensuring adequate
hydration. An anti-emetic may be used if there is excessive vomiting. Either
metoclopramide or acepromazine may be used; the latter has a longer duration of
action.
(a) MetoclopramideDose:
0.5-I mg/kg body weight orally, s.c. or
i.m. every 6-8 hours; I-2 mg/kg body
weight per day by siow i.v. infusion
(b) Acepromazine
Dose:
0.03-0.1 mg/kg body weight i.v, i.m., or
s.c. (use lower dose if giving i.v.);
I-3 ng/kg body weight orally.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 96/149473.
Yeary RA (1984). Oral intubation of dogs with combinations of fertilizer, herbicide
and insecticide chemicals comumonly used on lawns.American journal ofVeterinary
Resenrch: 45(2), 288-290.
144
134|Dogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  200O A Campbell and M Chapmain
Glyphosate
Type of product
Glyphosate is a broad-spectrum post-emergence herbicide. It is an
Organophosphate herbicide with mo anticholinesterase activity, wideiy
used because it is of low toxicity, lacks residual soil activity, does not
bioaccumulate and is biodegradable.
Presentation
Amateur and professional products are available. Glyphosate is primarily
used in the isopropylamine salt and is available in liquid formulations.
These are of variable strengths, but most of those commonly available
contain between 120 and 500 g/L of glyphosate, i.e. 12-50% w/v.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the faunch of the VPIs, the centre in London has received up to 45
glyphosate-containing products. Over 95% of these cases involve dogs.
Poisoning has usually been attributed to ingestion of grass and vegetation
recently treated with a giyphosate-based herbicide. A number of fatal cases
have occurred, five in dogs and three in cats.
Toxicity
        s n 
products. A surfactant, polyoxyethylene amine (POEA), present in many
liquid preparations, may be responsible for some of the effects, particularly
with the professional products. The surfactant aids adsorption of the
   d  s  sd  
According to the literature:
application rate.
 2000 ppm is the no-effect dietary concentration in long-term feeding
trials in dogs.
 Beagles fed 0-500 mg/kg/day (in gelatine capsules) for approximately
1 year showed no clinical signs of toxicity.
● There is limited information on dogs but the LDso in other animals is
high: mice >10 000 mg/kg, rats >5000 mg/kg, rabbits 3800 mg/kg, goats
>3500 mg/kg.
There is limited information on the toxicity of POEA, but in rats the
LD5o is 1280-1300 mg/kg, whichis about one-third that of glyphosate.
145
Dogs T135
Glyphosate
In the experience of VPISLn:
● The cases reported often involve dogs eating recenily treated
vegetation in parks or gardens. Over 150 canine cases have been
reported to the VPISLn, of which approximately 40% remained
the remainder would be classified as serious. Five fatal cases in dogs
have been reported.
In common with the findings of a French survey of enquiries to a
veterinary poisons information centre, the enquiries about glyphosate
products occur predominantly in spring and early summer. This correlates
with the agricultural use of glyphosate.
+
A 9-year-old Labrador was presented with spasms, panting, shaking,
hind-leg ataxia and muscle spasms after ingestion of a glyphosate-
containing herbicide. The animal was treated with i.v. diazepam,
atropine and steroids and made a slow recovery (VPISLn case 93/
80395).
1
 A 40 kg German Shepherd dog was admitted with ataxia, disorienta-
tion and convulsions after ingestion of a herbicide preparation. The
animal was treated symptomatically but deteriorated rapidly and was
euthanased (VPISLn case 94/40272).
A 6-year-old Airedale was presented with melena, pale mucous
membranes, icterus, pyrexia and haematuria after ingestion of
herbicide. The animai was given vitamin K, steroids, antibiotics and
plasma expanders, but died (VPISLn case 95/116804).
A 22 kg mongrel ate herbicide-treated grass. It presented with
diarrhoea, inappetence, and icterus. Laparotomy revealed a fibrosed
and cirrhotic liver. The animal was euthanased (VPISLn case 96/46988).
Mechanism of toxicity
The toxic mechanisms of glyphosate have not been determined. It may
Kinetics and metabolism
There is limited information on kinetics of glyphosate in dogs. In laboratory
and retention of glyphosate in tissues is low. The majority of absorbed
glyphosate is excreted unchanged in the urine or faeces.
Clinical effects
   s    i  p  
Recovery usually occurs over 1-2 days.
Salivation, vomiting, diarrhoea, irritation and swelling of lips are common
136T Dogs
Glyphosate
stages, with the animals subsequently becoming ataxic, depressed and
bradycardic. Inappetence, pharyngiis, pyrexia, twitching, shaking and
dilated pupils are noted occasionally. Rarely, jaundice, hepatic damage and
Tachypnoea occurs in glyphosate poisoning in other animals but does not
appear to be a feature of glyphosate toxicity in dogs.
In severe cases collapse, severe bradycardia and convulsions may occur.
Post-mortem findings
main feature in rats and mice.
Treatment
If within 2 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage, and then
administer adsorbents.
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.
0.1I mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5--I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c) ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal
Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally
(b) BCK granules?
Dose:
6-18 g oraily two or three times daily.
1f there is severe or persistent vomiting then anti-emetics shouid be administered.
If adsorbents have been administered this may reduce efficacy of orally
 administered anti-emetics. In such cases, parenteral administration is preferable.
Either metoclopramide or acepromazine may be used; the iatter has a longer
duration of action.
(a)   Metocloprarmide
Dose:
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight orally, s.c. or
i.m. every 6-8 hours; I-2 mg/kg body
weight per day by slow i.y. infusion
(b) Acepromazine
Dose:
0.03-0.I mg/kg body weight i.v., i.m., or
s.c. (use lower dose if giving i.v.):
I-3 mg/kg body weight orally.
If there is a risk of dermal exposure the animal should be thoroughly washed.
Treatment thereafter is largely supportive. ntravenous fluid support should be
given to maintain hydration if required. Liver function tests should be considered if
the animal displays serious clinical effegty.
147
Dogs  137
Glyphosate
References ond further reading
VPIS (London) cases up to 97/95765.
Burgat V et al. (1998). Glyphosate toxicosis in domestic animals: a survey from the
data of the Centre National d'Informations Toxicologiques Veterinaires (CNITV).
Veterinary and Human Toxicology 40(6), 363-368.
Smith EA and Oehme FW (1992). The biological activity of glyphosate to plants and
animals:a literature review.Veterinary and Human Toxicology 34(6),531-543.
148
138Dogs
Handbookof Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht @ 2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Holly/ Hlex aquifolium
The plant
Common name: Holy. The plant belongs to the Aquifolianeae family.
This is a commonly encountered evergreen shrub with characteristic
glossy, leathery, dark green leaves with spiky margins. The plant flowers in
late spring to early summer with yellow-green or pinkish blooms. The
female plants bear fruits, which remain on the plant through out the
winter. The rounded fleshy berries are usually bright red, sometimes
yellow or black, and grow in clusters.
Otccurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIs, the centre in London has received a small
are rare.
Toxicity
The plant is considered by the VPIS to be of low toxicity.
According to the literature:
Se s op e e un n ano  saq o 'ir 
unsubstantiated by case data.
Mechanism of toxicity
Potentially, all parts of the plant are toxic. The leaves and berries contain
saponins such as ilicin, ilexanthin and ilicic acid, which have local irritant
effects on mucous membranes. The leaves, berries and stems also contain
cyanogenic glycosides. Presence of triterpenes and a compound with
digitalis-type activity has also been documented.
Clinical effects
Clinical effects are rare, but the spiny nature of the leaves presumably
renders then unattractive for consumption.
Effects would be anticipated within 2-3 hours. Ingestion may result in
yomiting (which may be severe or protracted), diarrhoea and salivation.
Dogs I 139
Holly / llexaquifolium
Treatment
Gastric decontamination using gastric lavage. emesis or adsorbents is not
necessary as the berries are of low toxicity and vomiting usually occurs
spontaneously.
Use of metociopramide may be considered if vomiting is severe. Dose: 0.5-I mg/kg
body weight orally, s.c. or i.m. every 68 hours; I-2 mg/kg body weight per day by
slow i.v. infusion,
Maragement should otherwise be supportive, particularly ensuring that the anirmal
is well hydrated.
References ond further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 96/3398.
Willems M (1989). Quantitative determination and distribution of a cyanogenic
glycoside in Ilex aquifolium. Planta Medica 55, 195.
Waud RA (1932). A digitalis-like action of extracts made from holly. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 45,279.
150
140  Dogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Honeysuckle / Lonicera species
The plant
Common species are: Lonicera peridymenum (Common honeysuckle,
(Perfoliate honeysuckle)
There are numerous different species of honeysuckle and many cultivars
and hybrids. Honeysuckle is a many-branched spreading shrub or a woody
climber, with stems up to 6 m long. It is a member of the Caprifoliaceae
family. The leaves are variable in shape but often dark green with a pale
green underside. The flowers appear from May to late September; in the
Common honeysuckle they are yellowish-white with a purplish tinge.
The berries vary in colour but the common species have bright red round
berries approximately 89 mm in diameter. These occur in dense clusters of
between 5 and 15. Inside the berries are six oval, yellow seeds. The flesh is
juicy and sometimes the berries are sticky and covered in dust, which dulls
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS, the centre in London has received a small
number of enquiries each year regarding ingestion of honeysuckle. All
Clinical effects are usually mild and no fatal cases have been reported.
Toxicity
The plant is generally considered of low toxicity. Cases reported to the
VPISLn have usually displayed mild gastrointestinal effects only.
Mechanism of toxicity
Honeysuckle fruits contain valerianic acid and xylostein, which are irritant.
Clinical effects
Onset of effects is usually within 2 hours. The common effects are vomiting
diarrhoea (may be bloody), depression and lethargy. Convulsions were
reported by the owner of one dgg in a VPISLn case (93/81260).
151
Dogs | 141
Honeysuckle/ Lonicera species
Treatment
that the animal is adequately hydrated.
If there is severe or persistent vomiting, metoclopramide may be given. Dose: 0.5-
I mg/kg body weight orally, s.c. or i.m. every 68 hours; I-2 mg/kg body weight
per day by slow i.v. infusion.
Reference
VP15 (London) past cases up to 96/162522.
152
142|Dogs
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2000 A Campbelland M Chapmai
Horse chestnut/ Aesculus hippocastanum
The plant
Common names are: Horse chestnut or 'conker'. The plants belong to the
Hippocastanaceae family.
Aesculus hippocastanum is a large deciduous tree up to 25 m high, found in
parks and urban areas. The large, oval buds are covered with red-brown
sticky bud scales. The leaves consist of between five and seven leaflets, each
up to 15 cm long. The clusters of white, pink or deep red flowers appear
from April to June. The fruits are large spiny, green to yellow or brown
capsules, which contain one or more shiny brown seeds (the conkers),
which ripen from August to October.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1993, the VPIs London centre has received between five and 15
enquiries per annun regarding ingestion of horse chestnuts by dogs. Most
of these cases are reported in the autumn, when the fruits ripen. All but one
Toxicity
In the experience of the VPISLn:
●A 10 kg, 14-month-old, cross-bred dog consumed at least eight horse
chestnuts. The dog collapsed, vomited profusely, became dehydrated
and went into toxic shock. The dog was rehydrated, given predniso-
lone, multivitamins, antibiotics and a gastrotomy performed to remove
plant material from the gut. The animal returned 3 days later, after a
possible repeat ingeshion, but on this occasion died shortly after
presentation (VPISLn case 96/154594).
Mechanism of toxicity
The poisonous principle is aesculin, a saponin glycoside (7-hydroxycou-
marin-6-glucoside), though aesculin is sometimes used as a collective term
for the saponins in this plant. Young leaves and flowers are considered to
be the most toxic part of the plant. The bark contains the highest aesculin
concentration, but this part is rarely eaten. Alkaloids may also be present.
The seed (conker) contains a large amount of starch and 3-5% aesculin.
Clinicaleffects
Onset can occur within 1-6 hoursg but in most cases it has been 2 days.
153
Dogs |143
Horse chestnut/Aesculus hippocastanum
Effects include vomiting, diarrhoea, salivation, haematemesis, abdominal
tenderness, polydipsia, anorexia and dehydration; also restlessness, ataxia,
muscle tremor, rigidity, pyrexia, partial paralysis and obstruchion of the
gastrointestinal tract. In one fatal case reported to the VPIS, respiratory
paralysis occurred.
Treatment
If within 2 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage.
Adsorbents are unlikely to be of any benefit and rray exacerbate obstruction.
Emetics:
(a)   Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.;
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.y.
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
1-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Treatment is otherwise supportive, particularly ensuring that the animal does not
become dehydrated.
If there is severe or persistent vomiting, metoclopramide may be given. Dose: 0.5-
I mg/kg body weight orall. s.c. or i.m. every 6-8 hours: 1-2 mg/kg body weight
per day by slow i,v. infusion.
Laparotomy and surgical removal of impacted plant material may be required in
distress.
Reference
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/39819.
154
144| Dogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
Copyright  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Hymenoptera
The insects
 pe 'sm s sp n d e po d ae siasun ss
They are characterised by the possession of two pairs of wings, one pair of
antennae, three body segments and, in the females, stinging apparatus at
the end of the abdomen.
areq e aaer saag saads o saads on saea snnedde suuns a
stinger with lancets that firmly attach to the skin of the victim during the
attack. Stinging therefore results in the tearing off of the apparatus from
the abdomen and the subsequent death of the insect. The reflex action of
the stinger muscles may, however, continue to inject more venom into the
capable of inflicting multiple stings on their victims.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992, the VPIS London centre has received a small number of
 'se ui ss say  dsm ag u ra a saa
date, all of these have been in dogs. Several cases have involved multiple
stings.
Toxicity
Hymenoptera stings may result in localised pain and swelling, and only
to occur in animals sensitive to the insect venom, occasionally resulting in
fatality. Deaths have occurred as a result of upper airway blockage through
Oedema caused by stings in the mouth or on the neck or head.
The venom of africanised honeybees (so-called killer bees), which are found
in parts of the USA, is similar to that of domesticated honeybees. It is no
more toxic or allergenic than that of domesticated honeybees. These bees,
however, are more aggressive and the risk of multiple stings is greater.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
 A 1-year-old collie disturbed a beehive and received multiple stings. It
howled constantly, vomited profusely, with the vomitus containing
many insects. It became lethargic. Evidence of multiple stings was
present inside the mouth. The animal developed severe haemolytic
anaemia. The animal was managed supportively with corticosteroids,
plasma expanders and intravenous fluid therapy and a blood
L55
Dogs |145
Hyrmenoptera
transfusion. The clinical effects persisted for 6 days but the animal
made a full recovery (VPISLn case 87/29396).
Mechanism of toxicity
The venom compositions are variable but most contain phospholipases,
The latter contributes to the pain and inflammatory response.
Clinical effects
In dogs, stings to the facial area are complicating, as their panting is a
means of control of body temperature and the swelling that may occur
following stings may impair thermoregulation.
Local reactions: normal reactions to a sting include immediate pain,
redness, and inflammation. The animal may bark or yelp continuously. The
area local to the site of the sting may become irritating and swollen. If the
cause respiratory distress.
Toxic reactions: these normally occur with multiple stings. The clinical
effects include local reactions as above, with vomiting, diarrhoea,
 ss     l 
anaemia and renal failure being reported. Cardiovascular and respiratory
collapse of rapid onset have also been reported.
potentially fatal, anaphylactic reachions, usually within 30 minutes, Clinical
effects include bronchospasm and collapse.
Treatment
Treatment of local reactions need only be supportive, with the use of
antihistamines (e.g. chlorpheniramine) if deemed necessary. Steroids may be
given for severe local swelling or if the sting is to the mouth or facial regions (e.g-
beclomethasone,dexamethasone,methylprednisolone).
If the sting was from a bee, the stinger should be removed by flicking or scraping
with a fingernail, piece of card or knife blade. The stinger should not be squeezed
or pulled from the skin, since this may release more venom into the wound.
o se aueo aoddns pue snoduss ainbau kuo kgeqoid lim suonsea sixol
local reactions, with intravenous fluid support if required. Antibiotic cover is
recommended.
sion that may result. The use of adrenaline (l:loo0 strength) is advocated for
severe reactions. Dose: 20 μg/kg body weight i.v. (i.e. 0.02 ml/kg body weight of
0.1% solution (1:l000), diluted in 5-J 0 pl of normal saline).
|46| Dogs
Hymenoptera
Management is otherwise supportive. Where bees are involved, the stinger
apparatus should be removed where possible. Where multiple stings have
occurred, the anirmal should be checked for presence of anaemia.
References
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/111980.
Antin IP (1963). Fatal anaphylactic reaction of dog to bee shing. Journaf of thr American
Veterinary MedicalAssociation 142,775.
Cowell A and Cowell R(1995).Management of bee and other hymenoptera stings.
Current Veterinary TherapyXlI,226-228
157
DogsT147
Handbookof Poisoningin dogs andcats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  200O A Campbell and M Chapman
Ibuprofen
Type of product
Presentation
Ibuprofen is available in the UK both as a prescription medicine and as an
over-the-counter medication. lt is sold under various brand names in both
tablet and liquid suspension preparations. Topical preparations are aiso
availabie.
The dose of ibuprofen in tablet preparations is variable but usually within a
10  0oz uo siaqnn haqu-a-nao, 1s raun  og-00
400 mg-
Some preparalions may contain other drugs as well, e.g. codeine,
pseudoephedrine. Liquid suspension preparations are commonly of
100 mg/5 ml strength. Topical preparations vary in strength but are
commonly 5% w/v (i.e. 5 g/100 ml of gel).
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Ibuprofen is the drug about which the VPIS is most frequently consulted.
  go a a   l e   a e 
enquiries that enquiries about ibuprofen represent (2.5% in 1992, rising to
4.3% in 1997). Over 95% of these cases involved ingestion by dogs.
Recommended dosage
 ae aa 'uo suy ui asn nog paddns si np a n aul u
   aa    n   r s
particularly, its use is potentially very dangerous.
In the past, a dosage of 5 mg/kg body weight was advocated in the dog and
used for anti-inflammatory and analgesic purposes without any damaging
effects being reported, but prolonged daily doses of 8 mg/kg body weight
have resulted in severe toxicity.Hence, the safety margin is a narrow one.
Toxicity
Dogs are particularly sensitive to the propionic acid group of NsAIDs (e.g.
ibuprofen and flurbiprofen). In particular, they are prone to develop severe
 gastric uiceration and intestinal irritation.
158
148Dogs
ibuprofen
A dose of 5 mg/kg body weight was the recommended therapeutic dose in
dogs for analgesic and anti-inflammatory purposes. Such doses were not
reported to result in toxicity.
Experimental doses of 8-16 mg/kg body weight given once daily for 30
days have been reported to cause mild gastrointestinal disturbances only.
the severity increasing with dose. Post-mortem examination revealed
gastric ufcers and erosion, and severe intestinal inflammation.
According to the literature:
●An acute dosing of 100 mg/kg body weight may cause moderate to
severe toxicosis, with gastrointestinal effects predominant. With
treatment full recovery is likely.
●Acute doses greater than 250 mg/kg body weight may cause renal
impairment.
●A dose of 333 mg/kg body weight was reported to result in acute renal
failure.
●Doses greater than 300 mg/kg body weight may result in fatality.
 iaiear ie aq Ae shop piaydans ueia
In the experience of the VPISLn:
●Acute doses as low as 6 mg/kg body weight have caused gastro-
intestinal effects (VPISLn case 95/150712).
 hubham Apoq ayu 0og ueun iatean sasop anoe 'ssop auos u
been survived with treatment, and caused no apparent clinical effects
(e.g. VPISLn cases 94/141798 and 96/139572)
Mechanism of toxicity
Ibuprofen competitively inhibits the cyclo-oxygenase step of prostaglandin
synthesis. Such inhibition and subsequent reduction in levels of PGl and
PGE2 can account for the major effects seen in poisoning cases.
In the gastrointestinal tract prostaglandins have a cytoprotective function,
as they control production of gastric acid, stimulate secretion of mucous
and bicarbonate by the gastric epithelium and maintain mucosal blood flow
by causing vasodilatation. Deficiency will result in increased gastric acid
secretion and reduction in mucous production and mucosal blood flow.
These effects and the acidic nature of the drug itself all increase risk of uicer
formation.
In the kidneys, prostaglandins maintain afferent arteriolar dilatation
a role in control of renin release and maintenance of water balance. NSAID
inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis will result in reduchion of renal blood
flow and disrupt normal renal function and homeostatic mechanisms.
Constriction of renal arterioles may result in renal papilary necrosis. These
effects may be more evident in animals that are dehydrated or volune-
depleted.
159
Dogs 1 149
Ibuprofen
Kinetics and metabolism
Ibuprofen is completely absorbed in dogs. Absorption also occurs more
rapidly than in humans, with peak plasma levels being achieved between
30 minutes and 3 hours. It is largely bound to serum proteins once absorbed
  1  1  s    )s
metabolites produced in the liver are excreted in the urine.
Clinical effects
The initial clinical effects usually occur within 2 hours. These include
vomiting (often persistent), haematemesis, diarrhoea, melena, abdominal
tenderness and anorexia. Mucous membranes may be pale or congested.
Weakness, ataxia, incoordination, lethargy, depression and drowsiness are
often noted. On rare occasions dyspnoea, hyperventilation, and tachycar-
sia, tremors, twitching or convulsions are occasionally observed. Coma has
been reported in one VPISLn case (92/92984).
From 12 hours post-dose onwards, evidence of gastrointestinal irritation
and renal impairment occurs. There may be protracted vomiting pyrexia,
anaemia, anorexia, polyuria, polydipsia, dehydration and collapse.
Renal impairment or failure should be anticipated if a dose of 250 mg/kg
azotemia, and elevated creatinine and BUN. Such effects have been noted
in some VPISLn cases (94/107678, 94/142289 and 94/149382). There may be
hyperkalaemia and acidosis. Renal failure may be delayed for up to 5 days.
Hypotensive or dehydrated animals are more at risk from renal effects, as
are those with pre-existing renal impairment.
Gastric erosion, ulceration and, theoretically, perforation may occur, with
doses as small as 8 mg/kg body weight This may occur in the absence of
any major clinical effects. Dark, tarry stools may be observed in some
animals with gastric ulceralion (VPISLn cases 95/31770 and 95/29257).
Post-mortemfindings
 n n   a   a
Treatment
Treatment is advocated if a dose of I0 mg/kg body weight has been exceeded
existing renal insufficiency).
If within 3 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage. and then
administer adsorbents.
160
150T Dogs
tbuprofen
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a)   Activated charcoal
Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally
(b)BCK granules
Dose:
6-18 g orally two or three times daily.
If there is severe or persistent vomiting then anti-emetics should be administered.
If adsorbents have been administered this may reduce efficacy of orally
administered anti-emetics. In such cases, parenteral administration is preferable.
Either metoclopramide or acepromazine may be used; the latter has a longer
duration of action.
(a) Metoclopramide
Dose:
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight orally. s.c. or
i.rm. every 68 hours; I-2 mg/kg body
weight per day by slow i.v. infusion
(b) Acepromazine
Dose:
0.03-0.l mg/kg body weight i.v, i.m., or
s.c.(use lower dose if giving i.v.);
I-3 mg/kg body weight orally.
Gastric effects
In ol cases where treatment has been necessary, the animals should be
administered ulcer-healing or ulcer-preventing drugs.
The H2-receptor blocking drugs cimetidine, ranitidine and famotidine reduce
gastric acid and pepsin secretions, reducing the risk of ulcer formation and
alowing ulcers to heal. Omeprazole inhibits the proton pump responsible for
gastric acid production by the parietal ceils. It is more potent and has a longer
duration of action (>24 hours) than the three aforermentioned H2-receptor
blockers and its use should be reserved for animals who are not responding to
other therapies.
Sucraifate is an ulcer-coating agent that binds to proteins at an ulcer site.
Misoprostol is a synthetic prostaglandin analogue that in effect replaces the
prostagiandins whose production is inhibited by ibuprofen. Administration shortly
after ibuprofen ingestion will therefore ensure continued control of gastric acid
Bumoly sasn padolaaap peae aaey oum siee u paesuiuon si asn si
NSAID ingestion.
161
Dogs IT51
ibuprofen
Suggested regimen
The following treatment protocol is recommended for a I4-day period.
Either
Cimetidine
Dose:
5-10 mg/kg body weight i.v, i.m. or
orally every 6-8 hours.
Notes
1. If adsorbents have been administered then parenteral routes should be
employed in the initial stages.
2.
If the i.y. route is to be used then administer by siow i.v. injection over 30
minutes, to reduce risk of hypotension and arrhythmias.
3.1
 If metoclopramide has been used or sucralfate is to be used then a period of 2
hours should elapse before cimetidine is administered.
4.
Adverse effect - cimetidine blocks liver microsomal enzymes and therefore
hepatic drug metabolism.
Or
Ranitidine
Dose:
0.5-4 mg/kg body weight i.y. s.c. or
orally every 12 hours.
Notes
1. If adsorbents have been administered then parenteral routes should be
employed in the initial stages.
 2.If metoclopramide has been used or sucralfate is to be used then a period of 2
hours should elapse before ranitidine is administered.
Or
Famotidine
Dose:
500 μg/kg body weight orally every 12
hours.
Notes
1.  Where adsorbents have been administered, a period of 2 hours should elapse
before famotidine is administered, to minimise charcoal binding to drug.
2. If sucralfate is to be used then a period of 2 hours should elapse before
famotidine is administered.
Where ingestion was recent and >I0 mg/kg body weight of ibuprofen may have
been ingested, also give:
Misoprostol
Dose:
1-5 jg/kg body weight orally every
6--8 hours for 24 hours.
Notes
1.  Where adsorbents have been administered, a period of 2 hours should elapse
before misoprostol is administered, to minimise charcoal binding to drug.
2. If ulceration is already suspected or confirmed, misoprostol should not be
given and sucralfate given insteag.
162
[52| Dogs
lbuprofen
3.Adverse effects - misoprostol may cause vomiting, diarrhoea and abdominal
tenderness, and abortions in pregnant animals.
Where >I0 mg/kg body weight ibuprofen may have been ingested and uiceration
is either suspected or confirmed, give:
Sucralfate
Dose:
in dogs <20 kg body weight 500 mg/dog
B oz< slop u! snoy 8-9 Aana Aeo
body weight I g/dog orally every 6-8
hours.
Notes
1.Where adsorbents have been administered,a period of 2 hours should elapse
before sucralfate is administered, to minimise charcoal binding to drug.
2. If cimetidine, ranitidine or famotidine are to be used then sucralfate should be
given 2 hours beforehand. as it requires an acid environment for maximum
efficacy.
 3. Ideally, sucralfate should be administered on an empty stomach, ar least I
hour prior to food.
If the animal does not respond to the above therapies then administration of
omeprazole may be considered. The recommended dose is 0.5-1.5 mg/kg body
weight orally every24hours.
Othercare
Management is otherwise largely symptomatic and supportive. Ensure adequate
hydration and good urine output. In some cases, dopamine may be necessary to
increase renal perfusion and to minirmise renal insufficiency (dose: I-3 μig/kg body
weight per minute as constant i.v.infusion).
If possible, blood gases and electrolytes should be checked and corrected.
especially if there is evidence of renal dysfunction and/or oliguria. Bicarbonate
should be given to correct acidosis. Caution - dopamine precipitates in bicarbonate
solutions, so these fluids should not be administered together. lf the animal is
hyperkalaemic then this should be corrected using dextrose (dose: 20% solution
given I ml/kg body weight i.v.), together with insulin if available (dose: 0.5 units/kg
body weight).
weight i.v., repeated every t0 minutes up to three times if needed).
Bland diets are recommended.
Enhanced elimination
Ibuprofen is protein-bound and extensively metabolised and therefore alkaline
elimination.
163
Dogs I 153
lbuprofen
Investigative
ingestion. Interpretation of levels is difficult and case management is better based
offeredbymanylaboratories.
mucosal damage
Increases in prothrombin time or INR are rarely noted in ibuprofen overdoses.
In some VPISLn cases (94/107678, 94/142289 and 94/149382).elevated iver
enzymes, BUN and creatinine have been recorded.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/12582.
Adams SS et al. (1969). Absorption, distribution and toxicity of ibuprofen. Toxicology
nd Applied Phurmacology 15, 310-330.
Campbell A (1992). Ibuprofen in dogs - an example of species toxicity variation.
Poster presentation for European Association of Poisons Centres and Clinical
Toxicologists XV Congress, Istanbul, 24-27 May, 1992.
Earl JA (1987). Flurbiprofen warning. Veterinmary Record 120, 349.
Elliott GA (1988). The propionic acids. Gastrointestinal toxiciry in various species.
Toxicologic Pathology 16(2), 245-250.
Veteri!ary Record 120, 599-600.
Godshalk CP et al. (1992). Gastric perforation associated with administration of
1734-1736.
Jackson TW et af. (199l). Correlation of serum ibuprofen concenration with clinical
486-488.
Jones RD et al. (1992). Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug toxicosis in dogs and
cats: 240 cases. fournalof the American Veterinary Medical Association 201(3), 475-478.
Kore AM (1990). Toxicology of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Veterinary
Clinics ofNorth America: Simall Animal Practice 20, 419-429.
Kore AM (1997). Over-the-counter analgesic drug toxicoses in small animals.
Veterinary Medicine 92(2), 158-165.
Lascelles D and Balmer T (1997). Are all NSAIDs the same? Veterinary Times 24(4), 34-
37.
Marlow CA (1987). Flurbiprofen warning. Veterinary Record 120, 287.
Nash AS (1987). Flurbiprofen warning. Veterinary Record 120, 399
Poortinga EW and Hungerford LL (1998). A case-control study of acute ibuprofen
Sherkl R et al. (1987). Pharmacokinetics of ibuprofen in the dog. fournal of Veterinary
Pharmacology and Therapeutics 10, 26265.
154|Dogs
tbuprofen
Smith KJ and Taylor DH (1993). Another case of gastric perforation associated with
ibuprofen administration in a dog. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association 202(5), 706.
Spyridakis LK et al. (1986). Ibuprofen toxicosis in a dog.Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association 188(9), 918-919.
Thursby-Pelham C (1996). Peculiar drug poisonings in pets. In Practice 18(10), 478-
487.
Villar D, Buck WB and Gonzalez JM (1998). Ibuprofen, aspirin and acetaminophen
toxicosis and treatment in dogs and cats. Veterinary and Human Toxicology 40(3),
156-161.
Vollmar AM (1993). Clinico-toxicologic aspects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
agents in the dog and cat. Tierarztliche Praxis 21(2), 149-152 (in German).
Woolliscroft G and McArthur S (1987). Flurbiprofen toxicity in a dog. Veterinary
Record 121, 115-116.
Yeatts J (1988). Flurbiprofen toxicity. Veterinary Record 122, 215.
165
Dogs 155
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2OOO A Campbell and M Chapman
Indomethacin
Type of product
Indomethacin is a non-steroidal, anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) with
antipyretic and analgesic activity.
Presentation
Indomethacin is availabie in the UK as a 'prescription only’ medicine for
human use. It is indicated for use in the management of pain and severe
inflammation in rheumatic diseases, gout, musculoskeletal disorders,
dysmenorrhoea and closure of the ductus arteriosus. lt is sold under
Aosoddns pue 'suoisuadsns pinb 'ansdes 'anqen u saureu puerq snoiea
preparations.
The dose of indomethacin in tablet and capsule preparations is variable but
commonly 25 mg. 50 mg, and 75 mg. Some of these are modified- or
sustained-release preparations.
Suppository preparations contain 100 mg of indomethacin and the liquid
suspensions are commonly of 25 mg/5 ml strengths.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992, there have been a few enquiries about
indomethacin ingestion by dogs each year. Half of these have developed
clinical effects, but to date there have been no fatal outcomes to any of these
cases.
Recommended dosage
 are aau 'uo suy u asn r padns si p a 'n a u
indications for use of this drug in veterinary medicine. In dogs, its use is
potentially dangerous.
Toxicity
Dogs are generally sensitive to NSAIDs, and although indomethacin is
acetic acid derived, rather than propionic acid derived, clinical manifesta-
tions of adverse effects may be anticipated after ingestion of the drug. As
with other NSAIDs, indomethacin causes severe gastrointestinal irritation
and may also impair renal function at high doses.
According to the literature
●There is no LDs reported for gggs.
166
156  Dogs
Indomethacin
in 60% of dogs and perforation in 20%.Increased doses of 3,4 and
5 mg/kg over a similar period caused ulceration in all dogs and
increasing perforation (50%, 70% and 90%, respectively). All the dogs
given 2 mg/kg body weight survived. With the larger doses, survival
time decreased with increasing dose.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
●Acute doses of 2.7 mg/kg body weight and 5 mg/kg caused no clinical
effects in two cases (VPlSLn cases 94/116351 and 94/60068).
●A single acute dose of 71 mg/kg body weight caused gastrointestinal
irritation with no bleeding (VPISLn case 92/85934).
1.9 mg/kg body weight twice dailyfor 5 days causedgastrointestinal
bleeding and renal dysfunction (VPISLn case 95/156181)
Case report
A dose of 25 mg (0.74 mg/kg body weight) of indomethacin in the evening
and another 25 mg the following morning resulted in hospitalisation 24
hours later, with a 12-hour history of haematemesis, melena, anorexia and
depression. The dog, a 34 kg bitch, also regularly received aspirin for
osteoarthritis. On examination she was dehydrated, with abdominal pain.
Barium contrast radiography revealed severe gastritis. She was discharged
after 3 days of supportive care, but 24 hours later was readmitted with
haematemesis and melena. Repeat barium contrast radiography again
revealed severe gastritis. She vomited intermittently for 4 more days and
diarrhoea and melena continued for almost 4 weeks. She lost 7 kg in weight
but eventually began to improve and was discharged 35 days after the first
attendance. She returned to hospital 1 month after this with anorexia and
occasional vomiting and diarrhoea. She now weighed 25 kg. Laboratory
analyses and barium contrast radiograph were normal. A surgical
exploration of the abdomen was undertaken. Only the stomach was
digested blood (about 10 ml) was also present. A partial gastrectomy was
performed, removing all the visible erosions. She made a good recovery
surgery) she again returned to hospital with haematemesis, diarrhoea,
melena and complete anorexia. She weighed 28 kg. A barium contrast
[esp nur pue wmaponp aul uaamaq suoisaupe paneaaan ydeoipe
abdominal wall. Surgical exploration revealed splenomegaly, and gastric
and duodenal hyperaemia. She recovered well and was finally discharged
 s a o p as ss i an e sp 
vomiting, diarrhoea, anorexia, haematemesis and melena but recovered all
her lost weight. Other causes of chronic haemorrhagic gastritis were ruled
Out. The fact that she regularly received aspirin may have made her more
susceptible to the ulcerogenic potentjal of indomethacin (Ewing, 1972).
16
Dogs 157
Indomethocin
Mechanism oftoxicity
Like other NSAIDs, indomethacin inhibits the cyclo-oxygenase step of
prostaglandin synthesis. Such inhibition and subsequent reduction in levels
of PGl2 and PGEz can account for the major effects seen in poisoning cases.
In the gastrointestinal tract prostaglandins have a cytoprotective function,
by causing vasodilatation. Deficiency will result in increased gastric acid
secretion and reduction in mucous production and mucosal blood flow and
therefore potentially lead to cell damage.
In the kidneys, prostaglandins maintain afferent arteriolar dilatation,
regulating renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate. They also have
a role in control of renin release and maintenance of water balance. NSAID
flow and disrupt normal renal function and homeostatic mechanisms
Constriction of renal arterioles may result in renal papillary necrosis. These
effects may be more evident in animals that are dehydrated or volume
depleted.
Kinetics and metabolism
Indomethacin appears to be rapidly absorbed in dogs. It is metabolised to
form various metabolites in the liver that are excreted in the urine
Clinical effects
The clinical effects usually occur within 2 hours following acute exposures.
These include vomiting (often persistent), diarrhoea, abdominal tenderness
lethargy, depression and drowsiness are possible effects.
From 12 hours post-dose onwards, evidence of gastrointestinal irritation
repeated low doses. There may be protracted vomiting, Pyrexia, anorexia,
polyuria, polydipsia, dehydration, renal dysfunction and collapse. Hypo-
tensive or dehydrated animals are more at risk from renal effects, as are
those with pre-existing renal impairment.
Gastric erosion, ulceration and, theoretically, perforation with intestinal
irritation will occur, with large acute dosings, or repeated doses above
2 mg/kg body weight per day. This may occur in the absence of any major
clinical effects. Dark, tarry stools may be observed in some animals with
gastric ulceration
168
158 I Dogs
Indomethacin
Post-mortem findings
There may be evidence of gastrointestinat congestion and/or haemorrhage,
Treatment
Treatment is advocated if a single acute dose of I0 mg/kg body weight has been
exceeded (5 mg/kg body weight in animals who are dehydrated. hypotensive or
have pre-existing renai insufficiency).
If within 3 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage, and then
administer adsorbents.
Emetics:
(a)Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.i
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.;
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)Ipecacuanha
Dose:
f-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a)  Activated charcoal
Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally
(b) BCK granules*
Dose:
6-18 g orally two or three times daily.
If there is severe or persistent vomiting then anti-emetics should be administered.
If adsorbents have been administered this may reduce efficacy of orally
administered anti-emetics. In such cases, parenteral administration is preferable.
Either metoclopramide or acepromazine may be used; the latter has a longer
duration of action.
(a)Metoclopramide
Dose:
0.5-1mg/kgbody weight orally,s.c.or
i.m. every 68 hours; J-2 mg/kg body
weight per day by slow i.v. infusion
(b) Acepromazine
Dose:
0.03-0.1 mg/kg body weight i.v., i.m., or
5.c. (use lower dose if giving i.v.);
I-3 mg/kg body weight orally.
Gastric effects
In ofi cases where treatment has been necessary. the animals should be
administered ulcer-healing or ulcer-preventing drugs.
The H2-receptor blocking drugs cimetidine, ranitidine and famotidine reduce
gastric acid and pepsin secretions. reducing risk of ulcer formation and ailowing
ulcers to heal. Omeprazole inhibits the proton pump responsible for gastric acid
production by the parietal cells. It is mgre potent and has a longer duration of
169
Dogs ]159
Indomethocin
action (> 24 hours) than the three aforementioned Hz-receptor blockers and its
sdenaun sauo on supuodsan nou ane oym sieue joy paasau aq pinous asn
Sucralfate is an ulcer-coating agent that binds to proteins at an ulcer site.
protecting it from further gastric acid and pepsin attack.
Misoprostol is a synthetic prostaglandin analogue that in effect replaces the
prostaglandins whose production is inhibited by NSAIDs. Administration shortly
after NSAlD ingestion will therefore ensure continued control of gastric acid
Its use is contraindicated in animals who have already developed ulcers following
NSAID ingestion.
Suggested regimen
The following treatrment protoco! is recommended for a I4-day period.
Either
Cimetidine
Dose:
5-10 mg/kg body weight i.y., i.m. or
orally every 6-8 hours.
Notes
1.If adsorbents have been administered then parenteral routes should be
employed in the initial stages.
2.  lf the i.v. route is to be used then administer by slow i.v. injection over 30
minutes to reduce risk of hypotension and arrhythrias.
3.  If metoclopramide has been used or sucralfate is to be used then a period of 2
hours should elapse before cimetidine is administered.
4. Adverse effect - cimetidine blocks liver microsomal enzymes and therefore
hepatic drug metabolism.
Or
Ranitidine
Dose:
0.5-4 mg/kg body weight i.v., s.c. or
orally every I2 hours.
Notes
I. If arisorbents have been administered then parenteral routes should be
employed in the initial stages.
2.  If metoclopramide has been used or sucralfate is to be used then a period of
two hours should elapse before ranitidine is administered.
Famotidine
Dose:
500 μg/kg body weight orally every
12 hours.
Notes
I. Where adsorbents have been administered, a period of 2 hours should elapse
before famotidine is administered, to minimise binding to drug.
170
160|Dogs
Indomethacin
2.lf sucralfate is to be used then a period of 2 hours should elapse before
famotidine is administered
Where ingestion was recent, also give:
Misoprostol
Dose:
1-5 μg/kg body weight orally every
68 hours for 24 hours.
Notes
1. Where adsorbents have been administered, a period of 2 hours should elapse
before misoprostol is administered, to minimise binding to drug.
2.  If ulceration is already suspected or confirmed, misoprostol should not be
given and sucralfate given instead.
3.
 Adverse effects - misoprostol may cause vomiting, diarrhoea and abdominal
tenderness, and abortions in pregnant animals.
Where ulceration is either suspected or confirmed, give:
Sucralfate
Dose:
in dogs <20 kg body weight 500 mg/dog
3y 07< sop u! rsanoy 89 Aaaa Aeo
bodyweightIg/dog orallyevery68
hours.
Notes
1.Where adsorbents have been administered, a period of 2 hours should elapse
before sucralfate is administered, to minimise binding to drug.
2. If cimetidine, ranitidine or famotidine are to be used then sucralfate should be
efficacy.
3. Ideally, sucralfate should be administered on an empty stomach. at least I
hour prior to food.
If the animal does not respond to the above therapies then administration of
omeprazole may be considered. The recommended dose is 0.5-I.5 mg/kg body
weightorallyevery24hours.
Other care
increase renal perfusion and to minimise renal insufficiency (dose: I-3 μg/kg body
weight per minute as constant i.v. infusion).
If possible, blood gases and electrolytes should be checked and corrected,
especially if there is evidence of renal dysfunction and/or oliguria. Bicarbonate
shoufd be given to correct acidosis.Caution - dopamine precipitates in bicarbonate
solutions, so these fluids should not be administered together. If the animal is
hyperkalaemic then this should be corrected using dextrose (dose: 20% solution
given I ml/kg body weight i.v.). together with insulin if available (dose: 0.5 units/kg
body weight).
171
Dogs | 161
Indomethacin
Diazepam may be given if there is any convulsant activity. Dose: 0.5 mg/kg body
weight i.v. repeated every I0 minutes up to three tirmes if needed.
Bland diets are recommended.
Enhanced elimination
Alkaline diuresis or urine alkalinisation, dialysis or haemoperfusion are unlikely to
enhance elimination.
Investigative
Blood indomethacin levels are not helpful in management, except as confirmation
of ingestion. Interpretation of levels is difficult and case management is better
routinely oferedby many laboratories.
In severe cases, radiography or gastroscopy may be ernployed to assess gastric
mucosal damage.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 96/160278.
Journal of thne American Veterinary Medicai Association 161(12), 1665-1668.
Horton R and Zisper R (1978). Prostaglandins: renin release and renal function.
Cottributions to Nephrology 14, 87-96.
Jones RD et al. (1992). Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug toxicosis in dogs and
cats: 240cases.Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Assoriatioun 201{3),475478.
Kore AM (1990). Toxicology of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Vererinary
Clinics of Northi Anerica: Small Animai Practice 20, 419429.
Kore AM (1997). Over-the-counter analgesic drug toxicoses in small animals.
Veterinary Medicine 92(2), 158-165.
Lascelles D and Balmer T (1997). Are all NSAIDs the same? Veterinary Times 24(4),
3437.
Nicoloff DM (1968). 1Indomethacin - Effect on gastric secretion, parietal cell
'Sis-60g 'z6 fus8ins fo saaoy sop ay ui uoyesoaoid ain pue uogeindod
Vollar AM (1993). Clinico-toxicologic aspects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
agents in the dog and cat. Tierarztliche Praxis 21(2), 149-152 (in German).
172
162 I Dogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht @ 2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Iron and iron salts
Type of product
Iron salts are used in man as dietary supplements for the treatment of iron
contain small quantities of iron, usually present as the sulphate.
Iron salts are also present in some lawn moss killers.
Presentation
Pharmaceutica!
In dietary supplements and multivitamin preparations the sulphate,
fumarate and gluconate are the commonly encountered salts. Some of
the preparations are sustained- or modified-release varieties.
Ferrous sulphate
Usually available in tablet, capsule or spansule preparations of strengths
150 mg (47 mg elemental iron), 160 mg (50 mg elemental iron), 200 mg
(65 mg elemental iron) and 325 mg (105 mg elemental iron).
An oral solution of ferrous sulphate for paediatric use is available, which
contains 60 mg/5 ml (12 mg elemental iron/5 ml)
Ferrous fumarote
Usually available in tablet, capsule or spansule preparations of strengths
200 mg (65 mg elemental iron), 305 mg (100 mg elemental iron), 322 mg
(100 mg elemental iron) and 330 mg (110 mg elemental iron).
An oral solution of ferrous fumarate is available, which contains 140 mg/
5 mi (45 mg elemental iron/5 ml).
Ferrous gluconote
Usually available in tablet, capsule or spansule preparations of strengths
250 mg (30 mg elemental iron) and 300 mg (35 mg elemental iron).
An oral solution of ferrous fumarate is available, which contains 140 mg/
5 ml (45 mg elemental iron/5 ml).
Agricultura!
Some lawn sands or moss killers contain up to 30% w/w or w/v ferrous
sulphate. For a 30% strength preparation I kg or I litre of product would
contain the equivalent of 97.5 g of. plemental iron.
Dogs 163
Iron and iron solts
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS, up to 20 enquiries per annum have involved
canine ingestion of iron salts as a pharmaceutical and up to eight as a
component of a lawn sand or moss killer. A small percentage of these have
developed clinical effects. One fatal case has been recorded. This was due
to ingestion of a lawn sand preparation.
Recommended dosage
For treatment and prevention of iron-deficiency anaemia - ferrous
sulphate: 100-300 mg orally once daily or iron dextran: 25 mg/kg body
weight i.m. weekly as required.
Toxicity
According to the literature:
● The oral LDso in dogs for ferrous sulphate is 600 mg/kg body weight.
●
The intravenous LDso of ferrous sulphate in dogs is 79 mg/kg body
weight.
 Ingested doses greater than 20 mg/kg body weight elemental iron are
considered moderately toxic.
 Ingested doses greater than 200 mg/kg body weight elemental iron are
potentially tethal.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
●
 There have been no fatal cases resulting from ingestion of pharma
ceutical preparations.
caused mild gastrointestinal effects.
36 mg/kg body weight equivalent of elemental iron resulted in no
clinical effects.
●171 mg/kg body weight equivalent of elemental iron resulted in severe
abdominal tenderness and dark-coloured faeces at 24 hours post-
ingestion in a German Shepherd dog. The animal was treated with
intravenous fluids and desferrioxamine and made a full recovery
(VPISLn case 94/135340).
An estimated dose of 866 mg/kg body weight of elemental iron
(ingested as fumarate) resulted in severe and protracted vomiting in a
West Highland terrier. No treatment was given but the animal
developed no other clinical effects (VPISLn case 92/74040).
●A German Shepherd cross-bred dog ate an unknown quantity of a
lawn sand containing ferrous sulphate. The animal developed lethargy.
pale mucous membranes, severe vomiting, diarrhoea, melena and
collapsed. Despite aggressive management with intravenous fluid
therapy, multivitamins and ,desferrioxamine, the animal died. Post-
[64 1 Dogs
Iron ond iron salts
mortem analysis confirmed death due to iron poisoning (VPlSLnt case
96/145380).
Mechanism of toxicity
Under normal conditions, the amount of iron absorbed from the diet is
determined by the body's iron requirement, with absorption taking place
via an active process in the mucosal cells of the duodenum and jejunum.
-onai aun on paodsuen pue masen on punoq si uoin paqosqy
endothelial system, bone marrow and hepatocytes, where it is stored and
utilised. There is no specific mechanism for the excretion of iron. An
excessive intake of iron overwhelms the selective transport mechanism and
excess circulates as free iron.
Iron salts are corrosive and cause direct damage to cells. Gastrointestinal
perforation and peritonitis are therefore possible. Mitochondrial damage
causes hepatic necrosis, and increased capillary permeability and post-
arteriolar dilatation can lead to cardiovascular collapse. Also, free-radicai
additional cell damage.
Kinetics and metabolism
 sas au o paoe i ar s o
Clinical effects
Following ingestion, the initial signs usually occur within 6 hours and
include buccal irritation, vomiting, haematemesis, haemorrhagic diarrhoea,
recovery over 6-24 hours. This may be followed by dehydration, shock,
         p
naemia and coagulopathy may occur.
Laboratory diagnosis
●Elevated serum iron levels.
●Metabolic acidosis.
●Elevated LFTs and bilirubin.
The normal serum iron concentration in dogs is 17-22 μmol/L (94
122 μg/dl).
There are no definite data on toxic serun iron levels in dogs, although
levels greater than 62 μmol/L (350 pg/dl) are considered dangerous.
Post-mortem findings
Common findings include mucosal necrosis and ulceration, enteritis, liver
necrosis and congestion of splanghpic vessels, liver and kidney.
Dogs I 165
Iron and iron salts
Treatment
Treatment is advised if more than the equivalent of 30 mg/kg body weight of
elemental iron has been consumed.
Undissolved iron tablets are radio-opaque and X-ray may therefore be used to
confirm ingestion. However, absence of radio-opaque material does not exclude
ingestion.
If within 3 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage.
Emetics:
(a)Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b) Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.;
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
lron is not adsorbed to activated charcoal and therefore the use of adsorbents is
not recommended.
Elimination techniques
A chelating agent, desferrioxamine, is available for the management of iron
poisoning. The drug chelates free iron, removing it from cellular binding sites, and
the resultant complex is excreted in the urine, turning it a pink-brown colour.
In dogs, it should be given if there are definite signs of poisoning or where a large
uoui wnuas aup y! pasn aq osje pinous 1l pansaul uaaq aaey o syanou s sunoue
to obtain a serum iron level in time to determine this need and in many cases
desferrioxamine is given anyway.
Desferrioxamine dose: 40 mg/kg body weight i.v. slowly over 4 hours. Note: Rapid
 administration of desferrioxarmine may cause hypotension or cardiac arrhythmias.
● If the dog remains asymptomatic and the urine is the normal colour, no
further doses are required.
● If the dog is symptomatic and/or the urine is a pink-brown colour then further
doses should be given every 46hours.
Management is otherwise supportive, with particular care required to ensure
adequate hydration.
Reference
166|Dogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2OOO A Campbell and M Chapmar
lvermectin
Type of product
 Ivermectin is an antiparasitic agent and is one of the avermectins. These are
natural or semi-natural macrocyclic lactone disaccharides that are fermen-
tation products of Streptomyces avermitilis and Streptomyces cyamogriseus.
Ivermectin is a mixture of about 80% 22,23-dihydroavermectin Bia and 20%
22,23-dihydroavermectin Bib. It is active against mature and immature
nematodes and arthropods.
It has veterinary use for the control of migrating heartworm (Dirofilaria
immitis) larvae in dogs. This nematode worm is not endemic in the UK, but
may be present in some quarantined dogs. It is also used for management
of intractable dermal parasiticoses.
Ivermectin  is  used  for  control  of  gastrointestinal  roundworms  and
ruminants; horse bots; some lice and mites on cattle and pigs; warble fly
larvae in cattle; nasal bots in sheep; and mites on cats.
Presentations
Several preparations are available but none specifically for dogs, since
ivermectin is not licensed in the UK for use against heartworm in dogs. In,
non-canine farm animals, ivermectin may be given orally, subcutaneously
for injection are available at 10 mg/ml strength and pour-on solutions at
5 mg/ml. Dogs usually ingest one of the oral preparations.
Some modified-release ruminal preparations for cattle are available,
designed to release 1.72 g over 135 days.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992, the VPIs London centre has received between five and 10
cases involve collie breeds, who have inadvertently drunk preparations
intended for use in other animals. Two fatal cases have been reported, both
following injection (VPISLn cases 25/65270 and 96/39127).
Dogs T 167
Ivermectin
Recommended dosage
In the UK, ivermectin is not licensed for use against heartworm in dogs.
However 'off label use for management of dermal parasite infections is
common.
For heartworm prophylaxis, the recommended dosage in the USA is 6 μug/kg
body weight orally every month.
In some UK formularies, a dose of 0.2.mg/kg body weight either s.c. or i.m.
dosing is likely to cause toxicity.
In general, doses less than 50 μg/kg body weight will be tolerated by most
animals,although caution is recommended in neonatal animals and collie
related breeds.
Toxicity
According to the literature:
●
 Doses less than 50 μig/kg body weight should not affect even sensitive
breeds or species.
● 50-100 μg/kg body weight may cause adverse reactions in collie breeds.
200 μg/kg body weight causes convulsant-like activity, depression,
progress to paralysis and decreased consciousness.
200 μg/kg body weight ingested by a Collie caused salivation, ataxia
and disorientation within 3 hours. Coma and respiratory failure
followed. The dog was treated with i.v. fluids and anticholinergics.
EKG showed no CNS involvement and the animal recovered over 14
days.
● Beagles receiving doses of 2.5 mg/kg body weight developed dilated
 pupils. A dose of 5-20 mg/kg body weight caused tremors and ataxia
and 40 mg/kg body weight proved fatal.
●Oral LDso in beagles is quoted as 80 mg/kg body weight.
Beagles given 2 mg/kg acutely or 0.5 mg/kg daily for 14 weeks showed
no toxic effects.
●A Doberman that had ingested 2.9 mg/kg body weight was found
24 hours later with recumbency, twitching, dilated pupils and
dehydration. The animal was apparently blind. With supportive care
the animal recovered over 8 days.
● An Old English Sheepdog-type dog ingesting 150 μg/kg body weight
developed hind-limb ataxia, hypersalivation, hyperventilation, con-
stricting pupils, extreme drowsiness, and loss of menace response.
 Pregnant bitches of unspecified breed were given 500 μg/kg body
weight eight times between 5 and 40 days of gestation. No ivermectin-
related effects were seen in either the bitches or the foetuses.
178
[68  Dogs
Ivermectin
In the experience of the VPISLn:
140 μg/kg body weight ingested by a Rough Collie caused severe
reflexes within 14 hours. The animal survived with supportive care
(VPISLn case 91/90939)
Another Rough Collie was inadvertently injected with 1 ml of a 10 mg/
ml preparation intended for use in cattle. The animal became severely
ataxic, with hyperventilation, and lethargy. Despite supportive care
with rehydration, use of corticosteroids, antibiotics and millophyline,
the animal died 12 days post-exposure (VPISLn case 95/65270).
Mechanism of toxicity
Avermectins interfere with parasite nerve transmission by increasing
release of the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) from pre-synaptic nerve terminals and enhancing binding to
post-synaptic receptors. This leads to the opening of post-synaptic chloride
channels, causing neuronal hyperpolarisation and depression of neuronal
function. They may also act on chloride channels independent of GABA
receptors. In invertebrates, where GABA receptors are found in the
of the animal. In mammals, where GABA receptors are located in the CNS,
the result of excess GABA release and post-synaptic binding would be
diffuse cerebellar and cerebral cortex dysfunction. However, in mammals
avermectins do not readily cross the blood-brain barrier and so foxicity is
much reduced.
Collie breeds appear to have sensitivity to ivermectin because of an
permeability of their blood-brain barrier or to the existence of a transport
mechanism for ivermectin across this barrier.
The reversible blindness seen in some canine ivermectin cases may be
in the CNS. This blindness appears to occur even though the pupils
respond to light stimulation.
Some authors suggest that a recessive autosomal gene may be responsible
for the idiosyncratic reactions seen in collies.
Kinetics and metabolism
Ivermectin is well absorbed both orally  (approximately 95%) and
 s  u  e  a u peo si p ad
crosses the blood-brain barrier. Peak plasima concentrations following oral
exposures are achieved within 3-5 hours. Plasma conccntrations do not
correlate with neurological signs in-either collie or non-collie breeds.
179
Dogs I 169
vermectin
Ivermectin is metabolised in the liver into methyl alcohol and mono-
saccharides and the majority of the metabolites are excreted in the faeces.
with only 0.5-2% being excreted in the urine. It is also excreted in the milk
of lactating animals.
Plasma half-life is approximately 2 days following oral administration.
Clinical effects
Some breeds are more susceptible to ivermectin toxicity, particularly
Collies, Border Collies, and possibly Shelties, Australian Shepherd Dogs
and related breeds. Even with susceptible breeds, there is wide variation
in sensitivitybetween individualanimals.
Onset of effects is usually within 46 hours of oral exposure, although in
some cases effects are not observed until 10-14 hours post-exposure.
Recovery may be protracted; in most cases, it occurs within 48 hours,
although in some large exposures complete recovery has taken several
weeks.
Cases where mild intoxication has occurred are characterised by constricted
o sns a  sxan hea i p so s
absent. Some animals have been reported as polydipsic.
Severe intoxications are characterised by ataxia, vomiting, pin-point pupils,
blindness, tremors, depression, convulsions, hyperaesthesia, tremors,
hyperreflexia, hypothermia or hyperthermia, drowsiness, stupor, coma
and paralysis. Rarely, bradycardia and respiratory depression are reported.
Acidosis has occasionally been documented.
Note:rapid die-off of larvae in heartworm(Dirofilaria inmitus)-infected
dogs may cause vomiting, lethargy, tremor, tachycardia and shock.
Post-mortem findings
At post-mortem there are no diagnostic lesions observed in ivermectin
poisoned animais. In experimental cases, mild pulmonary congestion/
oedema and focal CNS haemorrhage were found. However, these findings
were not conclusively linked to ivermectin exposure.
Treatment
Treatment is recommended for doses >150 μg/kg body weight in susceptible
breeds and for >2.5 mg/kg in non-susceptible breeds. These doses are given only
as a guide, as some individuai animals may exhibit toxicity at lower doses and merit
treatmentaccordingly.
If within 3 hours of ingestion,induce vomiting or consider gastric lavage, and then
administer adsorbents.
180
170 | Dogs
Ivermectirn
Ermetics;
(a)  Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.rm.:
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.y.:
0.5--I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c) |pecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal  Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally
(b) BCK granules
Dose:
6-18 g orally two or three times daily.
Treatrment is essentially symptomatic and supportive and most dogs recover with
good nursing care. In particular, the monitoring of electrolytes and fluid balance,
blood pressure, heart rate, body temperature, blood gases and respiratory
function is advocated.
Animals with bradycardia may be given atropine or the muscarinic receptor
antagonist glycopyrolate. The former is recommended for mild cases only as,
unlike glycopyrollate, it will cross the blood-brain barrier, further compromising
the neurological status of the animal.
Atropine dose: 30-50 μig/kg body weight s.c. 0r i.m.: 20 μg/kg body weight i.v,
Glycopyrollate dose: I0 jug/kg body weight s.c.
Although there is no evidence of ivermectin causing cerebral oedema, some
authors recommend use of dexamethasone in severe cases. Dose: 2-3 mg/kg body
weight i.v. then I mg/kg body weight s.c. every 8 hours.
Cimetidine has been recommended to reduce gastric irritation. Dose: S-t0 mg/kg
body weight i.v., i.m. or orally every 6-8 hours.
 sa s y b   o s  
parenteral nutrition should be started as early as possible.
inhibitor physostigmine has been used. Physostigmine causes neuronal hypopolar-
isation by increasing sodium conductarce at the post-synaptic nerve endings.
thereby offsetting the effects of the chloride channel-mediated hyperpolarisation.
The duration of action for physostigmine is short, with effects usually lasting less
than 60 minutes. Use may be associated with development of convulsions
Physostigmine dose: 0.6 mg/kg body weight by slow i.v. injection. Prior use of
glycopyrollate to offset potential bradycardia should be considered.
Picrotoxin, a natural glucoside alkaloid that acts as an analeptic, has been suggested
as possible antidote to ivermectin poisoning. lt is a chloride channel blocker that
Dogs 171
Ivermectin
margin of safety. and its use is associated with developrment of convulsions. It
therefore should not beroutinely used for ivermectin poisoning cases.
Contra-indicated drugs
Benzodiazepine use is best avoided, as it also enhances CNS GABAergic activity,
owing to ivermectin causing an increased affinity of benzodiazepines for the GABA
receptor--chloride channel complex
Investigations
Plasma levels may be useful in confirming ingestion ard toxic exposures.
Heartworm-infested dogs
In infested dogs displaying adverse reactions, recommended management is
essentially symptomatic and supportive with use of corticosteroids, fluid
painba se uoddns Aoennsau pue suawareidau
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/101602.
Campbell WC and Benz GW (1984). Ivermectin: a review of efficacy and safety.
fournal ofVeteriary Pharmacology andTherapeutics 7,1-16.
Fassler PE ct al. (199l). Evaluation of the safety of ivermectin administered in a beef-
basedformulation toivermectin-sensitivecolies.journal oftheAncricanVeterinary
Medical Association 199(4), 457-460.
Hadrick MKet al.(1995). Ivermectin toxicosis in two Australian Shepherds. jourual of
the American1 Veterinary MedicalAssociationt 206(8), 1147-1152.
Heit JE et al. (1989). Clinical management of ivermectin overdose in a Collie dog.
Companion Animal Practice - Toxicology, 19(1), 3-7.
Hopkins KD et al. (1990). Ivermectin toxicosis in a dog. journal of thc American
Veterinary Medical Association 197(1),93-94.
Houston DM et al.(1987). Ivermectin toxicosis in a dog. Journal of the Anerican
Veterinary Medical Association 191, 78.
Hsu WH et al. (1989). The safety of ivermectin. Compendium of Continuing Education:
Smail Animal Practice 11(5), 584589.
Kieran P (1987). Toxicity associated with antheimintics.In Veterinary Clinical
Toxicology, Proceedings No. 103 (Proceedings of a conference held at the University
of Sydney, Australia, 24-28 August 1987), pp. 443-476.
Lovell RA (1990). Ivermectin and piperazine toxicoses in dogs and cats. Veterinary
Clinics ofNorthAmerica:Small AnimalPractice20(2),453468.
Paradis M (1998). Ivermectin in small animal dermatology. Part 1. Pharmacology and
Toxicology. Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practising Veterinarian
20(2), 193-200.
Paul AJ et al. (1987). Clinical observations in Collies given ivermectin orally. American
Journal of Veterinary Researcli 48(4), 684-685.
172|Dogs
Ivermectin
Pulliam JD et al. (1985). Investigating ivermectin toxicity in Collies. Veterinary Medicine
80(6), 33-40.
Roder JD and Stair EL (1998). An overview of ivermectin toxicosis. Vetcrinary aud
Human Toxicology 40(6), 369-370.
Ryan WG and Jones PH (1989). Iverrmectin use in Collie dogs. Veterinary Record
125(16), 425.
Seward RL (1983). Reactions in dogs given ivermectin. Journal of the American
Veterinary MedicalAssociation183(5),493.
Tranquili WJ et al. (1987). Response to physoshgmine administration in Colle dogs
exhibiting ivermectin toxicosis. Jourial of Veterinary Pharnacology and Therapeutics
10, 96-100.
Tranquilli WJ ef al. (1989) Ivermectin plasma concentrations in Collies sensitive to
ivermectin-induced toxicosis. American Journal of Veteriary Research 50(5), 769-770.
Dicrgeneeskunde 121(16), 446-448 (in Dutch).
183
Dogs 173
HandbookofPoisoning in dogs andcats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2OOO A Campbell and M Chapmaint
Laburnum species
The plant
Common names are: Bean Tree, Golden Chain, Laburnum and Golden
Rain. It is a member of the Leguminosae family.
Laburnum is a cultivated ornamental, sometimes found on waste ground as
 y s a y  e s  '  as u
stalks with three terminal, oval leaflets, light green in colour and downy
underneath. In summer, clusters of bright yellow flowers develop. These
are boine on pendulous racemes 10-20 cm long. The seeds are contained in
pods 3-5 cm long. Initially green with green seeds, they mature into pale
brown, dry pods. Each pod holds between three and eight brown or black
seeds.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992, the VPIS has received between five and 15 enquiries per year
regarding laburmum ingestion. These cases have principally involved dogs,
where pods, leaves and flowers have been consumed. No cases have had a
fatal outcome, though some 70% have developed clinical effects.
Toxicity
All parts of the Laburnum are toxic. However, severe cases are relatively
rare, probably as ingestion of large quantities usually results in emesis of
rapid onset.
According to the literature:
Toxicity has been reported in dogs following chewing of the twigs and
bark.
：
The fatal dose of seeds in a dog has been quoted as 6 g/kg (Clarke).
Two cases of laburnum poisoning in dogs are reported. One 7-month-
duration. A kaolin and neomycin preparation was prescribed. The next
day the bitch collapsed during normal exercise and died within 2
minutes. Post-mortem revealed an acute gastroenteritis, petechiation of
the thymus and a large quantity of fine 2-inch long pods in the
stomach; the significance of the stomach contents was not realised at
the time. Two hours later, the second animal collapsed with marked
muscle tremors, vomiting, and diarrhoea. Several treatments were
initiated to cover all possibilities, although poisoning was suspected.
The animal recovered. Three weeks later the dog collapsed again,
although the other clinical effegts were less marked. It was noted, that
184
174|Dogs
Loburnum species
the dogs used to chew the low hanging branches of a laburnum tree.
In the experience of VPlSLn:
●No fatal cases reported.
●A 2-month-old Dachshund puppy ingested laburnum flowers and
developed vomiting. The dog was given adsorbents and made a quick
recovery (VPISLn case 93/49336).
·A 25 kg Collie ate several laburnum pods. The animal developed severe
sia, facial spasms and dilated unreactive pupils. The animal was given
sp  aaao Aaaon pn e ap pue uad pue edaz
(VPISLn case 94/19569).
● A 26-month-old mongrel ate an unknown number of laburnum pods
and leaves. The animal developed hyperaesthesia, ptosis, apparent
blindness, diarrhoea and ataxia. The dog was given intravenous fluid
Mechanism of toxicity
parts of the plant contain the alkaloid, so have a potential to cause toxicity.
Cytisine has a nicotine-like action. Both nicotine and cytisine work on the
respiratory stimulant and has a weaker curare-like action than nicotine.
Kinetics and metabolism
Cytisine is rapidly absorbed via the mucous membranes of the mouth. It is
lesswell absorbed if the seeds are ingestedintact. Peak plasma
concentrations are seen at 2 hours post-oral dose in mice. It is excreted
unchanged in the urine. Studies in mice found the half-life of cytisine to be
approximately 200 minutes.
Clinical effects
The common effects are salivation, vomiting, and diarrhoea. These have a
Listiessness, muscular spasms, and incoordination have also been reported
in past VPIS cases. In severe cases, the central stimulation effects of cytisine
cause delirium, excitation, tonic-clonic convuisions can occur. Death is
usually due to respiratory paralysis.
Post-mortem findings
There are no characteristic findings on post-mortem. A post-mortem of a 7-
 month-old setter bitch showed acute gastroenteritis and petechiation of the
thymus, and a large quantity of laburnum pods were found in the stomach.
185
Dogs 175
Laburnum species
Treatment
If the animal has not vomited and is presented to surgery within 2 hours of the
ingestion then use of emesis and absorbents is recommended. Gastric lavage is
probably unnecessary.
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.;
0.I mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.;
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
1-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a)  Activated charcoal
Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally
(b) BCK granules@
Dose:
618 g orally two or three times daily.
Management thereafter is symptomatic and supportive, as there is no specific
antidote. An minimum observation period of 6 hours post-ingestion is
recommended. The animal should be kept weli hydrated.
References
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/78056.
Baker 1 (1993). Laburnum. In Practice 15(1), 20.
Clarke M (1993). Laburnum poisoning (letter). In Practice 15(2), 66.
Frohne D and Pfander HJ (1983). A Colour Atias of Poisonous Plants. London: Wolfe
Publishing, Pp. 124-125.
Leyland A (1981). Laburnum (Cytisus laburnum) poisoning in two dogs. Veterinary
Record 109, 287.
Rose F (1991). Thr Wild Flower Key. London: Frederick Warne, Pp. 180-181.
186
176 I Dogs
Handbookof Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  2O0O A Campbell and M Chapman
Loperamide
Type of product
Loperamide is a weak opioid with weak analgesic activity. It has licensed
use in veterinary medicine as a treatment for non-specific chronic and acute
diarrhoea. It also has human use as an antidiarrhoeal drug and as an
adjunct to rehydration therapies.
Presentation
Loperamide is available both as a prescription medicine and as an 'over-
the-counter' medication. It is commonly found in either capsule or syrup
preparations. Capsules are usually of 2 mg strength and syrups of 1 mg/
5 ml strength.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
d sa  xe 'e  S  jo  n 
annum have been made to the London centre about the ingestion by dogs
of products containing loperamide. It is predominantly accidental ingestion
of the ‘'over-the-counter’ capsules in the home environment that is the
cause of the poisonings, rather than accidental overdosing by owners or
veterinarians.
Recommended dosage
o si  go u y sp pa  'sop m
0.2 mg/kg body weight orally two or three times daily. It is remarked that in
dogs the drug may cause some sedative effects.
 am Aoq y ro u s sso 'ia a  aadxa a ui
collie breeds might produce toxic effects.
Toxicity
Loperamide ingestions usually result in the rapid onset of mild clinical
effects. Serious or fatal cases are rare. All but one of the cases reported to
VPISLn have recovered without sequelae.A fatal case was reported in a 6-
week-old Yorkshire Terrier puppy.
According to the literature:
Dogs | 177
Loperomide
Doses between 1.25 and 5 mg/kg body weight per day may result in
salivation and weight loss.
enteritis.
●The LDs is quoted as 40 mg/kg body weight.
● Collie breeds may be more susceptible.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
●Doses between 0.5 and 0.8 mg/kg body weight in non-Collie breeds
 produced vomiting only.
●A dose of 0.12 mg/kg body weight in one Collie produced excessive
salivation, inappetence and vocalising (VPISLn case 97/86921).
●A dose of 0.42 mg/kg body weight in a Collie resulted in profound
sedation and unresponsiveness, bradycardia, respiratory depression,
constricted pupils and hypothermia. The animal recovered with
supportive care (VPISLn case 96/164267).
●A dose of 14.3 mg/kg body weight given to a 6-week-old Yorkshire
Terrier by the owner resulted in collapse, coma and death (VPISLn case
97/19955).
 Collie breeds appear more susceptible.
Mechanism of toxicity
Loperamide is a weak opioid drug with potent anti-motility and anti-
secretory properties. At therapeutic doses it has no CNS effects and does
not cross the blood-brain barrier. It is possible that, as with Ivermectin, the
blood-brain barrier of colie breeds allows  significant diffusion of
loperamide.
Loperamide exerts its pharmacological effects by reducing peristalsis in the
lower intestine. This is achieved through increased circular contractions
and decreased longitudinal contractions of the intestinal and colonic
smooth muscle. This results in prolongation of intestinal transit time,
allowing for greater absorption of fluid and electrolytes. The mechanism is
blocking activity. Loperamide does not cause a delay in gastric emptying.
In high doses, the activation of opioid receptors in the CNS together with
the above effects on smooth muscle contractility are responsible for the
toxic effects.
Kinetics and metabolism
Loperamide is moderately well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. It is
metabolised in the liver and the plasma half-life ranges between 6 and
14 hours.
188
178 Dogs
Loperamide
Clinical effects
Collie breeds may be more susceptible to the effects of loperamide. Effects
may occur within 30 minutes and usually within 6 hours following single
acute exposures.
Vomiting, constipation, abdominal tenderness, constricted pupils, unreac-
tive pupils, salivation, vocalisation, circling, head pressing, incoordination
and ataxia (sometimes in hind limbs only) are the common effects. In more
severe cases depression, haemorrhagic diarrhoea, hypothermia, bradycar-
dia, bradypnoea, drowsiness, coma and collapse may occur.
Clinical effects may persist for 4 24 hours.
Hypersalivation, hypothermia, bradycardia, cyanosis, weight loss and
haemorrhagic enteritis have been reported after prolonged administrations
of doses between 1.25 and 5 mg/kg body weight per day.
Treatment
Treatment is necessary if a dose greater than 0.4 mg/kg body weight has been
body weight has been exceeded.
If within 2 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting (provided that the animal is not to0
depressed or drowsy) or perform gastric lavage.
Emetics:
(a)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.y.,;
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(b) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(c) Soda crystal.
The use of adsorbents. particularly activated charcoal, is not indicated as they may
increase constipation in the animal.
Treatment is otherwise supportive. The animal may require rehydration.A
minimum period of 6 hours observation is advocated.
If there is evidence of opioid-based depression (constricted pupils, drowsiness.
salivation, hind-limb paresis) then naloxone should be administered.
Naloxone dose: 0.04I mg/kg body weight by i.v., i.m. or s.c. injection. In severe
cases, repeated doses may be necessary for as long as 24 hours.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/86921.
189
Dogs I 179
Loperamide
Hugnet C et al. (1996). Loperamide poisoning in the dog. Veterinary and Human
Toxicology 38(1),31-33
1373-1375.
Papich MG (1990). Toxicoses from over-the-counter human drugs. Veterinary Clinics
of North Amterica: Small AnimalPractice 20(2), 431-451.
Staley EC and Staley EE (1994). Loperamide intoxication in a seven-week-old pup.
Veterimary and Human Toxicology 36(5), 451.
190
180Dogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  200O A Campbell and M Chapmain
Metaldehyde
Type of product
Metaldehyde is a common ingredient of molluscicide preparations.
Presentation
Usually as small blue-green coloured pellets containing about 3-8% w/w
metaldehyde in a bran/wheat filler. Some products contain animal repellent
components.
Liquid preparations are also available. These may contain up to 20% w/w
metaldehyde. They are usually clear, colourless solutions. Some may
contain ethylene glycol as an excipient.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992, between 30 and 60 enquiries about
ingestion of metaldehyde containing slug bait have been handled each
year. These cases predominantly involve dogs. Over 80% of these animals
have presented to a surgery displaying clinical effects. Fatal outcomes with
t i al  n no An  t  e t s
data. Between 10 and 23% of the cases referred have a fatal outcome.
Toxicity
Metaldehyde, which is most commonly ingested by dogs in the form of
slug pellets, is toxic to dogs. Slug pellets appear to be quite attractive to
dogs. It frequently resuits in prolonged convulsant activity. Fatalities due to
respiratory failure frequently result.
According to the literature:
● Quoted LDso values for dogs cover a wide range, the lowest reported
value being 60 mg/kg body weight.
Assuming a fatal dose in dogs for metaldehyde of 60 mg/kg body
weight and a bait of 8% w/w strength, then the fatal dose in dogs
would be 750 mg bait/kg body weight of the animal.
● Clinical effects have been reported following ingestion of total doses of
200 g of pellets (Rose).
● Smaller dogs tend to have higher mortality than larger ones.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
● Fatalities have been reported following ingestion of 250 g of bait
(VPISLn case 85/7443).
191
Dogs 181
Metaldehyde
●A 35 kg Retriever consumed a maximum of 500 g ofbait. Within 2 hours
the animal was twitching, tachycardic, tachypnoeic and hyperthermic.
Intravenous saline was given, with diazepam and pentobarbitone
sedation/anaesthesia and calcium supplementation. The animal dete
riorated and was euthanased (VPISLn case 94/47627).
·A 30 kg Great Dane ingested 400 g of slug pellets. Within 30 minutes
the animal had salivation, convulsions, total collapse and, despite i.v.
fluids, pentobarbitone and diazepam, died within 3 hours (VPISLn case
94/54462),
●A 5-year-old Collie ate a maximum quantity of 500 g of slug pellets
Within 30 minutes the animal had hyperaesthesia, collapse, tremors
and hyperthermia. The animal was given an emetic, i.v. fluid support
with Hartmann's solution, and maintained under pentobarbitone
gradualy recovered, with mild convulsant episodes being successfully
controlled with diazepam (VPISLn case 94/74663).
Mechanism of toxicity
The mechanism of metaldehyde toxicity is not clearly understood. It is most
frequently suggested that the primary toxic agent is acetaldehyde, which
The suggestion is that the subsequent metabolism of acetaldehyde to
carbon dioxide is a slower reaction than the hydrolysis one resulting in
acetaldehyde formation, and that acetaldehyde levels therefore rise,
causing the clinical effects. There is, however, no in vivo evidence for this
process or mechanism. Indeed, it has been shown that in the cases of both
paraldehyde and ethanol the conversion of acetaldehyde to carbon dioxide
Occurs at a rate faster than the acetaldehyde formation from the parent
Recent work has demonstrated that other factors may be involved. In mice
metaldehyde exposure has been linked to a decrease in the levels of the
inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), noradrena-
line and 5-HT, as well as causing an increase in monoamine oxidase (MAO)
activity. Mortality correlated well with decrease in GABA activity and it is
suggested that the impairment of GABA inhibitory activity may be
causative of the convulsant activity seen in metaldehyde exposures. The
exact mechanism is therefore unknown and it seems unlikely that
acetaldehyde can be the sole cause of toxic effects.
Kinetics and metabolism
and metabolised to acetaldehyde. This is further metabolised to carbon
dioxide or excreted in urine.
192
182|Dogs
Metaldehyde
Clinical effects
 Onset may be very rapid, often within 30 minutes of ingestion, but may be
delayed for up to 3 hours.
Incoordination, irritability, anxiety, hyperpnoea and tachycardia are
reported. Congested and pale mucous membranes, hypersalivation, dilated
diarrhoea (may be green in colour if ingested product was dyed),
borborygmi, abdominal tenderness, and ataxia are all documented.
Occasionally, animals become drowsy.
The classic clinical presentation is that of hyperaesthesia, muscle spasm,
twitching and tremors, leading to opisthotonus and continuous convul-
sions. These may have a duration of 24 hours or more. In serious cases this
may lead to collapse, loss of consciousness, dyspnoea, respiratory
depression and cyanosis. Deaths are usually due to respiratory failure.
Atrial fibrillation has been reported in VPISLn case 93/79105.
exposure. Renal damage has been reported in other species.
memory loss and temporary blindness, which resolved within 3 weeks.
Post-mortem findings
liver cells and of ganglion cells in the brain. Petechial and ecchymotic
and interstitial haemorrhages in the lung are reported. Massive subendo-
cardial and subepicardial haemorrhages have also been seen.
Treatment
op e Ag apkyapiau jo Aauenb Aue jo tosalu! loy pasiape s! suaweai
If the dog is presented to the surgery within 2 hours and is asymptomatic then
Metaldehyde reportedly does not bind to activated charcoal and therefore use of
adsorbents is not indicated.
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.,
0.I mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 rmg/kg body weight i.v.,:
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20mf)orally
(d) Soda crystal.
193
Dogs 183
Metaldehyde
All dogs require observation for a minimum of 4 hours.
If the animal is or becomes symptomatic then it is advisable to anaesthetise or
sedate the dog to control convulsant activity and to allow gastric lavage to be
performed if appropriate.
ausaeadsy Apeas ns ang paneas gop au sundaay pasiape aaey shouane Aue
and in control of their vital reflexes until the clinical effects are seen to resolve.
and then allowing them to slowly recover. Continued sedation has been necessary
for well over 24 hours in some cases.
Others, particularly in cases that present with severe signs, have advocated deep
anaesthesia for 24-48 hours, then allowing recovery of consciousness, with a
to be maintained by alternating lactated Ringers and dextrose saline drips.
Drugs used to achieve these procedures in past cases and reports have included
diazepam. pentobarbitone and acepromazine. Cases where the latter have been
used reportedly required far less supervision.
Doses recommended:
(a)  Diazepam
0.5 rmg/kg body weight i.v. repeated every 10 minutes
Up to three tirmes if needed.
(b) Acepromazine
I-3 mg/kg body weight orally: 0.03-0.1 mg/kg body
weight i.m., or s.c.
0.03 mg/kg body weight by slow i.v. injection.
(ln some past cases doses as high as l6.5 mg/kg
body weight have been given over a 45-min period
with good result.)
(c)  Pentobarbitone
25-30 mg/kg by slow intravenous infusion.
To prevent developrment of pulmonary oedema, it is advisable to turn the dog
every couple of hours.
Lactated Ringers solution has been recommended for animals that are acidotic
and/or dehydrated. Parenteral administration of dextrose saline or calcium
borogluconate has been suggested to prevent liver damage.
Both vitamins and antibiotics have been given in many past cases.
References ond further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/118197.
 Bishop CHG (1975). Blindness associated with metaldehyde poisoning. Veterinary
Record 96(19), 438.
Blaine DR (1977). Treatment of metaldehyde poisoning in dogs. Veterinary Medicine
Small Animal Clinician 72(6), 1009-1011.
Booze TF and Oehme FW (1985). Metaldehyde toxicity: a review. Veterinary and
Human Toxicology 27(1), 11-19.
Cruikshank AK (1982). Metaldehyde and paraquat poisoning. Veterinary Record
111(7), 149-150.
194
184| Dogs
Metaldehyde
Mayer S (1991). Poison - metaldehyde. In Practice 13(2), 57.
Oehme FW (1987). Clinical toxicology in small animals. In Veterinary Clinical
Toxicology, Proceedings No. 103 (Proceedings of a conference held at the University
of Sydney, Australia, 24-28 August, 1987), pp. 443-447.
Rose IRB (1986). Anaesthetic control for metaldehyde poisoning. Veterinary Record
119(15), 388.
Turtier T (1967). Metaldehyde poisoning in the dog. Veterinary Record 80(4), 184.
Turner T (1973). Toxicity of metaidehyde to dogs. Veterinary Record 93(19), 524.
Udall ND (1973). The toxicity of the molluscicides metaldehyde and methiocarb to
dogs.Veterinary Record 93,420-422.
Von Berg R and Stout T (1991). Toxicology update - metaldehyde. fournal of Applied
Toxicology 11 (5), 377-378.
Webster CJ and Webster JM (1986). Anaesthetic control for metaldehyde poisoning.
Veterinary Record 119(20), 511-512,
195
Dogs 1 185
Handbookof Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2OOO A Campbell and M Chapman
Methiocarb
Type of product
Carbamate pesticide used principally as a molluscicide.
Presentation
Commonly available as blue coloured pellets containing 4% methiocarb.
Some molluscicide preparations may contain a combination of methiocarb
and metaldehyde (see the chapter on metaldehyde).
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since its launch, the VPIS London centre has received a small number of
srdan saunbua asaui 'shop ui sansodxa qoa gnoqe sanbua
approximately 0.25% of the total enquiries. In all but two cases the animals
have exhibited clinical effects. Several fatal outcomes have been reported.
Toxicity
According to the literature:
+
The LDsu 0f methiocarb in dogs is 25 mg/kg body weight.
Assuming a fatal dose of 25 mg/kg body weight and a bait of 4% w/w
strength, a fatal dose is calculated as 625 mg bait/kg body weight in
dogs.
In the experience of VPISLn:
Several fatal cases have been reported. Clinical effects in these cases have
been those anticipated. In one case death occurred within 2 hours. At post-
mortem the stomach was found to be full of pellets (VPISLn case 94/41428).
Mechanism of toxicity
Like organophosphates, carbamates bind to and inhibit acetylcholinester-
ase. This results in accumulation of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine and
activation of nicotinic receptors at skeletal muscle end plates, autonomic
ganglia and within the CNS, and of muscarinic receptors at smooth muscle
myoneural junctions and exocrine and endocrine secretory systems.
Therefore both nicotinic and muscarinic effects occur, although nicotinic
receptors rapidly become desensitised. Myopathy is thought to be
secondary to excessive acetylcholine stimulation of muscle.
phate poisoning. the carbamylated acetylcholinesterase is more unstable,
196
186 Dogs
Methiocarb
and spontaneous reversal to the carbamate and acetylcholinesterase occurs.
As a result, the effects resulting from carbamate poisoning tend to be of
much shorter duration compared with those of organophosphate poison-
ing and use of cholinesterase reactivators (such as pralidoxime) is
the effect of the muscarinic receptors on target organs.
Kinetics and metabolism
Carbamates may be absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, through the
skin and following exposure to high concentrations via the lungs. They are
rapidly excreted.
Clinical effects
Onset of effects is usually between 30 minutes and 3 hours. Recovery may
take 1-2 days because of the slow-release nature of the pellets.
Mild to moderate effects normally inciude salivation, bronchial hypersecre-
tion, ataxia, diarrhoea, constricted pupils, muscle fasciculation, tremors and
twitching. weakness, shaking, hyperaesthesia, pyrexia, restlessness and
urinary incontinence.
In severe cases collapse, bradycardia, respiratory depression, convulsions,
cyanosis and coma may occur.
Myopathy occurs rarely following recovery.
Carbamates do not cause the delayed neurotoxicity sometimes observed
with organophosphate insecticides. This is due to the lack of ageing with
carbamates.
Laboratory findings
These are generally non-specific and include increased packed cell volume
(PCV), raised serum aspartate transaminase (AST) and creatinine phos-
phokinase (CPK). Elevated serum amylase may be noted.
Post-mortem findings
There are Ro characteristic lesions observed in carbamate insecticide
bronchoconstriction,  increased bronchial secretions and pulmonary
Oedema. Pancreatitis may be present.
Treatment
If more than the equivalent of 10 mg/kg body weight of methiocarb has been
administer adsorbents.
197
Dogs I 187
Methiocarb
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.mn.:
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.,
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal,
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal  Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally
(b)BCK granules*
Dose:
6-l8 g orally two or three times daily.
should be maintained, and blood gases and electrolytes monitored and corrected.
Rehydration may be required.
lf sedation is required then diazepam may be given. Dose: 0.5 mg/kg body weight
i.v. repeated every I0 minutes up to three tirmes if needed.
Atropine should be given to reverse cholinergic effects.Dose:0.2-2 mg/kg body
as required (usually every 45-90 minutes, initially). Large doses may be required
for effect.
Atropine has no effect on nicotinic receptors and will not counteract skeletal
muscle trermors, weakness or neuromuscular paralysis. However, effects from
carbamates such as methiocarb are generally short-lived and cholinesterase
reactivators such as pralidoxime are not required.
Contra-indicated drugs
Phenothiazine sedatives and succinylcholine should be avoided because of the
neuromuscular blocking activity, since they will exacerbate the toxicity of
methiocarb.Antibiotics such as aminoglycosides (e.g.streptomycin,gentamicin,
should also be avoided, since they may have neuromuscular blocking effects.
Benzodiazepines, opioids and barbiturates should be used cautiously because of
theirCNSdepressanteffects.
Laboratory investigations
Cholinesterase activity determination may be considered. It is advised that whole
blood from unaffected animals should also be submitted as a control. Although not
a uniformly reliable indicator, a decrease of 50% or more of normal activity
generally indicates significant inhibition and in many cases the cholinesterase
activity is less than 25% of normal. In cases of carbarnate poisoning, whole blood
sampies must be rapidly collected, frozen and transported to the laboratory
because of spontaneous reactivation @f gholinesterase.
188|Dogs
Methiocarb
References and further reading
VPlS (London) past cases tup to 97/91797.
Fikes JD (1990). Organophosphate and carbamate insecticides. Veterinary Clinics of
North America:Simall AnimalPractice 20(2),353-367.
McEntree K et al. (1994). Acute polymyopathy after carbamate poisoning in a dog.
Veterinary Record 134,88-89.
Udall ND (1973). The toxicity of the moluscicides metaldehyde and methiocarb to
dogs. Veterinary Record 93, 420-421.
199
Dogs 189
Handbookof Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2OOO A Campbell and M Chapmarn
Mistletoe/ Viscum album
The plant
Viscum nibum (common name, mistletoe) belongs to the Viscaceae family,
though was formerly ciassified in the Loranthaceae family.
The plant grows, as a partial parasite, on deciduous trees. It has a woody
appearance with long stems that bear thick, dark-green leaves of 5-8 cm in
length. The plant flowers in spring with clusters of yellowish flowers. Fruits
remain on the piant throughout winter. They are characteristic white, semi-
translucent berries containing a viscous juice and a single dark-coloured
seed.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS, the centre in London has received a small
These usually occur at Christmas time when plant parts being used as
festive decoration are found indoors. Over 70% of these cases remained
asymptomatic. Those with clinical effects displayed mild gastrointestinal
effects only.
Toxicity
The plant is considered by the VPIS to be of low toxicity. It is possible that
some reports are confusing the effects of the American mistletoe
(Phoradendron) as those of Viscum album.
According to the literature:
Ingestion of a spray of mistletoe with berries resulted in the
development of neurological signs with ataxia, incoordination, head
nodding and hyperaesthesia. The dog became hypothermic and died
some 50 hours post ingestion.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
both vomited and showed generalised weakness. Both recovered with
supportive care and rehydration (VPISLn case 93/130002).
Mechanism of toxicity
The berries, leaves and stems of the plant are all potentially toxic. They
contain lectins and viscotoxins,which are both protein structures.
200
190 | Dogs
Mistetoe/Viscum album
Experimentally, lectins are found to inhibit protein synthesis and cell
growth
Clinical effects
Vomiting, diarrhoea, salivation, and weakness are the only effects reported
in past VPIS cases. These effects have generally been rapid in onset.
The literature describes cases where effects have been delayed for several
hours and where ataxia, constricting pupils, hyperaesthesia, polyuria and
hypotension have been reported. CNS effects are also detailed in some
reports including convulsions, hyperactivity, drowsiness or coma, and
respiratory distress.
Treatment
Gastric decontamination using gastric lavage. emesis or adsorbents is not
necessary unless huge amounts of plant material have been ingested.
Where vomiting is profuse, use of anti-emetics such as metoclopramide may be
considered.
Metociopramide dose: 0.5-l mg/kg body weight orally, s.c. or i.m. every 6-8
"uoisnu! 'x'! mois Aq Xep jad zyalam Apog By/sw 7-I isunoy
Management should otherwise be supportive, particularly ensuring that the animal
is well hydrated.
In the unlikely event of hyperaesthesia or convulsions occurring. diazepam may be
given. Diazepam dose: 0.5 mg/kg body weight i.v. repeated every I0 mirutes up to
three times if needed.
References and Further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/189127.
Greatorex JC (1966). Some unusual cases of plant poisoning in animals. Vetcrinary
Record 78, 725-727.
201
161 1 s80a
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Naproxen
Type of product
Naproxen is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
Presentation
Naproxen is available in the UK as a prescription medicine with indications
for use in management of pain and inflammation in rheumatic diseases,
gout and dysmenorrhoea. It is sold under various brand names in tablet,
'suogeiedad Arosoddns pue uoisuadsns pinb
The dose of naproxen in tablet preparations is variable, but usually 250 mg.
275 mg and 500 mg.
Some preparations are modified release. Liquid suspensions are commonly
of 125 mg/5 ml strength, and suppositories of 500 mg.
A dose of 275 mg of naproxen sodium is equivalent to 250 mg of naproxen.
Some preparations, such as Napratec", have tablets of misoprostol
designed to be taken simultaneously.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
enquiries made to the VPIs London centre. Since 1993, between five and 10
enquiries per year have been received, with almost all cases occurring in
dogs.
Recommended dosage
In dogs the recommended dose is 5 mg/kg body weight initially and then
2 mg/kg body weight daily for management of inflammation and pain.
Toxicity
Dogs are particularly sensitive to the propionic acid group of NSAIDs,
gastric ulceration and intestinal irritation. In the case of naproxen the
toxicity appears to be lower than some of the other drugs in the group such
as ibuprofen and flurbiprofen. Although there have been no post-mortem
studies in the literature to confirm the presence of gastric ulceration and
intestinal inflammation in naproxen cases, the clinical effects reported are
consistent with such findings. Gastroscopy has revealed ulceration in the
pyloric region of the stomach in,ong, case in the literature.
202
192 | Dogs
Naproxen
Accordingtotheliterature
● LDso quoted as 1 g/kg body weight.
●A 2-month-old pug given a total of 110 mg/kg body weight naproxen
over 4 days exhibited depression, melena, lethargy vomiting and
anaemia. The animal survived with treatment, which included blood
transfusions and gastroprotective medications.
A dog given 125 mg twice daily for five days and developed
depression, weakness, tar-like faeces, anorexia, vomiting and anaemia.
Following intensive management with transfusions the animal
recovered.
In the experience of the VPlSLn:
●No effects were seen in a dog given 11 mg/kg body weight acutely.
● One dog received a dose of 375 mg/kg body weight and developed no
clinical effects. The animal had been given an emetic shortly after
ingestion (VPISLn case 96/52958).
● An acute dosing of 40 mg/kg body weight produced vomiting, melena,
diarrhoea and dehydration in a Daimatian. The dog survived with
treatment (VPISLn case 95/68608)
Doses as high as 283 and 588 mg/kg body weight have been survived
by dogs, though both developed severe gastrointestinal distress,
melena and vomiting. Both received supportive care with use of
cimetidine (VPISLn cases 94/26705 and 94/ 89197).
Mechanism of toxicity
subsequent reduction in levels of PGlz and PGE2 can account for the major
effects seen in poisoning cases.
In the gastrointestinal tract prostaglandins have a cytoprotective function,
as they control production of gastric acid, stimulate secretion of mucous
by causing vasodilatation. Deficiency will result in increased gastric acid
secretion and reduction in mucous production and mucosal blood flow.
These effects and the acidic nature of the drug itself all increase risk of ulcer
formation.
In the kidneys, prostaglandins maintain afferent arteriolar dilatation,
regulating renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate. They also have
a role in control of renin release and maintenance of water balance. NSAID
inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis will result in reduction of renal blood
flow and disrupt normal renal function and homeostatic mechanisms.
Constriction of renal arterioles may result in renal papillary necrosis. These
effects may be more evident in animals that are dehydrated or volume
depleted.
203
Dogs|193
Naproxen
Kinetics and metabolism
concentrations usually occur between 0.5 and 3 hours post-ingestion. The
drug is largely bound to serum proteins on absorption and has a low
volume of distribution. Faecal elimination is the primary route of excretion
and the plasma half-life is quoted as 35 hours or more (values in a range 51-
75 hours are quoted in some references).
Clinical effects
The initial clinical effects following acute exposures usually occur within 8
hours. With more prolonged dosing, effects may be delayed for 4 days or
more.
rhoea, melena, abdominal tenderness and anorexia. Mucous membranes
may be pale or congested. Weakness, ataxia, incoordination, lethargy,
collapse, dehydration, depression and drowsiness have been noted.
ity, hyperaesthesia, tremors, twitching or convulsions have been reported
following ingestion of other drugs of the same group and could be
anticipated for naproxen ingestion.
Evidence of gastrointestinal irritation and renal impairment is to be
expected from 12-24 hours after ingestion. Compared to the effects seen
    s  s a 
 polydipsia, dehydration and collapse.
Renal impairment should be anticipated if large doses (greater than
by oliguria, azotemia, and elevated creatinine and BUN. Renal failure can
theoretically occur and may be delayed. Hypotensive or dehydrated
pre-existing renal impairment.
Post-mortem findings
gastric ulceralion or perforation and renal tubule papillary necrosis.
Treatment
Treatment is advocated if a dose of I0 mg/kg body weight has been exceeded
(5 mg/kg body weight in animals that are dehydrated, hypotensive or have pre-
existing renal insufficiency)
If within 3 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage and then
administer adsorbents.
204
194IDogs
Naproxen
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.
0.I mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)  Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.y.;
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
1-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal
Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally
(b) BCK granules&
Dose:
6-I8gorallytwoorthreetimesdaily
If there is severe or persistent vomiting then anti-emetics should be administered.
Ifadsorbents have been administered this may reduce efficacy of orally
administered anti-emetics. In such cases, parenteral administration is preferable.
Either metoclopramide or acepromazine may be used; the latter has a longer
duration of action.
(a)Metoclopramide
Dose:
0.5-1 rng/kg body weight orally, s.c. or
i.m. every 6-8 hours: 1-2 mg/kg body
weight per day by slow i.v. infusion
(b)Acepromazine
Dose:
0.03-0.1 mg/kg body weight. i.v., i.m., or
s.c. (use lower dose if giving i.v.);
I-3 mg/kg body weight orally.
Gastric effects
In oll cases where treatment has been necessary, the animals should be
administered ulcer-healing or ulcer-preventing drugs.
The H2-receptor blocking drugs cimetidine, ranitidine and famotidine reduce
gastric acid and pepsin secretions,reducing the risk of ulcer formation and
allowing ulcers to heal. Omeprazole inhibits the proton pump responsible for
a e su e aand ao si i 'sas ead ar aq und pie s
duration of action (greater than 24 hours) than the three aforementioned H2-
receptor blockers and its use should be reserved for animals who are not
responding to other therapies.
Sucralfate is an ulcer-coating agent that binds to proteins at an ulcer site,
protecting it from further gastric acid and pepsin attack.
Misoprostoi is a synthetic prostaglandin analogue that in effect replaces the
prostaglandins whose production is inhibired by naproxen. Administration shortly
after naproxen ingestion will therefore ensure continued control of gastric acid
secretion and increased mucous production, thereby preventing ulcer formation.
Its use is contraindicated in animals who have already developed ulcers following
NSAID ingestion.
205
Dogs 195
Noproxen
Suggested regimen
The following treatment protocol is recommended for a I4-day period.
Either
Cimetidine
Dose:
5-10 mg/kg body weight i.v., i.m. or
orally every 6--8 hours
Notes
1. lf absorbents have been administered then parenteral routes should be
employed in the initial stages to minimise binding co drug.
2.  If the i.y. route is to be used then administer by slow i.v. infusion over 30
minutes to reduce risk of hypotension and arrhythmias.
3. If metoclopramide has been used or sucralfate is to be used then a period of 2
hours should elapse before cimetidine is administered.
4.
Adverse effect - cimetidine blocks liver microsomal enzymes and therefore
hepatic drug metabolism.
Or
Ranitidine
Dose:
0.5-4 mg/kg body weight i.y., s.c. or
orally every 12 hours.
Notes
I.If adsorbents have been administered then parenteral routes should be
employed in the initial stages to minimise binding to drug
2.
If metoclopramide has been used or sucralfate is to be used then a period of 2
hours should elapse before ranitidine is administered.
Or
Farmotidine
Dose:
500 μg/kg body weight orally every 12
hours.
Nores
I. Where adsorbents have been administered, a period of 2 hours should elapse
before famotidine is administered to minimise binding to drug
q asdea pinous snou  so poad e u pasn aq on si aens  7
famotidine is administered.
Where ingestion was recent and >10 mg/kg body weight of naproxen may have
been ingested, also give:
Misoprostoi
Dose:
1-5g/kgbody weight orally every6-8
hours for 24 hours,
Notes
1. Where adsorbents have been administered, a period of 2 hours should elapse
before misoprostol is administered to minimise binding to drug.
2. If ulceration is already suspected or confirmed, rmisoprostol should not be
given and sucralfate given instead.
206
196 I Dogs
Naproxen
3.Adverse effects - misoprostol may cause vomiting. diarrhoea and abdominal
tenderness and abortions in pregnant animals.
is either suspected or confirmed, give:
Sucralfate
Dose:
in dogs <20 kg body weight 500 rmg/dog
orally every 6-8 hours; in dogs >20kg
body weight I g/dog orally every 6-8
hours.
Notes
1.Where adsorbents have been administered. a period of 2 hours should elapse
before sucralfate is administered to minimise binding to drug.
 2.If cimetidine, ranitidine or famotidine are to be used then sucralfate should be
given 2 hours beforehand as it requires an acid environment for maximum
efficacy.
3. Idealy, sucralfate should be administered on an empty stomach, at least I hour
prior to food.
Jf the animal does not respond to the above therapies then administration of
omeprazole may be considered. The recommended dose is 0.5-l.5 mg/kg body
weight orally every 24 hours.
Othercare
Management is otherwise largely symptomatic and supportive. Ensure adequate
hydration and good urine output. In some cases, dopamine may be necessary to
increase renal perfusion and to minirmise renal insufficiency (dose:I-3 μg/kg body
weight per minute as constant i.v. infusion).
some cases, blood transfusion has been required. lf possible blood gases and
electrolytes should be checked and corrected, especially if there is evidence of
renal dysfunction and/or oliguria. Bicarbonate should be given to correct acidosis if
present. Caution - dopamine precipitates in bicarbonate solutions, so these fluids
should not be administered together. If the animal is hyperkalaemic, then this
should be corrected using dextrose (dose: 20% solution given I ml/kg body weight
i.v.) together with insulin if available (dose: 0.5 units/kg body weight).
Bland diets are recommended.
Enhanced elimination
Naproxen is largely protein-bound and extensively metabolised and therefore
alkaline diuresis or urine alkalinisation, dialysis or haemoperfusion are unlikely to
enhance elimination.
207
Dogs 1 197
Naproxen
Investigative
jo uoneuguos se adasxa tuawazeuew u! inydiay zou aue sjaaal uaxoideu pooig
ingestion. Interpretation of levels is difficuit and case management is better based
on clinical condition of the animal. In any event, such analysis is not routinely
offered by many laboratories.
Blood counts should be instituted for cases with clinical effects.
sa ssase o poa aq  adosses o yeoed 'sase aaaas um
mucosal damage.
Increases in prothrombin time or INR are rarely reported in naproxen overdoses.
References
VPIS (london) past cases up to 97/02428.
Dye TL (1997). Naproxen toxicosis in a puppy. Veterinary and Human Toxicology 39(3)
157-159.
Elliott GA (1988). The propionic acids. Gastrointestinal toxicity in various species
Tuxicofogic Pntlology 16(2),245-250.
Jorrmaf of Veterinary Researcll 42, 1615-1617.
Gilmour MA and Walshaw R (1987). Naproxen induced toxicosis in a dog. fourual of
the American Veferimary Medical Association 19l(11), 1431-1432.
Jones RD ef af. (1992). Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug toxicosis in dogs and
cats: 240 cases. forrmal of he Amwericn Veterinary Medicnl Associafiun 201(3), 475-478.
Kore AM (1990). Toxicology of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Veterinary
Clinics of North Amrrica: Small Aima! Practicr 20, 419429.
Kore AM (1997). Over-the-counter analgesic drug toxicoses in small animals.
Veterinary Medicine 92 (2), 158-165.
Lascelles D and Balmer T (1997). Are all NSAIDs the same? Veterinary Tines 24(4),
34-37.
Roudebush P and Morse GE (1981). Naproxen toxicosis in a dog. fourual of thr
Aerican Veferinary Medical Associntiou: 179(8), 805806.
Smith RE (1982). Naproxen toxicosis.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association 180(2), 107.
Vollmar AM (1993). Clinico-toxicologic aspects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
( u gh-ate z d ai e pe op a ui suae
Zech R et al. (1993). Plasma and tissue kinetics of phenylbutazone and naproxen in
dogs. Archires fternafionale de Plharmacodynamie ct de Therapie 325, 113-128.
208
198Dogs
Handbookof Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2OOO A Campbell and M Chapmaint
Organophosphate insecticides
Type of product
pesticides, as well as in agriculture.
Presentation
Formulations include liquids, sprays and powders, which may be used as
supplied or diluted; liquid preparations often contain organic solvents. In
veterinary medicine, they are found in sheep-dips, and pedicullicide
lotions. Shampoos, aqueous and alcoholic iotions are also used as human
pedicullicides and scabicides. They are also used in flea collars.
Substances included are chlorfenvinphos, chlorpyrifos, demeton-S-
methyl, diazinon, dichlorvos, dimethoate, fenthion, fenitrothion, hepte-
nophos, malathion and pirimiphos-methyl.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992, the VPIS has received an increasing percentage of enquiries
enquiry load. In the early years, enquiries about pirimphos-methyl and
dichlorvos containing agents predominated, although in recent years there
has been a noticeable rise in enquiries concerning chlorpyrifos and
diazinon as products for home use containing these active ingredients
have become available.
Toxicity
 ou r s  s  go a o ssp 
established.
According to the literature:
Chlorfenvinphos
The oral LDso for dogs are quoted in the range greater than 1200-
5000 mg/kg body weight.
Chlorpyrifos
Dogs I 199
Organophosphate insecticides
Dogs fed 3 mg/kg body weight daily for 2 years displayed no clinically
important effects.
Demeton-S-methy!
 No oral LDso for dogs is quoted.
+
ou padojaaap 1eaA 1 1oy Aiep tyaiam Apoq Sylu 9eo'o pay sao
clinically important effects.
Diozinon
●No oral LDso for dogs is quoted.
 Dogs fed 0.02 mg/kg body weight daily for 13 weeks developed no
toxic effects.
Dichlorvos
The oral LDsa for dogs is quoted as 100 mg/kg body weight.
+
100 mg/kg caused respiratory failure 1-3 minutes after ingestion in
1-year-old 20 kg dogs.
Dimethoote
The oral LDsn for dogs is quoted as 400 mg/kg body weight.
Fenthion
●No oral LDso for dogs is quoted.
Fenitrothion
The oral LDso for dogs is quoted as greater than 681 mg/kg body
weight.
Heptenophos
?
The oral LDso for dogs is quoted as greater than 500 mg/kg body
weight
Malathion
 No oral LDso for dogs is quoted.
Pirimphos-methy!
●No oral LDso for dogs is quoted.
seak z 1oy sainsdes augejag u Aep rad sybiam Apoq gy/su 0l pay so
suffered 25% mortality.
 ou pmus seaa z ry Aep iad huiam Apoq syu go pay soa
effects.
210
200 | Dogs
Organophosphate insecticides
In the experience of VPISLn:
Chlorpyrifos
● There are many cases on file of dogs ingesting chlorpyrifos, found
as the active constituent of some commercially available ant baits.
Very few cases develop clinical effects - in those that do, lethargy and
polydipsia seem the predominant effects. No fatal cases are
documented.
Demeton-S-methyl
 There are several records of demeton-S-methyl exposures on the VPIS
files but none with fatal outcomes. In the documented cases, salivation
and lethargy are the common effects.
Diazinon
● Many cases of diazinon exposures are on the VPIS fles, including five
fatal cases. Two of the fatalities had consumed flea collars containing
 Occurred as a result of dermal application of an incorrectly formulated
insecticide product (VPISLn cases 97/65471 and 97/124773). Predomi-
nant clinical effects include tachycardia, salivation, hyperthermia,
ataxia, muscle spasms, convuisions and respiratory distress.
Pirimphos-methy!
VPIS cases. Ant killers appear to be the common agent ingested.
Clinical effects are as anticipated - salivation, depression, tachycardia,
twitching or fitting and respiratory distress. One fatal case is reported;
the cause of death was respiratory arrest (VPISLn case 92/43025)
Mechanism of toxicity
Organophosphates bind to and inhibit acetylcholinesterase, resulting in
accumulation of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine and activation of
nicotinic receptors at skeletal muscle end plates, autonomic ganglia and
within the CNS, and of muscarinic receptors at smooth muscle myoneural
 e s ss s  e aa n sg
both nicotinic and muscarinic effects, although nicotinic receptors rapidly
acetylcholine stimulation of muscle.
Atropine acts as a non-competitive antagonist by blocking the effect of the
muscarinic receptors on target organs. Pralidoxime is a cholinesterase
reactivator, which dephosphorylates acetyl-cholinesterase. It is most
effective when used as an adjunct to atropine therapy, as the latter is
211
Dogs I 201
Organophosphateinsecticides
necessary to reverse the effects of muscarinic over-stimulation. Hence,
animals should be atropinised before receiving it. If administered soon after
acetylcholinesterase inhibition, reactivation of the enzyme will be almost
complete. The treatment becomes less effective with time, as an increasing
proportion of the enzyme becomes irreversibly inhibited or'aged'.
The onset, severity and duration of poisoning are determined by the
degree and route of exposure, the lipid soiubility and rate of metabolism,
whether transformation in the liver is required before the compound is
active and whether it reversibly or irreversibly binds to cholinesterase.
this may act as a source of continued exposure long after the initial contact
Kinetics and metabolism
through the skin and following exposure to high concentrations via the
lungs. Organophosphate insecticides are metabolised in the liver princi-
pally by oxidation, hydrolysis by esterase and by transfer of portions to
glutathione. Oxidation of organophosphate insecticides may result in more
chlorinated organophosphates (e.g, chlorpyrifos) are more lipid soluble and
persist longer in tissue.
Clinical effects
Onset usually occurs within 12-24 hours. Duration may be long (several
          
collars is in a slow-release formulation and effects may be prolonged.
Clinical effects are salivation, ataxia, diarrhoea, constricted pupils, muscle
fasciculation, tremors and twitching, weakness, shaking, hyperaesthesia,
pyrexia, restlessness and urinary incontinenice.
In severe cases,bradycardia,respiratory depression, convulsions and coma
may occur.
Some organophosphate insecticides may cause delayed neurotoxicity. The
organophosphate-induced delayed neuropathy (OPIDN) usually appears
2-3 weeks after the acute phase of poisoning and is thought to be due to
inhibition of a poorly characterised esterase termed neuropathy target
esterase (NTE). There is distal axonopathy, with progressive hind-limb
weakness and ataxia. There may be paralysis, which may also invoive the
fore-limbs. Histological examination is characterised by symmetrical, distal,
primary axonal degeneration in the central and peripheral nervous system,
with secondary myelin degeneration.
202 Dogs
Organophosphate insecticides
Laboratory findings
Laboratory analyses: these are generally non-specific and include increased
 packed cell volume (PCV), raised serum aspartate transaminase (AST) and
Creatinine phosphokinase (CPK). Elevated serum amylase may be noted.
Post-mortem findings
Post-mortem: there are no characteristic lesions observed in organophos-
phate-insecticide poisoned animals. Pulmonary changes may be observed,
including an increased bronchial secretions and pulmonary oedema.
Pancreatitis may be present.
Treatment
If the ingestion has occurred within 2 hours, vomiting may be induced or gastric
lavage performed, and then adsorbents administered.
Emetics:
(a)  Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v, or i.m.:
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a)  Activated charcoal  Dose:
 2 g/kg body weight orally
(b)  BCK granules@
6-l8 g orally two or three times daily
If there is a risk of dermal exposure,the animal should be thoroughly washed with
a mild shampoo or detergent.
should be maintained and blood gases and electrolytes monitored and corrected.
Rehydration may be required.
If sedation is required then diazepam may be given. Dose: 0.5 mg/kg body weight
i.v. repeated every I0 minutes up to three times if needed.
Atropine should be given to reverse cholinergic effects.Dose: 0.2-2 mg/kg body
effect.
Atropine has no effect on nicotinic reteptors and will not counteract skeletal
muscle tremors, weakness or reuromuscular paralysis.
Pralidoxime may be given in severe cases, preferably within the first 24 hours.
Dose: 20 mg/kg i.m. or by slow i.v, injection (at a rate not exceeding 500 mg/
Dogs I 203
Organophosphateinsecticides
minute) two or three times daily. Pralidoxime is given as an adjunct to atropine
therapy. Recovery with pralidoxime will be not be immediate (as with atropine)
but gradual, over a period of 2448 hours. In cases where initiation of therapy with
pralidoxime is delayed, it should be started and continued until the animal is
asymptomatic or unless no improvement in nicotinic signs (e.g. decrease in muscle
Contra-indicated drugs
Phenothiazine sedatives and succinylcholine should be avoided because of the
neuromuscular blocking activity, since they will exacerbate the toxicity of
organophosphate insecticides. Antibiotics such as aminoglycosides (e.g. strepto-
mycin, gentamicin, neorycin, kanamycin), polypeptides (e.g. polymixin A and B)
and clindamycin should also be avoided,since they may have neuromuscular
blocking effects. Benzodiazepines, opioids and barbiturates should be used
cautiously because of their CNS depressant effects.
Laboratory investigations
Cholinesterase activity determination may be considered.It is advised that whole
blood from unaffected animais should also be submitted as a control. Aithcugh not
a uniformly reliable indicator, a decrease of 50% or more of normal activity
generally indicates significant inhibition and in many cases the cholinesterase
activity is less than 25% of normal.
Delayed effects
Treatment of delayed neurotoxicity is symptomatic and supportive. The effects
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 98/16754.
Bodgett D et al. (1996). How do I treat? Organophosphate toxicity. Progrrss i
Veterinary Neurology 7(2),56-57.
Fikes JD (1990). Organophosphate and carbamate insecticides. Veterinary Clinics of
North America: Small Animal Practice 20(2),353-367.
Veterinaria Scandinavica,Suppl.87,347-348.
Mayer S (1990). Organophosphates. In Practice 12(6), 250-251.
Talcott PA and Dorman DC (1997). Pesticide exposures in companion animals.
Veterinary Medicine 92(2), 167-181.
214
204 T Dogs
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Paracetamol
Type ofproduct
Paracetamol is an analgesic drug and is also a non-narcotic, with anti-
pyretic properties similar to those of aspirin but without being anti-
 sn um s  d s po e s i 
recommended dosages.
Presentation
Paracetamolis widely available inthe UK as an‘over-the-counter
medication for human use. It is sold under many brand names in both
tablet and liquid suspension preparations.
The dose of paracetamol in tablet preparations is variable but the most
uaasns pinbn du bos pue su oi are panaunoua suuans uouo
sions are also marketed under a variety of brand names and in varying
and 250 mg/5ml.
Many preparations on the market contain paracetamol in combination with
caffeine.
Note: In the USA and Canada, paracetamol is called acetaminophen
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992, paracetamol has been among the most
common drugs about which it has been consulted. Until 1996 some 1.9% of
enquiries to the London centre involved paracetamol, with this percentage
then rising to 2.5%. More than 80% of these enquiries usually involve
canine cases, which predominantly occur as a result of accidental ingestion
Of packets left accessible to the animals.
Recommended dosage
In the UK, the drug is supplied for use in humans only.
There are no indications for use of this drug in veterinary medicine.
Toxicity
Dogs are susceptible to the effects of paracetamol. In particular, they are
 prone to development of liver damage and methaemoglobinaemia.
Z15
Dogs | 205
Parocetomol
According to the literature:
Dogs can tolerate 45 mg/kg body weight per day orally without
development of clinical effects.
 Ingestion of 100 mg/kg produced no clinical effects.
01 Aixon yo suais asno Aeu hiam Apoq Sya 007 yo sasop peio
develop, including methaemoglobinaemia.
A single oral dose of 500 mg/kg body weight has resulted in a
methaemoglobinaemia greater than 50%.
 500 mg/kg body weight has resulted in fatality.
hours onset).
In the experience of the VPISLn:
 Doses of 330 mg/kg body weight and 555 mg/kg body weight have
?
emesis was induced promptly and antidotal therapy given (VPISLn
cases 85/33780 and 93/112924).
A dog was presented 12 hours after ingestion of 545 mg/kg body
48 hours icterus and brown urine were noted. Acetylcysteine was given
and the animal made a gradual but complete recovery (VPISLn case 93/
26239).
?
aey nu3iam Apoq 3yau 0ee pue tygiam Apoq 3y3 s87 yo saso
been associated with fatality. In both these cases the dogs were
presented late. The first had haemorrhagic diarrhoea, dehydration and
collapse and died despite supportive care and N-acetylcysteine
administration (VPISLn case 95/22701). The other had vomiting, ataxia,
tachycardia, tachypnoea, and haematuria. The animal required
euthanasia (VPISLn case 95/72610).
Mechanism of toxicity
 In al species, paracetamol is metabolised in the liver by glucuronidation,
sulphation and oxidation. The glucuronide and sulphate conjugates are
non-toxic and are excreted in bile and urine. In most species, the oxidation
pathway is a very minor one and glucuronidation is the major pathway.
Thisis true of the dogwhere glucuronidation metabolism occurs for75% of
an ingested dose. In dogs between 10 and 20% of an ingested dose will be
metabolised by sulphation.
With increasing paracetamol dosing, both the sulphation and giucuronida-
tion pathways become saturated as they are capacity limited processes. This
results in more paracetamol being metabolised by oxidation.
At low paracetamoldoses some 3-5%of the drug undergoes oxidation
This pathway, mediated by cytochrome Paso, involves N-hydroxylation,
followed by spontaneous formation of N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine, a
highly reactive metabolite. Normally this is conjugated with reduced
206  Dogs
Paracetomol
glutathione, then further metabolised to cysteine and mercaptopuric acid
derivatives, which are non-toxic and which are excreted in urine. At low
dosings this can be an effective and efficient detoxification pathway.
At higher paracetarmol doses, when the glucuronidation and sulphation
a as saan pue poon u sial loiard pue paees ar sanno
liver and subsequently in red blood cells as the detoxification pathway is
used.As glutathione becomes depleted the reactive N-acetyl-p-benzoqui-
molecules and proteins with subsequent cellular necrosis.
At higher doses paracetamol also inhibits glutathione synthesis, further
Alternative metabolic pathways also allow accumulation of oxidising
metabolites that may induce methaemoglobin formation, Heinz body
formation and denaturation of erythrocyte membranes. Heinz bodies are
denatured chains of haemoglobin with oxidised sulphydryl groups. They
precipitate and migrate towards cell membranes where, perhaps due to
alteration of membrane phospholipids, they render cells fragile. Haemo-
lysis and restricted passage of erythrocytes through the microcirculation
and spleen may result. Canine haemoglobin has four sulphydryl groups
per molecule and is therefore susceptible to denaturation. Methaemo-
methaemoglobinaemia is directly related to Heinz body formation.
In the presence of glutathione, methaemoglobin will be reduced to
haemogiobin. However, when paracetamol levels are high, glutathione
will be depleted and its synthesis reduced and hence insufficient quantities
will be availabie for this reduction. Methaemoglobin accumulation occurs
 s  o ss   o  s 
globinaemia further pushes the oxidation dissociation curve to the left,
impairing unloading of oxygen further exacerbating the anoxia. Methaemo-
globinaemia normally only occurs when oxidative stress overwhelms
erythrocyte capacity.
Hence glutathione availabity is crucial in prevention of methaemoglobin
and Heinz body formation.It can be seen that increased metabolism of
paracetamol via the oxidative pathway is causative of the clinical picture
one of methaemoglobinaemia, cyanosis, anaemia and jaundice. Death
usually occurs from progressive methaemoglobinaemia or from severe
hepatic necrosis.
Kinetics and metabolism
Paracetamol is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract under
normal conditions. Clinical effects are_normally apparent within 4 hours.
Z17
Dogs | 207
Parocetomol
The various metabolic pathways are discussed in the above section on
mechanism of toxicity. As the elimination pathways are capacity limited,
the plasma half-life is dependent on dose. Experimentally determined half-
lives have been recorded at 1.2 hours after paracetamol doses of 200 mg/kg
body weight and 3.5 hours after 500 mg/kg body weight.
 panpod sop ui taiam Apoq Sysu mz jo Susop joeaeied y
         
produced a 51.9% level.
Clinical effects
Clinical effects usually occur within 4-12 hours.
Early effects
Within 1-4 hours there may be progressive cyanosis, tachycardia,
tachypnoea and dyspnoea, all of which are dependent on the degree of
methaemoglobinaemia. Depression, vomiting, diarrhoea, anorexia, facial
and paw cedema, pale mucous membranes, pruritus and hypothermia may
also be evident. Haematuria, anaemia, and evidence of haemolysis may be
present.
Less common effects include initial hyperactivity, depression, sedation,
salivation, lacrimation, abdominal tenderness, ataxia and collapse.
Loter effects
From 2-7 days there may be haemoglobinuria, intravascular haemolysis,
icterus and other evidence of liver damage (e.g. raised alanine amino-
transferase and bilirubin). Coma, convulsions and pulmonary oedema are
od sp g pe   s  ay  o 
ingestion.
Laboratory diagnosis
There may be raised alanine aminotransferase, aspartate transaminase,
alkaline phosphatase, total and direct bilirubin, and elevation of other liver
enzymes indicative of icterus. Decreased packed cell volume, methaemo-
globinaemia (chocolate blood colour of blood samples) and Heinz body
formation may be evident. Haemoglobinuria, proteinuria, and bilirubinuria
(dark brown urine colour) have all been reported. A metabolic acidosis with
respiratory compensation has been reported.
Note: Biochemical abnormalities may take up to 2 weeks to return to
normai.
218
208Dogs
Parocetomo!
Post-mortem findings
s    si   r 
mononuclear cell infiltrates, bile duct proliferation, biliary stasis and
presence of vacuolated hepatocytes.
Pulmonary congestion and oedema are sometimes noted. Haemorrhagic
congestion, oedema and petechiae renal cortex and meduila have been
reported.
Unclotted plum/chocolate coloured blood, indicative of methaemoglobi-
naemia, will be present.
Treatment
Cases that present late are more at risk from the serious adverse/toxic effects.
Treatment is recommended if more than I50 mg/kg body weight has been
exceeded.
If within 2 hours of ingestion induce, vomiting or perform gastric lavage, and then
administer adsorbents.
Emetics:
(a)Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.:
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.,
0.5-Img/kg body weight i.m. or 5.c.
(c)  Ipecacuanha
Dose:
|-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a)Activated charcoal Dose:
2 g/kg body weight. orally
(b) BCK granules?
Dose:
6-18 g orally.
Note
Adsorbents should not be given where antidotes are to be administered orally
because it may reduce their efficacy.
If the animal is cyanosed then oxygen shoula be administered. In addition, there
are several antidotal therapies that may be employed.
Antidotal therapy
Probably the most widely used antidote in paracetamol poisoning is N-
acetylcysteine because it can significantly reduce the toxicity of the drug by a
variety of mechanisms.First,it is a precursor of glutathione. On administration it is
hydrolysed to form L-cysteine, which provides substrate for glutathione synthesis
in red blood cells and the liver.Glutathione cannot be given directly,as it is not
219
Dogs I 209
Poracetomol
readily taken up by cells. Second, it acts directly on the reactive metabolite
p-benzoquinoneimine, to form an acetylcysteine conjugate that can be excreted,
although this reaction is slow. Third, it is oxidised in the liver to forrm sulphate,
thereby increasing the capacity of the sulphation pathway.
Methionine is a precursor for gjutathione and sulphate and has some use.It rmay be
given where N-acetylcysteine is unavailable or used in conjunction with N-
acetylcysteine therapy.
Ascorbic acid can be given to reduce methaemoglobin to haemoglobin as it is a
good non-enzymatic reductant, although the reaction does occur slowly. There is
before it binds to proteins, possibly reducing it back to paracetamol. This certainly
happens in vitro, though there is debate as to whether it happens in vivo. It may be
given in combination with the other antidotes.
Administration of sodium sulphate increases sulphate for conjugation, thereby
increasing capacity of the sulphation route of metabolism.It may be used in
combination with the other antidotes.
In cases of severe methaemoglobinaemia, methylene blue may be used. This drug
increases reduction of methaemoglobin. It is reduced to leucomethylene blue by
reduces the oxidised haem iron to its normal state. However, it should be used
with caution as high doses can themselves cause methaemoglobinaermia or
haemolytic anaemia.
Regimens for antidotes:
(a) N-acetylcysteine
Dose:
Either I40 mg/kg body weight orally.
wait 6 hours, then 70 mg/kg body weight
orally every 6-8 hours for 36 hours or
more, dependent on the clinical condi-
tion of the animal (some sources state it
can be given for up to 72 hours)
or 280 mg/kg body weight by slow i.y.
injection over 6 hours, then 70 mg/kg
body weighe orally every 6-8 hours for
36 hours or more dependent on the
clinicalcondition of the animal(some
sources state it can be given for up to
72 hours).
Note
The second method should be employed if adsorbents have previously been given.
(b)  Methionine
Dose:
70 mg/kg body weight orally every 6-8
hours, up to 24 hours.
220
210 T Dogs
Paracetomol
Note
 a  d     d   s
administration is started.
(c)Ascorbic acid
Dose:
30 mg/kg body weight i.v. every 6-8
hours until no cyanosis is present.
(d) Sodium sulphate
Dose:
1.6% solution; 50 mg/kg body weight i.v.
every 4 hours, up to 24 hours.
(e) Methylene blue
Dose:
I-5 mg/kg body weight by slow intran
venous injection.
Other care
Management is otherwise syrnptormatic and supportive, with particular care being
taken to ensure adequate hydration and maintenance of body temperature. Use of
heat pads or other warming methods have been required in some cases.
Urea, electrolytes and blood gases should be checked if possible and corrected
where necessary. The animal shouid also be monitored for evidence of liver
darmage, anaemia and haemolysis. lIf there is evidence of severe haemolysis,
significant decrease in packed cell volume, or severe anaemia then whole blood
transfusions may be required.
It is recommended that blood counts are monitored for at least I week post-
therapy.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/65219.
Harvey JW et al. {1986). Hematologic abnormalities associated with chronic
acetaminophen administration in a dog. Journal of the Americau Veterinary Medical
Association 189(10), 1334-1335.
Hjelle J and Grauer GF (1986). Acetaminophen-induced toxicosis in dogs and cats.
Journal of the American Veterinary MedicalAssociation 188(7),742-746.
Kolf-Clauw M and Keck G (1994). Paracetamol poisoning in dogs and cats. Enropcan
JotrnaiofCompanionAnimnlPractice 4,85-92
Kore AM (1997). Over-the-counter analgesic drug toxicoses in small animals.
Veferinary Medicine 92(2), 158-165.
Marcella KL (1983). Acetaminophen poisoning in cats and man. Journal of the Aerican
Veteriunry Medicnl Associatiom 183(8), 836.
Mayer S (1991). Poison - paracetamol. In Practice 13(1), 37.
Ortega L ct al. (1985). Acetaminophen-induced fulminant hepatic failure in dogs.
Hepatology 5(4), 673-676.
nophen toxicity. Canadian Veterinary.Jqurnal 36, 515-517.
ZZ工
Dogs |211
Poracetomo!
Thursby-Pelham C (1996). Peculiar drug poisonings in pets. In Practice 18(10), 478-
487.
Villar D, Buck WB and Gonzalez JM (1998). Ibuprofen, aspirin and acetaminophen
toxicosis and treatment in dogs and cats. Veterinary and Human Toxicology 40(3),
156-161.
222
212Dogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogsand cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  200O A Campbell and M Chapmain
Paraquat
Type of product
Paraquat is a non-selective, foliage-applied contact herbicide first marketed
in 1962. Since 1972, the UK Poisons Act has restricted the purchase of
concentrates containing >5% paraquat to farmers and horticulturalists
only.
Presentation
Paraquat is available as an aqueous concentrate and also in granular
formulations; all require dilution with or dissolving in water before use.
 pib e u pdns aau are asn eue on sino
(typically 20% paraquat), although there are a few granular formulations
available. In the UK, paraquat is readily available for domestic use in a
     m   s m g r
formulations are <5% w/w paraquat ion, generally 2.5% w/w. The
should not exceed 0.5% (5 g/L). Some products may also contain other
herbicides.
A stenching agent (1975) and an emetic (1977) were added to liquid
paraquat products to reduce the risk of accidental poisoning. The emetic (a
potent centrally-acting triazolo-pyrimidine code-named PP796) is  in a
concentration that would cause vomiting if the minimum potential lethal
dose of paraquat formulation for humans had been ingested.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
The VPIS London centre receives many enquiries concerning paraquat
each year, representing approximately 1.2% of the annual enquiry number.
ebed snoqugiau aq steuue jo suosiod sno on anp auanan
is one of the agents that most frequently results in fatalities in the
       r     
involving paraquat referred have a fatal outcome.
Not all cases result from intentional poisoning. Some occur from ingestion
of recently treated plant material or of the neat preparations by animals. In
plant, paraquat acts by alteration of enzyme systems and disruption of
photosynthesis. After application the plant begins to dry and the leaves
 n n si sd  pe d a s i  do
leaves drop and this presents a hazard to animals eating large quantities of
ZZ3
Dogs 213
Poraquot
recently sprayed vegetation. Paraquat is rapidly inactivated by and strongly
binds to soil.
Toxicity
paraquat exposure is not known and paraquat is assumed to be the agent
According to the literature:
●
 There are reports of poisoning in dogs who have eaten carcasses baited
with paraquat to kil foxes. In one reported case a dog ate the vomit of
The LDso in dogs is 25-50 mg/kg body weight.
of 85 ppm in food over 27 months or 170 ppm for 2 months resulted in
respiratory failure and death.
● The expected concentration in grass from the recommended applica-
tion rate is 75-150 ppm.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
● About 25% of cases reported to VPISLn are cases of malicious poisoning
and about 40% are due to ingestion of recently treated vegetation.
 Over 70% of cases involving products for professional use result in
fatality.
Mechanism of toxicity
Paraquat was originally used as a redox indicator (known as methyl
viologen) and it is this ability to continually undergo redox cycling that
accounts for its toxicity. The exact mechanisms of toxicity are not fully
free radical formation. Paraquat undergoes a NADPH-dependent reduction
to form the free radical. This free radical reacts with molecular oxygen to
o op m pue n a apadns e and pe u r o
 a    a   e  
radicals then disrupt cell function and structure, damaging them by lipid
peroxidation, which may cause cell death. Cellular NADPH becomes
depleted, partly from continual redox cycling of paraquat and also from its
peroxide, which is formed in the presence of superoxide dismutase.
In massive overdose paraquat can cause death within hours of ingestion
214|Dogs
Paraquat
toxicity due to active, energy-dependent uptake by alveolar type I and II
cells; paraquat seems to produce an acute damaging phase in the lung
followed by a reparative phase in which extensive fibrosis occurs.
Kinetics and metabolism
Paraquat is rapidlly but poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and
concentrates in the lungs. Metabolism is minimal (except for the redox
reactions described above) and is primarily excreted unchanged in the
stu hae sp g on dn roy aun u paaap aq a pnbee 'an
and sometimes for up to 7 days.
Clinical effects
     o      s 
continue until death 10-21 days post-exposure. Recovery in animals that
survive may be prolonged (7 weeks of intensive care in one case).
Note: Systemic toxicity may occur following dermal exposure, particularly
with the concentrated formulations.
The initial clinical effects include vomiting, diarrhoea, salivation,
haematemesis, abdominal tenderness, lethargy, anorexia, inappetence,
ulceration of mouth and tongue, dullness, ataxia, pyrexia, polydipsia and
dehydration.
In severe cases, the animals may develop tachypnoea, sometimes with mild
bradycardia. This progresses to severe dyspnoea, which is usually the most
dominant feature and may be accompanied by tachycardia and cyanosis
On radiography of the chest, there is usually a variety of infiltrative
changes, which are often mild compared with the degree of respiratory
distress. Pneumomediastinum occurs in about 25% of cases. Convulsions
and renal failure may also occur.
Biochemistry values may indicate dehydration, a neurophilic and
monocytic leucocytosis, uraemia and hypokalaemia.
Post-mortem findings
  sn   s    
and alveoli dilated with bilious emphysematous areas. Commonly, there is
necrosis of bronchioles and alveolar epithelium with the greatest effects
noticeable in type I pneumocytes.
adrenal necrosis, and duodenal cpngestion. The spleen may be enlarged.
ZZ5
Dogs |215
Poraquat
Treatment
Emptying the stomach is not worthwhile due to rapid absorption. Adsorbents
should be given as soon as possible, though these are probably only of benefit up
to 6 hours post-ingestion.
Adsorbents:
(a)Activated charcoalDose:
(b) BCK granules*Dose:
6--I8 g orally two or three times daily.
It is essentiai to thoroughly wash any anirmal that may have had paraquat on the
skin using soap and water.
Anti-emetics may be required.
(a)  Metoclopramide
Dose:
0.5-I mg/kg body weight orally, s.c. or
i.m. every 6-8 hours: I-2 mg/kg body
weight per day by slow i.v. infusion
(b) Acepromazine
Dose:
0.03-0.1 mg/kg body weight i.v., i.m., or
s.c. (use lower dose if giving i.v.):
I-3 mg/kg body weight orally.
Diazepam may be given if there is any convulsant activity (dose: 0.5 mg/kg body
weight i.v. repeated every I0 minutes up to three times if needed).
Care should also be taken to maintain fluid balance and monitor renal and
an pinous uasixo jo toenisiuwpe neun pansasns uaaq sey il 'uonouny Hoenidsau
avoided but the avidity of paraquat for oxygen is such that it is very unlikely to
make any difference. There is no specific antidote. Numerous regimens of various
drugs have been tried in human cases of paraquat poisoning and all have failed to
alter the outcome. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
Investigative
The paraquat urine spot test may be useful in the early stages of a poisoning to
confirm exposure. It is also possible to measure paraquat concentrations in blood.
solution.Add I mi of this toI ml of urine.A blue-green colour indicates a positive
result. It is usually only positive within the first 48 hours after exposure (depending
on the amount ingested) but has been detected up to 7 days later in some cases.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/76203.
Barton M and Gaskell CJ (1982). Poisoning after illegal use of paraquat bait. Veteriuary
Record 110, 565.
Darke PGG et al. (1977). Acute respiratory distress in the dog associated with
paraquat poisoning. Veterinary Record 100, 275-277.
Darke P (1992). Paraquat. In Practice 147)_66.
ZZ6
216 1 Dogs
Paraquat
     s     a  
canine model of paraquat poisoning. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics 254(2), 732-740.
Longstaffe JA et al.(1981). Paraquat poisoning in dogs and cats - differences between
accidental and malicious poisoning. Journal of Small Animal Practice 2, 153-156.
O'Sullivan SP (1989). Paraquat poisoning in the dog. Journal of Small Animal Practice
30,361-364.
Quick MP et al. (1990). Acute and sub-acute paraquat poisoning in a pack of
foxhounds. Journal of the Forensic Science Society 30(6), 37-376.
227
Dogs 217
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapmain
Phenolphthalein
Type of product
 Phenolphthalein is a laxative drug.
Presentation
Many preparations are available for human use. Some contain phenol-
phthalein in combination with sennosides and bisacodyl. Tablets are of
varying strengths. Some contain up to 130 mg phenolphthalein. Some
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992, the VPIS London centre has received up to 10 enquiries per year
 about accidental ingestions of phenolphthalein by dogs. Despite ingestion
of substantial quantities in some cases, all remained asymptomatic, except
one dog, who was described as lethargic.
Recommended dosage
Phenolphthalein is not recommended for use in dogs.
Toxicity
only occurs in primates, pigs and some birds.
Clinical effects
None are anticipated.
Treatment
No treatrment is necessary. even for very substantial ingestions. Note: Some
preparations are presented as 'chocolate tablets'. This is a flavouring only. and
therefore there is no risk of effects from theobromine alkaloids.
Reference
VPIS (London) past cases up to 98/32076.
228
218Dogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2O0O A Campbell and M Chapman
Phenoxy acid herbicides
Type of product
Phenoxy derivative herbicides are selective to broad-leaved plants, and
thus are often used as lawn weed killers.
Substances include:
2,4-D
(2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid)
2,4,5-T
(2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid)
2,4-DB
(4(2,4-dichllorophenoxy) butyric acid)
MCPA
(4-chloro-o-tolyloxy acetic acid)
MCPB
(2-(2-methyl-4-chlorophenoxy) butyric acid)
MCPP
(mecoprop: 2,2-chloro-o-tolyloxy propionic acid)
Dicamba
Dichlorprop.
Presentation
There are a number of products that contain phenoxy acid herbicides.
Some are presented as 'feed and weed' preparations. Products may be in
granular or liquid form. These chemicals are not very soluble in water and
solvents may be present in liquid formulations.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992, the London centre has received 45-60
enquiries about phenoxy acid herbicides each year. Enquiries about these
pesticides represent about 2.5% of the total cases reported each year.Most
of these enquiries involve dogs and the herbicides most frequently
implicated in these cases are 24-D, mecoprop and dicamba.
Toxicity
These compounds do not differ greatly in their toxicity; the LDso for most
to be more sensitive to phenoxy acid herbicides than other mammals.
According to the literature:
●The LDso 0f 2,4-D in dogs is 100 mg/kg body weight.
 Multiple doses of 20 mg/kg of 2,4-D for approximately 3 weeks 01
25 mg/kg for 6 days were lethal in dogs.
+
 250 ppm of dicamba fed to dogs caused mild hepatic jaundice and no
Dogs I 219
Phenoxyacidherbicides
 2560 ppm of MCPA or MCPP acutely fed to dogs caused anaemia and
decreased weight gains.
 640 ppm of MCPA or MCPP chronicaily fed to dogs caused decreased
weight gains.
In the experience of VPISLn:
Several fatal cases have been reported. In one case, the dog ingested grass
sprayed with 2,4-D, dicamba and ioxynil. The dog became unwell over 3
days with tachycardia, bradypnoea, haematemesis, bloody diarrhoea and
depression. The dog improved initially but died 18 hours after admission
(VPISLn case 91/26244). In a second case, the dog ate 2,4-D, mecoprop and
bromadiolone (an anticoagulant rodenticide). The clinical effects developed
over 1-2 weeks and were ataxia, weakness, jaundice, anaemia and pyrexia
(VPISLn case 93/50139). Another dog of 10 kg body weight died 5 days after
ingestion of 2,4-D. Clinical effects included collapse anid convulsions
(VPISLn case 95/153208).
Mechanism oftoxicity
The mode of action of poisoning of phenoxy acid herbicides is not
uncouple oxidative phosphorylation. This results in the energy that would
be stored as ATP being dissipated as heat. In dogs, phenoxy acid
derivatives may also directly affect muscle membranes. They are also
known to depress ribonuclease synthesis and to increase the number of
hepatic peroxisomes, but the significance of these effects to the toxicity of
hormones; they have no hormonal action in animals.
Kinetics andmetabolism
Phenoxy acid derivatives are readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal
tract. They are protein-bound and rapidly distributed to the liver, kidneys
and brain. There is some metabolism of these compounds; esters are
metabolised by hydrolysis and small amounts may be conjungated to
glycine or taurine. The majority is excreted unchanged in the urine and
   a     
enhanced if the urine is alkaline, because these compounds are acidic.
Clinical effects
Commonly observed effects include inappetence, anorexia, ataxia, saliva-
tion, vomiting, haematemesis, abdominal pain and diarrhoea, which may
and weakness, particularly of hind legs, have also been reported. Some
dogs have collapsed. Animals may be bradycardic or tachycardic, and have
220 Dogs
Phenoxy ocidherbicides
In severe cases, opisthotonus, coma and convulsions may occur.
dehydrogenase and creatinine kinase concentrations consistent with liver,
kidney and muscle damage.
Post-mortem findings
Post-mortem studies have revealed necrotic lesions and ulcers of the oral
mucosa, signs of irritation of the gastrointestinal tract and sometimes of the
snall intestine, liver necrosis and degeneration of renal tubules
Treatment
Ermesis is best avoided because of the risk of aspiration of the volatile solvents
present in some preparations.
Adsorbents may be given.
(a)  Activated charcoal   Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally
(b)  BCK granules* Dose:
6-I8 g orally two or three times daily.
Any animal with dermal exposure should be thoroughly washed with detergent
(these compourds are poorly soluble in water).
Treatment is symptomatic and supportive as there is no specific antidote. Avoid oil
Anti-emetics
(a)Metoclopramide
Dose:
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight orally, s.c. or
i.m. every 68 hours; 1-2 mg/kg body
weight per day by slow i.v. infusion
(b) Acepromazine
Dose:
0.03-0.1 mg/kg body weight i.v., i.m., or
5.c. (use lower dose if giving i.v.):
I3 mg/kg bady weight orally.
Diazepam may be given if there is any convulsant activity. Dose: 0.5 mg/kg body
weight i.v. repeated every I0 minutes up to three times if needed.
Blood transfusions may be necessary in animals with severe anaemia.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) cases up to 97/167334.
Cooper BS (1987). Animal toxicoses associated with herbicides and fertilisers. In
Veterinary Clinical Toxicology. Proceedings No. 103, Post-graduate Committee in
Veterinary Science, University of Sydney. pp. 189-203.
231
Dogs  221
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2OO0 A Campbell and M Chapman
Plastic explosive compounds
Type of product
Various different chemical compounds are used as plastic explosives.
Examples include:
●Semtex
RDX (Royal Defence Explosive - major ingredient cyclonite)
in warfare since World War II.
 Composition PE-4 (major ingredients cyclonite, paraffin and a bonding
Composition C-4 (major ingredient is cyclonite 91%, mixed with
polyisobutylene 2.1%, motor oil 1.6%, and di-(2-ethyl-hexyl) sebacate
5.3%) - this was the explosive most commonly used in the Vietnam
conflict.
Presentation
Their general characteristics are that they are malleable solids, usually burn
under normal conditions without exploding, and are relatively insensitive
to friction or impact and are therefore easily transported without undue
precaution being merited.
They require a blasting cap to detonate.
Cyclonite is described as being a colourless crystal that is very insoluble in
water and most body fluids.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992, a few enquiries have been received
about ingestion of plastic explosive compounds by dogs. The animals that
have been exposed to these agents are usually being trained for military or
police purposes and have accidentally ingested them during routine
training. No cases reported to the VPIS have resulted in fatality, although
the clinical effects have been classified as serious or severe. VPIS cases hhave
involved PE-4, C-4 and Semtex.
Toxicity
According to the literature:
bred female dog an oral dose?9f 3.85 mg/kg body weight caused n0
Z3Z
222Dogs
Plastic explosive compounds
apparent effects within 2.5 hours. A further dose was given, bringing
the total dose to 33.85 mg/kg body weight, with eventual fatality. The
authors estimated an effective fatal dosing of 14 mg/kg body weight
(see case report below).
In the experience ofVPISLn
● A Retriever ingested C-4 on a training exercise. The animal quickly
developed lethargy, ataxia, trembling, and fitting and aiso haematuria.
animal recovered in 48 hours (VPISLn case 91/48600).
the animal was confused, hyperaesthesic, vomiting and fitting. With
diazepam and supportive care the animal recovered (VPISLn case 91/
90365)
Kinetics and metabolism
2 hours. However, cyclonite is reportedly insoluble in most body fluids.
Case report
 Following a case involving PE-4 in a dog where the animal survived, De
Cramer and Short (1992) experimentally poisoned a 27-month-old, 26 kg.
cross-bred bitch with 100 mg of PE-4 (a dose of 3.85 mg/kg body weight)
with no effect within 2.5 hours. They then administered anothier 780 mg
(total dose 33.85 mg/kg body weight). After 5 hours (7.5 hours after initial
dosing) the animal developed severe congestion of mucous membranes,
pyrexia, tachycardia, hyperventilation, hyperaesthesia, light tremors and
thenepileptiform convulsions.At 8hours after theinitial dosing the animal
displayed generalised seizures lasting 3-5 minutes, separated by periods of
about 10-25 minutes where the animal would gradually become more
hypersensitive and congested before fitting and then remaining caim for a
short while before the ‘cycle' started again. These periods became pro-
         
became semi-comatose, then comatose, dyspnoeic and finally died.
Post-mortem revealed generalised congestion, hepatomegaly, pulmonary
congestion of both liver and kidneys and hydropic degeneration of the
kidneys. Of the 880 mg administered 512 mg was found in the stomach
content. Assuming non-selective absorption of cyclonite from the PE-4
Imixture, the authors calculated an effective dosing of approximately 14 mg/kg
of PE-4 resulted in fatality - an armount described by the authors as 'the
volume of two peas'. Since litle data are available on the absorption
kinetics and bicavailability of cyclonite from PE-4, this experiment indicates
a fatal dosing in the range 1434,mg/kg body weight.
Dogs 223
Plastic explosive compounds
Clinical effects
Bop e auo guaui as auo u - lsuo pidei Aiaa e aaey Kw Aau
developed fitting, vomiting. hyperaesthesia and apparent confusion within
1 hour of ingestion.
Clinical effects commonly reported include ataxia and lethargy in the initial
stages, excessive salivation and respiratory distress, congestion of mucous
membranes, vomiting, hyperventilation, excitability, tremors, hyperaesthe-
sia, and severe and prolonged epileptiform convulsions that may have a
duration of 6 hours or more. Fits may have a duration of 3 minutes or more
a yrm Sunp sanu oii jo sponad Aq paeas aq Ae pue
animal may be initially calm and then gradually become more hyper-
aesthesic and tremorous until fitting recommences. Untreated cases may
continue to fit until 18 hours post-ingestion.
Haematuria has been reported in one VPISLn case (91/48600)
Ingestion might also cause urinary incontinence, hepatic and renal
impairment characterised by oliguria, haematuria, proteinuria, increased
blood urea nitrogen, raised aminotransferase and serum bilirubin levels.
Post-mortem findings
Generalised congestion, hepatomegaly, pulmonary oedema, numerous
B a   s s   s 
and kidneys and hydropic degeneration of the kidneys can be displayed at
post-mortem.
Treatment
Dogs should be observed for a minimum of 4 hours following ingestion of any
quantity.
The use of emetics is contra-indicated owing to the potential for fitting to occur.
If the animals develop ciinical effects then it is advisable to anaesthetise or sedate
the dog to control the convulsant activity (see later) and to allow a gastric lavage
to be performed if considered appropriate, although this is probably only
worthwhile within 2 hours of ingestion. Adsorbents may be adrministered at this
stagealso.
Adsorbents:
(a)Activated charcoalDose:
(b)BCK granules
Dose:
6-l8 g orally two or three times daily.
If convulsions occur or the animal becomes markedly hyperaesthesic then there
are two preferred ways of managing cases.
I.Keep the dogs sedated but still slightly hyperaesthesic and in control of their
vital reflexes until the clinical efects are seen to resolve and then allow the
234
224Dogs
Plasticexplosive compounds
animal to slowly recover. Continued sedation may be necessary for over 6
hours in some cases.
2. Alternatively, cases that present with severe symptomatology could be placed
under deep anaesthesia for 6-8 hours, then the dogs allowed to come round,
with resumption of anaesthesia if clinical effects reappear as the animal
recovers. During this time, body fluids need to be maintained by alternating
lactated Ringers and dextrose saline drips.
Drugs best suited for these purposes are:
(a) Diazepam
(b)Pentobarbitone
Doses recommended:
(a) Diazepam
doses followed by 2-5 mg/hour in 5% glucose by slow
i.v. infusion
(b)  Pentobarbitone
25-30 mg/kg body weight by slow intravenous
infusion.
Note: Acepromazine may aiso be considered, although it is thought to be less safe
as it lowers the threshold for convulsions and seizure activity and is therefore not
use is best avoided in these cases.
To prevent development of pulmonary oedema it is advisable to turn the dog
every couple of hours while under the anaesthetic/sedative.
Lactated Ringer's solution has been recommended for animals that are acidotic
and/or dehydrated. Frusemide has been given to enhance renal clearance in some
cases. Both vitamins and antibiotics have been given in past cases.
body weight given s.c.
References ond further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 98/10008.
Berry AP, Arbuckle JBR and Nicol J (1983). Cyclonite poisoning in a dog. Veterinary
Record 113,449.
De Cramer KGM and Short RP (1992). Plastic explosive poisoning in dogs. fournal of
the South African Vetcrinary Association 63(1), 30-31.
Croft PG (1983). Cyclonite poisoning in a dog. Veterinary Record 113, 477.
Harrell-Bruder B and Hutchirs KL (1995). Seizures caused by ingestion of
composition C-4.Annals of Emergency Medicine 26,746-748.
Littlewood JD (1983). Cyclonite poisoring in a dog. Veterimary Record 113, 503.
Stone MAJ et al. (1969). Toxic effects following ingestion of C-4 plastic explosive.
Archives of Internal Medicine 124, 726-730.
235
Dogs | 225
Handbookof Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht @ 2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Pyracantha
The plant
The common name for Pyracantha is firethorn and the plant belongs to the
Rosaceae family.
This common evergreen shrub grows up to 3 m high, and has thorny
branches and small, oval-shaped, glossy dark-green leaves with serrated
edges. The plant flowers from May to September with small clusters of
white/cream flowers. The bright orange/red ovoid shaped fruits ripen from
August to March and contain tiny brown seeds.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS, the centre in London has received a small
enquiries have involved dogs. A few dogs have displayed mild clinical
effects but most have remained asymptomatic. One fatal case in an adult
German Shepherd dog was attributed to ingestion of a large part of a
Pyracantha bush. However, no post-mortem study was performed, and
therefore Pyracantha poisoning could not be confirmed as the cause of
death (VPISLn case 96/164507)
Toxicity
The plant is considered of low toxicity.
Mechanism of toxicity
Pyracantha contains cyanogenic glycosides. These are not present in high
enough concentrations to cause more than mild gastrointestinal effects,
Clinical effects
Clinical effects are rare. Ingestion of large numbers of berries or quantities
of plant material might result in vomiting, diarrhoea, salivation and rarely
abdominal tenderness.
Treatment
ingested vomiting usually occurs spontaneously. Use of metoclopramide may be
236
226 Dogs
Pyracantha
orally, s.c. or i.m. every 6-8 hours: 1-2 mg/kg body weight per day by slow i.v.
infusion.
Reference
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/102544
237
Dogs227
Handbookof Poisoningin dogs andcats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  20O0 A Campbell and M Chapman1
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids
Type of product
Pyrethrins (jasmolin I and Il, cinerin I and II, pyrethrin I and II) are
naturally occurring esters of chrysanthemic acid and pyrethric acid, which
are extracted from the floweis of Chrysanthemum cinerariaefolium.
Pyrethroids (allethrin, alphacypermethrin, bioresmethrin, cypermethrin,
deltamethrin, fenvalerate, permethrin, phenothrin, resmethrin, tetra-
methrin) are synthetic pyrethrins.
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids are used as insecticides for the treatment of
horses, goats and humans.
Presentation
Pyrethroids and pyrethrins are used in dogs for the control of fleas and lice.
Preparations are available as dusting powders, shampoos and sprays.
ou suoedaid penoe on pasodxa aq oe Aeu soa caon
designed for veterinary use; some of these may contain other constituents,
including other insecticides and solvents. Piperonyl butoxide is often
added to insecticidal preparations as a synergist (it delays the metabolism
of the insecticide and increases the toxicity).
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992, the London centre of the VPlS has received between 10 and 50
se u suad pe sod usan e aad sanna
result of ingestion of products or through over-zealous application of
of individual susceptibility.
Toxicity may arise from self-grooming of treated hair. Occasionally, toxicity
may arise from animals being in close association with or grooming treated
animals.
Recommended dosage
This varies with the individual preparation.
Toxicity
228  Dogs
Pyrethrinsondpyrethroids
A 9-week-old Collie cross was treated dermally with a powder
insecticide containing pyrethrins and piperonyl butoxide. Within 5
abdominal tenderness. The animal later developed acute respiratory
distress and pulmonary oedema. Despite aggressive oxygen therapy
and supportive care the animal died 13 hours post-exposure (VPISLn
case 91/42116).
●A 2-month-old Yorkshire Terrier was treated with a powder insecticide
containing perrmethrin. Within 2 hours the puppy was shaking,
salivating, and then convulsing. The animal was hospitalised but
later collapsed and died (VPISLn case 96/133486).
Mechanism of toxicity
The toxic effects of pyrethroids and pyrethrins are due to alteration of
the kinetics of voltage-dependent sodium channels in nerve membranes,
which causes repetitive discharges or membrane depolarisation. Somt
pyrethroids may also inhibit gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors.
This inhibits the GABAA-receptor mediated chloride ion influx, the
physiological function of which is to induce pre-synaptic inhibition. Loss
of this inhibition can lead to hyperexcitability of nervous tissue and may be
the mechanism by which these compounds produce convulsions.
In mammals, pyrethrins and pyrethroids are rapidly biotransformed and
detoxified by ester hydrolysis or oxidation. As a result, these compounds
are of relatively low toxicity in mammals. Also, the activity of these
compounds on sodium channels is negatively correlated to temperature
and the greater toxicity in insects may also be an effect of the lower body
temperature of insects.
Note: Non-specific plasma esterases are important for detoxification of most
pyrethroids and pyrethrins (except allethrin and pyrethrum). Orgarophos-
phorous insecticides inhibit these enzymes and sinultaneous exposure to
Clinical effects
 Onset is usuaily within 1-3 hours, sometimes up to 12 hours. Effects may
have a duration of 1-3 days.
Note: Simultaneous exposure to organophosphate insecticides may increase
the toxicity of pyrethroids and pyrethrins (see above). Piperonyl butoxide,
often added as a synergist to delay metabolism and increase toxicity in
insects, produces effects similar to that of pyrethrins and pyrethrins.
Vomiting, diarrhoea, salivation, ataxia, tremor, incoordination, twitching,
dilated pupils, tachycardia, hyperexcitability, hyperaesthesia, thirst,
have all been reported. Respiratory distress, probably due to weakness of
respiratory muscles, may occur.,
239
Dogs | 229
Pyrethrins ond pyrethroids
Some compounds cause paraesthesia, for example shaking of feet when
they are dry.
Treatment
If within 2 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage, and then
administer adsorbents.
Ermetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.;
0.1I mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
:aso0
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a)  Activated charcoal  Dose:
2g/kg body weight orally
(b) BCK granules
Dose:
6-18 g orally two-three times daily.
Treatment thereafter is essentially symptomatic and supportive.
If the exposure is dermal. the dog should be washed with lukewarm water and
detergent. The use of very warm water should be avoided as this increased dermal
perfusion and may result in increase, dermal absorption. Copious amounts of
detergent should be used because pyrethrins and pyrethroids are not soluble in
water. Following washing, collaring is recommended to prevent further grooming.
Atropine may be given for hypersalivation.
convulsions,
Diazepam dose: 0.5 mg/kg body weight i.v. repeated every I0 minutes up to three
times if needed. Pentobarbitone dose: 3-15 mg/kg body weight by slow
intravenous infusion.
Care should be taken to maintain hydration and body temperature. If temperature
rises due to muscle fasciculation cerebral oedema may result, which can lead to
continued convulsions.
Fatty foods should not be given because these will enhance absorption.
References and further reoding
(ud) 6 (ad) 6 0 dn ss ised (u) S
Nicholson SS (1995). Toxicity of insecticides and skin care products of botanical
origin.Veterinary Dermatology 6(3), 139-143.
Valentine WM (1990). Pyrethrin and pyrethroid insecticides. Veterinary Clinics of
North America: Small Aninal Practice, 20(2), 375-382.
240
230  Dogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
Copyriglit  200O A Campbell and M Chapmain
Rhododendro
The plant
Common names are azalea and rhododendron. Rhododendron and related
species are usually hardy, evergreen or deciduous shrubs and trees. They
are found outdoors and as house and conservatory plants and may grow to
s  a on nu pou ae a 'sana g e go si
their introduction as garden shrubs, they have become naturalised in many
places, often forming dense thickets in the countryside.
The most widely naturalised species, Rhododendron ponticum is a large,
branched shrub, often with a well-developed trunk. Rhododendron ponticum
is found in woodlands and heaths, on acid, peaty, or sandy soils.
Leaves are elliptical, pointed, leathery, usually shiny, dark green above,
paler beneath and hairless. Flowers are either bell- or funnel-shaped,
 s         g
clusters at the end of branches or occasionally arising from the side shoots.
p e si hy au adnd ue d an an am  ar s
oblong capsule.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPis, the centre in London has received a number
of enquiries each year regarding exposure to rhododendron. Some of these
dogs have been reported, although all canine cases reported to the VPIS
have been symptomatic.
ataxia after walking through a wood where shredded Rhododendron
 ponticum was present. Some of the animals developed lassitude, yawning.
and head rubbing. One animal also presented some difficulty in picking up
food, followed by gaseous efflux from the stomach, but no vomiting. There
was no ingestion, only paw and muzzle contact. Three of the dogs were
under care for other conditions, so no reliable conclusion can be drawn
(Frape and Ward, 1993).
Toxicity
 m  ' m  o s n o  os
animals are exercising.Rhododendron species are highly toxic to all
are toxic, including the nectar.
241
Dogs I 231
Rhododendron ond relotedplant species
Mechanism of toxicity
Rhododendron species contain several diterpene resinoids called grayano-
toxins. These are found in the nectar, leaves, and stems. Eighteen
grayanotoxins have been isolated from species in the Ericaceae family.
The main toxin in rhododendron species is grayanotoxin I, also known as
rhodotoxin, acetylandromedol or andromedotoxin.
Grayanotoxins bind to receptors of the open and closed sodium channel of
cell membranes. Binding results in a modified sodium channel that
undergoes slow opening. The activated cells maintain a persistent
excitation and depolarisation. Excitable cells in the nerves and muscle are
into the cell is made, The sotium-channel effects of grayanotoxins account
for the severe weakness, hypotension, dyspnoea, cardiac and neurological
signs observed with rhododendron toxicity.
Kinetics and metabolism
Limited information is available on the kinetics of grayanotoxins.
Experimental work in mice and rats indicate that grayanotoxins are rapidly
metabolised and excreted.
Clinical effects
Clinical effects have a rapid onset usually occurring within 20 minutes to
 2 hours. Initially, gastrointestinal signs predominate. The rapid develop.
ment of these gastrointestinal effects may discourage significant ingestions.
       r  
grayanotoxins are rapidly eliminated.
animal species. These include salivation, vomiting, diarrhoea, inappetence,
abdominal tenderness, trembling, staggering, lethargy, weakness, brady-
cardia, hypotension and exhaustion.
Fatal cases are very rare in dogs, but would occur within a few hours of
ingestion due to respiratory failure.
Post-mortem findings
enteritis wouidf be anticipated.
Treatment
If the animal has not vomited and is presented to surgery within 2 hours of the
jingestion then use of emesis and absorbents is recommended. Gastric lavage is
probably unnecessary.
242
232 Dogs
Rhododendron and relatedplant species
Emetics;
(a)Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.;
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b) Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.:
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)lpecacuanha
Dose:
1-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal
Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally
(b)BCK granules?
Dose:
618 g orally two or three times daily.
Management thereafter is symptomatic and supportive, as there is no specific
antidote.  A minimum observation period of 6 hours post-ingestion is
recommended. The animal should be kept well hydrated.
Atropine is a partial antagonist of the cardiac effects of grayanotoxins and may be
considered if the animal develops severe bradycardia. Atropine dose: 30-I00 μg/kg
body weight s.c. or i.m.; 20 μug/kg body weight i.v.
Investigative
There are no clinicaly useful toxicological tests.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/124588.
Apaaa 'soop ui Sunuosiod uoipuapopoui palnadsng (eooh) v prem pue (I adei
Record 132,515-516.
Hikino H et al. (1979). Subchronic toxicity of ericaceous toxins and rhododendron
leaves.Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 27,874-879.
Mayer S (1991). Rhododendron. In Practice 13(6), 222.
Rose F (1991). The Wild Flowcr Key. Frederick Warne, Pp. 276-277.
Seyama I and Narahasi T (1981). Modulation of sodium channels of squid nerve
membranes by grayanotoxin 1. Journal of Pharmacology andExperimental Therapeu
fics 219(3). 614-624.
Sutlupinar N et al. (1993), Poisoning by toxic honey in turkey. Archuives of Toxicology
67(2), 148-150.
243
Dogs I 233
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Rowan / Sorbus aucuparia
The plant
The common name is Rowan or Mountain ash. The plant belongs to the
Rosaceae family.
This deciduous tree is commonly found throughout the UK. The leaves
may be up to 30 cm long and occur in pairs off the mid-rib. It flowers from
May to June with a creamy blossom. The berries are orange-red, or
sometimes yellow, and develop and ripen from August onwards,
 o dn  sq   n d a o 
light-coloured seeds.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS, the centre in London has received a small
cases 1emain asymptomatic. Those with clinical effects displayed mild
gastrointestinal effects only.
Toxicity
This piant is considered of low toxicity.
Mechanism of toxicity
The plant contains the cyanogenic glycoside amygdalin, and also
parascorbic acid, which is irritant to mucous membranes. They are present
in very low concentrations and therefore rarely cause more than
 gastrointestinal effects.
Clinical effects
Vomiting, diarrhoea, and salivation are the only effects reported in past
VPIS cases.
Treatment
Gastric decontamination using gastric lavage. emesis or adsorbents is not
necessary unless huge amounts of plant material have been ingested.
Management should otherwise be supportive, particularly ensuring that the animal
is well hydrated.
Reference
234Dogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht @ 2O00 A Campbell and M Chapmalt
Salbutamol
Type of product
bronchodilator for use in patients with asthma, chronic bronchitis,
emphysema or other chronic airway obstruction. It also has a use in
management of premature labour.
Presentation
Salbutamol is available in many forms in the UK. It is a prescription-only
medicine.
Tablets are usually of 2 mg, 4 mg or 8 mg strength and syrup preparations
of 2 mg/5 ml are available. Respirator solution and solutions for nebulisers
commonly have strengths of 5 mg/ml and either 1 mg/ml or 2 mg/ml,
respectively. Disks and capsules for inhalers are usually of 200 μg or 400 μg
strength.
Note: In the USA, salbutamol is called albuterol.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992, enquiries to the VPIS London centre
about salbutamol have been common, representing approximately 1.1% of
the annual total. Over 90% of these enquiries involve canine cases, with the
chewing of the inhalers being the most common circumstance. Fatalities
have been very few, but many animals have displayed signs of intoxication
Recommended dosage
In the UK, the drug is supplied for use in humans only.
Toxicity
Salbutamol toxicity usually causes rapid onset of clinical effects, which are
generally mild and short-lived. All but two cases reported to VPISLn have
recovered without sequelae.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
●3.2 mg/kg body weight, ingested as tablets, caused severe tachycardia
Dogs I 235
Salbutomo!
● 2.8 mg/kg body weight, ingested as tablets, caused tachycardia,
periorbital oedema, dilated pupils, and pyrexia, which resolved over
24 hours (VPISLn case 93/12091).
 Two cases of ingestion of a single inhaler in dogs resulted in fatality.
The dogs weighed 25 kg and 40 kg. The lighter one became weak,
tachypnoeic, tachycardic and cyanosed, whilst the other became very
tachycardic and showed evidence of poor peripheral circulation. Both
animals died of shock (VPISLn cases 97/37032 and 97/130464).
Mechanism of toxicity
The clinical effects in poisoning cases can be seen to be a direct result of the
β2-agonist activity of the drug. These would inciude relaxation of smooth
muscle, which is probably mediated via the adenyl cyclase-cyclic adenosine
monophosphate system.
Clinical effects
Clinical effects have an onset between 30 minutes and 8 hours post-
exposure, but commonly within 4 hours. Recovery is usually within 8-24
hours. Rarely, effects may persist for 36 48 hours.
Tachycardia and hyperpnoea are the most common features of salbutamol
poisoning in dogs. Other reported effects include incoordination, lethargy.
restlessness, thirst, peripheral vasodilation, tremor, muscle weakness,
twitching, hypokalaemia, depression and anxiety. Effects more rarely
observed are vomiting, pyrexia, dilated pupils and periorbital oedema.
Temporary spastic paralysis has been observed in two VPISLn cases (87/
42873 and 94/11832). In the lwo fatal cases reported to the VPISLn, the
animals collapsed and went into shock.
Treatment
Treatment is necessary if a dose greater than I mg/kg has been exceeded.
If within 2 hours of ingestion, induce vomiting or perform gastric lavage, and then
administer adsorbents.
Emetics:
(a)   Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.
0.I mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b) Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.y.;
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal Dose:
2 g/kg bady weight orally
(b) BCK granules*
6-18 g orally two or three times daily.
236T Dogs
Salbutamol
Treatment thereafter is largely supportive. Observation is recoramended for at
least 4 hours post-ingestion. lf the animal does develop clinical effects then
electrolytes, especially potassium, should be checked and corrected where
possible.
Diazepam or acepromazine may be given for sedative or anticonvulsant purposes.
Where adsorbents have been administered then use parenteral routes.Diazepam
dose: 0.5 mg/kg body weight i.y. repeated every I0 mirnutes up to three times if
needed. Acepromazine dose: I-3 mg/kg body weight orally; 0.03-0.1 mg/kg body
Propranolol or atenolol may be given for severe or prolonged tachycardia. Where
adsorbents have been administered then use parenteral routes and doses,
Propranolof dose: 0.02-0.1 5 mg/kg body weight i.v. over 2-3 minutes; 0.2-1.0 mg/
 s  s  o 
weight orally twice daily.
References
VPIs (London) past cases up to 97/130464.
Owens JG and Dorman DC (1997). Drug poisoning in small animals. Veterinary
Medicine 92(2),149-156.
247
Dogs 237
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Salt/ sodium chloride
Type of product
Sodium chloride is widely available and has many uses. Possible sources
include modelling dough, cooking salt, botle sterilising fluids, water
softeners, dishwasher salt, sea water and salt used to de-ice roads in winter.
Presentation
It occurs as a white crystalline powder or colourless cuboidal crystals. One
gram of sodium chloride contains 17.2 mmol of sodium. One teaspoon of
sodium chloride weighs about 7.25 g (125 mmol); a tablespoon weighs
14.5-21.75 g. equivalent to 250-375 mmol.
  o hs  o s yop  q rg a  
 s  r  o  a e o g
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Enquiries to the VPIS regarding salt ingestion are infrequent. However,
and fatal outcomes are common. The most common sources of sodium
chloride in these canine cases is commercially available modelling dough
for small children. Three fatal cases involving such products have been
reported to the VPIS London centre.
Toxicity
According to the literature:
Aep e huiam Apoq sy8  isagui ot aqe aq on paodai ane soa
without adverse effect.
●3.7 g/kg body weight has been quoted as the lethal dose for dogs.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
●Mortality is high.
 Ingestion of an estimated 180 g modelling dough by a 22 kg Border
Collie resulted in severe clinical effects in a dog who then deteriorated,
despite aggressive management and required euthanasia (VPISLn case
94/53482).
248
238 Dogs
Solt/sodium chloride
Mechanism of toxicity
Sodium contributes to about 90% of the osmolality of the extracellular fluid
and an increase in sodium will thus increase the plasma omolality. This
results in the extracellular fluid becoming hypertonic and water moving
from the intracellular to the exracellular space. The net result is cellular
dehydration and vascular overload. In the CNs, this will cause vascular
stasis, thrombosis, brain shrinkage and shearing of intracerebral vessels
with subsequent haemorrhage.
The normal range of sodium in dogs is 137-149 mmol/L. In a reported fatal
case of ingestion of salt in a dog there was continued absorption of salt
mortem there was at least 20 g of sodium chloride found in the stomach
(Khanna et al., 1997).
Case reports
A 20 kg 8-year-old male Airedale terrier presented at a clinic with a 45-
minute history of continuous convulsions. The dog had ingested a salt-
pey sop aui uonuasand o soud snoy g ( oi 1noqe) auny no
yomited three times within 12 hours of ingestion and became progressively
more polydipsic and polyuric. The owner had removed the dog's drinking
water after 24 hours because it had been urinating every 10-15 minutes.
Poiyuria continued for 7 hours during which time he ingested an unknown
additional quantity of uncooked salt-flour mixture.Within 1 hour of this
second ingestion the dog developed generalised fine-muscular fascicula-
tion, which rapidly progressed to convulsions. On presentation no details
of the salt-flour ingestion were given by the owner. On examination the
animal was found to be an estimated 8% dehydrated, unresponsive to
painful stimuli and pyrexic. It had an elevated respiratory rate and irregular
heart rhythum, weak pulse, tachycardia (240 beats/minute) with a prolonged
QT interval. The dog was given diazepam and dexamethasone and started
(211 mmol/L), hyperchloraemia (180 mmol/L) and metabolic acidosis (pH
7.1.35). Ingestion of the salt-flour mixture was disclosed on discussion with
the owners. The intravenous fluids were changed to dextrose and sodium
bicarbonate and frusemide were given. Convulsions recurred despite the
diazepam infusion and phenobarbitone was added. Cooling measures were
 undertaken but the dog remained unresponsive for 4 hours. The pulse rate
fell to 160 beats/minute and the body temperature decreased. The sodium
and chloride concentrations initially decreased after 2 hours but increased
again at 4 hours. Intravenous fluids were increased and sodium bicarbonate
discontinued. The acidosis worsened after changing to dextrose,the
respiratory rate remained elevated and the dog subsequently suffered
respiratory arrest. Manual ventilation was followed by cardiac arrest.
Resuscitation was discontinued.The sodium concentration was 210 mmol/L,
chloride 167 mmol/L,pH 6.72.
249
Dogs 239
Saft/sodiumchloride
Post-mortem examination revealed I litre of putty-like, grey-white material
and the proximal two-thirds of the small intestine. Patchy areas of
was docuinented and there was diffuse white-matter vacuolation in the
brain. Analysis of the liquid portion of the stomach contents showed that it
contained at least 20 g of sodium chloride (Khanna et al., 1997).
A Golden Retriever of unknown age developed vomiting initially and then
died 4 days post-ingestion. The treating veterinarian considered that the
over-zealous rehydration in this case probably contributed to the fatal
outcome of the case (VPISLn case 94/3680).
A 5-year-old female Border Collie (22 kg) was fed Funstuff and Play Doh*
sinou z inoqe eixaoue padonaaap Sop aui Aued eag e guunp py e Aq
later and repeated vomiting about 24 hours after that. The dog presented to
surgery with dehydration about 3 days after onset of vomiting. It was
treated with antibiotics, anti-infiammatories and anti-emetics but did not
 p a sn a  n p m 
deteriorated and was euthanased 9 days after ingestion (VPISLn case 94/
53482)
Clinical effects
These are vomiting, diarrhoea, lethargy, tremor, thirst and dehydration
(the degree of dehydration may be underestimated because the vascular
volumeismaintained)
In severe cases, muscular rigidity, convulsions, coma and renal failure may
At post-mortem, there may be renal congestion and inflammation and
congestion of the gastrointestinal tract.
Treatment
Since vomiting is common and usually profuse, emesis is not recommended. It may
also exacerbate any dehydration. Gastric lavage following a large ingestion of
sodium chloride may enhance absorption through dissolution and although surgicaf
removal may be considered in severe cases, the animal may be too unwell to
tolerate anaesthesia. Adsorbents are not useful.
The sodium concentration, the chloride concentration and renal function should
cases.
250
240  Dogs
Salt/sodiumchloride
Note: The aim of therapy is to lower the sodium concentration slowly. Rapid
reduction may lead to cerebral oedema.
In mild cases, the animal should be allowed to drink small amounts of fresh water
at frequent intervals.
In more severe cases, parenteral fluids will be required. These should contain low
quantities of sodium, e.g. 5% dextrose or 2.5% dextrose in 0.45% saline. These
fluids should be administered with care and recovery may take several days.
References ond further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/64523.
Duncan A (1992).Poison - salt. In Practice 14(5), 252.
Khanna C, Boermans HJ and Wilcock B (1997). Fatal hypernatremia in a dog from salt
ingestion. Jourmal of fhe American Aninal Hospital Association 33, 113-117.
251
Dogs| 241
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  20O0 A Campbell and M Chapmai1
Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor
antidepressants
Type of product
These are antidepressant drugs for human use. One of the drugs in this
group, fluoxetine, has been proposed for use in small animals for
management of stereotypies, anxiety, aggression and 'depression'.
Presentation
They are available in tablet and/or capsule preparations of various
strengths:
Citalopram
10 mg, 20 mg
Fluoxetine
20 mg, 60 mg
Fluvoxamine
50 mg. 100 mg
Paroxetine
20 mg, 30 mg
Sertraline
50 mg, 100 mg
Fluoxetine and paroxetine are also available in liquid preparations at
strengths of 20 mg/5 ml and 10 mg/5 ml, respectively.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992, an increasing number of enquiries
have been handled each year regarding SSRI antidepressant ingestion by
dogs. In 1997 and 1998 over 20 enquiries per annum were received. This
probably reflects increasing use by humans and therefore increased
availability. Few cases have displayed clinical efects and no fatal cases
have been reported.
Recommended dosage
s     i   i 
aggression, anxiety, and depression.
Toxicity
      s as
According to the literature:
Citaloprom
 20-25 mg/kg body weight given either intravenously or orally resulted
in convulsions.
252
242 T Dogs
Selective serotoninre-uptake inhibitorantidepressants
Lower doses caused drowsiness, restlessness, anxiety, aggression and
tachycardia.
Fluoxetine
● In LDso studies in dogs no deaths were reported for a dose in excess of
100 mg/kg body weight.
 Dogs given 20 mg/kg/day for 90 days had mild anorexia, transient
dilated pupils, vomiing, fine tremor and loose, mucoid faeces. With
doses of 50 mg/kg for 11 months, one dog died after 50 days due to
convulsions. In addition to the effects seen with the lower dose, the
animals also had increased salivation.
Fluvoxamine
●The LDso in dogs is greater than 450 mg/kg body weight.
● Clinical effects observed in these studies included vomiting, dilated
pupils, ataxia, convulsions and bradypnoea.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
Fluoxetine
 o  pai a nm Aog y t s y s soa o
effects.
Poroxetine
●A Golden Retriever became drowsy and developed unspecified ECG
abnormalities after ingestion of 3 mg/kg body weight (VPISLn case 95/
51696).
● A Yorkshire terrier developed inappetence, laboured breathing and
'dullness' after ingesting 8 mg/kg body weight (VPISLn case 95/122877).
●In other cases, doses between 2.35 and 7.5 mg/kg body weight
produced no clinical effects.
Sertraline
● Doses between 12 and 24 mg/kg body weight resulted in no clinical
effects.
Kinetics and metabolism
The drugs appear to be rapidly absorbed. In clinical trials for fluvoxamine
in dogs, the peak plasma levels were reached berween 2 and 4 hours post-
ingestion.
The plasma half-life in dogs after 15 doses of 5-10 mg/kg was 1 day for
fluoxetine and 2.1-5.4 days for the,primary amine metabolite.
253
Dogs | 243
Selective serotoninre-uptakeinhibitor antidepressants
There is evidence to suggest that these drugs undergo some enterohepatic
recirculation in dogs.
Clinical effects
Clinical effects usually occur within 4 hours of ingestion.
Drowsiness, ataxia, and inappetence are reported in VPISLn cases.
Unspecified ECG abnormalities lasting 2-3 days have been reported.
Other possible effects include convulsions with high doses, restlessness,
anxiety, aggression, tachycardia, dilated pupils, vomiting, bradypnoea, fine
tremor and loose, mucoid faeces.
Treatment
Treatment is recommended if more than I0 mg/kg body weight has been ingested
for all these drugs except paroxetine, where treatment is recommended if more
than 5 mg/kg body weight has been eaten.
If within 2 hours of ingestion and if the animal is not drowsy, induce vomiting or
perform gastric lavage. Adsorbents should then be given.
Ermetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.;
0.I mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.;
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximur
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal  Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally
(b) BCK granules
Dose:
6-18 g orally.
needed. Diazepam dose: 0.5 mg/kg body weight i.v. repeated every 10 minutes up
to three times if needed. A 6-hour minimum observation period is recommended.
Reference
688t8/26 01 dn sases ised (uopuo7) SidA
254
244  Dogs
Handbook of Poisoningin dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2OOO A Campbell and M Chapmar
Sex hormones
Type of product
Sex hormones are used in a variety of disorders in veterinary medicine.
Oestradiol is used for the provision of short-term oestrogen therapy for the
treatment of misalliance, hypogonadal obesity and hormone urinary
incontinence in bitches and anal adenomata, excess libido and prostatic
control of oestrus in bitches.
Sex hormones are widely used in human medicine for oral contraception
and hormone replacement therapy (HRT).
Presentation
Injectable preparations are available for veterinary use but numerous tablet
formulations are available for oral contraception in humans. Transdermal
patches, gels, creams and pessaries are also used in human medicine for
and progesterone or progesterone only. HRT formulations may contain
oestrogen and/or progesterone.
Occurrence ofpoisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992, the London centre has received
u go t   d sa  p p 
preparations by dogs and cats. Most of these involved preparations
intended for human use. Almost all cases remained asymptomatic. Those
rare cases with clinical effects displayed mild gastrointestinal effects only.
Most animals were exposed to human preparations, particularly oral
contraceptives and hormone replacement therapy (HRT).
Recommended dosage
This varies, depending on the specific drug and the indication.
Toxicity
These drugs are considered of low toxicity in acute overdose.
Clinical effects
disrupt oestrus in bitches.
255
Dogs |245
Sex hormones
Treatment
No treatment is necessary, even for very substantial ingestions.
Reference
VPIS (London) past cases up to 98/165110.
256
246TDogs
Handbook of Poisoningin dogsand cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht @ 2OOO A Campbell and M Chapmain
Terfenadine
Type of product
Terfenadine is an antihistamine used for the symptomatic relief of
hypersensitivity reactions such as rhinitis and urticaria in human medicine.
It is not used in veterinary medicine.
Presentation
Terfenadine is available in the UK in both tablet and liquid preparations.
Tablet strengths are usually 60 or 120 mg and the liquid suspensions of
30 mg/5 ml strength.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992, there have been between five and 10
 on so  sodxa a a n d sb
have had a fatal outcome, though some animais have exhibited severe
clinical effects.
Recommended dosage
In the UK, the drug is supplied for use in humans only.
According to the literature:
 In a case review study, doses causing clinical effects in dogs ranged
from 6.6 to 557 mg/kg body weight.
●Wide variety in toxic doses may be due to individual variation or
variation in susceptibility due to differences in breed or age.
● Pre-clinical studies in dogs reported no clinical effects in dogs fed
30 mg/kg body weight for 2 years.
● Doses of 100 mg/kg body weight resulted in ataxia, trembling, rigidity,
weakness, disorientation and convulsions in three out of eight study
dogs after 2-3 weeks of treatment. In these cases, no ECG changes were
apparent.
 Doses of 150 mg/kg body weight consistently resulted in vomiting.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
● It is considered to have a relatively low toxicity.
● Doses of up to 46 mg/kg body weight in a variety of breeds resulted in
no visible clinical effects.
257
Dogs I 247
Terfenadine
24 mg/kg body weight ingested by a collie resulted in hyperaesthesia,
ataxia, congested mucous membranes, tachycardia, tachypnoea, dilated
the animal was given diazepam and acepromazine. With supportive
care the animal made a slow recovery (VPISLn case 91/9999).
48 mg/kg body weight in a Yorkshire Teirier resulted in weakness, pale
mucous membranes, drowsiness, twitching and fitting. The animal
made a slow recovery with supportive care (VPISLn case 97/119316).
 60 mg/kg body weight in a Labrador resulted in tremors, incoordina-
mos e apeu pue edazp pue joddns png snouanui uaag
recovery (VPISLnn case 96/183192).
+
No fatal cases reported.
Mechanism of toxicity
Terfenadine is a butyrophenone derivative. Like many antihistamines it
acts by reversibly and competitively blocking the action of histamine at the
receptor site, thereby reducing the pharmacological action. At high doses
the binding becomes irreversible.
In overdose, antihistamines cause anticholinergic effects and CNS depres-
sion or stimulation. The mechanism of the CNS effects is largely unknown,
although terfenadine causes minimal CNS effects in therapy since it does
observed with doses of 30 mg/kg and it is assumed at such doses the blood-
brain barrier may be crossed.
Kinetics and metabolism
stomach was at 3 hours; the half-life of the majo1 metabolite (the carboxylic
acid derivative ) was 17 hours. Terfenadine is metabolised in the liver and
Clinical effects
p om s u pd q o siae Aao a
clinical signs.
Commonly reported effects are dry mucous membranes or salivation,
vomiting, dilated pupils, ataxia, tachycardia, tachypnoea and hypotension.
hallucinations, hyperthermia, agitation, hyperaesthesia and anxiety. Rarely
reported effects include disorientation, polydipsia, convulsions, rigidity
and polyuria.
258
248 I Dogs
Terfenadine
Treatrment
Treatment is recommended if more than 25 mg/kg body weight has been ingested.
If within 2 hours of ingestion induce vomiting, after ensuring that there is an
adequate swallowing reflex, and then administer adsorbents.
Where the swallowing reflex is reduced or absent, give adsorbents only.
Emetics:
(a) Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.;
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.;
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)Ipecacuanha
Dose:
I-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal Dose:
2 g/kg body weight orally
(b)BCK granules?
Dose:
6-18 g orally two or three times daily.
Treatment thereafter is largely supportive, with particular care to ensure adequate
Observation for a minimum period of 4 hours is advocated.
Sedation may be required for animals that appear to hallucinate or fit. Diazepam or
acepromazine have been recommended for use in the past. Diazepam. however,
should be used with caution as antihistamines such as terfenadine are known to
potentiate the depressant effects of benzodiazepines. Diazepam dose: 0.5 mg/kg
body weight i.v. repeated every I0 minutes up to three times if needed.
Acepromazine dose: I-3 mg/kg body weight orally; 0.03-0.1 mg/kg body weight
i.m., or s.c.; 0.03 mg/kg body weight by slow i.v. injection,
References ond further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/119316.
Papich MG (1990). Toxicoses from over-the-counter human drugs. Veterinary Clinics
of North America: Small Animal Practice 20(2), 431-451,
Otto CM and Greentree WF (1994). Terfenadine toxicosis in dogs. Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association 205(7), 10041006.
Owens JG and Dorman DC (1997). Drug poisoning in small animals. Veterinary
Medicine 92(2), 149-156.
259
Dogs  249
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Tricyclic antidepressants
Type of product
These are antidepressant drugs for human use. Tricyclic antidepressants
are the most commonly prescribed type of antidepressants in the UK. They
but are toxic in overdose.
Some of these agents are used in veterinary medicine as anxiolytics and
also in the management of separation problems, excessive grooming, feline
urine spaying, acral lick dermatitis and compulsive stereotypic behaviours.
They have also rarely been used to treat canine narcoleptic hypersomnia
Presentation
each drug. Maximum dose for tablets or capsules available for all included
drugs is 75 mg.
Sorme of the drugs are available in syrup preparations: amitriptyline,
clomipramine and imipramine at 25 mg/5 ml strength and lofepramine at
70 mg/5 ml strength.
imipramine, lofepramine, nortriptyline, protriptyline, and trimipramine.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992, between five and 15 enquiries have
been received per annum concerning tricyclic antidepressant ingestion by
dogs. Some 10% have exhibited some clinical effects, but there have been
no fatal outcomes reported.
Recommended dosage
Amitriptyline:
1-2 mg/kg body weigitt given orally daily in
divided doses for anxiety, separation problems
and excessive grooming-
Clomipramine:
1-3 mg/kg body weight given orally daily for
anxiety, separation problems, and stereotypies.
Doxepin:
0.5-1 mg/kg body weight given orally daily for
compulsive stereotypic behaviour.
Toxicity
According to the literature:
260
250  Dogs
Tricyclic antidepressants
100 mg/kg body weight is the lowest published lethal oral dose of
inipramine in dogs.
Intravenous administration of 20 mg/kg body weight of various
tricyclic antidepressants caused death within 50 minutes of injection.
e iam Aoq  i u raa sasop ro usn a
anticipated to result in severe toxicity or fatality.
In the experience of the VPISLn:
●
25 mg of amitriptyline given to a German Shepherd dog resulted in
excitability, hyperventilation, and tachycardia. The animal recovered
with supportive care only.
 35 mg/kg body weight given to a terrier mongrel resulted in no clinical
effects.
450 mg of dothiepin ingested by a West Highland terrier resulted in
The animal was given activated charcoal and diazeparn and made a
gradual recovery 0ver 12 hours (VPISLn case 91/5473).
Mechanism of toxicity
Tricyclic antidepressants are thought to act by blocking the re-uptake of
noradrenaline and 5-hydroxytriptamine (5-HT) in the CNS. Additionally,
they also block the parasympathetic nervous system and the peripheral re-
uptake of noradrenaline and also have a membrane-stabilising effect
(quinidine-like) on the myocardium mediated by disruption of the sodium/
potassium pump.
      o i sa    
blockage of the parasympathetic nervous system and the noradrenaline re-
uptake results in anticholinergic signs such as tachycardia, dilated pupils,
convulsions. The effects of the membrane stabilising effect is most
pronounced on the myocardium where the refractory period increases
and conduction velocity decreases. This is reflected on the ECG where the
PR, QT and QRS intervals and complex increase in duration. Ventricular
arrhythmias are the clinical result
Kinetics and metabolism
The tricyclic antidepressants are rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal
n jo aa  e aa pe sod snd on puq o
therefore at higher doses more drug may be absorbed. The drugs also
undergo enterohepatic re-circulation.
hydroxylation and then glucuronide conjugation. Excretion is via the
kidney.
261
Dogs  251
Tricyclic ontidepressants
Clinical effects
Clinical effects usually occur within 4 hours.
Excitability, vomiting, ataxia, lethargy, and tremors are common. Dilated
pupils, dry mucous membranes, urine retenion, hypotension, and
tachycardia are occasionally reported.
also develop respiratory depression, convulsions and ventricular arrhythmias.
Prolongation of the PR, QT and QRS intervals and complex may be evident
on the ECG, and the animal may develop ventricular arrhythmias.
The animal may also develop metabolic acidosis and hypokalaemia.
Treatment
Treatment is recommended if more than 5 mg/kg body weight has been ingested.
Alternatively. gastric lavage may be performed.
Adsorbents should then be given. Some authors suggest that repeated doses of
adsorbents may be of benefit, although there is some evidence to suggest limited
Emetics:
(a)  Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.;
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)  Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.;
0.5-l mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c) Ipecacuanha
Dose:
1-2 rml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoal   Dose:
 2 g/kg body weight orally
(b)BCK granules
6-18 g orally.
These doses may be repeated at 2-3 hourly intervals until the adsorbent appears
in the stools if felt recessary or if ingested dose was very large.
Animals need close observation for a minimum of 9 hours. Management is largely
symptomatic and supportive. However. particular care should be taken to ensure
adequate hydration.
Intravenous fluid support may be required to maintain the blood pressure.
Where possible eiectrolytes, especially potasstum, and blood gases should be
monitored and corrected where appropriate.
G6Z
252IDogs
Tricyclicontidepressants
If the animal develops severe tremors or convulsions then diazepam may be given.
Diazepam dose: 0.5 mg/kg body weight i.v. repeated every I0 minutes up to three
be considered.
Where possible, the ECG should be monitored. If there is evidence of tachycardia
and particularly cardiac conduction abnormalities, such as a widened QRS, then
intravenous sodium bicarbonate should be administered to maintain arterial pH at
approxirnately 7.5. Additionally, potassium should be supplermented, where
necessary. to ensure plasma levels are within the normal range.
Sodiun bicarbonate dose: 2-3 mmol/kg body weight i.y. over 15-30 minutes
(approximately equivalent to 15-20 ml/kg body weight of a 1.24% solution).
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/65219.
Johnson LR (1990). Tricyclic antidepressant toxicosis. Veterinary Clinics of North
America:Small Animal Practice 20(2),393403.
263
Dogs253
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit @ 200O A Campbelland M Chapmai
Yipera berus berus / European adder
The snake
The European adder, Vipera berus berus (a member of the family Viperidae)
is the only venomous snake native to the UK. It is also found across
northern Europe, into the Arctic Circle, and Asia. It is a true viper, some 50--
moq yp on ara aed uy no ui hua u ge u u  o
in the male and from olive green/yellowish-brown to reddish-brown in the
female. It is distinguishable from the two other snakes native to Britain, the
grass snake (Natrix natrix) and the smooth snake (Coronella austriaca), by a
black/brown dorsal zig-zag patterning and a V-shaped marking on the
head. However, in darker coloured male specimens this patterning may not
be obvious. Another distinguishing feature is the eye of the adder, which is
elliptical with a typical viperid vertical slit, as compared with the round-
shaped eyes of the grass and smooth snakes. The adder is most commonly
found on dry, sandy heaths, sand dunes, rocky hillsides, moorlands and
woodfand edges.
The adder generally only bites when provoked. Bites rarely occur during
  ha a q   si a a ta am ag
summer months. Not all bites result in envenomation.
Owing to increasing deliberate persecution, collection, and loss of its
natural habitat, the adder is considered threatened throughout Europe. In
 i  n    i     
(Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 - Variation of Schedule Order 367)
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since 1992, the VPIS London centre has received a small number of
enquiries every year regarding animal bites in animals, representing
approximately 1% of the total enquiry number. Over 95% of these cases
involve bites in dogs.
Toxicity
In domestic animals adder envenomations cause significant morbidity and
high mortality, although the high mortality rate may be partly due to the
difficulty experienced by many veterinarians  in obtaining specific
antivenom.
Mechanism of toxicity
The venom is a complex mixture of high molecular weight proteins, mainly
264
254|Dogs
Vipera berusberus/European odder
  r   s   d   as
circulation. Hypovolaemia and local oedema result from an increase in
substances such as histamine, serotonin, bradykinin and prostaglandins.
haemorrhage is due to cytolytic and haemolytic factors.
Clinical effects
Reports indicate dogs are more likely to be bitten on the muzzle, the
mouth, tongue or face. Bites to the feet or lower legs also occur. As dogs are
reliant on panting as a means of control of body temperature, a bite to the
face area is serious as the swelling that may occur following a bite may
impair thermoregulation.
Localised painful swelling may occur within minutes of the bite or may be
delayed for 30 minutes or more but is always present within 2 hours.
Absence of sweiling within 2 hours excludes envenomation.
The swelling will gradually spread and may be haemorrhagic. It may affect
the animal's ability to eat and drink and to thermoregulate. There may be
dehydration, restlessness, drowsiness, depression, lethargy and lameness.
The puncture wounds may be visible. Petechial haemorrhage of the gums
has been seen in dogs bitten on the mouth. Necrosis is very rare.
Initially, tachycardia may be observed. Later there may be bradycardia,
trembling are often noted and convulsions have been reported in one
VPISLn case (85/32237). Some animals have developed chest and
abdominal tenderness, and respiratory distress.
Severe coagulopathy may be noted in severe cases. The animal may also
become anaemic, uraemic, thrombocytopaenic, hypoproteinaemic, and
hypoalbuminaemic.
Death, usually associated with severe renal and hepatic dysfunction or
failure, will usualy occur in 5-7 days in dogs that receive no treatment.
Post-mortem findings
At post-mortem, lesions resulting from envenomation by the European
Adder include haemorrhages, disseminated intravascular coagulation,
hepatic necrosis and infarction. There may be haemorrhagic oedema at
the bite site, pulmonary congestion, generalised haemolysis, icterus,
myocardial degeneration, and peteghial haemorrhages in the kidney cortex.
265
Dogs 255
Vipera berusberus/European odder
Treatment
Speed is essentiai. ldeally the affected animal needs to be kept as still and as quiet
a5 possible. The bite site should be left alone and if the bite was to the leg. the
affected limb should be immobilised if possible. Use of incisions, suction and
bleeding and restrict circulation.
Zagreb? Antivenom should be used in all cases where the bite was to the facial
region and in all cases where the swelling is significant or has spread beyond the
next major joint proximal to the bite. It should also be used if there is any
coagulopathy. or any ECG abnormality.
ao ui ea  ol u pasard ae sudad qa aau ao aso
vials were 5.5 ml volumes. Either I × I0 ml ampoule or 2 x 5.5 ml ampoules
diluted in 2-3 volumes of isotonic saline administered by slow i.v. injection at a
rate not exceeding 2 ml per minute is required. Alternatively, administer by i.v.
infusion.
Clinical improverment should be seen rapidly, particularly if the antivenom is
administered within I8 hours of the bite. lf chere is no clinical improvement within
2hoursof administrationof theinitial dose then theregimenmayberepeated.
Note: The insert on the packaging indicates an i.m. route of administration.
However, i.y. administration is perfectly safe and more likely to be effective.
The advice found in some sources suggesting that dogs require l0 vials of
antivenom (or five of the new variety) is not correct. The normal prescribed
dosage of two vials (or one of the new variety) is designed to counteract the
venorn of one snake bite. Excessive use of antivenom may result in the
development of severe adverse reactions.
Adverse reactions to Zagreb
These are very uncommon but if they occur (characterised by vomiting, fever,
tion) they can be minimised by giving the antiventom under the cover of adrenaline
Dose: 0.5-1.0 ml of a I:1000 solution given s.c.
Supply of Zagreb?
In the experience of the VPISLn, veterinarians occasionally experience difficulties
in obtaining Zagreb?. Usually the best source is the pharmacy or the Accident and
Emiergency Department of the local general hospital. The VPISLn may be able to
advise on local supplies, and carries a small stock itself for dispatch in emergency
cases. Cost of transport and antivenom will be to the veterinarian. The VPISLn is
contactable on 020 7635 9195.
The current suppliers of Zagreb in the UK are: Farillon Ltd, Ashton Road, Harold
Hill, Romford, Essex RM3 8UE, UK(telephone: 01708 379000) and P & D
266
256Dogs
Vipera berus berus/Europeun odder
Pharmaceuticals, 38 Woolmer Way. Bordon, Hampshire GU35 9QF. UK
(telephone: 01420 487501).
Other care
Generally, management is symptomatic and supportive. Observation is advised for
and body temperature.
Metoclopramide may be given to control persistent vomiting. Dose: 0.5-l mg/kg
body weight i.m., 5.c. or orally every 68 hours: I-2 mg/kg i.v. over 24 hours as
slow infusion,
Steroids (e.g. beclomethasone, dexamethasone, methylprednisolone) and anti-
swelling. In some cases, simple analgesia has been given.
Check for coagulopathy if there is any evidence of bleeding. Vitamin Ki
administration and blood transfusions have been necessary in some cases. Vitamin
K, dose: 3-5 mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c. daily in divided doses
Diazepam may be given for convulsions. General anaesthesia may be considered if
diazepam proves ineffective. Diazepam dose: 0.5 mg/kg body weight i.v. repeated
every I0 minutes up to three times if needed.
In severe cases. monitor renal and hepatic function if possible.
References and further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/58208.
Bratberg B and Flesja K (i973). Intoxication in the dog by the European adder.
Nordisk Veterinaermedicin 25, 185 (in Norwegian).
Fowler ME (1992). Snakes and snakebite in Europe. In Veterinary Zootoxicology. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press, Pp. 201-205.
Gonzalez D (1990). Snake bites in domestic animals. Toxicon 28, 149.
Kangstrom LE (1989). Snakebite in the dog and cat. Svensk Veterinartidning 41, 38 (in
Swedish).
Mayer S (1991). Poison: adder bite. In Practice 13(3), 126.
267
Dogs 257
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht  2000 A Campbelland M Chapmai
Yew / Taxus baccata and related plant species
The plant
Taxus baccata is commonly known as yew. The plant belongs to the
Taxaceae family.
It is a slow-growing, evergreen shrub/tree which may grow to a height of
about 20 m. It has a reddish-brown fibrous bark, and there may be more
than one trunk to each tree. The leaves are needles up to 3 cm in length
they may range from golden yellow to dark green in colour. The male and
female flowers grow on separate plants and it is only the female variety that
will bear fruit. The flowers are so small as to almost be inconspicuous and
appear on the plants from February to April.
The seed is about 5-7 mm long, brownish/purple in colour when ripe,
green when unripe and ovoid in shape. It is enclosed in a fleshy aril that is
green when unripe and red, or sometimes yellow, when ripe. The aril.
which is often mis-identified as a 'berry' is usually about 7-11 mm long and
about 7-8 mm wide and the seed is usually visible through it. The fruits are
cup-shaped and contain sticky, mucilaginous flesh, that is reportedly
sweet-tasting. They ripen from August to October.
Yew is commonly found on chalky/limestone soils in south and central
England. It is native also to Wales. It is, however, found throughout the UK
and is a common feature of many churchyards. It is also found in mainiand
Europe, particularly in areas of low altitude.
There are other varieties of the plant. The two most commonly
encountered are:
(a) Irish yew (Taxus baccata fnstigiafa). This is a more erect and compact
plant than the English yew. It has common use as a hedging plant.
(b) Japanese yew (Taxus chspidata). This is an evergreen ornamental plant,
with dark green glossy needle shaped leaves.
Occurrence of poisoning incidences
Since the launch of the VPIS in 1992, the London centre has received
approximately 10 enquiries a year about yew. Twenty-three enquiries were
received in 1997. Over 60% of these concerned suspected ingestion by dogs,
the rest usually involving cattle. In the canine cases most remained
asymptomatic, although some suffered profuse vomiting and salivation. All
the dogs recovered.
268
258  Dogs
Yew/Taxus boccata and related plant species
Toxicity
All parts of the Taxus baccata plant are toxic, including dried clippings, with
the exception of the fleshy red (or yelow) arils. It is thought that the other
varieties mentioned above have similar toxicity to Taxus baccata.
According to the literature:
● 30 g of leaves is potentially fatal in a dog.
●8 g plant material per kg body weight is quoted as a lethal dose in dogs.
Mechanism of toxicity
The toxic principle of the plant is its content of the alkaloids taxine A and B,
which are found in all parts of the plant except the fleshy aril. Taxine B is
cardiotoxic, with its effects due to inhibition of sodium and calcium
currents. There is also an irritant volatile oil contained throughout the
plant, as well as ephedrine and a cardiac glycoside named taxiphyllin. The
gastrointestinal clinical effects are probably due to the irritant nature of the
oils. The taxine alkaloids are non-irritant.
Kinetics and metabolism
Taxine alkaloids are rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. They
are metabolised in the liver and excreted as benzoic acid/conjugated
hippuric acid.
Clinical effects
Clinical effects usually commence within 2 hours, although they may be
diarrhoea, and excessive salivation, which all may be profuse. In some
In severe cases, hypothermia, bradycardia, hypotension, respiratory
depression, convulsions and coma should be anticipated. Fatalities would
usually result from heart or respiratory failure. In a canine case involving
Japanese yew the animal became pyrexic, tachycardic, tachypnoeic and had
dilated unresponsive pupils.
Taxine given to dogs produced ECG changes from wide QRS complexes to
ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation.
Post-mortem findings
material. In cattle the findings have been an empty right heart, and the left
heart, liver, spleen and lungs filled yith dark, tarry blood.
269
Dogs  259
Yew/Taxusbaccotaondreiatedplontspecies
Treatment
If only the fleshy aril has been ingested then no treatment is required. If any other
part of the plant has been consurmed and the animal has been presented within 3
hours then use of emetics followed by absorbents should be considered.
Emetics:
(a)  Apomorphine
Dose:
0.05 mg/kg body weight i.v. or i.m.;
0.1 mg/kg body weight s.c.
(b)Xylazine
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg body weight i.v.;
0.5-I mg/kg body weight i.m. or s.c.
(c)Ipecacuanha
Dose:
1-2 ml/kg body weight (maximum
20 ml) orally
(d) Soda crystal.
Adsorbents:
(a) Activated charcoalDose:
2g/kg body weight orally
(b)BCK granules
Dose:
6-18 g orally 2-3 times daily
Management thereafter is largely symptomatic and supportive. Particular care
should be taken to ensure the animal is well hydrated. An observation period of 4
6 hours is recommended.
Diazepam may be given if there is any convulsant activity (dose: 0.5 mg/kg body
weight i.v. repeated every I0 minutes up to three times if needed).
In serious cases where cardiac effects are present the administration of atropine
may be of benefit.
Atropine dose: 30-I00 μg/kg body weight s.c. or i.m.; 20 μg/kg body weight i.v.
Investigative
There areno clinically useful toxicological tests.
References ond further reading
VPIS (London) past cases up to 97/58208.
Baker I (1992). Yew. In Pracfice, 14(1), 32.
Evans KL and Cook JR (1991). Japanese yew poisoning in a dog. Jourtal of the
American Animal Hospital Association 27, 300-302.
Hare WR (1998). Yew (Taxus spp.) poisoning in domestic animais. Toxic Plants nd
Other Natural Toxicants. Wallingford: CAB International, Pp. 78-80.
270
260 I Dogs
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglit  200O A Campbell and M Chapmai
Appendix I: Recommended holding for drugs
used in management of poisoning cases
Unfortunately it seems to have become the norm to state the obvious in
medical textbooks. So, with apologies, the editors would like to emphasise
that this book is intended for veterinary clinicians, not for beginners, let
alone amateurs. It does not give a discourse on the pharmacology of every
treatment suggested, but relies on the reader's knowledge, experience and
ability to consult the appropriate literature and texts.
The book, while very much UK based in the range of cases and possible
toxicants discussed, takes a more global view of possible treatments. Whilst
mentioned, there has been no concerted attempt to fit the pharmacology
within the potential 'pharmacy. Thus, some of the products listed here are
 sn a     r  s
different rules about‘off-label use and about the use of unlicensed
medicines. As this section is written the situation in the EU is drawing to a
head and unless there is some dramatic change then - to take one example
- the use of a fluorescein eye 'strip' to check for corneal ulceration in cattle
(andl probably horses) will have become a criminal offence by the time this
book is published. The EU's 'Cascade Directive' is somewhat kinder to
companion animals, but what drug can be used or should be used in each
 individual case must remain a matter of clinical judgement unique to that
will assist once that judgement has been made.
Emetics
●Apomorphine
●Xylazine
●
Syrup of Ipecacuanha
Soda crystals - commercial 'washing soda' (that is sotdlium carbonate -
?
not to be confused with caustic soda (sodium hydroxide), baking soda
(sodium bicarbonate), etc.)
Adsorbents
●Activated charcoal
 BCK? granules
Anti-emetics
●Metoclopramide
●Acepromazine
271
262Appendix |
Appendix!
Sedatives/anaesthetics
Acepromazine
●
Benzodiazepines (e.g. diazepam)
事
Barbiturates (e.g. pentobarbitone)
Antidotal drugs
Zagreb? antivenom
(Adder bites)
Acetylcysteine
(Paracetamol)
Methionine
(Paracetamol)
Ascorbic acid
(Paracetamol)
Methylene blue
(Paracetamol/Nitrates/Chlorates*)
Cimetidine
(Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
Sucralfate
(Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
Ranitidine
(Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
Famotidine
(Non-steroidalanti-inflammatory drugs)
Misoprostol
(Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
Calcitonin
(Vitamin D, Calciferol)
Clodronate
(Vitamin D, Calciferol)
Desferrioxamine
(Iron)
Naloxone
(Opioids)
Atropine
(Organophosphates, Carbamates)
Beta-blockers
(Salbutamol, Theobromine)
Ethanol (20% solution)
(Ethylene glycol, Methanol, antifreeze)
Penicillamine
(Lead* and heavy metals*)
Sodium calcium edetate
(Lead* and heavy metals*)
Vitamin K;
(Anticoagulants)
*Management for these agents is not discussed in this book.
272
Appendix I| 263
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2OO0 A Campbell and M Chapman
Appendix 2: Case reporting
Below is a version of the case enquiry questionnaire used by the VPIS
centres. We would be grateful to receive notification of any cases of interest
  i  la     aa 
confidence.
Please complete a copy of this form and post to:
A Campbell
Veterinary Poisons Information Service - London
Medical Toxicology Unit
Avonley Road
London SE14 5ER, UK
If posting within the UK the Freepost service can be used. The address is:
Veterinary Poisons Information Service - London
FREEPOST
Medical Toxicology Unit
Avonley Road
London SE14 5BR
273
264Appendix 2
Appendix 2
POISONING INCIDENTS INVOLVING ANIMALS
IDate of Enquiry 
Time of Enquiry :
Case reference number :
1. DETAtLS OF ANImAL
h Breed:
Animal nane:
d1Age:
c) Weighit:
Sex:
Male
Fenale
Pregnant
Male (N)
Female (N)
Lactating
g) Envircommenl:
Fam
Zeo/Collection
Iap Cwners name / address :
i Your case reference / name anel address :
2. DETAILS OF AGENT
in} Nane anf agent / mamifacturer :
Generie / Approved name
annfacturer name
Maufacturer address
I) Route(s) tsf exposnre :
) Qmityinolved :
 VPIS
274
Appendix 2 265
Appendix 2
3. DETAILS OF INCIDENT
Where and how did the incidenl occur?
4.CIINICAL EFFECTS AND TREATMENTS
a)T'ime from incident to onset of clinical effecis :
b) Clinical effects observed and their period of duration :
c)Treatments instituted :
d) I,aboratory invesligations and resulls:
c) Oucome of case (if known) :
5.OTHER INFORMATION
Were any information services contacted to assist with managcment of this case ?
if'yes' please state which :
C VPIS
275
266  Appendix 2
Handbookof Poisoningin dogsand cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht @ 2O00 A Campbell and M Chapman
Appendix 3: Normal values for cats and dogs
General
Cats
Heart rate (young)
130-240 beats per minute
Heart rate (adult)
100-240 beats per minute
Rectal temperature
101.5 ± 1°F/38.6 ± 0.5°C
Resting respiratory rate
26 breaths per minute (range 20-60)
Urine volume
10-20 ml/kg body weight/day
Dogs
Heart rate (young)
100-120 beats per minute
Heart rate (adult)
70-120 beats per minute
 Rectal temperature
102 ± 1°F/38.9 ± 0.5°C
Resting respiratory rate (young)
20-22 breaths per minute
Resting respiratory rate (adult)
14-16 breaths per minute
Urine volume
20-100 ml/kg body weight/day
Biochemical and haemotological values
Cots
Base excess
+2 to -5 mEq/L
Bicarbonate
15-24 mEq/L
15-24 mmol/L
Calcium
9.2-11.9 mg/dl
2.1-2.6 mmol/L
Chloride
117-123 mEq/L
117-123 mmol/L
Creatinine
1.2-2.1 mg/dl
106-186 μmol/L
Glucose
 55-114 mg/dl
3.1-6.3 mmol/L
Haemoglobin
80-150 g/L
Iron
68-215 μg/dl
12-39 μmol/L
pH (serum)
7.32-7.44
pH (urine)
5.5-7.5
Phosphorus
4.6-7.1 mg/dl
1.49-2.29 mmol/L
Potassium
4.04.5 mEq/L
4.0-4.5 mmo/L
Prothrombin time
7-12 s
PTT (Partial thromboplastin time)
12-22 s
Sodium
147-156 mEq/L
147-156 mmol/L
Dogs
Base excess
+6 to 0 mEq/L
Bicarbonate
17-24 mEq/L
17-24 mmol/L
Calcium
8.7-11.8 mg/dl
2.18-2.95 mmol/L
276
Appendix3 267
Appendix3
Chloride
99-110 mEq/L
99-110 mmol/L
Creatinine
0.7-1.6 mg/dl
62-141 μmol/L
Glucose
55-102 mg/dl
3.1-5.7 mmol/L
Haemoglobin
120-180 g/L
Iron
94-122 μg/dl
17-22 μmol/L
pH (serum)
7.31-7.53
pH (urine)
5.5-7.5
Phosphorus
2.8-7.7 mg/dl
0.9-2.45 mmol/L
Potassium
3.7-5.6 mEq/L
3.7-5.6 mmol/L
Prothrombin time
7-12 s
PTT (Partial thromboplastin time)
12-15 s
Sodium
137-149 mEq/L
137-149 mmol/L
Electrocardiographic data
Cats
P wave width
0.04 s
P-R interval
0.05-0.09 s
QRS width
0.04 s
QT interval
0.12-0.18 s
Dogs
P wave width
0.04 s
P-R interval
0.06-0.13 s
QRS width
0.05-0.06 s
QT interval
0.15-0.25 s
Other data
Cats
Gestation period
mean 63 days (range 58-70 days)
Suckling period
3-6 weeks
Dogs
Gestation period
mean 63 days (range 58-71 days)
Suckling period
3-6 weeks
277
268 Appendix 3
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyriglht @ 2O00 A Campbell and M Chapmalt
General bibliography and references
Merck and Co.
Allen DG, Pringle JK and Smith DA (1998). Handbook of Veterinary Drugs.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven,
Andrews AH and Humphreys DJ (1992). Poisoning in Veterinary Practice. Enfield:
National Office of Animal Health.
Bishop YM (ed.) (1996). The Veterinary Formulary (third edition). London: Pharma-
ceubical Press.
Bishop YM (ed.) (1998). The Veterinary Formulary (fourth edition). London: Pharma-
ceutical Press.
London: Bailliere Tindall.
British CropProtection Council(1997).ThePesticide Manual (11th edition).Farnham:
British Crop Protection Council.
Cooper MR and Johnson AW (1998).Poisonous Plants andFungi in Britain Animal and
Huma!n Poisoning. London: The Stationery Office.
Fraser CM, Bergerson JA, Mays A and Aeillo SE (eds) (1991). The Merck Veterinary
Manual (seventh edition). Rathway: Merck and Co.
Frohne D and Pfander HJ (1983).A Colour Atlas of Poisonous Plantts. London: Wolfe
Science.
Gfeller RW and Messonnier SP (1998). Handbook of Small Animal Toxicology and
Poisontinigs. St Louis: Mosby.
 s p  o yo ) (s)   pe  s
Academic Press.
Henderson A (ed.) (1997). The Henstont Small Aima! Veterimary Vade Mecum (l6th
Humphreys DJ (1988). Veterinary Toxicology (third edition). London: Bailliere Tindall.
Lorgue G, Lechenet J and Riviere A (1996). MJ Chapman (ed.), Clinical Veterinary
Toxicology (English edition). Oxford: Blackwell Science.
Mabberley DJ (1987). The Plant-Book. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
National Office of Animal Health (1998). Compendium of Data Sheets for Veterinary
Products 1998/1999. Enfield: National Office of Animal Health.
Osweiler GD (1996). Toxicology. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins.
Osweiler GD, Carson TL, Buck, WB and Van Gelder GA (1985). Clinical and Diagnostic
Veterinary Toxicology (third edition). Dubuque: Kendall Hunt.
Postgraduate Committee irn Veterinary Science, Sydney (1987). Veterinary Clinical
Royal Pharmaceutical Society (1996). MartindaleThe Exira Pharmacopoeia (31st
edition). London: Royal Pharmaceutical Society.
Royal Pharmaceutical Society (1999). Martindale: The Complete Drug Reference (32nd
edition). London: Pharmaceutical Press
Tennant B (1994). Small Animal Formulary. Cheltenham: British Small Animal
VeterinaryAssociation.
278
General bibliography and references I 26 1
Handbook of Poisoning in dogs and cats
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL and MICHAEL CHAPMAN
Copyright  2OOO A Campbell and M Clhapman
lndex
2,4,5-T (dog) 219-21
selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors
2,4-D (dog) 219-21
(dog) 242-4
2,4-DB (dog) 219-21
tricyclics (dog) 250-3
4-Methylpyrazole
Antidotal drugs, recommended holding for
use in ethylene glycol/antifreeze
surgery263
poisonings (cat) 24
Anti-emetics, recommended holding for
use in ethylene glycol/antifreeze
surgery 262
poisonings (dog) 129, 131
Antifreeze (cat) 22-6
4-MP
Antifreeze (dog) 127-32
use in ethylene glycol/antifreeze
Antivenom
poisonings (cat) 24
Zagreb*,
,use in management of adder
usein ethylene glycol/antifreeze
bites (dog) 256-7
poisonings (dog) 129, 131
Ascorbic acid
Acetaminophen (cat) 31-8
use in paracetamol poisonings (cat) 32,
Acetaminophen (dog) 205-12
36-7
Activated charcoal, use for gastric
use in paracetamol poisonings (dog)
decontamination 10-11
210-11
Adder (dog)254-7
Avermectins
Adsorbents
ivermectin (cat) 27-30
recommended holding for surgery 262
ivermectin (dog) 167-73
Azalea (dog) 231-3
use for gastric decontamination 10-11
Aescuius hippocastanum (dog) 143-4
BAC (cat) 17-19
Albuterol (dog) 235-7
Baclofen (dog) 746
Alcohol, ethyl
Barbecue lighter fuel (cat/dog) 524
use in ethylene glycol/antifreeze
Batteries (dog) 77-9
poisonings (cat) 24-5
Bean tree (dog) 176
use in ethylene glycol/antifreeze
Bees (dog) 145-7
poisonings (dog) 129-30
Bendiocarb (dog) 101-5
Aldicarb (dog) 101-5
Benzalkonium chloride (cat) 17-19
Alkyldimethylbenzylammonium chloride
Benzodiazepines (cat/dog) 47-51
(cat) 17--19
Bioresmethrin (cat) 42-5
Allethrin (cat) 42-5
Allethrin (dog) 228-30
Bioresmethrin (dog) 228-30
Blue-green algae (dog) 80-5
Allopurinol (dog) 59-60
Bone meal (dog) 133-4
Alphachloralose (dog) 61-3
Borax (dog) 86-8
Alphacypermethrin (cat) 42-5
Brodifacoum (dog) 6473
Alphacypermethrin (dog) 228-30
Bromadiolone (dog) 64-73
Alprazolam (cat/dog) 47-51
Bromazepam (cat/dog) 47-51
Amitriptyline (dog) 250-3
Button batteries (dog) 77-9
Anaesthetics, recommended holding for
surgery 263
Calciferol (dog) 89-96
Anthelminthics
Calcitonin, use in vitamin D-derived
dichlorophen (cat) 20-1
rodenticide poisoning (dog) 95
piperazine (cat) 3941
Cannabis (dog) 97-100
Anticoagulant rodenticides (dog) 64-73
Cannabis satiua (dog) 97-100
Antidepressants
Carbamate insecticides (dog) 101-5
279
Index269
Index
Carbaryl (dog) 101-5
Diphacinone (dog) 64-73
Carbofuran (dog) 101-5
Dothiepin (dog) 250-3
Cationic detergents, benzalkonium
Doxepin (dog) 250-3
chloride (cat) 17-19
Dumb cane (dog) 126
Chlordiazepoxide (cat/dog) 47-51
Chlorfenvinphos (dog)199-204
Emetics
Chlorphacinone (dog) 64-73
recommended holding for surgery 262
Chlorpyrifos (dog) 199-204
use for gastric decontamination 8-9
Chocolate (dog) 106-10
Ethanol
Cholecalciferoi (dog) 89-96
use in ethylene glycol/antifreeze
Cimetidine
poisonings (cat) 24-5
use in paracetamol poisonings (cat) 32,
use in ethylene glycol/antifreeze
37
poisonings (dog) 129-30
use in vitamin D-derived rodenticide
Ethylene glycol (cat) 22-6
poisoning (dog) 91, 94
Ethylene glycol (dog) 127-32
Cinerin I and I1 (cat) 42-5
Euphorbia pulcherrima (cat/dog) 55-6
Cinerin I and II (dog) 228-30
European adder (dog) 254-7
Citalopram (dog) 242-4
Clobazam (cat/dog) 47-51
Fenitrothion(dog)199-204
Clodronate, use in vitamin D-derived
Fenthion (dog) 199-204
rodenticide poisoning (dog) 91, 95
Fenvalerate (cat) 42-5
Clomipramine (dog) 250-3
Fenvalerate (dog) 228-30
Clonazepam (cat/dog) 47-51
Ferrous fumarate (dog) 1636
Clorazepate (cat/dog) 47-51
gluconate (dog) 163-6
Cocoa (dog) 106-10
sulphate (dog)163-6
Common honeysuckle (dog) 141-2
Fertilisers (dog) 133-4
Composition C-4 (dog) 222-5
Firethorn (dog) 226-7
Composition PE-4 (dog) 222-5
Flocoumafen (dog) 64-73
Conker (dog) 143-4
Flumazenil, use in benzodiazepine
Corticostercids (dog) 111
poisonings (cat/dog) 50-1
Cotoneaster horizontalis (dog)112-13
Flunitrazepam (cat/dog) 47-51
pyracantha (dog) 112-13
Fluoxeline (dog) 242-4
simonsii (dog) 112-13
Flurazepam (cat/dog) 47-51
species (dog)112-13
Flurbiprofen (dog) 148-55
Coumatetralyl (dog) 64-73
Fluvoxamine (dog) 242-4
Cyanoacrylate adhesives (dog) 114-15
Fly honeysuckle (dog) 141-2
Cyanobacteria (dog) 80-5
Fomepizole
Cyclonite (dog)222-5
use in ethylene glycoVantifreeze
Cypermethrin (cat) 42-5
poisonings (cat) 24
Cypermmethrin (dog) 228-30
use in ethylene glycol/antifreeze
poisonings (dog) 129, 131
Daffodil (dog) 116-18
Deltamethrin (cat) 42-5
Gastric decontamination 7-11
Deltamethrin (dog) 228-30
adsorbents 10-11
Demeton-S-methyl (dog) 199-204
emetics 7,8-9
Desferrioxamine, use in iron poisonings
gastric lavage, method 9-10
(dog) 164, 166
Glyphosate (dog) 135-8
Diazepam (cat/dog) 47-51
Golden chain (dog) 174-6
Diazinon (dog) 199-204
Golden rain (dog) 1746
Dichlorophen (cat) 20-1
Dichlorprop (dog)199-204
Hashish (dog) 97-100
Dichlorvos (dog) 199-204
Hemp (dog) 97-100
Diclofenac sodium (dog) 119-25
Heptenphos (dog) 199-204
Dieffenbachia (dog)126
Herbicides
Diesel (cat/dog) 524
glyphosate (dog)135-8
Difenacoum (dog) 64-73
Paraquat (dog) 213-17
Dimethoate (dog) 199-204
270 Index
Index
Holly (dog) 139-40
Methylene blue
Honeysuckle (dog) 141-2
use in paracetamol poisonings (cat) 36-7
Hornets (dog) 145-7
use in paracetamol poisonings (dog)
Horse chestnut (dog) 1434
210-11
HRT therapy (dog) 245-6
Midazolam (cat/dog) 47-51
Hymenoptera (dog) 145-7
Mistletoe (dog) 190-1
Molluscicides
Ibuprofen (dog) 148-55
metaldehyde (dog) 181-5
lex aquifolium (dog) 13940
methiocarb (dog) 186-9
Imipramine (dog) 250-3
Mother-in-law's tongue (dog) 126
Indomethacin (dog) 356-62
Mountain ash (dog) 234
Insecticides
carbamate (dog) 101-5
N-acetylcysteine
organophosphate (dog)199-204
use in paracetamol poisonings (cat) 32,
pyrethrins and pyrethroids (cat) 42-5
36
pyrethrins and pyrethroids(dog)228-30
use in paracetamol poisonings (dog) 206,
Irish yew (dog) 25860
209-10
Iron and iron salts (dog) 163-6
Naproxen (dog) 192-8
Iron sulphate (dog) 163-6
Narcissus poericus (dog) 116-18
Ivermectin (cat) 27-30
pseudonarcissus (dog) 116-18
Ivermectin (dog) 167-73
species (dog) 116-18
Nitrazepam (cat/dog) 47-51
Japanese yew (dog) 258-60
Normal values (cat/dog) 267-8
Jasmolin I and 11 (cat) 42-5
biological and haematological 267-8
Jasmolin I and II (dog) 228-30
electrocardiographic 268
general267,268
Kerosene (cat/dog) 52-4
Nortriptyline (dog) 250-3
Laboratory analyses 12-16
Oral contraceptives (dog) 245-6
documentation 12-14
Organophosphate insecticides (dog)
labelling 15-16
199--204
packaging 15-16
Oxazepam (cat/dog) 47-51
postage requirements 14-16
sampling 12-14
Paracetamol (cat) 31-8
Laburnim species (dog) 1746
Paracetamol (dog) 205-12
Lent lily (dog) 116-18
Paraffin (cat/dog) 52-4
Leopard lily (dog) 126
Paraquat (dog) 213-17
Lofepramine (dog) 250-3
Paroxetine (dog) 242-4
Lonicera caprijfolium (dog) 141-2
Perfoliate honeysuckle (dog) 141-2
peridymenum(dog)141-2
Permethrin (cat) 42-5
species (dog) 141-2
Permethrin (dog) 228-30
xylosteum (dog) 141-2
Petrol (cat/dog) 52-4
Loperamide (dog) 177-80
Petroleum disillate (cat/dog) 52-4
Loprazolam (cat/dog) 47-51
Pheasants eye daffodil (dog) 116-18
Lormetazepam (cat/dog) 47-51
Phenolphthalein (dog)218
Phenothrin (cat) 42-5
Malathion (dog) 199-204
Phenothrin (dog) 228-30
Marihuana (dog) 97-100
Phenoxy acid herbicides (dog) 219-21
MCPA (dog) 219-21
Phytomenadione, use in anticoagulant
MCPB (dog) 219-21
rodenticide poisoning (dog) 66-8, 70-71
MCPP (dog) 219-21
Piperazine (cat) 39-41
Metaldehyde (dog) 181-5
Piperonyl butoxide (cat) 42, 44
Methiocarb (dog) 186-9
Piperonyl butoxide (dog)228,229
Methionine
Pirimphos-methyl (dog) 199-204
use in paracetamol poisonings (cat) 36-7
Plastic explosive compounds (dog) 222-5
use in paracetamol poisonings (dog)
Play doh (dog) 238-41
210-11
POEA surfactant (dog) 135-8
281
Index I 271
Index
Poet's daffodil (dog) 116-18
SSRIs (dog) 242-4
Poinsettia (cat/dog) 55-6
Supergiue (dog) 114-15
Polyoxyethylene amine surfactant (dog)
135-8
Taxus baccata (dog) 258-60
 Pralidoxime, use in organophosphate
baccata fastigiata (dog)258-60
insecticide poisoning (dog) 201-2, 203-4
cuspidata (dog) 258-60
Propoxur (dog) 101-5
Temazepam (cat/dog) 47-51
Protriptyline (dog) 250-3
Terfenadine (dog) 247-9
Pyracantha (dog) 226-7
Tetramethrin (cat) 42-5
Pyrethrins (cat) 42-5
Tetramethrin (dog) 228-30
Pyrethrins (dog) 228-30
Theobrona cacao (dog) 106-10
Pyrethroids (cat) 42-5
Theobromine (dog) 106-10
Pyrethroids (dog) 228-30
Thermometers (cat/dog) 58
Tricyclic antidepressants (dog) 250-3
Quaternary ammonium compounds,
Trimipramine (dog) 250-3
benzalkonium chloride (cat) 17-19
Turpentine substitute (cat/dog) 52-4
RDX (dog)222-5
Values, normal (cat/dog) 267-8
Resmethrin (cat) 42-5
biological and haematological 267-8
Resmethrin (dog) 228-30
Rhododendron (dog) 231-3
electrocardiographic 268
Rodenticides
general 267, 268
Veterinary Poisons Information Service
anticoagulant (dog) 64-73
vitamin D derived (dog) 89-96
case data collection 36
Rowan (dog) 234
monographs and their structure 3-5
reporting cases to 2646
Salbutamol (dog) 235-7
review of work 5-6
Salmon calcitonin, use in vitamin D-
work of 1-6
derived rodenticide poisoning (dog) 95
Vipera berus (dog) 254-7
Salt (dog) 23841
Viscum album (dog) 190-1
Screen washes (cat) 22-6
Vitamin D (dog) 89-96
Screen washes (dog) 127-32
Ds (dog) 89-96
Sedatives,recommended holding for
K,use in anticoagulant rodenticide
surgery 263
poisoning (dog) 66-8, 70-1
Semtex (dog) 222-5
Serotonin re-uptake inhibitor
Warfarin (dog) 64-73
antidepressants (dog) 242-4
Wasps (dog) 145-7
Sertraline (dog) 242-4
White spirit (cat/dog) 52-4
Sex hormones (dog) 245-6
Wild daffodil (dog) 116-18
Silica gel (cat/dog) 57
Windscreen washes (cat) 22-6
8-98 (3op) ajeioq unipos
Windscreen washes (dog) 127-32
Sodium chloride (dog) 238-41
Woodbine (dog) 141-2
Sodium sulphate
use in paracetamol poisonings (cat) 36-7
Yew (dog)258-60
use in paracetamol poisonings (dog)
210-11
Zagreb* antivenom, use in management of
Sorbus aucuparia (dog)234
adder bites (dog) 256-7
282
272 Index