ESVOT COURSES 2011
ESVOT
VetAgro Sup,
Veterinary Campus of Lyon
VetAgro Sup
?
Marcy I'Etoile, Lyon (France) - October 20th - 22nd, 2011
E
SEMINARON
E
PATELLARLUXATION
Saturday, October 22nd
Chair: DOMINIQUE GRIFFON
Faculty: RANDY BOUDRIEAU, KENNETH BRUECKER, LOiC DEJARDIN
DOMINIQUE GRIFFON, DON HULSE, MICHAEL KOWALESKI
G
BRUNO PEIRONE, MASSIMO PETAZZONI,ALESSANDRO PIRAS
RICOVANNINI,ALDOVEZZONI
SEMINAR ON PATELLAR LUXATION
Saturday, October 22nd, 2011 - Lyon, France
8:30 - STATE OF THE ART LECTURE (SMALL ANIMALS AND EOUINE)
VET 2011 - The World Veterinary Year Prof. Jean-Francois Chary
Chair: Dominique Griffon
Faculty: Randy Boudrieau, Kenneth Bruecker, Loic Dejardin, Dominique Griffon, Don Hulse.
Michael Kowaleski, Bruno Peirone, Massimo Petazzoni, Alessandro Piras, Rico Vannini, Aldo Vezzoni
09:15 Introduction: Current issues related to patellar luxation - D. Griffon
09:25Patela luxation: When thetibia is guilty Assessment of thetibia in dogs with MPL) - M Petazzoni ..page 3
09:40Radiographs: what projections are indicated - A. Piras
..page8
09:55Assessment of femoral angulation / pre- DFO planning - M. Kowaleski
.. page 12
10:15
Assessment of femoral torsion or Indications for CT - D. Griffon
..page 15
10:30
Tibial angulation: should we consider corrections? - K. Bruecker
. page 18
10:45
Coffee break
11:15 Assessment and correction of Patellar Alta/ Baja - D. Griffon 
..page 19
11:30 Arthroscopic assessment - D. Hulse .
..page 23
11:45
Improving wedge trochleoplasty - D. Griffon
page 25
11:55
Improving en-block trochleoplasty - A. Vezzoni 
,page 27
12:10
Patellar luxation in cats - R. Vannini
... page 30
12:25
 Patelloplasty - A. Vezzoni
page 32
12:35Intra-op DFO surgical tips - K.Bruecker
abed....
12:55 DFO then trochleoplasty or trochleoplasty first - K. Bruecker
..page 36
01:050
 Concomitant CCL and MPL repair with the arthrex stabilisation system - D. Hulse
.page 37
01:15  Lunch break and exhibition 
02:30 Medial patellar luxation associated with severe limb deformities - R. Boudrieau 
. page 38
02:50
Lateral patellar luxation associated with severe limb deformities - M. Petazzoni
..page 43
03:10
 Patellar Luxation with concomitant CrCL rupture - case based approach - M. Kowaleski
page 46
03:25Patelar luxation after TPLO -M. Kowaleski
..page 50
03:40Patellar luxation after TTA -R. Boudrieau .
.. page 52
03:55
Treatment of patellar luxation in immature dogs - D. Hulse
page 55
04:10 Locking plates in DFO - are they needed? - B. Peirone 
page 57
04:30
Coffee break
05:00
 Analysis of recurrence: why did it happen? - D. Hulse 
... page 60
05:15 Planning and performing a surgical revision for recurrence -
Planning to root out where the problem is when the patellar re-luxates - M. Petazzoni
page 62
05:30 Patellar Groove prosthesis - A. Vezzoni
page 64
05:50 Total knee prosthesis - L. Dejardin (M. Allen)
page 68
06:10Panel Discussion -All speakers
06:40 End of the Seminar
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
3·ESVOT 2011,Lyon(France)-October 20h-22nd
M.Petazoni
Patellar luxation: when the tibia is guilty
(Assessment of the tibia in dogs with MPL)
Massimo Petazzoni, DMV
Chief of the Orthopaedic and traumatology department of the “Clinica Veterinaria Milano Sud"
Va della Liberazione 26,20068PeschieraBorromeo (Mi)-ITALY
Partial or complete articular separations or dislocations are spoken of as sub-luxations or lux-
ations. Although luxations or subluxations can be traumatic in origin, there are also predisposing
factors that can play an important role. The patello-femoral joint is one of the most involved in
non traumatic subluxations/luxations. Patellar luxation is a frequent cause of lameness in the dog
ly or be symptomatic continuously up to the fourth grade where the patella is permanently lux-
ated. Patella luxation has been defined as congenital/developmental because can be diagnosed in
the first stages of the development of a puppy. Medial patella luxation is the condition that is most
small breed dogs and is more frequent in large and giant breeds.
The patello-femoral joint is a true joint, formed by the "union" of the femur and the patella.
 permitting wide articular movement. Like all synovial joints it is characterized by a joint cavity.
a joint capsule, synovial fluid and articular cartilage. The patella is a sesamoid bone that devel-
ops inside the tendon of insertion of the quadriceps muscle (patellar tendon) lying along the ex-
tensor axis of the quadriceps muscle, that is the vector result of the traction force of the 4 mus-
 cles that compose the quadriceps muscle unit. During the growing period, because of the trac-
tion that these muscles exert, the patella generates a depression on the methaphyseal cranial cor-
tex of the distal femur, the femoral trochlea. As a consequence the lack of pressure of the patel-
la is held in the trochlea of the femur mainly by muscular/skeletal proper alignment (quadri-
ceps/patella/patellar tendon - femur and tibia). Fascia lata and the medial and lateral femoro-
pate llar ligaments and fibrocartilage play a minor role contributing to stability in non traumatic
patella luxations as they progressively get stretched when malalignments occur/develop. Any
modification to the distal femur in the frontal plane and transverse plane, to the proximal tibia
in the transverse/frontal plane and any modification to the relationship between the femur and
the tibia (rotation of the tibia related to the femur) and combinations of the above mentioned
variation can cause a subluxation or a luxation of the distal portion of the femur relative to the
patella or of the patella relative to the distal femur. To my knowledge the patella can luxate/sub
luxate only because of two reasons: first, the patella being out of position because of the medi-
al or lateral traction of the patellar tendon distal insertion (tibial tuberosity) or, second, because
 of the distal femur being out of position on its frontal (distal varus or valgus) or transverse plane
(internal or external femoral torsion). Whenever the tibia is guilty a deformity on the transverse
plane occurs (internal or external tibial torsion Fig 1, Fig 2) or a rotation of the tibia (internal or
ial valgus or proximal excessive tibial varus alone don't cause patellar luxation because they
don't affect the tibial tuberosity position in the frontal plane or in the transverse plane (Fig 4).
4· ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22nd
M. Petazzoni
DEFORMITIES:TRANSVERSEPLANE
internaltorsion
int
normal
torsion
Figure1
DEFORMITIES:TRANSVERSEPLANE
externaltorsion
ext
normal
torsion
Figure 2
5· ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22nd
M. Petazzoni
normal
extTibialrotation
intTibialrotation
Figure 3
normal
proxtibialvalgus
prox tibialvarus
Figure 4
6· ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22nd
M. Petazoni
Figure5
Internal TibialTorsion
0°
-10°
15°
-20°
-25°
-30°
-40°
45°
SNPA
Figure6
7*ESVOT2011,Lyon(France)-October20h-22nd
M. Petazzoni
A medial patellar luxation, when the tibia is guilty (considering a normal femur), can occur on-
ly because of two reasons: internal rotation of the tibia related to the femur or external tibial tor-
sion (torsion is defined as from proximal to distal Fig 2). Lateral patellar luxation (considering
a normal femur) can occur only because of two reasons: external tibial rotation of the tibia re-
lated to the femur (Fig 3. 5) or internal tibial torsion (Fig 1).
Two orthogonal radiographic views are needed in order to properly assess the tibia in the
frontal and transverse planes. A caudal-cranial (Ca-Cr) and a medio-lateral (ML) projection (the
first giving the most important information) should be taken. The caudal-cranial projection
should show the medial ridge of the calcaneus bisecting the trochlea of the talus as depicted in
figure 6 and 7. Considering the distal tibia in a true Ca-Cr projection attention should be paid to
could be used as a reference to be compared to the bone we are considering (Fig 6. 7).
External Tibial Torsion
5°
10°
15°
20°
30°
35°
40°
45
SNPA
Figure7
8·ESVOT 2011,Lyon(France)-October 20h-22"
A. Piras
Radiographs: what projections are indicated
Alessandro Piras, DVM, MRCVs, ISVS
44 Pound Road, Newry, Co Down, BT358DT, Northern Ireland - UK
Absfract Courtesy ot:
Michael P. Kowaleski, DVM, Dipl. ACVS and ECVS
Associate Professor of Orthopedic Surgery,Tufts Cummings School ofVeterinary Medicine
200Westboro Road,NorthGrafton,MA 01536 -USA
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Assess patients with patellar luxation with an emphasis on the detection of femoral varus
 Describe the radiological assessment of femoral varus, evaluate radiographs of clinical cases
and calculate femoral varus and torsion angles
- Define magnitude and location of the corrective osteotomy based on the preoperative plan-
ning
Medial patellar luxation is a developmental disorder in small breed dogs. It may occur as
s  na s n s a s pe aa e   p  e
breed dogs. Medial luxation accounts for 75-80 percent of cases of patellar luxation, with bilat-
eral involvement in 20-25 percent. Concurrent rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament occurs in
15-20 percent of cases.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY OF THE NORMAL QUADRICEPS/
PATELLAR MECHANISM
The patella is an ossification in the tendon of insertion of the quadriceps, which functions to redi-
rect the line of action of the quadriceps tendon much like a pulley redirects a cable. In order for the
 s a a o n   a   d o is
mandatory.
The extensor apparatus originates at the tuberosity for the origin of the rectus femoris on the
ventral aspect of the ilium, cranial to the acetabulum.
The remainder of the quadriceps group originates from the proximal femur, and converges
on the patella, continues as the patellar tendon, and inserts on the tibial tuberosity. Muscular con-
traction of the quadriceps results in the patella being drawn onto a straight line from the origin
of the rectus femoris to the tibial tuberosity
Thus, for the patella to be stable, the extensor mechanism must align with the underlying skele.
tal elements including the femoral shaft, the trochlear groove, and the tibial tuberosity.
 s n pn as n a e n sss s rrd as
secondary support to the femoro-patellar articulation.
9·ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22nd
A. Piras
SKELETALABNORMALITIES
ASSOCIATED WITHPATELLAR
LUXATION
A variety of anatomic abnormalities can
be present in the patient with medial patellar
huxation.
These include coxa vara, a diminished an-
gle of inclination of the femoral neck; genu
varum, a bowlegged stance in which the knees
are abnormally separated, distal femoral varus
in which the distal femur bows toward mid-
line, external torsion of the distal femur, a shal-
low trochlear sulcus, proximal tibial varus or
valgus in which the proximal tibia bows to-
Trochlear
ward midline or away from midline respective-
groove
ly. internal tibial torsion, and medial displace
Tibial
ment of the tibial tubercle.
tuberosity
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Surgical correction is usually indicated in
all cases of Grade Ill or IV, and most cases of
Figure I - Anatomic abnormalities of the quadriceps mech-
Grade II medial patellar luxation. The goals of
anism,femur and tibia which contribute to medial patellar
surgery are to align the extensor mechanism
luxation. The dark line represents the line of action of the fe-
and deepen the trochlear sulcus to create a sta-
nur The arrow indicates the medial force acting on the
ble femoro-patellar articulation. The combina-
patella due to the anatomic alignment of the quadriceps
tion of techniques required is dependent upon
mechanism from the pelvis to the tibial uberosity. The result
the specific abnormalities of each patient. A
df the medially directed force (arrow)is that the patella is
thorough physical examination is imperative
luxated medial to the trochlear groove.
to guide the clinician in the interpretation of
diagnostic imaging studies, and to select an ap-
 propriate treatment plan.
Coexisting conditions such as hip dysplasia with subluxation or luxation of the femoral
head. partial or complete rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament, and torsional malformation
of the tibia or femur must be identified clinically to ensure appropriate imaging is obtained and
a rational treatment plan is devised.
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
Accurate radiographic assessment of limb alignment is difficult, and requires general anesthesia
and precise patient positioning to avoid positioning artifact. A complete radiographic evaluation in-
cludes at least a lateral and ventro-dorsal view of the pelvis including the femora and proximal tibia,
and an axial view of the femur for femoral anteversion calculation. In some cases, cranio-caudal
and medio-lateral views of the femur, and caudo-cranial and lateral views of the tibia including
the stifle and tarsus may be required.
10 ·ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22"
A. Piras
A well-positioned ventro-dorsal view of
the pelvis including the femora and proxi-
 mal tibiae is the most important view for
determination of femoral varus deformity.
It is imperative that the femora be parallel
to the spinal axis and the radiographic cas-
sette. In cases in which diminished hip
range of motion limits hip extension, the x-
ray beam and cassette can be angled such
that the x-ray beam is perpendicular to the
long axis of the femur, and the cassette is
perpendicular to the beam. Alternatively.
the patient can be elevated in a v-trough, or
a horizontal beam, cranio-caudal femur
can be obtained. In a well-positioned view.
the fabellae appear bisected by the femoral
cortices. the vertical walls of the inter-
condylar notch are distinct parallel lines.
and the lesser trochanter is only partially
visible. The angle of femoral varus (or val-
gus) is determined by the intersection of
the proximal femoral mechanical axis, and
the distal femoral mechanical axis. The
 proximal axis is determined by finding the
center of the femoral diaphysis at 3-4 points
just distal to the lesser trochanter; these
 points are connected with a line, which rep-
resents the proximal femoral mechanical
axis. The distal mechanical axis is deter-
Figure 2 - A well-positioned VD pelvic radiograph of a pa-
mined by identifying the transcondylar ax-
tient with Grade IV MPL and femoral varus. The varus an
is, and then drawing a perpendicular to this
gle (V)is determined by the intersection of the proximal and
axis, which bisects the intercondylar notch
distal femoral mechanicalaxes.Note bilateral femoral head
(Figure 2).
subluxation.
The intersection of these lines deter
mines the varus angle at the point of maxi-
mal curvature.
 The axial view of the fenur is obtained by positioning the patient in dorsal recumbency and
flexing the hip joint such that the x-ray beam is directed down the center of the femoral diaph-
ysis, with the cassette under the hip joint. The angle of anteversion is determined by the inter-
section of the transcondylar axis and an axis through the center of the femoral head and neck
(Figure 3).
Since these radiographic views are difficult to obtain, and are highly sensitive to radiograph-
ic positioning artifact, several exposures of each view should be obtained. A variation of more
than 2-3 degrees between radiographs or between left and right femurs in a symmetrically af-
fected patient suggests positioning or measurement artifact.
In cases in which tibial torsional or angular abnormalities are evident, caudo-cranial and lat-
eral views of the tibia including the stifle and tarsus should be obtained. Recently, computed to
mographic evaluation of tibial torsion has been described, and this technique was found to be
more accurate than the radiographic technique described by Slocum.
11*ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22nd
A. Piras
A
Figure 3-Axial view of the femur. Note that the angle of anteversion (A) determined by this method does not discriminate
betweenneckversionand femoral torsion.
REFERENCES
1. Apelt D, Kowaleski MP, Dyce J: Comparison of Computed Tomographic and Standard Radiographic
Determination of Tibial Torsion if the Dog. Vet Surg 34 (5): 457462, 2005.
2.
 Aper R, Kowaleski MP, Apelt D, and Dyce J: Computed Tomographic Determination of Tibial Torsion
in the Dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46 (3): 187-191, 2005.
 3. Hayes AG, Boudrieau RJ, Hungerford LL: Frequency and distribution of medial and lateral patellar lux-
ation in dogs: 124 cases (1982-1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:716-720, 1994.
4. Palmer R: Patellar Luxation: Femoral Osteotomy and Other Therapeutic Options in Large Breed
Dogs, in American College of Veterinary Surgeons, 12th Annual Veterinary Symposium, San Diego,
CA, pp 41-45.
5. Peruski AM, Kowaleski MP, Pozzi A, Dyce J, and Johnson KA: Treatment of Medial Patellar Luxation
  )   o n   g     
Conference of the Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Keystone, CO, February 25-March 4, 2006.
6. Dudley RM, Kowaleski MP, Drost WT, and Dyce J: Radiographic and Computed Tomographic De-
termination of Femoral Varus and Torsion in the Dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:546-552, 2006.
7. Tomlinson J, Fox D, Cook IL, and Keller GG: Measurement of Femoral Angles in Four Dog Breeds. Vet Surg
36:593-598, 2007.
12+ESVOT 2011,Lyon (France)-October 20"h-22
M.P. Kowaleski
Assessment of femoral angulation /
pre- DFO planning
Michael P. Kowaleski, DVM, Dipl. ACVS and ECVS
Associate Professor of Orthopedic Surgery. Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine,
200 Westboro Road, North Grafton, MA 01536-USA
Accurate radiological assessment of limb alignment is difficult, and requires heavy sedation or
general anesthesia and precise patient positioning to avoid positioning artifact. A complete radi-
ographic evaluation includes at least cranio-caudal and medio-lateral views of the femur and prox-
imal tibia, and an axial view of the femur for femoral torsion determination. In some cases caul
do-cranial and medio-lateral views of the tibia including the stifle and tarsus may be required. Al-
ternatively. a computed tomographic method with analysis of individual slices (Dudley 2006) or
three-dimensional reconstruction of the skeletal elements into views analogous to the radi-
ographic views can be utilized to quantify the deformities present.
A wellpositioned cranio-caudal view of the femur and proximal tibia is the radiographic view
that is used to screen for and quantify femoral varus deformity. It is imperative that the femur is
parallel and the radiographic beam perpendicular to the radiographic cassette or detector In cas-
es in which diminished hip range of motion limits hip extension, the x-ray beam and cassette or
detector can be angled such that the x-ray beam is perpendicular to the long axis of the femur.
and the cassette or detector is perpendicular to the beam. Alternatively. the patient can be ele-
tioned view, the fabellae appear bisected by the femoral cortices, the vertical walls of the inter-
condylar notch are distinct parallel lines, and the lesser trochanter is only partially visible; often
the proximal femoral mutrient foramen can be identified as a small, round lucency centered be-
tween the femoral cortices in the proximal diaphysis. 'The benefit of three-dimensional recon-
ed into the appropriate position to simulate a cranio-caudal view. In a normal femur, the magni-
tude of femoral varus (or valgus) is determined by measuring the anatomic lateral distal femoral
angle (aLDFA) at the intersection of the femoral anatomic axis and the distal joint reference line
of the femur, using the radiographic method described by Tomlinson (Tomlinson 2007) or the
computed tomographic method described by Dudley (Dudley 2006) or three dimensional recon-
     d   e    a  n 
femoral deformity is determined at the center of angulation of rotation (CORA) located at the in-
tersection of the proximal and distal anatomical axes of the femur.
In the radiographic and CT methods, the overall length of the femur is determined, and the
center of the femur at 33% and 50% of its length is identified. A line is drawn connecting these
two points; this is the anatomic axis of the femur. The distal joint reference line is a line con-
 necting the most distal aspect of the medial and lateral condyles of the femur The aLDFA is
measured at the intersection of the anatomic axis and the distal joint reference line. Comparison
of the aLDFA to a breed specific reference range will determine if significant femoral varus is pres-
ent. If a significant femoral varus deformity is present, the location and magnitude of the defor-
mity must be determined. Measure the overall length of the femur, and identifying the center of
13 *ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22"
M.P. Kowaleski
the femur at 33% and 50% of its length, draw a line connecting these two points to determine the
proximal femoral anatomic axis; in this case, the line is not drawn to the joint level. Draw the dis-
tal joint reference line, set the aLDFA to the breed specific value, and draw the distal anatomic
axis such that the line extends along the lateral aspect of the intercondylar notch. The CORA is
located at the intersection of the proximal and distal anatomic axes, and its magnitude can be
measured at this location. If a breed specific normal value is not available, then the opposite nor-
mal femur can be measured as a reference. If the opposite femur is affected, the aLDFA can be
arbitrarily set to 94-98 degrees, as this is the value for a number of large breed dogs (Tomlinson.
2007). It should be noted, that in some cases external femoral torsion (decreased angle of antev-
ersion) is the only identifiable femoral deformity. and in these cases, correction of torsion should
be undertaken.
Femoral torsion can be quantified from the axial view of the femur. To obtain the axial view
of the femur. position the patient in dorsal recumbency and flex the hip joint such that the x-ray
beam is directed down the center of the femoral diaphysis, with the cassette under the hip joint.
The femoral torsion angle (anteversion angle) is determined by the intersection of the
transcondylar axis and an axis through the center of the femoral head and neck. The reported
range for anteversion angle is quite broad, varies from study to study, and no breed specific nor
mal values are available at this time. The mean reported in one study was 27 degrees (range 12-
40 degrees). This is the value I generally use clinically, since this publication utilized a similar
radiographic method. In the case of medial patellar luxation, if the patient's femoral torsion an-
gle is less than 27 degrees, I consider correction during corrective osteotomy. If the patient's an-
lar luxation. Again, three-dimensional reconstruction of the femur and manipulation of the view
into the appropriate position is much more rapid and less labor intensive than obtaining this
viewwith radiographs.
Figure I - Cranio-caudal medio-lateral and axial three-dimensional reconstruction views of the femur These views were re-
constructed from a transverse piane CT scan, I mm slice thickness.
14 * ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22nd
M.P.Kowaleski
ic positioning artifact, several exposures of each view should be obtained. A variation of more
than 2-3 degrees between radiographs or between left and right femurs in a symmetrically af-
fected patient suggests positioning or measurement artifact.
In cases in which tibial torsional or angular abnormalities are evident, caudo-cranial and lat-
eral views of the tibia including the stifle and tarsus should be obtained. Recently. computed to-
mographic evaluation of tibial torsion has been described, and this technique was found to be
more accurate than the radiographic technique described by Slocum (Aper 2005, Apelt 2005).
REFERENCES
Apelt D, Kowaleski MP, Dyce J: Comparison of computed tomographic and standard radiographic deter-
mination of tibial torsion in the dog. Vet Surg 34:457, 2005.
Aper R, Kowaleski MP, Apelt D et al: Computed tomographic determination of ibial torsion in the dog, Vt
Radiol Ultrasound 46:187, 2005.
Dudley RM, Kowaleski MP, Drost WT et al: Radiographic and computed tomographic determination of
femoral varus and torsion in the dog. Vt Radiol Ultrasound 47:546, 2006.
Tomlinson J, Fox D, Cook IL et al: Measurement of femoral angles in four dog breeds, Vt Surg 36:593, 2007.
15 · ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22nd
D.J. Griffon
Assessment of femoral torsion
or indications for CT
Dominique J. Griffon, DMV, MS, PhD, DECVS, DACVS
Full professor Small Animal SurgeryAssociate Dean for Research,College of Veterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences 309E.2nd Street,Pomona,CA 91766-1854
Femoral torsion has been implicated in the pathogenesis of patellar luxation and cra
mial cruciate ligament disease (CCLD). However, obtaining an objective and repro-
ducible measurement of this conformation remains a challenge, thereby preventing ac-
curate surgical correction. The purpose of this presentation is to review the traditional
methods for assessing femoral torsion, discuss their limitations, and propose alternatives
specifically tested in dogs with or without CCLD.
Femoral torsion has traditionally been measured via radiographic determination of
the angle of antversion of the femoral head. The angle of anteversion (AA), which quan-
tifies femoral torsion can be measured on an axial projection of the femur, as the angle
between the axis of the femoral neck and the transcondylar axis. Alternatively, it may be
calculated based on the ventrodorsal view of the pelvis and the mediolateral projection
of the femur (Bardet 1983). This technique falsely assumes that the degree of magnifi-
cation is identical on both radiographic projections and requires good positioning. The
positioning of the fermur on the ventrodorsal projection of the pelvis is assessed in dogs
based on the position of the patella and symmetrical superposition of the fabellae with
the femur. The positioning of the femur on the mediolateral view is evaluated based on
superposition of both fabellae in the craniocaudal plane. We have developed a simpler
method for estimating the AA based on a single mediolateral radiographic projection
(lateral plane AA). The angle of anteversion is affected by other conformational charac
teristics of the hindlimb, such as the angle of inclination of the hip (coxa valga tends to
increase the angle of anteversion) and femoral angulation. Anteversion angles may be
 nbn  aa e   ss s o pa   n
1). We evaluated the correlation between the radiographic and CT methods for meas-
uring the angle of anteversion in the pelvic limbs (n = 28) of 14 dogs without CCL de-
ficiency classified as control limbs, and in limbs of 16 dogs with CCL deficiency con-
sidered as affected by (18 limbs) or predisposed to (10 contralateral limbs) CCL defi-
ciency. There was a significant correlation between biplanar and lateral plane AAs but
neither correlated with CT assessment of femoral torsion. This lack of correlation may
result from slight variations in radiographic positioning and selection of landmarks, af-
fecting the accuracy and variability of radiographic measurements. Our findings are in
contradiction with Dudley et al., who previously reported that femoral torsion could be
accurately evaluated with radiographs and CT in normal dogs. The discrepancy be-
tween our results and this previous publication may relate to differences in populations
16 ·ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22nd
D.J. Griffon
as well as statistical methodology. Dudley et al. looked for statistically significant differ
ences between radiographic and CT measurements within nine normal cadavers, where
as we tested the correlation between corresponding measurements in clinical patients
with or without CCL disease.
Although computed tomography allows correction of positioning artifacts, meas-
uring the angle of anteversion does not differentiate femoral neck version from distal
femoral torsion. This limitation has immediate clinical implications when considering
corrective osteotomy of the femur in dogs with medial patellar luxation. We have de-
veloped CT measurements to determine the level of torsion along the femur, based
on the relative position of the femoral head and condyles with the lesser and greater
trochanter (Mostafa et al. 2009). A significant correlation was identified between the
overall AA and each of the distal, proximal, and femoral head trochanteric (FHT) an-
gles in dogs with or without CCLD. Pelvic limbs of Labrador Retrievers with, or pre-
disposed to, CCL disease had evidence of internal torsion of the distal femur (in
[         
condyle trochanteric angle) and normal femoral neck anteversion (normal proximal
AA, femoral head trochanteric angle. This internal torsion of the femur was detected
on radiographs and CT of predisposed limbs, but only via CT in CCL deficient
limbs. Nonetheless, radiographic evaluation of femoral torsion appears to be valuable
as a predictive tool for CCLD (Ragetly et al. 2011). Comparing Labrador Retrievers
at low risk for CCLD (older, normal dogs) and Labrador Retrievers with unilateral
CCLD, we determined that, among all factors measured, a combination of tibial
 plateau angle (TPA) and femoral anteversion angle measured on radiographs was op-
timal for discriminating predisposed and non-predisposed limbs for CCL disease in
Labrador Retrievers.
AnteversionAngle:3D-CT
Thick CT slices
Volumerenderex
2
technique
Figure I -CT measurements of femoral torsion. The anteversion angle may be measured using cross sections at the level of the
femoralneck and condyles or directy with a volume rendered technique.These methods do not differentiate femoral neck ver-
sionfromdistalfemoraltorsion.
17* ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22ng
D.J. Griffon 
Assessing predisposition to CCL disease with a combination of conformational meas-
urements including anteversion angle therefore appears more promising than using uni-
variate parameters. Although this radiographic measurement may have a predictive val-
ue, computed tomographic evaluation seems warranted prior to surgical correction.
 In summary, CT may be especially relevant in the pre-operative evaluation of dogs
with moderate to severe patellar luxation and suspected femoral angulation and/or tor-
sion. The availability of CT and the possibility to generate studies under sedation have
improved the feasibility and cost effectiveness of this imaging modality in small animal
practices. CT quantification and localization of the level of angulation in three dimen-
sions could provide objective guidelines as to the selection of patients considered for cor-
rective osteotomies. This information would also be relevant to the pre-surgical planning
of corrective osteotomies, potentially improving surgical outcome.
SELECTED REFERENCES
s    e  s un n n go      r a
1983;12:1-6.
Dudlley RM, Kowaleski MP, Drost WT et al.: Radiographic and computed tomographic determination of
femoral varus and torsion in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultra, 2006;47:546-552.
Griffon Dl: A review of the pathogenesis of canine cranial cruciate ligament disease as a basis for preven-
tive strategies. Invited Review for Vet Surg 2010;39:399-409.
Kaiser S, Cornely D, Golder W, et al.b The correction of canine patellar luxation and the anteversion angle
as measured using magnetic resonance images. Vet Radiol & Ultrasound 2001;42(2):113-118.
Montavon PM, Hohn RB, Olmstead ML, et al. Inclination and anteversion angles of the femoral head and
neck in the dog: evaluation of a standard method of measurement. Vet Surg 1985;14(4):277282.
Mostafa AM, Griffon DJ, Thomas M, et al. Morphometric characteristics of the pelvic limb of Labrador Re-
trievers with and without cranial cruciate ligament deficiency. Am J Vet Res 2009;70(4):498-507
Nunamaker DM, Biery DN, Newton CD. Femoral neck anteversion in the dog: its radiographic measure
ment. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1973;14(1):45-47.
Ragetly CA, Evans R, Mostafa AA, Griffon DJ: Multivariate analysis of morphometric characteristics to
evaluate risk factors for cranial cruciate ligament deficiency in Labrador Retrievers. Vet Surg 201l;40:
327-333.
18·ESVOT 2011,Lyon(France)-October 20h-22nd
K.A. Bruecker
Tibial angulation: should we consider corrections?
Kenneth A. Bruecker, DVM, MS. DACVS
Board Certified American College ofVeterinary Surgeons,Veterinary Medical and Surgical Group,
Inc. (VMSG), 2199 Sperry Avenue Ventura, CA 93003-7426 - USA
The quadriceps mechanism includes the origin of the quadriceps muscles to the insertion of
the quadriceps tendon (patellar ligament) on the tibial tuberosity. Although the etiology of
malalignment of the quadriceps mechanism is largely centered on the femur and excessive distal
femoral varus (in the case of medially luxating patella), the conformation of the tibia should not
be ignored.
Unfortunately, there is little to no published literature that looks at the influence of tibial valgus
or torsion in the implication of quadriceps malalignment. Only recently have some normal tibial me-
 chanical angles and axis in-
formation been known and
even then only for limited
breeds (Figure a- from Dr.
M Petazzoni's Atlas of Go-
niometric Measurements of
the Hind Limb. published
口
by Merial.) Published nor-
mal values for tibial torsion
mMPTA
mLPTA
 are not available. We can all
likely show case examples
where tibial correction for
either excessive valgus or
 torsion was indicated (Fig-
ures b, c). yet until we all
more carefully measure the
tibial angles and axis in our
clinical cases and can cross
reference to breed normal
the answer to the question
of should we consider tibial
 correction will remain..
"MAYBE, POSSIBLY,
mMDTA
mLDTA
YES. CERTAINLY IN
SOME CASES"!
I contend it is critical
that we carefully evaluate
Figurea
the ENTIRE hind limb
G
alignment in cases of patel-
la luxation.
Figureb
Figurec
19+ESVOT 2011,Lyon (France)-October 20"-22
D.J. Griffon
Assessment and correction of Patellar Alta/Baja
Dominique J. Griffon, DMV, MS, PhD, DECVS, DACVS
Full professor, Small Animal Surgery, Associate Dean for Research, College of Veterinary Medicine
WesternUniversityofHealthStiences 309E.2ndStreet,Pomona,CA91766-1854
Proximo-distal misalignment of the patella has been proposed as a factor contributing to the
pathogenesis of patellar luxation and post-surgical recurrence of the the disease. Recurrence is one
of the most common major complications associated with surgical management of patellar luxa
fion. It accounted for 30-48% of the overall postoperative complications and up to 65-86% of the
major complications. Patella alta (high riding patella) refers to an abnormally elevated position of
the patella within the femoral trocheal groove. Patella baja describes a patella riding too distal
within the trochear groove. In humans. patella alta can be suspected based on examination of
knees of the patient siting on a table, with the legs hanging loosely and the knees at a right an-
s an  e  a  ra ae s a f e ai s e en as
Patellofemoral pain syndrome, which is closely associated with patella alta in man, is character-
sensations of the patella, stiffness of the knee, and periodic effusion. On clinical examination, pain
la. The significance and clinical signs associated with patellar baja/alta in dogs in less clear. Based
on a clinical impression, patella alta seems much more common than patella baja and tends to oc-
to the groove in a standing position, as well as the ability of the patella to ride off axis and prox-
imal to the groove, when the limb is extended and rotated, without pressure applied to the patel-
la. Patella baja most commonly results from premature closure of the tibial tuberosity growth
plate secondary to tension band repair of a Salter Harris fracture.
A definitive diagnosis of patellar proximo-distal misalignment is currently based on radi-
ographic indexes. Among these, the fnsaff-Safvaff fechniqueis most commonly used in man and
dogs. A lateral radiograph is taken with the stifle in a semi-flexed position and with the patellar
ligament taut. This true lateral radiograph gives a good visualization of the patellar tendon and
its insertion into the tibia. Insall's index is obtained by dividing the greatest diagonal length of the
Insall's index has been modified in humans to overcome the artifact created by long distal patel
lar facets that artificially increase the ratio and may mask the presence of patella alta. Insall's mod-
ified index is obtained by dividing the distance between the inferior aspect of the articular surface
of the patella and the insertion of the patellar ligament by the length of the patellar articular sur-
face. The distance between the inferior articular surface of the patella and patellar tendon inser-
fion is divided by the length of the patellar articular surface. The normal ratio averages 1.75
"range, 1.2 - 2.6". In spite of this modification, the clinical utility of Insall's index and Insall's mod-
ified index remains limited by the difficulty in precisely determining the point of insertion of the
patellar ligament on the tibial tuberosity. An alternative technique has been developed in humans
using anteroposterior radiographs to address this issue. Using this technique, patella alta should
be suspected if the distance from the inferior pole of the patella to a line drawn across the distal
aspect of the femoral condyles is more than 20 mm.
D.J. Griffon
Evaluation of the proximodistal alignment of the canine patella initially focused on the appli-
cation of Insall's index to large breed dogs. The ratio of the patellar ligament length (PLL) to
patellar length (PL) was increased in a retrospective study of 30 large breed dogs with MPL, with
ratios > 1.97 being consistent with patella alta (Johnson et al. 2002). Based on the association be-
tween increased PLL:PL and MPL, patella alta was suspected to play a role in the development
of medial patellar luxation in large breed dogs (Johnson et al. 2006). Although we found that this
index to be reproducible within the same investigator (2.5% variability). this ratio varies with the
degree of stifle flexion to reach a maximum value at 90 degrees. Other limitations of this index
are: 1- landmarks are difficult to identify when the patella is luxated and superimposed with the
femur, 2- the anatomical characteristics of the distal femur and proximal tibia are not taken into
considered, in spite of their contribution to the extensor mechanism.
PL
Figure 1:Determination of the modified PLL:PL
ratio. The length of the patellar ligament (PLL) represents
the distance from the point of origin of the ligament on the dis-
PLL
tal aspect of the patella to its insertion on the proximal extent
of the tibial crest (tibial tuberasity).When measuring the
length of the patella (PL) in dogs with degenerative joint dis-
ease,the normal contour of the patella shouid be extrapolat-
ed to exclude enthesophytes at the distal aspect the patella.
Contralateralradiographs may be superimpased to facilitate
this extrapolation. The normal values (95% CI) of the mod-
ifed PLL:PL are 1.97 to 2.06.
To palliate these limitations, the posifion of fhe
patella can be evaluated in relation to the transcondy-
lar axis of the femur (A:PL). (Figure 2)
Figure 2:Determination of the A:PL index. The
lengthof averticalline(A)connectingthe proximal pole of
the patella and the transcondylar axis of the distal femur,
measuredfrom a caudocranial orcraniocaudal radiograph,is
indexed to the PL to provide A:PL.The value for PL is
measured on the corresponding mediolateral view of the knee
because superimpasition over the distal aspect of the patella
prevents adequate visualization of the distal pole of the patel-
la on caudocranial and craniocaudal projections. The normal
values (95% CI) of A:PL was 1.92 to 2.03.
21 * ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22"
D.J. Griffon
We have previously evaluated the potential contribution of the proximodistal misalignment of
the patella to the side of patella luxation (medial vs. lateral) in medium to giant breed dogs. us-
ing the two ratios described above. In addition, we assessed other structures contributing to the
proximodistal alignment of the patella relative to the femoral trochlea (conformation of the distal
femur and proximal tibia). In this study. MPL was associated with patella alta as a result of
increased length of the patella ligament Lateral patellar luxation was associated with patella
baja, secondary to an increased proximal tibia length. A thorough evaluation of the proximal tib-
ia is recommended in dogs with lateral patellar luxation because dogs with P'TL:DI'W (Figure 3)
values > 1.65 are considered at high risk for developing patella baja.
PTL
Figure 3: Evaluation of the prximal tibia.
The proximal fibial length (PTL) was measured as
fhedistancebetweenthecranialpointofthemedial ar-
PTW
ficular surface ofthetibialplateau (l)andthefibial
(DTW) was measured at a distance equal to twice the
2xPTW
proximal tibial width (PTW) from the cranial aspect
ofthe medial tibialplateau (I).
DTW
Assessment of the proximo-distal alignment of the patella (via palpation, PLL:PL and A:PL
ratios) is recommended prior to surgical treatment in medium to large breed dogs with patel-
lar luxation. This evaluation is especially relevant in large dogs with concurrent cranial cruci-
retropatellar pressure and tend to create a proximal displacement of the patella that would ex
patella is indicated in dogs undergoing surgical repair of patella luxation, in cases with post-op-
eraive recurrence attributed to patella alta or in dogs with decreased stifle extension due to
patella baja.
Surgical treatment of patella alta consists in a distal transposition of the tibial tuberosity. typ-
ically combined with a lateral transposition. The tibial tuberosity is then immobilized via tension
band technique or application of a TTA plate. The optimal method for surgical correction of
patella baja remains unclear. In man, patella baja is corrected by proximal transfer of the tibial
tuberosity or Z-plasty lengthening of the patellar ligament. Based on the underlying mechanism
proposed in dogs with patella baja. proximal transposition of the tibial tuberosity would be pre-
ferred. The proximal transposition of the tibial crest in dogs can be maintained with a T"TA plate,
although limited bone stock may be available in that region.
22 * ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
D.J. Griffon
SELECTED REFERENCES
 1. Arthurs G I, Langley-Hobbs SJ. Complications associated with corrective surgery for patellar luxation in
109 dogs. Vet Surg 2006; 35: 559-566.
2. Carson WG, James SL, Larson LL, et al. Patellofemoral disorders: Physical and radiographic evalua
tion. Clin Orthop Rel Res 1984; 185: 178-186.
3. Gibbons SE, Macias C, Tonzing MA, et al. Patellar luxation in 70 large breed dogs. J small Anim Pract
2006;47: 3-9.
4. Johnson AL, Broaddus KD, Hauptman JG, et al. Verical patellar position in large-breed dogs with clin-
ically normal stifles and large-breed dogs with medial patellar luxation. Vet Surg 2006; 35: 78-81.
 5. Johnson AL, Probst CW, DeCamp CE, et al. Verical position of the patella in the stifle joint of clinical-
ly normal large-breed dogs. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63: 42-46.
6. LaFond E, Breur GJ, Austin CC. Breed susceptibility for developmental orthopedic diseases in dogs. J
Am An Hosp Assoc 2002; 38: 467-477.
7  Langenbach A, Marcellin-Little DI: Management of concurrent patellar luxation and cranial cruciate lig-
ament rupture using modifed tibial plateau leveling. J Small Anim Pract 2010; 51:97-103
8. Mortari AC, Rahal SC, Vulcano LC et al.: Use of radiographic measurements in the evaluation of dogs
with medial patellarluxation.Can Vet J 2009;50:1064-1068
9.Mostafa AM, Griffon DJ, Thomas MW, Constable P: Proximodistal alignment of the canine patella:Ra-
diographic evaluation and association with medlial and lateral patella luxation in dogs. Vet Surg
2008;31:201-211.
10. Piermattei DL, Flo GL. The stifle joint. In Piermattei DL, Flo GL (eds): Handbook of Small Animal Or-
thopedics and Fracture Repair. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: PA Saunders, 1997; 516-534.
11. Roush JK. Canine patellar luxation. Vet Clin North America: Small animal practice 1993; 23 (4): 855-
868.
12. Towle HA, Griffon DJ, Thomas MW, Siegel AM, Dunning D, Johnson A: Pre- and post-operative radi
ographic and reconstructed three-dimensional computed tomographic evaluation of dogs with medial
patellar luxation. Vet Surg 2005;34(3):265-272.
23*ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
D.Hulse
Arthroscopic assessment
Don Hulse, DVM, Dip ACVs, ECVS
Dept Small Animal Surgery College Veterinary Medicine Texas A&M University
CollegeStationTexas77843-4474-USA
Medial patellar luxation (MPL) is a common disorder that frequently requires surgical in-
   n d     
Arthroscopy has become a valuable tool to treat stifle problems, including cranial cruciate lig
imally-invasive manner. Arthroscopy also improves the surgeon's ability to better assess
pathological change due to the magnification provided by the scope and the ability to posi-
tion the scope in areas that are difficult to view with the naked eye through an arthrotomy.
Because of the enhanced view, arthroscopic surgery is typically more precise and less likely
to result in iatrogenic joint trauma.
Arthroscopy can also be used to assess the stifle in patients having patellar luxation. The
arthroscopic findings may influence the surgical techniques chosen to treat the patient and
may allow less invasive surgery.
ARTHROSCOPIC CONSIDERATIONS WITH MPL
Arthroscopy of the stifle allows visualization of the supratrochlear pouch, infrapatellar fat
pad. patella, femoral trochlea and trochlear ridges, synovial membrane, medial and lateral gut-
ters of the joint, intercondylar notch, anterior cruciate ligament, posterior cruciate ligament,
medial meniscus, lateral meniscus, medial and lateral femoral condyles, popliteal tendon, ar-
ticular surface of the tibia, and the long digital extensor tendon. Arthroscopic assessment of
the trochlear groove is helpful in MPL patients to determine if trochlear groove deepening
techniques are required. A less-invasive arthrotomy may be sufficient if the trochlear groove
tients having adequate depth ot the trochlear groove may be treated using a minimally-invaove
approach to perform a tibial tuberosity transposition, medial release incision and a lateral im-
brication.
Occasionally patients having mild MPL can be treated entirely arthroscopically by per-
forming an arthroscopic medial release incision. This is typically successful in mildly affected
patients and only when the alignment of the patellar mechanism is adequate. The medial reti-
naculum can be percutanously incised under arthroscopic visualization.
MPL has been implicated as a potential contributing factor to cranial cruciate ligament
(CrCL) tears. Arthroscopy of MPL patients is valuable to assess the condition of the cruciate
lgaments and the menisci. Partial tears of the cranial cruciate ligament may be found in MPL
patients. If a partial tear is missed, the patient may undergo progressive osteoarthritis (OA)
and additional tearing of the cruciate ligament. Identification of a partial tear of the CrCL at
the time of MPL surgery allows the surgeon to treat the tear during the same surgical proce-
dure, rather then at a second surgical procedure in the future, Early treatment of CrCL may
D.Hulse
also decrease future OA and preserve remaining fibers and function of the CrCL. In MPL pa-
meniscus. Meniscal tears are common with CrCL tears and accurate diagnosis and appropri-
ate treatment are needed to ensure optimal outcome.
REFERENCES
1. Whitney WO et al. Arthroscopy of the stifle. In: Beale BS, Hulse DA, Schulz KS, Whitney WO. Smal
Animal Arthroscopy. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2002, in press.
Allillustrations are from the textbook,Small Animal Arthrascopy,and are included courtesy ofWB.Saunders Co.
25 *ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22ng
D.J. Griffon
Improving wedge trochleoplasty
Dominique J. Griffon, DMV, MS, PhD, DECVS, DACVS
Full professor Small Animal SurgeryAssociate Dean for Research,College ofVeterinary Medicine
Western University of Health Sciences 309 E. 2nd Street, Pomona, CA 91766-1854
Trochlear wedge recession (TWR) was the procedure traditionally recommended to increase
the depth of the femoral trochlear groove in dogs with patellar luxation. This procedure has large-
ly been replaced by a trochlear block recession (TBR). This change was largely prompted by a
study using an experimental, cadaveric model of patellar luxation in dogs (Johnson et al. 2001)
The main conclusions of the study were that:
 A greater portion of patella was recessed within the femoral trochlear groove in extended sti-
fles modified via TBR compared to TWR
The patellar articular surface in contact with the recessed trochlea was increased after TBR
compared to TWR
pared to TWR
However, the clinical impact of performing a wedge versus a block recession remains unde-
to perform in very small patients.
The following recommendations are based on our clinical prospective study of dogs with
patellar luxation treated via TWR (Towle et al. 2005) and our clinical impression:
Carefully assess the supratrochlear entrance to the sulcus (most proximal aspect of the
trochlear groove). This site is decisive in terms of tracking of the patellar mechanism and
tends to be under-corrected via wedge recession. To palliate this, make sure the wedge orig-
inates at the osteochondral junction of the trochlear groove. Occasionally. additional tissue
must be removed (with a rasp).
In some cases, turning the wedge in a proximo-distal
direction (ie the proximal portion of the wedge is
placed at the distal end of the groove) seems to in-
crease the height of the femoral ridge on the luxated
side.
Angling the osteotomy so that the tip of the wedge is
slightly off toward the side of luxation seems to im-
prove the recession on this side of the trochlear
groove, as the wedge slides into the second osteoto-
my site.
26 +ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
D.J. Griffon
Avoid the use of rongeurs to cut the bot-
tom of the wedge as this will create a de
fect between the wedge and the under-
lying subchondral bone. This recom-
mendation is based on the presence of
air (arrow) between the wedge and its
bed on post-operative computed tomo-
graphic assessment of clinical cases:
The clinical relevance of this finding in terms of fracture or migration of the wedge is unclear
but aiming for subchondral bone apposition would be expected to accelerate bone union between
the wedge and its bed. Recession of the wedge is typically achieved by performing a second os-
 an an o q an n  n aq  ss  a n rd 
stead (or in combination with a second osteotomy) to gain depth without removing additional tis-
sue from the trochlear ridge. If so, enlarging the base of the subchondral trough (with rongeurs)
is suggested to match the shape of the wedge to its bed.
SELECTED REFERENCES
1. Johnson AL, Probst CW, DeCamp CE et al.: Comparison of trochlear block recession and trochlear
wedge recession for canine patellar luxation using a cadver model. Vet Surg 2001;30:140- 150.
2.
Towle HA, Griffon DJ, Thomas MW, Siegel AM, Dunning D, Johnson A: Pre- and post-operative radi
ographic and reconstructed three-dimensional computed tomographic evaluation of dogs with medlial
patellar luxation. Vet Surg 2005;34(3):265-272.
27+ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
A.Vezzoni
Improving en-block trochleoplasty
Aldo Vezzoni, DVM, SCMPA, Dipl ECVS
Clinica VeterinariaVezzoni -Via Massarotfi, 60/a 26100 Cremona -ITALY
Talcott (2o00) showed that the area of patella-trochlea contact was larger after en-block
trochleoplasty than after wedge trochleoplasty; this was later confirmed by Johnston (2001).
Fig. 1. Moreover, the proximal part of the trochlear groove, where reception of the patella occurs,
is wider after en-block trochleoplasty than after wedge trochleoplasty. Nevertheless, most sur-
geons prefer wedge trochleoplasty because it is easier and there is less risk of damaging the graff.
The purpose of this presentation is to demonstrate some surgical tricks for en-block trochleo-
plasty in a consistent and efficient manner.
Instrumentation is of fundamental importance for proper execution of this procedure. Dedi-
cated hand saws (Fig. 3) with a thin sharp blade are required to make two parallel incisions in
the trochlea. A variety of sizes of thin osteotomes (Fig. 2) of uniform thickness are also required
to cut and lift the block without damaging it. These osteotomes should be sharpened with an
Arkansas stone after every use to ensure that they are always sharp and cut with little effort
when hammered. Thin oscillating saw blades can also be used, but the risk of damaging both
the graft and the donor site is higher Different sizes of rasps are then used to deepen and shape
the sulcus.
Fig.2
Fig. 1
Fig.3
28 · ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22"
A.Vezzomi
The surgical technique requires a parapatellar approach to the femoral trochlea, usually on
  o pa  s aa n  #    n go a o a
parallel osteotomy lines on the cartilage along the inner third of the trochlear ridges, 1-2 mm deep
a po ais qa uo a abape u pq 'assod se ap s ap1 a sa a z )
trochlea (at least half of the ridge) is left. Using the hand saw (Fig. 3). the two parallel cuts creat-
ed in the cartilage by the scalpel blade are continued deep into the subchondral bone, while main-
taining a 5? angulation toward the midline to facilitate lifting of the graft. The osteotomy is deep-
ened to the level of an imaginary line from the origin of the trochlea to near the interchondylar
fossa. An appropriately sized thin sharp osteotome is held firmly with one hand and hammered
with the other from distal to proximal, starting 2 to 5 mm above the interchondylar fossa (Fig. 4).
The osteotome is lifted slightly when moving cranially (Fig. 5), so that the cut ends exactly at the
beginning of the trochlea. If the osteotome is not lifted, the osteotomy could end up inside the
trochlear groove. With gentle pressure, the trochlear graft is lifted distally leaving the cartilage in-
tact proximally, which acts as a hinge. When a deeper groove is required, the trochlear graft is
detached completely, taking great care to keep it in the surgical field, moist in a bloody sponge or
planned lineof
ostetomy
Fig.
A.vezzomi
Fig.9
inside the joint capsule. One or more layers of cancellous bone are undercut with a sharp os-
teotome to deepen the base for the graft as required (Fig. 6 & 7). and a small rasp is used to make
the base uniform and flat to accomimodate the graft (Fig. 8). Repositioning the graft and gently
pressing on it will allow the surgeon to evaluate the result and to determine whether further deep-
ening of the base is required. The sharp edges of the new groove are trimmed with a scalpel blade
to improve the fit of trochlear grove and patella (Fig. 9). The medial and lateral edges of the patel-
la may also be trimmed (patelloplasty) to improve the seating of the patella inside the new groove
if there is osteophyte formation or flattening of the patella. The new trochlear sulcus should be
wide and deep along all its length (Fig 10 & 11).
REFERENCES
in dogs and cats. Vet Com Orthop Trauma 13:39-43, 2000.
Johnson AL, Probst CW, De Champ CE et al: Compoarison of Trochlear Block Recession and Trochlear
Wedge Recession for Canine Patellar Luxation Using a Cadaver Model. Veterinary Surgery 30:140-150,
2001.
30 *ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22nd
R. Vamnini
Patellar luxation in cats
Rico Vannini, DVM, Dipl ECVS
Bessy'sKleiierklinik,Dorfstr.51,8105Waft -SWITZERLAND
Patellar luxation is infrequently seen in feline practice. In one institution, it had been encoun-
tered only in 8 of 7744 cats presented. As cats in general can hide their handicaps a lot better than
dogs, it remains unclear, whether the condition is simply overlooked or is indeed a rare problem
in cats.
In the majority of cats the patella luxates medially. but lateral luxations have been reported
The condition can be bilateral or unilateral, but bilateral luxation seems to be more common than
unilateral luxation. in one retrospective study bilateral medial patellar luxation was seen in 81%
of the affected cats.
Patellar luxation can result from congenital malformations or trauma. There are conflicting re-
ports regarding the relative frequency of congenital versus traumatic patellar luxations in cats.
In general, however, congenital luxation is believed to be more common, which also explains
the higher incidence of bilateral luxations. In one larger study 17% of the cats had some trauma
involved (eg. falling off a table or previous femoral fracture with malunion), but no history of
trauma was found for the other 83% cats.
Male and female cats are equally affected, however congenital patellar luxations might be
more prevalent in certain breeds such as Devon Rex, Abessinian and Main Coon. In one study
is was shown, that patella luxation was found in 34 of 37 Devon Rex cats compared with only
11 of 146 randomly selected cats. If there is indeed a breed predispostion remains still unclear.
A shallow trochelar groove, medial deviation of the tibia tuberositiy as well as a hypoplas-
in cats.
It has also been suggested that there is a weak association between patellar luxation and hip
dysplasia, because cats were 3 times more likely to have HD and MPL then to have either con-
dition alone.
As in dogs. patellar luxations are graded 1-4, according the severity of the luxation. Clinical
normal cats may have a certain degree of laxity. which might be graded as a subluxation (<1) or
as normal in cats.
Animals with severe forms of congenital patellar luxation usually present when they are
young. during the first year of the animals life. The majority of the remaining cats will present
within the 3 years of life.
 s      i    s e  
a persistent weight bearing. Although patellar luxation can result in lameness, affected cats are
not always lame, and occult patellar luxation is an incidental finding.
Diagnosis is made by palpation and supported with radiographs. As in dogs. the risk of de-
veloping osteoarthritis depends the severity and duration of the luxation. In one study 86% off
the stifle joints had no or only mild radiographic signs of osteoarthritis.
Cats with low grade MPL and minimal clinical signs can initially be treated conservatively. It
seems prudenf to recommend a period of nonsurgical managemenf (rest and analgesics) prior fo
31* ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22"
R. Vannini
months.
Surgery should be considered. if lameness persists or worsens. Cats can hide their pain very
well, thus if a cat shows a persistent lameness, it usually means, that the cat has a significant clin-
ical problem and surgery is warranted.
Surgical correction is typically associated with a favorable outcome. In one study. outcome
was excellent for 7 of 13 cats that underwent surgery. In an other study of 8 cats, outcome was
was eventually performed in these 2 cats. In a larger retrospective study outcome was excellent
for 8 of the 17 joints treated without surgery and for 23 of the 35 joints treated surgically.
Surgical techniques most commonly used in cats are desmotomies of the medial- and imbri-
ity.
Complications do occure infrequently. but can be quite distressing for everybody, the cat, the
owner a and the surgeon.
Complications in cats undergoing surgical treatment of patellar luxation include tibial crest
avulsion, pafellar fendon rupture, reluxafion, iatrogenic luxafion in the opposife direcfion, and
patellar fracture.
REFERENCES
Davies M, Gill I.: Congenital patellar luxation in the cat. Vet Rec 1987;121:474-475.
Engvall E, Bushnell N.: Patellar luxation in Abyssinian cats. Feline Pract 1990;18(4):20-22.
Flecknell PA.: Luxation of the patella in cats. Vet Rec 1977; 100:536-537
Flecknell PA, Gruffydd-Jones: TJ. Congenital luxation of the patellae in the cat. Feline Pract 1979; 9(3):
18-20.
Houlton JEF, Meynink SE.: Medial patellar luxation in the cat. J Small Anim Pract 1989;30:349-352.
Irving GW Ill, Ochs DL.: What is your diagnosis? I Am Vet Med Assoc 1979;175:845-846.
Johnson ME.: Feline patellar luxation: a retrospective case study. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1986;22:835-838.
24 349-52.
LEplattenier H. et al.: Patellar luxation in dogs and cats: management and prevention. 2002 Comp Cont
Euc, 24 292-8
Leighton RL.: Repair of bilateral medial patellar luxation in a cat. Feline Pract 1978;8(2):23-26
Loughin, CA; Kerwin, SC Hosgood, G et al.: Clinical signs and results of treatment in cats with patellar lux
ation: 42 cases (1992-2002) JAVMA 2006, 228 1370-75.
Prior JE.: Luxating patellae in Devon rex cats. Vet Rec 1985; 117:154-155.
Shires PK. et. al: Evaluation of the association between mecdial patellar luxation and hip dysplasia in cats. J
Am Vet Med Ass0c 1999;215:40-45.
A. Vezoni
Patelloplasty
AldoVezzoni,DVM.SCMPA.Dipl ECVS
Clinica VeterinariaVezzoni -Via Massarotfi, 60/a 26100 Cremona -ITALY
A patella that is deformed or has extensive damage with severe cartilage erosion may require
Surgical repair to improve its gliding surface. Patellar resurfacing is done in human total knee re-
placement using synthetic materials to replace the damaged cartilage, but recent reports have
shown that there is no significant advantage to this procedure. To the author's knowledge, there
are no reports on patellar resurfacing in veterinary medicine.
In some veterinary patients with patellar luxation, a technique called patelloplasty may be
needed. This method is used to adapt the patellar shape to the trochlear groove to improve the
seating of the patella inside the new deepened trochlear groove following surgical trochleoplasty.
Chronic patellar luxation may result in loss of the convex shape of the patella because of ab-
normal wear against the condylar sides. Moreover, development of osteophytes along the borders
of the patella and thickening of the joint capsule may also occur. These lesions result in a patel-
lar surface that is wider than the trochlear groove (Fig. 1), which promotes reluxation of the patel-
la. Adaptation of the patella to the newly formed trochlear groove requires trinming and re-
shaping of the patella until the fit is ideal. The thickened joint capsule can be gently removed with
a scalpel blade (Figg. 2. 5 & 6). Care must be taken to prevent damage to the patellar attachments
Fig.2
Fig.3
Fig.
33·ESVOT 2011,Lyon(France)-October 20h-22d
A.vezzomi
to the quadriceps muscle and to the patellar tendon, and to preserve the capsule attachment for
suturing later on. Osteophytes and new bone formed along the medial and lateral borders of the
patella can be removed with a rongeur (Fig. 3) and rasp (Fig. 4) or with a high speed bur to
achieve a narrower shape and smooth surface.
REFERENCES
Burnett RS, Bourne RB. Indications for Patellar Resurfacing in Total Knee Arthroplasty. JBJS 85-A, 4-
2003:728-745.
K.A.Bruecker
Intra-op DFO surgical tips
Kenneth A. Bruecker, DVM, MS, DACVS
Board Certified American College ofVeterinary Surgeons.Veterinary Medical andSurgical Group,
Inc. (VMSG), 2199 Sperry Avenue Ventura, CA 93003-7426 - USA
INTRODUCTION
Excessive distal femoral varus may preclude successful repair of a medially luxating patella by
tibial tubercle transposition and soft tissue techniques alone. Distal femoral osteotomy or ostec-
tomy (DFO) may be required to accomplish satisfactory quadriceps alignment.
APPROACH
To perform a lateral closing wedge ostectomy of the distal femur, a lateral approach is made
to the distal femur and stifle joint.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
Using a parallel jig, the distal jig pin is placed just proximal to the sulcus in a plane perpendi-
The jig is applied and the proximal jig pin inserted. (Tip: To avoid a stress riser in the cortical bone, the
location of this pin should be such that one screw willbe proximal and one screw will be distal once the plate is
applied.) The ostectomy should be made
Such that the distal cut is a few mm prox-
imal to the distal jig pin and sulcus. (Tip:
The plate can be used as a template to visualize
the ideal locations for the asteotomies.)Refer
ence marks are made on the lateral as-
pect of the femur and the ostectomy cre-
ated with a sagittal saw. (Tip: Contour the
plate and temporarily place one compression
screw in the distal segment prior to completing
the astectomy.) The soft tissues should be
protected using retractors and gauze
sponges. Room temperature irrigation
solution should be used to prevent Os-
teonecrosis from overheating by the saw
blade. (Tip: Save the ostectomized wedge of
bone for autologous cancellous bone graft.)The
DFO plate should be contoured and ap-
Figure I - Lateral intra-operative view of jig placement and wedge
plied using standard AO technique for
ostectomy.
35+ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
K.A.Bruecker
application of a plate using com-
pression and locking screws.
(Tip:If a combination ofcompression
and locking screws is to be used, place
all of the compression screws first.)
The jig can then be removed
 and additional techniques such
 as tibial tubercle transposition.
medial desmotomy/release and
lateral joint capsule imbrication
can be performed. The bone
graft can be placed around the
Figure 2 - Lateral intra-operative view of DFO plate in place.
ostectomy site and routine clo-
sure performed.
AFTERCARE
Ice/cold compresses can be applied to the surgery site for 15-20 minutes. A soft support band-
age or modified Robert Jones bandage can be applied for 24 hours or so. I generally like to be-
gin ROM and walking exercises as soon as the bandage is removed. I typically follow-up with ra-
SELECTED REFERENCES
Piermattei DL and Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and
Cat, 4th edition, WB Saunders, Plates 72 and 73, pages 336-341, 2004.
36· ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22d
K.A. Bruecker
DFO then trochleoplasty or trochleoplasty first
Kenneth A. Bruecker, DVM, MS. DACVS
BoardCertifedAmerican College ofVeterinarySurgeonsVeterinaryMedicalandSurgical Group.
Inc. (VMSG).2199 Sperry Avenue Ventura, CA 93003-7426 -USA
ARGUMENT FOR DFO BEFORE TROCHLEOPLASTY
With advanced techniques, the angle or direction of the trochleoplasty can be modified to im-
cession sulcoplasty. Thus allowing for realignment of the sulcus following realignment of the
quadriceps mechanism associated with the distal femoral osteotomy. (Figures a, b. c). Likewise, if
the DFO is proximal enough such that the most distal screw is not in the vicinity of the sulcus.
no interference with implants is encountered.
ARGUMENT FOR TROCHLEOPLASTY FIRST
In most of my cases, the location of the DFO is just proximal to the sulcus, thus the distal
plate screws are in the condyles just deep to the sulcus. Interference by the screws may be en-
countered if they are placed prior to the recession wedge trochleoplasty (Figure d). Thus, I pre-
fer to do the recession wedge trochleoplasty first.
Figurea
Figureb
Figurec
Figured
37+ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
D.Hulse
Concomitant CCL and MPL repair
with the arthrex stabilisation system
Don Hulse, DVM, Dip ACVS, ECVS
Dept Small Animal Surgery College Veterinary Medicine Texas A&M University
College Station Texas 77843-4474-USA
cur in conjunction with a lateral or medial patellar luxation. Although patellar luxation may oc-
cur in either direction, medial patellar luxation is more common. These co-existing conditions
may occur in large breeds of dogs as well as smaller breeds of dogs. In dogs weighing less than
approximately 50 - 6olbs my preference is to use an isometric extra-articular procedure combined
with standard procedures to stabilize the patella within the trochlear sulcus. Standard procedures
for patella luxation include a wedge or block recession, tibial crest transposition, and medial re-
lease. Isometric lateral
stabilization is achieved
with Arthrex anchors
preloaded with #2
FiberWire (15lbs or
less) or #5 FiberWire
(15 - 45 lbs). For cases
exceeding 45 lbs a
SwivaLock loaded with
mm FiberTape is used;
alternatively in dogs
weighing greater than
45 Ibs, a TPLO com-
bined with standard
 procedures for a patella
Arthrex Swival Lock
Location of femoral
huxation may be used.
The advantage of
Isometric site
using isometric paired
sites for the CCL injury
is that the isometric site
 on the tibia is caudal to
the osteotomy line for
tibial crest transposi-
tion. Likewise, the iso-
 metric site on the femur
is caudal and will not
interfere with a block
recession or a wedge re-
cession.
38 +ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
R. Boudrieau
Medial patellar luxation associated
with severe limb deformities
Randy Boudrieau, DVM, Dip ACVS. ECVS
Professor of Surgery Section Head -Small Animal Surgery,Department of ClinicalSciences
Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine,Tufts University, North Grafton,Massachusetts -USA
The etiology and pathogenesis of congenital patellar luxations remains controversial as many
theories have been proposed. The main recurring theme, however, includes an understanding
that the functional components of the extensor mechanism of the stifle joint: quadriceps muscle
 group. patella, trochlear groove, patellar tendon (or ligament), and tibial tuberosity must consist
of a straight line force.
If such a straight line force is not present, for whatever reason, the result will be a malalign-
ment of the quadriceps mechanism and a patellar luxation. The treatment goal, therefore, is to re-
align the quadriceps mechanism by any number of techniques, which includes addressing the
changes in limb alignme nt in addition to any pathology at the level of the joint itself. Patients with
angular and rotational limb deformities must have the significant varus, valgus, or torsional de-
formities of either the fenur and/or tibia addressed by angular & torsional correction before un-
dertaking any corrections at the level of the joint (re: deepening the trochlear groove, realignment
 of the tibial tuberosity, etc.).
Much emphasis has been give to the distal femur and the presence of femoral varus deformi-
ties, which are treated with a corrective distal femoral osteotomy (DFO); however, tibial malalign-
ment also occurs - and also is a significant cause of limb - and quadriceps mechanism - malalign-
ment. Torsional malalignment of both the femur and the tibia also must be considered.
CT evaluation of limb malalignment is the
preferred method to most readily determine
the degree of angular and torsional deformi-
ties. This also is the most expeditious and cost
effective method. CT images can be manipu-
lated so as to orient the affected bones in the
frontal and sagittal planes - both above and
3号
below the level of the deformity - in order to
appropriately plan for the necessary correc-
tions. Normal femoral and tibial axes have
been published for a few breeds, and can be
50号
used as general guidelines for all breeds; simi-
larly. there are some general guidelines for tor-
sion, which indicates that femoral head and
neck anteversion angles are -30° (Dismukes
et al, 2007; Tomlinson et al, 2007; Palierne et
al, 2006).
There are a variety of femoral and tibial
angular deformity cases that can be present
39·ESVOT 2011,Lyon(France)-October 20"h-22nd
R. Boudrieau
Table 2.95%ConfidenceIntervalsforMeanFemoral JointAngles forEachBreed
aLDFA
mLDFA
aLPFA
mLPFA
Inclination Angle
LabradorRetriever
96.5-97.7
100-101
101.9-104.4
98.5-100.9
132.8-134.9
Golden Retriever
96.6-97.8
99.6-100.5
96.5-98.8
93.8-95.8
133.3-135.3
German Shepherd
93.2-94.6
96.6-97.9
99.6-101.6
96.1-97.9
131.1-133.4
Rottweiler
97-98.4
99.6-100.7
95-97.1
92.4-97.1
135.8-138
aLDFA,anatomiclateraldistalfmoralange;mLDFAmechanical latral distal femoralangle;aLPFA,anatomic lateralproximalfemoralangle;
mLPFA,mechanical lateral proximal femoral angle.
Table1.Data for105 Canine TibialAngleMeasurements
Labradors
Non-Labradors
All (n=105)
Retriever (n=70)
(n=35）
Reference range(°),mMPTA(95%confidence interval)
89.74-96.86
89.76-97.00
89.68-96.6
Reference ranges(）mMDTA(95%confidence interval)
90.59-101.39
91.32-101.36
89.39-101.19
Mean Age ± SD(years)
4.59 ± 2.32
4.12±2.25*
5.51± 2.21*
Mean weight±SD （kg)
37.32 ± 7.08
37.12±6.35
37.73±8.43
Mean%Deviation±SD(%)
12.82± 10.99
13.09 ± 10.28
12.29 ± 12.45
*Significant difference(P.05)
mMPTA,medialproximal tibialangle;mMDTA,medial distal tibialangle.
Table4
Average valuesforcachof the calculatedparametersfor the 82femurs
Average
Standard deviation
Maximum
Cortico-medullary index
0.37
0.07
0.24
0.55
Canal flare index
2.4
0.32
3.4
1.8
Metaphyseal canal flare index
1.3
0.01
1.6
1.1
Indexofproximal position of theisthmus
38
3.17
45
30
Index ofdistalposition of the isthmus
46
2.77
54
40
Femoral head and nock anteversion angkeα
30
6.33
45
16.7
ed, and a couple of examples will follow. However, case series are limited except for a recent de.
scription of complex angular deformities with medial patellar luxation (MPL). which also in-
volved cranial cruciate ligament (CrCL) instability (Weh et al, 2011). In this case series, 11/19
dogs with angular limb deformities of the tibia and/or femur had MPL. These deformities in
these cases included 5 with excessive tibial plateau angle (eTPA ≥ 33° to 52°), 5 with tibial varus
(20° to 30°) and 4 with tibial valgus (6° to 8%), 6 with tibial torsion (> 30° to 40°). Three of these
cases also had distal femoral varus (8? to 12? DFO corrections), and two of these with femoral
torsion (15°). Two cases had an intact CrCL. These complex deformities were treated with a
combination of DFO, lateral or medial coplanar, or cuneiform biplanar, closing wedge osteoto-
my of the tibia, lateral tibial tuberosity segment transposition - all of which were performed be-
fore any ancillary techniques within the joint (5 cases with a wedge recession of the femoral
trochlear sulcus).
40·ESVOT 2011,Lyon(France)-October 20h-22nd
R.Boudrieau
 Exarmple of transverse coplanar rmedial closing
Exarmple of transverse biplanar cranial and medial closing
wedge osteotomy (c) in cormbination with a TPLO
wedge osteotomy (d) in combination with a TPLO
A
日
Exarmple of lateral transposition of tibial tuberosity segrment after TPLO and transverse osteotormy (A and B).
The arrows indicate the possible medial or lateral rmoverment of the central and cranially located tibial
berosityeentatral trapsitfteblrsiteentwhichasrealgehpt
within the fermoral slcus; notice that both the tibial plateau segrment and distal tibia rermain aligned (C).
Intraoperative photograph (D) of the proxirmal tibia dermonstrating the lateral displacerment of only
the tibial tuberosity segrment. Notice the TPLO csteotormy (arrows) and the transverse osteotorny
(arowheads), and the lateral displacement of only the tibial tuberosity segment (dule-head arrows).
Inadditionnotiethe distal jg pinhasbeenbent (arge aow)in order to externally rotate
the distal tibia at the level of the transverse osteotormy (arrowheads).
If the basic principles of osteotomy correction are followed, complex deformities can be suc-
cessfully addressed to resolve not only limb malalignment, but patellar luxation and other relat-
ed issues, e.g., CrCL instability. Two cases examples are presented to illustrate these principles.
41· ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22nd
R. Boudrieau
American Bulldog MC 45 kg: Grade 4 MPL & CrCL
12° distal femoral varus; -15° femoral torsion
26b3
ybute
24° TPA; 12° proximal tibial varus
TuRsCum
R. Boudrieau
REFERENCES
 1. Apelt D, Kowaleski MP, Dyce J: Comparison of Computed Tomographic and Standard Radiographic
Determination of Tibial Torsion if the Dog. Vet Surg 34:457-462, 2005.
 2. Aper R, Kowaleski MP, Apelt D, et al: Computed Tomographic Determination of Tibial Torsion in the
Dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:187-191, 2005.
3.  Boudrieau RJ, Kowaleski MP, Petazzoni M. Correction of rotational deformity of the pes with plate fix-
4. Dismukes DI, Tomlinson JL, Fox D, et al: Radiographic measurement of the proximal and distal me-
chanical joint angles in the canine tibia. Vet Surg 36:699-704, 2007.
 5. Dudley RM, Kowaleski MP, Drost WT, et al: Radiographic and Computed Tomographic Determina-
tion of Femoral Varus and Torsion in the Dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:546-552, 2006.
6.  Palierne S, Asimus E, Mathon D, et al: Geometric analysis of the proximal femur in a diverse sample of
dogs. Res Vet Sci 80:243-252, 2006.
 7 Peruski AM, Kowaleski MP, Pozzi A, et al: Treatment of Medial Patelar Luxation and Distal Femoral
Varus by Femoral Wedge Osteotomy in Dogs: 30 Cases (2000-2005). 33rd Annual Conference of the
Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Keystone, CO, February 25-March 4, 2006.
8. Tomlinson J, Fox D, Cook JL, et al: Measurement of femoral angles in four dog breeds. Vet Surg 36:593-
598,2007.
9. Weh JL, Kowaleski MP, Boudrieau RJ. Combination Tibial Plateau Leveling Osteotomy and Transverse
Corrective Osteotomy of the Proximal Tibia for the Treatment of Complex Tibial Deformities in 12
dogs. Vet Surg 40:670-686, 2011.
43·ESVOT 2011,Lyon(France)-October 20h-22nd
M.Petazoni
Lateral patellar luxation associated
with severe limb deformities
Massimo Petazzoni, DMV
Chief of the Orthopaedic and traumatology department of the "Clinica Veterinaria Milano Sud"
Va della Liberazione 26,20068Peschiera Borromeo (Mi)-ITALY
The patella is a sesamoid bone that develops inside the tendon of the quadriceps muscle. It
lies along the extensor axis of the quadriceps muscle, that is the vector result of the traction force
of the 4 muscles that compose the quadriceps muscle unit (the rectus femoris, the vastus medi-
alis, the vastus lateralis and the vastus intermedius). The rectus femoris inserts distally on the tib-
ial tuberosity and proximally from the eminentia ileopubica. The vastus medialis muscle arises in
the craniomedial surface of the proximal fifth of the femur. Vastus intermedius and vastus later
alis arise from the craniolateral part of the proximal fourth of the femur. Patella is always along
the origin and the distal insertion of the quadriceps muscles. For this reason, in a normal dog. the
trochlear sulcus is always on the same sagittal plane of the distal anatomical axis of the femur.
During the growing period, because of the traction that these muscles exert, the patella generates
a depression on the methaphyseal procurvatus of the distal femur, the femoral trochlea. Any mod-
ification to the femur, to the tibia and to the relationship between the femur and the tibia and a
combination of the above mentioned variation bring to a subluxation or to a luxation of the dis-
tal portion of the femur relative to the patella. From these considerations it is clear that Lateral
Patellar Luxations, (LPL) can be the result of relatively few causes: 1. An external tibial rotation
in respect to the femur; 2. An internal tibial torsion; 3. An internal torsion of the distal femoral
extremity that produces the distal femur subluxating in respect to the patella; 4. An excessive dis-
tal axial deviation of the femur in valgus 5. a combination of the previous. Excessive distal val-
gus of the femur and the internal torsion of the femur predispose to the so called lateral patella
huxation. Internal torsion and/or external rotation of the tibia with or without the femoral mal-
formations mentioned above can cause lateral patella luxation as well. Torsion indicates a bone
malformation in which the distal articular surface is rotated internally or externally along the
bone axis related to the proximal articular joint surface. This means the twisting of one end of
the bone while the other end is held fixed. This is generally the result of an abnormal
meta/epiphyseal development or secondary to an abnormal physeal growth during the develop-
ing period or secondary to a bone fracture and malunion. Rotation indicates a malalignment in
which two contiguous bones rotate one in respect to the other around the joint plane. It can be
the result of: - muscular and tendinous contracture; - ligamentous shortenings or because of bone
malformations. Torsion and rotations can be combined contributing to the same malalignment.
The determination of hind limb alignment requires accurate diagnostic imaging evaluations like
radiography and computed tomography. Surgery should be addressed to re-establish the anato-
my focusing on exactly where the malformation is. Each case of patella luxation should be eval-
uated on an individual basis to ascertain the abnormalities present contributing to the luxation.
and in accordance, the most appropriate treatment plan. Tibial tuberosity transposition should be
performed only when tibial tuberosity is not where it should be
M.Petazzoni
When coexistent with LPL, excessive distal femoral valgus and internal femoral torsion should
be corrected. Based upon personal experience, I currently advise consideration of corrective os-
tal Femoral Angle, a-LDFA < 86°) and/or when femoral torsion (or anteversion) is out of normal
reference values for that breed. In veterinary medicine a radiographic survey was traditionally per-
formed to diagnose hindlimb malformations but a few posifioning mistakes could determine misin-
urement is prone to "false negative” identification of excessive femoral valgus.
 A medially-based, closing-wedge ostectomy is performed in most instances in case of excessive
femoral distal valgus. The wedge excision is planned at the Center of Rotation of Angulation (CO-
 RA) as determined from preoperative x-rays and/or with computed tomography. In most instances
the CORA is at the level of, or just proximal, to the distal methaphysis. The CORA is located at the
intersection of the proximal anatomical axis with the distal anatomical axis. If the CORA is located
within the patello-femoral joint, the ostectomy is moved slightly proximal to the femoral trochlea to
avoid an intra-articular osteotomy. In order to properly locate the ostectomy at CORA during sur-
gery. it is helpful to measure the distance from identifiable landmarks (I take my measure from the
distal end of the two condyles) to the CORA on radiographs. The a-LDFA is measured from the
most adequate AP radiograph or from CT images. The angle of the wedge to be removed is the dif-
femoral varus should be that of the contralateral normal limb (in dogs affected by unilateral defor-
mity and LPL), or that of a "normal" reference value. I currently use a-LDFA ranging from 92° to
  a   a  e    d     
the angle of the wedge is determined using graphical method in which the wedge is drawn directly
on radiographs at the level of the ostectomy. In a dorsally-recumbent patient, a bilateral parapatellar
arthrotomy is made to free the patella from the capsule and retinaculum The bone is marked as pre-
planned on the radiographs. A sagittal straight line is scored into the cranial surface of the femur, us-
ing a periosteal elevator, spanning the region of the planned osteotomy. This line is used for refer-
ence in visualizing and checking the corrections after the osteotomy. My surgical technique is to use
e  s s s n -n   d   s e
ment during plate application and allows patellar reduction during surgery to verify the patella's po-
sition before jig removal and plate application (Fig 1). If pins are inserted in the sagittal plane of the
cranial femur. patella reduction wouldn't be possible until the jg and pins are removed after plate ap-
plication (Fig 2). Threaded or smooth pins can be used at the surgeon's preference. The proximal jig
pin is placed within the anticipated span of the bone plate or far away from the anticipated most prox-
imal plate screw hole to reduce the risk of femoral fracture through the pin tract during weight bear-
ing. In any case the proximal jig's pin shouldn't exceed 25% of the diameter of the bone. The wedge
ostectomy is completed and the distal femoral segment is rotated about the distal jg pin to obtain
 proper alignment in case of torsional correction. The two jig's pins can be used for reference during
torsional manipulations. Small Kirschner wires can be temporarily used to maintain reduction of the
osteotomy during bone plate fixation. A bone plate can be applied either medially or laterally of the
properly aligned femur with at least 3 screws planned for each segment. Purpose-specific plates (con-
ventional and locking) suit nicely to the distal shape of the canine femur. Caution should be used to
avoid inadvertent damage to the cruciate ligaments as drills, taps and screws are directed in the
femoral intercondylar notch. The jig is then removed. Varus and torsion corrections and patella po-
sition are confirmed visually. Surgical treatments at the level of the stifle such as trochleoplasty, lat-
eral soft tissue release and medial imbrication are performed as indicated based upon the patient's
pathology. Corrective femoral osteotomy should be performed when it is diagnosed to prevent stifle
degenerative joint disease. When LPL is associated with premature closure of the distal growth plate,
 a dynamic external skeletal fixator can be used for femoral alignment and lengthening.
45 · ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22nd
M. Petazzoni
Figure 1
Figure 2
46 · ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22"
M.P. Kowaleski
Patellar Luxation with concomitant CrCL rupture -
case based approach
Michael P. Kowaleski, DVM, Dipl. ACVS and ECVS
Associate Professor of Orthopedic Surgery. Tufts Cummings School ofVeterinary Medicine,
200 Westboro Road, North Grafton, MA 01536-USA
Concurrent medial patellar luxation and cranial cruciate ligament disease in large breed dogs
is a common condition that is challenging to treat. Current best evidence suggests that identifi
cation of all abnormalifies in a given patient with individualized treatment results in the best out-
comes. A compre hensive clinical evaluation including thorough orthopedic examination, gait
evaluation, and radiological evaluation serves as the basis for surgical planning.
A thorough physical examination is imperative to guide the clinician in the interpretation of
diagnostic imaging studies, and to select an appropriate treatment plan. Coexisting condiions
Such as hip dysplasia with subluxation or luxation of the femoral head., partial or complete rup-
ture of the cranial cruciate ligament, torsional malformation of femur, and torsional or angular
malformation of the tibia must be first identified clinically to ensure appropriate imaging is ob-
tained and a compre hensive treatment plan is devised. In addition, gait evaluation is critical to as-
sess limb alignment, and determine the effect of correction on limb alignment and overall ap-
pearance of the patient. For instance, in a patient with genu varum, a femoral corrective osteoto
       a          
tient with distal femoral varus and proximal tibial valgus, gross limb alignment may appear nor-
mal, with the foot placed under the hip during ambulation. In a case such as this, correction of
both the femoral and tibial deformities may be necessary to align the skeletal structures and en-
 In cases of concurrent MPL and cranial cruciate ligament rupture, physical examination find-
ings may influence the choice of the stabilization technique that is employed. Specific factors to
consider are rotational stability or instability of the stifle, fibial tuberosity position (i.e. medial dis-
placement) and patella/patellar tendon alignment, pelvic limb alignment, and femoral and/or tib-
ial deformity. To assess patellar tracking. the hip. stifle and hock are placed in a neutral position,
tendon is traced from the patella to its insertion on the tibial tuberosity. If the line of action of the
patellar tendon is not centered on, and parallel to the trochlear groove, then a tibial tuberosity
tendon is typically obliquely directed from proximo-lateral to disto-medial with respect to the
trochlear groove. Since the goals of surgery are to align the extensor mechanism and deepen the
trochlear sulcus to create a stable femoro-patellar articulation, the combination of techniques re.
quired is dependent upon the specific abnormalities of each patient.
Accurate radiographic assessment of limb alignment is difficult, and requires general anesthe-
sia and precise patient positioning to avoid positioning artifact. A complete radiographic evalua
tion includes at least a lateral and ventro-dorsal view of the pelvis including the femora and prox-
imal tibia, and an axial view of the femur for femoral torsion angle calculation. In some cases.
cranio-caudal and medio-lateral views of the femur, and caudo-cranial and lateral views of the tib-
47+ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
M.P. Kowaleski
ia including the stifle and tarsus may be required. particularly if tibial osteotomy is planned. Since
these radiographic views are difficult to obtain, and are highly sensitive to radiographic position-
ing artifact, several exposures of each view should be obtained. A variation of more than 2-3 de-
suggests positioning or measurement artifact.
Utilizing the results of a comprehensive clinical evaluation, the surgical treatment plan is in-
dividualized based on the abnormalities present. In general, cases complicated by femoral varus
can be subdivided into one of several categories, based on the morphology of the tibia. In all cas-
es, significant femoral varus is treated by distal femoral ostectomy. and the trochlear groove is
deepened as needed.
FEMORAL VARUS WITHNO MEDIALIZATION
OF THETIBIALTUBEROSITY
In this case, the corrections are the most straightforward. Femoral varus is treated with a dis-
tal femoral ostectomy. the trochlear groove is deepened if necessary. and the stifle is stabilized
with the procedure of the clinician's choice, such as TPLO. TTA, or extracapsular stabilization.
FEMORAL VARUS WITH MEDIALIZATION OF THE TIBIAL TUBEROSITY
ANDINTERNAL TIBIAL TORSION
In cases in which significant torsional or angular deformity exists, the TPLO procedure is best
suited for correction, since TPLO allows for simultaneous correction of limb alignment and sti-
fle stabilization (Figure 1A and B). Correction of internal tibial torsion at the level of the TPLO
results in external rotation of the distal tibial segment including the tibial tuberosity. Therefore, if
the internal torsion correction results in adequate lateralization of the tibial tuberosity, correcting
the limb alignment can treat both. However, if the internal tibial torsion correction results in un-
der correction or over correction of the tuberosity, a TPLO with proximal tibial osteotomy (see
Figure 3A and B) is preferred, as this will allow for independent and precise tuberosity alignment
and tibial torsion correction. Other procedures such as TTA or extracapsular stabilization can be
performed, however, tibial torsion correction would require an additional tibial osteotomy. thus
they are not recommended.
A
B
Figure IA and B - TPLO with internal tibial torsion correc-
ton resulting in lateralization of the tibial tuberosity and correc
tion of patellar tendon alignment. Reprinted from Langenbach A
et al, JSAP 2010.
48*ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22"
M.P. Kowaleski
FEMORAL VARUS WITHMEDIALIZATION OF THE TIBIAL TUBEROSITY
AND NO TIBIAL TORSION
The tibial tuberosity advancement (TTA) procedure (Figure 2A) can be modified to stabilize
the stifle and translate the tuberosity laterally; this has been termed tibial tuberosity transposition
advancement (TTTA) (Figure 2B) (Fitzpatrick VOS 2008). To perform a TTTA, the tuberosity
is translated to correct patellar tendon alignment, and the plate is contoured to match the lateral-
ized position of the tibial tuberosity. Additionally. the TTA cage must be placed to match this lat-
eralized position. Since the medial cortex of the tibial tuberosity and the tibia no longer lie in the
same plane, the caudal cage ear on the tibial side must be contoured and recessed into the medi-
al tibial cortex to allow lateralization of the cage. Alternatively, washer(s) can be placed under the
cranial cage ear on the tibial tuberosity. In cases of extreme lateralization, both cage ear recession
and washers may be needed. It is important not to deplete the medial cortex of the tibia during
B
Figwre 2A and B: Standard TTA (A) and TTTA (B). Note
that the caudal cage ear has been contoured and recesed into the
medial tibial cortex,and the platehasbeen contoured around the
medial tibialcortexto allwlateralization of thetibial tuberosity
The TPLO procedure can be modifed to allow lateralization of the tibial tuberosity by the
addition of a transverse proximal tibial osteotomy (Figure 3A and B). The osteotomy is placed
 perpendicular to the tibial crest, such that it intersects the TPLO at the caudal cortex. The tibial
tuberosity segment can be translated as needed to correct patellar tendon alignment. Fixation is
as for a TPLO/CCWO (Figure 4).
Figure 3A,B and C: TPLO with proximal tibial
csteotomy (A and B) and ostectomy (C). Utilizing an
additionalproximal tibialosteotony, the tibial tuberos-
ty segment is isolated and translated as needed to
align the patellar tendon (A and B).A proximal tib-
ial ostectomy can be utilized to correct proximal tibial
varus and valgus with or without excessive plateau
angle:in the latercase,the ostectomyisa cuneiforms-
tectomy.
49 *ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
M.P. Kowaleski
FEMORALVARUSWITH TIBIALANGULARDEFORMITY
Correction of complex tibial deformity including eTPA, proximal tibial varus and proximal
tibial valgus with or without tibial torsion and/or medialization of the tibial tuberosity is best ad-
dressed with a TPLO and proximal tibial ostectomy (Figure 3C). The ostectomy can be a medi-
al closing wedge to correct valgus, a lateral closing wedge to correct varus, a cranial closing wedge
to correct eTPA, or a cuneiform closing wedge to correct both eTPA and angular deformity. Tib-
ial torsion can be corrected at the proximal tibial osteotomy. Fixation is the same as for a TPLO
with proximal tibial osteotomy (Figure 4).
Figure 4 - Postoperative radiograph demonstrating the typical fixa-
tion applied to a TPLO with additional proximal tibial osteotomy or
ostectomy.
REFERENCES
Boudrieau RJ. Tibial Plateau Leveling Osteotomy or Tibial Tuberosity Advancement? Vet Surg 38:1-22,
2009.
Fitzpatrick N, Yeadon R, and Kowaleski M: Tibial tuberosity transposition-advancement for treatment of
medial patellar luxation and concomitant cranial cruciate ligament dlisease in the dog. Abstracts of the
34th Annual Conference of the Veterinary Orthopedic Society, March 3-10, 2007; p 67.
Hoffmann DR, Kowaleski MP, Johnson KA, Evans RB, Boudrieau RJ. In vitro biomechanical evaluation of
the canine CrCL deficient stife with varying angles of stife joint flexion and axial loads after TTA. Ab-
France. July 2-4, 2009; pp 557-559.
Langenbach A, Marcellin-Litle Dl: Management of concurrent patellar luxation and cranial cruciate liga-
ment rupture using modified tibial plateau leveling. J Sm Anim Pract 51:97-103, 2010.
Talaat MB, Kowaleski MP, Boudrieau RJ. Combination Tibial Plateau Leveling Osteotomy and Cranial
Closing Wedge Osteotomy of the tibia for the treatment of cranial cruciate ligament-deficient stifles with
excessve tibial plateau angle. Vet Surg 35:729-739, 2006.
Weh, JL, Kowaleski MP, Boudrieau RJ. Combination Tibial Plateau Leveling Osteotomy and Transverse
Corrective Osteotomy of the Proximal Tibia for the Treatment of Complex Tibial Deformities in 12
dogs. Submitted, Vet Surg 40: 670-686, 2011.
50 * ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22ng
M.P. Kowaleski
Patellar luxation after TPLO
Michael P. Kowaleski, DVM, Dipl. ACVS and ECVS
Associate Professor of Orthopedic Surgery. Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine,
200Westboro Road,NorthGrafton,MA 01536-USA
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A thorough physical examination is the initial step in outcome assessment. Findings of par
ficular interest following 'TPLO include presence and quantity of stifle effusion, stability of the
patella, discomfort noted overlying the implants and jig pin sites, and dynamic as well as static
stiflestability
GAIT EVALUATION
A gait evaluation should be part of any thorough orthopedic examination. Grade of lameness.
if present, and limb alignment and function should be noted. In addition, symmetry between the
operated and non-operated limb should be observed, and may play a role in future corrections of
the opposite limb if necessary.
ETIOLOGY
Medial patellar luxation following TPLO may occur due to a combination of quadriceps
mechanism malalignment or a shallow trochlear groove. Excessive femoral varus that is unde-
tected at the time of the TPLO procedure may result in clinical medial patellar luxation as the
cranial cruciate ligament progressively tears, or is excised at surgery. Since the cranial cruciate lig-
ament limits internal rotation of the tibia at the stifle, cranial cruciate ligament deficiency result-
ing from progressive degeneration and rupture, or surgical excision may allow the tibia to inter-
nally rotate, resuling in relative medial displacement of the tibial tuberosity. Low-grade medial
patellar luxation may cause progressive wearing of the medial trochlear ridge, resulting in more
frequent episodes of luxation, and further wearing of the ridge. Medial displacement of the tibial
tuberosity may occur due to inadvertent medial translation of the distal tibial segment - the seg-
ment that contains the tibial tuberosity - during the TPLO procedure; this results mechanical ax
is deviation. In addition, inadvertent torsional malalignment during osteotomy reduction, specif-
ically internal tibial torsion of the distal tibial segment, will result in medial displacement of the
tibial tuberosity.
PREOPERATIVE PLANNING
In cases of MPL following TPLO. physical examination findings are important in determin
ing the underlying etiology. and planning the surgical correction. Specific factors to consider are
51* ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
M.P.Kowaleski
rotational stability or instability of the stifle, tibial tuberosity position (i.e. medial displacement)
and patella/patellar tendon alignment, pelvic limb alignment, and femoral and/or tibial deformi-
ty. To assess patellar tracking. the hip. stifle and hock are placed in a neutral position, the patella
 is centered within the trochlear groove, and the pes is directed vertically. The patellar tendon is
traced from the patella to its insertion on the tibial tuberosity. If the line of action of the patellar
tendon is not centered on, and parallel to the trochlear groove, then a tibial tuberosity transposi-
tion is warranted. In cases of medial patellar luxation, the line of action of the patellar tendon is
typically obliquely directed from proximo-lateral to disto-medial with respect to the trochlear
 groove. Since the goals of surgery are to align the extensor mechanism and deepen the trochlear
slcus to create a stable femoro-patellar articulation, the combination of techniques required is de-
pendent upon the specific abnormalities of each patient. If medial displacement of the tibial
tuberosity is identified, the underlying cause must be determined. Potential causes include pre-ex-
isting malalignment that was not noted prior to the TPLO, or iatrogenic malalignment resuling
from medial mechanical axis deviation or internal tibial torsion.
SURGICAL CORRECTION
Once the factors that are contributing to the patellar luxation are identified, a comprehensive
surgical correction must be devised to address the abnormalities detected, including trochlear
groove depending, mechanical axis alignment, and quadriceps mechanism alignment.
52 *ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
R.Boudrieau
Patellar luxation after TTA
Randy Boudrieau, DVM, Dip ACVs, ECVS
Professor of Surgery Section Head -SmallAnimal SurgeryDepartment of Clinical Sciences,
Cummings School ofVeterinary Medicine,Tufts University,North Grafton,Massachusetts -USA
There exists some anecdotal information that medial patellar luxation (MPL) is a significant
complication of tibial tuberosity advancement (TTA). Despite these anecdotal reports, this is
not supported by the available published literature, or supported by any number of presenta-
tions. In the 4 published reports of the TTA (all of which were early reports of the technique).
there are documented 4 cases of MPL in 503 total cases (0.80%) [Hoffmann 1/65 (1.54%),
Lafaver 1/114 (0.88%), Stein 0/70 (0%0, Voss 0/40 (0%), Kemper 2/214 (0.93%)]. Additionally.
there are additional presentations where the overall rate was noted to be slightly higher: Tepic
S, 2007 Kyon Symposium 1/381 (0.26%), Botte R, 2011 Kyon Symposium 5/541 (0.92%). In all
there are 10 cases of MPL that have occurred in these 1,425 cases (0.07%). This frequency of
MPL of < 1.0% of the cases is therefore one of the least frequent complications as a result of
this surgical technique.
Regardless of the low frequency of MPL after TTA, it is prudent to be aware of this possi-
bility when performing this technique. There are 3 proposed etiologies for this complication: 1)
decreased retropatellar pressure, 2) oblique osteotomy. and 3) improper plate contouring.
1) DECREASED RETROPATELLAR PRESSURE
It has been proposed that TTA will decrease the retropatellar force; decreased retropatellar
pressure was the stimulus to perform TTA in humans to treat cases of severe patellofemoral
arthritis (Maquet procedure). Recently. a three-dimensional nonlinear joint finite element mod-
el reconstruction based on a human cadaver knee joint confirmed not only this procedure's ef-
fectiveness in decreasing patellofemoral contact forces, but also femorotibial contact forces with
stifle joint extension (Shirazi-Adl, 2007). This decrease in retropatellar force was demonstrated
in two in vitro studies (Hoffmann, 2011 and Guerrero, 2011). Despite this ability to decrease
the retropatellar force, there is no evidence that this results in any predisposition in a patellar
luxation.
2) OBLIQUE OSTEOTOMY
An osteotomy that is not parallel to the frontal plane will cause the advancement to be mal-
the advancement will occur perpendicular to the osteotomy. Therefore, if the osteotomy is per-
formed with a medial or lateral orientation, there can occur either a medial or lateral mal-align
ment of the advanced tuberosity; the result could be either MPL or lateral patellar luxation
53·ESVOT 2011,Lyon(France)-October 20h-22nd
R. Boudrieau
almniscun
ui tioal ipa
ligamnt
The Ted line indicates appropriate osteotory orientation paralle to the frontal
Advarncement of the tibial tuberosity wil ccu par alle to the orientation 
plane. The yellow line Tepresents a medially oriented osteotoy
of this osteotomy (or perpendiclat to the steotory such that
with advarcement (black arrows within the gap) causes a medial shift
of the final tubersity psition green aow)The presereof the cage
within the gap orientsthe be edges parall to the edge of the cage
(LPL), respectively. There are no reports, however, of LPL occurring after TTA. There is no sup-
porting evidence to document this possibility. other than the observation of a more medially po-
sitioned tuberosity after TTA.
Advancement of the tibial tuberosity will occur parallel to the orientation of this osteotomy
(or perpendicular to the osteotomy) such that with advancement (black arrows within the gap)
causes a medial shift of the final tuberosity position (green arrow). The presence of the cage with-
 in the gap orients the bone edges parallel to the edge of the cage.
3) 1MPROPER PLATE CONTOURING
An improperly contoured plate, re: insufficient bend, will result in the tuberosity being locat-
ed along the line of the plate, which because of the more medial position of the tibial shaft in re-
lation to the tuberosity. the tuberosity will be positioned medially. This phenomenon can be ob-
served on the craniocaudal view of the postoperative radiographs.
Inthe image on the left the plate on the left isinadequately cotoued (insfcient bend betweethe fork and the distal plate holes); therefore, with advaement
thusallwing theadvaed tibialtubersity toemaicenteredtothe tia
R.Boudrieau
30 kg FS Border Collie
Immediate postoperative craniocaudal and lateral radi
ographs. Three errors in technique are evident: 1) malposi
tion of the plate resulting in caudodistal positioning after ad.
vancement (which required the plate to be bent around the
caudal aspect of the tibial and the screws inserted caudocra-
nially). 2) cage placement too far proximally. and 3) medial
positioning of the tibial tuberosity (ARROW) as a result of
insuficient plate contouring (bending)
{The 1s two issues are relatively minor, and do not have un
toward consequences, although. these images illustrate poor
attention to detail of the technique. Alternatively. the medial
positioning of the tibial tuberosity after the advancement re
sulted in a grade 2 M PL noted at the 13 week re-evaluation.}
With either an oblique osteotomy or an inadequately contoured plate, translocation of the tib-
ial tuberosity occurs in the sagittal plane with advancement, resulting in malalignment of the
quadriceps mechanism. This malalignment ilustrated in the two figures will result in MPL. In
the case illustrated, re-operation was necessary due to the presence of a grade 2 MPL, and man-
dated removal of the existing plate and ears of the cage (the cage was left in place). A new os-
teotomy of the tibial tuberosity was performed immediately cranial to the existing cage, and a lat-
eral tibial tuberosity transposition performed to resolve the issue.
REFERENCES
1. Guerrero T, Pozzi A, Dunbar N, et al: Effect of Tibial Tuberosity Advancement on the Contact Me-
chanics and the Alignment of the Patellofemoral and Femorotibial Joints (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1111/.1532-950X.2011.00866.x/pdfy.
 2. Hoffmann DE, Miller IM, Ober CP, et al: Tibial tuberosity advancement in 65 canine stifes. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatol 19:219-227, 2006
3. Hoffmann DE, Kowaleski MP, Johnson KA, et al: Ex vivo biomechanical evaluation of the canine Cr-
CL deficient stife with varying angles of stife joint flexion and axial loads after TTA. Vet Surg 40:311-
320, 2011.
4. Lafaver S, Miller NA, Stubbs WP, et al: Tibial Tuberosity Advancement (TTA) for stabilization of the
canine cranial cruciate ligament deficient stifle joint: Surgical technique, early results and complications
in 101 dogs. Vet Surg 36:573-586, 2007.
 5. Stein S, Schmoekel H. Short-term and eight to 12 months results of a tibial tuberosity advancement as
treatment of canine cranial cruciate ligament damage. J Sm Anim Pract 49:398-404, 2008.
6. Voss K, Damur DM, Guerrero T, et al: Force plate gait analysis to assess limb function after tibial
tuberosity advancement in dogs with cranial cruciate ligament disease Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
21:243-249, 2008.
7Kemper M. Koch DA, Bass M, et al: Revisionsoperationsrate nach 214 Tibial Tuberosity Advancements
als Therapie des vorderen Kreuuzbandrisses beim Hund Schweiz. Arch Tierheilkd 153:131-133, 2011
8. Maquet P: Advancement of the tibial tuberosity. Clin Orthop Rel Res 115:225-230, 1976.
9. Shirazi-Adl A, Mesfar W: Effect of tibial tubercle elevation on biomechanics of the knee joint under mus-
cle loads. Clin Biomech 22:344-351, 200%
D. Hulse
Treatment of patellar luxation in immature dogs
Don Hulse, DVM, Dip ACVs, ECVS
Dept Small Animal Surgery College Veterinary Medicine Texas A&M University
College Station Texas 77843-4474 - USA
 Patella luxation is a common problem resulting in lameness and progressive osteoarthritis.
Patellar luxations are Graded from 1-4 with Grade 4 luxations being the most severe. The con-
dition is often diagnosed in the immature dog which for the purpose of this discussion are dogs
 g ap o z apr  ssard  nx no  a a jo s g n s
on occasion from Grade 3 to Grade 4 luxation. As important, in the immature dog with active
growth plates, skeletal deformity may progress. Skeletal deformity is the result of abnormal forces
across active growth plates. The Heuter-Volkmann principle states that increased pressure retards
growth whereas decreased growth accelerates growth. The result of patella luxation and quadri-
ceps displacement generating forces which act eccentrically on the active distal femoral physis and
proximal tibial physis is skeletal bowing and torsion. With medial patella luxation femoral varus.
medial femoral condyle hypoplasia, and proximal ibial torsion are common deformities noted ra-
diographically.
NormalForces
Eccentric force generated from medial patella luxation
The question often asked is when should the surgeon intervene, sta-
bilize the patella within the trochlear sulcus, and thereby surgically align
the quadriceps mechanism and resulting forces acting on the active
alignment is present (Grade 3 or Grade 4 luxation) surgical intervention
is warranted. If Grade 2 luxation is present, periodic examination to as-
sure that skeletal deformity is not progressing is acceptable. The problem
with waiting for skeletal maturity with a Grade 4 (possibly Grade 3) is
that skeletal deformity may become very severe making correction more
difficult.
56 +ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
D. Hulse
Techniques to stabilize a luxating patella include extensor
 mechanism alignment, sulcoplasty (wedge recession or block
 recession) release of muscular and capsular restraining tissue
and augmentation of redundant supporting tissue. A con-
Strip
sideration in the immature dog is the active growth plates.
The surgeon must apply techniques which do not cause
growth plate injury and resulting skeletal deformity. Tech-
niques relying on soft tissue reconstruction (release/augmen-
tation) may be necessary initially with the knowledge that
more definitive mechanical axis alignment may be necessary
as the dog matures. Fascial transposition/augmentation, re-
lease of the satorius/vastus medialis insertion (medial luxa-
Latoral
tion) may be effective. However, if the trochlear sulcus in
 non-existent which is often the case with Grade 4 luxations.
a recession of the sulcus must be undertaken. Chondroplas-
ty has been described for immature dogs but the author finds
this a difficult technique to perform accurately. Rather a
block recession has been successfully used without the devel-
opment long term skeletal deformity. One may place a fat
 graft to cover the cartilage growth plate with the thought of 
preventing bony bridge across the growth plate. Likewise.
tibial crest transposition has been successfully used without
long term skeletal deformity. If skleltal deformity is already
 present at the time of diagnosis, corrective osteotomy, axis
alignment, and soft tissue reconstruction is undertaken.
57+ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22"
B. Peirone
Locking plates in DFO - are they needed?
Bruno Peirone, DVM, Prof. PhD
Va Leonardo da Vinci, 44 - 10095 Grugliasco (TO) - ITALY
hixation in dogs and is planned based on the CORA methodology. Frequently the apex of the
deformity, where the ostectomy must be performed, is located in the distal part of the femur, close
to the joint. This may result in a very small distal bone portion where the insertion of at least
three screws could be challenging.
In some patients torsional correction is required, as well as varus/valgus alignment. This en
tails that the lateral surface of the femur, where the plate is usually applied, will not offer a flat
surface for plate placement.
mechanicalenvironment.
When a standard DCP plate is used to stabilize a DFO, the following are the major issues dur-
ing surgery.
Plate positioning in the distal fragment can be challenging. The aim of the surgery is to secure
the distal bone fragment to the plate with at least three screws, but it could be difficult due to the
straight and square design of the DCP plate. Moreover, the distal part of the plate must be posi-
These problems could be overcome employing a plate designed to make improved use of the dis-
tal femoral bone portion. Specialized DCP plates have been developed and marketed as supra
condylar plates (Roch 2008). As these plates are thick and particularly robust, conturing is diff-
cult and mostly unsatisfactory.
The standard DCP plate must be accurately contoured to the lateral surface of the femur, to
optimize plate-bone frictional forces and to avoid translation or malreduction at the osteotomy
In DFO very strong fixation is required. Conventional DCP plates depend on friction at the
plate-bone and screw-bone interface to maintain fracture fixation. These implants can fail due to
cortical screw toggling. which leads to screw loosening and loss of plate-bone fixation. Therefore
the system depends on each screw's resistance to loosening and pull-out strength.
ing forces.
The design goals of the locking plates are to increase the stiffness of the construct while main-
an  o rn o n r a sd  a a  a 
on friction at the plate-bone and screw-bone interfaces. Rather, the system relies on friction at the
coupling mechanism of the screw head-plate hole interface. Once the screw is locked into the
plate, the fixed angle stable design converts shear stress into compressive stress at the screw-bone
interface.
physeal, juxta-articular and comminuted fractures, therefore these implants could be suitable for
DFO stabilization. On the basis of same rationale, locking plates can be used successfully in DFO
58 · ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22nd
B. Peirone
because of the small distal fragment, the juxta-articular position of the osteotomy and the pres-
ence of a gap. in the case of the opening wedge DFO.
Furthermore locking plates do not need to be precisely contoured because, when the screw is
tightened, the small threads of the screw shaft will not generate compression between the plate
and the bone even if some space is left under the plate.
Also, because the plate does not depend on a tight fit to the bone for stability. less soft dissection
 maybe required. preserving the periosteal blood supply and enhancing osteotomy healing.
The biomechanical and biological advantages of locking plate systems, in comparison to con-
ventional plates, have led to widespread manufacturing of these new implants in recent years.
The LCP (Synthes) has combination locking and compression holes, or so called "Combi
holes". This allows the plate to be applied with either fixed angle locking screws in the threaded
part of the Combi hole or standard cortical screws that are placed in the dynamic compression
umit (DCU) part of the Combi hole. The new generation of LCP plates have a round edge, with
a special "stacked hole", which allows the insertion of LHS or standard cortical screws. This end
of the plate allows the insertion of more screws in a smaller portion of plate, if compared with a
standard one (fig 1) and can be useful in DFO fixation.
The DFO plate (New Generation Device) has 15 mm of space between the two compres-
sion/locking holes to accommodate an opening wedge osteotomy. When performing this opening
wedge osteotomy the DFO plate would be applied in a buttress fashion to the medial side, while
when performing a closing wedge osteotomy the plate would be employed in a compression role.
The DFO plate is also curved in the distal section, to follow the natural curvature of the distal fe-
mur and minimize the risk of overhang (fig 2). The DFO plate can be implanted using standard
screws or locking screws. When using locking screws, the plate/screw construct can withstand
more than twice the axial load as compared to a standard screw construct. Bruecker was the first
to report the use of a locking plate for a distal femoral osteotomy in 2006.
Figure 1 - Comparison between standard (A)
and special rounded edged with
Figure 2 - DFO Plate from
Figure 3 - Fixin L plate.
stacked hole (B) 3.5 broad LCP plate.
New Generation Device.
59 * ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22n
B. Peirone
The Fixin plate is characterized by a conical coupling locking mechanism between the screw
head and bushing insert-plate construct. The stability of the screw-insert coupling is achieved by
friction, micro-welding and elastic deformation between the contact surfaces of the head of the
screw and the bushing-insert. Special designed pre-contoured plates have been developed to
match the curved shape of the distal femur and these implants satisfactorily match the needs of
DFOsurgery.
REFERENCES
Cautier E, Sommer C: Guidelines for the clinical application of the LCP. Injury 34:S-B63-S-B76, 2003.
Petazzoni M, Urizzi B, Verdonck B Jaeger G: Fixin internal fxator: Concept and technique VCOT 23:
250-253,2010.
Roch SP, Gemmill TJ: Treatment of medial patella luxation by femoral closing wedge ostectomy using a dis-
tal femoral plate in four dog. JASAP 49: 152-158 (2008).
Stoffel K, Dieter U, Stachowiak G et al: Biomechanical testing of the LCP- how can stability in locked in
ternal fixators be controlled? Injury 34: S-B-11- S-B19, 2003.
60*ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
D.Hulse
Analysis of recurrence:
why did it happen?
Don Hulse, DVM, Dip ACVS, ECVS
Dept Small Animal Surgery College Veterinary Medicine Texas A&M University
CollegeStationTexas77843-4474-USA
The most common complications associated with patellar luxation include reluxation of the
patella and implant migration or failure. Other problems, such as wound infection and/or de-
hiscence, trochlear wedge/block migration, tibial tuberosity fracture, septic arthritis and loss of
all frequency of complications was about 18%.
The frequency of complications was greater for dogs weighing greater than 20kg and also
for dogs with higher grades of luxation. Tibial tuberosity transposition and femoral trochlear
sulcoplasty resulted in a lower frequency of complications, while retinacular release alone re-
sulted in a higher frequency of major complications.
An overall examination of the literature supports repair of medial patellar luxations and a
"success" rate of up to 92% has been reported.
These dogs had no observed pain or lameness; however, up to 48% of these dogs had a pal-
pable Grade 1 patellar luxation. Arguably. these dogs did well with some degree of patellar lux-
to excellent.
Because this surgery is designed to overcome angular limb deformities, cases that are severe
carry a more guarded prognosis (grade IV) and owners should be warned that even the most
heroic attempts to restore function may fall short, as best.
Realistically. the owner should be informed of intraoperative findings that could play into
management in the short and long term (cartilage erosions, severe degenerative joint disease.
cranial cruciate ligament rupture).
Patellar luxations are Graded from 1-4 with Grade 4 luxations being the most severe. Tech-
niques to stabilize a luxating patella include exte nsor mechanism alignment, sulcoplasty (wedge
recession or block recession) release of muscular and capsular restraining tissue and augmenta-
tion of redundant supporting tissue. One of the common reasons for recurrence is failure to align
the extensor mechanism.
transposition) or femoral osteotomy in more severe cases of femoral varus. Reliance on soft tis-
sue reconstrucfion (release/augmentafion) instead of mechanical axis alignment offen results in
reluxation.
The radiographs below demonstrates surgical planning for correction of in a case with femoral
varus and one with femoral valgus.
Failure to correct the deformity will generally lead to failure despite sulcoplasty and soft tis
sule reconstructive methods.
D.Hulse
H
Another cause for patellar reluxation is failure to perform a sucolplasty; a wedge recession or
block recession is preferred. A resection trochleoplasty where articular cartilage is removed to
deepen the trochlear groove will result in incomplete filling with fibrocartilage, abrasion of the
patella articular cartilage, and clinical dysfunction. The arthroscopic image below on the left
demonstrates the appearance of the trochlea 1 year following resection trochleoplasty in a Terri-
er. The arthroscopic image on the right demonstrates the appearance of the trochlea 1 year fol-
lowing a block recession.
arresection
patella
trochlea
conmiot
Failure to perform a release of contracted/restraining soft tis-
Slue can result in reluxation. For example with Grade 3 medial
patella luxation, release of the medial retinaculum, cranial sato-
rius insertion, and partial vastus medialis release will prevent me-
dial forces acting on the patella and subsequent reluxation.
M.Petazzoni
Planning and performing a surgical revision for
recurrence - Planning to root out where the problem
is when the patellar re-luxates
Massimo Petazzoni, DMV
Chief of the Orthopaedic and traumatology department of the “"Clinica Veterinaria Milano Sud"
Via della Liberazione 26,20068PeschieraBorromeo (Mi)-ITALY
Patella luxation has been classified in four degrees but this classification is based solely on clin-
ical findings. Because this classification is independent from the kind of anatomical malformations
that cause the patella to be luxated it is useless in the surgical preoperative planning process in gen-
eral and moreover after a relapse. Classically, the main surgical techniques for patellar luxation are
trochleoplasty, tibial crest transposition, joint capsule imbrication, medial release of the joint capsule
retinaculum or quadriceps muscle group alignment. Following a proper clinical and radiographic di-
agnosis corrective osteotomies allow to treat hind limb deformities in case of patella re-luxation.
The determination of hind limb alignment requires accurate diagnostic imaging evaluations.
Radiography. computed tomography and magnetic resonance have been described. In veterinary
medicine radiographic survey was traditionally performed to diagnose hindlimb malformations
but few positioning mistakes could determine significant mistakes. In other words, implants used
to correct a deformity can cause minor to major image disturbance on the MRI and lack of de-
tails and minor disturbance on CT.
Congenital, developmental malformations can produce an abnormal alignment of the femoral
and /or tibial axes. To my knowledge no studies have documented a developmental malforma-
tion of the tibial tuberosity alone without a concomitant femoral and/or tibial proximal deformi-
ty. For these reasons, surgery should be addressed to re-establish the anatomy focusing on exact-
ly where the malformation is. Tibial tuberosity transposition should be performed only when tib-
ial tuberosity is not where it should be or to correct mild misalignment of the quadriceps mech-
anism during the first surgery or during a revision surgery when the osteotomy/ies fail/s to re-es-
tablish hind limb alignment in the frontal and/or transverse plane.
In order to understand where the deformity, causing patella luxation, comes from I made a
simple practical scheme named Patella Luxation Table.
Medial patellar luxation occurs in case of: 1) internal rotation of the tibia related to the femur
2) external tibial torsion, 3) excessive distal femoral varus, 4) external femoral torsion, 5) a com-
bination of the previous deformities (Patella Luxation Table)
Lateral patellar luxation occurs in case of: 1) external rotation of the tibia related to the femur
2) internal tibial torsion, 3) excessive distal femoral valgus, 4) internal femoral torsion, 5) a com-
bination of the previous deformities (Patella Luxation Table)
In my experience excessive proximal tibial valgus and excessive proximal tibial varus solely
never cause patella luxations.
A radiographic survey of the pelvic limb is indicated in every case we are considering a sur
gical revision for patellar luxation. A complete radiographic survey must include the following
projections:
63·ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20h - 22nd
M. Petazzoni
 ventro-dorsal projection of the pelvis. This projection allows for an evaluation of femoral sym
of the lumbosacral joint, transitional vertebrae, and hip dysplasia.
 medial-lateral projections of the femurs with superimposition of the femoral condyles. Infor
mation can be obtained regarding the femur in the sagittal plane. The position of the femoral
head and its relationship to the greater trochanter can give an indication of the presence of
femoral torsion.
cranial-caudal femoral projections (siting dog position) with the femurs parallel to the table
top. This gives information in regards to the frontal plane. Radiographs should be taken of
each femur individually with the distal femoral condyles symmetrical with one another. The
relationship between the position of the femoral head and greater trochanter can give infor-
is not to center the patella within the femoral trochelar groove (the patella should not be used
as a reference point for femoral alignment since it is independent from the femur) but for the
femoral condyles to be symmetric.
axial projections of the femurs. This projection gives information regarding the degree of
femoral torsion.
 medial-lateral projections of the tibiae. This projection describes the sagittal plane and gives in-
formation regarding the tibial plateau angle.
 caudal-cranial views of the tibias. This projection gives information related to the frontal plane
and gives clues to a potential deformity in the transverse plane.
cranial-caudal projections of the entire pelvic limb with the dog in a sifting position. This pro-
jection gives information regarding the relationship of the tibia to the femur as well as the me-
chanical axis of the pelvic limb.
There are only normal reference values available for some specific breeds of dog. The ideal
case when planning for a deformity correction, are those that only have one limb affected and the
contralateral limb can be considered normal and can be used as a template for correction. The
patient can be affected with a bilateral deformity. In these cases we should compare our radi-
  s         n  s s n  n so
eral deformities, we should do our comparisons on dogs from breeds morphologically close to
the dog of interest.
The next step after obtaining the radiographic survey is measuring the radiographs. Meas
urements can be made using dedicated software in digital imaging programs or manually from
printed or conventional radiographs with the aid of a pencil and eraser, ruler, and goniometer
PATELLARLUXATION
bone/
luxation
medial
lateral
Tibia
intemal rotation
extemal rotation
external tibial torsion
internal tibial torsion
femur
distal femoral varus
distal femoralvalgus
extemal femoraltorsion
intemal femoral torsion
64*ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
A.Vezzoni
Patellar groove prosthesis
Aldo Vezzoni, DVM, SCMPA,Dipl ECVS
Clinica Veterinaria Vezzoni - Via Massarotti, 60/a 26 100 Cremona - ITALY
Chronic grade 4 patellar luxation, both medial and lateral, or failed trochleoplasty can
progress to severe joint degeneration with condromalacia, condyle deformation and massive os-
teophytosis. In such circumstances traditional trochleoplasty cannot provide a satisfying
 trochlear surface and the only conventional, but highly demanding solution is a total knee re-
placement.
Kyon AG, Zurich, has recently developed a trochlear prosthesis to replace the damaged
um aluminium vanadium alloy prosthesis shaped like the natural trochlea with a deep recess is
fixed to the condyle via a perforated c.p. grade 4 titanium base plate. The surface of the trochlear
prosthesis is treated with hard, low friction amorphous diamond-like coating (ADLC). The base
 o s    sn ao a o ss   p a  s
osteointegration. Ten sizes are available, suitable for all dogs from toy to giant breeds. 'The size is
selected with the aid of a template superimposed on medio-lateral and caudo-cranial view radi-
ographs.
The surgical technique requires strict asepsis, routine for any prosthetic joint surgery. A me
dial parapatellar approach for medial patellar luxation and a lateral parapatellar approach for lat-
eral patellar luxation is performed, isolating the skin with adhesive drapes or with towels. The os-
teotomy of the trochlea starts distally at the level of the origin of the EDPL, ending proximally
to the beginning of the trochlea.
The osteotomy should be parallel to the frontal plane, but in case of femoral torsion the os-
teotomy could be slightly tilted medial or lateral to correct for the torsion. Femoral torsion can
be assessed with an axial view of the femur or with CT. Anteversion of the femoral neck should
be between 25° to 35° as a reference.
65+ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
A.Vezomi
The osteotomy must be flat and uniform to create a stable and solid base for the fixation of
the prosthesis. Trial prostheses are available in all sizes to test on the bone the right size follow-
ing the preoperative planning. The size is correct when the proximal border of the prosthesis
matches with the proximal extent of the osteotomy and its distal border matches with the distal
part of the osteotomy. Since the trial prosthesis is of the same size as the corresponding final pros-
KYON
thesis, including its base, reducing the patella on the trial prosthesis allows for evaluation of the
tightness of the reduction and eventually the need to increase or decrease the size of the implant.
With the trial prosthesis the fit of the patella inside the trochlea is also tested. When the size of
the implant appears correct, the stability of the patella can be tested flexing and extending the
knee and finding the best medio-lateral position of the trial prosthesis to align the patella with the
tibial tuberosity. Transposition of the tibial tuberosity is usually not required, because the patella
can be realigned by just moving the trial prosthesis medially or laterally in the frontal plane. Once
the preferred position of the trial prosthesis is found, the bone is gently marked with an osteotome
and the base of the final prosthesis is fixed in the same position. The base is fixed to the bone
with 2 or 4 titanium screws, depending on the size of the implant. The final prosthesis is then
66 · ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22"
A.Vezzomi
fixed to the base plate, engaging the thre conical pegs of the prosthesis in the corresponding
holes in the base plate. The patella is reduced and tested again in flexion and extension. Some
patelloplasty may be required, trimming the lateral and medial border if too wide to seat proper
ly inside the trochlea. Capsuloraffy with imbrication of the opposite side to the luxation is per-
formed, leaving the capsule open on the side of the luxation. Subcutaneous and skin closure com-
plete the surgical procedure.
Radiographs of the knee are taken in both views, medio-lateral and caudo-cranial to check the
position of the implants.
Postoperative care and rehabilitation are routine as after other patella luxation surgeries. Phys-
ical and radiographic re-checks are recommended 2 and 6 month post op and then yearly to eval-
uate the stability of the patella and the bony integration of the implant.
67·ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22nd
A.Vezzomi
A clinical multicenter trial supported by Kyon is in progress; my preliminary results are shown
in my presentation.
Fig. Six months post op radiograph of the mongrel, M, 6 years old (pre and immediate post op
shown in the previous figure). The bone-implant interface is clean and uniform, indicative of
boneintegration.
68· ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
M.J. Allen, L.M. Dejardin
Total knee prosthesis
Matthew J. Allen, Vet. M.B., Ph.D.' and Loic M. Dejardin, DVM, MS, DACVS, DECVS
College ofVeterinary Medicine,The Ohio State University,Columbus,OH and
2College fVeterinary Medicine,MichiganStateUniversityEastLansing.MI
Total knee replacement (TKR) is a common and extremely successful clinical procedure in hu-
mans, with improved quality of life in around 90% of patients.' In the veterinary field, TKR is a
more recent development, with the earliest reports of the procedure coming from preclinical stud-
ies on implant fixation in orthopedic research literature.?s T'he first clinical case report on ce-
mented canine TKR was published by Liska ef af. in 2007, in which the authors reported on the
use of TKR to treat a working dog that had sustained a gunshot injury that went on to form a
chronic, comminuted femoral non-union.* In that case report, a custom femoral implant was used
to restore the bone that had been lost, but the geometries of the femoral and tibial component
[ a n a  s ps s s pn  e  ps ar
Knee; BioMedtrix, Boonton, NJ). This implant, which has now been used in more than 250 cas-
es worldwide, consists of a cobalt-chromium (Co-Cr) femoral component with a stem, and a
monobloc ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) tibial component with a keel
for rotational and translational stability. The fixation surface of the femoral component is covered
with sintered beads, allowing for cementless or cemented fixation. The UHMWPE component
is designed for use with polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) bone cement. Recently. an all-ce-
mentless implant system has been developed (GenuSys; Innovet, Hamburg, Germany). This sys-
tem uses a Co-Cr femoral component and a Co-Cr tibial baseplate that holds an UHMWPE in-
sert. The articuulating surfaces of the Co-Cr implants are coated with a wear-retardant coating of
titanium nitride, while the fixation surfaces are coated with plasma-sprayed fitanium. The femoral
component is secured to the distal femur with a bone screw, while the fibial component is im-
planted in press-fit fashion. Both implant systems (GenuSys and Canine Total Knee) incorporate
modular implant sizing to permit use in animals with a broad range of body shapes and sizes.
INDICATIONS FOR SURGERY
The most common indication for canine TKR is degenerative joint disease (DJD). usually sec-
ondary to rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament (CCL) or to other intra-articular pathologies such
as osteochondrosis or chronic fractures. As surgeons have become more confident with the proce-
dure, indications have started to expand, and animals with severe but not end-stage DJD are now
being treated with TKR. Prospective, randomized studies are needed to determine whether there
are any advantages (or disadvantages) to the selection of TKR as an alternative to a reconstructive
procedure in these dogs, but at the current time surgery is considered appropriate for dogs with
moderate to severe DJD or for those with evidence of significant, full-thickness cartilage loss with
bone-on-bone contact. These dogs should have failed at least one course of conservative manage-
ment with non-steroidal anti-inflamimatory drugs. A history of prior stifle joint surgery is not a con-
traindication to surgery, although any animal with implants should be evaluated carefully to rule
out the presence of infection, which is an absolute contraindication for TKR. Our current practice
s an j s p as od o A e  o A o sss ad o s
69 +ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22"
M.J. Allen, L.M. Dejardin
involved placement of an implant (e.g. lateral suture or TPLO plate), we recommend that the in-
plants be removed and submitted for microbial testing prior to admitting the dog for TKR.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
The surgical technique for TKR has been described in the literature,"8 and will not be re-
peated in detail here. The procedure can be performed through either medial or lateral ap-
proaches, with the final choice being at the discretion of the surgeon. Proponents of the lateral ap-
proach favor it because it facilitates reattachment of the tendon of the long digital extensor to the
proximal tibia; this is less easily accomplished through a medial approach. Advantages of the me-
dial approach include improved access to the medial tibial plateau, more complete visualization
of the medial collateral ligament, and more direct exposure of the medial buttress.
As in any surgical procedure, there are a number of important technical elements in success-
ful TKR surgery. The most important step in TKR is accurate preparation of the bone surfaces
so that the femoral and tibial implants are aligned parallel to one another in the frontal plane. Fail-
ure to restore parallelism between the articulating surfaces results in joint laxity. instability and
asymmetric loading of the implant. Human clinical studies have demonstrated that incorrect
alignment of the implants increases the risk of implant failure.9
A second critical step in TKR relates to preservation of the soft tissues and maintenance of
play a critical role in ensuring joint stability after TKR. Both collaterals are at risk of injury dur-
ing the preparation of bone cuts in TKR, although the medial collateral is more often damaged
because it is harder to visualize amongst the thickened periarticular soft tissues that constitute the
medial buttress. The risk of ligament injury can be reduced be paying close attention to both iden-
tification and protection of the ligaments during the osteotomies. If a collateral is damaged intra-
placed with a combination of fiber tape or fiber wire and suture anchors. In either case, use of a
custom orthotic for the first 6 to 8 weeks post-operatively is recommended as a means of pro-
tecting the ligament repair
POST-OPERATIVE CARE
animals taking around 10-12 weeks to return to optimal joint function. While it is hard to come
up with prescriptive guidelines that work for every dog. in general we recommend cage rest for
the first 2 weeks followed by gradual introduction of controlled, on-leash walking. Animals are
assessed at 6 weeks and 12 weeks post-surgery. If the knee is stable, pain-free and able to move
through a satisfactory range of motion (approximately 100 degrees), the owners are allowed to
reintroduce off-leash exercise. Dogs are seen again at 6 and 12 months, then annually thereafter.
Guidance has been published regarding the use of rehabilitation therapy in the post-operative
care of canine TKR patients.* The importance of pre-operative therapy should not be overlooked.
however, since pre-operative range of motion is the best predictor of post-operative range of motion
following TKR in humans. We do not consider rehabilitation to be an absolute requirement for all
dogs undergoing TKR, as long as the client is willing and able to put the dog through a series of at
home exercises. However, rehabilitation is indicated for any dog that fails to recover the -100 de-
gree range of stifle joint excursion that is typically expected following TKR. Owners should be
70 *ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20ih - 22nd
M.J. Allen, L.M. Dejardin
CLINICAL RESULTS AFTER TKR
There has only been a single report of clinical results folowing canine TKR in dogs with end-
stage stifle DJD.* In that series of 6 dogs, limb function (as assessed by range of motion and force
         s s  
ries are now needed. Only when they are presented will it be possible to determine the true effi
cacy of this procedure.
ONGOING QUESTIONS IN TKR
of implant failure (and indication for revision) in human TKR. The pathophysiology of aseptic loos-
ening involves the development of an inflammatory response to particulate wear debris liberated
are generated through abrasive wear mechanisms; in contrast, wear in TKR more often involves
adhesive wear mechanisms that result in the generation of a smaller number of much larger wear
particles. In a recent study on a series of canine TKR retrievals, we found evidence of sub-surface
failure, or delamination, of the UHMWPE in 3 of 6 implants.1 In human TKR, delamination has
been associated with the development of excessive contact stresses within UHMWPE implants,12
and a similar mechanism is likely to be ongoing in canine TKR. In laboratory studies, the risk of
delamination has been shown to be higher in implants with (a) reduced contact area between the
femoral and tibial components, or (b) thinner UHMWPE inserts. In dogs, there are physical (size)
limitations to the maximum thickness of the UHMWPE that can be implanted in the tibia.1? As a
result, the most reasonable approach to limiting wear lies in accurate surgical implantation of the
components, maintenance of optimal soft tissue balance, and use of semi-constrained implant de-
signs that distribute femorotibial loading over an increased area of surface contact.
lmplant Fixation: 'The advantages of cementless fixation include reduced operative time,
elimination of PMMA as a source of particulate debris and a decreased risk of thermal injury to
bone. In human 'TKR, the clinical results of cementless fibial fixation are not as good as those
seen with cemented fibial fixation. '3 However, one must be cautious in extrapolating human clin-
ical data into dogs. There is a large body of preclinical data indicating that cementless fixation is
o  e      a p   a  as
implant is as robust as that achieved with cemented fixation, at least over a 12-month time frame
in dogs.14 Cementless fixation is used in the GenuSys system, and we recently showed that it is
possible to achieve cementless fixation with a porous-coated, metal-backed version of the Bio-
Medtrix fibial component; the positive results from this study led to the introduction of a ce-
mentless option for this implant system.1$
Custom Total Knee Replacement: Revision options for canine TKR cases have until re-
cently been very limited. Implants that failed as a result of aseptic loosening could be removed
and replaced with long stemmed implants that bypass regions with bone loss and permit ce-
mented or cementless fixation in healthy distant bone stock. Implants that become infected are
  s ad  ds-on r a e 's n ia n  n
with excellent results (especially for two-stage revisions). However, the cost of a two-stage revi-
sion can be prohibitive in dogs. Paliative management with antibiotic-impregnated bone cement
beads may be tried, but most dogs with infected TKR end up being managed with arthrodesis.
amputation or euthanasia
71* ESVOT 2011, Lyon (France) - October 20"h - 22ng
M.I. Allen, L.M. Dejardin
In the last couple of years, there has been renewed interest in the development of revision so-
lutions for canine TKR, as well as in the development of custom implants that can be used to
manage animals with significant knee joint instability (e.g. following stifle joint derangement, or
recurrent medial collateral rupture) or dogs with malignant lesions in the distal femur or proxi-
mal tibial. Although case series are not available, the isolated case reports indicate that the use of
hinged implants is a viable option for these complex cases.'* However, data on the long-term sur
vival of these implants must be collected before any conclusions can be drawn regarding the po-
tential utility of these revision implants.
Patellar Resurfacing: The issue of patellar resurfacing continues to be contentious in human
TKR, with some surgeons advocating routine resurfacing at the time of primary TKR, while others
prefer only to resurface when there are symptoms of patellar pain and/or disease. In dogs. the situa-
fion is even less clear. While there is often evidence of significant cartilage eburnation and margina
osteophytosis in dogs that present with chronic DJD, the significance of these lesions as a source of
pain has not been determined. Retrieval samples from research dogs that have undergone TKR
demonstrate histological changes (decreased proteoglycan staining and alterations in cartilage thick-
ness) but none of the dogs exhibited clinical signs of patellar pain (Allen M1. Unpublished data). The
bng-term effects of TKR on patellar cartilage can only be determined through retrieval studies on
clinical cases, but at this time it does not appear to be a significant concern and there is currently no
REFERENCES
1. NIH Consensus Staterment on total knee replacement. NIH Consens State Sci Statements 20:1-34, 2003.
Bobyn JD, Cameron HU, Abdulla D. Biologic fixation and bone modeling with an unconstrained canine to
tal knee prosthesis. Clin Orthop Relat Res 166:301-312, 1982.
3 Turner TM, Urban RM, Summer DR, et al. Bone ingrowth into the tibial cormponent of a canine total condy-
lar knee replacement prosthesis. J Orthop Res 7:893-901, 1989.
4 Surmmer DR, Turner TM, Dawson D, et al. Efect of pegs and screws on bone ingrowth in cementless total
knee arthroplasty. Clin Orthop Relat Res 309:150-155, 1994.
5.
Berzins A, Sumner DR, Turmer TM, et al. Effects of fixation technique on displacement incompatibilities at the
bone-implant interface in cermentless total kmee replacement in a canine model. J Appl Biomater 5:349-352, 1994.
6. Liska WD, Marcellin-Little DJ, Eskelinen EV, et al. Custom total knee replacement in a dog with femora
condylar bone loss. Vet Surg 36:293-301, 2007.
7. Allen MJ, Leone KA, LaMonte K, et al. Cemented total knee replacement in the dog: surgical technique, clin-
ical results and complications in 24 dogs. Vet Surg 38:555-567, 2009
 n o ao pe an s n  n   o '  8
38:568-582,2009.
9. Ritter MA, Faris PM, Keating EM, et al. Postoperative aligmment of total knee replacement. Its effect on sur-
vival. Clin Orthop Relat Res 299:153-156, 1994.
10. Harris WH. Wear and periprosthetic osteolysis: the problem. Clin Orthop Relat Res 393:66-70, 2001
11. Rudinsky A, Townsend KL, Thurston S, et al. Wear analysis in retrieved canine total knee replacement im-
plants. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 23(4):A21, 2010.
12. Bartel DL, Bicknell VL, Wright, TM. The effect of conformity, thickness, and material on stresses in ultra-high mo
13. Robertsson O, Knutson K, Lewold S, et al. The Swedish Knee Arthroplasty Register 1975-1997: an update with
special emphasis on 41,223 knees operated on in 1988-1997. Acta Orthop Scand 72:503-513, 2001
14. Allen M, Leone K, Sharkey P, et al. Stability of a Peri-Apatite coated cermentless tibial baseplate in a canine to-
tal knee arthroplasty model. Transactions of the Orthopaedic Research Society 32:1892, 2007.
15. Allen MJ, Rudinsky A, Shah S, et al. Preclinical assessment of cermentless total knee replacement in the dog.
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 23:A1, 2010.
16. Fitzpatrick N, Asher K. Constrained total knee replacement: a novel prosthesis for salvage arthroplasty in the
dog and cat. Vet Surg 39:E36, 2010