Feline OrthopedicSurgery
and Musculoskeletal
Disease
P.M.Montavon
K.Voss
S.J.Langley-Hobbs
SAUNDERS
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://Ltahc.laobao.com
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
@ 2009, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise, without either the prior permission of the publishers or a
licence permiting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the Copy-
right Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP. Permissions
may be sought directly from Elsevier's Health Sciences Rights Department in
:- 6617 87 117 (1+) :x9 6984 8 117 ()   1
healthpermissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request on-line
via the Elsevier homepage (http://www.elsevier.com), by selecting "Customer
 Support" and then “Obtaining Permissions".
First published 2009
ISBN: 978-0-7020-2986-8
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
 A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
Knowledge and best practice in this feld are constantly changing. As new research
and experience broaden our knowledge, changes in practice, treatment and drug
therapy may become necessary or appropriate. Readers are advised to check the
most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (i) by the manu-
facturer of each product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or
formula, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is
the responsibility of the practitioner relying on their own experience and knowl-
edge of the patient, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment
for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
 To the fullest extent of the law, neither the publisher nor the author assumes
any liability for any injury and/or damage.
ThePublisher
your source for books,
ELSEVIER
journals and multimedia
in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Working together to grow
The
pubisher's
libraries in developing countries
 policy is to use
paper manufactured
www.elsevier.com I www.bookaid.org I www.sabre.org
from sustalnable forests
Printed in China
"I am the cat that walked by himself.."
 Just So Stories, Rudyard Kipling
Preface
The practice of feline surgery has developed markedly over
diseases are only described in single case reports or small case
the last 10 years. One cat lives in approximately every fourth
 series, and cats often show non-specific clinical signs with
household in industrial countries, and the caseload of cats
 diseases of the musculoskeletal system, which reduces owners
reaches or exceeds 50% of the species seen in many urban 
 and veterinarians’ awareness of such conditions.
practices and clinics in the USA, Europe, and Japan. Develop-
 The goal of this book was to produce a comprehensive and
ment of modern implants and improvement of diagnostic
 up-to-date textbook on feline orthopedics. There are parts on
modalities have resulted in an increased knowledge of feline
diagnostics, musculoskeletal diseases and neurological condi-
orthopedic conditions, and offer a wider range of treatment
tions, diagnosis and treatment of polytraumatized cats, basic
options.
principles of orthopedic surgery, anesthesia and analgesia,
The majority of feline orthopedic cases seen in practice
surgical instruments and implants, rehabilitation, and arthros-
copy. The main emphasis is on orthopedic surgical tech-
orthopedic injuries. The old saying, that “"if rwo pieces of cat
niques. These are described in detail for diseases and injuries
bone are put together in the same room they will heal," is of
of each bone and joint. Common classic surgical techniques
course not true. Although fxation stability may be of less
are reported, as well as many novel topics specifc to feline
concern in cats compared to dogs, the small size of the cat
musculoskeletal disease and orthopedics. This textbook
bones and the severity of some injuries can make feline ortho-
should form a good grounding in orthopedics for veterinary
pedic surgery particularly challenging. Also the choice of
students. It should improve the diagnosis of feline orthopedic
implants is different, as many implants used in dogs are too
conditions, provide detailed explanations of their treatment
large for cat bones.
for small animal practitioners, and it will offer further novel
Cats are less commonly presented with lameness than dogs.
 treatment options to specialist surgeons.
It can be a real diagnostic challenge to determine the cause
P.M. Montavon
of lameness if the cat does not suffer from a cat bite abscess
K. Voss
or a fracture. Knowledge of feline orthopedic diseases is
S.J. Langley-Hobbs
much lower when compared to dogs. Many feline othopedic
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our dear colleagues for their generous
Figs 3.07, 3.08,4.06, 5.05, 5.10, 8.07, 15.06, 22.02,27.04,
contributions in the form of cases, radiographs, inspiration
28.01, 28.04, 28.05, 29.03, 29.12, 30.04, 30.16, 31.03,
or ideas:
32.14, 33.04, 33.10, 35.02, 35.08, 35.19, 35.20, 36.08,
37.09, 38.06, 38.07, 38.16A-C
Kenneth Bruecker, DVM, DACVS, Ventura, United States
Stuart Carmichael BVMS, MVM, DSAO, MRCVS, Glasgow,
Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich
United Kingdom
Figs 1.01, 1.16, 2.01, 2.02, 2.03, 2.04, 2.05, 2.06, 2.07,
Jean-Romain Carroz, Dr med. vet., Sion, Switzerland
2.08, 2.09, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 2.15, 2.16, 3.04,
James L. Cook, DVM, PhD, DACVS, Columbia, USA
3.09, 3.10, 3.11, 4.01, 4.04, 4.07, 5.01, 5.02, 5.03, 5.04,
Jan Declercq, Dr med. vet., Gent, Belgium
5.06, 5.07, 5.08, 5.09, 5.11, 5.12, 6.01, 6.02, 6.03, 6.05,
Renate Dennler, Dr med. vet., DECVS, Affoltern,
6.07, 6.08, 7.01, 7.02, 7.06, 7.07, 7.08, 7.10, 8.01, 8.02,
Switzerland
8.03, 8.04, 8.05, 8.06, 9.01, 9.02, 10.01, 12.02, 12.04,
Jean-Christophe Dubuis, Dr med. vet., Lausanne,
12.05, 12.06, 12.07, 12.08, 12.09, 12.10, 13.11, 13.12,
Switzerland
13.13, 13.15, 13.24, 13.25, 13.31, 14.02, 14.03, 14.06,
Erick L. Egger, DVM, DACVS, Loveland, USA
14.07, 15.01, 15.03, 15.04, 15.05, 15.07, 16.03, 16.04,
 Barbara Haas, Dr med. vet., DECVS, Munich, Germany
16.05, 20.02,20.13,22.10, 26.01,26.02, 26.03, 26.09,
Alex Heller, Dr med. vet., Reinach, Switzerland
26.10, 26.11, 26.15, 26.17, 26.18, 26.20, 27.02, 27.06,
Gaelle Mandon, Dr med. vet., Sion, Switzerland
28.02, 29.05, 29.10, 29.16, 30.03, 30.05, 30.06, 30.07,
Ulrike Matis, Prof. Dr med. vet., DECVS, Munich,
30.08, 30.11, 30.13, 30.14, 30.15, 31.05, 31.06, 31.07,
Germany
31.08, 31.12, 31.15, 32.02, 32.03, 32.05, 32.06, 32.07,
Alison J. Patricelli, DVM, DACVS, Albuquerque, USA
32.08, 32.09, 32.10, 32.12, 32.15, 33.05, 33.06, 33.07,
Matthew Pead, BVetMed, PhD, MRCVS, RVC, London,
33.11, 33.13, 34.06, 34.08, 34.10, 34.11, 34.12, 34.13,
United Kingdom
34.14, 35.03, 35.07, 35.10, 35.11, 35.13, 35.16, 35.18,
Bruno Peirone, Prof. Dr med. vet., Turin, Italy
36.02, 36.03, 36.04, 36.05, 36.06, 36.10, 36.12, 36.13,
Rico Vannini, Dr med. vet., DECVS, Watt, Switzerland
37.03, 37.04, 37.07, 37.11, 37.13, 37.15, 37.18, 38.01,
Stergios Vlachopoulos, Dr med. vet., Athens, Greece
38.02, 38.03, 38.04, 38.08, 38.10, 38.12, 38.14, 38.16D-E,
Urs Weber, Dr med. vet., DECVS, Tenniken Switzerland
39.03, 39.05, 39.08, 39.10, 39.11, 39.13, 39.15, 40.02,
40.03, 40.04, 40.05, 40.07, 40.09, 40.11, 40.12, 40.14,
40.16, 40.17, 40.19, 40.20, 42.01, 42.02, 42.03, 42.04,
Many thanks also to the following friends for their valuable
42.05, 42.06, 42.07, 42.08, 42.09, 42.10, 42.11, 42.12,
help with the production of fgures:
42.13, 42.14, 42.15, 42.16, 42.17, 42.18, 42.19, 42.20,
42.21, 42.22, 42.23, 42.24, 42.25, 42.26, 42.27, 42.28,
Corina Blecher, Zurich, Switzerland
42.29, 42.30, 42.31, 42.32, 42.33, 42.34, 42.35, 42.36,
Anita Hug, Zurich, Switzerland
42.37, 42.38, 42.39, 42.40, 42.41, 42.42, 42.43, 42.44,
42.45, 42.46, 42.47, 42.48, 42.49, 42.50, 42.51
Sources of illustrations:
Department of Veterinary Medicine, University 
of
Cambridge
Contributors
Authors
 Pierre Montavon Prof., Dr med. vet.
 Clinic for Small Animal Surgery
Susi Arnold Prof., Dr med. vet., DECAR
Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich
 Center for Small Animal Reproduction
Zurich, Switzerland
Hinenberg, Switzerland
 Stefanie Ohlerth Dr. med. vet. DECVDI
Brian Beale DVM, DACVS
 Division of Diagnostic Imaging
Gulf Coast Veterinary Specialists
Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich
Houston, USA
Zurich, Switzerland
Luc Borer Dr med. vet., DECVs
John Lapish BSc, BVetMed, MRcVS
Cabinet Vetérinaire de Riantbosson
Veterinary Instrumentation
Geneve, Switzerland
 Sheffeld, United Kingdom
aude Favrot DVM, Mssc, DECVD
Valerie J. Poirier DMv, DAcvIM, DEcvIM-CA, DACVR
Clinic for Small Animal Internal Medicine
Brisbane Veterinary Specialist Center
Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich
Albany Creek, Australia
Zurich, Switzerland
Frank Steffen PD, Dr med. vet. DECVN
 Francesco Gallorini Dr med. vet.
 Clinic for Small Animal Surgery
Clinica Veterinaria S. Silvestro
Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich
Arezzo, Italy
Zurich, Switzerland
Stefan Grundmann Dr med. vet., DEcvs
Katja Voss Dr med. vet., DECVS
Kleintierpraxis Reinle & Grundmann GmBH
Clinic for Small Animal Surgery
Weil am Rhein, Germany
Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
Fredrik Gruenenfelder Dr med. vet., DECVN
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
University of Glasgow
Drawings and design
Glasgow, United Kingdom
Rainer Egle
Egle Consulting
Madeleine Hubler Dr med. vet., DECAR
Russikon, Switzerland
 Center for Small Animal Reproduction
Hinenberg, Switzerland
Daniel Erni
 Focused Publishing
Sandra L. Hudson Bs, MBA, CCRP
Russikon, Switzerland
Canine Rehabilitation & Conditioning Center
Round Rock, USA
Matthias Haab
Equine Clinic
Sabine Kaestner Prof., Dr med. vet., DEcVA
Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich
 Small Animal Clinic
Zurich, Switzerland
University of Veterinary Medicine
Hannover, Germany
Marianne Mathys
Graphik/AVD
Marcel Keller Dr med. vet., DEcvs
Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich
Kleintierklinik Rigiplatz
Zurich, Switzerland
Hinenberg, Switzerland
Sorrel Langley-Hobbs MA BVet Med, DsAs(O), DEcvs, MRCvs
 Department of Veterinary Medicine
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, United Kingdom
Foreword
Over the years many books have been published regarding
of the text. The fonts employed are very readable due to their
the surgical and medical care of the dog and cat - some of
size and spacing, according to what is required by the rele-
the dog alone, few of the cat alone. One of the earliest of the
vant text. I am also pleased to see the excellent quality of the
latter was Feline Medicine and Surgery, edited by Dr. EJ
fgures. The reproduction of the radiographs is excellent, as
Catcott in 1964. A second edition of that text was published
are the colored photographs. The diagrams are simple - clear
in 1975, in which I had a small contribution. Since that date
and colored with two, or sometimes three, pastel tints. The
fortunately the paucity of scientific texts regarding the treat-
artist has been asked for clarity - not for works of art, as
ment of many conditions of cats has gradually been reduced.
is required in major anatomical texts - and has succeeded
There are now a number of texts solely dedicated to the care
handsomely. The diagrams add considerably to the inter-
of specific systems of the domesticated feline species.
pretation of the neighboring text. One could comment upon
 The new text before you is confned to feline orthopedics
each individual chapter, but I am not going to do so, believing
 and traumatology. Using the word “confined" in the context
it not within the remit of an individual asked to write the
of this text is really an enigma: the term in itself is correct
 foreword, but being in the realm of a reviewer.
but is contrary to fact, an antithesis of what is to be found
 m res, e ro ri, e r aq  rpi a
in the book, which very competently covers the subjects that
comes to professional journals. If one color-codes articles and
come under its title. More so, one ventures to suggest that
 gives them a page number relevent to a condition described
 ao uen uopsim jo siread, arou Aue ae ara
within this book, then one can - dare one say - write the
anticipate. Within, the reader will fnd new information
reference number in the margin of the relevant material in
 regarding the diagnosis of conditions, including digital radi-
the text. In this way, a cross-reference system will grow on
ography and magnetic resonance imaging, and the essential
 its own, with or without a computer.
 supportive subjects of anesthesia and analgesia - the fore-
Herein, the triumvirate of editors has assembled much that
 q   s si o r an n o
is new in the literature, as well as some material that has
William Muir an eminent colleague in those areas. The
originally been published in journals. Nevertheless, it is all
reader will also fnd current information regarding arthros-
brought together - for the cat. New procedures and tech-
copy, postoperative care, and rehabilitation. These subjects
niques are described, as well as old techniques that have been
are described in detail, along with those covering the core
melded to ft the necessity of the feline traumatized patient.
subjects of traumatology and orthopedics. The whole is a
Neophytes to veterinary orthopedics, to trauma in general
veritable cornucopia of new and exciting instructive chapters
and the cat in particular, would do well to engage themselves
to salve the enquiring mind of practitioners in the art of feline
deeply in all that has been written by the cadre of accom-
care.
plished authors, garnered by the editors, to produce a text
Dr. Pierre Montavon and his co-editors have elected to
that may be used by newcomers to the feld who would do
divide the text into different parts, each with a varying
well to absorb the material between these covers. To the
number of conjunctional chapters. The apparent contra-
veterinarian experienced in trauma and orthopedics, I respect-
diction is solved when one observes that each part has been
fully suggest that you too will find useful ideas and informa-
allocated a separate color for the title page; the same colors
tion within. I did!
ueaalar aul jo saape aul u asyieu qunu, se pasn uaaq aaeu
uosod mau e on aoed aul umop Suou syreuu aun 'saaed
Learning is but an adjunct to ourself (Shakespeare, Love's
for the chapters following. The system thus readily aids the
Labour's Lost).
reader who, after consulting the list of contents at the begin-
ning of the book, is then readily able to follow the “"thumb
Finally, looking back over the nearly 60 years of my profes-
marks" and rapidly arrives at the material desired. The more
sional life, I believe that it is mandatory for me to presume
one uses the text the more readily one is able to go straight
to pass on some of that experience by making what one
to the material sought.
 considers some cogent and, one hopes, sagacious advice. I
At this point I should like to pay tribute to the staff at the
 believe that it is mandatory that before attempting to employ
a new technique it should be practiced on a cadaver or the
xX
Foreword
clinician should receive instruction alongside someone already
 problem - some more expensive than others. After reading
vested with experienced in its use. Know your own limita-
the results of the different techniques available for your
tions and do not be afraid to refer the patient to a specialist.
 choice, some more expensive than others, only one's con-
In so doing the neophyte to the endeavor will become better
 science remains to decide what is to be done.
eain au ui apeur uaaq seu ieui ssanoid aui oi se pasiape
This new addition to the veterinary literature should be
 of particular problems. That having been said, in a genuine
 exceedingly helpful to all clinicians fnding themselves with a
and dire emergency any method to resolve a critical situation
 traumatized cat on their examination table.
is eminently defendable.
 Sometimes the limitations of the owners’ ability to fund a
Geoff. Sumner-Smith DVSc(Liv) MSc FRCVS
 procedure may negate its use. In this text, in some instances,
University Professor Emeritus of the University of Guelph
you will see different methods for the treatment of the same
Ontario, Canada
Foreword
This, the frst edition of the text Feline Orthopedic Surgery
pulse oximeter, and indirect arterial blood pressure decrease
and Musculoskeletal Disease is a work long overdue. The
anesthetic risk.
nuances of feline anatomy, physiology, and behavior in con-
 Most cats that have suffered an orthopedic injury are
junction with the cat's unique responses to disease, surgery,
 stressed, in pain, and dehydrated. Those that have incurred
and medications deserve special attention. The aforemen-
 significant injuries secondary to trauma often sustain exten-
tioned distinctive characteristics create special challenges
 sive soft-tissue damage, blood loss, and infection. Those that
when designing and implementing adequate and effective
 have experienced severe head or chest wall trauma in addi-
anesthesia and analgesia protocols for cats. Compared to
dogs, for example, cats are more easily stressed, oftentimes
nervous system (stupor, depression), respiratory (labored
difficult to restrain, even for minor medical procedures (intra-
 breathing), or cardiovascular (arrhythmias) problems.
venous catheter placement), harder to intubate orotracheally,
The feline orthopedic surgical candidate presents special
easily overdosed or overanesthetized, and more frequently
anesthetic risks, requires intense analgesic care and provides
found to be hypotensive and hypothermic. Their size and
ample opportunity for the utilization of specialized monitor-
temperament alone predispose them to accidental drug-
ing equipment and techniques. Towards this end Dr. Kaest-
related side-effects.
 ner has written two chapters devoted to the anesthetic and
The importance of vigilance, dosing accuracy,
and
 analgesic care of the feline orthopedic patient. These chapters
familiarity with species differences in relationship to the
 provide detailed and clinically applicable information regard-
anesthetic and analgesic drugs and techniques used in
 ing the clinical pharmacology, monitoring, and analgesic care
cats cannot be overemphasized. Recent data assessing anes-
of cats. Figures, tables, and boxes provide key background
thetic-related mortality suggest that approximately 1:400
 information. Anesthetic techniques, monitoring equipment,
(0.24%) anesthetized cats die and that age, weight, proce-
 and common anesthetic problems and their therapy are dis-
dural urgency, endotracheal intubation, and fluid therapy
 cussed. A comprehensive list of analgesic drugs, drug dosages
increase risk. The mortality rate associated with anesthesia
 and analgesic techniques including local and regional analge-
 nog sanie pue shop un ueul iaiea qonu sl sieo u!
 sia are described and illustrated. Dr. Kaestner has provided
 greater vigilance and improved methods for detection of
the necessary basic applied information required to produce
deleterious changes in the cat's physical status during
safe and effective anesthesia and analgesia in cats.
anesthesia. Importantly, the routine use of monitoring
devices including, but not limited to, an electrocardiogram,
William Muir DVM, PhD, ACVA, ACVECC
Part
Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
The independent and curious nature of the cat often places
it in dangerous situations, making trauma the most common
etiology of orthopedic problems. Motor vehicle accidents,
falls from a height, or bite wounds are commonly encoun-
tered in cats and can cause severe and multiple injuries to the
skeletal system and the soft tissues. The initial examination
 of the trauma patient concentrates on diagnosing and treating
 life-threatening disorders. Orthopedic injuries are addressed
only after more severe soft-tissue injuries have been ruled out
and the cat is in a stable condition. Fractures or joint injuries
usually cause obvious clinical signs.
The lame cat without a history or signs of trauma can be
a diagnostic challenge. First, the awareness of the clinician
se aiep oi dn se iou uaio si sieo un saseasip oipadoqiro ro
 jo r  an n  q  s 'so 1os
presenting for lameness and to the paucity of specific litera-
 ture available addressing feline orthopedic patients. Second,
both a thorough gait analysis and a complete orthopedic
examination, necessary to detect subtle abnormalities, are
often difficult to perform in the cat. Lastly, cats exhibit more
discrete and distinct signs associated with orthopedic diseases
than dogs, which may be missed or misinterpreted by owners
and veterinarians. Awareness of specific feline orthopedic
diseases and the clinical signs associated with them is helpful
 in making a correct diagnosis.
One should follow the same principles when examining a
cat as one would in a dog, but with greater calm, and with
more patience. Appropriate handling and restraint methods
are the key for making cats cooperative and agreeable patients
to work with. Commonly used diagnostic procedures for the
feline orthopedic patient are described in the following
sections. The authors have emphasized practical tips and
peculiarities to the feline patient.
3
 Patient assessment
K. Voss, F. Steffen
The complete patient assessment consists of the signalment,
 cifc and accurate diagnosis, and fnally making an appropri-
history, general, orthopedic, and neurological examination.
ate treatment plan. Assessment of the severity of the disease
A summary of the decision-making proces for the feline
 process, presence of concurrent diseases, prognosis for return
orthopedic patient is shown in Figure 1-1. After the physical,
to function, morbidity associated with the treatment, cost,
orthopedic, and neurological examinations, the clinician
and the ability of the owners to provide necessary supportive
should have a list of differential diagnoses in mind, which
care for their cat should also influence the choice of
 dictates the choice for further diagnostic procedures. Risks
treatment.
 and benefts of these procedures should be assessed and dis-
cussed with the owners. The continuous analysis of informa-
1.1 History
tion obtained at each step of the diagnostic examination and
procedure has the goal of ruling out differential diagnoses,
The history obtained from the owner of a cat may not
 be as helpful as for other species. Mildly injured or ill cats
detecting concurrent diseases or conditions, obtaining a spe-
Data collection
Assessment
Decision-making
Figure 1-1 This flow diagram
represents the process of data
Owner's history
Interpretation
collection, continuous assessment
 Reason for presentation
 Initial problem list 
of data, and decision-making in 
Owner's observations
the feline orthopedic patient.
Owner's expectations
Emergency treatment if necessary
Clinical examinations
 Interpretation of the findings
General
 Expanded problem list
Orthopedic
Clinical differential diagnoses
Neurological
Evaluation of efficacy of
emergency treatment
 Decision on necessity for
further diagnostic tests
Continue emergency treatmentif
necessary
 Further examinations
 Interpretation of the findings
Blood work
Expanded problem list 
Diagnostic imaging
Decision of necessity for
Cytology
further diagnostic tests 
Histopathology
Evaluation of efficacy of
Bacteriology
emergency treatment
 Neurodiagnostic procedures
 One or more diagnoses
Owner's expectations
Clinical relevance of the diagnoses
Prognosis
Morbidity/mortality of treatment
Costs
Treatment plan
4
Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
often do not exhibit obvious or specifc clinical signs, and
Figure 1-2
it may take longer for the owners to realize that something
Transport boxes for
is wrong. Outdoor cats especially spend a large amount of
cats should have a
top construct
time unobserved by their owners. General habits, like the
designed to be
ability to urinate or defecate, are observed occasionally at
opened or
best. With trauma, the traumatic event itself is often not
removable. Most cats 
observed, and a common complaint relates to the cat coming
can then be lifted 
 home limping or injured. Despite these challenges, obtaining 
out of the box by
placing hands
an accurate history is an important step in evaluating the
around their chest.
feline patient. Because many cats are anxious in the hospital
 setting, it may be diffcult for the clinician to detect behav-
ioral changes effciently or to assess general health, and the
observation of the owners regarding the behavior of the
cat at home gives important diagnostic and prognostic
information.
 e on a r a  jo  a
there has been a possibility of trauma, and if so, to evaluate
possible causes, to assess when a potential traumatic event or
disease state occurred, to get an overview of the living habits
 and general health of the patient, and to localize the com-
plaint to one or more body systems. Additionally the expecta-
Figure 1-3 For
tions of the owners regarding the treatment and its expected
scruffing or the neck 
outcome, and their ability to care for the cat postoperatively,
grip, the loose skin
should be evaluated. Examples of questions that should be
on the dorsum of 
asked are listed in Table 1-1. The feline patient is left in its 
the neck is grasped 
with the whole
basket while the clinician talks to the owners to allow adjust-
hand. This is a
 ment to the new surroundings.
painful maneuver,
especially in older
1.2 Handling and restraint
 and heavier cats. The
other hand is
Every veterinarian has encountered the fractious, scratching,
therefore used to
support weight from
and biting cat. This is not only a bad and even dangerous
the bottom.
 experience for owner, cat, and clinician, but also precludes
 a thorough examination and may alter clinical parameters,
such as temperature, heart, and respiratory rate (1). Aggres-
 siveness in cats may be induced by several mechanisms
(2), but is often caused by fear, impossibility for escape, and
pain during manipulations. Fear can be reduced by providing
a quiet and calm environment, avoiding brisk movements
 and touch and loud voices. Ideally both the waiting room
and the consultation room should be closed, quiet, and
without dogs in the area. Successfully handling cats necessi-
tates a feeling for the individual nature of the cat, and using
minimal restraint (3). Over-restraining often leads to adverse
 reactions and can end with the cat immobilized from fear or
dorsum of the neck is gently tickled. The commonly used
too fractious to examine. Many cats will be cooperative
neck grip, scruffng (Fig. 1-3), should be avoided when pos-
patients when treated with patience and respect to their
sible (4). However scruffing controls the head movements of
nature.
 the cat and might have to be used in some cats during removal
The cat is usually taken out of its basket by holding it
from a basket or cage to avoid scratching or biting. The cat
around the chest (Fig. 1-2). Baskets in which the whole top
should be immobilized with minimal force and pressure while
can be removed are preferable. Before grasping the cat, it is
examining it on the table. The clinician can hold the cat
 gently stroked on the head and shoulders or the skin of the
gently between body and one hand while the examinations
1: Patient assessment
5
 Question
Interpretation
 Signalment (age, breed, and sex)
Gives frst hint for diseases or injuries, which occur
preferentially in certain breeds or age groups
Is the cat an outdoor or indoor cat?
Although indoor cats might have sustained an accident, the
trauma is generally milder, and confined to one
localization
Vaccination status?
Especially important in outdoor cats
Is there contact with other cats?
Evaluation for the possibility of bite wounds and infectious
diseases
Was the onset of the complaint acute or
 Trauma usually causes an acute onset of clinical signs,
progressive?
 diseases usually a progressive course
If trauma is suspected or the cat has been
Gives the time span when the trauma might have happened
missing, when was it last seen in a normal
state?
How and when was the cat found? Is there
Progression of clinical signs after trauma may indicate
 progression of clinical signs since the trauma
progression of shock, brain injury, injury to organs, or
occurred?
development of infection
Was the cat able to walk after the trauma? Did
In cats unable to walk, multiple limb injuries, pelvic
it use all limbs?
 fractures, or spinal fractures/luxations should be suspected
Did the cat urinate since the trauma happened?
Urination does not rule out urinary tract injury, but lack of
urination needs to be evaluated
Were any other signs observed, such as
coughing, mouth-breathing, diarrhea?
concurrent cardiac or respiratory diseases. General
diseases can mimic orthopedic or neurological problems
(for example, aortic thrombus formation with
cardiomyopathy). Concurrent systemic diseases might
have an influence on the treatment plan and the prognosis 
Is the cat eating normally? Has it lost weight?
Weight loss with reduced food uptake usually indicates
systemic diseases or painful conditions. Weight loss with
increased food uptake may indicate feline hyperthyroidism
 Is there a change in general behavior (activity,
Non-specific changes in behavior can be a sign of systemic
sleeping, grooming)?
disease or can be caused by pain
Was a limp or lameness noticed? If so, which
 Low-grade and intermittent lameness can be hard to detect
leg?
in the clinic
 Does the cat still jump on its favorite spots?
Reluctance to jump is a common sign of orthopedic and
neurological problems in cats
Does the cat drink a lot?
This question should always be asked, because of the high
frequency of kidney disease and diabetes mellitus in older
cats
What is the cat fed?
 An important question to rule out nutritional skeletal
disorders
Is there a change in the cat's ability to urinate
 Urination or defecation outside the litter box may be a sign
or defecate?
of skeletal pain or neurological dysfunction
Table 1-1. Examples of essential questions to be asked during history-taking. and their interpretation
6
Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
are performed with the other hand (Fig. 1-4). Some cats relax
instances. As much information as possible should be gained
by being groomed or stroked with a grooming mitt or brush,
through history and observation of fractious or feral cats.
which can release endorphins.
Clinical and further examinations may then only be possible
Firm local grasping, especially at the lower back, tail, and
with the use of anesthesia. Intramuscular injection of narcot-
feet, is avoided, as it often leads to defensive behavior. If
ics or induction of general anesthesia can be performed with
more restraint is necessary for certain manipulations, the cat
 the help of restraint boxes. These devices, however, cause
is held with flat hands around the neck, or chest and shoul-
signifcant stress for the patient, do not allow appropriate
ders, or the pelvis. The handler should use minimal force,
 monitoring, and should only be used for undomesticated or
but must be ready to enhance the restraint quickly if the cat
extremely aggressive cats.
 tries to scratch or bite. Cats should always be held by expe-
rienced staff and not by the owner. Although cats are usually
1.3 General physical examination
affectionate with their owners, aggression can be directed
against the owner in a stressful situation, leading to a scratch
Goals of the general physical examination of an orthopedic
or bite.
patient are to assess the general health of the patient, to detect
Occasionally a cat will be encountered which cannot be
clinical signs indicating underlying disease processes, and to
handled at all without physical or medical restraint. Sedation
exclude concurrent problems. Older cats, especially, may
may be preferable to mechanical restraint for lengthy proce-
suffer from systemic diseases. These diseases can cause or
dures if the cat is well hydrated and in good body condition.
mimic orthopedic or neurological signs, or may be present
concurrently with the actual orthopedic or neurological
example, palpation of an unstable joint, are conducted.
problem. The examination should include assessment of the
Mechanical restraint devices, such as a cat bag or a head and
general body condition, the vital parameters, and topographi-
face mask, are available, and can be indicated in some
cal examination of all body systems. Important features of
the general physical examination of the orthopedic patient
are described in the following section. The reader is referred
to small animal textbooks for a complete description and
Figure 14 Minimal
interpretation of the general physical examination. When
restraint is usually 
examining a traumatized patient, the complete physical
best. For non-painful
and non-stressful
examination is only performed after the cat has been stabi-
manipulations the
lized. The diagnostic and therapeutic approach to the trauma
cat on the table is
patient is described in Chapter 10.
only supported with
flat hands, with one
hand around the
Overview and vital parameters
patient's chest to
Evaluation of body condition, mental state, heart rate, respi
prevent it from
ratory rate and pattern, mucous membranes and capillary
jumping away
refill time, quality of femoral arterial pulse, and body tem-
perature is performed at the beginning of the clinical exami-
nation. Normal values of vital parameters in cats (1, 4, 5) are
listed in Table 1-2. Variability of the heart rate is high,
depending on stress (1). Body weight is also recorded.
 Parameter
Normal values
Table 1-2. Normal vital
parameters in cats
Heart rate (1)
130 beats/min (± 19) at home
150 beats/min (± 23) at veterinary hospital
187 beats/min (± 25) under restraint
Respiratory rate
20-40 breaths/min
 Body temperature
38-39°C
Pulse quality at femoral arteries
 Easily palpable and regular
Mucous membranes
Light pink and moist
 Capillary refill time
<1 second
1: Patient assessment
7
Figure 1-5 To open
Figure 1-6 Palpation
the mouth of a cat,
of the abdomen can
one hand is placed 
be conducted while
over the top of head
the cat is held
with the thumb and
upright with one
fingers under the
hand under its chest,
zygomatic arches.
its back towards the 
The head is then
examiner. Abdominal
gently tilted back.
contents are then 
Pressure is applied
gently palpated with
 on the lower incisors
flat fingers. Firm
with one finger of 
sharp grasping or
the other hand until
gripping is avoided,
the mouth is
as this will cause
 opened.
pain and may even
result in intra-
abdominal injury.
Head and neck
Eyes, ears, nostrils, and the oral cavity are examined. Blood
in the nostrils or the external ear canal may result from head
trauma. Lacerations around the lips or nose also indicate
and expiration with elevation of the respiratory rate. Cats
head trauma and are commonly caused by falls from a height.
show rapid and shallow breathing, and a predominantly
The oral cavity is examined to evaluate dental occlusion and
 inspiratory distress with pleural space diseases, such as pneu-
identify dental fractures, mandibular and/or maxillary frac-
mothorax, pleural effusion, or diaphragmatic hernia. The
tures, cleft palate, masses, or other abnormalities. Special
thoracic wall is palpated for rib fractures and other structural
attention is made to check for mandibular symphyseal frac-
 changes. Auscultation of the lungs may reveal abnormal lung
tures and traumatic cleft palates in cats with a history of
sounds, absence of normal lung sounds, and asymmetry
 between the right and left sides. The absence of normal lung
 mouth of a cat is shown in Figure 1-5 (5). The neck is gently
sounds suggests pleural space diseases, such as pneumo-
moved through its range of motion
ical spine is
thorax, pleural effusion,
 or diaphragmatic hernia. Purring
palpated in order to detect spinal or
of the high frequency of hyperthyroidism in older cats, the
a u d e o rim a Aq i a 
paratracheal region is carefully palpated from the larynx to
 the thoracic inlet for nodular masses, indicative of an enlarged
Heart
thyroid gland.
Auscultation of the heart may reveal heart murmurs or
arrhythmias. Gallop arrhythmias are common in cats with
Fur, skin, and lymph nodes
myocardial disease. Stress might cause previously subclinical
The quality and integrity of the fur are noted and the skin
heart disease to develop into heart failure. It can be difficult
elasticity is checked in order to evaluate hydration status of
to differentiate between traumatic shock and cardiogenic
 the animal. The whole body is inspected for pain, swelling.
 shock in this situation. The presence of lung edema or pleural
qduki ieyradns aul ‘snd io poonq yo uoeinunsse pue 
effusion, arterial thromboembolism, and jugular vein disten-
nodes, mandibular prescapular axillary, inguinal, and pop-
 sion indicates heart failure. An inadequate response to the
liteal, are palpated for enlargement. The mammary glands
 initial shock and dyspnea treatment should also alert the cli-
are examined to detect masses.
disease.
Respiratory tract
 Breathing pattern and the presence of respiratory noises are
Abdomen
noted. Upper-airway obstruction results in stridor or stertor, 
The abdomen is gently palpated, while the cat is standing or
and a deep and prolonged inspiratory phase with dyspnea.
while it is held with the forelimbs off the table and one hand
Open-mouth breathing can be secondary to airway obstruc-
around the chest with the examiner standing behind the cat
tion, or stress and pain. Lung parenchymal disease, such as 
(Fig. 1-6). The normal stomach is not always palpable, espe-
pulmonary contusion or edema, causes labored inspiration
 cially when empty and located completely within the rib cage.
8
Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
The small spleen and the edges of the liver may be located in
 Lameness grade
Description of lameness
non-obese cats. The small intestinal loops, a colon filled with
feces, the kidneys and the urinary bladder should all be
Grade 1
Low-grade lameness: lameness hardly
readily palpable, except in the obese animal. However, a
visible or no lameness is visible, but
palpable bladder does not rule out bladder rupture. Free
cat lifts foot when sitting (front
abdominal fluid is palpable if present in a significant amount.
limbs), or is unable to jump (from
 It results in abdominal distension and ballottement.
the history) (hindlimbs)
Grade 2
 Medium-grade lameness: lameness
clearly visible, but leg is used in
 Perineal region
most steps
The perineal region and the tail are inspected, mainly to
Grade 3
High-grade lameness: cat is only
diagnose the presence of injuries, abscesses, hematomas, and
toe-touching or not weight-bearing
neurological deficiencies (Chapter 1-5). Bloody urine may be
at all
present around the vulva or penis in traumatized cats, and is
'unss Areun an on Anu on np kenau
Table 1-3. Proposal for scoring lameness in cats
1.4 Orthopedic examination
only move in a crouched position. Despite the difficulties in
The orthopedic examination should include gait analysis,
gait examination, an effort is made to classify any lameness
palpation of the cat in a standing position, and palpation and
according to its severity in order to assess treatment success.
manipulation of every joint and bone on both sides with the
A simple lameness classifcation score for cats is described in
cat in lateral recumbency.
Table 1-3. Cats with low-grade lameness in the thoracic limbs
sometimes appear to walk normally, but lift the foot off the
1.4.1 Examination of gait
ground when sitting.
Cats with bilateral orthopedic problems may not show a
Gait examination can be difficult and often requires time and
distinct lameness, but are inactive and reluctant to jump.
patience because cats generally cannot be led on a leash, and
 sometimes standing or sitting with an abnormal posture, or
often tend to refuse to move around freely in a new
walking with a crouched gait. Bilateral orthopedic conditions
environment.
occur more frequently in the pelvic limbs, and can be con-
The examination room door and windows should be closed
fused with neurological disorders. Common bilateral pelvic
at all times when a cat is unrestrained. Many cats tend to
limb problems include patellar luxation, bilateral cranial cru-
crouch on the floor and stay immobile initially, but motivat-
ciate ligament disease, hip dysplasia, and coxarthrosis.
ing the cat to move around in a new environment is usually
Lumbar or lumbosacral degenerative disease and spondylosis
 possible when the behavior of the cat is understood. Cats
may also cause pain and should be considered as differential
placed in the middle of a room usually look for a place to
diagnoses. Bilateral orthopedic diseases of the thoracic limbs
hide. If the cat is positioned near a corner basket, or another
are rarer, with degenerative disease of the elbow being the
place to hide, it will often move towards that area, allowing
most common.
observation of a few steps at least. The place to hide should
Orthopedic injuries of more than one limb, unstable pelvic
be organized in a way that it is possible to remove the cat
fractures, and/or spinal fractures and luxations should be
from the area easily. The ability to jump can sometimes be
suspected in cats unable to stand and walk after trauma. A
assessed if the room has an elevated place, such as a table in
 thorough orthopedic and neurological examination is per-
a corner of the room. A closed room with a window can also
formed after stabilization of the patient. Minor joint instabil-
be used to observe the gait from outside the room, after the
ity, and fracture or luxation of the proximal limbs such as
cat has been allowed to get familiar with the room. Some cats
femoral head and neck fractures, scapular fractures, and hip
 can be motivated to play with the spotlight of a laser pointer.
and shoulder luxations can initially easily be overlooked if
If a cat completely refuses to walk, and lameness cannot be
the examination is not thorough, and concurrent more
assessed at the clinic, the observations of the owners have to
obvious injuries are present in other limbs.
be used to gather information. Another valuable method for
gait evaluation in cats is to ask the owners to film their cat
1.4.2 Examination in a standing position
at home.
Although it is generally possible to observe a few steps, the
 Palpation of the cat on the examination table in a standing
cat usually cannot be seen moving at different gaits, and may
 position is conducted gently, and with the least amount of
1: Patient assessment
9
Figure 1-7 Comparison of weight-bearing asymmetry is only possible
in cats standing symmetrically on the table, and is an additional
method for detecting which of the paired limbs is loaded less. The
amount of resistance before the leg is drawn back or lifted is compared
between the two limbs.
Figure 1-8 An assistant holds the cat gently on the table with flat
hands for examination in lateral recumbency. One hand is positioned
restraint possible. Only non-painful manipulations are per-
on the shoulders and around the neck to avoid turning of the head
formed during this stage of the examination. The standing
 i aun haad on sad aun uo sall pueu lauo al bua pue
standing up. A cat held like this usually remains cooperative, allowing
position allows direct comparison between paired limbs, and
 good assessment of pain responses
facilitates detection of asymmetry. One hand may have to be
placed under the abdomen to lift the pelvic legs in order to
keep the cat in a standing position. Another way to motivate
examination is started at the toes, working proximally, and
cats to stand up is gentle scratching at the base of the tail.
includes palpation and manipulation of all joints and bones
Gentle palpation is performed frst, and is used to detect axial
Weight-bearing asymmetry  can be compared between
deviation, temperature changes, changes in contour, and fluc-
paired legs while the cat is standing. A gentle pull in a caudal
direction with two fngers on the metatarsus will cause the
uation. Manipulations are conducted after, and may reveal
crepitation, joint hyper- or hypomobility, and pain. Any
cat to unload the limb (Fig. 1-7). The resistance to unload
the limb will be greater in the unaffected side. A comparable
manipulations suspected to be painful are conducted at the
 end of the examination. Pain can also be elicited by deep pal-
test for the front limbs consists of pushing in the area of the
 pation. The pain response in cats may be limited, and besides
accessory bone cranially, and assessing the difference in resis-
 hissing and turning the head will also include subtle signs,
tance to knuckling over.
such as changes in pupil size, breathing pattern, and position-
The neck, back, thoracic limbs, and pelvic limbs are then
gently palpated. Shoulder, back, pelvic, and thigh muscle
ing of the ears. Care is taken while examining the toes because
 many cats do not like manipulation of their feet.
hypotrophy or differences in muscle tone are noted. The bony
protuberances on both sides are compared to each other to
 detect asymmetry, which is often present with pelvic fractures
Bones
or hip joint luxations. Subtle changes in size or contour of
 Bones are palpated and manipulated to detect fractures,
joints and soft tissues are detected more easily if both sides
changes in contour, and pain. The toes, phalanges, and meta-
are palpated simultaneously. The spine and back musculature
pue rauaon paedied isny are sauoq jesieieiau 1o jedies
is palpated gently, including the lumbosacral and sacrococ-
 then individually. Non-displaced metacarpal or metatarsal
cygeal area to reveal pain. Many cats dislike palpation of the
fractures can easily be missed, as they may only cause subtle
 lower back and adverse reactions should be interpreted with
soft-tissue swelling and pain. Every bone is then thoroughly
caution.
 palpated from distal to proximal to detect axial deviation,
contour changes, crepitation, instability, and pain. Presence
1.4.3 Examination in lateral recumbency
 of abnormalities is usually caused by fractures in feline ortho-
pedics. Neoplasia and other diseases of bone, with or without
Cats have often become used to being touched after the
pathological fractures, are differential diagnoses.
standing examination and can then be put in lateral recum-
bency without anxiety. The cat should be held on the table
Joints
with fat hands around the proximal thoracic and pelvic limbs
(Fig. 1-8). All limbs are systematically examined, starting on
the unaffected side and ending with the affected limb. It is not
 or joint effusion. Joint effusion is a non-specic sign,
uncommon to fnd multiple limbs injured after trauma. The
 commonly encountered with traumatic hemarthrosis, degen-
10
Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
erative joint disease, and arthritis. The joints are then moved
pads are examined for pathological conditions (Chapter 7).
throughout their range of motion to detect reduction in range
The presence of several damaged and split nails is indicative of
of motion, joint instability, and/or crepitation. Instability or
a traumatic event. Bite wounds are the most common cause
luxation may be detected secondary to traumatic ligament
for lameness in the cat, and should be suspected in every lame
rupture. Knowledge of the anatomy of each articular liga-
cat with reported contact to other cats. They often cause
-ndiueu aienbape unojiad on Anoiepueu st iroddns snonuau
marked cellulitis with soft-tisue swelling and a severe pain
response on palpation (Chapter 16). Muscles and muscle-
more elastic than the canine joints. Comparing the range of
tendon units are palpated for muscle hypotrophy or atrophy,
 motion of the joint to the contralateral side helps in diagnos-
swelling, and pain. Rupture of the tendon of the triceps
 ing cases with minor instability. Clinically relevant collateral
 muscle, the Achilles tendon, and the patellar tendon has been
ligament sprain is always associated with periarticular swell-
described. Please see part 7 of the book for further details.
ing. Painful manipulations of injured joints are conducted at
the end of the examination. Sometimes sedation or even a
1.5 Neurological examination
short general anesthetic is necessary to be able to diagnose
the type and amount of instability accurately. Palpation and
The neurological examination includes evaluation of posture,
manipulation fndings and their interpretation are summa-
gait, mental status, cranial nerves, proprioception, spinal
rized in Tables 1-4 and 1-5. Specific tests and types of diseases
reflexes, and sensitivity of dermatomes and body areas (6-8).
and injuries are further described in part 7 of the book.
A standardized neurological examination should be per-
formed in all patients before sedation. Tests requiring minimal
 manipulation such as cranial nerves and proprioceptive tests
Soft tissues
are performed first, followed by tests that include some degree
The skin, muscles, and tendons are also evaluated during the
of immobilization and discomfort like spinal reflexes, and
orthopedic examination. The claws, clawbeds, and the foot-
 palpation of the spine or other painful areas.
Joint
Findings
Interpretation
Table 1-4. A summary of specific
findings on the major joints of
Carpus
 Joint effusion
Arthritis, DJD, trauma
the forelimbs and their
 Periarticular swelling
Ligament/capsule sprain, arthritis
interpretation
Crepitation during manipulation
Fracture, luxation, DJD
Valgus or varus instability (with
Collateral ligament sprain
the carpus in extension)
 Positive caudal drawer test
Medial collateral ligament rupture
Palmar instability/
Rupture of palmar ligaments
hyperextension
Elbow
 Joint effusion 
DJD, arthritis, synovial cyst
 Periarticular swelling
Ligament/capsule sprain, synovial cyst,
medial epicondylitis
Crepitation during manipulation
Fracture, luxation, DJD
Reduced range of motion in
DJD, luxation, synostosis between
extension/flexion and
radius and ulna
supination/pronation
 Medial or lateral instability
Collateral ligament sprains
Shoulder
 Crepitation during manipulation
Fracture, luxation, DJD, OC
 Reduced range of motion in
DJD, luxation, dysplasia, OC
flexion and extension
 Mediolateral and craniocaudal
Medial glenohumeral ligament rupture,
instability (drawer tests)
subluxation, luxation, rupture of
biceps tendon
Positive biceps tendon test
 Biceps tenosynovitis, rupture of the
biceps tendon
DJD, degenerative joint disease; OC, osteochondrosis.
1: Patient assessment
11
Joint
Findings
Interpretation
Table 1-5. A summary of specific
 findings on the hindlimbs and
Tarsus
Joint effusion
Arthritis, DJD, trauma
 their interpretation
Periarticular swelling
Ligament/capsule sprain, arthritis
Crepitation during manipulation
Fracture, instability, DJD
 Reduced range of motion in flexion/
DJD, luxation
extension
Valgus or varus instability (with the
Collateral ligament sprain,
joint held in extension/flexion)
malleolar or distal fbular fracture
 Dorsal intertarsal or tarsometatarsal
 Rupture of dorsal ligaments
instability
 Plantar intertarsal or tarsometatarsal
Rupture of plantar ligaments
instability
Stifle
 Joint effusion
DJD, arthritis, OC, trauma
 Periarticular swelling
 Capsule and collateral ligament
sprain, disruption, DJD
Crepitation during manipulation
Fractures, instability, DJD
Reduced range of motion
DJD
in flexion/extension
Unstable patella
Patellar luxation
 Positive cranial and/or caudal drawer
Cranial and/or caudal cruciate
test
ligament rupture
Valgus and varus instability (with stifle
 Collateral ligament sprain, condylar
joint in extension)
fractures
Hip
 Reduced range of motion in extension,
 Hip luxation or pain due to femoral
flexion, circumduction, internal and
head/neck fractures, DJD,
external rotation, and abduction
 femoral head/neck osteopathies
Positive Ortolani test (not standardized
Hip joint instability, hip dysplasia
in cats)
Abnormal position of greater
Hip luxation, avulsion fracture of
trochanter
greater trochanter
DJD, degenerative joint disease; OC, osteochondrosis.
A neurological problem should be suspected when owners
1.5.1 Posture, gait, and mental status
 report gait abnormalities such as dragging of one or more
limbs, swaying gai, legs sliding out from underneath or
The cat is observed for gait abnormalities, tendencies to drift
knuckling over. In addition, altered postures such as an
to one side, head movements, and posture while the cat is
arched back, low head carriage, or altered tail movement
 moving. Abnormalities in posture include a head tilt, abnor-
may indicate neurological disease. Behavioral changes also
mal truncal posture, or a stiff or flaccid limb posture.
indicate potential neurological disorders. Aggression and
Although the gait pattern is not used as a sole criterion for
fear, excessive or reduced appetite, loss of house training.
the localization of a lesion, some gait abnormalities are char-
and tail-chasing are the most common behavioral abnormali-
acteristic. For example, vestibular ataxia is characterized by
ties in cats. Motor signs such as restless wandering, circling.
a head tilt, a broad-based stance, hypotonia of the muscles
and excessive vocalization also occur. Often, the signs cannot
ipsilateral to the lesion, and hypertonia of the muscles con-
be attributed to one single anatomic location within the
tralateral to the lesion. During movement, affected animals
brain.
 drift or have a tendency to roll over to the weak side. Circling
The feline nervous system is particularly susceptible
to
is usually not a localizing sign, except that tight circles are
hypoglycemia, anoxia, liver malfunction, toxins and pharma-
often associated with caudal brainstem lesions. Cerebellar
cological agents. The major organ systems should therefore
lesions produce a gait characterized by hypermetria of all
be carefully evaluated in every neurological cat.
four limbs accompanied by loss of balance and tremor. Pacing
12
Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
Degree
Description
Interpretation
Table 1-6. Degrees of level of
consciousness
Normal
Cat is awake and normal
 Normal fnding
Apathic
Cat is awake but shows
 Non-specifc sign caused by secondary
decreased levels of reactions
or primary diseases of the nervous
and activity
system
Stuporous
Cat is sleeping but can be
Occurs with lesions or disruptions
awakened by strong
between the cerebral cortex and the
 mechanical or noisy stimuli
reticular formation
Comatose
Total absence of consciousness.
Occurs in lesions that cause complete
Cat does not react to painful
disruption between the brainstem
stimuli
and cerebral hemispheres
is observed with cortical lesions, but infrequently lesions in
Figure 1-9
the cervical spine may also result in this gait. Spinal cord
Knuckling over of
lesions result in a wide variety of gait patterns and it is rarely
the paw to test
proprioception. The
possible to associate the gait abnormality with the site of the
cat is supported
lesion. Lesions of major peripheral nerves may result in spe-
under the abdomen
cifc gait abnormalities, characteristic for the lesion.
to avoid a loss of
 The level of consciousness is mainly regulated by the reticu-
balance when its
lar formation. This structure consists of a fne neuronal
foot is lifted.
network that extends from the medulla oblongata to the
diencephalon. Clinically, four degrees of level of conscious-
ness can be differentiated (Table 1-6).
prognosis. Intact pupil reactivity, uni- or bilateral miosis, and
1.5.2 Cranial nerve examination
 intact deep pain perception indicate good chances for recov-
 ery of neurological function.
Abnormalities of cranial nerve function are seen in various
encephalopathies and neuromuscular diseases. Physiological
1.5.3 Proprioceptive testing
function of cranial nerves, tests, and common causes of dys-
function are listed in Table 1-7. Cats with head trauma and
Proprioception means correct orientation of the body in
possible brain injury are of special concern in view of the
the three-dimensional space during rest and locomotion.
potential need for anesthesia and surgical treatment.
Proprioceptive tests include examination of ascending and
Initial assessment focuses on the level of consciousness,
descending tracts. They are very sensitive for detection of a
cranial nerve function, and motor activity/posture. Cranial
neurological lesion, but are relatively non-specifc for the
nerve deficits in an otherwise alert and responsive cat indicate
 neuroanatomic localization. Proprioceptive deficits may occur
that the injury is outside the cranial vault. In general, the
before motor dysfunction can be detected. Several neurologi-
prognosis for recovery of a peripheral nerve injury is good,
 provided that neurotmesis has not occurred. Cranial nerve
dysfunctions in apathic, stuporous or comatose cats are likely
Proprioceptive positioning reaction
to be due to a central lesion. These patients need serial exami-
nations, and therapeutic intervention may be required to
The simplest method of evaluation entails flexing the foot so
that the dorsal surface is on the floor (Fig. 1-9). The normal
the pupil size, symmetry, and reactivity, and presence of
response is immediate reposition of the foot into a normal
physiological nystagmus. A comatose cat with dilated, unre-
position. Each limb is tested separately. Defcits may origi-
sponsive pupils and absent physiological nystagmus is likely
nate from lesions in the lower and upper motor neuron
to have irreversible brainstem damage and carries the worst
(UMN) system.
1: Patient assessment
13
 Cranial nerve
Function
Tests
Common causes for
dysfunction
Olfactory nerve
Sensory
 Presentation of food, strong
Rhinitis, tumors of nose and
(CN I)
substances such as ether
 cribriform plate, head
trauma
Optic nerve
Sensory (vision and
 Menace reaction; visual
 Many encephalopathies
(CN II)
 pupillary light reflexes)
placing; cotton-ball 
affecting visual and
 tracking test; pupillary
pupillary light pathways
light reaction (direct and
indirect); dazzle reflex
Oculomotor
Motor to extraocular
Observation for ventrolateral
Head trauma, increased
nerve (CN III)
muscles,
strabism, dilated pupil
 intracranial pressure
parasympathetic to
with absent pupillary light
 pupillary muscles
reflexes, eventually ptosis
Trochlear nerve
Motor to extraocular
Observation for lateral
Head trauma
(CN IV)
muscles
 rotation of the eyeball
Abducent nerve
Motor to extraocular
 Observation for medial
Head trauma
(CN VI)
muscles
 strabismus; inability to
retract the globe
Trigeminal nerve
Motor to muscles of
Palpebral reflex; corneal and
Traumatic nerve injury, loss
(CN V)
 mastication and sensory
facial sensitivity; jaw tone;
of facial sensitivity due to
to face and cornea
palpation of masticatory
various encephalopathies
muscles
and neuropathies
Facial nerve
Motor to facial muscles,
Palpebral reflex; muscle tone
 Otitis interna, traumatic nerve
(CN VII)
pue anguol ol KIosues 
of ear lips, and cheek;
 injury; chorda tympani
palate, parasympathetic
Schirmer tear test
 deficits are possible with
for nasal, salivary, and
middle-ear disease
lacrimal glands (chorda
tympani)
Glossopharyngeal
Motor/sensory to laryngeal
Gag reflex; thoracic X-ray
 Brainstem diseases
nerve (CN IX),
and pharyngeal muscles,
for megaesophagus;
vagal nerve
parasympathetic for
observation of vocal fold
(CN X)
thoracic and abdominal
 movement during light
organs (X)
sedation
Vestibulocochlear
Sensory
Vestibular dysfunction: head
Otitis interna, brainstem
nerve
tilt; nystagmus; ventral
diseases
(CN VIII)
strabismus, vestibular
ataxia
Cochlear dysfunction:
brainstem auditory evoked
potentials
Accessory nerve
Motor to muscles of the
Muscle tone of cervical
Thiamin defciency
(CN XI)
neck
muscles
(ventroflexion of the neck)
Hypoglossal
 Motor to the tongue
Observation of food intake
Brainstem diseases
nerve (CN XII)
and asymmetric tongue
position/atrophy
Table 1-7. Function, testing. and common etiologies of cranial nerve dysfunction
14
Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
Figure 1-11
Hopping in the
thoracic limb. The
cat is supported 
under the abdomen
and is moved to the
side on a straight
line. Hopping
movements of the
tested limb are
observed for
abnormalities such as
delayed initiation or
incorrect adaptation.
Figure 1-10 Wheelbarrowing with extended neck. While lifting
hindlimbs off the floor and extending the neck, the cat is moved
forward and movements of the front limbs are observed
Placing reaction
Visual placing is evaluated by supporting the cat under the
Wheelbarrowing reaction
thorax, and placing it near to the edge of a table. Normal
The cat is supported under the abdomen, with all of its
animals will reach for the surface before the carpus touches
weight on the thoracic limbs. Normal animals can walk
the edge of the table. Tactile placing is performed in the same
forward and sideways with coordinated movements (Fig.
manner but the examiner covers the eyes of the patient with
a au upuanxa Aq paieadai aq ke ranau au (ot-1
one hand. Immediately after contact with the edge of the
and neck with one hand. Visual control of movement is thus
table, the limbs should be placed on the surface and support
eliminated, making the animal mostly dependent on proprio-
weight. Normal tactile placing with absent visual placing
ceptive information. The cat should be observed for initiation
indicates a lesion in the visual pathways. Normal visual
of movement, paresis, and dysmetria. Deficits caused by a
placing with abnormal tactile placing suggests a sensory
lesion in the cervical spinal cord, the brainstem, and cerebral 
pathway lesion or a motor deficit in the cervical spinal cord,
cortex are detected with the aid of this test.
the brainstem, or cortex.
Hopping reaction
Tonic neck reaction
The test is performed with the cat supporred under the
A cat about to jump on a table extends head, neck, and tho-
abdomen, and one thoracic limb lifted from the ground so
racic limbs, and flexes the pelvic limbs. If the head is extended
 that the weight of the cat is supported by one limb. The
manually, the same response of the limbs will be observed.
patient is then moved medially, laterally, and forwards (Fig.
 A lesion in the cortex, brainstem, or cervical area will produce
1-11). Poor initiation of the hopping reaction suggests sensory
abnormal results.
 deficits, while poor follow-through suggests a motor system
 Subtle proprioceptive and motor deficits may be detected
abnormality. Some neurologically intact cats have a tendency
in cats by observing them performing more demanding exer-
not to support their weight and exhibit a floppy behavior
cises such as landing. The way in which a cat lands from 1-2
during the test. Thus, caution must be given to false-positive
dnood e ys t p an o (u 0-o) oo
deficit, by showing weakness during landing, such as stum-
reactions.
bling or abnormal limb positioning. Care is taken to ascertain
frst that the cat can support weight in order to avoid iatro-
Extensor postural thrust reaction
 i   oo m sii n 
The cat is supported by the thorax caudal to the thoracic
ently: a cat with bilateral elbow arthritis my land on its chin
limbs and the pelvic limbs are lowered to the floor. When
 in preference to landing on its forelimbs.
touching the floor the limbs should move caudally in a sym-
metric walking movement. In addition, the limbs will be
1.5.4 Spinal reflexes
extended as they contact the floor. This is a vestibular reflex
and absence of limb extension may indicate a lesion in the
Spinal reflex testing examines the integrity of the sensory and
vestibular system.
motor components of the reflex arc, including the influence
1: Patient assessment
15
 Spinal nerve
Loss of sensation
Muscles affected
Suprascapular (C6-C7)
Medial aspect between elbow and
Supra- and infraspinatus
shoulder
Musculocutaneus (C6-C8)
Dorsomedial side thoracic limb
Biceps and brachialis
Median, ulnar (C8-T2)
Ventral aspect of paw and forearm
 Flexor muscles of carpus and digits
and the ffth digit
Radial (C7-T2)
 Dorsolateral forearm
 Extensors of the forearm and carpus
Femoral (L4-L6)
Medial side of thigh and lower limb
Quadriceps group of muscles
Obturator (L4-L6)
Adductor, gracilis
Sciatic (peroneal and tibial
Whole limb below stifle, except medial
Flexors and extensors of the hock and
branches)
side
digits
 Peroneal nerve (L6-L7)
Dorsal leg and paw
 Flexors of the hock, extensors of the digits
Tibial nerve (L6-S1)
Ventral leg and paw
 Flexors of digits, extensors of the hock
Pudendal (S1-S3)
Perineum
Anal and exernal urinary sphincter
Caudal (Cc1-CcX)
Tail
Tail muscles
Table 1-8. Autonomous dermatomes and myotomes of spinal nerves
of the descending motor pathways on the reflex (Table 1-8).
Absent or depressed reflexes indicate lower motor neuron
(LMN) disease. Exaggerated reflexes indicate abnormality of
 the UMN system, or a deficit of the opposing muscle. Clonus
may be observed during testing of extensor reflexes such
as the patellar reflex. This is a repetitive contraction and
relaxation of muscle in response to the reflex stimulus. It
is a sign seen in chronic lesions of descending inhibitory
pathways.
Normal spinal reflexes
 Figure 1-12 Patellar reflex testing. While the cat lies in a relaxed
Quadriceps reflex (femoral nerve). The limb is supported in 
position the limb is supported with one hand. The patellar ligament is
a relaxed position with the stifle in slight flexion. The patel-
gently tapped with the pleximeter. The correct response is extension of
lar tendon is struck with the reflex hammer or pleximeter.
the stifle joint
In cats with a small patellar tendon it may be more accurate
to place a fnger on the ligament and tap the fnger instead,
thus indirectly stimulating the ligament. A normal knee jerk
is a single, rapid extension of the stifle (Fig. 1-12). An absent
Pelvic limb flexor reflex (sciatic nerve). This test can be per-
or depressed patellar reflex indicates a lesion in the afferent
formed by stimulating the dorsal surface of the foot, inner-
or motor component of the reflex arc. An exaggerated
vated by the peroneal nerve. Alternatively, the plantar surface
reflex results from loss of descending inhibitory pathways or,
of the foot is tested by stimulation of the tibial nerve. A
alternatively, a deficit of opposing hamstring muscles or the
noxious stimulus is applied to the foot with the cat in lateral
sciatic nerve.
recumbency. Squeezing the interdigital skin with two fngers
is usually enough to elicit withdrawal of the limb. Pressure
Cranial tibial reflex (peroneal nerve). With the hock held in
across the digits using a hemostat is applied if deep pain
a degree of extension, the belly of the cranial tibial muscle is
sensation needs to be assessed. The flexor reflex is divided in
struck with the pleximeter just below the stifle. The response
two components. Primarily, the segmental response occurs as
is flexion of the hock. It can be difficult to elicit this reflex in
 a flexion of the entire limb. Secondarily, conscious perception
normal cats and depressed responses should be interpreted
of the noxious stimulus in the sensory cortex is proved if the
with caution and always in combination with other neuro-
cat shows a painful reaction such as hissing or orientation
logical deficits.
towards the stimulus. An exaggerated reflex may be mani-
16
Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
Figure 1-13 Stimulation of
Figure 1-14
perineal area. The perineal area is
Extensor carpi
mildly stimulated with an
radialis reflex. The
instrument to elicit contraction of
limb must be
the anal sphincter and flexion of
supported in a
the tail
relaxed position to
obtain a response,
 and the muscle is
tapped below the
elbow at the
craniolateral side of
the forearm. The
correct response is
extension of the
 carpal joint
fested with sustained withdrawal after cessation of the stimu-
lus and/or a crossed extensor reflex (see below).
Perineal reflex (pudendal nerve). Stimulation of the perineum
with a hemostat elicits contraction of the anal sphincter and
flexion of the tail (Fig. 1-13). Squeezing the penis or vulva
causes a similar response (bulbocavernosus reflex). Absence
or depression of the reflex indicates a pudendal nerve or
sacral spinal cord lesion. Assessment of sacral reflexes is
especially important in cats with sacrococcygeal fracture/
luxation and urinary bladder dysfunction. An atonic anal
sphincter and urinary incontinence are present in complete
Babinski (extensor toe) reflex. The reflex can be elicited in
 pudendal or sacral lesions.
the pelvic limbs during stimulation of the caudolateral surface
from the hock to the digits when the animal is in lateral
Extensor carpi radialis reflex (radial nerve). This reflex is
recumbency and the limb is supported with the other hand.
difficult to recognize in cats. With the animal in lateral
 The abnormal response is an extension and fanning of the
recumbency, the forelimb is supported with the elbow and
digits. Presence of this sign indicates a lesion of the UMN
carpus in flexion. The extensor carpi radialis muscle is struck
 system. In most cases, clinical signs have been present for
with the pleximeter just distal to the elbow. The response is 
 longer than 3 weeks.
a slight extension of the carpus (Fig. 1-14).
Mass reflex. After eliciting a flexor reflex in a pelvic limb,
Thoracic limb flexor reflex (axilary, musculocutaneous,
flexion of the contralateral limb, flexion of the tail, contrac-
median, and ulnar nerves). The median palmar surface of the
tion of the anal sphincter, and sometimes micturition and
limb is innervated by the ulnar and median nerves, which
defecation, occur. This response is seen with complete spinal
originate frorm the spinal cord segments C8-T1. The lateral
 cord transections above the lumbar intumescence. Presence
palmar surface and most of the lateral digit are innervated
 of a mass reflex carries a poor prognosis.
by branches of the ulnar nerve. For technique and interpreta-
tion of the response, see description under pelvic limb flexor
1.5.5 Sensitivity testing of peripheral nerves
reflex, above.
Recognition of a sensory deficit is helpful in localizing specific
nerve or nerve root dysfunction. Dermatomes are skin areas
Abnormal spinal reflexes
innervated by one or several nerves. They may be autono-
Crossed extensor reflex. This reflex can be observed in the
 mous, i.e., innervated by a single nerve, or overlapping.
thoracic and pelvic limbs when the flexor is elicited. The
i.e., innervated by several nerves. Sensitivity is best tested
opposite limb extends simultaneously with flexion of the b
by pinching the skin with a surgical hemostat. Table 1-8
stimulated limb. A crossed extensor reflex occurs with lesions
 contains lists of the areas to which each peripheral nerve of
of the UMN system. It is not an indicator of severity, but of
clinical significance is sensory. The dermatomes are also
chronicity of a lesion.
depicted in Figure 1-15.
1: Patient assessment
17
Peripheral nervous system
From a clinical point of view the PNS can be regarded as
identical to the LMN, including the alpha-motor neuron in
the ventral gray column of the spinal cord, the ventral and
dorsal nerve roots, the peripheral nerve, the neuromuscular
 junction, and the muscle. A complete lesion to any one of the
components results in flaccid paralysis of the affected limb,
areflexia, atonia, and anesthesia. Incomplete lesions occur as
different degrees of paresis and weakness, decreased postural
reactions, hyporeflexia, and a decreased muscle volume and
strength. Occasionally, an animal can have LMN weakness
with normal reflexes, i.e., myopathy or myasthenia gravis.
 Monoparesis and monoplegia are most often the result of a
raumatic, neoplastic, or vascular lesion. A generalized LMN
lesion is generally caused by metabolic toxic, endocrine,
 inflammatory, degenerative, or inherited disease. Ventroflex-
ion of the neck is seen in cats as a typical clinical feature in
many disorders, i.e., hypokalemia, myasthenia gravis, or
polymyositis.
A
B
Figure 1-15 Dermatomes of the feline front and hindlimbs.
Spinal cord: L4-S3 (Cx)
Dermatomes may vary among individuals. (A) Dermatomes of the front
limbs. Dark blue, radial nerve; mid-blue,ulnar nerve; turquoise, median
A lesion to this area entails various degrees of involvement
nerve. (B) Dermatomes of the hindlimbs. Dark blue, peroneal nerve;
of the nerves to the pelvic limbs, bladder, anal sphincter, and
mid-blue, tibial nerve; turquoise, saphenous nerve.
tail. Clinical signs range from flaccid weaknes to paralysis
of pelvic limbs, perianal myotomes, and tail. An identical
 clinical presentation can be seen with different lesions in the
1.5.6 Localization within the nervous system
area affecting both spinal cord segments and the nerves of
the cauda equina. In compressive lesions, pain is usually
The nervous system can roughly be divided into the central
elicited with manipulation of the lower back and tail. The
nervous system (CNS) and peripheral nervous system (PNS).
 anal sphincter may be flaccid and dilated with fecal incon-
As a frst approach, it may be helpful to attribute the neuro-
tinence. In complete lesions, the bladder is atonic with urine
logical deficits to one of these divisions before the lesion is
retention and overflow incontinence. Sensory function of the
localized more accurately.
diferent dermatomes may be reduced or absent depending
A generalized PNS lesion can be distinguished from a
on the severity of the lesion. This syndrome is commonly
central lesion by assessment of the quality of the spinal
observed in cats with traumatic sacrococcygeal disruption.
reflexes. Generalized hyporeflexia in a mentally normal cat is
an indicator of a generalized LMN problem. Other signs 
Spinal cord: T3-L3
indicate a centrally located lesion.
A thoracolumbar lesion results in different degrees of ataxia
If the problem is located in the CNS, it has to be further
and paraparesis or paraplegia of the pelvic limbs. The dys-
specifed to a spinal cord or a brain lesion. Cranial nerve
function is of the UMN type. Urinary retention because of
deficits and/or behavioral or mental abnormalities indicate
hypertonicity of the urinary sphincter or absence of the detru-
 the presence of a brain lesion, whereas absence of these signs
sor reflex is a common complication of this syndrome. The
indicates a spinal cord lesion (Fig. 1-16).
so-called Schiff-Sherrington phenomenon is unique to the
After the patient's problem has been attributed to one of
dog and is not observed in cats. Increased sensitivity is found
the major divisions of the nervous system, PNS, spinal cord,
 at the level of the lesion and decreased sensitivity behind the
or brain, a more detailed localization is warranted. Rudimen-
lesion.
tary knowledge of the anatomy and physiology of the divi-
sions of the CNS is indispensable at this step. Clinically
relevant features and main symptoms of the 10 clinically rel-
Spinal cord: C6-T2
evant localizations are briefly summarized in the following
A lesion to these cord segments produces LMN signs in the
sections.
thoracic limbs and UMN signs in the pelvic limbs. The degree
18
Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
Reflexes
 Spinal reflexes decreased in all four limbs?
No
Yes
Central nervous system
Peripheral nervous system
Cranium
Vestibular Signs
Single or multiple cranial nerve deficits?
Yes
No
Brain
Spinal cord
Gait
 Proprioceptive deficits
 Proprioceptive deficits
Proprioceptior
in all four limbs
in rear limbs only
 Normal
Lesion cranial to T3
Lesion caudal to T2
Hypermetria
Normal
Tetra/
 hemiparesis
LMN thoracic limbs,
 UMN pelvic limbs
LMN in
Abnormal
pelvic limbs
UMN in
UMN pelvic
all four limbs
limbs
Localization
Peripheral
Central
Forebrain
Cerebellum
Brainstem
C1-C5
C6-T2
T3-L3
L3-S3
vestibular
vestibular
Figure 1-16 Algorithm for localization of neurological lesions. UMN, upper motor neuron; LMN, lower motor neuron; C, cervical; T, thoracic;
L, lumbar: S, sacral spinal cord segments.
of gait abnormalities is broad and ranges from ataxia to tet-
direction with the quick phase of the nystagmus away from
raplegia with flaccid paralysis of the thoracic limbs. Hypore-
 the lesion. Vestibular ataxia has different degrees of severity
flexia in one or both thoracic limbs is the most helpful clinical
consisting of falling or rolling towards the side of the lesion,
key to the localization. The panniculus reflex may be depressed
hypotonia of the limb muscles ipsilateral to the lesion, and
unilaterally or bilaterally.
 hypertonicity away from the lesion and/or a tendency to drift
towards the side of the lesion. Proprioceptive deficits are
Spinal cord: C1-C5
typically not present in peripheral lesions. Horner's syndrome
and facial paralysis frequently accompany peripheral vestibu-
A lesion to this area results in UMN signs to the thoracic and
lar syndrome due to their proximity in the middle and inner
pelvic limbs, including different degrees of ataxia and spastic
ear. Bilateral peripheral vestibular lesions are occasionally
tetraparesis, proprioceptive defcits in all four limbs, and
-aiies e inq il pea ou ane ra 'sieo ui paraooua
normal to increased reflexes. The neck is often painful and
 istic swaying movement of the head, and a decreased extensor
carried low with compressive or inflammatory lesions. In
muscles tone resulting in a creeping gait. Vestibular eye
severe lesions, hypoventilation due to phrenic nerve defcits
movements are absent.
may occur.
Peripheral vestibular system
Central vestibular system
A lesion to this part of the system causes a head tilt ipsilateral
A central vestibular disorder results in similar deficits to a
 to the lesion, and nystagmus with a horizontal or rotatory
peripherallesion.However the neurological presentation
1: Patient assessment
19
differs in some key areas. Signs of paresis and/or propriocep-
chronic or compensated cases. Severe lesions of the cerebel-
tive defcits in association with a head tilt indicate a central
lum may result in decerebellate rigidity with extension of the
lesion. The direction of the nystagmus is similar to that seen
thoracic limbs and flexion of the pelvic limbs.
in peripheral lesions, but a positional or vertical nystagmus
suggests the presence of a central lesion. Multiple cranial
Cerebrum
nerve dysfunctions are also strong indicators of a centrally
located lesion. Paradoxical vestibular disease is defned as a
A symmetric cerebral lesion causes various clinical signs in
-exanadsy oi uoissadap pue Aede uor suuen sie
vestibular deficit with the head tilt opposite to the side of the
ity, disorientation, aggression, and/or seizures. There is only
lesion. It is usually caused by a lesion near the cerebellar
 a minimal ataxia with cortical lesions (i.e., pacing). But com-
peduncles.
pulsive walking, restlessness, and head pressing may occur.
In unilateral lesions, the cat circles usually to the side of the
Brainstem
lesion or exhibits persistent sideward flexion of the head
The syndrome is characterized by decreased mentation,
(pleurothotonus). Postural reactions are reduced in the con-
obvious gait abnormalities such as tetraparesis, tetraplegia,
tralateral limbs. Vision is impaired contralateral to the lesion
hemiparesis and/or severe ataxia, and multiple cranial nerve
but pupillary function is intact.
deficits if the lesion is located in the pons or medulla oblon-
 gata, including cranial nerves V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, and XII.
References and further reading
Respiratory function may be disturbed, resulting in altered
1. Abbot JA. Heart rate and heart rate variability of healthy
patterns of breathing. Abnormal postures such as opisthoto-
cats in home and hospital environments. J Feline Med Surg
nus may be observed if the lesion is located in the cranial
2005;7:195-202.
 2. Beaver BV. Fractious cats and feline aggression. J Feline Med Surg
a spastic hemiparesis on the opposite side. The animal may
2004;6:13-18.
 3. Martin SL. The domesticated cat. In: Sherding RG (ed.) The cat:
be stuporous or comatose with severe brainstem lesions. Ocu-
diseases and clinical management, 2nd edn. New York: Churchill
lomotor nerve (cranial nerve IIl) deficits with normal vision
Livingstone; 1994: pp. 1-6.
can be present.
4. Schmidtke HO. Klinische Allgemeinuntersuchung und Umgang
mit der Katze. In: Horzinek MC, Schmidt V, Lutz H (eds)
Krankheiten der Katze, 4th edn. Suuttgart: Enke Verlag; 2005:
Cerebellum
pp. 25-37.
5. Schaer M. The medical history, physical examination, and physi-
Cerebellar lesions result in a spastic, hypermetric gait of all
cal restraint. In: Sherding RG (ed.) The cat: diseases and clinical
four limbs, and the body may sway to one side or the other.
 management, 2nd edn. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 1994:
Hypermetria is usually more pronounced in the thoracic
pp. 7-23.
6. Jaggy A, Tipold A. Die neurologische Untersuchung beim Klein-
limbs. The stance is broad-based and there is tremor of the
tier und beim Pferd. Opuscula Veterinaria. Munich: Wak Verlag
head and body, especially when movement is initiated or
und Kunstberatung; 1999.
during eating and drinking. Subtle oscillatory or pendulary
7. Glass EN, Kent M. The clinical examination for neuromuscular
S asdsn a au pnasqo aq  so aa
disease. Vet Clin North America Small Anim Pract 2002;32:
decreased ipsilateral to the lesion without affected vision.
1-31.
 8. Oliver JE, Lorenz MD, Kornegay JN. Neurologic history and
 Proprioceptive tests may show an exaggerated response with
examination. In: Handbook of veterinary neurology. Philadelphia:
normal initiation. Cerebellar symptoms may be subtle in
WB Saunders; 1997: pp. 3-46.
21
2
 Further diagnostic procedures
S. Ohlerth, K. Voss, F. Steffen
Further diagnostic procedures are often required to confrm 
 details. Poor-quality radiographs may result in erroneous
and further specify a clinical diagnosis, or to rule out a sus-
diagnoses.
picion. It is tempting to use the wide range of sophisticated
and interesting diagnostic tools available in many veterinary
Radiographic contrast. For a good-quality skeletal radio-
clinics nowadays, but the results obtained should always be
 graph, moderate to high contrast is desirable that enables
interpreted in conjunction with the clinical fndings.
evaluation not only of bony structures, but also of soft tissues.
Interpretation of the results from hematological and bio
A kVp technique in the range of 40-50 is chosen in the cat,
chemical analysis of blood is important in systemically ill
which produces a moderately long scale of gray shades. Too
cats, and in the preanesthetic work-up. Basic knowledge of
high a contrast impedes assessment of soft tissues, and detec-
interpretation of blood parameters is well covered in several
 tion of mildly mineralized structures (e.g., periosteal reaction,
veterinary textbooks, and will not be discussed further here.
 Osteophytes, enthesophytes, callus), subtle bone lysis, and
The most important diagnostic tools for orthopedic surgeons
gas.
are radiology and related diagnostic imaging methods. Further
diagnostic tools in the orthopedic patient include cytological
Radiographic density. High radiographic density is required
and bacteriological examination of synovial fluid, and cyto
for sufficient blackness on the radiograph. The mAs is the
pue sasseu jo uoniandraun jeionouedoisu pue jeio
 primary factor affecting radiographic density, and varies with
bone lesions.
the X-ray machine.
Diagnostic imaging of the traumatized and orthopedic
feline patient, arthrocentesis, fne-needle aspiration, selected
Radiographic detail. Radiographic detail is a term used to
 biopsy techniques, and neurodiagnostic procedures 
afe
describe image sharpness, which is dependent on various
 described in this chapter.
factors. Patient motion causes blurring of the image. A grid
 to remove scatter radiation is not required in feline orthope.
2.1 Diagnostic imaging
dic radiography since subject thickness does not usually
 exceed 12 cm. Instead, the cassette is placed on the table top.
 Radiology represents the most fundamental diagnostic aid for
the investigation of the lame or traumatized feline patient. It
 used to improve radiographic detail. The appendicular and
is used in conjunction with an accurate history, physical
 even the axial skeleton of the cat represents radiographic
examination, and other diagnostic tests. Results of the radio-
objects of low thickness. Therefore, a radiographic technique
graphic examination may confrm or exclude a suspected
using a small focal spot size is indispensable. The X-ray beam
diagnosis, reveal additional lesions, or indicate the need for
should be collimated to the feld of interest to reduce
further work-up. Computed tomography (CT), magnetic
scatter.
resonance imaging (MRI), and ultrasonography have also
increased in importance for the investigation of feline skeletal
diseases. The most important aspects of diagnostic imaging
Patient positioning
 modalities in feline orthopedics are summarized in the text
A radiograph represents a two-dimensional image of a three-
below. Veterinary radiology textbooks that may be of interest
dimensional object. Consequently, two orthogonal views
to the reader are listed in the reference section (1-7).
should always be taken, as lesions may be missed due to
superimposition on a single view. Sedation or anesthesia is
2.1.1 Radiographic technique
recommended to avoid patient movement, and to decrease
radiation exposure to the personnel.
Radiographic quality
Radiographic quality is dependent on radiographic contrast,
Radiographic overview. In traumatized cats, a lateral and
radiographic density, and radiographic detail. Good-quality
ventrodorsal overview is commonly used, including the
radiographs are needed to be able to perceive radiographic
 thorax, the abdomen, and the spine (8). To enable assessment
22
Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
of the thorax within this overview flm, radiographs are taken
used for all follow-up radiographs of a fracture; they are only
during maximum inspiration using exposure setings for an
adjusted if thickness has markedly changed, for example due
abdominal study (kVp 40-50, slightly higher than for a tho-
to loss of muscle mass.
racic study). These radiographs are used for assessment of
 injuries to the thoracic or abdominal wall, diaphragmatic
rupture, pneumothorax, pulmonary contusions, pleural,
Supplementary projections
abdominal or retroperitoneal effusion, and fracture luxations
Depending on the location of a lesion, oblique or skyline
 of the spine or pelvis. However overviews represent a techni-
  o  n s   
cal compromise, and subtle lesions may be overlooked. Addi-
rounding structures. Additional radiographs of the opposite
tional views focusing on the lesions or suspicious areas are
limb are especially useful in kittens, where incomplete ossifi-
highly recommended, because only then can the radiographic
cation or open physes may mimic trauma or infection. Stress
technique be optimized.
-wap u ingdiaq si uonaaas renipuadde an jo kudenopn
onstrating joint instability due to ligament injury. To reduce
Appendicular skeleton. In general, two orthogonal views are
radiation exposure to the personnel, tape, gauze, rope, and
taken, including a mediolateral and either a craniocaudal,
wedges should be used for positioning and stress application.
caudocranial, dorsopalmar or dorsoplantar view. To radio-
 Again, a comparison view of the opposite side may be helpful
graph the manus or pes in the cat, the phalanges are taped
for the diagnosis. Mediolateral views of the carpus and tarsus
on to the cassette to overcome the normal hyperflexed and
in hyperflexion and hyperextension are generated to assess
hyperextended position of the interphalangeal joints. To
the dorsal and palmar or plantar ligament apparatus. With
assess a joint, the radiograph should be centered on the joint
rupture of these ligaments, various degrees of subluxation or
and collimated to include one-third of the adjacent long
luxation are seen radiographically (Chapters 32 and 40).
bones. To assess conditions of the long bones, collimation
Varus and valgus angulations are used on dorsopalmar and
should include both joints adjacent to the affected bone. The
dorsoplantar radiographs for the evaluation of the collateral
beam is centered on the point of interest to avoid geometric
ligaments. With collateral ligament injuries, radiographs
distortion. The bone should be positioned parallel and close
should be evaluated for widening of the medial or lateral joint
to the film. For postoperative fracture repair assessment and
spaces following application of stress. In dogs, it is recom-
follow-up studies, superimposition of orthopedic fixation
 Jo suderaoiper ssans snaiea pue snrea urojrad oi papuau 
devices on the fracture site should be avoided to enable com-
the talocrural joint in flexed and extended positions to evalu-
 plete evaluation of fracture healing. For the assessment of
 ate both the short and long collateral ligaments. However the
fracture healing, four cortices should be visible on two
anatomy of the feline tarsal collateral ligaments is different
orthogonal radiographs. If a plate was used for fixation, it
(Chapter 40), and stressed radiographs are usually performed
should be positioned parallel to the X-ray beam to enable
in extension (Fig. 2-1). Interpretation of valgus and varus
evaluation of the adjacent cortex, and detection of signs of
stressed radiographs of the carpal joint, and anatomy of the
implant loosening. The same exposure values and views are
radiocarpal ligament, is also different in cats when compared
Figure 2-1 Mediolateral (A) and
dorsoplantar (B) radiographs of
the right tarsal joint of a cat with
a history of trauma show marked
 soft-tissue swelling in the area of
the talocrural joint (closed
arrows), and a small linear
structure of mineral opacity distal
to the medial malleolus (open 
arrow). On the dorsoplantar
valgus stress radiograph (C).
marked widening of the
talocrural joint space indicates
medial joint instability. Findings
are consistent with avulsion/
rupture of the medial collateral
ligament, and secondary joint 
人
effusion.
A
B
1
2: Further diagnostic procedures
23
to dogs (9). The medial opening of the mediocarpal joint is
 a p no  nt oi os p si
less pronounced in valgus stress radiographs, and varus stress
ment rupture (11).
leads to palmar and medial displacement of the radial carpal
bone (Chapter 32).
2.1.3 Patterns of soft-tissue and bone response
 In the stifle, injury to the cranial or caudal cruciate ligament
 may be demonstrated on a mediolateral radiograph using
With the systematic process of reviewing skeletal radiographs,
shear maneuvers similar to a drawer sign.
knowledge of basic soft-tissue and bone response patterns is
essential. The clinician should note bone response patterns,
their distribution within bones, and associated soft-tissue
2.1.2 Principles of radiographic interpretation
changes to formulate a correct radiographic diagnosis.
Radiographs should be evaluated in front of viewing boxes
in a quiet, shaded room with the ceiling light turned off. For
Soft-tissue changes
the assessment of bone diseases, a bright spotlight is indis-
 s  d   s s
 pensable for the ilumination of subtle changes, such as peri-
secondary to more serious bone disease. Fascial planes,
osteal reaction, soft-tissue mineralization, or lysis. The frst
tendons, and some portions of joint capsules may be seen
step in interpreting radiographs is evaluation of the technique
because of fat within and around these structures. Fat is less
and quality. The veterinarian should be critical with film
radiopaque than muscle, skin, tendons, joint capsule, and
exposure, artifacts, and patient positioning; if not satisfac-
synovial fluid. Soft-tissue structures should be evaluated for
tory, repeat radiographs should be attempted. Each radio-
swelling, mineralization, and free gas. Swelling is usually
graph is reviewed entirely and in the same way, using a
caused by trauma, inflammation, infection, or neoplasia.
systematic approach. To evaluate orthopedic diseases, several
 Radiographic signs include focal or diffuse enlargement of
film-reading techniques may be used. One approach is system-
soft-tissue opacity, displacement of fat around the joint
based, which starts with the interpretation of the soft-tissue
capsule, e.g., the infrapatellar fat pad in the stifle joint, or
 s     d s
 around muscles and tendons. Soft-tissue mineralization may
 approach would be to read a flm systematically from proxi-
occur in conjunction with mineralization of hematoma,
mal to distal (appendicular skeleton) or cranial to caudal
necrosis, inflammation, infection, calcinosis circumscripta,
(axial skeleton). Based on the radiographic description, a
myositis ossifcans, cancellous bone grafts, or neoplasia. Gas
summary of radiographic findings is formulated, which may
may be present in the soft tissues as a result of traumatic
lead to a final diagnosis or a list of differentials.
lacerations (open fracture), puncture wounds (cat bite), recent
Knowledge of normal radiographic anatomy in the imma-
surgery, needle centesis, or gas-producing bacteria. Gas is less
ture and adult cat is crucial. In particular skeletal features
os ueul anbedo arou st uonesyies liej ueul anbedoipei
of the young growing animal are diffcult to interpret, even
tissue. Adipose tissue and gas will only be recognized on
for the experienced radiologist. Therefore, it is highly recom-
skeletal radiographs if exposure values were appropriate,
mended to take radiographs of the contralateral limb for
resulting in good contrast.
comparison. The authors refer to anatomic and radiographic
textbooks to study normal anatomy (3, 4). Certain specifc
Periosteal reactions
anatomic features are encountered in cats. Cats have a clavi-
cle, which is mineralized at birth and located in the soft tissue
The periosteum adheres to the external surface of bone, and
craniomedial to the distal end of the scapula. It is slightly
 contains many blood vessels that penetrate and supply the
curved, about 2 mm thick and about 25 mm long in the adult
bone. It is capable of producing new bone. In the young
cat. The feline acromion is unique in that it has a caudally
 growing animal, adhesion of the periosteum to bone is loose,
directed suprahamate process that is visualized on some films.
 and reaction to trauma is more pronounced and occurs faster
Cats lack the supratrochlear foramen in the distal humerus 
than in the adult. Periosteal reactions are due to either trauma
but they have a supracondylar foramen found in the medial
 or a disease process, and they may be frst seen radiographi-
cortex of the distal humerus, forming a passageway for the
 cally after 7-10 days. There are different types of periosteal
brachial artery and median nerve (Chapter 29). A sesamoid
reaction, in order of increasing aggressiveness (Fig. 2-2):
bone may be seen in the tendon of the origin of the supinator
smooth, lamellar or onion skin, palisading, spiculated or
muscle articulating with the craniolateral aspect of the head
 sunburst, and amorphous. Smooth periosteal reaction is a
of the radius (10). The medial sesamoid bone in the medial
 non-aggressive type of new bone formation and is character-
head of the gastrocnemius muscle may not be mineralized in
ized by a solid, continuous (of pillar-like, longitudinal or
some cats (11). Calcification at the cranial pole of the medial
undulating) appearance, but always with smooth contours.
meniscus is a common finding, and can occur in both normal
 It is commonly seen with trauma (subperiosteal hematoma)
24
Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
solid,
Codman
oillar-like
triangle
spiculated
solid,
undulating
sunburst
spiculated,
palisading
solid,
lamellar
tudinal
continuous
interrupted
Figure 2-2 Radiographic characteristics of continuous and interrupted 
 periosteal reactions.
or benign processes. The other types of periosteal reaction
are included in the interrupted category, and are considered
aggressive. Lamellar periosteal reaction represents multiple
A
layers of new bone formation along a cortex and may be seen
Figure 2-3 In the distal metaphysis of the radius in this kitten,
geographic bone destruction is seen laterally (B) with a sclerotic rim
with trauma, infection or, less likely, neoplasia. With the
proximally, smooth periosteal reactions dorsally (A), mild intramedullary
spiculated type, new bone radiates from the cortex. This
new bone formation, and focal soft-tissue swelling. Surgically, a bone
pattern may be associated with osteomyelitis, malignant
abscess was diagnosed.
tumor or a healing fracture with motion present. Amorphous
new bone is unorganized, non-functional bone laid down in
the soft tissues next to a bone and may be seen with trauma,
ically consist of defects, erosion, lysis, and changes in thick-
ness. Cortical defects are most commonly seen with fractures.
infection, or neoplasia. Although type of periosteal reaction
can help to grade aggressive versus benign bone lesions, it
 In cats, they may also be found with bite wounds. Cortical
should not be relied upon for diagnosis, as other features of
defects must be differentiated from normal structures such as
the lesion are more reliable (see below).
nutrient foramina and physeal lines. Sequestrum formation
may also be associated with cortical defects. Cortical erosion
may arise from the endosteal or periosteal surface. Erosions
Endosteal reaction and intramedullary new
may be either smooth (pressure erosion, e.g., seen with a bone
bone formation
cyst) or irregular (infltrative processes). Cortical lysis and
Focal areas of smooth, homogeneous new bone formation
irregular erosion are usually caused by infection or neoplasia.
along the inside of a cortex or medullary sclerosis are seen
 In general, 30-50% of bone per unit area must be destroyed
with trauma, bone infarct, or bone healing. With osteomy-
before lysis is radiographically visible. Destruction of cortical
elitis or neoplasia, endosteal or intramedullary new bone
 bone is easier to detect than destruction of cancellous bone.
formation becomes inhomogeneous, patchy, and irregular.
 Cortical lysis typically has a punctate pattern. Reduction of
Assessment of radiographs for endosteal reactions may be
 the cortical width in the absence of other bone changes may
difficult due to superimposed periosteal reactions.
be the result of chronic decreased weight-bearing, poor frac-
ture healing or other, for example metabolic causes of
Cortical changes
osteopenia.
Cortical bone surrounds the diaphysis and metaphysis of long
 Non-aggressive bone lesions
bones. In the young growing animal, the outer surface of the 
metaphyseal cortex appears iregular due to remodeling.
Non-aggressive or less aggressive bone lesions include
which is necessary to achieve the smaller diameter of the
bone cyst, bone abscess, or benign tumors such as osteoma,
diaphysis. Cortical changes that can be identified radiograph-
enchondroma, osteochondroma, or fbroma (Fig. 2-3). They
2: Further diagnostic procedures
25
Figure 2-4 Mediolateral (A) and
craniocaudal (B) radiographs of
the proximal humerus of a cat
with an aggressive bone lesion in
the proximal metaphysis. An
interrupted sunburst type of
periosteal reactions is seen
medially. laterally. and cranially.
whereas a smoother type of
periosteal reaction is seen 
caudally. Endosteal new bone
formation, moth-eaten medullary
lysis, and punctate cortical lysis, a
pathological fracture at the level 
of the humeral neck, and marked
soft-tissue swelling are also seen.
 An osteosarcoma was diagnosed
histopathologically
R
A
B
commonly show a well-defined smooth margin between
the cortex represent a permeative bone destruction pattern.
 normal and abnormal bone, a geographic patern of bone
This pattern is also characterized by a large transition
desruction, possibly cortical thinning, but neither cortical
zone to normal bone and is considered highly aggressive.
lysis nor erosion, continuous and smooth periosteal reaction,
 Pathological fractures may occur with aggressive bone lesions.
homogeneous and smooth endosteal or intramedullary new
 Differentiation between a malignant bone tumor and osteo-
bone formation, and little radiographic change over time. A
 myelitis, and differentiation of tumor types is not possible
single lesion or multiple confluent lytic bone lesions charac-
radiographically.
terize geographic bone destruction. The lesions are usually
large, with well-defined smooth margins and no changes in
2.1.4 Radiographic evaluation of fractures
the adjacent bone. A sclerotic rim may be seen, denoting
walling-off. Cortical thinning may occur due to pressure
Radiology is the standard method to diagnose and classify a
erosion.
fracture, to evaluate fracture repair postoperatively, and to
monitor fracture healing and associated complications (12).
Aggressive bone lesions
 Pre- and postoperative fracture evaluation
Many primary malignant bone neoplasms, metastases, and
cases of osteomyelitis appear radiographically as aggressive
Radiographic assessment of fractures plays a crucial role in
bone lesions (Fig. 2-4). Primary bone tumors are usually soli-
classifying a fracture, planning treatment, and estimating a
tary, whereas metastases and osteomyelitis may be found in
 prognosis. Again, systematic film reading including the fol-
multiple locations. Aggressive bone lesions typically change
lowing criteria is suggested (5, 7). Soft tissues, completeness,
rapidly during radiographic follow-up examinations. The
 extent and location of the fracture are evaluated on preopera-
transition zone to normal bone is usually less distinct and
 tive radiographs. Classifcation of fractures is described in
irregular. Cortical destruction is commonly found. Irregular 
pasn are sqderopei aaenadoisod aiepeui tl rande
endosteal and intramedullary new bone formation may be 
 to document the repair, detect potential problems, which may
seen. Interrupted periosteal reactions of a lamellated, spicu-
 be corrected promptly by taking the patient back to surgery,
lated, or amorphous type are seen. Moth-eaten or permeative
 and to provide a reference point for comparison with follow-
patterns of bone destruction are recognized radiographically.
 up flms. The immediate postoperative radiographs can be
Moth-eaten lesions are moderate in size, often poorly delin-
 assessed using the “four A's": apposition, alignment, angula-
eated, and cortical lysis or irregular cortical erosion is visible.
 tion, and apparatus (12). Orthopedic fixation devices are
Multiple very small lytic lesions involving the medulla and
 assessed for appropriateness of position, size, and length of
implants. The fractured bone is evaluated for degree of appo-
5-10 days after reduction. The sharp ends of the fracture
sition of the fracture surfaces (fracture reduction) and accu-
 fragments become rounded and demineralized, which results 
racy of alignment and angulation of fragments. Complications
 in mild widening of the fracture gap.
may be identified, such as intra-articular placement of devices,
bridging of growth plates with implants, or fissures or frac-
10-20 days after reduction. Faintly mineralized internal and
 tures generated during the surgical procedure.
external callus formation is seen at a slight distance from the
fracture gap. Callus formation is usually more obvious in
Evaluation of fracture healing
young cats, in areas with a good blood supply, and in fracture
fxation with only relative stability (Chapter 13).
 Follow-up radiographs for evaluation of fracture healing are
 taken every 3-6 weeks, depending on the age of the patient,
 30 days-3 months after reduction. The fracture lines gradu-
 and type and localization of the fracture. The healing rate of
 ally decrease and fnally disappear. The opacity of the exter-
 a fracture is very variable and deterrmined by the age of the
nal callus increases and remodeling starts.
patient, severity of injury, location of the fracture, and accu-
racy of stabilization (Chapter 13). Follow-up radiographs
 >3 months after reduction. Remodeling continues. The callus
 should be compared with earlier studies to determine pro-
 becomes smaller with smoother margins, and the cortex and
gression of bone healing. The same exposure values and
 medullary cavity are re-established.
positioning should be used to avoid misinterpretation. Follow-
 Radiographically, a completely healed fracture shows
up radiographs are evaluated for fracture alignment, implant
 absence of fracture lines, corticomedullary continuiry, and
position, progression of fracture healing, changes in the adja-
restoration of the bone to its original form. A partially healed
cent joints and soft tissues, and complications.
fracture shows a large callus, but cortical bone and the med-
Radiographically, uncomplicated secondary bone healing
ullary cavity are not yet re-established. Original fracture lines
in the cat is similar to the dog, and happens according to the
may be faintly visible. However, a partially healed fracture
following scheme (Fig. 2-5):
may be strong enough to allow removal of the implants.
A
B
Figure 2-5 (A) Normal fracture healing in a 6-month-old cat with a closed spiral fracture of the left femoral diaphysis. (B) Three weeks after
fixation with an intramedullary pin and external skeletal fixator, rounded ends of the fracture fragments are seen with external and internal callus
formation at a slight distance from the fracture gap. The fixation devices appear stable. (C) Six weeks after reduction, the fracture line has
disappeared due to bridging callus. Cortical bone is formed and the medullary cavity is re-established. The fracture has healed completely.
2: Further diagnostic procedures
27
Estimation of healing time and removal of implants should
 may be caused by excessive distraction of fragments, insta-
d a o s n r  n    on     n   
type of stabilization and fracture healing. Radiographic infor- and fracture type and site may play a role. Healing is slow
mation is combined with clinical and historical information 
but should eventually occur. Radiographically, fracture
to determine clinical union, which is the time point in fracture 
 lines persist and callus formation may be either reduced
healing at which fxation devices can be removed.
(atrophic) or excessive (hyperrophic) but without bridging
the fracture gap. If the underlying cause is severe and
e on ssond Keu uoun paeip e panoaoun sao
Complications of fracture healing
non-union.
Implant loosening and failure. Implant loosening or failure
may occur as a result of insuffcient fixation, infection, and
no  in sa  m sin -
 thermonecrosis due to high-speed drilling or recurrent injury.
 united are classed as non-unions. Hypertrophic non-unions 
Radiographs should be checked for movement of implants,
are viable, indicating an adequate blood supply to the frac-
which would suggest loosening, and bending or breakage of
ture and the most common reason for its development is
orthopedic devices. Fracture alignment may be altered, result-
instability/motion at the fracture site. Radiographically, non-
ing in instability. Initially, no bone abnormalities may be
bridging callus with a well-defined fracture gap and sclerotic,
detected radiographically. Later, implants may be surrounded
rounded fracture ends with a closed medullary cavity are
sadi aissrae ro aaissanxa Aq pue dsuoz sui e Aq
 s) sios  g   aon s
 of periosteal reaction.
 do  ( ) s o
pencil-like fragment ends with a sclerotic marrow cavity,
Malunion. A malunion is a healed fracture that has not
well-defned fracture gap, and minimal to no callus. This may
 resumed its original form because of bone shortening, angula-
be a sequel to avascular fracture sites, excessive motion,
tion, rotation, or synostosis. The fracture-healing process
infection, or interposed tissue. Other factors significantly
itself is normal.
associated with development of a non-union in the cat include
age, body weight, affected bone, fracture type, and fixation
 Delayed umion. Fractures that do not heal at the predicted
type. The tibia and proximal ulna appear to be the most
rate are termed delayed unions (Fig. 2-6). Delayed unions 
common sites for non-unions (13).
R
R
R
A
B
C
D
Figure 2-6 Delayed healing in a closed comminuted diaphyseal femoral fracture (A, B, postoperative radiographs). Four months after fracture
fixation (C. D), partial healing has occurred distally. Proximally. the fracture line is still well visible; callus formation is seen on the cranial and lateral
eau ot uo juam aunpey aui pue 'algeis aam shuedul (smoe) Aepaw pue Allpnen buissu s ing aane aul jo padse
28
Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
R
A
B
Figure 2-7 Atrophic non-union in an open oblique diaphyseal fracture
of the tibia & months after fracture repair (A, B): osteopenic tapered 
fragment ends with a closed medullary cavity. and a well-defined 
fracture gap without callus is seen.
A
B
Figure 2-8 Osteomyelitis of the diaphysis of the ulna due to an
infection with Pasteurefla species after a cat bite (A, B): massive soft-
tissue swelling is seen with extensive spiculated periosteal reaction, and
corticomedullary lysis and sclerosis. The two focal lytic areas of a few 
millimeters in diameter represent the initial bite holes (arrows).
Osteomyelitis. Osteomyelitis as a complication in bone
-uuo jol jo uouqun e on anp Ansn si uu
tion with bacteria, inadequate blood supply to the fracture
site, and instability. Clinical signs of osteomyelitis usually
2.1.5 Radiographic evaluation of joint injury
 appear before radiographic changes are noted (Chapter 13).
Radiographically, soft-tissue swelling, subcutaneous emphy-
and diseases
sema, generalized periosteal reaction of the aggressive type,
Joint injury may be suspected alone or in combination with
corticomedullary osteosclerosis combined with osteolysis,
trauma to adjacent bones and soft tissues.
and sequestrum formation are seen (Fig. 2-8).
Soft-tissue changes
Radiographically, it is more radiopaque than normal cortical
Extracapsular and/or articular soft-tissue swellings may be
bone and typically the fragment ends are sharp due to absence
identifed; however they cannot always be differentiated
of resorption. In cases with concurrent infection, the seques-
radiographically. Intra-articular or extracapsular hemorrhage
trum may be surrounded by a radiolucent zone in the parent
or edema is possible in a patient with acute trauma. Other
bone, which in turn is surrounded by a sclerotic zone (invo-
 differential diagnoses of articular or extracapsular soft-tissue
lucrum). Occasionally, a draining tract (cloaca) is evident. In
swelling in the cat include abscess or cellulitis (cat bite), septic
cases with a sterile sequestrum, changes in the parent bone
arthritis, soft-tissue neoplasia or very rarely and most com-
are usually absent.
monly in the elbow joint, synovial cysts (14).
Structures with the same radiolucency as gas within
Joint complications. Degenerative joint disease may follow
the joint represent air influx, indicating an open joint in a
an intra-articular fracture or a changed load due to malunion
patient with acute injury, or can be seen immediately post
or physeal growth deformities.
surgery.
2: Further diagnostic procedures
29
 Intra-articular fractures and subluxation/luxation
Survey radiographs
Intra-articular fractures cause a roughened, irregular or
Sedation or general anesthesia is required to reduce posi-
incongruent articular surface, depending on the location and
tional artifacts and motion. The area of interest should be
fragment displacement. A fracture line extending into the
placed parallel to the table top and in the center of the X-ray
joint is usually visible.
beam with adequate collimation. A small focal spot and
Collateral ligament and joint capsule sprains may cause
exposure values similar to those for the appendicular skele-
subluxation or luxation of a joint. Depending on the degree 
 ton should be used. Although the cat is a small animal, sepa-
of separation of the articular surfaces the term subluxation
rate radiographs of the cervical, thoracic, thoracolumbar,
(partial) or luxation (complete) is used (Chapter 14). Instabil-
 and lumbar/lumbosacral regions should be made to reduce
ity of a joint may be diagnosed radiographically on normal
 the artifacts caused by beam divergence at the flm periphery.
projections; however joints most commonly appear normal
 Studies of the spine include a laterolateral and a ventrodorsal
and stress views are necessary (Fig. 2-1).
view. Obliquity is prevented on the laterolateral view by
using sponges to support the sternum, the midcervical, mid-
Osteoarthritis
lumbar, and skull regions and between the hind legs. For the
ventrodorsal view of the spine and the pelvis, the cat may
Osteoarthritis commonly develops secondary to an intra-
be placed in a trough. Additional views may be obtained in
articular fracture or joint subluxation and luxation. Other
 conjunction with myelography, where oblique ventrodorsal
acquired disorders and developmental diseases may also
 projections aid in evaluating localization and lateralization
cause osteoarthritis in the cat. Primary osteoarthritis may
of a lesion.
also be found (Chapter 5). In general, radiographic signs
include articular soft-tissue swelling, subchondral sclerosis,
Myelography
irregular articular surfaces, and development of osteophytes
and enthesophytes (new bone formation at the insertion site
Myelography is always performed under aseptic conditions
of the capsule and ligaments), depending on the progression
and general anesthesia. Non-ionic iodinated contrast media
of the disease.
(monomers or dimers) are used. The dosage varies between
0.2 and 0.5 ml/kg body weight depending on the contrast
agent (iodine concentration 200-300 mg/ml) and the study
Septic arthritis
(regional versus full-spine myelography). A 22-gauge spinal
Septic arthritis may follow open joint injury or may represent
needle with stylet should be used because of its short bevel,
 which is particularly important in the narrow subarachnoid
soft-tissue swelling is seen frst. Later, subchondral lysis with
 space of the cat. The patient should never be moved while
irregular articular surfaces or even collapse of the joint space
 the needle is still in place.
is identified. Collapse of the joint is best assessed in weight-
For the investigation of cervical (C2-C7), caudal number
bearing images. Osteophytes and enthesophytes develop 
 (L4-L7) and lumbosacral lesions contrast medium is injected
rapidly, and appear very irregular.
into the cerebellomedullary cistern through the atlanto-
occipital space with the cat in lateral recumbency. The head
2.1.6 Myelography
is flexed ventrally and the needle is inserted on the midline
just cranial to the center of a triangle formed by the external
Myelography is a positive contrast procedure following the
 occipital protuberance and the cranial margins of the wings
subarachnoid injection of iodinated contrast agent. Compres-
 of the atlas. Advancement of the needle should be stopped
sive lesions of the spinal cord and cauda equina as well as:
 frequently and the stylet removed to check for evidence of
intramedullary swelling which may be caused by masses or  cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), to avoid inadvertent trauma to the
myelomalacia can be identified. The procedure should only
cord. Penetration of the dura mater is usually felt as a slight
be performed by experienced clinicians, and if the possibility  popping sensation.
to proceed with surgery, depending on the results of myelog-
  o p   r
raphy, exists. Survey radiographs should always precede  and occasionally cranial cervical (C1-C2) lesions, contrast
myelography. Certain specific anatomic features of the feline agent is injected into the dorsal or ventral subarachnoid space
spine have to be taken into account. Variations in the shape  at the level of L6-L7, L5-L6, or occasionally L4-L5. The
of the thoracic and abdominal spine are normal due to a  needle may be inserted in a median plane just cranial to the
higher flexibility. The epidural and the subarachnoid space 
 spinous process at a 90? angle with the cat in lateral recum-
in cats are small, with a relatively wide spinal cord. The
 bency. Alternatively, the needle may be inserted in a parame-
spinal cord ends at the level of the sacrum.
dian plane, from caudolateral to the spinous process and
30
Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
aiming cranioventrally at a 45° angle through the interarcu-
Figure 2-9
Schematic drawing
ate space.
CSF may be collected before injection of the contrast agent.
of a ventral
extradural lesion 
The latter should be done slowly and, when fnished, the
with myelography
needle is withdrawn. Immediately afterwards, laterolateral,
(lateral (A) and
 ventrodorsal, and oblique projections are made. Stress pro-
ventrodorsal (B)
jections may be added if required. Flexion and extension as
projection): there is
well as compression and distraction projections are used to
displacement of the 
 assess dynamic instability and compressions. Stress views
A
ventral contrast
column away from
have to be taken with great care, or may be even contraindi-
the lesion in the 
cated, with severe spinal compression or if spinal dislocation
lateral projection,
or fracture is suspected. The contrast media may be pooled
whereas in the
to the region of interest by elevating or lowering the head or
ventrodorsal
hindquarters.
projection, swelling 
of the spinal cord is
seen with diverging
thinned contrast
Radiographic interpretation
B
columns.
 Survey radiographs are evaluated for number size, shape,
alignment, and alterations to the radiopacity and margin-
ation of the vertebrae. Surrounding soft tissue and other bone
structures should also be carefully assessed for signs of
trauma, infection, or neoplasia. Radiographic signs of inter-
vertebral disc disease include narrowing of the disc space, the
dorsal intervertebral articular process joint space and the
intervertebral foramen, extruded mineralized disc material,
end-plate sclerosis, and spondylosis.
 The clinician should be familiar with features of the normal
myelogram, e.g., normal widening or thinning of the spinal
A
cord and the contrast columns in certain locations. Common
myelographic abnormalities include obstruction of contrast
flow or changes in the size, shape, or location of the sub-
arachnoid contrast medium columns and the spinal cord.
Clinically significant subarachnoid filling defects are accom-
panied by thinning of the opposite contrast medium column
or evidence of cord compression. Patterns are categorized
into extramedullary (intradural or extradural) and intramed-
ullary lesions. Extradural lesions are located outside the dura
B
mater (Fig. 2-9). They cause thinning or absence of the con-
Figure 2-10 Schematic drawing of a ventral intradural lesion with
trast column and displacement away from the lesion in one
myelography (lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) projection): in the lateral
projection, whereas in the second projection, perpendicular
projection, the ventral contrast column is widened focally with a central
to the frst, swelling of the spinal cord is seen with diverging
ul uosal aul jo spua yiog uo ,aat job e saquasan ieun pajap bu!
the ventrodorsal projection, the spinal cord is widened and the contrast
thinned contrast columns. Differential diagnoses are disc pro-
columns diverge and are thinner.
trusion, congenital or developmental malformations, liga-
or luxation. Intradural lesions (Fig. 2-10) are located within
the subarachnoid space.
Radiographically, the contrast
column is widened focally with a filling defect that may
 spinal cord. They produce widening of the spinal cord in both
Jeds au ruoaloid peuooo aul u .'san o, e aquasa
 projections. The contrast columns may be thinned depending
cord may be widened and the contrast columns diverge,
on the size of the lesion. Spinal cord neoplasia, edema, or
and are thinner. This pattern may be seen with primary or
secondary neoplasia, hemorrhage, granuloma, or subarach-
tious or ischemic diseases may cause this myelographic
noid cysts. Intramedullary lesions (Fig. 2-11) are within the
pattern.
2: Further diagnostic procedures
31
Figure 2-11
 provides equivalent information. A thorough physical exami-
 Schematic drawing
nation is required so that ultrasonographic findings may be
 of an intramedullary
 correlated with the clinical information.
lesion with
To examine superficial structures in the cat, e.g., the mus-
myelography (lateral
(A) and ventrodorsal
 culoskeletal apparatus, linear probes with high frequencies in
(B) projection):
raiy apiaoid kaui asnesaq pasn are zN Si-8 jo auer au
widening of the
resolution in the near feld. A standoff may be helpful. Mus-
spinal cord is seen in
cular diseases, abscesses, hematomas, seromas, lipomas, cel-
both projections.
hulites, and neoplasia may be assessed. Foreign bodies in soft
 tissue may be identifed. Tendons such as the calcaneal tendon
(Fig. 2-12) can also be easily imaged ultrasonographically in
the feline patient (15). Bicipital tenosynovitis was diagnosed
 in a cat using ultrasound, in combination with arthrography
(16). However ultrasonographic examination of most
tendons and joints is limited in cats due to their small size.
The surface of bones can be successfully examined for dis-
crete changes like irregularities, discontinuities, periosteal
reactions, fragments, and sequestra seen with trauma or
infection. Every ultrasonographic evaluation of bone should
2.1.7 Ultrasonography
be preceded by radiography.
Ultrasound refers to sound waves of a high frequency, inau-
2.1.8 Computed tomography
dible to humans. During their transmission through tissue,
the ultrasound  waves emitted by the ultrasound  probe
 Similar to conventional radiography, the principle of CT is
undergo absorption, reflection, scattering, and refraction at
 based on the absorption of X-rays by tissue. Whereas con-
the interfaces between two different tissues. The reflected
 ventional radiography produces a summation image of a
waves, called echo, are then received by the ultrasound probe
 body region, CT as a cross-sectional imaging technique avoids
 au 'aheu suderaouosen aui anpond oi pasn are pue
aasn e  Aq sars ueie po uosodradn
size, shape, location, and architecture of an organ can be 
slice of the patient in the range of 0.5-10 mm thickness.
assessed with ultrasonography. At bone surfaces, most waves
Thus, a series of two-dimensional images of a certain body
are reflected or absorbed and litle sound is available to image
 region are produced. Three-dimensional images and images
deeper structures; therefore, only the bone surface can be
 in different planes may be reconstructed on the basis of the
examined ultrasonographically. Although MRI is considered
 digital data. In comparison to conventional radiography,
the method of choice to image diseases of soft tissue, ultra-
contrast resolution of CT is higher. Within the five conven-
sonography is more accessible and cost-effective and often
 tional radiopacities (gas, fat, soft tissue/fluid, bone, metal),
Tube
Tuber
calcane
calcan
A
B
Figure 2-12 Longitudinal ultrasonographic images of a partial rupture of the right Achilles tendon in a cat: the superficial portion of the Achilles
tendon (A) is intact (white arrows). The deeper medial portion (B) shows fiber alignment in the proximal part (calipers) but lacks longitudinal fibers
in the distal part (white arrows). Instead, inhomogeneous hypoechoic tissue is seen in this region.
32
Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
soft-tissue structures and fluid opacities may be further dif-
of neoplastic or infectious bone diseases (Fig. 2-13). In
ferentiated, e.g., muscles can be differentiated from tendons,
humans and animals with acute trauma in complex anatomic
and in the skull, the CSF differs from brain tissue and acute
areas such as the head or spine, CT has been established as
hemorrhage.
a standard method because of the advantage of being able to
CT is more sensitive in detecting bone lysis or soft-tissue
image fractures free of superimposition. Planning of surgical
mineralization. This is of particular value for the assessment
 procedures or detection of small fragments or bone sequestra
W+0.0°
FB3000
W+0.0°
FB 359
FL 750
RH
FL 159
A
.....
A
C
Figure 2-13 Osteosarcoma in the sixth lumbar vertebra: a lytic area (white arrows) is diagnosed in the right pedicle, which is well described in the
ventrodorsal view (B) and less well delineable in the laterolateral view (A). On transverse computed tomography images (C, bone window),
destruction of the right pedicle is well seen (white arrows) and the vertebral canal is widened. On postcontrast transverse images (D, soft-tissue 
window), a mildly enhancing soft-tissue mass is seen, occupying approximately 75 % of the vertebral canal and expanding dorsally (white arrows).
2: Further diagnostic procedures
 is thus facilitated. In combination with myelography, CT aids
in identifying compression of the spinal cord. For CT myelog-
/a mol keixodde) ouauoo auoi ramo e Aud
ml) of the agent is used, by diluting it with sterile saline.
Newer CT technologies such as helical CT provide a dramati-
 cally increased spatial resolution, and with their increasing
availability in veterinary medicine, new prospects may
ermerge.
2.1.9 Magnetic resonance imaging
With MRI, a patient is placed in a magnet and radiowaves
A
are ransmitted into the magnetic feld. The transmitter is
then turned off for a moment, and the patient re-emits the
radiowaves, which are received and used for reconstruction
of the image. The nuclei of hydrogen atoms in the magnetized
C
tissue absorb and emit the radiofrequency energy. MRI is
Figure 2-14 Recommended sites for arthrocentesis.
able to measure the hydrogen and protein content of tissue,
(A) Shoulder. The needle is inserted perpendicular to the skin surface
and displays it as a shade of gray on the image. Like CT,
sightly distal to the processus hamatus (acromion) of the scapula.
MRI also represents a cross-sectional imaging technique. It
(B) Elbow. The needle can be introduced just medial to the lateral
avoids superimposition of adjacent structures by imaging a
epicondyle and advanced along the olecranon into the olecranon fossa.
Alternatively, the needle may be entered just caudolaterally to the
slice of the patient. In comparison to the radiographic tech-
condyle, while the leg is held in slight supination.
niques such as CT and conventional radiography, MRI pro-
(C) Carpus. The needle is inserted into the radiocarpal joint from
vides excellent contrast resolution and is considered the
dorsally or dorsomedially while the joint is held in slight flexion.
imaging method of choice to examine soft tissue. MRI pro-
(D) Stifle. The needle is inserted lateral to the patellar ligament and
vides less bone detail because bone has a reduced signal due
directed towards the lateral aspect of the medial femoral condyle
through the infrapatellar fat pad. The same procedure can be 
to its lower hydrogen density. Major indications for the use
ael ellaed aul on lea wo paa
of MRI are for imaging diseases of the brain and spine,
(E) Tarsus. The needle is inserted from dorsally into the talocrural joint
because defnition berween gray and white matter, CSF,
in a slightly proximal direction. Digital pressure on the plantar joint sacs
spinal cord, epidural fat, and components of the interverte-
facilitates collection of synovial fluid. Alternatively, the lateroplantar
bral disc is possible. MRI of the appendicular skeleton in cats
joint space can be tapped by inserting the needle medially to the lateral
is limited due to their small size.
malleolus with the joint in sight flexion.
2.2 Arthrocentesis and synovial
fluid evaluation
normal feline joint. One drop to 0.25 ml can usually be
retrieved from normal shoulder, stifle, and hip joints, and
Collection and laboratory evaluation of synovial fuid is an
around 0.1 ml can be obtained from the carpal and tarsal
essential part of the diagnosis of arthropathies. The forma-
joints (17). Joint effusion generally allows retrieval of suff-
tion of abnormal synovial effusion can be initiated by carti-
cient synovial fluid for analysis. At least two, and preferably
lage damage and synovitis. Vasodilation in the subsynovial
 asen e nsa uum padden aq pnous siunol aro
capillaries leads to increased vascular permeability and allows
 possible polyarthritis.
extravasation of fluid, protein, and inflammatory cells into
Sedation or a short general anesthetic is necessary to
the synovial fuid. Distinguishing the type and number of
perform the procedure in most cats. The hair is clipped over
leukocytes can be used to differentiate between disease
the region, and the skin is prepared aseptically as for surgery.
conditions.
 Sterile gloves are worn. The joint is immobilized with one
hand, and with the other hand a 22- or 25-gauge needle
attached to a 2- or 3-ml syringe is inserted into the joint (17).
2.2.1 Arthrocentesis
Digital pressure on any joint distension opposite to the needle
Synovial fluid can be obtained by needle arthrocentesis from
insertion site may help to place the needle inside the joint
all major joints of the limbs. Figure 2-14 shows the location
capsule. Once the needle is inside the joint cavity, gentle
for needle placement for arthrocentesis from the different
 negative pressure is applied until some drops of synovial fluid
joints. Only a small amount of synovial fluid is present in a
 have been obtained. If blood appears at the needle hub, the
34
 Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
needle is retrieved, because contamination of the synovial
 and infectious causes of arthritis based on cytological findings
fluid with blood alters the cell count. Slides are prepared 
 alone (Table 2-1). Although total cell count and percentage
immediately for cytological evaluation. If an adequate sample
of neutrophils tend to be higher in infectious arthritis,
is obtained, the rest is placed in an ethylenediaminetetraacetic
immune-mediated arthritis can cause marked elevation of
acid (EDTA) tube, which can be stored for 24 hours in the
both total cell count and neutrophil percentage. The presence
refrigerator. A sample for bacteriological culture is taken,
 of degenerative neutrophils and intracellular bacteria indi-
 and processed as described below.
cates infection, but their absence does not rule out infection.
Therefore, the results of synovial fluid analysis should be
2.2.2 Visual and cytological evaluation
interpreted in conjunction with clinical and radiographical
features, and bacteriological culture results.
The amount of synovial fluid obtained is noted, and the fluid
is visually inspected. Normal synovial fluid is clear and color-
2.2.3 Bacteriology
less. Red-tinged fuid indicates hemorrhage due to trauma or
inflammation, or iatrogenic contamination. Streaks of blood,
Synovial fluid should be cultured for aerobic and anaerobic
rather than uniformly red or pink fluid, are observed with
bacterial and Mycoplasma growth. Synovial fluid simply
iatrogenic contamination. White or yellow turbid fluid is
 placed on an aerobic culturette yields about 50% false-nega-
consistent with elevation of leukocytes due to inflammation
tive cultures (19). Contact with room air should be avoided
or sepsis. Normal synovial fluid should form a 2-4-cm string
 to allow anaerobic culturing. Incubating synovial fuid on a
due to its high viscosity.
blood culture medium for 24 hours before reculturing yields
A white blood cell (WBC) count below 3000 cells/ul, with
significantly more reliable results compared to direct aerobic
more than 90% mononuclear cells, is considered normal in
culturing of synovial fluid and synovial membrane biopsy
most laboratories (18). Synovial fluid obtained from healthy
(19). Accordingly, it is recommended to place the synovial
shoulder and stifle joints in cats contained 0-4535 red blood
fluid both on an aerobic culturette and on a blood culture
cells (mean 483), 2-1134 WBCs (mean 161), 0-39% neutro-
medium. The aerobic samples are cultured immediately to
phils (mean 3.6%), and 61-100% mononuclear cells (mean
obtain rapid results, and the blood culture is recultured after
96.4%) (17). A positive correlation between body weight and
24 hours to achieve better accuracy (19). If a laboratory is
WBC count was found. The findings suggest that cats have
available in-house or nearby, the sample is best left in the
lower WBC counts compared to dogs, but with a similar cell
 sterile syringe, and sent immediately for further processing.
distribution (17).
 If an inadequate amount of synovial fluid was obtained for
A slight elevation in total cell count with a normal or only
culture, the syringe can be rinsed with bacterial culture
medium before placing it on the blood culture medium
 in degenerative joint disease (Table 2-1). The presence of red
(20).
 blood cells may indicate hemorrhage due to trauma or inflam-
 mation, or hemorrhage as a result of arthrocentesis. Neutro-
2.3 Selected biopsy techniques
phils enter the synovial fluid across the synovial membrane
during inflammatory processes, both immune-mediated and
Fine-needle aspiration or biopsies in the orthopedic patient
infectious, and are then found in larger than normal numbers.
are most commonly conducted for investigation of masses,
Synovial fluid containing markedly more than 10% neutro-
soft-tissue swelling, or bony lesions. Cytology is generally
phils is consistent with an inflammatory arthropathy. It is not
used to differentiate inflammatory or infectious processes
always possible to differentiate between immune-mediated
 from neoplasia. Histopathological examination of biopsy
 Fluid characteristics
Degenerative joint disease
Immune-mediated arthritis
Infectious arthritis (bacterial)
Viscosity
Normal to reduced
Reduced
Reduced
Clarity
Clear
Hazy to cloudy
Cloudy to opaque
 Leukocyte count
<5000 cells/μl
4000-700 000 cells/μl
15 000-267 000 cells/μl
Percentage of neutrophils
<10%
25-99%
77-99%
 Degenerated neutrophils
 Intracellular bacteria
2: Further diagnostic procedures
35
samples is often a more sensitive diagnostic method, and is
neutrophils versus mononuclear cells, the inflammation can
used if cytology was unrewarding. Histopathology is also
 be classified into acute, chronic active, and chronic or granu-
needed to diagnose and classify tumors to determine treat-
lomatous (21). Diagnosis of neoplasia is made on nuclear,
ment options and prognosis.
cytoplasmic, and sructural characteristics (21). Tissue hyper-
plasia is often diffcult to differentiate from neoplasia. Biop-
2.3.1 Fine-needle aspiration
sies and histopathological examination are indicated when
accuracy of the cytological diagnosis is questionable, and
 Fine-needle aspiration and subsequent cytological examina-
tion is an easy-to-perform and non-invasive tool in the diag-
for prognosis and treatment plan.
nosis of soft-tissue masses and swellings. Fine-needle
aspiration of bone lesions is also possible in the presence of
2.3.2 Bone biopsy
cortical lysis. Only loose cells are obtained through the
needle, in contrast to a biopsy specimen. Depending on tumor
Bone biopsies are indicated in the presence of most lytic
type, a definitive diagnosis might not be possible. At the least,
and/or proliferative bone lesions. Histopathological examina-
cytology often allows differentiation between inflammatory
tion of the specimen usually allows differentiation berween
or infectious, and neoplastic processes.
inflammatory and neoplastic processes, and diagnosis of
Sedation or anesthesia is not usually necessary for fine-
tumor type. Prognosis and treatment plan depend largely on
needle aspiration of superfcial masses, and the skin is only
tumor type. The Jamshidi biopsy needle (Fig. 2-16) is better 
 prepared with an alcohol swab. Fine-needle aspiration of
suited for cats when compared to Michel's trephine due to
bone lesions requires sedation or even general anesthesia, and
its smaller core diameter. Jamshidi needle biopsies had an
aseptic preparation of the overlying skin.
accuracy rate of 92% for detecting neoplasia versus other
Two techniques can be used: the needle-off and the needle-
 disorders, and an accuracy rate of 82% for correctly diagnos-
ro paijad si anbiuuoan o-apeau au (i) anbuqoan uo
ing tumor subtype (22). A 14-gauge needle is used in cats
vascular and small lesions, because it reduces the risk of
(23). Bone biopsies are taken from the center of the lesion
blood contamination. It is described in Figure 2-15. For the
 visible on radiographs, in order to avoid sampling the reac-
needle-on technique, the needle is advanced into the tissue
tive bone on the periphery of the lesion (22). The skin incision
pie as e uim asno pe si tons pe
Aq oupass on ioalqns euaiod are ioen Asdonq aul pue
to the needle. The negative pressure helps to retrieve cells
tumor cells.
 from tissues that do not exfoliate well. Suction is stopped and
A small skin incision is performed after clipping and surgi-
 negative pressure released before the needle is withdrawn
 cal preparation of the biopsy feld, and the Jamshidi biopsy
from the tissue. The needle is then temporarily removed from
 needle is inserted with the stylet in place and advanced up to
the syringe, the syringe flled with air, the needle replaced,
the bone surface. The stylet is then removed and the needle
and the cells in the needle are expelled on to glass slides.
is further inserted into the bone with a corkscrew motion,
 hereby pressing a bone core into the needle. Penetration of
nique for viscous material is used to prepare the glass
slide for cytological examination. Inflammatory processes
is rotated 360? several times in the same direction, and/or
can normally be diagnosed, and based on the percentage of 
 gently rocked back and forth to break the base of the biopsy
Figure 2-16 The Jamshidi bone
biopsy needle has a tapered tip.
The needle can therefore be
withdrawn from the bone
without losing the biopsy
 specimen. The piece of bone has
to be retrograded with the help
of the stylet through the tip of
the needle for further processing.
Figure 2-15 Fine-needle aspiration with the needle-off technique. The
mass is held with one hand, and a 22- or 25-gauge needle is inserted
into the mass with the other hand. The needle is then moved rapidly
back and forth in different directions with a jabbing motion. The tip of
the needle should not leave the deep margin of the mass in order to
avoid retrieval of normal cells adjacent to the lesion, and to avoid
seeding of tumor cells.
36
 Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
specimen. The specimen is removed from the needle by
cord disease as CSF flows caudally. For technique and posi-
 o s a m aau an o dnn an gnon no i s
tioning of the patient, see the section on myelography. The
a small wire. The specimens should ideally have a length of
quantity of collected fluid should not exceed 1-1.5 ml in
at least 1 cm and if possible two or three biopsies are taken.
adult cats. CSF should be stored in a plastic container as
The biopsy specimens are placed into 10% neutral buffered
leukocytes adhere to glass. The sample must be analyzed
formalin for histopathological examination.
within 30 minutes to avoid degradation of cells. Macroscopic
examination provides limited information, but if the sample
2.3.3 Synovial biopsy
has increased turbidity, an increased cell count may be
expected. Clots of fbrin or foam indicate marked elevation
 A synovial biopsy and histopathological examination are
 of protein. Artificial contamination with blood is frequently
indicated if synovial fluid cannot be obtained, if the cytolo-
      aa 
 gical examination of the synovial fluid is not diagnostic, or 
puncture produces a red tinge to the fluid that disappears as
if a tumor is suspected. Synovial biopsy is rarely pathogno-
the fluid continues to flow. Centrifugation should leave a
monic of a disease, as the synovial membrane reacts similarly
 colorless fluid. If xanthochromia is observed after centrifuga-
tion the cause is usually previous subarachnoidal hemor-
changes associated with feline immune-mediated arthropa-
rhage. Prolonged icterus can also result in xanthochromia.
thies have been described (25, 26). Inflammatory infltrates,
Quantitative measurement of CSF protein provides accu-
containing both mononuclear cells and neutrophils, are
rate information. Elevated protein levels are observed in
present during the frst 1 or 2 months of the disease (26).
inflammatory, neoplastic, and degenerative conditions. A
The inflammation remains active as the disease progresses,
poison or toxic insult that affects permeability of the blood--
but has more chronic characteristics, with mononuclear
brain barrier a lesion obstructing CSF flow, and necrosis of
cells predominating over neutrophils. Granulation tissue and
brain tissue may result in a high protein concentration. In
villous hypertrophy may also be present (26). Villous hyper-
healthy individuals the protein concentration should not
 trophy is a characteristic of rheumatoid arthritis in humans,
exceed 25 mg/dl in cisternal samples. Total protein content
and was described in conjunction with positive rheumatoid
in lumbar taps is considered normal up to a concentration of
factor in cats (25). Histopathological examination of the
45 mg/dl.
joint capsule might also reveal infectious causes of arthritis
Total and differential WBC counts are the most important
or neoplasia.
part of a CSF examination. Normal feline CSF contains 0-5
 The synovial biopsy can be obtained at the same locations
 mononuclear cells/μl in cisternal taps. Total cell count is sig-
as used for arthrocentesis or via arthroscopy (Chapter 25).
nifcantly elevated in inflammatory diseases. Minor increases
Excisional biopsy is preferably performed in cats, as currently
may be observed in neoplastic, necrotizing, hemorrhagic,
available biopsy needles are too large for the small feline
ischemic, or traumatic diseases. The more meninges and
joints. Excisional biopsy also has the advantage that the joint
ependyma that are involved in the pathology, the more cells
can be explored and a selected piece of synovial membrane
are expected. If the lesion is purely intraparenchymal, total
may be taken. The joint capsule is incised in a longitudinal
cell count may be normal. The results of a differential cell
direction to prevent iatrogenic injury to ligaments. A full
count may vary within diseases depending on localization,
thickness piece of the joint capsule is removed with a number
chronicity, and severity. Thus, its results are rarely specific.
11 scalpel blade, and the capsular incision is closed with
Exceptions to this rule include identification of neoplastic
sutures.
cells or infectious organisms in a CSF specimen. A predomi-
nance of neutrophils is found in bacterial infections. However,
neutrophils are also found in acute viral infections such as
2.4 Neurodiagnostic procedures
feline infectious peritonitis, meningiomas, and after myelog-
Neurodiagnostic procedures performed in feline patients
raphy. Mononuclear cells are frequently found in CSF of
include myelography, analysis of the CSF, and electrodiag-
patients with viral or autoimmune diseases, in compressive,
nostic tests. Myelography is described in the section on diag-
degenerative, or neoplastic conditions.
nostic imaging in this chapter (Section 2.1).
Measurement of antibodies such as feline infectious perito-
nitis or toxoplasmosis from CSF can contribute significantly
2.4.1 Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid
to a diagnosis. Results of these tests should be compared to
the serum antibody titer. False-positive results can occur
CSF is collected from a cerebellomedullary or lumbar punc-
when the blood-brain barrier is impaired as migrating B cells
may produce antibodies intrathecally without presence of the
ture may provide more information in animals with spinal
 antigen in the central nervous system.
2: Further diagnostic procedures
37
2.4.2 Electrodiagnostic testing
malities associated with motor nerve conduction studies
center around altered CMAP amplitudes and conduction
Electrodiagnostic testing is a mainstay in the diagnostic work-
velocities. In general, axonopathies result in a decrease of
 up of animals with neuromuscular disorders (27). Results of
CMAP amplitude and demyelination results in a decrease of
 these tests disclose the distribution of the disease and may
the conduction velocity. A slowed conduction velocity without
localize the lesion to the muscles, neuromuscular junction,
 a significant decrease in CMAP amplitude is most indicative
the myelin, or the axon. Accurate nerve and muscle biopsies
of demyelination in cats with diabetic neuropathy. In normal
may be obtained based upon electrodiagnostic results. Elec-
nerves, the conduction velocity should not be less than
tromyography (EMG) and peripheral nerve conduction
 50 m/s. Age has a signifcant influence on conduction veloc-
studies are the most routinely performed tests. Sensory nerve
ity. Adult values in felines are not reached before 3 months
conduction studies, repetitive nerve stimulation, F-wave
of age.
examination, and single-fber EMG may be performed in
 Supramaximal repetitive nerve stimulation (SRNS) uses the
more thorough investigations.
principles of motor nerve conduction by stimulation of a
 Pa rpn pd si siuid Kieaa ui D
 peripheral nerve with a series of impulses and analysis of the
anesthesia, and is restricted to the assessment of spontaneous
evoked CMAPs. It is useful in evaluation of neuromuscular
activity of the resting muscle and insertional activity elicited
junctionopathies such as congenital and acquired myasthenia
by insertion of the recording electrodes. Abnormal EMG
gravis and botulism.
fndings include fbrillation potentials, positive sharp waves,
Sensory nerve conduction studies assess function in sensory
complex repetitive discharges, and myotonic potentials. These
and mixed peripheral nerves. Clinically, sensory nerve con-
pathological activities have to be distinguished from physio-
duction studies are more difficult to interpret than the results
logical discharges, specifically insertional activity, miniature
of motor nerve conduction as sensory nerve action potentials
end-plate potentials, end-plate spikes, and motor unit action
(SNAPs) are more prone to artifacts and results may vary
potentials. Each of the listed EMG phenomena is accompa-
from patient to patient and even between sides within the
nied by characteristic noises, which aid the experienced
same animal. Calculation of the sensory conduction velocity
examiner in the interpretation of the EMG fndings. Abnor-
provides information about demyelination and SNAP ampli-
mal EMG activity is the result of a lesion of nerves and/or
tde may indicate sensory axonal disease. It is important to
muscles that alter the physiological properties of cell mem-
note that sensory fbers only degenerate with a lesion to the
branes. It is important to note that abnormalities are not
dorsal root ganglion. Avulsion of the preganglionic nerve
detected before 4-5 days after denervation in cats and they
root and spinal cord results in degeneration of the associated
only reach their maximal changes after 8-10 days. Further
sensory nerve distal to the ganglion, because the cell bodies
limitations include the inability to distinguish between neuro-
are still connected to their sensory axons. Postganglionic
and myopathy, to infer clinical signs and neuropathic deficits,
injuries to the sensory nerve affect conduction velocity
and to infer the underlying pathophysiological process.
substantially.
Although rarely specifc, EMG can provide useful informa-
tion about reinnervation and disease progression and regres-
sion. A significant decrease in the density of spontaneous
 References and further reading
activity often indicates successful reinnervation. The same
1. Farr RF, Allisy-Roberts PJ. Physics for medical imaging. Edin-
fnding may also indicate fibrosis. EMG is clinically useful in
burgh: WB Saunders; 1996.
distinguishing between denervation and disuse atrophy. It has
2. Lavin LM. Radiography in veterinary technology, 2nd edn.
a high degree of sensitivity in detecting peripheral axonal
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1999.
loss, even when 95% of the axons are still intact. Thus,
3. Farrow CS, Green R, Shively M. Radiology of the cat. St. Louis:
Mosby; 1994.
peripheral neuropathies may be diagnosed before clinical fea-
4. Waibl H, et al. Atlas of radiographic anatomy of the cat. Stutt-
tures such as hyporeflexia become evident.
gart: Parey; 2004.
Motor nerve conduction studies evaluate the function of
 5. Morgan JP Radiology of small animal fracture management.
motor and mixed nerves of thoracic, pelvic, and some cranial
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1995.
6. Morgan JP. Radiology of veterinary orthopedics. Features of
nerves. The nerve is stimulated at two different sites and a
diagnosis, 2nd edn. Napa, California: Venture Press; 1999.
recording electrode is placed in an appropriate muscle. The
7. Thrall DE. Textbook of veterinary diagnostic radiology, 4th edn.
result is a compound muscle action potential (CMAP). A
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2002.
number of measurements are considered for evaluation of the
8. Zulauf D, et al. Radiographic examination and outcome in
motor component of a peripheral nerve, including analysis of
consecutive feline trauma patients. Vet Comp Orthop Trauma-
tol 2008;21:36-40.
latency, amplitude, duration, shape, and area of the CMAP
9. Voss K, et al. Antebrachiocarpal luxation in a cat. Vet Comp
and assessment of the conduction velocity. The major abnor-
Orthop Traumatol 2003;4:266-270.
38
Part 1: Clinical approach to the orthopedic patient
10. Wood AKW, et al. Anatomic and radiographic appearance of a
19. Montgomery RD, et al. Comparison of aerobic culturette, syno-
sesamoid bone in the tendon of origin of the supinator muscle
vial membrane biopsy, and blood culture medium in detection
of the cat. Am J Vet Res 1995;56:736-738.
of canine bacterial arthritis. Vet Surg 1989;18:300-303.
11. Mahoney PN, Lamb CR. Articular, periarticular and juxta-
20. Johnson AL, Hulse, DA. Diseases of the joints. In: Fossum TW
articular calcifed bodies in the dog and cat: a radiologic review.
(ed.) Small animal surgery, 2Znd edn. St. Louis: Mosby; 2002:
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1996;37:3-19.
pp. 1023-1157.
12. Langley-Hobbs SJ. Biology and radiological assessment of frac-
21.（
Ogilvie GK, Moore AS. Clinical cytology and neoplasia. In:
ture healing. In Practice 2003;1:26-35.
Ogilvie GK, Moore AS (eds) Feline oncology. Trenton: Veteri-
13. Nolte DM, et al. Incidence of and predisposing factors for non-
nary Learning Systems; 2001: pp. 42-48.
22. Powers BE, et al. Jamshidi needle biopsy for diagnosis of bone
18 cases (1998-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005;226:77-82.
lesions in small animals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988;193:
14. Stead AC, et al. Synovial cysts in cats. J Small Anim Pract
205-210.
1995;36:450-454.
23. Ogilvie GK, Moore AS. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy. In:
15. Kramer M, et al. Utrasonographic examination of injuries
Ogilvie GK, Moore AS (eds) Feline oncology. Trenton: Veteri-
to the Achilles tendon in dogs and cats. J Small Anim Pract
nary Learning Systems; 2001: pp. 26-29.
2001;42:531-535.
24. Hardy RM, Wallace LJ. Arthrocentesis and synovial membrane
16. Scharf G, et al. Glenoid dysplasia and bicipital tenosynovitis in
biopsy. Vet Clin North Am 1974;4:449-462.
a Maine coon cat. J Small Anim Pract 2004;45:515-520.
25. Bennett D, Nash AS. Feline immune-based polyarthritis: a
17. Pacchiana PD, et al. Absolute and relative cell counts for syno-
study of thirty-one cases. J Small Anim Pract 1988;29:501-
vial fluid from clinically normal shoulder and stifle joints in cats.
523.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;225:1866-1870.
26. Pedersen NC, et al. Feline chronic progressive polyarthritis. Am
18. MacWilliams PS, Friedrichs KR. Laboratory evaluation and
J Vet Res 1980;41:522-535.
interpretation of synovial fluid. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
27. Cuddon PA. Electrophysiology in neuromuscular disease. Vet
Pract 2003;33:153-178.
Clin North Am Small Anim 2002;32:31-62.
Part 2
Musculoskeletal diseases
 Musculoskeletal diseases unrelated to trauma are infrequently
diagnosed in daily feline practice. Whereas some of the dis-
eases occurring in cats are indeed very rare, others occur
more often, and are probably underdiagnosed. Recent studies
have shown a surprisingly high radiographic incidence of
degenerative joint disease, hip dysplasia, and patellar luxa-
tion in cats. Clinical signs associated with musculoskeletal
diseases in cats tend to be less pronounced and often differ
from those described in dogs. Musculoskeletal disease in cats
-que aq Aeu no 'saumo au Aq paouun o Ae arojan
uted to the normal aging proceses. The veterinarian's aware-
ness of feline musculoskeletal diseases might also not be high
enough to diagnose the problems. Additionally, the orthope-
 dic examination and the interpretation of pain responses can
be challenging in some cats.
 Musculoskeletal diseases affect bones, joints, and muscles.
Diseases of bones, with the exception of neoplasia, are infre-
quent. They are usually caused by hereditary metabolic,
nutritional, or endocrine diseases, and are generalized. Mis-
cellaneous localized conditions of bone such as bone cysts
and diseases of the femoral head and neck have been described.
Joint diseases may be degenerative in origin, inherited or 
developmental, or inflammatory. In the broader sense, neu-
romuscular diseases and certain conditions of the footpads
and nails can also be included in the term musculoskeletal
disease, as they may mimic orthopedic conditions by causing
lameness and dysfunction. They are also covered in the fol-
lowing chapters.
41
3
 Hereditary and congenital musculoskeletal diseases
M. Hubler, S. Arnold, S.J. Langley-Hobbs
Hereditary and congenital diseases of the musculoskeletal
Thirteen storage diseases have been described in cats. All
system usually cause clinical signs within days to months
 have a common chronic progressive course, but there are
after birth, and therefore should be considered in the younger
 considerable variations in the clinical signs. While cats with
cat and kitten. This chapter covers hereditary metabolic
 either MPS or I-cell disease mainly exhibit skeletal changes
diseases and congenital malformations of the skeletal
 such as variable facial dysmorphism, the signs are mainly
system.
neurological in others. In some storage diseases, granules are
 seen within certain white blood cells. The presence of storage
3.1 Hereditary metabolic diseases of the
vacuoles within neutrophils is common for MPS and within
Iymphocytes for gangliosidosis GM2.
musculoskeletal system
In the following section only the storage diseases with
Hereditary metabolic diseases of the musculoskeletal system
skeletal changes (Table 3-1) are included. These are alpha-
include storage diseases, osteogenesis imperfecta, osteochon-
mannosidosis, MPS type I, VI, and VII and mucolipidosis
drodysplasia of Scottish Fold cats, congenital hypothyroid-
type II.
ism, and hereditary rickets.
Alpha-mannosidosis
3.1.1 Storage diseases
Alpha-mannosidosis is a chronic progressive disorder with a
Lysosomal storage diseases are rare disorders, mostly inher-
wide spectrum of clinical severity (1). Severe cerebellar dys-
ited in a simple autosomal-recessive pattern. They are caused
 function is a predominant feature common to all cases. The
by deficiency of one or more enzymes in the lysosomes of
 deficiency was associated with stillbirths and neonatal death
cells, or by deficiency of an activating enzyme or cofactor
 in Persian cats, with no kitten surviving to 6 months of
necessary for enzyme activity. The physiological catabolism
 age (2). Clinical fndings included hepatomegaly, corneal
of many macromolecules, in particular lipids, mucopolysac-
 changes, and calvarial abnormalities. Neurological examina-
charides (glycosaminoglycans, GAGs), glycogen, and glyco-
 tion showed cerebellar signs (e.g., intention tremor ataxia,
proteins, takes place within the lysosomes. This process is
and dysmetria). Other fndings included bizarre behavior,
dependent upon the function and concentration of many
 dementia, apathy, and a diminished response to stimuli.
enzymes and their corresponding cofactors. The failure of
In a domestic short-haired kitten with alpha-mannosidosis,
one step within the metabolic cascade results in the lysosomal
the presenting problem, at 4 months of age, was deformation 
storage of substrates of the deficient enzyme. Exceptions are
 of the forelimbs (3). The animal was represented to the vet-
chylomicronemia and glycogen storage disease type I and 
 erinarian at 7 months of age because of a progressive loss of
type IV, in which the glycan molecules accumulate within the
 balance. Findings just before euthanasia at 9 months of age
cytoplasm. The various disorders are named after the accu-
included hepatomegaly, lymph node enlargement, and radio-
 mulated substrate or the deficient enzyme or protein, as well
 graphic abnormalities of the spine and long bones. The ver-
 as eponyms. In most storage diseases the macromolecules
tebrae had a moth-eaten appearance, which was especially
themselves are non-toxic, but the gradually increasing depos-
noticeable in the lumbar region. The cortices of the long
its interfere with normal cellular function and architecture
bones were thin with an uneven appearance. Ocular abnor-
and, in turn, cause the chronic progressive diseases.
 malities included suture line cataracts and tapetal changes.
There is a functional deficiency of a single enzyme in the
 Neurological fndings included an intention tremor ataxia,
majority of storage diseases (e.g., mucopolysaccharidosis
 delayed righting reaction, and sluggish triceps and patellar
 nons nao (sisoiso-eudie 'ln pue l ladan (1)
reflexes.
diseases are caused by missing cofactors (e.g., GM1 and GM2
The clinical course for a litter of domestic long-haired
gangliosidosis) or defciency of one of the enzymes responsi-
kittens was similar to the domestic short-haired kitten, but
-i a) sauosos a oi suazua snoea uaaiei ro aq
 clinical signs were generally milder with a slower progression
disease).
(1). Ataxia was the frst abnormality observed. There were
42
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
Blakemore 1986 (3)
Vandevelde et al.
Cummings et al.
Gitzelmann et al.
Thrall 2001 (4)
Hubler 1996 (7)
Thrall 2001 (4)
(1982) (2)
(1988) (1)
Haskins et al.
Haskins et al.
(2002) (5)
(2002) (5)
(1994) (6)
Haskins et al.
(2002) (5)
Mazrier et al.
(2003) (8)
References
 isnl s  po s
 DSH), generalized tremors, ataxia,
 Dwarfism, deformed skull, abnormal
head tremors, spastic paraplegia,
wheelbarrow posture, respiratory
 tract infection, corneal clouding 
 Dwarfism, deformed skull, enlarged
 gait, corneal clouding, ataxia,
 paws, deformed legs, abnormal
 gait, corneal clouding, ataxia,
 Dwarfism, facial dysmorphismus,
 Deformed skull, crouched gait, 
 front-leg deformities (varus or
 Presenting clinical signs
opisthotonus
valgus carpi)
 paraparesis
paraparesis
presentation
6-12 months
4-12 months
2-4 months
4-9 months
2 months
Age at
At birth
 DSH, DLH
 Siam, DSH
Siam DSH
Persian,
Breed
DSH
DSH
1-phosphotransferase
N-acetylglucosamine-
C-L-iduronidase
 β-Glucuronidase
Enzyme defect
C-Mannosidase
 Arylsulfatase B
Mucopolysaccharidosis VI
Mucopolysaccharidosis VII
Mucopolysaccharidosis I
C-Mannosidosis
Mucolipidosis II
I-cell disease
Disease
3: Hereditary and congenital musculoskeletal diseases 
43
MPS 1
MPS VI
MPS VII
ML II
Table 3-2. Clinical features and
laboratory findings of
Clinical feature
 mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) type
I, VI*, and Vll and mucolipidosis 
Dwarfism
+
+
(ML) type Il (7)
 Large paws
+
+
十
 Facial dysmorphism
+
+
+
 Small ears
+
+
+
十
 Corneal clouding
+
+
+
Retinal atrophy
+ (25%)
Thickened eyelid
(+)
(drooping eyes)
Thickened skin
+ (neck)
+(neck, head)
+(paws)
+ (generalized)
Hepatomegaly
+
Gait abnormalities
+
+
+
+
(hindlimbs)
 Neurological deficits
+ (later
+ (25%)
+
stages)
(hindlimb
paresis)
Laboratory findings
 Toluidine blue spot test
+
+
+
 for glycosaminoglycans
 Decreased enzyme activity
+ (no activity)
in peripheral leukocytes
 Decreased enzyme activity
+(no activity) +
+ (no activity)
in cultured fbroblasts
Light microscopy
 Excessive granulation in
 peripheral neutrophils
Electron microscopy
 Membrane-bound
+
 inclusions in peripheral
leukocytes
*Severe form, genotype L476P/L476P.
no skeletal abnormalities, ocular abnormalities, or hepato-
chordae tendinae to thicken, interfering with normal cardiac
megaly as reported in the Persians and domestic short-haired
function and producing valvular stenosis, often with regurgi-
kitten.
tation (5).
In contrast, mucolipidosis type I (I-cell disease) results
from a defect of one of the enzymes responsible for the post-
Mucopolysaccharidoses type I, Vl, and Vll and
translational phosphorylation of lysosomal hydrolases. The
mucolipidosis type Il 
phosphorylation is necessary for targeting the enzymes
The MPS are characterized by the accumulation of GAGs,
(hydrolases) to the lysosomes. Thus, little enzyme reaches the
resulting from the impaired function of one of 11 enzymes
lysosome, and large amounts are secreted extracellularly into
required for normal GAG degradation. With the exception
 the plasma. As a consequence, various macromolecules, not 
of the central nervous system, and cartilage and bone, the
only GAGs as in MPS, accumulate in the lysosomes. These
pathophysiology of these lysosomal storage disorders is pre-
 lysosomes are described as cellular inclusion bodies, leading
dominantly related to increases in cell, tissue, and organ size.
to the term I-cell disease.
 For example, in MPS the storage of GAGs within the cells of 
Storage of GAGs in MPS or variable macromolecules in
 the heart valves causes these normally fusiform cells
to
mucolipidosis type II results in features common to most
become rounded. This change in turn causes valve leaflet and
affected cats (Table 3-2). The radiographic fndings of the
44
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
Radiography
MPS 1
MPS VI
MPS VII
ML II
Table 3-3. Radiographic findings 
 of the skeleton in 
Pectus excavatum
×
mucopolysaccharidosis (MPs) type
+
+
I. VI*, Vll, and mucolipidosis (ML)
Deformed vertebrae
+
+
+
+
type Il (7)
Fusion of the cervical vertebrae
+
+
一
+
 Bilateral coxofemoral subluxation
+
+
+
+
Shallow acetabulum and femoral head dysplasia
X
+
+
+
Epiphyseal dysplasia of the long bones
+
+
(+)
+, present; -, absent; (+), mild changes.
*Severe form, genotype L476P/ L476P.
skeleton are summarized in Table 3-3. MPS VI is one of the
most prevalent diseases in cats and is commonly found in
those of Siamese ancestry. Two different mutations in the
same gene, L476P and D520N, can result in three different
phenotypes. The L476P mutation, when homozygous, results
 in a severe phenotype. The D520N mutation, when homozy-
gous, has little clinical consequence and affected cats are most
likely regarded as clinically normal. Investigations of experi-
mental cat colonies revealed that only 1 of 18 cats homozy-
gous for the D520N had mild degenerative joint disease of
the shoulder (9). The compound form (L476P/D520N) results
in cats that are normal in size and appearance. However, they
 are characterized by mild to severe degenerative joint disease
of the shoulder (64% of the genotype) and stifle (20% of the
Figure 3-1. A cat with mucolipidosis type ll. Note the broad flat face
genotype) (9). In cats having the genotype D520N/D520N or 
with hypertelorismus, frontal bossing. small ears, markedly thickened 
L476P/D520N, the only evidence of storage disease is the
eyelids, and the large paws in relation to the body. (Reproduced from
presence of neutrophil inclusion bodies.
Hubler M, Haskins ME, Arnold S et al. Mucolipidosis type Il in a 
domestic shorthair cat. J Small Animal Pract 1996;37:435-441, with
The age at disease onset is variable and depends upon the
permission from the Journal of Smaff Animar Practice.)
severity of the underlying defect, but is usually before adult-
 hood. It is progressive, with many animals surviving months
or years. One, or a combination, of the following clinical
signs may be indicative of a storage disease: dwarfsm, facial
drates. The final diagnosis of a specific enzyme defect, for
dysmorphism, corneal clouding, deformity of the limbs, and
example lack of a particular lysosomal hydrolase in the
neurological signs, especially progressive cerebellar deficits
plasma or lack of activity of an enzyme in leukocytes or cul-
(7) (Fig. 3-1). Inclusion bodies in granulocytes, monocytes,
tured fbroblasts from biopsies, is only performed in special-
or vacuolization of lymphocytes may be present on a blood
ized laboratories.
smear. Organomegaly and skeletal deformities and/or degen-
 erative joint disease may be demonstrated on radiographs
3.1.2 Osteogenesis imperfecta
(Figs 3-2 and 3-3).
All cats with MPS have a positive toluidine blue test that
Osteogenesis imperfecta is a disorder of bone that leads to
demonstrates excessive excretion of urinary GAGs (Table
spontaneous fractures. It is a well-known disease in humans
3-2). In contrast to MPS, cats with I-cell disease do not
where several types have been described. This heterogeneous
excrete GAGs in the urine (Table 3-2). Screening tests for
syndrome can range from mild, subclinical disease to a lethal
 storage diseases are suitable for the localization of the bio-
syndrome leading to stillbirth or neonatal death. In humans
chemical defect, but are not specifc for a single enzyme
it has been shown that this group of diseases results from
defect. In lysosomal storage diseases, simple urine spot-on
deranged metabolism of collagen. Depending on the collagen
tests are available for MPS (toluidine blue) and carbohydrates
 type and production, it may be accompanied by abnormal
(Clinitest, Ketostix), as well as a one-dimensional paper chro-
 dentition, blue scleral hue, joint laxity, or growth deformities.
matography for amino acids, organic acids, and carbohy-
 The common features of all types of osteogenesis imperfecta
3: Hereditary and congenital musculoskeletal diseases
45
A
Figure 3-3. Ventrodorsal view of the pelvis and hindlimbs of the cat
pw uoexnl dy pue eisejdsap diy eaeg :/ladkt sisopidoonu yim
malformation of the stifle joints. (Reproduced from Hubler M, Haskins 
ME, Arnold S et al. Mucolipidosis type ll in a domestic shorthair cat. J
Small Animal Pract 1996;37:435-441, with permission from the Journal
Of Smafl Animar Practice.)
L
Figure 3-2. Lateral survey radiograph of the spinal column of a cat
with mucolipidosis type Il.
(A) Cervical spine: fusion of the vertebral arches and articular facets
(B) Thoracic spine: small vertebral bodies and bowed, shortened
spinous processes
o panpodaa) sane, ene aut po uoisny auis en ()
Hubler M, Haskins ME, Arnold S et al. Mucolipidosis type Il in a 
domestic shorthair cat. J Small Animal Pract 1996;37:435-441, with
permission from the Journar of Smaff Animar Practice.)
Figure 3-4. Laterolateral radiograph of a 4-month-old British Shorthair
with osteogenesis imperfecta. Marked osteopenia of the skeleton is
visible, except at the epiphyses and apophyses. Numerous spontaneous 
sad an snaien an so en pue eas yr po saes
and the sixth lumbar vertebrae are present. Numerous bones including 
are fragile bones that fracture spontaneously or in response
 the thoracic spine are deformed.
to minimal trauma.
Osteogenesis imperfecta is a very rare disease in cats. Ini-
tially, feline nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism was
until they suffered trauma. After a greenstick fracture, which
 appeared to be very painful, they had a reduced appetite, or
Gehring (10) reported on familial occurrences of osteogenesis 
 become anorexic. They often avoided using the litter box for
imperfecta in Siamese and Persian cats, drawing the conclu-
 defecation, resulting in constipation. The regulation of defe-
sion of a hereditary cause. This skeletal disease was recog-
 cation is very important, because in chronic cases intestinal
nized in young cats of both sexes, but was seen more often  paralysis may occur.
in males between 2 and 12 months of age. Affected cats 
 In cats with osteogenesis imperfecta, significant decrease in
showed lameness and pain in the pelvic region. They also 
 bone density can be documented radiographically. The
walked very cautiously and avoided jumping on tables or
 compact substance of the bone is sometimes as thin as paper,
other objects. If they did jump, even from a low height, they
 especially in very young kittens, and the long bones often
either did not walk at all afterwards, or only at a very slow
 have kinks and deformities, resulting from greenstick frac-
and dragging pace, especially on their hindquarters. General
tures (Fig. 3-4). The pelvis has a lyrate shape on ventrodorsal
condition of the cats, food intake, and digestion were normal
radiographs, which is very typical in young animals. This
46
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
malformation disappears with maturation of the skeleton.
Radiographic changes are evident in all true joints of the
The long bones develop to a more or less normal density with
spine and lower limbs. Splayed phalanges are commonly
increasing age and puberty. Deformities of the spine and
recognized. Affected joints have changes consistent with
 thorax are often present, and may be so serious that, even
ankylosing polyarthropathy, with smoothly marginated and
 after recovery from the skeletal disease, the life of the cat may
be impaired (10).
around the carpal and tarsal bones. This bone growth leads
 In one report (10), affected cats did not respond to calcium
to ankylosis in more severely affected joints. Signs of new
or to vitamin therapies. The prevention of trauma is the most
bone formation may also be evident in soft tissues adjacent
important measure, at least until the skeleton is suffciently
to joints, particularly at sites of ligamentous attachment to
mineralized. A severe form of an osteogenesis imperfecta-like
the bone. In cats with a short thick tail, the vertebrae are
 syndrome was reported in a 12-week-old kitten (11). In spite
shorter and wider than normal and in severe cases an ossify-
of prolonged cage rest there were multiple spontaneous frac-
 ing bridge may ankylose several caudal vertebrae (15).
tures that subsequently necessitated euthanasia.
 Because the underlying disease is a genetic defect, therapy
 mainly aims at reducing the clinical signs and accompanying
3.1.3 Osteochondrodysplasia in the Scottish
pain. Lameness and discomfort were reduced in some cats
with the subcutaneous application of pentosan polysulfates
Fold cat
or oral complex GAGs (14). Surgical approaches, which
The Scottish Fold is a purebred cat that originated in
resolved lameness, included removal of the tarsal exostoses
Scotland from the mating of a queen, affected with a spon-
(16) or staged bilateral ostectomies and pantarsal arthrodesis
taneous mutation, to local farm cats and British Shorthairs
of both hocks (17).
(12). Years earlier it was assumed that heterozygous cats
Recently, a novel therapeutic approach was described using
have no skeletal changes, other than the folded ears, and that
palliative radiation therapy in a Scottish Fold cat (18). The 
only homozygous cats develop progressive skeletal changes.
cat had grossly thickened tarsi due to severe bilateral exos-
Today it is accepted that the folded ear is an outward
toses on the plantar aspect of the tarsus and metatarsus
sign of generalized defective cartilage formation. The Rex
(Fig. 3-5). To decrease new bone formation, which eventually
Fold cat, which is a cross between the Devon Rex and
would lead to reactive inflammation and progressive ankylo-
Scottish Fold, is also affected by this osteochondrodysplasia
sing arthopathy, radiotherapy was initiated as a palliative
(13). The mutation affects both bone growth and the
treatment. The cat was irradiated in six fractions of 1.5 Gy
formation of articular cartilage. Therefore, all Scottish Fold
each over 2 weeks. The cat experienced no side-effects of
cats suffer from osteochondrodysplasia to some degree
radiation therapy, and within 1 month it had no ambulatory
(14).
 problems and was again able to climb trees. No further signs
During growth, a disturbed osteochondral ossification
of bony proliferation were visible on radiographs taken 28
leads to abnormal longitudinal growth of the skeleton, and
months after therapy (18) (Fig. 3-6). Although the result of
in turn to shortened metatarsal and metacarpal bones and
palliative radiotherapy was quite promising in this particular
shorter and wider vertebrae of the proximal tail (14). In
Scottish Fold cat, the continuation of this breed should be
severe cases the extremities become deformed. The affected
discouraged; the breed is already banned in the UK. Cats
joints are abnormally stressed, resulting in degenerative joint
heterozygous for the folded-ear gene will also become affected
disease and periarticular new bone formation at sites of liga-
by osteochondrodysplasia at some stage during their life
mentous attachment to bone and joint capsules. This bone
(14).
formation eventually leads to tarsometatarsal and intertarsal
ankylosis (14}.
3.1.4 Hypothyroidism
There is considerable variation in the age of clinical mani-
festation, the severity of changes, and the rate of progression
Congenital hypothyroidism leads to abnormal  skeletal
of osteochondrodysplasia in cats. Onset of clinical signs
development. The effect of thyroid hormone on bone - more
occurs between 5 months and 6 years of age (14). The affected
specifically on chondrocytes - is complex. Thyroid hormone
cats show varying signs of skeletal disease, which may include
displays a dual role in these tissues: it exerts anabolic as well
lameness, reluctance to jump, or a stiff and stilted gait. Gait
as catabolic effects. While thyroid hormone promotes linear
problems mainly originate from the tarsometatarsal and car-
growth, it is equally important for bone remodeling, a process
pometacarpal joints, with the hind legs always being more
indispensable for normal bone maturation. During bone
severely affected. The joints have a reduced mobility and
exostoses are often palpable. The tail can be shortened and
which is needed for normal bone formation. The catabolic
thickened in the proximal area.
activity of thyroid hormone may actually outstrip the ana-
3: Hereditary and congenital musculoskeletal diseases
47
Figure 3-6. Radiograph of the right tarsus of the cat shown in
Figure 3-5 28 months after radiation therapy. There are no signs of
Figure 3-5. Mediolateral radiograph of the right tarsus of a cat with
further bone proliferation. The exostoses have smooth surfaces and a
osteochondrodysplasia. New bone proliferation and osteophytes are
less opaque, but more homogeneous, structure. The talocrural joint
present on the dorsal aspect of the tarsus, extending from the
space is narrowed and the proximal intertarsal joint is nearly fused.
proximal talus to the proximal metatarsus. (Reproduced from Hubler M,
Volkert M, Kaser-Hotz B et al. Palliative irradiation of Scottish Fold 
eseeiaosen pue eseaui lers aut ie aado isoe si sisou
joints. (Reproduced from Hubler M, Volkert M, Kaser-Hotz B et al.
osteochondrodysplasia. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2004;45:1-4, with
Palliative iradiation of Scottish Fold osteochondrodysplasiaVet Radiol
permission from Veterinary Radiology ano Uftrasouno.)
Ultrasound 2004;45:1-4, with permission from Veterinary Radfiofogy
ano Uitrasouno.)
 bolic activity it exerts on cartilage. Hypothyroidism during
development, therefore, may cause both dwarfsm and defec-
to TSH, the thyroid gland was hypoplastic. In both breeds
tive bone maturation. The diagnosis of congenital hypothy-
the mutations were fransmitted in an autosomal-recessive
roidismis based on basal total thyroxine, total triiodothyronine
manner.
and free thyroxine and the result of thyrotropin-releasing
 Marked epiphyseal dysgenesis is seen on radiographs in
hormone and thyrotropin-stimulating hormone stimulation
 feline hypothyroidism. Long bones are typically shorter and
tests (19, 20).
wider than normal, with metaphyseal flaring, especially
 Only a few sporadic cases of hypothyroidism in the cat are
noticeable in the femur and sometimes with virtual absence
reported (21, 22). Familial occurrences are known in Japa-
 of the ossifcation center in the distal femoral epiphysis (21).
nese (19) and Abyssinian (20) cats. The frst clinical sign of
 The vertebral bodies are malformed with a caudal beaking.
hypothyroidism is the stumpy shape, seen even before the
Occasionally, the vertebral bodies are shortened and the end
retarded growth becormes obvious at the age of 3-4 weeks.
plates absent (21).
 Affected cats are characterized by a disproportionate dwarf-
 Based on the radiographic findings, in particular the verte-
 ism with a broad head, short neck and limbs, lethargy, mental
bral changes, storage diseases must also be considered as a
dullness, juvenile hair coat, and hypothermia. Constipation
differential diagnosis. MPS type VI and VIl, mucolipidosis,
was the cause for presentation in most affected kittens (23).
pduosne aq ru sisopisouu-ude susuos pue
In the Abyssinians (20), the hypothyroidism was due to
by dwarfism (24). Cats affected by these storage diseases
abnormal or absent hormone production and the thyroid
show no clinical signs until the age of 2-4 months (4). Clini-
gland was also enlarged. In contrast, in Japanese cats (19),
cal symptoms include growth retardation, corneal clouding
in which the hypothyroidism was due to a reduced response
(MPS VI and VII), and locomotion problems. Although
48
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
neurological signs are present in these storage diseases,
physis are unable to penetrate the cartilage. Epiphyseal lines
mental dullness is not a clinical feature. In MPS diseases
become thickened and irregular. In adults, osteomalacia
granulation of the neutrophils and urinary excretion of GAGs
occurs as vitamin D is needed for osteoclasts and osteocytes
are typical fndings (4). Both are absent in congenital
pue (auounouered) auounou pionkuered on puodsan o
hypothyroidism.
allow bone resorption. The metabolic pathway for vitamin
D is illustrated in Figure 3-7.
3.1.5 Hereditary rickets
The main clinical features are disturbance of longitudinal
 growth of long bones, and skeletal demineralization. Affected
Rickets is a very rare disease, caused by chronic dietary def-
animals are often young (less than 6 months), severely
ciency of vitamin D or hereditary abnormalities. The dietary
stunted, bowlegged, and plantigrade. Metaphyseal areas
form is discussed in Chapter 4. Hereditary rickets in cats
 and costochondral junctions (the so-called rachitic rosary)
is either secondary to a defect in the vitamin D pathway
are
prominent. Signs can also be atributable to the
(vitamin D-dependent rickets type 1, VDDR-1), the vitamin
systemic effects of hypocalcemia rather than the effects
D receptors (VDDR-2), or renal tubular reabsorption of
on bone. Thus, muscle weakness, tremors or seizures, vomit-
phosphate (25-28). Summaries of the different forms are
ing, diarrhea and mydriasis, may be the predominant features
listed in Table 3-4.
(26).
 Inadequate levels of active vitamin D result in reduction of
 Radiographically, the growth plates appear widened or cup
absorption of phosphorus and calcium from the intestine,
shaped, due to the accumulation of cartilage at the epiphyses,
and prevent mineralization of newly formed osteoid. The
and the metaphyses are irregularly mineralized (Fig. 3-8).
osteoid is highly stable and therefore uncalcifiable and dif-
 Bone deformation and osteoporosis may also occur and, in
fcult to resorb. In the young animal this results in cartilage
adults, the bones can appear osteopenic and folding fractures
cells that fail to degenerate and capillaries from the meta-
may be present (25).
Type of rickets
Laboratory analysis
Treatment
 References
Nutritional
Low 1,25(OH),D
 Balanced diet,
Vitamin D deficiency
 Hypophosphatemia and/or
exposure to
diet defcient in vitamin
hypocalcemia
sunlight
D, calcium, and/or
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
phosphate
Hereditary
Hypophosphatemia
Calcifediol
Henik et al. (1999) (25)
X-linked
 High urinary fractional
 Phosphate salts
hypophosphatemic
clearance of P
rickets
Normocalcemia
defect in renal tubular
Normal 25(OH)D;*(high 125)
reabsorption of
Normal to low 1,25(OH),D3
phosphate
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
Vitamin D-dependent
Very low 1,25(OH),D
Calcitriol
rickets type 1 (VDDR-1)
Hypocalcemia
supplementation
defect in calcitriol
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
production
Vitamin D-dependent
Normal 25(OH)D;
 Oral calcium
 Schreiner and Nagode
rickets type 2 (VDDR-2)
Elevated 1,25(OH),D
supplementation
(2003) (26)
impaired responsiveness
Hypocalcemia
Additional calcitriol,
Godfrey et al. (2005) (27)
of target organs to
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
analgesics
Tanner and Langley-Hobbs
 calcitriol because of
(2005) (28)
defects in vitamin D
receptors
Table 3-4. Summary of the different forms of rickets in cats
3: Hereditary and congenital musculoskeletal diseases
49
7-Dehydrocholecalciferol
ou p  uia jo so snona pun uoinddns
normalize the plasma calcium levels or reverse skeletal lesions.
Ultraviolet ight (SKIN)
Schreiner and Nagode (26) were successful in their treatment
 of a VDDR-2 kitten by effectively doubling the recormmended
Vitamin D; (cholecalciferol)
+
DIET
dosage of calcium together with a high dosage of calciriol
S sioidasan ( ue a aeisiadns on (ayau 0s)
Vitamin D-25-hydroxylase (LIVER)
kitten had no skeletal changes and a milder form of VDDR-2
and it was able to maintain serum calcium concentrations
25-OH-D, (circulating form)
within reference limits even when therapy was withdrawn at
maturity.
25-OH-D-1αhydroxylase (KIDNEY)
3.2 Congenital skeletal malformations
1,25-(OH)-Ds (caleitriol - active form)
Increases absorption of calcium from intestine
The term congenital means a defect present at birth. For the
Increases Ca & P retention in kidney
 Important for normal bone mineralization
 breeder it is of interest to know if it is a congenital hereditary
Figure 3-7. The metabolic pathway of vitamin D.
defect, or if teratogenic substances caused the deformity. In
d oq o ao sas  ard e jo as a
should be excluded from breeding. Although many congeni-
tal defects are thought to be hereditary, some of them may
also occur as a developmental defect or be triggered by a
teratogenic substance during pregnancy. Often it is very dif-
ficult or almost impossible to establish an etiological diagno-
sis, for example in cleft palate. This can be a congenital defect
 that is hereditary, but it can also be a developmental defect,
and it can be caused by griseofulvin treatment during preg-
nancy (29). The most frequent congenital defects are described
in the following sections.
Dwarfism in cats is a rarely occurring disease with an
autosomal-recessive heredity (30). Associated abnormalities
include ascites, visceromegaly (liver, spleen, lymph nodes),
and hepatic storage disease (31). Such cats die between 1 and
4 months of age.
Schistosoma is a rare lethal malformation that is character-
ized by a fissure of the abdomen, visceral herniation, and
malformation or absence of the pelvic limbs (32). This devel-
opmental anomaly often causes dystocia (Fig. 3-9).
Siamese or conjoined twins is a rare malformation which
is due to an incomplete splitting of the zygote during the early
stages of pregnancy. Generally, the condition is named
Figure 3-8. Ventrodorsal pelvic radiograph of a 4-month-old cat with
according to the sites of non-separation, i.e., thoracopagus if
itamin D-dependent rickets type 2 (VDDR-2). There are characteristic
adhered at the chest, cephalopagus at the head, etc. As with
radiographic changes, including generalized osteopenia, widened, cup-
Schistosoma kittens, dystocias are common in queens with
shaped epiphyses in the proximal and distal femur and proximal tibia,
conjoined twins.
and stippled metaphyses.
3.2.1 Skull
Diagnosis of hereditary rickets is supported by elevations
or decreases in vitamin D, parathormone, calcium, and phos-
Cleft palate is one of the most common defects. Defects of
phorus levels in blood. Table 3-4 summarizes the changes 
 the lip and premaxilla are called a primary cleft palate, or 
seen with the different hereditary forms of rickets.
harelip. Incomplete closure of the hard and soft palates is
In the two cases in the literature with VDDR-2 and char-
 called a secondary cleft palate (Fig. 3-10). Surgery is needed
acteristic skeletal changes (27, 28), treatment with calcium 
 in secondary cleft palates and large primary cleft palates to
50
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
A
B
 Figure 3-9. (A) Macroscopic and (B) radiographic appearance of a newborn kitten with Schistosoma reffexum.
A
Figure 3-10. Two examples of cats with cleft palates.
(A) A 2-day-old kitten with a large secondary cleft palate. The kitten was euthanized
(B) A 4-month-old cat with a primary cleft palate, or harelip. The lesion was not treated, as the cat did not exhibit significant clinical problems
 restore the nasal floor in order to prevent aspiration pneu-
missing eye sockets and a cleft replacing the nostrils. Exten-
monia. Surgery is usually delayed until the patients are at
sive hemorrhage and compression of the remaining brain in
least 2 months old. Cleft palate is hereditary in the Siamese
the skull are also present (32).
breed. Based on the frequency of anomalous kittens among
Brachycephaly results from a shortening of the maxilla and
10 litters an autosomal-recessive mode of inheritance was
 mandible and is characteristic of the Persian and Himalayan
assumed (32). Cleft palate can also occur after treatment with
 breeds. The condition is also called dish face and predisposes 
vitamin A or griseofulvin during pregnancy (32).
to respiratory, pharyngeal, and ocular disease (30).
Meningoencephalocele is herniation of the cerebrum
Facial dysmorphism includes frontal bossing, depression of
through an opening in the skull. It is perinatally lethal, as it
 the nasal bridge, a short broad muzzle, and hypertelorism
is usually associated with other severe malformations such as
(excessive distance between the eyes). This is a common
3: Hereditary and congenital musculoskeletal diseases
51
 of the vertebral arches can be seen under a thin layer of epaxial fascia
Figure 3-11. The thorax of the body of a domestic short-hair kitten
and muscle. (Courtesy of F. Steffen.)
with pectus excavatum. The marked depression of the sternum and the
deformation of the rib cage resulted in clinically significant compression
of the heart and the lung lobes.
 of abnormal closure is called spina bifda, which was described
in a large number of kittens. The disorder is most common
feature of some storage diseases (MPS and mucolipidosis
in the lumbar spine (Fig. 3-12). The defect is sometimes
associated with protrusion of the spinal cord or meninges
type II).
Craniofacial anomaly in the Burmese is an autosomal-
and/or spinal cord dysplasia. Depending on the severity, the
dominant malformation with variable expression depending
defect may be surgically corrected. Spina bifida is most
on modifying genes. This condition is characterized by exen-
common in Manx cats, which have a genetic anomaly of the
cephaly (a neural tube defect where the skull is incompletely
spinal cord (see later) (32). A double dorsal spinous process
 can be seen on radiography in some cases.
fused, causing exposure or extrusion of the brain), lack of
 eyes or nose, mild to severe hydrocephalus, and a severely
Vertebral body anomalies are common in cats and are
protruding jaw. Some affected individuals also exhibit a
usually of no clinical significance. The most common anomaly
double set of whisker pads, cleft palate, and rotated pinnae
is the presence of a 14th thoracic, or transitional vertebrae.
(32).
Although incomplete or fused vertebrae can be found any-
where throughout the spine, most are located in the thoracic
3.2.2 Thorax
and coccygeal spine (32).
Incomplete or fused vertebrae of the coccygeal spine may
 Pectus excavatum is a complete or partial depression of the
lead to a kinked tail. This deformity has to be differentiated
sternum with an associated flattening of the chest, resulting
from the hereditary form of the kinked tail, in which the
in a reduction in the diameter of the thoracic cavity (Fig.
 vertebrae are normal, but an angular deformity is present at
3-11). Siamese, Burmese, and related breeds are predisposed.
the intervertebral joint, namely at the connection of the
The malformation can cause respiratory disease and com-
 annulus fibrosus to the bodies of the vertebrae. The defect is
pression of the heart, which can be life-threatening in severely
usually towards the end of the tail, but may be at any point.
 affected kittens (29). Kittens with severe chest compression
Corrective surgery is often ineffective (34). The kinked tail in
can be treated with traction sutures and casts (33). Mildly
Siamese cats is an anomaly with an autosomal-recessive mode
affected kittens often grow out of the condition.
of inheritance. In the same breed, an inherited shortening of
 Pectus excavatum has to be differentiated from the flat-
the tail has also been described (32).
chested kitten, or “swimmer” syndrome, where the dorsoven-
Absence of the tail is the primary characteristic of the
tral flattening of the chest is secondary to the transient
Manx breed. The Manx gene is autosomal-dominant with
inability to walk.
incomplete penetrance (35). This means that a dominant
 gene, along with modifying genes, is responsible for variable
tail length. The various tail types are generally classifed into
3.2.3 Spine
four groups: (1) no coccygeal vertebrae (rumpy); (2) several
Spinal dysraphism involves the failure of closure of part of
 coccygeal vertebrae in upright position (rumpy-riser); or
the neural tube forming the vertebral canal. A milder form
 several coccygeal vertebrae with (3) a severe kink (stumpy),
52
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
and (4) a normal-appearing tail (longy). Additional defects in
Bilateral patellar aplasia has been described in two Siamese
some heterozygous Manx cats may affect the whole spine to
cat littermates (43). The condition was associated with defor-
some degree, but the major changes occur in the caudal part.
mity of the distal femur, the tibia and fibula, and the tail. The
These include small, deformed, fused vertebrae reduced in
cats showed gait abnormalities, but were able to move around
number in the thoracic, lumbar sacral, and coccygeal region.
the house.
 In mild cases a stilted walk or hopping is apparent. In severe
o    p pe r s
 References and further reading
"(ze) onain u ap uonenu aui roj snohzouoq sua
 See Chapter 6 for additional information on congenital
1.
Cummings JF, et al. The clinical and pathologic heterogeneity
 spinal abnormalities.
of feline alpha-mannosidosis. J Vet Int Med 1988;2:163-170.
2.
Vandevelde M, et al. Hereditary neurovisceral mannosidosis
associated with alpha-mannosidase deficiency in a family of
3.2.4 Extremities
Persian cats. Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 1982;58:64-68.
3.Blakemore WF. A case of mannosidosis in the cat: clinical
Agenesis of all or part of the digit (ectrodactyly) is an inher-
and histopathological findings. J Small Anim Pract 1986;27:
ited malformation affecting the forepaws. Polydactyly (extra
447-455.
toes) is caused by a dominant gene with variable expressivity.
4.
Thrall MA. Mucopolysaccharidosis. In: August JR (ed.) Consul-
tations in feline internal medicine 4. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;
It occurs predominantly in the forelimb. Amputation of
2001: p. 450-459.
extra digits is sometimes indicated if secondary complica-
5.
Haskins M, et al. Animal models for mucopolysaccharidoses
tions occur, such as recurrent interdigital infections or trau-
and their clinical relevance. Acta Paediatr Suppl 2002;439:
88-97.
matic injuries. Syndactyly is the term for fusion of toes.
6.
Gitzelmann R, et al. Feline mucopolysaccharidosis Vll due
Paw changes in syndactyle cats can include abnormal or
to beta-glucuronidase deficiency. Vet Pathol 1994;31:435-
absent digits, abnormal shape, fusion or absence of digital
443.
pads, and abnormal shape or fusion of nails. Radiographic
7.
 Hubler M, et al. Mucolipidosis type II in a domestic shorthair
changes can include complete or incomplete fusion of pha-
cat. J Small Anim Pract 1996;37:435-441.
8.
Mazrier H, et al. Inheritance, biochemical abnormalities, and
langes and metatarsal or metacarpal bones. Feline complex
clinical features of feline mucolipidosis I: the first animal model
syndactyly causes minimal to no discomfort and reported
of human I-cell disease. J Hered 2003;94:363-373.
patients affected with this condition have presented without
9.
Crawley AC, et al. Two mutations within a feline mucopolysac-
lameness (36). In the “kangaroo cat" the development of the
charidosis type VI colony cause three different clinical pheno-
types. J Clin Invest 1998;101:109-119.
long bone of the forelimbs is arrested, resulting in a forelimb
10. Gehring H. Osteogenesis imperfecta bei der Katze. Kleintier-
micromelia. A female cat with micromelia has been described
praxis 1975;20:225-231.
(37). Because some of the queen's progeny also had the
11. Cohn LA, Meuten DJ. Bone fragility in a kitten: an osteogenesis
deformity, a genetic trait was suspected. Amelia is lack of all
imperfecta-like syndrome. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990;197:
98-100.
limbs. Peromelus ascelsus is agenesis of the pelvic limbs
12. Jackson OF. Congenital bone lesions in cats with fold-ears. Bull
only.
Fel Advis Bur 1975;14:2-4.
Two cases of bilateral congenital elbow luxation have been
13. Schrey C, Gerlach KF. Osteochondrodysplasie bei Pudelkatzen
described in cats (38, 39). Affected cats can have good clinical
(Rex Fold). Kleintierpraxis 2002;47:433-435.
14. Malik R, et al. Osteochondrodysplasia in Scottish Fold cats.
limb function, and can then be treated conservatively. Surgi-
Aust Vet J 1999;77:85-92.
cal treatment is conducted if the lesion causes significant
15. Allan GS. Radiographic features of feline joint diseases. Vet Clin
clinical problems. Arthrodesis of the elbow could be consid.
North Am Pract 2000;30:281-302.
ered. See also Chapter 30.
16. Simon D. Osteochondrodysplasie bei einer Scottish-Fold Katze.
Tierarztl Prax 2000;28:107-110.
Radial bemimelia is agenesis of the radius. Bilateral agene-
17. Mathews KG, et al. Resolution of lameness associated with
sis of the radius has been described in a Devon Rex cat
Scottish Fold osteodystrophy following bilateral ostectomies
(40).
and pantarsal arthodesis: a case report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Carpal agenesis of the right leg has been recently reported
1995;31:280-288.
in a domestic short hair cat (41). Good leg function was
18. Hubler M, et al. Palliative irradiation of Scottish Fold osteo-
chondrodysplasia. Vet Radiol Utrasound 2004;45:1-4.
achieved with pancarpal arthrodesis.
19. Tanase H, et al. Inherited primary hypothyroidism with thyro-
Proximal femoral dysplasia was recently described in two
trophin resistance in Japanese cats. J Endocrinol 1991;129:
cats (42). One cat had bilateral agenesis of the fermoral head
245-251.
and neck with hypoplasia of the acetabulum. The other cat
20. Jones BR, et al. Preliminary studies on congenital hypothyroi-
dism in a family of Abyssinian cats. Vet Rec 1992;15:145-
had unilateral hypoplasia of the femoral neck and a grossly
148.
deformed femoral head. Treatment consisted of femoral head
21.
 Arnold U, et al. Goitrous hypothyroidism and dwarfism in a
 and neck excision if lameness was present.
kitten. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1984;20:753-758.
3: Hereditary and congenital musculoskeletal diseases 
53
22. Peterson ME. Feline hypothyroidism. In: Kirk RW (ed.) Current
32. Robinson R, Pedersen NC. Normal genetics, genetic disorders,
veterinary therapy X. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1989: pp.
developmental anomalies and breeding programs. In: Pedersen
1000-1001.
 NC (ed.) Feline husbandry. Diseases and management in the
23. Jezyk PF. Constitutional disorders of the skeleton in dogs and
muliple-cat environment. Goleta, CA: American Veterinary
cats. In: Newton CD, Nunamaker DM (eds) Textbook of small
Publications; 1991: pp. 61-129.
animal orthopaedics. Philadelphia: Lippincott; 1985: pp.
33.
Shires PK, et al. Pectus excavatum in three kittens. J Am Anim
637-654.
Hosp Assoc 1988;24:203.
24. Haskins ME, Patterson DF. Inherited metabolic diseases. In:
34. Saperstein G, et al. Congenital defects in domestic cats. Feline
Holzworth J (ed.) Diseases of the cat: medicine and surgery.
Pract 1976;6:18-43.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1987: pp. 808-820.
35. Wastlhuber J. History of domestic cats and cat breeds. In: Ped-
25. Henik RA, et al. Rickets caused by excessive renal phosphate
ersen NC (ed.) Feline husbandry. Diseases and management in
loss and apparent abnormal vitamin D metabolism in a cat. J
the multiple-cat environment. Goleta, CA: American Veterinary
Am Vet Med Assoc 1999;215:1644-1649.
Publications; 1991: pp. 1-61.
26. Schreiner CA, Nagode LA. Vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2
36. Towle HA, et al. Symdactyly in a litter of cats. J Small Anim
in a four-month-old cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;222:
Pract 2007;48:292-296.
337-339.
 37. William-Jones BG. Arrested development of the long bones in a
27. Godfrey DR, et al. Vitamin D-dependent rickets type II in a cat.
female cat. Vet Rec 1944;56:449.
J Small Anim Pract 2005;46:440-444.
38. Rossi F, et al. Bilateral elbow malformation in a cat caused by
28. Tanner E, Langley-Hobbs SJ. Vitamin D-dependent rickets type
radio-ulnar synostosis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2003;44:283-
2 with characteristic radiographic changes in a 4-month-old
286.
kitten. J Feline Med Surg 2005;7:307-311.
 39. Valastro C, et al. Congenital elbow subluxation in a cat. Vet
29. Willoughby K. Paediatrics :
and
1 inherited diseases.
In:
Radiol Ultrasound 2005;46:63-64.
Chandler EA, Gaskell CJ, Gaskell RM (eds) Feline medicine
40. O'Brien CR, et al. What is your diagnosis? Bilateral forelimb
and therapeutics, 3rd edn. Oxford: Blackwell; 2004: pp.
deformity and abnormal gait in a young Devon Rex. J Feline
355-379.
Med Surg 2004;4:112-113.
30. Bennett D. The muculoskeletal system. In: Chandler EA, Gaskell
41. Gemmill TJ, et al. Carpal agenesis in a domestic short haired
CJ, Gaskell RM (eds) Feline medicine and therapeutics, 3rd edn.
cat. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2004;17:163-170.
Oxford: Blackwell; 2004: pp. 173-233.
42. Isola MB, et al. Radiographic features of two cases of feline
31. Schrader SC, Sherding RG. Disorders of the skeletal system.
proximal
femoral dysplasia. J Small Anim Pract 2005;46:
In:
Sherding RG (ed.) The cat:
：diseases
and
clinical
597-599.
management, vol. 2. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 1989:
43. Milovancev M, Ralphs SC. Congenital patellar aplasia in a
pp. 1247-1292.
family of cats. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2004;17:9-11.
55
1
Diseases of bone
K. Voss
Normal bone undergoes constant remodeling with a physio-
Localized bone disease is rare in cats, with the exception
logical balance between new bone formation and bone
of neoplasia. Bone cysts, osteomyelitis, and disease of the
bone of the femoral head and neck are examples of localized
formation of new bone, whereas osteoclasts dissolve mineral-
bone disease. Feline bone diseases are summarized in Table
ized bone substance. Bone remodeling is closely related to
4-2.
calcium homeostasis because bone is an important calcium
reservoir. The activity of osteoblasts and osteoclasts is
4.1 Secondary hyperparathyroidism
hormone-dependent. These hormones in turn respond to
 changes in serum calcium and phosphate levels. Important
Secondary hyperparathyroidism occurs when there is chronic
hormones participating in calcium homeostasis and bone
elevation of PTH in response to changes in serum calcium
remodeling are parathormone (PTH), vitamin D metabolites,
 and phosphorus levels. Serum hypocalcemia and hyperphos-
and calcitonin (Table 4-1).
phatemia induce PTH secretion. Hyperphosphatemia does
Chronic changes in hormone activity cause generalized
i ss ker iq r H ie  o
 bone disease. Nutritional and renal secondary hyperparathy-
 concentration by the interaction of calcium and phosphorus
 roidism are the most common forms of clinically apparent
 in the serum. Chronic elevation of PTH results in generalized
acquired bone disease in cats. Other hormones, such as
 osteoporosis due to absorption of calcium from bone (Table
4-1). Two clinical entities have been described: nutritional
have a direct or indirect effect on calcium homeostasis and
hyperparathyroidism and renal hyperparathyroidism. Nutri-
bone metabolism. Hyperthyroidism has been associated with
Sunon u kuanba isou sinono wsipioiaqeredradau peuon
decreases in ionized calcium, hyperphosphatemia, and eleva-
cats secondary to inadequate dietary calcium intake, whereas
tion of serum PTH in up to 75% of cats in one study (1).
renal hyperparathyroidism is a disease of older cats second-
The combined resorptive effects of thyroid hormone and
ary to chronic increase of serum phosphorus concentration
PTH may reduce bone strength in these cats. Although the
 and relative hypocalcemia in cats with renal insufficiency.
degree of osteoporosis does not seem to cause clinical disease,
reduced bone strength should be expected in fracture repair
4.1.1 Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism
of hyperthyroid cats. Sex hormones are important due to
their effect on physeal closure and bone growth. Chronic
Diets low in calcium and high in phosphorus cause a chroni-
 vitamin D-deficiency and hypervitaminosis A also result in
cally low to normal serum calcium concentration. All-meat
 generalized skeletal abnormalities.
 diets have an unfavorable calcium and phosphorus content,
Organs
Parathormone
Vitamin D metabolites
Calcitonin
Kidney
Increases calcium reabsorption
Increases phosphate excretion
 Enhances synthesis of active vitamin D
Intestine
Increases calcium absorption
Increases calcium absorption
Bone
Enhances production and activity of
Enhances sensitivity of osteoclasts
Reduces activity of
osteoclasts
to parathormone
osteoclasts
Overall effect
 Releases calcium from bone
 Stimulates release of calcium
 Reduces absorption of
 on bone
Osteoporosis
 from bone
calcium from bone
Osteoporosis
Table 4-1. Effects of parathormone, vitamin D, and calcitonin on calcium homeostasis and bone remodeling
56
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
Disease group
Diseases
Inherited
Storage diseases
(Chapter 3)
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Osteochondrodysplasia in the Scottish
Fold cat
Hypothyroidism
Hereditary rickets
Congenital
Several skeletal malformations described
(Chapter 3)
Figure 4.1 Laterolateral radiograph of a 3-month-old male domestic
Nutritional hyperparathyroidism
short-hair cat with nutritional hyperparathyroidism. The cat was fed
Nutritional
Vitamin D deficiency (rickets)
with a meat-only diet. There is generalized osteopenia and
demineralization of the whole skeleton and the cortices of the femurs
Hypervitaminosis A
and tibias are thin. A pathological folding fracture is visible in the
Metabolic
 Renal hyperparathyroidism
proximal metaphysis of the femur.
Miscellaneous
Cartilaginous exostoses
 Hypertrophic osteopathy
Bone cysts
Spontaneous femoral capital physeal
suspected in cats or kittens with the signs described above, a
fracture and femoral neck
history of an inappropriate diet, and the typical radiographi-
metaphyseal osteopathy (Chapter 36)
cal features. Total serum calcium is typically mildly reduced
Infectious
 Hematogenous osteomyelitis
(2). Measurement of ionized calcium should be performed if
Neoplastic
Primary bone tumor
available. Elevated PTH serum levels confrm the diagnosis.
(Chapter 8)  Metastatic bone tumor
Serum PTH was markedly elevated in five of six cats with
nutritional hyperparathyroidism in one study (2). Other
Table 4-2. Bone diseases in cats
common laboratory abnormalities include elevation of cal-
citriol and alkaline phosphatase.
Therapy consists of changing the diet to a high-quality
commercial cat food, containing a balanced calcium:phos-
jeau aupey Aq donaaap osle Aeu usipiorauieiediadky inq
phorus ratio. Dietary correction results in rapid normaliza-
and rice or meat and vegetable diets (2). We have also
tion of serum PTH levels, and normalized mineralization of
observed mild clinical disease in cats fed a commercial diet
bone occurs within 4-8 weeks (4). Cats need to be confined
 from a non-scientifc cat food supplier. Hypocalcemia causes
 pd   d     
an increase in PTH secretion and activation of vitamin D
Pathological fractures of long bones often involve the metaphy-
(calcitriol) in the kidneys. Both substances lead to calcium
seal regions and are not significantly displaced. They gener-
 mobilization from bone. Intestinal calcium absorption and
ally heal readily with an appropriate diet and cage rest alone.
 renal reabsorption are also enhanced. In very young cats it
Surgical stabilization should be considered with severe frac-
takes weeks, in older cats months, before clinically relevant
 ture displacement or limb malalignment. Adequate implants,
osteoporosis occurs (3).
such as pins or internal or external fixators, must be used to
 Initial clinical signs are inactivity, apathy, and generalized
stabilize the osteoporotic bone (Chapter 13). Surgical stabi-
pain. Cats may also be presented with acute lameness or
lization or corrective osteotomies can also be performed later
in the treatment after establishment of more normal bone
 fractures. Seizures, excitation, and muscle twitching, proba-
mineralization. Prognosis for cats with pathological spinal
bly as a result of hypocalcemia, have also been described (2).
fractures depends on the degree of spinal cord compression,
Radiological features include generalized osteopenia, demin-
but is usually unfavorable.
eralization of the long bones and vertebrae, thinned cortices,
and a widened medullary canal (Fig. 4-1). Pathological frac-
4.1.2 Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism
tures commonly occur in cancellous bone, such as the
metaphysis of the tibia or femur or humerus, and the verte-
Chronic renal failure is often associated with renal secondary
brae (2). The fractures tend to be minimally displaced and
hyperparathyroidism. Elevated serum PTH concentration
are also called compression or folding fractures. Additionally,
was present in 84% of cats with chronic renal failure in one
deformation of the long bones, vertebral column, or the
study (5). Renal phosphorus retention, resulting in increased
pelvis might be encountered.
serum phosphorus concentration and a subsequent relative
4: Diseases of bone
57
4.2 Vitamin D deficiency (rickets)
Rickets is a very rare disease, caused by chronic dietary def-
ciency of vitamin D, or a hereditary defect in the vitamin D
pathway or the vitamin D receptors, or renal tubular reab-
sorption of phosphate. Hereditary rickets is described in
Chapter 3.
Cats do not synthesize cholecalciferol (pre-vitamin Ds) in
their skin when exposed to sunlight, and therefore depend on
dietary intake. Lean meat and vegetables contain low levels
of vitamin D. Inadequate levels of active vitamin D result in
reduction of absorption of phosphorus and calcium from the
intestine, and prevent mineralization of newly formed osteoid.
The main clinical features are disturbance of longitudinal
growth of long bones, and skeletal demineralization. Radio-
graphically, the growth plates appear widened and the
metaphysis irregularly mineralized (10). Bone deformation
and osteoporosis may also occur. Pathological fractures are
rare. The diagnosis of nutritional rickets is supported if
Figure 4.2 Radiograph of the skull of a 16-year-old cat with renal
25(OH)-vitamin D and calcitriol serum levels are markedly
hyperparathyroidism. Marked osteopenia of the bones of the skull is
reduced. Therapy consists of dietary supplementation of
visible. Osteopenia of the alveolar bone results in a "floating teeth"
vitamin D and optimization of dietary calcium and phospho-
appear ance.
 rus intake. Skeletal mineralization and appearance of metaphy-
ses improve within 3 weeks (6).
decrease in ionized calcium concentration, plays an impor-
4.3 Hypervitaminosis A
(5). Despite the presence of elevated serum PTH levels, most
affected cats have low to normal calcium levels. Possible
Hypervitaminosis A is a metabolic disorder caused by chronic
causes are reduction of active vitamin D production,
excessive dietary vitamin A uptake over several months or
and reduction of calcium reabsorption in the diseased
 years. Clinical disease has been observed both after feeding
kidneys (6).
a diet rich in the liposoluble vitamin A, such as raw liver or
Chronic renal hyperparathyroidism results in osteoporosis
fish, and after supplementation of a normal diet with vitamin
and metastatic calcium deposition in soft tisues (Chapter 8).
A drops. The exact mechanisms of vitamin A toxicity on the
The majority of cats with chronic renal failure have histologi-
skeletal system remain unclear but enhanced susceptibility
cal evidence of bone resorption (7). Although the bony
to periosteal trauma, individual predisposition for distur-
changes are usually mild, some cats may exhibit clinical
bances of vitamin A metabolism, and increased lability of
disease, such as bone pain, reluctance to move, osteolytic
membranes of osteoblasts and chondrocytes may play a role
changes, or even pathological fractures (8). The bones of the 
in the pathogenesis (11-13). The main feature of hypervita-
skull are typically predominantly affected (Fig. 4-2).
minosis A is formation of bony exostoses close to joints,
Diagnosis of renal secondary hyperparathyroidism is based
usually near attachment sites of tendons and ligament. The
on laboratory fndings consistent with chronic interstitial
bony proliferations are mainly composed of chondroid tissue,
nephritis, and elevation of serum PTH. Therapy aims at
surrounded by woven bone (11). The cervical spine is the
reducing phosphorus and PTH concentrations. Within 5
classic location, but non-vertebral hypervitaminosis A (Fig.
months of feeding a diet restricted in phosphorus and protein,
4-3) has also been described, with the proximal appendicular
a significant fall in plasma phosphate and PTH concentra-
 joints most commonly affected (11).
tions was observed in cats with stable chronic renal failure
Clinical signs are often frst observed between 2 and 4 years
(9). In cases where phosphorus and PTH levels do not return
of age (3). Depending on the site of skeletal involvement,
to normal, an intestinal phosphate-binding agent should also
clinical signs include lameness, reluctance to move, apathy,
be used. Prognosis depends on maintenance of renal function.
 and weight loss. Hypersensitivity may be present to palpation
nsn 'ssd aseas au un rni 'ds ernn al jo
parathyroidism, but carry a rather unfavorable prognosis due
of cervical and thoracic vertebrae may limit range of neck
to the reduced bone quality.
 motion. Thoracic limb lameness may be due to lesions around
58
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
Figure 4.3 A 15-year-old cat
with hypervitaminosis A.
 secondary to a liver-only diet.
(A) Radiograph of the head,
cervical spine, and thoracic inlet.
The cervical spine is completely
fused ventrally. Also note the
bony exostoses around the
shoulder joints, and the
deformation of the sternebrae.
(B) Also note the massive
periarticular calcifications around
the stifle and hip joint
A
B
the shoulder or elbow joints, or due to entrapment of nerve 
This is referred to as post-traumatic osteomyelitis and is
roots or involvement of the brachial plexus (12). The frst
described in Chapter 13. Cat bite wounds may result in
bony changes can be detected radiographically as early as 10
osteomyelitis but the small skin lesions can be hard to detect,
weeks after induction of the hypervitaminic diet ( 14), although
especially without clipping the hair. Bite wounds should
cats are only usually presented after months of the abnormal
be excluded by history and a thorough search for bite
diet. Initially, smoothly marginated enthesophytes develop in
wounds or scars before hematogenous osteomyelitis is
periarticular locations (14). They gradually grow, and with
suspected.
time, complete ankylosis of affected vertebrae or joints
 Hematogenous osteomyelitis is a rare disease in cats and
occurs.
most often affects the metaphyses of long bones in young
Diagnosis is based on a history of feeding a diet rich in
animals. Umbilical infections, pneumonia, and mastitis of the
vitamin A, and the classic radiological signs. Serum vitamin
queen are possible sources of bacteremia in neonates. The
A concentration may be elevated. Osteochondromas, feline
vascular anatomy of the metaphyseal region in immature
osteochondromatosis, and synovial osteochondromatosis,
animals facilitates hematogenous seeding and lodging of bac-
and bone tumors are differential diagnoses to 
be
teria. Abscesses in the metaphyseal region in children are
considered.
referred to as Brodie's abscesses and staphylococcal species
Treatment consists of feeding a diet free of vitamin A. The
are responsible for the majority of these cases. Metaphyseal
diet can be home-made and includes rice, cooked chicken
 Osteomyelitis has been described in the distal radial metaphy-
 meat, corn oil, and iodinated salt (6). Analgesic therapy may
sis of a young cat (15) (also see Chapter 2, Fig. 2-3). Hema-
improve overall well-being and reduce lameness. Although
togenous spread of bacteria into bone in adult cats rarely
progression of the lesions stops with the appropriate diet,
occurs but can be seen associated with distant infections
stiffness of joints and the spine remains. The clinical condi-
(Fig. 4-4).
tion may be ameliorated in less severely affected cats, but
Affected cats are frequently systemically ill, and lesions can
 prognosis is poor for severely affected cats.
occur in multiple sites (3). Clinical signs include lameness,
and swelling and pain over the area. Radiographs only reveal
4.4 Hematogenous osteomyelitis
soft-tissue swelling for the frst 2 or 3 weeks. Bone lysis and
deformation within the metaphysis and/or epiphysis of long
Bacterial osteomyelitis is most often caused by inoculation of
bones, and periosteal reaction appear later. Fine-needle aspi-
i s  o     
ration of fluctuant areas or bone biopsies should be evaluated
4: Diseases of bone
59
Figure 4.4 Radiographs of a cat
which had suffered thoracic and
abdominal dog bite wounds, and
later developed hematogenous
 osteomyelitis in the tibia.
(A) Emphysema is seen around 
the thorax and the abdominal
wall on the laterolateral
radiographs taken 1 day after the
 bite injury, indicating perforating
bite wounds
(B) The cat was presented 6
weeks later with osteomyelitis in
the tibia. The infection resolved
with antimicrobial therapy.
R
cytologically or histopathologically, and samples should be
istered for at least 2-4 months (17). Successful treatment has
cultured. Staphylococcal and streptococcal species are most 
also been described with amphotericin B and ketoconazole
likely to be isolated, but a Salmonella sp. was found in an
administered for 4-6 months (16).
older Persian cat with hematogenous osteomyelitis in the
proximal tibia and distal radius (3).
4.5 Bone cysts
 Treatment includes antimicrobial therapy, curettage and
drainage of the lesion, and bone grafting of the defect. A
Aneurysmal and solitary bone cysts have been described in
broad-spectrum antibiotic, such as cefazolin or amoxicillin/
clavulanic acid, is administered intravenously initially. Further
histopathology.
antibiotic treatment is selected according to culture and
Aneurysmal bone cysts are benign, locally expanding bone
sensitivity results and must be administered for 4 weeks.
masses, containing numerous blood-filled spaces between
Prognosis seems to be good if treated appropriately (3, 15).
bony trabeculae. They are thought to develop from disrup-
Destruction of growth plates in immature cats will result in
tion or shunting of intramedullary blood vessels, and tend to
 growth abnormalities, requiring later correction when the cat
cause destruction of the inner cortical bone layers during
is adult.
expansion. Aneurysmal bone cysts occur predominantly in
 Fungal osteomyelitis occurs in the southern parts of the
the flat bones of the axial skeleton. In cats, they have been
northern hemisphere. Histoplasmosis is a systemic fungal
 described in the vertebrae, sacrum, ilium, scapula, and rib (3,
infection, usually originating in the lungs and then spreading
18, 19). Complete resection is the treatment of choice when
to other regions, such as bone marrow. Affected cats may
 possible, and carries a favorable prognosis (18). Other treat-
have clinical signs consistent with lung disease. Bony involve-
ment options include surgical curettage with bone grafting.
ment causes lameness, pain, and swelling of the affected
 and radiation therapy.
region. The distal bones of the appendicular skeleton are
 Solitary bone cysts occur predominantly in long bones of
most commonly affected (16). Cats should be tested for feline
 young animals, most commonly in the distal radius and ulna.
leukemia virus (FeLV) and feline immunodeficiency virus
They are thought to develop after avascular necrosis of the
(FIV), because dissemination of the disease is facilitated with
 metaphyseal cancellous bone. The cysts are lined with fibrous
immune defciencies. The fungal organisms are often visible
 tissue and contain serosanguineous fluid. Elevated alkaline
e aq A snodos mon oq an jo kono uo
phosphatase level in the cystic fluid, compared to the serum,
further diagnostic tool if cytology does not reveal organisms.
supports the diagnosis of a solitary bone cyst (20). Treatment
Itraconazole orally (10 mg/kg per day) is considered the reat-
 involves curertage of the lesion and fling the defect with
ment of choice for feline histoplasmosis. It has to be admin-
cancellous bone graft. Solitary bone cysts have been treated
60
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
A
B
uiu aun jo ssauauel yim pauasad sem jen aul sseuu bunl e ot Aepuonas Auredoaiso yudouadry yim jen e jo sudebope s't aunh
forelimb. (Courtesy of B. Haas.)
(A) Thoracic radiographs reveal a mass in the caudal lung lobes. The mass proved to be an adenocarcinoma.
(B) Radiographs of the right carpus at initial presentation. Periosteal bone proliferations are visible along the radial and ulnar diaphysis. Similar
changes were present in all four limbs.
(C) Radiographs of the right forelimb 3 months later. Note the enormous progression of bone proliferation.
successfully with steroid injection directly into the cyst in Hyperrophic osteopathy in cats has been described in a
 humans. Recently, successful treatment of a solitary bone cyst  handful of case reports. One report describes a cat with
 in the distal ulna of a 9-month-old cat with repeated steroid hypertrophic osteopathy affecting predominantly the fore-
injections was reported (20). Repeated needle drainage and  limbs secondary to a thymoma (21). Two cases of hypertro-
injection of methylprednisolone acetate was performed every
3 weeks for 12 weeks. Remodeling of the bone occurred over 
(22, 23). Two more recent reports include cats with abdomi-
14 months without signs of recurrence.
nal lesions, a renal papillary adenoma (24) and an adreno-
cortical carcinoma (25). The thoracic cavity of the latter two
4.6 Hypertrophic osteopathy
cats was normal.
Treatment and prognosis depend on the underlying
Hypertrophic osteopathy is characterized by periosteal new
 disease, but prognosis is usually not favorable due to malig-
bone formation along the long bones of the fore- and/or  nancy of the primary disease. Regression of the bony lesions
hindlimbs, occurring secondary to a distant disease process, has been described after successful removal of the mass
most commonly tumors in the thoracic cavity. Clinical fea- (25, 26).
tures in early cases are warm and swollen distal limbs due to
hyperemia, and lameness. Later in the disease process, limb
4.7 Osteocartilaginous exostoses
hyperemia is less pronounced and periosteal new bone forma-
tion develops along the long bones (Fig. 4-5). The joints are
Osteocartilaginous exostoses are relative rapidly growing
not affected, but range of motion can be reduced due to
 tumor-like masses growing on the bony surface (Fig. 4-6). A
periarticular new bone formation. The exact pathogenesis of
solitary form and a multiple form, also called feline osteo-
the disease remains unclear but periosteal bone formation, 
chondromatosis, have been described. The solitary form
induced by changes in blood supply, caused by autonomic
tends to affect older FeLV-negative cats, and the multiple
neurovascular reflexes, is suspected.
form is more commonly seen in younger FeLV-positive cats.
4: Diseases of bone
61
D
Figure 4.6 Bone specimen of a cat with a large solitary
osteochondroma growing at the caudal aspect of the scapular neck
A
B
Siamese cats may be predisposed for both types. Malignant
Figure 4.7 Pre- and postoperative radiographs of the right radius and
 transformation of the lesions may occur.
ulna of a 2-year old Persian cat with a solitary osteochondroma of the
distal ulna.
4.7.1 Solitary osteochondromas
(A) A smoothly marginated mass expands from the distal metaphysis of
the ulna and deviates the distal radius. Histopathological examination
Solitary osteochondromas are exostoses consisting of cancel-
revealed cartilaginous tissue, confluent with mature bone.
(B) The mass was locally excised with a partial distal ulnar ostectomy.
lous bone, which grows from cartilaginous caps in the peri-
osteum. They typically arise near growth plates. Whereas
solitary osteochondromas cease growth after maturity in
other species, they continue to grow in cats. The average age
Treatment of choice is surgical excision (Fig. 4-7). Local
of cats with solitary osteochondromas was around 6 years in
 regrowth is common, especially if the site of origin could not 
one survey (27). Solitary osteochondromas have been 
be excised completely. Regrowth usually occurs within
described to be localized in the spine, long bones, head, ribs,
 months. Successful resection of a spinal osteochondroma was
and pubis with decreasing frequency (28).
described (29). Radiation therapy or amputation may be
Clinical signs depend on the location and size of the mass,
other treatment options for masses where local resection is
and include lameness, reluctance to move, joint stiffness due
not possible (28, 30).
 to impingement, and diffculty eating. Osteochondromas can
reach large sizes. Radiologically, the lesions appear as broad-
4.7.2 Feline osteochondromatosis
based, smoothly irregular masses with a clearly defined border
(Fig. 4-7). Affected cats should be carefully screened for other
Osteochondromatous lesions are present at multiple sites in
bony lesions in order to rule out the multiple form of the
 feline osteochondromatosis, The lesions are therefore also
disease, and a FeLV test should be performed. Hypervitamin-
 termed multiple cartilaginous exostoses (Chapter 8). Radio-
osis A and synovial osteochondromas may be considered
differential diagnoses in certain cases. Hypervitaminosis A is
 but differentiation is essential regarding treatment options
ruled out from the dietary history. Synovial osteochondromas
 and prognosis. Affected cats tend to be younger, with an
(Chapter 5) also occur around joints, but these lesions do not 
 average age of 2-3 years, than cats with the solitary form
originate from the bone itself (14). Definitive diagnosis is 
(28). The exact etiology of the disease is unclear, but may be
obtained by histopathological examination.
associated with FeLV infection. Viral particles have been
62
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
found in lesions (31), and several cats have tested positive
12. Polizopoulou ZS, et al. Hypervitaminosis A in the cat: a case
for FeLV (27, 32). Histology is similar to the solitary form,
report and review of the literature. J Feline Med Surg 2005;7:
363-368.
but they may more resemble a sarcoma, rather than an
13. Schmidt S, Geyer S. Hypervitaminosis A of the cat. Kleintier-
osteochondroma.
praxis 1978;23:75-79.
Clinical signs depend on location of the masses and are
14.
Allan Gs. Radiographic features of feline joint diseases. Vet Clin
similar as described for solitary osteochondromas. The lesions
North Am Small Anim Pract 2000;30:281-302.
15. Bradley WA. Metaphyseal osteomyelitis in an immature Abys-
seem to have a predilection for flat and irregular bones and
sinian cat. Aust Vet J 2003;81:608-611.
have been described to occur in the scapula, spine, ribs,
16. Wolf AM. Histoplasma capsulatum osteomyelitis in the cat. J
pelvis, and long bones in decreasing frequency. The whole
Vet Intern Med 1987;1:158-162.
skeleton must be radiographed to detect all masses. The
lesions continue to grow quite rapidly and no known treat-
Textbook of veterinary internal medicine. Diseases of dogs and
cats, Sth edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2000: pp. 453-476.
ment exists. Surgery or radiation therapy may be used as a
18. Biller DS, et al. Aneurysmal bone cyst in a rib of a cat. J Am
palliative measure in selected cases.
Vet Med Assoc 1987;190:1193-1195.
19. Walker MA, et al. Aneurysmal bone cyst in a cat. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1975;167:933-934.
References and further reading
20. Miura N, et al. Steroid injection therapy in a feline solitary bone
cyst. J Vet Med Sci 2003;65:523-525.
1. Barber PJ, Elliott J. Study of calcium homeostasis in feline
21. Richards CD. Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy in a cat. Feline
hyperthyroidism. J Small Anim Pract 1996;37:575-582.
Pract 1977;7:41-43.
 2. Tomsa K, et al. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism in
22. Roberg J Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy. Feline
six cats. J Small Anim Pract 1999;40:533-539.
Pract 1977;7:18-22.
3. Schrader SC, Sherding RG. Disorders of the skeletal system. In:
 23. Carr SH. Secondary pulmonary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
Sherding RG (ed.) The cat: diseases and clinical management.
in a cat. Feline Pract 1971;1:25-26.
New York: Churchill Livingstone; 1994: pp. 1599-1647.
 24. Nafe LA, et al. Hyerpertrophic osteopathy in a cat associated 
4. Hazewinkel HAw. Nutrition in relation to skeletal growth
with renal papillary
 ademona. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
deformities. J Small Anim Pract 1989;30:625-630.
1981;17:659-662.
5. Barber PJ, Elliot J. Feline chronic renal failure: calcium homeo-
25. Becker TJ, et al. Regression of hypertrophic osteopathy in a cat
stasis in 80 cases diagnosed between 1992 and 1995. J Small
after surgical excision of an adrenocortical carcinoma. J Feline
Anim Pract 1998;39:108-116.
Med Surg 1999;35:499-505.
6. Hazewinkel HAW, Wiegand U. Generalisierte Skelettverander-
26. Brodey RS. Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy in the dog, a clini-
ungen. In: Horzinek MC, Schmidt V, Lutz H (eds) Krankheiten
copathologic survey of 60 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1971;
der Katze, 4th edn. Stuttgart: Enke Verlag; 2005: pp.
159:1242.
603-614.
27. Carpenter JL, et al. Tumors and tumor-like lesions. In:
 7. Lucke VM. Renal disease in the domestic cat. J Pathol Bacteriol
Holzworth J (ed.) Diseases of the cat. Medicine and surgery.
1968;95:67-91.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1987: pp. 407-596.
8. Gnudi G, et al. Unusual hyperparathyroidism in a cat. Vet
28. Moore AS, Ogilvie GK. Tumors of the skeletal system. In:
Radiol Ultrasound 2001;42:250-253.
Ogilvie GK, Moore AS (eds) Feline oncology. Trenton: Veteri-
9. Barber PJ, et al. Effect of dietary phosphate restriction on renal
nary Learning Systems; 2001: pp. 233-250.
secondary hyperparathyroidism in the cat. J Small Anim Pract
29. Reidarson TH, et al. Thoracic vertebral osteochondroma in a
1999;40:62-70.
cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988;192:1102-1104.
10. Johnson KA, Watson ADJ. Skeletal diseases. In: Ettinger SJ,
30. Wood BC, et al. What is your diagnosis? J Am Vet Med Assoc
Feldman EC (eds) Textbook of veterinary internal medicine.
2002;221:905-1080.
Diseases of the dog and cat, 5th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saun-
31. Pool RR, Harris JM. Feline osteochondromatosis. Feline Pract
ders; 2000: pp. 1887-1919.
1975;5:24-30.
11. Franch J, et al. Back-scattered electron imaging of a non-
32. Turrel JM, Pool RR. Primary bone tumors in the cat: a retro-
vertebral case of hypervitaminosis A in a cat. J Feline Med Surg
spective study of 15 cats and a literature review. Vet Radiol
2000;2:49-56.
1982;23:152-166.
63
5
 Diseases of joints
K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs
Clinical degenerative joint disease is infrequently diagnosed
 causing crippling arthropathies, and many of them carry a
in cats, whereas it is a common problem in dogs. In the last 
 rather unfavorable long-term prognosis.
few years more attention has been focused on feline degenera-
A summary of feline joint diseases is shown in Table 5-1.
tive joint disease and the underlying joint pathologies in the 
 This chapter summarizes generalized joint diseases of cats.
veterinary literature. Recent studies have revealed a surpris-
 Diseases involving a specific joint, such as hip dysplasia,
ingly high radiographic incidence of osteoarthritis in cats, but
 meniscal calcifcation, non-raumatic patellar fractures, or
clinical relevance of the disease is likely to be underestimated.
 diseases of the elbow joint, are described in the corresponding
Improved awareness and diagnostic skills are required to
chapters of part 7 of the book.
obtain a clinical diagnosis of degenerative joint diseases in
cats. Whereas degenerative joint disease is more often found
 5.1 Degenerative joint disease
in elderly cats, some of the underlying joint diseases may
cause clinical signs earlier in life. These disease processes
Degenerative joint disease can be classified into primary and
include hip dysplasia, patellar luxation, or osteochondrosis,
secondary osteoarthritis. Primary or idiopathic osteoarthritis
which have hereditary components, but severity of clinical
is considered to be due to wear and tear of the cartilage
disease expression also depends on several other factors such
 during the normal aging process. Secondary osteoarthritis is
as growth, nutrition, activity, and body weight.
caused by an underlying joint pathology. Whereas osteoar-
Immune-mediated  and  infectious  inflammatory  joint
thritis in dogs is especially common following joint dysplasia
diseases are well described in cats, but are encountered
 or osteochondrosis, inciting causes are rarely found in cats;
infrequently in daily feline practice. Both immune-mediated
 potential causes were only identifed in 11% of cats with
and infectious inflammatory arthritis have the potential for
radiographic osteoarthritis in one study (1). All joint patholo-
Disease group
Diseases
Table 5-1. Joint diseases in cats.
Some of the listed diseases, such
 Inherited (Chapter 3)
Osteochondrodysplasia of the Scottish Fold cat
as hypervitaminosis A and
osteochondromas, arise from
Mucopolysaccharidosis
bone but result in secondary joint
Congenital (Chapter 3)
Selected conditions of the skull, spine, thorax, and
 ankylosis
extremities
 Inherited and developmental
Hip dysplasia (Chapter 36)
Patellar luxation (Chapter 38)
Osteochondrosis
Elbow dysplasia (Chapter 30)
Shoulder dysplasia (Chapter 28)
Degenerative
Primary and secondary degenerative joint disease
Nutritional (Chapter 4)
Hypervitaminosis A
Inflammatory
Erosive polyarthritis
Non-erosive polyarthritis
Miscellaneous
 Meniscal mineralization (Chapter 38)
 Non-traumatic patellar fractures (Chapter 38)
Elbow epicondylitis (Chapter 30)
Synovial osteochondromatosis
Synovial cysts (Chapter 30)
 Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
gies resulting in incongruity or instability have the potential
fbrosis of the joint capsule, and variable degrees of synovitis.
to cause secondary osteoarthritis. Joint trauma and joint
 Osteoarthritis-associated pain is due to synovitis and changes
dysplasia are probably the most common inciting causes in
 in the subchondral bone, as the hyaline cartilage does not
cats.
 contain nerve endings.
 Pathogenesis, pathophysiology, and treatment modalities 
for degenerative joint disease have been studied extensively
5.1.1 Incidence
in humans and dogs because of the high incidence in these
species. The basic pathophysiological mechanisms of osteo-
Cats suffering from osteoarthritis are usually older (1). One
arthritis are the same in the canine and feline patient, but
study showed 34% of cats with a mean age of 6.5 years to
results from experimental studies indicate that degenerative
have radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis (4). In cats older
joint disease develops at a slower rate in cats than in dogs
than 12 years, the radiographic incidence of osteoarthritis
(2, 3). Pathological changes in a joint with osteoarthritis
was reported to be as high as 90% (5). Despite these high
include carilage fbrillation, erosion and clefts, subchondral
numbers, the disease is rather infrequently diagnosed clini-
bone sclerosis, formation of osteophytes and enthesophytes,
cally. Only 33% of cats with radiographic osteoarthritis had
clinically evident osteoarthritis in one study (1). This implies
that cats are able to compensate for pain and functional
 deficits of minor joint diseases berter than dogs, probably due 
to their agility and lighter body weights. Also, awareness of
both owners and veterinarians for the disease is not as high
as in canine patients, and the clinical signs may be misinter-
 preted or missed.
 According to the literature, the spine was the most common
site for degenerative joint disease in cats older than 12 years
(5). Most of the spinal lesions were classified as low grade in
this study, except for the lumbosacral articulation, where
medium- or high-grade lesions were found. The elbow is the
most commonly affected joint of the appendicular skeleton,
Figure 5-1 Laterolateral radiograph of a 15-year-old cat with
degenerative disease of the thoracolumbar spine. Bridging spondylosis 
followed by the hip joint (6). Severe elbow osteoarthritis was
suis jenu ou pamous ien aui bupuy sde open ueu aun s!
found in 17% of cats older than 12 years (5). In another
associated with the lesions.
report of 40 cats with osteoarthritis, the elbow joint was
Figure 5-2 (A) Mediolateral and
(B) craniocaudal radiographs of
the elbow of a 14-year-old cat
with elbow osteoarthritis,
 presented for intermittent
forelimb lameness.Osteophytosis
 and soft-tissue miner alization are
present, most evident at the
cranial and medial aspect of the
joint. The mineralization cranial
to the radial head is most likely
the sesamoid bone of the
supinator muscle. Slight 
subchondral sclerosis is seen at
the ulnar notch
B
5: Diseases of joints
65
The limiting factor with these studies and fgures on inci-
overrepresented by a factor of 4.3 (7). This high incidence of
degenerative joint disease of the elbow raises the question if
 looking at thoracic and abdominal radiographs where the
primary factors, such as elbow dysplasia or incongruity,
 hips, stifles, and elbows were often visible, but the carpi and
could be inciting causes (Chapter 30). Osteoarthritis of the
tarsi were less commonly seen.
hip joint is often secondary to hip dysplasia (6). Gonarthrosis
is also relatively common and is usually associated with
rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament.
5.1.2 Diagnosis
The clinical manifestation of osteoarthritis is higher in obese
cats than in cats with a normal body condition. Obese cats
were three times as likely to be presented to a veterinarian
for lameness (8). Clinical signs of degenerative joint disease
 in cats can be different from those in other species. Cats com-
monly show non-specific signs, such as changes in demeanor,
inactivity or diffculty or reluctance to jump, and a stiff gait,
rather than limping (6, 9). Owners may observe the cat hesi-
tating before, or pausing during, activities such as climbing
stairs. Pain can also change grooming habits, or can even lead
to urination or defecation next to the litter box due to diffi-
culties climbing into the box. Changes in behavior and activ-
ity in older cats are often attributed to advanced age, by both
owners and clinicians.
Radiographic signs of osteoarthritis in cats are similar to
 those seen in dogs. Periarticular new-bone formation, sub-
 chondral bone sclerosis, changes in bone shape and density,
thickening of the joint capsule, and calcifed intra-articular
bodies may be present (10, 11). Thickening of the joint
capsule is usually less, and calcified intra-articular bodies are
Figure 5-3 Ventrodorsal radiographs of a 10-year-old Persian cat with
more commonly seen in cats than in dogs (11). Examples of
aun 'mollus ae engeiane aul sisoexo pue eieidsp du leae
femoral heads have an abnormal shape, and osteophytes are most
radiographs of joints affected by osteoarthritis are shown in
evident at the cranial aspect of the acetabulum.
Figures 5-1 to 5-5. Please also see the chapters in part 7 of
Figure 5-4 (A) Mediolateral and
(B) caudocranial radiographs of a
15-year-old cat with osteoarthritis
 of the stifle joint. Osteophytes
are present at the distal and
proximal patella, along the
proximal trochlear ridges, and at 
the dorsal borders of the tibia.
Intra-articular mineralizations are
seen, the distal one possibly
associated with the medial
meniscus.
A
B
66
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
Box 5-1. Suggestions for conservative treatment
of osteoarthritis
Weight reduction if necessary
 Environmental changes (facilitated access to feeding,
favorite sleeping spots, and litter box)
Physical therapy
 Motivation for enhanced physical activity at home
 Long-term application of slow-acting disease-modifying
agents
 Pain control (meloxicam)
Box
K5-2. Meloxicam
dosage
 for
long-term
application
Figure 5-5 Mediolateral radiograph of an 11-year-old cat with
 shoulder osteoarthritis and intermittent lameness. Osteophyte formation
 Meloxicam (Metacam 0.5 mg/ml oral suspension
is most evident at the caudal edge of the glenoid, resulting in a change
for cats)
 of shape.
0.1 mg/kg on frst day
 Followed by 0.05 mg/kg SID
the book for more information on underlying causes and
 A lower dose of 0.025 mg/kg SID also has an effect, and
differential diagnoses in the specifc joints.
 may be tried
 Differential diagnoses for osteoarthritis in general include
Scottish  Fold osteochondrodysplasia,
hypervitaminosis
A, osteochondromas, synovial osteochondromatosis, and
immune-mediated or infectious arthritis. The presence of
laser pointer motivates many cats to play and chase. Regular
bilateral joint pathology, especially with tarsal and carpal
physiotherapy sessions with a physical therapist can also
joint involvement, and concurrent systemic illness should
improve joint function and reduce pain (Chapter 21). Weight
alert the clinician to the possibility of inflammatory joint
loss is an important factor in the management of osteoarthri-
disease. Degenerative and inflammatory joint diseases can be
tis, as obese cats are more likely to suffer from clinical signs
differentiated by cytological examination of the synovial fluid
associated with degenerative joint disease. This point should
be discussed thoroughly with the owners to enhance their
(Chapter 2).
motivation. Regular follow-up examinations are also helpful
5.1.3 Treatment
to improve compliance.
Meloxicam is currently the only non-steroidal anti-inflam-
Surgical treatment of osteoarthritis is reserved for cats with
matory drug (NSAID) licensed in Europe for long-term use
 an inciting cause, such as joint instability, and is described in
in cats. Meloxicam has been shown to be an effective anal-
 part 7 of the book. Most cases are treated conservatively.
 gesic for feline locomotor diseases (12). Improvement of
Conservative management of osteoarthritis in cats involves
general demeanor, activity level, and ability to jump was 
environmental changes and physiotherapy, weight loss in
 observed after application of meloxicam for a 4-6-week
obese cats, and pain control (10) (Box 5-1). Preferred feeding
 period in clinical patients (6, 9), with 61% of owners feeling 
or sleeping spots should be made readily reachable for the
that their cat had markedly improved (6). Mild gastrointes-
cat, for example by building a ramp or dividing one large
 tinal side-effects did occur at the beginning of the treatment
leap into smaller leaps with furniture or other objects. Mod-
period in 18% of cats, when higher initial dosages were
erate exercise is beneficial for osteoarthritic joints. As cats
administered (6). Current dose recommendations are lower
sadi rauo woad oi ro qsea e uo pal aq oi asnjan Aau
and are shown in Box 5-2. Meloxicam may also be adminis-
of exercise, the cat's daily routine has to be used to enhance
tered with other analgesic substances if required (Chapter
activity. Gentle playing or taking the cat outdoors might
18), but should never be combined with other NSAIDs or
enhance activity and overall well-being. The spotlight of a
corticosteroids.
5: Diseases of joints
67
Other NSAIDs should be used very cautiously in the feline
joints. The main feature of these diseases is marked inflam-
species. Cats have a reduced hepatic activity for glucuronide
mation of the synovial lining, and inflammatory cells migrat-
 conjugation, which is necessary for metabolizing many drugs,
ing into the joint and synovial fluid. Smaller joints, such as
including most of the NSAIDs. Therefore accumulation and
the carpi and tarsi, are most commonly involved. Polyarthri-
toxicity might be encountered with drugs and dosages con-
tis is grossly classifed into erosive and non-erosive forms
sidered safe in other species. All NSAIDs are contraindicated
(Table 5-2).
in the presence of hypovolemia, dehydration, and kidney
disease.
5.2.1 Diagnosis
Chondroprotective slow-acting disease-modifying agents
were shown to be effcient in the treatment of osteoarthritis
Cats with polyarthritis are usually systemically ill and reluc-
in both dogs and humans (13, 14). Although similar studies
tant to walk. Marked joint pain, joint effusion, and fever
are not available for cats, clinical impressions suggest that
are detected on clinical examination. Pronounced swelling
these agents may be benefcial in the treatment of feline
and edema of the overlying soft tissues may also be
osteoarthritis (9, 10). One commercial nutritional supple-
 present (Fig. 5-6). Cats with chronic polyarthritis, especially
ment available for cats contains chondroitin sulfate, glucos-
with the erosive forms, often suffer from generalized
amine hydrochloride, and manganese ascorbate (Cosequin).
muscle atrophy and weight loss, and can have a cachectic
 These substances are precursors for synthesis of hyaline car-
appearance.
tilage matrix. Additionally, glucosamine may have anti-
inflammatory properties and stimulate the synthesis 
of
 most important method for diagnosing polyarthritis, and it
hyaluronan by synovial cells. Chondroitin sulfate inhibits
also may allow differentiation between immune-mediated
cartilage metalloproteinases. The overall effect of this com-
and infectious arthritis (15). Neutrophil numbers are in the
bination of nutritional supplements is facilitation of synthesis
high range during the acute phase of immune-mediated poly-
of cartilage matrix and hyaluronan, reduction of cartilage
arthritis (Fig. 5-7). Lymphocytes and plasma cells predomi-
degradation, and anti-inflammatory properties. The clinical
nate later with neutrophils still remaining above the top end
 response to those drugs only occurs gradually over several
of the normal range. With septic arthritis, degeneration of
weeks.
 neutrophils and intracellular bacteria may be seen in addition
to the high neutrophil count (Fig. 5-8). Bacteriological evalu-
ation of the synovial fluid including sensitivity testing should
5.2 Polyarthritis
also be performed, especially if cytology is suggestive for
Polyarthritis is a rare systemic inflammatory joint disease
 infectious arthritis. Some infectious agents are diffcult to
with a variety of different etiologies, involving at least two
      
Form
General
Subclassification
Table 5-2. Classification of feline
 polyarthritis into erosive and non-
Erosive
 Feline chronic progressive
 Periosteal proliferative form
erosive forms
polyarthritis (FCPP)
Destructive form/rheumatoid
arthritis
Septic polyarthritis
Non-erosive
 Immune-mediated non-erosive
Type 1: no underlying cause found
polyarthritis
Type 2: associated with systemic
infection
 Type 3: associated with
gastrointestinal disease
Type 4: associated with malignancy
Feline systemic lupus
erythematosus
Drug-induced polyarthritis
Drugs (antibiotics)
Vaccines
Infectious
Calicivirus
Lyme disease
68
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
Figure 5-6 A 10-year-old cat with septic polyarthritis, presented with
fever, apathy. and reluctance to walk. Note the swelling of the distal
Figure 5-8 A smear of synovial fluid from the tarsus of a 10-year-old
limbs. Culture of the synovial fluid revealed Streptococcus canis.
indoor cat with an acute hematogenous infectious arthritis. Intracellular
cocci can be seen (arrow) but the neutrophils are non-degenerate.
 Streptococcus canis was cultured. (Courtesy of Veterinary Pathology.
Zurich.)
 Radiographs of affected joints help differentiate erosive
from non-erosive forms of polyarthritis (Table 5-2). However,
the bony changes seen on radiographs only develop with
time, and lesions might not be apparent in the early disease
proces. Soft-tissue swelling is the only radiographic fnding
in cats with non-erosive polyarthritis.
 Screening for general or malignant disease, feline leukemia
virus (FeLV), and specific blood tests usually needs to be
performed to find or rule out the inciting cause. Doxycycline
can be given while awaiting the results of the diagnostic tests.
It has antimicrobial properties against some of the infectious
 agents that could be causing the polyarthritis and its immune-
modulating effects may improve clinical signs of cats with
immune-mediated polyarthritis. Figure 5-9 shows a possible
Figure 5-7 Cytology of the synovial fluid from the elbow of a
regime for the diagnostic and therapeutic approach in cats
10-year-old cat with immune-mediated non-erosive polyarthritis.
with polyarthritis.
A large number of non-degenerate neutrophils were present in the
joint fluid and culture was negative. The cat was feline leukemia virus
(FeLV)-positive. (Courtesy of Veterinary Pathology. Zurich.)
5.2.2 Erosive polyarthritis
Erosive forms of polyarthritis are feline chronic progressive
polyarthritis (FCPP) and septic arthritis.
examination of the synovial fluid is further described in
Chapter 2.
 Synovial biopsy may give additional information. Histo-
Feline chronic progressive polyarthritis
pathological appearance of the synovium depends on the type
 Cats with FCPP are generally intact or neutered males, often
 and duration of disease. Exudative inflammation with a pre-
between 1.5 and 5 years old (16). The tarsi and carpi are
dominance of neutrophils is seen in the acute phases of
 commonly affected. Around half of affected cats test positive
immune-mediated polyarthritis. Cell types shift towards lym-
for FeLV, and many cats are positive for feline syncytia-
phocytes and plasma cells in chronic cases, and fbroplasia
forming virus (FeSFV) (16, 18). Both viruses were also iso-
develops (16). Pyogranulomatous synovitis is present with
lated from affected joints (16). The exact role of these viral
septic arthritis (17).
infections in the disease mechanism is not clear yet. It was
5: Diseases of joints
69
Polyarthritis (confirmed cytologically)
Figure 5-9 Diagram showing the
diagnostic and therapeutic
approach to feline polyarthritis.
Bony changes
No bony changes
Erosive/destructive type
Proliferative type
No inciting cause
Inciting cause
Treat cause
 Doxycyline while waiting for bacteriological results
Culture positive
 Culture negative and
bony changes
Antibiotics
Improvement with
 No improvement
doxyc ycline
with
doxycycline
 Rheumatoid factor
Histopathology synovium
 Doxycycline for 3 weeks
Negative
Positive
 Prednisolone +/- chlorambucil or
 cyclophosphamide
Prednisolone
+/- chlorambucil or cyclophosphamide
 Prednisolone +/- chlorambucil or cyclophosphamide
 Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs)
suggested that immunosuppression caused by FeLV may
destruction in order to classify the disease as rheumatoid
allow FeSFV to multiply in the joints (16).
arthritis (18, 20). Siamese cats may be overrepresented
Two forms of FCPP have been described: the periosteal
(20).
proliferative form, and the destructive form. The periosteal
A treatment trial with prednisolone is usually performed
 proliferative form is the more common of the two. Its main
frst. Prednisolone is administered at a dose of 2-4 mg/kg SID
'aq m iead jo og assrd si ar
for 2 weeks, and is then slowly tapered to a dose of 0.25 mg/
Smaller areas of lysis and osteoporosis may also occur in the
kg SID for a further 2-3 months. Treatment success is evalu-
affected joints (Fig. 5-10). The destructive form of FCPP is
 ated by assessment of the clinical response, and by repeating
less common, affected cats tend to be older, and the disease
 synovial fluid cell count and differentiation. Prednisolone
 appears to be more chronic and insidious in onset (16, 19).
 therapy alone can improve clinical signs and slow down the 
 On raiel issarid 'sis jo sere apoui sis sderoie
processes of joint destruction. However, disease relapse is
marked joint destruction and instability. The disease has
 common, and many cats have to receive continuous therapy
similarities to rheumatoid arthritis, but a positive rheumatoid
(16, 18). The addition of cytotoxic drugs, such as cyclophos-
factor or characteristic histological changes in the synovium
phamide or chlorambucil, is indicated with lack of improve-
must be present in addition to radiographic evidence of joint
ment with prednisolone alone. Azathioprine should not be
70
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
Figure 5-10 (A) Mediolateral and 
(B) dorsoplantar radiographs of
the tarsal joint of a cat with the
periosteal form of feline chronic
progressive polyarthritis.
 Periosteal proliferative bone
reactions are evident at the level
of the distal tarsal bones, and on
the lateral side of the tarsus. Also
 note the soft-tissue swelling 
around the joint.
B
used in cats due to severe and potentially fatal side-effects
Drugs
Dosages
(16, 21). Cats receiving cytotoxic drugs should be monitored
closely for side-effects. Complete blood counts are performed
Doxycycline
10 mg/kg SID
every 2-4 weeks to detect myelosuppression, requiring dose
Prednisolone
2-4 mg/kg BW SID for 2 weeks,
reduction or discontinuation of therapy. Cyclophosphamide
 then gradually reduce to
may cause hemorrhagic cystitis, also necessitating discontinu-
0.25 mg/kg SID over 2-3 months
ation of therapy. Application of disease-modifying antirheu-
Cyclophosphamide
 50 mg/m^ on 4 consecutive days
matic drugs (DMARDs) was described in 12 cats with
 per week, max. 4 months
rheumatoid arthritis and results appeared to be encouraging
(in combination with 0.25 mg/kg
(20). Methotrexate and leflunomide given by the oral route
 prednisolone)
resulted in marked improvement within 4 weeks in more than
Chlorambucil
0.1-0.2 mg/kg SID or on alternate
50% of the cats. No serious toxic side-effects were encoun-
days
tered over the treatment period of 2-6 months (20). Drugs
(in combination with 0.25 mg/kg
and dosages are summarized in Table 5-3.
prednisolone)
Methotrexate
2.5 mg at 0, 12, and 24 hours on
Septic polyarthritis
the same day each week (total
of 7.5 mg weekly)
Bacteria can enter a joint via several routes: through a pene-
Decrease dose to 2.5 mg once a
trating injury, during surgery, by extension from local infec-
 week after clinical improvement
tions, or via the hematogenous route. Penetrating wounds,
(20)
especially cat bites, are the most common cause for septic
Leflunomide
10 mg daily (70 mg weekly)
monoarthritis in cats (Chapter 14). Hemotogenous spread of
 Decrease dose to 10 mg twice a
bacteria from a distant site of the body is less common in
week after clinical improvement
cats than in dogs (19). Kittens and cats with suppression of
(20)
 the immune system may be more susceptible to develop septic
arthritis or polyarthritis. Several joints are usually involved,
Table 5-3. Drugs used in the treatment of immune-mediated
and the tarsi and carpi are most commonly affected. Diagno-
polyarthritis
sis is based on the presence of degenerate neutrophils and
intracellular bacteria in the synovial fluid (Fig. 5-8), and on
positive bacteriology results.
mycoplasma, and especially L-form bacteria are diffcult to
Several bacteria have been isolated from cats with polyar-
culture. L-form bacteria can grow on mycoplasma-specific
thritis, including Pasteurella spp., Streptococcus spp., Myco-
culture medium, but differentiating between L-form bacteria
 plasma spp., and L-form bacteria (17, 19, 22-25). Anaerobes,
 and mycoplasma according to colony appearance is diffcult
5: Diseases of joints
71
(19). Subcutaneous abscesses may precede bacterial L-form
Prognosis relates to the inciting cause. Three out of nine
and mycoplasma polyarthritis (17), and the clinician should
 cats were euthanized due to persistent lameness or relapse in
suspect these species in cats with subcutaneous abscesses and
one study (19). The prognosis for cats with myeloprolifera-
polyarthritis, and negative routine bacteriological cultures.
tive tumors is poor.
Bacterial L-forms and mycoplasma are usually sensitive to
tetracycline or doxycycline (Table 5-3). A positive response
Feline systemic lupus erythematosus
can be expected as early as 48 hours after initiation of
therapy (19). Antibiotics are continued for several weeks if
occurring rarely in cats (18, 21). Affected cats may have
a positive response is seen. Repeating radiographs, cytology,
and mycoplasma culture before cessation of therapy seems
autoimmune hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukope-
nia, dermatitis, glomerulonephritis, polymyositis, and non-
reasonable.
Antibiotic treatment is selected according to sensitivity
erosive polyarthritis. Antibodies against blood cells cause
their alteration, and deposition of immune complexes results
testing if the bacterial culture reveals other organisms, such
in dermatitis, myositis, and arthritis. The presence of circu-
as Pasteurella or Streptococcus. Prognosis depends on the
lating antinuclear antibodies supports the diagnosis, but
inciting cause of infection, the immunocompetence of the
patient, and the duration of clinical signs but cats should
antinuclear antibodies are not specific for systemic lupus
respond well to long-term antimicrobial therapy.
using prednisolone in combination with other cytotoxic
 drugs, such as cyclophosphamide and chlorambucil (Table
5.2.3 Non-erosive polyarthritis
5-3). Prognosis is guarded and becomes even more unfavor-
able if renal involvement occurs (21).
Non-erosive forms of polyarthritis include immune-mediated
non-erosive polyarthritis, drug- and vaccine-induced polyar-
thritis, polyarthritis in association with systemic lupus ery-
Drug-induced polyarthritis
thematosus, viral-induced polyarthritis, and possibly Lyme
Drugs or vaccinations may serve as antigenic sources for
disease.
production of a hypersensitivity reaction in the synovial
membrane. Antibiotics are known to be able to induce
Immune-mediated non-erosive polyarthritis
polyarthritis, especially sulfadiazine, erythromycin, and
cephalosporins. Polyarthritis was observed in one cat after
Immune-mediated non-erosive polyarthitis is caused by depo-
administration of trimethoprim-sulfadiazine for the treat-
sition of immune complexes in the synovial membrane,
ment of cystitis (19). Drug-induced polyarthritis resolves if
leading to subsequent inflammation. Several inciting causes
drug administration is discontinued.
 might be responsible for activation of the immune system
 Feline calicivirus vaccines can also induce polyarthritis in
(Table 5-2). Systemic inflammatory or infectious diseases,
cats. Affected cats are generally younger than 6 months, and
diseases of the gastrointestinal, respiratory, and urinary tract,
clinical signs often occurred within 1 week after the frst vac-
and neoplasia have been seen in association with non-erosive
cination (26). In a study of 123 cats with vaccine reactions
polyarthritis (Fig. 5-9) (18, 19). Myeloproliferative neoplasia
 or breakdowns after calicivirus vaccination, 80% of affected
was the most commonly diagnosed tumor (18). A bone
cats showed signs of inflammatory arthropathy, either alone
 marrow biopsy should therefore be performed if myelopro-
 or in conjunction with pyrexia and oral or upper respiratory
liferative disease is suspected from hematological results. An
disease (26). Vaccine-induced polyarthritis is self-limiting,
underlying cause is not found in many cats, and the polyar-
and a specific treatment is not required.
thritis is then classifed as idiopathic, or type 1.
Therapy aims at removing the inciting cause, if possible. It
Viral infections
may be diffcult to differentiate immune-mediated non-erosive
polyarthritis from other forms of non-erosive polyarthritis,
Viral infections with FeLV, FeSFV, and feline calicivirus have
such as drug-, vaccine-, or virus-induced arthritis, or Lyme 
been associated with polyarthritis and lameness in the cat.
disease. If in doubt an initial trial of doxycyline should be 
 Polyarthritis seen with FeLV or FeSFV may rather be caused
tried frst (18). If a positive response is seen, doxycyline is
 by the host's immunological reactions rather than by the
administered for 2-3 weeks. Prednisolone therapy is started
virus itself.
if the response is negative. Cytotoxic drugs may have to be 
Infection with feline calicivirus is able to cause respiratory
administered in addition to prednisolone in cases with insuf-
 and ocular disease, a febrile lameness syndrome with polyar-
ficient treatment response. Drugs and dosages are listed in
 thritis, or a combination of the two. Symptoms are most
Table 5-3.
severe in cattery kittens, but older cats can also be affected
72
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
(26). Both feld and vaccine strain of virus, and virus antigen
could be isolated from joints in cats (27-29), but the presence
of virus in the joint did not necessarily cause arthritis in every
case (29). Lameness was more severe after exposure to a feld
strain of virus when compared to a vaccine strain in one study
(29).
Treatment is usually not necessary, because the clinical
signs resolve spontaneously after several days (21). NSAIDs
can be used in severe cases to alleviate joint pain.
Lyme disease
Lyme disease is caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi,
which is transmitted by ticks of the Ixodes group. The role
of Borrelia in the pathogenesis of polyarthritis is unclear,
 but it seems to be able to cause a low-grade inflammatory
arthropathy of one or several joints in dogs and cats (30, 31).
 In dogs, arthritis develops after an incubation period of
around 2 months in joints closest to the tick bite (31).
Systemic illness, such as fever or lymphadenopathy, may also
be seen.
Figure 5-11 Mediolateral radiograph of the shoulder joint of a
10-month-old cat with an osteochondrosis-like lesion in the caudal
 B. burgdorferi is difficult to culture, and serological testing
humeral head. Deformation of the proximal humeral metaphysis is also
 is of questionable diagnostic value, as many clinically normal
present. The reason for these bony changes could not be determined.
cats have positive titers. Approximately 5% of cats tested in
Similar changes were present in the contralateral shoulder. (Courtesy of 
the UK had antibodies against B. burgdorferi (32, 33). Anti-
J.C. Dubuis.)
bodies develop consistently after experimental infection of
sis and separation of a cartilage flap between the calcified and
cats with B. burgdorferi, but cats do not necessarily show
non-calcified layers. The loose flap may later dislodge and
clinical signs associated with the infection (30, 34).
can become a free joint body. The disease is then called
Lyme disease could be considered a possible etiology of
osteochondrosis dissecans. Synovitis and degenerative carti-
inflammatory non-erosive arthritis when no other causes are
lage changes develop in the affected joint and sclerosis of the
found, and when there is a history or possibility of tick infec-
subchondral bone occurs around the area of the abnormal
tion, but it should be remembered that a positive B. burgdor-
cartilage layer. The etiology of osteochondrosis in dogs
 feri antibody titer does not confirm the disease. Therapy in
remains unclear Besides a hereditary component, factors
 suspected cases of Lyme disease consists of administration of
such as diet, growth rate, trauma, changes in joint morphom-
antibiotics, usually tetracyclines (Table 5-3).
etry, and hormonal imbalance contribute to the expression
of the disease.
5.3 Miscellaneous diseases
Case reports suggest that osteochondrosis can also occur
A few diseases of feline joints have been described in case
in the feline species. Three case reports describe osteochon-
 reports or case series, but not much is known on incidence,
drosis or osteochondrosis-like lesions in the shoulder and
cause, and treatment. These conditions are summarized
stifle joint (36-38). Affected cats were young and presented
below. Diseases involving a specific joint are described in the
for lameness. Radiographic and intraoperative features of
corresponding chapters of part 7 of the book.
were located on the caudal aspect of the humeral head
5.3.1 Osteochondrosis
(Fig. 5-1l) and on the lateral femoral epicondyles. His-
topathological analysis of the removed flap was performed in
two of the described cases and appeared consistent with a
primary abnormality of endochondral ossification (35).
dislodged osteochondrosis flap (37, 38).
Epiphyseal chondrocytes fail to mature normally and the
Cats can be treated similarly to dogs, by an arthrotomy
extracellular cartilage matrix does not calcify. This failure
 and removal of the loose cartilage flap. The area is curetted,
results in local thickening of cartilage compared to normal
 until subchondral bone is exposed. Osteostixis creates vascu-
areas. The increased thickness of the cartilage impedes nutri-
lar channels to facilitate healing of the defect. From the
tion of deeper layers, which eventually results in local necro-
limited information available in the veterinary literature,
5: Diseases of joints
73
osteoarthritis, and from medial epicondylitis of the humerus
(Chapter 30).
Synovial osteochondromatosis is usually treated conserva-
tively, as the lesions are located within the joint capsule and
are difficult to remove (40).
5.3.3 Synovial cysts
s m p sarns renrad ae ssn o
fluid. They originate from the synovium of joints, bursae, or
tendon sheaths, and can grow to large sizes. Several cats with
synovial cysts of the elbow joint have been described (41-43)
(Chapter 30), but the cysts have also been seen in the shoul-
der and stifle joint (40). The cysts can cause pain when
mechanically interfering with joint function. Repeated needle
aspiration of the cyst is considered the treatment of choice,
as the cysts tend to recur even after surgical resection (42).
References and further reading
1.  Godfrey DR. Osteoarthritis in cats: a retrospective radiological
study. J Small Anim Pract 2005;46:425-429.
Herzog W, et al. Hindlimb loading, morphology and biochem-
Figure 5-12 Radiograph of the elbow joint of a cat with suspected
istry of articular cartilage in the ACL-deficient cat knee. Osteo-
synovial osteochondromatosis. Several large rounded mineralized
arthritis Cartilage 1993;1:243-251.
paienol Aigissod 'suiol aul po inadse leueo aul ie uaas aie saanpniis
3.
Suter E, et al. One-year changes in hind limb kinematics, ground
within the cranial joint capsule.
reaction forces and knee stability in an experimental model of
osteoarthritis. J Biomechanics 1998;31:511-517.
4.
 Clarke SP, et al. Radiographic prevalence of degenerative joint
 prognosis seems to be good, at least on a short- or medium-
157:793-799.
term basis (36, 37). The cat with bilateral stifle osteochon-
Hardie EM, et al. Radiographic evidence of degenerative joint
drosis returned to normal function (37).
disease in geriatric cats: 100 cases (1994-1997). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2002;220:628-632.
Clarke SP, Bennett D. Feline osteoarthritis: a prospective study
5.3.2 Synovial osteochondromatosis
of 28 cases. J Small Anim Pract 2006;47:439-445.
Godfrey DR. Osteoarthritis in cats: a prospective series of 40
Ossifed nodules located in joints may represent synovial
cases. BSAVA meeting 2003; Birmingham.
osteochondromatosis, or synovial osteochondrometaplasia
8.
Scarlett JM, Donoghue S. Associations between body condition
(Fig. 5-12). These nodules arise in the joint capsule from
and disease in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998;212:1725-
nodules of cartilage that are formed by synovial metaplasia.
1731.
9.
 Bennett D, Clarke S. Feline osteoarthritis. ESVOT meeting
The cartilage nodules can ossify and are then visible on
2004; Munich, Germany.
radiographs as rounded calcified structures in the vicinity of
10. Hardie EM. Management of osteoarthritis in cats. Vet Clin
joints. In contrast to solitary osteochondromas or feline
North Am Small Anim Pract 1997;27:945-953.
osteochondromatosis (Chapter 5), the calcifications seen in
11. Graeme SA. Radiographic features of feline joint disease. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2000;30:281-302.
synovial osteochondromatosis do not seem to be attached to
12. Lascelles BD, et al. Evaluation of the clinical efficacy of meloxi-
the bone, but the two conditions can look similar (39).
Synovial osteochondromatosis needs to be differentiated
Pract 2001;42:587-593.
radiographically from other diseases causing periarticular
13. Reginster JY, et al. Long-term effects of glucosamine sulfate on
osteoarthritis progression: a randomized, placebo-controlled
calcifcation or ossification, such as feline osteochondroma-
clinical trial. Lancet 2001;357:251.
  t )  s t  
14. Hulse D, et al. The effect of Cosequin in cranial cruciate defi-
H '( rnde) susyisso siso ro susso eiseids
cient and reconstructed stifle joints in dogs. VOs 25th annual
differential diagnosis for ossified bodies in the stifle joint is
conference 1998; Snowmass, Colorado.
15. Hardy RM, Wallace LJ. Arthrocentesis and synovial membrane
intra-articular calcification of the medial meniscus or cranial
biopsy. Vet Clin North Am 1974;4:449-462.
cruciate ligament (Chapter 38). Synovial osteochondromato-
16. Pedersen NC, et al. Feline chronic progressive polyarthritis. Am
sis of the elbow needs to be differentiated from severe elbow
J Vet Res 1980;41:522-535.
74
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
17. Carro T, et al. Subcutaneous abscesses and arthritis caused by
30. Gibson MD, et al. Borrelia burgdorfer infection of cats (letter).
a probable bacterial L-form in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;202:1786.
1989;194:1583-1588.
31. Straubinger RK,et al. Clinical manifestations, pathogenesis, and
18. Bennett D, Nash AS. Feline immune-based polyarthritis: a study
effect of antibiotic treatment on Lyme borreliosis in dogs. Wien
of thirty-one cases. J Small Anim Pract 1988;29:501-523.
Klin Wochenschr 1998;110:874-881.
19. Carro T. Polyarthris in cats. Compend Continuing Educ
32. May C, et al. Borrelia burgdorferi infection in cats in the UK.
1994;16:57-67.
J Small Anim Pract 1994;35:517-520.
20. Hanna FY. Disease modifying treatment for feline rheumatoid
33. Magnarelli LA, et al. Tick parasitism and antibodies to Borrelia
arthritis. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2005;18:94-99.
burgdorferi in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990;197:63-66.
21. Bennett D, May C. Joint diseases of dogs and cats. In: Ettinger
34. Burgess EC. Experimentally induced infection of cats with
SJ (ed.) Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, 4th edn.
Borrelia burgdorferi. Am J Vet Res 1992;53:1507-1511.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1995: pp. 2032-2077.
35. Olsson SE, Reiland S. The nature of osteochondrosis in animals.
22. Iglauer F, et al. Streptococcus canis arthritis in a cat breeding
Summary and conclusions with comparative aspects on osteo-
colony. J Exp Anim Sci 1991;34:59-65.
chondritis dissecans in man. Acta Radiol 1978;358:299.
23. Stallings B, et al. Sepicemia and septic arthritis caused by Strep-
36. Butcher R, Beasley K. Osteochondritis dissecans in a cat? Vet
Rec 1986;118:646.
child. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987;191:703-704.
37. Ralphs SC. Bilateral stifle osteochondritis dissecans in a cat. J
24. Ernst S, Goggin JM. What is your diagnosis? Mycoplasma
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2005;41:78-80.
arthritis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999;215:19-20.
38. Petersen CJ. Osteochondriis dissecans of the humeral head of
25. Moise NS, et al. Mycoplasma gateae arthritis and tenosynovitis
a cat. NZ Vet J 1984;32:115-116.
in cats: case report and experimental reproduction of the disease.
39. Hubler M, et al. Lesions resembling osteochondromatosis in 
Am J Vet Res 1983;44:16-21.
two cats. J Small Anim Pract 1986;27:181-187.
 26. Dawson S, et al. Investigation of vaccine reactions and break-
40. Bennett D. The musculoskeletal system. In: Chandler EA,
dowms after feline calicivirus vaccination. Vet Rec 1993;132:
Gaskell CJ, Gaskell RM (eds) Feline medicine and therapeutics,
346-350.
3rd edn. Oxford: Blackwell; 2004: pp. 173-233.
27. Bennett D, et al. Detection of feline calicivirus antigens in the
41. Prymak C, Goldschmidt MH. Synovial cysts in five dogs and
joints of infected cats. Vet Rec 1989;124:329-332.
one cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1991;27:151-154.
28. Levy JK, Marsh A. Isolation of calicivirus from the joint of a
42.9
Stead AC, et al. Synovial cysts in cats. J Small Anim Pract
kitten with arthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;201:753-763.
1995;36:450-454.
29. Dawson S, et al. Acute arthritis of cats associated with feline
43. White JD, et al. What is your diagnosis? J Feline Med Surg
calicivirus infection. Res Vet Sci 1994;56:133-143.
2004;6:339-344.
75
 Diseases of the spine and nervous system
F. Steffen, F. Grunenfelder
The range of feline spinal cord and peripheral nerve diseases
Diseases causing compression of the spinal cord include
is wide. The historical information is often incomplete in cats
intervertebral disc disease (IVDD), and tumors of the nerve
and the clinical presentation for many spinal cord diseases
 roots, meninges, spinal cord, and vertebral column. Tumors
and neuromyopathies is often similar. Thus, additional inves-
of the nervous system are described in Chapter 8.
tigations, including examination of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF),
plain and contrast radiography, computed tomography (CT),
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies, and cytologi-
6.1.1 Intervertebral disc disease
cal and histopathological analysis, are mandatory to reach a
 Spontaneous IVDD is rarely encountered in cats when com-
diagnosis in most cases.
pared to dogs. One study reported an incidence of 0.12% in
An overview of feline compressive and non-compressive
s a sd s o (i) ndod pso a e
spinal disorders is presented in Table 6-1. A selection of these
 extrusion) and II (disc protrusion) IVDD have been observed
diseases is discussed in more detail below. The most impor-
 in the cat, with type II being more common in cats older than
tant feline neuromuscular diseases are also described in the
 8 years. This age predilection is analogous to that seen in
following sections.
 non-chondrodystrophic dogs and in humans, where disc pro-
 trusion is the result of fbroid metaplasia of the disc with age.
6.1 Compressive diseases of the spinal cord
The presence of annular tears without changes of the nucleus
pulposus in many older cats also suggests that these discs
The severity of damage associated with chronic compressive
undergo similar changes as seen in non-chondrodystrophic
lesions and acute spinal trauma in cats can range from
dogs (2).
mild demyelination to total necrosis of both the white and
Although Hansen type II disc protrusions were seen more
gray matter. The underlying pathogenesis is different for the
 commonly in postmortem studies, Hansen type I disc extru-
 [wo types of spinal cord injury. The rate of development of
sions were found in 8 out of 10 cats in a clinical study, and
the compressive force is the main factor that differs between
only 2 of the patients had Hansen type II protrusions (1). The
the two entities. Two major forces have to be considered:
 apparent discrepancy between clinical and pathological fnd-
the direct mechanical disruption of the cord tissue by the
ings may be explained by the slowly progressive nature of
compressive lesion, and hypoxic changes resulting from
disc protrusions that do not necessarily result in clinically
 pressure on the vascular system in the cord. In acute spinal
overt pain and dysfunction, as compared to disc extrusions.
rauma, these forces result in immediate functional defcits,
 Chronic pain may easily be overlooked in cats.
which may be aggravated by a cascade of biochemical alter-
The predilection sites of clinical IVDD are the thoracolum-
ations that occur as a consequence of water and ionic
bar region and the mid to caudal lumbar spine, specifcally
changes, and spinal cord ischemia. With slowly progressive
the disc spaces of L4-L5 and L5-L6 (2). However, the highest
compressive disease processes there is remarkable attenua-
 incidence of disc protrusion has been found in the cervical
tion of the soff, compressible tissue of the spinal cord
spine in necropsied cats (3, 4). Interestingly, clinical reports
without initial neurological signs. The chronic compression
of cervical disc disease are rare (5, 6). Similarly, lumbosacral
of the spinal cord leads to changes in the structure of blood
disc disease occurs exceedingly rarely in cats (7).
vessels, loss of axons, and demyelination. Clinical signs
occur when the cord can no longer compensate for the
Diagnosis
pathological changes.
 Clinical signs of spinal cord compression are determined
 Plain radiography of the spine may reveal narrowed interver-
by their severity and neuroanatomic localization. Based on
tebral disc spaces and mineralized intervertebral disc material
the degree of the deficits, spinal patients may be assigned to
in situ and/or within the spinal canal (Fig. 6-1A). But these
one of fve groups (Table 6-2). In general, animals with grade 
are rather rare fndings, and in general, plain radiographs are
V lesions carry a poor prognosis if decompression cannot be
 not as useful for identifying extruded discs in cats as they are
carried out within 48 hours.
in dogs. Myelography (Fig. 6-1B) or advanced imaging
76
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
Category
Diseases
Vascular
Infarct
Focal malacia
Inflammatory/infectious
 Feline infectious peritonitis
 Bacterial, viral, or fungal
infections
Toxoplasmosis
 Eosinophilic meningomyelitis
 Idiopathic poliomyelitis
Traumatic
Vertebral fracture/luxation
(Chapters 15 and 34)
9
Intervertebral disc disease
Congenital/inherited
Storage disease affecting spinal
cord
 Syringohydromyelia
 Subarachnoid cyst
 Congenital malformations
Metabolic
Hypervitaminosis A
 Neoplastic
Lymphosarcoma
Vertebral column neoplasia
 Meningeal neoplasia
Extradural neoplasia/metastasis
Intramedullary tumors
Degenerative
 Neuroaxonal dystrophy
 Degenerative myelopathy
B
Figure 6-1 (A) Plain radiographs and lumbar myelogram (B) of a cat
Table 6-1. Feline spinal cord disorders
with a Hansen type I disc extrusion of the L5-L6 disc. (A) The L5-L6
disc space is narrowed and mineralized disc material is seen. (B)
Myelography confirms extradural compression at the L5-L6 level
Grade
Neurological signs
activity is diffcult to achieve in cats, so they may require
 Back/neck pain only, no neurological deficits
longer periods of cage rest. The use of steroids is controver-
II
 Ambulatory paresis/ataxia, normal micturition
sial. Based upon the clinical observation that some ambula-
III
 Ambulatory paresis/ataxia, urinary retention
tory animals (grade I-Il) improve significantly, a short course 
IV
 Non-ambulatory paresis/plegia, urinary
of prednisone (1-2 mg/kg SID for 24 days) is considered
 retention, intact deep pain perception
helpful by the authors. This effect may be attributed to reduc-
Non-ambulatory plegia, urinary retention,
tion of spinal cord edema secondary to the compressive
 absent deep pain perception
lesion. Prolonged glucocorticoid therapy for spinal injuries is
discouraged. Non-steroidalanti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
Table 6-2. Clinical degrees of spinal cord dysfunction
may be given for their anti-inflammatory and analgesic
effects, but never concurrently with steroids. Opioids can be
administered for analgesia together with either steroids or
modalities, such as CT or MRI, are indispensable for exact
NSAIDs. The rationale behind non-surgical treatment is to
diagnosis and localization of the disc herniation (8).
allow time for healing a ruptured annulus and to limit the
Non-surgical treatment
sus frequently showed a decrease in volume or even disap-
Non-surgical treatment is indicated in cats for the frst episode
 peared in some people in serial MRI studies of humans treated
of back pain without neurological deficits or in patients
where surgery is declined for other reasons, such as fnancial
showed no or minimal changes in size of the protrusion over
constraints. Non-surgical treatment consists of strict confine-
 time (9). Similar studies have not been published in veterinary
ment in a cage for 24 weeks. A gradual return to normal
medicine.
6: Diseases of the spine and nervous system
77
More aggressive medical therapy should be instituted prior
outcome. However, it should be kept in mind that only
to surgery in a cat presented with paraplegia (grade IV and
 5-10% of intact axons are necessary for functional recovery.
V). Experimental studies in cats have suggested that only
 Identification of this small percentage of axons would be
soluble corticosteroids given within 1 hour of the trauma are
visually impossible at durotomy. Therefore, animals with
beneficial (10). Methylprednisolone succinate given within 8
 malacia should only be euthanized if they develop ascending
hours of spinal trauma was beneficial in humans (11). Appli-
    o   
cation of methylprednisolone has been used as an initial bolus
period.
at a dose of 30 mg/kg IV, with additional doses of 15 mg/kg
Experimental studies in cats with complete spinal transec-
IV given at 2 and 6 hours after the initial dose in human
tion showed that 87% of the animals were able to walk
studies. Ventral spinal cord trauma was simulated and methyl-
unassisted on a treadmill 1 month after the injury. These cats
 prednisolone was administered following the protocol men-
received intensive physical rehabilitation consisting of 30
jyis on pnis aun jedxa ue un aoqe pauon
minutes of locomotor and proprioceptive exercises each day
benefit could be demonstrated. However, the degree of
(16). In another study involving spinal cord transection no
spinal trauma produced may not have been severe enough to
physical rehabilitation was given and only 30% of these cats
allow for distinction between the treatment and control
regained full weight-bearing ability 4 weeks after transection
groups (12).
(17). Fecal and urinary incontinence necessitated special
Success rates for conservative treatment of IVDD in cats
nursing in these cats.
are not yet available. Recovery rates for dogs with grade I-III
deficits are reported to be 90%, and approximately 50% for
6.1.2 Spinal subarachnoid cysts
those with grade IV lesions (13). In dogs with grade V lesions
conservative treatment is ineffective in most cases.
Spinal subarachnoid cysts represent a rare cause of myelopa-
Disadvantages of non-surgical treatment include slow or
thy in cats (18, 19). Whether this condition is a developmen-
incomplete recovery, a relatively high risk for recurrence,
tal abnormality or a consequence of an acquired disease,
 persistence of pain, and neurological deterioration.
such as spinal trauma or inflammation, is debatable. Prolif-
erative lesions or arachnoid adhesions are thought to create
a one-way valve that causes accumulation of the CSF. Alter-
Surgical treatment
natively, the diverticulum may result from herniation of the
Decompressive surgery is the treatment of choice in any cat
arachnoid membrane through a congenital defect in the
with recurrent back pain and/or neurological deficits of grade
dura. While the etiology remains unclear, the resulting neu-
II or more. Depending on the location of the herniated disc,
rological deficits can be explained by the compression of the
a hemilaminectomy or laminectomy may be performed in the
underlying spinal cord, and extension of meningeal connec-
 cervical, thoracolumbar, and lumbar spine. Decompression
tive tissue along the spinal canal. Diagnostic imaging reveals
of the cervical cord by a ventral slot procedure is technically
a characteristic bulb-like dilatation of the dorsal contrast
more demanding in cats than in dogs. Principles of spinal
column (Fig. 6-2).
surgery are described in Chapter 15, and decompression pro-
 Surgical treatment consists of dural fenestration or excision
cedures in Chapter 34.
of the cyst-like structure. The prognosis is usually good.
Outcome for surgically treated cats with IVDD in the tho-
Complications include recurrence of clinical signs due to ref-
racolumbar and lumbar spine is good to excellent for cats
 ormation of arachnoid adhesions or incomplete recovery due
with intact deep pain perception (1, 14). Time to recovery is
 to severe and irreversible spinal cord damage.
somewhat unpredictable, and may range from an immediate
postoperative improvement to a slow improvement over
6.2 Non-compressive diseases of
weeks to months. Clinical studies documenting outcome for
the spinal cord
cats with loss of deep pain perception after disc herniation
are not available. A recent study in dogs with loss of deep
The clinician offering a spinal surgery service should also be
pain sensation showed that more than 50% regained deep
fully aware and up to date with the diagnosis and treatment
pain sensation and the ability to walk within 4 weeks of
of non-compressive disorders of the spinal cord. Diagnosis
decompressive surgery (15). The main long-term complica-
of these diseases can be challnging, and some disorders
tion in animals with complete spinal cord injury is persistent
 can easily be missed. New insights have been obtained with
urinary and fecal incontinence. Assessment of spinal cord
advanced diagnostic imaging, most notably MRI. Non-
integrity by durotomy in animals with loss of deep pain per-
compressive diseases of the spinal cord include spinal cord
ception has been recommended. Presence of focal or exten-
infarction and the neurological form of feline infectious
sive malacia of the cord has been associated with a hopeless
 peritonitis (FIP). Many infectious diseases are also considered
78
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
Figure 6-2 Lumbar myelogram of a 7-year-old cat with marked
hindlimb ataxia of 4 months duration. The bulb-like dilation of the
dorsal subarachnoid space at T2 is characteristic for a subarachnoid
oezieidnshew pue Auonauuel lesop yi patean sem ien aul is
of the cyst after durotomy.
primarily non-compressive, although they may cause com-
pression in rare cases.
6.2.1 Spinal cord infarction
Spinal cord infarction secondary to fbrocartilaginous embo-
lization (FCE) of spinal vasculature is a rare entity in cats
(20-22). However, it is an important differential diagnosis
for non-painful myelopathies such as concussive spinal cord
B
rauma or a low-volume/high-velocity disc extrusion. The
Figure 6-3 A feline patient with spinal cord infarction.
cause of FCE in animal species is unknown. It is hypothesized
(A) A 6-year-old cat with hemiparesis due to a spinal cord lesion
between C1 and C5. The signs occurred acutely without associated
that small pieces of intervertebral fbrocartilage enter the
trauma.
vasculature by direct penetration of vessels, arteriovenous
(B) T2-weighted sagittal magnetic resonance imaging of the cervical
communications, the vertebral sinus, or via herniation
spine. Note the intramedullary, focal hyperintense signal between C4
through the endplate or through an embryonic remnant
and C5
vessel. One theory that could apply well to the outdoor
free-roaming cat is the possibility of trauma to the interver-
improved clinically within 3 weeks (22). Although FCE is
tebral disc, causing a fragment of nucleus pulposus to enter
rare in cats, it may be underdiagnosed because signs may only
the damaged venous system.
be transient when areas of the upper motor neuron are
 Onset of clinical signs is acute and the symptoms of spinal
affected, and histopathological examination of the spinal
cord dysfunction are dependent on the area affected, but are
cord is not routinely performed.
usually asymmetrical (Fig. 6-3A). Typically, palpation and
manipulation do not elicit painful reactions. Lower motor
6.2.2 Feline infectious peritonitis
neuron signs or absence of deep pain perception usually
Aaderr uid oai ron sisuid ssdou e aes
FIP is reported to be the most common infectious meningo-
and myelography are normal. CSF analysis may show an
 myelitis in the cat and also the single most common cause of
elevated protein content. Magnetic resonance tomography
cord disease (23). The neurological form of FIP can be present
despite normal results on physical and ophthalmological
(Fig. 6-3B).
examination (24). Although the majority of cases will present
In one review of five cats with FCE, three of the cats
with multifocal signs, with the brainstem being the most
were euthanized, and postmortem examination confrmed
common site affected, focal spinal cord dysfunction has been
 myelomalacia with intralesional FCE. Two cats survived and
described (25).
6: Diseases of the spine and nervous system
79
Antemortem diagnosis is challenging and will only be con-
Initial treatment of discospondylitis usually consists of
frmed by histopathology in many cases. The clinical diagno-
 antibiotics, cage rest, and analgesia. The antibiotic is ideally
sis of neurological FIP is based on results of the CSF analysis  selected based on the results of culture and sensitivity testing
with a marked elevation of protein, and a mixed-population  of blood, urine, or material aspirated from the site of infec-
pleocytosis with a prevalence of neutrophils. It is not uncom-  tion. If the infective agent is unknown, ampicillin, cephalo-
mon in cases of FIP that CSF cannot be obtained from  sporin, or enrofloxacin may be used. The optimal duration
globulinemia can often be demonstrated in the serum of  that patients should be treated for at least 8 weeks in an
affected cats. Absence of serum antibody titers against 
 attempt to clear the infection and to prevent recurrence.
 FIP virus does not rule out the disease. The prognosis is
There have been three reports of feline discospondylitis
usually hopeless and steroids may only provide a temporary
(27-29). In two animals, infection extended to the vertebral
alleviation.
canal and meninges, resulting in paraparesis. The third case
was presented with spinal pain without neurological defcits.
Radiographic signs in all cats included osteolysis of adjacent
6.3 Infections of the spine and spinal cord
vertebral endplates. The causative organism in one cat was
 Streptococcus canis and Actinomyces cultured from a para-
6.3.1 Discospondylitis
vertebral abscess. Escherichia coli was isolated in the second
 Discospondylitis is a bacterial infection of the intervertebral
patient where hematogenous spread was suspected. The
disc and adjacent vertebral bodies. The most common route
infective agent was not determined in the third case. The
of infection is by arterial spread of organisms from infected
sites elsewhere in the body. The infection frst localizes in
 advanced stage of the disease or lack of response to therapy
the endplates, probably in the slowly flowing, tortuous
(27-29).
venous sinuses of the subchondral area, and then spreads
 a    o rsn a o
6.3.2 Spinal empyema
nutrient foramina in the endplate. Primary sites of infection
include the genitourinary system, skin, heart valves, and
Infection of the epidural space secondary to a penetrating
mouth. Immunosuppression may be a factor in the develop-
wound or bite may represent a more common cause of infec-
ment of discospondylitis. Direct infection of the disc or
tious spinal cord disease in the cat than discospondylitis.
Formation of an epidural abscess or empyema can result in
 or bite, surgery or migrating foreign bodies such as grass
spinal cord compression, accompanied by fever and pain.
awns (26).
Reported cases of spinal empyema in cats were all associated
 Infection of the vertebral endplates results in inflammation
with extradural granulomatous mass lesions. Actinomyces
and tissue necrosis with erosion of the endplates. Spinal pain
 sp. was isolated from two cats, and Fusobacteriur sp. and
 and pyrexia are the frst clinical signs at this stage. The course
Bacteroidessp. from the other (30, 31). The infection occurred
of infection may vary with the infecting organism and the
subsequent to a broken tail in one case, whereas cutaneous
patient's immune status. Neurological deficits develop when
abscessation of the tail base was found in the other two.
the spinal cord is compressed by proliferation of inflamma-
 Diagnosis is best obtained by advanced diagnostic imaging,
tory tissue and exostosis. Occasionally, hypermobility of the
but exploratory surgery may be necessary for defnitive diag-
infected vertebral segment occurs. Extension of the infection
 nosis. Besides systemic antibiotics, surgical decompression,
through the dura represents an occasional, but serious,
 epidural lavage, and drainage may be necessary to treat this
sequela.
serious spinal disorder. Early recognition and surgical and
Diagnosis is usually possible with spinal radiographs taken
 antimicrobial treatment can result in a good outcome in dogs
at least 2 weeks after the onset of infection. The earliest
[32).
radiographic change is a subtle irregularity of the endplates.
The disc space may also be narrowed. Later, erosion of the
6.3.3 Fungal infections of the spinal cord
endplates becomes more evident, and the disc space may
widen because of lysis of adjacent bone. After a variable
The most common systemic fungal infections in cats are
period of time, bone regeneration occurs with sclerosis and
cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, coccidiomycosis, and blasto-
osteophyte production. Vertebral collapse and bony ankylo-
mycosis. The geographic distribution of the four organisms
sis represent the endstage appearance of discospondylitis.
is variable. Coccidiomycosis and blastomycosis most fre-
Scoliosis, fracture, and subluxation are possible complica-
quently appear in specifc defned geographic locations,
tions of the disease.
whereas cryptococcosis and histoplasmosis have a worldwide
80
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
distribution. Cryptococcus is a saprophytic, yeast-like fungi.
 and pigeons are believed to be an important vector. However,
outdoor cats are no more prone to infection than indoor cats.
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and feline immunodeficiency
virus (FIV) do not seem to have a significant influence on
disease prevalence (33). Histoplasmosis is most frequently
seen in regions with temperate and subtropical climates.
Blastomycosis occurs in North America, Africa, and India,
especially in regions with moist acidic soil. Coccidiomycosis
is seen in sandy and dry regions of the American continent.
 The major route of infection in all four groups is through
the respiratory tract. Peroral infections in histoplasmosis, and
 percutanous infections in coccidiomycosis, are alternative
pathways (33). Depending on the geographic location, cryp-
tococcosis and histoplasmosis are fairly common associated
with inflammatory central nervous system (CNS) disease.
Spread from the respiratory tract to the spinal cord alone has
 thoracolumbar junction. This malformation was an incidental finding
been reported for both cryptococcosis and coccidiomycosis
(23, 34). However, isolated cases of spinal cord infection are
rare. Ocular involvement, especially retinal changes, can be 
ing in vertebral body and disc abnormalities. Those of
 seen with all four fungal species.
ectodermal origin result in spinal cord and meningeal abnor-
Thoracic radiography and rhinoscopy are helpful investiga-
malities. Deformity of the vertebral bodies and discs is rarely
tive procedures for establishing the diagnosis. Definitive diag-
associated with primary clinical deficits, whereas malforma-
     o a si s
tion of the spinal cord is more likely to be associated with
tracheal wash, CSF, urine, or cytology/biopsies of lesions.
clinical signs.
Culture of the organisms from the samples is helpful in
 Malformations of the bony spine such as block vertebrae,
determining the varieties and serotypes. Serological antibody
butterfly vertebrae, hemivertebrae, or transitional vertebrae
screening can be used to narrow the tentative diagnosis,
may be detected on routine plain radiographs (Fig. 6-4). It is
although false-negative results are common, especially with
imperative that compression of neural tissue be demonstrated
blastomycosis and histomycosis. A highly specific and sensi-
before the clinical signs can be attributed to the radiological
tive latex agglutination test identifying cryptococcus capsule
abnormality. Pain and pelvic limb weakness have been associ-
antigen in serum or CSF is commercially available (33). MRI
ated with an abnormal lumbosacral junction due to transi-
is the recommended advanced diagnostic imaging modality
tional vertebral segments with resulting compression of the
for visualizing and evaluating CNS infection (35).
cauda equina. Clinical signs were alleviated following dorsal
Amphotericin B, itraconazole, and fluconazole are com-
laminectomy (37). Occipito-atlantoaxial malformation and
 monly used therapeutic agents for all four fungal species. The
atlantoaxial instability secondary to absence or malformation
main advantages of fluconazole are the relatively mild side-
of the odontoid process have been described as a rare entity
effects in the patient, and the good penetration into the CNS
in cats (38). The condition was successfully treated by ventral
(36). Infected cats often have to be treated for several months
cross-pin fixation and arthrodesis of the atlantoaxial articula-
to years, depending on clinical signs and serological course
tion in one case. Congenital abnormalities of the spine are
(33). Frequently, the organism cannot be completely elimi-
further described in Chapter 3.
nated, and the medical therapy has to be continued to prevent
Abnormalities of the spinal cord and vertebral arch are
recurrence of the disease. Surgical treatment is only used
 primarily influenced by neural tube development. Spina bifda
to decompress compromised tissue. Since these are systemic
 is a combination of defects involving the vertebral column,
diseases, the overall prognosis is guarded to poor.
spinal cord, and associated tissues. The defects may vary
from incomplete fusion of vertebral arches to incomplete
6.4 Congenital abnormalities of the spine
formation of the neural tube with or without protrusion and
dysplasia of meninges, spinal cord, or both (Chapter 3).
and spinal cord
These related malformations are commonly encountered in
Spinal cord and vertebral abnormalities can be divided into
the Manx breed. Absence of the tail is an autosomal-
two major groups based on embryological origin. Aberra-
dominant trait in this breed, which provides the genetic
tions may originate from tissues of mesodermal origin result-
basis for neural tube defects. Affected cats typically have a
6: Diseases of the spine and nervous system
81
Disorder
Frequency
 Ischemic neuromyopathy
Common
Polymyositis
Rare
Clostridial myositis
Rare
Masticatory myositis
Rare
Myositis ossificans
Rare
 Feline immunodeficiency virus
 Experimental
 Acquired/congenital myasthenia gravis
Occasional
Hypokalemic myopathy
Common
 Hyperkalemic myopathy
Occasional
Hypernatremic myopathy
Rare
Malignant hyperthermia
Rare
Feline X-linked muscular dystrophy
Rare
Figure 6-5 Four-month-old kitten with marked cervical ventroflexion
Myotonic myopathy
Rare
due to hypokalemic polymyopathy. This sign is characteristic for
neuromuscular weakness and can be caused by a variety of disorders
 Nemaline rod myopathy
Rare
Glycogen storage disease type IV
Rare
 Laminin alpha-2 (merosin) defciency
Rare
bunny-hopping gait. More severe abnormalities include fecal
 Myopathy of Devon Rex cats
Rare
and urinary incontinence, megacolon, and paraparesis. Signs
 Inherited motor neuron disease/spinal
Rare
may develop over weeks to months as the cat grows. This is
muscular atrophy in Main Coon cats
likely due to failure of cranial migration of the spinal cord --
 Skeletal muscle tumors
Rare
so-called tethering. Tethering may result from attachment of
the spinal cord at a specifc level associated with a meningo-
Table 6-3. Feline neuromuscular disorders
myelocele. It is clinically relevant to distinguish the deficits
 associated with a tethered cord from those of cord dysgenesis,
overview of feline neuromuscular disease is presented in
nificant improvement.
Tables 6-3 and 6-4. A selection of the most relevant disorders
will be discussed below in detail.
6.5 Peripheral nerve and muscle disorders
The neuromuscular diseases can be broadly divided into
6.5.1 Ischemic neuromyopathy
mono- and polyradiculo/neuropathies, myopathies, and neu-
 Ischemic neuromyopathy results from embolization or long-
romuscular junction diseases. The clinical sign common to all
standing compression of arteries.
 these disorders is muscle weakness. However the expression
of that weakness may vary considerably. Weak cats are prone
Ischemic neuromyopathy secondary to
to develop cervical ventroflexion because cats lack a nuchal
thrombus formation
ligament (Fig. 6-5). Other signs may include lower motor
neuron signs, fatigability, and alterations in muscle size
Cardiomyopathy with thrombus formation occasionally
(hypotrophy, swelling), possibly accompanied by myalgia.
occurs in cats. The emboli may be transported to any site
Accurate diagnosis of neuromuscular disorders in cats
within the arterial circulation, but the most common site of
requires diagnostic tools which are selected according to the
obstruction is the aortic trifurcation (90%). The internal and
specific case. Useful tests include measurement of creatine
external iliac artery and the median sacral artery are
kinase activity, viral and protozoal titers for FeLV, FIV, and
obstructed, with resulting ischemia of the distal organs.
toxoplasmosis, antiacetylcholine receptor antibodies, electro-
 Embolization of the brachial artery is very rarely observed.
diagnostic testing, and muscle and peripheral nerve biopsies.
The onset of clinical signs is acute. Painful paraparesis or
Muscle biopsies are usually evaluated using routine hemo-
paralysis
 occurs; asymmetric deficits are occasionally
-an p  ran is so p 
observed. The limbs are cool on palpation, there is absence
ses. Peripheral nerve fascicular biopsies are fixed in 2.5%
of a femoral pulse, and the nail bed appears cyanotic. The
glutaraldehyde and the plastic-embedded sections are stained
 gastrocnemius muscles are frm and painful. Pain sensation
with toluidine blue. Teased nerve fber studies and electronic
is often absent in the distal limbs. The ability to extend and
 microscopy can be useful in reaching a fnal diagnosis. An
flex the hip and stifle joints is usually preserved, and the
82
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
Disorder
Frequency
Figure 6-6 Cat 
trapped in a hung
 Ischemic neuromyopathy
Common
window. Ischemic
 Idiopathic polyradiculoneuritis
Rare
neuromyopathy
results from long-
 Chronic inflammatory demyelinating
Rare
standing
polyneuropathy
compression of
 Trigeminal neuritis
Rare
blood vessels,
Tetanus
Occasional
muscles, and nerves.
 Idiopathic self-mutilation (Siamese,
Rare
Abyssinian, Himalayan}
 Orofacial pain syndrome in Burmese cats
Rare
Traumatic neuropathy
Common
 Toxic neuropathies
Rare
Thallium
Organophosphate
Delayed
Salinomycin toxicity
Irradiation (>15 Gy)
 Diabetic neuropathy
Common
 Feline Niemann-Pick disease
Rare
Extensive tissue necrosis may necessitate limb amputation,
(sphingomyelinase deficiency)
but this is a rare complication.
 Hyperchylomicronemia
Rare
The severity of cardiac disease usually determines the prog-
Hyperoxaluria
Rare
 nosis. In one retrospective study of cats with thromboembolic
Idiopathic facial paralysis
Common
disease, all animals were dead 6 months after diagnosis. For
 Feline dysautonomia
Rare
cats with congestive heart failure, the prognosis is worse than
 Feline peripheral nerve tumors
Rare
for those without (39).
Table 6-4. Feline peripheral nerve disorders
Ischemic neuromyopathy after entrapment in bottom-
hung (hinged) windows
 Cats getting caught in a bottom-hung or hinged window are
 patellar reflex remains intact. Initially, the limbs may be held
commonly presented with signs of ischemic neuromyopathy
in extension because of ischemic muscle contraction.
(40). The resulting acute paralysis of the hindlimbs has been
 Electrodiagnostic studies reveal decreased motor nerve con-
duction and absent or reduced evoked potentials from the
rapped in an open window, and while making useless
interosseous and the cranial tibial muscles. The electromyo-
attempts to free thermselves, the abdominal area gets more
gram may be isoelectric. Chest radiography and echocardiog-
and more compressed (Fig. 6-6). Damage to muscles, nerves,
raphy often provide evidence of cardiac disease. The vascular
and occasionally abdominal organs and the spinal cord occurs
occlusion may be demonstrated definitively with an abdomi-
as a consequence of ischemia. The neurological presentation
nal ultrasound or an arteriogram.
is largely identical to cats with thromboembolic occlusion of 
The femoral pulse frequently returns within 1-2 weeks, and
the aortic trifurcation. Some cats are also in shock. The
no specific treatment has been shown to result in an improved
degree of neurological dysfunction and cardiovascular com-
recovery rate. Surgical embolectomy does also not appear to
promise is related to the time the cat is trapped in the
-saue qau e susaidan sies assl se Aeiadse paneiui aq
window.
thetic risk. Thrombolytic agents await clinical trials. Pain
Diagnosis is straightforward as most cats are found in the
 may be managed by restricting movement, and by admini-
window. However pathophysiological events may be more
stering morphine sulfate (0.1 mg/kg SC every 4-6 hours for
complicated, as iatrogenic ligation of the abdominal aorta
up to 2 days). For prevention of further episodes, lifelong
does not cause paraplegia (41). The presence of a thrombotic
administration of aspirin (25 mg/kg PO every third day) is
Jo assrd pue sissuoed aui on ieusa sass snoq
recommended.
ischemic neuromyopathy. The release of serotonin, throm-
Most patients develop collateral circulation and recover to
 boxane Az, prostaglandins, and other vasoactive substances
varying degrees within 6 weeks to 6 months. Defcits such
from thrombocytes causes constriction of collateral vessels
r rsd  s r ss ard e 5
 and activates intravascular clotting.
6: Diseases of the spine and nervous system
83
and a purely muscular localization is unlikely. Clindamycin
is the drug of choice for feline toxoplasmosis (25 mg BID).
Naturally occurring Neospora caninum has never been
 reported in cats, although it has been shown to affect feline
 skeletal muscles in experimental settings.
Bacterial myositis secondary to Clostridium chauvoei and
C. septicum has been reported in cats. Treatment consists of
administration of penicillin.
Paraneoplastic myositis may occur secondary to malignant
tumors, such as lymphoma. Animals with histopathologically
 confrmed non-infectious myositis that fails to respond to
steroid treatment should be evaluated for underlying
malignancies.
An acquired diffuse inflammatory myopathy, feline idio-
pathic myositis, has been described in cats. The disease may
Figure 6-7 Typical posture of a cat in the recovery phase after
 affect both young and old individuals, and is characterized
paraplegia due to ischemic neuromyopathy from being caught in a
by sudden weakness and cervical ventroflexion. Muscles are
hung window. Extension of the hindlimbs improves gradually over a
painful in some animals. Histopathology is the key to diag-
period of days to weeks in most cases, even when deep pain sensation
has been lost.
nosis, in addition to elevated creatine kinase and abnormal
electromyographic fndings. Muscle cells reveal mononuclear
cell infltration into non-necrotic fbers, a low degree of
The levels of creatine kinase are usually massively elevated
muscle fber necrosis, and phagocytosis, myofber regenera-
as a result of the damaged myocytes. However, this does not
tion, and variation in fber size. Differentiation between cats
seem to be related to the prognosis. Azotemia and elevated
with hypokalemic myopathy may be difficult, as some affected
alanine transaminase and aspartate aminotransferase reflect
cats may also be hypokalemic. If correction of hypokalemia
ischemic or direct traumatic damage of the kidneys and liver.
does not result in clinical amelioration and infectious causes
Most laboratory values return to normal within a few days.
have been ruled out, prednisolone is administered (4-6 mg/kg
Survival was reported as 75% in a large retrospective study
SID, then tapered over 8 weeks). The prognosis is generally
(40). Lethal complications include irreversible shock, and
good, but long-term administration of glucocorticosteroids
injury to the kidneys and intestines. Extensive necrosis of the
may be necessary in some cats (42).
limbs may complicate management and necessitate limb
amputation in rare instances.
6.5.3 Diabetic neuropathy
Intravenous fluid administration and the use of steroids
such as dexamethasone, prednisolone, or methyprednisolone
Peripheral neuropathy is a well-recognized debilitating
have been used in the acute stage. Pain may be controlled
complication of diabetes mellitus in cats. Eight percent of
 using the same regimen as in cats with thromboebolism due
diabetic cats are affected with neurological symptoms, but
to cardiac disease. Physiotherapy has been suggested as being
the incidence of subclinical disease is probably much higher.
extremely useful in the rehabilitation of affected cats. Recov-
Signs are usually typical of a symmetric distal limb poly-
ery of hindlimb paralysis occurs between 2 days and 1 month.
 neuropathy, and include a plantigrade stance (Fig. 6-8) and
Long-term prognosis is excellent, in contrast to ischemic neu-
paraparesis, distal limb muscular atrophy, and pelvic limb
romyopathy due to cardiomyopathy (Fig. 6-7).
hyporeflexia. Involvement of the thoracic limbs is observed
in rare cases. The most frequently observed signs of mild
6.5.2 Myositis
neurological dysfunction include difficulty jumping, abduction
of the pelvic limbs, weakness when standing, and increased
Infectious myositis is uncommon in cats. It is more likely to
be one aspect of a multisystemic illness such as toxoplasmo-
Electrodiagnostic examinations show a reduced motor
sis. Clinical signs include fever and apparent muscle pain.
nerve conduction velocity in the distal portions of the nerves,
Diagnosis is based on demonstrating the presence of one of 
 and reflect prominent demyelination at all levels of the motor
the following causative organisms in a cat with confrmed
and sensory nerves. Inconsistently, mild increases in inser-
myositis.
 tional and spontaneous activity in appendicular muscles are
Protozoal myositis occurs rarely. The cat with clinical toxo-
detected on electromyogram. This reflects the mild axono-
plasmosis typically has respiratory or gastrointestinal signs, 
 pathy associated with this neuropathy. The more severe the
84
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
 Serum potassium (mmol/l)
Supplementation (mEq/l)
3.5-4.5
20
3.0-3.5
30
2.5-3.0
40
2.0-2.5
60
<2.0
80
Table 6-5. Supplementation of potassium according to serum
potassium levels. Do not exceed an intravenous rate of 0.5 mEq/kg per
hour
serum potassium normal): 1 mEq/kg per day q12h) and par-
Figure 6-8 A 10-year-old cat with diabetes mellitus and associated
enteral potassium (Table 6-5) leads to reversal of the poly-
neuropathy in the hindlimbs. Note the bilateral plantigrade stance,
myopathy, and creatine kinase activity returning to normal.
which is characteristic for a conduction block due to demyelination in
 Prognosis for recovery of the polymyopathy is favorable, but
the tibial nerves
 the long-term outcome is determined by the underlying cause
of the hypokalemia.
A different, probably hereditary form of hypokalemia has 
been described in Burmese cats aged 2-12 months (49). The
cal abnormalities.
inciting factor in the etiopathogenesis of this disease seems
Histological examination of nerve biopsies reveals multiple
 to be low potassium intake or increased renal loss. Affected
signs of Schwann cell injury with minimal axonal involve-  cats can be normal berween their episodes of weakness and
ment. A combination of metabolic and vascular defects has
been implicated in the pathogenesis of diabetic neuropathy
 reduce the problem in this breed.
(43-45).
Many cats continue to show some degree of clinical weak-
6.5.5 Myasthenia gravis
ness and muscle atrophy, despite specifc therapy with oral
hypoglycemic agents or insulin. There is no specific treatment
Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a disorder of neuromuscular
for this neuropathy as a full understanding of the pathogen-
transmission resulting from either a deficiency or functional
esis and etiology of diabetic neuropathy is still lacking.
disorder of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (AChR). The
Acetyl-L-carnitine has been used in a few cats with persistent
most common cause in small animals is an autoimmune
neuropathy with subjectively good results (46). Alpha-liponic
attack against AChRs, resulting in depletion of receptors
acid, a substance used for the treatment of human diabetic
(acquired MG). An increased risk for acquired MG was iden-
polyneuropathy, has also resulted in improvement of the
tified in Somali and Abyssinian cats when compared with the
neuropathy in a series of diabetic cats (unpublished personal
incidence in mixed-breed cats. Only a few cats have been
results).
reported with congenital MG (50).
Feline MG is less common than its canine counterpart, but
6.5.4 Hypokalemic myopathy
MG should be considered in any cat that is presented with a
recent onset of muscular weakness.
Hypokalemia may result in an acute onset of generalized
Typical signs include generalized weakness, megaesopha-
weakness, muscular pain, and persistent ventroflexion of the 
 gus, and dysphagia. Focal signs, including ventroflexion of
head (Fig. 6-5). Affected cats show an exaggerated stilted,
the head, change of voice due to laryngeal paresis, absence
hypermetric gait in the forelimbs. Typical serum abnormalities
of palpebral reflexes and dysphagia without generalized
include low or low/normal potassium and markedly elevated
weakness, may occur. Thymomas have been found in a sig-
serum creatine kinase activity.
nifcant number of myasthenic cats; thoracic radiographs
Renal loss of potassium associated with chronic renal
should be evaluated in all cats with confrmed or suspected
failure is the most common cause. Other diseases resulting in
MG. Acquired, drug-induced MG should be considered in
hypokalemia include chronic vomiting or diarrhea, diuretic
hyperthyroid cats that become weak after initiation of treat-
therapy, and hyperaldosteronism (47, 48).
ment with methimazole (51).
Administration of oral potassium (initial
I dosage:
 Diagnosis is based upon clinical signs and demonstration
1-3 mEq/kg per day divided q8h, maintenance dose (when
of serum antibodies against AChR. Administration of edro-
6: Diseases of the spine and nervous system
85
phonium chloride (0.5-1 mg IV) may result in transient reso.
17. Giuliani CA, et al. Return of weight supported locomotion
lution of the clinical signs. The transmission disorder may be
in adult spinal cats. Society for Neuroscience 1984, abstract
10:632.
demonstrated by electromyelography with the aid of supra-
18. Shamir MH, et al. Subarachnoid cyst in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
maximal repetitive nerve stimulation. This test is especially
Assoc 1997;33:123-125.
helpful for diagnosis of congenital MG, where AChR anti-
19. Vignoli M, et al. Spinal subarachnoid cyst in a cat. Vet Radiol
bodies are not present.
1999;40:116-119.
 20. Scott HW, O'Leary MT. Fibrocartilaginous embolism in a cat.
Cats can be successfully treated with anticholinesterase
J Small Anim Pract 1996;37:228-231.
drugs, such as pyridostigmine bromide (1-3 mg/kg BID-TID
 21. Abramson CJ, et al. Tetraparesis in a cat with fbrocartilaginous
PO) or neostigmine bromide (2 mg/kg BID PO). However,
emboli. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2002;28;153-156.
immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids (prednisolone
22. Mikszewski JS, et al. Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy in
1-2 mg/kg SID-BID) may be necessary in most cases. Thy-
five cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2006;42:226-233.
 23. Marioni-Henry K, et al. Prevalence of diseases of the spinal cord
i-auoT ‘usnd si eouul e j paneiui si kuoi
of cats. J Vet Intern Med 2004;18:851-858.
studies with serial AChR antibody titers are not available in
24. Baroni M, Heynold Y. A review of the clinical diagnosis of feline
cats; thus the natural course of the disease is not known and
infectious peritonitis viral meningoencephalomyelitis. Prog Vet
lifelong therapy might be indicated (52).
Neurol 1995;3:88-94.
25. Legendre AM, Whitenack DL. Feline infectious peritonitis with
spinal cord involvement in two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
References and further reading
1992;167:931-932.
26. Thomas WB. Discospondylitis and other vertebral infections.
1. Munana KR, et al. Intervertebral disc disease in 10 cats. J Am
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2000;30:169-
Anim Hosp Assoc 2001;37:384-389.
182.
2. Rayward RM. Feline intervertebral disc disease: a review of the
 27. Norsworthy GD. Discospondylitis as a cause of posterior paral-
literature. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2002;15:137-144.
ysis. Feline Pract 1979;9:39-41.
3. King AS, Smith RN. Protrusion of the intervertebral disc in the
28. Malik R, et al. Bacterial discospondylitis in a cat. J Small Anim
at. Vet Rec 1958;70:509-512.
Pract 1990;31:404-408.
4. King AS, Smith RS. Disc protrusion in the cat: distribution of
 29. Watson E, Robertson RE. Discospondylitis in a cat. Vet Radiol
dorsal protrusions along the vertbral column. Vet Rec 1958;
1993;34:397-399.
70:509-515.
 30. Bestetti G, et al. Paraplegia due to Actinomryces viscosus in a
5. Heavener JE. Intervertebral disc syndrome in a cat. J Am Vet
cat. Acta Neuropathol 1977;39:231-235.
Med Assoc 1971;159:425-427.
31. Kraus H, et al. Paraparesis caused by epidural granuloma in a
6. Lu D, et al. Acute intervertebral disc extrusion in a cat: clinical
cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1998;194:789-790.
and MRI findings. J Feline Med Surg 2002;4:65-68.
32. Lavely JA, et al. Spinal empyema in seven dogs. Vet Surg 2006;
7. Jaeger GH, et al. Lumbosacral disc disease in a cat. Vet Comp
35:176-185.
Orthop Traumatol 2004;2:104-106.
 33. Kerl ME. Update on canine and feline fungal diseases. Vet Clin
8. Kneissl S, Schedlbauer B. Radiology corner. Sagittal computed
North Am Small Anim Pract 2003;33:749-758.
tomography of the feline spine. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997;
 34. Foureman P, et al. Spinal cord granuloma due to Coccidioides
38:282-283.
mmitis in a cat. J Vet Int Med 2005;19:373-376.
9. Komori H, et al. The natural history of herniated nucleus pulpo-
35. Lavely J, Lipsitz D. Fungal infections of the central nervous
sus with radiculopathy. Spine 1996;21:225-229.
system in the dog and cat. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
10. Braughler JM, Hall ED. Uptake and elimination of methypred-
2005;20:212-219.
nisolone from contused cat spinal cord following intravenous
36. Wiebe V, Karriker M. Therapy of systemic fungal infections: a
injection of the sodium succinate ester. J Neurosurg 1983;
pharmalogic perspective. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 2005;20:
58:538-542.
250-257.
11. Bracken MB, et al. A randomized controlled study of methyl-
 37. Colter SB. Congenital abnormalities of the spine. In: Bojrab MJ
prednisolone or naloxone in the treatment of acute spinal cord
(ed.) Pathophysiology in small animal surgery. Philadelphia: Lea
injury. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1405-1411.
& Febiger; 1981: pp. 729-738.
12. Coates JR, et al. Clinicopathologic effects of a 21-aminosteroid
 38. Jaggy A, et al. Occipitoatlanto-axial malformation with atlan-
ho auoosupaidayau asop-uay pue (egetn) punoduo
toaxial subluxation in a cat. J Small Animal Pract 1991;32:
spinal cord function after simulated spinal cord trauma. Vet
366-372.
Surg 1995;24:128-139.
39. Atkins CE, et al. Risk factors, clinical signs, and survival in cats
13. Coates JR. Intervertebral disc disease. Vet Clin North Am Small
with a clinical diagnosis of idiopathic hypertrophic cardiomy-
Anim Pract 2000;30:77-110.
opathy: 74 cases (1985-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;201:
14. Kathmann I, et al. Spontaneous lumbar intervertebral disc pro-
613-618.
rusions in cats: literature review and case presentation. J Feline
40. Fischer I, et al. Akute traumatische Nachhandlahmung bei 30
Med Surg 2002;2:207-212.
Katzen. Tierarztl Prax (K) 2002;30:361-366.
15. Olby N, et al. Long-term functional outcome of dogs with severe
41. Butler HC. An investigation into the relationship of an aortic
injuries of the thoracolumbar spinal cord: 87 cases. J Am Vet
jnd uuv [eus f des aun u sisleied soansod on snloqua 
Med Assoc 2003;222:762-769.
1971;12:141-158.
16. Lovely RG, et al. Effects of training on the recovery of full
42. Dickinson PJ, Lecouteur RA. Feline idiopathic inflammatory
weight bearing stepping in the adult spinal cat. Exp Neurol
myopathy. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2004;34:
1990;92:206-218.
1344-1345.
86
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
43. Kramek BA, et al. Neuropathy associated with diabetes mellitus 
48. Jones BR. Hypokalemic myopathy in cats. In: Bonagura JD (ed.)
in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1984;184:42-45.
Kirk's current veterinary therapy Xlll: small animal practice.
44. Munana KA. Long term complications of diabetes mellius, part 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2000: p. 958.
 on u n au doru oa 
49. Lantinga E, et al. Periodic muscle weakness and neck ventro-
Small Anim Pract 1995;25:715-730.
 flexion caused by hypokalemia in a Burmese cat. Tijschr Dier-
45. Miszin AP, et al. Myelin splitting, Schwann cel injury and
geneeskd 1998;123:435-437.
demyelination in feline diabetic neuropathy. Acta Neuropathol
50.
 Joseph RJ, et al. Myasthenia gravis in the cat. J Vet Intern Med
1998;95:171-174.
1988;2:753-768.
46. Platt SR. Neuromuscular complications in endocrine and meta-
51. Shelton GD, et al. Risk factors for acquired myasthenia gravis
bolic disorders. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
in cats: 105 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;216:55-57.
2002;32:125-143.
52. Shelton GD. Myasthenia gravis and disorders of neuromuscular
47. Dow SW, et al. Hypokalemia in cats: 186 cases (1984-87). J
transmission. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2002;
Am Vet Med Assoc 1989;194:1604-1608.
32:189-206.
87
Diseases of soft tissues
C. Favrot, F. Gallorini, K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs
Diseases of the soft tissues of the locomotion system can
occurs. This can also impair function of adjacent joints, can
result in gait disturbances and lameness. These include dis-
lead to secondary joint pathology, and may result in a com-
eases of muscles and tendons, and disorders affecting the feet
 pletely non-functional limb, depending on which muscle is
(Table 7-1). Diseases of tendons and diseases of muscles other
affected. The condition usually affects one specific muscle,
than neuromuscular disorders are diagnosed infrequently in
 uni- or bilaterally. Muscle contracture and fbrosis occurs in
cats. They involve muscle contractures, fbrotic myopathy,
various muscles in dogs, but seems to be rare in cats. The
and tendinopathies. Disorders involving the footpads, nail
quadriceps muscle group is most commonly affected. Fibrotic
bed, and nails are more common. Examination of the nails
myopathy of the semitendinosus muscle and contracture of
and footpads is therefore an important part of the orthopedic
the biceps muscle have also been described.
examination in cats. This chapter covers non-neurological
diseases of muscles, diseases of tendons, and diseases of the
footpads, nailbeds, and nails. Neuromuscular disorders are
Contracture and fibrosis of the quadriceps muscle
described in Chapter 6.
 Several cases of contracture of the quadriceps muscle secon-
dary to femoral fractures (1-3) and one case of congenital
7.1 Diseases of muscles
quadriceps contracture (4) have been described. Adhesions
between the muscle and femur and replacement of muscle
Most diseases of muscles encountered in cats are part of the
fbers by fbrous tissue lead to contracture, inelasticity, and
neuromuscular disease complex. They can be inherited or
loss of quadriceps function. Quadriceps contracture limits
acquired. Both inherited and acquired myopathies tend to
 motion of the stifle and tarsal joints, and the end stage of the
cause systemic muscular weakness. Ventroflexion of the neck
disease is a stifle joint locked in full extension (Fig. 7-1).
is a typical sign of myopathy in cats. Additional signs can
Initially, the condition may be partially reversible, but it
include multisystemic illness, fever, and muscle pain. The
rapidly becomes irreversible due to ongoing loss of muscle
most common feline neuromuscular diseases are described in
fbers, fbrosis, and degeneration, and ankylosis of the stifle
Chapter 6.
joint. Adhesions or incorporation of the quadriceps muscle
 Muscle contracture or fbrotic myopathy in cats has been
in the fracture callus is often present. It is unclear if adhesions
described as occurring in the quadriceps muscle, the semiten-
dinosus muscle, and the biceps muscle. Progressive ossifying
fbrodysplasia (POF) is an unusual disease, characterized by
generalized extensive periskeletal soft-tissue ossification.
 Affected tissue
Diseases
Muscles
Neuromuscular diseases (Chapter 6)
7.1.1 Muscle contracture and fibrosis
Muscle contracture and fbrosis
Progressive ossifying fibrodysplasia
Muscle contracture is a pathological shortening of the muscle
Localized myositis ossificans
which renders it unable to stretch. The condition is character-
Tendons
Biceps tenosynovitis (Chapter 28)
ized by fbroplasia of muscular tissue. This replacement of
Medial epicondylitis of the elbow
 muscle fbers by connective tissue results in a non-functional
(Chapter 30)
and taut muscle. Fibrotic myopathy is another term used to
Luxation of the superfcial digital
describe replacement of functional muscle tissue by connec-
flexor tendon (Chapter 40)
tive tissue. Possible reasons for muscle contracture and fbro-
Feet
Diseases of the nails and nail beds
sis include external and exercise-induced trauma, neuropathy
Diseases of the interdigital spaces
or myopathy, and muscle ischemia and necrosis. External
Diseases of the foot pads
frauma is likely to be the most common underlying cause in
cats. Muscle contracture and fbrosis does not seem to be
Table 7-1. Summary of diseases of soft tissues that can cause or mimic
painful by itself, but irreversible loss of muscle function
 orthopedic problems
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
are a result of the contracture, or if they initiate immobiliza-
tion and promote contracture (2).
Quadriceps contracture after internal fixation of femoral
fractures in cats was reported to occur in 4 out of 22 cats
(1). Most of these cats, including patients with comminuted
fractures, were treated with intramedullary pins alone or in
combination with cerclage wires. This kind of fracture repair
often results in fracture instability and prolonged disuse of
the leg, which may promote the development of quadriceps
contracture. Sciatic nerve entrapment by the intramedullary
pins and instability at the fracture site were identifed in 3
of the 4 cases with quadriceps contracture in one series, and
this was thought to have contributed to limb disuse (1).
Although not statistically evaluated, mid-diaphyseal femoral
fractures, fractures with moderate or severe displacement
and shortening, fracture fixation more than 5 days after the
Figure 7-1 Photograph of a cat with quadriceps contracture of the left 
injury, intramedullary pinning, and delayed use of the limb
hindlimb, 4 weeks postoperative to a distal femoral fracture. Only
postoperatively were considered to be predisposing factors
walked with the leg in extension.
(1). Nowadays, the application of more stable fixation tech-
niques results in a much lower incidence of quadriceps
contracture.
Treatment of quadriceps contracture is unrewarding once
Contracture and fibrosis of the semitendinosus muscle
the muscle is fbrotic and non-functional, and prevention is
Fibrotic myopathy of the semitendinosus muscle has been
therefore most important. Early and stable fracture fixation,
described in one cat (6). Gait abnormalities in this cat were
careful tissue handling, and postoperative physiotherapy
allow early weight-bearing and limb use, which is crucial to
consistent with inability to extend the stifle joint, flex the hip
joint, and abduct the limb. A taut band could be palpated in
maintain muscle function and joint mobility. Traumatic
lesions of the quadriceps muscle are appropriately treated, as
the area of the semitendinosus muscle, as in dogs. Treatment
of fbrotic myopathy of the semitendinosus muscle includes
described in Chapter 16.
 Treatment options include intensive physical therapy, sur-
Although surgery alleviates clinical signs in the short term,
gical release of muscle adhesions, inclusion of a fat graft as
 an anatomical gliding plane, muscle-lengthening procedures,
return to full function is unlikely. The fbrous band reformed
during the healing phase, and clinical signs relapsed in the
and application of a 90°-90° flexion splint or dynamic flexion
cat described (6). Best results are achieved with physiother-
apparatus. Each of these measures alone is not likely to result
apy in dogs.
in a successful outcome and they must therefore be combined.
Successful management of quadriceps contracture in a cat has
been described with application of a dynamic flexion appa-
Contracture and fibrosis of the biceps muscle
ratus after surgical release of adhesions, stable fracture fxa-
        o
tion, and physiotherapy (3, 5). The flexion apparatus consisted 
described in one cat (7). Clinical signs were an inability to
of an elastic band, anchored around transosseous pins in the
extend the elbow with resulting gait abnormality, and a taut
pelvis and distal tibia, which held the stifle joint in flexion.
muscle band was palpated over the craniolateral aspect of the
The quadriceps muscle needs to be released sufficiently to
brachium. Release of the fbrotic biceps muscle and section-
allow flexion of the stifle joint prior to application of the
 ing of its tendon of insertion immediately alleviated clinical
flexion apparatus.
signs, but contracture occurred again after several months. A
The authors have successfully treated two cats with quad-
second surgery combined with physiotherapy resulted in a
riceps contracture secondary to femoral fracture by femoral
successful outcome.
ostectomy and plate osteosynthesis (Fig. 7-2). Shortening of
the femur restores the relation between length of the con-
7.1.2 Progressive ossifying fibrodysplasia (poF)
tracted quadriceps muscle and the femur. The procedure is a
m sien huea non pou jeniins dans-auo hunsuond
POF is an extremely rare genetic disease of the connective
quadriceps contracture, provided that muscular fibrosis is not
 tissue characterized by a progressive heterotopic ossification
too extensive and some muscular function is left.
of the tendons, ligaments, fasciae, and striated muscles. It is
7: Diseases of soft tissues
89
B
C
Figure 7-2 Radiographs of a cat with contracture of the quadriceps muscle.
(A) Preoperative mediolateral radiograph of the cat with a non-union of a distal diaphyseal femoral fracture, which had occurred 4 months ago.
(B) Postoperative radiograph of the cat. Because the fracture could not be reduced due to the tension exerted by the contracted and partially
fibrosed quadriceps, a 2-cm ostectomy was performed prior to fracture stabilization. The stifle joint could be flexed 40° postoperatively.
(C) Two months after surgery the cat was using the leg well, and the stifle joint could be flexed 110°
also called myositis ossificans, although it is not only muscle
been observed (10). In the later stages, the nidus takes on the
tissue that is affected. The condition can be generalized or
 appearance of swelling of the affected muscular groups with
localized.
a hard bony consistency, that is not painful to the touch, and
The incidence of POF in humans is estimated to be 1 in
without perilesional edema or other signs of inflammation.
2 000 000, without sexual or racial predisposition (8). Clini-
The patient has a stiff, uncertain gait, with marked reduction
cal conditions, and radiographic or histological results similar
in the range of motion of affected limbs and muscles (Fig.
 to those observed in human POF, have been reported in cats
7-3). There are usually no significant hematological or bio-
(9, 10). The etiopathogenesis of the lesions in humans is
chemical alterations, but fever and leukocytosis have been
linked to the excessive presence of bone morphogenetic
observed, linked to the inflammatory effects of the early
 protein-4 (BMP4) in the lymphocytes. Once activated at the 
lesions (10).
tissue level, this cell population, both B and T types, produces 
 Diagnosis is made radiologically, based on the typical signs
a quantity of BMP4 without the normal biochemical regula-
of heterotopic ossification. The areas of ossification have a
tory mechanisms. This leads to the development of lesions,
which in the early stages are of a highly vascularized, fbro-
fasciae, and tendons (Figs 7-4 and 7-5). With the generalized
proliferating type. These undergo a process of chondroid
 form, the progression of the pathology is fairly rapid; death
metaplasia, followed by endochondral ossifcation with for-
usually occurs within weeks to a few months after the mani-
mation of lamellae and medullary elements (11-13). The
festation of the frst signs (10), but one cat was reported to
condition is genetically determined and is of the autosomal-
be alive and well 18 months after initial presentation (15).
dominant type linked to de novo genetic mutations (14).
 Similarly to what occurs in human POF, any type of trauma,
The genetic means of transmission has not been demon-
 even of limited entity such as an intramuscular injection, can
strated in cats at present, although the disease follows a
 set off tissue reactions ending in ossifying lesions. Muscular
similar clinical, radiological, and histological progression to
 biopsies and excisional surgery are contraindicated for this
that in humans. The disease occurs without sexual predispo-
 reason. Therapy based on selenium, vitamin E, and cortico-
sition in young or middle-aged cats. The lesions appear in
 steroids, followed by administration of sodium ethidronate,
the early clinical stages as inflammatory-type lesions of the 
muscles, and sometimes effects on the overlying skin have 
(10).
90
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
Figure 7-3 A 7-
Figure 7-5 A close-
month-old cat with
up radiographic view
progressive ossifying
of the tibia and the
fibrodysplasia,
ossified lesions in the 
showing internal
thigh. Note the
rotation of both
trabecular structure
hindfeet. The cat
of the soft-tissue 
had a stiff and stilted
ossification, almost
gait. (Courtesy of 
resembling normal 
F. Gallorini.)
bone.
authors has seen two cats with mineralization in the caudal
thigh muscles. Both cats had gait abnormalities very similar
to dogs with gracilis contracture, and similar to the gait
abnormality reported for the cat with the semitendinosus
contracture (6). In one cat the affected area of mineralization
was resected and the condition recurred after about a year.
 In the other cat the condition was managed conservatively.
 It is possible that there is a relationship between fbrotic
myopathy and localized myositis ossificans (7), as some dogs
with gracilis contracture have areas of mineralization in the
affected muscles.
7.2 Diseases of tendons
Diseases of tendons are extremely rare in cats, and only a
handful of case reports exist on feline tendon diseases in the
veterinary literature. These include biceps tenosynovitis, and
B
luxation of the superfcial digital flexor tendon from the cal-
Figure 7-4 (A) Radiographs of the scapula and (B) the hindlimbs of the
caneus, although the latter might have been caused by trauma
cat shown in Figure 7-3. Massive periskeletal ossification of the soft
tissues is visible, predominantly affecting the thigh muscles. The
(16, 17) (Chapters 28 and 40). Also, rupture or strain of the
scapular area has ossified lesions with a finer trabecular appearance.
Achilles tendon or triceps tendon is usually traumatic in
origin, but cats occasionally present with bilateral tendon
strains without a history of observed trauma. An underlying
7.1.3 Localized myositis ossificans
condition should be suspected if signs of chronicity, such as
Care must be taken to differentiate the generalized muscle
periosteal bone proliferation and soft-tissue calcification,
disease POF from the localized form of myositis ossificans,
exist, possibly resulting in weakness and pathological changes
which has a much better and non-fatal prognosis. One of the
in the tendon. Some medical conditions, such as diabetes or
7: Diseases of soft tissues
91
hyperadrenocorticism, and certain drugs are known to
promote tendon rupture. Exposure to quinolones and corti-
costeroids, for example, increases the risk for Achilles tendon
rupture in humans (18). Such conditions have not yet been
reported or identifed in cats. Rupture of the Achilles tendon
is described in Chapter 40, and rupture of the triceps tendon
in Chapter 30.
7.3 Conditions of the feet
Pododermatitis or inflammatory conditions of the feet can
induce discomfort, pain, and lameness in cats. These condi-
tions may affect the nail, nail beds, the interdigital spaces,
or the footpads. The most frequent pododermatitides are
summarized below. Tumors affecting the feet are covered in
Chapter 8.
Figure 7-6 Bacterial paronychia. Note the inflammation of the nail bed
with edema, erythema, and crusts.
7.3.1 Diseases of the nails and nail beds
Several diseases can affect the nail beds, all causing similar 
 should be interpreted with caution and always together with
-s p-n rn si os (e) so  si ed i n ode
common condition affecting a single or a few nail beds. Bac-
 eases usually requires excisional biopsy of the third
terial paronychia in association with systemic disease, pem-
 phalanx.
phigus foliaceus, onychomycosis, or nail chewing should be
Cats with one or two adjacent nail beds affected can be
considered if several or all nail beds are affected.
 given a treatment trial of antimicrobial therapy for 2-3 weeks
 prior to performing all the diagnostic tests. Possible antibiot-
Bacterial paronychia
ics to use include cephalexin (25 mg/kg BID) or amoxicillin
with clavulanic acid (12.5 mg/kg BID). Radiographs of the
Bacterial infection of the nail bed can occur secondary to
 third phalanx and the thorax should be performed if a tumor
local trauma, ingrowing nails, or it may be a complication
is suspected (Chapter 8). It is not usually posible to differ-
after declawing. These causes are most likely if only one or
entiate between osteomyelitis and neoplasia based on radio-
[wo digits are affected, but neoplasia should be considered
logical findings alone.
Prognosis for bacterial paronychia depends on the underly-
can also occur in association with systemic diseases and
ing cause. Most of the traumatically induced infections
impairment of the immune system, such as feline leukemia
respond readily to systemic antibiotic therapy, as described
virus (FeLV)/feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infection,
above. If systemic disease is present, the prognosis depends
diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism, glucocorticoid or
on the ability to treat the disease itself.
hormonal treatments, and internal tumors (19-23). If
several or all nail beds are affected, systemic disease, onycho-
Pemphigus foliaceus
mycosis, and pemphigus foliaceus are the main differential
diagnoses.
Pemphigus foliaceus is the most frequent autoimmune disease
The nail beds are usually swollen, erythematous, and
 in cats, and it can affect the nail beds. In such cases, pemphi-
painful. Pus, crusts, and erosions are often present (Fig. 7-6).
 gus foliaceus may resemble bacterial paronychia (Fig. 7-7).
The affected digit can be thickened and very painful if the
However, the nail beds are not usually the only affected sites
infection has caused osteomyelitis, or if a tumor is present.
(19-23). Most cats with pemphigus foliaceus also present
The diagnostic work-up depends on whether the paro-
with symmetric and pustular dermatitis of the face and
nychia is localized or affecting several nail beds, but it can 
ears.
include skin scrapings, cytologicalexamination, bacterial and
 Cytological examination of the pus usually reveals numer-
fungal cultures, basic blood work, FeLV and FIV tests, radio-
 ous acantholytic cells. These cells may also be seen in associa-
 graphs, and skin and bone histological examination. As con-
 tion with bacterial or fungal infection, so histological, and
tamination is frequent, bacterial and fungal culture results
bacterial and fungal cultures are always required. When
92
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
Figure 7-7 A cat with pemphigus foliaceus: erosions and purulent
Figure 7-8 A cat with a long and abnormally grown nail,which has
inflammation of the nail bed are visible
penetrated the skin and resulted in lameness.
Idiopathic onychodystrophy
Idiopathic onychodystrophy results in abnormal growth of
nail beds are the only affected sites, definitive diagnosis
the nails (21-23). Abnormally long or shaped nails can
requires excisional biopsy of the third phalanx. Treatment
penetrate the skin of the footpads, and thus cause lameness
requires immunosuppressive doses of glucocorticoid (pred-
(Fig. 7-8). Several nails can be affected. The condition is most
nisolone 2-4 mg/kg daily) either alone or in association with
1 commonly seen in older cats whose ability to retract their
other immunosuppressive drugs (chlorambucil 0.1 mg/kg 
 claws seems to diminish with advancing years. Regular clip-
daily).
ping of the nails is indicated to prevent injury to the skin of
the footpads and lameness.
Onychomycosis
Dermatophyte infections of the nail beds are rare in cats, and
7.3.2 Diseases of the interdigital spaces
 are often associated with impairment of the immune system
Compared to dogs, cats rarely suffer from diseases of the
(19-23).
interdigital space. The main differential diagnoses include
 These infections resemble other inflammatory conditions
allergic conditions (eosinophilic plaques), and parasitic infec.
affecting the nail beds (see above). Work-up should include
 tions such as trombiculosis.
fungal culture, cytological examination of the exudate and
evaluation of the immune system, including FeLV/FIV serol-
Eosinophilic plaques
ogy, and diagnostic screening for diabetes mellitus and
hyperadrenocorticism. The prognosis depends on the under-
Eosinophilic plaques can develop in the interdigital spaces
lying disease and both local and systemic treatments should 
 and cause lameness (20). Cytological and/or histological
be instituted. Local treatment can be carried out with enilco-
 examinations are usually necessary to obtain a specifc diag-
nazole or miconazole solutions. Griseofulvin (ultramicro-
 nosis. Allergy work-up is mandatory to confrm or rule out
sized: 10 mg/kg daily) or itraconazole (5 mg/kg daily) are the
 allergic conditions such as food hypersensitivity or atopic
best therapeutic options for systemic treatment.
dermatitis. Treatment with glucocorticoid (prednisolone
1-2 mg/kg daily) or cyclosporin A (5 mg/kg daily) is usually
Nail chewing
effective.
 Behavioral disorders may be associated with nail chewing in
Trombiculosis (chiggers)
cats (20). This condition is sometimes associated with sec-
ondary bacterial paronychia. History is mandatory to estab-
Chiggers (Neotrombicula autumnalis, North America:
lish a proper diagnosis in such instances. Nail chewing can
Eutrombicula alfreddugesi) larvae sometimes develop in the
also be seen in cats recovering from neurotmesis, as sensation
interdigital spaces of cats and may cause discomfort, pruritus,
returns to the feet.
and lameness. Trombicula autumnalis infection is seasonal,
7: Diseases of soft tissues
6
Figure 7-9 Cat with chiggers. The interdigital space is inflamed and
Figure 7-10 Footpads of the front limbs of a cat with plasmacytic
the larvae are seen as small orange dots. (Courtesy of J. Declercq.)
pododermatitis. The pads are enlarged and softened. The main pad of
 the left front limb is ulcerated.
with most of the infections occurring in the late summer and
phage numbers will increase if ulceration and infection are
early autumn. The larvae are seen as small orange dots
present.
between the toes, and often in Henry's pocket on the pinna
Cats usually respond well to glucocorticoid therapy in
(Fig. 7-9). The diagnosis is usually straightforward, and treat-
 immunosuppressive doses. Doxycycline, given for at least 3
ment requires parasite removal and acaricidal treatment.
weeks at a dose of 25 mg/kg BW orally every 24 hours, was
 also found to result in partial or complete remission in many
7.3.3 Diseases of the footpads
cats (25). This effect is most likely due to the immunomodu-
latory properties of doxycycline. As doxycyline bears less risk
Two conditions of the footpads secondary to systemic disease
for adverse side-effects compared to immunosuppressive
have been described in cats: plasma cell pododermatitis and
drugs, a doxycycline trial for 3-4 weeks can be used before
metastatic calcifinosis of the paws.
glucocorticoids are administered. Resolution has also been
described after surgical resection of affected pads (26), but
surgery should only be considered after failed conservative
Plasma cell pododermatitis
treatment, considering the invasiveness and morbidity associ-
Feline plasmacytic pododermatitis is a rare disease of the
ated with it.
 footpads, characterized by soft and spongy swelling of mul-
tiple pads. Initially the disease does not seem to be painful,
Metastatic calcinosis of the paws
but pain, bleeding, and lameness occur if the pads ulcerate
and become infected (Fig. 7-10). The pathogenesis of the
Metastatic calcinosis of soft tissues can be associated with
disease is unknown, but histologically the lesions consist of
ani
inflammatory infltrate, mainly composed of mature 
 mia. A solubility product of calcium and phosphorus of
plasma cells. This and the clinical response to immunosup-
 greater than 7 g/l is usually required for metastatic calcifica-
 pressive drugs suggests that it is an immune-mediated disease.
tion to occur. Chronic renal failure in cats is frequently
Concurrent plasmacytic stomatitis and renal amyloidosis or 
 associated with hyperphosphatemia, which may be high
glomerulonephritis have been reported (22, 23). One report
'  ueui iaiaa ionpoid Aqnios e ui insan oi qanoua
suggested a link between plasma cell pododermatitis and FIV
despite normal serum calcium concentrations. Hyperparathy-
infection (24).
roidism also seems to play a role in the mechanism of calci-
A tentative diagnosis can be made in the presence of the
fcation. Paw calcification as a manifestation of renal disease
characteristic soft swelling of several footpads. Often all feet
has been described in a small number of cats (27-29). Affected
are involved, but the disease can also occur in only the front
cats might be presented because of lameness. The calcifica-
or only the hindfeet. The central pad is the most commonly
 tions appear as intact or ulcerated nodules involving multiple
affected. Defnitive diagnosis requires histopathological con-
 pads or the interdigital spaces (Fig. 7-11). The nodules are
frmation of an inflammatory infltrate of the dermis of the
frm on palpation and appear whitish to gray. Laboratory
pads, containing mainly plasma cells. Neutrophil and macro-
results consistent with chronic renal failure, such as azotemia
94
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
ciated with such a condition (20). History is mandatory to
make the diagnosis and rule out similar conditions such as
plasma cell pododermatitis or calicivirus infection. Removal
of the offending compound and local treatments are usually
curative.
References and further reading
1. Fries SL, et al. Quadriceps contracture in four cats: a complica-
tion of internal fixation of femoral fractures. Vet Comp Orthop
Traumatol 1988;2:91-96.
2. Carberry CA, Flanders JA. Quadriceps contracture in a cat.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986;189:1329.
3. Liptak JM, Simpson DJ. Successful management of quadriceps
Comp Orthop Traumatol 2000;13:44-48.
4. Leighton RL. Muscle contractures in the limbs of dogs and cats.
Vet Surg 1981;10:132-135.
 5. Wilkens BE, et al. Utilization of dynamic stifle flexion apparatus
in preventing recurrence of quadriceps contracture: a clinical
Figure 7-11 Photograph of a cat with renal failure, showing metastatic
report. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1993;6:219-223.
calcinosis of the foot. (Courtesy of J. Declercq.)
6. Lewis DD. Fibrotic myopathy of the semitendinosus muscle in
a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988;193:240-241.
7. Taylor J, Tangner CH. Acquired muscle contractures in the dog
and cat. A review of literature and case report. Vet Comp
and hyperphosphatemia, are present. The paws are areas
Orthop Traumatol 2007;20:79-85.
-odap rog pasodsipard aq Keu arogaraun pue enen oi ioatqns
8.1
 Mahboubi S, et al. Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva. Pediatr
sition of calcium salts. Other soft tissues such as the aorta,
Radiol 2001;31:307-314.
9. Warren HB, Carpenter JL. Fibrodysplasia ossificans in three
stomach wall, and subcutaneous tissue, can also be affected
(27, 29).
cats. Vet Pathol 1984;21:495-499.
10. Valentine BA, et al. Fibrodysplasia ossificans in the cat. A case
 Diagnosis of calcinosis requires cytology and/or histopa-
report. J Vet Intern Med 1992;6:335-340.
 thology. Therapy consists of feeding a protein- and phospho-
11.9
 Shafritz AB, et al. Overexpression of an osteogenic morphogen
 rus-restricted diet. Intestinal phosphate-binding agents may
in fbrodysplasia ossificans progressiva. N Engl J Med 1996;335:
be additionally prescribed. Paw calcifcation due to renal
591-593.
12. Gannon FH, et al. Acute lymphocytic infiltration in an extremely
 failure improved or regressed with a low-phosphorus/low-
early lesion of fbrodysplasia ossificans progressiva. Clin Orthop
protein diet in some cases (27, 28).
Relat Res 1998;346:19-25.
 Besides chronic renal failure, rare causes of hypercalcemia
13. O'Connor P Animal model of heterotropic ossification. Clin
 and/or hyperphosphatemia, such as hyperthyroidism, hyper-
Orthop Relat Res 1998;346:71-80.
14. Delatycki M, Rogers RG. The genetics of fibrodysplasia ossifi-
vitaminosis D, hypercalcemia of malignancy, or primary
cans progressiva. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1998;346:15-18.
hyperparathyroidism, should be considered in the diagnostic
15. Bradley WA. Fibrodysplasia ossificans in a Himalayan cat. Aust
work-up. Metastatic calcinosis of the paws associated with
Vet Pract 1992;22:154-158.
hyperthyroidism has recently been described in a cat (29).
16. Scharf G, et al. Glenoid dysplasia and bicipital tenosynovitis in
a Maine coon cat. J Small Anim Pract 2004;45:515-520.
The lesions resolved after treatment with radioactive iodine.
17. McNicholas WT, et al. Luxation of the superficial digital flexor
tendon in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000;36:174-176.
Calicivirus infections
18. Van der Linden PD, et al. Increased risk of Achilles tendon
rupture with quinolone antibacterial use, especially in elderly
Calicivirus infections are sometimes associated, along with
patients taking oral corticosteroids. Arch Intern Med 2003;
classical signs, with facial and/or pedal signs in young cats.
163:1801-1807.
19. Guaguere E, et al. Feline pododermatoses. Vet Dermatol
Feet edema, pain, small crusts, and footpad ulceration may
1992;3:1-12.
be noticed. Clinical signs usually regress within a few days.
20. Guaguere E, et al. Diagnostic approach of feline pododermato-
Antibiotic therapy is sometimes required to treat secondary
ses. In: Guaguere P (ed.) A practical guide to feline dermatology.
bacterial infection.
Lyon, France: Merial Eds; 2000: pp. 24.1-24.9.
21. Scott DW, Miller WH. Disorders of the claw and clawbed in
cats. Compend Contin Educ 1992;14:449-455.
Contact irritant dermatitis
22.9
tons. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1984;20:537-564.
Contact irritant dermatitis is rare in cats but may sometimes
23. Scott DW. Feline dermatology 1983-85: the secret sits. J Am
affect the footpads. Herbicides have, for example, been asso-
Anim Hosp Assoc 1987;23:255-257.
7: Diseases of soft tissues
95
24. Simon M. Plasmacell pododermatitis in immunodeficiency
28. Jackson HA, Barber PJ. Resolution of metastatic calcification
virus-infected cats. Vet Pathol 1993;30:477.
in the paws of a cat with successful dietary management of
 25. Betenay SV, et al. Prospecive study of the treatment of feline
renal hyperparathyroidism. J Small Anim Pract 1998;39:495-
plasmacytic pododermatitis with doxycycline. Vet Rec 2003;
497.
152:564-566.
29. Declercq J, Bhatti S. Calcinosis involving multiple paws in a cat
26. Yamamura Y. A surgically treated case of feline plasma cell
with chronic renal failure and in a cat with hyperthyroidism.
pododermatitis. J Jpn Vet Med Assoc 1998;51:669-671.
Vet Dermatol 2005;16:74-78.
27. Bertazzolo W, et al. Clinicopathological findings in five cats with
 paw calcification. J Feline Med Surg 2003;5:11-17.
97
8
Tumors of the musculoskeletal system
V.J. Poirier, F. Steffen
Tumors of the musculoskeletal system are uncommon in cats
of the disease, and information must be extrapolated from
compared to dogs. The rarity of these tumors often makes
what is known of the equivalent canine tumor.
their behavior and optimal treatment difficult to define. This
chapter summarizes the knowledge and standard of care for
8.1.2 Pathology and natural behavior
cats with tumors involving the musculoskeletal system, based
on the current data available in the literature. Table 8-1 lists
Histopathologically, feline osteosarcoma is characterized
the tumors covered in this chapter and Table 8-2 outlines
by neoplastic mesenchymal cells which produce osteoid (5)
 the characteristics, treatment, and prognosis of the most
(Fig. 8-1). The production of osteoid is the hallmark of osteo-
common tumors of the musculoskeletal system in cats.
sarcoma. Multinucleated giant cells can be present. Different
types of osteosarcoma have been reported, including osteo-
sarcoma of medullary origin, parosteal osteosarcoma (6),
8.1 Bone tumors
fracture-associated osteosarcoma (7, 8), and extraskeletal
osteosarcoma (2). Extraskeletal osteosarcoma is often seen at
8.1.1 Incidence and risk
vaccination sites, and is classifed in the same category as
Primary bone tumors are uncommon in cats compared
vaccine-associated sarcoma. This will be discussed in one of
to dogs. The incidence of all bone tumors in cats is 4.9 per
 the following sections.
100 000 (1). Osteosarcoma is by far the most common feline
Skeletal
osteosarcoma
is much more common than
primary bone tumor accounting for about 70% of primary
extraskeletal osteosarcoma (2). The appendicular skeleton is
bone tumors (2, 3). A multitude of other histopathological
affected more often than the axial skeleton, and the tumor
diagnoses have also been reported, including fbrosarcoma,
occurs more frequently in the bones of the hindlimbs than
chondrosarcoma, plasma cell tumor hemangiosarcoma, and
the forelimbs (2, 3). Regardless of the primary site, feline
lymphosarcoma (4). Unfortunately, the behavior of most of
skeletal osteosarcoma is considered locally invasive, with a
these other feline bone tumors is unknown due to the rarity
low metastatic potential of only 5-10% (2, 3). This is an
Tumor localization
Tumor types
Table 8-1. Tumors involving the
feline musculoskeletal system.
Primary bone tumors
Osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, multiple myeloma,
Osteosarcoma, vaccine-associated
hermangiosarcoma, fbrosarcoma
sarcoma, and spinal lymphoma 
 are the most common
Soft-tissue sarcomas
Vaccine-associated sarcoma, undifferentiated sarcoma,
hemangiosarcoma, fbrosarcoma, malignant fbrous
histiocytoma, rhabdomyosarcoma
Oral tumors
Squamous cell carcinoma, fbrosarcoma
Tumors of the nervous system
Vertebral bodies
 Osteosarcoma, chondroma, chondrosarcoma,
fbrosarcoma
Spinal cord and meninges
Lymphoma, meningioma, meningeal sarcoma, glioma,
astrocytoma
Peripheral nerve tumors
Schwannoma, fbrosarcoma, lymphoma
Miscellaneous
Multiple cartilaginous exostosis
Metastatic digital carcinoma
Synovial cell sarcoma, synovioma
98
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
Tumor type
Characteristics
Treatment options
Prognosis
Osteosarcoma
Hindlimbs more
Amputation
Reasonable chance of cure, 10%
commonly affected
risk of metastasis
Vaccine-associated
Found at vaccine sites,
Surgery
Time to recurrence: 3 months for
sarcoma
highly invasive,
marginal excision, 9 months for 
moderate metastatic
radical excision
potential
Surgery combined with radiation
Time to recurrence: 18 months
therapy (treatment of choice)
Surgery and chemotherapy
Time to recurrence: 12 months
Spinal lymphoma
 Many cats feline
Radiation for local tumor
Poor
leukemia virus-
Chemotherapy for generalized
positive, often
disease
becomes systemic
Table 8-2. Characteristics, treatment, and prognosis of the most common musculoskeletal tumors of cats
bone tumors usually present for lameness or deformity,
depending on the location of the tumor. Pathological frac-
tures may also occur.
8.1.4 Diagnostic work-up
Local radiographs and thoracic radiographs are recom-
 mended to define the primary lesion and rule out gross metas-
tasis. Feline bone tumors are usually characterized by bone
lysis, cortical disruption with an indistinct zone of transition,
and variable periosteal reaction on local radiographs of the
affected bone (Fig. 8-2). The pattern of lysis is either moth-
eaten or permeative (Chapter 2). Most primary bone tumors
 are located in the metaphyseal region of long bones, whereas
bone metastases are often in the diaphyseal region of the
 bone. Multiple myeloma is typically associated with multiple,
Figure 8-1 Bone biopsy histology of a lytic lesion of the right distal
purely lytic lesions.
radius. Presence of neoplastic mesenchymal cells with osteoid
 Metastases on thoracic radiographs can be challenging to
production (extracellular matrix) indicates osteosarcoma. (Courtesy of
diagnose, because they have a different pattern in the cat
Veterinary Pathology. Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich.)
when compared to dogs, where most of the metastasis is
nodular in nature. Lung metastases in cats are more often
important difference to the disease in dogs, where more than
seen as a diffuse pattern, or as ill-defined nodules.
 90% of patients will have metastases.
 A definitive diagnosis can be made on bone cytology and/or
Plasma cell tumor involving bone in cats is a rare entity
biopsy, and it is important to rule out benign bone diseases,
and it can be a presentation of the systemic form of the
such as cartilaginous exostoses (Chapter 4). The technique
plasma cell tumor, multiple myeloma (9-11). Little is known
for bone biopsy using a Jamshidi bone biopsy needle is
 about the biological behavior of the other feline primary bone
described in Chapter 2. Hematology, blood chemistry, and
tumors but metastases have been seen with chondrosarcoma
urinalysis are recommended to rule out concurrent disease.
and hemangiosarcoma (4, 12, 13).
If a plasma cell tumor is suspected, survey skeletal radio-
graphs, serum electrophoresis, and a bone marrow aspirate
8.1.3 History and clinical signs
should be performed to rule out multiple myeloma. For
tumors of the axial skeleton, a computed tomography (CT)
Middle-aged to older cats are usually affected, but a wide age
scan can be performed to evaluate the extent of the tumor
range from 3 months to 20 years is reported (2, 3). Cats with
 and for planning surgery.
8: Tumors of the musculoskeletal system
99
The prognosis for cats with multiple myeloma is poor with
a median survival of 2-3 months (9-11), although some cats
can survive longer than 1 year. The prognosis for other feline
primary bone tumors is unknown.
8.2 Soft-tissue tumors
8.2.1 Incidence and risk
Epidemiological studies have found a strong association
between the administration of inactivated feline vaccines and
subsequent soft-tissue sarcoma development at sites where
vaccination was performed (15, 16). The prevalence of soft-
tissue sarcoma development at sites of vaccination has been
reported as 1-3.6 cases/10 000 vaccines administered (17).
It is now believed that vaccines are not the only cause of
sarcomas seen at injection sites, but that anything that pro-
A
B
Figure 8-2 (A) Mediolateral and (B) craniocaudal radiographs of a
duces local inflammation may be responsible for injection site
distal femoral osteosarcoma in a cat
sarcoma in susceptible cats. Inflammation remains the most
accepted hypothesis in the pathogenesis of vaccine-associated
sarcomas. Another reported syndrome is the development of
ocular sarcomas in cats due to trauma and foreign bodies
8.1.5 Therapy and prognosis
(18).
Limb amputation is the treatment of choice if the bone tumor
is located in the bones of the appendicular skeleton. Palliative
8.2.2 Pathology and natural behavior
radiation therapy can also be used to manage pain in cases
The tumors that develop at vaccine sites are typically mesen-
where the owner will not consider amputation, or the cat is
chymal in origin, and include fbrosarcomas, malignant
not a suitable candidate for amputation (14). Aggressive
fbrous histiocytomas, osteosarcomas, chondrosarcomas,
resection is recommended for tumors of the axial skeleton.
undifferentiated sarcomas, and rhabdomyosarcomas (19,
Radiation therapy can be considered if complete resection is
20). They usually have an increased amount of inflammation
impossible, although no studies are available to confrm the
and necrosis when compared to non-vaccine-associated sar-
effcacy of this treatment. No adjuvant therapy is known to
comas (21). Vaccine-associated sarcomas are characterized
be effcacious. However in cases of primary bone hemangio-
by local invasion (Fig. 8-3), and when compared to non-
sarcoma without evidence of metastases, a course of doxoru-
bicin chemotherapy is recommended. A course of melphalan
potential, reportedly as high as 23% (22).
and prednisone can be used in cases of multiple myeloma
(15-17).
8.2.3 Diagnostic work-up
The prognosis for appendicular osteosarcoma treated by
amputation is good ( Table 8.2). Amputation is often curative.
Primary work-up should consist of thoracic radiographs to
 A median survival of 24-44 months has been reported for
rule out metastases, and performing hematology, biochemis-
appendicular osteosarcoma with amputation as the sole treat-
try, and urinalysis to rule out concomitant disease. An inci-
ment (2, 3). No adjuvant chemotherapy is recommended at
sional biopsy is taken to confrm the diagnosis. Excisional
this point due to the low metastasis potential of the appen-
biopsy for suspected vaccine-associated sarcoma is not rec-
dicular osteosarcoma in cats.
ommended. If the diagnosis of vaccine-associated sarcoma is
 A median survival of only 6 months has been reported for
confrmed, a CT scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
axial osteosarcoma. It is however unclear if axial osteosar-
is a very useful imaging adjunct for evaluation of the tumor
puadde sin uun sisounond ranood e siu Ainn cuo
 extent, and for planning surgery (Fig. 8-3).
counterpart, or if it is related to whether the tumor can be
completely removed by surgery. It is important to understand
8.2.4 Therapy and prognosis
 that the prognosis for axial osteosarcoma is dependent on its
invasiveness (2, 3). If clean surgical margins can be obtained,
Aggressive surgical resection is the mainstream therapy
the cat is likely to be cured.
for vaccine-associated sarcoma. Marginal excision must be
100
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
believed that the chance of a cure increases with the use of a
combination of aggressive surgery and radiation therapy.
Whenever possible, radiation therapy should be recom-
 mended even in cats with clean margins.
 Several chemotherapeutic agents have been shown to have
effcacy against vaccine-associated sarcoma. Doxorubicin
and carboplatin are most commonly used. Both have a
reported response rate in the macroscopic disease setting of
around 40%, but all those responses were short-lived with a
median time to progression of 2-3 months. In a report of 67
lowing surgical excision, when compared to a historical
control group treated with surgery alone, those that received
chemotherapy had a longer time to frst recurrence versus
those treated with surgery alone (415 versus 87 days) (26).
Interestingly, adding chemotherapy to the combination of
surgery and radiation does not seem to bring beneft, but 
further information is required on this subject.
Figure 8-3 Contrast computed tomography scan of a cat with a
8.2.5 Prevention
vaccine-associated sarcoma. Note the invasion of the tumor inside the
abdomen (arrow)
The National Feline Vaccine-Associated Sarcoma Task Force
recommends that no vaccine be given in the interscapular
space. Instead, vaccines should be injected into the distal
avoided since it is seldom curative, and it makes further
aspect of the rear leg. It is also recommended that any vaccine
 attempts at more aggressive surgery more diffcult. A study
lump present after 3 months of vaccination, or with a diam-
 reported a median time to frst recurrence of 79 days for cats
eter greater than 2 cm, be removed after a biopsy. Other
with marginal excision versus 325 days for cats with radical
recommendations concerning vaccination frequency and
excision. Unfortunately, only 13.8% of the cats treated with
which vaccines to use are available on the National Feline
surgery alone had long-term (>2 years) survival (22). In
Vaccine-Associated Sarcoma Task Force website at http://
another study, the cats with complete surgical margins had
www.avma.org/vafstf/default.asp.
a median tumor-free interval of 16 months versus 4 months
 %os ui anou kuiodui ro pasixa Aanaduosu no
of the cats with complete excision, based on histopatholo-
8.3 Oral tumors
gical analysis of margins, had tumor recurrence (23), which
means that even with clean margins only 50% of cats were
Oral tumors account for 3% of all feline tumors (27). Most
cured.
cats will present with facial deformity or inappetence. Seventy
Due to the high recurrence rate of vaccine-associated
percent of feline oral tumors are squamous cell carcinoma
sarcoma, when treated with surgery alone, radiation therapy
and 20% are fbrosarcoma (28). Squamous cell carcinomas
has been used to try to achieve better local control. Radiation
are usually located in the bone of the maxilla or mandible or
therapy has been used pre- and postsurgery. In a report of
under the tongue, whereas fbrosarcomas usually derive from
78 cats treated with postoperative radiation therapy, the
the gingiva. Recommended investigations should include
median disease-free interval was 405 days, which means that
local and thoracic radiographs, cytology of the regional
the tumor either recurred or metastasized in more than half
lymph nodes, and incisional biopsy of the primary tumor. A
of the cats after 13 months. Factors with a negative influence
CT scan can be performed to evaluate further the extent of
on prognosis included cats having more than one surgery
the disease if the tumor is potentially amenable for surgical
performed prior to radiation therapy, and a large primary
resection (Fig. 8-4).
tumor (24). The median disease-free survival was 584 days
 Unfortunately, treatment is often unrewarding due to the
in another report of 92 cats treated with preoperative radia-
local extent of these tumors. Survival is poor with fewer then
tion therapy. When tumor margins were clean, postradiation
10% of the cats living to 1 year regardless of whether surgery
therapy, the median disease-free survival was 986 days versus 
alone (29), surgery and radiation therapy (30, 31), and addi-
292 days for incompletely excised tumor (25). It is now
tional chemotherapy (32, 33) is performed.
8: Tumors of the musculoskeletal system
101
R
A
A
B
Figure 8-4 Cat with oral squamous cell carcinoma.
(B) Contrast computed tomography scan of the cat in the picture. Note the invasion of the tumor into the orbit, and the lysis of the maxilla
(arrows)
8.4 Tumors of the nervous system
8.4.1 Tumors of the vertebral bodies and
spinal cord
Neoplasia of the spinal cord and vertebral column accounts
-doau paneiossy 'sies ui suoisal leuds le jo %os on dn 1oj
athies typically progress from initial asymmetric presentation
t0 para- or tetraparesis. The onset may be insidious or
acute.
The most common neoplasm affecting the spinal cord of
cats is lymphosarcoma (34). In many cases, lymphosarcoma
has multifocal localization within the central nervous system
and other organ systems. Cats with vertebral canal lympho-
sarcoma are usually feline leukemia virus (FeLV)-positive,
Figure 8-5  Ventrodorsal myelogram of a 1-year-old cat with neoplasia
affecting the third and fourth cervical vertebral bodies. The tumor has
and have bone marrow involvement. Cerebrospinal fluid
expanded medially. causing dr amatic compression of the cervical spinal
often contains malignant lymphocytes. Cats with vertebral
sisosoxa snouibelen 'anueleadde enibooe, aun uodn paseg pio
canal lymphoma may initially respond to corticosteroid treat-
has to be considered as a differential diagnosis to neoplasia, especially
 ment and chemotherapy. However long-term prognosis is
if the cat is young. Bone biopsy is necessary for a definitive diagnosis.
unfavorable because of the propensity of multifocal involve-
ment, local recurrence, and the development of systemic
in cats include lipoma and plasma cell tumors. Tumors with
FeLV-related disease (34).
a meningeal origin include meningioma, meningeal sarcoma,
Several non-lymphoid tumors affecting the spinal cord have
and neoplasia of histiocytic origin. The epidural space is a
been reported (35) (Fig. 8-5). The most common vertebral
favored place for tumor metastasis. Intramedullary tumors
tumor was osteosarcoma, followed by fibrosarcoma in a large
may be of glial or neuroectodermal origin. Gliomas and
 pathology-based study (36). Extradural non-lymphoid tumors
 astrocytomas have been reported.
102
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
Results suggest that contemporary neurosurgical techniques
commonly result in incomplete excision of feline non-
Ex11838
MI3Y
lymphoid vertebral and spinal cord tumors, but are effica-
Sa:7
kn7-Cc
cious at palliation of clinical signs of spinal cord dysfunction
OAXS1S
06:82:12PM
(37). Benign non-lymphoid vertebral canal tumors in cats,
Mag =1.41
FL:LR
such as meningiomas, that undergo surgery can have a fair to
 good prognosis. The median survival time for cats was 518
days for cats with benign tumours (37). Thus, more in-depth
 investigations such as advanced diagnostic imaging, biopsy,
and exploratory surgery may be justified. Bone tumors and
sisouoid rood e Areo reaamou eiseidou Arenpauen
 despite aggressive surgical and medical therapy, with a median
survival time of 110.5 days after surgical debulking (37).
ECI115.6kH
PXTRFM 12
8.4.2 Peripheral nerve tumors
Primary nerve sheath tumors, originating from Schwann
WW:1859WL: 659
RQFCS:SIF/VB
cells, perineural fbroblasts, or a combination of the two, are
rare in cats (38). They may present as cutaneous tumors of
Figure 8-6 Magnetic resonance image (T1-weighted, postcontrast) at
adult to aged animals. They are usually poorly circumscribed
the level of the seventh cervical vertebra in a 8-year-old cat with a
and locally invasive with a tendency to recur. Various sites
schwannoma of the right nerve root. There is marked contrast
have been reported, including the perineum, limbs, thorax,
enhancement of the affected nerve root (arrow), and subtle
enlargement of the right intervertebral foramen.
vertebral canal, neck, and head, with a greater frequency
reported for the limbs and head (39). Invasion of bone is
uncommon, but can result in compression of underlying
neural structures. Intradural expansion may cause resorption
8.5 Miscellaneous tumors
and enlargement of adjacent intervertebral foramina as well
8.5.1 Multiple cartilaginous exostoses
 as compression of the spinal cord (40).
Lymphoma is considered to be the most common second-
Multiple cartilaginous exostosis (osteochondromatosis) is a
ary tumor of the peripheral nerves. Based upon the small
tumor-like disease that mostly affects the axial skeleton. It is
number of reported cases, it is not possible to determine
seen in younger FeLV-positive cats (43, 44). In contrast to
predilection sites but the incidence of brachial plexus lym-
dogs, multiple cartilaginous exostosis does not seem to be
phoma seems to be higher than involvement of nerves at
familial in origin, is often asymmetric, and the lesion occurs
other sites (41).
after the closure of the growth plate. The condition is often
Diagnosis of peripheral nerve tumors is based upon the
seen in the scapula, vertebrae, and mandibula, although any
 presence of neurological deficits, atrophy of affected myo-
bone can be affected. Radiologically, the lesions are charac-
tomes, palpation of a mass, electromyography, and ultraso-
terized by sessile or pedunculated protuberances from bone
a o sisoup rog poon aaus Ara e si I udeou
surfaces, with indistinct borders with normal bone. Cats
extent of a peripheral nerve tumor (Fig. 8-6).
often present with rapidly progressing hard swellings over the
Treatment consists of resection of the affected nerve, and
 affected area causing pain and loss of function. Multiple
eventually amputation of the affected limb if major nerve
cartilaginous exostosis has an aggressive natural behavior.
plexuses are affected. Care is taken to try and resect the nerve
 Surgery or radiation therapy has been used to paliate the
beyond the neoplastic portion. A hemilaminectomy and a
clinical signs but no effective treatment exists at this time
durotomy may be necessary to remove all the affected parts
(45).
if nerve roots are affected. The optimal treatment for cats
Multiple cartilaginous exostosis must be differentiated
with lymphoma involving the peripheral nerves and plexuses
 from solitary osteochondromas, because prognosis and treat-
has not been established. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy
ment differ (Chapter 4).
are effective treatment modalities for feline lymphoma, but
surgical resection might be necessary if nerve function is
8.5.2 Metastatic digital carcinoma
impaired irreversibly (42). Recurrence of lymphoma at other
sites has been reported despite aggressive therapy of the
Metastasis of primary pulmonary neoplasia, usually bron-
tumor at the primary site.
chial or pulmonary carcinoma, to the digits is a well-described
8: Tumors of the musculoskeletal system
103
A
B
c
radiodense area in one of the caudal lung lobes. (B, C) Radiographs of the feet show lysis of several phalangeal bones and soft-tissue swelling
around the toes. These changes are characteristic of a pulmonary carcinoma with digital metastases.
syndrome in cats (46). It is typically characterized by swelling 
Although synoviomas do not metastasize, they usually recur
of several digits. A single lung mass is usually seen on thoracic
 after local resection, so amputation is recommended.
radiographs (Fig. 8-7). A recent study of primary and meta-
static carcinomas in the digits of cats concluded that 87.5%
 References and further reading
of digital carcinomas were metastases of a primary pulmo-
nary carcinoma. Treatment is unrewarding since multiple
1. Dorn CR, et al. Survey of animal neoplasms in Alameda and
Contra Costa Counties, California Il: cancer morbidity in dogs
digits on multiple limbs are usually affected. The prognosis
and cats from Alameda County. J Natl Cancer Inst 1968;40:
is poor with a median survival time of 4.9 weeks, compared
307-318.
to 29.5 weeks for cats with primary digital squamous cell
2. Hellmann E, et al. Feline osteosarcoma: 145 cases (1990-1995).
carcinoma (47).
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000;36:518-521.
3. Bitetto WV, et al. Osteosarcoma in cats: 22 cases (1974-1984).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987;190:91-93.
8.5.3 Synovial cell tumors
4. Quigley PJ, Leedale AH. Tumor involving bone in the domestic
cat: a review of fifty-eight cases. Vet Pathol 1983;20:670-686.
Synovial cell sarcoma is a rare tumor in cats, but it is believed
5. Lui S, et al. Primary and secondary bone tumours in the cat.
to be the most common primary joint tumor (48). Affected
J Small Anim Pract 1974;15:141-156.
cats present with a soft-tissue mass in the vicinity of a joint.
6. Banks WC. Parosteal osteosarcoma in a dog and a cat. J Am
Described cases have involved the elbow and carpal joint
Vet Med Assoc 1971;158:1412-1415.
(48-51). Lameness is usually, but not necessarily, present
7. Fry PD, Jukes HF. Fracture-associated sarcoma in the cat. J
Small Anim Pract 1995;36:124-126.
(50). A diagnosis of synovial cell sarcoma is suspected based
 8. Bennett D, et al. Osteosarcoma associated with healed fractures.
on radiographic evidence of bone lysis with or without peri-
J Small Anim Pract 1979;20:13-18.
osteal new bone formation, affecting the epiphyses of the
9. Patel RT, et al. Multiple myeloma in 16 cats: a retrospective
study. Vet Clin Pathol 2005;34:341-352.
bones proximal and distal to a joint. Biopsy is required to
10. Weber NA, Tebeau CS. An unusual presentation of multiple
obtain the diagnosis. A report documented two cats with
myeloma in two cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1998;34:477-
metastasis to the regional lymph nodes. Both were treated by
483.
amputation and adjuvant doxorubicin, and had survival
11. Hanna F. Multiple myelomas in cats. J Feline Med Surg
times or 444 and 41 days, respectively (51).
2005;7:275-287.
12. Turrel JM, Pool RR. Primary bone tumors in the cat: a retro-
Synoviomas are benign joint tumors, and have mainly
specive study of 15 cats and a literature review. Vet Radiol
involved joints, tendon sheaths, and the distal limbs (52-54).
1982;23:152-166.
104
Part 2: Musculoskeletal diseases
13. Berman E, Wright JF. What is your diagnosis? (osteosarcoma of
squamous cell carcinoma in the cat. Proceedings of the 11th
Annual Vet Cancer Society Conference, Minneapolis, 1991.
irradiated cat). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1973;162:1065-1066.
33. Jones PD, et al. Gemcitabine as a radiosensitizer for nonresect-
14. McEntee MC. Radiation therapy in the management of bone
able feline oral squamous cell carcinoma. J Am Anim Hosp
tumors. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1997;27:131-
Assoc 2003;39:463-467.
138.
34.9
 s     [  na  o
15. Hendricks MJ, et al. Postvaccinal sarcomas in the cat: epidemi-
1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;373-376.
ology and electron probe microanalytical identifcation of alu-
35. Levy MS, et al. Nonlymphoid vertebral canal tumors in cats: 11
minium. Cancer Res 1992;52:5391-5394.
cases (1987-1995). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997;210:663-664.
16. Kass PH, et al. Epidemiologic evidence for a causal relation
36. Marioni-Henry K, et al. Prevalence of disease of the spinal cord
between vaccination and fibrosarcoma tumorigenesis in cats. J
of cats. J Vet Intern Med 2004;18:851-858.
Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;203:396-405.
37. Rossmeisl Jr, H, et al. Surgical cytoreduction for the treatment
17. Coyne MJ, et al. Estimated prevalence of injection sarcomas in
of non-lymphoid vertebral and spinal cord neoplasms in cats:
cats during 1992. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997;210:249-251.
retrospecive evaluation of 26 cases (1990-2005). Vet Comp
18. Dubielzig RR, et al. Clinical and morphological features of post-
Oncol 2006;4:41-50.
traumatic ocular sarcomas in cats. Vet Pathol 1990;27:62-65.
38. Hayes HM, et al. Occurrence of nervous tissue tumors in cattle,
19. Couto Ss, et al. Feline vaccine-associated fbrosarcoma: mor-
horses, cats and dogs. Int J Cancer 1975;15:39-47.
phologic distinctions. Vet Pathol 2002;39:33-41.
39. Jones BR, et al. Nerve sheath tumors in the dog and cat. NZ
20. Hendricks MJ, Brooks JJ. Postvaccinal sarcomas in the cat:
Vet J 1995;43:190-196.
histology
and
immunohistochemistry.
Vet
Pathol
40. LeCouteur RA. Tumors of the nervous system. In: Witrow SJ,
1994;31:126-129.
MacEwen EG (eds). Small animal oncology, 3rd edn. Philadel-
21. Hendrick MJ, et al. Comparison of fbrosarcomas that devel-
phia: WB Saunders; 2001: pp. 500-531.
oped at vaccine sites and at nonvaccination sites in cats: 239
41. Mellanby RJ, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis
cases (1991-1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994;205:1425-
of lymphoma involving the brachial plexus in a cat. Vet Radiol
1429.
Ultrasound 2003;44:522-525.
22. Hershey AE, et al. Prognosis for presumed feline vaccine-associ-
42. Elmslie RE, et al. Radiotherapy with and without chemotherapy
ated sarcoma after excision: 61 cases (1986-1996). J Am Vet
for localized lymphoma in 10 cats. Vet Radiol 1991;32:277-
Med Assoc 2000;216:58-61.
280.
23. Davidson EB,et al. Surgical excision of soft tissue fibrosarcomas
43. Carpenter JL, et al. Tumors and tumor-like lesions. In: Holz-
in cats. Vet Surg 1997;26:265-269.
worth J (ed.) Disease of the cats: medicine and surgery. Phila-
24. Cohen M, et al. Use of surgery and electron beam irradiation,
delphia: WB Saunders; 1987: pp. 406-596.
with or without chemotherapy, for treatment of vaccine-associ-
44. Riddle WEJ, Leighton RL. Osteochondromatosis in a cat. Vet
ated sarcoma in cats: 78 cases (1996-2000). J Am Vet Med
Pathol 1972;9:350-359.
Assoc 2001;219:1582-1589.
45. Hubler M, et al. Palliative irradiation of Scottish Fold
25. Kobayashi I, et al. Preoperative radiotherapy for vaccine-associ-
Osteochondrodysplasia. Vet Radiol Utrasound 2004;45:582-
ated sarcoma in 92 cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2002;43:473-
585.
479.
46. Gottfried SD, et al. Metastatic digital carcinoma in the cat: a
26. Poirier VJ, et al. Liposome-encapsulated doxorubicin (Doxil)
retrospective study of 36 cats (1992-1998). J Am Anim Hosp
and doxorubicin in the treatment of vaccine-associated sarcoma
Assoc 2000;36:501-509.
in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2002;16:726-731.
47. Van der Linde-Sipman JS, Van den Ingh TS. Primary and meta-
27. Stebbins KE, et al. Feline oral neoplasia: a ten year survey. Vet
static carcinomas in the digits of cats. Vet Q 2000;22:141-
Pathol 1989;26:121-128.
145.
28. Withrow SJ. Cancer of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Withrow
48. Silva-Krott IU, et al. Synovial sarcoma in a cat. J Am Vet Med
SJ, MacEwen EG (eds) Small animal clinical oncology, 3rd edn.
Assoc 1993;203:1430-1431.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2001: pp. 261-279.
49. Borenstein, N, et al. What is your diagnosis? (Synovial sarcoma.)
29. Postorino Reeves NC, et al. Oral squamous cell carcinoma in
J Small Anim Pract 1999;40:236-237.
the cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1993;29:438-441.
50. Ireifej SJ, et al. What is your diagnosis? (Synovial sarcoma.) J
30. Hutson CA, et al. Treatment of mandibular squamous cell car-
Am Vet Med Assoc 2007;230:1305-1306.
cinoma in cats by use of mandibulectomy and radiotherapy:
51. Liptak JM, et al. Metastatic synovial cell sarcoma in two cats.
seven cases (1987-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;201:
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2004;2:164-170.
777-781.
52. Hulse, EV. A benign giant cell symovioma in a cat. J Pathol
31. Bregazzi Vs, et al. Response of feline oral squamous cell carci-
1966;91:269-271.
53. Davies JD, Little NR. Synovioma in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
2001;42:77-79.
1972;13:127-133.
32. LaRue SM, et al. Shrinking-field radiation therapy in combina-
54. Thoday KL, Evans JG. Synovioma in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
tion with mitoxantrone chemotherapy for the treatment of oral
1972;13:399-401.
Part 3
Polytrauma
The majority of orthopedic problems encountered in feline
 practice are due to trauma. Frequent causes of trauma include
motor vehicle accidents, falls from a height, bite wounds, and
gunshot injury. Traumatized cats often sustain injuries to
multiple body systems, including potentially life-threatening
injuries of the thorax, abdomen, and head. These injuries
have to be recognized and treated appropriately, before
addressing concurrent orthopedic injuries. Mortality rates of
traumatized cats presented at a veterinary clinic have been
reported to be around 20-25% (1-3). Thoracic, abdominal,
or brain injuries are usually the cause of death in these cats
(3), emphasizing the importance of a complete and thorough
assessment and appropriate emergency management of the
feline trauma patient.
The following part of the book addresses the initial assess-
-neajod aul roj sanpaoid jusuean Kousreua pue juu
matized feline patient. Additionally, basic diagnostic and
therapeutic features of commonly encountered soft-tissue and
neurological injuries are summarized. This book focuses on
orthopedic surgery, and does not cover a complete descrip-
tion of the pathophysiology of trauma, critical care tech-
niques, and soft-tissue surgery. For a detailed description of
these topics the reader is referred to specialized textbooks.
107
Etiology and severity of polytrauma
K. Voss
The definition of polytrauma is the presence of injuries to
distal limbs. Dog bites may cause severe intra-abdominal or
several body regions or organs. Polytrauma is more common
thoracic injuries.
adnu ieun isaaans saipnis suanaa 'sop un ueu sien u
 The severity of injuries can be rated with the help of scoring
injuries occur in around 30-60% of traumatized cats (1-4),
 systems. An example is shown in Table 9-2 (8). Scoring
and the presence of more than three concurrent injuries is not
 systems help in roughly predicting prognosis for survival and
unusual (Fig. 9-1). Several reasons may account for the high
 in estimating treatment costs. It should be remembered,
frequency of polytrauma in cats. Cats usually tend to sustain
 however, that clinical signs of certain injuries such as urinary
high-impact trauma, such as road traffc accidents and falls
 ract trauma might not be evident at the time of initial pre-
from a height. Due to their small body size, less body mass
sentation. Owners should therefore be informed that addi-
is available to absorb the energy generated during the acci-
tional injuries might only be diagnosed during the course of
dent, and the cat's organs are less protected as compared to
 treatment, and their presence may influence morbidity, mor-
larger animals (5).
tality, prognosis, and treatment costs. In one study, evaluat-
The severity and distribution of the injuries vary with the
 ing correlations between radiographic diagnosis  and
cause of trauma. Table 9-1 summarizes results from different
 epidemiological factors in 100 consecutive traumatized cats,
studies (1, 2, 6, 7). Road traffc accidents and falls from a
 negative correlations were found between survival and older
height often result in injury to the extremities, head and neck,
 age, between survival and spinal trauma, and between sur-
pelvis, and thorax. Injuries due to encounters with lawnmow-
vival and abdominal trauma (3).
ers and harvesting machinery usually result in extensive soft-
i po nsa 'sod o ro si s
9.1 Road traffic accidents
 Road traffc accidents often result in blunt trauma, causing
any variation of thoracic, orthopedic, neurological, and
abdominal injury. An epidemiological study performed in the
UK showed that younger cats, male cats, and non-pedigree
"6) aia roo e Aq i auiaq jo ys raiu e peq s1e
Cats between 7 months and 2 years had the highest risk of
being in a road traffc accident, and the odds decreased by
16% for every 1-year increase in age (10). Older cats may be
less at risk because they are more experienced and therefore
better able to deal with dangerous situations, and they may
alter their behavior by staying closer to home and spending
less time outside. Accidents were evenly distributed through-
out the year, but tended to happen more often at night (10).
Wearing reflective collars did not seem to prevent road traffc
accidents (10).
 Distribution and severity of injuries depend on the velocity
of the car and the body area hit. Injuries of the head, the
extremities, pelvic fractures, and thoracic injuries were most
commonly diagnosed (1, 2). The hindlimbs were affected
Figure 9-1 A lateral radiograph of a polytraumatized cat that
more often than the front limbs. Many of the injuries sus-
presented in shock, with dyspnea, and injuries to multiple limbs. Film
tained after road traffc accidents are severe and need to be
taken after fluid resuscitation and thoracocentesis with aspiration of air
reated surgically. In one study, 50% of cats had to be treated
Injuries visible on the radiograph are pneumothorax, loss of abdominal
detail a distal articular humeral fracture, a distal articular tibial fracture,
surgically (2), and approximately half of these cats then
and a non-displaced fracture of the fourth lumbar vertebral body.
required a second surgery (2). The second surgery was neces-
108
Part 3: Polytrauma
Features
Motor vehicle accident
Fall from a height
Gunshot injury
Dog bite wounds
Mortality
16-24%
10%
Unknown
Unknown
 Most common
Extremities (hindlimbs more
Thorax
Humerus
Abdominal wall 
localization of
often than forelimbs)
Head
Spine
Intra-abdominal organs
injuries
Head and neck
Extremities (forelimbs
Pelvis
 more often than
hindlimbs)
Table 9-1. The mortality of cats after different trauma and the most common sites of injury
 Grade
 Grade description
Types of injuries
0
 No definable injury
 No physically or radiographically definable injury
1
Minor
 Small skin lacerations or abrasions
 Undisplaced pelvic fractures
Simple metacarpal or metatarsal fracture
Moderate
Extensive or deep lacerations or abrasions
Skull or spinal fractures without neurological signs
Joint luxations and ligament ruptures
Simple fractures of long bones, ribs, or pelvis
Severe, not
Multiple extensive deep lacerations or abrasions
life-threatening
Skull or spinal fractures with minimal neurological deficits
 Pneumothorax, hemothorax or lung contusion with minimal respiratory compromise
Multiple pelvic or long-bone fractures
Severe,
Multiple extensive lacerations with shock
life-threatening
 Skull and spinal fractures with major neurological deficits
Thoracic trauma with respiratory compromise
Abdominal trauma with signs of shock
Ruptured urinary bladder or hemoperitoneum
Major pelvic fractures with extensive soft-tissue trauma
Multiple open long-bone fractures with shock
Table 9-2. An example of a scoring system for trauma patients, ranging from minor to severe and life-threatening (adapted from Kolata (8)).
Severe injuries occur in around 50% of traumatized cats
sary either as a continuation of reatment, for previously
mild injuries. However severe injuries do occur, and the
undetected injuries, or because the initial surgery had failed.
mortality rate is reported to be around 10% (6, 7).
Mortality rates of cats treated in a hospital after a road traffic
Type and severity of injury depend on the height of the
accident are relatively high, ranging from 16% to 24% in the
fall, and the type of ground the cat lands on (6). Thoracic
literature (1, 2). These numbers do not include cats that were
trauma occurs in up to 90% of cats with high-rise syndrome
killed immediately after the accident or those that died during
(6). Lung contusion and pneumothorax are most common,
 transportation to the hospital.
and are often the reason for death in these patients. The
incidence of thoracic injuries however does not seem to
depend on the height of the fall (7). Facial trauma, including
9.2 High-rise syndrome
hard palate fractures, and injuries of the extremities also
aissod jo A e sisn ss iu n a
 occur frequently. Injuries of the forelimbs are present more
injuries resulting from falling from a height equivalent to the
often after falls from a height than after road traffic acci-
second storey or higher. Cats have the unique capability of
dents, and tend to be localized distal to the elbow. Distal
being able to turn thermselves during a fall and landing on
femoral fractures seem to be the most commonly encoun-
their feet, and therefore sometimes suffering only surprisingly
tered injuries of the hindlimbs. Impalement injuries have
9: Etiology and severity of polytrauma
109
been described after falling on to sharp objects, such as metal
railings (11).
 The number or rate of injuries is related to the force of
impact on the ground, which in turn depends on the velocity
with which the cat reaches the ground. Cats spread out hori-
zontally during falling, and reach their terminal velocity
xe a as e rae ( a  o)
the height of a ffth storey (6). According to this assumption,
 the rate of injuries increased in a linear fashion up to a height
of approximately seven storeys in one study (6). Falls from
higher than seven storeys resulted in a decrease of total inju-
ries and fractures (6). The decrease in the number of fractures
Figure 9-2 Laterolateral abdominal radiograph of a cat, which was
after falls from more than seven storeys is explained by the
bitten by two dogs 1 hour previously. The overlying skin was intact, but
fact that, after having reached terminal velocity, the vesti-
li jeuuopge jeuaa aut jo Anuios pue bulams si aau
bular system is no longer stimulated by acceleration. The
Exploratory celiotomy revealed an abdominal wall rupture, a perforated 
cat may then relax and orient its legs more horizontally.
small intestinal loop. and a splenic laceration.
This positioning possibly allows for a beter distribution
of the impact force and a reduction in the incidence of
fractures (6).
Shearing, tensile, and compressive forces are involved in
 dog bite wounds, of which tensile and compressive forces are
9.3 Gunshot injury
the most devastating. Tensile forces result in avulsion of the
skin from underlying tissue, compromising blood supply and
Cats with gunshot injuries are encountered infrequently, and
 promoting infection due to creation of dead space. Compres-
information in the veterinary literature is mainly based on :
 sive forces may cause crushing of underlying tissue, possibly
01 Arnui pue 'suonerasel lem Apoq 'sarmsen ui Sunsar isour sies jo azis Apoq leurs au oi ana '(l) saop ui saupuy
 thorax, spine, abdomen, and proximal limbs. Around 50%  occur below the skin, and are likely to be present even if the
of gunshot injuries to the limbs are associated with fractures
 skin lesions do not appear to be serious. Cats with dog bite
(12). Fractures caused by gunshot injury are always severe,
 wounds are also at risk for developing systemic inflammatory
because the sudden release of high energy results in fracture
 response syndrome and/or sepsis due to widespread tissue
n  n ssn s n 
 destruction and development of infection.
are therefore always classified as grade 3 open fractures
In a survey addressing bite wounds in dogs and cats the
(Chapter 13). The humerus and the spine are most commonly
 limbs were the most frequently affected, followed by the head
affected in the author's experience.
and neck, and the regions overlying the thoracic and abdomi-
Animals with gunshot injuries of the thorax or the limbs
nal cavity (13). In the author's experience most dog bite
have a better prognosis than animals with abdominal or
wounds in cats affect the abdominal area, causing abdominal
spinal injuries (12). The prognosis for vertebral column
hernias and/or injury to abdominal organs (Fig. 9-2). Forty
injuries is poor if there is loss of deep pain sensation and
percent of abdominal hernias in cats were due to bite wounds
severely comminuted and displaced vertebral fractures/
in one study (14). Exploratory celiotomy is often indicated
luxations suggestive of transection of the spinal cord. Spinal
 to rule out injuries to intra-abdominal organs. Chest wall
concussion may result in reversible neurological deficits
injuries and open or closed pneumothorax can occur after
in rare cases. Spinal concussion should be suspected if radio-
 dog bites in the thoracic region. Fractures and joint injuries
logical evidence of severe spinal injury is missing, and if
may also be encountered.
neurological deficits show some improvement within a few
hours.
9.5 Trauma by entrapment in
bottom-hung windows
9.4 Dog bite wounds
Trauma by entrapment in a hinged bottom-hung window
Dog bite wounds are far less common than cat bite wounds,
au jo ounuado padeus-A au un yons siaa ien e ji sinono
but they may cause severe trauma. Cat bite wounds do not
window, while climbing through it. Cats usually get caught
usually result in polytrauma because the lesions are confined
between the ribs and the pelvis, and slide down the V-shaped
to a small area. They are described in Chapter 16.
opening even further in an attempt to free themselves. This
110
Part 3: Polytrauma
results in a time-dependent development of ischemic injury
5. Oechtering G, et al. Polytrauma. In: Horzinek MC, Schmidt, V,
to several organs. Ischemic neuromyopathy, damage to
Lutz H (eds) Krankheiten der Katze, 4th edn. Stuttgart: Enke
abdominal organs, such as the kidneys, bladder, and colon,
Verlag; 2005: pp. 649-665.
6. Whitney WO, Mehlhaff CJ. High-rise syndrome in cats. J Am
and spinal cord ischemia are possible consequences. Shock
Vet Med Assoc 1987;191:1399-1403.
develops after some time. Pathophysiology, signs, treatment
7.
Vnuk D, et al. Feline high-rise syndrome: 119 cases (1998-
options, and prognosis for the window-cat syndrome are
 2001). J Feline Med Surg 2004;6:305-312.
described in Chapter 6.
 n o    so ui   1o s8
North Am Small Anim Pract 1980;10:515-522.
9. Rochlitz I. Study of factors that may predispose domestic cats
References and further reading
to road traffic accidents: part 1. Vet Rec 2003;153:549-553.
1. Kolata RJ, et al. Patterns of trauma in urban dogs and cats:
cats to road traffic accidents: part 2. Vet Rec 2003;153:585-
a study of 1000 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1974;164:499-
588.
502.
11. Pratschke KM, Kirby BM. High rise syndrome with impalement
 2. Rochlitz I. Clinical study of cats injured and killed in road traffic
in three cats. J Small Anim Pract 2002;43:261-264.
accidents in Cambridgeshire. J Small Anim Pract 2004;45:390-
12. Fullington RJ, Otto CM. Characteristics and management of
394.
 gunshot wounds in dogs and cats: 84 cases (1986-1995). J Am
3. Zulauf D, et al. Radiographic examination and outcome in
Vet Med Assoc 1997;210:658-662.
consecutive feline trauma patients. Vet Comp Orthop Trauma-
13. Holt DE, Griffn G. Bite wounds in dogs and cats. Vet Clin
tol 2008;21:36-40.
North Am Small Anim Pract 2000;30:669-679.
4. Griffon D, et al. Thoracic injuries in cats with traumatic frac-
14. Shaw SR, et al. Traumatic body wall herniation in 36 dogs and
tures. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1994;7:98-100.
cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2003;39:35-46.
111
10
General approach to the trauma patient
K. Voss
The approach to a traumatized cat should be effcient, sys-
formed frst if respiratory compromise is predominant. If
tematic, and complete. The approach described here is a
shock is considered the main problem, fluid resuscitation is
 guideline, but may need to be adjusted, depending on the
 initiated as a frst step. The patient is re-evaluated every 10-
 individual case. It involves the initial general examination of
the patient, emergency reatment, reassessment of the patient
treatment.
during emergency treatment, the complete clinical, orthope-
Once the animal is considered stable and can be handled
 dic, and neurological examination, and further diagnostic
 safely, a thorough general physical, orthopedic, and neuro-
tests (Fig. 10-1).
logical examination is performed. This second look is aimed
The initial clinical examination and assessment of a trau-
 at diagnosing or excluding injuries, and obtaining additional
 matized patient focus on rapid evaluation of life-threatening
fndings, which suggest the need for further diagnostic tests.
respiratory, circulatory, and neurological conditions. This
It should be possible to give a rough estimation of the severity
frst look includes assessment of mental state, respiratory rate
of injuries to the owners and to discuss further measures with
and pattern, heart rate, mucous membrane color and capil-
them after the complete physical examination, and the
lary refltime, and measurement of body temperature. Treat-
ment is initiated immediately in cats with
respiratory
Routine blood analysis and thoracic and abdominal radio-
compromise, cats in shock, or cats with brain trauma (Chapter 
 graphs should be obtained from all traumatized cats. Blood
11). Oxygen supplementation and thoracocentesis are per-
is taken as soon as possible in order to have baseline values
Examination
Treatment
Figure 10-1 General approach
Re-evaluation
to the trauma patient. ECG,
electrocardiogram.
 lnitial clinical examination
 Emergency treatment
Cardiovascular function
 Oxygen supplementation
Respiratory function
Thoracocentesis
 Neurological function
 Fluid resuscitation
 Complete physical examination
 Pain treatment
General examination
Antibiotics +/-
Orthopedic examination
 Temporary treatment of injuries
 Neurological examination
 Clean and cover open wounds
External immobilization of
 Further diagnostic tests
fractures and joint instabilities
Basic blood work
Thoracic and abdominal
radiographs
Definitive treatment plan
ECG
according to diagnoses
 Ultrasonography
112
Part 3: Polytrauma
 Percentage of cats
 Body system affected
Types of injuries (in decreasing frequency)
Table 10-1. Radiological
findings of whole-body
radiographs from 100 consecutive
53%
Thorax
Pneumothorax
Lung contusion
traumatized cats from an urban
 area. Trauma types included
Pleural effusion
unknown trauma (32%), hit by
Rib fractures
car (30%), falls from a height 
 Diaphragmatic hernia
(25%), bite wounds (7%), and
39%
Abdomen
Loss of abdominal detail
others (6%). Because the limbs
 Loss of retroperitoneal detail
are usually not included on the
whole-body radiographs, only
Abdominal wall trauma
injuries to the trunk were
34%
Pelvis
Fractures
 evaluated
 Sacroiliac fracture luxations
26%
Spine
 Sacrococcygeal fracture/luxations
Thoracolumbar fracture/luxations
18%
Surrounding soft
Swelling
tissue
Subcutaneous emphysema
for later comparison. Thoracic and abdominal radiographs
are used to confrm and to specify the clinical diagnosis and
Opioids, like morphine, fentanyl or buprenorphine, are
 to detect additional abnormalities missed on physical exami-
appropriate analgesics in most patients (Chapter 18). No
 nation. Only stable cats should be radiographed. See Chapter 
 oficial guidelines exist on the need for antimicrobial therapy
12 for the emergency treatment of specific injuries.
in feline trauma patients, but it seems reasonable to admin-
 Due to the small body size of cats, it is possible to radio-
graph both the thorax and the abdomen on the same film.
 to those with severe lung contusions. Antimicrobial therapy
This does not lead to perfectly centered radiographs, but
should always be instituted in cats with contaminated or
 infected open wounds, including open fractures or joint
ing 100 consecutive whole-body radiographs of traumatized
injuries.
cats in an urban area, injuries were found in 96% of cases
 Orthopedic and neurological injuries are treated when the
(1). A summation of the fndings of this study is depicted in
animal is considered stable for anesthesia and surgery. The
Table 10-1. Not all of the injuries recognized need treatment,
animals must be hemodynamically and metabolically stable,
but recognizing them may help in the decision process and
pulmonary function should not be compromised, packed cell
estimation of prognosis.
volume should exceed 20%, and albumin should exceed 20 g/
Further diagnostic tests may be indicated according to clini-
1. With some injuries, such as spinal fractures and luxations,
cal or radiological findings. Electrocardiography is performed
 open fractures and joint injuries, and femoral and physeal
in order to detect arrhythmias due to traumatic myocarditis
fractures in immature cats, the prognosis for functional
 or underlying heart disease. Ultrasonography may be neces-
outcome is time-dependent. In these cases the cats are taken
 sary to evaluate further intra-abdorminal or intrathoracic
to surgery as soon as possible.
injuries.
Pain medication should be provided as soon as possible
Reference and further reading
after presentation. Pain causes peripheral vasoconstriction
1. Zulauf D, et al. Radiographic examination and outcome in
and decreases peripheral circulation. Pain also restricts respi-
consecutive feline trauma patients. Vet Comp Orthop Trauma-
ratory movements in patients with painful thoracic wall or
tol 2008;21:36-40.
113
11
Traumatic hemorrhaqic shock
K. Voss
Shock is defined as an inadequate delivery of oxygen to
(3). Aggressive fluid resuscitation is life-saving in many
tissues to maintain their metabolic requirements. Traumatic
animals, but deterioration and reperfusion injury may be
hemorrhagic shock results from a combination of blood loss
encountered
and tissue trauma, and is frequently encountered in trauma-
 In the terminal decompensatory stage, the compensatory
tized cats. Acute external or internal bleeding reduces circu-
 mechanisms fail to provide suffcient tissue oxygenation,
lating blood volume and causes direct hypovolemia. Patients
and the heart and brain begin to fail. Heart rate slows,
with an acute blood loss of more than 20% require aggressive
vasodilation, blood pooling, and profound hypotension
fluid substitution, and blood loss exceeding 50% usually
 occur, and respiration is depressed. Clinical signs include
results in death of the patient (1). The normal blood volume
 bradycardia, severe hypotension, pale or cyanotic mucous
of cats is 66 ml/kg body weight (2).
membranes, absent capillary refill, weak or absent pulses,
Tissue trauma contributes to hemorrhagic shock by redis-
hypothermia, anuric renal failure, and pulmonary edema.
tribution of blood flow at the capillary level, initiated by
Terrminal shock is frequently unresponsive, even to aggressive
neurogenic mechanisms and pain-induced vasoconstriction.
fluid therapy.
This causes indirect hypovolemia. Inadequate blood supply
and oxygen delivery to the kidneys, gastrointestinal tract, and
11.2 Signs of shock in cats
pancreas in the later stages of shock is responsible for initia-
tion of pathophysiological mechanisms, which can lead to the
Clinical signs of shock in cats differ from those in other
development of multiorgan failure and death.
 species (Box 11-1). The mean heart rate of normal cats mea-
sured in a veterinary hospital environment was around 150-
180 beats/min (4). Cats in shock may present with normal
11.1 Stages of shock
heart rates or even bradycardia, despite the presence of hypo-
Three phases of shock are described: the compensatory stage,
tension (3). One explanation for this is that cats may lack the
 initial compensation for shock by elevation of the heart rate,
 the early decompensatory stage, and the terminal decompen-
as seen in other species {3). It may therefore be difficult in
satory stage. The compensatory mechanisms are a life-saving
the feline patient to differentiate between early and late
measure taken by the organism to protect itself.
decompensatory shock, because cats in both stages can
The compensatory stage of shock is essentially character-
ized by release of catecholamines, resulting in increased
present with bradycardia and hypotension. Other common
signs of shock in the feline patient are mental depression and
cardiac output and systemic vascular resistance. The animal
severe hypothermia. Hypothermia may be worsened by bra-
is in a hypermetabolic state, and the main clinical feature is
dycardia and low cardiac output. In contrast, hypothermia
tachycardia. Arterial blood pressure can be normal or ele-
vated, mucous membrane color is normal or reddish, and
capillary refill time may be normal or slowed. Prognosis is
usually excellent with volume replacement.
 The early decompensatory stage of shock is characterized
by redistribution of blood flow to the heart and brain, and
Box 11-1. Signs of shock in cats
initiation of tissue hypoxia. Tissue hypoxia causes the cells
to change from aerobic to anaerobic metabolism, resulting in
Cinical parameters indicating shock
lactic acidosis. Cytokines are released from different cells and
Mental depression
tissues, causing hypotension, activation of inflammation and
Hypothermia (<98°F or 37°C)
coagulation, tachycardia, tachypnea, and catabolism. Clini-
Elevated, normal, or reduced heart rate
cal signs of early decompensatory shock include hypother-
Weak or non-palpable peripheral pulse
mia, cool limbs and skin, pale mucous membranes, prolonged
Mucous membranes gray or white
capillary refll time, mental depression, and tachycardia. Cats
Capillary refill time delayed or absent
do not always exhibit tachycardia, as compared with dogs
114
Part 3: Polytrauma
 Fluid type
Rate
Table 11-1. Rate and dosage of
fluid administration in cats with
Isotonic crystalloid solution alone
Up to 50 ml/kg per hour
traumatic hemorrhagic shock
Hetastarch/HAES (6% or 10%)
Resuscitation: 10 m/kg over 20 minutes
(crystalloids at 20 ml/kg per hour)
Maintenance: 10-20 ml/kg per day
Hypertonic saline (7.5%)
3-5 ml/kg over 5-10 minutes
(crystalloids at 20 ml/kg per hour)
Fresh whole blood and packed red
 5-10 ml/kg per hour (until PCV > 15-20%)
cells
Volume to be transfused (ml) = kg x 66 x
[(desired PCV - recipient PCV)/donor PCV]
 Fresh frozen plasma
10-15 ml/kg (at maintenance rate)
Hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers
 wx e um oq d a/ 7-1
 of 5-10 ml/kg
 PCV, packed cell volume.
11.3 Fluid resuscitation
rapid infusion of colloids can cause hypotension and vomit-
ing. Initial fluid doses are listed in Table 11-1.
Treatment of  shock  includes fluid resuscitation, active
The doses listed in Table 11-1 are not necessarily
warming of the cat in the presence of hypothermia, and
given during the whole hour Cardiovascular function, respi-
oxygen therapy. Although rapid fluid resuscitation is needed
ratory function, body temperature, and mental state should
to treat shock, it should be performed more cautiously in cats
be re-evaluated every 10 minutes while intravenous fluids are
than in dogs. Cats are more prone to develop lung edema
being administered rapidly. Fluid rates are reduced as these
with volume overload, and this may be fatal, especially in the
 clinical parameters return towards normal. Mean systemic
presence of concurrent intrathoracic injuries. Careful moni-
arterial blood pressure should ideally reach 60-80 mmHg,
toring of the patient during fuid therapy is therefore
and central venous pressure 6-8 cm HzO. In cats with
essential.
ongoing hemorrhage, mean arterial blood pressure should
be kept lower than normal, around 50-60 mmHg, to reduce
11.3.1 Crystalloid and colloid resuscitation
the risk of continuous bleeding. Perfusion parameters indicat-
ing an adequate response to fluid therapy are listed in Table
Placement of a peripheral intravenous catheter can be diff
11-2 (5).
cult in cats with severe shock as the veins collapse. A cut-
Cats must be carefully monitored for development of lung
down procedure to improve visibility of the peripheral vein,
edema, and/or pleural effusion. If volume overload occurs,
 placement of a central venous catheter or temporary intraos-
infusions are markedly reduced or stopped, and furosemide
seous fluid administration in immature cats may be used to
at 2-4 mg/kg is administered intravenously.
gain vascular access in such cases.
 Rapid volume loading with isotonic crystalloid solutions is
the mainstay of shock treatment, but crystalloid fluid starts
11.3.2 Transfusion of blood products
shifting into the interstitial space after 30-60 minutes. Cats
Transfusion of blood products is not usually indicated in the
are susceptible to develop pulmonary and pleural fluid accu-
initial treatment of shock, but may be necessary in the later
mulation if large volumes of crystalloid solutions are admin-
stage of treatment. An exception to the rule is the presence
istered rapidly. Simultaneous administration of crystalloids
of significant bleeding, where fresh whole blood may be
and colloids is the preferred treatment of choice for shock in
advantageous for fluid resuscitation.
cats (3). The addition of colloids (hetastarch) or hypertonic
saline in dextran (7.5% saline in dextran 70) helps retain
fluids in the intravascular space. This is especially important
Fresh whole blood and packed red blood cells
when large amounts of fluid have to be administered, and in
Cats have three major blood types: A, B, and AB (6). Group
patients with brain trauma or lung contusions. Colloids are
 A is the most common type, especially in non-pedigree cats,
usually given as a bolus, which may be repeated in cases with
 followed by type B, which tends to be more common in some
an inadequate response. The bolus must be given slowly, as  pedigree cats (7). Type AB is very rare. There are no universal
11: Traumatic hemorrhagic shock
115
 Parameter
Desired endpoint goals
Table 11-2. Parameters
indicating adequate response to
Heart rate
160-200 beats/min
shock treatment
 Body temperature
100-102.5°F
38-39°℃
Mucous membrane color
 Light pink (may remain pale in the presence of blood loss,
 despite adequate volume substitution)
Capillary refill time
1-2 seconds
 Peripheral pulses
 Femoral artery pulse easily palpable
 Mean arterial pressure
60-80 mmHg
Central venous pressure
5 cm HO
blood donors in cats, as cats with type A blood have anti-type
contains no calcium and therefore should reduce the risk of
 B antibodies, and vice versa (8). Fatal transfusion reactions 
clotting.
are likely to occur when a cat with type B blood receives
type A blood (9), but also cats with type A blood may
Hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers
develop mild reactions after receiving type B blood.
Therefore both the donor and the recipient blood must be
Hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers (HBOCs) contain bovine
blood-typed (RapidVet H Feline; dms laboratories, Fleming-
hemoglobin and are used to augment oxygen delivery to
ton, NJ, USA) and cross-matched before transfusion. Cats
tissue. HBOCs lack cell surface antigens and are universally
sads-ad um pssun aq pinous po a adn u
compatible blood products. Currently the solution is not
blood, or, if not available, type A blood (8). Transfusion
registered for use in cats, but dosage recommendations are
5 ml/kg per hour at a maximal dose of 5-10 ml/kg (8).
reactions are rare with adequate donor selection and compat-
ibility testing (10).
 HBOCs have profound colloidal effects and patients should
A healthy cat with a body weight of 4 kg can donate
be carefully monitored to prevent volume overload.
between 40 and 50 ml (absolute maximum) of blood (20%
of total blood volume), provided that fluid is administered
Fresh frozen plasma
intravenously during collection of blood (11). Two or three
Fresh frozen plasma contains clotting factors, albumin and
times the volume of blood taken should be substituted with
other serum proteins, and plasma protease inhibitors. The
crystalloid solutions. The packed cell volume (PCV) of the
most common indication for administration of fresh frozen
donor cats is always measured before blood is taken. Cats
plasma to traumatized animals is the prevention or treatment
usually have to be sedated for the procedure.
 of disserminated intravascular coagulopathy by providing
Fresh whole blood is the transfusion of choice in the pres-
clotting factors. Fresh frozen plasma is not ideal to treat
ence of severe acute bleeding, when multiple blood compo-
hypoproteinemia, because it does not significantly raise
nents are required. Volume overload may be a problem if
albumin concentrations. A dose of 45 ml/kg would be required
treating chronic anemia and the administration of packed red
to elevate albumin concentration by 10 g/l (which would
blood cells is therefore preferred in this situation. The PCV
cause volume overload). Hypoproteinemic cats may beneft
of packed red blood cell infusions is around 45-65% in cats
from a mild increase in albumin in the short term. Cats with
(8). The goal of administering fresh whole blood or packed
albumin concentrations less than 20 g/l should receive hetas-
red cells is to maintain or achieve a PCV of more than 20%,
tarch at a maintenance rate to maintain colloid pressures.
especially if the patient has to undergo surgery. Cats seem to
Fresh frozen plasma is slowly warmed to 37°C and admin-
be more tolerant to anemia than dogs (12), and a PCV as low
istered through a 170-μm flter and a dedicated fluid line.
as 15% is often well tolerated in cats that do not require
Once warmed, it should be used within 4 hours, because the
surgery. The formula for calculating the amount of blood
clotting factors do not remain stable after that time.
necessary to achieve the desired PCV is shown in Table 11-1.
As a rough guideline, 2 ml/kg of whole blood raises the
 References and further reading
recipient's PCV by 1%, or 1 ml/kg of packed red blood cells
raises the PCV by 1%. Blood products are administered
1. Day TK. Shock: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment. In:
through a 170-μm filter into a dedicated fluid line. The line
"upa pie Kiauns [eue [eus jo yooqnxa (pa) ( iaels
is flushed with 0.9% saline after the infusion, because saline
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2004: pp. 1-17.
116
Part 3: Polytrauma
2. Turnwald GH, Pichler ME. Blood transfusion in dogs and cats.
8. Haldane S, et al. Transfusion medicine. Compend Continuing
 Part Il. Administration, adverse efects and component therapy.
Educ 2004;26:502-518.
Compend Continuing Educ 1985;7:115-122.
9. Auer L, Bell K. The AB blood group system in cats. Animal
3. Kirby R, et al. Cats are not dogs in critical care. In: Bonagura
Blood Groups, Biochem Genet 1981;12:287-297.
 JD (ed.) Kirk's current veterinary therapy XIIl. Philadelphia:
10. Weingart C, et al. Whole blood transfusions in 91 cats a clinical
WB Saunders; 2000.
evaluation. J Feline Med Surg 2004;6:139-148.
4. Abbott JA. Heart rate and heart rate variability of healthy cats
11. Knottenbelt C, Mackin, A. Blood transfusions in the dog
in home and hospital environments. J Feline Med Surg 2005;7:
and cat. Part 1. Blood collection techniques. In Pract 1998;20:
195-202.
110-114.
5. Rudloff E, Kirby R. Colloid and crystalloid resuscitation. Vet
12. Knottenbelt C, Mackin A. Blood transfusion in the dog and cat.
Clin North Am 2001;31:1207-1229.
Part 2: Indications and safe administration. In Pract 1998;20:
6. Griot-Wenk ME, Giger U. Feline transfusion medicine. Blood
191-199.
types and their clinical importance. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 1995;25:1305-1322.
7. Knottenbelt CM. The feline AB blood group system and its
importance in transfusion medicine. J Feline Med Surg 2002;
4:69-76.
117
12
Specific injuries in the polytraumatized cat
K. Voss
Thoracic, abdominal, and neurological injuries are often
generally causes rapid shallow breathing with a predomi-
so asi on sn d i an al un nsd
 nantly inspiratory distres. Pulmonary parenchymal disease
are frequently more severe and more important for survival
causes labored inspiration and expiration. Severe and life-
and prognosis than concurrent orthopedic injuries. Initial
threatening respiratory compromise is associated with open-
 management of the most common problems and injuries is
 mouth breathing, postural changes, and paradoxical motion
summarized in this chapter.
 of the chest and abdomen. Cyanosis corresponds with a PaO2
 of less than 40 mmHg and is a sign of extreme hypoxemia.
12.1 Thoracic trauma
 The initial treatment of traumatized cats with dyspnea is
aimed at enhancing oxygen intake and reducing oxygen
Thoracic trauma is common in fracture patients. Around
 demand (Table 12-1). Oxygen should be supplied immedi-
40% of cats with fractures have radiographic evidence of
 ately to all trauma patients with respiratory distress. A flow-
thoracic injuries (1). Patients with fractures of the head and
by method or a face mask may be used during emergency
thoracic limbs are signifcantly more likely to have sustained
examination and vascular access procedures. The flow-by
thoracic injuries, compared to patients with fractures of the
method is better tolerated by most cats, but smaller fractions
 pelvis and pelvic limbs (1). The thoracic injuries most com-
 of oxygen are achieved than with the face mask. An oxygen
monly encountered are lung contusions, pneumothorax, rib
cage is preferable for cats requiring prolonged oxygen supple-
fractures, and diaphragmatic hernia. Intrathoracic tracheal
 mentation. A flow rate of 2 /min into a closed oxygen cage
avulsion has also been described in cats after trauma (2).
will result in a fraction of inspired oxygen of 40-50%, which
Respiratory compromise induces an elevated respiratory rate
 is safe for long-term application. The ambient temperature
and abnormal breathing patterns. The type of breathing
and humidity within the cage should be monitored and
pattern varies with different conditions. Pleural space disease
regulated. Ideally, oxygen saturation should be maintained
Measure
Pharmaceutical
Dosage/rate
Indication
agent/treatment
Oxygen
Flow-by
6-8 Vmin
All patients with dyspnea
 Face mask
6-10 Vmin
Oxygen cage
2 Vmin
Analgesia
 Buprenorphine
0.01-0.03 mg/kg
All patients with dyspnea
or:
IV/IM/SC
Morphine
0.1-0.3 mg/kg IM
or:
 Butorphanol
0.2-0.4 mg/kg IV/IM
 Fluid therapy
Crystalloid solution
10 (-50) ml/kg per hour
 All patients in shock
 Colloid solution
10 ml/kg over 20
 Add colloids if large volume is required
(hetastarch)
minutes
(and reduce crystalloid rates)
Thoracocentesis
All patients with continuing dyspnea
despite initial treatment
Sedation
Acepromazine
0.01-0.02 mg/kg IV/IM
 In very excited cats or those diffcult to
handle
Anti-inflammatory
Dexamethasone
0.02 mg/kg IV
Upper-airway obstruction
osansea ln ued Aaa oipaasuupeae spi pue 'see uax eaudsp y sie pazeune jo Adet leul h ae
118
Part 3: Polytrauma
at >94% and the PaO, should reach values of > 80 mmHg
Radiographs of the thorax are obtained from every trau-
Artifcial  ventilation is indicated if severe hypoxemia
matized patient. Not all thoracic injuries cause clinical signs
(PaO, < 60 mmHg) persists despite appropriate oxygen
of respiratory distress and some would go undiagnosed
supplementation.
without radiographs. This is especially true for diaphrag-
Open-mouth breathing and tachypnea may be solely due
matic ruptures without herniation of a large amount or
to stress and pain in some feline trauma patients. Early
number of organs. Cats with respiratory distress need to be
administration of analgesics during assessment and initial
stabilized before taking them to radiology. The stress caused
treatment should markedly improve respiration in these
from obtaining the radiographs will elevate the patient's
patients (Table 12-1). Pain medication will also reduce oxygen
oxygen demand to a level that will possibly exceed maximal
 demands. Rarely, mild sedation is indicated in very stressed
uptake capacities, causing hypoxemia and even death. In rare
cats, with the goal of reducing oxygen demand due to excite-
instances, a patient may show progressively worsening respi-
ment. Upper-airway obstruction may be seen with sublingual,
ratory distress, despite medical stabilization and negative
laryngeal, or pharyngeal swelling in cats with head trauma.
thoracic taps. Radiographs have to be obtained despite
These patients may benefit from a single injection of dexa-
asoup ro no ann on aiadsa 'siuid qns u eaudsa
methasone to reduce swelling. A tracheotomy is necessary in
diaphragmatic hernia. A laterolateral radiograph is sufficient
cases with upper-airway obstruction not responding to con-
for this purpose, or a horizontal beam view may be preferable
servative treatment.
for the cat whose dyspnea worsens when it is laid on its side.
Thoracocentesis is performed in any dyspneic trauma
Oxygenation should be provided during radiography.
patient before obtaining radiographs. Thoracocentesis is both
 diagnostic and therapeutic if fluid or air can be retrieved from
12.1.1 Pneumothorax
the thoracic cavity. In one study, air was retrieved in more
than 50% of cats with dyspnea (3). If the condition of the
 Rupture of the thoracic wall, bronchi, and pulmonary paren-
cat allows, the hair is clipped, and the puncture site is asepti-
chyma may cause accumulation of air in the intrapleural
cally prepared. Sterile gloves should be worn during the pro-
and/or mediastinal space. The most common injury is pulmo-
 cedure. Thoracocentesis is described in Figure 12-1. If no air
nary parenchymal tears after blunt thoracic trauma with
or fluid can be retrieved from one side, the other side is
accumulation of air in the intrapleural space, leading to loss
tapped as well.
of negative intrapleural pressure and collapse of lung lobes.
A radiograph of a cat with pneumothorax is shown in Figure
12-2. Tension pneumothorax develops if the site of leakage
Figure 12-1  Thoracocentesis.
An 18-22-gauge butterfly needle
acts as a one-way valve, resulting in rapid accumulation of
is attached to an extension set,
air, progressive increase in intrapleural pressure, and rapid
three-way tap. and a 20-ml
deterioration of the patient. As described above, thoracocen-
syringe to provide a closed
tesis (Fig. 12-1) is the most important diagnostic and thera-
suction system. The needle is
inserted between the seventh
and ninth intercostal space, just
cranial to the rib to preserve the
intercostal artery. The most dorsal
area of the thorax, with respect 
to the patient position, is tapped
if pneumothorax is suspected. If
fluid is suspected, the ventral
aspect of the thorax is tapped.
Care has to be taken not to
injure the internal thoracic artery.
which courses ventrally par allel to
the sternum.
Figure 12-2  Cat with traumatic pneumothorax. The heart base is
lung lobes and the diaphragm. The caudal lung lobes are consolidated
The gas-filled stomach is due to aerophagia secondary to dyspnea, and
impairs diaphragmatic excursions.
12: Specific injuries in the polytraumatized cat
119
A
B
Figure 12-3 Insertion of a thoracic drain. Although commercially available chest tubes with a metal stylet inside could be inserted bluntly. the
following insertion technique minimizes the risk of lung perforation. A small skin incision is made in the dorsal third of the thorax over the 11th rib.
(A) The skin is pulled cranially until the incision is located over the eighth intercostal space. A curved hemostat is used to penetrate the thoracic
wall bluntly. before the chest tube is inserted. (B) The tube is advanced along the inner thoracic wall in a cranioventral direction. Correct
positioning of the chest tube is shown. Air or fluid is retrieved as soon as the tube is placed. The tube is then closed or connected to a suction
aa ls e  aa siatis aea au aa ad o anns deau sau e yr us ao pas pue s
peutic measure if pneumothorax is suspected. The taps are
repeated if respiratory distress persists or relapses due to
continuing air accumulation.
Most pulmonary parenchymal tears seal after several hours
and no further therapy is needed. If pneumothorax persists
after several taps or if tension pneumothorax develops, a
thoracic drain should be placed (Fig. 12-3), which allows
 intermittent or continuous suction with a three-bottle system.
but should be considered if air leakage does not subside
Figure 12-4 Cat with contusion of the caudal lung lobes. Also note
after 3 days of continuous suction. Surgery for orthopedic
aerophagia secondary to dyspnea.
conditions should be delayed until pneumothorax has
resolved. Care has to be taken during anesthesia to prevent
re-rupture of the sealed leakage site with excessive ventilation
 minimizing stress. Antibiotics may be administered in the
pressure.
more severe cases to reduce the risk of development of pneu-
monia. Intubation and mechanical ventilation should be insti-
12.1.2 Pulmonary contusion
 tuted if the animal cannot be stabilized with oxygen therapy
 and supportive care and PaO, drops below 60 mmHg.
 Pulmonary contusions represent pulmonary hemorrhage and
 may occur alone or in addition to other thoracic injuries.
12.1.3 Thoracic wall injury
They are the most commonly diagnosed thoracic injury.
Dyspnea or tachypnea occurs if functional capacity of the
Rib fractures are most often due to injuries caused by interac-
lung is reduced due to large areas of lung parenchyma
tion with other animals or due to motor vehicle accidents (4).
obstructed by hemorrhage. Radiographs taken soon after the
 Nearly all cats with rib fractures have concurrent pulmonary
accident may underestimate the degree of contusion, because
 contusions (4). Displaced rib fragments may cause rupture of
radiographic changes are only fully visible after some hours
lung parenchyma and pneumothorax. The respiratory dis-
(Fig. 12-4). Treatment of lung contusions is supportive and
tress seen in patients with rib fractures probably results from
consists of oxygen supplementation, cautious fluid therapy,
concurrent lung contusions or intrapleural disease rather
120
Part 3: Polytrauma
than from the unstable rib cage. However, pain caused by
Figure 12-5
 the rib fractures may cause reluctance to expand the thoracic
Ventrodorsal
wall and can also impair ventilation. A survival rate of 78%
radiograph of a cat
with a right-sided
of cats with rib fractures has been described (4). Cats with
 open chest injury
concurrent pleural effusion, diaphragmatic hernia, and flail
after a fall on to a
chest were more likely to die than cats without these injuries
sharp object. The
(4). A flail chest is the most severe form of rib fracture and
thoracic wall is 
occurs when several consecutive ribs are fractured segmen-
disrupted in the area
of the eighth and
tally. The resulting free segment of the chest wallthen moves
ninth rib, and
paradoxically during respiration. Flail chest is accompanied
subcutaneous
by pulmonary contusions, pneumothorax, and subcutaneous
emphysema,
emphysema in most cases (5).
pneumothorax, and 
Rib fractures in cats can generally be treated conserva-
contusion of the
tively. The adequate treatment of concurrent intrathoracic
right lung lobe are
visible.Exploratory
injuries, such as pneumothorax and lung contusions, is most
lateral thoracotomy.
important for survival. Adequate pain medication is also
lobectomy of the
important to facilitate breathing. If a flail chest is present, the
lacerated lung lobe,
cat is positioned with the free segment downwards in order
and repair of the
thoracic wall were
to reduce movement of the free segment. Traditionally, sta-
 bilization of the flail segment has been suggested in order to
performed.
reduce the paradoxical movement of the segment and its
negative effects on ventilation. More recently the need to
stabilize the flail segment has been questioned, as respiratory
compromise is more likely to be caused by intrathoracic
injuries (5). Comparison of conservative and surgical man-
agement of flail chest in dogs and cats revealed survival rates
of 66.7% for surgically managed cases and 93.3% for con-
servatively managed cases (5). However, these results may be
biased by patient selection.
Penetrating thoracic wounds can be caused by dog bite
wounds or by impalement, for example after falls on sharp
objects. Concurrent rib fractures, intercostal muscle disrup-
tion, subcutaneous emphysema, and pneumothorax are
Figure 12-6  Cat with traumatic diaphragmatic hernia. The normal
usually visible on radiographs (Fig. 12-5). The open wound
contour of the diaphragm is not visible. Most of the smallintestine and 
is immediately covered with sterile and airtight bandages.
probably parts of the liver are displaced through the defect into the
Thoracocentesis is performed to evacuate intrapleural air if
eadde da ue sey  e aui  eou
present. Wound management and exploration of the thorax
are usually necessary after stabilization of the patient.
organs displaced dictates the degree of respiratory compro-
12.1.4 Diaphragmatic hernia
mise. Clinical symptoms are tachypnea, muffled heart sounds,
and vomiting (6). Cardiovascular stabilization and oxygen
Rupture of the diaphragm occurs with acute intra-abdominal
supplermentation should be performed prior to surgery.
 pressure elevation caused by blunt abdominal trauma when
 Many patients with diaphragmatic hernias do not have to
the glottis is open simultaneously. The pressure wave then
be rushed into surgery, allowing time for preoperative car-
continues in a cranial direction and may lead to rupture of
diovascular stabilization. In rare instances, ventilation and
the diaphragm. Diaphragmatic ruptures occur more com-
 Oxygenation do not improve with the stabilization proce-
monly after road traffic accidents than after falls from a
dures. These cats often have significant amounts or numbers
height (3). Abdominal organs usually dislodge into the tho-
of organs displaced into the thoracic cavity, preventing ade-
racic cavity during the accident, but with small diaphrag-
quate lung expansion, and should be operated immediately.
'sep raiel e ie rnsso Keu juauraeidsip ueaio 'siea seu
Herniation of a bloated stomach is another indication for
Liver lobes, spleen, omentum, stomach, and small intestines
immediate surgery, but is rare in cats. The bloated stomach
are displaced most frequently (Fig. 12-6). The amount of
 can be tapped percutaneously during preparation for surgery
12: Specific injuries in the polytraumatized cat
121
in order to reduce its volume. Elevating the chest of the cat,
lateral thoracotomy may be used (2). Prognosis is good with
ideally with the use of a tilting table, may also help to facili-
careful anesthetic and surgical technique (2).
tate ventilation.
Surgery involves careful repositioning of herniated abdomi-
12.2 Abdominal trauma
nal organs and herniorrhaphy. The surgeon may encounter
circular or radial tears, or a combination of these. The defect
Abdominal trauma has been reported to occur in 7-39% of
 is closed from dorsal to ventral in a continuous pattern. Care
raumatized cats (3, 7, 8). Abdominal trauma is generally not
is taken not to obstruct the caudal vena cava by placing
acutely life-threatening but may become so if underdiagnosed
sutures too close. In rare cases, for example chronic defects,
 Or missed. Diagnosis is often delayed for hours or even days,
diaphragmatic tissue may be missing, preventing primary
because symptoms are rather non-specific, and are often only
closure. Small intestinal submucosa grafts can then be used
detected during the course of treatment. There should be a
to fill the defect.
high index of suspicion of abdominal trauma, especially in
The mortality rate in cats with diaphragmatic hernias has
animals with pelvic fractures or other significant injuries of
been reported to be 17.6% in one study (6). The duration of 
 the caudal half of the body. Urinary tract injuries, abdominal
 inq Ki uo ioae ou pe Aains on rod ea a
wall hernias, and intra-abdominal bleeding are most common.
cats were more likely to die in the presence of concurrent 
 Rupture of the gallbladder or common bile duct, traumatic
n r  na  s  s  s
pancreatitis, or perforation or necrosis of the intestinal tract
myopathy (6).
may be encountered on rare occasions.
Once the patient has been stabilized and can be handled
12.1.5 Intrathoracic tracheal avulsion
safely, the abdomen is thoroughly and gently palpated, with
 special emphasis on the integrity of the abdominal wall and
Intrathoracic tracheal avulsion is a rare injury, which has
urinary bladder shape and filling. Abdominal pain, bruising
been described in several case reports and in a study of nine
 and hematoma formation, vomiting, and urinary ract symp-
cats (2). Intrathoracic tracheal avulsion is thought to be
toms should alert the clinician to the possibility of abdominal
-uaxaradau aup eauoen al jo auuiansraao Aq pasne
injury.
sion injury of the neck. The avulsion usually occurs just
 Abdominal radiographs should be obtained from all trau-
cranial to the bifurcation. The airway lumen usually remains
 matized cats with moderate and severe injuries (8). Loss of
 patent because a pseudomembrane surrounds the defect (Fig.
 integrity of the abdominal wall displacement of organs, loss
12-7). These cats are often only presented 1-3 weeks after the
of abdominal detail, or loss of detail and widening of the
 trauma due to dyspnea and respiratory distress. The develop-
 retroperitoneal space are common findings. Abdominal ultra-
ment of respiratory symptoms is associated with stenosis of
 sonography is usually performed if intra-abdorminal abnor-
the avulsed tracheal ends. Acute symptoms may occur in rare
 malities are detected on radiographs. Ultrasonography is
cases if air leaks into the mediastinum (2). Treatment consists
useful in detecting small amounts of free abdominal fluid,
of end-to-end anastomosis of the trachea for which a right
 guiding needle aspiration of the fluid, and to detect structural
 abnormalities of intra-abdominal organs.
Abdominocentesis is a quick and easy method to retrieve
free abdominal fluid for cytology, and biochemical and bac-
teriological tests, although around 5-6 ml/kg of free abdomi
nal fluid must be present to avoid false-negative results with
blind abdominocentesis (9). Ultrasound-guided abdomino-
centesis is a sensitive and non-invasive method for controlled
aspiration of small or localized fluid accumulations (10).
Diagnostic peritoneal lavage is another reliable technique for
retrieval of abdominal fluid but usually necessitates sedation,
which is often not recommended in traumatized animals. Any
abdominal fluid collected is analyzed in order to diagnose its
origin. Smears are prepared for cytology, abdominal fluid is
preserved for biochemical tests, and a bacteriology sample is
taken. Biochemical testing includes creatinine, potassium,
Figure 12-7  Radiograph of a cat with intrathoracic avulsion of the
bilirubin, and glucose levels. Possible types of free abdominal
trachea. Loss of continuity of the cranial thoracic trachea is seen. The
dilated space between the tracheal ends is surrounded by a
fluid and their characteristics are summarized in Table 12-2.
pseudomembrane, and is air-filled.
Free intra-abdominal blood is found most commonly after
122
Part 3: Polytrauma
 Type of free
Fluid characteristics
Table 12-2.
Types of free
 abdominal fluid and their
 abdominal fluid
distinguishing characteristics
Blood
Packed cell volume and total protein are similar to blood
levels
Urine
Creatinine and potassium exceed blood levels
Bile
Yellow color; bilirubin exceeds blood levels
 Septic effusion
 Degenerate neutrophils, intracellular bacteria, food particles
Glucose less than 50 mg/dl
Blood-to-abdominal fluid glucose difference >20 mg/dl (21)
rauma, followed by urine (10). Leakage of bile and septic
peritonitis are uncommon fndings in trauma patients.
Exploratory celiotomy is indicated in the presence of intra-
abdominal urine accumulation, presence of septic abdominal
fluid, and accumulation of bile. Open abdominal injuries can
be caused by gunshot injury, bite wounds, and stab wounds.
Damage to intra-abdominal organs occurs frequently with
 these types of injury, and early exploration of the abdominal
cavity is indicated to exclude, diagnose, and possibly treat
sustained trauma to organs.
Figure 12-8 Retroperitoneal fluid accumulation. Radiographs
demonstrate loss of retroperitoneal detail and ventral displacement of
abdominal organs. Rupture of a ureter was later diagnosed by excretory
12.2.1 Urinary tract injuries
urography in this cat.
Urinary tract injuries are often due to blunt abdominal
rauma, such as motor vehicle accidents. They are less com-
monly encountered with high-rise syndrome (3). Leakage of
tended abdomen and fluid waves are only palpable if large
urine into the abdominal cavity results in uroabdomen. Fol-
amounts of urine have leaked into the abdominal cavity.
lowing trauma, rupture of the urinary bladder is the reason
Bradycardia may be caused by severe hyperkalemia or may
for uroabdomen in more than 80% of cases (11). Injuries of
be associated with shock (Chapter 11). Hematological abnor-
the kidney and ureters classically result in retroperitoneal
malities include azotemia in nearly all cases, and hyperkale-
urine accumulation, but urine can still flow into the abdomi-
mia and hyperphosphatemia in around 50% of cases (11).
nal cavity due to concurrent rupture of the thin retroperito-
Abdominal radiographs and ultrasound are used to detect
neal fascia. Rupture of the urethra may result in uroabdomen
abdominal or retroperitoneal fluid accumulation (Fig. 12-8).
or subcutaneous urine accumulation in the perineal region
The presence of urine in the abdominal cavity is confrmed if
and hindlimbs, depending on the site of the lesion.
potassium and creatinine in the abdominal fluid exceed blood
Hematuria is a frequent finding in traumatized cats. Hema-
levels (Table 12-2). Because urea diffuses back into circula-
   a n sn  s 
tion more rapidly than creatinine, it is a less reliable param-
It may result from kidney trauma or partial-thickness lesions
eter. Bacteriological cultures can be positive (11).
of the urinary bladder mucosa, and usually subsides in 1-2
The site of urinary leakage is diagnosed by retrograde posi-
days. Hematuria may be severe enough to cause anemia, and
tive contrast cystourethrography and/or by excretory urogra-
packed cell volume should be checked on a regular basis.
phy. Retrograde positive contrast cystourethrography is
Diagnosis of urinary tract injury is often delayed due to the
indicated if rupture of the urinary bladder or urethra is sus-
non-specific nature and latency of onset of the clinical signs.
pected (Fig. 12-9). Excretory urography is used if radiographs
Urinary tract injury should particularly be suspected in
reveal accumulation of retroperitoneal fluid suggestive of
patients with orthopedic injuries of the pelvic limbs and
urine. If retroperitoneal fluid accumulation is due to bleeding.
spine. The most common clinical symptoms with uroabdo-
it will resorb with time. If it is due to urine leakage, the
men are anuria, dysuria, lethargy, and vomiting (11). Small 
 amount of fluid willincrease. Patients need to be well hydrated
bladder ruptures may seal if the bladder is empty; therefore
before conducting excretory urography in order to prevent
the ability to void does not exclude bladder rupture. A dis-
renal damage by the contrast media.
12: Specific injuries in the polytraumatized cat
123
Figure 12-10 Radiograph of a polytraumatized cat. A fracture of the 
ilium and a caudal abdominal wall hernia are visible. The contour of the
caudal abdominal wall is disrupted and small intestinal loops and the
colon are herniated through the defect.
Figure 12-9 Retrograde positive contrast cystourethrography
demonstrates intrapelvic rupture of the urethra. The cat had suffered a
road traffic accident and also had a proximal femoral physeal fracture.
urinary bladder and allows assessment of the amount of
urine produced. An indwelling catheter is usually not neces-
sary after adequate repair of urinary bladder tears, but is
Initial stabilization of the patient includes fluid resuscita-
indicated if the bladder wall is markedly inflamed and thick-
tion, correction of serum potassium levels, and drainage of
ened, or if concurrent neurological defcits prevent normal
urine from the abdominal cavity if necessary. Patients with
detrusor function. A urethral catheter is also indicated after
hyperkalemia are infused with a 0.9% saline solution to
 repair of urethral lesions, because stricture formation may be
dilute serum potassium and to enhance glomerular fltration
reduced by avoiding contact of the lesion with urine (13).
         s
 Azotemia should resolve in 1-2 days following surgery. Mor-
significant bradycardia, calcium gluconate (50-100 mg/kg) is
bidity and mortality largely depend on the preoperative
infused slowly (12). Calcium is cardioprotective by improv-
status, severity of the lesion, associated injuries, and delay of
ing cardiac conduction until potassium concentrations are 
therapy. Cats die after 47-90 hours in an experimental setting
lowered by other therapeutic measures. Patients with uroab-
 if uroabdomen is left untreated, but death may occur sooner
domen require drainage of urine from the urinary bladder
in clinical cases (14).
and abdominal cavity if surgery has to be delayed.
Surgery is performed as soon as the patient is considered
12.2.2 Abdominal wall hernias
hemodynamically and metabolically stable, and the site of
urine leakage has been determined. A midline exploratory
Traumatic abdominal wall hernias are most commonly
celiotomy and abdominal exploration are performed. Tears
caused by road traffc accidents and dog bite wounds (15,
in the urinary bladder wall are sutured. Devitalized tissue has
16). Blunt abdominal trauma results in tearing of abdominal
to be debrided beforehand. Urethral tears can be more diff-
 muscles or avulsion of muscle attachments, sparing the more
cult to repair. Sharp non-circumferential lacerations may be
elastic skin. Dog bite wounds cause crushing and tearing of
sutured although they can also heal with conservative man-
tissue and the abdominal wall injury may be associated with
agement using an indwelling catheter for around 2 weeks.
 penetrating injuries of the skin. Traumatic abdominal wall
a Aq paiea aq oi seu eran an jo uondns aiado
hernias can occur at any location, but they are found more
thral anastomosis or urethrostomy, depending on the loca-
frequently in the paralumbar region, the femoral region, the
tion of the lesion. Ureteral avulsion from the renal pelvis and
area of attachment of the cranial pubic tendon, the ventral
midureter lacerations are probably best treated with uretero-
abdominal wall, and the paracostal region (15, 17). The
nephrectomy if the contralateral kidney and ureter are intact
organs most commonly herniated through caudal body wall
and functional. Suturing or anastomosis of ureters is techni-
defect are the omentum, small intestines, and the urinary
cally diffcult in cats, and stricture formation is a common
bladder (Fig. 12-10).
complication (13). Distal ureteral lesions may be treated by
Herniation of abdominal organs is usually diagnosed
ureteronephrectomy or ureteroneocystotomy.
by abdominal palpation. Clinical diagnosis of caudal abdom-
 Postoperatively, a soft urinary catheter, connected to a
 inal hernias can be dificult in obese cats, and in the presence
closed suction system, may be left in place for some days.
of cellulitis or necrosis of subcutaneous fat. Radiographic
The closed suction system helps to prevent distension of the
ane sueno ieuoqe-enun j premnoaies si sisou
124
Part 3: Polytrauma
herniated. Herniation of omentum or intra-abdominal fat
mended in humans when transfusion requirements exceed
may not be readily visible on radiographs, and ultrasonogra-
20 ml/kg (18). Immediate blood transfusions and exploratory
phy can add information in unclear cases.
celiotomy are performed if ongoing bleeding is suspected,
 Traumatic abdominal wall hernias are repaired surgically
based on the mentioned parameters.
 in order to restore continuity of the body wall and prevent
 incarceration of abdominal organs. Surgery is performed
12.2.4 Injuries to other abdominal organs
 once the animal is considered stable. Emergency surgery is
only indicated in cases where the urinary bladder or small
Injuries to abdominal organs other than the urinary tract,
intestinal loops are incarcerated and at risk of avascular
liver or spleen are rare. Intestinal perforation or crushing
necrosis. A midline celiotomy and abdominal exploration are
may occur after dog bite wounds or penetrating trauma, such
preferable to a local approach, as the incidence of concurrent
as gunshot or impalement injuries. Exploratory celiotomy is
intra-abdominal injuries is nearly 30% (15). The defect is
indicated in any cat with penetrating abdominal trauma.
sutured with slowly absorbable or non-absorbable suture
Waiting for a diagnosis of septic peritonitis leads to delay
 material using interrupted mattress or cruciate sutures. If the
in treatment and enhances morbidity and mortality. Other
abdominal muscles are avulsed from the pubic floor, small
rare intra-abdominal injuries include intestinal necrosis
 holes drilled into the cranial rim of the pubic floor may serve
resulting from vascular damage, rupture of the gallbladder
or ducts, traumatic pancreatitis, and avulsion or tearing of
provided.
the uterus.
 Prognosis is usually favorable for smaller defects. Large
abdominal wall hernias associated with massive soft-tissue
12.3 Brain injury
drome or sepsis. The survival rate for cats with traumatic
Head and brain injuries are a common sequel in cats after
abdominal wall hernias has been reported as 80% (15).
motor vehicle accidents. Brain trauma may cause primary
damage to the nervous tissue that may not be influenced by
12.2.3 Intra-abdominal bleeding
therapeutic measurements. Secondary pathophysiological
mechanisms result in hypoxia, ischemia, edema, and eleva-
 Intra-abdominal bleeding may occur after blunt abdominal
tion of intracranial pressure {ICP) minutes to days after the
 trauma, and the liver and spleen are the most likely sources.
injury. Treatment is aimed at reducing these secondary com-
 Intra-abdominal hemorrhage often subsides spontaneously
plications and preventing irreversible lesions of neurons and
 and may go unnoticed if only a small volume of blood is lost.
axons. Stabilization of respiratory and cardiovascular func-
If significant intra-abdominal hemorrhage occurs, affected
tion has major priority in the treatment of head-injury
cats are presented in hypovolemic shock, and blood accumu-
patients. Close monitoring of patients with head trauma is
lation may be large enough to cause abdominal distension.
essential: worsening of mental status, pupil size, and reactiv-
Radiographs show loss of abdominal detail. A packed cell
 ity should lead to more aggressive treatment.
volume and total protein content of the abdominal fluid that
Subcutaneous hematomas, and hemorrhage from the nose
is similar to blood levels is consistent with intra-abdominal
or the ears may be a sign of skull fracture. Initial neurological
bleeding (Table 12-2).
dysfunction is related to the site of injury (Chapter 1). Patients
Initial treatment consists of fluid resuscitation (Chapter
with injury to the brainstem usually carry a worse prognosis
11). Hypotensive resuscitation should be used, because bleed-
than patients with injuries to the brain hemispheres. When
ing is more likely to stop with lower than normal arterial
deterioration of neurological function occurs during the
blood pressures (Chapter 11). Whole blood or packed red
course of treatment, brain edema and elevation of ICP
cell transfusions are necessary if the packed cell volume drops
should be suspected. Common clinical signs for an elevation
markedly below 20%. An abdominal wrap may help stop the
of ICP include deterioration of mental state, loss of cranial
bleeding by elevating intra-abdominal pressure.
nerve function, especially pupil size and responsiveness to
Surgical hemostasis is rarely necessary. Concrete clinical
light, loss of body posture, and changes in breathing pattern.
guidelines do not exist to help in the decision for the need of
Elevation of ICP may also result in bradycardia due to the
surgical management. A lack of response to conservative
Cushing reflex. Skull fractures and intracranial hematomas
management, deterioriation of the patient during fluid
are best diagnosed by computed tomography. However,
therapy, an increase in the amount of free abdominal fluid,
anesthesia, which is necessary for computed tomography,
and continuous dropping of the packed cell volume in both
should only be performed once the patient has been stabi-
the abdominal cavity and peripheral blood are signs of con-
lized. Therefore treatment is usually initiated based on clini-
tinuous hemorrhage (18). Surgical exploration is recom-
cal findings only.
12: Specific injuries in the polytraumatized cat
125
Treatment is aimed at reducing cerebral edema and ICP
References and further reading
and at preservation of cerebral blood flow and oxygen levels.
Fluid is administered cautiously in order to avoid overload-
1. Griffon D, et al. Thoracic injuries in cats with traumatic frac-
tures. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1994;7:98-100.
ing. Mean arterial blood pressure should be maintained
2. White RN, Burton CA. Surgical management of intrathoracic
between 70 and 110 mmHg, because cerebral trauma can
tracheal avulsion in cats: long-term results in 9 consecutive
result in loss of the autoregulatory processes within the brain,
cases. Vet Surg 2000;29:430-435.
and both reduction and elevation of arterial blood pressure
3. Whitney WO, Mehlhaff CJ. High-rise symdrome in cats. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 1987;191:1399-1403.
disturb cerebral blood flow. Hypertonic saline can be added
4. Kraje BJ, et al. Intrathoracic and concurrent orthopedic injury
to crystalloid solutions in order to draw fluid back into the
associated with traumatic rib fracture in cats: 75 cases (1980-
vessels (Chapter 11).
1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;216:51-54.
 5. Olsen D, et al. Clinical management of flail chest in dogs and
Hypoxia is a common reason for death, and therefore,
cats: a retrospective study of 24 cases (1989-1999). J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 2002;38:315-320.
intubation, and ventilation in comatose cats). Hyperventila-
6. Schmiedt CW, et al. Traumatic diaphragmatic hernia in cats:
tion decreases ICP by reducing cerebral blood flow and mean
34 cases (1991-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;222:
arterial COz pressure. The head of the patient is elevated 30°
1237-1240.
7. Kolata RJ, et al. Patterns of trauma in urban dogs and cats: a
without obstructing the jugular veins to facilitate venous
study of 1000 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1974;164:499-502.
outflow. The jugular veins should not be used for obtaining
8. Zulauf D, et al. Radiographic examination and outcome in
blood. Mannitol is the most effective drug to decrease ICP
consecutive feline trauma patients. Vet Comp Orthop Trauma-
rapidly and its effect lasts 24 hours. It is indicated if the
tol 2008;21:36-40.
9. Walters MJ. Abdominal paracentesis and diagnostic peritoneal
 patient shows deterioration in neurological function during
lavage. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 2003;18:32-38.
treatment. A dose of 0.5-1 g/kg body weight is administered
10. Boyson SR, et al. Focused abdominal sonogram fro trauma
over 20 minutes. Recently, the administration of methylpred-
(FAST) in 100 dogs. In: Proc Intern Vet Emerg Crit Care Symp
nisolone was shown to enhance mortality in human patients
2003; p. 765.
with brain trauma (19). Corticosteroids are therefore not
11. Aumann M, et al. Uroperitoneum in cats: 26 cases (1986-1995).
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1998;34:315-324.
recommended for patients with head trauma. In cats that are
12. Syring RS, Drobatz KJ. Preoperative evaluation and manage-
presented in an excitatory state or status epilepticus, intrave-
ment of the emergency surgical smal animal patient. Vet Clin 
nously or rectally applied diazepam may be used. Phenobar-
North Am Small Anim Pract 2000;30:473-489.
bital is necessary in some cases to control seizure activity.
13. Gannon K, Moses L. Uroabdomen in dogs and cats. Compend
Continuing Educ 2002;24:604-611.
Phenobarbital may also lower the metabolic demands of
14. Burrows CF, Bovee KC. Metabolic changes due to experimen-
neurons and reduce cerebral arterial pressure. Pentobarbital
tally induced rupture of the canine urinary bladder. Am J Vet
may be indicated to achieve rapid cessation of seizure activ-
Res 1974;35:1083-1088.
ity, as phenobarbital can take up to 30 minutes to show an
15. Shaw SR, et al. Traumatic body wall herniation in 36 dogs and
cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2003;39:35-46.
effect.
16. Waldron DR, et al. Abdominal hernias in dogs and cats. J Am
Surgical intervention is indicated if neurological function
Anim Hosp Assoc 1986;22:817-823.
 continues to deteriorate despite appropriate medical and sup-
17. Friend EJ, White RA. Rupture of the cranial pubic tendon in
portive therapy or if compressive lesions, such as bone frag-
the cat. J Small Anim Pract 2002;43:522-525.
18. Vinayak A, Krahwinkel DJ. Managing blunt trauma-induced
ments or a sizeable blood clot, are identifed on computed
hemoperitoneum in dogs and cats. Compend Continuing Educ
tomography, or suspected on clinical and radiological exami-
2004;26:276-290.
nation. A craniotomy and durotomy allow the brain tissue
19. Sauerland S, Maegele M. Effects of intravenous corticosteroids
to expand and therefore help to reduce ICP. Intracranial
on death within 14 days in 10008 adults with clinically signifi-
cant head injury (MRC CRASH trial): randomized placebo-
hematomas can be reached by a lateral craniotomy in 75%
controlled trial. Lancet 2004;364:1321-1328.
of cats (20). Prognosis is favorable if patients with minor
20. Dewey CW. Emergency management of the head trauma patient.
Principles and practice. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
rological dysfunction, such as stupor or coma, dilated unre-
2000;30:207-225.
sponsive pupils, and loss of deep pain perception, has a
21. Bonczynski JJ, et al. Comparison of peritoneal fluid and periph-
eral blood pH, bicarbonate, glucose, and lactate concentration
guarded or grave prognosis, especially when occurring imme-
as a diagnostic tool for septic peritonitis in dogs and cats. Vet
diately after the accident.
Surg 2003;32:161-166.
Part 4
Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
Injury to the musculoskeletal system is by far the most
common reason for orthopedic problems in the feline patient.
Trauma to the pelvic limbs is encountered more frequently
than trauma to the thoracic limbs. Musculoskeletal injuries
in cats are often caused by major trauma, such as motor
vehicle accidents or falls from a height. These cats commonly
suffer from concurrent and more severe injuries of vital
organs, which have to be diagnosed and treated prior to
addressing orthopedic problems (Chapters 9-12). Occasion-
 ally, cats may also sustain indoor trauma, such as being shut 
 in a door being stepped on, or having something fall on
them. Trauma sustained indoors is usually minor compared
to trauma sustained outdoors.
 Orthopedic injuries in cats tend to be severe, with associ-
ated soft-tissue and vascular compromise, and multiple
 orthopedic injuries are common. Atraumatic surgical tech-
nique is important to minimize further tissue damage. The
following chapters review the basic knowledge necessary for
treatment of feline fractures, joint injuries, injuries of the
spine and spinal cord, and soft-tissue injuries. Postoperative
treatment and rehabilitation therapy of injured patients
are described in Chapters 20 and 21, respectively. Part 7 of
this book provides surgical anatomy, a description of specific
conditions of the different anatomical areas, and technical
details for surgeries.
129
13
 Fractures
K. Voss, PM. Montavon
The basic principles of fracture repair and treatment of joint
 mately fracture. Cortical and cancellous bone have different
injuries are the same for cats and dogs, but there are some
mechanical properties (2). Cortical bone has a lower poros-
clinically important differences between the species. The
ity, and is stronger and more brittle than cancellous bone.
bones of cats are straighter and more slender than dog bones,
Cancellous bone has a higher porosity, is weaker, more
and there is little variation in size among different breeds.
elastic, and has greater capability for plastic deformation
This uniformity leads to less variation in implant sizes and
 before it ultimately fails. The differences in porosity between
types necessary to treat feline fractures. The old saying that
cortical and cancellous bone also have an influence on the
when two pieces of a cat's bone are put together in one room
bone-holding power of implants. Implant anchorage is stron-
they will heal is of course
not true
. Although most feline
fractures seem to heal readily based on clinical impressions,
 brittle than in dogs and might fissure
complications and pitfalls do c
more easily (3).
principles of osteosynthesis is 2
compression
cessfully. Compared to dogs, the
axial tension (Fig. 13-2). Local internal
surgeon has slightly less need
concerned about the
 build up inside the bone if it is subject to
and
fracture can occur along the
ses. The direction and energy
ease of restricting activity during the
ery period. On the
of the applied e
other hand the small size of feline bones limits the choice of
confgurations and types (Fig.
implant size and strength, 
is
13-2). Axial
ession of a bone results in an oblique
required when working with small bone fragments. The basic
fracture. Bending forces
 cause transverse fractures. A small
knowledge of this chapter should help the clinician with the
fragment, called a wedge or butterfly fragment, might be
decision for selecting the optimal treatment option for a spe-
created at the compression side of the fracture. Torsional
cific fracture. Implants and their application are described in
forces create spiral fractures. Tensile forces cause transverse
part 6 of this book.
fractures, usually seen as avulsion fractures.
According to most authors around 50% of fractures in cats
 involve the long bones (1). The incidence of fractures of spe-
cific bones in cats presented to the Clinic for Small Animal
Surgery of the Vetsuisse Faculty of the University of Zurich
is shown in Figure 13-1.
13.1 Fracture biomechanics
Understanding the biomechanical behavior of bone in
 response to external forces and the differences in bone quality
n edoidde asooo oi sdu su irap ne
methods. Bone deformation occurs in response to increasing
external forces. Initially elastic deformation occurs, meaning
 that after the force is removed, the bone returns to its original
siructure. Internal damage starts to occur if the load is
 5  5  '66 p 06 u 1- 
increased beyond this elastic property of bone, resulting in
admitted to the Clinic for Small Animal Surgery of the University of
plastic deformation. Plastic deformation is characterized by
Zurich. Shades of red represent the frequency of fracture occurrence.
microfractures and cracks, resulting in a permanent change
Fractures of the pelvic limbs, including pelvic fractures, were present in
60% of cases. Fractures of the thoracic limbs were encountered in
in shape. The point at which plastic deformation occurs is
19% of cases. Mandibular and maxillary fractures accounted for 14%,
called the yield point. If bone is loaded beyond, it will ulti-
 and fractures of the spine for 6%.
130
 Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
tion system for long-bone fractures is based on the assessment
of over 1000 fractures in both cats and dogs (4). It includes
the methodological description of the affected bone, the
fracture localization in the bone, the fracture type, and the
 fracture morphology. The humerus is assigned number 1,
radius/ulna number 2, the femur number 3, and the tibia/
fbula number 4. Each bone is divided into a proximal (1),
middle (2), and distal (3) segment. Fracture morphology is
classifed according to severity and inherent fracture stability
and is described by the lerters A, B, and C. The classification
A
B
D
system is explained in a simplifed form in Figure 13-3.
Figure 13-2 The four principal forces acting on bone are (A) axial
compression; (B) bending: (C) torsion; and (D) axial tension. They
influence the resulting fracture configuration. Axial compression causes
13.2.2 Classification of sacral fractures
oblique fractures. Bending forces result in transverse fractures. A wedge
The sacrum has been assigned number 5. Sacral fracture in
or butterfly fragment may be present at the compressive side of the
fracture. Torsional forces cause spiral fractures. Axial tension results in
small animals can be classifed into five categories (5) (Fig.
fractures perpendicular to the direction of the force, usually seen as
13-4). Type I fractures are associated with sacroiliac luxa-
 avulsion fractures of attachment sites of ligaments or tendons.
tion. Type I and type II fractures are most common in cats.
Type IV fractures are avulsions of the sacrotuberal ligament,
and do not occur in cats because they do not have a sacro-
The velocity of the applied load also has an influence on
 tuberal ligament.
fracture pattern. With rapidly occurring loads, such as gun-
shots and motor vehicle accidents, both stiffness and ultimate
strength of the bone increase, and more energy is absorbed
13.2.3 Classification of pelvic fractures
by the bone and then released into the surrounding tissues.
A classification system for pelvic fractures has been developed
Rapid loading of a bone therefore causes more comminution
from the AO/ASIF system for pelvic fractures in humans.
and soft-tissue trauma than the same load applied at a slower
Modifcations were made because of the unique features of
rate. Many of the fractures encountered in cats are due to
pelvic fractures in small animals, based on a review of 556
high-velocity trauma and high fracture comminution and
 dogs and cats with pelvic fractures (6). The system takes into
severe soft-tissue injury is common. Quality of bone also has
account the severity of the fracture, with the higher numbers
an influence on the degree on comminution. Whereas imma-
and letters indicating increasing fracture severity. The pelvis
ture cats with soft bones usually sustain simple fractures,
fractures in older cats with stiffer bones tend to be commi-
is assigned number 6. The second digit 1, 2, or 3, describes
nuted. An example of a low-energy fracture in a young cat
involverment of the weight-bearing parts of the pelvis, which
include the acetabulum, the ilial body, and the sacroiliac
is the spiral tibial fracture with an intact fbula
joint. The third digit (A-C) indicates the localization of the
13.2 Fracture classification systems
most significant fracture (Table 13-1).
Fracture classification systems help assess the severity of a
13.2.4 Classification of physeal fractures
fracture, improve communication between clinicians, and
allow categorization of the fracture with regard to treatment
The classification system for physeal fractures in animals has
options and prognosis. Classifications have been developed
been adapted from the Salter and Harris classification in
for long-bone fractures, sacral fractures, and pelvic fractures 
children (7, 8). Physeal fractures can be assigned to one of
in small animals. The whole system is based on an alphanu-
six possible types (Fig. 13-5). In humans, higher numbers
merical code. The frst digit represents the anatomic site of
 indicate a greater possibility of development of growth abnor-
the fracture within the whole-body system. Numbers 1-4
malities. Salter and Harris type I fractures run through the
have been assigned to the long bones, number 5 can be used
physis. Salter and Harris type II fractures run through the
for the sacrum, and number 6 the pelvis.
physis and metaphysis. The small metaphyseal fragment is
known as the Thurston-Holland sign. Salter and Harris type
III fractures run through the physis and epiphyis and are
13.2.1 Classification of long-bone fractures
therefore articular fractures. Salter and Harris type IV frac-
The Arbeitsgemeinschaft fir Osteosynthesefragen/Associa-
tures run through the metaphysis, across the physis, and into
tion for the Study of Internal Fixation (AO/ASIF) classifca-
the epiphysis, and are also articular fractures. Healing of type
13:Fractures
131
C
diaphysis (yellow), or the distal epiphysis and metaphysis (green). (B) Diaphyseal fractures can be simple-reducible (left), have one or two reducible
large fragments (middle), or can be comminuted, non-reducible (right). (c) Fractures of the distal or proximal bone segment can be metaphyseal or
supracondylar (left), involve the lateral or medial portion of the condyle, also called unicondylar (middle), or can be supra- and intracondylar, also 
called bicondyl ar (right).
ⅢI and IV fractures may lead to formation of a bridging
callus, preventing further growth. Salter and Harris type V
 fractures are compression injuries of the physis. They are not
visible on initial radiographs, but may result in symmetrical
physeal closure. Salter and Harris type VI fractures are partial
 compression injuries resulting in asymmetrical closure of one
portion of the physis.
R
13.2.5 Classification of open fractures
Open fractures are classified according to the extent of soft-
tissue injury, and origin of the fracture (9, 10). Higher
numbers indicate more severe soft-tissue defects and infec-
tion, resulting in more complex treatment and a higher likeli-
hood for development of complications (Table 13-2). Grade
1 fractures are caused by bone penetrating the skin from the
inside, causing a small puncture wound. The chance for
development of infection is low, when appropriately treated.
Grade 2 fractures are characterized by moderate soft-tissue
injury and higher fracture comminution. These have a moder-
ate risk for becoming infected. Grade 3 open fractures are
fractures are most common. (A) Alar fractures are classified as type I.
Kaui pue 'shousuna se yons 'sanun kaiaua-qaiu Aq pasnen
These are associated with luxation of the sacroiliac joint. (B) Foraminal
have high fracture comminution, exposure of bone, and
fractures are classified as type ll. (C) Transverse fractures are classified 
 as type Ill. (D) Comminuted fractures are classified as type V.
extensive soft-tissue injury. Infection is present or likely to
132
 Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
 Pelvis
Weight-bearing elements
Most significant fracture
6 (Pelvis)
61
 No involvement of weight-bearing
61A
 Fractures of the pelvic margin
elements
61B
Fractures of the pelvic floor
61C
Fractures of the ischial body
62
Unilateral involvement of weight-
62A
Unilateral sacroiliac luxation
bearing elements
62B
Unilateral fracture of the ilial body
62C
Unilateral fracture of the acetabulum
63
Bilateral involvement of weight-
63A
Bilateral sacroiliac luxation
bearing elements
63B
 Bilateral involvement of weight-bearing elements,
 including a fracture of the ilial body
63C
 Bilateral involvement of weight-bearing elerments,
including a fracture of the acetabulum
Table 13-1. Classification of pelvic fractures
Fracture
 Description of fracture
classification
Grade 1
Small skin laceration (< 1 cm)
 Bone has penetrated skin from within
 Usually simple fracture
Grade 2
Larger skin laceration (> 1 cm)
A
Wound communicates directly with
bone
Usually minimally comminuted
fracture
Moderate soft-tissue trauma
Grade 3
 Extensive soft-tissue trauma
 Loss of skin and/or bone
Comminuted fractures
Signifcant neurovascular damage
D
possible
Table 13-2. Classification of open fractures
 In adult animals, around two-thirds of diaphyseal bone thick-
F
ness is supplied by the intraosseous artery, and the outer third
is supplied by the extraosseous blood supply. Abundant
Figure 13-5 Salter and Harris classification of physeal fractures.
extraosseous blood supply is derived from the thick perios-
llad seh pue aties (a) anpe i ad seh pue aties ()
fracture. (C) Salter and Harris type Ill fracture. (D) Salter and Harris type
teum in immature animals, whereas only one-third of the
 pe aes () ane  a se pe aes (a) ne 
au qanorun panddns si auoq iashudep aui po ssau
type Vl fracture.
intraosseous artery. The metaphysis and epiphysis of long
bones have a rich blood supply (Fig. 13-6).
develop. Grade 3 open fractures can be further subclassifed
The intraosseous blood vessels are often disrupted after a
according to skin loss and arterial blood supply.
fracture has occurred, and a temporary extraosseous blood
supply is instituted (Fig. 13-7). These extraosseous vessels
13.3 Fracture healing
supplying the fracture region are derived from surrounding
soft tissues, such as muscle attachments. Soft-tissue attach-
Rate and quality of bone healing largely depend on adequate
 ments to the bone should therefore be preserved during
blood supply to the fracture region, and on fracture stability.
surgery.
13: Fractures
133
Figure 13-6 Blood is supplied 
Figure 13-8 Primary bone
to the diaphysis of the long
healing is characterized by direct
bones via intraosseous arteries 
 bridging of the fracture site by
and periosteal blood vessels. In
 osteons. Primary bone healing is
adult animals, the inner two-
only possible if the fracture has
thirds of the cortex are supplied
been anatomically reduced and
by the intraosseous artery. In
rigidly stabilized under
immature cats, periosteal blood
interfragmentary compression.
supply is more important. Blood 
supply to the metaphysis and
epiphysis is derived from direct
 arteries.
tissues (Fig. 13-9). The frst tissue present in a fracture gap
is the fracture hematoma. Granulation tissue then forms,
Figure 13-7 The intraosseous
which is slowly replaced by fbrocartilage. Mineralization of
artery is often disrupted after a
this so-called soft callus and endochondral ossification of the
fracture. The blood supply for
fbrocartilage marks the beginning of the bony callus, which
fracture healing then derives
becomes visible on radiographs. The bony callus is built in
 initially from extraosseous blood
and around the fracture gap. The last step is remodeling of
vessels, located in the soft-tissue 
the initially unorganized bone into lamellar bone, a process
attachments to the bone
that takes several months.
 The objective of this stepwise ransformation of tissues into
bone is gradually to enhance stability in the fracture region.
The different tissues are able to survive different interfrag-
 mentary strains. Granulation tissue can withstand 100%,
fbrous tissue and cartilage 10%, and bone only 2% inter-
 fragmentary strain. Multiple fracture gaps share the displace-
ment of fragments and are therefore more tolerant to
instability than single fracture gaps. If motion at a fracture
site exceeds the tolerance for building oseous tissue, two
main mechanisms exist to reduce interfragmentary strain.
First, the fracture ends are absorbed by osteoclasts in order
13.3.1 Healing of cortical bone
to enlarge the fracture gap and therefore reduce interfrag-
mentary strain. This will mainly happen in simple fractures.
Healing of cortical bone is classified as primary (direct) and
Second, the formation of callus through the above steps is
secondary (indirect) bone healing. Primary bone healing is
 activated by minimal amounts of movement at the fracture
characterized by direct osteonal remodeling and bridging of
site (11). The bony callus increases the cross-sectional diam-
the fracture gap, usually in the absence of an extraosseous
eter of the bone and therefore increases stability in the area.
callus (Fig. 13-8). Contact healing and gap healing are sub-
An intact or re-established exraosseous blood supply is
 groups of primary bone healing. Perfect alignment of fracture
essential for callus development.
ends and absolute stability are necessary for primary bone
healing to occur.
13.3.2 Healing of cancellous bone
Most fractures will heal by secondary bone healing in a
clinical situation. Secondary bone healing is characterized by
Fracture healing is different in areas with predominantly
the formation of bone through transformation of precursor
 cancellous bone, such as the metaphysis and epiphysis of long 
134
Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
A
B
D
Figure 13-9 Secondary bone healing is characterized by transformation of precursor
or tissues into bone. It occurs in the presence of a fracture gap
and micromotion. The fracture hematoma (A) is transformed into granulation tissue first, followed by fibrocartilage (B). A bony callus is formed if 
(a) snlien Auog aui jo buipowan ynoui sanno adeus iepu aut jo uoe soisay () %z ueui ssal oi panpan si uie s auney aui
bones, flat bones of the pelvis, maxilla, and mandibula, and
vertebral bodies. Healing of cancellous bone usually proceeds
at a faster rate than that of cortical bone. Osteoblasts are
responsible for new bone deposition in the fracture gap. New
bone is laid on to the existing bone trabeculae, and along
fbrous tissue fbers. Healing of the thin cortical shell lags
behind cancellous bone healing, and an extraosseous callus 
is usually absent (12) (Fig. 13-10). The appearance of an
extraosseous callus may be seen with gross instability or dis-
placement (12).
Figure 13-10Healing of cancellous bone occurs through new bone
auog snoianue y deb anpey aul ui anssil snougy buoje uoewos
13.3.3 Clinical factors influencing bone healing
heals at a faster rate than cortical bone.
Clinical union of a fracture is a term used to describe the time
when fracture healing is considered stable enough to remove
 the implants. Healing times vary with factors such as age of
the animal, type, severity, and location of the fracture, and
tibial and proximal ulnar fractures (14). Results of the same
technique and implants used. Published times to fracture
study indicate that older cats and obese cats have a higher
healing in studies on feline fractures are summarized in Table
 risk of developing non-unions. Results of those studies (13,
13-3. Overall, the fractures had healed in mean times
15-18) are summarized in Table 13-4.
ranging from 1 to 3 months. Subjectively, cats seem to have
less and smaller callus formation than dogs with similar
13.4 Decision-making in fracture treatment
fractures.
 Few data exist on clinical or epidemiological factors influ.
 The main goal of fracture repair is early weight-bearing, and
encing bone healing in the feline patient. A study of feline
complete restoration of limb function. Early postoperative
   s s a   s
 use of the limb improves vascularity in the fracture region,
the patient to be the only factor influencing healing time;
reduces muscle atrophy and fbrosis, reduces osteoporosis,
fractures healed faster in immature cats than in older cats,
 and improves function of adjacent joints. Many implant types 
regardless of fracture type (1). In another study of feline tibia
 are suitable for fracture repair, and each of them has its own 
fractures repaired by different methods, severely comminuted
 indications, advantages, and disadvantages. Careful preop-
and displaced fractures and open fractures took longer to erative planning of a fracture repair is vital to reduce surgery
heal, regardless of patient age (13). A further study has shown
 time, achieve the goal of early limb function, and avoid com-
that the incidence of non-union is signifcantly greater in plications. Decision-making depends on the biomechanical
13: Fractures
135
 Number of cats
Bone
Fixation method
Time to fracture union
13 cats (Langley-Hobbs
Humerus
External skeletal fixation
5.5 weeks (mildly
et al. 1997 (16))
comminuted)
10.5 weeks (severely
comminuted)
48 cats (Richardson &
Tibia
 External coaptation
4.5 weeks
Thacher 1993 (13))
 Intramedullary pin
8 weeks
External skeletal fixation (closed
7 weeks
reduction)
 External skeletal fixation (open 
12 weeks
reduction)
 Bone plate
12.5 weeks
34 cats (Langley-Hobbs
Femur
External skeletal fxation
8.5 weeks (to implant
et al. 1996 (15))
removal)
7 cats (Haas et al. 2003
Radius/ulna (distal)
External skeletal fxation
12 weeks (to implant
(18))
removal)
12 cats (Gemmill et al. 2004
Radius/ulna and tibia
External skeletal fxation
9.5 weeks
(17))
Factors
Influence on fracture healing
Table 13-4. Factors influencing
fracture healing in cats
Comminuted fractures
Higher incidence of non-union
 Open fractures
Higher incidence of non-union and osteomyelitis
Tibial fractures and proximal ulnar
Higher incidence of non-union
fractures
Age
Faster healing in young cats
Higher incidence of non-union in older cats 
Obesity
 Higher incidence of non-union
evaluation of the fracture, severity of concurrent soft-tissue
stabilization, thereby promoting early callus formation
trauma, estimated time to healing, and on individual patient
through minimal movement at the fracture site. Care is taken
factors, such as age, general health, temperament of the cat,
to preserve the blood supply to the fracture region by indirect
or number of limbs injured. Cats with injuries to several
 fracture reduction, minimal surgical approach, and implant
limbs, for example, are forced to bear weight on at least one
selection and positioning (11). The more flexible fracture
of the operated limbs immediately postoperatively, and fxa-
fixation should not compromise early and complete return to
tion stability therefore should be accordingly high.
function, which is still the main goal of fracture repair. It
should rather create an ideal environment for fracture
healing.
13.4.1 Diaphyseal long-bone fractures
Micromotion at the fracture site promotes early callus for-
Repair of diaphyseal fractures of long bones has evolved in
mation, which in turn results in early stability. The amount
recent years from the classical concept of anatomic reduction
of instability tolerated and warranted is difficult to assess in
and absolute stable fracture fixation towards a more biologi-
-uos pue adi anoeng uo spuadap pue uonens jeiu a
cal approach (11). This approach involves less rigid fracture
fguration, fracture healing time, activity of the animal, and
136
 Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
concurrent orthopedic injuries. With the same load applied,
serve soft-tissue attachments and vascularity at the fracture
 interfragmentary strains are higher in small fracture gaps
 site. This is the case with comminuted fractures. The implants,
o  s a a ro r o p
plates, or internal and external fixators are applied in buttress
simple fractures therefore must be more stable to keep the
 function (Chapter 24). Because all loads are conducted across
interfragmentary strain low enough for fracture healing.
 the implant, it should be strong and durable enough to with-
compared to that required for comminuted fractures.
stand the forces until the fracture has healed. An intramedul-
Two important criteria should be considered before a long-
lary pin may be inserted additionally to compensate for the
bone fracture is repaired: frst, is the fracture reducible?
lack of bone buttress and to increase bending stability. Pres-
Second, does reduction add to fixation stability? If both ques-
ervation of blood supply usually results in rapid callus forma-
tions can be answered with yes, anatomic reduction and rigid
tion, and in early stability (Figs 13-11 and 13-12).
fixation are usually performed. This is mainly the case in
 Bone necrosis can occur as a consequence of reduced blood
simple fractures. Bone plates are often used in this situation.
supply to the bone and carries the risk for sequesra forma-
The application of a plate in compression function (Chapter 
tion and infection. A problem sometimes encountered after
24) causes axial compression across the fracture line, and
s   q o o n  
adds additional stability by allowing the bony column to
Whereas this phenomenon was earlier attributed to stress
carry a significant part of the load. Ideally, the plate is placed
shielding due to too rigid implants, current thinking is that
on the tension side of the bone. Long oblique fractures may
bone necrosis and subsequent internal bone remodeling are
be primarily aligned and compressed with lag screws or cer-
more likely to be caused by vascular damage in the contact
clage wires. A plate is additionally applied in neutralization 
area of the implant to the bone (11, 19). Bone porosity is
function (Chapter 24), protecting the initial fixation. Both the
occasionally encountered after fracture repair in cats, possi-
bone and the plate then share the loads.
bly due to the large plates applied on a small bone. Internal
If one of the answers to the above questions is no, it is
or external fixators do not require an extensive surgical
better not to attempt anatomic reduction, and thereby pre-
approach with stripping or damaging of the periosteum, and
A
B
D
easydeip e ylm ien e jo syaam ol (a) pue t () ie sydesboipen dn-molloy pue 'sne ladoisod aneipaui (a) 'aaieadoaid () llel aunby
fracture of the left tibia, treated by open reduction and plate osteosynthesis. Please compare with Figure 13-12.
13: Fractures
137
D
P
B
D
aul po aunpey leasudep e jo syaam ol (a) pue t () re sudenopen dn-mollo, pue 'se ladoisod arepai (a) 'alie adoaid () zhel anna
right tibia of the cat in Figure 13-11. Both fractures were sustained and repaired at the same time. This fracture was treated by closed reduction
and external skeletal fixation. Fracture healing in the right leg was more obvious at 4 weeks postoperatively. and more complete at 10 weeks,
compared to the left leg (Fig. 13-11).
 the implants are not pressed on to the bone surface. They are
 disease and chronic pain. Fractures of the lateral or medial
ideal for preserving extraosseous blood supply.
portion of a condyle, or intracondylar fractures, are usually
Table 13-5 provides general suggestions for treatment of
 stabilized by lag screw fixation, combined with an antirota-
different types of long-bone fractures.
tional pin, and metaphyseal plating if indicated (Table 13-6).
 Fractures of the glenoid of the scapula and the acetabulum
13.4.2 Metaphyseal long-bone fractures
 are commonly repaired with small bone plates. A meticulous
pioae on paunojad aq isnu juno! aui on qoeoidde jeoiains
Metaphyseal fractures are characterized by rapid bone healing
 iatrogenic damage to periarticular structures.
due to adequate vascularity and cancellous bone quality in
 this region. The main problem the surgeon encounters is the
13.4.4 Fractures of flat bones
limited amount of bone stock to anchor the implants. Internal
fixators, miniplates, screws, threaded pins, and external fix-
Treatment of fractures of flat bones of the pelvis and skull
 ators are therefore most appropriate (Table 13-6). Holding  follows the same basic principles as for long-bone fractures.
power of implants is not as good as in bone areas with a  Bone healing is good in flat bones, because they are sur-
thick cortical shell. Due to the close vicinity to joints, ana-1
 rounded by abundant soft-tissue mass and the bone is pre-
 -oojoishqd ueiuiu oi panduae si uoonpan armoen suron
 dominantly cancellous. Holding power of implants is not as
cal joint motion.
good as in long bones, not only due to the thin cortical shell
but also because the flat shape often only allows for insertion
of small and short implants. It is therefore important to place
13.4.3 Joint fractures
the implants on the tension side of the bone. Flat bones often
 Joint fractures should always be perfectly reduced, and rigidly
have curved shapes, making adequate contouring of plates
Jo Ano aroisn oi rapro u uoissanduon rapun pazqns
more diffcult. Reconstruction plates are commonly used,
instability will invariably lead to severe degenerative joint 24).
138
 Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
 Fracture type
Fracture
Reduction
Age of cat
Stabilization methods
location
possible?
 Simple
Distal to
Closed
Young
External fixator
transverse or
elbow or
reduction
Cast
short oblique
stifle joint
possible
PIO
External fixator (± IM pin in tibia or ulna)
fracture
Interlocking nail (tibia)
Cast
Closed
Young
External fixator (± IM pin in tibia or ulna)
reduction
Internal fixator
 not possible
Interlocking nail (tibia)
PIO
 Compression plate
Internal fxator
External fixator (± IM pin in tibia or ulna)
Proximal to
Young
 Internal fxator
elbow or
External fixator (± IM pin)
stifle joint
Interlocking nail
PIO
 Compression plate
Internal fxator
External fixator (± IM pin)
 Interlocking nail
 Simple long
 Any long
Young
External fixator (+ IM pin, except for radius)
oblique
bone
Internal fixator
fracture
 Interlocking nail (except radius)
PIO
Lag screw and plate
Internal fixator
External fixator (+ IM pin, except for radius)
Interlocking nail (except for radius)
IM pin and hemi-/cerclage (except for radius)
Multifragment
 Any long
Anatomic
Young
Internal fixator
fracture
bone
reduction
 External fixator (+ IM pin, except for radius)
possible
 Interlocking nail (except for radius)
PIO
Lag screw and plate
Internal fixator
External fixator (+ IM pin, except for radius)
Interlocking nail (except for radius)
Distal to
Anatomic
Young
Closed reduction and:
elbow or
reduction
and old
 External fixator (± IM pin in tibia)
stifle joint
 not possible
Interlocking nail (tibia)
Open reduction and:
External fixator (+ IM pin in tibia)
Internal fixator
Plate (± IM pin in tibia)
Interlocking nail (tibia)
 Proximal to
Young
Plate and rod
elbow or
and old
External fixator (+ IM pin)
stifle joint
Internal fixator
Interlocking nail
Table 13-5. A summary of selected treatment options for diaphyseal long-bone fractures
IM pin, intramedullary pin.
13: Fractures
139
 Fracture type
Growth plates
 Stabilization methods
Table 13-6. Treatment
suggestions for metaphyseal and 
 Metaphyseal and
Open
Internal fxator
epiphyseal fractures in cats
supracondylar
 External fixator (± IM pin, except for radius)
fractures
 Interlocking nail
Avoid bridging of growth plates!
Closed
 Internal fxator
Plate(s) (± IM pin, except for radius)
 External fxator (± IM pin, except for radius)
Miniplate, T-/L-plate
Interlocking nail
Lateral or medial
Open or closed
Lag screw and antirotational Kirschner wire
portion of the
condyle
(unicondylar
fracture)
 Intracondylar and
Open
Lag screw to stabilize condyle
supracondylar
+ Cross pins or rush pins
(bicondylar
Closed
 Lag screw to stabilize condyle
fracture)
+ Internal fixator(s)
+ Plate(s)
+ External fxator
+ Cross pins or rush pins
IM pin, intramedullary pin.
13.4.5 Fractures in immature animals
Figure 13-13  Greenstick
fracture of the radius and ulna in
Treatment of fractures in immature animals differs from
a 9-month-old cat.
treatment of fractures in adult animals for the main reasons
of differences in bone quality and blood supply. Immature
animals have an abundant extraosseous blood supply deriv-
ing from the thick periosteum. This blood supply allows for
damaged during the initial trauma or surgery. The strong
periosteum may even prevent fracture displacement and add
to stability, when it remains intact around a fractured bone.
These fractures are called greenstick fractures, and are ideal
fractures for conservative treatment (Fig. 13-13). Holding
power of implants is not as good as in adult animals due to
the soft bone quality. Intramedullary nails and internal or
external fixators are ideal implants for repair of diaphyseal
long-bone fractures in immature animals. These implants
preserve the extraosseous blood supply, and implant stability
does not rely as much on holding power of the implants in
the bone as it does with conventional plates.
Open growth plates of growing animals are a weak area,
and physeal fractures are common. Physeal fractures in
 growing animals always carry the risk for premature physeal
140
 Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
closure and symmetrical or asymmetrical cessation of growth.
bone growth subside or cease. The Salter and Harris classif-
Histologically,  the growth plates contain  several distinct
 cation (Fig. 13-5) was originally thought to provide a prog-
zones (Fig. 13-14). The cells of the proliferating zone are
nostic indicator for premature closure of the physis, with type
rapidly dividing and are responsible for the growth potential.
I fractures bearing the lowest, and type V and VI fractures
Hence, if the proliferating zone is damaged, cell division and
bearing the highest risk for growth disturbances. Although
Ad s l pue I ad s pue ran
involve the hypertrophic zone, a clinical study has shown that
Figure 13-14  Histological zones
 type I and type II fractures also commonly deviate into the
of a growth plate. (A) The reserve
proliferative zone, potentially causing premature physeal
zone is located immediately
closure (20). The classification is therefore not very useful in
adjacent to the epiphyseal bone.
(B) The proliferative zone contains
prognosticating the outcome in small animals. Instead each
dividing chondrocytes, oriented in 
 injury should be evaluated individually, and a guarded prog-
columns. (C) The chondrocytes
nosis given until evidence for continued growth is seen
enlarge in the hypertrophic zone.
radiographically.
D
and the amount of matrix
 The different growth plates close at different times during
decreases in between them. (D)
Calcification of the matrix occurs
skeletal growth. They can be classified into an early group, a
C
in the provisional calcification
middle group, and a late group according to the time they
zone.
close (21) (Table 13-7). Neutering has been shown to delay
B
physeal closure in cats, especially of the later-closing growth 
plates (22-24). Open growth plates may be diagnosed in male
castrated cats up to an age of 3-4 years, but physeal fractures
do not cause growth disturbances in adult cats.
Type I and II physeal fractures are the most common
physeal fractures in cats and they are stabilized with cross or
A
B
Figure 13-15 (A) Preoperative, (B) postoperative, and (C) 4-week follow-up radiographs of a 7-month-old cat with a pathological humeral fracture
secondary to nutritional hyperparathyroidism. The fracture was stabilized with an intramedullary pin, because marked axial deviation was present.
Fracture healing was rapid after the cat was fed a balanced diet.
13: Fractures
141
Closure
 Approximate age
 Physes
shown to decrease infection rates (25). A frst-generation
at closure
cephalosporin or amoxicillin-clavulanate penetrate well into
bone and are effective against most commonly encountered
Early
4-8 months
Phalanx
bacteria. In older wounds and in the presence of necrosis and
Scapula
avascularity anaerobic infection is likely. Clindamycin or
Distal humerus
metronidazole in combination with amoxicillin-clavulanate
Proximal radius
should be considered in these cases. The wound is cleaned
 Ilioischial physis
and debrided as soon as the patient is considered stable for
Middle
8-14 months
Proximal femur
anesthesia. Wound debridement is performed under aseptic
Distal tibia and fbula
technique to avoid nosocomial infection. The wound is
 Metacarpus, metatarsus
 covered with a sterile water-soluble gel during clipping of
Proximal ulna
hair to prevent hair entering the wound. Copious flushing of
Late
14-20 months
Proximal tibia and fbula
the wound with isotonic fluid removes debris and reduces
Distal femur
bacterial contamination. Tissue is only surgically removed if
Proximal humerus
obviously devitalized and necrotic. Severe soft-tissue wounds
Distal radius
might have to be sequentially debrided over several days as
Distal ulna
the true extent of the necrosis becomes obvious.
Spine
If the patient is stable for a prolonged anesthetic, it is advan-
tageous to stabilize the fracture at the same time as debride-
Table 13-7. Growth plates may be classified into an early-. middle-. or
ment and culture. Early stabilization not only enhances bone
late-closing group (21). The time frames for physeal closure are derived
healing but also facilitates establishment of new soft-tissue
from intact cats
vascularization. Open fractures are considered infected if they
have existed for longer than 6-8 hours before treatment (25).
Grade 1 fractures, which are less than 8 hours old and ade-
quately managed, can be treated as closed fractures and the 
parallel pinning. Smooth pins are used if further growth is
wound can usually be closed after fracture repair. Grade 1
expected. In fractures involving the joints, type Il and IV,
s  aper pe z aper pue si ue rpio saioen
anatomical reconstruction and rigid stabilization of the joint
carry a higher risk for infection and delayed union or non-
surface are performed using a lag screw. Any physeal injury
union. Open wound treatment and fracture stabilization with
 in growing animals should be rechecked radiographically
an external skeletal fixator is then the treatment of choice.
 after 2-3 weeks to be able to detect premature closure, and
Open wounds are bandaged with wet to dry dressings until
plan an intervention if necessary.
healthy granulation tissue covers the bone. The cat is closely
monitored for signs of sepsis until demarcation of necrotic
13.4.6 Open fractures
tissue is obvious and a decision can be made regarding further
 treatment, if viability of the distal limb is questionable.
Open fractures are probably more common in cats than in
 Bone grafting promotes fracture healing and is advanta-
dogs, although most of the literature is based on fndings in
geous to use in all open fractures. It is mandatory in cases
dogs. They usually occur distal to the elbow and stifle joint,
with bone loss from the fracture itself or after necrosis of
where the bone is surrounded by little soft tissue.
bone fragments. Its application is delayed when the wound
Open fractures are considered orthopedic emergencies,
 is extensive and/or dirty, until a healthy granulation bed has
although concomitant life-threatening injuries may necessi-
been formed and the wound can be secondarily closed.
 tate delaying treatment. Bacteria isolated before treatment
Antibiotic therapy is based on results from aerobic and
are the causative agents for later infection in 66% of cases
 anaerobic cultures. Cultures are repeated, with special atten-
(9). Contamination after initial trauma is also common and
 tion to the presence of anaerobic infection, if clinical signs of
referring veterinarians should be advised to cover the wound
 infection persist despite adequate treatment and antibiotic
for transportation with a sterile dressing and a splinted
therapy. Duration of antibiotic therapy depends on the initial
bandage.
 grade of contamination or infection, on the clinical appear-
 The goal of frst-line treatment of open fractures is preven-
ance of the wound, and on the radiological assessment of
tion of additional contamination and reduction of bacterial
fracture healing. A 10-day course is sufficient in uncompli-
numbers. Tissue samples are obtained for aerobic and anaer-
cated cases with appropriate wound management. If the
obic cultures and sensitivity testing before treatment is started.
wound is infected, or if osteomyelitis is present, 4-6 weeks 
Early administration of intravenous antibiotics has been
of antibiotic treatment is necessary.
142
Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
Figure 13-16  Direct reduction
of a simple transverse fracture
(toggling). (A) The bone
segments are elevated until the
bone ends are in direct contact.
(B) The bone is then gradually
and carefully straightened by
 applying digital pressure while
A
bone contact is maintained.
B
13.4.7 Pathological fractures
B
Figure 13-17 Reduction of a long oblique fracture. (A) The bone
Pathological fractures occur in weakened osteopenic bone
segments are distracted with the help of self-retaining bone reduction
during normal activities. They are often localized to areas
forceps. Once the fracture line is close to apposition, a pair of pointed 
bone reduction forceps is placed at an angle to the fracture line. (B) As
with predominantly cancellous bone, such as the metaphyseal
the instrument is slowly closed, the fracture should glide into the
aaeu Aesidh Aau pue rsuids aul pue sauoq auol jo suoit
the appearance of a folding fracture (Fig. 13-15). Thorough
until the fracture is stabilized. They must be carefully positioned so they
investigations should be made to fnd underlying bone disease
will not interfere with the subsequent placement of implants.
(Chapters 4 and 8). Bone tumors and hyperparathyroidism
are the most common diseases resulting in pathological
fractures.
Treatment is aimed at eliminating the primary disease, if
digital pressure to achieve alignment - a process called tog-
possible. Undisplaced fractures can be treated with cage rest 
gling (Fig. 13-16). Alternatively, a slim instrument, such as a
alone and tend to heal well if the underlying disease can be
pediatric Hohmann retractor can be used to lever the frac-
 treated, for example in cases with nutritional hyperparathy-
roidism (Chapter 4). Surgical stabilization should be consid-
 Simple long oblique fractures are reduced by applying trac-
ered for displaced fractures or multiple-limb involvement
 tion with the help of self-retaining bone reduction forceps
(Fig. 13-15). Intramedullary pins or internal and external
 placed on both segments. Once the fracture fragments are
 skeletal fixators are commonly used because implant holding
nearly apposed, reduction is facilitated by placing a pair of
power is markedly reduced in osteoporotic bone.
pointed bone reduction forceps obliquely across the fracture
line. Careful and slow compression of the fracture site will
13.5 Fracture reduction techniques
cause the fracture fragments to glide into position (Fig. 13-
17). A pointed dental hook is ideal for reducing and holding
Fracture reduction is often the most challenging and time-
small fracture fragments, such as small periarticular avulsion
consuming part of osteosynthesis. Manipulation of the frac-
fragments (Fig. 13-18).
ture fragments needs to be performed carefully to avoid
Indirect fracture reduction is used in comminuted fractures.
inadvertent damage to soft tissues. Feline bones tend to fissure
Only the main fracture segments are manipulated in order to
easily if excessive force is applied during reduction and appli-
achieve physiological limb length and spatial alignment of
cation of bone holders.
adjacent joints. By applying traction across the fracture site,
Fracture reduction can be performed by direct and indirect
the small fracture fragments are realigned by tension in the
techniques. Direct techniques are used if anatomic reduction
surrounding soft tissues. Pointed bone-holding forceps or
is the aim. Indirect reduction is used if biological osteosyn-
 transosseous pins for external skeletal fxators can be used to
thesis is to be performed. It may be conducted in a closed
hold and manipulate the main fracture segments (Fig. 13-19).
manner or by using a minimally invasive approach.
Alternatively, insertion of an intramedullary pin prior to
Direct fracture reduction is mainly indicated for simple
definitive fracture repair with an external skeletal fixator or
fransverse and oblique fractures. Simple transverse fractures
a plate can be used to distract and align the main fragments.
can be reduced by elevating the bone ends through the inci-
A correctly prebent plate can also serve as a reduction tool.
sion, placing them in contact to each other and then applying
The plate is anchored to the proximal fragment in the frst
13: Fractures
143
Figure 13-18  Reduction of an
avulsion fracture with a dental
hook. Small avulsion fractures,
for example the medial malleolus.
A
are difficult to manipulate with
large bone forceps. A dental
hook can be used to reduce the
fragment and apply compression
across the fracture line while
inserting the implants.
B
Figure 13-20 Fracture reduction with the help of a precontoured
plate. The plate is fixed to the larger fragment with two screws (A),
and is then used to pull the smaller, usually the distal metaphyseal.
fragment, towards the plate. The reduced fragment is secured to the
plate with the help of a Verbrugge bone clamp before insertion of the
SCrews (B).
tension created may predispose to fracture collapse and
implant pull-out. Emphasis must also be paid to correction
of valgus-varus, rotational, and craniocaudal alignment.
 Fractures of the extremities tend to orient themselves with a
lateral or valgus malpositioning and external rotation. This
tendency must be counteracted by slightly exagerating
reduction towards varus and internal rotation.
13.6 Complications in fracture repair
Fracture complications include fracture union disorders,
osteomyelitis, and fracture disease. Fracture union disorders
 include delayed union, non-union, and malunion.
Although complications cannot be avoided completely,
A
they often occur as a result of inadequate fracture treatment.
Figure 13-19 Indirect reduction of a comminuted fracture with
Many complications can be treated, and a good outcome
ue se pasn ag uen sdanioy uonpan pauiod 'suid snoassosue
achieved, if recognized early enough. Fractures of growth
alternative to transosseous pins. (A) The distal fragment is manipulated
 plates in immature animals carry the risk for growth abnor-
to achieve distraction and spatial alignment. Overdistraction must be 
avoided, especially in the tibia. (B) Fracture reduction is slightly
malities. Growth abnormalities are described later in this
pue snbiea pioae ot uoenou luatu! pue snea spiemot pate labbexa
chapter.
external rotation.
13.6.1 Delayed union and non-union
 Delayed union is a term used to describe slower than expected
step, before the distal fragment is pulled towards it (Fig.
 bone healing. Delayed union is a subjective diagnosis, because 
13-20).
healing times vary and depend on many factors, such as age 
Overdistraction of the fracture site must be avoided,
of the cat, bone, type of trauma and fracture, and fxation
because it allows invasion of soft tissues into the fracture gap,
method. All the biological and mechanical factors present
possibly resulting in delayed healing, and the increased axial
 must be considered when evaluating healing time. Fractures
144
 Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
in immature animals can be expected to heal within 2-6
appearance of the fracture ends. Avascular bone is sclerotic
weeks. Fractures in adult animals usually heal within 1-2.5
 and appears radiodense.
months (Table 13-3), but longer healing times may still be
The incidence of non-union after fracture treatment of the
normal for heavily comminuted fractures, in situations
 appendicular skeleton has been reported as 4.3% in cats (14).
without much soft-tissue coverage, and in old cats.
In this retrospective clinical study of 344 cats with fractures
If delayed union is suspected, but the implants are consid-
 of the appendicular skeleton, several predisposing factors
ered stable, the healing progress is followed on serial radio-
were found for the development of non-union (14): the tibia
 graphs, generally taken every 3-4 weeks. Delayed union is
and the proximal ulna were the most common sites of non-
usually due to inadequate blood supply in the presence of
union. Approximately 15% of cats with tibial fractures devel-
stable implants. Surgical revision is necessary if the implants 
oped non-union. The reduced vascularity and poor soft-tissue
 are unstable, or if fracture healing ceases to progress.
cover of the tibia may explain this high incidence. Open and
 a sassanoid suu aisia jl pasouep si uounou y
comminuted fractures were also associated with an increased
ceased. The diagnosis is made from the typical radiographic
risk for non-union. Additional predisposing factors were
features (Chapter 2), and if serial radiographs do not show
older age and greater body weight of the cats, and fracture
ongoing healing. The possible causes of non-union are mul-
stabilization with type II external fixation. External fxation
tifactorial. Impaired blood supply, fracture instability, large
-uou oi pasodsipard sadki aroe rearn on pasn Auouon si
fracture gaps, interposition of soft tissue in the fracture gap.
union, which can explain the higher incidence of non-unions
and infection may delay or prevent fracture healing. Non-
with type II external fxation seen in this particular study.
unions are classifed into viable and non-viable, according to
Bone defects have been evaluated as a model for non-union
the presence of radiographic signs of biological activity at the
in cats (26). Tibial defects greater than 1.25 times the diaphy-
fracture site. Viable non-unions have a blood supply and
seal diameter stabilized with a 2.7 dynamic compression
evidence of new bone formation at the fracture site, but they
plate, were unable to heal in 12 weeks. Histologically, the
fail to heal, mainly due to instability at the fracture site (Fig.
 fracture gap was mainly flled with fbrous tissue and sriated
13-21). Non-viable non-unions have a poor or absent blood
muscle.
supply to one or both fracture ends, resulting in absence of
Treatment of viable non-unions is not usually problematic.
new bone formation and fracture bridging. Avascular and
Replacement of unstable implants with either a plate or an
necrotic bone segments may be present (Fig. 13-22). Cats
 external fxator removal of softissues from the fracture gap,
often tend to have less callus formation than dogs, and dif-
and placement of cancellous bone graft will allow healing in
ferentiation of viable and non-viable non-union should be
most cases. Non-viable non-unions are a therapeutic chal-
based not only on the presence of callus but also on the
lenge. All necrotic bone pieces are removed, and the medul-
Figure 13-21 Viable non-union.
A bony callus has been formed
Figure 13-22 Non-viable
around the fracture site,
non-union. Absence of a bony
indicating an adequate blood
callus may indicate insufficient 
 supply. but the fracture ends are
blood supply. The bone ends are
 sclerotic and the fracture gap is 
sclerotic and often appear
not filled with new bone.
rounded and atrophied.
13: Fractures
145
Figure 13-23  Wave plate
Figure 13-24 Malunion of a
treatment of a non-union
femoral diaphyseal fracture.
fracture. The plate is contoured 
Malunion often causes
 around the fracture region to
dysfunction of muscles and 
allow placement of an adequate
adjacent joints. Patellar luxation
amount of bone graft in and 
may occur after malunion of a
around the defect, and facilitate
femoral fracture.
vascular ingrowth from the 
surrounding soft tissues. The
wave plate increases the
functional diameter of the
non-union site, and improves
stability.
quately reduced, or if implants bend or loosen before healing
1
is complete. Malunions in cats are most commonly seen after
untreated pelvic and femoral fractures, the latter resulting in
shortening of the total femoral length (Fig. 13-24). Devia-
tions from the physiological axis of less than 5-10° are
usually acceptable, and cause no clinical problems. Larger
axial deviations change limb biomechanics and lead to func-
 tional defcits and degenerative changes of adjacent joints and
lary cavity is opened by drilling holes in the sclerotic ends of
muscles. Clinically significant malunions are treated with cor-
the fracture segments. This should allow intraosseous vessels
 rective osteotomies. Irreversible muscle or joint changes are
to reach the fracture gap. The fracture gap is packed with
 often present in chronic cases, precluding normal limb func-
cancellous bone graft. Corticocancellous chips may be placed
 tion even after correction of the bone axis (see also fracture
around the defect. The fracture is best stabilized using a
disease, below).
wave plate technique (Fig. 13-23) or with an internal
Prevention of malunion is much easier than its treatment,
fixator.
 and revision of the repair should therefore be undertaken
A technique has been described for treatment of non-viable
 immediately if postoperative radiographs have revealed sig-
non-unions, which involves a segmental ostectomy of the
nificant axis deviation.
necrotized fracture ends, followed by compression plating
(27). This technique might be used if the fracture ends cannot
13.6.3 Post-traumatic osteomyelitis
 be stabilized under compression due to large gaps or atrophy.
A maximum of 15-20% of bone length can be removed.
Post-traumatic osteomyelitis is relatively rare in cats. The
Most non-unions can be induced to heal with adequate
most common reasons for osteomyelitis are extension from
treatment.
soft-tissue infections and open fractures (28) (Fig. 13-25).
Bone necrosis, ischemia, instability, foreign bodies, and
-nn uado raje uonanu aound sueidui jo ausad a
13.6.2 Malunion
 tures. The most common bacteria isolated from cats and dogs
Malunion is fracture healing in a non-physiological position.
with osteomyelitis are β-lactamase-resistant staphylococci,
Malunion occurs if a fracture is not stabilized, if it is inade-
especially Staphylococcus intermedius (29). Polymicrobial
146
Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
Figure 13-25 (A) Mediolateral
and (B) caudocranial radiographs
of a cat with tibial osteomyelitis,
2 months after having sustained 
an open comminuted fracture.
Bone lysis, cortical sclerosis,
periosteal reaction, and a non-
viable healing disorder are
evident. Also note lysis around 
the proximal transosseus pins (B),
indicating pin loosening. Revision 
 of this situation requires removal
of the hemicerclage wire and
bone sequestrae, replacement of 
the external fixator, open wound 
treatment until the area is clean,
and bone grafting.
A
R
infection often includes Streptococcus spp., and aerobic
defects are filled with cancellous bone graft. External fixators
Gram-negative bacteria, such as Pseudomonas spp., Esche-
 may be replaced by a plate or internal fxator at this stage.
richia coli, and others. Anaerobic bacteria may be encoun-
Antibiotics are given for 4-6 weeks, according to bacterio-
tered in up to 70% of osteomyelitis cases (30). Anaerobes
logical results and sensitivity testing. Amoxicillin-clavulanate
and Pseudomonas spp. are normally present in the mouth
or cefazolin are usually effective against most of the
and might cause infection after bite wounds.
involved aerobic bacteria (29). Amoxicillin-clavulanate is
Acute osteomyelitis causes local soft-tissue swelling, pain,
also effective against many anaerobes, but some might be
and fever a few days after the injury or surgery. It can usually
resistant. Clindamycin and metronidazole are good choices
be treated with appropriate antibiotics and wound manage-
for anaerobic infection. If Gram-negative organisms are
ment, if fracture fxation is stable. Chronic osteomyelitis is
involved, quinolone antibiotics, such as enrofloxacin, may be
characterized by sequestrum formation, development of
given. Antibiotics may have to be combined for polymicro-
draining tracts, and delayed union or non-union. Radio-
bial infections.
 graphic signs include periosteal new bone formation, resorp-
tion of cortex and fracture ends, and sequestration (Fig.
13.6.4 Fracture disease
13-25). Treatment requires wound debridement, removal of
all devitalized tissue and sequestra, and opening of all infected
 Fracture disease is a term used for fracture-related secondary
cavities. Internal implants are removed and the fracture is
changes of bone, joints, and muscles. Maltreated fractures
stabilized with an external fixator. A suitably stable configu-
prevent limb use after surgery. Prolonged disuse of a limb
ration should be chosen, because fracture union may be
may cause muscle atrophy and contractures, bone atrophy,
delayed. Tissue samples, such as the sequestrum and purulent
and loss of joint range of motion due to capsular fibrosis and
 material, are submitted for both aerobic and anaerobic cul-
cartilage degeneration. At worst, the entire limb is rendered
turing and sensitivity testing. Specimens for anaerobic culture
non-functional. Probably the most common form of fracture
should not be exposed to room air and oxygen for longer
 disease encountered in cats is quadriceps contracture (Chapter
than a few minutes. The wound area is flushed copiously.
 7). Treatment of advanced fracture disease is often not pos-
Often open wound treatment with wet-to-dry bandages is
sible and the affected limb often has to be amputated. Preven-
necessary to allow further drainage. Once the wound is flled
tion of fracture disease is achieved by adhering to the correct
with granulation tissue and is ready for closure, any bone
 principles of osteosynthesis, using gentle tisue handling and
13: Fractures
147
Type of graft
Osteogenesis
Osteoinduction
Osteoconduction
Table 13-8. Functions of bone
 grafts graded from + to +#+
 Cancellous autograft
+
+
+
Cancellous allograft
+
+
 Demineralized bone matrix
+
+
fasciotomy of swollen muscle groups and encouraging the
early postoperative use of the limb.
13.7 Bone grafting
Bone grafts are used to enhance fracture healing. Their use
is indicated for repair of fractures with low healing potential,
such as heavily comminuted fractures, fractures with large
fracture gaps, and open fractures. Bone grafting is an impor-
tant part of the treatment of delayed union or non-union
fractures and post-fraumatic osteomyelitis, and is used to
enhance healing of arthrodeses. Both autografts and allografts
can be used in the feline patient.
 Bone grafting accelerates bone formation by three general
Figure 13-26  Cancellous autograft can be harvested from the
 functions (31) (Table 13-8). Osteogenesis is new bone forma-
o yhnoua ael ag isn alou ssae leo aul snanu leixod
allow easy passage and manipulation of the bone curette in order to
tion by transplanted viable cells. Osteoconduction is pro-
avoid iatrogenic fractures during levering. The cancellous bone is
vided by the sructure of the graft, which acts as a framework
harvested from the subchondral area, without disturbing the nutrient
for vascular and bony ingrowth of surrounding tissue. Osteo-
 artery. which is located more distally.
induction, probably the most important attribute, is the
transformation of undifferentiated cells into osteoblasts by
growth factors. Live cells are only provided by autogenous
without risking iatrogenic fracture. Cancellous bone is then
bone graft. Allografts lack the osteogenic function. In one
harvested with the curette (Fig. 13-26). The graft obtained is
study using a feline non-union model evaluating the effects
kept moist with blood until it is used. The syringe plunger
of both fresh autogenous and deep-frozen allogenic cortical
cavities might offer a better storage solution than a sponge
chips, both types of graft effectively promoted bone healing.
 as the small fragments can become entwined with the threads
but a more rapid and consistent response was observed with
 of the surgical sponge. Especially in older cats, it can be
the autogenous graft (32). These differences are most proba-
 impossible to obtain an adequate amount of cancellous bone,
bly due to the lack of osteogenic potential, reduced osteoin-
 and an allograft might have to be added to it. Alternatively,
ductive potential, and antigenicity of allografts. Antigenicity
corticocancellous morsels can be obtained from the dorsal
of banked allografts is reduced due to processing, but not
 ilial wing. These are obtained by making a dorsal surgical
completely eliminated, and an immunological response may
approach to the iliac crest, and nibbling off pieces of bone
lead to excessive graft resorption and lack of new bone for-
with a small pair of rongeurs. Morsels should be 2 mm or
mation in some cases.
less in size to avoid sequestra formation.
Autogenous cancellous bone graft is the gold standard for
Autogenous corticocancellous strips can be used to enhance
bone grafting. Its disadvantages are the increased surgery
healing of arthrodeses or large cortical defects. The strips are
time and additional morbidity associated with the harvest
also obtained from the lateral side of the wing of the ilium
site. The proximal humerus, the ilial wing, and to a lesser 
(Fig. 13-27). The strips are placed around the fracture site
extent the proximal and distal femur can be used as harvest
with the cancellous side towards the bone. Corticocancellous
sites. The graft is usually collected at the beginning of the
 strips have the same properties as cancellous graft, but addi-
surgery, and separate draping and instruments are used in
tionally provide some mechanical strength and more bone
order to prevent spreading of infection between donor and
stock.
recipient site. The corical bone is opened with a bur, large
 Allografts lack an osteogenic potential due to the process-
Kirschner wire, or drill bit. The opening needs to be large
 ing, but they can be stored, and are readily available without
enough to be able to insert and handle a sharp bone curette
extending surgery time and causing additional morbidity to
148
Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
 Age in
Femoral length
Tibial length in
months
in mm
mm
Right
Left
Right
Left
3.5
8
88
5
86
92
96
92
9
90
106
111
109
12.5
92
110
115
114
17
93
113
118
117
27
93
113
118
117
Table 13-9.
 Serial femoral and tibial length measurements of a cat
with a distal comminuted supracondylar fracture of the right femur.
sustained at 3.5 months of age. Shortening of the right femur
occurred. The right tibia showed temporary compensatory overgrowth
(Study of Stergior Vlachopoulas.)
Figure 13-27 Corticocancellous bone strips can be obtained from the
lateral side of the ilium. The strips are harvested with the help of a
Slocum gauge or a smaller bone gauge after splitting the gluteus
medius muscle.
Compensatory overgrowth of the tibia has been seen in a
14-week-old male cat with an intracondylar fracture of the
femoral condyle with supracondylar comminution, repaired
the patient. The beneficial effect of cancellous allograft on
with a transcondylar screw and two dynamic intramedullary
bone healing in cats has been proven in experimental settings,
pins (Stergios
s Vlachopoulos, personal communication).
although bone union occurred less rapidly and consistently
Mediolateral radiographs taken 6 weeks postoperatively,
when compared to fresh autogenous cancellous graft (32).
prior to implant removal, showed mild shortening of the right
 Allografts may be preferable in patients with enhanced anes-
femur (6 mm) and elongation of the right tibia (4 mm) when
thetic risk, for old cats, or when large amounts of graft are
compared with the opposite leg. Interestingly, as the cat
needed. Feline allograft is commercially available (Veterinary
matured, the discrepancy between the lengths of the tibias
Transplant Services). It is freeze-dried and can be stored at
decreased, indicating that after an initial phase of overgrowth
room temperature for 12 months. Cancellous allograft should
 a phase of undergrowth of the left tibia followed, starting
be mixed with bone marrow or cancellous autograft to
from an initial discrepancy in tibial length of 4.35% at 6
provide progenitor cells or osteoblasts. For the flling of small
weeks postoperatively to 0.85% 1 year postoperatively. The
defects, 0.5 ml is usually adequate. Filling of large defects
right femur remained shortened (Table 13-9).
may require 1.0 ml.
13.8.2 Principles of correction of limb deformities
13.8 Growth deformities
Several problems may be encountered with limb deformities
Growth deformities occur secondary to premature closure of
caused by growth disturbances, including loss of bone length,
 growth plates in immature animals. They are rare in cats, and
bone deformation, and incongruity of adjacent joints. Treat-
not much is known on incidence or risk factors. Premature
ment of clinically apparent limb deformities requires an oste-
closure of growth plates can be secondary to traumatic or
otomy for angular and rotational realignment of the limb. An
infectious damage to the proliferating cells of the physis.
opening wedge or closing wedge osteotomy are the most
Resulting clinical appearance and limb deformities may not be
practical to correct angular limb deformities in cats due to
as pronounced as in dogs due to the smaller growth potential
the small bone sizes (Fig. 13-28). The osteotomy can be sta-
of the feline patient. Thorough evaluation of the limb and its
bilized with an external fxator, an internal fixator, or a bone
radiographs, comparison to the unaffected side, and careful
plate after alignment.
planning of surgery are essential for successful treatment.
Besides restoration of angular limb deformity, restoration
of limb length may be necessary. Loss of bone length is con-
sidered clinically significant if exceeding 15-20%, compared
13.8.1 Compensatory bone overgrowth
to the contralateral unaffected side. Distraction osteogenesis
Compensatory bone overgrowth of both adjacent bones in
can be performed in cats, using small linear or circular dis-
the limb and the same bone after fracture is a well-recognized
traction devices. Uncomplicated new bone formation was
and reported phenomenon in dogs (33), and can compensate
achieved without encountering muscle contraction with a
for smaller disparities of bone length.
distraction rate of 0.7 mm/day (34) (Fig. 13-29).
13: Fractures
149
closure of the distal radial physis (34). Growth cessation of
the distal radial physis results in short-radius syndrome. In
develop from continued ulnar growth, rather than elbow 
incongruity (34) (Fig. 13-30).
A
B
Figure 13-28 (A) Opening and (B) closing wedge osteotomies.
(A) Opening wedge osteotomy has the advantage of gaining bone
length. Its disadvantage is that the osteotomy ends are stabilized 
without contact. (B) Closing wedge osteotomy has the advantage of
good bone contact after fixation, but it reduces bone length.
13.8.3 Premature physeal closure of the distal
radial physis
The most common site for premature physeal closure in dogs
 is the distal ulnar physis, which is predisposed to compressive
injury due to its conical shape. The distal ulnar physis in cats
is oriented perpendicular to the long axis of the radius and
 is therefore less susceptible to premature physeal closure.
Premature closure of the distal radial physis can be caused
A
B
 by distal radial physeal fractures, but may also occur after 
Figure 13-30 A 6-month-old cat with premature closure of the distal
 other injuries to the distal antebrachium and paw. Trauma
radial physis after having sustained a Salter and Harris fracture of the
to the distal antebrachium can cause compressive lesions of
distal radial physis. (A) Preoperative radiographs. The distal radial physis
the physis, not visible on initial radiographs. Control radio-
is closed, the ulnar physis is still open. A large gap is present on the 
graphs after 2-3 weeks should be suggested to owners after
lateral aspect of the radiocarpal joint. (B) Radiographs after radial and 
ulnar osteotomies. Realignment of the distal radius resulted in improved
any kind of trauma to the distal antebrachium in immature
carpal congruity. (Reproduced with permission from: Voss K, Lieskovsky 
cats. Cats falling from a height, and cats with fractures of the
 J. Trauma-induced growth abnormalities of the distal radius in three
ulnar styloid process, may be predisposed to premature
Gats. J Feline Med Surg 2007:9:117-123.)
Figure 13-29 Distraction
osteogenesis of a 4.5-month-old 
cat with radius brevis.
(A) Radiograph taken after 10
days of distraction.
(B) Radiograph taken after 2.5
weeks of distraction when it was 
stopped. Uncomplicated new 
bone formation was achieved
with a distraction rate of
0.35 mm twice daily.
(C) Radiograph after healing of 
the osteotomies and removal of 
 the external skeletal fixator 5
weeks later. (Reproduced with 
permission from: Voss K,
Lieskovsky J. Trauma-induced
growth abnormalities of the distal
radius in three cats. J Feline Med 
Surg 2007;9:117-123.)
150
 Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
A
C
D
E
F
Figure 13-31 A case example of a 1-year-old cat with a hindlimb deformity secondary to premature physeal closure of the proximal tibial physis.
radiographs of the tibia. The tibia was shortened and the tibial plateau deformed (B). The varus deformity at the tarsal level was mainly caused by
continuous growth of the fibula, pushing the tarsus into varus and internal rotation (C). (D, E) Postoperative radiographs. An opening wedge
osteotomy of the proximal tibia was performed to correct the slope of the tibial plateau (D). Proximal and distal fibular ostectomies and stabilization
of the lateral malleolus in a more proximal position ameliorated tarsal deformity (E). (F) Appearance and function of the limb were excellent after 4
months, although the tibia was markedly shorter than on the contralateral side.
 Treatment varies according to age of the patient, and pro-
the time of injury can be expected to have a clinically relevant
gression of limb deformity. Osteotomy and realignment of
loss of antebrachial length when fully grown, and distraction
the radius are performed to correct angular deformity (Fig.
osteogenesis of the radius should be considered (Fig. 13-29).
13-30). If carpal incongruity is mainly due to excessive length
Satisfactory clinical function was achieved in three cats with
of the distal ulna in comparison to the radius, a distal ulnar 
premature closure of the distal radial growth plate, although
ostectomy is performed, allowing the distal part of the ulna
the range of motion in flexion of the carpal joint remained
to migrate proximally. Cats younger than 4 months of age at
reduced (34).
13: Fractures
151
Implant type
Indications for removal
Table 13-10. Indications for
implant removal after healing has
External fixator
Always
been achieved
Pins
 Loose and migrating
 Interfering with joint function
 Intramedullary pin
 Loose and migrating
 Interfering with soft tissue (e.g., sciatic nerve)
Plates or internal fixators
Causing soft-tissue or skin irritation
Interfering with joint function
Causing osteoporosis (temporary stabilization with
external fixator might be necessary)
Causing thermic conduction (e.g., tibia, radius)
All internal implants
After infections
 After open fractures
13.8.4 Premature closure of the proximal
Bone plates are often relatively oversized in the feline patient.
tibial physis
Skin irritation occurs in areas where the plates are located
directly under the skin and may include lick granulomas,
Premature closure of growth plates other than the radial
repetitive skin damage, and skin necrosis. Implants posi-
physis is rare, but deformity of the proximal tibia has been
tioned near joints may interfere with joint motion and cause
described (35), and the authors have seen one affected cat.
swelling and fbrosis. All implants must be removed in the
The cat presented with a shortened tibia, marked varus defor-
presence of infection, as the glycocalyx surounding the
mity of the tarsus, and a caudally tilted tibial plateau (Fig.
implants prevents clearance of bacteria by host immune
13-31). Historically, the cat had an episode of fever and
mechanisms and antibiotics. Bacterial growth can even be
lameness at a younger age, which resolved after a short
found in routinely removed metallic implants (40). Indica-
course of antibiotics. The reason for premature closure might
tions for implant removal are summarized in Table 13-10.
 have been hematogenous metaphyseal osteomyelitis based on
Radiographs are obtained after removal of the implants, and
the owner's history. The varus deformity of the tarsus
the cat is kept confined to a crate for 2 weeks and to the
improved impressively after distal ostectomy of the fbula.
house for a further 2 weeks to prevent fracture through
Additionally, osteotomy and realignment of the tibial plateau
implant holes.
were performed (Fig. 13-31). Distraction osteogenesis would
have been indicated to lengthen the tibia, but was declined
by the owner. Functional outcome was good.
References and further reading
The cat reported in the literature, with an excessive tibial
plateau angle and a cranial cruciate ligament rupture, was
1. Harari J. Treatment for feline long bone fractures. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2002;32:927-947.
successfully treated by a combination of tibial plateau-level-
2. Carter DR, Spengler DM. Biomechanics of fracture. In: Sumner-
ing osteotomy and cranial closing wedge osteotomy (35).
Smith G (ed.) Bone in clinical orthopedics, 2nd edn. Dibendorf:
AO Publishing; 2002: pp. 261-285.
3. Schrader SC. Orthopedic surgery. In: Sherding RG (ed.) The cat:
13.9 Implant removal
diseases and clinical management. New York: Churchill Living-
stone; 1994: pp. 1649-1709.
Implants have no function after fracture healing is completed.
4. Unger M, et al. Classification of fractures of long bones in the
Routine implant removal is a matter of preference of the
dog and cat: introduction and clinical application. Vet Comp
surgeon in many cases. The fear that implants may cause
Orthop Traumatol 1990;3:41-50.
bone tumors is not substantiated by the literature. Only a few
5. Anderson A, Coughlan AR. Sacral fractures in dogs and cats: a
classification scheme and review of 51 cases. J Small Anim Pract
case reports on fracture- or implant-related tumors exist,
1997;38:404-409.
including sarcoma (36), fbrosarcoma (37), and osteosarcoma
6. Messmer M, Montavon PM. Pelvic fractures in the dog and cat:
(38). Defnitive reasons for plate removal in dogs and cats
a classification system and review of 556 cases. Vet Comp
include fxation instability, infection, soft-tissue irritation,
Orthop Traumatol 2004;4:167-173.
thermic conduction, and chronic lameness (39). Besides
7. Salter RB, Harris WR. Injuries involving the epiphyseal plate. J
Bone Joint Surg Br 1963;45:487-622.
implant loosening and infection, soft-tissue irritation is prob-
8. Piermattei DL, Flo GL. Fractures in growing animals. In: Brinker
ably the most common reason for implant removal in cats.
WO, Piermatei DL, Flo GL (eds) Handbook of small animal
152
Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
orthopedics and fracture repair, 3rd edn. Philadelphia: WB
24. Houlton JEF, McGlennon NJ. Castration and physeal closure in
Saunders; 1997: pp. 676-685.
the cat. Vet Rec 1992;131:466-467.
 9. Tillson DM. Open fracture management. Vet Clin North Am
25. Popovitch CA, Nannos AJ. Emergency management of open
Small Anim Pract 1995;25:1093-1110.
fractures and luxations. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
10. Grant GR, Olds RB. Treatment of open fractures. In: Slatter D
2000;30:645-655.
(ed.) Textbook of small animal surgery, 3rd edn. Philadelphia:
26. Toombs JP, et al. Evaluation of Key's hypothesis in the feline
WB Saunders; 2003: pp. 1793-1798.
tbia: an experimental model for augmented bone healing
11. Perren SM. Evolution of the internal fixation of long bone frac-
studies. Am J Vet Res 1985;46:513-518.
tures. The scientific basis of biological internal fixation: choos-
27. Blaeser LL, et al. Treatment of biologically inactive nonunions
ing a new balance between stability and biology. J Bone Joint
by a limited en bloc ostectomy and compression plate fixation:
Surg Br 2002;84:1093-1110.
a review of 17 cases. Vet Surg 2003;32:91-100.
12. Uhthoff HK, Rahn BA. Healing patterns of metaphyseal frac-
28. Griffiths GL, Bellenger CR. A retrospective study of osteomy-
tures. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1981;160:295-303.
elitis in dogs and cats. Aust Vet J 1979;55:587-591.
13. Richardson EF, Thacher CW. Tibial fractures in cats. Comp
 29. Johnson KA. Osteomyelitis in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med
Continuing Educ 1993;15:383-394.
Assoc 1994;12:1882-1887.
14. Nolte DM, et al. Incidence of and predisposing factors for
30. Muir P, Johnson KA. Anaerobic bacteria isolated from osteo-
 nonunion of fractures involving the appendicular skeleton in
myelitis in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 1992;21:463-466.
cats: 18 cases (1998-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005;226:
31.1
Fitch R, et al. Bone autografts and allografts in dogs. Comp
77-82.
Continuing Educ 1997;19:558-575.
15. Langley-Hobbs SJ, et al. Use of external skeletal fixators in the
32. Toombs JP, Wallace LJ. Evaluation of autogeneic and allogeneic
repair of femoral fractures in cats. J Small Anim Pract
cortical chip grafting in a feline tibial nonunion model. Am J
1996;37:95-101.
Vet Res 1985;46:519-528.
16. Langley-Hobbs SJ, et al. External skeletal fixation for stabilisa-
33. Schaefer SL, et al. Compensatory tibial overgrowth following
ton of comminuted humeral fractures in cats. J Small Anim
healing of closed femoral fracture in young dogs. Vet Comp
Pract 1997;38:280-285.
Orthop Traumatol 1995;8:159-162.
17. Gemmill TJ, et al. Treatment of canine and feline diaphyseal
34. Voss K, Lieskovsky J. Trauma-induced growth abnormalities
radial and tibial fractures with low-stiffness external skeletal
of the distal radius in three cats. J Feline Med Surg 2007;9:
fixation. J Small Anim Pract 2004;45:85-91.
117-123.
18. Haas B, et al. Use of the tubular external fixator in the treatment
35. Hoots EA, Petersen SW. Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy and
of distal radial and ulnar fractures in small dogs and cats. Vet
cranial closing wedge ostectomy in a cat with cranial cruciate
Comp Orthop Traumatol 2003;16:132-137.
ligament rupture. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2005;41:395-399.
19. Gautier E, et al. Porosity and remodelling of plated bone after
36. Fry PD, Jukes HF. Fracture associated sarcoma in the cat. J
 internal fixation: result of stress shielding or vascular damage.
Small Anim Pract 1995;36:124-126.
In: Ducheyne P, Van der Perre G, Aubert AE (eds) Biomaterials
37. Sinibaldi K, et al. Osteomyelitis and neoplasia associated with
and biomechanics. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science; 1984: pp.
use of the Jones intramedullary splint in small animals. J Am
195-200.
Vet Med Assoc 1982;181:885-890.
20. Johnson JM, et al. Histological appearance of naturally occur-
38. Bennett D, et al. Osteosarcoma associated with healed fractures.
ring canine physeal fractures. Vet Surg 1994;23:81-86.
J Small Anim Pract 1979;20:13-18.
21. Smith RN. Fusion of ossification centres in the cat. J Small Anim
39. Emmerson TD, Muir P. Bone plate removal in dogs and cats.
Pract 1969;10:523-530.
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1999;12:74-77.
22. May C, et al. Delayed physeal closure associated with castration
40. Smith MM, et al. Bacterial growth associated with metallic
in cats. J Small Anim Pract 1991;32:326-328.
implants in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989;195:765-767.
23. Root MV, et al. The effect of prepubertal and postpubertal
gonadectomy on radial physeal closure in male and female
domestic cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997;38:42-47.
153
14 Joint injuries
K. Voss, P.M. Montavon
Joint injuries in cats frequently occur after motor vehicle 
 10% proteoglycans. Proteoglycans and collagen are synthe-
accidents and falls from a height. The pelvic limbs are involved
 sized by the chondrocytes. The collagen fiber network in the
more often than the thoracic limbs, and the hip and tarsus 
are the most commonly affected joints. The incidence of joint
e cartilage is compressed during weight-
injuries in cats presented at the Clinic for Small Animal
Surgery of the University of Zurich is shown in Figure 14-1.
 of a hyaluronic acid backbone and several core proteins to
Injuries of joints can be classified into ligament sprains, joint
which GAGs are attached. Proteoglycans are capable of
luxations, joint fractures, and open joint injuries. Regardless
binding water and form most of the cartilage matrix.
of the type of injury, disruption of normal joint alignment
and stability results in development of painful osteoarthritis
14.2 Healing of joint injuries
and functional defcits. Treatment is therefore aimed at
restoring joint surfaces and joint stability to minimize osteo-
Trauma to joints can result in laceration or abrasion of car-
arthritic changes and maintain joint function. Structure and
tilage, and/or rupture of the joint capsule and associated liga-
function of joints, healing of joint injuries, surgical principles,
ments. Trauma additionally initiates an inflammatory
treatment of complications such as post-traumatic septic
response, causing synovitis and joint effusion. Regenerative
arthritis, and principles of arthrodesis are described in this
 and degenerative processes occur simultaneously during the
chapter. Joint fractures are covered in Chapter 13.
 healing phase of joint injuries.
 Cartilage is an avascular tissue with very limited healing
capacities, and inflammatory cells and blood vessels have no
14.1 Structure and function of joints
therefore depends on synthesis of new matrix from chondro-
Normal joint function allows a pain-free and full range of
 motion, while providing stability during weight-bearing.
cytes surrounding the defect. This matrix is usually insuff-
cient to fll larger defects. Inflammatory cells and blood
Synovial joints consist of a joint cavity, a joint capsule, the
vessels can enter the defect from the bone if the lesion reaches
synovial fluid, the articular cartilage, and the subchondral
bone. The synoviocytes of the inner synovial membrane of
 the joint capsule produce the synovial fluid. Synoviocytes are
also capable of phagocytosis. The outer fibrous layer of the
joint capsule provides some stability to the joint, but the main
joint stabilizers are the collateral and intra-articular liga-
ments. The capsule contains nerves and vessels.
 Synovial fluid is a dialysate of blood, enriched with glycos-
aminoglycans (GAGs). The main GAG in the synovial fluid
is hyaluronic acid. Synovial fluid has two functions: lubrica-
tion and nutrition of the articular cartilage. Lubrication is
necessary to decrease friction between the joint surfaces to
reduce wear and tear of the articular cartilage. Synovial fluid
has a viscous consistency, which is important for the adhe-
sion between the two articular surfaces. The articular carti-
lage is nourished by diffusion from synovial fluid into the
Figure 14-1 Distribution of joint injuries in 531 cats presented at the
cartilage layers.
Clinic for Small Animal Surgery of the University of Zurich. Shades of
 Articular cartilage allows gliding of two joint surfaces on
red represent the incidence of injury. A total of 467 injuries (88%)
involved the joints of the pelvic limb, and 64 injuries (12%) involved
each other and acts as a buffer during weight-bearing. Artic-
joints of the thoracic limb. The hip joint, tarsal joint, and stifle joint
ular cartilage lacks blood and lymphatic vessels, and nerves.
were most commonly affected. Of the joints of the thoracic limbs, the
It consists of approximately 80% water, 10% collagen, and
carpus was the most frequently injured.
154
 Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
down to the subchondral bone. The defect is then initially
Figure 14-2
filled with a fbrin clot, which is replaced by fbroblast-like
Example of a cat
cells and collagen fibers. These fibroblast-like cells differenti-
with tibiotarsal
instability!
ate into chondroblasts after about 2 weeks, and are capable
subluxation. Valgus
of synthesizing cartilage matrix. The new cartilage does not
stress radiographs
have the same quality, thickness, and mechanical properties
result in opening of
as normal hyaline cartilage, and is prone to fbrillation and
the tibiotarsal joint
erosion.
space medially.
indicating rupture, or
 Healing of joint capsule and collateral ligament ruptures
grade Ill sprain, of 
occurs through invasion of the defect with blood vessels,
the medial collateral
inflammatory cells, and fbroblasts from the surrounding
ligament.
tissues. The defect is filled with granulation tissue during the
frst 2 weeks of the healing phase. This tissue is still weak,
and it takes another 2-4 weeks until fibrous scar tissue which
is strong enough to withstand tensile forces has formed.
Remodeling of the scar tissue involves longitudinal orienta-
tion of the collagen fbers to improve tensile strength. This
process requires a controlled amount of tensile stress across
the wound.
 Intra-articular ligaments, such as the cruciate ligaments of
the stifle joint, do not heal, because they lack sufficient intrin-
sic vascular supply, and the possibility of cell migration from
surrounding tissue. Periarticular fbrosis and thickening of
the joint capsule are the body's attempt to stabilize the
affected joint. Excessive periarticular fibrosis is undesirable
 because it reduces range of motion.
 Joint injuries always initiate some degree of degenerative
Figure 14-3
changes in the affected joint by several mechanisms. Articular
Example of a cat
 cartilage can undergo further degeneration, because injury
with caudal elbow
luxation. The
may induce loss of proteoglycans and water, which in turn
humeroulnar and
reduces resilience of the articular cartilage, and makes it sus-
humeroradial joint 
ceptible to mechanical damage. Prolonged immobilization of
surfaces are
joints in the postoperative period also causes thinning and
completely
dislocated.The
softening of the articular cartilage (1). The soft cartilage is
easily damaged in the period of remobilization. Changes in
sesamoid bone of 
the tendon of the 
amount and quality of synovial fluid reduce lubrication of
supinator muscle is
cartilage and increase friction between the joint surfaces.
seen cranial to the
Continuous instability may result in abnormal force trans-
radial head.
mission and enhanced wear of the cartilage. Osteophytosis
often develops after joint injuries, and is probably an attempt
by the body to stabilize the affected joint, in conjunction with
fibrosis of the joint capsule.
14.3 Diagnosis of joint injury
Joint instability and subluxation are usually caused by sprain
or rupture of one of the joint ligaments, and the joint capsule
Ligament sprains are classifed into three categories (Table
(Fig. 14-2). Joint luxation is defned as complete loss of
14-1) (2). Grade I collateral ligament sprains cause relatively
contact between the adjacent joint surfaces, and occurs
mild clinical signs, which are usually self-limiting. Grade II
if several ligaments and the joint capsule are disrupted
and II sprains result in more obvious clinical signs, including
(Fig. 14-3).
marked pain on palpation, periarticular swelling, and joint
14: Joint injuries
155
 Sprain
Characteristics
 Clinical findings
Radiographic findings
Grade I
Parenchymal hematoma/edema
Mild lameness
Mild soft-tissue swelling
Only few fibers torn
Mild local swelling and pain
 No bony lesions or instability on
stress radiographs
Grade II
Partial tear of ligament
Obvious lameness
 Obvious soft-tissue swelling
Functional deficits but ligament
 Obvious swelling
Mild instability on stress radiographs
grossly intact
Obvious pain on palpation/
manipulation
Grade III
Complete rupture of the ligament
 Severe lameness
Soft-tissue swelling
Complete loss of function
Obvious swelling and pain on
Avulsion fractures possible
 palpation/manipulation
Subluxation possible
Crepitation
Marked instability on stress
Abnormal mobility
radiographs
Table 14-1. Classification and clinical findings in sprain injuries
instability. These often require surgical intervention. Joint
days after the incident, and the small skin punctures may
injuries in cats are often due to severe trauma, such as motor
be difficult to detect. Instability is not usually present, but
vehicle accidents and falls from a height. The high energy
septic arthritis will cause marked pain, swelling, and joint
released with these types of injury often causes grade II or II
effusion.
sprains. Grade I sprains are rarely diagnosed in feline
patients.
14.4 Principles of joint surgery
Diagnosis of joint instability or subluxation requires precise
knowledge of the regional anatomy and normal range of joint
 motion. The joint is carefully palpated to detect pain, joint
The goal of joint surgery is to restore congruity and stability
of an injured joint, necessary for a normal range of motion
effusion, and periarticular swelling. Crepitation may be felt
and prevention of abnormal wear and tear. Surgery should
during manipulation. Range of motion is tested, and the joint
be performed as soon as possible after injury to avoid
is manipulated in order to stress the individual ligaments. The
the development of permanent changes. Knowledge of the
anatomy and specifc tests for the individual joints are
regional anatomy, a correct diagnosis, and meticulous sur-
described in part 7 of this book. Routine radiographs are
 gical technique are vital for success. Postoperative manage-
performed to rule out articular fractures. Stress radiographs 
ment is also important to achieve a good outcome after joint
confrm the diagnosis, and help to document the site of insta-
bility (Chapter 2) (Fig. 14-2). They are especially useful in
surgery.
the diagnosis of ligament sprains in joints with several joint
levels, such as the carpus and tarsus. The definitive diagnosis
14.4.1 Arthrotomy
 may only be obtained at surgery.
Joint luxations are easy to diagnose as they cause marked
An arthrotomy is a surgical exploration of a joint, which
limb deformity, swelling, pain, crepitation, changes in range
should include inspection of the cartilage, intra-articular
of motion, and dislocations of the palpable bony promi-
structures, joint capsule, and ligaments. The incision through
nences. Radiographs are used to confrm the diagnosis, and
the joint capsule is generally performed in a longitudinal
to rule out fractures.
direction in order to avoid damage to the periarticular struc-
A common reason for open joint trauma in cats is deglov-
ures, particularly the ligaments. The capsular incision is
ing injuries, most often seen at the tarsal and carpal joints.
started with a stab incision using a number 11 scalpel blade,
        
taking care not to injure the underlying intra-articular struc-
joint capsule damage, and cartilage and bone loss. Diagnosis
tures. The incision is then elongated with scissors under
of degloving injuries is obvious, but stress radiographs should
visual control. Finger-held retractors such as small Meyerd-
be used to evaluate the exact site and degree of instability.
ing, Hohmann, and Senn retractors or mini self-retaining
Another common reason for open joint injuries is cat bite
retractors such as Gelpi's are suitable for retraction of the
wounds, which often result in less obvious signs of an open
 joint capsule, and distraction of the articular surfaces, which
joint injury. Affected cats are often only presented several
 is necessary for adequate exposure and exploration.
156
Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
 Frequent irrigation of the cartilage with Ringer's solution
Figure 14-4 The locking-loop
is performed because the superfcial cartilage layers are
suture, or modified Kessler
suture, is the most appropriate
rapidly damaged when exposed to room air (3). Loose carti-
tension suture for repair of the
lage flaps and small bone fragments are removed as they do
small feline ligaments.
not heal and may dislodge and become free joint bodies.
Meticulous hemostasis, removal of intra-articular blood clots,
and flushing of the joint before closure are beneficial for
joint can induce cartilage damage (4). Osteophytes or ossified
bodies in the joint capsule are only removed when they seem
to interfere mechanically with joint function or if they cause
regional synovial inflammation. Osteophytes rapidly reform
after removal. Free ossifed bodies, or joint mice, are removed
if possible. Partial synovectomy of a hypertrophied synovial
membrane may be benefcial by reducing inflammation and
pain (2).
 The joint capsule is closed with fne absorbable monofla-
Figure 14-5 A collateral ligament 
ment suture material in a cruciate or continuous suture
prosthesis is applied to protect 
pattern. Care should be taken to place the sutures in the
the ligament suture. Care has to
fbrous part of the capsule, remaining protected by the
be taken to position the screws
synovium, to avoid abrasion of cartilage.
at the anatomical attachment 
sites of the ligament to respect
the center of motion of the joint.
14.4.2 Treatment of ligament sprains
If the center of motion is not
respected premature suture
Grade I, or stable grade II ligament sprains can be treated
breakage is likely
conservatively. Restriction of activity is all that is needed for
 grade I sprains. Application of a splinted bandage for 2-3
weeks is often sufficient for minimally unstable grade II
 sprains. Grade II and II ligament sprains resulting in marked
joint instability should be surgically stabilized in small
animals, because conservative management cannot be moni-
tored or planned as precisely as in humans, and most animals
start weight-bearing soon after the injury. Although fbrous
healing will ultimately result in a stable joint in most cases,
prolonged joint instability would promote degenerative joint
ligament prosthesis consists of a fgure-of-eight suture
changes. Collateral ligaments are repaired primarily if possi-
anchored between two screws, suture anchors, or bone biters
ble. Intra-articular ligaments, such as the cruciate ligaments,
(Chapter 24). Non-absorbable multifilament suture materials
have low healing capabilities. Their function is therefore imi-
have good tensile resistance and knot security; they activate
tated by performing extracapsular stabilization techniques.
capsular fbrosis, but are at risk of becoming infected. They
Depending on the joint involved and the stability obtained
are never used in open wounds. Non-absorbable or slowly
with the repair, additional postoperative immobilization may
absorbable monoflament suture material usually provides
be indicated for 2-3 weeks. Fibrous healing of a ruptured
suffcient stability in cats. The screws have to be placed at
ligament takes 2-3 months, and activity should be restricted
the anatomical insertion sites of the ligament in order to
during that time period.
respect the center of motion of the joint (Fig. 14-5). The liga-
The shredded collateral ligament ends are apposed with
ment prosthesis is subject to abnormal loads and is at risk
sutures if possible. A fne monoflament slowly absorbable
for early breakage if it is not applied in the correct anatomical
suture material is usually used. The small size of the collateral
position.
ligaments in cats and frayed ligament ends may render place-
Intra-articular ligaments, and the palmar and plantar liga-
 ment of a stable suture diffcult. The modifed locking-loop
 ments of the carpus and tarsus, are not repaired primarily in
suture pattern is most appropriate in cats (Fig. 14-4). In most
cats. Function of intra-articular ligaments has to be restored
cases, a collateral ligament prosthesis is also required to
 by extracapsular stabilizing procedures. The short palmar
protect the ligament suture in the postoperative period. The
and plantar ligaments of the carpus and tarsus are subject to
14: Joint injuries
157
A
B
Figure 14-6 A cat with an open tibiotarsal luxation
(A) Radiograph of the tarsus of the cat, showing a lateral tibiotarsal luxation.
(B) Photograph of the tarsal area after reduction of the luxation. Skin loss, dirt and hair in the wound, and the soft-tissue defect make development
 of septic arthritis possible. Early and aggressive treatment can save the joint, but osteoarthritis and functional deficits are likely to develop.
large tensile forces. Primary repair and healing of these liga-  include the carpal, stifle, and tarsal joints. Shoulder, elbow,
ments do not result in adequate stability to resist these tensile  or hip joint luxations may also have to be treated surgically.
forces; therefore partial or panarthrodesis of the affected 
 General indications for joint luxation surgery are unsuccess-
joint levels is necessary.
ful closed reduction, immediate or delayed re-luxation,
marked instability after closed reduction, and the presence of
14.4.3 Treatment of joint luxations
articular bone fragments or fractures. Surgical stabilization
 involves suturing of joint capsule tears, and repairing collat-
Joint luxations occur if several of the joint stabilizers are
eral ligaments as described above. Avulsion fractures are
disrupted, allowing complete dislocation of the adjacent
reattached with small Kirschner wires, or with screws if the
articular surfaces. Two general treatment options exist: closed
rnoniesuen e 'saseo suos un 'qanoua sarel are ssuuaen
 reduction and external immobilization, and closed or open 
external skeletal fixator or a temporary transarticular pin is
reduction and surgical stabilization. Closed reduction and
 inserted for postoperative immobilization. Transarticular
external immobilization is a possible treatment option for
 external skeletal fxators can be applied across the elbow,
temporomandibular shoulder elbow, and hip joint luxa-
 carpus, stifl, and tarsus. Temporary transarticular pinning
tions. All of these joints may have suffcient stability after
 is mainly used for the stifle and hip.
closed reduction. The temporomandibular joint and the
elbow joint have a stable bony configuration and the shoulder
14.4.4 Treatment of open joint injuries
and hip joint have strong secondary joint stabilizers, such as
tendons and muscles. Reduction is attempted as soon as pos-
Open joint injuries are relatively common in cats, with the
sible after luxation to reduce the risk of ongoing cartilage 
tarsus being most frequently involved. Many open joint inju-
damage due to ongoing injury and malnutrition. General
ries in cats are caused by degloving trauma, and are heavily
anesthesia is necessary for closed reduction to achieve muscle
contaminated with hair, dirt, and commensal bacteria from
relaxation and reduce pain.
 the skin or intestine (Fig. 14-6). Open joint injuries are surgi-
 Joints that largely depend on ligamentous support for sta-
cal emergencies. There is a high incidence of development of
bility have to be surgically stabilized after reduction. These 
 septic arthritis if these injuries are not treated appropriately.
158
Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
Septic arthritis is a devastating condition, resulting in degen-
have to be weighed against their positive effects of providing
eration and even total destruction of the articular cartilage.
stability. Immobilization for a time period of 2 weeks is
As with open fractures, wound debridement and lavage of
usually sufficient for cases with minor joint instability; 3-4
open joint injuries are best performed within 6-8 hours of
weeks may be required in severely unstable lesions. General
the injury occurring. Anesthesia is usually necessary for
aspects on postoperative treatment of joint injuries are
wound debridement, and the patient should be stabilized
provided in Chapter 20. Physiotherapy is an important
beforehand.
adjunct to the treatment of joint injuries and is described in
Wound debridement is performed under aseptic conditions
Chapter 21.
to avoid introduction of additional bacteria. The hair around
the injury is clipped while the wound is protected with a
14.6 Complications of joint surgery
sterile lubricating jelly. Obvious avascular or necrotic tissue
is excised. The joint is explored, and foreign bodies and blood
Complications after joint surgery include the development of
and fbrin clots are removed. Samples for bacterial culture
septic arthritis and severe postoperative osteoarthritis. A
and sensitivity testing are obtained. The joint is copiously
certain degree of degenerative joint disease will develop after
lavaged with sterile Ringer's solution. It is not reported how
any type of severe joint trauma. Fortunately, cats are often
much lavage is needed, but we suggest flushing the joints with
able to compensate for mild to medium-grade osteoarthritis
around 0.5-1 liter. The joint is left open and a sterile wet-to-
clinically, but severe postoperative osteoarthritis causes lame-
dry bandage is then applied. The bandage may either be
ness, inactivity, reduction of range of motion, and chronic
splinted for stabilization, or a transarticular external skeletal
pain.
Aq ieau on pamone si puom au pdde aq un roex
second intention. Sterile bandage changes are performed
14.6.1 Post-traumatic osteoarthritis
daily initially, with decreasing frequency after granulation
tissue has been formed. Further flushing of the joint can also
The incidence of post-traumatic osteoarthritis is not known,
be necessary, depending on signs of persisting infection with
but some degree of degenerative joint disease is likely to
synovial fluid cytology.
develop in most cases. Osteoarthritis can be induced by direct
When stabilization procedures are necessary they are
damage of the cartilage, by causing joint instability, and by
delayed until the whole wound is covered with a healthy-
initiating inflammatory responses in the joint. Post-traumatic
looking granulation bed. Monoflament absorbable suture
 osteoarthritis is characterized by cartilage degeneration and
material is used instead of multiflament material for collat-
loss, joint capsule fbrosis and thickening, joint effusion,
eral ligament repair in open injuries to reduce the risk of
osteophyte formation, and subchondral sclerosis. Clinical
bacterial contamination. Synovial fluid cytology and bacteri-
signs include lameness, pain, thickening of the joint, and
ology should be repeated at the time of surgery.
reduced range of motion. Cats may show marked radio-
 Prognosis largely depends on type and severity of the injury,
 graphic changes with relatively few associated clinical signs.
contamination grade at admission, and development of septic
The integrity of the articular cartilage of the joint surface and
 arthritis. A surprisingly high level of joint function can often
the degree of capsular fbrosis are probably more important
be achieved with adequate and aggressive treatment, although
for joint function than the periarticular osteophytosis. Assess-
postoperative osteoarthritis will develop to different degrees
ment of severity of post-traumatic osteoarthritis should there-
in all patients.
fore not be based on the radiographic changes alone.
Even after major joint trauma, the severity of post-trau-
14.5 Postoperative management of
matic osteoarthritis can usually be minimized to an extent,
joint injuries
allowing good to satisfactory limb function, if the initial
In contrast to fractures, postoperative immobilization is 
 many treatment options exist for post-traumatic osteoarthri-
required after reconstruction of unstable joints in order to
tis. Conservative management of degenerative joint disease
 protect the surgical repair and to allow healing of periarticu-
 may improve the clinical condition of the cat and is described
lar tissues. Joint immobilization can be achieved with ai
 in Chapter 5. Salvage procedures include excision arthro-
splinted bandage, transarticular external skeletal fixator or
 plasty or arthrodesis in selected cases that do not respond to
temporary transarticular pin, depending on the joint involved 
 medical and physical therapy. Current limb function, and
and the severity of injury. The duration of immobilization is 
s morbidity and expected limb function after the salvage pro-
selected according to the grade of instability, and the negative 
 cedures, must be taken into account when deciding on the
effects of postoperative immobilization on joint function 
appropriate treatment.
14: Joint injuries
159
14.6.2 Post-traumatic septic arthritis
chronic infections, and include subchondral bone lysis and
sclerosis, periosteal new bone formation, and joint surface
Septic arthritis is a bacterial infection of joints. Hematoge-
irregularities.
nous osteomyelitis is rarely encountered in cats, and is
 Post-traumatic septic arthritis should be considered an
described in Chapter 5. More commonly bacteria enter the
 orthopedic emergency. Immediate treatment is instituted, as
joint during trauma, surgical procedures, or possibly after
 the degree of joint destruction and the prognosis largely
arthrocentesis. Specifc literature on feline post-traumatic
depend on the duration of infection. Broad-spectrum antibi-
septic arthritis is not available. The most commonly isolated
otics, such as the combination of amoxicillin and clavulanic
organism in dogs with septic arthritis is Staphylococcus spp.
acid, or cephalosporins, are administered intravenously
(5), but other aerobic and anaerobic bacteria are also encoun-
s n ieineq ro as a re n
tered. Infection causes rapid degradation and loss of cartilage
 been taken. Aggressive joint lavage is the most important part
within 1 week, fbrin deposition on cartilage surfaces, syno-
of the treatment, and has the goal of reducing bacterial
vial inflammation, release of lysosomal enzymes, and joint
 numbers in the joint (7). Joints with septic arthritis following
instability due to infection of the joint capsule and ligamen-
 injuries or surgical procedures usually need to be opened and
tous structures (6). The infection may ultimately invade the
explored. Blood clots, foreign bodies, and fbrin layers are
subchondral bones, resulting in osteomyelitis.
removed. The joint is then copiously flushed, preferably with
Animals with septic arthritis usually have marked or non
sterile Ringer's solution. The joint capsule is usually closed,
weight-bearing lamenes. Affected joints are warm, swollen,
but it may be left open for drainage in severe cases or if tissue
and very painful. A history of recent trauma or surgery should
is missing.
alert the clinician to the presence of septic arthritis. If there
 Especially joints with more chronic infections often need
is no history of trauma, the area around the affected joint
to be flushed several times. This is usually performed every
should be carefully checked for cat bite wounds, as this is a
second day until the infection has cleared. Repeated
very common cause of septic arthritis in felines (Fig. 14-7).
 arthroscopic flushing with large amounts of Ringer's solution
Diagnosis is mainly based on cytological and bacteriological
is currently considered the best treatment in human medicine
(8), but is often not instituted in cats due to the small size of
changes other than soft-tissue swelling are only seen in more
 joints or lack of arthroscopic equipment. Instead, the joint
can be flushed using large-diameter needles, or an ingress-
egress drainage system can be instituted. Lavage can then be
performed continuously, or 2-3 times daily. Once the syno-
vial fluid seems more normal from visual assessment, cytol-
ogy and bacteriology are repeated. Flushing is stopped when
these tests indicate resolution of infection. Oral antibiotics
are selected according to the bacteriological results and
sensitivity and are administered for a time period of 4-6
weeks.
Prognosis depends on the amount of cartilage destruction.
 In a study of dogs with septic arthritis, most responded well
 to treatment, and were free of septic arthritis at follow-up
(5). Such information is not available for cats, but based on
clinical experience most articular infections resolve with
aggressive joint lavage and appropriate antimicrobial treat-
ment. Prognosis for joint function is variable, and depends
on the duration of infection and the degree of cartilage
destruction (7).
14.7 Principles of arthrodesis
Arthrodesis is a permanent surgically induced fusion of a
Figure 14-7 Mediolateral radiograph of the carpus of a cat with septic
 joint. It is a salvage procedure and is only performed if other
arthritis of the radiocarpal joint after having been bitten by another cat.
 treatments do not result in pain relief or joint stability. Indi-
There is soft-tissue swelling in the carpal area. A small radiodense
structure is seen dorsal to the radial carpal bone; this proved to be a
cations for arthrodesis may include comminuted joint frac-
small piece of tooth at surgery.
tres, open joint luxations with traumatic destruction of
160
Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
cartilage, severe disabling degenerative joint disease, selected
usually noted (11, 12). Most successful outcome after elbow
ligamentous injuries, and some neurological dysfunctions.
arthrodesis seems to depend on the flexion angle (10). Com-
Arthrodesis is not commonly performed in cats, but has been
plications include failure to fuse, premature implant loosen-
 described for the elbow joint, carpal joint, and tarsal joint
ing or breakage, angular and rotational deformities due to
(9-12). In joints with several joint levels, such as the carpal
incorrect positioning of the joint, and infection. Failure to
 and tarsal joint, either panarthrodesis or partial arthrodesis 
fuse is often due to inadequate debridement of the joint sur-
can be performed. Partial arthrodesis preserves most joint
faces. The incidence of complications after stifle arthrodesis
motion but is a treatment option only if the antebrachiocar-
in four cats was also high, with a tibial fracture and a femoral
pal, or the tarsocrural joint, is intact.
fracture occurring in two cases (Langley-Hobbs, unpublished
 The goal of arthrodesis is to fuse a joint at a physiological
data). Amputation may be a preferable option to arthrodesis
 angle and to prepare the joint to achieve rapid fusion. The
in the elbow and stifle, high-motion joints, giving cats a more
implants are subject to cycling and may break prematurely if
functional outcome.
an Adde on ieiyaq ose s l ios ooi sssrid uoi
implants on the tension side, if anatomically possible, to
reduce the risk of implant breakage.
References and further reading
Before surgery, the standing angle of the joint is measured
1. Vanwanseele B. et al. The effects of immobilization on the char-
on the contralateral limb. Joints are fused at an angle slightly
acteristics of articular carilage: current concepts and future
more flexed than physiological to facilitate ambulation. All
directions. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2002;10:408-419.
of the joint cartilage has to be debrided, using a burr or a
2. Piermattei DL, Flo GL. Principles of joint surgery. In: Piermattei
small bone curette. Osteostixis is performed with a small drill
DL, Flo GL (eds) Small animal orthopedics and fracture repair,
3rd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1997: pp. 201-217.
bit to create vascular channels through the subchondral bone.
3. Mitchell N, Shepard N. The deleterious effects of drying on
Cancellous or corticocancellous bone graft (Chapter 13) is
articular cartilage. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1989;71:89-95.
placed into the joint spaces. The two bones are then rigidly
4. Roosendaal G. et al. Blood-induced joint damage: a canine in
stabilized, ideally under compression. Long-enough implants
vivo study. Arthritis Rheum 1999;42:1033-1039.
 5. Marchevsky AM, Read RA. Bacterial septic arthritis in 19 dogs.
should be used in order to prevent iatrogenic fractures at the
Aust Vet J 1999;77:233-237.
end of the implants. Plates are used in most circumstances,
6. Roy S, Bhawan J. Utrastructure of articular cartilage in pyo-
 but arthrodesis with Kirschner wires, transarticular screws,
genic arthritis. Arch Pathol 1975;99:44-47.
and external fixators has also been described (10, 13). Exter-
7. Bubenik LR. Infections of the skeletal system. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2005;35:1093-1109.
nal skeletal fxators are a good option in the presence of
8. Bonnaire F, et al. Bakterielle Gelenkinfektion. OP J 2005;
 open wounds. Additional cancellous or corticocancellous
21:232-239.
bone graft is placed around the joint before closure of the
9. DeCamp C, et al. Pantarsal arthrodesis in dogs and a cat: 11
wound.
cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;203:1705-1707.
10. Moak PC, et al. Arthrodesis of the elbow in three cats. Vet
-t p so e  a  
Comp Orthop Traumatol 2000;13:149-153.
weeks. Bony fusion can be expected after 34 months. It
11. Vannini R. Tarsal panarthrodesis. In: Proceedings of the BSAVA
seems beneficial to remove plates after fusion is completed to
Meeting, Birmingham, 1998.
reduce the risk of fractures at the plate ends and because
12. Simpson D, Goldsmid S. Pancarpal arthrodesis in a cat: a case
report and anatomical study. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
low-grade infection may be present. Outcome depends on the
1994;7:45-50.
joint involved. Cats ambulate relatively well after carpal and
13. Willer RL, et al. Partial carpal arthrodesis for third degree carpal
tarsal arthrodeses, although a slight gait abnormality is
 sprains - a review of 45 carpi. Vet Surg 1990;19:334-340.
161
15
 Injuries of the spine, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves
K. Voss, F. Steffen
Neurological injuries occur relatively frequently in the cat.
The normal feline spine allows for a high degree of dor-
Spinal fractures and luxations account for 6% of allfractures
siflexion, ventroflexion, and torsion. Lateral bending is
at the Vetsuisse Faculty of the University of Zurich. Half of
 possible to a lesser degree. The upper thoracic and cervical
the lesions are localized at the sacrococcygeal spine. Spinal
 vertebrae have the highest degree of dorsiflexion, enabling
cord injury may also be caused by traumatic disc extrusion.
 extensive movement of the head and neck, particularly impor-
Although less frequent than spinal cord injury, trauma to the
tant in grooming behavior and hunting (3). The lower tho-
 peripheral nerves is also seen, and may occur with or without
 racic and lumbar spine is particularly designed for ventroflexion
concurrent orthopedic lesions.
(3). Ventroflexion of the thoracolumbar spine is caused by
General considerations and principles of spinal trauma and
 contraction of the ventrally located psoas minor iliopsoas,
surgery are covered in the following chapter. The most
and quadratus lumborum muscles, and is important for
common peripheral nerve injuries are also described. Diseases
 sitting, locomotion, and jumping. The physiological range of
of the spine or spinal cord and neuromuscular diseases are
motion of the feline spine in torsion is large, reaching almost
important differential diagnoses in cats with neurological
180° at the mid-thoracic region (3).
dysfunction, because the traumatic incident is often not
 Intervening soft-tissue structures allow high motion in the
directly observed. Neurological diseases are described in
spine while both the soft-issue and osseous structures are
Chapter 6.
responsible for spinal stability. The anulus fbrosus is highly
 resistant against tensile forces, and prevents excessive bending
15.1 Injuries of the spine and spinal cord
and torsional movements. The intervertebral discs have been
 shown to be the most important stabilizers against torsion in
Injuries of the spinal column include spinal fractures, luxa
vitro (4). The articular facets with their joint capsule provide
tions, and traumatic disc extrusion. The resulting neurologi-
rotational stability on the dorsal side of the spine. Traumatic
cal deficits allow clinical localization of the lesion, and are
or iatrogenic disruption of the anulus fbrosus, together with
 the most important prognostic factors. An understanding of
fractures or luxations of the articular facets, therefore causes
both the pathophysiological events that occur after acute
 significant rotational instability. The supra- and interspinous
spinal cord rauma and the biomechanics of the spinal column
is important for making treatment decisions and estimating
 Hyperflexion is also restricted by the vertebral bodies, which
the prognosis for return to function.
act as a ventral buttress. The dorsal and ventral longitudinal
ligaments and the ligamentum flavum contribute to spinal
stability to a lesser degree.
15.1.1 Structure and function of the spine and
spinal cord
15.1.2 Pathophysiology of acute spinal
The spinal cord consists of eight cervical, 13 thoracic, seven
cord injury
lumbar, three sacral, and approximately seven coccygeal seg-
ments. Dorsal and ventral nerve roots emerge from each
 Acute extradural spinal cord compression and injury occur
spinal cord segment, leaving the vertebral canal at their cor-
 after spinal fractures and luxations, and with traumatic disc
 responding vertebral foramen after having fused to form a
 extrusions. Trauma to the spinal cord results in both direct
segmental spinal nerve. Clinically, the most important nerve 
 and indirect injury mechanisms (6). Direct injury involves
roots are the ones that form the brachial and pelvic plexuses.
 contusion, tearing, or crushing of nervous tissue. Trauma and
The nerves of the brachial plexus supply the front limbs, and
 compression further initiate a cascade of secondary injury
the nerves of the pelvic plexus the hindlimbs, the bladder, the
 mechanisms, including ischemia of the spinal cord, raised
rectum, and the perineal region (Chapter 1). The medullary
 intraneuronal calcium, and free radical-induced lipid pero-
cone of the spinal cord extends more caudally in cats than in
xidation, resulting in alterations in spinal cord blood flow
dogs, terminating at the level of the vertebral body of S1 in
and swelling of the spinal cord (6). These secondary injury
most cats (1, 2).
mechanisms happen within a short time of the injury, and
162   Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
eventually cause additional irreversible damage to the nervous
Figure 15-1
tissue. Progressive myelomalacia is an ascending necrosis of
Myelography of a cat
with a comminuted
the spinal cord and is the most severe form of the secondary
vertebral body
injury mechanisms.
fracture of T12
 Differentiation between irreversible and reversible damage
Leakage of the 
to the spinal cord is not always possible with the clinical
contrast medium
examination and diagnostic imaging techniques available. It
from the intradural 
is important to realize that many of the neurological deficits
space indicates
disruption of the
due to secondary injury mechanisms are reversible, if decom-
dura mater. These
pression of the spinal cord is conducted early enough in the
patients can be
 disease process. Stabilization of vertebral body fractures is
expected to have
also necessary to prevent further damage to the spinal cord.
sustained severe,
In contrast, neurological deficits caused by direct injury and
irreversible spinal
cord damage.
disruption of the nervous tissue are irreversible. Vertebral
fractures and luxations tend to cause more direct damage to
the spinal cord than do other forms of extradural spinal cord
 compression that occur more slowly and with less energy.
15.1.3 Diagnosis of spinal and spinal cord injuries
The mainstay of diagnosis is the clinical neurological exami-
nation (Chapter 1). The goals of the neurological examina-
tained during injury is likely to be underestimated on radio-
tion are localization of the lesion, and assessment of the
graphs. The severity of a spinal fracture and luxation should
severity of the injury. A grading system for extramedullary
therefore be assessed based on the grade of neurological defi-
spinal cord compression, based on severity of the neurologi-
cits present.
cal defcits, is listed in Table 6-2 (Chapter 6). Cats with sus-
Additional diagnostic imaging procedures useful for assess-
pected fractures or luxations of the spine should be
 ment of spinal injuries include myelography, magnetic reso-
manipulated as little as possible during examination to
nance imaging (MRI), or computed tomography (Chapter 2).
prevent further injury to the spinal cord by dislodging unsta-
Myelography or MRI is indicated in the diagnostic work-up
 ble vertebral segments during manipulation.
of suspected traumatic disc extrusions. These imaging modal-
Radiographs are obtained after clinical localization of the
ities can also be used to obtain further information for spinal
lesion. Spinal radiography usually requires general anesthesia
fractures where the radiographic findings do not match the
to enable corect positioning of the patient. However general
clinical localization of the lesion or its severity, if multiple
anesthesia reduces muscle tone, and may increase spinal
lesions are seen on radiographs and their clinical significance
 instability. Therefore, cats with suspected spinal instability
is not clear, and if additional information is necessary for
should be manipulated as carefully as possible while position-
planning a surgical procedure. Myelography and MRI may
ing for radiography. Both a laterolateral and ventrodorsal
also give additional information regarding the prognosis by
view should be obtained. Consideration should be made to
 demonstrating disruption of the dura mater and spinal cord
taking horizontal beam views if there are concerns about
in cases with severe neurological deficits (Fig. 15-1). A com-
turning the patient for taking ventrodorsal radiographs.
puted tomography scan can provide further information on
Spinal fractures and luxations are usually readily visible on
exact fracture configuration.
radiographs, but some lesions are only displaced minimally
and diagnosis requires careful examination of each vertebra
15.1.4 Spinal fractures and luxations
and orthogonal radiographs. Traumatic disc herniation is
suspected in the presence of narrowing of an intervertebral 
Spinal fractures and luxations occur after motor vehicle acci
 space or subluxation of vertebrae.
dents, and falls from a height in most cats. Cats with spinal
 It is important to note that the vertebral displacement
 fractures and luxations frequently sustain concurrent injuries.
visible on radiographs is not of prognostic value. The correla-
A thorough clinical examination and full-body radiographs
tion between vertebral displacement and the neurological
should therefore be performed in every cat with a spinal
-opey (z) rood se painodan uaaq seu suaned aul jo anens
fracture or luxation.
graphs only provide a static record of the position of the
Hyperflexion, axial compression, rotation, and hyperexten-
vertebrae and fragments, and the grade of dislocation sus-
sion are the principal forces causing a spinal fracture or luxa-
15: Injuries of the spine, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves
163
tion. A combination of these forces is usually present in
vertebral bodies can be relatively stable injuries, but if simul-
clinical cases (Fig. 15-2). Fracture/luxation confguration is a
 taneous trauma to the dorsal compartment is present, the
result of the type and direction of the forces applied during
 lesions should be considered unstable. Concurrent injuries to
the trauma. Understanding the biomechanics of spinal frac-
 the dorsal compartment include rupture of the supra- and
tures and luxations helps to assess the spinal instability
 interspinal ligaments, and/or fractures of the articular facets.
radiologically.
Concurrent trauma to the articular facets is common,
Endplate fractures are the most common spinal fracture
although not always detectable on radiographs (9). Endplate
 jo sae ads as (e-h ) (a) sies u ad
 fractures with vertebral subluxation are likely to have been
caused by rotational and ventral bending forces.
 Fractures through the vertebral bodies are not as cormmon
 in cats. They result from ventral bending and/or axial com-
 pression forces, and can be simple or comminuted. Varying
 degrees of concurrent dorsal compartment injury may occur
(Fig. 15-4). The lack of a ventral buttress results in ventral
bending instability. These injuries should be stabilized
surgically.
 Vertebral subluxations and luxations occur after disruption
of the anulus fbrosus of the intervertebral disc, and fractures
and/or luxations of the articular facets (Fig. 15-5). These
 Figure 15-2 Vertebral fractures are commonly caused by a
combination of external forces, such as hyperflexion, axial compression,
and rotation of the spine.
A
A
B
Figure 15-4 Cat with an oblique fracture through the vertebral body
Figure 15-3 Cat with an endplate fracture of L5.
of C6 with concurrent fracture of the dorsal spinous process and dorsal
(A) Laterolateral radiograph shows an endplate fracture of L5 with L5/
lamina
L6 subluxation. A fragment is visible in the dorsal aspect of the spinal
(A) Laterolateral radiograph taken at admission. Because the fracture
canal, possibly an avulsion fracture of the facet joints. The facet joint
was only minimally displaced, conservative therapy was chosen
space is enlarged. This injury should be considered unstable because
(B) Laterolateral radiograph 3 weeks after the injury. The neurological
both the dorsal and ventral compartment is affected
status of the cat had not improved, and radiographs show further
(B) Postoperative radiograph showing reduction and stabilization of the
displacement of the fragments, and callus formation. This unstable
L5/L6 lesion using a dorsal tension band technique.
lesion should have been stabilized surgically.
164
 Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
rupture of the anulus fbrosus secondary to external injury,
allowing the normal nucleus pulposus to herniate into the
spinal canal. The nucleus tends to extrude explosively in
traumatic cases, resulting in significant spinal cord contusion
and myelomalacia (8).
Traumatic disc extrusion can accompany other spinal inju-
ries or may occur as a single problem. It should be suspected
in cats with a history or likelihood of trauma that show
neurological deficits in the absence of radiologically visible
fractures or luxations. The main findings on myelography are
intramedullary swelling or epidural contrast medium leakage
(12). Extradural compression is usually not visible, as the
Figure 15-5 Cat with a vertebral luxation between L1 and L2. The
extruded disc material is soft and unmineralized, and it tends
lumen of the spinal canal is occluded by approximately 50%. Open
 to spread out within the medullary canal. An MRI helps in
reduction and internal stabilization are required.
obtaining the diagnosis. Definitive diagnosis and differentia-
tion berween spontaneous and traumatic disc herniation are
sometimes only possible intraoperatively. Rupture of the
injuries are predominantly caused by rotational forces, and
anulus fbrosus, hematoma formation in the area, and the
should be considered rotationally unstable.
presence of non-degenerate nucleus pulposus in the spinal
 Isolated injuries of the dorsal compartment are rare, but
canal are compatible with a diagnosis of traumatic disc
extrusion.
trauma, such as dog bite wounds. Isolated dorsal compart-
Surgical exploration of the spinal canal and decompression
ment fractures are usually stable injuries, but may cause
of the spinal cord are indicated if traumatic disc herniation
dorsal compression of the spinal cord.
is suspected. Large ruptures of the anulus fibrosus may result
Although successful conservative management of spinal
in spinal instability. Rotational instability is a particular
fractures and luxations has been described (8, 10), surgical
concern, even more so in the presence of concurrent fractures
stabilization of a spinal fracture/luxation is indicated in all
 or luxation of the articular facets, or if the articular facets
 cats exhibiting marked neurological deficits and/or unstable
are removed during decompression procedures. Unstable seg-
lesions in the authors’ opinion. Conservative treatment of
ments should be stabilized. Cats with grade IV or V neuro-
unstable lesions is likely to result in delayed healing and a
logical deficits may benefit from concurrent medical treatment
prolonged period of pain, and carries the risk of further dis-
(Chapter 6). The prognosis for traumatic disc extrusions is
placement of the fragments (Fig. 15-4). Additionally, exces-
good to excellent if deep pain sensation is present (8). Pro-
sive callus formation may result in secondary spinal cord
 gnosis for patients with disc exrusions and loss of deep pain
compression. In one study only 18% of cats with grade 3
 sensation is questionable, but there is a fair chance for recov-
neurological deficits treated conservatively recovered neuro-
 ery if treatment is instituted within the frst hours after the
logically, versus 71% of surgically treated cases (11).
onset of clinical signs.
The severity of neurological deficits may influence the treat-
ment decision. In general, the prognosis is excellent in cats
15.2 Principles of spinal surgery
with sustained motor function, and good to moderate in
paraplegic cats without loss of deep pain sensation. The prog-
The two main goals of spinal surgery are decompression of
nosis for patients with loss of deep pain sensation is grave in
the spinal cord and stabilization of the spinal column. Treat-
the presence of fractures or luxations, because loss of deep
ment decision-making and principles of decompressive
 pain is usually due to direct irreversible spinal cord damage.
surgery and stabilization procedures are summarized in the
 Such patients should be euthanized. Myelography, MRI, or
following section.
exploratory hemilaminectomy with durotomy may reveal
  n    o  n p
15.2.1 Decompression
decision process in unclear or borderline cases (Fig. 15-1).
Neurosurgery in cats requires meticulous surgical technique.
 The spinal cord diameter is relatively large compared to the
15.1.5 Traumatic disc extrusion
diameter of the spinal canal, leaving little epidural space to
Acute disc herniations may occur spontaneously (Chapter 6)
 work in. Good lighting is necessary, and the use of magnifica-
or secondary to trauma. Traumatic disc extrusion involves
tion is also beneficial. Bipolar electrocautery should be used.
15: Injuries of the spine, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves
165
Instruments used for performing spinal surgery in cats include
certain caudal lumbar fractures. Techniques for stabilization
small Gelpi self-retaining retractors, a Freer periosteal eleva-
of specific spinal fractures and luxations are described in
tor blunt and pointed scrapers and nerve hooks, curettes,
Chapter 34.
and fine rongeurs.
 Hemilaminectomies and pediculectomies can both be per-
15.3 Traumatic neuropathy
formed with an electric or pneumatic burr, or with fne ron-
geurs, such as micro-Friedman, small Kerrison, and/or
Peripheral neuropathy of traumatic origin is the most common
synovectomy rongeurs. The rongeurs must be used very care-
cause of peripheral nerve damage in small animals. Injury
fully in order to prevent iatrogenic spinal cord damage during
results from mechanical blows, fractures, pressure, gunshot
insertion of the instrument into the narrow epidural space.
wounds, surgical injury/implants, and stretching (13).
 Manipulation of fracture fragments or disc material within
Mechanical injury can induce temporary or permanent motor
the spinal canal can be performed with fine blunt or pointed
and sensory defcits, depending on the site of the lesion
nerve hooks or scrapers, or with the tip of small Halsted
and likelihood of functional repair (Chapter 1). Three funda-
hemostatic forceps. Care is taken not to injure the venous
mental types of nerve injuries can be identified but, in most
 plexus with the instruments, because significant bleeding may
spontaneous injuries, a combination of these should be
result. Several methods for hemostasis can be used if bleeding
expected.
occurs: a small piece of muscle can be excised and placed in
 A localized conduction block without structural damage
the area of bleeding, commercially available hemostyptic
is present in neuropraxia. Recovery occurs within days to
products such as surgical cellulose can be used, or an ice-cold
weeks. The axon is severed but the endoneural sheath is pre-
isotonic solution can be poured into the surgical wound. Ice-
served in axonotmesis. Recovery occurs after weeks to
cold solutions work well, but it is crucial to monitor body
months. The nerve is completely transected and spontaneous
temperature and keep the cat warm.
recovery is unlikely to occur in neurotmesis. Axonal regen-
Decompression is not required for all spinal fractures/luxa-
eration occurs at a rate of 1-4 mm/day, depending on the
tions, because in many cases indirect decompression occurs
specifc nature of the nerve. Axonal regrowth is limited to a
with reduction of the fractures or luxations. The different
period of 4 months. This equals an approximate distance of
 decompression techniques are described in more detail in
10-15 cm that can be bridged within this time. If reinnerva-
Chapter 34.
tion of a muscle has not occurred within this period of time
or the distance to the target muscle is longer than 10-15 cm,
15.2.2 Stabilization
recovery is unlikely (14). Additionally, irreversible damage to
the receptors at the denervated muscles occurs after 6-9
Surgical stabilization of the spine is indicated for all unstable
months (15). The majority of peripheral nerve injuries are
spinal fractures and luxations. Assessment of stability based
associated with pelvic fractures. Injury to other nerves such
 as the radial nerve with humeral fractures is less common.
lizers, such as the supra- and interspinous ligaments, and the
anulus fibrosus are not visible. However the type of fracture
15.3.1 Brachial plexus avulsion
and the degree of displacement do allow some assessment to
be made of the stability of the lesion (see sections above).
This type of traumatic nerve lesion is common in cats. It
 Fracture reduction and stabilization will restore integrity and
results from severe abduction and/or traction of the thoracic
width of the spinal canal, prevent further spinal cord injury,
limb. Avulsion of the ventral nerve roots is the most common
allow faster healing without excessive callus formation,
form of brachial plexus injury, probably due to a lack of a
reduce pain, and permit a faster return to function.
perineurium at this site. The sensory nerve roots seem to
The small size of the feline vertebrae and the thin lamina
be more resistant to traction, and therefore there may be
and spinous processes limit the implants that can be used for
some inconsistency in the patterns of motor and sensory
 deficits. In acute, complete avulsions of the brachial plexus,
ate to the bone size and strength. Most thoracolumbar frac-
the clinical picture includes monoplegia with dragging of the
tures and luxations can be stabilized with dorsal stapling
foot, a dropped elbow, and absence of spinal reflexes and
techniques, using small-diameter Kirschner wires and ortho-
deep pain response in all dermatomes. If the nerve roots of
pedic wire. The dorsal tension band fxation, a modification
C8-T3 are involved there may be an ipsilateral Horner's
of spinal stapling, was shown to be a suitable technique
syndrome and lack of a cutaneous trunci reflex (Fig. 15-6).
for most thoracolumbar fractures in cats (Fig. 15-3) (9). The
 Proprioceptive deficits may be present in the ipsilateral rear
use of other implants, such as internal fixators, or pins and
 limb in cases where the nerve roots are torn out of the spinal
polymethylmethacrylate, may be necessary in cervical or 
 cord. In chronic cases, the affected forelimb can become rigid
166
Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
Figure 15-6 (A) Cat with
traumatic avulsion of the nerve
roots of the brachial plexus,
resulting in lower motor neuron
monoparesis of the right
forelimb. (B) Also note signs of 
ipsil ateral Horner's syndrome:
miosis, ptosis, and protrusion of 
the third eyelid.
B
due to muscle fbrosis and immobile elbow and carpal
15.3.2 Injury to the lumbosacral plexus
joints.
 In incomplete lesions of nerve roots, motor and sensory
Nerve structures lying close to the pelvis are the most common
function may be retained in some myo- and dermatomes.
sites for serious nerve injury. These nerves include the ventral
Weight-bearing function of the limb is preserved if only the
branches of nerve roots L6, L7, and S1, and the lumbosacral
 cranial nerve roots are involved in the avulsion. Further diag-
trunk, including the intrapelvic portion of the sciatic nerve.
 nostic procedures should include electrophysiological testing.
The sciatic nerve has been reported to be injured in 11% of
The use of electromyelography (EMG) to confrm the diag-
cats with pelvic fractures (18). Craniomedial displacement of
nosis is very useful if performed at least 7 days after the injury
ilial fractures and cranial displacement of sacroiliac luxations
(Chapter 2). Serial nerve conduction studies of the radial
are most likely to cause nerve trauma (19) (Fig. 15-7).
nerve can provide valuable prognostic information.
Clinically, the signs of injury to these structures can be
 In general, the prognosis for brachial plexus injury is poor 
largely identical but vary with severity of injury. Paralysis and
for functional return of the limb. If the nerve roots are avulsed
hyporeflexia resulting in knuckling and dragging of the limb
there is no chance of improvement, but some degree of recov-
are the most obvious features. Neurogenic loss of muscle
ery may occur if the roots are still intact. Resorption of
 mass occurs within a few days of denervation. EMG mapping
hematomas and edema may contribute to restoration of
of muscle denervation helps to confrm the level of the injury
axonal function in the nerve roots. In animals that show no
in cats with a sciatic-type deficit due to pelvic fractures
improvement within a 1-2-month period, the prognosis is
(Chapter 2). If the lesion involves the L6 spinal nerve and the
considered to be hopeless for recovery of limb function.
lumbosacral trunk (gluteal and obturator nerves), denerva-
The main complications of brachial plexus injuries include
tion will occur in muscles supplied by both nerves. In a lesion
contracture of joints due to muscle fbrosis, abrasions of the
affecting the extrapelvic portion of the sciatic nerve, patho-
foot, trophic ulcers, and paresthesias and resultant self-muti-
logical EMG activity will be observed only in the sciatic
lation. Attempts to lessen the effects of the injury include
myotomes distal to the lesion.
tendon relocation directed at providing extension of the
Recommendations as to whether to perform internal fxa-
elbow and carpus, and carpal arthrodesis. However, the
tion of pelvic fractures and sacroiliac joint fracture/luxations
 success of these techniques is questionable. Surgical reinner-
should be followed according to orthopedic principles and
vation of avulsed and reimplanted ventral rootlets in the
 guidelines (Chapter 35). Cats with pelvic fractures and sciatic
cervical spinal cord, and reinnervation by nerve transfers was
nerve defcits should undergo exploratory surgery and frac-
 successful in experimental settings (16, 17), but limb amputa-
ture stabilization. The sciatic nerve roots course ventromedial
tion is often the most practical course of action for severe
to the sacroiliac joint, and they may become entrapped or
injuries.
damaged with sacroiliac fracture/luxations. The nerve roots
15: Injuries of the spine, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves
167
A
B
(A) Note hypotrophy of the hamstring muscles and the plantigrade stance of the left hindlimb, indicating sciatic nerve deficits.
(B) Postmortem examination of the sciatic nerve. The sharp edge of the fractured ilial shaft has injured the sciatic nerve after failure of an
inadequate fracture fixation with pin and wires. Note the extensive formation of fibrous tissue around the nerve (arrow). Extension of filbroblasts
into the nerve is associated with conduction block and questionable functional recovery even after surgical release.
are best explored using an abdominal approach but a lateral
9.
Voss K, Montavon PM. Tension band stabilization of fractures
approach to the pelvis is preferable if sciatic nerve trauma is
 pue shop ui ads requonn a jo suonnxn pu
38 cases (1993-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;225:78-
suspected to result from an ilial or ischial fracture. Surgery
83.
will allow visualization of the injured nerve, but simple anas-
10. Selcer RR, et al. Management of vertebral column fractures in
tomosis is not feasible in crush or traction injuries. Successful
dogs and cats: 211 cases (1977-1985). J Am Vet Med Assoc
use of a saphenous nerve graft was described for the treat-
1991;198:1965-1968.
ment of sciatic neurotmesis in a dog (20). Overall, 81% of
11. Besalti O, et al. Management of spinal trauma in 69 cats. Dtsch
Tierarztl Wochenschr 2002;109:315-320.
34 dogs and cats had an excellent or good recovery of neuro-
12. Montavon PM, et al. What is your diagnosis? Swelling of spinal
logical defcits following pelvic fractures (19). Limb ampu-
cord associated with dural tear between segments T13 and L1.
tation  is indicated  in  cases  with permanent paralysis to
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990;196:783-784.
13. Forterre F, et al. Periphere Nervenerkrankungen: Teil I Mono-
 prevent morbidity caused by muscle contractures, abrasion
parese, -plegie bei Hund und Katze: Retrospektive Studie iber
and ulcers on the feet, and paresthesia.
94 Falle. Kleintierpraxis 2003;48:125-184.
14. Welch JA. Peripheral nerve injury. Semin Vet Med Surg
References and further reading
1996;11:273-284.
15. Chrisman CL. Peripheral neuropathies. In: Bojrab MJ (ed.)
1.  Kot W, et al. Anatomical survey of the cat's lumbosacral spinal
Disease mechanisms in small animal surgery Philadelphia: Lea
cord. Prog Vet Neurol 1994;5:162-166.
& Febiger; 1993: pp. 1158-1173.
2.
Frewein J, Vollmerhaus, B. Anatomie von Hund und Katze.
16. Hoffmann CF, et al. Reinnervation of avulsed and reimplanted
Berlin: Blackwell; 1994.
ventral rootlers in the cervical spinal cord of thecat. J Neurosurg
3.
Macpherson JM, Ye Y. The cat vertebral column: stance con-
1996;84:234-243.
fguration and range of motion. Exp Brain Res 1998;119:324-
17. Moissonnier P et al. Restoration of elbow flexion by performing
332.
contralateral lateral thoracic and thoracodorsal nerve transfers
4.
Shires PK, et al. A biomechanical study of rotational instability
after experimental musculocutaneous nerve transection. J Neu-
in unaltered and surgically altered canine thoracolumbar verte-
rosurg 2005;103:70-78.
bral motion units. Prog Vet Neurol 1991;2:6-14.
18. Bookbinder PF, Flanders JA. Characteristics of pelvic
Smith GK, Walter MC. Spinal decompressive procedures and
fracture in the cat. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1992;5:122-
5.
dorsal compartment injuries: comparative biomechanical study
127.
in canine cadavers. Am J Vet Res 1988;49:266-273.
19. Jacobson A, Schrader SC. Peripheral nerve injury associated
6.
Caughlan AR. Secondary injury mechanisms in acute spinal
with fracture or fracture-dislocation of the pelvis in dogs and
cord trauma. J Small Anim Pract 1993;34:117-122.
cats: 34 cases (1978-1982). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987;190:
7.
McKee WM. Spinal trauma in dogs and cats: a review of 51
569-572.
cases. Vet Rec 1990;126:285-289.
20. Granger N, et al. Cutaneous saphenous nerve graft for the treat-
Grasmueck S, Steffen F. Survival rates and outcomes in cats with
ment of sciatic neurotmesis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
horacic and lumbar spinal cord injuries due to external trauma.
2006;229:82-86.
J Small Anim Pract 2004;45:284-288.
169
16
 Soft-tissue injuries
K. Voss
While injuries to the deeper soft tissues, including muscle and
Marked pressure elevation due to hematoma and edema
ane spunom us 'sien un suanbau Aaaein ane 'suopual
formation in a muscle compartment may cause necrosis of
common. Skin wounds are classifed by etiology into abra-
muscle fbers. This is called compartment syndrome. Four
sion, avulsion, incision, laceration, and puncture wounds (1).
susceptible muscle compartments have been identifed in the
Abrasion injury of the skin frequently accompanies ortho-
dog: the femoral, craniolateral crus, caudal crus, and the
pedic trauma in cats, especially trauma of the distal limbs,
caudal antebrachial compartment. Although compartment
and has been termed degloving injury. Cat bite wounds are
syndrome has not been described in the feline literature,
also commonly encountered in feline practice. They are
 intracompartmental pressure elevation should be suspected if
usually puncture wounds with a high incidence of infection,
one of the listed compartments is very firm, swollen, and
resulting in subcutaneous abscesses, cellulitis, or infection of
painful. Muscle fbrosis and contracture may be the fnal
deeper structures. Diagnosis and treatment of injuries to
result of compartment syndrome if ischemia and necrosis
muscles, tendons, and skin are described in this chapter.
have been present for more than a few hours. Pressure within
a muscle compartment can be measured, with values above
 30 mmHg being of concern in dogs (3, 4), but no reference
16.1 Muscle injuries
data exist for cats.
 Muscle injury may be due to contusion, strain, or laceration
 Diagnoses of muscle strains unassociated with fractures are
and is usually associated with fractures and, less commonly,
rare in cats. Clinically, the serratus ventralis muscle and the
with blunt trauma. Severe or mistreated muscle injury
 abdominal wall muscles are most commonly affected. Rupture
 can result in irreversible muscle contracture and fbrosis
of the serratus ventralis muscle causes laxity and dorsal dis-
(Chapter 7).
placement of the scapula (Chapter 27). Muscles of the
abdominal wall are subject to strain and rupture after blunt
abdominal trauma. Herniation of intra-abdominal organs
16.1.1 Muscle contusion, strain, and laceration
can occur through full-thickness lacerations of the abdominal
Muscle contusion resulting from blunt trauma is character-
wall (Chapter 12).
ized by hemorrhage, edema, inflammation, pain, ischemia,
and possibly necrosis. Muscle strain or rupture is caused by
16.1.2 Treatment of muscle injuries
eccentric contraction and stretching of a muscle. Human
quadriceps strains have been categorized into four grades (2).
Muscle injuries heal through the sequential stages of inflam-
Grades 1 and 2 involve tearing of a few muscle fbers and
mation, repair, and remodeling. The fnal stage of healing is
hematoma formation; the muscle fascia is still intact. In grade
either muscle fber regeneration or scar tissue formation,
3 strains a larger number of muscle fibers and the fascia
dependent both on the size of the original defect and other
are ruptured. Complete muscle rupture is categorized as
injury factors. Regeneration is desirable because healing by
 grade 4. Clinical signs of both muscle contusion and strain
scar tissue reduces the muscle's ability to produce tension. A
include pain, swelling, bruising, hematoma, and muscle
 source of myoblasts, exracellular matrix, vascularization,
spasm. Serum creatine phosphokinase activity in the serum
and innervation is required for regeneration to occur. Vascu-
may be elevated.
lar ingrowth occurs slowly, and prolonged ischemia results
 Clinically apparent muscle injuries in cats are usually asso-
 in death of muscle fbers. Large gaps therefore heal by scar
ciated with fractures. The commonest injuries seen are contu-
formation (5, 6). In the remodeling phase of healing, some
sion and laceration of muscle by sharp fracture fragments.
 stress is necessary to allow remodeling and longitudinal ori-
Hematoma, ischemia, denervation, and rupture may occur
 entation of muscle fibers.
subsequently. Much of the energy released during trauma is
Conservative treatment of muscle contusion and lower-
absorbed by the surrounding soft tissues. Muscle damage
 grade strains is aimed at minimizing the initial inflammatory
is therefore ofen approximately proportional to fracture
processes. Cage rest and systemic non-steroidal anti-
severity.
inflammatory drugs are administered. Local ice packs can be
170
Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
applied for the frst 1-2 days if the cat cooperates. Later on,
The Achilles tendon (Chapter 40), patellar tendon, and triceps
warm packs may facilitate resorption of hematoma and
muscle tendon (Chapter 30) usually need repair after trau-
promote vascularization. Grade 3 and 4 strains are best
matic rupture (8, 9).
 treated surgically with debridement of damaged or necrotized
 Reapposition of the tendon ends and immobilization during
tissue, and apposition of muscle tissue by suturing the muscle
the initial phases of healing are necessary. The common
fascia. Cruciate sutures or mattress suture patterns with fne
feature of all tendon and ligament suture patterns is one or
monoflament suture material may be used. If muscle lacera-
more transverse bites through the tissue. Because the collagen
tions are encountered during fracture repair, hematomas and
fbers in a tendon are mainly oriented longitudinally, sutures
devitalized tissue are debrided, and significant lacerations are
tend to slip along the fbers and tear out of the tissue. The
sutured. The fascia is left unsutured or is only loosely apposed
transverse part of the tendon suture patterns compresses the
if swollen muscle is identified at surgery. Small fascial inci-
longitudinal fbers when the suture is tightened, and thus
sions should be made to relieve intracompartmental pressure
prevents the suture from tearing out of the tissue. Non-
if pressure elevation is suspected in a muscle compartment,
absorbable monoflament suture materials are usually used.
or if a large hematoma is seen under the intact fascia.
 Braided composite sutures may be taken if greater suture
Postoperatively, cold packs and non-steroidal anti-inflam-
strength is required. Frayed and necrotic tissue at the stump
matory drugs may be administered for 1-2 days if marked
of the severed tendon is sharply resected before the tendon
swelling and inflammation are present. Patients with severe
ends are apposed. The locking-loop suture is a simple suture
contusions, large lacerations or high-grade strains are cage-
pattern to apply, which is adequate for small and flat tendons
rested for 3 weeks to reduce and control activity. Gentle
(Chapter 14, Fig. 14-4). The three-loop pulley suture pattern
was shown to have a superior tensile strength than the
locking-loop pattern (10). It is used for larger round tendons,
16.2 Tendon injuries
such as the tendons of the Achilles mechanism (Fig. 16-1).
 Flat tendons, such as the deep gluteal tendon, can be sutured
Tendon injury may be caused by both direct and indirect
with a continuous suture pattern (Fig. 16-2).
 trauma. Direct trauma with sharp objects causes tendon lac-
 eration. Degloving injury may cause partial or complete loss
of tendons. Indirect trauma by excessive eccentric loading
Figure 16-1 Three-loop pulley
leads to tendon sprain or rupture.
suture pattern for repair of large
Healing of a tendon defect is a slow process. In tendons
tendons
without a tendon sheath, it follows the same basic mecha-
nisms as healing of extra-articular ligaments (Chapter 14). If
 a small gap is present between the tendon ends, blood vessels
and fbroblasts from the surrounding tissue enter the gap, and
form granulation tissue. A fbrous scar forms in the frst 3
weeks, which then starts to reorganize in a way that the
tendon fbers regain a longitudinal orientation. The longitu-
dinal orientation requires limited tensile forces across the
lesion. The whole process of remodeling takes several months.
Tendons regain approximately 50% of their normal strength
6 weeks after surgery, which is suffcient to withstand the
forces exerted during active motion (7). Tendon strength
returns to around 80% of normal after 1 year (7). Tendons
Figure 16-2
Continuous suture
in tendon sheaths have the disadvantage of poorer blood
pattern for repair of 
supply and healing, and the potential for adhesions between
flat tendons
the tendon and the tendon sheath
(recommended by
Anatomically and surgically important tendons in cats
Ken Bruecker).
 include the Achilles tendon complex, the patellar tendon, the 
tendon of the deep gluteal muscle, the tendon of the deltoid
muscle, and the tendon of the triceps muscle. The tendons of
the deep and middle gluteal, deltoid, and triceps muscle are
sutured if tenotomy is performed during surgical approaches
to the hip joint, shoulder joint, and elbow joint, respectively.
16: Soft-tissue injuries
171
A 3-week period of complete immobilization is usually
debridement are performed under aseptic conditions to
recommended postoperatively, followed by another 3 weeks 
 prevent the introduction of nosocomial bacteria. The wound
of less immobilization with a gradual increase in tensile loads
 is protected with a sterile water-soluble gel or with sterile
(5, 6). Practically, this can be achieved for example with a
 sponges, while the hair is clipped. Hair around the wound
 so   p p 
 edges is removed with clippers or scissors. Foreign bodies in
affected joint for the frst 3 weeks, followed by a splinted 
 the wound, such as hair and dirt, are also removed.
bandage, and then by a modifed Robert Jones bandage
Surgical wound debridement involves sharp excision of
(Chapter 22).
obviously devitalized tissue with a scalpel blade. Overzealous
debridement is avoided initially, and tissue with questionable
viability is initially left. After approximately 3 days, demarca-
16.3 Degloving injuries
tion results in changes in skin color and consistency, which
Degloving injuries occur most commonly during motor
facilitates assessment of tissue viability. Nerves, vessels, and
vehicle accidents. It has been proposed that they happen
 tendons are spared whenever possible.
when the brakes are applied with the car wheel positioned
The wound is copiously lavaged. Wound irrigation should
on the limb, causing the limb to shear along the ground
 be performed with some pressure to reduce bacterial numbers
surface. In dogs, the distal limbs are affected more commonly
effectively. Adequate pressure can be generated with a 35-ml
than the proximal limbs, the rear limbs are affected more
syringe and a 19-gauge needle (1). Several solutions may be
commonly than the front limbs, and the medial tarsal area is
used as irrigants, including tap water, sterile saline solution,
the most commonly affected area overall (11). No large
 and Ringer's solution. Ringer's solution may be preferred,
studies have been performed in cats but the distribution of
because it has been shown to cause less cell damage and
degloving injuries seems to be similar to that in the dog. In
lower cell mortality than tap water or saline solution (12).
most cases not only skin but also deeper tissue layers are lost,
Wounds older than 12 hours are always considered infected,
resulting in bone or joint exposure (11). Prognosis depends
and the addition of an antiseptic to the initial lavage solution
on the location and amount of tissue lost. Patients without
may additionally help decrease bacterial numbers. The anti-
bone and joint exposure usually have an excellent prognosis
septics have to be diluted to avoid tissue inflammation and
(11). Dogs with shearing injuries of the limbs with either
cell damage. Chlorhexidine diacetate as a 0.05% solution
bone or joint exposure had an excellent outcome in approxi-
 and povidone-iodine as a 1% solution may be used. Antisep-
mately 55%, a good outcome in about 30%, and a poor
tics should not be added to the irrigation solution in the
outcome in 15% of cases (11). No similar studies have been
presence of open joint injuries, as they may cause cartilage
performed in cats, but our clinical impression is that many
damage.
cats have a good prognosis despite severe loss of tissue, joint
Degloving injuries are left to heal by second-intention
exposure, and joint instability if treated appropriately Degen-
healing after wound cleaning and debridement. Second-inten-
erative joint disease and intermittent lameness may develop
tion wound healing is characterized by formation of granula-
in some cases. Shearing injuries of the medial tarsus with loss
tion tissue, wound contraction, and epithelialization from the
of a substantial part of the medial malleolus may result in
wound edges. The goal of treatment is to promote the devel-
persistent joint instability despite treatment. These injuries
 opment of granulation tissue and to prevent infection. Adher-
carry a poorer prognosis.
ent wound dressings are chosen in the initial inflammatory
Treatment consists of wound debridement and care, as
stages of wound healing; these result in superficial mechanical
described in detail below. Treatment is usually costly and
debridement during bandage changes. Wet-to-dry bandages
time-consuming. Patients frequently need more than one sur-
are an easy and effective method to achieve this goal. The
gical wound debridement, daily bandage changes, and poten-
initial layer consists of a sterile gauze sponge, moistened with
tially additional surgeries for stabilization procedures, skin
sterile Ringer's solution and covered with a second absorptive
grafting, or arthrodesis.
layer of dressing material. Evaporation of fluid results in
hypertonicity of the fluid in the dressing, causing fluid from
16.3.1 Initial treatment of the wound
the wound to be drawn into the dressing. Wet-to-dry ban-
dages are usually changed once a day, and wound debris is
Most degloving wounds are left to heal by second-intention
 therefore removed with the dressing from the wound surface.
healing, because they are grossly contaminated, and lack of
Once granulation tissue has been formed over the entire
skin precludes tension-free closure. The frst step in treatment
wound bed, the wound dressing is changed to a non-adherent
of a degloving injury is wound cleaning and debridement,
type (Chapter 22) to allow undisturbed maturation, contrac-
with the goal of reducing bacterial numbers, and creating an
tion, and epithelialization of the wound. The mean healing
environment for undisturbed healing. Wound cleaning and
time for degloving injuries left to heal by second intention
172
Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
A
Figure 16-3 (A) The paw of a cat with a large degloving injury of the tarsus and metatarsus, 5 days after trauma. (B) The injury was treated with
wet-to-dry bandages for 2.5 weeks until granulation tissue had covered the wound. The wound bed is now ready to accept a skin graft.
was 6.7 weeks in dogs (11), but this is of course dependent
on the size of the defect. Second-intention wound healing
has recently been demonstrated to be slower in cats than in
dogs (13).
Systemic antibiotics are usually used both prophylactically
 and therapeutically, but they are not a substitute for proper
 wound management. Most superfcial wound infections are
caused by staphylococcal species, and either cephalosporins
or amoxicillin-clavulanate may be effcacious to use while
awaiting culture and sensitivity results. However, continued
therapeutic use of systermic antibiotics should be based on
culture and sensitivity testing. Antimicrobial therapy is dis-
continued once granulation tissue has been formed, because
 the highly vascularized granulation tisue is very resistant to
infection.
Figure 16-4 Preparation of a full-thickness mesh graft. First, all
subcutaneous fat is meticulously removed with curved Metzenbaum
16.3.2 Skin grafting
scissors, until the graft has a granular appearance. Before the graft is
sutured to the wound bed, small longitudinal incisions are performed 
A wound devoid of skin will close by contraction and epithe-
all over the graft. These allow drainage of wound secretions and
lialization. Contraction starts from the wound edges and is
prevent seroma formation between recipient site and graft.
slow during the frst week after wounding, but then acceler-
ates in the following 2 weeks (13). Excessive wound contrac-
tion in areas over joint surfaces may cause reduction in range
The graft can be applied as soon as the whole wound is
of motion of a joint. Additionally, large wounds tend to be
 covered by healthy granulation tissue (Fig. 16-3). An appro-
only covered by a thin epithelial layer centrally, which has
 priate-sized skin graft is harvested from the lateral thoracic
suboptimal mechanical strength, and is at risk for repetitive
or abdominal wall. Color of hair and direction of hair growth
injury. Large wounds on the distal limbs, which have not 
 should be considered when choosing the harvest site. The
healed after approximately 2 weeks, should therefore be
 retrieved piece of skin is spread on a sterile piece of cardboard
covered by a skin graft. Different methods of skin grafting 
with needles. All the subcutaneous fat is removed with scis-
exist, but a full-thickness mesh graft is easy to apply in cats,
sors until the bases of the hair follicles are clearly visible (Fig.
16-4). The graft then has a granulated appearance. The graft
cal damage, and results in a good cosmetic appearance. A
 is meshed with a number 15 scalpel blade, and is kept moist
 90-100% graft take can be expected for skin grafting of
until used. The epithelial line at the wound edges of the
distal limb wounds in cats (14).
recipient site is carefully removed with a scalpel blade and
16: Soft-tissue injuries
173
B
Figure 16-5 Appearance of a full-thickness mesh graft on the dorsum 
of the tarsus after 4 days, 2.5 weeks, and 4 months.
(A) After 4 days the graft is attached to the wound bed and is pink
and well vascularized. Fluid is able to drain through the mesh incisions.
(B) The graft has taken completely after 2.5 weeks and new hair
growth is already visible. The bandage and external skeletal fixator
were removed at this time.
Ay s e au aeasd s t al an jo aad ()
regrown.
any residual debris in the graft bed is removed with sponges.
this stage, and is replaced every 4-5 days. Graft take is
Bleeding is controlled by digital pressure before the graft is
usually complete after 3 weeks (Fig. 16-5). The bandage can
applied. The graft is sutured to the wound edges with simple
 be removed if there is presence of new hair growth, but exces-
interrupted sutures, again considering the direction of hair
 sive licking at the graft site should be prevented for another
growth. The graft should have maximal contact with the
2-3 weeks.
wound bed and the mesh incisions should be slightly open.
 A non-adherent wound dressing is then applied and the leg
16.4 Cat bite wounds
is immobilized in a splinted bandage. The timing of the frst
bandage change is controversial. We usually perform it on
Territorial fghts between cats often result in bite wounds.
the fourth or ffth day after surgery, because any motion
Cat bites were reported to contribute to 4.3% of all visits
between graft and wound bed before that time may interfere
made by cats to veterinarians (15), and a cat bite wound is
with graft take. We prefer to keep the cats hospitalized to
one of the most common causes of acute lameness in the
ensure proper cage rest and frequent bandage checks. At the
 feline patient. The limbs, head, and lower back and perineum
paouan aq on seu sussanp punom al saueuo aaepueq isg
are most frequently affected. Bite wounds can cause lacera-
carefully, so the fragile connection between graft and wound
tions, crushing, avulsion of skin, and puncture wounds (16).
bed is not disturbed; a cat that is likely to struggle is therefore
 The sharp canine teeth of cats tend to cause predominantly
best anesthetized. After 5 days the graft should ideally have 
 deep puncture wounds. Bite wounds are always considered
a slightly reddish or cyanotic appearance (Fig. 16-5),but even 
 infected, due to proliferation of bacteria from the cat's normal
pale areas may still survive. Another bandage is applied at
 oral flora, such as Pasteurella, beta-hemolytic Streptococcus,
174
Part 4: Introduction to musculoskeletal injuries
and Bacteroides spp. Whereas local tissue infection is usually
taken against potential transmission of rabies after a bite
the main problem with cat bite wounds, more extensive and
depend on the vaccination status of the cat, whether rabies
life-threatening injuries to organs can be caused by dog bite
is endemic, and the specific guidelines for each country.
wounds (Chapter 12).
 The small skin puncture lesions often go unnoticed by the
 References and further reading
owners, and cats may only be presented 1-2 days after the
1. Waldron DR, Zimmerman-Pope N. Superficial skin wounds. In:
injury, when cellulitis is already present. Common reasons
Slatter D (ed.) Textbook of small animal surgery. Philadelphia:
for presentation are fever, depression, anorexia, and lameness
WB Saunders; 2002: pp. 259-273.
if the limbs are involved. Careful palpation of the cat for local
2. Ryan A. Quadriceps strain, rupture and charlie horse. Med Sci
swelling, pain, and small scabs, and clipping of hair in the
Sports 1969;1:106-111.
3. Hargens AR, et al. Quantification of skeletal-muscle necrosis in
 suspected area may reveal the small skin lesions. Another
a model compartment syndrome. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1981;63:
reason for presenting the cat to the veterinarian is when the
631-636.
owner notices a fluctuant swelling indicating a subcutaneous
4. Basinger RR, et al. Osteofacial compartment symdrome in the
abscess. Once the infected tissue has been walled off and an
dog. Vet Surg 1987;16:427-434.
 5. Fitch RB, et al. Muscle injuries in dogs. Comp Continuing Educ
abscess has developed, cats are usually free of general sys-
Pract Vet 1997;19:947-958.
temic signs. However, the lesion can be very painful and may
6. Fahie, MA. Healing, diagnosis, repair, and rehabilitation of
induce behavioral changes, such as aggression or hiding.
tendon conditions. Vet Clin Small Anim Pract 2005;35:
Antibiotic therapy with β-lactamase penicillins is usually
1195-1211.
sufficient to resolve the infection in the early stages when
7. Dueland R, Quenin J. Triceps tenotomy: biomechanical assess-
ment of healing strength. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1980;16:
cellulitis is present. Care must be taken not to miss a joint
507-512.
infection if the bite wound is located close to a joint (Chapter
8. Brunnberg L, et al. Injury to the patella and the patella ligaments
14). Radiographs, arthrocentesis, and evaluation of the syno-
in dogs and cats Ii: rupture of the patellar ligament. Eur J Comp
Anim Pract 1993;3:69-73.
vial fluid, or surgical exploration is conducted if joint involve-
9. Liehmann L, Lorinson D. Traumatic triceps tendon avulsion in
ment is suspected.
a cat. J Small Anim Pract 2005;47:94-97.
 Small abscess cavities should be opened with a scalpel blade
10. Moores AP, et al. Biomechanical and clinical evaluation of a
and debrided. The incision is left open for second-intention
modified 3-loop pulley pattern for reattachment of canine
healing. Large abscess cavities may have to be drained for a
tendons to bone. Vet Surg 2004;33:391-397.
11. Beardsley SL, Schrader SC. Treatment of dogs with wounds of
couple of days to prevent healing of the skin incision before
the limbs caused by shearing forces: 98 cases {1975-1993).
the infection has resolved. Large abscesses at the tail base
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207:1071-1075.
sometimes result in areas of skin necrosis due to undermining
12. Buffa E, et al. The effects of wound lavage solutions on canine
and reduced blood supply of the skin. Systemic antimicrobial
fbroblasts: an in vitro study. Vet Surg 1997;26:460-466.
13. Bohling MW, et al. Cutaneous wound healing in the cat: a
 treatment is not necessarily required when an abscess cavity
macroscopic description and comparison with cutaneous wound
 has been drained, but antibiotics should be given in the pres-
healing in the dog. Vet Surg 2004;33:579-587.
ence of systemic signs of infection, and if cellulitis is present
14. Siegfried R, et al. Treatment of large distal extremity skin
in the tissues surrounding the abscess.
wounds with autogenous ful-thickness mesh skin grafts in 5
cats. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 2004;146:277-283.
Viral diseases, such as rabies, feline leukemia virus (FeLV),
15. Leonard CA, Tillson M. Feline lameness. Vet Clin North Am
and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), can be transmitted
Small Anim Pract 2001;31:143-163.
through bite wounds. Serological testing of cats for FeLV and
16. Holt DE, Griffn G. Bite wounds in dogs and cats. Vet Clin
FIV may be performed 6 months after the bite wound if there
North Am Small Anim Pract 2000;30:669-679.
is a concern about potential infection (16). The measures
Part 5
The surgical patient
Complicated and invasive surgical procedures are now fre-
quently performed in cats, thereby increasing the demand for
appropriate surgical preparation, effective and safe anesthe-
sia, pain management, and postoperative care. Peri- and
 cats, probably due to lack of recognition of pain in the feline
patient and fear of side-effects from the analgesic drugs. Only
in recent years has feline analgesia gained more attention
in the literature, and effective and safe protocols have
been instituted. Anesthesia and perioperative analgesia for
the feline patient are described in Chapters 17 and 18,
respectively
dard sdese spu ins rn nued a jo uoneea
aration of the surgical feld, the surgical team, and the instru-
ments, and is aimed at reducing the risk of surgical infection.
These measures are the same for both cats and dogs. The
most important features are summarized in Chapter 19 and
the reader is referred to other textbooks for more informa-
tion. Postoperative management of traumatized or orthope-
dic patients, such as general postoperative care, nutritional
support, and physical therapy, is often as important as
the surgical procedure itself. Benefits include a shortened
recovery time and improvement in overall well-being
and outcome. Postoperative care of the traumatized and
 orthopedic patient and rehabilitation therapy are described
 in Chapters 20 and 21, respectively.
177
17
Anesthesia
S. Kaestner
Every surgical procedure bears a risk. For evaluation of the
and treatment of infections, correct surgical techniques, and
surgical risk many individual factors should be considered,
intensive postoperative care all reduce the surgical risk
such as anesthetic risk, preoperative health status, postopera-
tive morbidiry, risk of infection, risk of surgery-related com-
17.1 Preoperative assessment of the
plications, and the long-term prognosis for functional
surgical patient
recovery and quality of life.
Overall anesthetic-related mortality in cats is reported to
Preanesthetic assessment involves obtaining an owner's
be between 0.1% and 0.42%, whereas serious anesthetic
history, and performing a physical examination according to
complications occur in 1.3-11% of cats (1-3). In a recent
 standard procedures. The cardiovascular and the respiratory
study in the UK, the incidence of anesthetic-related mortality
system are the most important body systems to assess, fol-
 in healthy cats was 0.11%, and 1.4% in sick cats (4). Preop-
lowed by renal and hepatic function, and electrolyte status.
erative assessment of the physical status according to the
True resting values (Table 17-2) are often diffcult to obtain
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) is useful for
in cats in a foreign environment, such as the veterinary
evaluating the anesthetic risk for the cat (Table 17-1). Cats
-raduan Apoq pue ursieq ot on dn saien neah 'enidsou
with an ASA status of 3 or higher are four times or more at
arno nq passas un rnooo ueo os'ot oi dn sa
risk for serious perianesthetic complications, including cardiac
healthy cats.
arrest, as compared to cats with an ASA status of 1 or 2 (2,
 Blood work has little impact on anesthetic management in
3). Age alone does not necessarily increase the anesthetic risk
 the apparently healthy young cat. However, after the physical
(3), but older cats might have a higher incidence of specifc
examination, minimal screening of hematocrit, plasma total
disease conditions.
 solids, and blood urea nitrogen will help to rule out subclini-
Surgical risk factors have been evaluated in several studies
cal problems such as mild dehydration, anemia, or renal
 on cats and dogs and these are summarized in Box 17-1.
disease, which will influence the response to and consequences
Many orthopedic feline patients have sustained trauma and
of administration of anesthetics. More intensive lab work,
injuries to multiple body systems, thus markedly enhancing
anesthetic risk. Appropriate stabilization of the patient before
Box 17-1. Factors influencing surgical risk. The
factors at the top of the list have the greatest
ASA grade
 Physical status
impact on surgical risk
ASA 1
Healthy patient - elective surgery not
Physical status according to the American Society of
required for the patient's well-being
Anesthesiologists (ASA)
ASA 2
Mild systemic disease, no functional
Emergency surgical procedures
limitations - routine necessary surgery
 that would not cause any added risk
Hypoalbuminemia (albumin < 21 g/l)
Anemia (packed cell volume < 20%)
ASA 3
 Severe systemic disease limiting activity but
 Renal uremia
 not incapacitating
Liver dysfunction
ASA 4
 Incapacitating systemic disease that is a
Coagulation disorders
constant threat to life
Moribund; not expected to live 24 hours
Dyspnea
ASA 5
with or without surgery
Age
Weight loss
E
 Emergency anesthesia
 Risk for infection
Complexity and duration of surgery
Table 17-1.
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) patient
physical status assessment 
178
 Part 5: The surgical patient
 Parameter
Normal range
Table 17-2.Normal values for
heart rate, respiratory rate, body
Heart rate
100-240 beats/min, mean true resting 128
temperature, and clinical
 chemistry and hematology in
beats/min
domestic felines
 Respiratory rate
20-40 breaths/min
 Body temperature
36-39°C
Packed cell volume
33-45%
Hemoglobin
11.3-15.5 g/dl
Erythrocytes
7.0-10.7 x 10%/μl
 Mean corpuscular hemoglobin
14-17 pg
 Mean corpuscular hemoglobin
33-36 g/dl
concentration
 Mean corpuscular volume
41-49 fl
Leukocytes
4.6-12.8 x 107/ul
 Band neutrophils
0-123/μl
 Segmented neutrophils
2315-10 000/μul
 Lymphocytes
1050-6000/ul
Monocytes
46-678/μl
Eosinophils
100-600/μl
 Basophils
0-143/μul
Platelets
180-680 x 10²/μl
 Total solids
64-80 g/l
Albumin
30-40 g/l
Bilirubin (total)
1.7-7.2 μmol/l
Glucose
4-9 mmol/l
Blood urea nitrogen
7.4-12.6 μmol/l
Creatinine
98-163 μmol/l
Aspartate aminotransferase
19-44 U/I
Alanine transaminase
34-98 U/l
Lipase
8-26 U/l
Sodium
158-165 mmol/l
Potassium
3.8-5.4 mmol/l
Chloride
121-131 mmol/l
Calcium
2.4-2.8 mmol/l
 Phosphate
0.9-1.8 mmol/l
including clinical chemistry and hematology, is indicated in
recognized and preparations made for intervention (i.e.,
geriatric cats older than 8 years, because of increasing inci-
blood transfusion, ventilatory management).
dence of compensated disease processes with age, and in
Traumatized cats need to be stabilized before anesthetic
raumatized patients.
induction. Aggressive fluid therapy up to 50 ml/kg per hour
 Further diagnostic procedures should be centered round
is required (Chapter 11), and at least 50% of the fluid deficit
abnormal findings. Cardiac as well as respiratory abnormali-
should be replaced before anesthesia can be considered. Chest
ties warrant chest radiographs and/or echocardiographic
and abdominal radiographs should be obtained from every
examination. Chest radiographs will also help to rule out
traumatized cat, to rule out clinically unapparent internal
lung metastases in cats with tumors. Elective surgical proce-
injuries (Chapter 12).
dures may need to be delayed if there are signifcant abnormal
A complete clinical examination is not always possible in
findings (e.g., respiratory infections, untreated diabetes mel-
litus). Patients with debilitating disease (ASA 3 and higher)
excessive stress to the cat. After obtaining a complete history
should be stabilized prior to anesthesia, and possible compli-
and health status of the patient from the owners, these unap-
cations related to the specifc disease condition should be
proachable animals may have to be anesthetized to allow
17:Anesthesia
179
handling. The safest, least depressive, and easiest to eliminate
 tion of the skin with EMLA cream (euthetic lidocaine/prilo-
or reversible sedative or anesthetic should be given. A basic  caine mixture, Astra) to provide skin anesthesia has been
physical examination and blood samples can then be per-  described (5), but catheter placement is successful in only
formed after induction of anesthesia or sedation, taking the  40% of unsedated cats.
drug effects into account when evaluating the results (e.g.
un ieinn! au roy pasn aq ueo st azis oi dn sianaue
changes in packed cell volume).
 Short catheters will easily dislodge from the jugular vein
because of the flexibility of the neck, and a length of at least
17.2 Preparation for anesthesia
6 cm is therefore recommended. Conventional over-the-
needle catheters of this length can be difficult to introduce in
After the physical examination, diagnostics, and appropriate
the neck area of cats and a through-the-needle technique
preanesthetic therapy, the owners should be informed of the
might be necessary for insertion of a jugular catheter after
risks associated with the planned procedure. They can be
induction of anesthesia. For placement of a central venous
asked to sign a written informed consent to perform anesthe-
catheter intended for long-term use, commercial human pedi-
sia and surgery. This procedure will assure proper client
atric catheter kits are suitable. Catheter lengths should not
communication in the light of increasing numbers of liability
exceed 12 cm in the average-sized cat to avoid placement of
trials. The results of the preanesthetic assessment and ASA
the catheter tip into the right atrium.
classification should also be documented in combination with
Preparation of the catheter area depends on the type of
an anesthetic record (Fig. 17-1). Undocumented measures are
catheter used and intended duration of catheter placement.
considered non-existent in cases of litigation. The protocol
The hair should be clipped around the vessel to be catheter-
ized, and the clipped area prepared with an antiseptic solu-
tion, and anesthetic maintenance, including time of adminis-
tion. The area is surgically draped and sterile gloves are worn
tration, drugs used, and route of administration.
when using a cut-down technique or inserting long catheters
Food should be withheld for 8-12 hours in adult cats in
 using guidewires (Seldinger technique).
preparation for scheduled surgical procedures. Fasting time
The catheter is fixed by tape to the limb, or is sutured to
is reduced to 1-2 hours in animals younger than 5 weeks,
the skin of the neck. It is flushed with heparinized saline (2
and suckling kittens are left with the queen to reduce the risk
of hypoglycemia. Fasting will reduce the chance of pre- and
clotting and obstruction of the catheter. To avoid accidental
intraoperative vomiting and possible aspiration of gastric
extraction of the catheter the infusion line should also be
contents and reflux esophagitis. A full stomach will also
secured to the body of the animal. A variety of different
impair ventilation and cardiac filling by compression of the
catheter types and connectors are available to provide unre-
lung and the caudal vena cava. Water should be available
stricted access to the vein with concurrent fluid administra-
until induction of anesthesia to avoid disturbance of the fluid
 tion. The catheter is protected with a bandage, is inspected
balance. The exact body weight of the cat is determined for
 and redressed every 24 hours, and is removed if there are
calculation of doses for sedatives, anesthetics, and fluid
signs of inflammation (fever thrombophlebitis).
rates.
17.4 Premedication
17.3 Venous access
Preanesthetic medication serves several purposes, including
Venous access is necessary for safe and effective administra-
reduction of stress and decreasing anesthetic drug require-
tion for the majority of anesthetics, and for fluid administra-
ments. The choice of drugs used can have a significant influ-
tion during anesthesia. Accessible veins in the cat include the
ence on the induction and maintenance of anesthesia, and the
cephalic, saphenous, femoral, and recurrent tarsal vein. For
recovery phase.
blood sampling the external jugular vein is easily accessible
and it can also be used for placement of central venous
17.4.1 Sedation
catheters.
Indwelling catheters using the over-the-needle technique
  o sa  s sss ro 
with sizes 20 and 22G and a length of 1.5 cm are suitable for
cholamines, which results in increased anesthetic require-
the peripheral veins in cats (Fig. 17-2). In uncastrated males
ments, and consequently more severe cardiovascular
with very thick skin, perforation of the skin with a hypoder-
depression. Catecholamines also contribute to arrhythmia
mic needle is sometimes necessary to avoid damage to the 
 formation in combination with certain anesthetics (i.e., thio-
 pental, halothane). Therefore, preanesthetic calming of the
small animals or dehydrated or hypovolemic cats. Prepara-
 cat not only makes handling easier but also makes anesthesia
180
Part 5: The surgical patient
ANESTHETICRECORD
PAGE
of
DATE:
SURGEON:
ANESTHETIST:
CLIENT#
PROCEDURE:
POSITION:RLATLLATV-DD-V
PATIENT NAME:
BODY
TEMP:
PULSE:
RESP:
PCV:
TPP:
MM/CRT:
SPECIES:
BREED:
WT:
ASA STATUS
OTHER PE or LAB:
ACILITY:
12345
FASTED:length
HISTORYOFRECENTMEDICATIONS:
Y
N
PRE-ANESTHETIC AGENT(S)
INDUCTION AGENT(S)
GENT
DOSE(MG)
ROUTE
TIME
AGENT
DOSE(MG)
ROUTE
TIME
TIME:
TYPE:
RATE:
IV2
TYPE:
RATE:
Bair Hugger
Circ. Water Bla
NITROUS OXIDE - L/min
NO
OXYGEN
FLOW
L/min
VAPORIZER
X-NILES
6
AGENT:
 DESFLURANE
厂
ISOFLURANE
E
SEVOFLURANE
厂
HALOTHANE
SYMBOLS
PULSE
RESP
ET C02A
SP O2
■
BLOOD PRESSURE
80
SYSTOLICY
MEAN
.60
DIASTOLIC^
DIRECT
L
INDIRECT
DOPPLER
.20
TIMES
TOTAL ANES:
PROCEDURE:
EXTUBATION:
00
STERNAL:
STANDING:
AIRWAYMAINTENANCI
JETTUBE
L MASK
SIZE:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
 CIRCLE .MECH VEN
NON-REBREATHING
CATHETERS:
3219
TYPE:
SIZE
TYPE:
POST-OP AGENTS:
REMARKS
Figure 17-1 Anesthesia record for documentation of the preanesthetic evaluation, anesthetic protocol, and monitoring.
17: Anesthesia
181
Figure 17-2
deepen sedation and provide analgesia. In contrast to thio-
Different styles of
pental, the induction dose of propofol was not reduced by
 Catheters suitable for
 acepromazine in cats (7). Dilution (1:10) of the commercial
cats. (A) Butterfly
 1% solution of acepromazine is suggested to improve proper
needle with
extension; (B) plain
dosing in cats. Acepromazine has no specific antagonist and
over-the-needle
in cases of overdose and severe hypotension palliative treat-
catheter: (C) catheter
ment with intravenous fluid therapy for volume replacement
with side-port; (D)
 should be instituted immediately.
catheter with flow-
switch mechanism.
Benzodiazepines
 Benzodiazepines bind to gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
F
receptors and stimulate inhibitory neurons in the brain and
spinal internuncial neurons. They have anticonvulsant, anx-
iolytic, and muscle relaxant activities, and they produce seda-
tion and amnesia in humans with minimal cardiovascular and
respiratory depression and with a wide safety margin. The
calming effects are unreliable in healthy adult cats, and a state
 of abnormal behavior and euphoria occurs quite frequently.
Therefore, benzodiazepines are rarely used alone in healthy
cats. Benzodiazepines are often administered in conjunction
with ketamine to prevent seizures and muscle rigidity. Low
doses of benzodiazepines have been used to stimulate appetite
in anorexic cats.
safer. In cats there is often no clear differentiation between
 Diazepam exists in two different formulations. It is either
sedative premedication, induction of anesthesia, and total
intravenous anesthesia (TIVA). The same drugs or drug com-
dissolved in propylene glycol, known as Valium (Roche), or
binations are often used and the overall effect is mainly dose-
it is available as an emulsion with soya bean oil, and known
 as Diazemuls ( Roche). The formulation with propylene glycol
dependent. Drug dosages and drug combinations are
(Valium) is more stable and an open vial can be used over
summarized in Tables 17-3 and 17-4.
several days; however the propylene glycol can cause throm-
bophlebitis, pain on intravenous injection, and cardiovascu-
Phenothiazines
lar depression when used in high doses. The oily or emulsion
The most widely used member of this class of neuroleptics is
formulation (Diazemuls) is not suitable for intramuscular
acepromazine. Other examples include chlorpromazine and
 injection, and it should not be mixed with other drugs prior
 promazine. Their mechanism of action depends on antago-
to injection. Diazepam is also available for rectal administra-
nism at excitatory dopamine receptors and at alpha adren-
tion, which can be useful in seizuring cats without venous
ergic receptors. Acepromazine induces muscle relaxation and
access.
reduction of spontaneous activity. The degree of sedation
Midazolam is a water-soluble benzodiazepine with a rapid
with acepromazine can be very variable, and higher doses
elimination half-life. It can be administered via either the
only prolong the duration of action. Acepromazine exerts
intramuscular (IM) or the intravenous (IV) route. It has a
antiemetic effects and this makes it a useful premedicant in
rapid onset of action and is rapidly absorbed after IM injec-
combination with opioids. Hypothalamic thermoregulation
tion in cats (7, 8). About 50% of awake cats responded with
-radaq ro euauiodu on ien au ausodsipand passaidap si
euphoric behavior after various doses of midazolam given IV
thermia, so body temperature should be monitored.
 or IM (8). The combination of ketamine and midazolam is
High doses of chlorpromazine were found to lower the
well tolerated for IM injection.
threshold for seizures (6), and it is not recommended to use
acepromazine in known epileptics, head trauma patients, and
prior to myelography. Acepromazine also lowers systemic
Benzodiazepine antagonists
blood pressure by reducing vascular tone, and it reduces the
It is not usually necessary to antagonize the benzodiazepine
packed cell volume.
effects in cats, but it can be useful to use an antagonist in the
 Acepromazine lacks analgesic effects and for most indica-
case of an inadvertent overdose resulting in central nervous
tions it is combined with an opioid or with ketamine to
system and respiratory depression or excessive euphoria/
182
 Part 5: The surgical patient
Drug
Dose (mg/kg)
Route
Comments
Acepromazine
1-3
PO
 Reduction of spontaneous activity, dose-dependent mild to deep
0.02-0.2
IM/IV
sedation, non-painful procedures, travel sickness
SC unreliable
Onset: 15-20 minutes, duration: 3-4 (6) hours
Contraindications: hypovolemia, seizure activity, severe anemia
Diazepam
0.1-0.5
IV
 Unreliable sedation, potent muscle relaxation, combine with 
Midazolam
0.1-0.5
SC/IM/IV
 ketamine or butorphanol, give immediately prior to induction
Climazolam
0.1-0.5
SC/IM/IV
of anesthesia
Xylazine
0.2-0.5 (1.0)
SC/IM
 Dose-dependent mild to deep sedation, analgesia
 Medetomidine/
0.03-0.08
SC/IM
Dose-dependent mild to deep sedation, analgesia
Dexmedetomidine
0.02-0.04
Romifidine
0.1-0.2
IM
 Dose-dependent mild to deep sedation, analgesia
Acepromazine
0.02-0.03
IM
 Dose-dependent mild to moderate sedation, analgesia
+ Buprenorphine
0.012
Acepromazine
0.02-0.03
IM
 Dose-dependent mild to moderate sedation, analgesia
+ L-methadone
0.1-0.3
Acepromazine
0.03
IM
Moderate to deep sedation, sometimes lack of muscle relaxation
+ Ketamine
10
Midazolam
0.2
IM/IV
 Moderate to deep sedation, transition to anesthesia
+ Ketamine
5-10
Midazolam
0.2
IM/IV
Mild to moderate sedation
+ Butorphanol
0.2
Xylazine
0.5
IM
 Moderate to deep sedation, transition to anesthesia
+ Ketamine
5-(10)
Medetomidine
0.05
IM
 Moderate to deep sedation, transition to anesthesia
+ Ketamine
5
Romifidine
0.1
IM
 Moderate to deep sedation, transition to anesthesia
+ Ketamine
5
Table 17-3. Drugs and drug combinations used for premedication and sedation in cats; PO, peroral; SC, subcutaneous; IM, intramuscular; IV,
intravenous.
excitation. The available antagonists are non-competitive
Alpha, agonists
antagonists at the GABA receptor.
 Flumazenil has a rapid onset of action within 2-4 minutes,
Alphaz agonists act on central and peripheral alphaz adreno-
and in humans the elimination half-life is similar to mid-
receptors and partially, with low affinity, on alpha adreno-
azolam. Redosing might be necessary to antagonize a large
receptors. Their central effects mediate analgesia, sedation,
 dose of benzodiazepines. No data are available on antago-
 and muscle relaxation with minimal respiratory depression.
nist/agonist ratios for cats. In dogs it is 26:1 for diazepam
Unfortunately, dose-dependent cardiovascular depression,
and 13:1 for midazolam (9). Titration to effect might be
including bradycardia and bradyarrhythmias, is associated
necessary in a cat with severe central nervous system
with the use of alphaz agonists. These is most prominent after
depression.
intravenous injection. Administration by the IM route is
 Sarmazenil has similar properties to flumazenil but with a
therefore preferred. Other effects include stimulation of the
longer duration of action. This makes it more suitable to
i   n  z r rdn
 antagonize the long-lasting effects of high doses of benzodi-
agonists have the characteristic that their sedative effects
a ond Auo m asop qiu a e os d e q1
  s uq s iiot po oi asop is 
duration of action. Other side-effects of alphaz agonists to
success.
consider in compromised cats are hyperglycemia and diuresis.
17:Anesthesia
183
and/or maintenance of anesthesia 
Table 17-4. Injectable
.n
Alphaz agonist and ketamine combination not
use
laryngeal
recommended for concurrent IV injection,
Dose reduction depending on premedication
m pue saieis suaoaodaq ui sn iou ol
Not recommended without premedication 
uoeqnun pue uoneiuualddns uaaxo
Possible histamine release, with paw, l
Minimal cardiovascular suppression
Possible excitation during recovery
Minimal cardiovascular depression
[n nom psn aq osie 
Possible dysphoric recoveries
Can cause tachyarrhythmia
Do not use in hypovolemia
 because of muscle rigidity
 All ketamine protocols:
Adrenal suppression
benzodiazepines)
 cardiac disease
High-risk patients
Comments
TIVA, total intravenous anesthesia; CRI, constant rate infusion; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.
 Short surgical procedures
Induction of anesthesia
Induction of anesthesia
 Short minor procedures
Induction of anesthesia
Induction of anesthesia
(30-40 minutes)
(20-30 minutes)
(30-40 minutes)
(30-40 minutes)
TIVA maintenance
TIVA maintenance
Induction
Induction
Route  Purpose
Induction
TIVA
CRI
IM
M
2
2
2
2
0.2-0.5 mg/kg/min
0.1-0.15 mg/kg/min
0.05-0.08 mg/kg
Redose 2-6 mg/kg
50-150 μg/kg per
3-9-(12) mg/kg
0.2-0.4 mg/kg
5-(10) mg/kg
0.2-0.5 mg/kg
dose to effect
dose to effect
0.5-2 mg/kg
0.25-1 mg/kg
 20-30 mg/kg
10-20 mg/kg
0.05 mg/kg
0.01 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg
mg/kg
3-5 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg
0.25 mg/kg
0.01 mg/kg
1 mg/kg
20 mg/kg
5 mg/kg
5 mg/kg
5 mg/kg
minute
Dose
2-6 1
+ Buprenorphine
or Butorphanol
Medetomidine
 alphadolone
+ Ketamine
Alphaxalone/
Anesthetics
Ketamine
+ Ketamine 
- Ketamine
Alphaxalene
Romifdine
+ Ketamine
Midazolam
Ketamine
Midazolam
+ Etomidate
Diazepam
Ketamine
Thiopental
Etomidate
Diazepam
Fentanyl
Xylazine
Propofol
+
184   Part 5: The surgical patient
When using alphaz agonists with or before general anesthesia
 Alphaz antagonist
Dose
their potent anesthetic-sparing effects need to be taken into
 account. They are powerful drugs which have to be used with
Atipamezole after medetomidine:
80-600 μg/kg SC/IM
due consideration to exploit their advantages. Alphaz ago-
Atipamezole after xylazine:
200 μg/kg SC/IM
nists should not be used in animals with cardiac disease,
Yohimbine after medetomidine:
 500 μg/kg IV
hypovolemia (shock), and endotoxemia.
Yohimbine after xylazine:
100-200 μg/kg IV
Xylazine is the least potent alphaz agonist used in veteri-
Tolazoline after xylazine:
2 mg/kg IV
nary medicine, meaning that a higher dose rate is required to
obtain the same effect than with a more potent drug. After
Table 17-5. Documented alphaz antagonist doses for cats
 IM and SC administration the incidence of vomiting in cats
is high.
Romifidine has higher alphaz/alpha selectivity than xyla-
zine, it has a longer duration of action, and produces less
for general anesthetics, and help to obtain a smooth and
muscle relaxation when compared to xylazine at equipotent
 pain-free recovery. Pre-emptive analgesia will improve anal-
doses.
gesic effectiveness by counteracting peripheral and central
Medetomidine is the most selective alphaz agonist in clini-
 sensitization. The most important class of drugs used periop-
cal use. It is a racemic mixture, with the D-isomer being the
eratively are the opioids, followed by the non-steroidal anti
active ingredient. Dexmedetomidine represents the purifed
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). A detailed description of
D-isomer of medetomidine and it is twice as potent as the
perioperative analgesia is given in Chapter 18.
racemic mixture. Dexmedetomidine, particularly, seems to be
suitable as an anesthetic and analgesic adjunct, and as an
analgesic given by low-dose infusion to minimize cardiovas-
17.4.3 Anticholinergics
cular and sedative effects.
Anticholinergics block acetylcholine at muscarinic sites, and
Alpha, antagonists
therefore block parasympathetic transmission at postgangli-
onic nerve terminals. This leads to a decrease in oral, gastric,
An often-cited advantage of alphaz agonists is that they are
and respiratory secretions, reduction of bronchial tone and
 true competitive antagonists available to be used in case of an
-pan Aq aien ieau ui aseio ue o jsans
emergency or to shorten recovery. However, it should be
tion of the vagal influence on the heart, and mydriasis by
noted that in a healthy animal without anesthetic complica
tions antagonizing the sedative and analgesic effects will often
central activity. The routine use of anticholinergic premedica-
tion is not necessary, but can be indicated in some instances.
have no advantage, and might leave an overstimulated or
It reduces disease or drug (i.e., ketamine)-related salivation,
painful animal. The dose required to antagonize a specifc
or increased bronchial secretions to avoid airway obstruc-
alphaz agonist depends on species, dose of agonist used, time
tion. It can also be benefcial in surgical procedures,
of administration, and degree of desired antagonism. Intrave.
which might elicit vagal reflexes (surgery in the head and
nous administration of an antagonist can lead to tachycardia,
hypertension, defecation, vomiting, and hyperexcitability.
neck area).
The only licensed alphaz antagonist for use in cats is atipa-
A controversial issue is the use of concurrent administra-
tion of anticholinergics to prevent bradycardia induced by
mezole (Antisedan, Orion). Atipamezole has high alphaz/
alphaz agonists. Bradycardia might be resolved by this
e Ae ou m ds ai s p As t
approach and heart rates improve, but cardiac work can be
other receptors. To antagonize medetomidine sedation, 2-4
E isueae durnd on se irea au uaum paseanou Aaaiss
times the preceding dose of medetomidine is required. The
high vascular resistance during the hypertensive phase.
current recommendation in cats is to give a volume equivalent
Atropine can be given by the SC/IM and IV route. After IV
to half of the medetomidine dose. The recommended route of
administration is IM or SC and sedation will be antagonized
injection an initial increase in vagal tone can occur; therefore
IM injection is recommended when used in a therapeutic
within 5-10 minutes after injection. Documented alphaz
manner. Atropine crosses the blood-brain barrier readily and
antagonist doses for cats (10) are listed in Table 17-5.
induces mydriasis by central actions, and it can also induce
17.4.2 Analgesia
tachycardia. Recommended doses are 0.02 mg/kg IV or 0.04-
0.1 mg/kg SC/IM. High doses can cause central excitation.
Analgesics given as part of the premedication serve several
Contraindications are glaucoma and predisposition  for
 purposes. They will improve sedation, reduce requirements 
tachyarrhythmias (i.e., hyperthyroidism).
17: Anesthesia
185
Glycopyrrolate is a large polar molecule with a quarternary
dilute solution of 1-1.25% to avoid venous irritation. The
ammonium structure that does not readily cross the blood-
 distribution/redistribution kinetics of thiopental into differ-
brain barrier and the placenta. This lack of permeability 
 ent body tissues result in rapid recovery after a single dose,
means it does not induce mydriasis and is suitable for preg-
 but prolonged recoveries occur after multiple injections or
nant cats. It can be given by the SC/IM/IV route with an onset
infusions.
of action within 1 minute after IV injection. The duration
of action is longer than with atropine (3-4 hours). Glycopyr-
17.5.2 Propofol
rolate is less likely to induce tachycardia than atropine
but initial arrhythmias can occur immediately after injection.
Propofol is a rapidly acting alkylphenol producing a short
Recommended doses are 0.01 mg/kg IV or 0.02 mg/
duration of anesthesia with rapid recovery, even after mul-
kg IM/SC.
tiple doses. Propofol is currently formulated as a white oil-
in-water emulsion. This emulsion is an ideal culture medium
17.5 Injectable anesthetics
for bacteria. Open vials should therefore be refrigerated and
should not be used once they have been opened for more
Injectable anesthetics can be used for induction followed by
than 24 hours. Special disinfection procedures to avoid
inhalational anesthesia, or as the sole anesthetic used to
 contamination have been used to prolong usability of open
maintain general anesthesia (TIVA; total intravenous anes-
vials.
thesia). There is a dose-dependent transition from sedation
 Intramuscular injection does not induce anesthesia and
 t0 general anesthesia for some injectable anesthetics. Dose 
 inadvertent perivascular injection is not irritating. Too rapid
rates required for induction and maintenance of anesthesia
 an injection of propofol can lead to apnea, so an injection
 depend on the premedication given and individual sensitivity.
time of 2 minutes is recommended for induction doses, to be
Fragmented dosing of the calculated amount of anesthetic
able to titrate to effect and to avoid apnea. In contrast to
helps to prevent overdosing.
dogs, the induction dose of propofol is not reduced to a sig-
nificant extent by acepromazine premedication (12), but
17.5.1 Barbiturates
opioids and alphaz agonists reduce propofol requirements in
cats significantly.
i is    s i
 The most prominent cardiorespiratory effects are moderate
anesthetics used in veterinary medicine for more than 60
hypotension, which can cause problems in hypovolemic cats,
 and its use should be avoided in shock patients. Respiratory
 high doses are required to produce surgical anesthesia. Bar-
-xo ieare u dop e pue eaudeiadau qm uossrd
ation occur after repeated or continuous propofol dosing.
tion occurs.
Oxygen supplementation is therefore advisable during pro-
Pentobarbital has been used widely in cats in veterinary
longed propofol administration. Cats have a relative defi-
practice. Approximately 2 hours of surgical anesthesia result
ciency of glucuronide conjugation, which is required for
from one IV injection of 25 mg/kg pentobarbital. Pentobar-
 metabolism of phenolic compounds, and feline hemoglobin
bital, however, has a narrow safety margin and doses three 
times the anesthetic dose (72 mg/kg) are lethal in cats. Recov-
 propofol anesthesia on consecutive days or prolonged infu-
ery from pentobarbital anesthesia is very prolonged, and as
sions will result in significant Heinz body formation, anorexia,
such it is no longer recommended for clinical anesthesia in
diarrhea, facial edema, depression, and prolonged recovery
cats. Its main use in veterinary medicine is as a euthanatizing
from anesthesia (13). When propofol is used for induction
agent, causing very rapid loss of consciousness.
 and maintenance it should be titrated to effect similar to an
Thiopental (thiopentone) as the sole anesthetic agent
 inhalant anesthetic because of the variable influence of pre-
requires doses up to 20 mg/kg when given slowly. Rapid
medicants, concurrent analgesics, and surgical stimulation.
injection of a lower dose (5-6 mg/kg) results in about 10
The maintenance rate for TIVA ranges from 0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg
minutes of anesthesia, which is usually suffcient to enable
per minute (or 2 mg/kg every 5 minutes).
endotracheal intubation and maintenance under gaseous
anesthesia. Thiopental has no analgesic effects, and causes
17.5.3 Dissociatives
 dose-dependent cardiovascular and respiratory depression as
well as arrhythmias (11). Thiopental is therefore best used
The phencyclidine derivatives ketamine and tiletamine differ
with an acepromazine/opioid premedication to reduce the
from the classic anesthetic substances. These agents produce
required dose (5-10 mg/kg). Thiopental should be used as a
 dissociative anesthesia by functional dissociation, character-
186
 Part 5: The surgical patient
ized by somatic analgesia with very superficial sleep. They
Alphaxalone (Alfaxan; Jurox, Australia) has recently been
induce a state of catalepsy, an akinetic state with loss of
introduced for anesthesia induction in dogs and cats, although
orthostatic reflexes. The tone of the muscles is increased and
it has been used for some years in Australia and New Zealand.
visceral analgesia is insufficient. Therefore dissociatives alone
The alphaxalone molecule is solubilized in the Alfaxan for-
cannot produce a state of surgical anesthesia. They have to
mulation using 2o-hydroxypropyl beta cyclodextrin (HPBCD).
be combined with a muscle relaxant and analgesic to prevent
Cyclodextrins are complex polysaccharides derived from
muscle stiffness and convulsions.
starch that have a hydrophobic center for lipophilic drugs
Ketamine is a water-soluble agent, with a standard con-
like alphaxalone. Unlike Cremophor EL, HPBCD does not
centration of 10% (100 mg/ml) for veterinary use. Racemic
cause histamine release in dogs and cats. Alfaxan provides
ketamine is a scheduled drug in the USA because of possible
smooth inductions and less excitement during recovery, and
abuse by humans. Ketamine is effective after SC, IM, and
has a shorter duration of action.
 IV administration, and also by transmucutaneous uptake
from the oral mucous membranes. This flexibility makes
ketamine suitable for use in cats that are diffcult to handle.
17.5.5 Etomidate
Intramuscular injection of ketamine is painful and often
Etomidate is an imidazole derivative inducing hypnosis
resented by cats. Laryngeal and pharyngeal reflexes are
without analgesia. Etomidate induces very little cardiovascu-
retained after administration, but salivation is often profuse
lar and respiratory depression and is well suited for use in
in cats, and airway patency has to be monitored closely.
high-risk patients. It induces myoclonus without premedica-
Spontaneous, athetotic (writhing or jerky) movements may
tion. Etomidate is rapidly hydrolyzed and has little cumula-
occur unrelated to surgical stimulation or lightening of anes-
tive effects, making it suitable for constant-rate infusion.
thesia. Ketamine exerts indirect sympathomimetic effects
However, etomidate suppresses adrenal steroidogenesis and
resulting in cardiovascular stimulation with increased heart
 is therefore not recommended for long-term use. A single
rates and blood pressures similar to awake blood pressures
injection can inhibit adrenal function for several hours but
in the healthy animal. But it has also direct negative inotro-
this lack of stress response after a single injection is well toler-
pic effects on the myocardium, which might predominate in
ated. Etomidate is available as a solution with 35% propyl-
the compromised  animal.  Ketamine-induced  respiratory
ene glycol and similar to propofol as an emulsion in soya
depression is minimal at clinical doses but it induces an
bean oil, egg lecithin (Lipuro, Braun, Germany). The emul-
sion requires aseptic handling procedures and an open vial
 alternating with apnea), and overdosing causes apnea. Ket-
should not be used after it has been open for more than 24
amine increases cerebral blood flow and intracranial pres-
iua rae panrodan uaq seu siskioau anov 'snou
sure and therefore should be avoided in patients with
injection in cats, which is related to the osmolality changes
suspected head trauma. It is also avoided in cats with hyper-
 induced by rapid injection of the propylene glycol-containing
trophic cardiomyopathy because it increases myocardial
solution. Rapid IV injection can also be painful and perivas-
 oxygen consumption. Domestic cats excrete the majority of
 cular injection can cause phlebitis.
ketamine unchanged via the kidney so recovery after large
doses or repeated doses of ketamine can be prolonged in
cats with renal dysfunction.
17.6 Inhalation anesthesia
Recovery from ketamine anesthesia can be associated with
increased sensitivity to external stimuli and increased motor
Inhalation anesthesia is the preferred technique for maintain-
activity, so cats should be allowed to recover in a quiet
ing general anesthesia for surgical procedures, because the
room.
depth of anesthesia can easily be altered and drug accumula-
tion is not a problem with modern inhalation anesthetics.
Administration of inhalation anesthetics requires specialized
17.5.4 Alphaxalone/alphadolone
equipment, and an understanding of basic principles is neces-
Neuroactive steroids induce hypnosis and muscle relaxation
sary. The focus of this chapter is on the volatile anesthetics
via GABAa receptors enhancing the inhibitory effects of
currently in clinical use, including nitrous oxide (NzO), halo-
GABA. A combination of alphaxalone/alphadolone in Cre-
thane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane. Desflurane has also been
mophor EL was marketed as Saffan. Saffan administered
used in cats (14), but the costs of maintenance requirements
intravenously can induce histamine release which is related
for the sophisticated vaporizer make routine use in veterinary
 to the Cremophor EL. Transient hyperemia, and facial and
m pean sh jo %s kixodde ui ro eaa md
 defined as general anesthesia is directly related to the partial
Saffan. Saffan has therefore been taken off the market.
 pressure of the anesthetic in the brain, and depth of anesthe-
17: Anesthesia
187
sia varies with changes in this partial pressure and not with
Oxygen concentrations are always monitored when using
changes in concentration or total amount of the anesthetic in
NO in low-flow systems.
the brain tissue.
 Halothane was introduced in the 1950s and is still widely
The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of an inhaled
used in veterinary anesthesia. Halothane has a fairly rapid
 anesthetic is the major index of anesthetic potency. It can be
action with a moderate potency. It is best delivered by a
described as the medium effective dose (EDsp) of an inhala-
precision vaporizer. Halothane depresses respiration and che-
tion anesthetic, where 50% of animals respond and 50% do
moreceptor sensitivity in a dose-dependent manner with
not respond with purposeful movements to a standard supra-
decreased responses to hypoxia and hypercapnea. It also
maximal stimulus (i.e., tail clamp). MAC values are deter-
 seems to reduce bronchial tone, which might be an advantage
mined in healthy animals, and anesthetic requirements may
in asthmatic cats. Cardiovascular function is depressed dose-
vary with disease and individual cat. MAC can be lowered
 dependently with reduction of cardiac output, stroke volume,
by NzO, analgesics and sedatives, hypothermia, and preg-
and arterial pressures. Heart rates remain stable within a
nancy, whereas central stimulation (i.e., atropine), hyperther-
clinical dose range but cardiac output is reduced by reduction
 mia, and hypernatremia will increase MAC. MAC-sparing
in myocardial contractility. Halothane predisposes the heart
measures are highly desirable because cardiovascular depres-
 to premature ventricular contractions in the presence of cat-
sion will be reduced by lower concentrations of volatile
echolamines. Halothane increases cerebral blood flow with a
anesthetics.
concurrent increase in intracranial pressure, and it depresses
autoregulation of cerebral blood flow. Its use should there-
fore be avoided in head trauma patients. Liver function is
17.6.1 Pharmacological characteristics of
reduced both by direct effects of halothane and by reduction
of liver blood fow during anesthesia, thus prolonging the
volatile anesthetics
effects of concurrently used drugs. Halothane should not be
The relatively non-specific central depression exerted by the
used in animals with compromise of liver function. Transient
volatile anesthetics is always accompanied by cardiovascular
increase in liver enzymes can occur after anesthesia; however,
and respiratory depression.
 severe liver damage is a very rare event. Halothane can trigger
NO is an odorless gas at room temperature and is pro-
 malignant hyperthermia in sensitive animals but this effect is
vided as compressed gas in tanks. NzO can be characterized
extremely rare in cats.
as a rapidly acting anesthetic with a very low potency in cats.
 Isoflurane is a halogenated ether, allowing rapid induction
At atmospheric pressure NzO cannot be used as the sole
and rapid changes in anesthetic depths. Therefore, isoflurane
anesthetic agent; however as an adjunctive anesthetic with
seems to be suited for mask or chamber induction, but it has
other anesthetics it has several advantages. NzO has good
 a pungent smell and cats can become agitated or hold their
analgesic effects with only minimal cardiovascular and respi-
 breath during mask induction. Isofurane has a similar vapor 
ratory depression contributing to MAC reduction of other
paidepe aq ues siaziodea aueioie os aueieu oi arnssard
volatile anesthetics. NzO has to be used in high concentration
 to be used with isoflurane after recalibration. Alveolar venti-
to achieve an analyesic effect. Nitrogen in air-filled spaces has
lation is depressed in a dose-dependent manner with relative
lower blood solubility than NzO; thus more NzO will be
 constancy in respiratory frequency but decreased tidal volume.
available for exchange than N, will leave, and volume exten-
Cardiac output is better maintained with isoflurane than with
sion will occur. Therefore, NzO is contraindicated in intesti-
 halothane at the same anesthetic depths, and with isoflurane
nal obstructions and pneumothorax.
the myocardium is not sensitized to catecholamine-induced
At the end of anesthesia, large amounts of NzO diffuse into
arrhythmias. A dose-related decrease in arterial blood pres-
the lungs and can displace oxygen (diffusion hypoxia). This
sure caused by vasodilation can be quite pronounced in cats.
effect can be prevented by keeping the cat on high oxygen
With isoflurane, cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure
flow rates for at least 5 minutes after the NzO has been turned
 are increased at doses above 1.2 MAC but autoregulation of
off. The use of NzO (at least 50% is required to achieve
cerebral blood flow in response to changes in systemic blood
analgesia) limits the amount of oxygen that can be delivered
 pressure seems to be maintained. Isoflurane can therefore be
to the patient, and at least 30% oxygen should be contained
used in patients with head trauma.
in the inspired gases. To insure appropriate oxygen delivery
Sevoflurane is a fluorinated ether allowing very rapid
to the tissues in patients requiring higher fractions of inspired
induction of anesthesia and changes in anesthetic depth. The
oxygen (anemia, shock), NzO is contraindicated. A similar
lack of pungency and the aromatic smell make it well toler-
 problem can occur with the use of NzO in low-flow anesthe-
ated for mask or chamber induction in cats. Sevoflurane has
shown dose-dependent cardiovascular depression in cats,
the patient, NzO can accumulate, and hypoxia can occur.
which is mainly attributable to myocardial depression. In one
188
 Part 5: The surgical patient
study, heart rates and systemic vascular resistance remained
flowmeter control knobs are color- and often touch-coded to
stable whereas stroke volume and mean arterial blood pres-
 avoid oxygen and NzO being confused. Within the flowmeter
 sures decreased (15). Sevoflurane does not sensitize the myo-
cylinder a ball or a rotor indicates the gas flow rate. The flow
cardium to the arrhythmogenic effects of catcholamines.
level is read from the center of the ball or the top of the rotor.
Respiratory depression is also dose-dependent and seems
sn assnd an sianamo al qanor ssd se au s
comparable to isoflurane. Cerebral blood flow and intracra-
further reduced to allow safe passage of gas into the patient's
nial pressure are minimally increased at clinical doses. Recov-
airways.
ery when sevoflurane is used alone is very rapid but can be
 A vaporizer converts a liquid anesthetic to the vapor state,
associated with excitement and paddling. This recovery
and adds a controlled amount of vapor to the carrier gas.
 period can be influenced by premedication or concurrently
Vaporizers can be positioned within the breathing system
used drugs.
(VIC) or after the flowmeter outside the breathing system
(VOC). Modern volatile anesthetics are most safely delivered
by precision vaporizers in a VOC position. Vaporizer output
17.6.2 Equipment
is very stable over a range of commonly used fresh gas flows
The administration of inhalational anesthetics requires a
until very low flow rates (<250 ml/min). Vaporizer perfor-
carrier gas including oxygen, an anesthetic vaporizing device,
 mance and calibration should be tested at least once a year.
and a patient breathing system. In-depth information on the
Adaptation of halothane vaporizers to use with isoflurane
construction of anesthetic machines, vaporizers, and breath-
(similar vapor pressure) is possible; however this requires
ing systems is not covered in this text and the reader is
cleaning and recalibration of the vaporizer by specialized
referred to other sources on this subject (16, 17).
companies. Otherwise cross-agent use is dangerous and
strongly discouraged.
 Most anesthetic machines have an oxygen flush which
Anesthetic machine
 allows the oxygen to bypass the vaporizer via a separate line,
A variety of different commercial veterinary and human anes-
directly to the common gas outlet. Pure oxygen is delivered
 thetic machines are available, from the very basic apparatus
 at high flow rates. This is useful in emergency situations, and
to sophisticated electronically regulated all-in-one anesthetic
can also be used to dilute the anesthetic concentration in the
and monitoring systems. The basic components of all these
breathing system at the end of anesthesia. The oxygen flush
machines are the same. A source of oxygen and NzO, a gas-
has to be used with caution in combination with non-rebreath-
regulating and measuring device, and a vaporizer to control
ing systems, because the high flow rates produced by the flush
vaporization of the liquid anesthetic (Fig. 17-3) must be
 are directly transferred into the patient and can easily damage
present.
the lung of the cat.
 In the low-pressure system of the anesthetic machine the
Before using any anesthetic machine or breathing system in
 gas first passes through the flowmeter. By using the flowmeter
an animal a short function check should become routine. The
the amount of gas (lmin) delivered to the patient can be
 pressure relief valve should be closed and the machine and the
altered. For each gas a calibrated flowmeter is present. The
breathing system should be pressurized with oxygen to
Figure 17-3  Diagram illustrating
the basic elements of an
anesthetic machine and the
different breathing systems.
(A) The anesthetic machine has
an oxygen source (1), pressure
regulator (2) flowmeter (3), and
vaporizer (4). (B) Rebreathing
(circle) system with unidirectional
valves (5). reservoir bag (6), soda
lime canister (7), and pressure
relief valve (8) (C) Non-
rebreathing system with pressure
relief valve (9) and reservoir bag
(10).
10
C
17: Anesthesia
189
OO ro un pnos annssd s (iequ) ohu o
Systems
Gas flow rates
seconds without further gas supply. Any leak present can be
measured by the amount of oxygen needed to maintain this
Induction
pressure (flowmeter setting). The leak should not exceed
Chamber induction
5 Vmin
300 ml/min. It should also be ensured that enough oxygen is
 Mask induction
300 ml/kg per minute or
available and the vaporizer is flled with the proper anesthetic.
1-3 Imin per cat
After intravenous induction
200-500 m/kg per minute
Maintenance
Breathing systems
Rebreathing system
25-500 ml/kg per minute
The breathing system carries the anesthetic gas mixture to
 Bain system
200 ml/kg per minute
 the patient and draws off expired gases. An important feature
 Other non-rebreathing
200-300 ml/kg per minute
of the breathing system is the removal of expired carbon
systems
dioxide (COz). There are two major ways of removing CO:
frst, absorption of CO, via a chemical reaction with soda
Table 17.6. Recommended gas flow rates
lime in combination with rebreathing systems; and second,
elution of CO, in non-rebreathing systems.
 per minute for a cat). However with this mode of operation
the advantages of rebreathing humidifed and warm gas will
 Rebreathing systems
be abolished.
Fresh gas flow rates will vary during induction and main-
 Rebreathing systems allow partial or complete rebreathing of
tenance phases. During induction higher flow rates are used
exhaled gases. Circle systems are most commonly used. The
 than during maintenance. This is necessary to saturate the
gas flow in this system is unidirectional. A circle system con-
anesthetic circuit with anesthetic gas and to wash out the
 tains unidirectional valves, a reservoir bag, a pressure relief
nitrogen from the lung and bloodstream of the patient.
valve, CO, absorber (soda lime canister), a pressure manom-
The chosen carrier gas flow rate will affect the amount of
eter, and breathing hoses connected by a Y-piece (Fig. 17-3).
anesthetic received by the animal. Low fresh gas flow rates
oe An s a a ss rq a
result in more rebreathing of expired gas, which contains
economic use of anesthetic gases when operated in a low-flow
lower anesthetic concentrations. The lower the fresh gas flow
fashion, and preserve airway moisture and body heat by recy-
rate, the lower the anesthetic concentration with the same
cling exhaled gases. These are factors of particular concern in
vaporizer setting. Therefore, precision vaporizer settings have
small patients like cats. However, the large volume of this
to be increased when a low-flow approach has been chosen.
system, the valves, and the COz absorber pose a significant
 In addition, low flows will make a system less dynamic,
resistance to breathing in cats. Some modern pediatric circle
meaning that changes in vaporizer setings will only change
breathing systems with small-volume absorber and small-
anesthetic concentrations in the system very slowly. If a more
diameter breathing hoses have a low resistance to breathing.
rapid change is desired, gas flow rates have to be increased
but most cats in a surgical plane of anesthesia require mechan-
(Table 17-6).
ical ventilation to move the gas volume and avoid rebreathing
of COz-containing gas when using a circle system.
Non-rebreathing systems
Circle breathing systems can be used in different ways. A
low-flow approach facilitates the advantages of partial
For most non-rebreathing systems, flow rates of at least
rebreathing of respired gases. With this mode, the system is
 300 ml/kg per minute are required to function properly.
not totally closed, and some gas leaves the circle via the pres-
These systems have the advantage of a low resistance to
sure relief valve (semi-closed). Low-flow anesthesia in cats
breathing. They come in many different designs, but basically
can be performed with gas flows of 25-50 ml/kg per minute
they all fit in the original Mapleson classification (Fig. 17-4).
with special anesthetic machines (flowmeter calibration,
The systems differ in the position of the fresh gas inlet, the
vaporizer output). However with the commonly used anes-
reservoir bag, and where the exhalation valve is positioned:
thetic machines, fresh gas flows should reach 200-300 ml/kg
this determines the required gas flow rates. In the valve-less
per minute to allow safe inhalational anesthesia. In a low-
non-rebreathing systems the high gas flow rate ensures COz
flow system NzO can accumulate, and oxygen flows have to
elution. Light-weight systems with the exhalation valve
-u ukxo sixodku pio oi a rad ay/u oi-oo1 aq
distant from the patient's head (Mapleson D and E) are
centrations (<30%) in the inspired gas, when NO is used in
advantageous for cats (Ayres T-piece, Kuhn system, Bain
combination with oxygen (Table 17-6). Gas concentrations 
system). The coaxial Bain system (Mapleson D) (Fig. 17-5)
 is a special design with two concentric tubes. The inner tube
190
 Part 5: The surgical patient
inner tube. Expired gas is transported within the outer tube.
Figure 17-6 Induction chamber with connectors to fresh gas flow
F
from the anesthetic machine and to the scavenging system.
mask induction are alternatives. Induction in a see-through
or transparent chamber using a rapidly acting inhalational
F
 anesthetic like sevofurane might be less stressful than restraint
in a crush or squeeze cage in uncooperative cats (Fig. 17-6).
The drawback to chamber induction is that monitoring of
the animal's vital signs in the chamber can be diffcult.
 Mask induction with a tight-fitting face mask and isoflu-
rane or sevoflurane in oxygen or in an oxygen/N,O mixture
Figure 17-4 Clasification of non-rebreathing systems according to
can be used for induction of anesthesia, followed by intuba-
Mapleson (A-F) vary in placement of the reservoir and pressure relief
valve. Systems D (Kuhn system, coaxial Bain system) and E (Ayres T-
tion or by maintenance by mask for short procedures such
piece) are most commonly used in cats.
as blood sampling or radiography. When available, sevoflu
rane is preferred over isoflurane for mask induction because
of a more rapid onset of action and lack of pungency com-
carries the fresh gas and exhalation occurs via the outer tube,
's au un   rog s on prd
 thereby warming the fresh gas slightly. Special care has to be
vaporizer settings of 7-8% sevoflurane or 4-5% isoflurane
taken that the inner tube is not detached from the tube con-
are combined with gas flows of 3 Vmin in a non-rebreathing
nector to avoid rebreathing of CO,. The Bain system can be
system. As soon as the cat can be positioned in lateral recum-
operated with flow rates of 200 ml/kg per minute. Commer-
bency (1-3 minutes) vaporizer settings are reduced. Lower
cial light-weight pediatric non-rebreathing systems are avail-
 initial concentrations are recommended in debilitated patients,
 able and well suited for the cat.
and adapted to the individual patient (18).
17.6.3 Chamber and mask induction
17.6.4 Endotracheal intubation
Inhalation anesthesia is usually used for maintenance after
The upper airway of a cat is very delicate and easily damaged
induction with an intravenous anesthetic, but chamber and
 or blocked by secretions. Endotracheal intubation is the only
17: Anesthesia
191
way to achieve complete control of the airways during general
Figure 17-7 A small
 anesthesia. It allows direct oxygen supplementation and
blade laryngoscope is
 mechanical ventilation and protects the airways from aspira-
 used for endotracheal
intubation in the cat.
tion of gastric reflux, blood, and debris. Intubation in cats
The blade is used to
 can be associated with specifc problems. The larynx is very
depress the tongue
small and the protective reflexes are very well developed.
 and should not touch
Rough treatment of the larynx can lead to sweling and
 the larynx.
laryngeal spasm, which might cause problems during intuba-
tion, and also later in the recovery phase. Endotracheal intu-
 sxn i a  assd a i 
suppressed. This requires either very deep planes of anesthe-
sia, which is not without risk, or decreasing the sensitivity of
the larynx by superficial application of local anesthesia with
lidocaine. Most commercial lidocaine sprays contain high
concentrations of lidocaine (10% = 100 mg/ml) and excessive
spraying should be avoided.
Cats can be intubated in the lateral, prone, or supine posi-
tion. The prone position with the head extended and the
tongue pulled forward is the easiest way and allows good
visualization of the larynx facilitated by a laryngoscope with
a small blade (Fig. 17-7). The blade should only be used to
depress the base of the tongue and should not touch or
depress the epiglottis, because this action alone can cause
laryngeal spasm. Attempts to intubate are only made once
 the larynx opens. Some time has to be allowed for the topical
lidocaine to exert its effect.
Different styles of cuffed and uncuffed endotracheal tubes
are available for cats (Fig. 17-8). The commercial products
 made for human or veterinary anesthesia are usually too long
so the tube should be cut at the adapter side to avoid inadver-
tent endobronchial intubation or increased equipment dead
space. The endotracheal tube connector should be at the level
of the incisors. Tube sizes between 3.0 and 5.0 internal diam-
eter are suitable for adult cats. Some types of tubes are very
flexible and intubation is made easier by using a stylet to
stiffen the tube, but the stylet should not protrude over the tip
of the tube to avoid laceration of the trachea. The cuff should
lie in the cervical part of the trachea. Overinflation of endo-
tracheal tube cuffs can result in tracheal rupture and consecu-
tive strictures at the site of the cuff, regardless of cuff type. The
longest ruptures were associated with the use of high-volume,
low-pressure tubes (19). Therefore, cuffs should be filled with
care using a 2-ml syringe with the lowest possible volume
necessary to obtain a seal. For clinically normal adult cats the
average volume to obtain an airtight seal was 1.6 ml (19).
The endotracheal tube is securely tied around the head of
D
the cat with a gauze bandage to prevent inadvertent extrac-
Figure 17-8 Different styles of cuffed and uncuffed endotracheal
tion. As cats produce high amounts of saliva and mucus and
tubes suitable for use in the cat. (A) Low-volume, high-pressure cuff;
the endotracheal tubes are small, the tubes can easily become
(B) high-volume, low-pressure cuff; (C) uncuffed for very smmall animals
blocked in cats. Patency of the tube has to be regularly
Note the different shapes of the inflated cuffs, resulting in differences 
in contact area with the tracheal mucosa. (D) Special design of the pilot 
checked and excessive saliva should be removed with a
balloon (Lanz pressure-regulating valve) prevents pressure increase in
suction catheter.
the cuff during anesthesia with nitrous oxide.
192
Part 5: The surgical patient
Ventilator
Settings
 Parameter
Values
Tidal volume
5-20 ml/kg
Heart rate
 80-160 beats/min
 Respiratory rate
12-20 breaths/min
 Respiratory rate
15-30 breaths/min
 Minute volume
400-600 ml
 Tidal volume
15-20 ml/kg
 Peak inspiratory pressure
20 cm HO
Capillary refill time
<2 seconds
Inspiratory to expiratory time ratio
1:2 to 1:3
Mean arterial blood pressure
60-120 mmHg
Central venous pressure
0-5 cm HO
Table 17-7. Suggested ventilator settings in cats
Body temperature
35.0-40°C
SpO2
95-100%
PaO2
>60 mmHg
17.6.5 Ventilation
End-tidal cOz
25-50 mmHg
PacOz
25-60 mmHg
Anesthesia can usually be well maintained in cats under spon-
Fl0z
>30%
taneous respiration. In circumstances where mechanical res-
 Arterial pH
7.30-7.45
piration is necessary, the reservoir bag is replaced with a
ventilator. Ventilators suitable for use in cats (human pedi-
Table 17-8.
.Range of acceptable parameters in cats under general
atric, small-animal ventilators) come in varying designs
anesthesia
depending on the cycling mechanism and the mechanism
producing the inspiratory phase (pressure or flow generator).
However for safe use in cats, independent of the working
Figure 17-9 Eyeballs rotated
principles, the ventilator should be able to deliver small tidal
rostroventrally with mild dilation
volumes (20-200 ml) at a safe working pressure (10-60 cm
of the pupils during light and 
 HO) to avoid barotrauma to the lungs. Ventilator settings
moderate planes of anesthesia.
(Table 17-7) have to be adapted to the individual animal's
d uo paseq (u se-o) eudena ueiu on Ae
 pressures of COz in expired gas (end-tidal COz) or arterial
blood (PacOz).
anesthesia. The presence of the palpebral reflex and high tone
of the jaw muscles indicate a very light plane of anesthesia
17.7 Monitoring
in the cat. With ketamine anesthesia, muscle tone is not
reduced and the eyeball remains in a central position with
Monitoring of a patient undergoing general anesthesia begins
brisk palpebral reflexes; therefore these signs cannot be used
at induction of anesthesia, and continues during anesthesia
 to judge depth of anesthesia.
(at least every 10 minutes) and also after surgery until
Ventilation can be assessed by counting the respiratory
complete recovery (20). Observation should be instituted
rate, observation of chest excursions, or movement of the
after premedication in certain situations looking for
reservoir bag. Information on oxygenation is obtained from
vomiting, respiratory depression or excessive sedation for
mucous membrane color. Heart rate, pulse strength, and
example. A recent study of perioperative fatalities in small
capillary refll time will give information on circulation. In
animals revealed that 62% of anesthetic-related deaths in cats
general, cardiovascular and respiratory depression will
occurred in the immediate postoperative period (0-3 h),
increase with an increasing depth of anesthesia. However,
jeq Sunp Suouou panpar ro ou oi panejan Aqeqond
these signs can be unreliable in indicating depth of anesthesia
period (21).
as they may vary with the different combinations of anesthet-
Acceptable ranges of important parameters of cats under
ics and analgesics used.
 general anesthesia are summarized in Table 17-8.
17.7.2 Cardiovascular monitors
17.7.1 Physical monitoring
Esophageal stethoscope
Basic monitoring for all anesthetized cats should include
assessment of depth of anesthesia by testing palpebral reflexes,
A simple device for monitoring heart rate and rhythm is an
eyeball position, and jaw tone. With inhalation anesthetics,
 esophageal stethoscope. The stethoscope is introduced into
thiopental, and propofol, the eyeballs rotate rostroventrally
 the esophagus until the balloon at the end lies at the base of
during light and moderate planes of anesthesia (Fig. 17-9),
the heart. This position can easily be checked and controlled
and return to a central position with dilated pupils in deep
by auscultation via the stethoscope.
17: Anesthesia
193
Electrocardiogram
again. Theoretically, the pressure on the aneroid manometer
where the frst pulse sounds are heard is the systolic pressure.
Information on the electrical rhythm and rate of the heart is
The specifc sounds indicating diastolic pressure cannot be
obtained from an electrocardiogram using standard limb
heard in many cats. A cuff placed too loosely or too tightly
leads. Clip or adhesive electrodes are taped on the paws of
will result in overestimation or underestimation of blood
the cat. Placement of the electrodes should not interfere with
pressure. Comparison of the Doppler method with direct
the surgical intervention or cause artifacts by movement of
femoral artery pressures showed that it underestimated direct
the electrodes (i.e., breathing).
 systolic pressures by 14-25 mmHg (22, 23). The conclusion
is that the Doppler method seems to be more indicative for
Arterial blood pressure monitoring
mean arterial blood pressure than for systolic blood pressure
Usually arterial blood pressures during general anesthesia are
in cats.
lower than those in the awake state. Protocols using keta-
Systems using the oscillometric method function with self-
 mine, tiletamine, or high doses of alphaz agonists might
inflating cuffs. Systolic, diastolic, and mean arterial pressure
increase systemic arterial pressures. Decreased blood pressure
as well as heart rate are displayed on the monitors. The
can be related to decreased cardiac output or peripheral
median artery (thoracic limb) gives the best results for indi-
vasodilation or a combination of both. Arterial blood pres-
rect blood pressure measurements when using this method.
 sure can be determined by direct methods requiring catheter-
There are a variety of oscillometric systems made for human
ization of an artery or indirect methods using Doppler
 anesthesia that do not accurately reflect blood pressures in
ultrasound or oscillometric techniques.
The Doppler ultrasound probe can be placed over the meta-
cine (i.e., Dinamap) can give good results. Often no measure-
tarsal or metacarpal artery, on the plantar or palmar surface
ments are obtained when using the oscillometric method in
of the paw just proximal to the main footpad, or the coccy-
low-pressure states.
geal artery on the ventral surface of the tail. An inflatable
The most accurate method of assessing blood pressure is
a on pxond jn a ro q au punoe pad s 
by invasive measurement. Direct measurement of arterial
 transducer (Fig. 17-10). The appropriate cuff size, with cuff
blood pressure in the cat requires catheterization of the
widths being between 40 and 60% of the circumference of
femoral artery. The cranial tibial, coccygeal, or dorsal pedal
the limb, has to be selected for accurate results. Cuffs made
artery may also be accessible with a 24-gauge catheter in
for human newborns (size 1 and 2) are suitable in the cat.
large cats. Over-the-needle-type catheters can be used for
The cuff is inflated above systolic pressure and slowly released
 arterial catheterization. Catheters employing the Seldinger
technique with insertion of a thin flexible guidewire make
catheterization of small cat arteries easier. A simple method
to measure arterial pressure is by use of an aneroid manom-
Figure 17-10
eter connected via extension tubing and three-way taps to the
 Doppler ultrasound
catheter, and a syringe flled with heparinized saline. Care
 probe placed over
has to be taken to avoid saline entering the manometer by
the metacarpal artery
leaving an air gap that needs to be at the zero reference level
on the palmar
 surface of the paw
(right atrium). Mean arterial pressure is measured when the
just proximal to the
manometer is open to the artery. Continuous-pressure wave-
footpad. Metacarpal
forms are obtained with an electrical pressure transducer
(front leg)
placed at the level of the heart and the zero calibration open
measurements give
to ambient air pressure. The pressure transducer is ideally
the best results in 
connected to the catheter by short, non-compliant tubing
the cat.
completely filled with heparinized saline. The waveform is
displayed on an anesthetic monitor.
Central venous pressure
Central venous pressure is used to assess adequacy of blood
volume. A long catheter is advanced via the jugular vein into
 the cranial vena cava. The pressure is measured by venous
manometers, fluid-filled tubing, and a ruler or an electrical
pressure transducer. The zero reference level is the right
194
 Part 5: The surgical patient
atrium, which is approximated by the sternal manubrium.
Central venous pressure is usually reported as cm HzO (1 cm
Box 17-2. list of possible problems indicated by
H2O = 0.736 mmHg). Normal central venous pressure ranges
changes in the capnogram readings
from 0 to 5 cm HzO. Pressures above 12 cm HzO might
indicate hypervolemia or cardiac failure.
High end-tidal CO2
Hypoventilation
17.7.3 Respiratory system monitors
 Malignant hyperthermia
Apnea alarm
Low end-tidal CO2
Apnea alarms record respiratory rate and give an alarm when
Hyperventilation
apnea occurs. The signal is created by a thermistor registering
Hypothermia
temperature changes caused by the gas flow.
Deep anesthesia (low cardiac output)
Cardiac arrest
Tidal volume monitors
Sampling line broken
Tube cuff deflated
Tidal volume or minute volume can be determined by volu-
meters or flowmeters based on different measurement prin-
Inspiratory concentration above zero = rebreathing
ciples. The routinely used Wright's respirometer is not
of cO,
sensitive enough for the small volumes produced by cats.
Large technical dead space
 Pediatric adapters for the Datex spirometry system (D-lite)
Soda lime exhausted
included in anesthesia monitors are suitable for clinical anes-
Expiratory valve malfunction
thesia in cats.
Panting (rapid, shallow breathing)
Pulse oximetry
Flat curve slopes
 Pulse oximetry is a non-invasive method for determination
Lung disease (bronchoconstriction, obstruction)
Slow inspiratory time
of hemoglobin oxygen saturation and pulse rate. The mea-
surement principle is based on the different light absorption
Leak in breathing circuit
spectra of oxyhemoglobin and reduced hemoglobin. The pul-
Leak in sampling line
satile flow of arterial blood is displayed by some monitors as
Gas sampling slow
a plethysmogram. The pulse oximetry clip probe is usually
placed on the tongue during anesthesia. For some pulse oxim-
useful tools to detect
states
 of inadequate oxygenation;
17-2). It will guide ventilator settings in mechanically
however, their signal is very sensitive to noise, and measure.
ventilated animals.
ment artifacts may occur. In case
 doubt the pulse rate
 Side-stream capnographs aspirate a gas sample from the
e compared to the actual
Y-piece or endotracheal tube and measure COz in a remote
pulse rate. Sometimes
 infrared analyzer. Mainstream capnographs are inserted
resulting in artificially
low1
measurements,
which requires
between the endotracheal tube and the breathing system, and
 the CO, concentration is measured in the immediate expired
and veterinary medicine are available with varying accuracy
gas flow. The adapter of mainstream capnographs can sig-
and signal stability.
nificantly increase equipment dead space, whereas high gas
sampling rates of side-stream monitors can dilute the gas
Capnography
sample with fresh gas, which gives erroneously low values.
Capnography measures the concentration of CO, in expired
The given end-tidal concentration only truly represents alveo-
gas. In healthy animals it can be used as a non-invasive con-
lar gas in equilibration with arterial blood when there is a
tinuous estimate of the arterial CO, tension (PaCOz). Cap-
plateau phase present on the capnogram. Pneumothorax,
nometers give a numerical value on a breath-by-breath basis,
 open-chest surgery, and lung disease increase the end-tidal
whereas capnographs display a CO, waveform. Capnogra-
arterial CO, difference, and capnographic readings will not
phy is a useful tool for diagnosing circulatory and respiratory
represent arterial COz tension. Arterial blood gas sampling
problems, as well as mechanical equipment failure (Box
is indicated in such situations.
17: Anesthesia
195
Blood gas analysis
rhage. In addition, with most anesthetics vascular tone is
Defnitive information on oxygenation and ventilation can
reduced, and intravascular volume has to be replaced to
only be gained from the analysis of arterial blood gases.
maintain an adequate perfusion pressure.
Samples should be drawn anaerobically (no air bubbles) from
 For all procedures with a duration exceeding 30 minutes it
Aasis e un sp Al ransiupe on aunor aq pnous
an arterial catheter or by percutaneous puncture of an acces-
sible artery. The blood is collected into a heparinized syringe
 healthy patient any isotonic crystalloid solution (i.e., lactated
 Ringer's solution, saline) can be used at a rate of 5-10 ml/kg
or capillary tube. Information on rectal or esophageal tem-
 per hour. Dehydrated, hypovolemic, and shock patients have
perature of the cat is required for temperature correction of
the blood gases.
to be stabilized prior to induction of anesthesia (Chapter 11).
Fluid therapy is continued during anesthesia according to the
17.7.4 Anesthetic gas analyzers
patient's needs with colloids, isotonic or hypertonic crystal-
loids, or blood.
Anesthetic gas analyzers measure the concentration of the
volatile anesthetic, oxygen, NzO, and CO, in inspired and 
17.8.2 Temperature control
expired gas. End-tidal anesthetic concentration will represent
alveolar concentration and is compared to the MAC value of
 Hypothermia due to decreased heat production and increased
the respective volatile anesthetic. The MAC values given by
heat loss can occur quickly during anesthesia in cats, with
 most commercial monitors are MAC values for adult humans.
detrimental effects on recovery and surgical success. The
End-tidal anesthetic concentration during surgery has to be
greatest decrease usually occurs during surgical preparation.
1.2-1.5 MAC to prevent movement during monoanesthesia
Prevention of hypothermia is easier than rewarming, and
with an inhalant. Premedication, concurrent administration
every effort should be taken to avoid a decrease in body
of analgesics, or local analgesic techniques will reduce end-
 temperature. Heat loss can be minimized by warm environ-
tidal anesthetic concentrations below MAC values
mental temperatures, placing the cat on or between two cir-
Side-stream monitors aspirate gas from the endotracheal
culating warm water pads or on a self-heating pad, placing
tube adapter with rates up to 150 ml/min, which can cause
warmed gel packs around the cat, or wrapping parrs of the
a problem when using a low-flow technique in cats. Special
 cat with plastic bubble sheets or an aluminum rescue blanket.
makes of side-stream monitors for very small laboratory
 The most effective way of warming a small animal is with
animals, with low gas sampling rates, are available. The 
forced warm-air blankets (i.e., Bair Hugger) placed around
exhaust from the monitor should be returned into the breath-
 the cat underneath the surgical drapes. Intravenous fluids
ing or the scavenging system to avoid environmental
 should be warmed by commercial IV fluid-warming systems,
contamination.
coiling the infusion line through warm-water baths, on the
heating pad or underneath forced warm-air blankets.
17.7.5 Temperature monitoring
Active heating should be continued during recovery until
physiological body temperature is reached. This can be done
Monitoring of the body temperature is crucial in a small
by infrared heating lamps placed outside the cage to avoid
patient like the cat. Hypothermia occurs quickly during
 skin burns, or by using hair dryers or forced warm-air blan-
general anesthesia, in particular when using non-rebreathing
kets. Heated cage floors are usually not enough to raise body
systems. Rectal temperature or esophageal temperature can
temperature again.
be monitored continuously with flexible thermistor probes or
Hyperthermia can occur occasionally in cats. It can be due
at intervals with a conventional thermometer. Prolonged
hypothermia during anesthesia will interfere with immune
-adaq i on  e pe ia p
system function and wound healing and will cause central
thermia is extremely rare in cats. After a triggering event (i.e.,
nervous system depression with prolonged recoveries. Moni-
toring of body temperature should continue until complete
with a massive increase in COz production. The use of high
recovery of the cat.
doses of opioids, such as hydromorphone, morphine sulfate,
or fentanyl, can also be associated with a transient increase
17.8 Supportive care during anesthesia
in body temperature above 40*C.
17.8.1 Fluid administration
Turning off the heating devices and cooling the cat with
fluids or alcohol may be necessary to bring the temperature
 During inhalational anesthesia a significant amount of fluids
 into physiological ranges. In cases of malignant hyperthermia
are lost via the respiratory tract, open wounds, or hemor-
 the inhalant is stopped immediately, and hypercarbia is
196
 Part 5: The surgical patient
tion should be ready to use on a so-called crash cart or in an
Box 17-3. Emergency support (ABCD system)
emergency kit. Emergency drugs should be prepared in a
ready-to-use fashion and required doses in ml/kg should be
· Airway: Establish patent airway by intubation or
available on a self-explanatory list, because in an emergency
checking the endotracheal tube for obstruction if
already present
doses. A well-trained team following a set algorithm (Box
• Breathing: Start ventilation (intermittent positive-
17-3) will have the best results.
pressure ventilation} with highest possible oxygen
External cardiac massage can provide effective cardiac
concentration (breathing system, self-inflating Ambu
bag or mouth-to-tube ventilation) at a rate of 8-12
O diau iuau adunu, iepiosand y 'saoads sun un san
breaths/min. All anesthetics are turned off immedi-
restart myocardial contraction in case of electromechanical
ately if arrest occurs during anesthesia
dissociation (maintained electrical activity without or ineffec-
 Circulation: Start external cardiac massage with the
tive myocardial contractions). Ventricular fbrillation should
cat in lateral recumbency, and compress the thorax
 be treated as early as possible by electrical conversion with
between the thumb and the opposing fingers of one
an electrical defibrillator for best success. External paddles
hand at a rate of about 100 compressions per minute.
are best used on either side of the chest in cats. Energy output
Compression and release have the same lengths.
 is set at 1 Jcat and defbrillation is attempted repeatedly or 
 Effectiveness of cardiac massage (i.e., producing a
until success (sinus rhythm). Cardiac massage should be
 cardiac output) is ideally monitored with a capno-
resumed between defbrillation attempts. For more informa-
 graph indicating return of CO, from the tissues. At
tion the reader is referred to other texts (24).
this stage of resuscitation, an electrocardiogram is
established to check electrical activity of the heart
 References and further reading
● Drugs: Prolonged life support begins with IV fluid
1. Gaynor JS, et al. Complications and mortality associated with
and drug treatment. Repeated doses of epinephrine
anesthesia in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1999;35:
(every 5 minutes) for cardiac stimulation and redis-
13-17.
 tribution of blood flow to vital organs, and atropine
2. Dyson DH, et al. Morbidity and mortality associated with anes-
to reduce vagal tone followed by volume replacement
thetic management in small animal veterinary practice in
are the frst measures to take. Further drugs are
Ontario. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1998;34:325-335.
 3. Hosgood G, Scholl DT. Evaluation of age and American Society
selected according to the existing problem. Drugs can
of Anesthesiologists {ASA) physical status as risk factors for
be given with a long urinary catheter through the
 perianesthetic morbidity and mortality in the cat. J Vet Emerg
endotracheal tube into a bronchus to reach the resorp-
Crit Care 2002;12:9-16.
tive alveoli in the lung if no venous access can be
4. Brodbelt DC, et al. Anesthetic-related mortality risks in small
animals in the UK. Proceedings of the AVA spring meeting
established. Blind intracardial injection is discouraged 
2005, Rimini, Italy, p. 68.
as coronary vessels can be damaged and epinephrine
 5. Flecknell PA, et al. The use of lignocaine-prilocaine local anaes-
injection into the myocardium can cause refractory
thetic cream for pain-free venepuncture in laboratory animals.
ventricular fbrillation and local necrosis
Lab Anim 1990;24:142-146.
6. Hedges D, et al. Antipsychotic medication and seizures: a
review. Drugs Today 2003;39:551-557.
7. Ilkiw JE, et al. The behaviour of healthy awake cats following
intravenous and intramuscular administration of midazolam.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1996;19:205-216.
8. Ikiw JE, et al. The optimal intravenous dose of midazolam after
treated by aggressive ventilation. Dantrolene at 3 mg/kg IV
intravenous ketamine in healthy awake cats. J Vet Pharmacol
has been recommended as specific treatment for malignant
Ther 1998;21:54-61.
hyperthermia in different species.
 9. Tranquilli WJ, et al. Flumazenil effcacy in reversing diazepam
Or midazolam overdose in dogs. J Vet Anaesth 1992;19:
65-68.
17.9 Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
10. Thurmon J, Tranquilli WJ, Benson GW. Lumb & Jones'
veterinary anesthesia, 3rd edn. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins;
Rapid action is necessary in cats with apnea and cardiac
1996.
arrest. Loss of cardiac pump function can be related to
11. Middleton D, et al. Physiological effects of thiopentone, ket-
 cardiac arrest, ventricular fbrillation, or electromechanical
amine and CT1341 in cats. Res Vet Sci 1982;32:157-162.
dissociation. The chances of regaining spontaneous circula-
12.
 Brearley JC, et al. Propofol anesthesia in cats. J Small Anim
Pract 1988;29:315-322.
tion are increased with early intervention and a systematic
13. Andress JL, et al. The effects of consecutive day propofol anes-
approach. All equipment and drugs for emergency interven-
thesia on feline red blood cells. Vet Surg 1995;24:277-282.
17: Anesthesia
197
14. McMurphy RM, Hodgson DS. The minimum alveolar concen-
 21. Brodbelt DC. Update results from the enquiry into perioperative
tation of desflurane in cats. Vet Surg 1995;24:435.
small animal fatalities. Proceedings of the AVA spring meeting 
15. Pypendop BH, Ikiw JE. Hemodynamic effects of sevoflurane in 
2006, Liverpool, UK, pp. 119-121.
mats. Am J Vet Res 2004;65:20-25.
22. Grandy JL, et al. Evaluation of the Doppler ultrasonic method
16. Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE. Understanding anesthesia equipment,
of measuring systolic arterial blood pressure in cats. Am J Vet
4th edn. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1999.
Res 1992;53:1166-1169.
17.
Moyle JTB, Davey A, Ward C. Ward's anaesthetic equipment,
 23. Caulkett NA, et al. A comparison of indirect blood pressure 
4th edn. London: WB Saunders; 1998.
monitoring techniques in the anesthetized cat. Vet Surg 1998;
18. Tzannes S, et al. The use of sevoflurane in 2:1 mixture of nitrous
27:370-377.
oxide and oxygen for rapid mask induction of anesthesia in the
24. Plunkett SJ, McMichael M. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation in
cat. J Feline Med Surg 2000;2:83-90.
small animal medicine: an update. J Vet Intern Med 2008;22:
19. Hardie EM, et al. Tracheal rupture in cats: 16 cases (1983-
9-25.
1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999;214:508-512.
20. ACVA Suggestions for monitoring anesthetized
1veterinary
patients. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;206:936-937.
199
18
Perioperative analgesia
S. Kaestner
The term perioperative encompasses the preoperative, intra-
 tochondral junction of the ribs. If no blood can be aspirated,
operative, and postoperative periods. The importance of pre-
lidocaine or bupivacaine, diluted to a volume of 5 ml to
emptive analgesic treatment is well recognized with the
 facilitate spread, is injected during withdrawal to reach the
knowledge that the administration of analgesics before and
ulnar radial, median, musculocutaneous, and axillary nerves.
during the surgical procedure will reduce postoperative pain.
The use of a nerve stimulator to locate the nerves and to give
This is achieved by several mechanisms, with peripheral and
 more specific dosages improves the results.
central sensitization of the nociceptive system as well as
Additional analgesia for amputation of a thoracic limb can
wind-up mechanisms being reduced by pre-emptive analge-
be achieved by a splash block. The nerves of the brachial
sia. The use of analgesia preoperatively reduces the required
 plexus are prepared by splashing lidocaine or bupivacaine
doses or minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of anes-
(longer action) directly on them, prior to severing them with
thetic drugs, and analgesics given early will have developed
a sharp scalpel blade.
their full effect by the time of recovery from anesthesia, so
breakthrough of severe pain is avoided. Local anesthetics,
18.1.2 Epidural/spinal anesthesia
opioids, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
are the main options for perioperative analgesia. The choice
Epidural anesthesia in the cat is performed under deep seda-
of the specific drugs to be used depends on the degree of pain
tion or general anesthesia in the lumbosacral space, between
expected from a specific procedure and the response of the
animal to the therapy. A multimodal approach using different
classes of drugs acting at peripheral and central sites of the
nociceptive system is advantageous. Some examples of mul-
Box 18-1. Examples of multimodal perioperative
timodal therapy are illustrated in Box 18-1.
analgesia
18.1 Local anesthetics
Mild pain expected
 Buprenorphine premedication
Local anesthetics are used for specific nerve blocks, local
 One preoperative dose of carprofen or meloxicam
infltration, regional blocks, brachial plexus blocks, or in
 Buprenorphine every 6-8 hours for 2 days
epi/subdural anesthesia (Table 18-1). Interpleural infusion of
bupivacaine diluted in 5 ml saline infused into the interpleu-
Moderate pain expected
ral space via a chest tube provides good analgesia after tho-
Buprenorphine premedication
racotomy (Table 18-1).
 Lidocaine, and the long-acting substance bupivacaine, are
Local blocks (plexus block, epidural/spinal)
Meloxicam pre- and postoperative
the most commonly used local anesthetics in cats. Toxic side-
effects include cardiovascular depression, bradycardia, brady-
Buprenorphine every 6-8 hours for 3 days
arrhythmia, salivation, and seizures, so total applicable doses
Severe pain expected
are limited to 4 mg/kg lidocaine and 2 mg/kg bupivacaine.
Morphine premedication
Ropivacaine has a lower toxicity than bupivacaine, but safe
dose rates are not available for cats.
Fentanyl patch
Local blocks (plexus block, epidural/spinal)
 Intraoperative fentanyl constant-rate infusion
18.1.1 Brachial plexus block
Postoperative fentanyl constant-rate infusion or mor-
Brachial plexus blocks provide analgesia for surgical proce-
phine until the fentanyl patch is effective (approx. 7-
dures on the thoracic limb within or distal to the elbow. The
10 hours)
block is performed with the cat under general anesthesia. A
Meloxicam pre- and postoperative
22G, 5-cm needle is inserted medial to the shoulder joint,
Consider ketamine constant-rate infusion as adjunct
advanced parallel to the spine, and directed towards the cos-
200
 Part 5: The surgical patient
Drug
Type of block
Dosage/concentration
Onset/duration
Table 18-1. Dosages and
concentrations of local 
Lidocaine
Local
1-2%, do not exceed
10 minutes/1 hour
 anesthetics used for perioperative
analgesia in cats
infltration
4 mg/kg
Nerve block
1-2%, do not exceed
10 minutes/1 hour
4 mg/kg
Epidural
1-2%, do not exceed
1.5 hour
4 mg/kg
 Bupivacaine
Nerve block
0.5%, do not exceed
20 minutes/6-(8) hours
2 mg/kg
Epidural
1 mg/kg (0.25-0.5%)
20 minutes/6 hours
 Spinal
0.5 mg/kg (0.25-0.5%)
Shorter than epidural
 Interpleural
1.5 mg/kg (0.5%) in 5 ml 
6-8 hours
 Morphine/
Epidural
0.1 mg/kg morphine
20 minutes/6-12 hours
bupivacaine
Spinal
1 mg/kg
 Half epidural dose
Figure 18-1  Needle placement
between the last lumbar (L7) and
first sacral (S1) vertebrae for
epidural/subdural (spinal)
anesthesia. In the cat the spinal
 cord ends at the level of the
sacral vertebrae and subarachnoid
puncture occurs quite frequently.
(A) Epidural needle placement;
(B) subdural needle placement.
A
B
 L7 and S1. The cat is placed in lateral or sternal recumbency
brospinal fluid (CSF) or blood before injection of the anes-
with the hind legs flexed forward (frog position) and the
thetic is necessary. When blood flows back, the needle is
lumbosacral space is localized dorsally between the iliac
removed without injection. Backflow of CSF indicates sub-
wings. Palpation of the craniodorsal iliac crests with thumb
arachnoid puncture, which occurs quite often in cats because 
and middle fnger and placing the index fnger on L7 will
the spinal cord ends at the level of the sacral vertebrae. The
facilitate orientation. The area is prepared aseptically. A 22G,
 spinal needle can be withdrawn minimally, or one-half of the
2.5-cm spinal needle is inserted in the midline at two-thirds
calculated dose of the anesthetic is injected for spinal anes-
of the distance between the dorsal spinal processes of L7 and
thesia (Fig. 18-1).
 S1, and is advanced until the interarcuate ligament is pene-
Epidural anesthesia/analgesia can be performed via single
trated, creating a popping feeling. This popping feeling is less
injections or via placement of an epidural catheter with inter-
obvious in cats than in dogs. Injection of a small volume of
mittent injections or continuous infusions. Commercial pedi-
  r      r 1s
atric epidural catheter kits containing a 20G, 5-cm epidural
without encountering resistance, or the “hanging drop" tech-
needle and a 24G, 7.5-cm catheter including a bacterial filter
nique, verifes placement of the needle tip in the epidural
are suitable for cats. Proper placement in the epidural space
space (Fig. 18-1). Careful inspection of the needle for cere-
requires radiographic verification.
18: Perioperative analgesia
201
The volume of the injected anesthetic/analgesic determines
without causing signs of excitation at doses of 0.1-0.2 mg/kg.
the spread of the block and the concentration of a local
 The intramuscular (IM) route is preferred because intrave-
anesthetic determines the degree of motor block: 1 ml/5 kg
 nous (IV) injection can cause histamine release. Onset of
will produce a block up to L1 (pelvic limb) and 1 ml/3.5 kg
action is slow and repeated dosing is required after 24
-   e  o d 1s d 
 hours. Prolonged use of morphine can cause constipation and
centrations of local anesthetics less motor dysfunction occurs.
urine retention.
Epidural use of morphine will induce analgesia up to the
cervical spine without motor block (Box 18-1).
18.2.2 Hydromorphone/oxymorphone
Contraindications for epidural anesthesia are septicemia,
coagulation disorders, hypovolemic shock, skin infections
Hydromorphone and oxymorphone are both morphine
at the puncture site, and deformation due to fractures
derivatives. They are more potent than morphine and can
or luxations of the spine or pelvis. Possible complications
 produce several hours of analgesia in cats. The use of hydro-
include local skin infection, meningitis, and trauma to the
morphone has recently been implicated in postanesthetic
spinal cord.
hyperthermia in cats.
18.2 0pioids
18.2.3 Pethidine
Opioids exert their effects via opiate receptors. Opiate recep-
q s pe s rn e  a a
tors are mainly located in the central nervous system in the
widely used in cats. It has a rapid onset of action but also a
dorsal horn of the spinal cord and the brain where impulses 
 very short duration of analgesic effect (1-2 hours). IV injec-
 from the periphery are modulated. Opiate receptors are also
tion should be avoided, as this might cause excitement and
found in peripheral tissues, for example the synovial mem-
histamine release. Unlike morphine, it relaxes intestinal
brane. Location, classification, and subclassification of opiate
spasms.
receptors are the subject of much ongoing research. The μ-
receptors mediate supraspinal analgesia, respiratory depres-
18.2.4 Methadone
sion, bradycardia, physical dependence, and euphoria. The
μ-receptors mediate analgesia, hallucinations, sedation, and
 Racemic methadone and L-methadone are synthetic μ-
mydriasis in cats, and &-receptors modulate μ-receptor activ-
receptor agonists with similar properties as morphine. The
ity. Differences in subtype distribution, density, and activity
L-isomer has a higher receptor affnity than the D-isomer,
state of opiate receptors cause species-specifc effects of
 resulting in approximately twice the analgesic effect of the
opiates. All full μ-receptor agonists are controlled substances
 L-methadone compared to the racemic methadone, and doses
(schedule II drugs) because of possible abuse and physical
for racemic and L-methadone should not be confused. Metha-
dependence in humans.
done also acts as an N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA)
 The historical reputation of cats for becoming excited after
 receptor antagonist and might help to prevent the develop-
the use of opioids is based on overdose. In contrast to many
 ment of hyperalgesia. In some countries, the veterinary
  s   i  s 
 product L-Polamivet contains an anticholinergic to counter-
act opioid-induced vagal stimulation. Tachycardia can occur
treated with an opioid. However, there is enough evidence that
when the L-methadone is antagonized with naloxone because
opioids at appropriate doses are recommended for the treat-
of the excess of diphenylpiperidine.
ment of feline pain (1-6). The choice of opioid depends on the
degree of pain expected, the speed of onset and duration of
18.2.5 Fentanyl
action of the drug, as well as the side-effects that can occur.
Full μ-receptor agonists follow a linear dose-response curve,
Fentanyl is a μ-receptor agonist. It is about 50-100 times
and increasing their dose will increase analgesic effects. Partial
 more potent than morphine and can produce a high level of
agonists and μ-receptor antagonists theoretically follow a bell-
analgesia. It is effective after IV injection but is also well
shaped dose-response curve, and analgesic effects cannot nec-
absorbed through mucous membranes and the transdermal
essarily be increased by higher doses (Table 18-2).
route. A single bolus has a short duration of effect (15-20
minutes). Fentanyl is used as part of neuroleptanalgesic
 mixtures, balanced anesthetic techniques, and postoperative
18.2.1 Morphine
 analgesia. When used in combination with general anesthet-
The classic μ-receptor agonist morphine has shown analgesic  ics, intermittent positive-pressure ventilation is usually
effects in experimental models and clinical pain in cats 
necessary.
202
Part 5: The surgical patient
Drug
Dose
Route
Duration/dosing
Table 18-2. Dosages of opioids
interval
for perioperative analgesia in cats
 Butorphanol
0.2-0.4 mg/kg
SC/IM/IV
1-2 hours
 Buprenorphine
0.007-0.03 mg/kg
SC/IM/IV
4-8 hours
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
PO
8 hours
Morphine
0.1-0.3 mg/kg
IM
2-4 hours
0.05-0.1 mg/kg per hour
CRI
12-24 hours
0.1 mg/kg
Epidural
Methadone
0.2-0.3 mg/kg
SC/IM/IV
4 hours
0.05-0.1 mg/kg per hour
CRI
L-methadone
0.1-0.3 mg/kg
SC/IM/IV
4 hours
Pethidine
2-5-(10) mg/kg
SC/IM
2 hours
0.5-1 mg/kg per hour
CRI
Hydromorphone
0.05 mg/kg
SC/IM
2-4 hours
0.03-0.05 mg/kg
IV
1 hour
0.005-0.01 mg/kg per hour
CRI
Oxymorphone
0.03-0.05 mg/kg
SC/IM
4-6 hours
0.01-0.03 mg/kg
IV
0.005-0.01 mg/kg per hour
CRI
Tramadol
 2-4 mg/kg
IV/PO
24 hours
Fentanyl
0.001-0.01 mg/kg
IV/IM
20-30 minutes
0.01-0.02 mg/kg per hour
CRI intra Sx
0.001-0.005 mg/kg per hour
CRI post Sx
 Fentanyl patch
 25 μg/hour patch
Transdermal
Onset: 7 hours
Durogesic TTS?
Approx. 72 hours
Naloxone
0.001-0.01 mg/kg IV to effect
IV
20-40 minutes
SC, subcutaneous; IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular; PO, peroral; CRI, constant-rate infusion; Sx,
surgery.
For continuous controlled administration of fentanyl,
18.2.6 Butorphanol
transdermal patches (Durogesic TTS) are available. The
25 μg/hour release patches are appropriate for cats.
Butorphanol is a μ-receptor antagonist that has a bell-shaped
Steady-state plasma concentrations are reached within 6-12
dose-response curve. Recommended doses should not be
exceeded. It is not a controlled drug and therefore very
hours in cats and the average duration of analgesia after
patch application is approximately 72 hours. However, the
popular in veterinary practice. Butorphanol is an effective
analgesic for visceral pain but poor for somatic pain. For this
fentanyl plasma concentrations after patch placement are
reason, it is not the best choice of drug for orthopedic surgical
very variable, depending on skin permeability and perfusion
 and body and skin temperature. Therefore, repeated evalua-
patients. It has a short duration of action and requires fre-
tion of the animal for signs of pain or overdose is necessary.
quent redosing (2 hours). Butorphanol has a high affinity for
the opioid receptors, and when given for premedication will
The time to onset of effective plasma concentrations of fen-
impair further analgesic therapy with μ-receptor agonists
tanyl has to be bridged with another analgesic. The skin is
 during painful procedures.
without degreasing the skin. After the skin has dried the
patch is applied and pressed on to the skin for some seconds.
18.2.7 Buprenorphine
An area where there is not too much movement, for example,
 the lateral thorax, should be used for patch placement. The
Buprenorphine is a partial μ-receptor agonist with slow
time and date of patch placement can be marked on
receptor association and dissociation. This results in a slow
the patch.
onset of action even after IV injection (at least 30 minutes)
18: Perioperative analgesia
203
but also a very long duration of action at the receptor (6-8
 function and coagulation. Renal perfusion will be reduced
hours). Transmucosal absorption through the oral mucous 
 during general anesthesia, and NSAIDs should be avoided if
membranes is almost 100% in the cat, and buccal administra-:
tion with a syringe is effective and well tolerated. Experimen-
 volemic (shock patients). Non-selective or COX1-selective
tal studies on a transdermal delivery patch in cats gave very  NSAIDs (i.e., acetylasalicylic acid, ketoprofen) can influence
inconsistent plasma buprenorphine concentrations as well as  coagulation times by inhibiting thromboxane formation, and
analgesic effects. Buprenorphine rarely causes dysphoria or  should not be used when excessive hemorrhage is expected
yomiting, and it has produced effective analgesia in both
 or when coagulopathies are present. Only carprofen and
experimental cats and in the clinical seting, making it very
 meloxicam are licensed for preoperative use in cats (4-7)
suitable for perioperative pain treatment in the cat. Buprenor-
(Table 18-3).
phine is a controlled drug because of possible human abuse
Different NSAIDs should not be combined because toxicity
and dependence.
is increased. Combinations of NSAIDs and corticosteroids
will also increase gastrointestinal toxicity with an increased
risk of ulcer formation.
18.2.8 Tramadol
18.3.1 Carprofen
activity in combination with serotonin and norepinephrine
reuptake inhibition. For cats a dose of 1-2 mg/kg IV and
o e  i 's u sa s q s o
2-4 mg/kg PO has been recommended but no controlled
 safety profle because of limited COX inhibition, and pro-
studies are available.
vides effective perioperative analgesia. One dose of carprofen
at 4 mg/kg is currently licensed for preoperative use in cats.
18.2.9 Opioid antagonists
This will provide analgesia for at least 24 hours. Toxicity
with repeated dosing can occur because of a high variability
Naloxone is a pure antagonist at all opioid receptors. It can
 in individual elimination half-life (9-49 hours) in cats. Long-
be used to reverse inadvertent overdose and respiratory
term use is therefore prohibited.
depression. Naloxone has a fairly short duration of action,
shorter than most agonists, often making redosing necessary.
18.3.2 Meloxicam
 Naltrexone is also a pure antagonist with a longer duration
of action than naloxone. Butorphanol and buprenorphine are
Meloxicam is a COX2-selective NSAID, licensed in cats to
difficult to antagonize because of their high receptor affnity.
 be given as a single subcutaneous injection for preoperative
Low doses of butorphanol (< 0.1 mg/kg) can be used to
 use. In Europe, an oral formula (0.5 mg/ml meloxicam) is
 reverse respiratory depression induced by pure μ-receptor
 now also licensed for long-term use. The oral suspension is
agonists without fully reversing analgesic effects.
provided as a honey-flavored liquid, which is palatable to
some cats, and which can be accurately administered by
18.3 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
owners. Meloxicam is therefore a good choice of an NSAID
drug for perioperative use in orthopedic patients, because
NSAIDs exert their main effects by inhibiting cyclooxygenase
therapy can be continued in the postoperative period. Its
(COX) isoforms, thereby interfering with the arachidonic acid
analgesic efficiency in the perioperative period is comparable
cascade and preventing the formation of prostaglandins, pros-
to carprofen.
tacyclin, and thromboxane. Development of COX2-selective
NSAIDs was thought to reduce the potential for toxicity of
18.3.3 Other NSAIDs
NSAIDs, but the situation is more complex than initially
thought. The deficiency of the glucuronidation pathway in
Tolfenamic acid is a COX1-selective NSAID that should not
cats results in slow metabolism of several NSAIDs with a pro-
 be used preoperatively. When given at the end of anesthesia
longed duration of effect, and possible accumulation. There-
tolfenamic acid at 4 mg/kg produces analgesia comparable to
fore, a dosage and dosing interval transfer from other species
 ketoprofen, carprofen, and meloxicam in the cat.
 must not be made to avoid gastrointestinal and renal toxicity.
Ketoprofen is a potent COX inhibitor without any selectiv-
The practical advantages of NSAIDs in the perioperative 
ity. It causes thromboxane inhibition and should not be used
period are their long analgesic action and that they are not 
 preoperatively because excessive hemorrhage can occur.
controlled substances. Important factors to consider when
When given after anesthesia its analgesic effect is similar to
NSAIDs are used preoperatively are their influence on renal
that of tolfenamic acid.
204
 Part 5: The surgical patient
Drug
Dose
Route
Duration/
 dosing interval
Carprofen
4 mg/kg single preoperative dose
IV/SC/PO
24 hours (single dose)
Meloxicam
 0.2 mg/kg single preoperative dose
IV/SC
24 hours (single dose)
 0.1 mg/kg if to be continued postoperatively
IV/SC
(see Chapter 5 for long-term use)
Vedaprofen
0.5 mg/kg
PO
24 hours (for maximum 5 days)
 Acetylsalicylic acid
10-25 mg/kg
PO
48 hours
Piroxicam
0.3 mg/kg
PO
24 hours (for maximum 5 days)
 Unpredictable enterohepatic
circulation possible
Tolfenamic acid
4 mg/kg postoperatively
IV/PO
24 hours
Ketoprofen
 2 mg/kg postoperatively
SC/IM/IV
24 hours (for maximum 5 days)
PO
Table 18-3. Dosages of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs used for perioperative analgesia in cats
Drug
Dose
Route
 Duration/dosing interval
Table 18-4. Dosages of
analgesic adjuncts used for
Xylazine
0.2-0.4 mg/kg
SC/IM
2 hours
 perioperative analgesia in cats
Medetomidine
0.01-0.020 mg/kg
SC/IM
1-4 hours
0.005-0.01 mg/kg per hour
CRI
0.001-0.005 mg/kg
Epidural
Romifidine
0.01-0.05 mg/kg
SC/IM
2-4 hours
Ketamine
0.5 mg/kg
IM/IV
1-2 hours
0.6 mg/kg per hour
CRI
Intra Sx
0.12 mg/kg per hour
CRI
Post Sx for 24 hours
SC, subcutaneous; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; Sx, surgery; CRI, constant-rate infusion.
Piroxicam has been used for its antiangiogenetic effects in
18.4 Analgesic adjuncts
 canine tumor patients in addition to its analgesic properties.
The pharmacokinetics can be unpredictable in cats because
In addition to the classic analgesic substances, other
of possible enterohepatic circulation.
classes of drugs have shown advantageous effects in pain
 Vedaprofen is not licensed for use in cats. The gel formula-tion
management via a variety of different mechanisms. Systemic
for dogs has been used in cats at 0.5 mg/kg PO q24 hours over
administration of low-dose ketamine and alphaz agonists are
5 days without toxic signs in healthy cats. However, no infor-
 the most important analgesic adjuncts in the perioperative
mation exists on its perioperative use and analgesic effcacy.
period (Table 18-4). Systemic lidocaine has also shown
Phenylbutazone is still licensed in many countries for
 prokinetic and anesthetic-sparing effects in various species 
use in cats. No controlled studies are available on its phar-
in combination with other analgesics. However the cardio-
macokinetic properties or toxicity in the cat. Historical dose
vascular depressive effects caused by lidocaine in cats out-
recommendations are based on those for chronic pain man-
weigh the
 anesthetic-sparing effects, so its use in not
 agement. With the availability of the newer NSAIDs with a
recommended (8).
known safety profle, phenylbutazone should not be used in
the cat in the perioperative period.
18.4.1 Ketamine
Paracetamol (acetaminophen), ibuprofen, indomethacin
and naproxen are toxic in the cat and must not be used in
Activation of NMDA receptors in the spinal cord plays an
this species.
important role in the wind-up phenomenon, and ketamine,
18: Perioperative analgesia
205
as a non-competitive NMDA antagonist, might be able to
References and further reading
reduce hyperalgesia. Using ketamine as part of the anesthetic
1.
.Taylor PM, et al. Morphine, pethidine and buprenorphine
protocol can provide pre-emptive analgesia in cats. However,
disposition in the cat. J Vet Phamacol Ther 2001;24:391-398.
the analgesic effects of ketamine are diffcult to prove in
2.
 Robertson SA, et al. Changes in thermal threshold response in
experimental cats and it cannot be considered as a stand-
eight cats after administration of buprenorphine, butorphanol
alone analgesic, rather as a reinforcing analgesic. Subanes-
and morphine. Vet Rec 2003;153:462-465.
thetic doses of ketamine have been found to reduce opioid
3.
Hofmeister EH, Egger CM. Transdermal fentanyl patches in
small animals. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2004;40:468-478.
requirements.
4.
present and future. Part 2. Treatment of pain -clinical pharma-
18.4.2 Alpha, agonists
cology. J Feline Med Surg 2004;6:321-333.
'S
Gaynor JS, Muir ww. Handbook of veterinary pain manage-
pe aanes aun ron pasn ad ae sise reui
ment. St. Louis: Mosby; 2002.
Flecknell PA, Waterman-Pearson AE. Pain management in
anesthetic-sparing effects in cats. However potent analgesia
animals. London: WB Saunders; 2000.
is mediated via alphaz receptors in the dorsal horn of the
7.
 Slingsby LS, Waterman-Pearson AE. Postoperative analgesia in
spinal cord and can be used to treat severe pain states. Pro-
the cat after ovariohysterectomy by use of carprofen, ketopro-
found sedation and cardiovascular depression are unwanted
fen, meloxicam or tolfenamic acid. J Small Anim Pract 2000;
41:447-450.
side-effects, which can be reduced by epidural administration
8.
 Pypendop BH, Ikiw JE. Assessment of the hemodymamic effects
and low-dose constant-rate infusions. The mild sedation in
of lidocaine administered IV in isoflurane anesthetized cats. Am
combination with analgesia can be advantageous in the
J Vet Res 2005;66:661-668.
immediate postoperative period in some cats.
207
19
Preparation for surgery
K. Voss
 Preparation for surgery includes preoperative assessment and
 ing motion at the fracture site. Fractures and joint injuries
stabilization of the patient, an appropriate anesthetic proto-
above the elbow and stifle joint are difficult to stabilize
col (Chapter 17), and perioperative analgesia (Chapter 18).
 securely with external immobilization, and cats should there-
Aseptic preparation of the surgical site, preparation of the
fore be cage-rested until surgery is performed. If definitive
surgical team, and preparation of instruments, implants,
surgery has to be delayed for several days or longer, tempo-
facilities, and the environment are essential both to the success
rary stabilization with an external skeletal fixator should be
of the surgery and to prevent infection of the surgical wound.
considered. Adequate analgesia is provided for every patient
Antisepsis is defined as the inactivation or destruction of most
with orthopedic injuries (Chapter 18).
pathogenic microorganisms on living tissue, and is aimed at
 Food is withheld for 12 hours prior to surgery in adult
limiting bacterial contamination of the surgical site to the
 patients. Cats less than 4 months of age should only be fasted
lowest possible level. Sterilization is destruction of all micro-
for 4 hours, because of limited glycogen reserves. The patient
organisms, usually applied to surgical instruments, implants,
 must be stable, both cardiovascularly and metabolically,
and materials.
before induction of anesthesia. The packed cell volume should
This chapter focuses on preparation of the patient for
 be at least 20% with albumin levels exceeding 20 g/l. Admin-
surgery and on preparation of the surgical team. Cleaning.
istration of blood products should be considered if the packed
sterilization, and maintenance of the surgery theater and
cell volume and/or albumin levels fall below these values
surgical materials and implants are described elsewhere.
(Chapter 11). Balanced electrolyte solutions are administered
at a rate of 10 ml/kg per hour during preparation of the
 patient and perioperatively.
19.1 Preparation of the patient
As many as 30-60% of feline fracture patients have sustained
19.1.2 Risk factors for surgical infections
concurrent and possibly life-threatening injuries (1-3).
Surgical wound infections develop when bacteria enter the
Management of the polyraumatized cat is described in part
wound through the dermal incision, overwhelm the host's
3 of this book.
defense mechanisms, and start to replicate. Significant factors
in the development of surgical wound infection are the
19.1.1 Preoperative management of the
number and pathogenesis of the microorganisms, and the
effectiveness of the host's defense mechanisms. Local reduc-
orthopedic patient
tion of vascularity, for example due to trauma or implants,
Repair of most fractures and joint instabilities can be delayed
is a common factor promoting wound infection. Infections
several days without negatively affecting outcome if the
occurring within 30 days of surgery at the surgical site
patient is not stable for anesthesia and surgery. However,
 are considered surgical infections. Infections occurring up to
early treatment and stabilization are preferable for open frac-
1 year after surgery at the surgical site are considered
tures and joint injuries, joint luxations, fractures with a criti-
surgery-related.
cal blood supply, and fractures and luxations causing
 Several studies have evaluated the incidence of postopera-
neurological deficits. Fractures in immature cats are at risk
tive wound infection and associated risk factors (Box 19-1).
for interference with growth potential and joint function if
Postoperative wound infection occurs with an overall fre-
treatment is delayed. Young cats may also be more suscepti-
quency of 3.0-5.5% (4-6). One prognostic factor for the
ble to quadriceps contracture after delayed stabilization of
development of post surgical infection is the degree of wound
femoral fractures.
 contamination at the time of incision. Surgical procedures are
Fractures and joint injuries distal to the elbow and stifle
classifed into clean, clean-contaminated, contaminated, and
joint can be stabilized with a splinted bandage until definitive
 dirty procedures (Table 19-1). Clean and clean-contaminated
treatment is performed. External immobilization should
 wounds are less likely to become infected than contaminated
reduce pain and minimize further vascular damage by limit-
 or dirty wounds (4-6). The incidence of postoperative wound
208
Part 5: The surgical patient
lipid-based emulsion and capable of supporting microbial
Box 19-1. Identified risk factors which increase the
growth. Opened bottles should be kept in a fridge, and used
risk of surgical infections
within 12-24 hours of opening. Clipping of hair before anes-
thetic induction also renders the surgical site more likely to
Risk factors of surgical infection
become infected, compared to clipping shortly after induction
Contaminated and dirty surgical wounds
just prior to the procedure (5). The use of razors is not rec-
Duration of anesthesia
ommended, because it causes skin irritation and erosion and
 Duration of surgery
 thus increases the surgical wound infection rate.
 Break in asepsis
 Number of persons in the surgery room
19.1.3 Perioperative antibiotics
 Endocrinopathies
 Use of propofol
Preoperative antibiotic prophylaxis has been shown to
Clipping of hair before anesthetic induction 
 decrease postoperative infection rates in elective orthopedic
surgical procedures (10). For this reason routine prophylactic
 perioperative antibiotic treatment is usually recommended,
although many orthopedic surgeries are classified as clean
 Surgical procedure
Examples
procedures. Orthopedic procedures commonly last longer
than 90 minutes and local wound factors, such as metallic
Clean
Elective procedures
implants and tissue trauma, may potentiate infection. Addi-
Closed fractures
tionally, bone and joint infections are difficult to treat in the
No break in asepsis
presence of implants, enhance morbidity, and may negatively
Clean-contaminated
Minor break in asepsis
influence outcome. Cefazolin is currently considered the anti-
Contaminated
Fresh traumatic wounds
biotic of choice due to its excellent effcacy against most sur-
(<4 hours after trauma)
gical wound pathogens, its low toxicity, and reasonable cost.
Skin lacerations
The frst dose should be administered 30-60 minutes before
Grade 1 open fractures
the surgical incision at a dose of 22 mg/kg. Repeating the
Dirty
Traumatic wounds with
dose every 90-120 minutes is commonly recommended, but
 devitalized tissue, foreign
evidence suggests that a frequency of every 3 hours is suff-
bodies, delayed treatment
cient (11).
(>4 hours after trauma)
Antimicrobial therapy is continued postoperatively after
Grade 2 and 3 open fractures
contaminated and dirty procedures. A short postoperative
 Degloving injuries
course of antibiotics is also indicated in patients with increased
Bite wounds
susceptibility to infection, such as severely fraumatized
Abscesses
patients, those with endocrinopathies, malnutrition, and cats
with an expected prolonged hospitalization period. Cefazolin
Table 19-1. Classification of surgical wounds with orthopedic surgery
is often a good initial choice and can be continued after
examples
surgery, but defnitive postoperative antimicrobial therapy
should be selected according to the results of antimicrobial
infection for clean and clean-contaminated wounds ranges
testing. Anorexia, vomiting, or diarrhea is observed in some
from 2.5 to 5%, whereas the incidence of postoperative
cats taking cephalosporins in the postoperative period.
wound infection for contaminated and dirty wounds ranges
from 5.8 to 18.1% (4, 5).
19.1.4 Preparation of the surgical site
Clinical factors associated with an enhanced infection rate
are duration of anesthesia (7, 8) and length of surgery (6, 8).
Normal bacteria on feline and canine skin include Sapbylo-
Prolongation of anesthesia, especially for preoperative diag-
coccus spp., Micrococcus spp., Acinetobacter spp., Coryne-
nostic procedures, and duration of surgery should therefore
bacterium spp,
Streptococcus spp., Clostridium spp.,
be kept as low as possible. A larger number of persons
Escherichia coli, and Enterobacter spp. These organisms
present in the operating room is another factor that increases
lodge on hair and skin surfaces, within the superficial corni-
 postoperative wound infection (6). Patients suffering from
fed layers and in the glands of skin and subcutaneous tissue.
endocrinopathies also have a higher risk for wound infection
The goal of aseptic preparation of the surgical site is reduc-
(8). The use of propofol for anesthetic induction increases the
tion of the number of bacteria to levels incapable of produc-
likelihood of infection by a factor of 3.8 (9). Propofol is a
ing an infection.
19: Preparation for surgery
209
 Antiseptic agent
Characteristics
Povidone-iodine 
 Broad-action antiseptic against Gram-
negative and Gram-positive
 bacteria, mycobacteria, and fungi
 Inactivation of spores only after
prolonged application time
Reduced action in the presence of
 blood or necrotic debris
 May cause skin irritation
Chlorhexidine
 Broad-action antiseptic, but better 
against Gram-negative bacteria than
 Gram-positive bacteria and fungi
Sustained action in the presence of
 blood and necrotic debris
Excellent residual action
iadouo ioy paggnns si len e jo bapuy lal aul -ah aani
Ethyl alcohol
Fast and efficient antibacterial action
surgery in the preparation room. Note that the whole circumference of
Enhances action of both iodophors
the limb is going to be prepared aseptically. allowing free manipulation
 of the limb during surgery.
and chlorhexidine
Causes tissue necrosis (not to be used
 in open wounds)
 The hair is clipped after anesthetic induction in a prepara-
tion room outside the surgical theater. A minimum of 10-
Table 19-2. Type and characteristics of selected antiseptic agents
15 cm is clipped around the incision site. For most orthopedic
procedures the whole leg is prepared aseptically in order to
be able to manipulate and position the leg freely during
Alcohol causes tissue necrosis in open wounds and is there-
 sn paaoar Aiipui si reu paddo asoo ars
fore avoided in the presence of open wounds. Phenol deri-
vacuum cleaner. For surgeries not involving the toes and
vates, another class of antiseptics, should not be used in cats
metacarpus or metatarsus, the hair of the feet is not clipped,
 because cats have a defective glucuronide synthesis, and may
and the feet are covered with an adhesive or cohesive bandage
therefore be more sensitive to phenol toxicity than other
after the limb was scrubbed. The limb is suspended from the
species (12).
aul oi ssasoe mone oi pueis durp snouaaenu ue io guii
The patient is positioned on the table inside the surgery
whole circumference. Antiseptic scrubs are applied with wet
room. For orthopedic surgeries, the affected limb is sus-
gauze sponges by gentle pressure in a circular motion (Fig.
 pended on an intravenous stand or similar and the surgical
19-1). Scrubbing starts at the center of the clipped feld and
site is wiped or sprayed once more with an antiseptic solution
then moves towards the edges. The sponge is replaced once
to complete the preparation (Fig. 19-2). Orthopedic draping
it has touched the edges, and a new one is taken to start again
should allow the surgeon to manipulate the leg in different
at the center. At least 3 minutes of scrubbing is required for
directions without risk of contamination. The body of the
all commonly used scrub solutions. After scrubbing is com-
patient is covered frst with four drapes around the base of
pleted, residual debris and loose hairs are removed with
 the limb. These drapes are applied with approximately 10 cm
antiseptic solutions, and the fur around the edges is flattened
of double-thickness folds at the edges. They are secured to
away from the incision site. Either 70% ethyl alcohol or
the skin with Backhaus towel clamps (Fig. 19-3). The clamps
tinctures of chlorhexidine or iodine may be used for this
should not be repositioned because their tips are contami-
purpose.
nated after skin penetration. The foot is then covered with a
Both iodophors and chlorhexidine can be used as scrubs
layer of sterile adhesive draping material (Fig. 19-3). A second
and as antiseptic solutions, but they should not be mixed
layer consisting of a large single sheet with a central opening
because this reduces effcacy (Table 19-2). Overall, chlorhexi-
is then applied over the body with the limb emerging from
dine seems to have some advantages when compared to
it. Depending on the draping material used, a third layer
iodine. It remains effective in the presence of blood, pus, and 
should be applied over the second one. Reusable coton cloth
other organic material, it has a good residual activity for
 drapes do not prevent bacterial penetration effectively, espe-
kiling bacteria that emerge from sebaceous glands and hair
cially when wet. Their advantage for orthopedic procedures
follicles during surgery, and skin irritation is uncommon.
is their good mechanical properties, which give better resis-
210
Part 5: The surgical patient
Figure 19-2  The
cat is now in the 
surgical theater. The
foot is covered with
a clean bandage
and the limb is
suspended from an
intravenous stand.
tance to penetration by sharp instruments. If cotton drapes
Figure 19-3  Four sterile towels have been placed around the base of
are used, the middle drape should be of water-repellent
the hindlimb, and were fixed with Backhaus towel clamps. The foot is
covered with a sterile bandage, meaning that the whole limb
material to reduce the risk of wetting or strike-through and
protruding from the four towels is now prepared aseptically.
bacterial penetration.
Special Backhaus forceps with balls at their extremities are
employed to the most superfcial drapes to stabilize the cables
 and tubes of the cautery and suction units (Fig. 19-4).
19.2 Preparation of the surgical team
The preparation of the surgical team is aimed at reducing
both airborne contamination and contamination from human
 skin. The number of people, the level of activity in the surgery
room, the amount of uncovered skin, and the amount of
talking may increase bacterial numbers in the air (6).
Surgical scrub suits are worn to avoid introduction of
organisms from the consultation and ward area into the
surgery room. The shirt is tucked into the pants. A laboratory
coat or overalls are worn on top of the scrub suit if the
surgery room is left between surgeries. All people inside the
surgery room wear head covers and face masks. It seems
reasonable not to wear the same shoes as in the rest of the
hospital and on the street, although no difference in floor and
air contamination was found between street shoes, dedicated
surgery shoes, and shoe covers (13). Face masks protect the
wound from saliva drops by redirecting the airflow from the
mouth and nose sideways. Masks flter particles for several
hours; however, a reduction of air contamination has not yet
Figure 19-4 Appearance of the completed orthopedic draping. Two
been shown (14).
large towels with a central opening were added because cotton towels
 Several different options exist for the hand scrub, including
were used (the green ones). The suction tube and the cautery cable are
iodine, chlorhexidine, and alcohol-based scrubs. Generally
fixed to the superficial towel with a non-penetrating towel clamp.
19: Preparation for surgery
211
the frst scrub of the day should last 5 minutes and the fol-
4. Vasseur PB, et al. Surgical wound infection rates in dogs and
lowing scrubs on the same day 2-5 minutes, but the manu-
cats. Data from a teaching hospital. Vet Surg 1988;17:60-64.
facturers’ recommendations for the different types of scrub
5. Brown DC, et al. Epidemiologic evaluation of postoperative
wound infections in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
must be followed. The fngernails and nail beds host a high
1997;210:1302-1306.
number of bacteria and should be cleaned thoroughly. Gowns
6. Eugster S, et al. A prospective study of postoperative surgical
should be water-resistant, and made of tough material.
site jnfections in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 2004;33:542-550.
7. Beal MW, et al. The effects of perioperative hypothermia and
Gowns that cover the back of the surgeon are recommended.
the duration of anesthesia on postoperative wound infection
The gown is put on with the help of an assistant and the
rate in clean wounds: a retrospective study. Vet Surg
hands of the surgeon stay inside the sleeves until the gloves
2000;29:123-127.
are put on. A closed gloving technique is used. Up to 31%
8. Nicholson M, et al. Epidemiologic evaluation of postoperative
of gloves have perforations at the end of surgery (15), and
wound infection in clean-contaminated wounds: a retrospective
study of 239 dogs and cats. Vet Surg 2002;31:577-581.
although perforations have not been associated with increased
9. Heldmann E, et al. The association of propofol usage with
surgical wound infection rates, probably because surgical
postoperative wound infection rate in clean wounds: a retro-
hand scrubs have reduced bacterial counts on the skin, the
spective study. Vet Surg 1999;28:256-259.
gloves should be exchanged if perforation is noticed intraop-
10. Whittem TL, et al. Effect of perioperative prophylactic antimi-
 crobial treatment in dogs undergoing elective orthopedic surgery.
eratively. Talc and cornstarch particles may induce inflam-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999;215:212-216.
matory reactions when entering a wound, and starch causes
11. Rosin E, et al. Cefazolin antibacterial activity and concentra-
synovial necrosis in joints (16). Powdered gloves should
tions in serum and the surgical wound in dogs. Am J Vet Res
 therefore be cleaned with a sponge soaked in sterile isotonic
1993;54:1317-1321.
12. Stubbs WP, Bellah JR, et al. Chlorhexidine gluconate versus
solution before skin incision.
chloroxylenol for preoperative skin preparation in dogs. Vet
Surg 1996;25:487-494.
13. Hambraeus A, Malmborg AS. The influence of different foot-
References and further reading
wear on floor contamination. Scand J Infect Dis 1979;11:
243-246.
1. Kolata RJ, et al. Patterns of trauma in urban dogs and cats:
14. Shmon C. Assessment and preparation of the surgical patient
a study of 1000 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1974;164:
and the operating team. In: Slatter D (ed.) Textbook of small
499-502.
animal surgery, 3rd edn. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003: pp.
2. Griffon D, et al. Thoracic injuries in cats with traumatic frac-
162-178.
tures. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1994;7:98-100.
15. Dodds RD, Barker SG, et al. Self protection in surgery: the use
 3. Rochlitz I. Clinical study of cats injured and killed in road traffic
of double gloves. Br J Surg 1990;77:219-220.
accidents in Cambridgeshire. J Small Anim Pract 2004;45:
16. Singh I, Chow WL, et al. Synovial reaction to glove powder.
390-394.
Clin Orthop 1974;99:285-292.
213
20
Postoperative care
K. Voss, F. Steffen
The aim of postoperative care is to aid a rapid and complete
and until the pin tracts are sealed with granulation tissue.
 recovery from surgery. Appropriate analgesia, general care,
After that only the cut ends of the transosseous pins and the
 and nutrition must be provided in the early postoperative
connecting bar are protected to avoid self-trauma.
period. Postoperative analgesia should be a synergistic and a
Cats with uncomplicated fractures can usually be dis-
natural extension of pre- and perioperative analgesia and its
 charged from the hospital the day after surgery, provided the
 provision should be considered and planned before surgery
owners are supplied with analgesics to give to the cat (Chapter
according to the severity of pain expected. Nutritional
18). Cats can be discharged with fentanyl patches, or
demand is high after injury and major surgery. Cats are
buprenorphine can be given intrabuccally by the owners after
peculiar in their eating habits when under stress or in pain,
painful procedures; however, there are serious concerns
and they may reject food intake. Nutritional support is there-
regarding legislation and abuse of these drugs so these only
fore often required in postoperative management of trauma-
should be dispensed in selected cases. Non-steroidal anti-
tized cats. Postoperative care also includes instructions for
 inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), especially meloxicam, can be
the owners regarding the management of their cat at home.
Depending on the type of lesion and the stability achieved at
 of NSAIDs has a potential to slow down fracture healing (1),
 surgery, immobilization of the limb may be necessary for a
but using meloxicam for 3-7 days in the postoperative period
certain period and this can involve vigilant and intensive
will not have a clinically relevant effect.
postoperative monitoring by the owner. Postoperative care
The owners should be instructed about the normal expected
may also require rehabilitation therapy to optimize return to
function after orthopedic and neurosurgery.
associated signs. Internal fracture fxation should be stable
 Postoperative care of patients with fractures or joint inju-
ries, postoperative care of the neurological patient, and nutri-
running, playing, and jumping on high objects should be
tional support of critically ill cats are described in the
 prevented. In selected cases with limited fracture fxation
following sections. Analgesia is described in Chapter 18, and 
stability, the cat might need to be confined to a cage or a
physical therapy is covered in Chapter 21.
single room for 2-4 weeks. Cages should be large enough to
 include a padded surface for sleeping and resting, room for
20.1 Postoperative care of the
a litter box or tray, water and food bowls, and some kind of
fracture patient
a hiding place, such as a cardboard box. Large dog crates, a
rabbit run, or a baby's playpen are suitable.
Most cats recover quickly after fracture repair if they are
The time and frequency of clinical and radiographic frac-
otherwise healthy. The surgical site should be protected for
ture reassessment depend on the age of the cat, presence of
2-3 days postoperatively with a sterile dressing to prevent
soft-tissue injuries, fracture type, location in the bone, and
contamination of the skin wound. A light bandage may be
implants used. As a general rule, radiographs are obtained
applied to help reduce limb sweling and edema in patients
after 2-3 weeks in immature cats, after 3-4 weeks in young
with fractures distal to the elbow or stifle joint. Prolonged
adult cats, and after 4-6 weeks in older cats. Fractures sta-
and unnecessary external immobilization of a limb should be
bilized with external fixators need frequent clinical checks to
avoided to prevent development of pressure sores, and to
reduce and manage complications with pin tracts (Chapter
allow early weight-bearing, joint motion, and muscle func-
24). Owners of cats treated with external skeletal fxators
tion. Exceptions to this rationale are fractures where stability
tend to be more reliable in returning them for follow-up
of the fixation is considered insufficient for immediate weight-
examinations compared to owners of cats treated with inter-
bearing, where only small, flexible implants have been used
nal fixation devices (2).
(e.g., metacarpal/metatarsal fracture repair), and in the pres-
Rehabilitation therapy is not yet widely used in cats, mainly
un puooas q ieaq oi al arn ie spuom jo aoa
because of concerns about the cat's dislike for manipulation.
 External skeletal fixators are covered with a bandage only for
 Despite this, physical therapy is possible and beneficial in
the frst few postoperative days to reduce swelling and edema,
 many feline patients, if conducted correctly and with patience
214
Part 5: The surgical patient
(Chapter  21). Cats with
1  uncomplicated fractures and
has a protective effect on cartilage (5), but this is difficult to
stable repair usually start to use their limbs the day after
perform in cats. A splinted bandage does allow minimal joint
surgery, and physical therapy may not be necessary. Owners
motion, and in this respect is preferable over rigid joint
should be encouraged to observe the degree of lameness and
 immobilization with an external skeletal fixator but in prac-
palpate joint range of motion and muscle mass, to be able to
 tice may be more difficult to keep on a fractious cat.
evaluate improverment of their cat. Lack of early limb use or
All cats with severe joint injuries should be kept in the
failure to improve, reduced range of joint motion, and loss
house for 3 months to avoid strenuous activity. Analgesia is
 of muscle mass are all indications for rehabilitation therapy
 provided during the early postoperative period as described
if the signs are not associated with complications of the frac-
 n n n      o
ture repair. Rehabilitation therapy should be instituted early
 treatment of joint injuries. It is indicated in cats after pro-
if indicated.
longed joint immobilization to improve range of motion and
joint function, and in those that are non-weight-bearing after
20.2 Postoperative care of the patient
surgery. Physical therapy is described in Chapter 21.
with joint injuries
20.3 Postoperative care of the
Severe joint injuries require postoperative immobilization
neurological patient
after reconstruction to protect the surgical repair and allow
fbrosis and healing of periarticular tissues. Joint immobiliza-
 Postoperative care of neurosurgical patients is labor-intensive
tion may involve application of splints, slings, or rigid joint
and time-consuming, especially in non-ambulatory animals.
immobilization with a transarticular external fixator depend-
Pain management (Chapter 18) and adequate nursing care
ing on the joint involved and the type of injury sustained. No
will enhance physical well-being in the recovery period, and
 general rules exist for how long a joint should be immobilized
encourage food and water intake. Neurosurgical procedures
after various injuries and procedures. The need for joint
are painful and adequate peri- and postoperative analgesia
immobilization depends on the injury sustained and the
must be provided. Opioid analgesics are most effective. They
amount of preoperative instability, stability achieved after
are always indicated in the immediate postoperative period,
surgery or reduction, and inherent anatomic stability of a
and are usually given for a couple of days in the form of
joint.
fentanyl patches or subcutaneous or intrabuccal buprenor-
Immobilization for 10-14 days is usually sufficient, even in
phine. NSAIDs should be used very cautiously as neurosurgi
the presence of multiple ligamentous injuries, in joints with
cal patients tend to develop gastrointestinal disorders.
good stability due to joint congruency and bone conforma-
Hydration and nutrition must be provided until the cat drinks
tion, such as the temporomandibular, elbow, and hip joint.
and eats on its own.
 In other joints, such as the carpus, tarsus, and stifle, an exter-
Non-ambulatory cats are less prone to decubital ulceration
nal splint or transarticular external fxator is often left in
than dogs due to their low body weight, but patients should
place for 3-4 weeks after multiple ligament injuries or luxa-
 still be provided with adequate padding in the form of spe-
tions. The period of immobilization should be long enough
cially manufactured pet bedding (synthetic bedding that is
 for periarticular scar tissue and fibrosis to develop, providing
water-repellent) and a carpet or clean towel, and they must
 pn a p on s r
be kept clean and dry to avoid urine scald. Grooming care is
activity. A soft bandage may be applied for an additional
essential for the well-being of paralyzed cats as they are not
week or two to increase weight-bearing forces slowly. Weight-
able to reach every part of their body. The hair coat should
bearing is important in this phase of healing, as the longitu-
be brushed and cleaned daily to improve mental well-being.
dinal orientation of the collagen fibers depends on the presence
A neck brace or buster collar may be necessary to prevent
of moderate tensile forces across the wound.
 self-mutilation in cats with denervation injury.
 Prolonged joint immobilization causes periarticular fbro-
The ability to urinate voluntarily is often absent in non-
sis, loss of range of motion, and cartilage softening and
 ambulatory cats with spinal cord lesions due to upper motor
degeneration (3). Structural and biochemical cartilage changes
can already be apparent after 4 weeks of rigid immobilization
of the detrusor reflex. Manual expression of the urinary
(4). Ideally, immobilization should therefore not exceed 4
 bladder or catheterization has to be performed at least two
weeks, although prolonged immobilization may be required
to three times daily in these patients to prevent overdistension
in selected cases. For example a transarticular external skel-
 of the bladder and urinary infections. Placement of a urinary
etal fxator applied to a joint with a degloving injury should
catheter with a closed urine collection system is indicated
be left in place until the soft-tissue injuries have healed, which
 when the bladder is difcult to express, and if the patient is
may take longer than 4 weeks. Continuous passive motion
 diffcult to handle. Micturition may be medically supported.
20: Postoperative care
215
Phenoxybenzamine (0.25-0.5 mg/cat PO BID) is used to
 the individual patient. Establishing a specifc protocol for
relax the internal urinary sphincter. Bethanechol chloride
each patient may be helpful and the owner can be involved
(2 mg/kg PO BID) enhances bladder contractility but should
in the care after instruction from the veterinarian and phys-
 only be given after urethral relaxation.
iotherapist. See Chapter 21 for further information about
Cats with fractures and luxations of the spine are kept in
 feline physiotherapy.
a cage for at least 10 days. They are then allowed to move
 around in the house under supervision if they are ambulatory.
20.4 Nutritional support
Jumping activities must be prevented for about 8 weeks.
Physical therapy is of great value, especially in non-ambula-
 Many polytraumatized cats and cats following major surgery
tory cats. Physical therapy includes massage and passive
are reluctant to eat for several days, and at the same time
movements of paralyzed limbs, and gait exercises to improve
they have an enhanced nutritional demand. This results in a
neurological recovery. Intensive physical therapy helps in the
 negative energy balance and patients are at risk for decreased
prevention of joint stiffness and muscle atrophy, and improves 
immune competence, decreased tissue synthesis and repair,
circulation and production of collagen. The physical therapy
and altered drug metabolism (6). Overweight cats may also
can help decrease tissue adhesions and inflammation. A
develop hepatic lipidosis during phases of anorexia. Nutri-
suggestion for a physical care plan for non-ambulatory
tional support should ideally start within 24 hours of injury.
animals is given in Box 20-1. Physiotherapists may be able
The goal is to provide exogenous sources of energy and pro-
to apply more specific exercises tailored to the problem of
teins, thus sparing endogenous sources and preventing a cata-
bolic state and muscle wasting.
An anorexic cat may start eating if the food is prepared
 according to its preference. The owners can be asked to bring
Box 20-1. Suggestion for physical therapy in a non-
in their cat's favorite diet. The smell of the food plays an
ambulatory cat, ideally performed three times
important role in dietary preference in cats (7). Most cats like
daily
fat, and fat may be used as a flavor enhancer on dried kibble
(7). Warming canned food in a microwave enhances the smell 
Therapeutic hot packing of affected limbs. Place the
of the food and may initiate food intake. Cats reject food if
limb in heated towels or on covered hot-water bottles
served at temperatures lower than 15*C and higher than
 for approximately 20 minutes
50°C (8). Low-dose intravenous diazepam (0.1-0.2 mg/kg)
Massage of the paralyzed limbs with simple hand tech-
can be given as an appetite stimulant and is sometimes suc-
nique, beginning with the distal part of the affected
cessful in geting a previously anorexic cat eating again. It
limb. Apply moderate pressure with the fngertips.
should not be used repeatedly to avoid side-effects.
 Knead or twist the skin and larger muscle groups with
the palm of the hand
20.4.1 Nutritional needs
Passive range-of-motion exercises. Hold the foot with
one hand and grasp the stifle or elbow with the other.
Diseased animals have energy requirements near their resting
Pull the limb forward and then back in a circling
 energy requirement (RER) (6). Metabolic rates are enhanced
motion. Assess range of motion and repeat the exer-
in traumatized patients and patients with sepsis. RER can be
cise several times.
easily calculated with the equation shown in Box 20-2. RER
Flexion/extension exercises. Perform 5-10 flexions and
of a cat with a body weight of 5 kg is around 200 kcalday.
 extensions of each joint before flexing the entire
At least 50% but preferably 100% of RER must be fed daily
limb
ao pue sso n o) poad anadsod a 
 Proprioceptive exercises. Support the animal in a stand-
wasting indicate insuffcient calorie uptake, and in these cir-
ing position and place paws in a correct position.
 cumstances energy and protein supplementation should be
Move the body slightly to and fro under maintenance
 enhanced. Cats have a higher protein demand than dogs (7),
of a physiological posture
and the protein content of a food should be 6-8 g/100 kcal
Gait exercises. Support the paretic animal with a sling/
(6). Nutritional support is required if patients voluntarily
towel around the abdomen (and chest if necessary).
consume less than 50% of their RER over the frst 24
 Follow the movements of the cat slowly and support
hours (6).
spontaneous movements. If the cat is reluctant to
Other nutritional needs that should be considered in cats
move with this support, let it move freely in the
 are the essential amino acids, especially taurine and arginine,
room
 and vitamins. Although most veterinary diets contain argi-
nine, the demand may be higher in cats with traumatic or
216
 Part 5: The surgical patient
cated in orthopedic and trauma patients. Insertion of naso-
 Box 20-2. Calculation of resting energy require-
esophageal and esophagostomy tubes is described below.
ments (RER)
Only liquid food can be introduced through the small-
 diameter nasoesophageal tubes. An adequate liquid food for
Cats larger than 5 Ib (2.5 kg) BW: RER kcalday = 20
cats is CliniCare Feline (Abbott Laboratories, Chicago, IL).
x BW Ib (= 40 x BW kg)
CliniCare has an energy content of 1 kcalml and a protein
Cats smaller than 5 Ib (2.5 kg) BW: RER kcal/day = 25
content of 6-8 g/100 kcal. Approximately 200 ml meet the
x BW Ib (= 50 x BW kg)
RER of a 5-kg cat. Esophagostomy and gastrostomy tubes
 allow feeding with blended diets mixed with water. Hills a/d
Bw, body weight.
is a high-energy thick liquid diet (Hill's Pet Nurition, Topeka,
KS). It contains 1.3 kcal/100 ml and 8.3 g protein/100 kcal.
A cat with a body weight of 5 kg would need about 160 ml/
day (Table 20-2). Cats have a stomach capacity of around
surgical wounds. Arginine supplementation improves nitro-
5-10 ml/kg body weight during initial food introduction.
gen balance and immune function, and enhances formation
Maximal stomach capacity is around 50 ml/kg body weight.
of new collagen in traumatized animals (6, 9, 10). The optimal
Enteral feeding should be started by giving small quantities.
arginine concentration is not known, but 100-400 mg/kg per
  d s t  s s  si s
day has been shown to improve healing of burn wounds in
vomiting occurs even smaller amounts should be fed at a
rats (9). Oral supplementation of arginine may therefore be 
higher frequency. In cats that have been anorexic for several
beneficial in polytraumatized cats. Arginine is available as a
days, food has to be introduced slowly, with one-third of
food supplement for people (Dynamisan).
RER given on the frst day, two-thirds on the second day,
B-complex vitamins (folic acid, thiamin, and others) are
and the full dose on the third day.
With both nasoesophageal and esophageal feeding tubes it
essential for hepatic metabolism of glucose, fat, and protein.
All diets contain B-complex vitamins, but they should be
is extremely important to introduce the food slowly with a
 supplied when the cat is not eating. Vitamin B can be added
syringe to avoid regurgitation and aspiration pneumonia.
to intravenous fluids.
 Sterile saline is injected into the tube before feeding is begun.
 The position of the tube is checked radiographically if cough-
20.4.2 Enteral feeding
ing or regurgitation occurs. The tube is cleaned with water
after every feeding session to avoid drying of food particles
 Nutritional support may be provided enterally and parenter-
in the tube and tube obstruction. This is especially important
ally. Enteral support is easy to administer and cost-effcient,
 in the small-diameter nasoesophageal tubes. Tube position
and is usually adequate for traumatized cats. The most
should also be checked if vomiting occurs, as this can result
important and practical aspects of enteral nutritional support
in tube displacement (14).
are summarized in the following section. For a more detailed
discussion on nutritional support and parenteral feeding the
Insertion of a nasoesophageal feeding tube
reader is referred to specialized textbooks.
Enteral feeding can be provided via nasoesophageal tubes,
Polyurethane or silicon feeding tubes can be used as naso-
esophagostomy tubes, gastrostomy tubes, and jejunostomy
esophageal tubes. The 5-French size is appropriate for most
tubes. Advantages, disadvantages, and potential complica-
cats. A drop of lidocaine is placed into the nasal passage
tions of different tubes are summarized in Table 20-1. Naso-
before tube insertion. The distance from the nares to the
esophageal tubes are easy to insert without sedation or
eighth intercostal space is premeasured to estimate the length
anesthesia. They are only indicated in cats requiring short-
of tube to be inserted, and a mark is made on the tube at the
term nutritional support. In cats with facial trauma, esopha-
 appropriate point. The tube is then inserted carefully into the
 gostomy or gastrostomy tubes may be preferred to avoid
ventral meatus and advanced slowly. The head of the cat
additional occlusion of the nasal meatus. Gastrostomy tubes
should be held in flexion during advancement of the tube into
can be inserted surgically or percutaneously with or without
  go y a n o  d a
endoscopic control, and are often used in patients requiring
placement into the trachea (Fig. 20-1A and 20-1B). Most cats 
long-term feeding (11-13). Esophagostomy tubes are a viable
will swallow as the tube is passed through the proximal
alternative for long-term feeding (14). They are easier to
 esophageal sphincter. The tube is advanced up to the previ-
insert, do not require specialized equipment, and have similar
ously marked point and is then secured to the skin adjacent
complication rates and owner acceptance as gastrostomy
to the nares with superglue (Fig. 20-1C). Correct positioning
tubes (15). Jejunostomy tubes are rarely necessary or indi-
 of the tube is checked by injection of sterile saline. Coughing
20: Postoperative care
217
 Feeding tube
Advantages
Disadvantages
Potential complications
Nasoesophageal tube
Very easy to place
pooy pmb kjuo
 Inadvertent placement into airways
 No anesthesia needed
 Only short-term feeding
 Aspiration pneumonia if food is
No additional
 Should not be used in cats
injected too rapidly
trauma/surgery
with facial trauma
Esophagostomy tube
 Easy to place
Anesthesia needed
Local infection
Long-term feeding
Not for patients with
 Inadvertent placement into
possible
 pharyngeal and esophageal
 mediastinum
Can be removed any time
trauma
Aspiration pneumonia if food is
applied too rapidly
Gastrostomy tube
 Comfortable for patient
Anesthesia needed
Local infection
(surgical,
 Ideal for long-term
 More diffcult to place
 Inadvertent damage to other
percutaneous with/
feeding
Special instrumentation needed
organs (percutaneous technique)
without endoscopic
Must be left in place for at
Septic peritonitis if tube dislodges
control)
least 10 days
prematurely (less likely if placed
surgically)
Table 20-1. Advantages, disadvantages, and potential complications of different feeding tubes
 Product
Energy and proteins contained
Amount to be fed per day
CliniCare Feline (Abbott)
Energy 1 kcal/ml
200 ml
Protein 8.2 g/100 kcal
Prescription diet a/d (Hills)
 Energy: 1.3 kcal/ml
160 ml
Protein: 8.3 g/100 kcal
Two cans prescription diet a/d (Hills) mixed with 50 ml 
Energy: 1 kcal/ml
200 ml
water
Protein: 8.3 g/100 kcal
 Reconvalescence support feline (Waltham)
1.2 kcal/ml
170 ml
1 sachet (50 g) mixed with 150 ml water
Protein: 8.7 g/100 kcal
Table 20-2. Examples of type and amount of food to be fed. A cat with a body weight of 5 kg needs at least 200 kcal/day to meet the resting
energy requirement (RER), with an ideal protein content of 6-8 g/100 kcal
should occur if the tube is inserted in the trachea. An addi-
correct positioning. An Elizabethan collar prevents the cat
tional test is to attempt air aspiration by attaching a syringe
from removing the tube.
to the tube; air can be aspirated if the tube is in the trachea,
but not if it is in the esophagus, because negative pressure
Insertion of an esophagostomy feeding tube
created by gentle suction on the syringe will collapse the
esophagus. Tubes with radiodense markers are ideal as
A 10-14 French red rubber tube is commonly used as an
correct tube placement can be checked radiographically (Fig.
 esophageal feeding tube. The cat is anesthetized and the left
20-2). A nasoesophageal tube can be placed straight after
cervical area is aseptically prepared. A curved Kelly forcep is
surgery while the cat is still under anesthesia. Direct visualiza-
Jo sdn a (e-oz a) snaeudos jesiaian a oun paas
tion of the tube with a laryngoscope as it disappears through
the forceps are pressed against the skin, dorsal to the jugular
the upper esophageal sphincter can then be used to verify
vein. The tube length is premeasured from the tube insertion
218
Part 5: The surgical patient
A
c
Figure 20-1  Insertion of a nasoesophageal feeding tube
(A) The tube is inserted into the ventral nasal meatus after a drop of lidocaine has been instilled .
(B) Flexing the neck of the cat helps direct the tube into the esophagus. Most conscious cats swallow once the tube has entered the esophagus.
(C) The tube is inserted the premeasured distance. It can be fixed just laterally to the nasal plane with a drop of superglue. The correct position of
 the tube is then controlled.
through the proximal esophageal sphincter. The tube end,
which is still protruding from the incision site, is carefully
retracted to allow advancement of the tip of the tube further
down the esophagus without kinking or curling of the tube.
Care is taken not to remove the tube inadvertently during this
step of the procedure. The tube should be advanced up to the
premeasured length and secured to the skin with a Chinese
fngertrap suture (Fig. 20-3). The tube insertion site can be
protected with a light neck bandage. An Elizabethan collar
may have to be applied in cats that scratch at their tube.
Another technique has been described in which the esopha-
inom sneudos a ou aap panrasui si aqn Auonso
the need for retrieving it and redirecting it through the oral
cavity (16). The tube is inserted with the help of a tube appli-
cator (esophageal feeding tube applicator, Fixomed, Munich,
Figure 20-2 Laterolateral radiograph of the thorax of a cat after
Germany), which allows insertion of the esophageal tube
insertion of a feeding tube. The tip of the tube should be located in
directly in a distal direction after the skin and esophageal wall
the esophagus between the heart base and the cardia, ideally at the
have been incised with a scalpel blade (Fig. 20-4).
eighth intercostal space.
 Correct tube positioning is checked radiographically, and
by inserting sterile saline before each feeding session, as
site to the eighth intercostal space. A small longitudinal inci-
described above.
sion through the overlying skin and esophageal wall is then
 Cats can still eat despite the presence of an esophagostomy
performed with a scalpel blade. The tip of the tube is securely
tube. The tube is removed once the patient has resumed an
 grasped with the Kelly forceps and retrieved through the oral
adequate oral food uptake. The incision is left open for
cavity. The tip of the tube is then redirected and inserted
second-intention healing.
20: Postoperative care
219
C
D
Figure 20-3 Insertion of an esophagostomy feeding tube.
uoisou! leabeudosa aui woy agnt buipaa, Auoisobeydosa aul jo dll aui dseh oi pasn s! sdano, Allay pauno  ()
(B) The tip of the tube is guided through the oral cavity with the help of the Kelly forceps.
uoisui aul sassed agni aul jo d aul late uaei ag isn aey 'snbeudosa aui oui Aen eo ai woy paapan uaul s! agnt aul jo di aul ()
site to ensure that it is advanced correctly down the esophagus.
(D) The tube is inserted the premeasured distance, and is fixed to the skin with a Chinese fingertrap suture.
220
Part 5: The surgical patient
 References and further reading
1.Wheeler P, Batt ME. Do non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
adversely affect stress fracture healing? A short review. Br J
Sports Med 2005;39:65-69.
Emmerson TD, Muir P. Bone plate removal in dogs and cats.
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1999;12:74-77.
3.
 Piermattei DL, Flo GL. Principles of joint surgery In: Piermattei
DL, Flo GL (eds) Small animal orthopedics and fracture repair,
3rd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1997: pp. 201-217.
4.
Vanwanseele B, et al. The effects of immobilization on the char-
acteristics of articular cartilage: current concepts and future
directions. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2002;10:408-419.
 Salter RB. The biologic concept of continuous passive motion
of synovial joints. The first 18 years of basic research and its
clinical application. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1989;242:12-25.
Remillard RL. Nutritional support in critical care patients. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2002;32:1145-1164.
 Zaghini G, Biagi G. Nutritional pecularities and diet palatability
110°
in the cat. Vet Res Commun 2005;29:39-44.
8.
Sohail MA. The ingestive behaviour of the domestic cat: a
review. Nutrition Abstracts Rev 1983;53:177-186.
Chen X, et al. Dose-effect of dietary L-arginine supplementation
on burn wound healing in rats. Chin Med J (Engl) 1999;112:
828-831.
10. Shi HP, et al. Supplemental L-arginine enhances wound healing
in diabetic rats. Wound Repair Regen 2003;11:198-203.
11. Mauterer JV, et al. New technique and management guidelines
for percutaneous nonendoscopic tube gastrostomy. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 1994;205:574-579.
12. Mauterer JV. Endoscopic and nonendoscopic percutaneous gas-
trostomy tube placement. In: Bonagura JD (ed.) Kirk's veterj-
nary therapy. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1995: pp. 669-674.
13. Han E. Esophageal and gastric feeding tubes in ICU patients.
c
Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 2004;19:22-31.
 Figure 20-4 Insertion of an esophagostomy feeding tube with the
14. Devitt CM, Seim HB. Clinical evaluation of tube esophagos-
tomy in small animals. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1997;33:
help of an applicator.
(A) The applicator is inserted into the esophagus.
55-60.
15. Ireland LM, et al. A comparison of owner management and
(B) It is then turned until the widened insertion area with its slot can be 
complications in 67 cats with esophagostomy and percutaneous
 palpated laterally. The skin and esophageal wall are incised over the
endoscopic gastrostomy feeding tubes. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 slot and a feeding tube is inserted into the esophagus, without the 
2003;39:241-246.
need for redirecting it through the oral cavity.
16. Von Werthern CJ, Wess G. A new technique for insertion of
(C) The applicator is turned back and is removed. The tube is fixed to
esophagostomy tubes in cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2001;
the skin with a Chinese fingertrap suture, as shown in Figure 20-3D
37:140-144.
(Reprinted with permission from Von Werthern CJ, Wess G. A new
technique for insertion of esophagostomy tubes in cats. J Am Anim 
Hosp Ass0c 2001;37:140-144.)
221
21
Rehabilitation of the cat
S. Hudson
The field of feline rehabilitation has been slow to take hold
due to the perceived idea that the cat will not cooperate with
Box 21-1. Important factors for successful rehabili-
the physical therapy modalities or perform therapeutic exer-
tation therapy in cats
cises. However physical rehabilitation is a very effctive
modality in cats, provided that feline behavior and personal-
Factors that facilitate productive and safe rehabili-
ity are taken into account (1). Specific orthopedic conditions
tation session
that beneft from physical therapy include postoperative frac-
Quiet environment free of other animals
ture repair postoperative joint repair and osteoarthritis
Presence of owner
management.
No rushing
Confdent application of modality or introduction of
exercise
21.1 Principles of rehabilitation
Sedation
dia ieu saniuan jo uonndde au si Adnaun pisi
 Pain management
restore function, improve mobility, relieve pain, and prevent
Second attempt at an exercise is more diffcult than
or limit permanent physical disabilities of patients suffering
frst
 from injuries or disease. Identical modalities and similar exer-
Closed area to reduce risk of escaping cat
cises used in the human feld can be applied to the animal.
Studies have shown effectiveness of physical therapy tech-
niques applied to the dog (2, 3). Veterinary physical therapy
and rehabilitation is a relatively new feld. Certification pro-
grams and continuing education programs for canine and
and proprioception as in the early weight-bearing phase;
equine patients are providing raining for veterinarians, vet-
however, the exercises are longer and more strenuous.
erinary technicians, and physical therapists. There is not cur-
Gait training is used when the cat moves in a way that is
rently a program designed specifically for the cat.
 not normal following an injury or procedure. Gait training
 Rehabilitation can be used to provide immediate postop-
identifes and addresses the areas that need to improve to
erative care, early weight-bearing training, progressive
produce a normal gait pattern.
weight-bearing training, advanced conditioning, gait train-
Conditioning can be defined as controlled exercise to
ing, management of chronic pain, and conservative manage-
improve the body composition of an overweight cat. Reduc-
ment for certain conditions or as an alternative to some
tion in body weight and improvement in muscle strength and
surgeries.
endurance may be the most important elements to improve
The primary focus of rehabilitation immediately following
the quality of life of the older cat.
surgery is to reduce pain, swelling, and edema that can result
 Rehabilitation is designed to provide the most complete
from trauma to tissue. Efforts are made to preserve range of
return to function posible while reducing the risk of addi-
motion and muscle mass to speed return to normal activities.
tional injury. Factors that facilitate a productive and safe
This is usually all passive rehabilitation, and may begin before
 rehabilitation session are summarized in Box 21-1. Not every
 the cat has fully recovered from anesthesia.
exercise or modality is well suited for every cat. It is impor-
 In the early postoperative stage, the goal is to begin to
tant to have several alternative ways to reach rehabilitation
 improve strength and endurance of muscles, increase range
goals.
of joint motion, and improve proprioception. At this stage
the cat may be non-weight-bearing or just barely placing a
21.2 Four target areas of rehabilitation
toe of the injured limb on the ground.
 As the cat begins to use the injured limb more, the progres-
The goal of rehabilitation is restoration of the quality of life
sive weight-bearing stage begins. The focus in this stage is on
and function for the cat through improvement of the bones,
increasing muscle strength, endurance, joint range of motion,
 joints, and muscles. The four primary target areas of reha-
222   Part 5: The surgical patient
bilitation are strength, endurance, range of motion, and 21.3 Passive and active rehabilitation
proprioception.
Rehabilitation can be divided into two specifc categories.
21.2.1 Strength
Passive modalities require no participation from the cat and
include cold and heat therapy, passive range of motion,
Muscle atrophy can occur due to disease, injury, lack of use,
stretching, massage therapy, electrical stimulation, and ultra-
or lack of nerve impulse. Strength activities increase the
 sound. Active rehabilitation requires active participation
size of muscle fbers. Increasing strength can help with the
from the cat, and includes exercise therapy, gait training, and
stability of the joint.
aquatic therapy.
21.2.2 Endurance
21.3.1 Passive rehabilitation
Prolonged contraction of a muscle leads to muscle fatigue due
Thermal agents
to the inability of the metabolic process of the fibers to supply
The application of heat or cold is used to increase or decrease
 nutrients at the level required for the workout. Endurance
 can be defned as the amount of time between the beginning
the temperature of the tissue around a joint and can be used
throughout a rehabilitation program. The use of heat versus
of physical activity and the end because of exhaustion or
cold is determined by the tissue's stage of recovery.
fatigue. Endurance exercises increase the oxidative capacity
of the muscle, making it more resistant to fatigue. Improving
Application of cold therapy. The application of cold is
endurance helps the cat return to its normal level of
used to reduce bleeding and inflammation, and to decrease
activity.
pain. Specific indications for the use of cold include muscu-
21.2.3 Range of motion
loskeletal injury following orthopedic surgery, treatment of
muscular pain, and postexercise soreness.
Range of motion is the capability of a joint to go through its 
Cold can be applied using ice packs, cold packs, or
complete spectrum of movements. It can be passive or active.
iced towels. In addition, compression can be applied with
 the cold to help reduce or prevent edema. When applying
Passive range of motion can be defined as what is achieved 
when an outside force, such as a therapist, causes movement
 cold treatments, place a thin layer of material between the
of a joint. It is usually the maximum range of motion. Active
  a a n  s an p  
range of motion is what can be achieved when opposing
 Placing a towel over the cold pack also avoids loss of cold to
muscles contract and relax, resulting in joint movement.
the environment. Cold therapy is usually applied for 10
 Active range of motion is usually less than the passive range
 minutes, one to four times a day. Even one application of
of motion.
cold during the frst 24 hours of trauma has been shown to
 be benefcial in the reduction of swelling and pain in the
soft-tissue and joint lesions, maintaining existing joint and
human patient.
 Cold should not be applied if the cat has cold hypersensitiv-
soft-tissue mobility, minimizing the effects of contracture
formation, assisting neuromuscular re-education, and enhanc-
ity, decreased or absent sensation, and it should not be
ing synovial movement. Measurement of range of motion can
applied directly over areas with compromised circulation.
 be used to evaluate available motion, determine joint stabil-
The skin should be inspected if the cat shows unusual signs
 of discomfort. Immediately postoperatively, while the cat is
ity, and determine soft-tissue elasticity as well as response to
h still under anesthesia, may be the only time that the cat toler-
therapy over time. The evaluation of a joint's end feel, which
a passive movement of the joint, will provide information 
 performed with the cat resting in the lap of the therapist and
about the complete range of motion for that joint (Table
ned ai puore padderm naruig e
21-1).
21.2.4 Proprioception
to increase metabolism, increase soft-tissue extensibility, and
decrease pain. Heat should only be used after signs of inflam-
motor control and posture. These mechanisms along with the 
 spasm, tissue tightness, adhesions, and pain. In the manage-
vestibular  system  help  the body remain  oriented  and
 ment of osteoarthritis, heat may be used to help loosen tight
balanced.
muscles around a joint to improve flexibility. Heat is often
21: Rehabilitation of the cat
223
 End feel
Description
Example (normal)
Example (abnormal)
Bone on bone
Abrupt halt to movement when two hard
Carpal extension
Shoulder flexion
surfaces meet
 Cervical extension
Capsular
Elastic arrest of movement with some give
Hip flexion
Shoulder flexion
Hip extension
Shoulder extension
Empty
Unable to reach end range due to painful
All joints
reaction of cat, no tissue tension felt
useds
 Muscle spasm actively occurs when
All joints
attempting range of motion
Springy block
 Rebound of both extreme ends of range of
Common with meniscal
motion due to intra-articular displacement
injury
 Tissue approximation
Range of motion stopped due to secondary
Stifle flexion
 engagement against a muscle
Table 21-1. Joint end feels
used within the frst days to weeks after surgery, once the
Figure 21-1  Most
initial inflammation has decreased.
cats tolerate 
application of heat
Superfcial heat can be applied using heat packs (Fig. 21-1).
Application time is 10 minutes two to four times per day.
well.
Remove the heat source if the cat shows any signs of
discomfort.
Heat therapy should not be used if any signs of inflamma-
tion are present, such as redness or swelling. Heat should not
be used on animals with decreased or absent sensation, over
malignancies or over an active infection.
Electrical stimulation
Electrical stimulation can be used to increase muscle strength,
to attenuate atrophy, for pain control, and to reduce edema.
Positive results have been documented with the use of electri-
cal stimulation on the dog (4). It should not be used on cats
with pacemakers or seizure disorders. It should also not be
used over the trunk of pregnant females, in patients that
cannot give feedback, over infected areas, or in areas of
thrombosis. Active motion is contraindicated. The animal's
management of pain due to post-traumatic, postoperative, or
reaction to electrical stimulation should be carefully
chronic pain.
monitored.
 The interferential waveform consists of two channels, each
Electrical stimulation recruits muscle fbers in reverse of
with a sinusoidal waveform, one fixed- and one variable-
volitional contractions. Electrical stimulation recruits the
frequency. The electrodes are positioned so that the two
fast-twitch fbers frst. The area to be stimulated must be
channels cross each other to stimulate large-impulse fibers.
clipped and cleaned before the electrodes can be properly
These frequencies interfere with the transmission of pain
 messages at the spinal cord level. Interferential stimulation
use on felines: continuous alternating current for pain and
allows for a deep penetration of the tissue with more comfort
edema or pulsed current for strengthening and edema.
and therefore more compliance than a transcutaneus electri-
cal nerve stimulation application.
Electrical stimulation for pain management. Two waveforms,
The premodulated waveform is an amplitude-modulated
interferential and premodulated, are generally used for the
sine wave that is similar to the beat frequency created by the
224
 Part 5: The surgical patient
interferential current. This is often used when the placement
ans jo suoe riar e d oi suopn jo ans
of four electrodes cannot be utilized.
 Use caution when using ultrasound over plastic or metal plate
The electrode placement should cover the entire area sus-
implants because the reflection may cause more intense
pected of pain. Specific frequency and phase duration of the
heating, leading to burns or discomfort.
stimulation will vary with each patient and condition. There
To begin the treatment, determine the depth of tissue to be
are many electrical stimulation units available with a variety
treated. Clip hair and clean skin (5). If the depth of tissue to
 of variables and recommended parameters.
be treated is up is 3 cm, select 3.3 MHz frequency (6, 7). If
the tissue to be treated is 2-5 cm in depth, select 1.0 MHz
Electrical stimulation for attenuation of muscle atrophy. Two
  assn os po n an ap  a
waves that can be used for muscle contraction are high-volt
 area. Intensity is the rate at which the energy is delivered into
and Russian. Locate the area where the motor nerve enters
 the area. Choose 1-2 W/cm? for areas with large amount of
 the muscle. This allows for optimum muscle contraction with 
1 soft tissue such as the caudal thigh muscles, choose 1-1.5 W/
as low a current as possible to increase the comfort level
cm² for areas with less soft tissue, and 0.5-1.0 W/cm? for
of the treatment. Apply the gel to the skin of the cat and place
areas with little soft tissue such as the carpus.
the electrode over the expected area of the motor point. Turn
Choose the mode, pulsed or continuous, depending on the
the unit on and move the electrode until the desired contrac-
type of thermal effects desired. Both give thermal and non-
tion is observed. Once identifed, the motor points can be
 thermal effects, but the pulsed ultrasound has a lower average
marked on the cat with an indelible marker for subsequent
 energy so the thermal effects are minimal. Pulsed ultrasound
treatments.
is available in 20% pulse and 50% pulse. Pulsed ultrasound
 The optimum time and frequency of treatment are unknown.
is selected when healing effects are desired with minimal
The generally accepted frequency is 25-50 Hz.
heating effects.
Treatment time can be calculated by determining the
Therapeutic ultrasound
number of transducer heads that fit into the treatment area
and multiplying that number by 2.5. The transducer head is
Therapeutic ultrasound is produced by applying an electric
 moved at a rate of 4 cm/sec in overlapping circles in the treat-
current to a crystal. The current causes the crystal to vibrate
ment area. Keep the beam at less than 15° to the surface of
at a resonant frequency, emitting pressure waves that are
the skin. Do not select a treatment area that requires more
absorbed by the tissue (Fig. 21-2).
 than 20 minutes treatment time. If a large treatment area is
Therapeutic ultrasound can be used to increase collagen
desired, select a larger transducer head or divide the area into
extensibility (stretch), increase blood flow, increase range of
different treatment session areas. Sessions are usually repeated
motion, decrease pain and muscle spasm, and accelerate
2-3 times per week.
wound healing. Ultrasound therapy generates ultrasonic
The application of therapeutic ultrasound to increase the
energy in continuous or pulsed form to produce thermal,
extension of a joint that has restricted movement can be
mechanical, and chemical effects in tissues. Ultrasound is
-uaui pue Kouanbarj aienidoidde aun aunidde Aq pauojiad
capable of separating collagen fbers and changing the tensile
sity for the proper amount of time to the affected area. After
the treatment is complete hold the joint in extension for 2
minutes as the tissue cools in the extended state. Repeat two
to three times a week for 6-8 weeks. Heating tissue with
range of motion if combined with stretching (7).
Massage
Therapeutic massage is the manipulation of soft tissue that
includes holding, causing movement, and applying pressure
to the body. Massage therapy may improve function of the cir-
culatory, lymphatic, muscular, skeletal, and nervous systems
and may improve the rate at which the body recovers from
injury or illness. Massage can be used to relax and reduce
anxiety of the cat in the postoperative stage of recovery.
Two basic massage techniques are effleurage and petris-
Figure 21-2  Therapeutic ultrasound for a carpal injury.
sage. Effleurage massage is a gliding stroke using the whole
21: Rehabilitation of the cat
225
hand. The stroke is applied along the lines of the muscle and
affects the superficial tissues. It is mostly used to assist with
circulation so the strokes are always performed toward the
heart. Pétrissage uses a kneading compression stroke with
skin rolling. It is used for muscle tension, knots, and
spasms.
Passive range of motion
Passive range of motion is the manipulation of a joint through
its maximum flexion and extension angles. It provides con-
trolled movement along the normal lines of stress, which can
 result in stronger scar and connective tissue. The motion of
the joint affects muscles, joint surfaces, capsules, ligaments,
 fasciae, vessels, and nerves. Reduction in the normal range
Figure 21-3 Application of cold laser therapy to increase healing
following femoral head ostectomy surgery.
of motion can be caused by orthopedic or neurological
 surgery, trauma, immobilization or inactivity.
Range of motion therapy is beneficial in aiding recovery
from soft-tissue and joint lesions, maintaining existing joint
and soft-tissue mobility, minimizing the effects of contracture
formation, assisting neuromuscular re-education, and enhanc-
 is broken. Apply the laser with gentle contact for duration of
 ing synovial movement. It can be used to evaluate available
treatment.
motion, determine joint stability, and determine soft-tissue
elasticity. It is possible to identify, and improve a limited
21.3.2 Active rehabilitation
range of motion. Passive range of motion can be used to
warm up before exercise. It is important to note that passive
Aquatic therapy
range of motion will not prevent muscle atrophy or improve
Aquatic therapy is the use of the therapeutic properties of
strength and endurance, but passive range of motion may be
 Jo auer usuns ron sasiraxa aedodde apod oi iam
 the most important exercise for a cat recovering from restric-
 motion, and endurance, while reducing the risk of injury. It
 tive movement caused by splinting or casting.
allows for active muscle contraction while limiting weight-
 bearing. Aquatic therapy is beneficial for soft-tisue injuries,
Phototherapy
osteoarthritis, postoperative fracture care, muscle weakness,
 neurological impairment, geriatric care, and postoperative
areas of the body in order to stimulate healing. It is also
amputee care. It should not be used for cats with cardiac
known as cold laser, soft laser or low-intensity laser. It can
dysfunction, respiratory dysfunction, surface infection,
accelerate wound and tissue repair by as much as 30-40%.
danger of bleeding or hermorrhage, severe peripheral vascular
Cell proliferation and wound healing can be enhanced by
disease, or diarrhea. The therapeutic properties of water
150-200%
include:
 Electromagnetic energy is emitted from the low-power laser
● thermal - transfer of heat to the submerged tissue
and enters the tissue, where it is absorbed by the mitochon-
● buoyancy - the upward thrust of water on a immersed
dria of the cell. The energy is converted to chermical energy
body
within the cell. The permeability of the cell membrane
· hydrostatic pressure - pressure exerted by water on
changes, which affects a variety of cell types including
immersed body
macrophages, fbroblasts, endothelial cells, and mast cells.
● cohesion - the tendency for water molecules to adhere to
 Phototherapy can be used for soft-tisue injuries such as
each other
sprains, strains, and tendonitis, for osteoarthritis, chronic
● turbulence
the whirlpools in water caused by
pain, in the wound management of ulcers, pressure sores or
burns, for skin infections, and for healing of incision sites
movement.
(Fig. 21-3).
The therapeutic thermal effects of water are the same as
To begin phototherapy, remove any dressing and cleanse
for superfcial heat, but more systemic. The soothing effects
the wound bed and surrounding tissue. Cover the wound or
 of warm water reduce pain and may increase the cat's ability
phototherapy device with clear protective barrier if the skin
to exert more effort.
226
 Part 5: The surgical patient
The buoyancy property of water is used to increase or
increase soft-tissue extensibility. Water temperature should
decrease the amount of weight-bearing on joints and bones.
be approximately 90-92°F (32-34°C). The normal walking
 Reducing the body weight of the cat can reduce the amount 
speed for the cat on the treadmill is 0.8-1.3 mph.
of stress on a weak joint to allow the cat to exercise with a
 more natural gait pattern and move more comfortably.
Exercise therapy
The effect of hydrostatic pressure increases with water
depth. This encourages upward flow of edema. Exercising the
Feline exercise therapy is an active rehabilitation technique
cat in deeper water enhances the effect of hydrostatic
using the cat's natural ability to perform activities. This form
pressure.
of therapy is designed to return the cat to normal function
Cohesion and turbulence contribute to the resistance the
sooner and to lessen the risk of future injuries. The level of
 each exercise will vary with the condition or postoperative
 erty of water is used to increase the specifc flexion of the
stage of the cat.
joint at water level.
 An exercise therapy program begins with short-duration,
 The underwater treadmill provides exceptional therapeutic
low-impact activities and progresses to longer time periods
exercise for the feline (Fig. 21-4). The unique effects of the
with more strenuous activities. It is important to modify
underwater treadmill include the ability to vary the water
 the program to accommodate the cat's comfort level. The
depth to increase or decrease the amount of weight-bearing
 exercise therapy program is divided into three stages:
the cat has while exercising, to vary the speed of exercise,
warm-up, the exercise activities, and the postexercise
and to control the water temperature closely due to the small
therapy.
body of water. Increasing the water temperature can stimu-
 The warm-up portion of the program includes assessing the
late metabolism, relax tight muscles, help reduce pain, and 
 cat's physical and mental condition and preparing the cat for
A
facing the direction in which it will walk. (B) Place the cat in the water. Guide with hands supporting the trunk of the cat if needed. (C) w/hen the
session is complete, lift the cat from the water and place it on a prepared towel. Have the owner or an assistant gently towel the cat dry. Then
turn off and drain the treadmill
21: Rehabilitation of the cat
227
the exercise session. It is important to assess the cat in order
 motion of the affected and unaffected joints is measured to
to evaluate the impact of previous sessions and to make
 determine any loss of movement. Both passive and active
changes necessary to keep progressing toward therapy goals.  range of motion can be evaluated.
The cat is prepared for the exercise session by warming the
Determine the cat's body condition (10). Is the cat
affected area with a warm pack, passive range of motion, 
 muscular or weak? Is there a noticeable difference in the
 massage, or stretch. A combination of superfcial heat and 
muscle mass of the affected limb? Is the cat overweight? If
stretch is an excellent way to prepare the cat to get the most
 so, how much? After the assessment of the cat's current con-
from the exercise session.
dition is complete, rehabilitation goals and expectations are
determined.
It is important to set reasonable goals at the beginning
Gait training
of the rehabilitation program. Thorough evaluation and
Chronic pain or traumatic injury can cause a cat to alter its
 assessment of the cat's current condition, the expectations of
movement. This alteration in gait may cause pain or injury 
the cat's owner, and the commitment of the owner to the
to unaffected limbs (8). Gait-training techniques and exercise
rehabilitation program provide necessary information to
focus on returning the cat to as near normal movement as
develop the proper program for each cat. Expectations will
possible.
vary greatly. Owners should be given the information and
time to determine their personal rehabilitation goals for their
21.4 The rehabilitation program
cat.
Goals can be set for each phase of the rehabilitation. For
The rehabilitation program begins with the evaluation of the
example, phase I: within 1 week, strengthen pelvic limbs
cat. This evaluation is a combination of subjective and objec-
 so that the cat is able to bear weight for a minimum of
tive information. Subjective information is data provided by
 20 seconds without outside support. Phase II: strengthen
the owner whereas objective information is data collected
pelvic limb so the cat is able to walk normally. Examples
during the examination. Both are important in determining
of rehabilitation programs are listed at the end of this
the current condition of the cat. The owner is the key factor
chapter.
in providing information for the optimal outcome for the cat
because the cat will not usually act or behave normally in the
21.5 How do you know you have
clinic environment.
reached a goal?
Owner-provided history includes information such as age,
breed, the general appearance and disposition of the cat to
Outcome measurements ensure that rehabilitation goals are
help determine how cooperative the cat will be, details about
being met. They are vital to providing the information needed
the onset of the problem or injury to identify how long the
a n nd  a  r  
animal has been favoring a leg, and any past pertinent medical
the most benefit for each individual cat. The documentation
history which may indicate that an exercise or modality
 of the measurements provides progress information to owner,
should or should not be used. The presence of other pets is
therapist, and veterinarian.
also a consideration since in the early to middle phase of
Passive range of motion is measured with a goniometer
rehabilitation it is often necessary to restrict unsupervised
(Fig. 21-5). A goniometer is a protractor-like instrument with
activity with other animals to reduce the risk of injury. The
two blades that are attached to a 360? marked hinge that
cat's baseline activity level helps determine the cat's condition
pivots to measure the angle formed by two bones across a
and the owner's expectation of what the cat should be able
joint. The two bones are moved to extreme flexion and
to do after rehabilitation. Identification of medication and
extension and a measurement is taken at each extreme.
supplements the cat is currently receiving and how the owner
Limited range can be at flexion only, extension only, or both.
believes they are or are not working can be helpful in
Range of motion can be limited by pain or a mechanical
assessing benefits from rehabilitation. Questions should be
problem such as contracted muscle. Measurements taken in
asked to help determine if the cat's normal activities have
the conscious cat can indicate pain-free range of motion.
changed (9).
Measurements made in the sedated cat can indicate the
Clinical examination should include a lameness evaluation,
maximal range of motion, because the cat cannot respond to
evaluation of the cat in standing and sitting positions, the
pain in joint manipulation when sedated. Affected and non-
cat's ability to rise, appearance of the scar and any discolor-
affected joints are measured.
ation, swelling, edema, or warmth of the affected tissue.
Active range of motion is evaluated by encouraging or
 These areas are evaluated before and after surgery. Range of
allowing the cat to sit, rise, and lie down. The cat can be
228
Part 5: The surgical patient
Figure 21-5 Initial
goniometry
measurements can
provide information
for planning
rehabilitation
exercises, and to
measure the
effectiveness of the 
interventions.
Figure 21-6 The ooliometer has a special gauge at the end of the
tape to verify that the same amount of stress is placed on the tape to
ensure repeatability of measurement and help give accurate results.
asked to climb stairs or walk over poles for additional
data.
Muscle mass. The size of a muscle correlates with the strength
Figure 21-7 Example of visual analog scale. Walks normally: the cat
of the muscle. Therefore, the circumference of a front or rear
has no lameness; range of motion, swing phase, and stance phase of
leg muscle provides information about how much strength a
all four legs are normal. Continuous non-weight-bearing lameness: the
cat has in one leg compared to the other. Measurement of
cat never places one of the legs down during all phases of movement.
thigh or arm circumference helps assess changes in muscle
Each evaluation on the same gait is performed on the same scale, using
mass throughout the rehabilitation program. Sometimes the
a different mark each time
loss of muscle in a limb can be felt or even seen. The meas-
-nsau ads e um ure si auarn al jo jun
ing tape called an ooliometer (Fig. 21-6). Without this
 objective tool, expectations can prejudice and alter results
mined by marking the distance from the left-hand side of
(11).
the line to the point on the line where the mark is made.
The example above uses a 10-cm line to separate the two
Body composition. Body composition is a term used to
ends of the continuum. Based on this, the cat would receive
describe the percentage ratio of body fat to lean muscle.
a grade of 5 (5 cm distance), indicating that it has a severe
 Measurements can be taken of the circumference of the waist
weight-bearing lameness. The VAS system is only valid and
and chest to give objective data of the degree of obesity.
reliable when the same individual performs the initial and
Actual weight should also be taken.
re-evaluations under similar conditions. This is very diffcult
to perform in a clinical situation with the cat. It may be nec-
Visual analog scale. The visual analog scale (VAS) is a com-
essary for the cat to be flmed in its home environment for a
monly accepted technique for measuring gait, functionality,
more reliable evaluation.
 pain, and performance. For example, in measuring gait, the 
VAS uses a continuum ranging from walking normally to
Gait analysis
continuous non-weight-bearing lameness. The evaluator
places a mark along a line of a specifed length to indicate
Motion is a result of a combination of nerves stimulating
the cat's performance at a particular gait. Each evaluator
muscle to move bone. Abnormal motion occurs when this
must be aware of the criteria used to identify the low and
chain of events is disrupted. Gait analysis is performed by
high end of the scale. For example, the definitions shown in
 most of us on a daily basis. We can recognize if a person
Figure 21-7 could be used for this scale. Scores are deter-
walking toward us is graceful or clumsy or if a person running
21: Rehabilitation of the cat
229
is balanced and fluid or stiff. The same observations are
carpal joint and then supporing the elbow joint to keep in
applied to the cat.
same location; flex to end feel. Hold for 10 seconds. Repeat
Lameness is defined as a difference from normal gait. The
5-10 times.
walk and trot are the easiest gaits to evaluate for lameness
because of the symmetrical movement of the trot and walk.
Shoulder
 Subjective gait analysis is the most common diagnostic tool
to assess lameness in cats. It is best done before touching the
 Begin with one hand supporting the leg in a neutral position.
cat. It starts by observing the animal while it is still. The
 Hold one hand on the top of the shoulder Begin extending
the elbow, which will also extend the carpus (Fig. 21-8).
analyst looks for conformational abnormalities, such as
turned-out toes, or abnormalities in stance, such as the cat
Bring the elbow to end range and continue to push on the
holding one leg up or putting most of its body weight on a
 elbow gently until the end feel of shoulder is reached. Usually
particular leg. After these observations are noted the animal
the leg will reach just above the eye if the head is in normal
is analyzed while moving. Gait analysis of the cat should be
position. Hold for 10 seconds. Begin the fexion. Fold the
done in a closed room.
elbow and gently push up against the supporting hand to end
Visual gait analysis is a very difficult outcome measurement
feel. Hold for 10 seconds. Repeat 5-10 times.
to make in a clinic situation. If possible, a videotape of the
cat in its home environment will provide a more accurate
 Stifle and hock
evaluation of the gait of the cat.
Combine passive range of motion for these two joints to get
maximum extension and flexion. Supporting the tarsus in a
21.6 Examples of exercises
neutral position, begin to push the stifle gently into extension
until end feel is reached. Gently push on the tarsus to reach
21.6.1 Passive range of motion
maximum extension. Digits can be extended and the pads of
General instruction
the foot pressed as if the cat was standing. Hold for 10
seconds; begin flexion by folding the tarsus to maximum
Lay the cat on its side on a comfortable surface and allow or
flexion and then folding the knee to maximum flexion. Hold
help the cat to relax. Isolate the affected joint as much as
 for 10 seconds, and repeat 5-10 times.
possible so that pain or stiffness elsewhere in the limb does
not influence the range of the focus joint.
Hip
Support the limb and begin to push the stifle gently into
Carpus
extension. Keeping the knee in extension, and one hand on
Support the leg with one hand. With the leg in a neutral
 the ischial tuberosity preventing movement, gently bring the
position begin extension. Continue to extend the carpus to 
leg back until end feel of the hip is reached. Hold for 10
the end feel. Then, to get maximum extension, extend the
 seconds. Begin flexion by folding the stifle and tarsus and
digits to end feel. Press on the pads of the foot. This will
1 rog io iey pa iuol d on dn a a q
simulate the normal position of the leg during the stance
seconds. Repeat 5-10 times.
phase of movement, giving the cat proprioception feedback
and making it more aware of the leg. Hold for 10 seconds,
then release and begin flexion of the carpal joint. Continue
21.6.2 Early proprioception exercises
flexing the joint until the end feel, then for maximum flexion,
Physioroll
flex or fold the digits to the back of the leg. Hold for 10
seconds. Repeat 5-10 times.
Choose the appropriate-size ball for the cat, and for the type
of exercise. The ball should be at the shoulder height of
the cat when it is standing. Air can be added or removed to
Elbow
help make the ball the right size. Although many cats may
 The carpal joint must be flexed and extended, respectively,
 resist being placed on the ball initially, most cats relax after
to flex and extend the elbow. Begin with the carpal joint
rhythmic movement or bouncing begins (Fig. 21-9).
'moqn au puq rao au pue pueu auo Aq painoddns
Gently push the elbow into extension end feel. The carpal
joint will extend at the same time. Push gently on the carpal
Standing resistance
joint to get maximum extension of both the carpal joint and
Once the cat can stand, gently press on the shoulder,
elbow. Hold for 10 seconds. Begin the flexion by flexing the slowly increasing pressure. The cat will push back to remain
Figure 21-8  Cat during passive
range of motion exercise.
(A) Extension and (B) flexion of
the elbow and shoulder joint.
Figure 21-9 (A) Place the cat
on the ball so that the trunk is 
supported. (B) Gently roll the ball
until the front legs come in 
contact with the ground. Hold 
and bounce gently for 10-20
seconds. (c) Then gently roll the 
ball so the front feet come off 
the ground and the back feet
touch the ground. Gently bounce
for 10-20 seconds. The amount 
of weight can be increased or
decreased depending on the
amount of roll and pressure on 
the ball. The cat will use its trunk
muscles to stabilize itself.
21: Rehabilitation of the cat
231
 o payou aq m ieo au prey ooi si usnd al  upeis
Cross-leg standing
to keep the cat in the same spot. Shoulder, hip, and trunk on
diagonal rear leg (Fig. 21-11). Hold for 10-15 seconds.
both sides of the cat are good locations for resistance 
 Repeat 2-3 times. Increase time and repetitions as cat's
exercises.
strength is increased.
Balance board
Carts
The balance board is usually 20 inches (approx. 50 cm) with
Carts and slings can be used to support the animal during
 a 14° angle. Homermade versions may vary from these speci-
fications and are still very suitable.
They provide the necessary support for the cat to assist the
Balance board exercise can assist in the restoration of sta
therapist during range of motion and floor exercises.
bility and proprioception of cats following back, rear-limb,
or front-limb surgery (Fig. 21-10). It can also be used as an
early weight-bearing exercise following knee or hip surgery,
21.6.4 Examples of front-limb exercises
elbow or shoulder surgery, or fracture repair. Benefts include
Wheelbarrow
improved balance and coordination, better proprioceptive
awareness for injury prevention, greater trunk and pelvic
Lift both rear legs (Fig. 21-12). Hold for 10-15 seconds
girdle stability, and increased leg and ankle range of
Repeat 2-3 times. Increase time and repetitions as cat's
motion.
 strength is increased.
21.6.3 Early weight-bearing exercises
Down to sit
Start with the cat in the down position. Lure the cat to the
One-leg standing
 sitting position by raising your hand above its head with food
Lift the contralateral leg. Hold for 10-15 seconds. Repeat
 in your hand.
2-3 times. Increase time and repetitions as cat's strength is
increased.
Physioroll or physioball
Fold and hold the contralateral limb to the injured limb and
roll the cat forward as shown in Figure 12-9. The cat will
reach for the ground with the injured limb. Gently bounce
with limb on ground.
Figure 21-10 Position the cat centrally over the board with feet
shoulder-width apart. Begin by slowly moving the board front to back
for 20 repetitions. Support the cat as needed. Be sure to keep the
Aens on iubiam si! lyus pue sapsnu shl peauon l jen aul suoadan
Figure 21-11 Cross-leg standing. The right front limb and the left
on the balance board.
hindlimb are lifted up.
232   Part 5: The surgical patient
Trail of treats
21.6.5 Examples of hindlimb exercises
Place treats on the floor about 1 foot (30 cm) apart. Allow
Dancing
the cat to walk slowly, sniffng the ground (Fig. 21-13).
Support the cat under its front legs and lift to encourage
increased weight-bearing on rear legs (Fig. 21-15). Hold for
Decline and tunnel
10-15 seconds. Repeat 2-3 times. Increase time and repeti-
Walk the cat down hills or a ramp to encourage front-limb
 tions as cat's strength is increased.
weight-bearing. Similarly, walking through a tunnel will
cause the cat to crouch and increase weight-bearing on its
front limbs (Fig. 21-14).
Sit to stand
 Place the cat in a sit position. Allow or encourage the cat to
stand. Repeat several times (Fig. 21-16).
Incline
Inclining improves the strength of the hindlimbs. The cat is
led up a ramp or a hill. Gradually increase the inclination
grade.
21.6.6 Gait-training exercises
Cavaletti poles can be used to increase range of motion and
stride length (Fig. 21-17). Start with poles approximately the
same distance apart as the height of the cat's elbow. Encour-
Figure 21-12  Wheelbarrow. When the cat's strength is increased to
age the cat to go over the poles. This can be done by luring
the point that it is no longer difficult to support its weight in the
with food, calling, or allowing the cat to go over the poles
stationary position, begin to walk slowly forward while holding both
rear legs. Begin with 2-3 steps and increase until the cat is able to
 into a closet or carrier. Raise, lower, or spread apart the poles
move forward 10 steps.
to reach desired gait.
A
B
Figure 21-13 (A, B) Trail of treats. Sniffing or eating from the floor shifts body weight cranially and encourages weight-bearing on both front
feet.
Figure 21-14 Example of walking a cat through a tunnel.
Figure 21-15 Dancing. When the cat's strength is increased to the
point that it is no longer difficult to support its weight in the stationary
position, begin with 2-3 steps and increase until the cat is able to
move forward 10 steps.
Figure 21-16 (A-C) Sit-to-stand exercise.
234
Part 5: The surgical patient
Figure 21-17
e
Limb rehabilitation program (Table 21-2)
walking over
Cavaletti pole.
Back rehabilitation program (Table 21-3)
Obesity program (Table 21-4)
Problem
Exercises
Specific exercises and
Modalities
treatments
Loss of range of motion
 Passive range of
motion
Active range of motion
Cavaletti
Walking in 6 inches
(15 cm) of high grass
Walking in 6 inches
(15 cm) of water
 Exercise in underwater
treadmill (tarsus)
Loss of muscle mass
Stationary weight-
 One-leg standing
 bearing exercises
Cross-leg standing
Sit to stand
Down to stand
 Moving weight-bearing
Slow walking
exercises
 Incline
Underwater treadmill
 Serpentine walking
 Muscle guarding
Physioball
Active stretching
Massage therapy
Balance board
 Therapeutic ultrasound
 Electrical stimulation for pain control
Table 21-2. Limb rehabilitation program
21: Rehabilitation of the cat
235
 Problem
Specific exercises
Modalities
Table 21-3. Back rehabilitation
program 
Rear-limb atrophy
Underwater treadmill
Massage therapy
 Serpentine walking
 Electrical stimulation for pain control
Muscle spasm
Physioball
Active stretching
Balance board
Problem
Specific exercises
Table 21-4. Obesity program
Modalities
Exercise-intolerant
Underwater treadmill
Massage therapy
 Slow walking
Electrical stimulation for pain control
Joint pain
Physioball
Therapeutic ultrasound
Active stretching
Balance board
Underwater treadmill
References and further reading
6. Levine D, et al. Effects of 3.3 MHz ultrasound on caudal thigh
1. Overall KL. Clinical behavioral medicine for small animals. St.
muscle temperature in dogs. Vet Surg 2001;30:170-174.
Louis: Mosby; 1997.
7. Draper DO, et al. Immediate and residual changes in dorsiflex-
2. Marsolais GS, et al. Effects of postoperative rehabilitation on
ion range of motion using an ultrasound heat and stretch
limb funcion after cranial cruciate ligament repair in dogs. J
routine. J Athletic Train 1998;33:141-144.
Am Vet Med Assoc 2002;220:1325-1330.
 8. Rumph PF, et al. Redistribution of vertical ground reaction
 3. Millis DL, Levine D. The role of exercise and physical therapy
qupuy suou panpu Aeuauadxa ym shop u sanoj
modalities in the treatment of osteoarthritis. Vet Clin North Am
lameness. Vet Surg 1995;24:384-389.
Small Anim Pract 1997;27:913-930.
9. Millis DL, et al. Canine rehabilitation and physical therapy St.
 4. Johnson JM, et al. Rehabilitation of dogs with surgically treated
Louis: Saunders; 2004: pp. 416-418.
cranial cruciate ligament-deficient stifles by use of electrical
10. Burkhoder WJ. Precision and practicality of methods assessing
stimulation of muscles. Am J Vet Res 1997;58:1473-1478.
body composition of dogs and cats. Compend Continuing Educ
5. Steiss JE, Adams CC. Rate of temperature increase in canine
Pract Vet 2001;23:1-10.
muscle during 1 MHz ultrasound therapy: deleterious effect of
11. Maylia E, et al. Can thigh girth be measured accurately: a
hair coat. Am J Vet Res 1999;60:76-80.
preliminary investigation, J Sport Rehab 1995;8:43-49.
Part 6
Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
Use of the right instruments and implants is critical for success
in orthopedic surgery. Although in general the same instru-
ments and implants are used in cats as in dogs, they need to
be adapted to the smaller size of the patients. Using instru-
lengthen surgery, and cause iatrogenic damage to soft tissues
and bone. A large variety of instruments and implants are
available on the market, and the information provided in
-nsu qum supioap u daq oi paue s! tz pue z siaide
ments and implants to use for the treatment of the feline
orthopedic patient. Technical guidelines for the correct use
of these instruments and implants are also provided.
External coaptation and arthroscopy are techniques of
great value in orthopedics if selected for the right indications
and performed correctly. External coaptation is often more
difficult to apply and maintain in the feline patient, and not
all bandaging techniques described for dogs are suitable for
cats. Tips for bandages, casts, and slings are described in
Chapter 22 and should help the orthopedic surgeon to apply
these techniques safely in cats. Arthroscopy is not yet widely
used in cats, mainly due to the small size of joints. But,
although in its infancy, the use of arthroscopy is already
revealing additional information on joint pathology in the
feline, as described in Chapter 25.
239
22
External coaptation
S.J. Langley-Hobbs, M. Keller, K. Voss
External coaptation is an important and versatile therapeutic
 Even dangerous in the cat. A modified Robert Jones bandage
method for the management of orthopedic cases, but treat-
or soft padded bandage is usually suffcient; used in the
ment with external coaptation must follow strict indications,
immediate post
and should not be regarded as a cheap substitute for surgical
and seroma f
 formation, and they are an important part of
stabilization. External coaptation includes bandages, splints,
 open-wound treatment. Indications for bandages are sum-
casts, and slings. Bandages are usually used to protect post-
marized in Box 22-1
 and to prevent limb
A bandage
consists of three main layers: the contact layer,
swelling and edema. Incorporation of a splint into the bandage
the padding layer and the external layer(s). The technique of
provides additional stability and is often used for temporary
application
sauof iraqoy paypou ro papped nos e jo
immobilization of joint injuries
. Casts are used
bandage is described in Figure 22-1.
for the treatment of selected fractures.
. The main indication
for slings is immobilization of joints after closed or open
22.1.1 Contact layer
reduction of luxations and to prevent weight-bearing.
Application of bandages, splints,
casts, and slings is not
The contact layer protects the wound. Depending on the
without risk. Circulatory stasis and limb swelling, and avas-
type of wound treated and the phase of wound healing, either
skin and deeper tissue, may
a non-adherent or adherent contact layer is chosen. Non-
result from improper application
insufficient patient care.
 adherent contact layers are used to protect clean postopera-
coaptation. Some
tive wounds or healthy granulating and epithelializing
cats will refuse to move
n of their leg,
after
traumatic wounds.
whilst others will make deter
stained efforts to
 In contaminated and dirty wounds, which are left open for
get rid of the external coaptation,
successfully. In
secondary wound healing, the contact layer is adapted to the
most cases, the patients will eventually accept the external
phase of wound healing. Adherent and absorptive contact
coaptation after minutes or hour
layers are used in the early inflammatory and exudatory
but in rare cases it may be necessary
y and safer to sedate the
 phase of wound healing: dry-to-dry or wet-to-dry bandages
are often ideal in this situation (see Chapter 16 on degloving
The beneft of the bandage, particularly complex ones such
 injuries). Non-adherent contact layers are used once the gran-
as slings and spica splints, must be weighed against potential
ulation bed has been formed. They will allow wound contrac-
problems. There are a number of situations, particularly in
tion and epithelialization without damaging the new tissue
or healing processes. It is also still possible to alternate the
type of contact layer used depending on the appearance of
cat, but to use cage rest, analgesia, and sedation to restrict
the wound, changing back to an adherent layer if the wound
further damage at the fracture site.
needs further superficial debridement. A variety of non-adher-
External coaptation is described in several review articles
and book chapters (1-5), but the emphasis is on dogs (1-4)
rather than cats (5). In the following section, indications,
Box 22-1 Indications for bandages
application techniques, and possible complications of exter-
nal coaptation in the feline patient are described.
Postoperative bandage after orthopedic procedures on
 the elbow or stifle joint or distal to them
Protection of clean and clean-contaminated wounds
22.1 Bandages
(dry bandage)
The basic functions of a bandage are wound protection,
Treatment of contaminated and dirty wounds (wet-to-
absorption of wound secretions, an aid to hemostasis, com-
dry bandage)
pression of soft tissues, stabilization, and to increase patient
Minor joint instability
comfort. True pressure bandages are not necessary and are
240
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
A
B
C
(A) One or two strips of adhesive tape (stirrups) with a wooden tongue depressor or spoon adhered to the tape, is/are applied on to the dorsal.
medial, or lateral aspect of the metacarpus or metatarsus. Padding is applied from distally to proximally (usually in inward rotation) with about 50%
overlap. The bandage is unwound two to three times up and down the limb, giving a total thickness with the 50% overlap of four to six layers
(B) Two or three layers of conforming or elastic gauze are then applied on top of the padding. extending from the distal limb to 1 cm below the
aeddis abeueg suaaad diay uen uoisuat anelapo azne aui lao pue dn analan s! (dns) aden aisaupe aul buipped aui jo apa lxoid
(C) The outer protective layer is finally applied, extending no further proximally than the conforming gauze
ent contact layers are available and their properties and uses
22.2 Splints and casts
are summarized in Table 22-1 and examples of the different
manufacturers' products are given.
 Proper immobilization is best achieved with a cast. Splints
Krenoduan rog pasn isaq are (sauof aqo) seepueq pue
immobilization prior to defnitive repair. The clinician must
22.1.2 Padding layer
be aware of the disadvantages and limitations of casts and
splints. Their use is limited to conditions affecting the lower
The padding layer creates even compression of soft tissues
limbs (below the elbow and stifle). To function properly, the
and protects bony prominences from pressure sores. Non-
joints above and below the affected bone must be immobi-
absorptive padding materials, such as cast padding, are used
lized, thus increasing the likelihood of fracture disease. The
for soft padded bandages, with or without a splint. Because
cast or splint may be bulky and uncomfortable and become
they do not absorb fluid, they prevent soiling of the bandage
self-traumatized, leading t
essity for replacement. Sores
from water urine, or feces. Absorptive cotton padding is used
can develop under the c2
for a modified Robert Jones bandage. The soft cotton allows
immobilized with external coaptation. Despite the disadvan-
mild compression of soft tissues without causing vascular
tages, external coaptation can be an excellent method of
 compromise. Cotton is also used for wet-to-dry bandages,
producing rapid uncomplicated fracture healing when used
because it is able to absorb excess fluid (see Chapter 16 on
 in the correct situations (Fig. 22-2).
degloving injuries).
 Splinted bandages are easier to apply, easier to change, and
bear less risk for complications than cylinder casts. They are
22.1.3 External layers
 most often used for temporary immobilization of joints and
There are often two external layers: an inner layer using some
 for the treatment of metacarpal and metatarsal fractures.
Casts provide more stability and are mainly used for conser-
stretchy bandage material (conforming gauze) is used to
create compression of the padding layer and an outer protec-
vative fracture treatment. They are more difficult to apply
tive layer uses Elastoplast or cohesive bandage (e.g., Vetrap).
and change, and may be more of a risk in terms of vascular
Care has to be taken not to apply these layers too tightly, as
compromise of the leg. Indications for splints or casts are
pressure necrosis of the skin occurs easily in cats. Special care
listed in Table 22-2.
must be taken over bony prominences and over implants with
minimal soft-tissue covering. Conversely, the bandage must
22.2.1 Splints
also be tight enough to prevent slippage. Slipping is usually
less of a problem in the hindlimbs due to the angulation of
For application of a splinted bandage, a soft padded bandage
the hock joint.
is frst used, as described in Figure 22-1. The splint is then
22: External coaptation
241
traditional gauze
incorporated into
 Reasonably priced
 Reasonably priced
Need less frequent
 Adherence to skin surrounding Maintains a moist
 Entraps bacteria
 Readily available
 and economic
 Readily available
changing than
Very hydrophilic.
 gel removed
 and economic
 antibiotics
Can be used to
antimicrobials
Advantages
Comfortable
dressings
the wound
dressings
be
and
can
wounds. Can be painful to
Granulating or epithelializing
wounds. Can be painful to
Sussaip kadod uououny o
 Needs an overlying layer such
[AoUaI je eune1 Hu1snen 
 absorbent layer at pores -
op
 not readily stick to hair
0 - punom Supunouns
 contraction. Expensive
Wound can adhere to
granulation tissue
Contraindications,
complications, and
Moderate in price
disadvantages
remove
remove
Expensive
Expensive
autolytic debridement in early
epithelialization in later stages
 a i s r 
autolytic debridement in early
calcium exchanged for sodium
 Absorb large amounts of wound 
 in flm for absorbtion of
 wound fluid and exchange of
- promotes
 Film allows gas exchange but
Absorb large amounts of fluid
 enviroment promotes
stages and fbroplasia and
fluid and maintain a moist
Absorb and retain moisture
limits escape of fluid -
 Superfcial debridement
 Superficial debridement
pmy pumom uon suo!
but not to wound -
environment
Function
gases
moist
Poresi
Table 221iffent typesof contat layers that are availableforuseunder bandages
Very exudative wounds
epithelializing wounds
epithelializing wounds
Post surgical incisions.
 epithelializing wound
Post surgical incision
Acute or healing
 Saline-soaked sterile gauze  Mildly exudative
Serous exudative
Highly exudative
Granulating
Exudative or
Exudative or
Indication
wounds
wounds
wounds
wounds
 Insoluble polymers or gels 1
Hydrocolloid  Layer of carboxmethylated
combinations of calcium
sheet or applied as a gel
 Absorbent layer berween
 Single layer of adhesive
 Polyurethane or Silastic
cellulose and gelatin
polyurethane or foam
alginate and sodium 
two thin layers of
or non-woven
pads derived from
 Insoluble hydrophilic
polyethylene oxide
polyethylene film
 Dry gauze swabs
brown seaweed.
to a
Composed of
porous film
polymers of
Description
attached t
backing
alginate
swabs
foam
Non-adherent
contact layer
Wet-to-dry
Dry-to-dry
 dressings
dressings
dressings
Hydroactive
Type of
Adherent
Alginate
Hydrogel
Film
Film
Foam
242
 Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
applied on the outer surface of the conforming gauze (the
any side of the bandage. Placing the splint on the medial or
frst external layer), and is secured with an outer external
lateral surface of the bandage may help prevent pressure sores
layer of elastic tape or cohesive bandage. Commercially
at the level of the accessory carpal bone and tuber calcanei.
available off-the-shelf splints or spoon splints are particularly
The tarsus should be immobilized in a slightly flexed position
 useful for temporary and emergency use. Custom-made
to prevent contracture and atrophy of the gastrocnemius
splints made of cast material can usually be adapted better
muscles. Additionally, some angulation at the hock gives the
to the conformation of the leg and are therefore preferable
cat a more normal conformation for weight-bearing, and
for long-term use. Theoretically, the splint can be applied on
helps prevent bandage slippage.
Most splints extend to just distal or proximal to the elbow
or stifle joint, depending on the indication they are applied
for. Only the spica splint extends more proximally, incorpo-
rating the affected leg and the torso (Fig. 22-3). It is used to
immobilize the elbow joint in extension, for example after
closed reduction of elbow luxation.
22.2.2 Casts
Cylinder casts encircle the limb to stabilize a fracture tempo-
rarily or as definitive fracture treatment. Only non-articular
A
Figure 22-2  Example of a suitable fracture for stabilization with
externalcoaptation.
(A) A tibial fracture in a 10-week-old kitten. The fracture was not 
ae ss asaul ren ae po qlag aui uo uds eids ez ana
suitable for internal fixation due to the distal and fissured nature of the
useful for protection of injuries or surgical repairs of the shoulder or
fracture and its closeness to the physis.
elbow. A bandage is wrapped around the extended leg. and around
(B) The fracture was stabilized with a cast, and was healed at 6 weeks.
aui buoje padde s! lullds aul bal atisoddo aui ot lepnen 'xesoui aul
There was some craniocaudal angulation, which is remodeling. Note
lateral surface of the limb, extending from the toes to over the dorsal
that the growth plate of the distal tibia is still open.
midline.
Splinted bandage
Cylinder cast
Indications
Immobilization of joints (especially carpus, tarsus,
Fractures of the lower limb: closed, simple,
toes; elbow with spica splint)
reducible, transverse/interdigitating radius/ulna
Metacarpal, metatarsal, and phalangeal fractures
or tibia/fbula fracture in immature animals
Protection of tendon sutures (e.g., digital tendon or
At least 50% of the fracture ends should be in
Achilles tendon)
contact on orthogonal radiographs
Neurological deficits (e.g., peroneal nerve deficit)
Fractures of the radius when the ulna is intact
Protection of suboptimal surgical fracture repair
Fracture of the tibia when the fbula is intact
(radius/ulna, tibia/fbula)
Greenstick fractures in very young cats
Table 22-2 Indications for splints and casts
22: External coaptation
243
fractures distal to the elbow and stifle joint without concur
tion of the tapes in a dry state, a non-elastic bandage soaked
rent soft-tissue injuries are amenable for cast immobilization.
with water is used to activate the cast.
Ideal fractures for external coaptation are greenstick or
Adequate conformity can be achieved by exploiting the
simple transverse fractures in young cats, which can be
 elastic properties of the tapes. On the distal part of the limb,
reduced in a closed manner, and fractures where one bone of
 the tape is unrolled without applying tension to avoid exces-
 a pair (radius and ulna or tibia and fbula) is intact. Following
sive compression of the sparse soft tissues and potential
reduction, there should be at least 50% overlap between
resulting circulatory compromise. On the proximal part of
fracture ends on orthogonal radiographs.
the limb, some compression of the larger muscle masses is
Casts have to be applied with the cat under general anes-
desired to ensure a close ft of the cast to the limb and to
thesia. Newer synthetic cast materials have largely super-
compensate for ensuing muscle atrophy. Horizontal rotation
seded plaster of Paris. They are less messy to apply, set more
of the roll in the area of flexed joints, such as the tarsus, stifle,
quickly, are lighter than plaster of Paris, and they are water-
and elbow, facilitates directional changes and minimizes
resistant. However they are not as comformable as plaster
folds. If folds are created, the tape should be cut through the
of Paris and are more expensive. The synthetic materials
folds and then smoothed over.
include fberglass impregnated with polyurethane resin, poly-
The tapes are unwound with 50% overlap, from distal to
propylene with polyurethane resin, and thermoplastics (6).
proximal and back to distal, resulting in four to six layers
The 5-cm (2-inch) size is appropriate for the cat. The syn-
(Fig. 22-4). Final small corrections of the seting cast can be
 thetic casting tapes are activated by immersion in water prior
done at this stage to optimize the form of the cast for fracture
to application. To slow down seting of the cast and allow
healing and joint conformity. The carpus should be placed in
more time to mold it perfectly to the leg of the cat, it can be
mild internal rotation, 10-15? of flexion, and varus posture.
applied in a dry state (7) or be immersed in cold rather than
The hock joint should be flexed by approximately 5° from
hot water. This also ensures better lamination of the tapes
its neutral standing position. Additionally, the cast should be
over joints, such as the tarsus, stifle, and elbow. After applica-
bent slightly to overcorrect the initial angulation of the frac-
Figure 22-4 Application of a
cast.
(A) One or two tape stirrups are
applied to the distal limb, as 
described in Figure 22-1. A single
layer of thick orthopedic
stockinette is applied over the
limb.
(B) Three or four layers of extra
padding are applied over bony
prominences at risk for pressure
sores (accessory carpal bone and 
 olecranon in the forelimb, tuber
calcanei, patella, and the fibular
B
head in the hindlimb).
Additionally the distal end of the
limb is provided with extra
padding.
(C) Elasticated gauze or rolled 
foam underwrap is applied to
stabilize and compress the
 padding.
(D) The fracture is reduced, and 
the cast material applied from
distal to proximal and back, in
inward rotation. The limb is held 
with flat hands in slight varus
 and inward rotation while the
casting material hardens. The 
stockinette and the tape stirrups
are reflected back on to the cast.
244
 Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
ture. The stockinette and padding are reflected back using
22.3.1 Carpal flexion sling or splint
some tension, so that the edges of the cast are bent outward
 from the limb and fixed with tape (Fig. 22-4). Spending ade-
The purpose of a carpal flexion sling or splint is to hold the
carpus in suffcient flexion to prevent weight-bearing (Fig.
quate time and care at this stage to ensure the cast fts well,
and that the ends are smooth and will not rub or iritate the
22-5). The advantage is that the elbow and shoulder are not
soft tissue, can be time well spent, as preventing cast-related
included, so these joints are able to move freely, which should
problems is much easier than trying to deal with cast sores.
The success of fracture reduction is assessed with radiographs.
Figure 22-5  A carpal flexion
Although perfect anatomic reduction is desirable, satisfactory
splint is designed to prevent 
results can be achieved when at least 50% of the fracture ends
weight-bearing while still 
are in reduction on both the lateral and craniocaudal view.
allowing motion in the elbow
and shoulder.
Slight overcorrection of the initial deformity is optimal.
(A) The padding layer and gauze
Hospitalizing the cat for 24 hours is recommended after
are wrapped around the carpal
cast application, so it can be monitored for slippage of the
joint in a figure-of-eight pattern.
cast or vascular problems of the digits prior to discharge.
Carpal flexion should not exceed
Written instructions should always be given to owners to help
90°
identify potential complications early (Section 22.4).
(B) A splint can additionally be
applied on the dorsal aspect of
the paw to help maintain carpal
22.3 Slings, muzzles, and hobbles
flexion.
Slings are usually applied with the main aim of preventing
A
weight-bearing, although some of the slings have an addi-
tional specific function (Table 22-3). Cats may not tolerate
slings, and some will attempt amazing contortions in their 
efforts to remove them. In most cases the patients will eventu-
ally accept the sling and adapt to the situation, but in rare
cases it may be necessary and safer to sedate the cat or
remove the sling to prevent additional injury or damage.
Slings are potentially dangerous if not applied and
maintained correctly. To avoid avascular necrosis or venous
congestion, the bandage material should never be wrapped cir-
cumferentially around a leg. Instead, when bandage material is
used in a sling it is folded around the extremity as illustrated in
Figure 22-7, below. Adhesive bandage material can be used to
reduce slippage of the bandage material on the fur.
B
Sling
Function
Indication
Duration
Tape muzzle
Interarcuate stabilization of mandibular
 Temporomandibular luxation
1-2 weeks
 fracture and maxilla
 Selected mandibular fractures
Velpeau sling
Flexion of shoulder and elbow joint
Scapular fractures
7-10 days
 Prevents weight-bearing
Scapular dislocation
Medial shoulder luxation
Carpal sling
 Prevents weight-bearing
Prevention of weight-bearing while
7-10 days
maintaining elbow and shoulder
mobility
 Ehmer sling or
Internal rotation and slight abduction
Craniodorsal and caudodorsal hip joint
7-10 days
Robinson sling
of femur (Ehmer)
luxations
 Prevents weight-bearing
Avoid when possible
Hobble sling
Prevents abduction of hindlimbs
 Pelvic floor fractures
1-3 weeks
Ventral hip joint luxation
Table 22-3 Function, indication, and suggested duration of application for selected orthopedic slings and miscellaneous bandages
22: External coaptation
245
minimize joint stiffness. Its use is indicated after flexor tendon
repair and in some cases after fracture repair of the scapula,
 humerus, or accessory carpal bone.
A carpal flexion splint may be more comfortable than a
-pu aui won qu au sunddem Aq padde s! pue gus
antebrachium to the toes with a secondary layer of padding
 material in a fgure-of-eight pattern. A layer of stretchy gauze
is applied in a similar manner. Cast material is conformed to
the cranial or dorsal aspect of the flexed foot; additional
strips of padding can be applied beneath the splint if there is
insuffcient present. The fnal external layer is applied
4
from the foot to the distal radius. Care must be taken not to
overflex the carpus or to apply the bandage too tightly as
swelling of the foot can result. The toes should be visible for
monitoring purposes, but not protruding.
22.3.2 Velpeau sling
Velpeau slings are designed to prevent weight-bearing in the
forelimb. They are indicated for injuries such as a reduced
medial shoulder luxation, some fractures of the scapular neck
and glenoid, and dorsal dislocation of the scapula. A Velpeau
sling keeps the whole thoracic limb flexed (Fig. 22-6). The
R
sling is applied by wrapping a padding layer around the torso
and flexed antebrachium. The layers should be wrapped
caudal and cranial to the contralateral leg to prevent cranial
or caudal bandage slippage. An initial outer layer of less 
stretchy material is then applied on top. Great care must be
as constriction can lead to pressure sores, particularly on
the flexor aspects of the elbow and carpal joints. The thorax
must not be excessively compressed as this can lead to
 compromised respiration.
Cats can be very adept at removing their legs from Velpeau
slings. A Velpeau sling should not be used for too long a
period as the elbow and shoulder can become very stiff if
c
immobilized for more than 2 weeks. If immobilization is
Figure 22-6 A Velpeau sling prevents weight-bearing on the forelimb.
absolutely needed for more than 2 weeks, the bandage should
(A) Padding material is wrapped around the metacarpus. (B) while the
carpus, elbow, and shoulder are held in moderate flexion, padding
be removed weekly and physiotherapy applied to the fore-
 material is then wrapped around the thorax of the cat, passing cranial
limb joints, paying special attention to the elbow joint.
and caudal to the contralateral leg. and incorporating the affected limb.
01 jou uaxei a pinous ane 'l! jo dot uo padde uaut s! azneb se ()
22.3.3 Ehmer sling and Robinson sling
apply the bandage too tightly to avoid overflexion of the joints.
Two types of sling are described to prevent weight-bearing
erwise allows relatively free movement of joints. The Robin-
of the hindlimbs (4): the Ehmer sling and the Robinson, or
son sling may be indicated for situations where immediate
pelvic limb, sling.
weight-bearing is not desired.
The main indication of an Ehmer sling is to prevent relux-
 Both of these slings are usually disliked by cats. They are
ation after closed reduction of a craniodorsal hip luxation. It
diffcult to apply and maintain safely due to the looser skin
is applied across the metatarsus and femur in a fashion that
of cats, which frequently results in slippage of the bandage
aims to prevent weight-bearing and inwardly rotates and
material down over the stifle joint (Ehmer sling) or down the
abducts the hip. The stifle and hock are held in marked
back (Robinson sling). Applying adhesive elasticated tape
flexion. The Robinson sling also prevents weight-bearing of
directly to the cat's skin or fur may be required to keep these
the hindlimb by holding the joints in slight flexion, but oth-
slings in place, but this causes marked patient discomfort,
246
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and technigues
Figure 2-7 Modified Ehmer
Figure 22-8  A tape muzzle is
sling. using self-adhesive bandage
applied to maintain dental
material. This sling may be
occlusion and limit the ability to
difficult to maintain in position,
open the mouth. An Elizabethan
and removal of the adhesive
collar is necessary to prevent the
material from the skin is painful.
cat removing the muzzle.
(A) A sling is formed around the 
metatarsus (never wrap the
adhesive bandage material
circumferentialy around the
 metatarsus!). The self-adhesive
bandage is directed medial to the
Figure 22-9 Hobble sling.
tibia and lateral to the femur,
 Padding is first applied around
which results in inward rotation
each hindlimb, proximal to the
 of the femur, and is then
tarsus. A self-adhesive bandage is
wrapped around the caudal
then folded around the padding.
abdomen.
and stuck to itself between the
(B) An additional wrap can be
legs (never wrap the self-adhesive
applied from the abdomen
bandage circumferentially around 
around the plantar aspect of the
the limbs !).
metatarsus for additional
stabilization, taking care not to 
lose internal rotation of the limb.
the canine teeth slightly overlapped, and tight enough to
prevent the cat opening its mouth far enough for malocclu-
B
sion to occur but loose enough to allow the cat to open its
mouth a few millimeters to lap liquids.
 Applying the tape muzzle at this optimal level of pressure is
damage to the fur and skin, and it is painful to remove the
diffcult. Strips of zinc oxide tape are used to make the
sling. For these reasons, Ehmer and Robinson slings should
muzzle; two pieces of tape are stuck together (sticky side in),
be avoided in cats wherever possible.
with straps fastened around the head of the cat (Fig. 22-8). A
 A modifed Ehmer sling, incorporated into a body bandage
chin strap is a useful addition and an Elizabethan collar is
around the caudal abdomen, is shown in Figure 22-7. This
required to prevent the cat attempting to remove the muzzle.
sling holds the limb in slight inward rotation by passing the
Tape muzzles are of absolutely no use in brachycephalic
bandage material medial to the tibia and lateral to the femur,
breeds like the Persian or Chinchilla as the muzzle will not
but reduces the likelihood of slippage of the bandage material
be able to be applied under suffcient tension across the nose
down over the stifle joint. It can be used instead of a tradi-
or muzzle. In cats with head trauma and mandibular frac-
tional Ehmer sling to maintain reduction after hip joint luxa-
 tures the pharyngeal area and chin may be swollen, bruised,
tion. The sling will only stay in place if adhesive bandage
and edematous. These are also contraindications for use of
material is applied directly on to the fur and, as stated above,
tape muzzles. The muzzle will need regular replacement, and
 this should be avoided whenever possible.
 the cat will need meticulous cleaning under and around the
Complications include slippage of the skin down the back
muzzle to prevent soreness, as salivation is often excessive.
of the cat, foot swelling, and sores at the flexor aspect of
the hock if the sling is too tight. Removal of the adhesive
22.3.5 Tape hobbles
 bandage material is painful, and usually requires sedation or
anesthesia.
Tape hobbles are used to restrict hindlimb abduction. Their
use is indicated for pelvic floor fractures and after reatment
of ventral hip dislocation. They can also be used to prevent
22.3.4 Tape muzzles
scratching at a surgical site on the flank, forelimb, or head.
These are used for stabilization of non-displaced mandibular
Tape hobbles are applied between both hindlimbs with the
 fractures and after reduction of temporomandibular luxation
limbs held at a normal standing width apart, and with enough
(see Chapter 26 for indications). They should be applied with
laxity to allow stepping movements (Fig. 22-9). A layer of
22: External coaptation
247
Figure 22-10 Skin
with a bandage, splint, or cast should be given written instruc-
slough over a locking
tions on home care and inspection of all forms of external
 plate used for
coaptation (Fig. 22-11).
pantarsal arthrodesis,
due to pressure
necrosis from a
22.4.1 Bandage, splint, and cast aftercare
bandage that was
too tight. Skin is
 f possible, the tips of the third and fourth distal phalanges
especially subjective
should be left visible at the bottom of the bandage, splint,
to pressure necrosis
or cast for monitoring of toe temperature and swelling,
in areas with
minimal soft-tissue
and to check for bandage slippage. Any animal showing
cover, and over
signs of pain or licking and chewing, foul odor swelling of
®
implants.
toes, or evidence of slippage should have the external coap-
tation removed and replaced. All bandages should be reas-
®
sessed within 24 hours of application to minimize the risks
inherent in inadvertent misapplication of the bandage. Ban-
dages placed on limbs with vascular injury or deep lacera-
tions should be rechecked and changed frequently to monitor
for increased tissue pressure due to edema (8). Even the
     s rs
bandage, when applied above the elbow or stifle, tends to
slip down and form a pendulum of extra weight at or below
the joint. If this occurs the bandage should be removed and
replaced.
Cats with bandages, splinted bandages, or casts should
have regular weekly checks and the external coaptation
changed and replaced if there are any concerns. Problems are
more likely to develop after a change, so if the cat is comfort-
padding material is frst applied around the hindlimbs just
able and walking well with the external coaptation at the
above the hock, and stabilized with conforming gauze. A
 revisit, and no problems can be identifed on external assess-
layer of self-adhesive bandage material is then folded around
 ment, a change is not always necessary.
the padding and is stuck to itself between the limbs. Care
 A properly applied cast in a mature cat can remain in place
 must be taken not to apply the hobbles too tightly around
for up to 4 weeks. In growing cats, casts should be changed
the hock as this will impede venous and lymphatic drainage,
weekly or every second week. Anesthesia or heavy sedation
 and may result in an edematous swollen foot.
is required for changing of the cast and when fractures are
Hobbles can be applied more proximally on the hindlimb
 present radiographs should be taken before and after every
just above the stifles. An additional strip of tape coursing over
cast change. Radiographic assessment of fractures should
the back, and connecting the lateral-most aspects of the stifle
 generally be conducted 1 week following cast application and
hobbles, is necessary to prevent ventral slippage. The more
every 2-3 weeks thereafter.
proximal hobble may be more effective at preventing hindlimb
abduction for ventral hip dislocation; the more distal hobble
22.4.2 Sling aftercare
can be more effective at controlling the distal limb and pre-
venting scratching (2).
Similar to bandage and cast aftercare, cats with a sling should
be rechecked on a regular basis for potential problems,
22.4 Aftercare for bandages, splints, casts,
especially pressure necrosis. The Ehmer sling in particular
and slings
bears risks for slippage, and the authors prefer to keep cats
with an Ehmer sling in hospital to allow daily checks. Other
Ischemic injury can occur after incorrect application of a
slings, like the hobble sling or the tape muzzle, are less
bandage, cast, or sling (8) (Fig. 22-10). This can be attributed 
dangerous.
uaun no aienbapeun on paieiar sisoioau ainssard ioanp oi
 Slings holding joints in flexion, such as the Velpeau, Ehmer,
application of padding, or to a tourniquet effect resulting in
 and carpal sling, should not be left on for longer than 10
secondary ischemic edema. All owners of cats discharged
days to avoid joint contractures and pain.
248
 Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
The Queen's Veterinary School Hospital
Figure 22-11  Example of an
instruction sheet on bandage,
University of Cambridge
splint, cast, and sling care that
Madingley Road Cambridge CB3 0ES
can be given to owners. (Adapted
from Whittick WG, Egger EL
Telephone:
Fax:
Principles of fracture
e-mail:
management. In: Whittick WG
(ed.) Canine othopaedics, 2nd 
Sorrel Langley-Hobbs MA, BVetMed, DSAS (Orthopaedics), Dip. ECVS, MRCVS
edn. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger;
University Surgeon (Orthopaedics)
European Specialistin Surgery
1990: p. 232.)
Homecare of cats with splints, casts, bandages or slings
It is of extreme importance for the well being of your cat that a bandage, splint, cast or sling
be well cared for at all times. You, as the pet owner, must assume this responsibility. It
 should be realised that under certain conditions (i.e. getting wet, slippage from its original
 position, etc) the bandage, splint, cast or sling may not perform its function properly or may
even do severe damage to your cat, such as causing gangrene of the foot
Your cat should not be allowed outside
Examine the splint bandaqe or cast at least once daily
the toes at least once daily to ensure that your cat has good sensation in them and that the
and clean.
If any of the following events occur, phone your veterinary surgeon
1. Any change in shape of the bandage, splint, cast or sling on the limb.
 2. Any excessive chewing of the bandage, splint, cast or sling by the cat.
 3. Any sign of excessive discomfort.
4. Any unusual or bad odors coming from the bandage, splint, cast or sling.
5. Any unexplained soiling that was not present before.
6. Any sores that develop at the top or bottom of the splint or cast or around a sling
7. Swelling of the toes, or the leg above the bandage, splint, cast or sling.
 8. Inappetance, depression or fever in your cat.
examined by your veterinary surgeon. No bandage, splint, cast or sling can be worn in
 even a suggestion of trouble, it is always better to have your cat examined as soon as
possible.
References and further reading
5. Montavon PM, Vass K. [External coaptation]. In: Horziaek MC,
Schmidt V, Lutz H (ed.) Krankherten der Katie, 4th edn. Stult-
1. Leighton RL. Principles of conservative fracture management:
gart: Enke Verlag; 2005: pp. 682-684.
splints and casts. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 1991;6:
6. Langley-Hobbs SJ, et al. Comparison and assessment of casting
39-51.
        
2. Tobias TA. Slings, padded bandages, splinted bandages and casts.
262.
In: Olmstead ML (ed.) Small animal orthopaedics. St. Louis:
 7. Keller MA, Montavon PM. Conservative fracture treatment using
Mosby; 1995: pp. 75-110.
casts. Indications, principles of closed fracture reduction and
3. Oakley RE. External coaptation. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
stabilization, and cast materials. Compend Continuing Educ
Pract 1999;29:1083-1095.
2006;28:631-641.
4. DeCamp CE. External coaptation. In: Slatter D (ed.) Textbook 
8. Anderson DM, White RAS. Ischemic bandage injuries: a case
of small animal surgery, 2nd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;
series and review of the literature. Vet Surg 2000;29:488-498.
2003: pp. 1661-1676.
249
23
Orthopedic instrumentation
J.P. Lapish
As the patient size or area of surgery becomes smaller in
 blade is approximately half the scale of the number 11, and
relation to the surgeon's hand, the tissues must be manipu-
the number 65a blade is even smaller.
lated increasingly through the medium of surgical instrumen-
tation. Appropriately scaled instruments must be selected to
23.1.2 Dissecting forceps
minimize devitalization of the bones and soft tissues. Feline
orthopedic surgery will therefore have a greater reliance on
 Standard dissecting forceps such as Treves are slightly bulky
instruments than orthopedics on larger patients
and cumbersome for operating on cats, and the lighter Adson
Generally, smaller variants of familiar instruments are
is preferred for soft tissues. The Adson is available in toothed
selected, but ultimately, within certain parameters, the
or serrated versions. A microtoothed version, the Adson-
fnal choice of instruments will be dictated by surgeon prefer-
 Brown, offers a good combination of grip and gentleness, and
ence. Although the patient is small, the hand of the surgeon
is mainly used to manipulate tough tissues like fascia. DeBakey
remains unchanged; therefore, typically, the working tips
pattern forceps, which were developed as an atraumatic
of instruments will be scaled down but the handles and
 r    s r ro dr
often the length will remain unchanged. Surgeons who do not 
atraumatic grip. The smallest variant is 150 mm (6 inch)
 work exclusively with cats will prefer the working distances
with a 1.5-mm jaw width. Dissecting forceps are depicted in
of the instruments to remain similar across the patient
Figure 23-2.
range.
23.1.3 Scissors
23.1 Instruments used for
The preferred dissection scissor for feline orthopedics is the
surgical approaches
Metzenbaum (Fig. 23-3). Although a similar overall length
to the standard surgical Mayo, the Metzenbaum has shorter,
23.1.1 Scalpels and blades
fner cutting blades. Appropriate lengths are 180 mm (7 inch)
 For most feline procedures a number 15 blade is appropriate
and 145 mm (5.75 inch): the latter are also known as pedi-
which fts the number 3 or number 7 scalpel handle (Fig.
 atric Metzenbaum or Laheys. The ophthalmic range offers a
23-1). Where a sharp pointed blade is required, the number
wide selection if an even smaller scissor is required. The
11 or number 15a are useful choices: both ft the same 
strabismus scissor (Fig. 23-3) is effectively a scaled-down
handles. The smaller Beaver-type handle and blade is pre-
Metzenbaum. The curved Mayo scissor or dedicated suture
ferred if it is necessary to work within joints. The number 65
 scissor is used to cut suture material (Fig. 23-3).
23.1.4 Artery forceps
Hemostasis in the cat may be achieved using Halstead mos-
quito forceps 125 mm (5 inch), either curved or straight (Fig.
23-4). The tip of the instrument is used for clamping small
R
vessels. The Halstead is also ideal for bluntly opening a
channel through soft tissues to bone, prior to closed place-
ment of external fixation pins. The closed jaws are placed
D
 down a stab incision and gently opened to create a passage.
E
23.1.5 Retractors
Figure 23-1 Scalpels and blades. (A) Number 3 scalpel handle plus
Retraction of the soft tissues around bones and joints is
number 10 blade; (B) number 7 scalpel handle plus number 15 blade;
(C) number 15a blade: (D) number 11 blade; (E) Beaver-type handle
Jo auoq aui asodxa on eunen wonj waun noanoid on jeuass
plus number 65 blade: (F) number 65a blade.
joint under investigation, and to allow in suffcient light for
250
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
A
Figure 23-2  Dissecting forceps
with close-up views of the
tips. (A) Debakey: (B) Treves;
(C) dressing: (D) Adson; (E) Adson
serrated: (F) Adson Brown tips.
V.-SHFEL
D
A
B
Figure 23-4 Artery forceps. (A) Halstead mosquito; (B) Spencer Wells.
c
Figure 23-3 Scissors. (A) Strabismus: (B) Metzenbaum: (C) Mayo.
Senn is a double-ended instrument: one end is a single blade
6 mm wide and the other is a sharp multipronged tip with a
adequate visualization. Surgeons working without assistance
width of 10 mm.
will rely on a wide range of self-retaining retractors to provide
Hohmann retractors are a specifc group of retractors
exposure (Fig. 23-5). They may be subdivided into two main
designed both to elevate bone or joint structures while at the
 groups: single-pronged (Gelpi style) and multipronged (Wests 
same time retracting and flattening soft tissues for improved
 or Travers style). Both types are available in smaller variants
visual access and manipulation (Fig. 23-6). All have a small
  e   
tip which is placed behind the bone and a wider proximal
used for superficial retraction of skin and muscle, where a
blade which, when depressed, pushes the soft tissues away.
relatively wide exposure is necessary. Closer to the bone or
All require an assistant to maintain retraction. Short-tipped
joint more focal retraction is obtained by using single-pronged
variants with blade widths of 6 or 8 mm are the most useful.
devices. Two single-pronged small Gelpis may be placed at
Hohmann retractors can also be used as a lever to distract
right angles to each other to create a window on to the area
and reduce a fracture.
of interest.
Although not technically instruments, Penrose drains and
Hand-held focal retraction offers the most controllable
woven or umbilical tape have a role to play in soft-tissue
retraction where assistance is available (Fig. 23-6). Single-
retraction, particularly in the protection of nerves and vessels.
blade retractors with a blade width of 6 mm or less are pre-
 Passed around the nerve or vessel, these products are used to
ferred. Most of those available to the veterinary surgeon were
manipulate its position atraumatically, avoiding contact with
designed for human fnger surgery. Appropriate patterns are
metal instruments. A pair of Halstead mosquito forceps
the smaller Langenbecks, Meyerdings, and the Senn. The
 clipped on to a Penrose drain offers a degree of self-retaining
23: Orthopedic instrumentation
251
1
D
Figure 23-7 Needle-holders. (A) Olsen-Hegar: (B) Mayo-Hegar;
(C) DeBakey: (D) microserrated tungsten jaw inserts
Figure 23-5 Self-retaining retractors. (A) Small Gelpis: (B) mini
Gelpis;: (C) standard Gelpis with blunt tips; (D) mini Travers; (E) Aln;
retraction, the weight of the instrument being sufficient to
(F) Weitlaners.
keep the nerve in the desired position. Alternatively, position-
ing may be controlled by an assistant.
23.1.6 Needle-holders
Needles used in feline surgery are small, and needle-holders
with suitable-sized jaws should be selected (Fig. 23-7). It
is recommended that a needle-holder with tungsten
B
carbide jaws is used for maximum grip and minimum needle
slippage, as the very hard microserrations bite into the
relatively soft stainless-steel needle. Many designs are avail-
able and typically the needle-holder is the one instrument
over which the surgeon likes to express a choice. Recom-
mended are the Mayo-Hegar 125-165 mm (5-6.5 inch).
Similar in pattern but lighter are the DeBakey. Non-locking
Gillie-rype needle-holder/scissors are less reliable, although
useful for cutting sutures if an assistant is not available. An
alternative to the Gillie as a needle-holder/scissor is the
Olsen-Hegar: this has the beneft of a locking action. Tung-
Figure 23-6 Hand-held retractors. (A) Meyerding finger: (B)
sten carbide jaw versions are available in 115-165 mm (4.5-
Langenbeck 6 mm: (C) Senn: (D) Hohmann 12 mm: (E) Hohmann
6.5 inch). The Derf needle-holder is effectively a scaled-down
8 mm: (F) Hohmann 6 mm: (G) Penrose drain.
Mayo-Hegar.
252
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
122
Figure 23-9Adson suction tip.
凸
Figure 23-8 Electrocautery. (A) Monopolar hand piece; (B) bipolar
hand piece.
23.1.7 Ancillary aids
Adequate lighting is a prerequisite for good surgery. A repo-
sitionable focal light source is very desirable. Care should be
exercised to control the heating and drying effects of good
lighting. Ideally an assistant should be delegated the task of
keeping tissues moist. Newer LED light sources are able to
provide light without heat.
 Diathermy facilitates the creation of a blood-free operating
site by electrocutting and coagulation (Fig. 23-8). Blood loss
is minimized: this may be crucial in severely injured patients.
B
Bipolar diathermy must be used in the proximity of any nerve
Figure 23-10B
 Binocular loupes and LED light source. (A) Loupes and
bundles, and particularly the spine. Dry swabs or sponges are
light source on a spectacle frame; (B) loupes and light source fitted to a
abrasive and will cause damage if used repetitively, particu-
head band.
larly if dragged across soft tissues. Conversely, a swab can
be an effective means of clearing soft tissue from a bone
fragment.
ficient for most procedures. The focal distance should be
 Suction will contribute to a clear operating feld. It is par-
selected to maintain a normal working distance, usually
ticularly desirable in the presence of cooling irrigation. Many
between 380 and 430 mm. The addition of a loupe light,
tips are available but the most useful are the Adson (4 mm
either fberoptic or, more economically, LED, will automati-
diameter) (Fig. 23-9) or Frazier (2.6 mm diameter) type,
cally provide surgical light where it is needed.
which offer fngertip control of suction by an assistant. The
nx ss  xa q ous s s
23.2 Instruments used for osteosynthesis
1.5-2 hours to decrease bacterial contamination.
The bones and joints of cats are small, so the use of bin-
23.2.1 Powered equipment
ocular loupes, which magnify while maintaining a normal
working distance, will signifcantly improve visualization of
Most powered orthopedic equipment is designed for human
the working area (Fig. 23-10). Magnification is especially
large-bone surgery. Until recently the industry-standard
useful for spinal surgery. A magnifcation of 2.5 times is suf-
 pneumatic equipment for small canine and feline orthopedics
23: Orthopedic instrumentation
253
Surgairtometwo
Figure 23-12
The Halls Surgairtome is a high-speed, low-torque air
driven bur system useful for neurosurgery or debridement of articular
cartilage prior to arthrodesis.
A
B
Figure 23-11  Powered orthopedic equipment for feline surgery.
(A) DeSoutter MPZ modular system; (B) Synthes Colibri modular system.
was the 3Ms Mini Driver which is no longer available new,
although it is still widely used. Alternatives include the pneu-
matic DeSoutter MPZ system, the cable drive Aesculap Elan
or battery-powered Aesculap mini Acculan systems, and the
Synthes battery Colibri system. All have their own advan-
R
 s ss o arn  d p s
hand piece with a range of interchangeable attachments,
including drill, oscillating saw, and wire driver (Fig. 23-11).
Most drills are based on a 4-mm-capacity Jacobs chuck.
Some systems have a novel oscillating drill attachment, which
generates cleaner and heat-reduced drilling plus minimal soft-
tissue wrap-around. All the saws in the systems mentioned
will take appropriately sized saw blades for cutting feline
C
bones.
Figure 23-13 Small pointed reduction forceps showing the different
closing mechanisms. (A) The ratchet; (B) soft lock; and (C) spin lock
A wire driver is particularly useful in feline orthopedics.
mechanism.
Hard wires having a diameter of less than 2 mm are flexible
iseal ie ro auuaq inoum auoq oui ap on inou pue
creating a hole which is less than circular. The interface
23.2.2 Pointed reduction forceps
between pin and bone is reduced if the hole created is
not circular resulting in early implant failure. Wire drivers
Pointed reduction forceps are designed to reduce and main-
 permit the incremental insertion of wires via a rotating clutch
tain reduction of bone fragments. Each fragment is com-
mechanism. Only a short segment of wire is exposed to
pressed at a single point, which is typically critical in its
bending forces at any time. Recreating incremental insertion
 location. The jaws are maintained in position using either a
using a chuck and key is much less convenient and very
ratchet mechanism or a spin lock mechanism. When dealing
time-consuming.
with very small fragments, the increments between ratchets
All the modular systems described above are powered by
can be too large and offer less “feel." The spin lock allows
low-speed, high-torque motors. They are not suitable for
Unds si ypof uds aui pue pueu-aany pauaiul aq oi sdasroj a
driving high-speed burs, which demand a much higher speed 
into position to maintain reduction. A third option available
together with low torque. At speeds approaching 100 000 rpm,
is a “soft lock" mechanism: this utilizes a very fne ratchet
the burs become self-cleaning to a degree, as bone debris gets
are sad aarn l ciay, raq qn sai aroar pue
spun off. Burs that run at lower speeds very rapidly clog up.
 available in a variety of small sizes suitable for cats (Fig.
 The industry standard bur system is the Halls Surgairtome II,
23-13).
driven by an air vane motor (Fig. 23-12). The Surgairtome
23.2.3 Bone-holding forceps
2.34 mm) of a variety of lengths and diameters. Bur construc-
tion will be of carbide or a diamond coating. The latter offers
The distinction between pointed reduction and bone-holding
a fner cut and better wear characteristics.
forceps is somewhat arbitrary. Generally, bone-holding
254
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
Figure 23-15 (A) The combination wire twister and shear cutter is
shown alongside (B) the wire tightener for loop cerclage. Close-ups are
on the left.
dental hooks, curettes, and a small Hohmann retractor,
together with a very fine periosteal elevator to use as bone
levers and probes in any feline orthopedic kit.
23.2.5 Instruments for placing orthopedic wire
Cerclage may be applied either as a length of wire twisted
around itself or as a wire tensioned against an end loop. The
former offers the ability to adjust tension incrementally, but
has to be done correctly to avoid weakening the wire at the
base of the twist (Chapter 24). The latter is more reliable but
does not offer the option of retightening. Both will require
1
 dedicated insruments. The use of needle-holders or artery
Figure 23-14 Bone-holding forceps. (A) Small curved; (B) small
forceps for twisting wire is not recommended. The combina-
Pisimi roj aedoidde si rano rus pue iaisimi anm uo
cerclage. Looped cerclage wire requires its own dedicated
tightener (Fig. 23-15). Various designs of wire passer are
forceps are used to grip and hold bone and move fragments  3
 available for passing wire around bone fragments while mini-
while attempting reduction rather than simply to hold already
y mizing damage to the soft tissues. All consist of a stiff tube
reduced bone fragments in apposition; the latter is the main  curved to match the diameter of the bone. The curved tube
ised pue qanorq uauaeny auoq aui punore pausnd Apuaa s! susiueuou Suisop auL sdasroy uoonpai pauiod jo ysel
described for pointed reduction forceps are also available for
 soft tissues. The flexible piece of orthopedic wire is passed
bone-holding forceps. A wide variety of jaw designs are avail-
into the wire passer, which can then be withdrawn. A wire
able to suit different orthopedic situations. There is no such
passer with a diameter of around 20 mm is the most useful
thing as a universal bone-holding forceps. The long bones of
in feline orthopedics.
cats have a relatively thin cortex and manipulating their frag-
ments requires that the forceps offer support as well as grip.
23.2.6 Hard wire and pin insertion
aie1 e 1ea1 00i aaeq 1o 21el 001 a1e 1ei sdao1o1 jo 2s
increment or the wrong-shaped jaw will crush the fragment.
 Pins and wires, including external fxation pins, should be
A variety of useful designs are illustrated in Figure 23-14.
driven into bone by pure axial rotation. Anything less will
compromise the bone-pin interface which retains the pin in
 the bone. The ideal instrument is a powered wire driver (Fig.
23.2.4 Bone levers and hooks
23-16). Larger less flexible pins can be driven reasonably
 Bone fragments in small patients should not be handled with
well using a hand chuck. A Jacobs chuck consists of a stain-
fngers. Fingers obscure the fracture site and devitalize bone
less-steel chuck mounted on an anodized aluminum handle.
and soft tissues. In addition to reduction forceps and bone-
 Two capacities are available: the larger 6.35-mm version, and
holding forceps, it is useful to include a small selection of 
a smaller, lighter 4-mm-capacity version. The latter is recom-
23: Orthopedic instrumentation
255
HALL
wiredriver100
B
Figure 23-16An air-powered wire driver.
mended. Pin vices of even smaller capacity are available for
wires of 2 mm diameter and less. These vices ft into the palm
of the hand, and this allows a purer axial rotation than the
D
larger hand chucks. It should be noted that the chuck key,
Figure 23-17 Instruments for bone-cutting. (A) Fine bone cutters
having approximately 25% of the teeth of the chuck, will
9 mm jaw; (B) bone cutters 11 mm jaw; (C) hard back saw; (D)
wear much faster than the chuck. The key should therefore
adjustable bone saw.
be replaced more often than the chuck.
o a pue sol o aso paoeid aeidi are sam pie
end will require management to avoid premature loosening
and soft-tissue irritation. The cut ends can be pushed flat to
 Trochleoplasty is a specific bone-cutting procedure requir-
the bone surface using a punch, the end of which is recessed
 ing a fine but stiff blade. A stronger piece of metal is run 
to reduce slippage. Alternatively, the cut end can be bent over
 along the back of the blade to stiffen the blade. This type of
and turned to align with inserting ligament or tendons. It is
 blade is available as a disposable hobby saw (Xacto), which
important to maintain the fracture reduction under pressure 
has the benefit of very fine teeth, or as a surgical hard back
while bending the wire to avoid destabilization of the frac-
saw which can be autoclaved, but whose teeth are a little
ture. This is achieved using a Kirschner wire bender, an
larger (Fig. 23-17).
instrument cannulated along its length, and slid down the
wire to the bone surface. Applying pressure as well as bending
23.2.8 Removing bone
forces means that the repair is not disrupted and that the
 bend is created sharply at the bone surface.
Debulking of bone is best achieved using a high-speed bur,
so material can be gently incrementally removed. When close
to vital structures, particularly the spine, it is desirable that
23.2.7 Cutting bone
the fnal overlying layer of bone is removed by hand. It is
 If bone is being cut with a view to subsequent reattachment,
important that this final layer of bone should only be eggshell
control and accuracy are very important. A powered oscillat-
 thick, as the appropriate-sized rongeurs are not strong enough
ing saw with an appropriate blade is then recommended.
 for thicker bone. When using any rongeur near the spine, it
Bone cutters and osteotomes are less controllable. Cutters
is important to remember that one jaw has to be inserted
can be appropriate in certain circumstances, e.g., tibial crest
between the bone and the spinal cord for the opposite jaw to
transplants or femoral head and neck excisions; however,
cut against. The jaw inserted must therefore be as small as
they crush the bone whilst cutting. Osteotomes are difficult
possible (Fig. 23-18). The jaw width should be between 1.5
to use, because the small size of the cat results in the power
and 3.00 mm. However, jaw size is related to strength and
from the mallet typically dissipating by movement of the cat
these microrongeurs should be reserved for delicate work.
or cat limb away from the mallet. Where the bone in question
Other useful instruments for removing bone include a selec-
can be supported, a 4- or 6-mm osteotome can be used
tion of dental probes. Sharp probes, such as the Jaquette
effectively.
style, are used for hooking bone fragments away from the
256
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques 
B
Figure 23-18 Rongeurs. (A) Stellebrink synovectomy rongeurs;
(B) micro-Friedman rongeurs.
spine. Dental curettes have a rounded back surface and are
therefore more useful when working up against the spine.
 Most traditional curettes are too large but the House curette,
 a human ear instrument, is double-ended and appropriately
sized.
C
23.2.9 Plating equipment
Figure 23-19 Plate bone-holders. (A) Synthes 2.7-mm plate-holding 
forceps: (B) close-up of (A); (C) cat-sized Lowman clamp.
Traditionally, plates and screws in the cat have been restricted
to 2.7-, 2.0-, and 1.5-mm dynamic compression plate
(DCP) systems. Today more options are available, including
miniature and 2.4-mm plates and screws, and internal fx-
ators, which involve screws that interlock with the plates
on the plate hole, and is placed at right angles to the plate
p o  sa  a  r)
(Chapter 24). The machine thread on the head of the locking
instrumentation.
screw is very unforgiving in terms of screw angle.
The Mini AO kit will be described in some detail. For
The inherently unstable construct of bone plate and bone
example, for a 2.0-mm position screw the following are
fragment makes the creation of a simple, universal plate-
required: drillguide, pilot drill (1.5 mm), 1.5/2.0 depth gauge,
holding forceps diffcult. Ratchet-type, jointed instruments
tap, small countersink, and 1.5 hexagonal or cruciate screw.
work efficiently over a relatively small range of bone diame-
driver. A lag screw will require in addition a clearance
ters. The most effcient bone plate-holding devices are
drill of 2.0 mm and a 1.5/2.0 insert sleeve. If applying a
 designed to work with a single size of bone plate. In feline
 DCP, a load/neutral drillguide will also be necessary to posi-
fracture orthopedics, useful instruments include the Synthes
tion screws appropriately in the plate. If using self-tapping
2.7 mm plate-holding forceps, and the cat-sized Lowman
screws the tap is not necessary. The 1.5-, 2.4-, and 2.7-mm
clamp. The former is a modifed Verbrugge forceps, incorpo-
 screw/plate sets will require a similar array of dedicated
rating a sliding self-centering hinge and a hinged jaw. The
equipment.
latter is not hinged and works in a single plane, allowing it
 Locking plates require a threaded drill guide to be placed
to function over a wider range of bone size, and with both
into the locking hole to ensure that the pilot hole is centered
2.0- and 2.7-mm plates (Fig. 23-19).
23: Orthopedic instrumentation
257
style 6-mm elevator can be slightly large for cats. The Freer
elevator is a fner and slightly narrower alternative at 5-mm
A
width. A small double-ended periosteal elevator with 2- and
3-mm tips is an even smaller option. These instruments
 should be held with the index finger near the working extrem-
B
ity to facilitate control.
C
Figure 23-20 Periosteal elevators. (A) AO style: (B) Freer; (C) very fine
 References and further reading
2-3-mm periosteal elevator.
Commercial catalogues and websites featuring human hand surgery
instruments and veterinary orthopedic specialties illustrate a wide
range of small instruments appropriate for feline orthopedics.
23.2.10 Periosteal elevator
Catalogues are available from many companies, including:
Aesculap: www.aesculap.de
A periosteal elevator is used to strip soft tissues from long
Synthes: www.synthes.com
bones prior to plate fixation (Fig. 23-20). The standard AO-
Veterinary Instrumentation: www.vetinst.com
259
24
Orthopedic implants
S.J. Langley-Hobbs, K. Voss, J.P. Lapish, P.M. Montavon
A large variety of orthopedic implants are suitable for use in
Cerclage and hemicerclage are not used as the sole
cats. The commonly applied standard implants include ortho-
method of fxation on any type of long-bone fracture.
pedic wire, Kirschner wires, intramedullary pins, and dynamic
 Most commonly, cerclage wires are combined with an intra-
compression plates (DCPs). More specialized implants, such
 medullary pin to repair long oblique fractures. They can also
as miniaturized and specific plates, internal fxators, and
be placed under or over a plate. One study showed that
interlocking nails, can be particularly useful for repair of the
it was preferable to use them under rather than over the
smaller bones of cats. It is often possible successfully to apply
plate (1).
a variety of different implants for stabilization of a fracture,
 There are a variety of methods for tightening and securing
and the choice of which implant 1
e is based on individual
 the wire with both cerclage and hemicerclage wiring. These
assessment of the cat, including its size, age, and the presence
 include twisting the ends together or using a single- or double-
of other injuries, the fracture itself and the type of fracture
loop knot. Numerous articles discuss the pros and cons and
healing expected (Chapter 13), the availability of implants,
 different mechanical characteristics of these different tighten-
and the experience of the surgeon. An advantage in feline
ing techniques.
. The twist knot should be appropriate for
fracture repair is the fairly limited variation of implant sizes
 most feline orthopedic procedures when the correct principles
that need to be kept in stock because of the similar size range 
of application are applied. Wire twisters or pliers are used to
of all domestic cats. Implants suitable for cats and their
form the twist. The wire should be pulled tight to the bone
application techniques are described in the following
before starting the twist. Then, the twist is started by hand
 before grasping both ends of the wire with the instrument.
sections.
The instrument is pulled frmly away from the bone while
twisting the two ends evenly around each other (Fig. 24-1).
24.1 Orthopedic wire
i ar uam soq ai oi readd l si isimn a
Orthopedic wire is composed of 316 L stainless steel. It is
manufactured differently from pins and plates to make it more
flexible and malleable. It is available in a variety of diameters,
Pin size
Wire
referred to as gauge (G). The 0.8-mm or 22 G wire is usually
Millimeters
Inches
Fractions
gauge
the most appropriate size to use in cats. The 0.4-mm (26 G),
0.6-mm (24 G), or 1.0-mm (20 G) wire may occasionally be
0.4
0.015
24 G
preferred. Orthopedic wire is used for cerclage, hemicerclage,
0.6
0.023
interfragmentary, and tension band wiring. Cerclage refers
0.8
0.031
22 G
to a circle of wire that completely encircles the circumference
0.9
0.035
of the bone. Hemicerclage refers to a piece of wire that is
1.0
0.039
20 G
placed through holes in the bone, thus partially encircling it.
1.1
0.043
A conversion chart of the metric and imperial wire and pin
1.2
0.047
18 G
size system is provided in Table 24-1.
1.6
0.062
1/16
2.0
0.078
5/64
2.4
0.094
3/32
24.1.1 Cerclage and hemicerclage wiring
2.5
0.098
2.8
0.109
7/64
Cerclage wires must be placed correctly, obeying certain prin-
3.0
0.118
ciples (Box 24-1). Wires placed incorrectly will loosen and
3.2
0.125
1/8
disrupt blood supply. Subsequent disturbed fracture healing
3.5
0.140
9/64
has given cerclage wiring a bad name. However, when used
4.0
0.156
5/32
appropriately, they are a useful and economic implant for
feline osteosynthesis (see Fig. 37-9, Chapter 37).
Table 24-1 Pin and wire size conversion chart
260
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques 
Figure 24-1
Box 24-1 Principles for use of cerclage wires in
Correct application
feline orthopedic surgery
of cerclage wire
requires pulling away
from the bone as the
Use large enough diameter wire - 22 gauge or 0.8 mm
wire is twisted to
 is usually appropriate in cats
ensure an even twist 
Apply the wire tightly - movement allows devascular-
is formed.
ization and demineralization of bone
When applying the wire use a wire passer to disturb
surrounding soft tissues minimally and disrupt the
 blood supply to the bone minimally
Restrict the use of wires to areas where the bone can
be reconstructed anatomically - they should not be 
used to surround unreduced fragments
Only use for oblique fractures; the length of the fracture
line should be at least twice the diameter of the
bone
A minimum of two wires should be placed for oblique
 fractures - one alone will act as a fulcrum for bending 
Figure 24-2 A hemicerclage
 and if there is only room for one wire, this suggests 
wire in combination with an
intramedullary nail. A thick nail is
that the fracture is not oblique enough to be
used, filling approximately 70%
cerclaged
 of the medullary cavity.
Wires should be placed at least 0.5 cm from the fracture
 line, and a gap equivalent to between half and the
entire bone diameter should be left between the
wires
Wires should be placed at the narrowest part of the
 bone or if the bone is tapered it can be notched or a
small K wire placed across the bone (skewer pin) to
 prevent slippage
When twisting the wire use pliers and pull away from
ISIMl sam aul annsua oi Susin ism auoq a
evenly around each other. It should not end up with
around it, which will loosen
Cut the ends of the wires, leaving three twists or turns
- a longer end than this is unnecessary and could lead
to soft-tissue irritation
when tightened the pin is pulled against the endosteum (Fig.
The twist can be left protruding perpendicular to the
bone (biomechanically the better option) - unless
stability, and the holes in the bone can weaken the bone
there is little soft-tissue cover in which case the twist
further (2).
should be bent over flat on the bone
24.1.2 Interfragmentary wiring
enough surrounding soft tissue to prevent irritation, and the
 Interfragmentary wires are placed through holes in bone in a
ends are cut short, leaving three turns.
Hemicerclage is used less frequently than cerclage. Care
 as the primary fxation device for simple fractures of the flat
must be taken that the wire is tightened sufficiently with this
bones of the skull or scapular body (Fig. 24-3). They are not
technique, and especial care should be taken when making
appropriate for full weight-bearing bones. Small-diameter
the holes to thread the wire through so that additional fis-
wire (0.4-0.6 mm) should be selected as larger-diameter wire
sures or fractures are not created. The wire inside the medul-
will be more diffcult to tighten, and may cut through the
lary canal should wrap around the intramedullary pin so
thin bone.
24: Orthopedic implants
261
Figure 24-4
Example for (A) cross
pinning and
(B) dynamic
intr amedullary
pinning of a Salter
and Harris type I
fracture of the distal
femur.
Figure 24-3 Application of an interfragmentary wire. The holes for
the wires to pass through are drilled in a slightly oblique direction
towards the fracture to facilitate wire insertion. The tip of a mosquito
forceps helps tension the wire.
A
24.2 Kirschner wires
Kirschner wires (or K wires) are semirigid pins made of 316 L the pin during insertion. Anatomic fracture reduction is nec-
stainless steel. They are available from 0.6- to 3.0-mm diam-  essary to achieve suffcient stability with cross and parallel
a n uan aq oi seq a ud ssn u ud rass  noe oi osi o san qua n pe ia
wires exist with pointed tips on one or both ends. These are pins cross above the fracture line (Fig. 24-4). Insuffcient
usually trocar-type tips. Small Kirschner-type pins with trocar  rotational stability is achieved if they cross at the level of the
tips are also available with a threaded section, either on the  fracture. In oblique fractures, the pin oriented more parallel
end of the pin or in the center. Further details on threaded  to the fracture line is inserted frst to prevent distraction of
pins are described in the section on external skeletal fixation  the fracture.
(ESF) implants, below. A conversion chart of the metric and 
In certain locations, such as the distal humerus or femur,
imperial wire and pin size system is provided in Table  the K wires are sometimes inserted too parallel to the long
24-1.
axis of the bone, causing the pins to glance off the inner
Kirschner wires can be applied for many indications and
 surface of the transcortex without penetrating it. If this
purposes in feline orthopedics. Smooth pins are used for  occurs, the pins can be advanced further proximally into the
intramedullary nailing, for cross and parallel pinning, for 1
 medullary cavity, similar to Rush pinning. A spring-like effect
tension band fixation, and for skewer pins. Kirschner wires
 is created by enhanced contact with the inner surface of the
can also be used as transosseus pins for ESF. Most com-
cortex to compensate for the lack of cortex penetration. This
monly, threaded pins are used for this indication.
Buud aepunun surup paan uaq seu anu
(3) (Fig. 24-4).
24.2.1 Cross and parallel pinning
With the right indications, few complications are encoun-
tered with cross or parallel pinning. Intraoperative complica-
The main indication for cross pinning and parallel pinning is
 tions include pin placement into a joint and subperiosteal pin
for repair of physeal fractures. Rotational stability is pro-
 placement resulting in reduced holding power. Thorough
vided because two pins are inserted across the fracture. Cross
 knowledge of regional anatomy helps avoid poor placement
pinning is used for Salter Harris type I and I fractures of the
 of pins. Late complications are mainly attributed to pin
distal humerus, radius, femur and tibia. Parallel pinning is
 migration. Fracture instability should be suspected if pins
indicated to repair Salter I and II fractures of the proximal
 migrate, and the affected pin may have to be replaced or a
humerus, distal femur, and proximal tibia, and to stabilize 
 different implant system applied if healing is not advanced
fractures of the femoral capital physis and femoral neck.
sufficiently. Because cross pins penetrate the cortex in highly
 Appropriately sized small-diameter smooth K wires are
functional areas near joints, it may be beneficial to remove
selected according to the size of the fragment. Their size may
them after the fracture has healed.
range from 0.6 to 1.6 mm, depending on the size of the cat
and fragments, and location of the fracture. The K wires are
24.2.2 Skewer pin
best inserted by low-speed battery drilling. Insertion with an
oscillating mode is useful if this facility is available and has
When cerclage wires are applied on hourglass-shaped bones
the advantage of preventing soft tissue from twisting around
or around oblique fractures the use of an adjunctive K wire
262
 Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques 
Figure 24-5  Close-up of a
Figure 24-6  Tension band
skewer pin. The figure-of-eight
fixation of a simple proximal
wire is anchored around the pin
olecranon fracture. The wire does
ends and compresses the fracture
not oross over the fracture site.
fragments.
across the bone can prevent wire slippage towards the nar-
rower part of the bone and improve the function of the
cerclage. This technique has been termed the skewer pin
technique. After reduction of the fracture, a 0.9- or 1.1-mm
 K wire is directed across the bone, between fragments, just
off perpendicular to the fracture plane. If the fracture is more
transverse, the K wire must be directed at an angle between
perpendicular to the long axis of the bone and the angle of
the fracture. Once the K wire is inserted, either a full cerclage
or a piece of orthopedic wire in a fgure-of-eight fashion is
fxation, using orthopedic wire of too small a diameter so it
 positioned around it. Tightening of the wire provides some
breaks, and compression of soft-tissue structures below the
 interfragmentary compression, prevents slippage of the K
implants. Close attention to insertion technique and knowl-
wire, and improves stability of the construct (Fig. 24-5). The
edge of regional anatomy should avoid most complications.
most common clinical applications for a skewer pin are long
oblique fractures of the ilium (Chapter 35).
24.3 Intramedullary pins
24.2.3 Tension band fixation
Intramedullary pins are often termed Steinmann pins. Stein-
mann pins are larger than K wires. Similar to K wires, they
A tension band wire is used to secure avulsion fractures. The
are round pins composed of 316 L stainless steel. They usually
tension band works on the principle that active distracting
have a point at both ends but are available with only one
 forces are counteracted and converted into compressive forces.
pointed end. The point is usually a trocar tip, but bayonet,
 Tensile forces are exerted by the pull of ligaments or con-
diamond points, and threaded ends are also available. They
traction of muscles on small fracture fragments. These frac-
are usually 250- or 300-mm long. Kirschner wires are often
tures are termed avulsion fractures. Avulsion fractures in the
-adsa 'sien un unud Arelnpuenun ron pazis Aidoidde
cat include those of the olecranon, greater trochanter medial
cially in smaller bones and younger animals.
malleolus, acromion of the scapula, os calcaneus, and tibial
Intramedullary pinning is used for diaphyseal and metaphys-
tuberosity. These tension forces can be overcome and con-
 eal fractures of long bones including the femur humerus,
verted into compressive forces by inserting two parallel K
ulna, tibia, and metatarsal and metacarpal bones. Its applica-
 wires across the fragment, and a fgure-of-eight tension band
tion, insertion, and fnal position cause minimal damage to
wire on the tension or distraction side (Fig. 24-6).
 the periosteal blood supply, which can be an advantage in
The K wires act as an anchor point for the tension band,
young animals. The radius is the only long bone not suited
and if two are placed, they will counteract rotational forces.
for intramedullary pinning, as insertion of a pin would cause
The figure-of-eight wire can also be placed through a pre-
damage to the carpal or elbow joint. Metacarpal and meta-
drilled hole instead of being anchored around the pin ends.
tarsal bones also do not have sites for easy insertion of
This can be advantageous as it avoids tendon compression
intramedullary pins, but by burring a small slot in the distal
compared to placing the wire around the pin ends, for
end of the bone, the pins can be inserted into the medullary
example during the repair of olecranon fractures, and it also
canal without trauma to the articular surfaces.
places the wire closer to the fracture, which makes it stronger.
Intramedullary pins are well suited for resisting bending
 ae sam pueq uoisun pue sud idde roy sadiud a
forces, but lack rotational and axial stability. They should
listed in Box 24-2.
not be used as a sole method of fxation except in the rare
Complications include placement of the hole for the tension
interdigitating transverse fracture or in very young kitens
band wire too superficially, risking wire pull-out, placement
less than 3 months of age. Otherwise they should be com-
of the K wires too close to the fracture, resulting in loss of
bined with cerclage or hemicerclage wires, plates, or ESF.
24: Orthopedic implants
263
rog pasn st lp Araeq paads-mois ro yonuo sqooef 
Box 24-2 Principles for application of pin and
insertion of intramedullary pins. Pins can be inserted in a
tension band to an avulsion fracture
apeaona "L-7 o) rauuu apenouou 1o aperaonar
insertion means that the insertion of the pin begins at the
1. Reduce the fracture indirectly by extension of the
fracture site. The pin is retrieved from the proximal end of
joint and the use of Allis tissue forceps on the tendon
the bone until it is flush with the fracture. The fracture is then
or a pointed dental hook. Do not grasp the fragment
reduced and the pin is advanced into the distal fragment.
itself as it is mainly composed of cancellous bone
Normograde insertion begins at one end of the bone (usually
and may be crushed or fragment further
proximal). The pin is advanced to the level of the fracture,
2. Place two small K wires perpendicular to the fracture
the fracture is reduced, and the pin is further advanced.
and parallel to each other
Regardless of which method is used, the pin is driven distally
3. Pins are placed through the fragment and into the
until resistance is felt when the pin starts to touch the distal
parent bone until the ends just penetrate the far bone
cortex or subchondral bone. Comparison with a pin of the
cortex
same length helps to assess depth of insertion of the pin into
4. A transverse hole is drilled through the diaphysis
the bone and thus avoid inadvertent joint penetration. It is
 distal to the fracture site at a distance approximately
also important to avoid overdistraction, which will create a
 equal to the distance of the pins above the fragment.
 gap at the fracture, and may predispose to delayed union or
 The hole is drilled superficially but deep enough to
non-union, particularly in the tibia.
engage suffcient bone to prevent pull-out*
Normograde pinning is generally preferred, because with
5. Large-gauge orthopedic wire is inserted in a fgure-
retrograde pinning the exit point of the pin is poorly con-
of-eight pattern through the hole and around the
trolled. This is especially true in the femur and tibia. Retro-
protruding K wires (or through a second hole in the
grade pinning of the femur carries the risk of sciatic nerve
 fragment). Using two pieces of wire allows making a
injury (5) (Chapter 37), and retrograde pinning of the tibia
twist on both sides for better distibution of tension.
causes the pin to impinge on the patellar tendon (6)
6. The wire is twisted using two rwists until the twist
(Chapter 39).
is taken up. The wire should not cross directly over
 Complications associated with intramedullary pins include
the tracture line.
loosening and migration, bending, and breakage. A massive
 7. The K wires are bent over, initially in a direction that
ermbolic shower of fat occluding the pulmonary capillaries
 has been reported in one young cat that died during intra-
will ensure they lie flat against the bone; they are
then rotated over the fgure-of-eight tension band
medullary pin advancement for a humeral fracture (7).
wire, opposite to the pull of the wire, and the ends
of the K wires are cut short
24.4 Interlocking nails
8. Tightening of the fgure-of-eight tension band wire
is completed and the ends are twisted and flattened
An interlocking nail is a stainless-steel intramedullary pin
prior to cutting so three or four twists remain
with holes in it. It is connected to the bone by implants placed
through the holes, usually through the use of a temporary jig
*The hole can be drilled and the orthopedic wire placed prior 
to K wire placement to prevent interference with intramedul-
that is removed after implant placement. The advantage of
lary implants.
this implant system is that rotation, compression, and nail
migration are prevented, and the location of the nail inside the
bone, close to the neutral axis, is a biomechanically advanta-
 geous position with excellent resistance to bending. Interlock-
ing nails are the implants of choice in humans for the fixation
Although a general recommendation is to use a pin size
of femoral, tibial, and humeral fractures. They have been used
which fills at least 70% of the medullary cavity, this applies
in cats for the stabilization of femoral, humeral, and tibial
to situations where intramedullary pins are used as the main
fractures (8-12). Their application in cats is limited by the size
method of fxation, for example in combination with cerclage
of the bone affected and the nature of the fracture. Suitable
wires. Thinner pins occupying only 30-40% of the intramed-
 fractures are mid-diaphyseal, simple or comminuted fractures
ullary canal are chosen if the pin is combined with a plate or
in straight bones. Distal fractures in either the humerus or
an external fixator to leave room for placement of screws or
tibia may not be suitable for interlocking nails because of the
transosseous pins (4). Intramedullary pins are always inserted
narrowness of the intramedullary canal, precluding placement
prior to antirotational implants. This helps in fracture reduc-
of the pin distal enough in the bone. Interlocking nails have
tion and alignment.
been used mainly for femoral fractures in cats.
264
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and technigues
A
B
C
Figure 24-7  Intramedullary pinning of the humerus.
(A) For normograde insertion, the pin is started from the craniolateral aspect of the humerus and aimed distally and medially
(B) For retrograde insertion, the pin is started from the fracture site and aimed proximally and laterally.
(C) For both insertion techniques the fracture is then reduced and the pin is passed from the proximal fragment into the distal fracture fragment
 24.4.1 Interlocking nail systems
nails in cats. Several interlocking nail systems have been
reported in the literature; however, not all the systems are
 commercially available. The use of the veterinary interlocking
nail (VIN: Numedic Company, Cholet, France) was reported
in 43 cats with femoral, tibial, or humeral fractures (10). The
third-generation nails for use in cats are 4 mm in diameter
with a trocar tip on one end and a slot on the other to accept
the removable sliding jig. They are used with specifc
interlocking screws with a 2-mm core. The nail has one
Figure 24-8 The interlocking nail system and jig (Innovative Animal
 proximal and two distal holes and is available in six lengths
Products).
(92, 100, 109, 119, 130, and 142 mm). Another interlocking
intramedullary nail system (INN; Mizuho Ikakogyo, Tokyo)
and dogs (11). The first is an axial extension for the ILN that
was successfully used in femoral fractures in cats (8). These
connects to a conventional type I ESF via a short connecting
nails are 4 mm in diameter, 60, 70, 80, 90, or 100 mm in
bar for femoral and humeral fractures. The second is hybrid
length, with holes at 10-mm intervals, and are used with 2.0-
ILN bolt/ESF pins that were used to lock the ILN and serve
mim screws.
as the transosseous pins for a type IESF for femoral, humeral,
 Another interlocking nail system (ILN) is marketed by
and tibial fractures.
Innovative Animal Products (Fig. 24-8). Nails suitable for
cats are available in 4.0- and 4.7-mm diameter; both are used
24.4.2 Application principles
with 2.0-mm self-tapping screws or bolts. They have three to
four pre-placed holes per nail, 11 mm apart. The solid cross-
Specifc guidelines for application are dependent on the nail
locking bolt has self-tapping threads below the head of the
system. The following description applies to the ILN system
bolt that engage in the near cortex. The bolts are provided
(Innovative Animal Products), which is the system with which
in one length and then cut to the measured bone length,
the authors are most familiar (Fig. 24-9).
which eliminates having to keep a large bolt inventory.
The size and length of nail are selected prior to surgery by
Additionally, a smaller 3.5-mm titanium nail (Fixomed,
comparing the ILN nail templates with the radiographs. A
Munich, Germany) has recently been introduced for the
 limited open approach for nail placement in the distal medul-
repair of femoral fractures in cats (12).
'suoq qu raddn aui roj Aressau Aerauaa s! jeues Aiel
Two additional devices can be used to stabilize further ILN
Closed application may be possible in the tibia, as the thin
repair of inadequately stabilized diaphyseal fractures in cats
surrounding soft tissue makes palpation and fracture reduc-
24: Orthopedic implants
265
tion easier. The nail is usually placed in a normograde fashion
holes are filled. The jig is then detached from the bone. Addi-
after a hole has been predrilled with a K wire. Care is taken
tional fixation devices such as cerclage wires can be consid-
to advance the K wire in the correct direction down the
 ered in simple fractures if fracture confguration is appropriate.
intramedullary canal. The hole is gradually enlarged using
Fewer complications are seen if additional implants are not
sequentially larger K wires and Steinmann pins, and fnally
used in comminuted fractures (10).
 using a reamer from the interlocking nail instrument kit. The
Complications with interlocking nails include delayed or
appropriate-length and diameter nail is then placed into the
non-union, missed nail holes, implant failure (nail and pin),
bone using the insertion tool. When the nail has been inserted
and the windshield wiper effect where the distal piece of bone
far enough into the bone the insertion handle is detached and
rotates on a single screw.
replaced with the jig. Insertion sleeves are placed into the
relevant hole in the jig, corresponding to the distal hole in
24.5 External skeletal fixation (ESF)
the nail. A trocar is used to make a small notch or impression
on the bone, aimed to prevent the drill bit slipping on the
ESF is a versatile method for both fracture repair and treat-
curved bone surface. A hole is then drilled across both corti-
 ment of other orthopedic conditions. The main advantages
ces of the bone, using the appropriate additional drill sleeves.
of ESF for fracture repair are preservation of blood supply
The direction of the drill has to be correctly oriented in the
in the fracture region and the possibility of closed reduction
anticipated direction of the nail hole. The depth of the hole
of a fracture. Opportunity for postoperative revision of frac-
 )  r   a  p s
ure reduction also exists. Comminuted and open fractures
length) inserted. The fracture is checked for correct rotational
 are the main indications for fracture stabilization with ESF.
alignment prior to placing screws in the proximal nail. Further
Temporary fracture and joint immobilization, stabilization
screws or bolts are added in a similar manner until all nail
 after soft-tissue repairs, correction of limb deformities, and
 distraction osteogenesis are other indications.
 A disadvantage of ESF is morbidity due to pin tract inflam-
Figure 24-9
 mation, especially if the transosseous pins are inserted in
Interlocking nail 
 areas with a large muscle mass or in highly mobile areas, such
insertion technique.
(A) The nail is
as near the larger joints, especially the stifle and elbow. Post-
inserted in a
normograde fashion
plate osteosynthesis, and minor complications occur more
and, with the jig in
 frequently. Despite this, fracture fixation with ESF is a ver-
place, drill holes are
made through the
satile method in orthopedic surgery of the cat. Different ESF
holes in the nail and 
2.0-mm bolts are
and possible complications are described in the following
placed.
section.
(B) The final result
after jig removal. The
bolts lock the nail to
24.5.1 Transosseus pins
the bone, preventing
Suipnoun 'suid snassosuenl se pasn aq ues sadki und jeraaag
rotation and axial
compression of the
smooth K wires, negative-profle threaded pins, or positive-
fracture and 
profile threaded pins (Fig. 24-10). Positive-threaded pins
migration of the nail.
provide the best resistance to pull-out. Pins used for ESF are
classifed as half pins if they penetrate only one skin surface,
B
and as full pins if they transfx the limb and penetrate two
Figure 24-10 Transosseus pins.
(A) Positive-profile centrally
A
threaded 2.0-mm pin.
(B) Positive-profile end-threaded 
B
2.0-mm pin.
(C) Positive-profile end-threaded 
c
1.6-mm pin.
D
(D) Negative-profile threaded 
E
1.6-mm pin.
(E, F) Negative-profile 1.2-mm
F
pins with different-length
threaded portions.
266  Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
skin surfaces. Positive-threaded half pins only have a thread
wrenches are needed. The miniature SK ESF is a stable system
at the end of the pin, whereas positive-threaded full pins have
usable for both fracture repair and transarticular ESF. One
their thread in the center
of its main advantages is the relatively large size of connecting
Negative-profle threaded pins are available with 1.2-2.0-
 rod. Larger connecting rods have been shown to have a posi-
mm outer diameters. Although the thread provides improved
tive effect on overall frarme stiffness, if fewer than two full
bone-holding power compared to smooth pins, the thread- p
pins are used (14). This means that simpler frames can be
pin interface is a weak point of these pins, making them
 applied with the SK ESF system compared to other systems
prone to bending or breakage if placed incorrectly. To avoid
1with sustained stability. Simpler frames have the advantage
this complication, the short threaded tip of the pin should
 of causing less morbidity from the interaction of the pins with
only engage the transcortex so the thread-pin interface is
the musculature.
located inside the medullary cavity, where it is protected from
bending or breaking.
Meynard external skeletal fixation system
Pins where the threaded section is larger than the core size
An ESF system widely used in Europe is the Meynard system
of the pin are known as positive-profile pins. Pins with a core
(15) (Fig. 24-11). The Meynard clamps are inexpensive and
diameter of 1.6-2.4 mm can be used in cats. These pins do
are available in three sizes. They each accommodate variable
not have the stress riser or weak point at the pin-thread junc-
pin and external bar sizes (Table 24-3), which makes the
tion but they are slightly more expensive than the negative
system quite versatile for different indications, including
profle pins. The size of the overall pin, including the thread,
transarticular ESF. The holding power of the clamps has been
must be considered when used in a cat. Using too large a pin
 shown to be inferior to others, and the large size of the
of more than 25% of the width of the bone can result in iat-
clamps limits the closeness of adjacent pins, but the system
rogenic fracture.
has been applied with good clinical results in cats (15).
24.5.2 External skeletal fixation systems
Tubular external skeletal fixation system (FESSA)
 Several different ESF systems are available for feline orthope-
The tubular ESF (FESSA: Medical Solution) is widely used in
dics. They differ with regard to implant sizes, costs, ease of
cats in some countries in Europe (16, 17). It consists of a
application, overall stability, and indications (Table 24-2).
stainless-steel tube, designed for use as a type 1 ESF. The
tubes are available in 6-, 8-, and 12-mm diameters in various
Kirschner Ehmer external skeletal fixation system
lengths, but the 6- and 8-mm tubes are mainly used in cats
(Table 24-3). The external tube has four rows of holes along
The original small Kirschner Ehmer (KE) system is still widely
its longitudinal axis. The non-threaded holes accommodate
used in cats (Fig. 24-11). Single clamps are designed to
accommodate transosseous pins up to 2-mm diameter and a
s papearn ousodo aun pue 'sud snoassosun a
accommodate set screws for securing the pins (Fig. 24-12).
3-mm bar (Table 24-3). Double clamps designed to connect
An Allen key is supplied to tighten the screws. The main
two bars are also available. The KE ESF has been used suc-
cessfully for both fracture repair and transarticular ESF in
advantages of the system are the stable but light-weight tube,
and the possibility of inserting a large number of transosseous
cats. The system is relatively simple but has some disadvan-
tages compared to some of the newer ESF systems, including
pins of different diameters over a small distance. Six pins can
 oi rd sieq a u sd le ad-d oi ssu a
be inserted over a distance of 15 mm with the 6-mm tube,
assembly, and the inability to place large positive-profle
whereas only three screws can be inserted in the same area
with a 2.0-mm DCP (17). There are also no clamps, which
threaded pins through the pre-placed clarmps. These disad-
are usually the weak link in an external fixator. Fractures
vantages have been largely overcome by the introduction of
with small metaphyseal or epiphyseal fragments are ideal
split clamps and KE plus clamps, respectively.
indications for the tubular ESF.
The maximum outer pin diameter that can be inserted
 SK external skeletal fixation system
through the tubes is 2 mm for the 6-mm tube, and 2.5 mm
A widely used system in the USA is the IMEX miniature SK
  go x a  -  g g an rg 
ESF system (13) (Fig. 24-11). The single pin-gripping clamps  pin, which can be inserted before the tube is placed on to it,
and double clamps for rod-to-rod articulations are made of only smooth or negative-threaded pins can be used with the
aluminum. They accommodate a 3.2-mm stainless-steel con-  6-mm tube, because even the smallest positive-threaded pins
necting rod and 0.9-2.5-mm diameter transfixation pins  do not fit through the holes. It is advantageous to use at least
(Table 24-3). The stainless-steel rods can be cut to the desired
  a few negative-profle threaded pins (Ellis pins) to enhance
d pd ns are sd an se s on  - s an  o  a  pe 
24: Orthopedic implants
267
 System
Advantages
Disadvantages
Indications
Kirschner
Readily available
Cannot add positive-profle
Fractures
 Ehmer system
 Simple to use
 threaded pin through preplaced
Transarticular fixation
Lighter and less bulky than SK
 clamps unless use KE plus
clamps
clamps
Cannot add or remove clamps
from middle of bar
 SK external
Versatile
Heavy weight
Fractures
skeletal
 Stable clamps
Too large for immature cats
Transarticular fixation
fxator
 Large connecting bar allows use
 Distraction osteogenesis
of simple constructs
Threaded bar for distraction
 osteogenesis and circular rings
 for hybrid frames available
Meynard
 Inexpensive
Clamp stability
Fractures
system
Versatile
Clamps bulky, limiting closeness
Transarticular fixation
 Usable with all types of
 of pins
transfixation pins
 All types of constructs possible
Tubular
Light weight
Pins have to be inserted
Fractures of straight bones
external
 No large clamps
perpendicular to external tube
 Ideal for distal metaphyseal
skeletal
 More transosseous pins can be
 Only non-threaded or negative-
fractures of tibia and
fxator
inserted over a small distance
threaded pins fit through holes
radius and ulna
(FESSA)
compared to other systems
(with the 6-mm tube)
Acrylic pin
Economic
More difficult to remove frame or
Transarticular frames
external
Light weight
adjust it
Mandibular fractures
fixator
Radiolucent
 Radius and ulnar fractures
(APEF)
Pins can be inserted from
different angles and no limit to
closeness
Ring fixator
 Small pins cause minimal
Technically more difficult to
 Lower-limb fractures or
morbidity
apply
joint injuries
 Useful for small epiphyseal
Requires specialized equipment
 Small epiphyseal/
fragments
metaphyseal stabilization
Combine with linear fixator to
make hybrid frames
Table 24-2 Disadvantages and advantages of the external skeletal fixation systems used in cats
to the bar and parallel to each other. Smaller pins, however,
pins can be placed from any direction, there is no maximum
can be inserted obliquely through adjacent holes (Fig. 24-12).
pin size that can be used (Table 24-3), positive-profle
An additional adaptation is that the 6-mm tubes can be
threaded pins can easily be placed, and the frame is light and
inserted and connected to the 8-mm tube, and connectors are
relatively radiolucent. Disadvantages include increased diff-
available to assemble two tubes at an angle (Fig. 24-13).
culty in adjusting the fxator postoperatively, and implant
removal involves cutting the pins or the acrylic bar.
Acrylic external fixator systems
m  sdn on si siq pe sd on aane u
IMEX miniature circular external skeletal fixation system
acrylic (Fig. 24-14). The small APEF system (Innovative
The IMEX miniature circular ESF system is specifically
Animal Products) has a 15-mm diameter column designed for
designed for small patients, including toy breed dogs and
cats and toy breed dogs. This system has the advantage that
cats. A ring ESF system is especially useful for fractures with
268
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
a small fragment close to a joint. Using a ring fixator enables
two small pins to be placed into a small fragment close
together in a similar plane, but from different angles. The
two pins are then secured to the ring using SK clamps. The
 full aluminum rings are slotted for freedom in wire position
and they can be cut at holes to convert into arches or half-
rings. Most often 1-mm stopper wires with trocar point are
used for cats and small dogs. A wire tensioner is not necessary
with miniature frames.
 The completed ring can be connected to further rings,
which may be indicated for correction of limb deforrmities. A
ring can also be connected to a linear frame, using mini
hybrid rods. The combination of a ring with the linear system
is called a hybrid frame.
Figure 24-11  Clamps from different external fixation systems
24.5.3 Application principles
(A) Kirschner Ehmer (KE) clamp.
(B) SK external skeletal fixation clamps.
au jo uonan uado ro pasono rae pdde aq Ae sis
(C) Meynard external skeletal fixation clamp.
fracture. The ESF should be designed to have appropriate
二0二0二0二二二禁二二二二电二电二电二
A
B
Figure 24-12 The FESSA tubular external skeletal fixation system.
(A) Two different lengths of the 6-mm tube and the 8-mm tube are shown. The screws are tightened to hold the pins secure using an Allen key
(B) It is poible to angle small pins through two adjacent holes in the tubular bar, but normally the pins are inserted perpendicular to the bar.
 System
Clamps
External bar
Pin sizes
 Kirschner Ehmer (KE) clamps
 Small KE clamps
3 mm
Up to 2.0 mm (the smallest
size varies)
 SK external skeletal fxator
Mini SK clamps
3.2-mm
0.9-2.5 mm
 Ring fixator
Mini SK clamps
4-mm threaded rod
1 mm
Meynard system
 Meynard clamps
 K wire or Steinmann pin
All sizes
Tubular external skeletal fxator
Screws
6-mm external tube
 Maximum pin size 2.0 mm
(FESSA)
 8-mm external tube
 Maximum pin size 2.5 mm
Acrylic systems
 Acrylic or epoxy putty
Acrylic bar or stainless-
All sizes
clamps
steel bar
Table 24-3Size guide for the different external fixation systems used in cats
24: Orthopedic implants
269
A
Figure 24-14 Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) in plastic tubing.
forming the external skeletal fixation bar, on a cat with a humeral 
fracture. (Courtesy of Erick Egger.)
 proportional to the third power of pin length; the external
Figure 24-13 Options for connecting the FESSA tubes.
bar is therefore placed as near as possible to the skin to
(A) The 6-mm tube can be inserted into the 8-mm tube, allowing
insertion of a larger number of pins even in very small fragments.
reduce pin length.
(B) Tube connectors allow angulation of the tubes for use in a
Using transosseous pins with a diameter of 20-25% of
transarticular fashion.
bone diameter is generally recommended. Pins are inserted in 
the areas with the least muscle mass and should not interfere
with joint and muscle function. The pin-bone interface is the
stability for the severity of the fracture and the anticipated
 weakest point in most ESF constructs. Holding power of the
healing time. Frame stability depends on several variables, 
 pins is influenced by pin type and insertion technique. The
such as frame confguration, number of pins inserted per 
 use of threaded pins enhances the pin-bone interface and
fragment, pin size and length, and location and size of the
therefore pin-holding strength (23). Smooth pins should be
ad) eg p "( ad) p rq 
 inserted with an angle of around 70? to the long axis of the
Ib), bilateral (type Ib), and bilateral biplanar (type IIl) frames
bone to reduce the risk for pulling out of the bone. Thermal
are increasingly stiffer (Fig. 24-15). A type I construct pro-
and structural damage to the cortex during pin insertion is
vides suffcient stability in many feline fractures, especially if
reduced by predrilling a hole with a drill bit and by inserting
a large connecting bar is used. Low-stiffness frames were used
the pin using low-speed power drilling (24). Predrilling is
in radial and tibial fractures (1a, 1b, 2b) in cats with no fixa-
recommended for positive-threaded pins, and is performed
tion failure (18). Bilateral frames have the disadvantage that
with a drill bit 10% smaller than or the same size as the core
m seaie qanoiu paasui aq oi aheu suid snoassosuen au
diameter of the pin.
large muscle mass, which may cause morbidity. They should
The frst pins to be inserted are the most distal and proxi-
therefore only be used in heavy cats and in fractures which
mal ones. The ESF bar is then connected to the frst two pins.
 are expected to heal slowly. Insertion of an intramedullary
Clamps have to be pre-placed with the KE system. With other
pin and connecting its end to the external bar is another
 systems additional clamps can be added to the frame as more
option to enhance frame stability (19) (Fig. 24-16). This tie-in
 transosseous pins are placed. The clamps are tightened around
confguration is especially useful in fractures of the humerus
the frst two pins and bone alignment and fracture reduction
and femur (20, 21).
are checked. Additional pins are added to the bone, alternat-
Techniques for increasing stiffness of the ESF construct are
 ing between the distal and proximal fracture fragments. Limb
listed in Box 24-3. The number of pins influences ESF stabil-
 alignment is constantly reassessed. Skin tension around pins
-e iad pasn aie sund inon oi dn uaum saseaiou uium %i
 should be checked at the end of surgery by flexing and extend-
ment (22). A minimum of two pins per main fracture fragment 
ing the leg. Any tension or skin puckering around the pin
should always be used. Pins are placed according to the far-
insertion site should be eliminated by enlarging the skin
near near-far principle. The stiffness of a pin is inversely
incision.
270
 Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
D
F
Figure 24-15  External skeletal fixation framme types useful in cats.
(A) Type la - unilateral
(B) Type Ilb - bilateral.
(C) Tie-in configuration.
(D) Freeform.
(E) Hybrid ring fixator.
Knowledge of local anatomy and a drill sleeve must be used
to stabilize the soft tissues around the pins. A bandage is
to protect surrounding soft tissues and avoid damage to
sp ez pao si aepeq au reiau le raaos oi pandde
nerves and vessels.
after surgery and then removed. The pin insertion sites are
cleaned from debris with a diluted povidone-iodine or 
chlorhexidine solution. After several days, granulation tissue
24.5.4 Postoperative treatment and complications
 forms within the pin tracts, resulting in an enhanced resistance
Gauze sponges are placed around the pins, between the skin
to infection. Bandages are then left off and the sharp pin ends
and the external bar to prevent infection of the pin tracts and
 and clamps are covered with strips of self-adhesive bandage.
24: Orthopedic implants
271
Complications after ESF occur in up to 100% of cases
tional ones placed if fracture healing has not advanced
according to the literature (25). The majority of complica-
sufficiently.
tions are minor and do not interfere with fracture healing and
 Pin breakage during insertion or at a later date has mainly
outcome. Pin tract drainage is the most common complica-
been associated with the use of negative-threaded pins and
tion. Minor pin tract drainage consists of serous secretion
occurred in more than 10% of pins in one study (17). Another
around the pin entrance site, only minimal inflarmmatory
study looked at Ellis pins in 70 dogs and cats and found no
signs, and no patient discomfort. Major pin tract drainage
problems with any of the pins when used appropriately, with
includes excessive and/or purulent discharge, signifcant
the thread-pin intersection located inside the medullary
inflammatory signs, and patient discomfort. Secondary infec-
cavity (26). Adequate-sized smooth or positive-threaded pins
tion is present and affected pins might be loose. In rare cases
rarely break. Affected pins have to be replaced if fracture
the infection progresses to a focal osteomyelitis, visible as
stability is not sufficiently advanced.
excessive periosteal reaction, cortical lysis, and increased
Iatrogenic fractures through pin holes are rare, but can
intramedullary density on radiographs. The main cause of pin
occur if oversized pins are used, if pins are placed too close
tract drainage is a loose pin or motion of soft tissues around
together, too close to the fracture, or if they are inserted
the pin. Excessive motion causes tissue necrosis and an envi-
through pre-existing fissure lines. Antebrachial fractures,
ronment for potential infection. Pins should therefore be
transarticular fixators, and animals having had previous revi-
inserted without tension on soft tissues. Threaded pins give
sion surgery or more than one injured limb were at increased
 improved purchase in bone and are less likely to loosen and
risk of fracture after ESF in one study (Langley-Hobbs,
pull out. Treatment of minor pin tract drainage consists of
unpublished data). Unrestricted activity of the patient can
cleaning of the pin entrance site, application of topical anti-
also predispose to fracture.
septic or antibiotic solutions, and stabilizing bandages. If
major pin tract drainage is present it is likely that the pin is
24.6 Bone screws
loose and affected pins need removal; antibiotics alone will
 not usually solve the problem.
The small size of feline bones limits the sizes of screws that
Pin loosening causes pin tract discharge and patient dis-
can be used. Appropriate screw sizes usually are 1.5, 2.0, 2.4,
comfort. Pins are considered loose if they can be turned by
 and 2.7 mm. Even smaller screws, such as 1.0 or 1.3 mm, are
hand. Premature pin loosening can be secondary to inade-
 indicated for small or thin bones, for example the metacarpi,
quate pin insertion techniques, or to an unstable fracture
 toes, or maxilla. In general, the screw size selected should not
 repair causing excessive stress at the pin-bone interface. Also,
be greater than 20-25% of the bone diameter to avoid a risk
continuous motion due to delayed fracture healing can cause
of iatrogenic fracture. Only cortical screws are used, as can-
pin loosening over time. Loose pins are removed and addi-
cellous screws are not available in small-enough sizes. Screws
are available as self-tapping or non-self-tapping screws. Table
24-4 details the different screw sizes and drills to be used for
placing the screws.
Box 24-3 Methods of increasing stiffness of exter-
 Self-tapping screws are designed so that once a pilot hole
nal skeletal fixators
 is drilled into bone, they can be inserted by simply screwing
them in. A thread does not need to be cut. The pilot hole is
Use four pins maximum per fracture fragment
Use biggest pin possible but not more than 25% of bone
diameter
Place pins in a near-far fashion
Figure 24-16  (A) A
Angle pins to reduce pin pull-out
position screw
 Use positive-profle pins
engages both bone
aau ud pean areid sd ard-aau hsn 
cortices and is
 inside bone
usually used through
a plate hole. With a
Place bar close to bone
lag screw (B), the
 Bilateral/biplanar > bilateral > unilateral (type II > type 
thread only engages
II > type I)
the far cortex. This 
Clamp should be oriented with nut/bolt closest to leg
results in
 Predrill holes to minimize loosening
interfragmentary
compression as the
Consider fracture
 biomechanics and design frame
screw is tightened.
appropriately
A
B
272
 Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
Screw type
Cortex self-tapping and non-self-tapping
Table 24-4Summary of 
commonly used screw sizes in
 Screw diameter (mm)
1.5
2.0
2.4
2.7
cats and their appropriate drill
1.5
2.0
2.4
2.7
bits and taps
 Drill bit (mm) for glide hole
Drill bit (mm) for thread hole
1.1
1.5
1.8
2.0
Tap (mm) for non-self-tapping screws
1.5
2.0
2.4
2.7
somewhat larger than the core of the screw. Because the
positional screw can be safer in very small fragments, where
screw has to cut its own thread as it is inserted, it encounters
drilling of the larger gliding hole would carry a risk of creat-
resistance, particularly in thick cortical bone. Theoretically,
ing fragmentation of the smaller piece of bone. In this situa-
the resistance during screw insertion may be such that the
 tion the fracture line should be compressed with bone-holding
 torque required to drive the screw is greater than the toler-
forceps prior to screw insertion.
ance of the screw and the screw may break, especially with
Mais aui punoe sineduo ie auoq a 'smains leus Aia
during insertion can improve pull-out resistance, an advan-
24.6.3 Lag screws
tage in both osteopenic patients and cancellous bone. If
The thread of a lag screw only engages the far or trans
removed carefully the screw can be reinserted, but care has
cortex, but not the near or cis cortex. The bone fragments
to be taken not to place the screw in a different angle or it
are therefore compressed together as the screw is tightened
will cut a new thread.
 Non-self-tapping screws require a predrilled pilot hole, fol-
(Fig. 24-16). The main clinical indication for lag screws is
interfragmentary compression of intra-articular fractures.
lowed by careful cutting of a thread in cortical bone with a
Oblique diaphyseal fractures or fractures with large bone
tap that corresponds exactly to the profle of the screw thread.
 fragments can also be reduced and stabilized with lag screws.
As the thread is cut with the same-size tap as the screw
thread, the thread has a deeper bite into bone, but it is still
Lag screws are preferable to cerclage wires because they
provide better interfragmentary compression. A lag screw can
important that the screw is carefully inserted into the tapped
also be placed through a plate hole. Lag screws can also be
hole. The low resistance to insertion generates less heat. It is
su se sais anedr p a i 
used as an alternative to a tension band (see section above),
but most feline avulsion fractures are small, and the presence
of a gliding drill hole and pressure from the screw head can
24.6.1 Plate screws
cause further fragmentation of the small piece of bone. Screws
Bone screws are most commonly applied in conjunction with
are never used in isolation for repair of diaphyseal
plates. Bicortical screws are usually used for securing bone
fractures.
plates to the bone. The technique for insertion involves drill-
To insert a fully threaded screw as a lag screw, the near
ing an appropriate-sized hole through both bone cortices.
cortex must frst be drilled with a hole equal in size to the
Then, with the plate in position, the depth of the hole is
diameter of the screw threads, meaning that the screw threads
 measured using a depth gauge. A screw is selected that is
do not engage the near cortex. This is called the glide hole.
either at least as long as the measured depth or 2 mm longer
 An insert guide is then placed in the glide hole to ensure that
than the measured length to ensure that the threads on the
the hole in the far cortex is drilled at the correct angle. A drill
screw adequately engage the far or trans cortex. The screw
bit equal in diameter to the screw core is then drilled in the
is inserted until it is fnger-tight. It is recommended to
far cortex with the fragments in anatomic reduction. This is
retighten each screw three times after application of all screws
rej aul oiul ins st peaun aupuodsaion au ajou pearq aul
into the plate.
 cortex, and the screw is inserted.
 The lag screw must be inserted in the middle of the frag-
24.6.2 Positional screws
ment equidistant from the fracture edges, and directed at a
right angle to the fracture plane to achieve maximal inter-
Positional screws engage both corices and do not result in
fragmentary compression. Shearing forces are introduced
interfragmentary compression (Fig. 24-16). Positional screws
during tightening of the screw if the screw is not inserted
can be used to secure fracture fragments together, although
 perpendicular to the fracture plane, and the fragments will
lag screws are usually used for this purpose. Insertion of a
shift. Screws inserted at right angles to the fracture plane
24: Orthopedic implants
273
Figure 24-17 Suture anchors
shown separately and in situ in
 plastic bone models.
 Suture anchor
Size {mm} xlength
Drill bit size
Size of hole for suture
Additional equipment
(mm)
 or suture size
Screw and washer
1.5,2.0,2.7
1.1, 1.5, 2.0
Any
 Tap and screwdriver
 Bonebiter
2.0
1.5
5 braided or 50 Ib
Combination driver set
5.0
2.5
80 Ib
IMEX suture anchor
4.0 x 6 mm
2.7
1.1 mm
Suture anchor driver
Suture anchor tap
Arthrex - bioabsorbable
3.0 × 8 mm
2-0
 Insertion tool
PLLA screw
 Suture screw - Veterinary
2.0 × 6 or 10 mm
1.5
1.0 mm
Insertion tool - 2.0 mm
Instrumentation
2.7 x 8 or 14 mm
2.0
1.5 mm
Insertion tool - 2.7 mm
Table 24-5 Summary of suitable suture anchors for use in cats
 provide maximum interfragmentary compression but minimal
placed in drill holes in the bone. They are either designed to
axial stability. A screw inserted at 90? to long axis of bone
lie completely under the bone, therefore causing no interfer-
provides maximum axial stability but can cause shift of frag-
ence to joint range of motion, or they protrude slightly from
ments. Therefore, when using more than one screw it is best
the bone and the suture is threaded through the protruding
to have the frst screw perpendicular to the fracture line, and
eye (Fig. 24-17). Suture anchors have been used in cats for
the second one perpendicular to the long axis of the bone.
cruciate surgery, collateral ligament ruptures, elbow and
coxofemoral luxation, and tendon avulsions. There are
several different designs available and some of the smaller
24.6.4 Suture anchors
sizes of these designs are suitable for use in cats (Table 24-5).
Suture anchors are used for securing ligament prostheses to
Alternatively, a small conventional screw, with or without
bone, for reattachment of joint capsule, or anchoring avulsed
washer, can be used with the suture anchored around the
tendons. They are usually small metal implants that are 
screw head.
274
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
D00000000000
A
000000000000
B
C
Figure 24-19 Veterinary cuttable plates. (A) 2.0/2.7 mm;
Figure 24-18 Dynamic compression plates. 2.0-mm DCP, 2.7-mm
(B) 1.5/2.0 mm; and (c) 1.5 mm.
DCP, and 2.0-mm screw shown as a size guide
The design of the screw holes in DCPs is based on the
24.7 Bone plates
spherical gliding principle developed by AO and patented by
One of the primary aims and objectives in the treatment of
Synthes. The spherical screw head glides towards the center
fractures is early return to full function of the injured limb.
 of the plate as the screw is tightened, until the deepest portion
 Bone plates are ideal for accomplishing this goal because they
 of the plate hole is reached. This results in the bone fragment
are applied internally and have the potential to restore rigid
attached to the screw being displaced towards the fracture,
stability to the reconstructed fractured bone.
which results in compression of the fracture line. The DCP
drill guide accommodates two guides at each end of the
instrument - the neutral (green) or load (gold). A maximum
24.7.1 Types of plate
of four screws can be inserted in the load mode for each plate,
Several types of plate are available. They differ regarding
so when the 2.7-mm plate and the load guide are used, the
strength and shape, design of the plate holes, and indications.
 fracture is compressed approximately 0.8 mm for each screw
Most of the plates described below are used for fracture
 inserted, giving a maximum amount of compression of
repair, and some of them have been designed for specifc
C3.2 mm. With the 2.0-mm plate the fracture is compressed
locations and fracture types. Specific plates are also available
 0.6 mm for each screw, inserted in a load fashion, giving a
for arthrodesis and stifle joint surgery.
maximum of 2.4 mm of compression.
Dynamic compression plates
Veterinary cuttable plates
The 2.0- and 2.7-mm DCPs (Fig. 24-18) are both used in
The veterinary cuttable plate (VCP) (Fig. 24-19) has rapidly
feline fracture repair, but have their limitations. The 2.7-mm
become popular, filling a gap in the market for long-bone
plate used with 2.7-mm screws is often too big for all but the
 fracture repair in cats. It comes in two main sizes, 2.0/2.7 mm
largest cats and the largest cat bones, like the femur. The 
 and 1.5/2.0 mm, and each plate is designed to take two dif-
distance between screw holes in the 2.7-mm plate also limits  ferent cortical screw sizes. There is also a 1.5-mm plate that
 n  s  'ss -t s    e o s q n r ss o r a
The 2.0-mm is usually too small, short, and weak for diaphy-
 either size plate is 300 mm. The 1.5/2.0-mm plate is 1.0 mm
seal fractures in cats. The 2.0-mm plate is available in two t
 thick and the 2.0/2.7-mm plate is 1.5 mm thick. Both plates
thicknesses. Plates with six holes or fewer are only 1.0 mm
1  are 7 mm wide. The holes are round and equally spaced in
thick and very weak. Plates of 7-12 holes in length are avail-
 all plates and all sizes. A small amount of compression can
able in 1.5-mm thicknesses. The thicker plates are signif-
be achieved by drilling the screw hole slightly eccentrically
cantly stiffer.
and away from the fracture line.
There is a new plate, the 2.4-mm limited contact-dynamic
The plates were developed because the 2.0-mm DCP plates
compression plate (LC-DCP). This is available in both tita-
were often too short or too weak and the 2.7-mm too thick,
nium and stainless steel and is used with 2.4-mm screws.
 too wide, or the 2.7-mm screws too large for small bone
Titanium is slightly weaker than stainless steel and can bend  f
 fragments (exceeding 25% of bone diameter and thus weak-
if used as a buttress plate for diaphyseal cat fractures. The
 ening the bone). The distance between screw holes in the
stainless-steel 2.4-mm plate is a very useful implant for feline
2.7-mm plate also limits the number of screws that can be
diaphyseal fracture repairs.
inserted into a fragment.
24: Orthopedic implants
275
 The stiffness of cuttable plates can be enhanced by stacking
The cuttable plate can be easily cut through a plate hole to
 two plates of the same size or two plates of different sizes.
the desired length using standard pin cutters. It can also be
This gives five different thicknesses and stiffnesses (Table
customized into a hook plate (28). These can be very useful
24-6). The thicker and longer plate is placed adjacent to the
for very distal or proximal epiphyseal or avulsion fractures
bone. Screw size is determined by the largest screw that will
with small fragments to reduce.
fit the smaller plate. Stacking can be full-length (both plates
The cuttable plate has been used successfully in many frac-
same length) down to half-length, where the upper plate is
tures, including long-bone repair in cats and for pelvic frac-
half the length of the lower plate. However, when using
ure repair. The ability to place many screws within a short
plates of different lengths it can be difficult to place screws
 distance is very useful in multifragmented fractures and often
in the holes in the lower plate adjacent to the cut end of the
makes the bone plate construct stronger than a larger plate
plate. Stacked plates should be contoured simultaneously by
with fewer screws.
placing a screw through both plates, at each end, to prevent
sliding of plates relative to each other during contouring. The
 Reconstruction and adaptation plates
cuttable plate has been compared to the stiffness of other
Reconstruction plates (Fig. 24-20) are characterized by
small bone plates (27) (Table 24-7). Single and stacked VCPs
notches between the holes which allow the plates to be con-
were stiffer than miniplates accepting 1.5 and 2.0 mm screws,
but less stiff than the 2.7-mm DCP.
curved to allow accurate contouring and reconstruction
to awkwardly shaped bones like the pelvis or mandible,
and in the vicinity of joints. The notches make them weaker
Veterinary cuttable
Thickness
Width
 than a similar-size DCP so care should be taken when using
Length
plates (mm)
(mm)
(mm)
(mm)
them in areas with high load. They should not be used as
buttress plates. They are available as 2.7-mm plates and a
1.5/2.0
1.0
7
300
 thinner version, called an adaptation plate, is available in the
2.0/2.7
1.5
7
300
2.0-mm size.
1.5/2.0 and 1.5/2.0
2.0
7
300
1.5/2.0 and 2.0/2.7
2.5
7
300
Acetabular plates
2.0/2.7 and 2.0/2.7
3.0
7
300
The 2.0-mm acetabular plate may be of use in acetabular
Table 24-6
The veterinary cuttable plates, sizes and lengths when
fractures in cats. Sizes 0 and 1 take 1.5- and 2.0-mm screws
used alone or stacked
(Fig. 24-21). However the feline pelvis has quite a straight,
Screw (mm)
Table 24-7 Calculated slopes
Plate(s)
Stiffness (N/mm) (sD)
(stiffness) from the force versus
1.5-mm straight miniplate
1.5
67 (10.8)
displacement curves of 13 bone
 plate and screw combinations
2.0-mm DCP
2.0
134 (12.7)
2.0-mm straight miniplate
2.0
190 (23.2)
1.5/2.0 VCP
1.5
340 (10.4)
1.5/2.0 VCP
2.0
356 (13.3)
2.0/2.7 VCP
2.0
542(31.5)
2.0/2.7 VCP
2.7
578 (30.6)
1.5/2.0 VCP + 1.5/2.0 VCP
1.5
600 (9.0)
1.5/2.0 VCP + 1.5/2.0 VCP
2.0
638 (21.2)
1.5/2.0 VCP + 2.0/2.7 VCP
2.0
828 (32.0)
2.0/2.7 VCP + 2.0/2.7 VCP
2.0
938(50.6)
2.0/2.7 VCP + 2.0/2.7 VCP
2.7
1066 (46.6)
2.7-mm DCP
2.7
1507 (30.5)
DCP, dynamic compression plate; VCP, veterinary cuttable plate.
Normal font, VCPs; italics, other plates; bold, stacked VCPs.
Reproduced with permission from Fruchter AM, Holmberg DL. Mechanical analysis of veterinary
cuttable plate. Compend Continuing Educ 1991;4:116-119.
276
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
A
A
B
B
C
Figure 24-22 Pancarpal arthrodesis plates. (A) 1.5/2.0 mm: (B)
2.0/2.0 mm; and (C) 2.0/2.7 mm. A 2.0-mm screw is shown for size
comparison.
Figure 24-20 Reconstruction and adaptation plates. (A) 2.7 mm;
(B) 2.0 mm: (C) 1.5 mm.
中中中中中中中二中中中中
A
C
Figure 24-23 Miniaturized plates. These plates are cuttable, and the
Figure 24-21 Miniplates with specialized shapes. (A) The 2.0-mm
screws are self-tapping. (A) A 1.0-mm maxillofacial miniplate; (B) a
supracondylar distal femoral plate; (B) size 0 and 1 acetabular plates;
reconstruction plate of the 1.3-mm Compact Hand system: (C) a 2.0-
(C) finger T plates and a 1.5-mm/2.0-mm AO T-plate. 2.0-mm screws
mm dynamic compression plate for comparison.
 are shown as a size guide.
flat dorsal surface and straight plates also work well in
are available as straight mini-DCP, round and oval hole
this area.
miniplates, mini L-plates, mini T-plates (Fig. 24-21), or cut-
table plates. Indications include repair of long-bone fractures
in small cats, repair of articular fractures, and stabilization
Distal femoral plate
of pelvic, metacarpal, metatarsal, and digital fractures (29).
Distal femoral plates have been designed to match the caudal
Veterinary T-plates are available in 2.0-mm sizes that take
() apo ienoy al jo iadse iai a jo a 
2.0- or 1.5-mm screws, useful for fractures with a small
24-21). The plate is indicated for repair of supracondylar
epiphyseal fragment such as distal radial, tibial fractures, and
femoral fractures, and facilitates insertion of screws into the
scapular neck fractures.
 small distal fragment.
The application of even smaller plates and screws is desir-
able for some indications in feline orthopedics. Specialized
 Pancarpal arthrodesis plate
miniplates are available from human hand and maxillofacial
implant systems. The cuttable 1.3-mm reconstruction plates
Dependent on patient and bone size, the 2.0/2.7, 2.0/2.0 or
the 1.5/2.0 mm pancarpal arthrodesis plate (Fig. 24-22) can
 from the Compact hand system (Synthes) are an appropriate
size for repair of fractures of the maxilla, carpal, and tarsal
be used in cats for both pancarpal arthrodesis and pantarsal
bones, metacarpi, metatarsi, and digits (Fig. 24-23). A 1.0-
arthrodesis.
mm drill bit and a cruciform screwdriver are used to insert
 the 1.3-mm self-tapping screws.
Miniaturized plates
 Another system that can be used for stabilization of very
A minifragment plate is a general description for plates
small and thin bones is the 1.0-mm Compact maxillofacial
designed for use with 2.0- and 1.5-mm cortex screws. They
miniplate system. This consists of a variety of preshaped
24: Orthopedic implants
277
cruciate ligament deficiency. Tibial tuberosity advancement plate with
A
B
C
corresponding prongs and screws.
Figure 24-25 The three basic functions of plates. (A) Compression
function; (B) neutralization function; (C) buttress function.
titanium reconstruction plates, including cuttable plates (30).
The corresponding screws are self-tapping and require a 0.7-
mm drill bit for the core hole and a cruciform screwdriver to
 2.4-mm self-tapping titanium screws after drilling the screw
insert them. Emergency screws with a thread diameter of
holes.
1.2 mm are also available for use when the smaller screw
A bone spacer of 3.5 mm is used to advance the tibial
tuberosity to treat cranial cruciate ligament deficiency in cats
stand bending forces, so they are strictly used on the tension
(Chapter 38).
side of a fracture. Indications for their application are the
same as for the 1.3-mm Compact Hand plates, but the 1.3-
Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO) plates
mm plate is sronger and offers more bending stability.
A specifc plate (Fig. 24-25) designed for TPLO, a procedure
Tibial tuberosity advancement (TTA) plates
for the treatment of cranial cruciate ligament rupture, has
 been used successfully in cats with cranial cruciate rupture.
Plates have been specially developed to stabilize the tibial
The 2.0-mm plate is suitable for cats. It has six holes, three
tuberosity after its osteotomy and are known as TTA plates
 in the nose or proximal end, which are oval-shaped to allow
(Fig. 24-24). The technique is indicated to treat cranial cruci-
 compression, and three round holes on the straight aspect. It
ate ligament ruptures or patellar luxation. These plates act
is designed to ft the shape of the proximal tibia after contour-
as a tension band and can also be employed to stabilize oste-
ing. It can be used after cranial closing wedge osteotomy or
otomies and avulsion fractures of other apophyses, such as
after creation of a circular tibial plateau osteotomy. The plate
the greater tubercle of the humerus, the olecranon, and the
is made of stainless steel. Locking titanium TPLO plates are
greater trochanter.
also available.
 The plates are made of pure titanium. A fork with prongs
is adapted to be inserted into holes at the proximal part of
24.7.2 Principles of plate application
the plate. A branch connects the proximal part of the plate
with the distal part, where two holes for screw fxation are
Plates for fracture repair should be applied using the tension
present. The smallst plate with only two prongs and two
band principle, with the plate being applied on the tension
holes for 2.4-mm screws is indicated for cats. The holes for
 side of the bone. This gives the benefit of dynamic cormpres-
the prongs are frst drilled with a 2.0-mm drill bit angled
 sion, especially after full reconstruction of the bone. The plate
distally into the piece of bone to be stabilized. The branch
 should span the length of the bone for optimal load sharing
part of the plate can be contoured to fit the surface and shape 
 between the plate and implants, and it should be contoured
of the bone. The plate is secured to the main fragment with
 to the shape of the bone to maintain anatomic reduction.
278
 Size of plate
Plate type
Indications
Table 24-8 Bone plates for
feline orthopedic surgery, their
2.7
 Dynamic compression plate
 Diaphyseal fractures of the femur,
indications and sizes
humerus, and tibia
Reconstruction plate
 Distal femoral fractures
2.4
Limited-contact dynamic
 Diaphyseal fractures of the femur,
 compression plate
humerus, and tibia
2.0
Dynamic compression plate,
Diaphyseal fractures of the radius,
 miniplate with oval holes
 femur humerus and tibia,
arthrodeses, pelvic fractures
Veterinary cuttable plates
 Fractures of the long bones (femur,
(2.0/2.7 and 1.5/2.0 mm)
humerus, tibia, and radius)
Pelvic fractures
Reconstruction plate
Acetabular fractures, flat-bone fractures
Acetabular plate
 Acetabular fractures
T- and L-miniplates
Flat-bone fractures
 Fractures with small epiphyseal
fragments
1.5
Miniplate with round holes
Skull fractures, metacarpal and
metatarsal fractures
1.3
Compact Hand plates
 Skull fractures, metacarpal and
metatarsal fractures
1.0
Titanium micro maxillofacial
 Facial fractures - mandibular and
plate
maxillary
Bending and twisting are usually necessary. Pre-stressing the
are used with 2.0-mm plates. The holding power of a screw
plate is advisable for simple transverse fractures as it aids in
diminishes, and the risk for iatrogenic fracture increases, as
minimizing the gap on the far or trans cortex and aids in
the diameter of the screw approaches 40% of the diameter
compressing the fracture site. This is achieved by leaving a
of the bone, so use of too large a screw is not recommended.
very small gap of less than 1 mm between the plate and bone
The 2.0- and 2.4-mm screws are generally recommended in
at the fracture site. Selection of proper plate size and screws
all except the largest cats and bones (e.g., the femur), where
is important: too weak an implant will bend or break, whereas
2.7-mm screws may be used. Avoid leaving a single empty
too large tends to destroy blood supply and result in bone
screw hole over the fracture. This will act as a stress riser and
necrosis and soft-tissue damage. Table 24-8 gives appropriate
 the plate may fatigue and break at this point.
plate and screw sizes to use in feline bones.
 Plates may be applied to achieve one of the following three
 An absolute minimum of two screws or four cortices is
functions (Fig. 24-25).
 applied either side of a fracture, but where possible a minimum
of three screws or six cortices should be aimed for. It is usually
preferable to use the longest plate possible to distribute the
Compression plate
 load better and avoid stress risers at the ends of the plate. It is
Static compression is achieved by the application of a self-
not necessary to fill every plate hole but screws should be
compressing technique with a DCP (Fig. 24-25). This aids in
inserted in a near-far manner with screws placed close to the
improved load sharing of the fracture fragments, and improves
fracture and at the proximal and distal aspects of the bone.
fxation stability. Fractures suitable for applying axial com-
The minimum distance a screw is placed from the fracture line
 pression include simple transverse fractures or short oblique
should be at least the diameter of the screw.
fractures with an angle of less than 459.
The fracture may lend itself to lag screws being inserted
 During weight-bearing every bone has a tension and com-
through plate holes. The size of screw to use is dictated to a
pression side (Table 24-9). Dynamic compression results
certain extent by the plate; for example, the 2.0-mm screws
from the muscular tension across the bone during weight-
24: Orthopedic implants
279
 Bone
Tension side
Box 24-4 Indications for bone plate removal
Femur
Lateral
Tibia
Cranial or medial
Plate is loose or broken
Humerus
Cranial or lateral - proximal humerus
Plate causes irritation when it ends close to a joint
 Caudal or medial - distal humerus
Plate acts as a thermal conductor causing lameness in
Radius
Craniomedial or cranial
cold weather
Medial - distal radius
Plate causes stress protection or interferes with the vas-
Ulna
Caudal - proximal ulna (olecranon)
cular supply to the bone, resulting in osteoporosis
under the plate
Table 24-9 The tension sides of the long bones
 Plate crosses a growth plate in an immature cat
Plate causes irritation - lick granuloma occasionally
seen with superfcial plates
au jo apis uoisuai al on pendde si aeid au uaum ue
Infection - if the fracture is stable then the plate should
bone. This is known as the tension band principle. Therefore,
be left in place until healing has occurred prior to
plates are preferably applied to the tension side of the
plate removal
bone.
Plate causes a stress riser and there is concern that the
bone will fracture at the plate-bone junction
Neutralization plate
 Routine removal - some surgeons will routinely remove
the plate once the bone has healed - this should gener-
A neutralization plate is applied to the tension side of the
ally not be done sooner than 5 months after fracture
bone, after the fracture is reduced and stabilized by other
repair in an adult animal
means to neutralize or overcome the torsional, bending, com-
pressive, or distraction forces to which the fractured bone
may be subjected during healing (Fig. 24-25). Interfragmen-
tary compression is applied prior to plate application by lag
 union, and osteomyelitis are possible complications (Chapter
screws or cerclage wires that are used to reconstruct the cyl-
13). Plate breakage is rare in cats. Screw pull-out or plate
inder of bone. Fractures suitable for neutralization plates
include oblique or multifragmentary fractures that can be
 bending are more likely complications.
 Indications for plate removal are listed in Box 24-4. It is
anatomically reconstructed.
important not to remove plates too early, or refracture may
occur. This is when a fracture of bone occurs in a region of
Buttress plate
a previous fracture that appears to have undergone sound
A buttress plate is used to shore up fragments of bone, whilst
union both clinically and radiographically. It commonly
maintaining bone length and orientation of the main frag-
results from premature implant removal.
ments (Fig. 24-25). Fractures suitable for plates applied in
butress function are unreconstructable or severely commi-
24.8 Internal fixators
 nuted fractures. A relatively larger and longer plate is selected
when the plate is being used in butress function. The implants
Internal fixators, or locking plates, have gained popularity in 
should be applied in a manner that minimally disturbs the
both human and veterinary surgery (31, 32) during the last
blood supply to the bone. The plate is precontoured with the
few years. Internal fixators have a locking mechanism between 
help of radiographs of the normal bone and a cat skeleton.
the plate hole and the screw heads, resulting in a stable fixa-
It can be inserted through small stab incisions in the skin,
tion and fixed angle of the screw heads in the plate. This has
and is then slid under muscle bellies and secured to the proxi-
several advantages over conventional plates. The inherent
mal and distal ends of the bones, taking care to achieve
stability between the screws and the plate renders screw
correct rotational alignment. This technique is also known as
loosening less likely, and allows insertion of fewer screws and
minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO) or biological
monocortical screws with sustained stability. Additionally,
plating.
the plate is not pressed on to the underlying bone during
screw insertion, thus preserving periosteal blood supply, and
reducing or eliminating pressure necrosis of the cortex.
24.7.3 Postoperative treatment and complications
 Because the plates can be applied with a small gap between
Complications are rare after adequate plate osteosynthesis.
the bone and plate, precise plate contouring is less critical for
Implant failure, iatrogenic fracture, delayed union and non-
maintaining fracture reduction, and less tissue dissection is
280
 Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
required to apply the plate. Overall, this technique is more
without a threaded head) can be used through the same plate
rapid than conventional plating. partly because self-tapping
holes. All screws are self-tapping. The plates are reconstruc-
screws are used.
tion plates and are available in different forms and lengths.
 Indications for application of internal fixators for long-
They can also be cut and bent in three dimensions. The
bone fractures include fractures in young cats with softer
implants are made of titanium, reducing the risk of
bones, older cats with osteopenia, comminuted fractures,
infection.
fractures in the vicinity of joints, and for treatment of com-
The 2.0-mm plate comes in three different thicknesses, 1.0,
plications, especially if vascularity is poor. Stabilization of  1.3, and 1.5 mm, which all accept the same 2.0-mm locking
complex fractures with two plates placed orthogonally on the  and non-locking screws (Fig. 24-27). Non-locking emergency
diaphysis or metaphysis is rendered possible by inserting
3 screws with a diameter of 2.4 mm can also be inserted if a
 monocortical screws. Other applications are pelvic fractures,
 smaller screw thread strips in the bone. The 2.0-mm plates
and certain spinal fractures and/or luxations (32, 33). Inter-
are mainly used for the repair of metaphyseal long-bone
nal fixators can also be used for temporary splinting of inter-
 fractures, pelvic fractures, intertarsal instabilities, carpal and
tarsal fractures and instabilities (34), and for carpal and
tarsal arthrodeses, and spinal fractures.
tarsal arthrodeses.
The 2.4-mm plates are 2.5-mm thick (Fig. 24-28). Two
different sizes of locking screws can be inserted, 2.4- and
24.8.1 Internal fixator systems
3.0-mm screws, but the 2.4-mm screws are mainly used in
cats. Non-locking 2.4-mm screws and non-locking emergency
Despite the numerous advantages of internal fxators, the
high implant costs have prevented widespread use of these
implants so far. A system from human surgery, which has
been used by the authors in over 100 feline cases, is described
0000
in detail below. Other locking plates have recently become
00000000000000000000
available at reduced costs for veterinary use (Konigsee
oooooo
may vary slightly depending on the design of the plate holes
o000oo0o00oo
 and screw heads, the use of self-tapping or non-self-tapping
screws, and plate strength.
oooooo
ooooooooooo
Unilock mandible locking plates
The 2.0/2.4 Unilock mandible locking plate system (Synthes)
was originally designed for mandibular surgery in humans.
Figure 24-27 A selection of 2.0-mm Unilock plates. They are available
The locking mechanism consists of a thread in the plate hole
in three different thicknesses that are all used with 2.0-mm screws. The
and a corresponding thread on the screw head (Fig. 24-26).
1.3- and 1.5-mm thick plates are used most commonly. A 2.0-mm
Both locking and non-locking screws (screws with and
dynamic compression plate is shown for comparison
Figure 24-28 A 2.4-mm Unilock plate. The purple screws have a
threaded head, allowing engagement into the threaded plate hole.
Figure 24-26  A 2.0-mm Unilock plate and the locking threaded head
The special drill guide shown is needed to ensure screw insertion
alou aeid papeau aul oui abebua speay mans papeaul aul mans
perpendicular to the plate. The golden screws do not have a threaded
once the screw is fully inserted.
head, and can be angled like conventional screws.
24: Orthopedic implants
281
screws with a diameter of 2.7 mm are also available. The
screws are avoided in the diaphysis of older cats, as iatrogenic
2.4-mm plates are suitable for osteosynthesis of diaphyseal
fissures or fractures may occur. The advantage of monocorti-
long-bone fractures.
cal screw placement is particularly beneficial for avoiding
A 1.5-mm drill bit is required for the 2.0-mm screws, and
screw insertion into joints or the spinal canal. In areas where
 a 1.8-mm drill bit for the 2.4-mm screws. Because the screw
angling of the screws is necessary, for example to avoid pen-
heads have a cruciform recess, a corresponding cruciform
etration of a joint, a non-locking screw can still be inserted
screwdriver is used. The locking screws must be inserted
through the plate hole. Monocortical screws also allow place-
perpendicular to the plate to achieve maximal locking stabil-
 ment of two plates perpendicular to each other, or on the
ity. This is performed with the help of a special threaded drill
medial and lateral aspect of the bone.
guide, which centers the drill precisely over the plate hole
(Fig. 24-28).
24.8.3 Postoperative treatment and complications
Complications are rare after application of the Unilock
24.8.2 Application principles
system. Implant failure was not observed in a series of con-
secutive clinical cases of cats with long-bone fractures (Voss,
The application principles described here are based on recom-
mendations from human medicine and on a retrospective
unpublished study). Screw pull-out may occur if the screws
 have not been fully seated in the bone, for example if they
evaluation of consecutive clinical cases with long-bone frac-
only engage the cranial or caudal edge of a cortex. This
tures, stabilized with the Unilock system (Voss, unpublished
data).
problem may occur unnoticed during surgery, because the
surgeon's feel for the screw-holding power in the bone during
 o ads a on p on Ao a sd a
bone. Repeated bending back and forth should be avoided,
tightening of the screw is not as good as when conventional
screws are used. A locked screw has a stable appearance after
because it weakens the titanium plates. The plates can be
tightening, even if not inserted into bone at all.
applied with a small gap between the implant and the bone
Iatrogenic fractures/fissures may occur in the diaphysis of
to avoid compression of bone and periosteum and allow for
older cats if bicortical screws are inserted. A possible reason
ingrowth of vessels. Gaps larger than 1 or 2 mm should be
for this complication is that shear forces may be created in
avoided. The reduced contact between plate and bone allows
preservation of the periosteum and soft-tissue attachments in
a po n  n   x a
the fracture area. Internal fxators are most commonly used
screw heads in the plate holes. Therefore only monocortical
in buttress function for the repair of comminuted fractures.
screws should be used in the diaphysis of older cats with
Screws are then only inserted into the main proximal and
brittle bones. For the same reason, care is also taken if the
distal fragments. Internal fixators can also be applied in neu-
internal fxator is used together with an intramedullary pin.
The screws are forced to lock perpendicular to the plate
tralization function in the presence of simple transverse frac-
during tightening, which creates shear forces when the screw
tures, or after interfragmentary compression of long oblique
 fractures with a lag screw.
tips touch the intramedullary pin. In cats even the shortest
6-mm long screws are often too long to be inserted without
Positioning of the plate over the bone has to be carefully
coming into contact with the pin.
maintained while inserting the frst locked screw, because the
locking screws cannot be angled as in conventional plates.
References and further reading
The frst screw is only fully tightened after partial insertion
of a second screw to avoid rotation of the plate during screw
1. Willer RL, et al. Comparison of cerclage wire placement in rela-
tightening. Based on clinical experience with the 2.4-mm
tion to a neutralisation plate. A mechanical and histological
Unilock system, two screws per main fragment result in suf-
study. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1990;3:90-94.
ficient stability for the treatment of long-bone fractures.A
2. Roe SC. External fxators, pins, nails, and wires. In: Johnson
AL, Houlton JEF, Vannini R (eds) AO principles of fracture
third screw may be added if there is enough room.
management in the dog and cat. Swizerland: AO Publishing;
The holes for the locking screws are drilled perpendicular
2005.
to the plate using the special drill guide shown in Figure 24-
 3. Whitney WO, Schrader SC. Dynamic intramedullary cross
28. The self-tapping locking screws can be inserted both
pinning technique for repair of distal femoral fractures in
dogs and cats: 71 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;191:
monocortically and bicortically. As a rule of thumb, mono-
1133-1138.
cortical screws are used in the diaphysis of long bones, where
4. Hulse D, et al. Effect of intramedullary pin size on reducing
a thick cortex is present. Bicortical screws are inserted in soft
bone plate strain. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2000;13:
bone, such as the cancellous bone of the epiphysis and
185-190.
5. Withrow SJ. Sciatic nerve injuries associated with intramedul-
metaphysis of long bones, and also in the diaphysis of imma-
lary fixation of femoral fractures. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1977;13:
ture cats, where screw pull-out is more likely. Bicortical
562-568.
282
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques 
6. Payne J, et al. Comparison of normograde and retrograde intra-
23. Bennett RA, et al. Comparison of the strength and holding
medullary pinning of feline tibias. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
[axa (i ada) ud jeu pim asn ioj suisap ud  jo yamod
2005;41:56-60.
skeletal fixation. Vet Surg 1987;16:207-211.
7. Schwarz T, et al. Fatal pulmonary fat embolism during humeral
24. Egger EL, et al. Effect of fixation pin insertion on the bone-pin
fracture repair in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 2001;42:195-198.
interface. Vet Surg 1986;15:246-252.
 8. Endo K, et al. Interlocking intramedullary nail method for the
25. Marcellin-Little DJ. External skeletal fixation. In: Slatter D (ed.)
treatment of femoral and tibial fractures in cats and small dogs.
 Textbook of small animal surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;
J Vet Med Sci 1998;60:119-122.
2002: pp. 1818-1834.
9. Larin A, et al. Repair of diaphyseal femoral fractures in cats
26. Beck AL, Pead MJ. The use of Ellis pins (negative profile tip-
using interlocking intramedullary nails: 12 cases (1996-2000).
threaded pins) in external skeletal fixation in dogs and cats. Vet
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001;219:1098-1104.
Comp Orthop Traumatol 2003;16:223-231.
10. Duhautois B. Use of veterinary interlocking nails for diaphyseal
27. Fruchter AM, Holmberg DL. Mechanical analysis of veterinary
fractures in dogs and cats: 121 cases. Vet Surg 2003;32:8-20.
cuttable plate. Compend Continuing Educ 1991;4:116-119.
11. Basinger RR, Suber JT. Two techniques for supplementing inter-
 28. Robins GM, et al. Customized hook plate for metaphyseal frac-
locking nail repair of fractures of the humerus, femur, and tibia:
tures, nonunions and osteotomies in the dog and cat. Vet Comp
results in 12 dogs and cats. Vet Surg 2004;33:673-680.
Orthop Traumatol 1993;6:56-61.
12. Scoti SA, et al. Retrograde placement of a novel 3.5 mm
29. Montavon PM, et al. The mini instrument and implant set and
titanium interlocking nail for supracondylar and diaphyseal
its clinical application. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1988;1:
femoral fractures in cats. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2007;20:
44-51.
211-218.
30. Von Werthern CJ, Bernasconi CE. Application of the maxillo-
13. Toombs JP, et al. The SKTM external fixation system: descrip-
facial mini-plate Compact 1.0 in the fracture repair of 12 cats/2
ton of components, instrumentation, and application tech-
dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2000;13:92-96.
niques. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2003;16:76-81.
 31. Savoldelli D, Montavon PM. Clinical handling: small animals.
14. Bronson DG, et al. Influence of the connecting rod on the bio-
Injury 1995;26:47-50.
mechanical properties of five external skeletal fixation configu-
32. Keller M, et al. The ComPact UniLock 2.0/2.4 system and its
rations. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2003;16:82-87.
clinical application in small animal orthopedics. Vet Comp
15. Font J, et al. A review of 116 clinical cases treated with external
Orthop Traumatol 2005;18:83-93.
fixators. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1997;4:173-182.
33. Voss K, et al. Use of the ComPact UniLock System for ventral
16. Reichler IM, et al. Der Tubulare Fixateur Externe (F.E.S.S.A.):
stabilization procedures of the cervical spine: a retrospective
Klinische Anwendung zur Frakturversorgung bei 6 Zwerghun-
study. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2006;19:21-28.
den und 20 Katzen. Kleintierpraxis 1997;42:407-419.
34. Voss K, et al. Internal splinting of dorsal intertarsal and tarso-
17. Haas B, et al. Use of the tubular external fixator in the treatment
metatarsal instabilities in dogs and cats with the ComPact
of distal radial and ulnar fractures in small dogs and cats. Vet 
UniLock 2.0/2.4 System. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2004;
Comp Orthop Traumatol 2003;16:132-137.
17:125-130.
18. Gemmill TJ, et al. Treatment of canine and feline diaphyseal
radial and tibial fractures with low-stiffness external skeletal
A selection of websites for further information on the implants
fixation. J Small Anim Pract 2004;45:85-91.
described above:
19. Aron DN, et al. Experimental and clinical experience with an
Animal Care: www.animalcare.co.uk/orthopaedics.html.
 IM pin external skeletal fixator tie-in configuration. Vet Comp
Eickemeyer: www.eickemeyer.de.
Orthop Traumatol 1991;4:86-94.
IMEX Veterinary: www.imexvet.com.
20. Langley-Hobbs SJ, et al. Use of external skeletal fixators in the
Innovative Animal Products: www.innovativeanimalproducts.com.
repair of femoral fractures in cats. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
 Konigsee Implantate: www-koenigsee-implantate.de.
1996;37:95-101.
Kyon: www.kyon.ch.
21. Langley-Hobbs SJ, et al. External skeletal fixation for stabilisa-
Medical Solution: www.medical-solution.ch.
ton of comminuted humeral fractures in cats. J Small Anim
Synthes Veterinary: www.synthesvet.com.
Pract 1997;38:280-285.
Synthes: www.synthes.com.
22. Briggs BT, Chao EYS. The mechanical performance of the stan-
Veterinary Instrumentation: www.vetinst.com.
juof auog f snenedde uonexy [euaxa lepi-ueuoh piep
Surg Am 1982;64A:566-573.
283
25
 Feline arthroscopy
B. Beale
Feline arthroscopy - is it possible? Is it useful? Is it practical?
attaches to the cannula with a coupling mechanism. A light
Arthroscopy is a valuable tool for the diagnosis and treat-
cable attaches to the cannula to provide the illumination
ment of conditions affecting the joints of cats. The arthro-
 needed to produce a qualiry image. Fluid tubing also
scope can be inserted into the shoulder elbow, hip, and stifle
attaches to the cannula, allowing fluids to be continuously
of the cat to allow a direct view of the joint in a minimally
 delivered into the joint to improve the quality of the image
invasive manner. The arthroscope is also used to evaluate
(Fig. 25-2).
joints approached by routine arthrotomy. The arthroscope
 Arthroscope diameters commonly used in feline arthros-
copy include 1.9-2.7 mm. The cannula is frst introduced into
sible areas of the joint, improving the view
structures
the joint through a stab incision in the skin and fascia. A
within the joint. Even if you never
 conical or sharp obturator is locked in the cannula and the
cedure completely arthroscopically, the
cannula is carefully pushed into the saline-distended joint.
used to improve the effectiveness
The cannula may be available in a smaller and a larger diam-
veterinary surgeon performing joint :
 in the cat.
eter depending on the manufacturer. The smaller-diameter
repetition. Instrumenta
cannula can be inserted more easily, but allows less fluid flow
tion, patient preparation, and postop
ative care are similar
into the joint due to the reduced space between the cannula
for all joints. The chapter will also foc
cus on the most common
wall and the arthroscope. Another advantage of the smaller
indications for feline arthroscopy. The shoulder, elbow, hip,
scope and cannula is greater mobility in small joints such as
and stifle of the cat can be ex
amined arthroscopically, but
the elbow or hock. The advantage of larger arthroscopes is
 the stile is much more frequently examined. Arthroscopy is
used for evaluation of joint conditions (e.g., cranial cruciate
disease, shoulder ligamentous damage), removal of loose
joint bodies (e.g., elbow dysplasia), and treatment of meniscal
damage. For information on arthroscopy the reader is
reminded to review other sources, listed at the end of this
chapter (1-4). The purpose of this contribution is to intro-
duce the reader to basic arthroscopy of the cat and is not
intended to be a complete review of the topic.
25.1 Arthroscopic instrumentation
The instrumentation used for arthroscopy in cats is similar
to that used in small dogs. An arthroscope, cannula, camera,
monitor light source, fluid delivery and collection system,
and assorted hand instruments are required (Fig. 25-1).
Instrument cannulas, radiofrequency or cautery units, and
motorized shavers may also be useful.
25.1.1 Arthroscope and cannula
The arthroscope is a rigid telescope that transmits an image
to the camera and monitor. The arthroscope contains a series
of lens or fberoptics that produce the image. The arthroscope 
Figure 25-1 The arthroscopic tower includes a cabinet, monitor,
is inserted into a cannula which acts to protect the scope and
camera control box, light source, cautery or radiofrequency unit, digital
provides a continuous portal into the joint. The arthroscope
 image capture device, and printer.
284
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
much bending pressure is applied to the scope or if the glass
Light Cable
at the end of the scope is scratched or broken due to a direct
三
blow with a hand instrument, shaver blade, or cautery tip.
Camera
25.1.2 Arthroscopic cameras
The arthroscopic image is projected on to a monitor screen
by means of a video camera system. The camera system
Ooturator
comprises a control unit and a camera head. Most cameras
contain either one or three semiconducting chips. Three-chip
cameras give greater resolution than one-chip cameras;
Cannula
-adxa arou syis aq un srs d-aa amo
sive than single-chip cameras. Newer single-chip cameras
provide an excellent image and are appropriate for most
Figure 25-2 A cannula is inserted into the joint using an obturator. The
arthroscope is attached to a camera head and light cable. The
applications. Most camera heads should fit most arthroscope
arthroscope is inserted into the cannula to view inside the joint. Fluid
 eye pieces regardless of manufacturer, but it is advisable to
tubing is attached to the cannula.
ensure compatibility before purchasing components from dif-
ferent manufacturers. Some camera heads will have buttons
that permit white balance, image printing, or zoom. The
a larger feld of view and greater resistance to bending and
control box converts the electronic image information into a
therefore greater durability. Smaller cannulas are most often
standard video signal and relays the image to the monitor.
used in the cat.
The control box is usually specific to the camera head and
Arthroscopy of the feline shoulder, elbow, and hip is usually
therefore the camera head and control box must be from the
performed with a 1.9-mm arthroscope. Arthroscopy of the
same manufacturer. Camera heads may be sterilized by auto-
feline stifle is usually performed with a 2.3-, 2.4-, or 2.7-mm
clave, ethylene oxide gas or cold sterilization, according to
arthroscope. The 30° arthroscope is the most common
manufacturer's recommendations.
employed in feline arthroscopy. Working length refers to the
overall length of the shaft of the telescope and is usually
25.1.3 Monitors
designated as short or long. Short arthroscopes (8.5 cm) are
recommended for feline arthroscopy due to the ease of han-
The arthroscopic image is visualized on a color monitor.
dling in smaller joints and less susceptibility to damage from
Monitors for arthroscopy should have a high horizontal reso-
bending.
lution of at least 450 lines and a large screen (20 inches
The light post on the arthroscope is the site of attachment
(50 cm) or greater). Medical-grade monitors are available
of the fberoptic cable that will provide lighting within the
and provide the best image, but household monitors may
joint. The light post can be rotated around the arthroscope,
provide adequate image quality at a lower cost. Most moni-
changing the arthroscopic feld of view. This maneuver is an
tors will have S-video or red, green, blue (RGB) inputs which
important concept of arthroscopy. Use of the light post to
 enable higher-quality video imaging.
 change the feld of view reduces the need to move the tip of
 the arthroscope to achieve the same result. Reduced manipu-
25.1.4 Light source
lation of the arthroscope decreases the chance of iatrogenic
rauma to the joint surface and unintentional withdrawal of
Light sources provide illumination within the joint for visuali-
the scope from the joint.
zation. Light source bulbs may be tungsten-halogen, or xenon.
 Arthroscopes are fragile and can be easily damaged during
Xenon lamps provide increased light intensity and higher color
surgery, cleaning, or storage. Not only are arthroscopes
temperature as compared to halogen and therefore provide
expensive to buy initially, they are also expensive to repair
higher visual clarity and color rendition. Xenon light sources
or replace. Thus, they should be handled with extreme care.
are more expensive than halogen but are generally recom-
Many manufacturers offer repair or replacement warranties
 a uo  a e s roans rog pap
that often provide a replacement or loan within 24 hours.
source is transferred to the arthroscope through a fberoptic
 Proper methods of cleaning and storage have been described
 adoso a o isod i an oi s il a
(1). In my experience most damage to arthroscopes is caused
connection for the fberoptic cable must be compatible with
by the surgeon or technician and not as a result of manufac-
the light source and the camera. The light cable may be steri-
turing problems. Damage during surgery can occur if too l
lized by ethylene oxide gas, Cidex soaking, or autoclave,
25: Feline arthroscopy
285
depending on manufacturer's recommendations. The light
cable is composed of numerous glass fibers that may be broken
if the cable is bent or wound too tightly; therefore it should be
handled carefully. The fiberoptic cable will also heat up signif-
cantly and should never be placed directly against the patient
 or draping materials as it may cause burning.
25.1.5 Storage of arthroscopic images
Documentation of arthroscopic procedures provides a per-
manent visual resource that is invaluable for historical
archiving of arthroscopic findings and therapy, and for client
and professional communication. Arthroscopic images can be
stored as digital images or as printed photos. Methods used
to collect and store the images include video tape recording,
digital still image capture, and color printing. A household
 Figure 25-3 Sterile fluids are administered continuously through the
video camera provides an excellent and convenient means of
cannula into the joint using a fluid infusion pump (shown) or by
documenting patient data. The video camera typically attaches
hanging a bag of fluids attached to a pressure bag
to the arthroscopic camera using an S-video cable.
25.1.6 Arthroscopic irrigation
A constant and reliable fow of fluid across the tip of the
arthroscope and through the joint is vital to give adequate
visualization. Fluid expands the joint, provides clear fluid for
visualization, and clears the joint of debris and contamina-
tion. Irrigation also increases pressure within the joint and
this suppresses bleeding during the procedure. Irrigation
systems must provide a minimum pressure necessary to
distend the joint and maintain flow without exceeding safe
pressures, which could result in exravasation of fluid into
the adjacent soft tissues. Recommended pressures in most
Figure 25-4 Hand instruments are used to treat various conditions
when used with arthroscopy. Commonly used instruments (from top to
feline arthroscopy are between 25 and 50 mmHg. As previ-
bottom) include a banana knife, curette, hand bur, probe, and a
ously described, fluid is directed into a Luer-Lok connector
grasper.
on the arthroscope cannula and enters the joint via the space
between the telescope and the cannula. Fluid may be pressur-
minimize trauma due to their size, although the sharp tips
ized either by gravity flow or by an electric fuid pump
may damage the cartilage and the narrow tube may fre-
(Fig. 25-3). Both systems have advantages and selection often
quently become clogged. Selection of the appropriate outflow
depends upon the joint being operated and surgeon prefer-
instrument will be based primarily on the size of the joint
ence. Gravity remains an effective method of fluid delivery
being operated. If the outflow cannula is not providing ade-
for most procedures that do not involve fluid suction or long-
quate fluid evacuation, the instrument portal can be increased
term use of shaving devices.
ardo apishuoe ssria on p iad on ranan 
instruments.
25.1.7 Egress systems
25.1.8 Hand instruments
Maintenance of appropriate fuid flow through the joint
during arthroscopy also necessitates establishment of ade-
 Hand instruments for small-joint arthroscopy must combine
quate outflow or egress. Maintenance of fluid outflow can be
 d o s i  r 
particularly challenging in small-animal arthroscopy due to
 accuracy and reliability while minimizing iatrogenic trauma
the small size of the joints. Use of standard outflow cannulas
 and instrument failure. Basic recommended arthroscopic
in smaller joints, particularly the elbow, may result in signif-
 hand tools include a probe, grasping forceps, biting forceps,
cant iatrogenic cartilage trauma. The use of needles may
 arthroscopic knife, curette, and a hand bur (Fig. 25-4).
286   Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
Probes are usually right-angle in design with a tip of
approximately 1-3 mm in length. Probes are used to palpate
surfaces and manipulate tissues within the joint. In small-
animal arthroscopy right-angle probes are used to palpate
articular cartilage for pathology and to manipulate flaps,
meniscal injuries, and bone fragments. Many bucket-handle
tears are missed because non-displaced meniscal tears cannot
be seen. The probe can be used to pull the torn portion of
the meniscus cranially, allowing identification and treatment
using partial meniscectomy.
Grasping forceps are available as locking and non-locking
Figure 25-5 An instrument cannula can be used to maintain an
types. Grasping forceps designed specifically for arthroscopic
instrument portal. Hand instruments can be moved in and out of the
aaissaoud ag uen azis einuuen aul leod aun yonoun Aisea uiol
use are usually more sturdy and have a locking mechanism
increased over a series of "switching sticks" to allow removal of larger
that aids in tissue removal. The grasping surface may be
fragments.
-ds ae e aau  ppuoa s i pneas no qoo
q s jo  r n p im s 
chips and cartilage flaps. A small grasping forceps is also
useful for delicate tissue manipulation in narrow joint
major advantage of working through a cannula is the ease of
spaces.
instrument insertion. Without a cannula it may be difficult
 Biting or punch forceps are used to debride soft tissues and
to switch instruments and identify the portal, particularly if
may also be referred to as basket forceps. Punch forceps have
 the portal was poorly made. Repeated attempts to insert an
a sharp hollow lower anvil and an upper punch that can be
instrument through a poorly defined portal can lead to soft-
used to remove small pieces of soft tissue, including synovium
tissue trauma and fluid extravasation. The major disadvan-
or meniscus. Variations in design include straight or side-
tage of using a cannula is the limited diameter of the
biting and differences in diameter and length. A small- or
instruments that will ft into the cannula.
medium-diameter straight punch forceps is most useful in
Instrument cannulas are available in numerous diameters
small-animal arthroscopy for debriding synovium that is
and lengths. For small-joint arthroscopy, cannulas of inner
obscuring the view, obtaining a synovial biopsy, or debriding
a meniscal injury.
4-5 cm are appropriate. Most cannulas come with both
 Arthroscopic knives are useful in small-animal arthroscopy
sharp and blunt obturator, although the blunt obturator
for treating meniscal injuries, tenodesis, and cutting soft-
should be used whenever possible. Small-joint cannula
tissue attachments to bony fragments. Knives may be straight,
systems should also include a set of switching sticks and/or
curved, or hooked, and the choice depends upon the pro-
- aassid a sd aniun s 's s
cedure being performed. A knife set is not mandatory
tion of the portal and subsequent insertion of larger cannulas.
for basic small-animal arthroscopy; however, purchase of
To work with this system, a relatively small cannula and
straight and hook knives is recommended for advanced
obturator is inserted frst into the joint. A switching stick is
techniques.
then placed through the cannula and the cannula withdrawn.
Small-diameter curettes are very useful in small-joint
A larger cannula or dilation tube is then placed over the stick
arthroscopy for elevation of bone fragrments and debridement
and the process is repeated until the desired cannula is in
of cartilage and bone. Generally, a straight curette will be
 place. The use of cannulas depends upon the joint being oper-
easier to insert into the joint and will be adequate for most
ated, the instruments being used, and the surgeon's prefer-
applications. Loop or ring curettes are also available specifi-
ence. Although a cannula system is not necessary for
cally for arthroscopic use.
-ed ro uass e aa on injesn si ni dosse iol-us
Curettage and abrasion of bone or cartilage can be per-
 ticular situations and it may be easier for the inexperienced
formed with a hand bur. The instrument is a round bur on
arthroscopist to work through cannulas.
the end of an arthroscopic handle. Alternatively a bur from
 r e  Ps   as rd e
25.1.10 Motorized shavers
Motorized shavers are designed to debride soft and hard
25.1.9 Instrument cannulas
tissues rapidly. The small-joint shavers can be used in the
Arthroscopic instruments may be inserted into the joint
 elbow, shoulder, and stifle of cats. Power shavers comprise a
through a portal with or without a cannula (Fig. 25-5). The
 control box, a hand piece, and a shaver tip (Fig. 25-6). The
25: Feline arthroscopy
287
underwater arthroscopic application are available for use
with standard electrocautery generators. These instruments
may be used for cautery of small vessels and special tips are
designed for cutting soft tissues. Special tips are also available
to ablate or shrink soft-tissue structures. Small probe sizes
(1.0-2.5 mm) should be used in most feline arthroscopic
procedures.
25.2 Patient preparation and positioning
 Patients should be positioned in a routine fashion for explor-
 atory surgery of the joint. Clip and prepare the patient as if
an open arthrotomy were to take place. The reason for this
strategy is that the arthroscopy procedure may need to be
 aborted for technical reasons and an open arthrotomy per-
Figure 25-6 A power shaver is a useful instrument to remove
 formed. This will occur more frequently when the surgeon is
beginning to learn arthroscopy. The arthroscope can still be
eburnated subchondral bone.
used to improve the surgeon's view even if an arthrotomy is
performed. The surgeon and assistant generally stand on the
 same side of the table when performing arthroscopy.
control box includes the power supply and basic operational
controls. Most shavers permit variation of speed and direc-
25.3 Postoperative care
tion, including forward, reverse, and oscillation. Speed
control is important as debridement of different tissues with
1 Lavage of the joint should be performed at the conclusion of
different shaver blades requires different speeds. The shaver  arthroscopy to remove debris. If an instrument cannula is
is generally controlled with a foot pedal. The hand piece has being used, the joint can be lavaged with inflow through the
a switch that controls the amount of suction pressure.
 arthroscope cannula and outflow through the instrument
Shaver blades come in numerous styles and diameters that  cannula. If an instrument cannula was not used, lavage can
are designed for either soft-tissue or hard-tissue debridement. be achieved by connecting the fluid line to the egress needle
a auana 'enuno sii uor adossore ai sor pue suer Aeidh sien u pasn sapeq raaus jo ranau a
from 2.0 to 3.5 mm. Soft-tissue shaver blades include 
cannula in the joint to allow fluid egress. Once the joint has
guarded sharp cutters and aggressive cutters. Sharp cutter  been thoroughly lavaged, remove the arthroscope cannula
blades have a simple sharp-edged cup whereas aggressive and suture the arthroscope and instrument portals with nylon
cutters have a toothed cup. Both can be used for debridement  in a cruciate pattern through the skin. Bupivacaine may then
of fat or synovium in small joints. Aggressive cutters are  be injected into the joint to provide topical anesthesia. Post-
t roy qu au uo pased aq keu aepueq e Kjaerado paaouan aq isnu anssn jo iunoue aaiel e ji aasa anou
or if the target tissue is expected to be denser due to chronic hours if there is significant swelling around the joint from
synovitis. When using an aggressive cutter to debride the fat  fluid extravasation. Cold therapy applied 2-3 times a day for
pad of the stifle, it is helpful to apply limited suction to the  several days will help provide analgesia and decrease swell-
unit and use the shaver at a relatively slow speed. Operation  ing. The duration of activity restriction depends on the pro-
of the shaver at higher speeds limits the amount of tissue  cedure. Activity should generally be restricted for 2 weeks
that can be drawn into the shaver blade. Shaver blades for following arthroscopy. Further restriction may be needed
debridement of bone are round or oval-shaped guarded depending on the orthopedic procedure performed at the time
burs. Full-radius shaver blades are useful to debride necrotic  of arhroscopy (e.g., cruciate ligament repair requires 2
cartilage, soft bone, or small amounts of synovium or fat months of minimal activity).
pad.
25.4 Arthroscopy of the shoulder
25.1.11 Electrocautery and radiofrequency
25.4.1 Patient position
Electrocautery and radiofrequency are used to generate heat
for cauterization of vessels, debridement of tissues, or shrink-
The patient should be in lateral recumbency with the target
ing of collagen. Electrosurgical tips specifically designed for
shoulder up. The lateral aspect of the shoulder will be
288
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
approached. Slight traction should be placed on the leg while
 needle should pass easily into the joint perpendicular to the
holding the leg parallel to the floor.
 long axis of the limb.
To insert the scope use a number 11 blade to make a
2-3-mm stab incision through the skin and superficial soft
25.4.2 Recommended arthroscope size
tissues. The incision should not be continued full-thickness
This is 1.9, 2.3, or 2.4 mm.
through the joint capsule or the joint distension will be elimi-
nated and it will allow excessive extravasation of fluid into
25.4.3 Portal sites for shoulder arthroscopy (3)
the surrounding soft tissues. The instrument portal is estab-
lished if a biopsy of intra-articular tissue is desired or if
 The portal sites used for feline shoulder arthroscopy are
 treatment of joint pathology is required. The craniocaudal
similar to the canine (Fig. 25-7). Arthroscope, egress, and
 and proximodistal position of the instrument portal relative
S irod ssnie a 'pasn eid are seiod suns
 to the acromion can be estimated from the lateral radiograph.
established frst. Insert a 20-gauge needle from the craniolat-
 This site is approximately 1 cm caudal and slightly distal to
eral aspect of the shoulder over the greater tubercle towards
the caudal edge of the acromion. It is best to learn to trian-
the craniomedial aspect of the joint near the origin of the
gulate the instrument portal site relative to the position
biceps tendon. In most cases, when the egress portal is prop-
of the arthroscope tip within the joint. A 20-gauge 1-inch
erly placed, synovial fluid is easily aspirated. If synovial fluid
(2.5-cm) needle is used as a guide needle to locate the appro-
is not aspirated and the surgeon believes the joint has been
priate site for the instrument portal. The guide needle must
entered, saline can be instilled into the joint. If the needle is
penetrate the skin surface at a 75-90° angle and maintain
located in the joint, fluid is easily instilled and reverse pres-
this orientation through the soft tissues. As the needle enters
sure is felt on the syringe plunger as the joint capsule fully
the joint and is seen on the monitor (be sure the scope and
distends. Approximately 3-6 ml of fluid is needed to distend
light post are directed toward the point of entry), the surgeon
most feline shoulder joints. The arthroscope portal is estab-
can assess correct placement of the portal relative to the
lished second. The arthroscope cannula with the attached
 conical obturator is inserted. Standard scope insertion site is
is entering at a very oblique angle. This is the illusion created
based on localization of the acromion of the scapula and
by the 30 fore-oblique arthroscope and not the real penetra-
 approximation of the location of the joint surface. Place a
tion angle.
fnger on the acromion and then move distally until the
The most common reason for failing to locate the appropri-
 approximate level of the joint is reached. Estimation of this
 ate instrument portal site is entering the skin and soft tissue
level is assisted by evaluation of the lateral radiographic view.
at too oblique an angle. When one enters at too oblique
A 22-gauge needle may be inserted at the location of the
 an angle, the triangulation needle (to locate the instrument
proposed scope port to ensure proper port location. The
 port) crosses the arthroscope and cannot be visualized on the
Figure 25-7 The portals for the
shoulder are lateral, as shown in
(A) and (B). The arthroscope
portal is distal to the acromion
process of the scapula. The
instrument portal is typically
caudal and the egress portal is
Canial to the arthroscope portal.
The instrument and egress portals
are occasionally exchanged
depending on the site of the
lesion to be treated.
25: Feline arthroscopy
289
monitor. Once the appropriate site for the instrument portal
● Subscapularis tendon
has been confirmed by observation of the needle on the
● Humeral head (Figs 25-10 and 25-11)
monitor the portal site is prepared for instrumentation. A
● Glenoid cavity (Fig. 25-10)
 number 11 scalpel blade can be inserted adjacent to the
· Caudal joint pouch
needle into the joint. The opening can then be enlarged with
The joint is explored by changing the feld of view of the
 Metzenbaum scissors or a series of increasing-diameter instru-
 arthroscope using a combination of techniques. Actual move-
 ment cannulas. If different-sized cannulas are needed, a
ment of the scope should be minimized to avoid inadvertent
switching stick is used to change out cannulas.
withdrawal of the scope from the joint. The field of view can
be changed in three ways:
25.4.4 Surgical anatomy
1. by advancing or withdrawing the tip of the arthroscope
The initial step in shoulder arthroscopy should be a thorough
slightly
systematic exploration of the joint. Developing a standard-
2. by leaning the arthroscope proximally, distally, cranially,
ized pattern for examination of the joint will help the devel-
and caudally
opment of arthroscopic skills and ensure that all accessible
 3. by rotating the light cable to change the orientation of the
areas of the joint are examined. An example of standard
beveled lens.
shoulder joint examination would be to visualize the:
Pathological lesions are evaluated and treated using hand
●Biceps tendon (Fig. 25-8)
instruments or the motorized shaver through the instrument
● Medial glenohumeral ligament (Fig. 25-9)
portal.
25.4.5 Indications for shoulder arthroscopy
Shoulder arthroscopy is occasionally performed in cats.
SGT
Indications for shoulder arthroscopy may include diagnosis
BT
Figure 25-10 The
TS
humeral head (H),
glenoid cavity. and
synovial membrane
SM
(SM) can be
G
evaluated in the
caudal joint space.
Figure 25-8 The normal biceps tendon (BT) of the cat appears similar
pouabeadns aun woy saneuibio uopuan aul bop aut jo jeui o
tuberosity (SGT) of the scapula. The tendon crosses the joint space and
H
enters the tendon sheath (TS) at the intertubercular groove (IG) of the 
humerus. A portion of the tendon within the sheath can be assessed by
flexing the shoulder.
Figure 25-9
 Structures that
D
should be assessed 
Figure 25-11 The
 on the medial aspect
humeral head (H)
of the shoulder
and synovial
include the medial
membrane (SM)
MGHL
 glenohumeral
H
are visible in the
SM
ligament (MGHL),
caudomedial joint 
 subscapularis tendon
pouch.
(S), glenoid rim (G),
and synovial
SM
S
membrane (SM).
290
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
and therapy of infectious, neoplastic, traumatic, developmen-
removed using grasping forceps. Areas of full-thickness car
tal, and degenerative diseases. Minimally invasive synovial
tilage wear can be treated. A description for treatment of
biopsy may be performed. Biopsies of the synovium are
damaged regions of the articular cartilage is described below
usually obtained with a small biter forceps. The sharp biting
in elbow osteoarthritis.
step. Biopsies of cartilage or soft bone may be performed with
25.5 Arthroscopy of the elbow
very small trephines or a meniscal vascular punch. The most
aq siu sien un dossore ranous po uonde uoo
25.5.1 Patient position
for the diagnosis and therapy of traumatic and degenerative
The patient should be in lateral recumbency with the target
diseases, specifically ligamentous injury, osteoarthritis, and
elbow down. The medial aspect of the elbow will be
synovitis. The list of indications for shoulder arthroscopy in
approached.
ditions are discovered during exploratory arthroscopic exam-
inations of cats having painful conditions of the shoulder.
25.5.2 Recommended arthroscope size
This is 1.9 mm.
Ligamentous injury
25.5.3 Portal sites for elbow arthroscopy
Feline patients may have ligamentous damage of the shoulder
similar to that found in canine patients. Injury to the medial
The portal sites used for feline elbow arthroscopy are similar
supporting structures of the joint appears to be most common.
The medial glenohumeral ligament, subscapularis tendon,
to the canine (Fig. 25-15). Arthroscope, egress, and instru-
 and joint capsule may be torn or stretched. In a study by
ment portals are typically used. The egress portal is estab-
Ridge (3) the medial glenohumeral ligament in the cat
lished frst. Insert a 20-gauge needle from the medial aspect
appeared as a single band and was not Y-shaped as in dogs.
of the elbow over the medial epicondyle crest, towards the
tip of the anconeal process. In most cases, when the egress
Arthroscopy can be used to assess the integrity of these struc-
portal is properly placed, synovial fluid is easily aspirated. If
tures. The structures can be probed to assess for tightness.
synovial fluid is not aspirated and the surgeon believes the
Thermal shrinkage of these tissues can be attempted using a
radiofrequency probe in an attempt to tighten the medial
tissues and restore stability. A minimally invasive surgical
approach can be performed to reconstruct the ligamentous
Figure 25-13 The
structures if needed.
bone of the
humeral head (B) is 
eburnated following
Osteoarthritis and synovitis (Figs 25-12-25-14)
grade 4 cartilage
Arthroscopy of the shoulder has limited use in the manage-
erosion. Chronic
ment of osteoarthritis and synovitis in cats. The underlying
inflammation of the
B
synovial membrane 
cause of osteoarthritis should be identifed and eliminated if
is seen (S).
possible. Arthroscopic exploration of the joint can be used
 to obtain synovial biopsies for histopathology and culture
and sensitivity. Loose osteochondral fragments can be
Figure 25-12 A
Figure 25-14 The
G
bone fragment (F),
medial glenohumeral
proliferative synovial
ligament (MGHL)
membrane (SM).
and subscapularis
SM
glenoid (G), and
MGHL
tendon (S) are intact
eburnated bone of
SM
in this feline patient 
the humeral head (H)
with chronic
can be seen in this
inflammation of
feline patient with 
the synovial
chronic shoulder
membrane (SM)
osteoarthritis of
S
unknown cause.
25: Feline arthroscopy
291
Figure 25-15 The portals for the
elbow are medial, as shown in
(A) and (B). The arthroscope
portal is usually 5-7 mm distal
and caudal to the medial humeral
epicondyle of the humerus in the
cat. The instrument portal (probe)
is cranial and the egress portal
(needle) is caudal and proximal to
the arthroscope portal.
joint has been entered, saline can be instilled into the joint.
insert the arthroscope. The instrument portal is established
If the needle is located in the joint, fluid is easily instilled 
last and is used for insertion of a variety of instruments,
 including smalljoint graspers, right-angled probes, small-
 joint shavers, and curettes.
needed to distend most feline elbow joints. The arthroscope
Once the joint has been thoroughly explored, position the
portal is established second. The arthroscope cannula with
 arthroscope to visualize the craniomedial portion of the joint.
the attached conical obturator is inserted. Standard scope
 Insert a 22-gauge needle into the joint caudal to the medial
insertion site is based on localization of the medial epicon-
collateral ligament while observing arthroscopically. Once
dyle and approximation of the location of the joint surface.
the needle has been visualized and the internal and external
Place a fnger on the medial epicondyle and then move dis-
positioning are judged to be satisfactory, use a number 11
tally until the approximate level of the joint is reached. Esti-
blade to make a 3-5-mm longitudinal incision directly adja-
mation of this level is assisted by evaluation of the lateral
cent to the needle. Insert a small blunt trochar into the joint
radiographic view. Next move the fnger approximately
at a similar angle to the needle. If an instrument cannula is
4-5 mm caudal to this point for arthroscope insertion. A
 going to be used it should be inserted at this time.
22-gauge needle may be inserted at the location of the pro-
 The obturator is removed and the portal enlarged as needed
posed scope port to ensure proper port location. The needle
using Metzenbaum scissors or a hemostat to spread the
should pass easily into the joint perpendicular to the long
opening. A cleanly created, large portal will allow easy inser-
axis of the limb.
tion of all necessary instruments without the need for a
To insert the scope use a number 11 blade to make a 2-3-
cannula. A larger portal also allows egress fluid to drain more
mm stab incision through the skin and superficial soft tissues.
effectively with fewer tendencies to extravasate into the sub-
The incision should not be continued full-thickness through
cutaneous tissues.
 the joint capsule or the joint distension will be eliminated and
it will allow excessive extravasation of fluid into the sur-
 25.5.4 Surgical anatomy
rounding soft tissues. The elbow should be positioned at the
edge of the table or a bolster placed under the elbow to use
The initial step in elbow joint arthroscopy should be a thor-
as a fulcrum. Have the assistant maintain a slight valgus force
ough systematic exploration of the joint. Developing a stan-
[pau aui uado on nooj aul on (annssnd premumop Piur)
dardized pattern for examination of the joint will help the
compartment of the joint.
development of arthroscopic skills and ensure that all acces-
Once in the joint, remove the obturator from the cannula.
 sible areas of the joint are examined. An example of standard
 Fluid will flow freely from the cannula, confrming correct
medial elbow joint examination would be to visualize and
placement. Attach the fluid ingress line to the cannula and
image each area of the medial joint as follows:
292
 Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques 
● Anconeal process (Fig. 25-16)
The joint is explored by changing the feld of view of the
● Trochlear notch
arthroscope using a combination of techniques. Actual move-
● Lateral coronoid process (Fig. 25-17)
ment of the scope should be minimized to avoid inadvertent
● Medial coronoid process
withdrawal of the scope from the joint. The field of view can
● Radial head (Figs 25-17 and 25-18)
be changed in three ways:
● Medial collateral ligament
1. by advancing or withdrawing the tip of the arthroscope
●Medial humeral condyle (Fig. 25-19)
slightly
 2. by leaning the arthroscope proximally, distally, cranially,
Figure 25-16 The
and caudally
anconeal process 
3. by rotating the light cable to change the orientation of the
AP
(AP) of the cat is
beveled lens.
sightly smaller than
the dog. The
Pathological lesions are evaluated and treated using hand
trochlear notch of
instruments or the motorized shaver through the instrument
the ulna (TN) and 
portal.
TN
humeral condyle 
(HC) are similar to
HC
the dog.
25.5.5 Indications for elbow arthroscopy
Indications for elbow arthroscopy in cats may include diag-
nosis and therapy of infectious, neoplastic, traumatic, devel-
opmental, and degenerative diseases. Arthroscopy provides a
Jo Ssnn u Asdoq Ios asa A Jo s
immune-mediated arthritis or neoplasia. Biopsies of the
 synovium are usually obtained with a small biter. The sharp
Figure 25-17
biting action of these instruments permits rapid biopsies in a
Structures that
-rad aq ke suoq nos no ieies jo saisdoig 'dans aauss
should be assessed
formed with very small trephines or a meniscal vascular
on the lateral aspect
LHC
punch. The most common application of elbow arthroscopy
of the elbow include
in cats has been for the diagnosis and therapy of developmen-
the lateral coronoid 
process (LCP) and 
tal and degenerative diseases, specifically fragmentation of
the lateral aspect of 
the medial coronoid process (FCP) and osteoarthritis.
LCP
the humeral condyle
R
(LHC) and radial
Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process
head (R).
 Feline patients may have degenerative changes of the elbow
similar to that found in canine patients with elbow dysplasia
(Figs 25-20 and 25-21). Periarticular osteophytes, joint
Figure 25-18
Figure 25-19
Structures that
 Structures that
should be assessed 
MHC
 should be assessed
centrally in the
on the medial aspect 
elbow include the 
of the elbow include
LHC
radial incisure of the
the medial coronoid 
ulna (RI), lateral 
process (MCP),
aspect of the
medial aspect of the
humeral condyle
humeral condyle
(LHC). and radial
(MHC) and radial
head (R)
head (R).
RI
MCP
25: Feline arthroscopy
293
Figure 25-22 A
MHC
fragment (F) from 
the medial coronoid
AP
process (MCP) of this 
cat has shifted
canial to the radial
head (R) Medial
humeral condyle 
(MHC).
HC
MCP
Figure 25-20 Fragmented medial coronoid process of the elbow is a
id shen lo shop age re uouo sul eiseidsp mola yo woy
Figure 25-23 Full-
pathological changes include erosion of cartilage from the medial
thickness cartilage
ae  pe (d) ssas eoe a w (*) ao ea
erosion of the
of the trochlea of the humeral condyle (HC). Fragmentation of the
MHC
Medial humeral
medial coronoid process leads to loose osteochondral fragments within
the joint.
condyle (MHC)
occurs in cats with
 elbow dysplasia.
Figure 25-21 This
feline patient with
elbow dysplasia has
 changes that are
identical to those
seen in canine
patients. Note the
AP
full-thickness 
HC
 cartilage erosion of
the humeral condyle
Figure 25-24
(HC) and anconeal 
Multiple fragments
process (AP) and 
(F) are often found 
grooves in the
MHC
in patients with
subchondral bone of
fragmented medial 
the humeral condyle.
coronoid process.
The fragments are
 typically located near
the medial coronoid
capsule thickening, and mineralized free bodies are seen
process and the
 radiographically in affected cats. The mineralized free bodies 
medial aspect of the
may be found both inside the joint and within the soft tissues
humeral condyle 
(MHC) or cranial to
around the joint (Fig. 25-22). FCP has been identified
the radial head.
arthroscopically in cats (4). The cause of this condition is
unknown, but developmental, degenerative, and traumatic
causes are considered most likely. The lesion is characterized
 by fragmentation of the cartilage and subchondral bone in
 ments are often seen (Fig. 25-24). Avoid iatrogenic cartilage
the cranial and lateral aspect of the medial coronoid, and
damage by carefully manipulating the working instruments.
grade II to grade IV cartilage erosion over the medial coro-
The assistant must be cautioned not to move abruptly or
noid process (Fig. 25-23).
iatrogenic cartilage damage may occur. Remove multiple
When an FCP fragment initially separates, it may remain
 fragments individually (Fig. 25-25).
in its original location. Insert a small curete or probe into
Larger and more chronically migrated fragments become
the joint to dislodge the fragment. A small grasper or small
 more diffcult to remove because of their size, location, and
shaver blade is used to remove the fragment. Multiple frag-
 soft-tissue attachments. Fragments may continue to grow
294
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
Figure 25-25 A
 Postoperatively, pain can be managed with cold therapy
grasper is used to
and appropriate doses of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
MHO
remove a fragment 
drugs (NSAIDs), chondroprotectants, or narcotics. Pain is
(F) arising from the
usually minimal. Adequan is a good consideration for feline
medial coronoid
process. Medial
 patients with FCP and can be given at a dose of 2 mg/kg, IM
humeral condyle.
or SQ, every 5-7 days for eight treatments. Activity should
 be restricted for 4 weeks. The prognosis following arthro-
scopic management of FCP in the cat has yet to be determined
and likely varies tremendously with severity of disease,
function of the animal, postoperative management, and
 patient temperament. Fortunately, complications are rare and
minor.
Osteoarthritis of the elbow
Figure 25-26 A
Arthroscopy has limited use in the management of elbow
motorized shaver (S)
osteoarthritis in cats. The underlying cause of osteoarthritis
is used to remove
should be identified and eliminated if possible. Arthroscopic
osteochondral
exploration of the joint can be used to obtain synovial biop-
fragments, necrotic
sies for histopathology and culture and sensitivity. Loose
cartilage, and
sclerotic bone of the
 osteochondral fragments can be removed using grasping
medial coronoid
forceps. Areas of full-thickness cartilage wear can be treated.
process (MCP).
Management of articular cartilage lesions is based on the
concept that providing blood, with mesenchymal stem cell
MCP
precursors, acces to the lesion encourages healing by the
formation of fbrocartilage. Several methods have been
described to achieve this. Abrasion arthroplasty involves
uniform removal of subchondral bone until bleeding is
achieved. This can be accomplished in the feline elbow by use
of either a curette or bur attachment on a small-joint shaver.
once migrated and become very large. To remove these frag-
The shaver is usually more rapid and efficient and generally
ments with a grasper alone, insert a locking grasper and
just as accurate. Another method of treatment for grade IV
Yerq ot rdsa aui as r anid ao un suuen aul aaou
lesions is microfracture. In this technique, numerous micro-
it into smaller parts, always being careful to avoid damage
cracks are created in the subchondral bone plate to allow
to adjacent cartilage. Alternatively, insert a small-joint shaver
 bleeding at the lesion surface. Microfracture awls are avail-
with a shielded bur and suction (Fig. 25-26). Using the shield
able for smalljoint arthroscopic use. Alternatively, a small
 to protect the radial head, humerus and remaining coronoid,
microfracture pick may be created by bending the end of a
bur the fragment down to a size that can be removed or bur
0.035- or 0.045-inch K wire to about a 45° angle. The wire
away the entire fragment.
is then secured into a Jacobs chuck.
 m d e on    s
cannot be reached with a bur or grasper. In this case, insert
25.6 Arthroscopy of the hip
a 5-0 curette and pass the tip of the curette medial and cranial
to the fragment. Then use the tip of the curette to push parts
25.6.1 Patient position
technique is diffcult at frst but with practice will permit
The patient is positioned in lateral recumbency with the
retrieval of most cranially migrated fragrments. Once the frag-
target hip-up. The lateral aspect of the hip will be approached.
ments have been completely removed, lavage the joint to
Slight traction should be placed on the leg while holding the
remove any remaining bone debris. If osteochondritis disse-
leg parallel to the floor.
cans or additional cartilage damage is identified, treat as
described in the following sections. At the conclusion of the
25.6.2 Recommended arthroscope size
 procedure inject bupivacaine if desired, and close the skin
wounds.
This is 1.9, 2.3 or 2.4 mm.
25: Feline arthroscopy
295
Figure 25-27 The portals for the
hip are lateral, as shown in (A)
and (B). The arthroscope portal is 
proximal to the greater
trochanter. The instrument portal
is slightly cranial and the egress
portal is more cranial to the
arthroscope portal.
A
B
25.6.3 Portal sites for hip arthroscopy
probing, biopsy, or treatment of joint pathology is required.
The instrument portal can be placed at the site of the egress
The portal sites used for feline hip arthroscopy are similar to
portal. An instrument cannula can be used, allowing the
the canine (Fig. 25-27). Arthroscope, egress, and instrument
 portal to have dual actions - acting as an instrument and an
portals are typically used. An instrument portal may not be
 egress portal. Alternatively the instrument portal may be
needed in all cases. The arthroscope portal is established first.
established halfway between the arthroscope and egress
The joint capsule must initially be distended. Insert a 20-
portals.
gauge needle from the lateral aspect of the hip just proximal
to the greater trochanter. The needle should be directed per-
pendicular to the long axis of the limb. In most cases, when
25.6.4 Surgical anatomy
 the needle is properly placed, synovial fluid is easily aspirated.
If synovial fluid is not aspirated and the surgeon believes the
qanonoun e aq pinous Adosonune diu un dans jeui au
joint has been entered, saline can be instilled into the joint.
 systematic exploration of the joint. Developing a standard-
If the needle is located in the joint, fluid is easily instilled and
 ized pattern for examination of the joint will help develop-
reverse pressure is felt on the syringe plunger as the joint
 ment of arthroscopic skills and ensure that all accessible areas
capsule fully distends. Approximately 3-6 ml of fluid is
of the joint are examined. An example of standard hip joint
 needed to distend most feline hip joints. The needle is quickly
examination would be to visualize the:
removed.
● Femoral head (Figs 25-28 and 25-29)
 The arthroscope cannula with the attached conical obtura-
● Acetabulum (Figs 25-28 and 25-29)
tor is inserted. Standard scope insertion site is based on
● Labrum (Fig. 25-29)
localization of the greater trochanter of the femur and
● Synovial membrane
approximation of the location of the joint surface. Place a
● Round ligament (Fig. 25-30)
fnger on the greater trochanter and then move proximally
just over its proximal edge. To insert the scope use a number
The joint is explored by changing the field of view of the
11 blade to make a 2-3-mm stab incision through the skin
arthroscope using a combination of techniques. Actual move-
and superficial soft tissues. The incision should not be con-
ment of the scope should be minimized to avoid inadvertent
tinued full-thickness through the joint capsule or the joint
withdrawal of the scope from the joint. The feld of view can
distension will be eliminated and it will allow excessive
be changed in three ways:
extravasation of fluid into the surrounding soft tissues. The
egress portal is established second. A 20-gauge needle is
1. by advancing or withdrawing the tip of the arthroscope
placed in the craniolateral joint space just cranial and distal
slightly
to the arthroscope portal. The lateral radiograph should be
 2. by leaning the arthroscope proximally, distally, cranially,
used to estimate the location of the craniolateral joint space.
and caudally
If the needle is properly placed, fluid should flow freely from
3. by rotating the light cable to change the orientation of the
the egress needle. The instrument portal is established if
beveled lens.
296
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
Figure 25-28 The
of infectious, neoplastic, traumatic, developmental, and
acetabulum (A),
degenerative diseases. Minimally invasive synovial biopsy
 acetabular fossa (AF),
may be performed. The most common application of hip
and femoral head 
arthroscopy in cats has been for the diagnosis and therapy of
(FH) are easily
accessed during hip
traumatic and degenerative diseases, specifcally hip disloca-
arthroscopy in cats.
tion, and osteoarthritis. The list of indications for hip arthros-
copy in cats willikely expand in the future as new pathological
conditions are discovered during exploratory arthroscopic
 examinations of cats having painful conditions of the hip.
FH
Hip dislocation
Feline patients may incur cartilage damage of the hip as a
sequela to traumatic dislocation. The arthroscope can be used
to assess damage to the acetabulum, articular cartilage, and
Figure 25-29 The
joint capsule prior to determining a definitive surgical plan.
acetabulum, femoral
If closed reduction is to be performed, the arthroscope can
head, and labrum of 
be used to guide removal of debris and hematoma from the
the hip joint can be
acetabulum. The swollen round ligament and avulsed frac-
 seen arthroscopically.
caudal acetabulum
ture fragments can be debrided to facilitate reduction. The
arthroscope can also be used to confrm reduction of the hip
following closed reduction. If substantial damage to the joint
capsule or articular cartilage is seen, the surgeon may opt to
perform a total hip replacement or a femoral head and neck
femoral
ostectomy using traditional techniques.
head
labrum
Osteoarthrtitis and synovitis
Arthroscopy of the hip has limited use in the management of
osteoarthritis and synovitis in cats. The underlying cause of
Figure 25-30 The
osteoarthritis should be identifed and eliminated if possible.
round ligament can
Arthroscopic exploration of the joint can be used to obtain
be evaluated as it
acetabular fossa
 synovial biopsies for histopathology and culture and sensitiv-
courses from the
ity. Loose osteochondral fragments can be removed using
acetabular fossa to
the femoral head
 grasping forceps. Areas of fullthickness cartilage wear can
by applying traction
be treated. A description for treatment of damaged regions
to the leg and
of the articular cartilage is described above, in the section on
round ligament
advancing the tip of
elbow osteoarthritis.
the scope towards
the medial aspect of 
the hip joint.
25.7 Arthroscopy of the stifle
femoralhead
25.7.1 Patient position
The patient is positioned in dorsal recumbency with the stifle
hanging off the end of the table. It is helpful to tilt the table
Pathological lesions are evaluated and treated using hand
slightly with the head up and the stifle down. The cranial
instruments or the motorized shaver through the instrument
aspect of the stifle will be approached. The stifle should
portal.
be unconstrained so that flexion and extension can be
achieved.
25.6.5 Indications for hip arthroscopy
25.7.2 Recommended arthroscope size
Hip arthroscopy is occasionally performed in cats. Indica-
tions for hip arthroscopy may include diagnosis and therapy
This is 1.9, 2.3, 2.4 or 2.7 mm.
25: Feline arthroscopy
297
25.7.3 Portal sites for stifle arthroscopy
joint pouch medial to the insertion of the quadriceps. The 
 cannula is inserted over the obturator and pushed carefully
The portal sites used for feline stifle arthroscopy are similar
into the joint while the stifle is held in extension (Fig. 25-34).
The obturator is removed. The cannula can then be carefully
egress, and instrument portals are typically used. The egress 
maneuvered into the medial joint pouch (Fig. 25-35). The
portal is placed frst (Fig. 25-33). A stab incision is made
scope portal is created next. The arthroscope is inserted
lateral to the insertion of the patellar tendon just proximal
through the previous craniolateral stab incision in the same
to the tibial plateau. The obturator for the matched-egress
direction as was used for the egress obturator (Fig. 25-36).
cannula is inserted into the joint in a distal to proximal and
The instrument portal is made at the same level as the scope
lateral to medial direction. The obturator is directed into the
portal but is medial to the insertion of the patellar tendon. A
 trochlear groove, under the patella, exiting the suprapatellar
small portion of the patellar fat pad may need to be removed
Figure 25-31 The
portals for the stifle
 are shown in Figures
25-31 and 25-32
Egress
The arthroscope
Portal
 portal is lateral to
the patellar tendon 
 and just proximal to 
MOL
the tibial plateau.
Ligament
LCL
 The instrument
Ligament
 portal is medial to
the patellar tendon.
 The egress portal is 
located in the medial
aspect of the
 suprapatellar pouch.
Scope
Instrument
Porial
Portal
obturator is first passed from the arthroscope portal, under the patella,.
 exiting at the medial aspect of the suprapatellar pouch.
Figure 25-32 Portal
positions for stifle
arthroscopy in the 
cat.
Figure 25-34 The egress cannula is inserted into the joint by sliding
the cannula over the obturator.
298
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques 
Figure 25-37 Examination of the
 stifle joint begins in the trochlear
groove with the arthroscope
 positioned as shown.
Figure 25-35 The obturator is removed and the cannula is positioned
in the medial gutter of the joint.
Figure 25-38 The
trochlear groove is
examined for
cartilage wear
patella
below the patella.
trochlear groove
Figure 25-36 The arthroscope is placed into the joint through the
 arthroscope portal.
compartment. Developing a standardized pattern for exami
using hand instruments or a motorized shaver to allow an
nation of the joint will help development of arthroscopic
adequate view of the intercondylar notch, cruciate ligaments,
skills and ensure that all accessible areas of the joint are
articular cartilage, and menisci. An attempt can be made to
examined. An example of a standard stifle joint examination
retract the fat pad distally using a probe or small retractor
would be to visualize the:
 than removed with the shaver.
● Supratrochlear joint pouch
● Trochlear groove (Fig. 25-38)
25.7.4 Surgical anatomy
● Patella (Figs 25-39 and 25-40)
● Lateral joint compartment (Fig. 25-41)
The initial step in stifle arthroscopy should be a thorough
● Articular surface of the femoral condyles (Fig. 25-42)
systematic exploration of the joint. The proximal aspect of
●Medial joint compartment (Fig. 25-43)
the stifle is evaluated frst (Fig. 25-37), followed by the distal
● Cranial cruciate ligament (Figs 25-44 and 25-45)
25: Feline arthroscopy
299
Figure 25-39 The
Figure 25-42 The
 arthroscope is
lateral femoral
P
advanced and the
 condyle (LFC) is
light cable is turned 
evaluated for
to view the
cartilage wear and
underside of the
osteophyte
proximal pole of the
formation near the 
patella (P), trochlear 
LFC
SM
synovial membrane 
groove (TG), fat
(SM) attachment.
within the joint (F),
and the insertion of 
 the quadriceps
TG
tendon (Q).
Figure 25-40 The
arthroscope is
withdrawn slightly.
maintaining the 
 position of the light 
cable to view the
MFC
remaining portion of
SM
the patella (P) and 
trochlear groove
(TG).
TG
Figure 25-43 The tip of the arthroscope is carefully moved into the
medial gutter to evaluate the medial femoral condyle (MFC) and
 ! uaas aa Aeuoiseno  (d) ellaed aul (s) auegua eouss
shifts medially due to tension placed on the soft tissues during
 placement of the egress cannula.
Figure 25-41 The tip of the
arthroscope is carefully moved
into the lateral gutter to evaluate
Figure 25-44 The
 the lateral joint pouch.
tip of the
arthroscope is
carefully moved into
the intercondylar 
notch and the stifle
is slowly flexed to 
vew the cruciate
ligaments and 
menisci.
300
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques 
Figure 25-45 The
Fgure 25-48 The arthroscope is
normal cranial
positioned to view the medial
 cruciate ligament 
meniscus. Complete evaluation of 
(CrCL) and caudal
the medial meniscus requires
CdCL
cruciate ligament 
rotation of the light cable to
(CdCL) are seen
change the position of the
within the
beveled lens of the arthroscope.
 intercondylar notch.
A portion of the fat 
pad may have to be
CrCL
retracted or removed
to evaluate the
lig aments
adequately.
Figure 25-46 The arthroscope is
Figure 25-49
 positioned to view the lateral
Appearance of the
meniscus. Note the position of 
the light cable.
normal medial
meniscus (MM), tibial
plateau (T). and
MFC
medial femoral
condyle (MFC)
MM
Figure 25-50 The
medial meniscus
(MM) seen in this
MFC
view has a small fold 
 due to compression
Figure 25-47
MM
between the medial 
 Appearance of the
femoral condyle
LFC
normal lateral
(MFC) and tibial
meniscus (LM), tibial
plateau (T) as the
plateau (T). and
 stifle is flexed. This is
lateral femoral
a normal meniscus 
condyle (LFC).
and should not be
mistaken for a tear.
LM
The joint is explored by changing the feld of view of the
arthroscope using a combination of techniques. Actual move-
ment of the scope should be minimized to avoid inadvertent
withdrawal of the scope frorm the joint. The field of view can
● Caudal cruciate ligament
be changed in three ways:
● Lateral meniscus (Figs 25-46 and 25-47)
● Medial meniscus (Figs 25-48-25-50)
1. by advancing or withdrawing the tip of the arthroscope
●Articular surface of the tibial plateau
slightly
25: Feline arthroscopy
301
 2. by leaning the arthroscope proximally, distally, cranially,
Figure 25-51 A
and caudally
smmall osteophyte (O)
P
3. by rotating the light cable to change the orientation of the
can be seen at the
beveled lens.
junction of the
medial femoral
Pathological lesions are evaluated and treated using hand
condyle (MFC) and
synovial membrane 
instruments or the motorized shaver through the instrument
MFC
(SM) in this cat with
portal. The cruciate ligament debris is removed to allow a
a torn cranial
better view of the menisci. The lateral meniscus is evaluated
cruciate ligament.
by applying a mild varus pressure to the joint while simulta-
Patella (P)
neously rotating the stifle internally. The medial meniscus is
evaluated by applying a mild valgus pressure to the joint
SM
while simultaneously rotating the stifle externally.
25.7.5 Indications for stifle arthroscopy
Figure 25-52 The
The stifle is the most common joint in the cat evaluated
patella (P) is
arthroscopically. Conditions that may benefit from arthros-
positioned medial to
copy include cruciate ligament disease, multiligamentous
P
the medial trochlear
ridge (MTR) in this
instability, osteochondrosis, meniscal tears, and meniscal
TG
feline patient with
 mineralization. Minimally invasive synovial biopsy may also
medial patellar
be performed.
luxation. Note the
shallow trochlear
MTR
groove (TG) and the
Cranial cruciate ligament disease
focal area of 
Injury to the cranial cruciate ligament in cats occurs com-
cartilage wear at the
monly. Treatment options include conservative management
proximal extent of
 the MTR.
and surgical management. Most orthopedic surgeons recom-
mend surgical management as the best and most predictable
option. Arthrotomy and extracapsular stabilization of the
stifle have traditionally been used in surgical managerment.
Figure 25-53 This
 Arthroscopic evaluation of the stifle offers advantages com-
cat has a tear of the
pared to arthrotomy. Arthroscopic evaluation of the stifle
cranial cruciate
 offers a minimally invasive method of evaluating all regions
ligament (CrCL). The
caudal cruciate
of the stifle under magnification and in a fluid medium. This
CdCL
ligament (CdCL) is
allows more critical evaluation of the condition of the articu-
visible behind the
lar cartilage, synovial membrane, cranial and caudal cruciate
torn fibers of the
ligaments, and medial and lateral menisci. Documentation of
CrCL.
the condition of the joint is important and easily performed
at the time of arthroscopy. Examination of the cranial cruci-
ate ligament and menisci can be accomplished and a diagno-
sis made prior to making a more invasive arthrotomy. This
CrCL
becomes particularly important for confrmation of partial
tears of the cranial cruciate ligament and meniscal tears. The
degree of cartilage damage associated with osteoarthritis can
also be assessed and this may help the surgeon plan a long-
lear groove. Patellar position and integrity of the subpatellar
term therapeutic regime following surgery (Fig. 25-51).
articular cartilage are evaluated (Fig. 25-52). The distal aspect
The proximal aspect of the joint is evaluated frst. The
of the joint is assessed after retraction or removal of a small
degree of synovitis and presence of osteophytes are assessed
 portion of the infrapatellar fat pad. The intercondylar notch
by positioning the arthroscope in the medial and lateral
is best examined with the stifle positioned in flexion.
gutters of the joint. The condition of the articular cartilage
 The cranial cruciate ligament should be assessed for changes
in the trochlear groove and trochlear ridges can be assessed
 in vascularity, tautness, and fiber damage (Fig. 25-53). Com-
- a um posod adossoe a jo di an 
plete tears of the ligament may be characterized by the typical
302
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques 
Figure 25-54 The
Figure 25-57 A
arthroscope is
partial tear of the
CaCL
advanced towards
cranial cruciate
the cranial cruciate
MFC
ligament (CrCL) is
ligament (CrCL) to
seen in this feline
evaluate the torn 
patient. The torn
fibers. Caudal
fibers (TF) are at the
cruciate ligament
insertion of the
(C dCL).
TF
 craniomedial band of 
CrCL
CrCL
the CrCL on the tibia
near the medial
femoral condyle
(MFC).
Figure 25-58 Radial
Figure 25-55 A
tears (MT) of the
 complete tear of the
cranial cruciate 
MFC
medial meniscus
(MM) are present in 
ligament (CrCL) is 
 this feline patient 
seen in this feline 
MT
with a partial tear
patient.
of the cranial
 cruciate ligament.
 Medial femoral 
CrCL
condyle (MFC).
MM
tibial platean (T)
Figure 25-56 A
Figure 25-59 A
 partial tear of the
motorized shaver is
cranial cruciate
used to remove torn
CdCL
ligament (CrCL) is
fibers of the cranial
CrCL
seen in this feline 
cruciate ligament 
MFC
 patient. The torn
(CrCL).
fibers (TF) are seen
CrCL
in the craniomedial
band of the CrCL 
adjacent to an
osteophyte (O) off 
the medial femoral
TF
condyle (MFC) in the
intercondylar notch.
Caudal cruciate
ligament (CdCL).
 appearance of torn collagen fibers and hematoma formation
s    s n  
if the tear is acute (Figs 25-54-25-56). Partial tears of the
Although the fbers are not completely disrupted, the liga-
ligament may be easily observed or may be apparent only
 ment is non-functionaland stabilization is indicated. Damaged
after careful probing of the ligament (Figs 25-57-25-59).
fbers of the cranial cruciate ligament are excised using hand
Occasionally partial tears are characterized by fber stretch-
instruments or a motorized shaver (Figs 25-60 and 25-61).
 ing and not total fber disruption. The ligament should be
 The radiofrequency probe can be used to remove small por-
25: Feline arthroscopy
Figure 25-60 A
Figure 25-62 A
motorized shaver is
radial tear (MT) of
used to remove
the lateral meniscus 
hyperplastic synovial 
LFC
(LM) is seen in this 
tissue (S) adjacent to
feline patient. Lateral
the femoral condyle 
femoral condyle 
(F).
(LFC), tibial plateau
MT
(T).
LM
Figure 25-61 A
 bucket-handle tear
 of the medial
Figure 25-63 Small
meniscus (MM) is
radial meniscal tears
MFC
seen between the
can be removed 
medial femoral
by partial 
condyle (MFL) and
LFC
the tibial plateau (T).
meniscectomy using
MM
a radiofrequency
probe (RF). Lateral
femoral condyle 
(LFC), tibial plateau
(T), meniscus (LM).
RF
LM
tions of torn fibers in areas that cannot be accessed with the
shaver or hand instruments.
The caudal cruciate ligament should be assessed in a similar
Figure 25-64
 manner to the cranial ligament. Perhaps the greatest advan-
Appearance of the 
lateral meniscus (LM)
tage of arthroscopic evaluation of the stifle is assessment of
LFC
following partial 
 the menisci. The magnification provided by the arthroscope
meniscectomy.
allows a better view of tears that might otherwise be missed
Lateral femoral
during arthrotomy. The menisci should be carefully probed
condyle (LFC), tibial
for tears. Bucket-handle tears of the posterior horn of the
plateau (T).
 medial meniscus are the most common tears found. Radial
tears are also commonly seen and may affect the medial or
lateral menisci (Fig. 25-62-25-65).
Partial meniscectomy is performed, removing only the
LM
damaged portion of the meniscus. Partial meniscectomy can
be performed arthroscopically using hand instruments, a
 motorized shaver or a radiofrequency probe. This procedure
can be challenging and a miniarthrotomy can be used if
needed to complete the procedure. Release of the meniscal
Multiple ligamentous instability
tibialigament (meniscal release) can be performed arthroscop-
Multiple injuries are common stifle injuries in the cat.
ically in the cat if desired as a means of preventing meniscal
Arthroscopic evaluation of these patients commonly reveals
tears in the future. Stabilization of the stifle is generally
injuries to the cranial cruciate ligament, caudal cruciate liga-
achieved using an exracapsular technique through a mini-
 ment, collateral ligaments, and medial and lateral menisci.
mally invasive approach to the lateral aspect of the stifle.
The arthroscope is useful in assessing the extent of damage
304
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques 
Figure 25-65
Figure 25-67 A
Appearance of a
 punch forcep is used
large bucket-handle 
to cut the attached 
MFC
tear of the medial
portion of the torn 
meniscus (MM)
medial meniscus
Medial femoral
(MM), allowing
condyle (MFC)
removal of the
damaged meniscal 
tissue.
MM
MM
Figure 25-68 Small
Figure 25-66 The
remnants of the torn
torn portion of the
medial meniscus
medial meniscus
MFC
(MM) can be
(MM) is pulled
MFC
removed with a
forward using a
radiofrequency
probe in preparation
 probe. Medial 
of partial 
meniscectomy.
femoral condyle
Medial femoral
(MFC).
MM
condyle (MFC).
MM
Figure 25-69
and assisting in surgical treatment. An arthrotomy is usually
Appearance of the
needed, but the scope can be used to magnify the areas of
MFC
cranial aspect of the
medial meniscus
interest and confrm adequate treatment. The stifle can be
(MM) following
stabilized using a transarticular pin, transarticular external
 partial meniscectomy.
fxator, or reconstruction of the torn ligaments. The arthro-
Medial femoral
scope can be used to help guide the surgeon in proper place-
condyle (MFC), tibial
ment of a transarticular pin.
MM
plateau (T).
Medial meniscal tear
Tears of the medial meniscus are most commonly seen in cats
  ro r  p   s 
 ment instability. Isolated medial meniscal tears are very rare.
Occasionally, meniscal tears occur a period of time after
conservative or surgical treatment of a torn cranial cruciate
ligament. The posterior horn of the medial meniscus is the
 using a grasper or probe (Fig. 25-67). The cranial and caudal
 portion of the meniscus that is at greatest risk of tearing.
attachments of the torn portion of the meniscus ("the bucket-
 Bucket-handle tears are commonly seen in this region (Fig.
handle") are transected using a biting punch forcep (Fig.
25-66). Arthroscopic partial meniscectomy is achieved by
25-68), a meniscal knife, or a radiofrequency probe (Fig.
placing tension on the damaged portion of the meniscus
25-69). The grasper and cutting device can be placed though
25: Feline arthroscopy
305
Figure 25-70
Figure 25-73
 Appearance of the
Mineralization
MFC
caudal aspect of the
(arrow) of the
medial meniscus 
meniscus, torn
(MM) following
cruciate ligament
partial
fibers, and synovial 
 meniscectomy.
membrane
MM
Medial femoral
commonly occur
condyle (MFC), tibial
caudal to the patellar
 plateau (T).
tendon in feline
T
patients. Many 
patients with this
condition have a
chronic tear of the
 cranial cruciate
lig ament.
Figure 25-71 The
medial meniscus
MFC
(MM) should be
 probed to avoid
missing a tear that
might not be seen 
upon initial
 inspection. Medial
Meniscal mineralization
femoral condyle 
Meniscal mineralization is seen more commonly in cats than
MM
(MFC), tibial plateau
dogs. Mineralization may be seen in the cranial and caudal
(T).
 aspect of the stifle. Mineralization is most commonly found
in the region of the medial meniscus near the insertion of the
cranial cruciate ligament (Fig. 25-73). It appears that most
cats having meniscal mineralization have some degree of
cranial cruciate ligament disease. It is unclear whether lame-
 ness in affected feline patients is due primarily to the mineral-
ized tissue, a tear of the cranial cruciate ligament, or both.
Figure 25-72
The cranial cruciate ligament commonly has a complete or
Fibrillation of the 
 partial tear. Mineralization is found not only in the meniscus,
MFC
cartilage on the tibial
but it may also be found in the synovium, infrapatellar fat
 plateau (T) is seen in
this feline patient
pad, and insertion of the cranial cruciate ligament. The min-
with a cranial
eralized tissue can be quite large, leading to abrasion of the
 cruciate ligament
adjacent articular cartilage of the femoral condyle. The min-
tear. Medial femoral
eralized tissue may also include variable amounts of the inter-
condyle (MFC).
meniscal ligament and lateral meniscus. Arthroscopic
examination of the intercondylar notch is usually difficult
until the mineralized tissue is removed (Figs 25-74-25-78).
The tissue can be removed using a motorized shaver or hand
instruments. A miniarthrotomy may be needed to view the
mineralized tissue better and facilitate excision. Ligament
 the same instrument portal; the portal may need to be enlarged
 reconstruction and treatment of meniscal injury may also be
to accommodate both instruments. Alternatively, a second
needed following removal of the mineralized tissue. Relief of
instrument portal can be made adjacent to the frst instru-
clinical signs is generally seen following treatment. Free-float-
ment portal. The damaged portion of the meniscus is removed
 ing osteochondral fragments are occasionally seen in the stifle
(Figs 25-70 and 25-71). The surgeon should always probe
of the cat. The source of the fragments may be associated
the remaining portion of the meniscus to be sure that a
with osteochondrosis, osteophytosis, or dystrophic mineral-
second or third tear is not present (Fig. 25-72).
ization (Figs 25-79 and 25-80).
306
Part 6: Orthopedic materials, instruments, implants, and techniques
Figure 25-77
Meniscal
mineralization (M) is
difficult to evaluate
arthroscopically due
to hyperplastic
synovium and the 
cranial location of 
the lesion. Femur (F).
Figure 25-78
Figure 25-74 Gross appearance of a mineralized body in the stifle joint
Appearance of
excised mineralized
of a cat.
tissue as viewed
through the
arthroscope.
Figure 25-75 The mineralized body is grasped and resected.
seen in the stifle of the cat. The source of the fragments may be
associated with osteochondrosis, osteophytosis, or dystrophic
miner alization.
Figure 25-80
Free-floating
osteochondral
fragments (F) are
F
usually easily
removed with a
grasper.
Figure 25-76 Appearance following removal of a mineralized body.
Note the intimate association with the cranial horn of the medial 
meniscus and insertion of the cranial cruciate ligament.
25: Feline arthroscopy
307
References and further reading
3. Ridge PA. Feline shoulder arthroscopy: a cadaveric study.
In: Scientific proceedings of the British Small Animal Veterinary
1. Beale BS, Hulse DA, Schutz KS, Whitney WO. Small animal
Association 49th annual congress 2006, Birmingham, UK,
arthroscopy. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003.
p.17.
2. Chamness CJ. Endoscopic instrumentation. In: Tams TR (ed.)
4. Staiger BA, Beale BS. Use of arthroscopy for debridement of the
Small animal endoscopy, 2nd edn. St. Louis: Mosby; 2001;
elbow joint in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005;226:401-403.
pp.1-16.
Part 7
Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
This part of the book is designed to deliver easily accessible
 information for the operating room or during consultations.
It is organized according to the anatomic location of the
orthopedic condition and injury. Surgical techniques, that
have worked well on feline patients in our hands, and that
are based on referenced literature and the knowledge and
philosophy described in the previous parts of the book, have
been chosen. Surgically relevant anatomy, diagnostic aids, an
overview of treatment options, specifc surgical techniques,
and postoperative treatment and prognosis are covered for
       
only described in detail when anatomic differences exist
between dogs and cats. For all standard approaches we refer
to An Atias of Surgical Approaches to the Bones and Joints
of the Dog and the Cat (1).
311
26
Mandible and maxilla
K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs, S. Grundmann, PM. Montavon
Traumatic mandibular and maxillary fractures are common
of the frontal sinus, and the tooth roots of the upper arcade.
in the feline patient. The incidence of mandibular fractures
For simplicity, these bones are summarized as maxillary
has been described as 16% of all fractures (2). Motor vehicle
 bones in the following text. The infraorbital artery and the
accidents tend to cause severe and multiple head injuries,
maxillary nerve exit the infraorbital foramen of the maxillary
whereas falls from a height are more likely to result in simple
bone, ventral to the orbit.
fractures, such as symphyseal separations or a traumatic split
 The feline temporomandibular joint is a very stable hinge
palate. Traumatic luxation of the temporomandibular joint
joint due to close congruity between the mandibular fossa of
is also common in cats. The main goal of treatment for man-
 the temporal bone and the condylar process of the mandible
dibular and maxillary trauma is restoration of dental occlu-
(3). Cats have a large retroarticular process caudally, and also
sion and function of the temporomandibular joint, essential
a large bony process rostral to the temporomandibular joint,
for feeding and grooming. Cats with mandibular and
contributing to joint stability (3). The temporomandibular
maxillary fractures often have suffered concurrent critical
joint contains a fbrocartilaginous meniscus.
injuries, such as brain trauma, shock, and injuries to the
upper or lower airways. These conditions must be diagnosed
26.2 Diagnosis and general
and treated prior to addressing the bony lesions. Initial sta-
considerations
bilization, general care, anesthesia, postoperative care, and
nutritional support are as important, or more so, than the
Nearly 70% of cats with fractures of the mandible and
actual fracture repair in these patients (Chapters 11, 12, 17,
Jesu aunsu peau al jo sanu paneiosse aaeu exu
and 20).
trauma resulting in epistaxis, brain trauma, and ocular inju-
ries (4). Brain trauma occurred in 15% of the cats in this
26.1 Surgical anatomy
survey (4). Repeated neurological examinations should there-
fore be conducted to detect for evidence of brain trauma, and
 The mandible consists of the mandibular body and the man-
instigate appropriate treatment if necessary. Epistaxis associ-
 dibular ramus. The fbrocartilaginous symphysis joins the
 ated with head trauma can be severe enough to cause anemia
right and left halves of the mandible. The mandibular body
(4), and changes in packed cell volume should be monitored
hosts the roots of the teeth of the lower arcade, and the
 prior to anesthesia. Cats with head trauma should be placed
 mandibular canal, containing the mandibular alveolar artery
01 anp paneduri aq Keu auqiearq asnesaq aaes uaakxo ue u
and the inferior mandibular nerve. Knowledge of the topo-
occlusion of the nasal passages and sublingual and pharyn-
 graphical anatomy helps avoid iatrogenic damage from incor-
 geal swelling. Additionally, oxygen supplementation is helpful
rect implant placement. The mandibular ramus has three 
in preventing cerebral hypoxemia in patients with brain
bony prominences: the angular process, the condylar process
 trauma. Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated because many of
of the temporomandibular joint, and the large coronoid
 the fractures are open and oral surgery cannot be performed
process dorsally. The masseteric fossa of the mandibular
 under aseptic conditions.
ramus is the insertion site of the thick masseter muscle. The
Mandibular and maxillary fractures are diagnosed by
bone is very thin in this region, and implants for repair of
clinical examination of the oral cavity. A thorough palpation
fractures of the mandibular ramus must be placed near the
is often only possible once the cat is sedated or under general
thicker coronoid crest rostrally, and along the caudoventral
anesthesia. Separation of the mandibular symphysis (Fig.
border to achieve sufficient bone purchase.
 26-1) and fractures of the mandibular body are easily detected
The facial and palatine regions are shorter in cats than in
and palpable. Lesions of the caudal part of the mandibular
other species. This is even more pronounced in brachyce-
body, the ramus of the mandibular body, and the temporo-
phalic breeds with disturbed endochondral ossification. The
 mandibular joint are not as obvious due to the overlying
incisive, nasal, maxillar, palatine, and zygomatic bones are
 muscle mass, but these should be suspected if dental maloc-
 raddn aun uog pue 'suoensie adh-anns se panauuon
 clusion is present and no other injuries are readily visible. An
 part of the face, containing the nasal cavity, the cranial part
Wim Aeroenu suasaid uao si euoieuaq ro punom uado
312
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Figure 26-1  Cat
with a symphyseal
separation.
Figure 26-2  Cat with a traumatic split palate after a fall from a
height. The wide gap between the oral and nasal cavities is unlikely to
heal without surgical intervention in this case.
It is common that the fracture line runs through the alveo-
lus of a tooth. However, the affected tooth should only be
fractures of the mandibular ramus that extend through the
removed if luxated or loose. Stable teeth are left in place
coronoid crest.
because they contribute to fracture stability.
 The hard palate should be inspected for the presence of a
 Restoration of dental occlusion is the most important goal
split and, if present, stability and width of the fracture
with osteosynthesis of mandibular and maxillary fractures.
assessed (Fig. 26-2). Significant instability of the two halves
The presence of an endotracheal tube does not allow com-
indicates concurrent fractures of the facial bones. Facial frac-
plete closure of the mouth, which is necessary to evaluate
tures cause local swelling, exophthalmos, and scleral bleed-
 dental occlusion adequately during surgery. Other intubation
ing, epistaxis, and facial asymmetry. They are often
methods must therefore be used in some cases to be able to
compression fractures with inherent stability.
close the mouth completely during surgery, especially for the
Ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint is a rare compli-
repair of multiple or comminuted fractures. Intubation
cation of trauma or neoplasia, and results in inability to open
through a pharyngotomy incision is a good solution, and is
the mouth. Another disease interfering with mastication is the
described in Figure 26-3. Alternatively, tracheal intubation
locking-jaw syndrome, which has been reported in the Persian
can be used.
cat (5). Oral neoplasia is relatively common in cats and is
 It is also essential when planning the surgery that consid-
summarized in Chapter 8. The reader is referred to oncologi-
eration is made as to how the cat will eat postoperatively.
cal textbooks for in-depth information on oral neoplasia.
Placement of a feeding tube can be done prior to fracture
 Radiographs are obtained under general anesthesia once
fixation (Chapter 20).
the patient has been adequately stabilized. Intubation is
usually necessary because of upper-airway obstruction sec-
26.3 Stabilization techniques
ondary to retropharyngeal and laryngeal swelling. Dorsoven-
tral and laterolateral radiographs of the head, oblique
Mandibular fractures can be classifed into separations of
radiographs of the mandibular body and temporomandibular
the mandibular symphysis, fractures of the mandibular
joints, and intraoral radiographs of the rostral mandible or
body, and fractures of the mandibular ramus. Fractures
 maxilla need to be obtained depending on the clinical fracture
 of the maxilla include fractures of the hard palate and the
localization. The temporomandibular joints are best assessed
facial bones, or a combination of the two. Dental occlusion
on dorsoventral radiographs and on 20° lateral oblique views
and fracture stability are the two most important factors to
(6). Superimposition of bony structures makes radiographic
consider when deciding on the best choice of treatment. Con-
diagnosis of caudal mandibular and maxillary fractures dif-
servative treatment can be appropriate for stable fractures
fcult. A computed tomography scan displays fractures more
with correct occlusion. Mandibular and maxillary fractures
accurately in these cases.
causing malocclusion and unstable fractures must be reduced
26: Mandible and maxilla
313
Figure 26-4  The
tension side of the
mandibular body
is located at its 
alveolar border the
compression side at 
the ventral border.
interdental wiring, with the wires passing through predrilled
holes in between the tooth roots, is sometimes used for bilat-
eral fractures of the rostral mandible or maxilla
26.3.2 Interfragmentary wiring
inserted orally. A pharyngeal incision was then performed in the
piriform fossa, caudal to the mandibular ramus. The oral tube end was
Interfragmentary wires can be applied to stabilize simple
redirected through the pharyngeal incision with the help of mosquito
 fractures of the mandibular body and ramus. Interfragmen-
forceps. The connecting device of the tube was temporarily removed
tary wires have to be positioned perpendicular to the fracture
during redirection. The endotracheal tube was secured to the skin with
line to prevent shearing of the fragments while tightening the
sutures
wire. The holes to pass the wire through are located about
5 mm away from the fracture line, and they are drilled in a
oblique direction towards the fracture to facilitate insertion
and surgically stabilized. Unstable fractures cause pain
of the wire medially (Fig. 26-5). A piece of 0.5-0.6-mm
due to motion of fracture fragments, which precludes food
 orthopedic wire is usually used. Interfragmentary wires are
uptake and carries the risk of non-union, or malunion
 most stable if positioned at the tension side of a fracture,
development.
which is the alveolar border of the mandible. The tooth roots
 In general, internal fracture repair is preferable to indirect
 should be avoided.
fracture stabilization with interarcuate immobilization tech-
niques because it allows a faster return to normal food uptake
26.3.3 Plating
and grooming. Interarcuate immobilization can be the treat-
ment of choice for more complicated fractures, and fractures
Reconstruction plates are useful for the mandible and maxilla
involving the caudal aspects of the jaw that are not amenable
because they are easy to contour in all directions. The flat
to primary repair. Internal fxation of mandibular and maxil-
bones of the mandible and maxilla offer little bone purchase
lary fractures requires small implants and a precise surgical
for screws, especially in areas with thin cortices. Miniaturized
technique to achieve perfect reduction and sufficient implant 
 Screws with a small-thread pitch provide better screw-holding
stability in the small and flat bones. Orthopedic wire, mini-
 power in the thin bone compared to standard screws. The
plates, internal fixators, and external skeletal fxators can be 
used. The tension side of the mandibular body is located 
 struction plates from human maxillofacial and hand implant
orally at the alveolar border of the mandibular body (Fig.
se rn  e aie as (t rd) s
26-4), so implants should be positioned orally from a biome-
with very thin bone, such as the mandibular ramus, and the
chanical point of view (4, 7). This can be diffcult to achieve
facial bones of the maxilla. These small plates are too weak
because damage of the tooth roots and the mandibular canal
 to withstand bending and compression forces, and should
must be avoided.
always be applied to the tension side of a fracture. The small
A selection of treatment options for the different types of
screws can be placed in between the teeth or the tooth roots,
fracture is summarized in Table 26-1.
allowing the plate to be positioned at the alveolar border of
the mandible.
26.3.1 Interdental wiring
 Stronger plates, such as the 1.5/2.0-mm veterinary cuttable
plate, the 2.0-mm dynamic compression plate, or a 2.0-mm
True interdental wiring is not possible in the cat, because the
 locking plate (Chapter 24) are required to repair comminuted
small size and shape of the teeth prevent stable anchorage of
 fractures. These larger plates have to be applied on the bio-
the wire around the base of the teeth. A modification of
 mechanically less ideal ventral border of the mandibular
314
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
 Localization of lesion
Type of lesion
Treatment options
 Mandibular symphysis
Separation
Cerclage wire
Hemicerclage wire
Screw
Mandibular body
Bilateral rostral fracture
Interdental wiring
External skeletal fxation
Simple fracture
 Interfragmentary wiring
Plates
Internal fixator
Comminuted fracture
Plates
 Internal fixator
External skeletal fxation
Interarcuate immobilization
Mandibular ramus
Simple fracture
Plates
 Interfragmentary wiring
Conservative treatment
Comminuted fracture
Plates
Interarcuate immobilization
Conservative treatment
Temporomandibular joint
Luxation
Closed reduction and tape muzzle
Fracture/luxation
Closed reduction and rigid interarcuate immobilization
Excisional arthroplasty (for chronic cases)
Maxilla
Split palate
Conservative treatment for small and stable fractures
 Skewer pin for large and unstable fractures
Combination of intraoral and
Skewer pin
facial fracture
Plates
Facial compression fracture
Conservative treatment
Plates
 Mandibular-maxillary realignment
may have to be combined in the presence of more than one injury
body, because 2.0-mm screws are too large to be inserted at
the alveolar border without causing damage to the tooth
roots.
26.3.4 External skeletal fixation
External skeletal fixation can also be used to stabilize man-
dibular body fractures. Main indications are comminuted
unilateral or bilateral mid-body fractures, and grade 3 open
fractures. Smooth or negative-threaded 1.0-1.4-mm transos-
seous pins are used. The pin ends are best connected with an
 external bar made of dental acrylic or polymethyl methacry-
Figure 26-5 Interfragmentary wiring for stabilization of a simple
late, because it can be molded to the shape of the mandible
ano s e u paasui si a aul ane ao enue
direction. Tooth roots are avoided by drilling the holes in between
and avoids using heavy clamps and bars which limit the
them.
choices for pin placement. Pharyngeal intubation is always
26: Mandible and maxilla
315
A
B
C
Figure 26-6  Different techniques for interarcuate immobilization.
(A) Interarcuate wiring is usually performed bilaterally. Tension can be exerted on the mandible in a caudal or cranial direction by inserting the wire
obliquely.
(B) Transarticular external skeletal fixation with elastic bands allows restricted jaw motion. Care is taken to prevent the elastic bands rubbing on the
skin. A rigid bar and clamps could be used instead of the rubber band
(C) Dental composite fixation of both the left and right canine teeth. This technique is least invasive, but requires specialized equipment.
performed to allow intraoperative closure of the mouth for 
tion of temporomandibular luxation to prevent reluxation.
control of reduction and dental occlusion.
The technique for application of a muzzle is described in
Chapter 22.
26.3.5 Interarcuate immobilization
Interarcuate wiring
Interarcuate immobilization is a practical option for man
dibular fractures that are difficult to repair by internal fixa
 Interarcuate wiring provides more stability than a tape
tion, and to prevent reluxation after closed reduction of a
muzzle, but less than other techniques. A 0.6- or 0.8-mm wire
temporomandibular luxation. Cats with interarcuate immo-
is inserted through predrilled holes in the oral border of the
bilization are only able to lick liquid food, are unable to
 maxilla and mandible, and is tightened just enough for the
groom themselves, and can develop local dermatitis due to
cat to open the mouth a few millimeters (Fig. 26-6). The holes
dribbling of saliva. Frequent cleaning of the lips, cheeks, and
 are usually drilled between the premolar and molar tooth
chin is necessary. Interarcuate immobilization is contraindi-
roots. Interarcuate wiring is performed bilaterally in most
cated in cats with intraoral and pharyngeal sweling and sig-
cases to enhance shearing stability, but the wire is sometimes
nifcant occlusion of the nasal passages, and in the presence
applied to one side only for correction of lateral deviation of
of vomiting. Several methods of interarcuate immobilization
the lower jaw. Instructions to the owners and wire cutters
 can be applied, including tape muzzle, interarcuate wiring.
must be provided to be able to release the fixation immedi-
external skeletal fxation, and composite fixation techniques.
 ately in case of vomiting.
Where possible, the mouth is left slightly open to allow
uptake of liquid food, but many cats with interarcuate immo-
Transarticular external skeletal fixator
bilization require insertion of a feeding tube to assure ade-
A bilateral transarticular external skeletal fixator with elastic
quate nutrition. Depending on the indication, the interarcuate
immobilization devices are removed after 10 days to 4 weeks.
bands, or with clamps and short connecting bars, is another
An Elizabethan collar is usually necessary as cats resent this
method of interarcuate stabilization (8). Kirschner wires are
 placed horizontally across the mandible, just caudal to canine
form of fxation and will make attempts to remove the
teeth, and across the maxilla just dorsal to the hard palate.
implants.
The ends of the Kirschner wires are twisted and connected
to each other with small elastic bands (Fig. 26-6). The twists
Tape muzzles
prevent the elastic bands rubbing against the skin, or slipping
A tape muzzle can only be applied in cats with a long nose.
 off the ends of the pins. As an alternative, external skeletal
It should allow the cat to open the mouth slightly, but the
 fxation clamps and bars can be used instead of elastic bands
tips of the canine teeth must overlap to prevent lateral devia-
 t0 create rigid immobilization. With this technique, the cat
tion of the hemimandible. The muzzle is not stable if the
 benefts from having intact canine teeth as the correct occlu-
canine teeth are broken or absent. The main indication for
sion of the teeth helps maintain both the teeth and fracture
tape muzzles is temporary immobilization after closed reduc-
fragments in correct alignment.
316
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Dental composite fixation
cated, for example to repair oblique or comminuted fractures
or to perform revision surgeries (Fig. 26-9). Cerclage wires
Composite splints can be used to bond maxillary to mandibu-
lar canine teeth in functional occlusion. The technique is less
are removed after 4-6 weeks.
invasive than others, because the fixation connects directly to
the teeth without the need for bone exposure and placement
26.4.3 Fractures of the mandibular body
of internal implants (9, 10). Fixation of both the left and right
Fractures of the mandibular body are usually located just
side is more stable than unilateral fxation. The canine teeth
caudal to the canine teeth, or they involve the mid-body of
are frst cleaned with an ultrasonic scaler. Then the enamel
is acid-etched with 37% phosphoric acid, rinsed, and dried.
the mandible.
 Rostral fractures usually run through the caudal alveolar
A bonding agent is applied and light-cured. The mouth is
canal of the canine teeth, and can be bilateral, resulting in an
fixed in a semiopened position with composite resin, placed
unstable rostral fragment (Fig. 26-10). These fractures are
around the canine teeth in 2-mm thick layers. The layers are
diffcult to stabilize with hemicerclage wires and plates,
s    r s
because the large roots of the canine teeth occupy most of
the rostral aspect of the mandible. A modifed interdental
26.4 Fractures of the mandible
wiring technique or an intraoral splint is best used to treat
these fractures (Box 26-2).
Mandibular symphyseal separation is the most frequent
 Mandibular mid-body fractures are usually bilateral or are
injury, followed by fractures of the mandibular body (4, 11).
 accompanied by a symphyseal separation (4). Both situations
As many as 68% of mandibular fractures are open (11).
 result in instability of the lower jaw and require surgical
Fractures of the mandibular ramus are less frequent, possibly
01 Asea s1 Apoq 1enqiuu a1 "(1-97 ) nuuan
because the vertical ramus is protected by the zygomatic arch
approach, and internal fxation allows early function and
 and overlying masseter muscle.
immediate oral food uptake postoperatively. Several implants,
such as orthopedic wire, miniplates, internal fxators, and
 s i     s s
26.4.1 Approaches to the mandible
lar body fractures.
 Simple and reducible multifragmentary fractures are reated
A ventral approach is preferable for fractures of the mandibu-
- xog) uxy d no m Ar 
lar body since it reduces the risk of contamination from the
Implants are best positioned at the tension side on the alveo-
oral cavity and allows wound drainage. The skin incision for
 lar border of the mandible. The 1.3-mm reconstruction plates
the approach to the rostral part of mandibular body is per-
from the human hand surgery set (Chapter 24) are a good
formed directly over the bone (12). A midline skin incision
 size for this application. They are strong enough for applica-
followed by retraction of the skin edges can be used for
tion on the tension side, and the screws are small enough to
bilateral fracture repair.
fit in between the tooth roots (Fig. 26-12). Alternatively, a
The caudal mandibular body and the mandibular
1.5- or 2.0-mm dynamic compression plate or a 2.0-mm
ramus are also approached via a ventral skin incision cen-
locking plate can be used. Larger plates are positioned on the
tered on the bone (12). Elevation of the digastric muscle is
ventral side of the mandibular body to avoid damage of the
raassur au Xpoq reinqipueut iepneo au qoear on Aressarau
 tooth roots by the larger-diameter screws.
muscle is elevated from its insertion on the masseteric fossa
Comminuted fractures are stabilized with plates and inter
and is retracted dorsolaterally to expose the mandibular
nal or external fixators (Box 26-4). Relatively strong implants,
ramus.
such as a 2.0-mm dynamic compression plate or a 2.0-mm
locking plate, are recommended for comminuted fractures.
Accurate plate contouring is essential to ensure perfect frac-
26.4.2 Symphyseal separation
 ture reduction, thereby preventing postoperative dental mal-
 occlusion. Locking plates have the advantage of improved
a height in most cases (4, 11) (Fig. 26-1). They are treated
stability in soft bone and in cases where fewer than three
surgically to restore stability between the two hemimandibles.
screws can be inserted per fragment. External skeletal fixa-
Application of a cerclage wire is an easy and reliable tech-
tion is often reserved for severely comminuted and open
nique, and is most commonly used (Box 26-1). Other possi-
fractures, but it is also useful for simple and mildly commi-
bilities include insertion of a hemicerclage wire or an
 nuted fractures, particularly if small plating equipment is not
interfragmentary screw (Box 26-1). These techniques provide
 readily available. It has the advantage of not requiring an
better stability against shear forces and are sometimes indi-
 open approach to the fracture. Instead, fracture reduction is
26: Mandible and maxilla
317
 Box 26-1. Stabilization of a mandibular symphyseal separation
A small longitudinal skin incision is made on the chin
ventral aspect of the chin for ease of removal after
ventral to the symphysis.
healing.
Cerclage wire: A 0.6-0.8-mm piece of orthopedic wire
Hemicerclage wire: This technique prevents shearing
 is threaded through a prebent 18-gauge hypodermic needle
and can be used for revision surgeries. A ventral approach
that has been placed from the skin incision along the
to the mandibular symphysis is performed, and the frac-
lateral aspect of the bone to penetrate the oral mucosa just 
ture is reduced. A hole is drilled just caudal to the tooth
caudal to the canine tooth (Fig. 26-7). The needle is then
roots of the canine teeth, perpendicular to the symphysis.
withdrawn and placed in the same fashion to exit just 
 A hemicerclage wire is inserted through the hole and is
caudal to the other mandibular canine tooth. The ortho-
tightened ventrally as described above (Fig. 26-8A).
 pedic wire is directed through the tip of the needle back
Positional screw: A positional screw can be used if frac-
to the ventral chin skin incision (Fig. 26-7). The wire ends
 ture comminution is present, which would prevent stable
of the cerclage are twisted ventrally while reduction is
fxation with wiring techniques. A 1.5- or 2.0-mm posi-
controlled manually. The wire must be tightened suffi-
tional screw is inserted across the rostral mandible, cau-
ciently until no motion can be elicited between the two
dodorsal to the tooth roots of the canine teeth (Fig.
mandibles. The wire twist is left protruding from the 
26-8B).
Figure 26-7  Cerclage wiring for stabilization of mandibular symphyseal separation. A piece of orthopedic wire is inserted from ventrally
paasui 'aipaau papoday e yonout panapan si am aul yiooi auuen aui ot lepnen isni buiia 'aipaau siuapoay suagand e yonou
 on the contralateral side. The wire ends are twisted and cut short.
A
B
(A) Stabilization of symphyseal separation with a hemicerclage wire. Note that the wire is located further caudal to avoid the roots of the
canine teeth.
(B) Insertion of an interfragmentary positional screw for fixation of a symphyseal separation with comminution of the fracture ends.
318
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
A
B
(A) Preoperative radiographs of a cat with symphyseal separation.
A
B
mandible is fractured bilaterally along the caudal alveolar canal of the canine teeth. Modified interdental wiring was used to stabilize the fracture.
There is slight overreduction, but the wire will adjust to the tensile forces present on the alveolar border.
Box 26-2. Modified interdental wiring for bilateral rostral mandibular body fractures
Holes are predrilled in the alveolar border of the mandible
between the teeth with a small Kirschner wire. A piece of
0.4-0.5-mm orthopedic wire is inserted into these holes in
loops. The wire is passed through the loops intraorally.
The loops are tightened individually over the intraoral
wire (Fig. 26-11). Alternatively, a 0.6-mm Kirschner wire
can be used as an intraoral splint, around which the wire
loops are anchored. The oral part of the splint can be
reinforced with dental composite if deemed necessary.
Figure 26-11  Modified interdental wiring of a bilateral rostral
mandibular body fracture. The wire loops are twisted intraorally.
26: Mandible and maxilla
319
A
B
C
D
pue Apog seingipueu huaiu aul jo aunpey aidwis paneidsip e ym jen e jo sudebopen aaie ladoisod (a 's) pue ae ladoaid (a 'v) zh-gz ane
symphyseal separation. The mandibular body fracture was anatomically reduced to restore dental occlusion and stabilized with a six-hole 1.3-mm
reconstruction plate along the alveolar border. The symphysis was stabilized with a cerclage wire.
indirectly
assessed from maintaining normal dental
 implants are positioned along the thicker rostral coronoid
occlusion.
 crest of the mandible, which has the additional advantage of
being the tension side of the bone.
Simple fractures are usually stabilized with one or two
26.4.4 Fractures of the mandibular ramus
 also be treated with miniplates applied along the rostral coro-
Many fractures of the mandibular ramus are minimally dis-
noid crest. The 1.0-mm compact maxillofacial plates or the
placed because of the large muscle masses covering the region.
1.3-mm compact hand plates (Chapter 24) are a suitable size
These fractures can be treated with interarcuate immobiliza-
for the thin bone (Fig. 26-16). An additional plate can be
tion or may require no stabilization at all if normal dental
applied along the ventral mandibular rim if deemed necessary
occlusion is maintained.
for stability.
 Displaced fractures causing malocclusion have to be reduced
As an alternative, slowly absorbable suture material can be
and stabilized with plates or hermicerclage wires (Box 26-5).
used instead of orthopedic wire. This may be used if the
The bone of the masseteric fossa is very thin and does not
fracture is open to the oral cavity, avoiding the risk of infec-
tion around the implants. The suture can then be applied
320
Box 26-3. Stabilization of simple and reducible multifragmentary fractures of the mandibular body
 A ventral approach is performed to the lateral side of the
ventral wire is inserted in a fgure-of-eight fashion incor-
mandibular body. Anatomic fracture reduction is essential
porating the butterfly fragment (Fig. 26-13B). The wires
to restore dental occlusion.
l a qonon suan pioae oi pauiaao nou ae
 Interfragmentary wiring: A 0.6-0.8-mm orthopedic wire
bone.
is inserted on the oral side of the mandible through two
Plating: A 1.3- or 1.5-mm plate is used for tension band
 predrilled holes, around 5 mm away from the fracture line 
 application along the alveolar border of the mandible. The
(Fig. 26-13A). The location of the drill holes is also dic-
screws are inserted between the teeth or in between the
tated by the location of the tooth roots, which should be
tooth roots. At least two and preferably three screws are
avoided. An additional wire can be placed at the aboral
inserted per fragment (Fig. 26-13C). If larger plates are
side of the mandible to enhance neutralization of shear
used, they should be positioned along the ventral border
and rotational forces. In case of a butterfly fracture, the 
of the mandible (Box 26-4).
A
B
c
Figure 26-13 Options for stabilization of reducible mandibular body fractures
(A) Stabilization of a simple fracture with an interfragmentary wire, positioned at the oral tension side. An additional wire inserted at the
aboral border would improve stability.
(B) Interfragmentary wiring technique for butterfly fractures. The ventral figure-of-eight wire incorporates and stabilizes the butterfly
fragment.
(C) Stabilization of a simple mandibular body fracture with a 1.5-mm miniplate. The plate is positioned on the tension side and the screws
are inserted in between teeth and tooth roots.
directly from the oral cavity, provided that fracture stability
26.5 Disorders of the
is judged to be suffcient for only one suture to be placed at
temporomandibular joint
the rostral mandibular angle.
 Interarcuate stabilization is a valid alternative to primary
Disorders of the temporomandibular joint include fractures
fracture repair especially in multifragmentary fractures.
and luxations, which are seen most frequently, and ankylosis
Interarcuate stabilization maintains accurate dental occlusion
of the joint, most commonly occurring as a sequel to trauma.
during the early stages of fracture healing. Techniques for
 Another condition affecting mandibular-maxillary function
interarcuate stabilization are described above and are shown
 is the locking-jaw syndrome.
in Figure 26-6. Both dental bonding and bilateral external
skeletal fixator technique provide suffcient stability of ade-
quate duration. An endotracheal tube is placed via a pharyn-
26.5.1 Fractures and luxations
gostomy incision to enable control of correct dental occlusion
if the external skeletal fixator technique is chosen. Interarcu-
The temporomandibular joint usually luxates in a rostrodor-
ate immobilization is usually required for a time period of
sal direction, but caudal luxations are also observed. Tem-
2-3 weeks if used for fracture stabilization. Mobility can be
poromandibular joint luxations can occur uni- or bilaterally.
 gradually enhanced with the external skeletal fixator tech-
Unilateral luxations result in deviation of the mandible
nique, by exchanging the rigid rod and clamp fixation with
towards one side. Bilateral luxations cause rostral or caudal
elastic bands (Fig. 26-6).
translation of the mandible in relation to the maxilla. Rarely,
26: Mandible and maxilla
321
Box 26-4. Stabilization of comminuted fractures of the mandibular body
Intubation through a pharyngeal incision is required for 
 pared to standard screws. Plate contouring is less critical
 the repair of multiple or comminuted fractures to allow
 for fracture reduction than with conventional plating, but
intraoperative closure of the mouth and control of dental
maintenance of correct dental occlusion is still essential.
occlusion. The mandibular body is approached from
External skeletal fixation: External skeletal fixation is a
ventral for plate osteosynthesis. Closed reduction is per-
 good treatment option for bilateral comminuted and/or
formed when an external skeletal fixator is used.
open fractures. Two to three 1.0-1.4-mm smooth or nega-
Plating: A 1.5/2.0 veterinary cuttable plate or a 2.0-mm
 tive-threaded pins are inserted into the main fragments.
dynamic compression plate is contoured and applied later-
Avoid passing the pins across both hemimandibles unless
ally along the ventral border of the mandibular body. The
correct occlusion is maintained. Additional pins can be
mouth is kept closed during insertion of the screws. At
placed into larger interposed fragments. The ends of the
least two, but ideally three, screws are inserted per main
transosseous pins are bent perpendicular to the skin.
fragment. Interposed free fragments containing teeth are
 Dental acrylic or polymethyl methacrylate is prepared and
correctly aligned and incorporated in the fixation to restore
molded around the pin ends when it has a doughy consis-
dental occlusion (Fig. 26-14A).
tency (Fig. 26-14B). The mouth is kept closed during appli-
Internal fixator: A 2.0-mm locking plate is preferred
cation of the acrylic to control occlusion. Soft tissues are
over a conventional plate in cases with soft bone and
protected with wet sponges to avoid heat damage while
limited room for screw insertion. Insertion of two locking
the acrylic is applied.
A
B
Figure 26-14  Options for repair of comminuted fractures of the mandibular body.
(A) Stabilization of a unilateral comminuted fracture with a 2.0-mm dynamic compression plate applied along the ventral border of the
mandible. A locking plate could have been used instead.
(B) Stabilization of a bilateral comminuted fracture with an acrylic external skeletal fixator
the mouth is kept open in a locked position because of
provides suffcient stability in the absence of fractures, but
impingement between the coronoid process and the zygo-
more stable techniques may be required in the presence of
matic arch (Fig. 26-17). Luxation of the temporomandibular
articular fractures (Fig. 26-19).
joint can be associated with fractures of the bony promi-
The mandibular condyles can also fracture in the absence
nences of the temporal bone, or fractures of the mandibular
 of luxation of the temporomandibular joint. These fractures
condyle. These fractures may be difficult to detect on
are usually only minimally displaced and diffcult to stabilize
radiographs.
with internal implants due to their small size and location
 Temporomandibular joint luxations are treated by closed
(13, 14). Interarcuate immobilization is not required in cases
reduction (Box 26-6). Interarcuate immobilization for 1-2
with normal dental occlusion, but liquid or soft food is given
weeks helps to prevent reluxation and allows fbrous healing
 for approximately 2-3 weeks. Interarcuate immobilization
of the periarticular structures. Techniques for interarcuate
 for approximately 14 days should be provided in cases with
immobilization are described in Figure 26-6. A tape muzzle
deviation of the mandible and poor dental occlusion (Fig.
322
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 26-5. Stabilization of fractures of the mandibular ramus
A ventral approach with partial elevation of the masseter
rostral coronoid crest of the vertical ramus using at least
muscle from its fossa is used for interfragmentary wiring
[wo or three screws per fragment (Fig. 26-15B). This may
and plate osteosynthesis.
be suffcient in simple fractures, but an additional plate
Interfragmentary wiring: Interfragmentary wiring is only
 placed along the ventral margin of the ramus does enhance
indicated for treatment of simple fractures. One 0.5-0.6-
fxation stability. A second plate is always indicated in
mm wire is placed through predrilled holes at the rostral
other than simple fractures.
coronoid crest, and one at the ventral margin of the ramus.
Interarcuate stabilization: Interarcuate stabilization can
The fracture is reduced and the wires are tightened care-
be used to treat simple and comminuted fractures, but is
fully to prevent pull-out (Fig. 26-15A).
mainly indicated for stabilization of fractures not amena-
Plating: Plating can be used for simple and multifrag-
 ble for primary fxation, considering the postoperative
mentary fractures. A 1.0-mm compact maxillofacial plate
morbidity associated with it. See description above and
or a 1.3-mm compact hand plate is positioned along the
 Figure 26-6.
A
B
Figure 26-15 Options for stabilization of fractures of the mandibular ramus.
(A) Stabilization of a simple fracture with two interfragmentary wires.
(B) Stabilization of a butterfly fracture with a miniplate positioned along the rostral coronoid crest as tension band. A second plate, or an
interfragmentary wire, could be placed along the ventral border for additional stability.
26-6). Traction may have to be used while applying the
 devices to restore dental occlusion.
Most cats regain satisfactory function of the temporo-
mandibular joint, although in some patients non-union,
persistent instability, and periarticular fbrosis or mineral-
ization may result in temporomandibular joint ankylosis
(see below).
26.5.2 Ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint
Ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint is a rare chronic
condition causing significant patient morbidity due to diff-
culty or inability to feed and lack of grooming behavior.
Figure 26-16 (A) Preoperative and (B) postoperative radiographs of
True ankylosis involves the temporomandibular joint itself,
the skull of a cat with bilateral mandibular ramus fractures, and a
whereas false ankylosis is caused by periarticular structures.
True ankylosis is more common in cats (15). Temporoman-
with a 1.0 mini maxillofacial plate positioned along the rostral coronoid
dibular joint ankylosis is usually a sequel of trauma, such as
ventral aspect of the fracture on the right side. The mandibular
temporomandibular joint luxations and fractures, or frac-
symphysis was repaired with a cerclage wire.
tures of the zygomatic arch (15-17). It may also occur sec-
26: Mandible and maxilla
323
Box 26-6. Qosed reduction of the temporomandibular joint
Closed reduction of the temporomandibular joint luxation
can be performed with the help of a pencil. The pencil is
interposed between the involved upper and lower molars.
Firm digital compression rostrally causes distraction of the
 temporomandibular joint (Fig. 26-18). The pencil is then
rotated to shift the mandible in a caudal direction for
rostral luxations (Fig. 26-18), or in a rostral direction for
caudal luxations. Additional traction with pointed reduc-
aul jo iaproq jenuaaopneo aul o1 padde sdasroy uon
 mandible may be necessary to achieve reduction. A snap-
ping sensation is usually felt while reducing the joint.
Occlusion, mobility, and stability are tested after reduc-
 tion. Failure to achieve stable reduction often indicates the
 presence of concurrent fractures.
Figure 26-18 Diagram showing reduction of a rostral
temporomandibular joint luxation with the help of a pencil. The
pencil is used to create distraction of the temporomandibular
joint (arrows). The mandible is then shifted caudally by rotating
the pencil around its axis (arrows), while the jaws are still 
compressed rostrally.
Figure 26-17
Cat with bilateral
ondary to infection, tumors, and temporomandibular
temporomandibular
dysplasia (18).
joint luxation. The 
Clinical signs include progressive dificulty with eating,
 mouth is locked in
 limited mobility of the lower jaw, and inability to open the
an open position
because of
mouth. Residual opening of the mouth can be as little as 4--
impingement of the
8 mm (15). Ankylosis can occur uni- or bilaterally. Radio-
 coronoid process and
 graphs or computed tomography scans of the head and the
the zygomatic arch.
temporomandibular joints are obtained to detect fractures
 Additional injuries
included a cleft
and luxations, or callus formation (Fig. 26-20). Oblique 20°
 palate and a
lateral views of the mandible have been recommended as the
symphyseal
best view for looking at the temporomandibular joints in
separ ation.
cats (6).
 Conservative treatment is usually unsuccessful (15), and is
therefore only tried in less severe or early cases. It involves
stretching of the jaws under general anesthesia. Recurrence
 is prevented by manually forcing the jaws open several times
324
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Figure 26-19 (A) Preoperative
R
and (B) postoperative radiographs
of the cat shown in Figure 26-17.
Bilateral rostral luxation of the
temporomandibular joints is seen 
 on preoperative radiographs. Also
note the displacement of the
right coronoid process over the
zygomatic arch, which prevented
closure of the mouth (A). Closed 
reduction and interarcuate
 stabilization with a wire was
 performed. The cleft palate and
 symphyseal separation were also
stabilized.
B
A
C
D
bone formation is seen in the area of the temporomandibular joint on both transverse section (A) and three-dimensional reconstruction (B). Surgery
involved removal of the condylar process of the mandible, the mandibular fossa of the temporal bone, and most of the zygomatic arch (c, D).
a day, and by administration of corticosteroids. However,
 tissue immediately and markedly improves range of motion,
al po Asedoe jeoisixa orapn on aa sien iso
and long-term prognosis is good in most cases (15-17).
temporomandibular joint to treat true ankylosis, or excision
 Surgery is performed bilaterally if necessary. Manual opening
of parts of the zygomatic arch for false ankylosis (Fig. 26-20
 of the jaws several times a day should be instituted postop-
and Box 26-7) (15, 19). Surgical excision of the affected
 eratively to prevent recurrence.
26: Mandible and maxilla
325
Box 26-7. Excisional arthroplasty of the temporomandibular joint
Normal tracheal intubation is difficult or even impossible,
depending on the residual opening of the mouth. Intrave-
nous anesthesia, blind intubation, or intubation through a
tracheotomy incision can be used instead. Performing a
 mandibular symphysiotomy allows opening of the unaf-
fected hemimandible and normal tracheal intubation in
unilateral cases. A symphysiotomy can also help in bilat-
eral cases, because it is easier to evaluate intraoperatively
if all adhesions have been removed when each hemiman-
 dible can be moved independently.
The skin is incised along the ventral border of the zygo-
matic arch, followed by subperiosteal elevation of the mas-
 seter muscle (Fig. 26-21). Branches of the facial nerve and 
the maxillary artery and vein course through that region
and must be preserved. The joint capsule is incised, and
the condylar process and all reactive tissue and new bone
 around are excised with scissors and rongeurs or burs
(Fig. 26-21). Parts of the mandibular ramus, condylar
 process of the mandible, and zygomatic arch may have to
be removed additionally.
Figure 26-21  Excisional arthroplasty of the temporomandibular 
joint. The skin is incised along the ventral border of the zygomatic
arch. Note that branches of the facial nerve course nearby. They
from the ventral border of the zygomatic arch allows access to the
temporomandibular joint. The condylar process is removed with 
rongeurs (dotted line). Additional removal of periarticular fibrosis or
 poe aape o essanau aa Aeu uoeie
26.5.3 Locking-jaw syndrome
often be palpated as a protrusion lateral to the zygomatic
arch. Manual correction can be achieved under sedation by
The open-mouth locking-jaw syndrome is caused by impinge
 further opening of the mouth followed by medial pressure on
ment of the mandibular coronoid process on the zygomatic
 the coronoid process and closure of the mouth.
arch. Locking occurs after opening of the mouth during
 Persian cats are overrepresented in the literature (5, 20, 21),
yawning, grooming, or vocalization, and prevents closure of
 indicating that the brachycephalic formation of the skull is
the mouth. Locking of the jaw causes distress, and affected
 involved in the pathogenesis of locking-jaw syndrome, but
cats often paw at their faces or vocalize. The duration of the
other breeds can also be affected (22). Temporomandibular
locking period may last from a couple of seconds to several
joint dysplasia or laxity and traumatically induced conforma-
days. The malpositioned mandibular coronoid process can
tional changes of the mandible or zygomatic arch are other
326
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
described inciting causes (5). Radiographs or computed
treated conservatively. Surgery is indicated to close any com-
tomography scans can be performed to investigate for an
munication between the oral and nasal cavities, and to restore
 underlying cause.
occlusion if the maxillary teeth are maloccluded.
Surgery usually involves partial resection of the portion of
the zygomatic arch. The mouth is manually locked when the
26.6.1 Approaches to the maxillary bones
cat is anesthetized to facilitate identification of the site of
impingement during surgery. The skin is incised along the
The facial bones are approached by incision of the buccal
ventral border of zygomatic arch, and the masseter muscle is
mucosa lateral to the teeth, and elevating it from the underly-
elevated. The portion of the zygomatic arch that the coronoid
ing bone. A surgical approach is not necessary to repair a
'e  psn  si u a si ssd
traumatic split palate.
Alternatively, the tip of the coronoid process coming in
contact with the zygomatic arch can be ostectomized (22).
26.6.2 Traumatic split palate
Prognosis is good with both techniques if sufficient bone was
Mid-sagittal fractures through the hard palate usually occur
removed.
after falls from a height (Fig. 26-2). The resulting connection
 Symphyseal laxity and overriding of the molar teeth were
between mouth and nose allows water and food to lodge in
considered causative factors in one cat (21). This cat was
successfully treated with mandibular symphysectomy and
the nasal cavity, causing septic rhinitis and potentially aspira
 tion pneumonia. Choice of treatment largely depends on the
symphyseal arthrodesis, which prevented independent move-
ment of the hemimandibles and interference of the lower
size of the defect. Rapid spontaneous healing often occurs if
molars with the upper molars.
the fracture is stable and minimally displaced. Cats with
small defects are treated conservatively, but are re-examined
26.6 Fractures of the maxillary bones
Surgery is indicated if the defect is not closing. Larger defects
and split palate with instability require surgical correction
Fractures of the maxilla can involve the hard palate, the facial
(Box 26-8). Wound dehiscence is a common complication
bones, or a combination of the two. Traumatic split palate
after repair of only the soft tissues, due to tension, impaired
is the most common fracture type. A computed tomography
 blood supply, and mobility. Signifcantly displaced split
scan is superior to standard radiographs to outline maxillary
 palates are therefore best stabilized surgically with a pin or
fractures. Many fractures of the maxillary bones can be
 a skewer pin. The wound edges can be additionally apposed
Box 26-8. Stabilization of a traumatic split palate
The fracture can be reduced by gently applying pointed
bone reduction forceps across the maxilla. Care is taken
 not to cause folding of the hard palate, because this would
result in inward deviation of the upper molars and maloc-
clusion. The torn mucosa can be apposed with simple
qanoue pazqeis st aroen aq ranje sanns paidniau!
this is not necessary if the fracture is adequately reduced.
Skewer pin: A 0.6-0.8-mm Kirschner wire is inserted at
the level of the premolars, from the lateral alveolar border
ventrally across the nasal floor to exit on the contralateral
Figure 26-22  Stabilization of a traumatic split palate with a
side. This may cause temporary nasal bleeding. Both pin
skewer pin and placement of a transoral figure-of-eight wire
ends are bent and cut short to avoid mucosal trauma,
across the pin ends. This type of fixation provides
migration of the pin, and distraction of the fracture. A
intertragmentary compression.
 0.6-mm orthopedic wire is then anchored around the pin
ends in a fgure-of-eight pattern and is tightened on the
buccal mucosal surface (Fig. 26-22). Overtightening of the
wire is avoided. This type of fixation compresses the split
palate.
26: Mandible and maxilla
327
with fne absorbable suture material. Implants are removed
Nutritional support can be provided through nasoesopha-
after approximately 6 weeks.
geal, esophageal, and gastric feeding tubes (Chapter 20).
Nasoesophageal feeding tubes are used if short-term nutri-
tional support is necessary, and if nasal passages are not
26.6.3 Fractures of the incisive, nasal, maxillary.
occluded. Esophageal tubes are the best choice for most cats
and zygomatic bones
with severe facial trauma and need for prolonged artifcial
feeding (Chapter 20).
Fractures of the facial bones are often minimally displaced
Dental occlusion, food uptake, and general health are
compression fractures that cause no malocclusion or instabil-
parameters used for assessment of clinical outcome. Radio-
ity. More commonly, they cause occlusion of the nasal pas-
 graphic evaluation of fracture healing is not usually necessary.
sages. Instability and malocclusion occur if both the hard
 Intraoral implants, such as cerclage wires for fixation of sym-
palate and the facial bones are fractured, resulting in a free
physeal separation, and skewer pin fixation of traumatic split
bone fragment. These unstable fractures are usually treated
 palate are removed after approximately 4-6 weeks.
surgically with the goal of restoring dental occlusion. Another
 Overall, the prognosis is good for mandibular fractures (4,
indication for surgery is to relieve severe nasal compression
11). Cats with multiple mandibular fractures have a higher
caused by impacted facial fractures. Impression fractures of
risk for complications such as malocclusion (11). Dental
the zygomatic arch can cause injuries and compression of the
Surgery, such as shortening of the canine teeth, may be needed
eye globe, which would also be an indication for open reduc-
for chronic cases. Although many mandibular fractures are
tion and surgical stabilization.
open fractures, the incidence of soft-tissue infection or osteo-
The facial bones of cats are very thin and miniaturized
 myelitis has been reported to be low in cats (11).
implants, such as maxillofacial miniplates, are required for
surgical stabilization (Chapter 24). Interfragmentary wiring
is another possibility in simple fractures, but thin wire and
References and further reading
meticulous technique must be used to prevent tearing out of
the bone. The facial bones are reached through a buccal
1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA. An atlas of surgical approaches to
approach.
the bones and joints of the dog and the cat, 4th edn. Philadel-
A useful alternative option in some cases to restore dental
phia: WB Saunders; 2004.
2. Hill FWG. A survey of bone fractures in the cat. J Small Anim
occlusion is to realign the mandible to match the maxillary
Pract 1977;18:457-463.
malalignment. This can be done by malaligning a concurrent
3. Caporn TM. Traumatic temporomandibular joint luxation.
mandibular symphyseal separation or by performing an oste-
Comparative anatomy of the temporomandibular joint. Vet
auuu au uan on sishudus renqpuu an jo Auon
Comp Orthop Traumatol 1995;8:58-60.
4. Battier B, Montavon PM. A retrospective clinical study of the
with the maxillary malalignment (23).
fractures and luxations of the mandible in the cat. Schweiz Arch
Tierheilkunde 1989;131:77-80.
 5. Lantz GC. Intermittent open-mouth locking of the temporo-
26.7 Postoperative treatment
mandibular joint in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987;190:
and prognosis
1574.
6. Ticer JW, Spencer CP. Injury of the feline temporomandibular
joint radiographic signs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1978;19:
Nutritional support is of particular concern in the postopera-
146-156.
tive treatment of cats with mandibular and maxillary frac-
7. Piermattei DL, Flo GL. Fractures and luxations of the mandible
tures and luxations. Cats tend to start eating surprisingly
and maxilla. In: Piermattei DL, Flo GL (eds) Small animal
early and well after stable internal fixation of simple man-
orthopedics and fracture repair. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;
dibular fractures, often requiring no special nutrition besides
1997: pp. 659-675.
8. Baines SJ, Langley-Hobbs S. Horner's syndrome associated with
avoidance of dry food.
a mandibular symphyseal fracture and bilateral temporoman-
Cats with multiple mandibular and maxillary fractures,
dibular luxation. J Small Anim Pract 2001;42:607-610.
concurrent brain trauma, occlusion of the nasal passages, and
 9. Bennett JW, et al. Dental composite for the fixation of mandibu-
cats with interarcuate immobilization frequently need assis-
lar fractures and luxations in 11 cats and 6 dogs. Vet Surg 1994;
23:190-194.
tance in postoperative feeding. Although interarcuate stabili-
10. Legendre L. Maxillofacial fracture repair. Vet Clin North Am
zation should allow uptake of liquid foods, it usually takes
Small Anim Pract 2005;35:985-1008.
several days until the patients have adapted to the situation
11. Umphlet RC, Johnson AL. Mandibular fractures in the cat. A
and start feeding on their own. Many cats with facial trauma
retrospective study. Vet Surg 1988;17:333-337.
have occluded nasal passages. These patients may not eat
12. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA. The head. In: Piermattei DL,
Johnson KA (eds) Surgical approaches to the bones and joints
because the ability to smell is an important factor for food
of the dog and cat, 4th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2004:
uptake in cats (24).
pp. 33-45.
328
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
13. Salisbury SK, Cantwell HD. Conservative management of frac-
20. Oakes MG, et al. Intermittent open mouth locking in a Persian
tures of the mandibular condyloid process in three cats and one
cat. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1990;3:97-99.
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989;194:85-87.
 21. Reiter AM. Symphysiotomy, symphysiectomy, and interman-
14. Lantz GC. Surgical correction of unusual temporomandibular
dibular arthrodesis in a cat with open-mouth jaw locking - case
joint conditions. Compend Continuing Educ
：1991;13:
report and literature review. J Vet Dent 2004;21:147-158.
1570-1583.
22. Hazewinkel HAW, et al. Mandibular coronoid process displace-
15. Meomartino L, et al. Temporomandibular ankylosis in the cat:
ment: signs, causes, treatment. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
a review of seven cases. J Small Anim Pract 1999;40:7-10.
1993;6:29-35.
16. Sullivan M. Temporomandibular ankylosis in the cat. J Small
23. Buchet M, Boudrieau RJ. Correction of malocclusion secondary to
Anim Pract 1989;30:401-405.
maxillary impaction fractures using a mandibular symphyseal
17. Okumura M, et al. Surgical correction of temporomandibular
realignment in eight cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1999;35:68-76.
joint ankylosis in two cats. Aust Vet J 1999;77:24-27.
24. Zaghini G, Biagi G. Nutritional pecularities and diet palatability
18. Eisner ER. Bilateral mandibular condylectomy in a cat. J Vet
in the cat. Vet Res Commun 2005;29:39-44.
Dent 1995;12:23-26.
19. Bennett D, Campbell JR. Mechanical interference with lower
jaw movement as a complication of skull fractures. J Small Anim
Pract 1976;17:747-751.
329
27
Scapula
K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs, PM. Montavon
The scapula is a mobile bone, protected by an extensive
Their main function is to support the trunk against gravity
muscle mass. Fractures of the scapula are therefore rarely
when the cat is weight-bearing. The superficial muscle group
encountered. When they do occur they may be after motor
 includes the rapezius, latissimus, and superfcial pectoral
vehicle accidents, falls from a height, or dog bites. Animals
 muscles. These are more important for mobility.
with scapular fractures will have suffered concurrent thoracic
trauma due to the proximity of the scapula to the thoracic
27.2 Stabilization techniques
wall (1). Cats with spinal fractures and luxations had a rela-
"(z) Apnis auo ui sainen rendess jo auiu qu Aia
Scapular fractures can involve the thin scapular body, the
Cats with scapular fractures may also have sustained injuries
scapular spine and its distal processes, the scapular neck, and
of the brachial plexus or the subscapular nerve. Avulsion of
the glenoid cavity of the shoulder joint. Many scapular body
the scapula, where the medial muscular attachment to the
fractures can be treated conservatively, but fractures of the
body wall is disrupted, is another injury occasionally seen.
scapular neck and glenoid cavity must be stabilized surgi-
The disconnection between the scapula and the body wall
cally. This is difficult to achieve due to the extensive surgical
then causes the scapula to dislocate dorsally during
approaches necessary for adequate exposure, and the small
weight-bearing.
fragment sizes. Small T- or L-plates are most commonly used.
o   p s rs n  
 is provided in Table 27-1.
27.1 Surgical anatomy
 The scapula consists of the scapular body, the scapular spine
27.3 Fractures of the body and spine
with the acromial process, the scapular neck, and the glenoid
The clinical signs associated with fractures of the scapular
cavity for articulation with the humeral head. The scapular
body and spine are often less severe than those seen with
body is flat and very thin; the thickest bone is found at the
fractures of other bones. Some affected cats are still weight-
base of the scapular spine. The scapular spine ends distally
bearing, and pain can be diffcult to localize clinically. Neu-
in the acromion process. The acromion of cats has two bony
rological signs associated with brachial plexus injury (Chapter
prominences: the hamatus and the suprahamatus processes.
The suprahamatus process curves off in a caudodistal direc-
tion, and is also called the metacromium (Fig. 27-1). The
acromion serves as origin for the acromial part of the deltoid
muscle.
The short scapular neck has an oval shape and is thicker
than the scapular body. It ends in the glenoid cavity, which
articulates with the head of the humerus. The supraglenoid
tuberosity is located at the craniodorsal edge of the glenoid
cavity, and is the origin of the tendon of the biceps muscle.
Another prominent process in the cat protrudes from the
C
craniomedial aspect of the glenoid, the coracoid process (Fig.
 27-1). The suprascapular nerve courses from cranial to caudal
along the lateral border of the scapular neck, just under the
A
acromion process. It innervates the supra- and infraspinatus
B
muscles and must be protected during surgery.
Figure 27-1Anatomy of the left distal scapula. The acromion has two
The scapula is connected to the body wall by several
bony prominences: the hamatus (H), and the suprahamatus (SH)
processes. The suprascapular nerve courses along the lateral side of the
muscles. The deep muscle group includes the serratus ventra-
scapular neck (B: lateral view). Another process, the coracoid process
lis and rhomboid muscles, which originate from the ribs and
(CO), is present on the craniomedial aspect of the glenoid cavity
spine and insert on the dorsal border of the scapular body.
(A: cranial view)
330
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
 Fracture localization
Fracture type
 Treatment options
Table 27-1. Fractures of the
scapula and their treatment 
 Scapular body and
Mild to moderate
Conservative
options 
spine
displacement
 Severe displacement, simple
 Interfragmentary wiring
Internal splint
Severe displacement,
Internal splint
comminuted
Plate
Acromion process
Avulsion
 Tension band repair
 Scapular neck
Extra-articular
Cross pins
Plate
 Internal fxator
Intra-articular
 Interfragmentary lag screw and:
cross pins
一
plate
internal fixator
Supraglenoid tubercle
Avulsion
 Tension band repair
Lag screw
15) can occur simultaneously and may be the main reason
Figure 27-2
for presentation (Fig. 27-2).
Radiograph of the 
scapula of a cat,
presented with
27.3.1 Approaches to the scapular body, spine,
neurological deficits
and acromion process
associated to a
brachial plexus
The scapular body, spine, and acromion are approached
avulsion. A
 through a lateral incision performed directly along the spine
 comminuted fracture
of the scapular body
of the scapula (3). Cranial elevation and retraction of the
with minimal
 supraspinatus muscle and/or caudal elevation and retraction
displacement of the
of the infraspinatus muscle from the spine and body are nec-
fragments is visible.
essary to access the scapular body.
This fracture can
be treated 
conservatively.
27.3.2 Fractures of the scapular body
Many fractures of the scapular body show little displacement
due to the protection and splinting by the surrounding
muscles, and can be treated conservatively (Fig. 27-2). The
scapular body is a flat bone with an abundant blood supply
and fractures usually heal well with cage rest alone.
 Indications for open reduction and internal stabilization
are grossly displaced or folded fractures, and fractures result-
ing in spatial displacement of the scapular neck and glenoid
cavity, altering the biomechanics of the shoulder joint, and
of interfragmentary wires bears the risk of the implants
impeding joint function. Simple fractures can be stabilized
tearing out of the thin and fragile bone.
with interfragmentary wiring (Box 27-1). It is advantageous
An internal splint or a bone plate is more appropriate for
to place the wires near the scapular spine, and/or the cranial
stabilization of comminuted fractures (Box 27-1). The inter-
or caudal scapular rim, where the bone is slightly thicker.
nal splint is easy to apply, no specialized implants are needed,
Repair of transverse fractures of the scapular body can also
and it provides good stability in cats. Small-diameter wires,
be achieved by anchoring an additional figure-of-eight wire
a careful insertion technique, and the application of moderate
in the scapular spine in a tension band fashion. Application 
tension while tightening of wires are necessary to prevent
27: Scapula
331
Box 27-1. Stabilization of scapular body fractures
A lateral approach with partial elevation of the supra- and
and then bent to form a U-shaped splint. The fracture is
infraspinatus muscles from the scapular spine is
 reduced and the splint is adapted along the base of the
performed.
spine to the main distal fragment. The U-shaped Kirschner
 Interfragmentary wiring: Small-diameter wires (0.5-
wire is stabilized to the scapular spine with 0.5- or 0.6-mm
0.6 mm) are used in the thin bone of the scapular body
hemicerclage wires (Fig. 27-3B). Additional wires can be
for the repair of simple fractures. Interfragmentary wires
 inserted into the proximal or intermediate fragments if
can be placed at the cranial and/or caudal border of the
 deemed necessary.
scapular body. As an alternative to an additional interfrag-
 Plating: Plates can also be applied to stabilize simple and
mentary wire at the base of the scapular spine, a fgure-of-
 comminuted fractures. A 1.5/2.0-mm veterinary cuttable
eight tension band wire can be positioned over the spine
plate is positioned with its convex surface lying along the
of the scapula (Fig. 27-3A).
base of the scapular spine in order to achieve better bone
Internal splinting: This technique can be used for simple
contact (Fig. 27-3C). At least three 1.5-mm screws are
and comminuted fractures. A 0.9- or 1.0-mm Kirschner
 inserted at an angle into the junction between body and
wire is inserted in the proximal main fragment through the
spine to achieve as much bone purchase as possible. Do
thicker bone of the base of the spine. It is inserted midway
 not overtighten the screws or the threads will strip.
A
C
Figure 27-3  Options for stabilization of fractures of the scapular body.
(A) Reduction of a simple transverse scapular body fracture with interfragmentary wire and a tension band wire applied lateral to the
scapular spine.
(B) Splinting of a comminuted scapular body fracture with a U-shaped Kirschner wire anchored to the scapular spine with hemicerclage
wires.
(C) Stabilization of a comminuted scapular body fracture with a reversed 1.5/2.0-mm veterinary cuttable plate positioned cranial to the
scapular spine
additional damage to the bone. Plates are positioned along
Reattachment of the spine to the body with cerclage wires
the base of the scapular spine, where most bone can be pur-
may be necessary if displacement is severe or if lameness
chased. The use of veterinary cuttable plates is most often 
 persists with conservative treatment.
recommended (4). The 1.5/2.0-mm veterinary cuttable plate
 The acromion process is the origin of the acromial head of
can be reversed to match the groove between scapular body
the deltoid muscle, which courses distally and covers the
and spine, and it allows the insertion of more screws over the
scapular neck. Fractures of the acromion process or, more
same distance when compared to other plates.
commonly, osteotomy of the acromion needed to expose the
scapular neck and shoulder joint, require surgical repair. The
distal pull of the deltoid muscle results in distal displacement
27.3.3 Fractures of the scapular spine and
of the acromion after fracture, and impingement of the supra-
scapular nerve may occur. The distally directed muscle forces
acromion process
can be adequately counteracted with a tension band fxation.
 Fractures of the scapular spine and acromion process are rare
The size of the acromion and the spine of the scapula can
(Fig. 27-4). The spine can be avulsed from the scapular body.
 make it diffcult to insert a Kirschner wire for the tension
332
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
only the hamatus process is cut. The osteotomy is performed
by making two cuts (Box 27-2). Care is taken not to injure
 the suprascapular nerve on the craniolateral surface of the
scapular neck. The acromion is reattached with a tension
band before closure (Box 27-2).
A craniomedial approach to the shoulder joint allows
access to the supraglenoid tuberosity and the insertion site of
the biceps tendon (3).
27.4.2 Extra-articular fractures of the
scapular neck
Extra-articular fractures of the scapular neck interfere with
shoulder joint function by creating malalignment of the
glenoid cavity. The distal fragment is usually displaced cau-
domedial to the scapular body, and in the absence of internal
A
B
fxation, delayed union, non-union, or malunion is likely to
Figure 27-4 (A) Craniocaudal and (B) oblique views of the scapula of
result. The suprascapular nerve can be trapped between the
a cat with a fracture of the suprahamate process. The cat presented
fracture fragments or can become enclosed in the fracture
with a mild sudden-onset forelimb lameness. Conservative treatment
callus during healing. Fractures of the scapular neck are
was successful in this case.
 xo is pn aa
Most fractures of the scapular neck are simple transverse
fractures. Cross pinning can result in sufficient fracture stabil-
ity if anatomic fracture reduction is achieved. Plates offer
band fixation. A figure-of-eight wire can be used in a tension
more stability and are always indicated to repair comminuted
or unstable fractures. A 2.0-mm T- or L-plate can be posi-
band fashion instead (Box 27-2).
tioned just cranial to the spine and around its distal base,
allowing insertion of at least two screws in the distal frag-
27.4 Fractures of the scapular neck and
ment (Fig. 27-7). Alternatively, a 1.5/2.0-mm veterinary
glenoid cavity
cuttable plate or a 2.0-mm locking plate can be used if the
Fractures of the distal scapula are classifed into non-articular
distal fragment is large enough to place two screws.
fractures of the scapular neck and articular fractures involv-
ing the glenoid cavity. The latter include avulsion fractures
27.4.3 Intra-articular fractures of the
of the supraglenoid tuberosity and articular T- or Y-fractures.
scapular neck and glenoid cavity
All fractures of the distal scapula result in shoulder joint
dysfunction and chronic pain if left untreated (5).
Intra-articular fractures of the scapular neck and glenoid
cavity are rare in cats. They are classifed into T- or Y-
fractures of the scapular neck, and avulsion fractures of the
27.4.1 Approaches to the distal scapula
supraglenoid tuberosity or the glenoid rim.
The scapular neck and glenoid cavity are best approached via
T- or Y-fractures of the scapular neck and glenoid are dif-
 a craniolateral approach to the shoulder joint (3). The acro-
ficult to stabilize because of the small fragment sizes. Lateral
mial head of the deltoid muscle originates from the acromion 
exposure requires osteotomy of the acromion process (Box
process and overlies the scapular neck. Dissection between 
 27-2) and additional exposure can be achieved by osteotomy
the deltoid muscle and the supraspinatus muscle, followed by
of the greater tubercle to reflect the supraspinatus muscle
cranial retraction of the distal supraspinatus muscle, allows
 from the craniolateral aspect of the joint. The intra-articular
access to the craniolateral part of the scapular neck and the
 part of the fracture is addressed frst. The fragments are
supraglenoid tuberosity.
reduced anatomically and stabilized in compression with a
Osteotomy of the acromion with its origin of the deltoid
2.0-mm lag screw, or with a threaded Kirschner wire if the
muscle is necessary to visualize the entire scapular neck and
fragments are too small to insert a screw. The neck of the
glenoid cavity. Both the hamatus and suprahamatus pro-
scapula is then repaired with a plate or internal fixator,
cesses should be osteotomized in one piece because reattach-
as shown in Box 27-3. The 2.0-mm T- or L-plates or the
ment of this relatively large piece of bone is easier than when 
1.5/2.0-mm veterinary cuttable plates are good implant
27: Scapula
Box 27-2. Osteotomy of the acromion process and tension band repair of fractures or osteotomies of the
acromion
A lateral approach to the distal spine of the scapula and
Tension band repair: One hole is drilled through the
the acromion process is used.
base of the spine where the bone is thickest, and one hole
Osteotomy of the acromion process: One hole is pre-
is drilled through the acromial process, proximal to the
drilled proximal and one distal to the osteotomy site for 
hamatus and suprahamatus processes. A small-diameter
later stabilization, as described below. Two osteotomy
wire (0.6-mm) is inserted in a fgure-of-eight fashion
cuts are then made to be able to remove both the hamatus
through the predrilled holes and is carefully tightened on
and suprahamatus processes in one piece and facilitate
both sides. The wire should not cross exactly over the
later reduction and stabilization (Fig. 27-5A).
fracture or osteotomy line (Fig. 27-5B).
Figure 27-5  Osteotomy of the
acromion and its fixation.
(A) Two cuts are performed
 perpendicular to each other. The
resulting step shape of the
osteotomy facilitates later repair.
(B) Tension band wire for repair
of fractures or osteotomies of the 
acromion.
A
R
choices. Internal fixators offer better stability when fragment
27.5 Scapular avulsion
size only allows insertion of one or two screws into the distal
fragment.
The scapula is connected to the body wall by both deep and
Avulsion fractures of the supraglenoid tuberosity are rare.
superficial muscles. The deep muscle group holds the body
a qanorq Aisip pand Aensn s juauen pasnae au
up towards the scapula when the cat is standing, and is com-
biceps muscle. Anatomic reduction and stable fixation are
posed of the serratus ventralis, trapezius, and rhomboideus
 necessary to restore the biceps tendon mechanism, and shoul-
muscles. These insert at the cranial angle and dorsal border
der joint stability and congruity. A craniomedial approach is
of the scapula. Rupture of the deep muscle group causes the
best used to repair fractures of the supraglenoid tuberosity.
scapula to shift dorsally, and prevents the cat maintaining
The avulsed fragment is anatomically reduced and reattached
normal posture during weight-bearing. Jumps, falls, and bite
  si nu a j ud euooe pue mas e e 
wounds are common traumatic causes (6). There is one case
enough, or a tension band repair (Fig. 27-1).
report of feline scapular avulsion in the literature (7). Frac-
 In addition to supraglenoid fractures, fractures of the
ture of the body of the scapula may coexist.
glenoid rim could theoretically occur at any other location.
The characteristic dorsal displacement of the scapula is
Large fragrments should be stabilized in anatomic reduction
easily observed and palpable (Fig. 27-8). The proximal part
with a small lag screw or threaded pin. Fragments too small
of the scapula displaces laterally if the distal limb is adducted.
to be reattached are resected.
The function of the limb is initially impeded but with time
334
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 27-3. Stabilization of extra-articular scapular neck fractures
A craniolateral approach to the shoulder joint is per-
Plating: Plating can be used for both simple and com-
formed. This may give sufficient exposure for cross pinning.
minuted fractures of the scapular neck. A 2.0-mm L- or 
but osteotomy of the acromion process helps to visualize
 T-plate is contoured to the scapular neck and distal scapu-
and reduce the fracture and is advised for plating proce-
lar body, cranial to the spine of the scapula. The plate is
 dures. The fracture is reduced carefully without damaging
 positioned as far distally as possible to allow insertion of
the suprascapular nerve.
a 1q (- ) yau 1dos ai oi ss a
Cross pinning: Cross pinning is only used for simple
transverse fractures. One 0.9-1.2-mm Kirschner wire is
 the glenoid and thus penetrate the shoulder joint. Three
driven from the supraglenoid tuberosity into the caudo-
screws are positioned into the scapular body proximal to
proximal portion of the scapular neck/body, and one pin 
the fracture. They are angled in a caudal direction to
is driven from proximal to the fracture line into the cau-
achieve better bone purchase at the base of the spine.
dodistal aspect of the scapular neck (Fig. 27-6A).
Figure 27-6  Options for
stabilization of an extra-articular
fracture of the scapular neck.
(A) Cross pinning of a simple
transverse scapular neck fracture.
(B) Stabilization of a scapular
 neck fracture with a 2.0-mm
L-plate.
A
27: Scapula
335
Figure 27-8 A cat with disruption of the scapula from the thoracic
wall. Note the marked dorsal dislocation of the scapular body.
 exaggerated by pressing the bone dorsally. (Courtesy of James L
B
Cook.)
Figure 27-7 (A) Preoperative and (B) postoperative radiographs of a
cat with an extra-articular fracture of the scapular neck. The distal
fracture fragment is displaced in a caudomedial direction (A). The 
fracture was stabilized with a 2.0-mm T-plate, which allowed insertion
of three screws into the distal fragment.
the cats start to use their leg again, although the scapula
flexion and prevents weight-bearing of the limb. It is applied
usually remains dorsally dislocated without surgical treat-
 for 1 week after repair of fractures of the scapular neck and
ment. A Velpeau sling may be a successful treatment option 
 glenoid cavity where fixation stability is deemed insufficient,
for acute dislocation (8).
 and after repair of dorsal dislocation of the scapula. It should
The goal of surgery is temporarily to stabilize the scapular
 not be used after avulsion fractures of the supraglenoid tuber-
body to the body wall in its anatomic position until fbrous
 osity, because flexion of the shoulder creates additional
healing has occurred. Repair can be achieved by reattaching 
 tensile stress on the fracture. Cats that will not tolerate a
the bone to the serratus ventralis muscle with non-absorbable 
Velpeau sling can be prevented from weight-bearing by appli-
sutures secured through small holes in the scapula. If the
 cation of a carpal flexion splint, which is also left in place
soft-tissue repair is tenuous, a wire can be placed carefully
 for 7-10 days. Application of Velpeau slings and carpal
around an adjacent rib (Box 27-4).
flexion splints is described in Chapter 22.
Prognosis for return to full function after fracture of
the scapular body is excellent with both conservative and
27.6 Postoperative treatment
surgical treatment in the absence of neurological deficits. If
uo nuapuadap si sisouoid aun 'parnun uaaq aaeu sanru
and prognosis
 recovery from the neurological defcits. The most devastating
Postoperative immobilization of the scapula and shoulder
 neurological injury is trauma to the brachial plexus, which
joint is diffcult. Cage rest is sufficient in most cases, but fxa-
 almost always includes the nerve roots of the radial nerve
tion stability may not be suffcient to allow weight-bearing  (Chapter 15).
after repair of scapular neck fractures in some cats. Weight-
 Prognosis after fracture of the scapular neck and glenoid
bearing should also be prevented after dorsal dislocation of
 depends on fracture reduction and fixation stability. A long-
the scapula. A Velpeau sling stabilizes the shoulder joint in
 term follow-up study of 20 dogs with articular fractures of
336
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 27-4. Stabilization of a scapular avulsion
The surgical approach is along the dorsal border of the
Figure 27-9
scapula. The torn muscles are sutured where possible.
Position of an
 Sutures can be anchored through holes drilled into the
orthopedic wire
 cranial angle and dorsal border of the scapula to reattach
around the dorsal 
 aspect of the fourth
an avulsed serratus muscle. One or two holes are then
or fifth rib and 
 drilled near the caudal scapular angle. A piece of 0.4-0.6-
through a hole in
mm orthopedic wire is passed though the holes and care-
the caudal rim of the
fully around the dorsal aspect of the fourth or ffth rib
scapula to help
 stabilize the scapula
(Fig. 27-9). The wire is tightened enough to prevent dorsal
to the thoracic wall 
displacement.
 after luxation.
the scapula showed that only 15% of animals were free from
4. Piermattei DL, Flo GL. Fractures of the scapula. In: Piermattei
clinical signs (5). Anatomic alignment and reduction of the
DL, Flo GL (eds) Small animal orthopedics and fracture repair.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1997: pp. 221-227.
glenoid cavity and stable fracture fixation are crucial for
5. Johnston SA. Articular fractures of the scapula in the dog: a
success, but may be difficult to achieve.
retrospective study of 26 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1993;29:
157-164.
References and further reading
6. Piermattei DL, Flo GL. The shoulder joint. In: Piermattei DL, Flo
GL (eds) Small animal orthopedics and fracture repair. Philadel-
1. Tomes PM, et al. Thoracic trauma in dogs and cats presented for
phia: WB Saunders; 1997: pp. 228-260.
limb fractures. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1985;21:161-166.
7. Leighton RL. Feline scapular luxation repair. Feline Pract
2. Voss K, Montavon PM. Tension band stabilization of fractures
1977;7:59.
and luxations of the thoracolumbar spine in dogs and cats: 38
8. Parker RB. Scapula. In: Slatter D (ed.) Textbook of small animal
surgery, 2nd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2003: pp.
cases (1993-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;225:78-83.
 3. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA. An atlas of surgical approaches to
1703-1710.
the bones and joints of the dog and the cat, 4th edn. Philadelphia:
WB Saunders; 2004.
337
K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs
Both traumatic and orthopedic diseases of the shoulder joint 
With medial shoulder luxation the foot is rotated externally;
are rarely diagnosed in cats. Treatment options therefore
with lateral luxation it is rotated internally. The greater
have to be largely extrapolated from what is known in dogs,
 tubercle is displaced and palpable when the luxation is
although shoulder joint instability and luxation, rupture or
 lateral. Medial and lateral shoulder stability is evaluated by
tenosynovitis of the biceps tendon, glenoid dysplasia, and
 abducting and adducting the shoulder while it is held in
osteochondrosis have been described in case reports (1-9).
extension, and by performing a mediolateral drawer test.
Shoulder joint instability and luxation, shoulder joint dyspla-
 Normal range of motion has been described as ranging
sia, and conditions of the biceps tendon are described in the
from 95° to 100° from maximal abduction to adduction.
following sections, and osteoarthritis and osteochondrosis
 Range of motion in internal and external rotation is around
are covered in Chapter 5.
60-70° (10). Craniocaudal and mediolateral drawer tests
are additionally performed to evaluate craniocaudal and
28.1 Surgical anatomy
 mediolateral stability. Clinical fndings are best compared
to the contralateral side. Anesthesia may be necessary to
The feline shoulder joint has some anatomic differences
reduce the stabilizing effects of the cuff muscles during
compared to the canine shoulder, especially at the distal
palpation.
aspect of the scapula and the acrormion (Chapter 27). An
 Radiographs are taken to rule out fractures of the scapular
ossifed clavicle is present, which is visible on radiographs
neck, glenoid, or proximal humerus. Shoulder joint luxation 
cranial to the shoulder joint.
 is readily seen on radiographs. Both mediolateral and cranio-
 The shoulder joint has a wide range of motion, not only in
caudal radiographs should be obtained and the films carefully
extension and fexion but also in abduction and adduction
screened for the presence of degenerative joint disease and/or
and in external and internal rotation (10). The glenoid pro-
dysplasia. Ultrasonography of the biceps tendon is a non-
vides little coverage of the humeral head, and the joint is
 invasive tool that is useful if lesions of the biceps tendon are
mainly stabilized by the joint capsule, the glenohumeral liga-
suspected clinically or on radiographs (Chapter 2). Arthrog-
ments, and the tendons and muscles spanning the joint. The
raphy may also help to obtain additional information
lateral and medial glenohumeral ligaments are confluent with
(Chapter 2). Diagnostic arthroscopy can be performed to
the joint capsule and can be difficult to visualize in cats. The
inspect the joint for signs of osteochondrosis, collateral liga-
medial glenohumeral ligament courses from the rim of the
 ment ruptures, or biceps tendon disease or rupture (Chapter
glenoid to insert caudal to the lesser tubercle. An additional
25). Table 28-1 provides a summary of diseases and trauma
ligament strand is present in the cat between the coracoid
of the shoulder joint.
process and the lesser tubercle (10). Clinically important
tendons that cross the joint include the biceps tendon, origi-
nating on the supraglenoid tubercle, and the tendons of the
28.3 Approaches to the shoulder joint
supra- and infraspinatus muscles, inserting craniomedial and
The shoulder joint can be approached from craniomedial,
lateral to the greater tubercle, respectively.
cranial, craniolateral, and caudal directions. The craniomed-
28.2 Diagnosis and treatment options
ial approach to the shoulder joint (11) is performed to access 
the biceps tendon, the supraglenoid tubercle, and the medial
Clinical features of shoulder joint conditions include lame
glenohumeral ligament, and is used for medial transposition
ness, pain on manipulation of the shoulder joint, and possibly
 of the biceps tendon. The cranial approach (11) involves
instability. Instability and luxation of the shoulder joint are
 osteotomy of the greater tubercle and is used for lateral
caused by rupture of the joint capsule and associated liga-
 transposition of the biceps tendon. A craniolateral approach
ments, or they can rarely be associated with shoulder joint
with osteotomy of the acromion process may be used to
dysplasia.
access the lateral part of the joint capsule and the lateral
Animals with luxation of the shoulder joint are usually
 glenohumeral ligament (11). A caudal approach is chosen if
non-weight-bearing and carry the limb in a flexed position.
 osteochondrosis of the humeral head is suspected (11).
338
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Type of lesion
Further classification
Treatment options
Shoulder dysplasia
Conservative
Arthrodesis in severe cases
Biceps tenosynovitis or biceps tendon
Conservative
rupture
 Tenodesis, tenotomy
 Shoulder joint luxation
Rupture of collateral ligaments
 Closed reduction and conservative
and joint capsule
treatment
Surgical stabilization
Shoulder joint instability
Collateral ligament sprain
Conservative treatment
Surgical stabilization if no improvement
Fractures (for further information on
 Avulsion of the supraglenoid
 Tension band fixation
humeral and scapula fractures, see
tubercle
Chapters 27 and 29)
 Unreconstructable fractures
Arthrodesis
Amputation
Table 28-1. Injuries of the shoulder joint and treatment options
28.4 Dysplasia of the shoulder joint
Figure 28-1
 Mediolateral
Dysplasia of the glenohumeral joint has been described in
radiograph of the
shoulder joint of a 
two case reports (8, 9). The altered conformation of the joint
cat with two ossified
results in secondary degenerative joint changes, and was con-
bodies at the caudal
sidered the cause for concurrent tenosynovitis of the biceps
aspect of the
tendon in one cat (8). In the other cat, dysplasia of the shoul-
glenoid. These most 
der joint was associated with osteochondrosis (9). Clinical
likely represent
symptoms include lameness and/or reluctance to move, and
accessory centers of
pain during manipulation. Radiologically, glenohumeral
ossification.
Osteoarthritis of the
incongruity and degenerative joint changes are seen. Treat-
shoulder is also
ment options include conservative treatment with chondro-
present.
protective agents and pain medication in cats with mild
lameness (see treatment of osteoarthritis in Chapter 5).
Arthrodesis of the shoulder joint can be considered in cats
with severe lameness, if they do not respond to conservative
treatment (9).
humeral incongruity and degenerative joint changes. Bicipital
tenosynovitis was diagnosed by ultrasound and arthrogra-
28.5 Biceps tenosynovitis or rupture
phy, and was confrmed during surgery. Constriction of the
biceps tendon by the transverse ligament was relieved and
Bicipital tenosynovitis is a common clinical complaint in
osteophytes in the bicipital groove were removed. Lameness
large-breed dogs. In cats, it is only described in detail in one
resolved initially, but recurred 6 months after surgery. The
case report (8), and was thought to be secondary to increased
 degenerative joint changes had markedly progressed at that
joint laxity associated with glenohumeral dysplasia and
time.
 incongruity. Another report mentions a cat with arthroscopi-
Other possible treatment options for bicipital tenosynovitis
cally diagnosed acute biceps tendon laceration, but the case
include intra-articular injection of long-acting corticosteroids,
was not described in greater detail (6). One of the authors
and tenodesis or tenotomy (also see Chapter 25).
has seen a biceps tendon rupture in association with a shoul-
der luxation in a cat.
28.6 Accessory centers of ossification
The 3'-year old cat in the case report mentioned above
(8) presented with weight-bearing forelimb lameness. Pain
Accessory centers of ossification can sometimes be seen on
could be elicited by flexion of the glenohumeral joint and
the caudal and medial aspect of the glenoid cavity in some
pressure on the biceps tendon. Radiographs revealed gleno-
 cats (Fig. 28-1). These are presumed to be incidental findings
28: Shoulder joint
     ro s a no p
for medial luxations, and a spica splint (Chapter 22) in slight
generally seen in cats being radiographed for reasons other 
 abduction is advised for lateral luxations to prevent relux-
than lameness. However, in cats with clinical signs attributed
 ation. External immobilization is needed for at least 7 days.
to the shoulder joint they may be considered a cause of lame-
 Surgical stabilization is indicated if reluxation occurs.
ness. Arthroscopy or arthrotomy for fragment debridement
Scapulohumeral luxation may be accompanied by avulsion
can be curative (J. Cook, personal communication).
fractures of the humeral head (3) or of the glenoid cavity
 j! pd samie s uozqis iean (-a )
 tures are involved with the luxation. Avulsion fractures are
28.7 Shoulder joint instability and luxation
 repaired with small lag screws or a tension band repair.
Instability of the shoulder joint and traumatic scapulohumeral
Surgical techniques described for stabilization of the gleno-
luxation is rare in cats. Lateral luxation of the shoulder joint
 humeral joint are capsulorrhaphy (Box 28-1), prosthetic col-
was described in two case reports (2, 3). The authors have
 lateral ligament replacement (Box 28-1), and medial or lateral
seen two cats with a medial shoulder luxation (Fig. 28-2).
 transposition of the biceps tendon. Extrapolated from the
Shoulder instability is difficult to evaluate clinically and
literature in dogs (12-14), capsulorrhaphy and prosthetic
confrm radiographically. Cases with suspected instability of
 collateral ligament replacement are likely to result in suff-
the shoulder joint are therefore often treated conservatively
 cient stability in cats, and do not alter regional anatomy.
with restricted activity and pain medication (Chapter 5).
Lateral or medial transposition of  the biceps tendon as
Diagnostic arthroscopy would be the treatment of choice in 
 described for dogs may be performed in cats if imbrication
unclear cases in which lameness does not resolve after 4-6
 of the joint capsule and collateral ligament prosthesis is insuf-
weeks of conservative treatment. Surgical stabilization can be
 ficient to maintain shoulder stability. Medial transposition of
performed as described below in cats with confrmed rupture 
the biceps tendon is used for medial luxation and lateral
of the medial and/or lateral glenohumeral ligaments.
 transposition for lateral luxation of the shoulder joint. The
For shoulder joint luxation, closed reduction followed by 
 authors have no experience with transposition of the biceps
external immobilization and limited activity for another 4-6
 tendon in cats.
weeks is usually attempted frst. Closed reduction is per-
 Another option for treating cases where soft-tissue tech-
formed with the cat under general anesthesia. Medial or  niques do not result in suffcient stability is temporary stabi-
lateral pressure is applied to the greater tubercle and humeral  lization of the joint with an internal fixator (15) (Box 28-1).
head while the leg is held in extension, depending on the  An internal fxator is used because the shoulder joint is not
direction of luxation. A Velpeau sling (Chapter 22) is advised  amenable for transarticular stabilization with an external
A
B
c
Figure 28-2 Pre- and postoperative radiographs of a cat with medial shoulder luxation and an avulsion fracture of the supraglenoid tuberosity.
(A) Preoperative craniocaudal radiograph demonstrating medial shoulder luxation and an avulsion fracture of the glenoid cavity. Also note the
abnormal position of the clavicle.
(B) Mediolateral radiograph of the luxated joint. The avulsed supraglenoid tuberosity is seen proximal to the greater tubercle.
(C) A craniomedial approach to the shoulder joint was performed, the torn medial joint capsule and glenohumeral ligament were repaired with
sutures, and the supraglenoid tuberosity was reattached with a tension band fixation.
340
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 28-1. Options for stabilization of the shoulder joint
Medial instability or luxation: A craniomedial approach
from medial to lateral through the humeral tunnel and tied
to the shoulder joint is performed. If the joint capsule is
 in moderate tension (Fig. 28-3B).
not torn, it is incised together with the overlying tendon
 Lateral instability or luxation: A cranial approach with
of the subscapular muscle. The joint is inspected for the
 osteotomy of the greater tubercle or a craniolateral
presence of other injuries. The joint capsule and the tendon
approach with osteotomy of the acromion process is
of the subscapular muscle are imbricated with horizontal
performed. The joint capsule is incised, if not torn, to
mattress sutures, using non-absorbable monoflament
 inspect and flush the joint. The capsule is then carefully
oe ae suonual pardn nauo Quv “ieaiu arnins
imbricated with non-absorbable monoflament suture
sutured. A prosthetic ligament is applied additionally if
residual instability is present after imbrication:
to enhance stability similar to the techniques described
Technique 1 - using screws or suture anchors: One
above.
screw or suture anchor is placed at each of the insertion
Transarticular stabilization with an internal fixator: A
sites of the medial glenohumeral ligaments and a non-
 2.0-mm internal fxator is contoured to the cranial aspect
absorbable fgure-of-eight suture is anchored and tight-(
 of the shoulder joint. There should be a small gap between
ened around the screws or suture anchors (Fig. 28-3A).
 the shoulder joint and the plate to avoid damaging periar-
Technique 2 -using bone tunneis: A hole is drilled from 
 ticular structures. The supraspinatus muscle is partially
lateral to medial through the center of the humeral neck
 elevated. The locking plate is fixed proximally to the
and a similar hole is created in the neck of the scapula.
cranial angle of the scapular body and spine with three
 Care must be taken to avoid injury to the suprascapular
screws, and distally to the proximal humerus with three
nerve. One or two strands of 0 or 1 polybutester are passed
or four screws (Fig. 28-3C). The internal fixator is removed
from lateral to medial through the scapular tunnel and
after 3-4 weeks.
A
B
c
Figure 28-3Stabilization of medial or lateral shoulder joint instabilities.
(A) A medial glenohumeral ligament prosthesis is attached using suture screws with washers. The screws are placed at the insertion sites of
the medial glenohumeral ligament.
(B) A prosthetic collateral ligament is anchored through bone tunnels in the scapula and humerus.
unstable shoulders.
28: Shoulder joint
341
Figure 28-4
Figure 28-5
A cat of unknown
 A cat with a healed
age with a severely
arthrodesis of the 
comminuted fracture
shoulder joint
of the shoulder joint 
performed 5 years
caused by a gunshot.
earlier following a
 Both articular
gunshot injury. Limb
surfaces are
function was good.
destroyed and 
 arthrodesis is the
only treatment
skeletal fxator. The implants are removed after approxi-
mately 3 weeks.
28.8 Fractures of the shoulder joint
Fractures involving the shoulder joint are exceedingly rare,
but fractures of the glenoid cavity, avulsion of the supragle-
noid tubercle, and fractures of the humeral head can occur.
Gunshot injuries commonly involve the proximal forelimbs
 plate across the shoulder joint (16). Osteotomy of the greater
and can cause devastating shoulder joint injuries (Fig. 28-4).
 tubercle may have to be performed to be able to position the
Repair of fractures of the scapular neck are described in
 plate and preserve the tendon of insertion of the supraspina-
Chapter 27 and fractures of the proximal humerus in Chapter
tus muscle (17). Suitable plates for cats include a long 2.0-
29. Avulsion fractures of the glenoid rim or supraglenoid
mm dynamic compression plate, a 2.0/2.7- or 1.5/2.0-mm
tuberosity are reattached with a tension band fixation or a
 veterinary cuttable plate, or a 2.0-mm internal fxator. The
lag screw (Fig. 28-2). Arthrodesis should be performed in
 use of pins and wires in a tension band technique could also
cases where the articular surfaces cannot be reconstructed.
 be considered, but the authors have not tried this method in
cats.
selected cases (Chapter 41).
28.10 Postoperative treatment
28.9 Arthrodesis of the shoulder joint
and prognosis
Arthrodesis of the shoulder joint is a salvage procedure rarely
External immobilization for 10 days is recommended after
performed in cats. Indications are non-reconstructable joint 
 surgical repair of a shoulder joint luxation to provide addi-
fractures or luxations (Fig. 28-5), and shoulder joint disease 
tional stability to the joint until fbrous healing of the joint
causing significant clinical signs which do not resolve with
pde si ss neadia y unaaq seu suai pue ansde
for medial luxations, and a spica splint for lateral luxations
 report on shoulder arthrodesis in a cat as a treatment of
(Chapter 22). Some cats may resent the sling or splint, and
glenoid dysplasia (9). Functional outcome was not reported
it may be safer and easier just to provide cage rest for these
in detail.
patients. External immobilization should not be necessary
 Arthrodesis of the shoulder joint is performed with a crani-
after fracture repair. Activity is restricted for 4-6 weeks after
ally applied plate (Box 28-2). The standing angle of the
surgery of the shoulder joint by keeping the cats indoors or
shoulder joint in cats is 105-115° (10), so the shoulder should
in a cage.
be fused with an angle of approximately 105-110°. At least
 Prognosis for return to full function is likely to be good if
four screws should be placed in the proximal humerus, and
 adequate joint stability and congruity is achieved. A chronic
four screws in the scapular neck and base of the scapular 
 luxation, instability, or incongruity will result in varying
spine. Ideally an additional lag screw is inserted through the 
 degrees of osteoarthritis, pain, and lameness.
342
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 28-2. Arthrodesis of the shoulder joint
A combined craniolateral and cranial approach to the
angle of approximately 105-110° (Fig. 28-6). At least four
shoulder joint with tenotomy of both the acromial head
screws should be inserted into the base of the spine of the
 of the deltoid and either a tenotomy of the supraspinatus
scapula and the scapular neck, and four screws into the
muscle or osteotomy of the greater tubercle, to reflect the
humerus. One lag screw is placed through the plate and
supraspinatus muscle, is performed. The biceps tendon is
across the scapulohumeral joint (Fig. 28-6).
severed. The cartilage from the glenoid cavity and the
humeral head is burred away with a high-speed bur. Take
care not to remove too much bone from the glenoid. The
Figure 28-6
Arthrodesis of the 
suprascapular nerve and caudal circumflex humeral artery
shoulder joint. A 10-
are preserved.
hole plate is applied 
A 2.0/2.7- or 2.0/1.5-mm veterinary cuttable plate, a
to the cranial surface
2.0-mm dynamic compression plate, or a 2.0-mm locking
of the humerus and 
scapular neck along 
plate is contoured to the cranial part of the base of the
the base of the spine
spine of the scapula, and to the cranial humerus. The
of the scapula. Four
 2.0/2.7-mm veterinary cuttable plate has the advantage of
110°
screws are inserted 
enabling the use of 2.0-mm screws in the thin bone of the
into the scapula and
base of the scapula, and 2.7-mm screws in the proximal
four screws into the
 metaphysis of the humerus. The plate must be long enough
humerus. One lag
for placement of at least four screws proximal and distal
screw crosses the
osteotomy.
to the osteotomy.
The shoulder joint can be temporarily stabilized with
pins while the plate is applied. It is fused with a flexion
References and further reading
11. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA. An atlas of surgical approaches to
the bones and joints of the dog and the cat, 4th edn. Philadel-
1. Petersen CJ. Osteochondritis dissecans of the humeral head of
phia: Saunders; 2004.
a cat. NZ Vet J 1984;32:115-116.
12. Prostredny JM, et al. Use of a polybutester suture to repair
 2. Vaughan LC. Dislocation of the shoulder joint in the dog and
medial scapulohumeral luxation in the dog: three cases. J Am
cat. J Small Anim Pract 1967;8:45-48.
Anim Hosp Assoc 1993;29:180-183.
3. Bedford PG. Dislocation of the shoulder joint with fracture
13. Ringwood B, et al. Medial glenohumeral ligament reconstruc-
of the caput humeri in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 1969;10:
tion for ex-vivo medial glenohumeral luxation in the dog. Vet
519-522.
Comp Orthop Traumatol 2001;14:196-200.
4. Schrader SC. Orthopedic surgery In: Sherding RG (ed.) The cat:
14. Fitch R, et al. Clinical evaluation of prosthetic medial glenohu-
diseases and clinical management. New York: Churchill Living-
 meral ligament repair in the dog (ten cases). Vet Comp Orthop
stone; 1994: pp. 1649-1709.
Traumatol 2001;14:222-228.
5. Bardet JF. Diagnosis of shoulder instability in dogs and cats: a
15. Post C, et al. Temporary transarticular stabilization with a
retrospective study. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1998;34:42-54.
locking plate for medial shoulder luxation in a dog. Vet Comp
6. Bardet JF. Lesions of the biceps tendon. Diagnosis and classifica
Orthop Traumatol 2008;21:166-170.
ton. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1999;12:188-195.
16. Johnson AL, Houlton JEF Arthrodesis of the shoulder. In:
7. Butcher R, Beasley K. Osteochondritis dissecans in a cat? Vet
Johnson AL, Houlton JEF, Vannini R (eds) AO principles of
Rec 1986;118:646.
fracture management in the dog and cat. Stuttgart: Thieme;
8. Scharf G, et al. Glenoid dysplasia and bicipital tenosynovitis in
2005: pp. 435-439.
a Maine coon cat. J Small Anim Pract 2004;45:515-520.
17. Fowler JD, et al. Scapulohumeral arthrodesis: results in seven
9. Christiansen E, Schneider-Heiss M. Schultergelenkdysplasie bei
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1988;24:667-672.
einer Katze. Kleintierpraxis 1999;44:117-119.
10. Roos H, Brugger S. Functional and applied anatomy of the
shoulder joint of the domestic cat. Tierarztl Prax 1993;21:265-
270.
343
29
Humerus
K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs, P.M. Montavon
The incidence of humeral fractures in cats is reported to be 
 chial artery and vein, is located at the caudal edge of the
between 5% and 13% of all fractures (1, 2), with the humeral
 biceps brachi muscle. The bundle divides distally, with the
shaft and the supracondylar area fractured most often (2, 3).
median nerve and brachial artery coursing through the supra-
Falls from a height, motor vehicle accidents, and gunshot
condylar foramen in a cranial direction, and the ulnar nerve
wounds often result in comminuted fractures (3, 4). These
continuing in a caudal direction.
can be challenging to stabilize, especially if they involve the
supracondylar area. Concurrent thoracic injuries, such as
29.2 Stabilization techniques
lung contusions and pneumothorax, can be encountered due
to the proximity of the thorax.
Internal stabilization is required for nearly all fractures of the
humerus, because the bone is not amenable to stable external
29.1 Surgical anatomy
coaptation. Only rare greenstick fractures in kittens and some
pathological fractures can be treated with cage rest alone.
The humerus in cats is straighter and more slender than in
General considerations on intramedullary pinning and nailing.
dogs. Important anatomic differences between the humerus
external skeletal fxation, and plating of humeral fractures
in dogs and cats exist, mainly affecting the distal part of the
 are described in the following sections. A summary of feline
bone. Cats lack the supratrochlear foramen, but they have a
humeral fracture types and their preferential stabilization
supracondylar foramen proximal to the medial epicondyle.
methods is provided in Table 29-1.
The bony bridge of the medial aspect of the supracondylar
foramen is confluent with the medial epicondyle. The median
 nerve and the brachial artery course through the supracon-
 29.2.1 Intramedullary pinning
dylar foramen, and iatrogenic damage to these structures
Intramedullary pins have to be combined with antirotational
should be avoided (Fig. 29-1).
implants in all cases, except the occasional simple transverse
Important
nerves are
encountered
during
surgical
interdigitating fracture in the immature cat. Insertion of an
approaches to the humerus. The radial nerve courses laterally
intramedullary pin improves construct stability of plates and
across the middle third of the humerus, in a slightly oblique
 external fixators by adding to the resistance to bending forces,
caudal to cranial direction, before it divides into its sensory
 and it also aids the spatial alignment of the main bone frag-
and motor branches. It is located superficial to the brachialis
ments in comminuted fractures.
muscle. Medially, a neurovascular bundle, containing the
 Placement of an intramedullary pin into the humerus can
median, musculocutaneous, and ulnar nerves, and the bra-
be performed in a normograde or retrograde fashion. The
area for insertion of a normograde intramedullary pin is the
craniolateral aspect of the greater tubercle (Fig. 29-2). After
Figure 29-1
penetration of the cortex, the pin is advanced in a distomedial
Anatomy of the
direction. For retrograde pinning, a double-pointed Kirschner
medial aspect of the
wire is inserted from the fracture site, and is retrograded
Ieft distal humerus.
along the lateral cortex to exit through the proximolateral
The median nerve
 aspect of the greater trochanter. The fracture is then reduced
and brachial artery
course through the
and the pin is advanced into the distal fracture fragment with
supracondylar
 the help of a Jacobs chuck, until resistance to its passage is
foramen in a caudal
felt and/or the fracture line starts to distract. The pin can
to cranial direction.
often only be inserted into the distal central humerus proxi-
mal to the condyle, and not right into the medial aspect of
the condyle, as is usually recommended in dogs. The elbow
joint is manipulated through its range of motion to exclude
inadvertent placement of the pin into the elbow joint. The
344
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
 Fracture localization
Fracture type
Stabilization methods
Proximal humerus
Salter and Harris type I
 Parallel pinning
Tension band fixation
 Diaphysis
Simple transverse or short oblique
M pin and ESF
 Compression plate
Internal fxator
Simple long oblique and reducible
 IM pin and cerclage/hemicerclage wires
multifragmentary
 Lag screw(s) and neutralization plate
 Lag screw(s) and internal fixator
Comminuted
Interlocking nail
ESF ± IM pin
Buttress plate ± IM pin
Internal fxator
Distal humerus
Supracondylar, simple
 M pin and Kirschner wire
Cross pins/dynamic pins
Compression or neutralization plate
Internal fixator
Supracondylar, comminuted
ESF ± IM pin
Buttress plate ± IM pin
 Double plating
Internal fixator (single or double)
Lateral portion of the condyle and Salter
Transcondylar lag screw and Kirschner wire
and Harris type IV
Intracondylar T- or Y-fracture
Transcondylar lag screw and:
- IM pin with Kirscher wire
- neutralization plate
- internal fixator
Intracondylar fracture with supracondylar
Transcondylar lag screw and:
comminution
- ESF
 - buttress plate
- double plating
- internal fixator (single or double)
Table 29-1. A summary of feline humeral fractures and selected treatment options
IM pin, intramedullary pin; ESF, external skeletal fixator.
proximal end of the intramedullary pin is then either cut
in the treatment of distal fractures. However, an intramedul-
short or bent laterally if it is to be connected to the bar of an
lary canal distal to the supracondylar foramen is only present 
external skeletal fxator in tie-in confguration.
 in less than half of cats, and its diameter only allows insertion 
The size of pin used is affected by the size and anatomy of
of a maximum pin size of 1.6 mm (5) (Fig. 29-2). The distal
the cat, fracture type and location, and type of ancillary
end of the intramedullary pin is seated at the end of the distal
implants used. A pin is selected to fit the smallest diameter
humeral canal, just above the supratrochlear fossa in all other
of the distal intramedullary canalin the supracondylar region,
cats (Fig. 29-2). A maximum pin size of 2.4 mm can be used
or to fit the medullary canal of the medial epicondyle. Advanc-
 in these cases (5). The presence or absence of an intramedul-
ing the pin distally into the medial epicondyle results in frm
lary canal distal to the supracondylar foramen can be evalu-
anchorage of the distal pin end, which is especially important
29: Humerus
345
nail entry point. The nail is aimed down the middle of the
medullary canal with the tip ending in the supracondylar
 area. The proximal humeral bone has a thin cortical shell and
a high proportion of cancellous bone. In dogs it was found
that two screws must be placed distal to the tricipital line to
 prevent screw loosening and collapse of the repair (6).
29.2.3 External skeletal fixation
External skeletal fixation is a versatile method for stabiliza-
tion of humeral fractures, especially useful for the common
comminuted fractures of the distal diaphysis and supracon-
dylar area, which have little distal bone stock to insert other
implants (4). However the transosseous pins can create
irritation of the mobile soft-tissue structures, particularly
 near the elbow joint. A stable construct and appropriate
 postoperative care help to minimize pin tract complications
(Chapter 24).
A
B
C
 Only type I or modified type II constructs can be used in
Figure 29-2 Diagram showing normograde intramedullary pinning of
the feline humerus due to the proximity of the thoracic wall
the humerus. (A) The entry site of the pin is on the craniolateral aspect
on the medial side. Placement of an intramedullary pin adds
of the greater tubercle. (B) In around 50% of cats, a small-diameter
to stability, especially if used as a tie-in configuration (8). The
intramedullary pin can be inserted right into the medial epicondyle. (C)
In cats without a medullary cavity extending into the medial epicondyle,
tie-in confguration also prevents migration of the intramed-
a larger-diameter pin can be inserted instead into the distal aspect of
ullary pin. Two to three transosseous pins are needed per
the humeral medullary cavity.
 fragment in combination with an intramedullary pin, depend-
ing on fracture type, location, and severity (Chapter 24).
Three pins should be inserted per fragment if the fxator is
used as the sole method of fixation. Closed fracture reduction
during surgery with the help of a small-diameter Kirschner
is rarely possible, and a limited open approach is usually
 helpful. An open approach also allows visualization and pro-
wire as a probe.
tection of the radial nerve during fracture reduction and pin
29.2.2 Interlocking nailing
insertion.
Transosseus pin size should not exceed 25% of the bone
The application of an interlocking nail for stabilization of
diameter usually allowing the use of 2.0-mm positive-
feline humeral fractures has been described (6, 7). This
threaded pins in the proximal half of the humerus, and 1.6-
implant is only useful for proximal to mid-diaphyseal frac-
 mm positive- or negative-threaded or smooth pins in the
tures due to the narrow size of the intramedullary canal in
distal half of the humerus. Transosseous pins can be placed
the distal humerus of the cat. There should be room to place
safely in the proximal third of the humerus where there are
two screws distal and proximal to the fracture, with the
no important neurovascular structures. In the distal humerus,
middle screws placed a minimum distance, equivalent to at
pins should be inserted at least 2 cm proximal to the medial
least one screw diameter, from the fracture line.
 epicondyle to avoid penetration of the supracondylar foramen
The 4.0-mm nail with 2.0-mm screws or bolts is the most
and associated nerves and vessels (5). Transosseous pins
useful size for all but the largest cat, where the 4.7-mm nail
 distal to that are angled in a laterodistal to proximomedial
may work. An open surgical approach is generally recom-
 direction to avoid the foramen. A transcondylar pin is indi-
mended, and the nail should be tested for ft in the distal
cated if fracture configuration or the presence of a large
humeral medullary canal where the bone is narrowest. Place-
intramedullary pin precludes insertion of two pins between
 the distal fracture end and the supracondylar foramen. A
and further fracturing of the bone. Alternative implant
transcondylar pin is inserted from just cranial to the lateral
systems should be applied if the nail is considered too large.
epicondyle, and exits the bone craniodistal to the medial
Normograde or retrograde placement of the nail is possible.
epicondyle. A pin size between 1.5 and 2.0 mm is recom-
Normograde placement may require a slightly more proximal
mended (5}.
346
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
29.2.4 Plating
and type of plate used. Principles of plate function and appli-
cation are described in Chapters 13 and 24. Pre-contouring
Plate osteosynthesis is generally a good choice of treatment
 the plate prior to surgery is advantageous in the presence of
for fractures of the humeral diaphysis, with the exception of
comminuted fractures. The plate and rod confguration can
open fractures, or comminuted distal fractures, which do not
be used for stabilization of comminuted fractures.
 permit insertion of a suffcient number of screws in the distal
fragment.
29.2.5 Internal fixators
The humeral diaphysis is unique in that plates can be posi-
tioned laterally, cranially, and medially. The convex dorso-
lateral surface is the tension side of the proximal humerus,
plates, are valuable for buttress fixation of comminuted frac-
and the mediocaudal surface is the tension side of the distal
tures of the humeral diaphysis. They preserve the local vas-
 humerus. Accordingly, plates are positioned cranially or lat-
cularity, and their application requires less tissue dissection
erally for fractures of the proximal half of the diaphysis. The
       
 lateral approach is easier and less invasive than the medial
 also indicated for diaphyseal fracture repair in immature cats,
 approach in the proximal half of the humerus, but care has 
as the periosteal blood supply is left undisturbed. The 2.4-
to be taken to preserve the radial nerve. Medial plating is
 mm Unilock plate is used for most diaphyseal fractures, and
better for distally located fractures, because the medial
the 2.0-mm plate may be applied in smaller and immature
approach to the distal humeral requires lesstissue dissection
cats.
(9). Additionally, the straighter shape of the medial side
 Internal fixators have advantages over conventional plating.
of the distal humerus eases plate contouring. The medial
 especially when used for the repair of supracondylar fractures
of the humerus. The small distal fragment and the close vicin-
retraction of the median nerve and the brachial artery within
ity of the elbow joint make screw placement difficult in this
the limits of the supracondylar foramen. This facilitates screw
location. The small distal fragment often only allows inser-
 placement in distally located fractures, while minimizing the 
tion of two screws, and the stability of internal fxators is
risk for iatrogenic damage of these vital structures.
superior to conventional plating in situations where few
Suitable plates for fractures of the shaft of the humerus are
the 2.7-mm dynamic compression plate (DCP), the 2.4-mm
 also be applied with monocortical screws, therefore reducing
limited contact-dynamic compression plate (LC-DCP), and
the risk of screw insertion into the elbow joint. Bilateral
the 2.0/2.7-mm veterinary cuttable plate. Veterinary cuttable
 plating is also easier when monocortical screws are used, and
plates are preferred in the distal, narrow region, as they allow
 j r  r  p a  
insertion of 2.0-mm screws. A 2.0-mm DCP may be used for
 fractures of the supracondylar region. Additionally, accurate
simple diaphyseal fractures in small cats, and for supracondy-
 plate contouring is not as critical as compared to conven-
lar fractures. The plate is applied in compression, neutraliza-[
 tional plates. The 2.0-mm Unilock plates are a suitable size
tion, or buttress function, depending on fractureconfguration,  for fractures of the distal humerus.
Figure 29-3 (A) Preoperative and
(B) postoperative radiographs of 
a Salter and Harris type I fracture
of the proximal humerus in an
11-month-old cat, stabilized with
two pins
29:Humerus
347
Box 29-1. Stabilization of Salter and Harris type I fractures of the proximal humerus
A craniolateral approach is made to the proximal humerus.
wire is placed in a fgure-of-eight fashion through the hole
The shoulder joint is held in extension to reduce the frac-
and around the pin ends (Fig. 29-4B). Overtightening of
ure. Distal traction is applied on the humeral shaft with
the tension band wire is avoided, as this could cause the
the help of pointed reduction forceps, followed by levering
fracture gap to open on the caudal aspect.
the proximal epiphysis into place. The proximal epiphyses
 are slightly V-shaped, which allows control of reduction,
Figure 29-4
and gives some inherent stability after fracture reduction.
Stabilization methods
 Reduction is maintained manually or with the help of
for Salter and Harris
pointed reduction forceps during pin insertion.
type I fractures of 
 Parallel pinning: A 0.8-1.2-mm Kirschner wire is inserted
the proximal
humerus.
at the proximal ridge of the greater tubercle, and is
(A) Parallel pinning is
advanced perpendicular across the fracture surface into
preferable for
the caudal cortex of the proximal humeral metaphysis. A
immature cats.
second pin is inserted parallel to the frst one (Fig. 29-4A).
(B) Tension band
Tension band repair: The two parallel pins are inserted
repair. This
technique can be
frst. A hole is then drilled through the cranial cortex of
used in mature cats
the proximal metaphysis, at a distance from the fracture
without further
line approximating the distance between the proximal pin
 growth potential.
ends and the fracture. A piece of 0.6-0.8-mm orthopedic
B
29.3 Fractures of the proximal humerus
ubercle and one for the humeral head. Both epiphyses
break off the humeral metaphysis like a cap in Salter and
Fractures of the proximal humerus are uncommon. They
Harris type I fractures (Fig. 29-3). The distal fragment
includephysealfractures in youngcats,and proximal metaphys-
is usually displaced caudally and laterally (11). Parallel
eal fractures.
pinning is the treatment of choice for these fractures in
 growing cats, because further physeal growth is possible, and
29.3.1 Approaches to the proximal humerus
parallel pinning can allow this (Fig. 29-3). A tension band
repair offers more stability but may result in physeal closure
The proximal humeral metaphysis and shaft are exposed
if applied in cats with further growth potential (Box 29-1).
via a craniolateral approach, extending from the proximal
The tension band repair is also indicated to repair osteoto-
end of the greater tubercle distally (10). Extension of the
 mies of the greater tubercle, which are sometimes performed
pe raes reda on sne sone aeud qoodde
aS part of the surgical approach to the shoulder joint
Harris type I fractures of the proximal humerus. Articular
(Chapter 28).
 fractures of the humeral head requiring anatomic reconstruc-
tion of the fragments necessitate a more extensive approach
29.3.3 Proximal metaphyseal fractures
for adequate exposure of the articular surface. An approach
to the craniolateral region of the shoulder joint with either
Proximal metaphyseal fractures are most often caused by
tenotomy of the deltoid and infraspinatus muscles or osteot-
gunshot injuries. They are otherwise uncommon because the
omy of the acromion process or greater tubercle (10) may be
cross-sectional area is larger in the proximal humerus com-
necessary.
 pared to distal, and the bone is cancellous in nature and there-
fore less brittle (12). Simple fractures can be stabilized with
a cranial plate or with an intramedullary pin with an anti-
29.3.2 Salter and Harris fractures
rotational device, such as an external skeletal fixator. Commi-
Fractures of the proximal humeral physis are rare (2). The
nuted fractures caused by gunshot wounds require external
proximal humerus has two epiphyses, one for the greater
skeletal fixation, with or without an intramedullary pin.
 348   Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
 r     
therefore based on general fracture assessment, as discussed
ited bone diseases have a tendency to involve the proximal  in Chapter 13. The surgeon must be familiar with the specifc
metaphysis of the humerus (Chapter 4). Undisplaced patho-  anatomy of the feline distal humerus. Preoperative radio-
logical compression fractures can be treated conservatively
 graphs of the opposite humerus help to evaluate the anatomic
with cage rest. Intramedullary pinning in combination with
shape of the bone.
an external skeletal fxator is used to stabilize displaced
pathological fractures. Smaller and more flexible implants
29.4.1 Approaches to the humeral diaphysis
than normal should be used in the osteoporotic bone
The shaft of the humerus can be approached from both later-
(Chapter 13).
ally and medially. The lateral approach to the shaft of the
humerus (10) is better suited for the proximal and middle
29.4 Diaphyseal fractures of the humerus
humeral diaphysis. The most important structure encoun-
Diaphyseal fractures of the humerus usually occur between
tered is the radial nerve, which courses along the brachialis
the middle and distal third of the bone. The radial nerve
muscle in a caudoproximal to craniodistal direction. For
crosses the diaphysis on the lateral aspect of the bone, and is
 exposure of the humeral diaphysis, the brachialis muscle and
therefore vulnerable to traumatic or iatrogenic injury. Func-
the radial nerve are retracted caudally or cranially with
tion of the radial nerve should be assessed preoperatively.
Hohmann retractors or with a Penrose drain around the
Response to spinal reflex testing may be diffcult to interpret
structures
in the presence of a humeral fracture, but sensitivity of the
 During the medial approach to the shaft of the humerus
 dermatome of the radial nerve on the dorsum of the paw can
(10), the medial neurovascular bundle, consisting of the
be used for assessment of sensory function of the radial nerve
median, musculocutaneous, ulnar nerve, and brachial artery
(Chapter 1).
and vein, has to be identifed below the deep brachial fascia.
Cats younger than 1 year tend to have simple fractures,
The distal humeral shaft is exposed by cranial retraction of
whereas older cats are more likely to have comminuted frac-
the brachiocephalic muscle, and caudal retraction of the
tures (2). Stabilization of diaphyseal fractures is possible with
 triceps muscle. Extending the medial approach proximally
virtually any of the implants available for treatment of long-
requires incision and elevation of the pectoral muscles, and
bone fractures (Table 29-1). The fnal choice of implant is
 cranial retraction of the biceps muscle.
A
B
C
da ww-z padde Alleipau e yi pazes (a ') 'aney leasydep-pu aidwis e yim e e jo sudeaopen ae ladoaid (a 'v) s-ez ane
Lateral plating could also have been used in this case.
29: Humerus
349
Box 29-2. Stabilization of simple and short obligue fractures of the humeral diaphysis
A lateral approach to the humeral diaphysis is used for
Plating: Plates are usually applied cranially for proxi-
 external skeletal fxation and lateral plating, whereas a
mally located fractures (Fig. 29-6B), laterally for fractures
 medial approach is used for medial plating.
in the mid-diaphyseal area (Fig. 29-6C), and medially for
Intramedullary pin and external skeletal fixator: An
fractures of the distal third of the shaft (Fig. 29-6D). A
intramedullary pin of a pre-selected size is inserted until
minimum of three to four screws should be used per frac-
its distal end is seated just proximal to the supratrochlear
ture fragment. Interfragmentary compression can be
fossa. One 1.6-2.0-mm positive-threaded or two 1.4-
applied when a dynamic compression plate is used. It is
2.0-mm smooth transosseous pins are inserted in the main
usually sufficient to insert one screw per fragment eccentri-
fragments to prevent rotational stability. Smooth pins are
cally to achieve compression.
 angled about 70° to the long axis of the bone to prevent
pull-out (Fig. 29-6A).
Figure 29-6 Stabilization options for
simple transverse fractures of the
humeral shaft.
(A) Simple transverse fracture stabilized
with an intramedullary pin and a type l
external skeletal fixator with two
smooth pins per fragment. Note the
70° angle between pins and bone.
(B) Simple transverse fracture of the
 proximal humerus stabilized with a 
cranial plate.
(C) Simple transverse fracture of the
humeral mid-shaft repaired with a 
lateral plate.
(D) Distally located simple transverse 
fracture fixed with a medial plate.
C
D
29.4.2 Simple transverse and short
Plate osteosynthesis is advantageous in cats which are
oblique fractures
dificult to handle, in avoiding the morbidity associated with
ransosseus pins, and is preferred in older cats with the longer 
Simple transverse and short oblique fractures usually occur
healing times expected (Fig. 29-5).
in the middle and distal third of the humeral shaft. These
fractures are best treated with a plate or with an intramedul-
lary pin and external skeletal fxator (Box 29-2).
29.4.3 Long oblique and multifragmentary
 External skeletal fxation is mainly used in young cats.
reducible fractures
Although minimally displaced fractures could be reduced in
a closed manner, an open approach is usually preferred to
Anatomic reduction of long oblique fractures and multi-
aid accurate implant placement and visualize and preserve
fragmentary reducible fractures enhances bone contact and
the nerves. A relatively large intramedullary pin is selected to
stability. Long oblique fractures can be stabilized with an
 provide bending stability. The external skeletal fixator is then
intramedullary pin in combination with antirotational
only needed to provide rotational stability, and insertion of
implants, or with an interfragmentary lag screw and a plate
two transosseus pins per fragment is sufficient.
in neutralization function (Box 29-3).
350
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 29-3. Stabilization of long oblique and multifragmentary reducible fractures of the humeral diaphysis
Fractures in the middle to proximal region of the humerus
are best approached from lateral, whereas fractures of the
distal portion of the humeral shaft are best approached
from medial.
 Intramedullary pin and cerclage wire: This technique is
indicated for long oblique fractures. A pin diameter
approximately 70% of the medullary canal is inserted
normograde or retrograde, as described in Figure 29-2.
Two or more 0.8-mm cerclage wires are then positioned
 approximately 5 mm away from the proximal and distal
ends of the fracture line (Fig. 29-7A). Care is taken not to
engage soft tissues between the bone and wires.
 Lag screws and neutralization plate: This technique can
be used for both long oblique and multifragmentary reduc-
ible fractures (Fig. 29-7B and C). The fracture fragments
are anatomically reduced and temporarily stabilized with
pointed reduction forceps, and a 2.0-mm lag screw is
inserted perpendicular to the fracture line(s) for interfrag-
mentary compression. The plate is then applied across the
A
B
C
primary repair in neutralization function, with at least
Figure 29-7 Anatomic reduction and stable fixation of simple
oblique and multifragmentary reducible fractures.
three screws in the proximal and the distal fragment. Alter-
(A) Stabilization of a long oblique fracture with an intramedullary
natively, the lag screws can be inserted through the plate
pin and three cerclage wires.
if fracture confguration allows (Fig. 29-7C).
(B) Stabilization of a long oblique fracture with a lag screw and a
later al neutr alization plate.
(C) Reducible butterfly fracture in the distal shaft of the humerus,
stabilized with a medial plate. Two lag screws are inserted through
the plate holes.
 Fractures with one or even two large intermediate frag-
tion of the external skeletal fixator is selected according to
ments can also be repaired with lag screws or cerclage wires,
the expected healing time, the degree of fracture comminu-
and a neutralization plate (Box 29-3). Anatomic repair of
tion, soft-tissue damage, and age of the cat (Box 29-4). An
fractures requires extensive dissection of soft tissues, and
intramedullary pin facilitates spatial alignment and fracture
should only be attempted if anatomic reduction seems pos-
reduction, and enhances bending stability of the construct. A
sible from the preoperative radiographs, and it is felt that this
double bar can be used to provide better bending stability in
will enhance fxation stability. Alternatively, multifragmen-
the absence of an intramedullary pin (Fig. 29-8). Modified
tary fractures can be treated like comminuted fractures with
type II or even transarticular constructs may be needed for
a minimally invasive approach and stabilization of only the 
severely comminuted fractures and very distally located frac-
main fragments in functional reduction. Plates are usually
tures (Box 29-5).
positioned cranially in the proximal third, laterally in the
 Interlocking nailing, plate osteosynthesis, with or without
mid-diaphysis, and medially in the distal diaphysis.
an intramedullary pin, and internal fixators are other options
for stabilization of comminuted fractures of the humerus
29.4.4 Comminuted fractures
(Box 29-4). Internal stabilization should be considered,
especially in cats that are diffcult to handle or to keep
 External skeletal fixators are most commonly used to repair
indoors. Plates are applied laterally if the fracture extends
comminuted fractures of the humeral shaft, especially for
into the proximal diaphysis, and medially if the fracture is
fractures extending into the distal diaphysis. The configura-
located distally. As many comminuted fractures are located
29: Humerus
351
4
B
Figure 29-8 External skeletal fixation of a highly comminuted fracture of the humeral shaft. (Reproduced with permission from: J Small Anim Pract
1997:37:280-285.)
stability.
(C. D) Progression of healing at 6 and 12 weeks postoperatively
in the distal third of the humerus, it can be difficult to insert 
A lateral and medial approach to the distal humerus
onr moe on kisnosuus paunoad aq oi a a jraun uaue ies a u smans jo rqunu uins e
situation.
especially if comminuted. Osteotomy of the olecranon
29.5 Fractures of the distal humerus
condyle and can be used for intracondylar fractures if
required.
Fractures of the distal humerus include supracondylar frac-
tures, fractures of the lateral portion of the humeral condyle,
29.5.2 Supracondylar fractures
intracondylar T- or Y-fractures, intracondylar fractures with
supracondylar comminution, and Salter and Harris fractures
panedar aq uen sien auno u saien reapuoeidns aiduns
of the distal growth plate. Supracondylar and intracondylar
with pins (Box 29-5). Anatomic fracture reduction is neces-
fractures are most common (3, 13).
sary for fixation stability if using pinning techniques. Dynamic
 intramedullary pinning and stabilization with an intramedul-
29.5.1 Approaches to the distal humerus
lary pin and a Kirschner wire have been described (14). It can
 be diffcult to insert the pins into the medial epicondyle in
The supracondylar area of the humerus can be approached
 cats in the absence of a medullary canal distal to the supra-
from medially, laterally, and caudally (10). The medial
 condylar foramen. Medial plating is an option for both simple
"(-7 xog) sasen reapuoseidns Areuusenun pue repuoseidns jo uonezqeis rog paneipu s qeoidde
humeral fractures, because less dissection is necessary and 
 Plating offers more stability, and in dogs it has been shown
placement of implants is facilitated when compared to a  to be associated with lower complication rates when com-
lateral approach. The median nerve and brachial artery pared to stabilization with screws or pins and wires, particu-
coursing through the supracondylar foramen are protected. larly in adult animals (15).
The neurovascular bundle can carefully be moved proximally
 Supracondylar fractures in cats are often comminuted, and
and distally within the foramen to create room for insertion
 their surgical repair can be a challenge. Comminuted supra-
 paado aq uen uarog au Kresaseu jn 'smanos ro sund jo
 condylar fractures may be stabilized with an external fixator,
with rongeurs to prevent damage or compression of the neu-
 especially if the distal fragment does not offer enough room
rovascular bundle.
for plating (Fig. 29-11 and Box 29-5). Type I constructs are
352
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 29-4. Stabilization of comminuted fractures of the humeral diaphysis
A medial or lateral approach is made, depending on the
ullary pin (Fig. 29-9C). Pin size is usually 2.0 mm to
technique selected. Cancellous bone grafting should be
1.6 mm in the proximal humerus, and 1.6 mm or smaller
 considered if large fracture gaps are present, and an open 
in the distal humerus. Insertion of pins into the supracon-
approach has been used. Otherwise it is preferable to
dylar foramen is avoided, either by angling the pins in a
disturb the fracture site minimally. Fracture alignment is
proximomedial direction, or by insertion of a transcondy-
facilitated by insertion of an intramedullary pin prior to
lar pin (Fig. 29-9D).
application of an external skeletal fixator or a plate. The
Buttress plate: The plates are applied in buttress func-
pin should occupy a maximum of one-third of the distal
tion, with or without an intramedullary pin. Stacked
medullary canal to allow transosseous pins or screws to
2.0/2.7-mm veterinary cuttable plates or a 2.7-mm dynarmic
be placed.
compression plate can be used. At least six cortices must
Interlocking nail: The use of interlocking nails is limited
be engaged with the screws in both the proximal and distal
to diaphyseal fractures of the humerus, where there is suff-
main fragment in the absence of an intramedullary pin.
cient bone for insertion of two bolts or screws distally and
Four cortices should be suffcient with the plate and rod
proximally (Fig. 29-9A). Nails with a diameter of 4.0 mm
confguration (Fig. 29-9E).
and with 2.0-mm screws are most commonly used
Internal fixator: A 2.4-mm Unilock plate is applied in a
External skeletal fixation: Confguration of the external
similar fashion as a buttress plate. The screws can be
skeletal fxator depends on fracture severity and location,
 insered bicortical or monocortical, and should engage at
but type I constructs are usually adequate for diaphyseal
least four cortices in each main fragment. If possible,
fractures. At least three pins must be inserted per fragment
bicortical screws are used at the proximal and distal end
if no intramedullary pin is used (Fig. 29-9B). Two pins per
of the plate, and monocortical screws in the middle of the
fragment can be sufficient in the presence of an intramed-
diaphysis.
A
B
C
D
E
(B) Mildly comminuted fracture stabilized with a type I external skeletal fixator, using three pins per fragment.
(C) Mildly comminuted fracture stabilized with an intramedullary pin and a type I external skeletal fixator. The pins are angled at 7o° to the
long axis of the bone.
(D) Stabilization of a more distally located fracture with an external skeletal fixator in tie-in configuration, using a positive-threaded 1.6-mm 
transcondylar pin.
(E) Mid-diaphyseal comminuted fracture stabilized with a plate and rod technique.
29:Humerus
353
 Box 29-5. Stabilization of supracondylar humeral fractures
A lateral approach is performed for pinning and for exter-
foramen to allow insertion of an additional screw in this
nal skeletal fixation. A medial approach is used for medial
area. Double plating is also possible and should be con-
plating. Cancellous bone graft should be applied in severely
sidered in comminuted fractures (see Box 29-7, below).
 comminuted fractures. The supracondylar foramen may be
Internal fixator: A 2.0-mm Unilock plate is applied in a
opened with rongeurs if nerve compression is present.
similar fashion as described for conventional plating, but
 Pinning techniques: In cats with a medullary canal in the
the locking screws can be inserted monocortically. The
medial epicondyle, a 1.2-1.6-mm intramedullary pin is
 most distal screw often has to be angled to be inserted into
inserted from the greater tubercle into the medial epicon-
the condyle. A standard screw must then be used for this
dyle. A Kirschner wire is then drilled from just caudal to
 purpose. Bilateral application is useful in comminuted
the lateral epicondyle through the distal lateral metaphys-
fractures.
eal ramus to exit the craniomedial cortex of the humeral
External skeletal fixation: An intramedullary pin is
diaphysis (Fig. 29-10A). Alternatively, two 1.2-1.4-mm
inserted into the medial epicondyle, if possible. It is later
connected to the external bar in a tie-in confguration to
medullary pin in cats without an intramedullary canal in
 avoid pin migration. A 1.6-mm transcondylar end-threaded
the medial epicondyle (Fig. 29-10B).
'isny pairasu sl und uoexysue papearu Aeun 1o
 Plating: Medial plating is indicated for simple and mildly
depending whether a type I or a modifed type II (Fig.
comminuted fractures. A 2.0-mm dynamic compression
 29-10D) external skeletal fixator is to be used. It is started
plate or 1.5/2.0-mm veterinary cuttable plate is positioned
from just cranial to the lateral epicondyle and exits the
caudomedially along the medial epicondylar crest (Fig.
bone craniodistal to the medial epicondyle to avoid joint
29-10C). The most distal screw is directed cranially into
 penetration. The most proximal pin is then inserted, and
 the humeral condyle. The median nerve and brachial artery
the connecting bars applied. Two more half pins are
are visualized, and can be moved within the supracondylar
 inserted proximally and one distally.
Figure 29-10 Stabilization methods for
supracondylar humeral fractures
(A) A simple oblique supracondylar
fracture, stabilized with an
intramedullary pin and lateral Kirschner
wire. This technique only applies in 
cats with a distal intramedullary canal
(B) Repair of a simple supracondylar
fracture with cross pins. Instead of
penetrating the transcortex, the pins
could also be inserted far proximally
along the inner cortical surface as
dynamic intramedullary pins.
(C) Stabilization of a simple
supracondylar fracture with a medial
plate.
(D) A severely comminuted fracture
treated with a modified type Il external
skeletal fixator in tie-in configuration.
B
D
354
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
adequate if the distal fragment allows insertion of two pins,
plating is further described under stabilization of intracondy-
 and if an intramedullary pin is also placed. A modifed type
lar fractures of the humerus.
 II external skeletal fixator provides more stability than a type
I external fixator, and may be used in severely comminuted
29.5.3 Fractures through the humeral condyle
fractures, and fractures with a very small distal fragment
(16). Medial or bilateral plating are other options for treating
Fractures through the humeral condyle are classifed into
comminuted supracondylar fractures. Double plating is easier 
 simple fractures of the lateral portion of the humeral condyle,
with internal fixators than with conventional plates, because
 where the medial portion remains attached to the humeral
of the possibility of monocortical screw insertion. Bilateral
 shaft (Fig. 29-12), and T- or Y-intracondylar fractures, where
A
B
?
D
Figure 29-11 External skeletal fixation of a supracondylar humeral
fracture.
(A, B) Preoperative radiographs showing a multifragmentary
reduciblefracture.
(C, D) Treatment with an external skeletal fixator in tie-in
configuration
(E, F) Three-month follow-up radiographs showing healing of the
fracture.
29: Humerus
355
both the lateral and medial portions of the condyle are broken
fractures of the lateral portion of the condyle are usually
off the shaft (Fig. 29-13). The supracondylar part of the 
immature, and the fracture is then classifed as a Salter and
fracture may be simple or comminuted.
Harris type IV fracture. These fractures should be anatomi-
Fractures of the lateral portion of the humeral condyle
 cally reduced to restore elbow joint congruity, and stabilized
occur only infrequently in adult cats (Fig. 29-12). Cats with
with a 1.5- or 2.0-mm transcondylar lag screw (Fig. 29-12
and Box 29-6). Either an antirotational pin or another screw
 angled along the lateral epicondylar crest is added to provide
rotational stability.
Most fractures through the humeral condyle in cats
 are intracondylar fractures combined with a supracondylar
fracture, resulting in detachment of both the medial and
lateral portion of the condyle from the shaft. Simple T- or Y-
fractures can occur, but comminution of the metaphyseal
part of the fracture is present in most cases (13). Comminuted
articular fractures of the distal humerus are among some of
the most difficult to repair in cats. The humeral condyle and
articular surface have to be anatomically reduced and stabi-
lized with a lag screw. Then, depending on the fracture con-
fguration and degree of comminution, plates, internal
fxators, or external fixators are added to address the supra-
 condylar part of the fracture (Box 29-7). The small condylar
fragments and the presence of a transcortical lag screw often
A
B
render insertion of a sufficient number of screws difficult, and
Figure 29-12 (A) Preoperative and (B) postoperative radiographs of an
bilateral plating is usually necessary to achieve adequate sta-
adult cat with a fracture of the lateral portion of the humeral condyle.
bility (Fig. 29-13). Internal fxators are ideal for this purpose
The articular surface is reconstructed and stabilized anatomically with a
transcondylar lag screw. A second screw is used as an antirotational
because monocortical screws can be used, and fxation stabil-
implant.
ity is better than with conventional plates if only two screws
B
D
Figure 29-13 (A, B) Preoperative and (C, D) postoperative radiographs of an intracondylar fracture with supracondylar comminution. The condyle
was first anatomically reduced and stabilized with a transcondylar lag screw. The supracondylar part of the fracture was then bridged with two 2.0-
mm locking plates. Note that monocortical screws can be used with locking plates. The medially applied plate could have been positioned further
distally. taking care not to injure the structures in the supracondylar foramen.
356
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 29-6. Stabilization of a fracture of the lateral portion of the humeral condyle
A craniolateral approach to the elbow joint is performed.
Figure 29-14 Stabilization of a fracture of the
A 1.5-2.0-mm lag screw is inserted from just cranial to
lateral portion of the humeral condyle with a
the lateral epicondyle to slightly caudodistal to the medial
transcondylar lag screw and an antirotational
epicondyle (Fig. 29-14). The gliding hole into the lateral
pin.
au jo ioadse jerie aui uony paip aq ueo apuoide
bone after the fracture has been reduced and stabilized
with pointed bone reduction forceps. A C-shaped drill
guide is useful for this method. An alternative is to drill
the gliding hole from the fracture surface towards the
lateral aspect of the bone before the fracture is reduced.
This may facilitate correct screw placement, but involves
more dissection and manipulation of the fragments. After
the gliding hole has been drilled and the fracture reduced,
a drill guide is inserted into the gliding hole to assist in
directing the drill bit for the thread hole. The lag screw is
inserted. A small Kirschner wire is inserted into the lateral
epicondylar crest to provide rotational stability before the
screw is tightened.
can be inserted distally. Cancellous bone graft should be used
between 4 and 6 weeks postoperatively in adult cats, and
in fractures with supracondylar comminution to enhance
after 2 weeks in growing cats with physeal fractures. Post-
fracture healing.
 operative treatment of cats after external skeletal fxation
-jan aaneradonsod on pareduos Suunsuos-qu arou si
29.5.4 Salter and Harris fractures
all forms of fracture fixation is likely to improve functional
Salter and Harris fractures of the distal humeral physis are
outcome, especially in cats with restricted elbow function.
rare, and only occur in very young cats before physeal closure
 Healing of fractures of the humeral shaft is usually good,
at 16-18 weeks of age (17). Salter and Harris type IV frac-
even after severely comminuted fractures. Ten comminuted
tures are seen most often (3). Anatomic alignment and stabi-
fractures of the humeral shaft healed without major compli-
lization of the joint surface are classically achieved with an
cations in a study evaluating 13 cats (4). Complications
 intercondylar screw and an antirotational pin, as described
encountered in three cats included non-union, refracture after
above (Fig. 29-16). The small size and soft bone quality of
 implant removal, and a stiff elbow joint. Healing times were
the condyle in a young cat ofen preclude the use of lag
5-6 weeks for mildly comminuted fractures, and 10-11
screws. As an alternative, a 1.5-mm positional screw or a
weeks for severely comminuted fractures (4).
small threaded Kirschner wire may be used as transcondylar
Outcome after distal humeral fractures depends on the
implants after reduction and careful compression of  the
ability to restore elbow congruity and achieve stable fixation.
 fracture with pointed bone reduction forceps (18).
Approximately 90% of dogs and cats were described as
having a good to excellent functional outcome after fractures
29.6 Postoperative treatment
 of the distal shaft and supracondylar region, and after simple
and prognosis
fractures of the lateral portion of the condyle (15). Intracon-
dylar T- or Y-fractures had a less favorable outcome, with
Postoperative treatment depends on the implants used. Cats
 only around 50% of patients regaining satisfactory or good
with stable internal fixation of humeral fractures are confined
function (15). In a report on five cats with T- or Y-fractures
to the house for around 6 weeks. Radiographs are taken
and supracondylar comminution, three cats regained good
29:Humerus
357
Box 29-7. Stabilization of intracondylar humeral fractures with supracondylar comminution
 Both a lateral and medial approach have to be performed.
comminuted fractures, and is facilitated if an internal
An olecranon osteotomy could be made to reflect the
fxator is used.
triceps muscle, and improve visualization. The articular
The presence of the intracondylar lag screw does not
part of the fracture is always treated frst. It is anatomically
allow for easy insertion of a transcondylar transosseus pin
reduced and stabilized with a lag screw, as described in
 if external skeletal fixation is used, but it may be possible
Box 29-6.
to insert small Kirschner wires. These are inserted proxi-
 Medial (Fig. 29-15A) or bilateral plates or internal
 mal to the screw, either monocortically or bicortically.
fxators (Fig. 29-15B) or an external skeletal fxator
 Bicortical pins are positioned under visual control and
(Fig. 29-15C) are then used to stabilize the supracondylar
 retraction of the median nerve and brachial artery. At least
 part of the fracture. Bilateral plating is advised for severely
'uauaer jeuixoid a ul pasn are suid snassosuenn saiu 
Figure 29-15 Stabilization methods for
intracondylar humeral fractures with
supracondylar comminution.
(A) Repair with a lag screw, and a
medial plate
(B) Stabilization with a lag screw, and 
both a medial and lateral plate. Bilateral
plating offers more stability than medial 
plating alone.
(C) Fixation using a lag screw, and an
 external skeletal fixator in tie-in 
configur ation.
function, one cat was persistently lame, and the limb of one
Plates are not routinely removed after healing of humeral
cat had to be amputated following fixation failure (13). The
fractures, because the approach is relatively invasive and
bears the risk for iatrogenic nerve damage. An indication for
tion in a few cats with severe elbow fractures, resulting in
implant removal is irritation of the elbow joint by periarticu-
decreased range of motion in the joint.
lar implants.
358
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
A
B
C
D
Figure 29-16 A Salter and Harris type IV fracture in a 4-month-old cat.
(A, B) Pre- and postoperative radiographs. Anatomic reduction and stabilization was achieved with a 1.5-mm lag screw and two small Kirschner
wires.
(C, D) Radiographs & weeks postoperatively after implant removal, showing the healed fracture.
References and further reading
10. Piermattei DL, Johnson, KA. An atlas of surgical approaches to
the bones and joints of the dog and the cat, 4th edn. Philadel-
1. Hill FwG. A survey of bone fractures in the cat. J Small Anim
phia: WB Saunders; 2004.
Pract 1977;18:457-463.
11. Tomlinson JL. Fractures of the humerus. In: Slatter D (ed.)
2. Staimer MS. Humerusfrakturen bei der Katze. Dissertation-
Textbook of small animal surgery, 3rd edn. Philadelphia: WB
schrift. Minchen: Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat; 1980.
Saunders; 2003: pp. 1905-1918.
3. Vannini R, et al. An epidemiologic study of 151 distal humeral
12. Turner TM. Fractures of the proximal humerus. In: Johnson AL,
fractures in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1988;24:
Houlton JEF, Vannini R (eds) AO principles of fracture manage-
531-536.
ment in the dog and cat. Stuttgart: Thieme; 2005: pp.
4. Langley-Hobbs SJ, et al. External skeletal fixation for stabilisa-
203-208.
tion of comminuted humeral fractures in cats. J Smal Anim
13. Macias C, et al. Y-T humeral fractures with supracondylar com-
Pract 1997;38:280-285.
minution in five cats. J Small Anim Pract 2006;47:89-93.
 5. Langley-Hobbs SJ, Straw M. The feline humerus. An anatomical
14. Piermattei DL, Flo GL. Fractures of the humerus. In: Piermattei
study with relevance to external skeletal fixator and intrame-
DL, Flo GL (eds) Small animal orthopedics and fracture repair.
dullary pin placement. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2005;18:
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1997: pp. 261-287.
1-6.
15. Vannini RS, et al. Evaluation of surgical repair of 135 distal
6. Moses PA, et al. Intramedullary interlocking pin stabilisation of
humeral fractures in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
21 humeral fractures in 19 dogs and one cat. Aust Vet J 2002;32:
1988;24:537-542.
336-343.
16. Klause SE, et al. A modification of the unilateral type 1 ESF
 7. Duhautois B. Use of veterinary interlocking nails for diaphyseal
configuration for primary or secondary support of supracondy-
fractures in dogs and cats: 121 cases. Vet Surg 2003;32:8-20.
lar humeral or femoral fractures. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
8. Aron DN, et al. Experimental and clinical experience with an
1990;3:130-134.
 IM pin external skeletal fixator tie-in configuration. Vet Comp
17. Smith RN. Fusion of ossification centres in the cat. J Small Anim
Orthop Traumatol 1991;4:86-94.
Pract 1969;10:523-530.
9. Harari J, et al. Medial plating for repair of middle and distal
18. Morshead D, Stambaugh JE. Kirschner wire fixation of lateral
diaphyseal fractures of the humerus in dogs. Vet Surg 1986;
humeral condylar fractures in small dogs. Vet Surg 1984;13:
15:45-48.
1-5.
359
30
 Elbow joint
K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs, P.M. Montavon
 Elbow luxations and articular fractures of the distal humerus
coronoid processes of the ulna (4). Cats lack the strong
are the most common injuries of the elbow joint. Humeral
interosseous ligament between radius and ulna that is seen in
 fractures are described in Chapter 29, and ulnar and radial
dogs (5).
fractures in Chapter 31. A variety of different types of elbow
luxation are observed in cats, in contrast to dogs where
30.2 Diagnosis and treatment options
lateral elbow luxations make up the vast majority of cases.
Anatomic differences may be responsible for this. Other inju-
A summary of diseases and injuries of the elbow joint is
 ries, like avulsion fractures or collateral ligament sprains, are
provided in Table 30-1. Lameness varies from acute non-
 also diagnosed.
weight-bearing to chronic low-grade lameness, depending on
 The elbow joint of older cats is more commonly affected
the cause of the elbow disorder. The elbow is palpated to
by osteoarthritis when compared to other joints of the appen-
detect periarticular enlargement or fbrosis or alteration in
dicular skeleton (1-3), but underlying disease processes have
normal anatomy and palpable bony landmarks. Pain and
not yet been described. A variety of other elbow diseases such
range of motion are evaluated by manipulating the joint
as synovial cysts, elbow epicondylitis, synovial osteochondro-
through flexion and extension, and pronation and supina-
matosis, elbow dysplasia, or congenital elbow luxation, may
 tion. Osteoarthritis and other chronic conditions often cause
also be encountered, but information on these conditions
subtle clinical signs. Large fluid-filled structures adjacent to
is scarce. Diseases and traumatic injuries to the elbow joint
the joint may be consistent with synovial cysts. The insertion
are summarized in the following sections. Please also see
site of the flexor tendons on the medial humeral epicondyle
Chapters 5 and 25.
may be painful on palpation in the presence of medial
epicondylitis.
 Pain, abnormal joint confguration, reduced range of
30.1 Surgical anatomy
motion, and crepitation are usually easily palpable in acute
injuries, such as elbow luxations or fractures. In cases with
The elbow joint consists of three combined articulations: the
lateral elbow luxation, the radial head and proximal ulna can
humeroradial, humeroulnar, and radioulnar articulation. The
be palpated lateral to the humeral condyle. The integrity of
shape and orientation of the feline trochlea humeri is differ-
 the collateral ligaments can be tested with the Campbell test,
ent to that of the dog, and lead to medial movement of the
as shown in Figure 30-2.
radius and ulna during flexion of the elbow joint (4). The
Radiographs of the elbow joint are taken to detect signs of
radioulnar joint allows rotation of the ulna around the radial
degenerative joint disease, luxations, and fractures. A sesa-
head, which is necessary for the high degree of pronation and
supination seen in felines.
Differences exist between cats and dogs regarding anatomy
of the ligaments and the types of luxations seen. Similar to
the dog, the collateral ligaments of the elbow in cats consist
of two parts each, but their course and relative strength differ
(Fig. 30-1). The ulnar part of the lateral collateral ligament
is broader than the radial part, and it courses caudally to
insert on the lateral coronoid process (4, 5). The ulnar part
of the medial collateral ligament is also broader than the
radial part of the medial collateral ligament (4, 5). The ulnar
A
parts of the collateral ligaments are taut throughout the range
of motion, whereas the radial parts are lax in flexion, allow-
Figure 30-1 Anatomy of the collateral ligaments of the elbow in cats.
The ulnar parts of both the lateral (A) and medial (B) collateral
ing an increased range of rotation of the radial head (4). The
ligaments are broader than the corresponding radial parts. The annular
annular ligament surrounds the radial head. It originates
ligament has an additional attachment to the humeral epicondyle on
 from the lateral collateral ligament, and inserts on the medial
the lateral side.
360
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
 Type of lesion
Further classification
Treatment options
Elbow dysplasia and
Dysplasia
Depends on individual case
 congenital luxation
Congenital luxation of the radial head
 Synovial cysts
Conservative, aspiration of the cyst
Disorder of tendons
Epicondylitis, avulsion of flexor tendons
Conservative
Surgical
 Triceps tendon rupture
Tendon suture
Elbow instability
 Collateral ligament sprain
Conservative
 Collateral ligament prostheses
Elbow luxation
Elbow luxation with intact radioulnar
Closed reduction followed by conservative
joint
treatment
Open reduction and collateral ligament
prostheses
Luxation of the radial head
Open reduction and temporary positional screw
between ulna and radius
Complex elbow luxation with
 Open reduction and temporary positional screw
 disruption of the radioulnar joint
 between radius and ulna, and collateral
ligament prostheses
Fractures
Medial epicondylar crest
Conservative
Excision of fragment and suture anchorage of
flexor muscles
Anconeal process
Excision of fragment
Table 30-1. Injuries of the elbow joint and possible treatment options
moid bone in the tendon of origin of the supinator muscle is
present in around 40% of cats (6). It is located at the cranio-
lateral aspect of the head of the radius, and should not be
mistaken for a pathological condition. Stress radiographs
can help to confrm medial or lateral collateral ligament
strain if elbow instability is suspected from clinical fndings.
Arthrography can confrm the presence of synovial cysts.
30.3 Approaches to the elbow joint
110°
Surgery of the elbow joint in cats is most often performed to
reduce and stabilize elbow luxations. Lateral and medial
approaches may have to be combined.
 A lateral approach allows access to the lateral epicondyle
70°
of the humerus, the head of the radius, the lateral coronoid
process of the ulna, and the lateral collateral ligament (7).
The head of the radius and the lateral coronoid process of
 the ulna can be reached by blunt separation of the extensor
muscles. The superfcial branch of the radial nerve lies
Figure 30-2 Campbell test. Elbow and carpal joint are held in 90° of
between the lateral head of the triceps and the brachialis
flexion and supination and pronation movements are performed.
muscle, and runs cranial and distal to the elbow joint. Care
Approximately 110° of supination, and up to 70° of pronation, is
must be taken not to injure the thin deep motor branch of
normal. Supination is exaggerated in the presence of lateral collateral
the radial nerve, which courses between the extensor carpi
ligament rupture. Subluxation of the radial head may also be felt
laterally.Pronation is exaggerated in the presence of medial collateral
radialis muscle and the supinator muscle, innervating the
ligament rupture.
 extensor muscle group.
30: Elbow joint
361
The caudal humeroulnar part of the elbow joint is also
approached from lateral (7), but the incision is located more
caudally between the humeral epicondylar crest and the olec-
ranon. Incision and elevation of the anconeus muscle allow
visualization of the caudal humeroulnar joint, including the
anconeal process.
The medial humeral epicondyle, the medial coronoid
process of the ulna, and the medial collateral ligament are
approached through a medial intermuscular approach (7).
The medial coronoid process is relatively large in cats and
almost completely covers the radial head. The ulnar nerve lies
just caudal to the medial epicondylar crest. The median nerve
and run further cranially below the pronator muscle.
A
B
Figure 30-3 (A) Mediolateral and (B) craniocaudal radiographs of the
30.4 Elbow dysplasia and congenital
o uoexnl leanelnen jeuabuos yr ie pio-ea-1 e jo mogla hal
elbow luxation
the radial head. The condition was present bilaterally without causing
marked clinical signs.
The high incidence of degenerative changes of the elbow joint
in cats raises the question of whether underlying causes, such
as elbow dysplasia, could play a role in the disease process.
Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process of the ulna of synovial cysts in humans is herniation of the synovial
was considered a possible cause for osteoarthritis in the membrane through the joint capsule, possibly secondary to
elbowjoints of one cat, explored arthroscopically (8)(Chapter rauma or osteoarthritis. Synovial cysts of the elbow are
 25), and the authors have seen bilateral radioulnar incongru-usually associated with degenerative joint disease in elderly
ency in one cat with elbow osteoarthritis. However, as infor-  cats (13, 14).
mation in feline literature on elbow dysplasia is nearly
Affected cats usually present with a mild lameness. The
non-existent, treatment options in affected cats have to be
 cysts can be palpated as large fluid-filled structures adjacent
extrapolated from dogs (Chapter 25).
to the elbow joint, protruding between muscle bellies, and
 Congenital elbow luxation has been described in two case
 extending towards proximally and/or distally. Radiographs
 demonstrate soft-tissue swelling and degenerative changes of
(9), and caudolaterally in the other case (10). Affected cats the elbow joint (Fig. 30-4). Rerieval of synovial fuid out of
jo uao rne au aunsuup Aq sisoup ai suy ssosous (e-oe ) saumo al Aq paouun o keur uon
between the proximal radius and ulna can be present, and  the mass, and it can be used to outline the extent of the
was considered a possible cause for elbow luxation in one cyst.
report (10). A similar condition is described in children, 
 Surgical resection of synovial cysts at the level of their
where a developmental arrest of longitudinal segmentation  origin at the joint capsule appears to be the treatment of
during feal life causes congenital synostosis between the choice in dogs. However neither needle drainage nor surgical
imal radius and ulna, resulting in congenital elbow luxation  recurrence of the cyst in most of the reported cats (13). It is
(11). Treatment mainly depends on the severity of clinical therefore suggested to treat the underlying elbow osteoarthri-
O1 Aeipoad sisko aql aiendse on pue (s randeu) sn Xaaeaiasuos paeueur aq Aqeqond ues sies ison suais
and arthrodesis of the elbow should be reserved as a salvage 
control their size (13).
procedure in cases with marked clinical disability
30.6 Elbow epicondylitis
30.5 Synovial cysts
Avulsion and calcification of the antebrachial flexor tendons
Synovial cysts are periarticular swellings lined with synovial
at their insertion site on the medial epicondyle of the humerus
membrane-like cells and containing synovial fuid. Although  is a rare condition in dogs (15, 16). The inciting cause is
synovial cysts can theoretically originate from any synovial unknown, but trauma or overuse may cause partial or com-
da p a u so roxa al jo is aad  s n s moie a jo sis aqs ao son i
362
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Figure 30-4
Figure 30-6
Mediolateral
Radiographs of a
radiograph of the
cat with triceps
elbow joint of a 15-
tendinopathy. Similar
year-old cat with a
changes were
synovial cyst. The
present in the
cyst is visible as a
contralateral leg.
large soft-tissue
Treatment consisted
swelling proximal to 
 of reinforcement by
the elbow. Note also
imbrication of the
the presence of
 triceps tendon.
 elbow osteoarthritis.
R
 Figure 30-5 Radiographs of a
16-year-old cat with medial
epicondylitis of the elbow. Several
mineralized bodies are present in 
the area of the flexor tendons
caudal and distal to the medial
epicondyle, on both (A) the
mediolateral and (B) craniocaudal
radiograph. The medial
 epicondyle has a rounded and
irregular appearance (A).
A
B
dyle, resulting in epicondylitis, insertion tendinopathy, and
affected most commonly. The tendons of the flexor muscle
dystrophic calcification of the flexor muscles.
are in close association with the joint capsule, and care is
A similar condition also occurs in cats. Affected cats can be
taken during removal of the calcified tissue not to damage
 asymptomatic, or are presented with mild lameness. Pain can 
the joint capsule. The debrided flexor tendons are then reat-
often be elicited by digital pressure on the flexor muscles and
tached to the surrounding tendons and muscle fascia with
medial epicondyle. Radiological signs in chronic cases include
mattress sutures. Postoperatively, a modifed Robert Jones
foci of mineralization in the area of the attachment of the
bandage is applied for 10 days. The carpal joint is immobi-
flexor muscles on the medial epicondyle or distal to it, and a
lized in slight flexion to reduce the tension on the flexor
rounded and irregular medial epicondyle on mediolateral
muscles. Activity should be restricted for another 4 weeks.
radiographs (Fig. 30-5). The condition could be a sequel to
traumatic avulsion, or it could be caused by repetitive stre-
30.7 Avulsion of the triceps tendon
nuous activity, such as jumping down from a height. Osteo-
arthritis of the elbow joint can be present concurrently.
Avulsion of the triceps tendon was recently described in two
Treatment consists of surgical removal of calcified tendon
cats with a history of falls or jumps from a height (17, 18).
and muscle tissue if the cat is lame at presentation. The
 One of the cats had histopathological evidence of a pre-exist-
humeral head of the flexor carpi ulnaris muscle seems to be
ing tendinopathy prior to complete rupture (18). Chronic
30: Elbow joint
363
tendinopathy may result in radiographic changes, as shown
in Figure 30-6. The authors have also seen a cat with an
avulsed triceps tendon after pin and tension band wire repair
of an olecranon fracture.
 Diagnosis of triceps tendon avulsion is obtained by clinical
signs of a dropped elbow and inability to keep the elbow
extended during weight-bearing, palpation of the integrity of
the tendon, radiographs to detect avulsion fractures or frag-
ments, and possibly ultrasononography.
The triceps tendon must be reattached to the tuber olecrani
to restore resistance to weight-bearing forces. One or several
modifed locking-loop or three-loop pulley sutures (Chapter
16) are anchored through holes drilled into the tuber olecrani.
Non-absorbable monoflament or braided composite suture
material is used. Postoperatively, the elbow is kept in an
A
B
es reua pds e jo diau  wm sd papaa
Figure 30-8 (A) Preoperative and (B) postoperative mediolateral
splint, or transarticular external skeletal fixator (18) for
radiographs of a cat with caudal elbow luxation.Instability persisted
after closed reduction. Both collateral ligaments were sutured and
around 3 weeks. Activity is restricted for another 2-3 months.
medial and lateral ligament prosthesis applied, using 1.5- and 2.0-mm
screws and polypropylene sutures.
30.8 Elbow luxations
Traumatic luxation of the feline elbow joint can be classified
due to bony restriction of the prominent medial epicondyle
into one of three types: elbow luxation with an intact radio-
(Fig. 30-7), but caudal luxations also occur in the feline
ulnar joint; luxation of the radial head, often accompanied
patient (Fig. 30-8). Medial elbow luxation is exceedingly
by an ulnar fracture and then called a Monteggia lesion; and
rare. The elbow is a very stable joint due to its bony anatomy.
elbow luxation with concurrent disruption of the radioulnar
Considering the force necessary for elbow luxation to occur,
joint, thus a combination of the frst two types.
the collateral ligaments are likely to be damaged in most
cases. Instability of the collateral ligament support was clini-
30.8.1 Elbow luxation with intact radioulnar joint
cally diagnosed after closed reduction of elbow luxations in
60% of cases in a study including dogs and cats (19).
These injuries are the classical form of elbow luxation, and
The reduction of acute elbow luxations is attempted in a
are characterized by an intact connection between the proxi-
closed manner (Box 30-1). A decision between conservative
mal radius and ulna. Lateral elbow luxation is most common,
 treatment and surgical stabilization has to be made once the
joint is reduced. The decision is based on clinical elbow sta-
bility, which is evaluated by the Campbell test, as described
above (Fig. 30-2). If stability is considered adequate, a spica
splint is applied for 10 days (Chapter 22). The spica splint
immobilizes the elbow in extension, thus reducing the risk of
reluxation. Some cats do not tolerate the spica splint well.
Cage rest alone, or application of a transarticular external
skeletal fixator, can be used in these cats, depending on elbow
stability.
 Indications for surgery are elbow luxations that cannot be
reduced in a closed manner for example chronic elbow luxa-
tions, and elbow joints with marked instability after closed
reduction. Surgical stabilization of the collateral ligaments
reduces the risk of reluxation, and is likely to reduce instabil-
ity-related degenerative joint changes. According to the ana-
A
B
tomic course of the ligaments, the medial collateral ligament
Figure 30-7 Craniocaudal radiographs of a cat with lateral elbow
luxation, (A) before and (B) 10 days after closed reduction. The elbow
should be reconstructed from the humerus to the ulna, and
was considered stable enough for conservative treatment with a spica
the lateral collateral ligament from the humerus to the radius
splint after closed reduction.
{Box 30-2).
364
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
lesion. The ulna is usually fractured through its proximal
Box 30-1. Closed reduction of a lateral elbow joint
 diaphysis, causing separation of the radioulnar joint by dis-
ruption of the annular ligament. The injury is due to a fall in
Closed reduction of the elbow joint is performed under
most cases and concurrent injuries are frequent (20). Monteg-
 general anesthesia. The aim of the frst manipulation is
 gia lesions have been classified into four types, according to
to bring the anconeal process back into the caudal
the direction of luxation of the radial head (20, 21). The
humeral fossa while the elbow joint is held in flexion
0 "(l ad) Aeno "(i ad) Ae aiex uo pea iep
and pronation (Fig. 30-9). The anconeal process is then
laterally (type IIl). An additional fracture of the proximal
 used as a fulcrum to reduce the radial head, while the
radial diaphysis is present in type IV lesions. Type I injuries
elbow joint is gradually extended (Fig. 30-9). Consider-
are most common (Fig. 30-11).
able force may be necessary to reduce an elbow joint 
Luxations of the radial head and Monteggia lesions are
and care should be taken not to injure the cartilage by
always treated surgically in order to restore the weight-
performing unnecessary manipulations. If closed reduc-
bearing humeroradial axis. Suturing the annular ligament as
 tion is not possible without risking damage, then open
the only means of stabilization often results in reluxation of
 reduction should be attempted.
the radial head (20). A temporary positional screw is prefer-
ably placed between the proximal ulna and radius to add
stability until the ligament and periarticular tissues have
healed (Box 30-3). The radial neck in cats is narrow, so screw
placement bears the risk for iatrogenic fracture of the bone.
This risk is minimized by insertion of a 1.5-mm screw into
the slightly larger radial head, close to the elbow joint. The
screw is removed after approximately 4-6 weeks.
The ulnar fracture is stabilized surgically, because instabil-
ity of the ulna increases load-sharing of the radius, and
enhances the risk for reluxation of the radial head (Box 30-3).
Simple reducible ulnar fractures can be stabilized with a
caudally positioned fgure-of-eight wire and/or an intramed-
ullary pin. Application of a lateral plate provides more stabil-
ity and is always indicated for comminuted fractures.
30.8.3 Elbow luxation with disruption of
the radioulnar joint
Cats can sustain elbow luxation with concurrent disruption
 of the radioulnar joint. An ulnar fracture is present in most
cases (Fig. 30-13). These injuries are similar to Monteggia
B
lesions, but the humeroulnar joint is also luxated. Two of the
Figure 30-9 Closed reduction of a lateral elbow luxation. (A)
The anconeal process is levered into the fossa olecrani of the
anatomic differences in the ligamentous support of the elbow
humerus by digital manipulation or with the help of bone-
and proximal radius and ulna may predispose cats to this
holding forceps positioned on the olecranon, with the elbow
type of injury. First, the annular ligament has an attachment
joint held in flexion and the antebrachium in pronation. (B) The
to the lateral humeral condyle together with the lateral col-
elbow is then slowly extended while exerting digital pressure on
lateral ligament, which may result in simultaneous damage
the radial head in a medial direction.
to both the annular and the lateral collateral ligaments.
 Secondly, cats lack the strong interosseus ligament between
the radius and ulna (5), resulting in a weaker connection
between the radial and ulnar diaphyses.
 Meticulous reconstruction of all ruptured ligaments is nec-
30.8.2 Luxation of the radial head and
essary to achieve correct reduction and adequate stability of
Monteggia lesions
these highly unstable joints (Fig. 30-13). The elbow is frst
Traumatic luxations of the radial head usually take place in
approached by a lateral intermuscular approach. The humero-
conjunction with an ulnar fracture, but isolated luxations of
ulnar joint is reduced, followed by reduction of the radial
the radial head also occur. The combination of luxation of
head. The injury is then treated like a Monteggia lesion as
the radial head and an ulnar fracture is called a Monteggia
described above, including suturing of the annular ligament,
30: Elbow joint
365
Box 30-2. Open reduction of lateral elbow luxation with ligament reconstruction
A lateral approach is performed for open joint reduction
and for application of a lateral ligament prosthesis. A
medial approach is used for a medial ligament prosthesis.
A bilateral approach is needed to reconstruct both the
medial and lateral collateral ligaments.
Open reduction: Open reduction is performed on the
flexed joint with the help of Metzenbaum scissors or mos-
 quito forceps inserted from laterally. The instrument is
Uaui s! il 'suol aui uado oi eare ieapuosenui au ul pased
twisted round and used as a fulcrum to reduce the joint.
aad on aane pad are suondi au
 additional damage to the cartilage.
A
B
Figure 30-10 Positioning of the screws for collateral ligament
 Lateral collateral ligament prosthesis: The ligaments are
prostheses.
sutured if possible. A 1.5-mm screw is inserted into the
(A) Ligament prosthesis of the lateral collateral ligament: the
 lateral humeral epicondyle, and another one into the radial
figure-of-eight suture anchored around the screws mimics the
head (Fig.  30-10A).  A fgure-of-eight non-absorbable
radial part of the lateral collateral ligament.
suture is anchored around the screw heads. An additional
(B) Ligament prosthesis of the medial collateral ligament: the
suture prosthesis can be applied between the screw in the
figure-of-eight suture anchored around the screws mimics the
ulnar part of the medial collateral ligament.
humeral epicondyle and another screw in the proximal
ulna in cases with a tendency to luxate caudally.
 Medial collateral ligament prosthesis: The medial col-
coronoid process of the ulna, one 1.5-mm screw is inserted
 lateral ligament is nearly always damaged with lateral
into the medial humeral epicondyle, and one into the
elbow luxations, and is usually explored and treated frst.
proximal ulna (Fig. 30-10B). Non-absorbable suture mate-
Torn ligaments are sutured if possible. Because the larger 
 rial is anchored around the screws in a fgure-of-eight
part of the medial collateral ligament inserts on the medial
fashion.
A
B
c
Figure 30-11 (A) Preoperative, (B) postoperative, and (C) follow-up radiographs of a cat with a type I Monteggia lesion.
(A) The radial head is luxated cranially, the proximal ulnar diaphysis is fractured, and the radioulnar joint is separated.
(B) A 1.5-mm positional screw was placed from the ulna into the radial head, and the ulnar fracture was stabilized with a laterally applied 1.5-mm
miniplate
(C) Radiographs after removal of the positional screw 1 month postoperatively. The elbow joint is congruent and the ulnar fracture has nearly
healed.
366
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 30-3. Internal fixation of Monteggia lesions
The skin incision is performed caudolaterally over the
Figure 30-12 Stabilization of a
proximal ulna. An intermuscular lateral approach to the
Monteggia lesion. A 1.5-mm positional
elbow joint is used to reach the radial head. The ulnar
screw is inserted from the ulna across 
the radioulnar joint into the radial
fracture and the radial head are reduced. A pair of pointed
head. A simple ulnar fracture can be
bone reduction forceps can be placed very carefully across
repaired with a caudally applied figure-
the radial head and the proximal ulna to help maintain
of-eight wire.
reduction. Care is taken to achieve a functional pronation
and supination position for the antebrachium. A 1.5-mm
positional screw is then inserted from the caudal aspect of
the ulna into the center of the radial head, as close to the
elbow joint as possible (Fig. 30-12). The repair of the ulnar
fracture should provide axial stability. Simple ulnar frac-
tures may be repaired with a caudally placed fgure-
of-eight tension band wire (Fig. 30-12) and/or an
intramedullary pin. Comminuted fractures are stabilized
with a laterally applied 1.5- or 2.0-mm plate. The annular
ligament is identifed and sutured if possible.
30.9 Fractures of the elbow joint
The most common fractures involving the elbow joint are
distal humeral fractures, followed by fractures of the olecra-
non. These are described in Chapters 29 and 31.
Fractures of the medial epicondylar crest are sometimes
observed as a cause of lameness. They are likely to be avul-
sion fractures of the origin of the antebrachial flexor tendons
(Fig. 30-14). Chronic medial epicondylitis and lameness can
develop if these lesions are left untreated (see above). Because
the avulsed fragment is too small to be reattached, the condi-
tion is treated conservatively if not associated with severe or
ongoing clinical symptoms, or the fragment is removed using
A
pannins are suopuan roxa pasnae au pue qoeoidde jeipau e
Figure 30-13 (A) Preoperative and (B) postoperative mediolateral
to the surrounding tissue.
radiographs of a cat with elbow luxation and concurrent Monteggia
The authors have seen one cat with a traumatic fracture of
lesion. Both the humerulnar joint and the radioulnar joint are disrupted
the anconeal process, resulting in lameness (Fig. 30-15). As
and the proximal ulna is fractured. Surgery consisted of reduction of
the anconeal fragment was too small to be reattached, it was
the joints, stabilization of the radioulnar joint with a positional screw,
excised using a caudolateral approach to the elbow joint.
and repair of the ulna with a caudally applied figure-of-eight wire.
Lameness resolved after excision of the fragment.
Lateral and medial collateral ligament prostheses were additionally
applied.
insertion of a positional screw between the ulna and radial
30.10 Arthrodesis of the elbow joint
head, and repair of the ulna fracture. The lateral collateral
ligament is sutured and a lateral ligament prosthesis is applied.
Arthrodesis of the elbow joint is a salvage procedure for the
Finally, a medial intermuscular approach to the elbow joint
treatment of disabling elbow joint conditions, such as severely
is conducted to repair the medial collateral ligament.
comminuted joint fractures, articular gunshot wounds, mal-
30: Elbow joint
367
Figure 30-14
Mediolateral
radiograph of a 
cat with an acute
lameness of
unknown origin.A
fracture fragment is
visible at the origin
 of the flexor tendons
 at the caudal aspect 
of the medial
epicondyle.
Untreated, it may
lead to medial
epicondylitis.
Figure 30-15 Mediolateral radiograph showing traumatic fracture of
the anconeal process. The cat was presented with a moderate-grade
lameness and pain could be elicited on extension of the elbow joint.
Removal of the fragment resulted in resolution of clinical signs.
A
B
Figure 30-16 Example of an elbow arthrodesis.
(A) The 5-year-old cat was presented with forelimb lameness and elbow pain. Periarticular soft-tissue calcification is seen in the area of insertion of
the triceps muscle. Histologically. the lesion was classified as localized osifying myositis, Resection was attempted but the lesion recurred 11
months later with accompanying pain and lameness
(B) An arthrodesis of the elbow joint was performed, using a 1.5/2.0-mm veterinary cuttable plate. 1.5-mm screws were used in the ulna, one of
which stripped so the hole was left empty.
(C) Three-week postoperative radiographs taken when the spica splint was removed; progress is satisfactory
368
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 30-4. Arthrodesis of the elbow joint
A lateral approach to the elbow joint is performed and the
 the humerus and ulna. The frst screw is inserted through
olecranon process is osteotomized. The proximal ulna
 the distal humerus into the radial head. The second screw
must be prepared on the caudal aspect to create a smooth
g an on en jxnd a uo pas si
surface for the plate to lie on (Fig. 30-17A). It can be
condyle. The third screw is placed through the ulna and
contoured with rongeurs, an osteotome, an oscillating
 the radial head (Fig. 30-17B). The screw holes proximally
saw, or bur. The articular cartilage of the humeroradial
and distally are flled. Monocortical screws in the most
and humeroulnar contact surfaces is completely removed
proximal and distal plate holes can help decrease the stress
with a bur. The joint is temporarily stabilized in 135° with
riser effect. Copious bone graft is applied into and around
a transarticular pin, and limb alignment in valgus and
 the joint surfaces. The osteotomized olecranon process is
 varus and internal and outward rotation is checked. A long
reattached to the medial epicondyle with a lag screw or a
2.0-mm dynamic compression plate or a 2.0/2.7-mm vet-
tension band repair (Fig. 30-17C).
erinary cuttable plate is contoured to the caudal surface of
 Figure 30-17 Diagrams showing the
different steps of an elbow arthrodesis.
(A) The olecranon process is
osteotomized, and the proximal ulnar
 surface has been contoured to allow 
 plate application.
(B) The joint is stabilized in an 1359
angle with a Kirschner wire, and the
 plate is secured to the caudal surface 
with one screw through the humerus 
 and radial head, one screw through the
135°
ulna and humeral condyle, and one
 screw through the ulna and radial 
head.
(C) All plate holes are filled with screws,
and the olecranon process is attached 
to the medial humeral epicondyle with
a lag screw.
A
B
C
unions of articular elbow fractures, chronic traumatic luxa
angle (22). The best functional outcome was achieved with a
tions, congenital elbow luxation, and also periarticular
joint angle of 135° (22).
diseases resulting in loss of elbow function (Fig. 30-16, Box
30-4). Arthrodesis is only performed if pain does not resolve
30.11 Postoperative treatment
and joint function cannot be restored by other means.
and prognosis
 Arthrodesis of the elbow has been described in three cats
(22). It was performed with plate fxation in two cats, and
30.11.1 Elbow luxations
with external skeletal fxation in the third cat. One of the cats
with plate arthrodesis sustained a fracture of the radius and
 Postoperative radiographs are performed to evaluate joint
ulna just distal to the end of the plate. Functional outcome
congruity and position of the screws. A spica splint can be
in the other two was good to moderate. The less than ideal
 applied for 10 days after lateral elbow luxation to reduce the
function in one cat was atributed to a too-extended joint
risk of reluxation. The spica splint holds the elbow in exten-
30: Elbow joint
369
sion, which causes the anconeal process to remain in the
 3. Clarke SP, Bennet D. Feline osteoarthriis: a prospective study
humeral fossa, and helps to prevent reluxation. Some cats do
of 28 cases. J Small Anim Pract 2006;47:439-445.
 4. Vollmerhaus B, et al. Anatomic fundamentals and species-spe-
not tolerate the spica splint well, and cage rest alone may be
cific movements of the elbow joint and proximal radioulnar
more appropriate for these cats after stable surgical repair.
joint of domestic cats. Tierarztl Prax 1993;21:163-171.
Cats with Monteggia lesions should have their elbows stabi-
5. Frewein J, Vollmerhaus B. Anatomie von Hund und Katze.
lized in moderate flexion with a splinted bandage for 10 days,
Berlin: Blackwell; 1994.
6. Wood A, et al. Anatomic and radiographic appearance of a
because overextension of the elbow would facilitate cranial
sesamoid bone in the tendon of origin of the supinator muscle
luxation of the radial head. Positional screws between the
of the cat. Am J Vet Res 1995;56:736-739.
radius and ulna are removed after 4-6 weeks to allow a
7. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA. Surgical approaches to the bones
return of supination and pronation, which are important for
and joints of the dog and cat, 4th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saun-
normal gait and limb function in cats.
ders; 2004.
8. Staiger BA, Beale BS. Use of arthroscopy for debridement of the
 Prognosis for return to function after luxation of the elbow
elbow joint in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005;226:401-403.
is good with appropriate treatment, although reduction in
9. Valastro C, et al. Congenital elbow subluxation in a cat. Vet
range of motion and osteoarthritis are likely to occur (20).
Radiol Ultrasound 2005;46:63-64.
Complications are reluxation after inadequate stabilization,
10. Rossi F et al. Bilateral elbow malformation in a cat caused by
radio-ulnar synostosis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2003;44:283-
iatrogenic fractures through the radial neck caused by posi-
286.
tional screws between the radius and ulna, or screw breakage,
11. Cleary JE, Omer GE Jr. Congenital proximal radio-ulnar synos-
and osteoarthritis.
tosis. Natural history and functional assessment. J Bone Joint
Surg 1985;67:539-545.
12. Prymak C, Goldschmidt MH. Synovial cysts in five dogs and
one cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1991;27:151-154.
30.11.2 Elbow arthrodesis
13. Stead AC, et al. Synovial cysts in cats. J Small Anim Pract
1995;36:450-454.
Cats with arthrodesis of the elbow joint need external support
14. White JD, et al. What is your diagnosis? J Feline Med Surg
for around 4 weeks. A splinted spica bandage should be
2004;6:339-344.
applied, reaching as proximally as possible. The carpal joint
15. Zontine WJ, et al. Redefined type of elbow dysplasia involving
can be immobilized in slight flexion, which will prevent
calcified flexor tendons attached to the medial humeral epicon-
dyle in three dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989;194:1082-
weight-bearing. Initial follow-up radiographs are performed
1085.
after 6weeks.
16. Meyer-Lindenberg A, et al. Vorkommen und Behandlung von
Elbow arthrodesis is considered to result in less than ideal
knochernen Metaplasien in den am medialen Epikondylus des
function in dogs by some authors (23). Clinical experience
Humerus entspringenden Beugesehnen beim Hund. Tierarztl
with elbow arthrodesis in cats is scarce, but it appears to
Prax 2004;32:276-285.
17. Liehmann L, Lorinson D. Traumatic triceps tendon avulsion in
be a technique with a high potential for complications and
a cat. J Small Anim Pract 2005;47:94-97.
failures. Described complications include fracture of the
18. Clarke SP, et al. Avulsion of the triceps tendon insertion in a
radius and ulna, and suboptimal limb function (22). Amputa-
cat. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2007;20:245-270.
19. Savoldelli DM, et al. Traumatic elbow luxation in the dog and
tion of the limb is a viable alternative after failed arthrodesis
the cat: perioperative findings. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd
of the elbow joint.
1996;138:387-391.
20. Schwarz PD, Schrader SC. Ulnar fracture and dislocation of the
 proximal radial epiphysis (Monteggia lesion) in the dog and cat:
References and further reading
a review of 28 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1984;185:190-194.
21. Bado J. The Monteggia lesion. Springfeld, IL: Charles C
1. Hardie EM, et al. Radiographic evidence of degenerative joint
Thomas; 1962.
disease in geriatric cats: 100 cases (1994-1997). J Am Vet Med
22. Moak PC, et al. Arthrodesis of the elbow in three cats. Vet
Assoc 2002;220:628-632.
Comp Orthop Traumatol 2000;13:149-153.
2. Godfrey DR. Osteoarthritis in cats: a prospective series of 40
23. Piermattei DL, Flo GL. The elbow joint. In: Piermattei DL, Flo
cases. Proceedings of the BSAVA Meeting 2003; Birmingham,
GL (eds) Small animal orthopedics and fracture repair. Phila-
UK. J Small Anim Pract 2003:418.
delphia: WB Saunders; 1997: pp. 288-320.
371
31
 Radius and ulna
K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs, P.M. Montavon
Fractures of the radius and ulna often occur after a fall from
31.2 Stabilization techniques
a height, and are therefore more commonly encountered in
Radius and ulnar fractures can be treated with external
urban areas (1, 2). The paired bones are usually fractured
simultaneously. Stabilization of the radius alone is suffcient
coaptation, external skeletal fxation, and plating. Casts can
in many cases, but fixation stability can be enhanced by
be used to stabilize greenstick and simple transverse diaphy-
additional stabilization of the ulna, especially in proximal
seal fractures of both the radius and ulna, or fractures of
fractures. Range of motion in pronation and supination is
either radius or ulna, when the other bone is intact. The
11e8 jeunou 1og leuassa s! pue shop ul ueui sieo ul 1aiean
radius is not amenable to intramedullary pinning, because the
and grooming activities. Care should be taken to maintain
pin would have to be inserted through the articular cartilage
pronation and supination, and to avoid formation of a syn-
 of the radiocarpal joint. Intramedullary pins can be used to
ostosis between the radius and ulna, by correct implant posi-
stabilize fractures of the ulna.
tioning and adequate fracture reduction.
 In diaphyseal fractures of the radius and ulna only the
radius is stabilized in many cases, but additional stabilization
of the ulna can enhance fxation stability in many instances,
31.1 Surgical anatomy
especially when the fracture affects the proximal antebra-
 chium, where the cross-section of the ulna is greater than the
The radius is a slender bone, with the radial neck being the
narrowest area. Its small diameter can make it difcult to
radius, and pronation and supination movement is high.
 Radius and ulnar fracture types and their possible stabiliza-
insert implants. Although the radius carries most of the
 tion methods are summarized in Table 31-1.
weight through its articulation with the lateral portion of the
humeral condyle proximally and the radial carpal bone dis-
tally, the ulna is thicker than the radius in cats (3). The radius
31.2.1 Intramedullary pinning of the ulna
and ulna twist around each other, the radius being located
craniolateral to the ulna proximally, and medial to the ulna
 Intramedullary pinning of the ulna can be used in conjunction
distally.
with external skeletal fixation or plating of the radius. It
The radius and ulna are connected to each other by an
enhances bending stability, and also provides axial compres-
interosseus membrane, but the strong interosseus ligament
sion stability in cases with a simple fracture of the ulna.
 present in dogs is lacking (4). This could possibly contribute
 Intramedullary pinning of the ulna is therefore most useful
to the pronounced supination and pronation in cats. Prona-
 in simple ulnar fractures, accompanying comminuted frac-
tion and supination motion also derives from the proximal
 tures of the radius. The intramedullary pin is either inserted
and distal radioulnar joints. These small synovial joints allow
normograde, starting at the proximocaudal aspect of the
the radius and ulna to rotate around each other.
olecranon, just caudal to the insertion site of the triceps
The olecranon process of cats is relatively smaller than in
 tendon (Fig. 31-1), or retrograde from the fracture site. Pin
the dog, and its caudal surface curves cranially, whereas in
 size is selected according to the diameter of the intramed-
the dog it curves caudally. The caudal ulna surface in the cat
ullary cavity of the distal ulna, and on how far distally it
also differs from the dog (5) in that its surface is convex from
 is intended to insert the pin. A 1.0-1.4-mm pin is usually
proximal to the midshaft, and then concave distally. These
used.
differences should be taken into account when repairing frac-
tures in this area.
Another anatomic difference between dogs and cats
31.2.2 External skeletal fixation of the radius
is the shape of the distal ulnar growth plate. Whereas the
distal ulnar physis is cone-shaped in dogs, it is straight in
External skeletal fixation is indicated for comminuted or
cats (4), This anatomic difference might account for the
open fractures of the radial diaphysis and metaphyses. A type
low incidence of antebrachial growth deformities in this
I or modified type I external skeletal fixator usually results in
species.
sufficient stability. Transosseous pins are inserted from medial
372
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
 Fracture localization
Fracture type
Stabilization methods
Table 31-1. Radius and ulnar
fractures and possible treatment
Proximal ulna
Salter and Harris type I
 Tension band repair
options 
Extra-articular
Tension band repair
Intra-articular simple
 Plate ± fgure-of-eight wire
 Tension band repair
Intra-articular comminuted
 Plate ± fgure-of-eight wire
Proximal radius
Salter and Harris type I
Cross pins
Proximal metaphyseal
Plate
Internal fxator
ESF
Diaphysis radius
Simple transverse or short
 External coaptation
and ulna
oblique
Compression plate radius ± IM
pin ulna
ESF radius ± IM pin ulna
Internal fixator ± IM pin ulna
Long oblique or reducible
Neutralization plate radius ± IM
multifragmentary
pin ulna
 ESF radius ± IM pin ulna
Internal fxator ± IM pin ulna
Comminuted
ESF radius ± IM pin ulna
 Buttress plate radius ± IM pin
ulna
 Buttress plates radius and ulna
Internal fixator(s)
Distal radius
Simple metaphyseal fracture
ESF
Plate
 Internal fxator
Comminuted metaphyseal
ESF
fracture
Internal fxator
 Salter and Harris type I and
Cross pins
II fractures
Distal ulna
Styloid process fracture
Conservative (carpal joint stable)
 Tension band repair (carpal joint
instability)
IM, intramedullary; ESF, external skeletal fixator.
in the mid-diaphyseal and distal area of the radius to avoid
External skeletal fixators can be applied to the radius in a
irritation of the extensor muscles and tendons. In the most
closed or open fashion. However insertion of the transosse-
proximal aspect of the bone, pins impinge less soft tissue if
ous pins in a mediolateral direction is difficult due to the flat
inserted from lateral, and a curved bar can be used to connect
shape of the radius, especially in the proximal third of the
 the distal pins medially to the proximal pins laterally. A more
bone. A minimally invasive approach is therefore often used
stable type II or modified type II external skeletal fixator can
to visualize the bone. Pin size is restricted by the small cra-
 be considered if prolonged fracture healing is expected, for 
niocaudal diameter of the radius. Transosseous pin sizes of
example in older cats with severely cormminuted or open
1.2-1.4 mm are usually adequate in the distal third of the
fractures.
radius, and even smaller pins may have to be inserted into
 For fractures located in the distal third of the radius, the
the proximal third of the radius. As positive-threaded pins
tubular external fixator is a useful implant because it allows
are only available in sizes 1.6 mm and larger, smooth or 
insertion of a larger number of transosseous pins over a small 
negative-threaded pins are commonly used. Care is taken not
distance (Chapter 24).
to engage the ulna with the pins.
31: Radius and ulna
373
Figure 31-1 The entry site for
Complications with tendons crossing the plate are also
intramedullary pinning of the
avoided.
ulna is located on the olecranon,
The 1.5/2.0-mm veterinary cuttable plate (VCP) and the
just caudal to the insertion of the
- iso ane (da) and uoissanduon snep w-oz
triceps tendon. Note the rounded
form of the proximal ulna. The
monly used. Screw size should not exceed the diameter
pin is then advanced distally. As
of the intramedullary cavity to avoid cortical damage or
the diameter of the medullary
iatrogenic fractures. Dorsally applied plates are generally
canal is narrowest distally. pin
used with 2.0-mm screws. The mediolateral plane may be to0
size dictates how far the pin can
narrow to insert 2.0-mm screws in small cats, but both the
be inserted
1.5/2.0-mm VCP and the 2.0-mm DCP can also be used
with 1.5-mm screws for medial plating. The 1.5- and 2.0-mm
 screws have been shown to have a similar holding power
(8).
Plate osteosynthesis is also possible to stabilize ulnar frac-
tures located in the middle and proximal ulna. Indications
for plate osteosynthesis of the ulna include intra-articular
olecranon fractures, and comminuted fractures of the radius
and ulna, where additional stabilization of the ulna contrib-
 utes to fixation stability. Plates are best applied to the flat
lateral surface of the ulnar shaft. A 1.5/2.0-mm VCP or a
2.0-mm DCP with 1.5- or 2.0-mm screws is used. Plates can
be applied laterally or caudally for the repair of olecranon
 fractures. Lateral plating is easier and preferable in many
cases because the caudal proximal ulna is thin and curved,
 making caudal plate contouring and screw insertion techni-
cally difficult.
Figure 31-2 Cross-sectional area of the distal two-thirds of the radial
diaphysis. Insertion of a screw in the mediolateral plane provides more
31.2.4 Internal fixators
bone purchase than if inserted in the craniocaudal plane.
Internal fxators can be used instead of conventional plates.
The main indications to use these more expensive implants
are fractures close to the carpal and elbow joint, where the
31.2.3 Plating of radius and ulna
small fragment does not allow insertion of three screws, as
 needed for conventional plating. Insertion of two screws in
 Plates can be positioned on the lateral, dorsal, or medial
a small fragment near a joint gives better stability when
aspect of the radius, depending on fracture location. Lateral
locked screws are used with an internal fixator. Plates from
plating is rarely performed, but is an option for fractures
the 2.0-mm Unilock system (Chapter 24) are a suitable size
located in the proximal radial metaphysis. Dorsal plating can
for radial and ulnar fractures.
be used for fractures involving the whole diaphysis of the
radius. Medial plating is used for fractures located in the
31.3 Fractures of the proximal radius
distal third of the radius, and has several advantages over
and ulna
dorsal plating in this area (6). The mediolateral plane offers
more bone purchase for the screws than the dorsocaudal
Fractures of the proximal radius and ulna accounted for 24%
plane (Fig. 31-2). Smaller screws can be used in the medio-
of the fractures in one survey (9). Treatment goals are ana-
lateral plane with sustained pull-out strength compared to
tomic reduction and rigid stabilization to restore elbow joint
screws placed in the craniocaudal plane (7). A medial plate
congruity and stability. Fractures of the proximal radius
is also positioned closer to the tension side of the radius,
usually involve the metaphyseal area. The ulna is usually
which is located caudomedially in the distal radius, and the
fractured concurrently when the radius is fractured, but frac-
plate has a better resistance to bending than a dorsal plate.
ures of the proximal ulna also occur in isolation. They can
Additionally, there is no need for lateral retraction of the
be classified into fractures through the olecranon physis,
extensor tendons if the plate is applied medially, thus reduc-
articular and non-articular fractures of the olecranon, and
ing the risk of valgus malpositioning and external rotation.
fractures of the proximal metaphysis of the ulna.
374
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
31.3.1 Approaches to the proximal radius
andulna
A lateral intermuscular approach is best performed to access
the radial head and proximal metaphysis of the radius (10).
The radial head is palpable under the extensor muscle group.
The thinner motor branch of the radial nerve courses below
the extensor carpi radialis muscle, and must be identified and
spared.
 For fractures involving both the proximal radial metaphy-
sis and diaphysis, a medial approach to the shaft of the radius
is extended proximally (10) to be able to apply a plate on to
the dorsal aspect of the proximal radius. The medial attach-
ment of the pronator muscle to the radius can be severed and
A
B
the muscle is retracted medially. The median nerve courses
below the pronator muscle and must be left intact. The supi-
Figure 31-3 (A) Preoperative and (B) postoperative radiographs of a
cat with an intra-articular comminuted fracture of the olecranon. The
nator muscle may also have to be elevated and retracted later-
fracture was anatomically reduced and stabilized with a caudally
ally to gain exposure of the most proximal parts of the
applied 1.5/2.0-mm veterinary cuttable plate. A hook was created at
radius.
the proximal plate end by cutting through a plate hole to provide
The olecranon and proximal metaphysis of the ulna are
additional fixation of the proximal fragment
exposed by a lateral skin incision (10). Periosteal elevation
of the anconeus muscle, the ulnaris lateralis muscle, and the
flexor muscles on the medial side may be necessary for com-
Plating is associated with a higher success rate than external
plete fracture exposure. Elevation of the anconeus muscle
 skeletal fixation, and the authors also recommend concurrent
 allows access to the caudolateral part of the humeroulnar
stabilization of the ulna in these cases (see below).
joint, and is necessary for visual control of reduction of intra-
articular olecranon fractures (10).
31.3.3 Fractures of the proximal ulna
31.3.2 Fractures of the proximal radius
Fractures of the proximal ulna may involve the anconeal
process (Chapter 30), the olecranon, or the proximal ulnar
 Fractures of the proximal third of the radius were more
metaphysis.
common in cats than fractures of the distal bone in one
 Olecranon fractures are classified into physeal, intra-articu-
survey (9). True metaphyseal fractures of the proximal radius
lar, and extra-articular fractures. The proximal fragment is
Jxnd an un pe Ao ao are an daen ae
 always displaced in a proximocranial direction due to the pull
diaphysis. The proximal radial physis closes between 20-28
 of the triceps muscle (Fig. 31-3). A tension band repair is
weeks of age (11). Salter and Harris fractures could therefore
required to counteract the action of the triceps muscle and
theoretically occur in cats younger than 5-6 months of age,
to provide interfragmentary compression. Two parallel
but have not been encountered by the authors in this
inserted Kirschner wires and a caudally applied fgure-of-
species.
eight wire are usually used to stabilize physeal fractures and
 Fractures of the proximal radius are often accompanied by
simple extra-articular fractures of the olecranon (Box 31-1).
ulnar fractures and/or luxations of the radial head (Chapter
 In dogs, the pins are directed towards the cranial cortex of
30). Laterally or dorsally applied plates or internal fxators
 the ulna distal to the trochlear notch, because pin anchorage
 can be applied for stabilization if the proximal fragment
 in the cranial cortex of the ulna improves stability compared
allows insertion of a sufficient number of screws. Only
to leaving them free in the medullary canal. The shape of the
1.5-2.0-mm screws can be used due to the small diameter of
proximal ulna in cats makes angling the pins in this direction
the proximal radius, especially in the lateromedial direction,
difficult, and most pins are inserted as intramedullary pins.
 Tension band wiring of olecranon fractures has been associ-
tures or invasion of the joint. Both the 2.0-mm DCP and the
 ated with a high complication rate in one survey (9). Careful
1.5/2.0-mm VCP allow insertion of 1.5- and 2.0-mm screws.
 care in selection and obeying the correct principles for appli-
Transarticular external skeletal fxation is also possible.
 cation can improve success (Chapter 24).
Complications and revision surgeries are common with
 Plate osteosynthesis is preferred for intra-articular fractures
 -o  ro    'o    o)  p s p  g s 
31: Radius and ulna
375
Box 31-1. Stabilization of fractures of the olecranon
 A caudolateral approach to the olecranon is performed.
Accurate reduction of the joint surface of the ulnar
notch can be checked by elevating the anconeus muscle
to gain access to the caudolateral aspect of the elbow
joint.
Tension band repair: The tension band fixation is used
for physeal fractures and simple extra-articular fractures.
Two parallel 0.8-1.2-mm Kirschner wires are inserted
from caudolateral and caudomedial to the insertion site of
the triceps tendon into a distal direction down the intra-
medullary canal. One hole is drilled through the ulnar
metaphysis distal to the fracture, and one through the
olecranon, passing cranial to the Kirschner wires. A piece
of 0.6-0.8-mm orthopedic wire is placed through these
holes in a fgure-of-eight fashion (Fig. 31-4A). Alterna-
tively, the fgure-of-eight wire can be anchored around the
pin ends proximally, but care is taken not to strangulate
 the insertion of the triceps tendon.
Plating: Plate osteosynthesis is the method of choice for
intra-articular and comminuted fractures. The plate is
applied to the lateral (Fig. 31-4B) or caudal (Fig. 31-4C)
surface of the olecranon and proximal ulna. At least two
1.5- or 2.0-mm screws must be inserted into the proximal
A
B
c
fragment. Slight overbending of the plate across the frac-
Figure 31-4 Tension band fixation of fractures of the olecranon.
ture site is necessary to avoid opening of the fracture at
(A) A simple extra-articular fracture of the olecranon, stabilized with
lepnes e pue saulm lauupsuly lallesed omi buisn pueg uoisuat e
si auneid peraieg tuneid pepnes ron aoens renonre an
figure-of-eight wire.
preferred for comminuted fractures. A caudal fgure-of-
eight wire can be placed additionally to enhance resistance
pl ate.
to tension.
(C) A simple intra-articular fracture of the olecranon, repaired with a
caudal plate in tension band function.
can be applied to the lateral or caudal surface of the olecra-
twisting of the proximal fragment and opening of the fracture
non (Box 31-1). Plates applied to the caudal surface have the
site caudally. This carries the risk of a delayed or non-union
better tension band effect. A hook plate can be created to
if the fracture is left untreated. Intramedullary pins, fgure.
achieve additional holding power (Fig. 31-3) (12). Plates
of-eight wires, or a lateral plate can be used to stabilize these
applied to the lateral surface have a larger moment of inertia
fractures.
and provide better resistance to bending forces. Lateral
plating is therefore preferred for comminuted fractures of the
31.4 Diaphyseal fractures of the radius
olecranon.
and ulna
Proximal metaphyseal fractures of the ulna are located
distal to the annular ligament, and are often associated with
Many of the diaphyseal fractures of the radius and ulna are
fractures of the proximal radius, or with luxation of the
simple transverse fractures, but small fracture fragments or
radial head. The latter is called a Monteggia lesion and is 
fissure lines are often present. The fractures usually involve
described in Chapter 30. Isolated fractures of the proximal
 the middle third of the diaphyses (9). Treatment options in
ulna distal to the elbow joint are rare. These fractures should
 general include conservative treatment with a cast, plate
be stabilized because the pull of the triceps muscle results in
osteosynthesis, and external skeletal fixation. Intramedullary
376
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
pinning is not performed in the radius, but can be used in the
 31.4.1 Approaches to the radial and
ulna.
ulnar diaphyses
It is often suffcient to stabilize the radius alone, but
additional fixation of the ulna should be considered in some
A medial approach to the radial shaft is performed to repair
cases, especially in mid-diaphyseal and proximal physeal
 fractures of the radial diaphysis (10). Application of the plate
 fractures. Additional stabilization of the ulna is advantageous
to the proximal bone when using a dorsal plate requires ele-
in fractures where healing is expected to be long. For example,
vation and medial retraction of the pronator muscle. The
in comminuted fractures in older cats, and where fixation
median nerve courses below the pronator muscle and must
stability of the radius alone is critical, it also aids reduction
be spared. The ulna is approached via a caudolateral incision
of the radial fracture when the ulnar fracture is simple.
directly over the bone.
Stabilization of both radius and ulna is also considered in
heavy cats or if immediate weight-bearing is expected due to
31.4.2 Simple transverse and short
concurrent injuries to other limbs. It is easiest to stabilize the
oblique fractures
bone with less fracture comminution frst to achieve fracture
alignment.
Simple transverse or short oblique fractures of the radius can
Pronation and supination movement is crucial for a
 generally be treated conservatively or surgically. Good indi-
normal feline gait and activity, and must be preserved by
cations for conservative treatment with a cast are greenstick
avoiding inadvertent insertion of screws or pins from the
 fractures in immature cats, reducible fractures in young cats
radius into the ulna, by inserting short screws or pins, and  (Fig. 31-5), and those rare cases where only the radial or the
by correct fracture alignment.  Pronation and  supination l
 ulnar shaft is broken. The technique for cast application is
are checked both with the elbow in extension and in flexion.(
described in Chapter 22.
The paw is normally held in supination, which is more
 Surgical stabilization is indicated if closed reduction is not
pronounced when the elbow is flexed, compared to when it 
 possible, if the fracture fragments are grossly unstable after
is extended.
reduction, and if fracture healing is expected to take longer
A
B
C
D
Figure 31-5 (A, B) A minimally displaced simple transverse fracture of the distal third of the radial and ulnar diaphysis in a 4-month-old cat, (C. D)
treated with a cast.
31: Radius and ulna
377
Figure 31-6 (A) Preoperative, (B)
postoperative, and (c) follow-up
radiographs at 4 months of a 1-
year-old cat with a distal
diaphyseal radius and ulnar
fracture. A 2.0-mm dynamic
compression plate with 1.5-mm
screws was applied to the medial
aspect of the radius, and
uncomplicated fracture healing
resulted.
E
A
B
c
than 4-6 weeks in mature cats. Internal stabilization can also 
 and a neutralization plate, application of a butress plate, or
be justified in fractures theoretically amenable to closed external skeletal fixation could theoretically be used.
reduction and external coaptation, because it allows a faster
n an un as iso ar s abo o
return to function, requires less frequent follow-up examina-
 Anatomic reduction and stable fixation of the ulna fracture
tions, and reduces the potential risks of cast-associated com-
 can enhance overall fixation stability, especially in the pres-
plications, such as pressure sores, loss of reduction, and joint
ence of a comminuted fracture of the radius. Possible fixation
fbrosis.
choices for long oblique ulna fractures include intramedullary
Both plates and external skeletal fixation can be used to
 pinning, lag screw fixation, and lateral plating.
treat simple or short oblique fractures of the radius. Plates
are usually applied medially (Fig. 31-6) or dorsally, depend-
ing on fracture localization (Box 31-2). Lateral plating can
31.4.4 Comminuted fractures
also be used for fractures located very proximal in the radial
diaphysis, because the lateral approach is least invasive here.
Comminuted fractures of the radial and ulnar diaphyses are
A medially applied type I external skeletal fixator is usually
always stabilized surgically with a plate or an external skele-
used for simple fractures. Pin insertion is easier distally com-
tal fixator (Box 31-3). Internal stabilization of both the radius
pared to proximally, because of the lack of soft tissues overly-
and the ulna is advisable (Fig. 31-8), because the 2.0-mm
ing the distal radius. The tubular external skeletal fxator is 
DCP and the 1.5/2.0-mm VCP may be too short, or too weak,
ideal due to its low weight, absence of bulky clamps, and the
respectively, to provide sufficient stability if applied in but-
possibility of inserting a large number of transosseous pins
tress function.
over a small distance (Fig. 31-8).
 Dorsal plating is chosen for radial fractures extending into
Additional stabilization of the ulna enhances fxation sta-
the proximal to middle third of the diaphysis, whereas medial
bility, and may be performed in selected cases (Fig. 31-9).
plating is preferred for fractures located in the middle to
Simple fractures of the ulnar diaphysis can be easily stabilized
distal radial diaphysis. Dorsal plating carries the risk of sta-
with an intramedullary pin, or a laterally applied plate.
bilizing the fracture in external rotation and/or valgus,
because the extensor tendons have to be retracted laterally to
Aeuawbeyynw pue anbqo buon E't'te
be able to apply the plate. Closed fracture reduction followed
reducible fractures
by external skeletal fixation is technically difficult in cats.
Long oblique and multifragmentary reducible fractures are
tion diffcult, and insertion of transosseous pins into the
 rarely encountered in the radius. Application of a lag screw
narrow radial shaft is problematic without visual control,
378
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 31-2. Stabilization of simple transverse or short oblique fractures of the radial and ulnar diaphysis
 A medial approach is performed to reach the radial diaph-
 muscle has to be elevated and retracted medially. The plate
 ysis for open fracture reduction and plate application. If
is contoured to the dorsal radial surface and is secured
 the fracture is located in the proximal radial diaphysis, a
using at least three 2.0-mm screws proximally and distally.
lateral approach is used.
A 1.0-1.4-mm intramedullary pin can be inserted into the
External skeletal fixation: A type I external skeletal
ulna to enhance fixation stability (Fig. 31-7C).
fxator is applied medially after closed or open fracture
Medial plating: The plate is applied to the medial surface
reduction for fractures located in the distal half of the
of the radius for fractures located in the distal half of the
radial diaphysis (Fig. 31-7A). At least three transosseous
radius (Fig. 31-7D). The plates have to be contoured along 
 pins with a diameter of 1.2-1.6 mm are inserted per frag-
the medial epiphysis distally, and care is taken not to insert
ment. Alternatively, a modifed type I external fixator with
 the most distal screw into the radiocarpal joint: 2.0-mm
an acrylic bar can be used for fractures located in the
screws can be used in the distal metaphysis, but 1.5-mm
proximal half of the diaphysis, because proximally it is
screws are preferred in the narrow diaphysis. This is pos-
easier to insert the transosseus pins from laterally (Fig.
sible with both the 1.5/2.0-mm veterinary cuttable plate
31-7B).
and the 2.0-mm dynamic compression plate. An intramed-
 Dorsal plating: Dorsal plating is used for fractures
ullary pin can be inserted into the ulna if deemed necessary
located in the proximal half of the radius. The pronator
for fixation stability.
Figure 31-7 Stabilization options for
simple transverse or short oblique
fractures of the radial and ulnar
diaphysis.
(A) Application of a type I external
 skeletal fixator for a simple transverse 
fracture of the mid-diaphysis of the
radius.
(B) A modified type I external skeletal
fixator with an acrylic bar for the repair
of a fracture located in the proximal
half of the radius.
(C) Stabilization of a simple radial
fracture located in the proximal aspect
of the diaphysis with a dorsally applied 
 plate. The ulnar fracture is additionally
stabilied with an intramedullary pin.
(D) Medial plating for stabilization of a
short oblique fracture of the distal
radial shaft.
A
B
C
especially in the proximal radial diaphysis. A minimally inva-
31.5 Fractures of the distal radius and ulna
sive approach to the radius is therefore commonly used for
application of a type I, modifed type II, or type II external
Fractures of the distal radius and ulna are less common in
skeletal fixator.
cats, as compared to dogs (9). They include fractures of the
Concurrent simple transverse or oblique fractures of the
distal radial growth plate, metaphyseal and epiphyseal frac-
ulna are best stabilized with an intramedullary pin. Commi-
tures, and fractures of the radial or ulnar styloid processes.
nuted fractures can be repaired with a laterally applied 2.0-
Most of these fractures interfere with congruity and/or stabil-
mm DCP or 1.5/2.0-mm VCP if they are located in the
ity of the carpal joint, and must be treated surgically to
 proximal, thicker portion of the ulna.
restore anatomy and function of the carpal joint.
31: Radius and ulna
379
Figure 31-8 (A) Postoperative,
and (B) follow-up radiographs at
1 month and (c) 2 months of
distal diaphyseal radial fracture in 
a 10-month-old cat, stabilized 
with a medially applied tubular
external skeletal fixator, using 
three small pins distally and four
proximally. This semirigid fixation
and the young age of the cat
resulted in a large callus 
formation.
B
C
Premature closure of the radial physis is a potential com-
plication in immature cats after physeal fractures (Chapter
13). Control radiographs should be obtained 2 weeks after
the injury in all immature cats having sustained trauma to
the distal antebrachium to be able to detect early signs of
premature closure of the radial physis. The distal growth
plate of the ulna seems less vulnerable to premature closure
compared to dogs, probably because it is oriented perpen-
dicular to the long axis of the radius, and does not have a
conical shape as in dogs.
31.5.1 Approaches to the distal radius and ulna
The distal radius is approached via a medial or craniomedial
incision. A medial approach is chosen for repair of fractures
of the distal metaphysis of the radius. A craniomedial
approach is performed for open reduction and internal fixa-
tion of Salter and Harris fractures of the distal radial physis.
The styloid process of the ulna is approached from laterally.
A
B
Figure 31-9 (A) Preoperative and (B) postoperative radiographs of a
31.5.2 Distal metaphyseal fractures of the radius
cat with a mid-diaphyseal fracture of the radius and ulna. Both bones
 ww- l pue aeid uossaduon yeup ww-oz e ym paeid aam
Distal metaphyseal fractures of the radius in cats are best
panban lios uaanuon paunui shal lauio oml peu ien aul smans
treated with external skeletal fixation, because the small
 stable fracture fixation.
distal fragment precludes insertion of a suffcient number of
screws for plate osteosynthesis (Box 31-4). The tubular exter-
 Alternatively, a modifed type Il external skeletal fxator
nal fixator (Chapter 24) is most useful, as more pins can be
(Box 31-4), a hybrid circular external skeletal fxator,
 inserted over a smalldistance than with other systems, making 
Kirschner wires in a cross-pinning fashion, or a 2.0-mm
it an ideal system for metaphyseal fractures of the radius (13).
 internal fixator can be used to stabilize the small distal frag-
The 6-mm tube of the system allows insertion of six transos-
seous pins over a distance of 1.5 cm (13).
an internal fxator.
380
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 31-3. Stabilization of comminuted fractures of the radial and ulnar diaphysis
 The radius is approached from medially and the ulna from
with a diameter of 1.2-1.6 mm are used. Positive-threaded
laterally. Application of cancellous bone graft should be
1.6-mm pins can only be inserted into the distal radial
considered in severely comminuted radial fractures, and in
metaphysis.
the presence of fracture gaps. The ulna is reduced and
Plating of the radius: A medial plate is used for fractures
stabilized frst if it is a reducible fracture, because this
located in the distal half of the radius (Fig. 31-10C), and
facilitates fracture reduction.
au oui supuxa san ron aeid padde kesrop e
 External skeletal fixation: A medial type I external skel-
 proximal radius. At least three screws must be inserted
etal fixator is applied for mildly comminuted fractures as
into the proximal and distal fragment. The 1.5/2.0-mm
described in Box 31-2 (Fig. 31-10A). A modifed type II
veterinary cuttable plate should be used in sandwich or
or a type II external skeletal fxator provides more stability
stacking function to enhance bending stability. Care is
in severely comminuted radial fractures (Fig. 31-10B). Full
taken to avoid malpositioning of the distal fragment in
pins must be angled in a dorsolateral direction to avoid
valgus and external rotation.
 inadverent engagement of the ulna. At least one full pin 
 Plating of the proximal ulna: The plate is applied to the
and one half pin should be inserted into the distal frag-
lateral surface of the ulna with three screws distal and
ment, and at least one full pin and one half pin or three
proximal to the fracture (Fig. 31-10C).
half pins into the proximal fragment. Transosseous pins
Figure 31-10 Stabilization options for
comminuted fractures of the radial and 
ulnar diaphyses.
(A) Type I external skeletal fixation of a
mildly comminuted fracture of the
radial diaphysis. An intramedullary pin 
is used to stabilize a concurrent simple
ulnar fracture.
(B) Stabilization of a severely
comminuted fracture of the radius with
a type ll external skeletal fixator. An 
 intramedullary pin in the ulna is used 
additionally.
(C) Stabilization of a comminuted
fracture of both radius and ulna with
buttress plates.
A
B
C
Fractures extending into the radiocarpal joint are rare.
31.5.3 Salter and Harris fractures of the distal
Most of these are comminuted and render joint reconstruc-
radius and ulna
tion impossible, thus necessitating pancarpal arthrodesis
(Chapter 32). If fragment numbers and sizes allow anatomic
The distal radial physis closes between 14 and 20 months
reconstruction of the radial joint surface, lag screws can be
of age in intact cats (1l), and even later in neutered cats
used for stabilization.
(14-16). Fractures of the distal radial physis carry the risk of
31: Radius and ulna
381
Box 31-4. External skeletal fixation of distal metaphyseal fractures of the radius
A medial approach to the distal radius is performed.
Tubular external skeletal fixator: A 6-mm tube is used.
The frst transfixation pin is inserted parallel to the distal
radial joint surface, close to the joint. The direction of this
frst pin is most important, as the tube will be positioned
 perpendicular to that pin, and dictates the direction of all
future pins. A positive-threaded 1.6-mm pin can usually
be used. The connecting tube is then assembled over the
pin. The fracture is reduced and the most proximal pin is
inserted next. At least two, preferably three, 1.2-1.4-mm
 pins are required proximal and distal to the fracture. Ellis
pins can be used to enhance pull-out strength because the
transosseous pins are all inserted parallel to each other
(Fig. 31-11A).
 Modifed type Il external skeletal fixator: A centrally
threaded 1.6-mm transfixation pin is inserted from medial
across the radial epiphysis, parallel to the radial carpal
joint and in a craniolateral direction to avoid the ulna. A
1.2-1.4-mm Ellis pin is inserted as the most proximal pin.
A
B
The fracture is reduced and the pins are connected with
 Figure 31-11 External skeletal fixation of distal metaphyseal
the external bar medially. One more pin is drilled into
fractures of the radius.
(A) Application of a 6.0-mm tubular external skeletal fixator, using 
the distal fragment, and at least two more pins are
one positive-threaded pin distally. and one Ellis pin proximally.
inserted into the proximal fragment. The lateral aspect of
(B) Stabilization with a modified type ll external skeletal fixator.
the distal full pin is connected to the external bar with
a second connecting bar curved cranially around the
radius (Fig. 31-11B).
 premature physeal closure, depending on the age of the cat
primarily stabilized, but a small intramedullary pin can be
 at the time of trauma. Radial shortening and limb deformity
 inserted from the distal aspect of the ulnar styloid if deemed
may result (Chapter 13). The mean length of the feline radius
necessary.
was approximately 70 mm in 5-month-old cats, and around
Control radiographs should be performed in every case of
85-100 mm in 20-month-old cats, with neutered cats having
distal radial or ulnar physeal fracture after 2-3 weeks to
 the longest radial length (16). These numbers indicate that if
 detect radiographic signs of premature physeal closure.
premature physeal closure occurs at an age of 5 months, loss
of radial length can be expected to be 15-30%. Carpal incon-
31.5.4 Fractures of the styloid processes of the
 gruity is likely to occur in addition to the loss of radial length
radius and ulna
(17).
 Salter and Harris type I and II fractures of the distal radial
Fractures of the ulnar styloid process are occasionally encoun-
physis can be treated conservatively with a cast if they are
tered. Because the styloid process of the ulna is the attach-
not displaced or if they can be reduced in a closed manner.
ment site for the lateral collateral ligament of the carpus,
Reduction and surgical stabilization are necessary if the frac-
carpal instability may occur. However, many fractures of the
ture is displaced and/or considered unstable after reduction
ulnar styloid process in cats do not result in carpal instability.
(Fig. 31-12). Cross pinning is commonly used (Box 31-5).
Stress radiographs have to be performed for evaluation of
Salter and Harris fractures of the distal ulna may occur
lateral stability of the antebrachiocarpal joint. Ulnar styloid
together with distal radial fractures. They are not usually
fractures are treated conservatively with a splinted bandage
382
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Figure 31-12 (A) Preoperative.
(B) postoperative, and (C) follow-
up radiographs of a cat with a
distal radial physeal fracture,
stabilized with cross pins. Follow-
up radiographs at 3 weeks
showing good progression of
healing.
B
Box 31-5. Stabilization of Salter and Harris type I and ll fractures of the radius
A craniomedial approach to the distal radius is performed.
 Figure 31-13 Cross pinning of a Salter
The distal fragment is usually displaced in a caudal direc-
and Harris type I fracture of the distal 
radius. The lateral pin is inserted 
tion. The fracture is reduced manually with the carpal joint
through the ulnar styloid process. This 
in flexion and avoiding iatrogenic injury of the fracture
is especially important if the ulnar
surface of the distal fragment, where the proliferating
styloid process is displaced from the 
cells of the growth plate are located. Two 0.8-1.0-mm
radius preoperatively.
Kirschner wires are inserted in a cross-pin fashion. One
Kirschner wire is inserted from the radial styloid process
across the fracture line into the lateral cortex of the radius.
The second Kirschner wire is inserted from the laterodistal
edge of the radius into the caudomedial cortex of the
radius, or from the ulnar styloid process into the radius
(Fig. 31-13). A separate small skin incision may be neces-
sary for the lateral pin to be placed. In young cats with 
 soft bones the pins are not bent to avoid the risk of tearing
them out of the bone; instead, they are cut short.
31: Radius and ulna
383
Box 31-6. Stabilization of fractures of the ulnar styloid process
A lateral approach to the ulnar styloid process is per-
Figure 31-14 Diagram showing
formed. Adequate reduction of the fracture is necessary to
tension band repair of a fracture of 
the ulnar styloid process.
achieve stability and congruity of the carpal joint. The
distal part of the fractured ulna is stabilized to the radius
with two parallel pins or a tension band repair. One or
two 0.6-mm Kirschner wires are inserted from the ulnar
styloid process, and are driven into the distal radius. A
0.5-mm wire is inserted in a fgure-of-eight fashion around
the distal pin ends and through a hole drilled into the
radius (Fig. 31-14).
for 2-3 weeks if the carpal joint is considered stable. If ulnar
distal antebrachium to be able to evaluate further radial
styloid fractures are associated with antebrachiocarpal insta-
 growth. Initial radiological signs of premature closure of the
bility, the distal fragment is reattached with a tension band
 distal radial physis include narrowing of the growth plate,
fxation (Box 31-6).
and changes in shape of the growth plate (Fig. 31-15). Treat-
 Ulnar styloid fractures in young cats have been associated
 ment of premature physeal closure of the radius is described
with the development of premature closure of the distal radial
 in Chapter 13.
growth plate (Chapter 13) (17). Control radiographs are
Repair of radial and ulnar fractures in cats was associated
therefore taken 2-3 weeks after the trauma in growing
with a high failure rate with the initial intervention, and 17
 animals to rule out radial physeal damage.
out of 36 cases required revision surgery (9). Fractures of the
proximal radius and ulna seem to be especially prone to
31.6 Postoperative treatment
complications and failures, and fractures of the proximal
and prognosis
ulna were described to have a higher risk for non-unions (18).
 A meticulous technique and attention to performing accurate
Activity is restricted to cage rest or confinement to the house
fracture reduction and stabilization of both the ulna and
after all fractures of the radius and ulna. External coaptation
radius should lead to an increased success rate.
 is usually unnecessary for diaphyseal fractures. In fractures,
Functional outcome after proximal radial and ulnar frac-
where the stability achieved with surgery is suboptimal for
ures is good if anatomic reconstruction of the elbow joint
immediate weight-bearing, external coaptation with a splinted
was achieved. Osteoarthritis will develop in most cases with
bandage should be considered for 2-3 weeks. A modifed
fractures involving the elbow joint.
Robert Jones bandage is used to limit elbow flexion after
Prognosis for return to function is usually excellent after
comminuted fractures of the proximal ulna. A splinted
diaphyseal fractures of the radius and ulna, provided that
bandage is also normally applied after repair of Salter and
correct limb alignment was achieved during surgery. Possible
Harris fractures of the distal radius for 10 days.
complications are the development of synostoses between the
Control radiographs are performed after 4-6 weeks in
radius and ulna. Synostosis is rare in cats and more likely to
adult cats, and after 2-3 weeks in immature cats. They are
occur after comminuted fractures, or if radial implants are
absolutely mandatory in immature cats with trauma to the
placed inadvertently into or close to the ulna. Degenerative
384
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Figure 31-15 Cat with
premature closure of the distal
radial physis. Serial radiographs
of a 6-month-old cat with a
minimally displaced Salter and
Harris type I fracture of the distal 
radial physis, which was treated 
conservatively with a splinted 
bandage. Note the irregular
physis 2 weeks after the injury
(A), and the subsequent
narrowing and dorsal tilting 4
weeks (B) and 7 weeks (C)
postinjury. Also note that the
ulnar physis was narrowed 4
weeks after injury (B), but had
widened again after 7 weeks (C).
A
B
joint disease may develop in the elbow or carpal joint, if the
3.5 mm cranio-caudal-placed cortical screws in canine cadaver
fxation resulted in length discrepancy between the radius and
radi. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2001;14:1-6.
ulna.
Kudnik ST, et al. In vitro comparison of the holding power of
1.2 mm, 1.5 mm, and 2.0 mm orthopaedic screws in canine
 The prognosis for distal radial and ulnar fractures is good
radi. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2002;15:78-84.
after stable fxation if congruity of the antebrachiocarpal
9.
Wallace AM, et al. Radius and ulna fractures in cats: a retro-
 joint was preserved. Healing of Salter and Harris fractures of
spective study of 38 cases. BSAVA Meeting 2007; Birmingham,
the distal radius is usually rapid due to the young age of cats
UK.
10. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA. An atlas of surgical approaches to
and the good metaphyseal blood supply. Premature closure
the bones and joints of the dog and the cat, 4th edn. Philadel-
of the distal radial physis can occur after both Salter and
phia: WB Saunders; 2004.
Harris fractures of the distal radius and fractures of the ulnar
11. Smith RN. Fusion of ossification centres in the cat. J Small Anim
Pract 1969;10:523-530.
styloid process (Fig. 31-15).
12. Robins GM, et al. Customized hook plate for metaphyseal frac-
tures, nonunions and osteotomies in the dog and cat. Vet Comp
References and further reading
Orthop Traumatol 1993;6:56-61.
13. Haas B, et al. Use of the tubular external fixator in the treatment
1.
Whitney WO, Mehlhaff CJ. High-rise symdrome in cats. J Am
of distal radial and ulnar fractures in small dogs and cats. Vet
Vet Med Assoc 1987;191:1399-1403.
Comp Orthop Traumatol 2003;16:132-137.
2.
Kapatkin AS, Matthiesen DT. Feline high-rise symdrome.
14. May C, et al. Delayed physeal closure associated with castration
Compend Continuing Educ 1991;13:1389-1394.
in cats. J Small Anim Pract 1991;32:326-328.
3.
 Harari J. Treatments for feline long bone fractures. Vet Clin
15. Houlton JE, McGlennon NJ. Castration and physeal closure in
North Am Small Anim Pract 2002;32:927-947.
the cat. Vet Rec 1992;131:466-467.
4.
Frewein J Vollmerhaus B. Anatomie von Hund und Katze.
16. Root MV, et al. The effect of prepuberal and postpuberal gonad-
Berlin: Blackwell; 1994.
ectomy on radial physeal closure in male and female domestic
5.
 Nunamaker DM. Fractures of the radius and ulna. In: Newton
cats. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1997;38:42-47.
 CD, Nunamaker DM (eds) Textbook of small animal orthopae-
17. Voss K, Lieskovsky J. Trauma-induced growth abnormalities of
dics. Philadelphia: Lippincort; 1985: pp. 365-373.
the distal radius in three cats. J Feline Med Surg 2007;9:117-
6.
 Sardinas JC, Montavon PM. Use of a medial bone plate for
123.
repair of radius and ulna fractures in dogs and cats: a report of
18. Nolte DM, et al. Incidence of and predisposing factors for non-
 22 cases. Vet Surg 1997;26:108-113.
union of fractures involving the appendicular skeleton in cats:
7.
Linn LL, et al. Extraction resistance of 2.7 mm medio-
18 cases {1998-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005;226:77-82.
lateral-placed cortical screws compared with 2.7mm and
385
32
 Carpal joint
K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs, P.M. Montavon
Carpal injuries occur after both falls from a height and motor
absent in cats. The lateral collateral ligament has a similar
vehicle accidents. Hyperextension injury at the level of the
 arrangement as described for dogs (2).
carpometacarpal joint was the most frequent, and medial
 The distal radius and ulna are connected to each other by
collateral ligament strain the second most common injury in
the joint capsule of the radioulnar joint and the radioulnar
a personal survey of feline carpal injuries. Intercarpal liga-
ligament (2). 
 The radioulnar joint allows rotational move-
mentous injury and luxation of the radial carpal bone were
 ment between the distal radius and ulna, allowing for supina-
diagnosed only infrequently. Fractures of the carpal bones
 tion and pronation of the paw, both important functions of
are exceedingly rare, with the exception of fractures of the
 the antebrachium in cats.
accessory carpal bone. Knowledge of carpal anatomy and a
thorough clinical and radiological examination are required
32.2 Diagnosis and treatment options
to diagnose correctly the exact type and site of carpal injury.
Anatomy of the carpal joint and the diagnosis and treatment
Carpal injuries include ligament sprains resulting in insta-
options of the most common carpal injuries in cats are
bility or luxation, and fractures of the carpal bones (Table
described in the following sections.
Osteoarthritis of the carpal joint is rare, but the carpi are
commonly affected in cats with polyarthritis. The carpal joint
is also prone to open injuries, such as degloving injuries and
cat bite wounds. These conditions are described in Chapters
5 and 14
32.1 Surgical anatomy
The carpal joint consists of two rows of bones and three joint
levels, the antebrachiocarpal, the middle carpal, and the car-
 pometacarpal joints. The individual bones are connected to
the joint capsule and there are numerous short ligaments,
s a  n a s o  jo so
are stronger on the palmar side of the joint, and these resist
the tensile forces during weight-bearing together with the
palmar fibrocartilage. These ligaments are damaged in hyper-
extension injuries.
 Recent publications have addressed anatomy of feline
carpal ligaments (1, 2). The medial collateral ligament of the
antebrachiocarpal joint in cats has anatomic and functional
differences to the ligament in the dog (1). It consists of only
a single broad ligament that extends obliquely from dorso-
A
B
proximal on the radius to its palmarodistal attachment on
Figure 32-1 Diagram illustrating anatomy and function of the feline
the radial carpal bone (Fig. 32-1). The angle between the
medial collateral ligament. (A) The angle between the longitudinal axis
longitudinal axis of the radius and the medial collateral liga-
of the radius and the medial collateral ligament is approximately 100°.
 ment is approximately 100°. Due to its oblique course, the
(B) Rupture of the medial collateral ligament results in palmar
medial collateral ligament not only counteracts valgus stress,
dislocation of the antebrachiocarpal joint, similar to a drawer motion.
(Reproduced with permission from: Voss K, Geyer H, Montavon PM.
but it also prevents dislocation of the carpal bones in a
Antebrachiocarpal luxation in a cat. A case report and anatomical study
palmar direction (1). The straight superficial part of the
 medial collateral ligament, which is present in the dog, is 
2003;16:268.)
386
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
 Localization of lesion
Type of lesion
Treatment options
Antebrachiocarpal joint
Medial collateral ligament sprain
Ligament prosthesis
instability/luxation
(medial instability)
 External coaptation
 Antebrachiocarpal luxation
 Primary repair
 Pancarpal arthrodesis
Luxation of the radial carpal bone
 Primary repair
 Hyperextension injury
 External coaptation
Pancarpal arthrodesis
 Middle carpal joint
Instability or luxation
 External coaptation
instability/luxation
 Partial carpal arthrodesis
 Hyperextension injury
 Partial carpal arthrodesis
 Carpometacarpal joint
Hyperextension injury
Partial carpal arthrodesis
instability/luxation
Dorsal, medial or lateral instability
Dorsal plate or internal fxator (adaptation function)
with intact palmar ligaments
 Screw and wire technique
 Partial carpal arthrodesis
Fractures of carpal bones
Fractures of the accessory carpal
 External coaptation
bone
Removal of fragment
 Fractures of the ulnar styloid
External coaptation
process
 Tension band repair
Table 32-1. Carpal injuries and possible treatment options. Antebrachiocarpal instability and luxation and carpometacarpal hyperextension are the
most common injuries
32-1). Fractures of the distal radius and ulna (Chapter 31)
fndings. Hyperextension stress views determine the level of
and fractures of the proximal aspect of the metacarpal bones
palmar instability at the radiocarpal, the middle carpal, or
(Chapter 33) may also affect the carpal joint. Cats with
carpal injuries often present with non-weight-bearing lame-
sion injury, below). Interpretation of valgus and varus stress 
 ness. The carpal area is swollen, and instability and/or crepi-
radiographs is diffcult due to the small size of bones and the 
tation may be felt. Comparison to the contralateral side can
oblique course of the medial collateral ligament in cats. The
be useful to detect mild periarticular swelling. Septic or
normal appearance of valgus and varus stress radiographs of
immune-mediated arthritis should be considered as differen-
the feline carpus is shown in Figure 32-2. Medial opening of
tial diagnoses in cases with carpal effusion and periarticular
swelling (Chapters 5 and 14).
Thorough palpation of a painful carpal joint often neces-
sitates sedation or a short general anesthetic. The presence of
crepitus is suggestive of fractures, luxations, or severe arthri-
tis. Joint stability is evaluated by manipulation of the carpus
 in all directions. The normal degree of carpal extension differs
between individual cats, ranging from 10° to 25°, so the
contralateral side should be used as a reference point. Hyper-
- rd    n d  n 
aul on pandde are ssans sniea pue snaieA 'inoddns snon
extended carpal joint to detect medial or lateral instability.
ing these mediolateral stresses. Finally, dorsopalmar stability
should also be tested to evaluate fully the integrity of the
 medial collateral ligament (Fig. 32-1).
 Mediolateral and dorsopalmar radiographs of the carpus
A
B
are obtained to diagnose or rule out luxations and fractures.
Figure 32-2 (A) Valgus and (B) and varus dorsopalmar stress
Stress radiographs in hyperextension, valgus, and varus stress
radiographs of an extended normal feline carpus. Note the large
are performed if ligament damage is suspected from clinical
physiological range of motion in valgus stress.
32: Carpal joint
387
the antebrachiocarpal joint in valgus stress is not as pro-
32.4.1 Medial collateral ligament sprain
nounced as in dogs in the presence of medial collateral liga-
ment sprain (see below). More commonly, varus stress causes
Sprain of the medial collateral ligament is a common cause
 the radial carpal bone to dislodge in a mediopalmar direction
of antebrachiocarpal instability. Medial collateral ligament
rupture results in both medial instability and palmar sublux-
(Fig. 32-3).
ation of the radiocarpal joint (Fig. 32-3). It may even lead to
complete palmar radiocarpal luxation if the dorsal joint
capsule is also ruptured (see next section).
32.3 Approaches to the carpal joints
Primary surgical reconstruction is the treatment of choice
for medial collateral ligament sprains resulting in either
A medial approach to the carpal joint is made for most pro-
marked subluxation or luxation (Box 32-1). Conservative
cedures. The medial approach allows repair of medial col-
 treatment with a splinted bandage can be tried for minor
lateral ligament ruptures, luxation of the radial carpal bone,
instability. In the presence of radiocarpal joint luxation it is
and pancarpal or partial carpal arthrodesis with a medial
 imperative also to evaluate the integrity of the palmar liga-
plate or internal fixator. The skin is incised along the cranio-
-unxaiadaq uo uonsas aas) Araains arojq iroddns snoiuu
medial border of the distal radius and carpal joint. The inci-
sion injury, below). Primary repair should be attempted
sion is extended distally just cranial to the frst digit, if the
 before arthrodesis is considered, if the palmar ligaments
distal carpal rows have to be approached. The antebrachial
are intact.
fascia is then incised and the tendon of the abductor pollicis
longus muscle identifed. It covers part of the medial collat-
32.4.2 Antebrachiocarpal luxation
eral ligament close to its proximal attachment, before insert-
ing at the base of the metacarpal bone I. The tendon is spared
 Complete antebrachiocarpal luxation in a palmar or dorsal
but can be retracted to visualize the medial collateral liga-
direction is occasionally encountered. Palmar antebrachio-
ment. Incision of the radiocarpal joint capsule is performed
carpal luxation is more common than dorsal luxation in cats.
in a longitudinal direction, cranial to the medial collateral
Palmar luxation is often caused by rupture of the medial
ligament, if necessary.
collateral ligament and the dorsal joint capsule (Fig. 32-5).
A dorsal approach to the carpal joints is performed
 Dorsomedial luxation of the antebrachiocarpal joint was
for partial carpal arthrodesis by the pin fixation method, and
 associated with disruption of the radioulnar ligament and a
for pancarpal arthrodesis with a dorsal plate (3). The exten-
grade II medial collateral ligament strain in one report (2).
The enhanced mobility of the distal ulna with respect to the
aging them. If partial carpal arthrodesis is performed, the
dorsal joint capsule of the radiocarpal joint can be left
intact.
32.4 Antebrachiocarpal instability
and luxation
[edeoqae aui jo oddns sno an on san
 joint include medial colateral ligament sprain, antebrachio-
carpal luxation, luxation of the radial carpal bone, and ante-
brachiocarpal hyperextension injury (Table 32-1). Medial
collateral ligament sprains and antebrachiocarpal luxations
are the most frequently diagnosed injuries at the antebrachio-
carpal level. Luxation of the radial carpal bone and ante-
 collateral ligament rupture and radiocarpal luxation are more
commonly caused by motor vehicle accidents, hyperextension
A
B
injury is almost invariably seen after falls from a height.
Figure 32-3 (A) Valgus and (B) varus stress radiographs of a cat with
medial collateral ligament sprain. Valgus stress radiographs do not
Motor vehicle accidents may also result in degloving and
 edee e  po buado aaissxa ui lnsn aess
open antebrachiocarpal joint injuries. Treatment of open
Varus stress causes palmaromedial subluxation of the radiocarpal joint,
joint injuries is described in Chapter 14.
as identified by the abnormal radiocarpal joint space.
388
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 32-1. Medial collateral ligament prosthesis
A medial approach to the carpal joint is performed as
Figure 32-4  The screws are
described above. The ligament ends are identified below
positioned at the insertion sites 
of the medial collater al ligament.
the tendon of the abductor pollicis longus muscle, and are
 The ligament prosthesis mimics 
sutured with a locking-loop suture if possible. A ligament
the anatomic course of the
prosthesis is applied to protect the primary ligament repair.
ligament, and prevents both
The prosthesis must mimic the physiological course of the
medial opening of the joint and 
ligament (Fig. 32-4). A 1.5-mm screw is placed in the
palmar (sub)luxation of the radial 
radial epiphysis in a dorsomedial to palmarolateral direc-
carpal bone.
 tion. Avoid penetrating the ulna with the screw tip, as this
would impede supination and pronation movements. A
second 1.5-mm screw is inserted palmar to the tendon of
the abductor pollicis longus muscle into the radial carpal
bone. A figure-of-eight suture is anchored around the
screw heads below the tendon of the abductor pollicis
 muscle. Flexion, extension, supination, and pronation are 
tested after the suture has been tightened. Impaired range
of motion or dorsal subluxation can occur if the suture is
too tight. Instability will persist if it is left too loose.
A
B
c
D
Figure 32-5 (A, B) Preoperative and (c. D) postoperative radiographs of the carpal joint of a cat with palmar radiocarpal luxation, caused by
medial collateral ligament sprain and rupture of the dorsal joint capsule. Avulsion fragments are seen at the insertion site of the medial collateral
ligament at the distal radius (A). The radiocarpal joint is luxated towards palmar (B). Note the reciprocal directions of the two 1.5-mm screws used
for anchorage of the prosthesis on the postoperative radiographs (c, D).
32: Carpal joint
389
radius, caused by radioulnar joint disruption, resulted in
 32.4.3 Luxation of the radial carpal bone
lateral instability of the antebrachiocarpal joint, despite an
Luxation of the radial carpal bone is an uncommon injury
intact lateral collateral ligament (2).
Stress radiographs are performed when closed reduction of
that has only been described in one cat (4). The radial carpal
 the luxation is feasible to evaluate integrity of the collateral
bone is luxated in a palmar direction with the proximal
ligaments and the palmar ligamentous support. Evaluation
articular aspect of the radial carpal bone coming to lie facing
 of joint structures can also be done during surgery, especially
dorsally (Fig. 32-6). The injury is associated with rupture of
in cases where closed reduction and preoperative stress
the dorsal joint capsule, the intercarpal ligament, which con-
radiographs were not feasible.
nects the radial and ulnar carpal bones, and the medial col-
 Antebrachiocarpal luxation is not necessarily associated
with palmar ligament damage in cats, and primary repair of
thought to be hyperextension combined with pronation,
followed by supination of the foot, as may occur during a
ruptured ligaments should be attempted if the palmar liga-
ments are intact (1, 2). Pancarpal arthrodesis is indicated
fall. Open reduction using a dorsomedial approach to the
radiocarpal joint and internal fxation is the treatment of
when anatomic reduction and stable primary repair are not
choice. The radial carpal bone is secured to the ulnar carpal
possible. Further indications for pancarpal arthrodesis are
bone with a 1.5-mm screw or small Kirschner wire, and the
severe degloving injuries with loss of bone and/or prolonged
septic arthritis.
medial collateral ligament is reconstructed (Fig. 32-6). The
Primary repair involves apposition of and suturing the rup-
repair is protected with a splinted bandage or a transarticular
external skeletal fxator for 2-3 weeks. The prognosis is
tured joint capsule and ligaments when possible. A medial
collateral ligament prosthesis is additionally applied in the
favorable.
presence of medial collateral ligament rupture (Fig. 32-5 and
Box 32-1). Instability of the radioulnar joint can be treated
32.5 Hyperextension injury
with a temporary screw or pin inserted from the distal ulna
into the distal radius to allow fbrous healing of the joint
The palmar ligaments and fbrocartilage are the main struc-
capsule and radioulnar ligament (2). This implant is removed
 tures that resist carpal hyperextension. Carpal hyperexten-
after 4-6 weeks, because it restricts pronation and supination
sion injuries in cats result from a fall from a height, where
of the antebrachium.
arge tensile forces are generated on the palmar side of the
D
auoa ledien leipen pateiou pue paienl ui mous sudeopen aalie adoaid aul (a 't) auog edien leipen aun jo uoiexni yim ien y g-ze auna
ww-o'l e yim auog iedien yeuin aui oi pazgers pue pannpan sem auog ledien lepen aul (a ') Aesiop patenol si anens yenoie ewxoid si
Kirschner wire. The medial collateral ligament was sutured, and a ligament prosthesis was placed between the 1.5-mm screw in the radius and
around the bent pin end.
06E
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
ment or primary ligament reconstruction, clinical results
are unsatisfactory because a palmigrade stance persists.
Arthrodesis is therefore the treatment of choice (5, 6). Partial
carpal arthrodesis is performed for intercarpal and carpo-
injuries involving the antebrachiocarpal joint necessitate
 pancarpal arthrodesis. A cat with atraumatic hyperextension
at the antebrachiocarpal joint level should be screened for
diabetes mellitus. A conservative treatment trial usually pre-
cedes the decision to perform pancarpal arthrodesis in cases
with minor palmar instability at the antebrachiocarpal joint
level. External immobilization with the carpal joint in slight
flexion may allow fbrous healing of the ligaments and result
in acceptable function. Partial carpal arthrodesis and pan-
carpal arthrodesis are described at the end of this chapter.
Figure 32-7 Mediolateral stress radiograph of a cat with
carpometacarpal hyperextension injury. The metacarpal bones are
32.6 Rare carpal injuries
angled in a dorsal direction in relation to the distal row of carpal
bones. The antebrachiocarpal joint is intact. The treatment of choice is
-rdaq uel ro saqeisut edreidien ro iedeia
partial carpal arthrodesis
extension injury can occur after rupture of the short intercar-
pal and carpometacarpal ligaments. The exact site of
instability is difficult to diagnose radiographically, and these
lesions are usually treated by partial carpal arthrodesis. For
isolated dorsal instabilities at the intercarpal or carpometa-
carpal joint levels, a dorsally applied internal fixator or mini-
plate in adaptation function, or dorsal fxation using two
screws and a fgure-of-eight suture, are used to allow fbrous
healing of the dorsal ligaments. The techniques for repair of
short dorsal ligaments are similar to those described in
Chapter 40 for the more frequent dorsal instabilities of inter-
tarsal joints.
Fractures of the carpal bones are exceptionally rare in cats,
and mostly affect the accessory carpal bone (Fig. 32-9). Frac-
tures of the accessory carpal bone have been classified into
five types in racing greyhounds (9). Accesory bone fracture
types seen by the authors in cats include type I, distal basilar
fractures, and type V, comminuted fractures. Type I injuries
may be associated with hyperextension injury due to avulsion
of the accessoroulnar ligaments. Treatment usually consists
Figure 32-8  Mediolateral stress radiograph of a cat with
of external coaptation with the carpus immobilized in 20° of
angle and the angle between the radius and the accessory carpal bone
flexion for a time period of around 4 weeks, as the fragments
larger than 90° indicate either instability at the level of the
of the small accessory bone are too small to be reattached
antebrachiocarpal joint or disruption or dysfunction of the flexor carpi
with a lag screw. Removal of the fragment, partial carpal
ulnaris tendon. Pancarpal arthrodesis is performed if lameness and/or a
arthrodesis, or pancarpal arthrodesis may be indicated if
palmigrade stance persists after conservative treatment.
lameness persists.
32.7 Partial carpal arthrodesis
carpus during impact on the ground. The carpometacarpal
 joint is affected in the majority of cases (Fig. 32-7). Radio-
Partial carpal arthrodesis is indicated for the treatment of
carpal and intercarpal hyperextension injuries are infrequent
carpometacarpal and intercarpal hyperextension injuries,
(Fig. 32-8). Although cats may be able to walk after fbrous
comminuted fractures of the distal joint levels, and other
healing of the palmar ligaments following conservative treat-
 non-reconstructable injuries at the intercarpal and carpo-
32: Carpal joint
391
   on   a o
 although the 2.0-mm screws are relatively large for insertion
 into the thin metacarpal bones.
32.8 Pancarpal arthrodesis
Pancarpal arthrodesis is indicated for treatment of ante-
brachiocarpal injuries with damage to the palmar ligamen-
 tous support, comminuted fractures involving the radiocarpal
joint surfaces, abrasion injuries with severe damage to the
joint surface, and other non-reconstructable injuries of the
radiocarpal joint. Infrequent indications are joint destruction
by septic or immune-mediated arthritis. Pancarpal arthrode-
sis relieves pain and restores stability of the limb to allow
weight-bearing, but it causes noticeable functional defcits 
and gait disturbances. The functional abnormalities are more
disabling for cats as compared to dogs due to the restriction
of pronation and supination motion. The carpus should be
fused in about 15-20° of extension; the exact angle chosen
should be dependent on comparative measurements of the
weight-bearing contralateral carpus.
A
B
Pancarpal arthrodesis may also be performed in cats with
Figure 32-9 Examples of accessory carpal bone fractures. Both cats
radial nerve paralysis and an inability to extend the carpal
were treated conservatively with a splinted bandage.
joint and toes. The carpal joint should be fused in 20-30° of
(A) A distal basilar fracture of the accessory carpal bone.
extension in such cases to prevent trauma to the toes (10).
(B) A mildly comminuted fracture of the accessory carpal bone.
Patients must be selected carefully, as partial carpal arthro-
desis only gives functional results if the function of the triceps
o aul jo le aui aaiasqo oi daq ues ii paiasd si as
with the carpal joint stabilized in an extended position by an
 external splint prior to performing surgery.
metacarpal joint levels. The advantage of partial carpal
Cross pinning (10), dorsal plating (11), and external skel-
arthrodesis is the preservation of functional mobility of the
etal fixation (12) have been suggested for panarthrodesis of
antebrachiocarpal joint. To our knowledge, partial carpal
the carpus in cats. Only the dorsal plating technique has been
 arthrodesis has not been published in cats. In dogs, a pinning
described in detail, including an anatomic study to evaluate
technique, cross pinning, and dorsal application of a T-plate
suitable plate and screw size (11). Screw size is restricted by
have been described (5-8).
the size of the metacarpal bones and the authors suggested
The pin fixation technique works well in cats (Box 32-2),
using a 1.5-mm miniplate (11). Screws with a diameter of
and has the advantage of not requiring any specialized equip-
1.5 mm can also be inserted through a 2.0-mm dynamic
ment or implants (Fig. 32-11). The pins are inserted from the
compression plate (DCP) or a 1.5/2.0-mm veterinary cuttable
metacarpal bones II and II so the tips can be seated in
plate. Cross pinning is a less stable fixation, carrying the risks
the radial carpal bone. Pin insertion can be hazardous due to
of implant loosening and delayed fusion. Prolonged external
the small diameter of the medullary cavity at the base of the
 Coaptation is necessary if this method is chosen. Panarthrod-
metacarpals and the hard quality of the carpal bones.
esis with external skeletal fxation is a useful option, espe-
Dorsal plating is not feasible in cats, because the small size
 cially in the presence of open injuries.
of the radial carpal bone would result in irritation of the
Medial plating for pancarpal arthrodesis has recently been
radiocarpal joint and distal radius from impingement of the
described in dogs (13), and can also be performed in cats.
proximal end of the plate. Instead, partial carpal arthrodesis
Medial plating has the advantage of the plate being less
"(-e xog) aeid padde Aeia e qm paad aq ue
 subject to bending forces and therefore less liable to break.
A small plate, such as the 1.3-mm compact hand plate or a
 More stability is achieved because the screws engage more
1.5-mm miniplate, can be used, because the medial side of
 bone material. Screw loosening is even less likely when an
the carpus is under tension during weight-bearing, and the
 internal fixator is used, compared to a conventional 2.0-mm
plate is more stable against bending along its broad axis. A
 DCP. The 2.0-mm Unilock plate is a reconstruction plate
392
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 32-2. Partial carpal arthrodesis
Adequate preparation of all intercarpal and carpometacar-
pal joint spaces is needed to achieve fusion, regardless of
which stabilization method is used. Preparation of the joint
spaces involves complete debridement of the articular car-
tilage and application of a bone graft. See Chapter 13 for
grafting techniques and Chapter 14 for principles of
arthrodesis.
Jedres au on uonoidde jesiop y :anboai su
joints and metacarpal bones is used with a skin incision
over the third metacarpal bone. The extensor carpi radialis
tendon is preserved and the joint capsule of the ante-
brachiocarpal joint remains intact. Slots are drilled or
burred into the mid- to distal diaphyseal area of metacar-
pus II and Il. The slots have to be long enough to intro-
duce 0.8-1.0-mm Kirschner wires into the medullary
cavity and avoid inadvertent penetration of the transcor-
tex. The Kirschner wires are advanced while the carpus is
A
B
held in flexion until their tips emerge in the carpometacar-
Figure 32-10 Two techniques for partial carpal arthrodesis.
pal joint. The medullary cavity of the metacarpal bones
(A) Partial carpal arthrodesis with the pinning technique. The
can be opened proximally by predrilling a hole from the
sdi daul 'ill pue ll sauog jedieneiaw aun oui palasui ahe suid
proximal joint surface prior to pin insertion, which helps
engage the radial carpal bone, and are ideally located just below 
 directing the pins. Cancellous bone graft is packed into the
the proximal joint surface of the radial carpal bone.
joints. The carpus is reduced, and the pins are advanced
(B) Partial carpal arthrodesis with a medially applied 1.5-mm
until they come to lie in the radial carpal bone, just below
miniplate. One screw is inserted into the radial carpal bone, one
is inserted into the distal row of carpal bones, and three screws
the radiocarpal joint surface (Fig. 32-10A). Position of the
engage the metacarpals.
pins is verifed by comparing the length of pin inserted
with another pin of the same length. Curved mosquito
forceps can be introduced into the antebrachiocarpal joint
first digit can be removed if it interferes with plate posi-
through a small incision in the joint capsule to feel for
tion, and part of it can be used as bone graft. The frst
 protruding pin tips if in doubt. The distal ends of the pins 
screw is inserted into the radial carpal bone. The distal
are bent and cut short.
carpal joints are reduced and a screw is inserted into the
Medial plating: A dorsomedial approach to the carpo-
base of the metacarpal bones. Distraction between the
metacarpal joints and metacarpus II is performed. A five-
metacarpal bones must be avoided during insertion of the
or six-hole miniplate or internal fxator is contoured to the
frst screw. One screw should engage the distal row of
medial surface of the carpal bones and metacarpal bone
carpal bones. The distal holes of the plate overlying the
II. The medial collateral ligament and the abductor pollicis
second metacarpal bone are filled, aiming the screws
longus tendon are preserved. The proximal phalanx of the
slightly towards dorsal (Fig. 32-10B).
which facilitates contouring to the carpus. The advantage of
32.9 Postoperative treatment
using a 2.0-mm DCP is that 1.5-mm screws can be inserted
and prognosis
 into the small metacarpal bones and the radial diaphysis (Fig.
32-12).
External coaptation of the carpus is necessary in the postop-
 Techniques for pancarpal arthrodesis in cats are described
erative period after primary repair of carpal injuries, and
in Box 32-3.
after partial or pancarpal arthrodesis. Techniques for apply-
32: Carpal joint
A
B
Figure 32-11  (A) Dorsopalmar and (B) mediolateral radiographs
following partial carpal arthrodesis of the cat in Figure 32-7 with
e suid w-a au jo sd aul unui uosuaxaady edeeaoie
nicely seated in the radial carpal bone.
A
B
Figure 32-12 (A) Example of a cat with pancarpal arthrodesis
ing bandages and splints are described in Chapter 22.
performed with a medially applied 2.0-mm dynamic compression plate,
Bandages and splints should be changed weekly to be able to
using both 2.0- and 1.5-mm screws. (B) The carpus could not be fused 
check for the development of pressure sores and skin
in more extension in this case due to contracture of the flexor muscles.
irritation.
Also note the sight radioulnar distraction due to the screw tips pushing
the ulna away.
32.9.1 Primary repair of carpal injuries
preserve carpal range of motion. Physiotherapy can be con-
The healing of ligaments is slow. It takes several weeks until
ducted during bandage changes, and after the external coap-
the resistance to tensional forces is sufficient to withstand full
tation has been rermoved. Some degree of carpal osteoarthritis
weight-bearing. External coaptation is used to protect the
is likely to develop after all injuries of the carpal joint, but
surgical repair of ruptured ligaments, until periarticular scar
functional outcome can be expected to be good after ade-
tissue has been built up sufficiently to provide some intrinsic
quate reduction and stabilization of the joint (1, 2).
stability. The duration of external coaptation depends on
stability achieved during surgery and postoperative activity
32.9.2 Partial carpal and pancarpal arthrodesis
of the cat and anticipated healing time. After surgical repair
of medial collateral ligament sprains, 2-3 weeks of external
External coaptation is provided with a splinted bandage for
immobilization is usually adequate. After repair of complex
 4 weeks after partial carpal arthrodesis. Kirschner wires can
carpal injuries, such as complete antebrachiocarpal luxation 
 be left in place if they are not migrating or causing other
and luxation of the radial carpal bone, 3-4 weeks are needed.
 problems. It may be advantageous to remove plates used for
Although a splinted bandage does not provide absolute 
 partial carpal arthrodesis after fusion has occurred to mini-
immobilization, it usually provides suffcient stability. A trans-1
 mize irritation of the medial aspect of the radiocarpal joint
articular external skeletal fixator (Fig. 32-14) can be used if 
 and periarticular structures.
rigid immobilization is deemed necessary, and is also helpful
 Loss of range of motion in flexion is expected after partial
in the presence of degloving wounds, when frequent bandage 
 carpal arthrodesis. The incidence of development of second-
changes are necessary. The carpus should be immobilized for
ary radiocarpal degenerative joint disease is not known in 
no longer than 4 weeks.
cats, but around 15-30% of dogs develop degenerative joint
Carpal range of motion in flexion will be reduced after
disease in the radiocarpal joint (6, 7). Despite this, functional
immobilization. Early passive physiotherapy is beneficial to
outcome seems good in most cases.
394
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 32-3. Pancarpal arthrodesis
Successful pancarpal fusion requires preparation of all
one in the distal radius. If alignment is satisfactory, the
joint levels. The articular cartilage is completely debrided,
other screw holes are filled (Fig. 32-13A).
and cancellous bone graft is inserted into the joint spaces.
s no! edres ai o ydde iepu y ueid iep
Cancellous or corticocancellous graft is additionally
performed. The proximal phalanx of the frst digit is
an pue pue as o! pesrop a on uo paod
removed to achieve a flat surface for plate application. It
implants before wound closure. Grafting techniques are
can be used as additional bone graft. The articular carti-
covered in Chapter 13, and principles of arthrodesis are
lage is debrided from all joints. An eight-hole internal
further described in Chapter 14.
fxator or plate is bent 10? longitudinally and contoured
Dorsal plating: A dorsal approach to the carpal joint is
to the medial surface. Twisting the plate proximally and
used, and the extensor tendons are spared. After debride-
distally to apply it on the caudomedial surface of the
ment of the joint surfaces, an eight-hole internal fxator or
radius and metacarpal bones, respectively, gives additional
plate is contoured to the dorsal surface of the radius and
degrees of carpal extension. A 2.0-mm screw is inserted
the third metacarpal bone to give 15-20° of extension to
 frst into the radial carpal bone, ideally also engaging
 the joint: 2.0-mm screws are used in the radial metaphysis
the ulnar carpal bone. The plate is then secured to the
and the radial carpal bone, and 1.5-mm screws distal to
radius and the metacarpal bones with one screw each. If
that. The frst screw is inserted into the radial carpal bone,
alignment is considered appropriate, the remaining screw
followed by one screw in the third metacarpal bone and
holes are flled (Fig. 32-13B). Then 2.0-mm screws can be
15-20
D
Figure 32-13  Different techniques for pancarpal arthrodesis
(A) Pancarpal arthrodesis with a dorsally applied eight-hole 2.0-mm dynamic compression plate (DcP): 1.5-mm screws are used in the
metacarpal bones. The carpal joint is fused with 15-20° of extension
(B) Pancarpal arthrodesis with a medially applied eight-hole 2.0-mm DCP: 1.5-mm screws are inserted into the metacarpal bones and the
radial diaphysis in a slight dorsal direction.
(C) Pancarpal arthrodesis with external skeletal fixation. Full pins are placed across the radius and base of the metacarpal bones. At least two
additional small half pins are added both proximally and distally
(D) Pancarpal arthrodesis with cross pins. Positive-threaded 1.6-mm pins can be used in large cats. The pins must cross each other distal to
the radiocarpal joint surface to give enough rotational stability.
32: Carpal joint
395
 External coaptation is provided for 4-6 weeks after pan-
inserted into the radial metaphysis, and 1.5-mm screws
carpal arthrodesis. Plates can be removed once fusion of the
daeniau aun pue sishqdeip peiper aul rog pasn ane
carpal joint is completed in order to prevent iatrogenic frac-
bones. The screws are directed in a slight cranial and
tures of the metacarpal bones or the radius at the plate ends
 dorsal direction. The ulna should not be engaged with
(Fig. 32-15). Functional outcome for walking and running is
the screws to allow movement of the radioulnar joint, 
 good if an appropriate carpal position is achieved, and if the
necessary for pronation and supination.
radioulnar joint has not been fused. However, some gait
 External skeletal fixator: Panarthrodesis of the carpus
abnormalities may be noted and cats are restricted in their
using external skeletal fixation is indicated in the pres-
climbing and hunting activities.
ence of open and contaminated carpal injuries. A type II
frame is applied to the distal radius and metacarpal
bones after preparation of the joint surfaces (Fig. 32-
13C). One full pin is inserted into the radius, and one
Figure 32-14
across the base of the metacarpal bones. Additional
Photograph showing
a medially applied 
transfixation pins are added once the external bars have
 transarticular
been connected to the full pins, holding the carpal joint 
external fixator
in 15-20? of extension. Non-threaded pins are angled 
immobilizing the
70° to the long axis of the bones.
carpus after primary
 Cross pinning: After joint preparation and reduction,
repair of an
 two 1.1-1.4-mm Kirschner wires are drilled from the
antebrachiocarpal
luxation. The fixator
base of both metacarpus II and IV into the distal radial
was left in place for
metaphysis in cross-pinning fashion (Fig. 32-13D).
3 weeks.
 Aiming devices help in directing the pins. Care is taken
not to lose reduction during insertion of the pins. The
pins should cross below the antebrachiocarpal joint
 level to achieve rotational stability. The pins should not
 enter the ulna, as rotational movement between the
radius and ulna can cause pin loosening.
Figure 32-15 A cat 6 months
after left pancarpal arthrodesis 
with a medial 2.0-mm Unilock
plate.
(A) The cat before plate removal.
The cat had good function of the
limb with minimal gait
abnormality.
(B) Mediolateral radiograph after
plate removal. Arthrodesis is
complete in all carpal joints.
(C) Dorsopalmar radiograph after
 plate removal. Note that the
radioulnar joint is not fused.
allowing some pronation and
supination motion.
B
C
396
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
References and further reading
 7. Haburjak J, et al. Treatment of carpometacarpal and middle
carpal joint hyperextension injuries with partial carpal arthro-
desis using a cross pin technique: 21 cases. Vet Comp Orthop
and anatomical study of the medial collateral ligament. Vet
Traumatol 2003;16:105-111.
Comp Orthop Traumatol 2003;16:266-270.
8. Slocum B, Devine T. Partial carpal fusion in the dog. J Am Vet
 2. Shales CJ, Langley-Hobbs SJ. Dorso-medial antebrachiocarpal
Med Assoc 1982;180:1204-1208.
luxation with radio-ulna luxation in a domestic shorthair. J
9. Johnson KA. Accessory carpal bone fractures in the racing
Feline Med Surg 2006;8:197-202.
greyhound: classification and pathology. Vet Surg 1987;16:60-
3. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA. An atlas of surgical approaches to
64.
the bones and joints of the dog and the cat, 4th edn. Philadel-
10. Denny HR, Butterworth S. A guide to canine and feline ortho-
phia: WB Saunders; 2004.
 pedic surgery, 4th edn. London: Blackwell Scientifc Publica-
4. Pitcher GD. Luxation of the radial carpal bone in a cat. J Small
tions; 2000.
Anim Pract 1996;37:292-295.
11. Simpson D, Goldsmith S. Pancarpal arthrodesis in a cat a case
 5. Piermattei DL, Flo GL. Fractures and other orthopedic condi-
report and anatomical study. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
tions of the carpus, metacarpus, and phalanges. In: Piermattei
1994;7:45-50.
DL, Flo GL (eds) Small animal orthopedics and fracture repair.
12. Kapatkin AS,
, Matthiesen DT. Feline high-rise syndrome.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1997: pp. 344-389.
Compend Continuing Educ 1991;13:1389-1394.
6. Willer RL,et al. Partial carpal arthrodesis for third degree carpal
13. Guerrero TG, Montavon PM. Medial plating for carpal panar-
sprains - a review of 45 carpi. Vet Surg 1990;19:334-340.
throdesis. Vet Surg 2005;34:153-158.
397
33
Metacarpus, metatarsus, and phalanges
S.J. Langley-Hobbs, K. Voss, P.M. Montavon
Metacarpal and metatarsal fractures account for only 2% of
 for joint stability. Paired sesamoid bones are present at the
feline fractures (1). Motor vehicle accidents and falls from a
 palmar and plantar surface of the metacarpophalangeal and
height are the most common causes. Concurrent soft-tissue
 metatarsophalangeal joints II-V. These serve as a gliding and
injuries are often encountered. Motor vehicle accidents can 
-aies lug suopuan noxa iep au rog paq anssand 
cause degloving injuries, and encounters with lawnmowers 
aul jo ainsdes iuio! jesrop aul ul paiesof are saipoq snou
and harvesting machinery often result in grade III open frac-
metacarpophalangeal, metatarsophalangeal, and interpha-
tures and luxations, or even traumatic amputation of parts
langeal joints. Those of the metacarpophalangeal and meta-
of the digits. Such injuries can be severe enough to result in
tarsophalangeal joint can ossify and are then visible on
critical disruption of the vascularity of the foot. The reat-
radiographs.
ment of degloving injuries is described in Chapter 16.
Fractures or luxations of toes can also occur after minor
33.2 Stabilization techniques
injury.
 External coaptation is a commonly used and adequate
Metacarpal, metatarsal, and phalangeal fractures can be
 method for the treatment of selected metacarpal, metatarsal,
reated with either external coaptation alone or with internal
stabilization, often combined with external coaptation. The
and phalangeal fractures, but internal fxation is preferred in
decision on what method to use to stabilize metacarpal, meta-
some cases. Miniaturized implants are necessary to stabilize
the tiny bones. Amputation of a digit is a useful salvage pro-
shp Aueu mou uo spuadap sanoen jaueeud pue iesie
are fractured, and on fracture confguration and location.
cedure if other treatments fail to achieve a functional outcome
Table 33-1 provides a general overview on possible fixation
(Chapter 41).
techniques. No strict rules exist for the choice of whether to
 The paws may also be affected by diseases of the claws,
clawbeds, or footpads. These conditions are summarized in
Use conservative or surgical treatment, but, as a general rule,
Chapter 7.
fractures of more than two metacarpi, metatarsi, or phalan-
 ges and grossly displaced fractures are treated surgically.
The presence of open wounds or extensive soft-tissue bruis-
33.1 Surgical anatomy
ing and swelling also has an influence on treatment choice.
 Severe soft-tissue injuries can markedly complicate treatment
The metacarpal, metatarsal, and phalangeal bones and joints
and postoperative care, and often prolong hospitalization
are highly functional despite their small size. They are num-
time and treatment costs. If viability of one or several toes is
bered I-V frorm medial to lateral. Only digits II-V are weight-
questionable at the time of admission, the wounds are mini
bearing. Digit I is missing on the hindlimb, where it is only
 mally debrided, flushed, and treated with wet-to-dry splinted
present as a small rudimentary piece of bone. The third digit
bandages, until demarcation of devitalized tissue is obvious,
is the longest one in the forelimb in cats. The metacarpal and
allowing definitive debridement and selective excision of dead
metatarsal bones articulate with the distal carpal bones and
001 aaepueq on lou uaxei aq oi seu aie '(91 randeu) anssg
distal tarsal bones proximally, and with the proximal pha-
tightly to keep blood vessels patent, and avoid pressure
necrosis. In some cases, a small external skeletal fxator can
closes between 29 and 40 weeks of age (2). The growth plates
be applied to provide temporary stability, until defnitive
of the phalangeal bones close berween 16 and 22 weeks of
repair can be performed. Survival of the footpads is essential
age (2). The distal phalanx (P3) ends in the claw. The claws
for function of the digits or paw. Necrosis of the footpads or
of the second to ffth toe are retracted into the skin fold and
entire toe often requires amputation of the affected digit.
are positioned dorsolateral to the middle phalanx when the
Amputation of the toes is described in Chapter 41.
cat is standing. This is caused by a special elastic ligament,
which runs from the lateral surface of the middle phalanx to
33.2.1 Intramedullary pinning
the extensory process of the distal phalanx.
The metacarpophalangeal, metatarsophalangeal, and inter-
Intramedullary pinning of fractures of the metacarpal
 phalangeal joints have collateral ligaments that are important
and metatarsal bones is commonly used, as implants are
398
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
 Localization of lesion
Type of lesion
 Treatment options
Table 33-1. Fractures and
luxations occurring in the
 Metacarpal and
Base of metacarpus
Conservative
metacarpi, metatarsi, and
phalanges, and possible 
metatarsal fractures
and metatarsus
Tension band repair (II or V)
treatment options
 Diaphysis
Conservative
 IM pin
 Miniplate
Supracondylar and
Conservative
physeal
Cross pins
 Intercondylar
Transcondylar lag screw
Conservative (if reconstruction is not
possible)
Amputation (if lameness persists)
Phalangeal fractures
Non-articular
Conservative
Cross pin
Miniplate
Articular
Transcondylar lag screw
Conservative (if reconstruction is not
possible)
 Amputation (if lameness persists)
 Metatarsophalangeal,
Luxation
Closed reduction
metacarpophalangeal,
 Open reduction and ligament
and interphalangeal
prosthesis
 IM pin, intramedullary pin.
inexpensive and readily available. Intramedullary pins provide
proximally across the fracture until it is seated in the base of
bending stability, but no axial compression or rotational
the bone.
stability. They are used to repair simple fractures, where the
An alternative technique is toggle pinning, or intramedul-
fracture ends prevent axial collapse of the bone. Rotational
lary pinning with distraction (3) (Fig. 33-2). It is technically
stability is not as essential as in other long bones, because the 
adjacent digits help restrict movement. Small pins must be
lary pinning, and is mainly used for distally located fractures.
used because of the narrow intramedullary canal, especially
The pins are left completely encased in bone and are therefore
at the base of the metacarpals. Small pins are also more flex-
difficult to retrieve if this became necessary. The pin is frst
ible, facilitating pin insertion. Kirschner wires with a diame-
placed into the proximal intramedullary canal. It is then cut,
ter of 0.8 or 0.9 mm are generally appropriate for metacarpal
with about 0.5-1.5 cm left protruding from the medullary
bones, and 0.9-1.2-mm pins can be used in the metatarsal
canal, depending on the length of the distal fragment. The
bones. The abaxial metatarsal bones (II and V) are narrower
fracture is distracted and the distal fragment is carefully
than the axial bones (II and IV) so different-sized pins should
levered on to the protruding pin tip (Fig. 33-2). If it is not
 be used to obtain the optimal diameter pin for each bone.
possible to reduce the fracture on to the pin, then the pin can
The intramedullary pins can be inserted in two ways: either
be gradually shortened until this is possible. It is important
normograde, from distal to proximal (Fig. 33-1), or as toggle
not to force the end of the bone on to the pin, as fissuring
pins (Fig. 33-2). The entry point for normograde insertion is
can occur. The careful use of a small mosquito hemostat as
at the dorsal and distal aspect of the metacarpus or metatar-
a bone holder can facilitate fracture reduction.
sus, just proximal to the condyle and at least 5 mm away
from the fracture line. The pins have to be inserted as parallel
33.2.2 Screws and plates
 as possible to the intramedullary canal to avoid penetration
of the transcortex and inadvertent exit caudally. This is
 Isolated screws are rarely used, except when they are applied
facilitated by burring a longitudinal slot into the dorsal cortex
as lag screws across oblique fractures or condylar fractures.
for the pin entry point, and by bending the tip of the pin
The small size of the metacarpal and metatarsal bones only
slightly towards dorsal (Fig. 33-1). The pin is then advanced
allows insertion of screw sizes of 1.5 mm or smaller.
33: Metacarpus, metatarsus, and phalanges
399
Figure 33-2
 Toggle pinning of a distal metacarpal or metatarsa
A
fracture.
(A) The pin is inserted into the proximal medullary canal
Figure 33-1  Normograde intramedullary pinning of a metacarpal or
(B) The protruding pin is cut to a length of approximately 5 mm. The
metatarsal bone.
buisn di uid buinod aui on uo paaaal Anjae s suae es
(A) A slot can be burred into the dorsal cortex of the metacarpus or
traction on the digits. Mosquito forceps can be used as bone holders
metatarsus to facilitate insertion of the pin. The entry point of the pin
on the proximal and distal bone fragments.
is at least 5 mm, but preferably further away from the fracture site. The
(C) Completed toggle pin.
tip of the pin is slightly bent towards dorsal before insertion
(B) The tip of the pin is advanced across the fracture and is seated in
the base of the metacarpal or metatarsal bone. The pin is cut short
I or V. Fractures of the diaphysis and/or head tend to involve
several or even all four weight-bearing bones. Fracture of all
four bones is also called a serial metacarpal or metatarsal
fracture.
Plate osteosynthesis can be used for simple and commi
nuted diaphyseal fractures of the metacarpus and metatarsus.
33.3.1 Approaches to the metacarpal and
 Miniaturized plate systems, such as the 1.5-mm miniplate,
metatarsal bones
the 1.3-mm compact hand plate, and the 1.0-mm maxillofa-
cial miniplate can be applied (Chapter 24). The plates are
The bones are usually approached via a straight or curved
applied dorsally on the flat surface of the bone. At least two
dorsal skin incision. The skin edges can be retracted medially
screws must be inserted per fragment. Plate positioning on
-ixa au sauoq iedieseia suaoeie ssaooe oi keiaiel pue
the dorsal side has the disadvantage of the plate being located
sor tendons are spared and carefully retracted. A more local-
on the compression side of the bone. The weak 1.0-mm
ized incision is made over the affected bone if only one bone
maxillofacial miniplates are therefore only suitable for simple
is fractured. When plates are used, it is preferable that the
and anatomically reduced fractures. Stabilization of commi-
skin incision is not directly located over the implant to mini-
u-'l no -e'l a m paod s san pnnu
 mize the chance of wound dehiscence.
plates.
33.3.2 Fractures of the base of metacarpals and
33.3 Fractures of the metacarpal
metatarsals Il or V
and metatarsal bones
The bases of the metacarpals and metatarsals II and V are
Fractures of the metacarpus and metatarsus can be classified
 the insertion sites for the short medial and lateral carpometa-
into fractures of the base, the diaphysis, and the head. Frac-
carpal and tarsometatarsal ligaments, and the tendon of the
tures of the base usually affect the metacarpus or metatarsus
lateral ulnar muscle, and peroneus brevis muscle, respec-
400
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 33-1. Stabilization of an avulsion fracture of the base of metacarpus and metatarsus ll or V
A lateral or medial approach to the base of metacarpus or
metatarsus II or V is performed. The avulsed fragment is
reduced and stability of the joint is assessed with the frag-
ment in reduction.
Tension band fixation: A 0.8-1.0-mm Kirschner wire is
inserted from the proximal aspect of the avulsed base into
the medullary canal of the diaphysis. A 0.5- or 0.6-mm
piece of orthopedic wire is then placed in a fgure-of-eight
wire pattern around the protruding proximal pin end, and
through a hole drilled into the shaft. The protruding end
of the Kirschner wire is bent over to avoid migration, and
is cut short (Fig. 33-3A).
 Lag screw: A 1.5-mm lag screw is inserted from the
avulsed fragment, perpendicular to the fracture, into the
ranscortex (Fig. 33-3B). Two metacarpal or metatarsal
 bones can be incorporated to enhance pull-out resistance.
With small fragments, it may be safer to use pointed reduc-
tion forceps to achieve reduction and compression, and
 then place a positional screw. This avoids the need to drill
 the larger glide hole for the lag screw.
A
B
 Figure 33-3 Stabilization of fractures of the base of metacarpal
 or metatarsal bone ll or V.
(A) Tension band fixation of an avulsion fracture of the second
metacarpal bone.
(B) Screw stabilization of an avulsion fracture of the fifth
metatarsal bone.
tively. Avulsion fractures of the base of metacarpus or neta-
of the distal third of the radius or tibia. The splint is usually
tarsus II and V are therefore often associated with joint
required for 3-4 weeks, depending on fracture type and sta-
instability. Such injuries are rare in cats, and occur more
bility, and age of the cat. Principles and techniques for appli-
commonly in the hindlimb. Undisplaced fractures with a
cation of a splinted bandage are described in Chapter 22.
 stable joint can be treated conservatively with a splinted
Open reduction and internal fixation are indicated if there is
bandage. Displacement of the avulsed fragment and concur-
significant fragment displacement, and closed reduction is not
rent carpometacarpal or tarsometatarsal instability are indi-
possible.
cations for surgical stabilization. A tension band fixation or
 Although no difference in healing rates berween conserva-
a 1.5-mm lag screw can be used to reattach larger fragments
tive and surgical treatment was reported in dogs (4, 5),
(Box 33-1). A partial carpal or tarsal arthrodesis needs to be
surgery is usually preferred if three or all four metacarpal or
 performed if the fragment is too small to be reattached, and 
metatarsal bones are fractured. Fractures of all four bones
joint instability is present (Chapters 32 and 40).
are unstable injuries, and have a tendency for fracture union
disorders, and malunion in a valgus position if not treated
surgically (4, 6). Distal and mid-diaphyseal fractures as
33.3.3 Fractures of the shaft
opposed to proximal fractures are more likely to be displaced
and to heal with malunion (Fig. 33-4), so the level of the
tarsal bones are usually treated conservatively. The adjacent
fracture should also be considered when deciding whether to
intact bones allow weight-bearing, and act as an internal
treat surgically (4).
splint. If possible, the fractures are reduced in a closed manner
It is not always necessary to stabilize all four bones, but at
when displaced, and a splinted bandage is applied to the level
least two of the bones should be treated to allow weight-
33: Metacarpus, metatarsus, and phalanges
401
bearing. In older cats with slower fracture healing, or if other
 fractures are present, it is easier less invasive, and provides
limbs are also traumatized, it is advantageous to perform 
 more stability to stabilize the simple fractures, and leave the
internal fixation of three or all of the bones. The decision on
 comminuted metacarpals or metatarsals. Internal implants
which and how many bones to stabilize depends on fracture 
 should also be avoided in fractures in areas with open
types and soft-tissue rauma. If both simple and comminuted
wounds.
 Intramedullary pinning is most commonly used for simple
fractures (Figs 33-5 and 33-6). Miniplates can be applied to
the dorsal surface of the metacarpal bones for both simple
 and comminuted fractures. The small size of the bones only
 allows insertion of 1.5-mm or smaller screws. Plating of
metatarsal fractures is easier than plating of metacarpal
fractures, due to their larger size and flat dorsal surface (Fig.
33-7). Simple long oblique fractures can also be stabilized
with 1.5-mm lag or positional screws. The surgical tech-
niques are described in Box 33-2.
33.3.4 Fractures of the metacarpal and
metatarsal heads
Fractures of the head of the metacarpal or metatarsal bones
can be supracondylar unicondylar, or comminuted. Salter
and Harris fractures may occur in immature cats. Salter and
'sud soo m panen are sa l pue I adi s
Cross pins can also be used for supracondylar fractures with
a small distal fragment, but toggle pinning (Fig. 33-2) is pre-
 ferred if the distal fragment is large enough to seat the pin.
Condylar fractures cause incongruity and instability of the
A
B
metacarpophalangeal joints and should be treated surgically.
Figure 33-4 (A) Radiographs of a 7-month-old cat with distal
They are stabilized with a 1.5-mm transcondylar screw in
fractures of metacarpals Il, IV, and V, treated with a splinted bandage
for 4 weeks. (B) There is good fracture healing after 4 weeks with
order to restore joint congruity. Although a lag screw is
functional malunion.
sod e isn on rnes i in 'asodnd siu ron pasn iens
Figure 33-5  Radiographs of
metacarpal non-unions in a 4-
year-old cat with serial fractures
that had been treated with
external coaptation for 6 weeks
(A) Immediate postoperative film
showing normograde
 intramedullary pinning of all four
bones; the pin in metacarpal V
inadvertently exited the bone in
the proximal fragment.
(B) At 4 weeks postoperatively.
there is evidence of fracture
healing and remodeling of the
fracture sites in all four bones.
(C) The 8-week postoperative
films show that fracture healing
is now nearly complete.
L
402
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Figure 3-6  Example of
intramedullary pinning of the 
metatarsal bones.
(A) Preoperative radiographs
showing a serial fracture of the
metatarsal diaphysis in an
immature cat.
(B) Radiographs after
intramedullary pinning of the 
metatarsal bones Il-IV. Note that 
the pins enter the intramedullary
cavity proximal to the growth
plates.
(C) Follow-up radiograph 6 weeks
later. All fractures are healed.
A
B
Figure 33-7  Radiographs of a
cat with grade Ill open fractures
of metatarsal (MT) bones Ill-V.
(A) The wound was treated with
wet-to-dry bandages, and surgery
was delayed until the area was
covered with granulation tissue.
(B) MT Ill was stabilized with a
toggle pin, MT IV and V with 
1.3-mm compact hand plates.
Cancellous bone graft was
inserted in the gaps where bone
was missing.
(c) The 4-week postoperative
radiograph shows advanced 
fracture healing of MT Ill and IV.
MT V went into atrophic non-
union, but limb function was
good.
A
C
screw after anatomic reduction and application of a small
33.4 Fractures of the phalanges
bone reduction forceps, to avoid iatrogenic fractures of the
tiny piece of bone. A transcondylar screw is also used in
Most fractures of the phalanges can be treated with external
 comminuted intracondylar fractures, if possible. The supra-
 coaptation, because it is unusual for more than two digits to
condylar part can be left to heal with external coaptation
be affected. Open reduction and surgical stabilization are
when stabilization with cross pins is not feasible. Non-
indicated for condylar fractures, and involve screw fixation
reconstructable comminuted joint fractures may necessitate
as described above (Box 33-3). Displaced fractures of the
amputation of the affected digit (Chapter 41). The surgical
phalangeal shaft may also beneft from internal stabilization.
techniques are described in Box 33-3.
Mini screws and plates from the 1.0-mm maxillofacial or the
33: Metacarpus, metatarsus, and phalanges
403
Box 33-2. Stabilization of diaphyseal metacarpal or metatarsal fractures
A dorsal approach is performed, and the skin and extensor
Toggle pinning: Toggle pinning is most useful for distal
tendons are retracted as needed. It may not be necessary
 or proximal metacarpal and metatarsal fractures (Fig. 33-
 to stabilize all fractured bones surgically, but at least two,
 8B). The pin is inserted into the proximal medullary canal
 and preferably three, metacarpals should be intact or sta-
 and seated in the base of the bone. The protruding end is
bilized. Displaced, simple, and axial fractures are prefer-
cut short to 0.5-1.0 cm. The distal or proximal fragment
entially stabilized. Comminuted fractures should be 
 is then gently levered on to the protruding pin tip using
minimally handled to maintain the blood supply. Implants
traction (Fig. 33-2).
are avoided in areas with open wounds.
 Plating: Plating allows stabilization of both simple and
 Intramedullary pinning: Normograde intramedullary
comminuted fractures, but is more commonly used for
pinning is used for simple mid-diaphyseal fractures of the
comminuted fractures. The metatarsal bones are slightly
metacarpals or metatarsals (Fig. 33-8A). A slot can be
 broader than the metacarpal bones, so it is preferable to
burred into the dorsal cortex of the distal metacarpus or
use 1.5-mm miniplates for the metatarsi; 1.3-mm compact
metatarsus to facilitate insertion of the pin (Fig. 33-1). The
hand plates can be used for the metacarpi (Fig. 33-8C and
entry point of the Kirschner wire is at least 5 mm away
33-8D). The plates are applied to the dorsal surface of the
from the fracture site. A useful landmark site for pin place-
bones. At least two, and preferably three, screws should
ment is the small depression in the bone just proximal to
be inserted into the proximal and distal fragments.
the distal condyle. The tips of small flexible Kirschner
Lag screw: A 1.5-mm lag screw can be used to treat a
wires can be bent or curved slightly, which aids pin place-
simple oblique fracture (Fig. 33-8D). Lag screw fixation
ment up the medullary canal. When the pin exits the
 does not provide much dorsopalmar bending stability, and
medullary canal at the fracture site, the fracture is reduced
is only used if other metacarpal bones are intact or stabi-
 and the pin is advanced across the fracture and seated in
lized with other implants.
the base of the metacarpus or metatarsus. The pin is cut
short or is bent at the distal edge of the slot to prevent
migration.
Figure 33-8  Options for
stabilizing metacarpal and
metatarsal fractures.
(A) Normograde intramedullary
pinning of simple transverse mid-
diaphyseal metacarpal fractures.
(B) Toggle pinning of simple
transverse distal metacarpal
fractures.
(C) Plate osteosynthesis of both
simple and comminuted 
metatarsal fractures, using
1. 5-mm miniplates.
(D) Screw fixation of a simple
oblique fracture of the second
metacarpal bone. The third
metacarpal bone was stabilized 
with a 1.3-mm miniplate.
D
404
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 33-3. Stabilization of fractures of the metacarpal, metatarsal, and phalangeal heads
A dorsal approach is performed, the joint capsule is opened
longitudinally, and the fracture is reduced anatomically.
Cross pinning of Salter and Harris I and II or supracon-
dylar fractures: The fracture is held in reduction manually.
Two 0.6-mm Kirschner wires are inserted from the medial
and the lateral condyle in a cross-pin fashion (Fig. 33-9A).
Their ends are cut short.
Transcondylar screw for intercondylar fractures: The
intercondylar fracture is temporarily compressed with
small pointed bone reduction forceps in anatomic reduc-
tion. A 1.5-mm intercondylar positional screw is inserted
(Fig. 33-9B).
A
B
Figure 33-9 Stabilization of fractures of the metacarpal,
metatarsal, or phalangeal head.
(A) Cross pinning of a Salter and Harris type I fracture.
(B) Fixation of a unicondylar fracture with a 1.5-mm positional
screw.
1.3-mm compact hand system are used for the smallfracture
be accompanied by other fractures or joint injuries of the paw.
fragments. Amputation of the digit is a salvage procedure if
 Clinically, they should be suspected if pain and local swelling
fracture healing and pain-free function cannot be achieved by
of one or more joints are detected. A pathological position of
either conservative or surgical treatment (Chapter 41).
the affected toe is sometimes also seen (Fig. 33-10). Closed
reduction and external coaptation are successful in most cases
33.5 Metacarpophalangeal,
(Fig. 33-11). Surgical stabilization is indicated if closed reduc-
metatarsophalangeal, and
 tion is not feasible, or if reluxation occurs. Surgery includes
interphalangeal luxation
imbrication sutures of the joint capsule and ruptured collat-
eral ligaments. A suture sling can be applied as a ligament
Metacarpophalangeal, metatarsophalangeal, and interpha-
 prosthesis if the periarticular structures are impossible to
langeal joint luxations are occasionally encountered, and can 
1 suture, or if insufficient stability is achieved (Box 33-4).
Figure 33-10 The foot of a cat
with a P2/3 luxation. Note the
90° rotation of nail, visible from
both the palmar (A) and the
distal aspect (B). The joint was
stable after closed reduction.
A
R
33: Metacarpus, metatarsus, and phalanges
405
Figure 33-11  (A) Radiographs
of the left hindpaw of a cat with
metatarsophalangeal luxation of 
the second and third digits. The
joints were reduced in a closed 
manner, and a splinted bandage
was applied for 10 days.
(B) Follow-up radiographs 4
weeks later show maintenance
of reduction.
B
33.6 Postoperative treatment
and prognosis
Box 33-4. Ligament prosthesis for metacarpopha-
langeal, metatarsophalangeal, and interphalageal
The implants used for stabilization of metacarpal, metatarsal,
joint luxation
and phalangeal fractures are too weak to allow early weight-
bearing. A splinted bandage is therefore necessary in the
 A dorsal approach to the affected joint is performed.
'uoexy aen jo sad isou iae poad aanenadoisod
Holes are drilled through the articular condyles with a
The duration for external coaptation depends on the fixation
small drill bit or Kirschner wire. A size 2-0 or 0 non-
stability achieved with surgery and on progression of healing.
 absorbable suture is inserted through the holes. Hypo-
but usually ranges between 2 and 6 weeks: 2 weeks in young
dermic needles can be helpful to guide the suture
cats with stable fractures, 6 weeks in older cats with unstable
through the bone. The joint is reduced and, if feasible,
fractures, such as comminuted metacarpal or metatarsal
the joint capsule is sutured. The ligament prosthesis is
serial fractures. The presence of open wounds, such as deglov.
tightened (Fig. 33-12).
ing injuries, may markedly complicate postoperative treat-
ment and enhance costs. Please also see Chapter 16 for
Figure 33-12  Appearance of a
treatment of concurrent soft-tissue injuries.
ligament prosthesis for
Progressive fracture healing usually occurs irrespective
stabilization of a 
of stabilization method, if the surrounding soft tissues are
metacarpophalangeal,
not severely traumatized and avascular. More than 80%
 metatarsophalangeal, or
of metacarpal or metatarsal fractures treated with toggle
interphalangeal luxation.
pinning healed without complications in a recent study (3).
Complications are most likely to occur with conservative
treatment of fractures of three or all four metacarpal bones,
and include delayed union or non-union (Fig. 33-13), and
malunion. Non-unions need to be treated surgically with
stable internal fxation and application of a bone graff.
Malunions tend to occur in a valgus position. They do not
require revision if functional outcome is good (Fig. 33-4).
Fracture alignment was consistently improved by open reduc-
tion and internal fixation of acute fractures with bone plates
in dogs (4).
406
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Figure 33-13 (A-C) Serial
radiographs of a 9-month-old cat 
with fractures of metacarpals Ill.
IV, and V, treated with a splinted 
bandage. Metacarpus V was
healed well after 6 weeks, but
hypertrophic non-unions
developed in the metacarpal 
bones Ill and IV, indicating
instability (C). Internal stabilization 
with toggle pins for these distal
fractures would have been a
better option.
A
B
C
References and further reading
 4. Muir P, Norris JL. Metacarpal and metatarsal fratures in dogs.
J Small Anim Pract 1997;38:344-348.
1. Hill FwG. A survey of bone fractures in the cat. J Small Anim
5. Kapatkin AS, et al. Conservative versus surgical treatment of
Pract 1977;18:457-463.
 metacarpal and metatarsal fractures in dogs. Vet Comp Orthop
2. Smith RN. Fusion of ossification centres in the cat. J Small Anim
Traumatol 2000;3:123-127.
Pract 1969;10:523-530.
6. Piermattei DL, Flo GL. Fractures and other orthopedic conditions
 3. Degasperi B, et al. Intramedullary pinning of metacarpal and
of the carpus, metacarpus, and phalanges. In: Piermattei DL,
metatarsal fractures in cats using a simple distraction technique.
Flo GL (eds) Small animal orthopedics and fracture repair. Phila-
Vet Surg 2007;36:382-388.
delphia: WB Saunders; 1997: pp. 344-389.
407
34
The spine
K. Voss, PM. Montavon
Surgical conditions of the spine include spinal fractures and
or the L5-L6 junction, and spinal nerves S2 and S3 at the
luxations, disc disease, spinal tumors, and miscellaneous con-
L5-L6 junction or at the level of L6 (4).
ditions such as subarachnoid cysts or epidural empyema.
The spinal cord is wider at the cervical and lumbar intumes-
Spinal fractures and luxations may be due to motor vehicle
cences, where the nerve roots for the front and hindlimbs
accidents, falls from a height, dog bites, and gunshot injury.
 arise. The nerve roots of C6-T2 form the brachial plexus sup-
Around half of cats with spinal injuries have concomitant
plying the front limbs, and the nerve roots of L4-S3 form the
rauma to other body systems and must undergo a thorough
pelvic plexus supplying the hindlimbs, the bladder the rectum,
general clinical and radiological examination. Spinal injuries
and the perineal region. The nerve roots exit the spinal canal
were negatively correlated with survival in one study evaluat-
 at the cranial aspect of their corresponding foramen.
ing radiographs of 100 consecutively traumatized cats (1).
Vessels to preserve during surgery include the vertebral
Although spinal stabilization procedures often have to be
artery, running through the foramina of the transverse pro-
performed on an emergency basis, the patients should be well
 cesses of the cervical spine, and the venous plexus, located
hydrated before induction of anesthesia. Careful evaluation
bilaterally on the floor of the spinal canal. The venous plexus
and monitoring of cardiovascular and respiratory function
is a thin-walled vein, which is easily damaged during surgery.
death of the patient (2, 3).
34.2 Diagnosis and general considerations
This chapter focuses mainly on the surgical treatment of
spinal fractures and luxations. Decompres
ssive procedures are
The diagnosis of spinal diseases and injuries requires a
also described. Interpretation of the neurological examina-
thorough neurological examination, spinal radiographs, and
tion and diagnostic procedures are covered in Chapters 1 and
often additional diagnostic imaging procedures. The clinical
2 of this book. Diseases of the spine are summarized in
neurological examination should provide information on
Chapter 6. The reader is also referred to Chapter 15, where
localization and severity of the lesion, therefore guiding the
decision-making processes and principles of spinal surgery
clinician as to which areas to focus on for imaging (Chapter
are described.
1). Diagnostic imaging procedures are required to confrm or
diagnose specific diseases or injuries (Chapter 2). It should be
34.1 Surgical anatomy
remembered that it is not the radiological appearance of a
spinal injury or disease but the severity of the preoperative
The spine has seven cervical, 13 thoracic, seven lumbar ver-
neurological deficits that is relevant for the prognosis. Dis-
tebrae, the sacrum, and a variable number of coccygeal ver-
eases of the spine and spinal cord are described in Chapter 6,
tebrae. Cats have long and slender vertebral bodies with a
 and basic information on spinal injuries is covered in Chapter
thin and fragile dorsal and lateral lamina. With the exception
15 of this book. The reader is also referred to Chapter 15 for
of the atlantoaxial joint, an intervertebral disc is located
 radiological interpretation of spinal fractures and luxations.
between all the vertebral bodies. The spinous processes are
Many cats with spinal fractures and luxations have sus-
connected to each other by the supra- and interspinous liga-
tained additional soft-tissue or orthopedic injuries (3). A
ments. These ligaments act as tension bands and contribute
 thorough clinical examination of the thorax and abdomen
to spinal stability. They should be preserved during surgery.
 and the skeletal system is necessary to diagnose these injuries.
The spinal cord consists of eight cervical, 13 thoracic, seven
Life-threatening injuries are treated before addressing the
lumbar three sacral, and approximately seven caudal seg-
spinal injury, but spinal surgery is performed as soon as
ments. The spinal segments are located slightly cranial to
 possible to prevent further damage to the spinal cord.
their corresponding vertebrae, especially in the caudal lumbar
spine, although the ascensus medullae is not as pronounced
34.3 Decompressive procedures
in cats as it is in dogs. The medullary cone of the spinal cord
extends as far caudally as S1 in most cats (4, 5). Spinal nerves
 Decompressive procedures in general include dorsal laminec-
L7 and S1 originate at the level of the vertebral body of L5
tomy, hemilaminectomy, pediculectomy, ventral slot, and
408
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Decompression
Localization
Indications
Comments
procedure
Ventral slot
Cervical
Cervical disc
Creates instability; stabilization is advised
Hemilaminectomy
Cervical
Cervical disc
May cause instability with concurrent injury
Thoracolumbar
 Thoracolumbar disc
 of the ventral compartment, requiring
Exploration of spinal canal after
surgical stabilization
fractures/luxations
Tumors
Pediculectomy
Thoracolumbar
 Exploration of spinal canal after
 Does not create instability; limited exposure
fractures/luxations
of spinal canal
Thoracolumbar disc
Dorsal laminectomy
 Lumbosacral
Lumbosacral disc
Facet joints are left intact
Thoracolumbar(
Compression fractures of dorsal
 At least one facet joint is left intact; surgical
compartment
stabilization should be considered with
Tumors
fractures
Durotomy
Thoracolumbar
Diagnosis of myelomalacia
A wide hemilaminectomy is needed to
 Additional decompression in
 perform a durotomy
patients with severe deficits
 Intradural or subdural tumors
Table 34-1. Spinal cord decompression techniques and their indications
durotomy. Localization of the lesion and type of spinal cord
The most common localization for spinal fractures and
-rd ns uoisnduosp po ad au aeip uissanduo
luxations in cats is the sacrococcygeal area (1). The lumbar
formed (Table 34-1). The most common indications for
spine is the next most commonly affected area, followed by
decompressive procedures in cats are intervertebral disc
the thoracolumbar junction (2, 3). Fractures and luxations
extrusion and neoplasia.
involving the lumbosacral segment are less common, and
Anatomic reduction and stabilization of fractures and luxa-
fractures and luxations of the cervical spine are rare.
tions often result in indirect decompression of the spinal cord
Dorsal stabilization methods with small and flexible pins
by restoring the integrity of the spinal canal. A decompressive
rs s  r    aa  p
procedure is then only required if fracture fragments or disc
except for the cervical spine, where ventral stabilization with
material remain, compressing the spinal cord after reduction.
an internal fixator, plates or pins and bone cement is used
Decompression as a single measure is only recommended for
(Table 34-2). Internal fxators or pins and bone cement can
 compression fractures of the dorsal or lateral lamina without
also be useful for stabilizing fractures in the lumbosacral area
additional injuries. The reader is also referred to Chapter 6
of the spine, where the small spinous processes render dorsal
on diseases of the feline spine, and Chapter 15 on injuries of
stabilization methods diffcult.
the feline spine, for further information.
34.5 Surgical conditions of
34.4 Stabilization of spinal fractures/
the cervical spine
luxations
Surgical conditions of the cervical spine are rare in cats. They
Surgical stabilization of spinal injuries is indicated in cats
mainly include cervical disc disease, cervical spinal fractures
with neurological deficits, and cats with spinal instability.
and luxations, and possibly tumors of the cervical spine. See
Conservative treatment should be reserved for patients
Chapter 6 for more information on diseases of the spine and
without neurological deficits and with stable fractures. Stabil-
spinal cord.
ity of the spine can be difficult to judge on radiographs, but,
 in general, fractures with involvement of both the dorsal and
34.5.1 Approaches to the cervical spine
ventral compartment and fractures with vertebral displace-
ment should be considered unstable. Please also see
The cervical spine can be approached from dorsally, laterally,
Chapter 15 for further information on interpretation of
and ventrally, depending on the type of surgery to be per
radiographs.
formed. The ventral approach to the vertebral bodies and
34: The spine
409
 Localization of lesion
Type of lesion
 Treatment options
Table 34-2. Localization and
types of spinal fractures and 
Cervical spine
All unstable fracture/luxations
Ventral internal fixator
luxations, and stabilization
Ventral plate
methods
 Screws and PMMA
Thoracolumbar spine
All unstable fracture/luxations
Spinal stapling
Tension band repair
 Dorsal internal fixator
Lumbar spine
All unstable fracture/luxations
 Tension band repair
 Dorsal internal fixator
Lumbosacral spine
L7 fractures
Transilial pin
 Dorsal internal fxator
External skeletal fixator
Lumbosacral luxation
 Dorsal suture sling
S2/S3 fracture
 Dorsal hemicerclage wire
Endplate fracture of S3 and
 Dorsal suture sling
sacroccocygeal luxation
PMMA, polymethyl methacrylate.
intervertebral discs is most often used (6). It gives access for 
 cal spinal fractures and luxations (7), and can be applied in
performing ventral slots, and stabilization of cervical frac-
cats as well.
 tures/luxations. The lateral approach can be used to perform
A ventral midline approach to the cervical spine is per-
a hemilaminectomy between C3-C4, C4-C5, or C5-C6 to
 formed. Fracture reduction is aided by having an assistant
remove lateral disc extrusions (6)
 apply manual traction to the head, with the atlantoaxial joint
held in flexion. The feline vertebrae are very slender and do
34.5.2 Decompression of the cervical spinal cord
not offer much bone purchase. Miniaturized implants must
therefore be used. Size 1.5- or 2.0-mm internal fxators or
A ventral slot or a hemilaminectomy is used to decompress
plates, or 1.5- to 2.0-mm screws or pins embedded in poly-
the cervical spinal cord. A ventral slot is a partial corpectomy
 methyl methacrylate (PMMA), are possible options.
of two adjacent vertebral bodies and the corresponding inter-
Internal fxators are especially useful to repair cervical spinal
vertebral disc to gain access to the ventral spinal canal (Box
 fractures, because interlocking of the screw heads in the plate
34-1). Ventral slots are performed in the cervical spine to
 enhances overall stability, and reduces the risk for pull-out of
treat centrally located intervertebral disc herniation. The
the screws compared to conventional plates (Fig. 34-3) (8, 9).
slender vertebral bodies in cats make this technique demand-
Two 2.0-mm internal fixator plates are contoured and placed
ing, and visibility is limited. Some degree of spinal instability
along the left and right borders of the ventral surface of the
is created and stabilization of the affected segments should
two vertebral bodies adjacent to the lesion (10). One or two
be considered after having performed a ventral slot. Cervical
screws are inserted bilaterally in each vertebra adjacent to the
hemilaminectomy is a good alternative for the treatment of
lesion. The maximum screw length is evaluated from latero-
lateralized intervertebral disc extrusions (Box 34-2).
ateral radiographs to avoid penetration into the spinal canal.
Care is taken not to injure the vertebral arteries.
34.5.3 Fractures and luxations of the
cervical spine
34.6 Surgical conditions of
Cervical spinal fractures and luxations are rarely encountered
the thoracolumbar spine
 in cats. Clinical signs include neck pain, possibly accompa-
nied by tetraparesis or tetraplegia. Unstable lesions are stabi-
Indications for surgery of the thoracolumbar spine include
lized surgically to reduce the risk of further spinal cord
 thoracolumbar fractures and luxations, disc disease, tumors,
damage, diminish pain, and to facilitate anatomic healing.
and rare diseases such as subarachnoid cysts. Diseases of the
Ventral stabilization methods are used in dogs to treat cervi-
 spine and spinal cord are described in Chapter 6.
410
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 34-1. Ventral slot
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency, with the neck
extended and supported dorsally, and the front legs
retracted and tied backwards. A ventral midline approach
is performed. The prominent transverse processes of C6
and the C1-C2 junction serve as landmarks for localizing
 the affected disc space.
The ventral tubercle cranial to the disc space is removed
with rongeurs, and the central portion of the ventral
annulus is excised with a scalpel blade. A very small-size
high-speed pneumatic drill or power bur is then used to
create the slot. The disc spaces are oriented at a caudal to
cranial angle, so the center of the slot is located cranial to
the disc space (Fig. 34-1A). The extent of the slot should
not exceed half the length of the vertebral bodies, and half
their width (Fig. 34-1B). Care is taken while drilling the
inner cortical layer with the bur and once the inner corti-
cal layer is penetrated, the thin remaining bone is removed
with small bone curettes or scrapers. The dorsal anulus
and protruded disc material are removed with fne ron-
geurs. The dorsal longitudinal ligament is then visible and
can be partially excised if necessary. Avoid injuring the
B
Figure 34-1  C reating a ventral slot.
venous sinuses once the vertebral canal is opened. Instabil-
(A) The slot should be started from a slightly cranial position to 
ity is created, especially if the slot is wide. Ventral stabili-
center it over the dorsal anulus fibrosus because of the caudal to
zation, using internal fxators or screws and bone cement,
cranial angle of the disc space
 should be performed if the affected segment is considered
(B) The extent of the slot should not exceed half the length or half
unstable at the end of surgery.
the width of the vertebral bodies.
34.6.1 Approaches to the thoracolumbar spine
muscles are incised and elevated from their attachment on
the mamillary processes. The small tendons of the longissi-
A dorsal approach to the thoracolumbar spine is used for
mus muscle are also incised at their attachment on the acces-
 dorsal stabilization techniques (6). The skin incision extends
sory processes to access the most ventral aspect of the spinal
from three vertebrae cranial to three vertebrae caudal to the
lesion. The dorsal fascia is incised bilaterally on each side of
the four spinous processes centered over the lesion, and the
34.6.2 Decompression of the thoracolumbar
epaxial musculature is elevated from the dorsal lamina, while
spinal cord
sparing the supraspinous and interspinous ligaments between
the spinous processes.
Decompression procedures of the thoracolumbar spine include
Muscular attachments on the mamillary and accessory
hemilaminectomy and pediculectomy. Hemilaminectomy is
processes can be preserved if no decompressive procedure
the unilateral removal of the dorsolateral lamina with the
is required. To perform a hemilaminectomy, the multifidus 
facet joint (Box 34-3). It is most commonly performed to treat
34: The spine
411
Box 34-2. Cervical hemilaminectomy
The cat is positioned in ventral recumbency with the neck
hemilaminectomy (Fig. 34-2). After opening the cervical
slightly rotated away from the surgeon to ease visualiza-
spinal canal, extruded disc material is removed with probes,
tion of the lateral aspects of the spinal cord. The neck is
fine rongeurs, or mosquito forceps, avoiding damage to the
 gently flexed and supported. The prominent transverse
internal vertebral venous plexus.
 processes of C6 and the spinous process and the alar wings
of C2 are important landmarks for localizing the affected
 intervertebral space.
 The approach is slightly different depending on whether
the lesion is in the cranial or caudal cervical spine. The skin,
 subcutis, and platysma muscle are incised for an approach
to the cranial cervical spine. The brachiocephalic muscle is
 then incised or bluntly dissected over the corresponding
articular facets. If a caudal cervical approach is performed,
the serratus ventralis cervicis muscle is retracted caudally,
 and the splenius muscle dorsally. The articular facets are
exposed, by creating a plane of dissection between the over-
lying muscles.
Once the desired articular facets are freed of muscula-
ture, a high-speed bur and rongeurs are used to perform a
 Figure 34-2  Appearance of a cervical hemilaminectomy.
B
Figure 34-3 Radiographs of a cat with a vertebral body fracture of C3 (A)
preoperatively, (B) postoperatively after stabilization with an internal fixator,
and (C) at follow-up 6 weeks postoperatively. The cat had a non-
abans ae uoung ln, pauiban pue sisaedean Aoengue
(Reproduced with permission from: Voss K, Steffen F, Montavon PM. Use of
the ComPact UniLock system for ventral stabilization procedures of the
cervical spine. A retrospective study. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
2006;19:24.)
412
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
unilateral facetectomy (12). Patients with fractures/luxations
Box 34-3. Thoracolumbar hemilaminectomy
 s  r s    
the ventral compartment, and hemilaminectomy may worsen
The cat is positioned in ventral recumbency, with the
instability. Surgical stabilization is then required.
abdomen supported and slightly elevated. The last rib
Pediculectomy is the unilateral removal of the laminar
 is used to localize T13 for orientation. A dorsal midline
pedicle while preserving the facet joint (Box 34-4). Significant
a pauad si oodde uepauered e ro unordde
decompression is not achieved, and the smallopening created
articular processes are removed with rongeurs. The
may lead to difficulties in exploration of the dorsal spinal
hemilaminectomy can then be performed with rongeurs
canal. Pediculectomy is especially indicated for exploration
 or with a high-speed pneumatic drill.
of the ventral spinal canal after thoracolumbar fractures and
 For a hemilaminectomy with rongeurs, an assistant
luxations, because spinal stability is unaltered.
souids iesiop aui aeaala on sdasro rauoo leus ssn
 Durotomy can be used in addition to a hemilaminectomy
as a diagnostic or therapeutic procedure. A wide and long
facilitates insertion of a small rongeur into the spinal
hemilaminectomy is necessary to perform a durotomy.
canal at the level of the accessory process (see pedicu-
Durotomy allows direct inspection of the spinal cord and
lectomy). The opening is then enlarged cranially and
helps in the intraoperative diagnosis of myelomalacia. Myelo-
caudally with fine rongeurs (Fig. 34-4).
malacia should be suspected in patients suffering acute spinal
 If a high-speed pneumatic drill is used, a rectangular
cord compression with grade 5 neurological defcits (2).
 portion of bone is selected and burred, extending from
 Patients with intraoperative fndings suggestive for myeloma-
-ie aui oi jesiop on ssaooid Arossasoe aul ol jenuaa
-ans aq pinous eiseueuina pue sisouoid aaeia e aaeq ei
lar facets. Care is taken when drilling the inner cortical
Sssan ui daq osie ke Aonona 'siamo a on pnsa
layer and entering the spinal canal. The thin bone of
pressure on the spinal cord, as the dura mater is a relatively
the inner cortical layer is removed with curettes or
 inelastic structure which restricts expansion of the spinal cord
rongeurs.
in the presence of severe spinal cord swelling.
 The spinal cord and spinal canal are explored and
 The cranial and caudal aspects of the durotomy incision
compressive lesions are carefully removed. The epidural
should extend to within a few millimeters of the ends of the
space is narrow in cats and care is taken not to com-
 hemilaminectomy. The dura can be incised with a number 11
press or injure the spinal cord with the instruments or
scalpel blade or a small-gauge hypodermic needle. The cutting
to injure the venous sinus and the nerve roots. If neces-
edge of either a scalpel blade or a hypodermic needle is
sary, the nerve roots are retracted out of the way in a
reversed towards the surgeon and is held parallel to the spinal
 cranial direction.
cord while performing the incision. The spinal cord is discol-
ored or hemorrhagic, swollen, and significantly softer in the
presence of myelomalacia. In severe cases it may even flow
out of the durotomy incision.
34.6.3 Fractures and luxations of the
thoracolumbar spine
Fractures of the thoracic and lumbar spine are common in
Figure 34-4  Appearance of a thoracolumbar hemilaminectomy.
cats. Approximately 50% of cats with spinal fractures/luxa-
It extends from ventral to the accessory process to the dorsal
tions suffer from concurrent injuries (3). These injuries
 border of the articular facets. The spinal cord and the nerve root
include thoracic trauma, abdominal trauma, head trauma,
are clearly visible.
and orthopedic or neurological injuries at other sites. Scapu-
lar fractures, which are otherwise rare in cats, were observed
in two out of 16 cats with spinal fractures in one study (3).
thoracolumbar disc disease. Hemilaminectomy generates a
Whereas in dogs most of the fractures occur around the
wide opening of the spinal canal, which allows good visualiza-
 thoracolumbar junction, the second to sixth lumbar vertebrae
tion of the spinal canal and spinal cord, and achieves good
seem to be predisposed to fractures/luxations in cats (2, 3). The
decompression, but it creates a degree of instability by remov-
 most common type of injury in cats is fracture of the endplate
ing one articular facet joint. Although hemilaminectomy was
with vertebral subluxation (2). Vertebral subluxation and
shown not to affect bending strength of the spine (11), rota-
luxation are less common (2). Comminuted fractures of the
tional instability does occur if fenestration is combined with
vertebral bodies seem to occur less commonly than in dogs.
Box 34-4. Pediculectomy
The cat is positioned in ventral recumbency and a dorsal
 approach is performed as for a thoracolumbar hemilami-
TAAA
nectomy. The articular facets are left intact.
An assistant elevates the spinous processes with Kocher
forceps to open the intervertebral foramen. A small rongeur
is inserted over the accessory process into the spinal canal,
taking care to stay close to bone with the inner blade. The
Figure 34-5  A pediculectomy is centered over the accessory
 accessory process is removed in total with this frst bite.
process and stays below the articular facets. It allows visualization
of the ventral aspect of the spinal canal and spinal cord.
The opening is then carefully enlarged with fine rongeurs
in a cranial and caudal direction, but staying below the
articular facets (Fig. 34-5). The pediculectomy can be
transformed into  a hemilaminectomy  if  visualization
remains insuffcient.
A
Figure 34-6Cat with a fracture of L4.
(A, B) Preoperative radiographs showing a fracture of the caudal endplate of L4, which is not displaced on the laterolateral view, but is displaced
on the ventrodorsal view.
414
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 34-5. Stabilization of thoracolumbar spinal fractures and luxations with a tension band fixation
After elevation of the epaxial musculature as described
above, a 1.0-1.25-mm Kirschner wire is inserted through
the base of the largest spinous process cranial or caudal to
the fracture just dorsal to an imaginary curved line between
the spinal canal. To be able to insert it perpendicularly, it
can be passed through the soft tissues initially before being
redirected above the epaxial musculature. Once the Kirsch-
 ner wire is inserted to its midpoint, it is bent into a U shape
with bending pliers (Fig. 34-7A), and is then positioned
bilaterally along the dorsal lamina in the groove between
the spinous and articular processes of four vertebrae. The
fracture is reduced and the free ends of the Kirschner wire
-u wu-o'o e qm ssanond snods au on panos ae
cerclage wire (Fig. 34-7B). Holes are drilled ventral to the
Kirschner wire through the bases of the spinous processes
on each side of the lesion. A 0.6-0.8-mm orthopedic wire
is passed through the holes and placed over the U-shaped
Kirschner wire, and below the supraspinous and interspi-
nous ligaments in a fgure-of-eight fashion (Fig. 34-7C).
The wire is tightened bilaterally under visual control to
ensure correct positioning of the articular facets. Correct
reduction depends on adequate positioning of the U-
shaped Kirschner wire along the groove between spinous
processes and articular facets.
Figure 34-7Tension band fixation of a thoracolumbar fracture.
(A) A Kirschner wire is inserted into the largest spinous process
adjacent to the affected segment, and is bent into a U shape.
(B) The Kirschner wire is then adapted to the groove between the
spinous and articular processes. Its free ends are secured to the
spinous process on the opposite side of the affected segment with a
hemicerclage wire.
(C) The figure-of-eight wire is centered over the lesion. The
vertebrae are pulled towards the Kirschner wire while it is tightened.
Multiple methods have been described for stabilization of
spinal fractures/luxations (3). The tension band technique
thoracolumbar fractures in dogs (7). The small size of the
 is most appropriate for fractures located between T12 and
vertebrae in cats precludes performing some of these tech-
L6 with an intact dorsal lamina. Fractures cranial to T12
niques. Dorsal stabilization methods using pins and orthope-
are mostly stabilized with the classical spinal stapling
dic wire are therefore commonly used in cats. Spinal stapling
technique.
offers adequate strength in small patients, and is a biome-
Fracture stabilization is also possible with internal fixators,
chanically sound technique because the implants are posi-
 applied to the dorsal or lateral lamina, or the vertebral bodies.
tioned on the tension side of the spine (13). A modification
The 2.0-mm Unilock mandible locking system (Chapter 24)
of spinal stapling, using a fgure-of-eight wire as a tension
is an adequate internal fixator to be used in cats (Fig. 34-8).
band, has been shown to be an effective surgical technique
It is mainly indicated for fractures of the sixth or seventh
for stabilization of thoracolumbar fractures/luxations in cats
lumbar vertebrae, where dorsal stabilization methods may
(Fig. 34-6 and Box 34-5). No implant-related complications
 offer insufficient stability because of the smallspinous process
were seen with this technique in 16 cats with thoracolumbar
of L7.
34: The spine
415
C
R
D
Figure 34-8 Cat with a fracture of L6.
(A, B) Preoperative radiographs showing an endplate fracture and fracture of the dorsal lamina of L6 with L6-L7 dislocation.
(C, D) Postoperative radiographs. The fracture was stabilized with two 2.0-mm Unilock plates applied to the vertebral bodies of L6-L7 using a
ventroabdominal approach. (Courtesy of Urs Weber.)
34.7 Surgical conditions of the
34.7.2 Decompression of the lumbosacral
lumbosacral spine
spinal cord and nerve roots
Surgery of the lumbosacral spine is most commonly per-
The spinal cord and nerve roots at the lumbosacral junction
formed to treat fractures and luxations. The most common
 are decompressed by dorsal laminectomy (Box 34-6). Dorsal
lesion in this area is fracture of the seventh lumbar vertebra.
 laminectomy is removal of the dorsal lamina, with or without
Luxations between the seventh lumbar vertebra and the 
 the facet joints. Removal of both facet joints creates signif-
sacrum also occur in cats (14). Decompression can be indi-
 cant spinal instability and is discouraged. Dorsal laminec-
cated in cases with lumbosacral disc disease or spinal
tomy is rarely performed in cats. The most common indication
would be protrusion of the lumbosacral disc. Decompression 
empyema (Chapter 6).
pue uosnpar udo Aq kpsanu paunoad Aquo Aensn s
internal fixation in the presence of fractures or luxations.
34.7.1 Approaches to the lumbosacral spine
34.7.3 Fractures and luxations of the
The most commonly used approach to the lumbosacral area
lumbosacral spine
is the dorsal approach to the seventh lumbar vertebra and
the sacrum (6). It is used for all dorsal decompression and
Trauma to the lumbosacral spine may result in fractures of
stabilization techniques. A ventral abdominal approach (6)
the seventh lumbar vertebra, luxation of the lumbosacral
can be used for ventral stabilization of fractures.
joint, and fractures of the sacrum.
416
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 34-6. Dorsal laminectomy
 The cat is placed in ventral recumbency with the hind legs
Figure 34-9
in a frog position. The abdomen is supported. A dorsal
Diagram showing
the extent of a
au jo jeu iepnen au 'paoad si qoondde au
lumbosacral dorsal 
spinous process of L7 and the spinous process of S1 are
laminectomy. The
removed with rongeurs. The laminectomy is started, by
facet joints have
removing a rectangular piece of bone with a high-speed
been preserved.
power bur. The lateral extent of the dorsal laminectomy
is restricted by the facet joints, which are left intact (Fig.
34-9). Care is taken while burring the inner cortex. The
ligamentum flavum between L7 and S1 is removed with a
scalpel blade when only a thin shelf of bone is left. The
thin bone shelf is then elevated and removed with fne
curettes or rongeurs. The cone of the medullary canal and
 its nerve roots can be retracted sideways with a nerve hook
to explore the dorsal anulus fbrosus and the L7 nerve
root.
Fractures of L7 often show marked cranioventral displace-
Traumatic lumbosacral luxation is occasionally observed
ment of the caudal segment due to the pull of the iliopsoas
in cats (14). Radiographic features include subluxation on
musculature ventrally, causing significant narrowing or even
laterolateral radiographs and rotational malalignment of the
obliteration of the spinal canal (Fig. 34-10). Besides neuro-
spinous processes on dorsoventral radiographs (Fig. 34-12).
logical dysfunction of the sciatic nerve, bladder and anus
A dorsal midline approach to the lumbosacral junction is
 paralysis may result from pudendal and pelvic nerve injury.
performed. The articular facets are usually both luxated but
 Stable fixation of these fractures is difficult due to the high
not fractured. Reduction of the articular facets is achieved by
mobility and force transmission in this area. Transilial pinning
distracting the articular facets while flexing the lumbosacral
is a method for stabilization of these fractures, but correct
joint. This is done with the help of pointed bone reduction
pin placement is crucial to achieve adequate fixation stability
forceps, one positioned at the base of the spinous process of
(Box 34-7). The pin must lie in close contact with the dorsal
L7 and another one placed lateral to the articular facets of
lamina of L7, cranial to the fracture, to be able to prevent
the sacrum. The lesion appears stable after reduction. A
ventral dislodgment of the caudal fracture segment. A certain
suture sling is anchored between the spinous processes of L7
degree of axial compression and shortening of the L7 verte-
and S2 in order to prevent hyperflexion and reluxation in the
 bral body is seen during healing, even with correctly placed
recovery period. A small tension band repair should be con-
pins. External skeletal fixation combined with internal dorsal
 sidered in the presence of fractured articular facets.
stabilization has been described in dogs and is considered
Fractures of the sacrum occur commonly in cats. Most
more stable than transilial pinning (15). It may be potentially
 often they are avulsion fractures of the craniolateral edge of
applicable in cats if small implants are used. The use of inter-
the sacral wing in conjunction with sacroiliac luxation, and
'sdo uuean rano are vd pue sud no sroexy jeu
pelvic fractures. These are usually stabilized with sacroiliac
Internal fixators can also be applied to the ventral surface of
screw fixation (Chapter 35). Other sacral fractures, such as
L7 and the sacrum, using an abdominal approach, in addition
foraminal and transverse fractures (see Chapter 13 for clas-
to a transilial pin.
sification of sacral fractures), are also treated surgically in the
34:Thespine
417
A
B
D
Figure 34-10 A cat with a fracture of L7.
(A) Preoperative radiographs. The caudal fragment is dislocated cranioventrally due to the pull of the iliopsoas musculature.
(B) Reduction and fixation with two transilial pins resulted in satisfactory realignment of the spinal canal.
pey ing 'siem oi Aie au pauieban ien aul sudeabope, dn-molloy yaam-g uo uaas s! /l jo buuaous pue uoissaduon jeixe ui bulean ()
residual tibial nerve and voiding deficits.
(D) Transverse computed tomography view of the transilial pin. The tuber coxae are used to anchor the pin in the pelvis. Close contact of the pin
with the dorsal lamina of L7 cranial to the fracture prevents the caudal part of the spine and the pelvis displacing ventrally
Box 34-7. Transilial pinning of L7 fractures
A dorsal approach to the dorsal lamina of L7 and the
Figure 34-11
iliosacral joint is performed. A 1.6-2.0-mm Kirschner wire
 Transilial pinning for 
is inserted through the tuber coxae on one side, using a
an L7 fracture. The
pin is anchored in 
mini intergluteal approach. The entrance site is aimed so
the tuber coxae
that the pin will be located at the level of the roof of L7,
bilaterally and lies on
cranial to the fracture. The caudal part of the spinous
the dorsal lamina of 
process can be removed with rongeurs if necessary. It is
L7. cranial to the
crucial that the pin comes to lie in close contact to the
fracture (also see
Figure 34-10D).
dorsal lamina of L7 (Figs 34-10D and 34-11). Only then
is it able to prevent cranial dislocation of the caudal frag-
ment. The fracture is reduced, and the pin is then advanced
along the dorsal lamina of L7 until it has penetrated the
contralateral tuber coxae. The pin ends can be bent bilater-
ally prior to cutting them to avoid migration (Fig.
34-11).
Transilial pinning can be also used as an auxillary sta-
bilization method for repair of sacroiliac luxations
(Chapter 35).
Figure 34-12 A cat with
lumbosacral luxation.
(A, B) Preoperative radiographs
showing rotation of the sacrum
in relation to L7 (A), and dorsal
subluxation of the sacrum (B).
(C, D) Radiographs after open
reduction and stabilization with a
suture sling anchored in the
spinous processes of L7 and S1
(Reprinted with permission from:
Zulauf D, et al. Traumatic
dislocation of the lumbosacral
joint in two cats. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatol 2008;21:468.)
B
C
D
34: The spine
419
Figure 34-13 A cat with pelvic
fractures, hip luxation, and a
R
foraminal fracture of the sacrum.
(A) Preoperative radiographs
showing cranial displacement of
the left hemipelvis. The fractured
part of the sacral wing is
attached to the sacroiliac joint.
(B) A 2.0-mm Unilock plate was
applied on to the ventral aspect
of the sacral body and the ilial
wing after reduction. The luxated
hip was treated at a later date.
 presence of neurological defcits and fracture displacement.
of injury, the traction exerted on the sacral and coccygeal
 Foraminal fractures are best stabilized with internal fxators 
 nerve roots during trauma results in damage to the nerve
or plates using a ventroabdominal approach (Fig. 34-13).
 roots themselves, and can also cause myelomalacia of the
Dorsal stabilization methods can be used for transverse 
sacral and caudal lumbar spinal cord segments (17). Impor-
fractures.
tant nerves involved are the coccygeal nerves, the pudendal
nerve, and the pelvic nerve (Chapter 1). Many cats with
34.8 Surgical conditions of the
sacrococcygeal fracture/luxation suffer from concurrent
sacrococcygeal spine
 pelvic fractures or other injuries of the hindlimbs.
Symptoms depend on the severity of neurological involve-
Sacrococcygeal fractures or luxations are the most common
 ment, but include local hyperesthesia, flaccid tail paralysis,
spinal injuries in feline patients. These injuries are a result of
swelling around the tail base, and dribbling of urine. The
traction to the tail, resulting in fractures or luxations at the
 neurological examination should include assessment of motor 
tail base, often accompanied by damage to the nerves of the
 and sensory function of the tail. Sensory and motor function
tail, bladder perineum, and anus. They are usually caused by
 of the pudendal nerve is assessed by testing perineal reflex
motor vehicle accidents, when the tail is trapped under a
activity. The presence or absence of anal tone reflects motor
wheel. Concurrent injuries of the pelvis and/or hindlimbs are
function of the pudendal nerve. Inability to urinate and the
common.
 presence of residual urine after micturition are usually caused
by pelvic nerve dysfunction. A classification system of the
34.8.1 Approach to the sacrococcygeal spine
severity of neurological deficits suggested by Smeak and Olm-
stead (18) is shown in Table 34-3.
The sacrococcygeal spine is approached from dorsally (6). In
Although cats with only tail paralysis frequently recover
some cases the nerve roots have been torn out of the vertebral
after both conservative and surgical stabilization, surgical
canal, and can be located dorsal to the spine. They can be
stabilization of the lesion may have some benefts. Surgical
manipulated carefully, but no traction should be applied.
stabilization restores the pelvic diaphragm, and prevents
further neurological damage due to traction on the nerve
34.8.2 Fractures and luxations of the
roots during the healing period. Persistent hyperesthesia has
sacrococcygeal spine
been described in some cats after conservative treatment (16,
18). Surgically treated patients had no evidence of hyperes-
Sacrococcygeal fractures or luxations include three different
 thesia, and a larger number of cats regained motor function
types of injury: sacrococcygeal luxation, a fracture between
Apnis auo ul kiaaearasuos paieanl siuaed ueqi len aul jo
the second and third sacral segment, or an endplate fracture
 (16). From current knowledge, surgery does not seem to have
of the third sacral bone (Fig. 34-14). The sacral growth plates
 a significant effect on regaining the ability to urinate. A
close around 18 months of age and seem to be a predilection
 simple technique for surgical stabilization is the dorsoventral
site for fractures in younger cats (16). Regardless of the type
suture sling (16) (Box 34-8). Significant undermining of the
420
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
A
B
Figure 34-14 (A) Preoperative and (B) postoperative radiographs of a cat with a sacrococcygeal luxation.
Grade
 Neurological signs
Nerves
Prognosis for ability
Table 34-3. Classification of
cats with sacrococcygeal fracture/
to urinate
luxation based on neurological
 Hyperesthesia only
Excellent
signs and prognosis
Grade 1
Grade 2
 Flaccid tail paralysis
Coccygeal nerves
Excellent
Grade 3
 Flaccid tail paralysis
 Coccygeal nerves
Good in most cases
Some residual urine
 Pelvic nerve
Grade 4 
 Flaccid tail paralysis
 Coccygeal nerves
<75% recovery rate
Residual urine
 Pelvic nerve
 Perineal reflex and anal tone
 Pudendal nerve
reduced
 Urethral tone normal (bladder
 Reflex dyssynergia
hard to express)
Grade 5  Flaccid tail paralysis
Coccygeal nerves
<50% recovery rate
Residual urine
 Pelvic nerve
Absent perineal reflex and anal
 Pudendal nerve
tone
Urethral tone diminished or absent
Pudendal nerve
(bladder easy to express)
Adapted from Smeak DD, Olmstead ML. Fracture/luxations of the sacrococcygeal area in the cat. A
retrospective study of 51 cases. Vet Surg 1985;14:319-324.
skin from avulsion of subcutaneous tissue can be present
necessary in cats developing skin necrosis of the tail. For
 around the tail base, necessitating drainage.
further details on tail amputation see Chapter 41.
 Tail amputation should also be considered in the cat with
a paralyzed tail. If this is done early it may relieve distraction
and the pendulum effect by the weight of the limp tail. Alter-
34.9 Postoperative treatment and
natively it can be done after 6 weeks if motor and sensory
prognosis of spinal fractures
function is not regained. The tail is usually amputated distal
and Tuxations
to the level of the injury, thereby leaving the cat with a small
 stump and minimizing further disruption and disturbance to
Postoperative
treatment 
depends
on the neurological
function of the patient. Basic principles for the postoperative
34: The spine
421
Box 34-8. Stabilization of sacrococcygeal fractures and luxations
The cat is positioned in ventral recumbency with the tail
 geal vertebra and through the hole in C2 bilaterally (Fig.
 prepared surgically to allow free manipulation. A dorsal
34-15A). Non-resorbable monoflament suture material
approach is performed over the lesion. The dorsal fascia
 size 2-0 is used. Reduction is achieved by careful manipu-
 is incised paramedian, sparing the interspinous ligaments.
lation of the tail, before the sutures are tightened using
After elevation of the epaxial musculature, the lesion and
sliding knots. Over-reduction and entrapment of nerve
 the articular facets are visible. The coccygeal nerves are
roots should be avoided.
often swollen and protrude through the lesion. If reduction
Transverse fracture between S2 and S3: A dorsal suture
of the lesion compresses the nerve roots, a small dorsal
sling can be anchored between the bases of the dorsal
laminectomy can be performed with a fine rongeur.
spinous processes of S2 and S3 to repair these fractures
 Sacrococcygeal luxation and endplate fractures: A hole
(Fig. 34-15B). Care is taken not to break the fragile dorsal
 is drilled manually through the base of the spinous process
spinous process of S3. Non-resorbable monoflament
of S2 with a 0.8-mm Kirschner wire. A suture sling is then
suture material is used.
placed around the transverse processes of the frst coccy-
A
Figure 34-15  Repair of sacrococcygeal fractures and luxations.
(A) A dorsal suture sling between the transverse processes of C1 and the dorsal spinous process of S2 is used to stabilize sacrococcygeal
luxations and fractures of the endplate of the sacrum
(B) A dorsal suture sling between the spinous processes of S2 and S3 is used for stabilization of transverse sacral fractures between S2 and 
S3
treatment of neurological disorders are also described in
Prognosis after spinal cord injury depends on the preopera-
Chapter 20.
tive neurological state of the cat, and on the type and pres-
ence of concurrent injuries. Overall, only 50% of cats that
34.9.1 Cervical and thoracolumbar
 presented with traumatic spinal lesions survived in one study
fractures/luxations
(2). Forty percent of patients died or were euthanized within
4 days after the injury, due to severe neurological deficits,
Cats should be confined to a cage for at least 10 days after
intraoperative evidence of myelomalacia, postoperative car-
surgical repair of cervical and thoracolumbar spinal frac-
diovascular complications, and owner's decision (2). Ten
tures. Activity is further restricted by keeping the cat indoors
percent of treated cats did not recover satisfactory restoration
for another 6 weeks. Ancillary external stabilization with
 of gait or ability to urinate and had to be euthanized during
splints is not used by the authors. Control radiographs are
 the treatment period (2). In another study, evaluating outcome
usually performed after 3-4 weeks. Radiographs must be
 of surgically stabilized spinal fractures and locations in dogs
taken prior to this to detect potential fixation failure, if neu-
and cats, 79% of patients regained satisfactory or complete
rological recovery is inadequate, or if a sudden worsening of
neurological recovery (3). Cats with preoperative grade 1-3
the neurological status occurs.
422
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
outcome (3). Around one-third of cats with grade 4 deficits
 References and further reading
did not regain satisfactory function of gait or ability to
urinate, and were euthanized during the treatment period (3).
1. Zulauf D, et al. Radiographic examination and outcome in
consecutive feline trauma patients. Vet Comp Orthop Trauma-
No cats with grade 5 deficits recovered (2, 3).
tol 2008;21:36-40.
 In summary, cats with spinal fractures and luxations and
2. Grasmueck S, Steffen F. Survival rates and outcomes in cats with
grade 1-3 neurological deficits have a good to excellent prog-
thoracic and lumbar spinal cord injuries due to external trauma.
 nosis, especially after surgical stabilization. Cats with grade
J Small Anim Pract 2004;45:284-288.
3. Voss K, Montavon PM. Tension band stabilization of
4 deficits seem to have a more guarded prognosis. Cats with
fractures and luxations of the thoracolumbar spine in dogs and
grade 5 neurological deficits have a poor prognosis due to
cats: 38 cases {1993-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;225:
the high likelihood of spinal cord disruption and/or
78-83.
myelomalacia.
4. Kot W, et al. Anatomical survey of the cat's lumbosacral spinal
cord. Prog Vet Neurol 1994;5:162-166.
5. Frewein J, Vollmerhaus B. Anatomie von Hund und Katze.
34.9.2 Sacrococcygeal fractures/luxations
Berlin: Blackwell; 1994.
6. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA. An atlas of surgical approaches to
Postoperative treatment mainly depends on the ability to
the bones and joints of the dog and the cat, 4th edn. Philadel-
urinate. In the absence of normal micturition, the bladder has
phia: WB Saunders; 2004.
7. Wheeler SJ, Sharp NJ. Small animal spinal disorders. London:
to be emptied 3-4 times daily by manual expression or by
Mosby-Wolfe; 2005.
 catheterization if the bladder is hard to express. A urinary
8. Smith SA, et al. An in-vitro biomechanical comparison of the
catheter connected to a closed suction system, is a good
Orosco and AO locking plates for anterior cervical spine fixa-
method to avoid the stress and microtrauma associated with
ton. J Spinal Disorders 1995;8:220-223.
repeated catheterization. Although most bladders are easy to
9. Richman JD, et al. Biomechanical evaluation of cervical spine
 stabilization methods using a porcine model. Spine 1995;20:
express due to lower motor neuron lesions of the pudendal
2192-2197.
nerve, some cats show normal sphincter tone or reflex dys-
10. Voss K, et al. Use of the ComPact UniLock system for ventral
synergia. Detrusor muscle function can be assisted pharma-
stabilization procedures of the cervical spine: a retrospective
cologically (Chapter 20).
study. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2006;19:21-28.
11. Smith GK, Walter MC. Spinal decompressive procedures and
Prognosis depends on the neurological deficits present and
 dorsal compartment injuries: comparative biomechanical study
is summarized in Table 34-3. Motor function of the tail
in canine cadavers. Am J Vet Res 1988;49:266-273.
returns in around 50% of patients (16-18), although in some
12. Shires PK, et al. A biomechanical study of rotational instability
cases only the proximal third of the tail recovers. Mean time
in unaltered and surgically altered canine thoracolumbar verte-
bral motion units. Prog Vet Neurol 1991;2:6-14.
to recovery has been described as 1 month (18), but it may
13. Gage ED. A new method of spinal fixation in the dog (a pre-
take significantly longer. If the tail remains completely para-
liminary report). Vet Med Small Anim Clin 1969;64:295-303.
14. Zulauf D, et al. Traumatic dislocation of the lumbosacral joint
Recovery of urinary function is the most important factor for
in two cats. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2008;21:467-470.
15. Shores A, et al. Combined Kirschner-Ehmer device and dorsal
survival of affected cats. If the ability for voiding returns, it
spinal plate fixation technique for caudal lumbar fractures in
usually does so within 1 month (18). The chance for recovery
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989;195:335-339.
is poor after that time, and most cats are euthanized.
16. Bernasconi C, et al. Simple techniques for the internal stabiliza-
One complication occasionally encountered after sacrococ-
tion of fractures and luxations in the sacrococcygeal region in
cats and dogs. Schweiz Arch Tierheilk 2001;143:269-303.
cygeal fractures and luxations is necrosis of the tail. It can be
17. Lautersack O, et al. About the avulsion of the tail in the cat.
encountered after both surgical and conservative therapy (16)
Tieraztl Prax 2002;30:41-49.
and necessitates tail amputation. Fecal incontinence is rarely
18. Smeak DD, Olmstead ML. Fracture/luxations of the sacrococ-
a problem, due to functional intrinsic innervation of the
cygeal area in the cat. A retrospective study of 51 cases. Vet
colon and rectum (18). Constipation is occasionally seen, but
Surg 1985;14:319-324.
can usually be managed by dietary means, laxatives, and
enemas.
423
35
 Pelvis
K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs, L. Borer, P.M. Montavon
Pelvic fractures are a common complaint in feline orthope-
35.2 Diagnosis and
general considerations
dics, accounting for 22-32% of fractures (1, 2). Motor
vehicle trauma is the most frequent cause for pelvic injuries.
Around 60% of c
with
pelvicfractl
6 are unable to bear
Many cats with pelvic fractures have sustained additional
weight on the pelvic limbs at admission (5). A thorough
injury of other bones, organs, or nerves, which may influence
neurological examination
treatment decisions, costs, and prognosis. Fracture categories
cal injury, especially of the sciatic, the pudendal, and coccy-
include sacroiliac luxations, ilial body fractures, acetabular
geal nerves. Sciatic nerve dysfunction occurs in 11% of cats
fractures, pelvic floor fractures, and fractures of the pelvic
with pelvic fractures
s (1). The nerve deficits were associated
margin (3). The pelvic floor is the most commonly fractured
with ilial body fractures in around 70%, and with sacroiliac
region of the pelvis in cats, followed by sacroiliac fracture/
lhuxations in approximately 30% of cases (1). Craniomedial
luxations, ilial fractures, and ischial fractures (1).
displacement of ilial fractures and cranial displacement of
sacroiliac luxations enhance the risk for damage to the lum-
bosacral plexus (6). Injury to the pudendal and coccygeal
35.1 Surgical anatomy
nerves is common with concurrent sacrococcygeal fractures
or luxations.
The pelvis is a ring-like structure consisting of the two os
Radiographs are performed to identify and classify the
coxae and the sacrum. The os coxae each consist of the os
injuries (Chapter 13). Because the pelvis is ring-shaped, at
ilium, the os ischium, and the os pubis. In kittens there is a
least two different fracture/luxations will occur simultane-
small bone, the os acetabulae, which fuses to the other bones
ously. The pelvis was broken at three or more sites in 76%
to form the acetabular fossa. All four bones form part of the
of dogs and cats in one study (3). A total of 160 possible
acetabulum. The acetabulum, the ilium, and the sacroiliac
combinations of fractures was observed in the same study.
joint are the weight-bearing structures of the pelvis. The main
load-bearing area of the acetabular fossa is the caudal and
central thirds (4).
Palpable bony prominences are the tuber coxae and tuber
sacrale of the ilial wing, and the tuber ischiadicum of the os
ischium. The ilium is slimmer and straighter in cats than in
dogs. The body of the ilium has a relatively thick cortical
shell, but the ilial wing is mainly composed of cancellous
bone (Fig. 35-1) (5). The ilium articulates medially with the
sacral wings. The sacroiliac joint has both a fbrocartilagi-
nous and a synovial part. The synovial part is covered with
hyaline cartilage and is visible as a crescent-shaped structure
on the sacral wing with the concave side facing craniodor-
sally. The ischial bone and the pubic bone unite ventrally at
the pubic symphysis.
The lumbosacral plexus and the sciatic nerve are important
structures coursing close to the pelvic bones. They are at risk
of being damaged during pelvic trauma or surgery. The lum-
bosacral plexus is composed of the sixth and seventh lumbar,
and the frst and second sacral nerve roots. The resulting
nerves course ventrolateral to the sacrum, and along the
Figure 35-1  Cross-sectional views of the ilium. The ilial body is a
tubular structure with a relatively thick cortex. The ilial wing is mainly
medial surface of the ilium, from where the sciatic nerve
composed of cancellous bone. Its thickest area is at the ventral aspect.
separates to leave the pelvic canal caudodorsal to the
(Adapted from Bohmer E. Beckenfrakturen und -luxationen bei der
hip joint.
Katze. Munich: Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat: 1985.)
424
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
tion of these fractures can be beneficial if there is marked
Box 35-1. The most common combinations of feline
instability, displacement, and pain. Conservative treatment
pelvic fractures
of pelvic fractures consists of providing analgesia, controlling
and monitoring urination and defecation, and cage confine-
Ilial body and pelvic floor fracture
ment for 2-4 weeks.
Ilial body fracture and contralateral sacroiliac luxation,
Fractures of the weight-bearing elements of the pelvis, that
with/without pelvic floor fracture
is, the acetabulum, the ilial body, and the sacroiliac joint, are
Unilateral sacroiliac luxation and pelvic floor fracture
usually repaired surgically to allow early return to function,
 Bilateral sacroiliac luxation, with/without pelvic floor
and to prevent malunion, delayed union, and pelvic canal
fracture
narrowing. Pelvic canal narrowing of more than 45% is likely
to result in obstipation or constipation (8). Extreme pain and
 the presence of neurological deficits are also indications to
aq pinoo suais asaul asnesaq Aiains Kroierodxa uoiad
Common combinations of pelvic fracture/luxations are listed
 caused by entrapment of nerves berween the fracture frag-
in Box 35-1.
ments. Box 35-2 provides a summary of indications for
Significant trauma is necessary to cause fracture of the
surgery. Fractures of the weight-bearing parrs of the pelvis
pelvic bones, which are well protected by musculature, and
often occur bilaterally.
as many as 74% of cats with pelvic fractures have extrapelvic
 q r  n    o 
injuries (1). These occur mainly in the caudal body of the cat
pelvic floor. Fracture reduction and stabilization of one hemi-
and include sacrococcygeal fracture/luxation, coxofemoral
 pelvis should automatically result in adequate reduction of
luxation, femoral fractures, sciatic nerve injury, and caudal
 the contralateral side, provided that the pelvic floor has
body wall hernias. Thoracic trauma is also common. In one
remained intact. However the pelvic floor is fractured in
study urinary tract rauma occurred in more than 30% of
90% of cases (1), and bilateral injuries with concurrent frac-
 dogs with pelvic fractures (7). Surprisingly, this was described
tures of the pelvic floor result in marked instability of both
to be far less common in cats (1).
hemipelves, often necessitating bilateral fracture/luxation
Hematuria is a common clinical finding in cats with pelvic
repair. Either bilateral surgical repair or unilateral repair and
Xieun au jo jred Aue oi Anu Aq pasneo aq ues il 'saoen
stabilization of the pelvic floor may be necessary in these
system, but is often due to lesions of the urinary bladder
cases. If bilateral surgery is to be performed, the side where
mucosa. Other possible injuries to consider include kidney
anatomic reduction is more important, for example an ace-
trauma, and rupture of the ureters, urinary bladder, and
tabular fracture, should be operated frst. If unilateral nerve
urethra. Plain radiographs, ultrasonography, abdominocen-
deficits are present, the affected side should also be operated
tesis, and contrast radiography may confrm or rule out clini-
cally significant urinary tract trauma (Chapter 12). Hematuria
fragments affecting the other hemipelvis.
caused by mucosal lesions of the urinary bladder is usually
Surgical stabilization of pelvic fractures is most commonly
self-limiting after 2-3 days and no specific treatment is neces-
 performed with plate osteosynthesis. Screw fixation and pin
sary. However, cats may lose a significant amount of blood
and wire techniques also have some indications. The use of
and should be monitored for anemia.
 an oscillating drill mode reduces the risk of iatrogenic damage
to the nerves of the lumbosacral plexus and sciatic nerve
35.3 Stabilization techniques
while drilling screw holes or inserting pins (9). If available it
should be used, especially for sacroiliac luxation repair, and
Fractures or luxations of the pelvic ring are classified into
for osteosynthesis of the ilium. Treatment options for the
 sacroiliac luxation, fractures of the ilium, acetabular frac-
different fracture types are listed in Table 35-1.
tures, pelvic floor fractures, and fractures of the pelvic margin
(Chapter 13) (1, 3). The most common combinations of
35.3.1 Pins and wires
pelvic fractures in cats are listed in Box 35-1. The decision
for conservative or surgical treatment mainly depends on
Pins and wires are rarely used for the repair of pelvic frac-
whether the acetabulum or other weight-bearing parts of the
      
pelvis are fractured, and on the presence of neurological
Kirschner wire can help maintain fracture reduction while a
 injury and degree of pelvic canal narrowing.
plate is contoured and applied. This is especially helpful for
 Fractures of the non-weight-bearing elements of the pelvis,
repair of acetabular fractures. Orthopedic wire can be applied
that is the pelvic floor the ilial wing, and the ischium, can
t0 repair symphyseal pubic fractures with hemicerclage or
often be treated conservatively. However surgical stabiliza-
cerclage wiring. Skewer pins with a fgure-of-eight cerclage
35: Pelvis
425
wire can be used to stabilize long oblique fractures of the ilial
Box 35-2. Indications for surgical stabilization of
body, but the fracture line must be long enough to allow
pelvic fractures
application of at least two skewer pins.
 Acetabular fractures
35.3.2 Screws
 Fractures of the ilial body
Sacroiliac dislocation (if > 50% displaced)
Screw fixation is mainly used for stabilization of sacroiliac
Pelvic canal narrowing (if >40% narrowing)
luxations (see corresponding section). Screws with a diameter
 Extreme pain
 of 2.0-2.7 mm are appropriately sized.
Nerve deficits
 Long oblique fractures of the ilial body are another indica-
Pelvic floor fractures (if widely displaced or unstable or
 tion for screw fixation. Lag screw stabilization of long oblique
ilial fractures has been shown to be biomechanically superior
abdominal wall avulsion)
to lateral plating in dogs (10). A minimum of trwo 2.0-mm
Fractures of the ischial tuberosity (if clinically
disabling)
lag screws are inserted perpendicular to the fracture line and
parallel to each other.
Fracture
Fracture type
Treatment options
Table 35-1. Treatment options
localization
for the different fracture types.
Treatment decisions also depend 
on the combination of the
Sacroiliac joint
Unilateral luxation
Conservative
different lesions
Screw fixation
 Repair of pelvic floor
Bilateral luxation
Conservative
Unilateral screw fixation if pelvic floor intact
Bilateral screw fixation if pelvic floor broken
 Unilateral screw fixation and repair of pelvic
floor (if broken)
 Transilial pin/bolt
Ilium
Simple transverse
Lateral or dorsal plate or internal fixator
 Simple long oblique
Lag screws
 Skewer pins
 Lateral or dorsal plate or internal fxator
Comminuted
 Lateral plate(s) or internal fixator(s)
Acetabulum
Simple
Plate
Internal fixator
 Tension band repair
Comminuted
Plate
Internal fixator
 Femoral head and neck resection
Pelvic floor
Symphysis
Conservative
Hemicerclage wires
Plate
 Internal fxator
Other
Plate
 Internal fxator
Pelvic margin
Ilial wing
Conservative
Ischial tuberosity
Conservative
 Divergent pins
Tension band
426
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
35.3.3 Plating
35.4 Sacroiliac fracture/luxation
Plate osteosynthesis is the most commonly used method for
Approximately 60% of cats with pelvic fractures have sus-
surgical repair of pelvic fractures. It is indicated to stabilize
tained a sacroiliac luxation or fracture/luxation (1). Sacroiliac
ilial body fractures, acetabular fractures, and fractures of
fracture/luxations can occur uni- or bilaterally, and are
the pelvic floor. Short plates are often used for the small size
 accompanied by a variety of possible pelvic fracture combina-
of the pelvic bones, because they are more easily contoured to
tions. Bilateral luxation occurred in 37% of cats in one study
the curved bone surfaces compared to longer plates. A minimum
(11). Common fracture combinations are unilateral sacroiliac
of two screws must be inserted per fragment, but three or four
luxation with pelvic floor fracture, bilateral sacroiliac luxa-
screws are preferable in the thin bone of the ilial wing. Meticu-
tion with and without pelvic foor fracture, and unilateral
lous technique should be applied to prevent stripping of the
sacroiliac luxation with contralateral ilium fracture, with or
screws, especially in the ilial wing with its thin cortical shell.
without pelvic floor fracture (Box 35-1).
The screws can be inserted without tapping a thread in areas
Sacroiliac fracture/luxations are best identified on ventro-
that are predominantly composed of cancellous bone.
dorsal pelvic radiographs (Fig. 35-2). Sacroiliac luxation
Useful plates for repair of ilial fractures include the 2.0-mm
and sacroiliac luxation with an avulsion fracture of the
dynamic compression plate (DCP), the 2.4-mm limited
cranial part of the sacral wing are the two most commonly
contact-DCP (LC-DCP), and the 1.5/2.0-mm or 2.0/2.7-mm
seen injuries. The nerve roots of the sixth and seventh
 veterinary cuttable plate (VCP). Plates are most often applied
 lumbar nerves and the obturator nerve course ventromedial
to the lateral surface of the ilium, although it does not offer
to the sacroiliac joint, and are at risk of damage, especially
 much bone purchase for the screws, especially in the thin ilial
in cranial and ventral luxations. The sacral nerve roots
wing. For lateral plating, the implants are best applied along
can also be torn during sacroiliac luxation. Neurological
the ventral border of the ilial wing where the bone is thicker
deficits of the sciatic nerve and voiding dysfunction are
(5). Dorsal plating is possible for fractures of the ilial body,
observed in approximately 20% of cats with sacroiliac
and has the advantage of being able to insert longer screws
luxation (11).
compared to lateral plating (8).
Minimally displaced sacroiliac luxations can be treated
Acetabular fractures are often repaired with 2.0-mm recon
conservatively, especially if unilateral. A general rule is that
struction plates, which allow more accurate contouring to the
displacerment of less than 50% of the length of the joint
curved bone surface compared to conventional plates. The
allows conservative treatment. Although cats seem to recover
reconstruction plates are weak and should be applied dor-
well after conservative treatment, many will develop ankylo-
sally, which is the tension side of the acetabulum. A short
sis of one or both sacroiliac joint, as well as degenerative
2.0-mm DCP or a 1.5/2.0-mm VCP can also be used. These
changes in the lumbosacral joint (5). In cases with a contra-
stronger plates are beneficial for the repair of comminuted
lateral fracture of the ilium and an intact pelvic floor repair
fractures. Specifically designed 2.0-mm acetabular plates are
of the ilium will result in indirect reduction of the sacroiliac
also available.
joint (Fig. 35-3).
If pelvic floor fractures are to be stabilized surgically, min-
 Indications for surgical repair are pain and lameness, bilat-
iature implants are best suited, such as the 1.5-mm mini-
eral injuries (Fig. 35-2), neurological deficits, and displace-
plates, and the 1.3-mm compact hand plates. The different
ment exceeding 50% of the length of the joint surface. Severe
plates are described in Chapter 24.
pain and neurological defcits indicate nerve entrapment or
damage. The classical and commonly used stabilization
35.3.4 Internal fixators
method is insertion of a lag screw from the lateral aspect of
the ilial wing across the sacroiliac joint into the sacral body
Internal fixators are good implants to use in pelvic fractures, 
(Fig. 35-2). Alternatively, a positional screw can be inserted
because they offer superior stability in the soft and thin bone
 across the joint using a ventroabdominal approach (12). The
of the pelvis and render screw loosening less likely. Two
 ventroabdominal approach can also be used to repair concur-
locking screws per fragment are generally suffcient. Another
rent fractures of the sacrum with a ventrally applied internal
advantage of using locking plates is that, because the plate is
fxator or miniplate (Chapter 34). The use of a transsacral
not pressed on to the bone while the screws are tightened,
screw has been described for bilateral sacroiliac fracture/
secondary loss of reduction does not occur, even if the plate
luxations for use in both dogs and cats (13), and a tension
A   i a s d   
band wire technique has also been reported in 18 cats (14).
acetabular fractures. The 2.0-mm Unilock mandible locking
The lateral and ventral screw methods are described in Boxes
plates (Chapter 24) are a suitable size for the feline pelvis.
35-3 and 35-4.
35: Pelvis
427
Figure 35-2 A cat with bilateral
sacroiliac luxation.
(A) Ventrodorsal radiograph
showing bilateral sacroiliac 
luxation, fractures of the pelvic
floor, and an ischial/caudal
acetabular fracture.
(B) The sacroiliac joints were 
stabilized bilaterally with 2.7-mm
lag screws inserted from lateral.
Reduction and screw position and 
length are good.
(C) Laterolateral postoperative
radiograph showing correct 
 position of the screws in the
body of the sacrum.
Figure 35-3 A cat with an
ilial fracture and contralateral
sacroiliac luxation.
(A) Preoperative radiograph
showing a fracture of the left
ilium with contralateral sacroiliac 
luxation. Note that the cat also 
has hip dysplasia.
(B) Stabilization of the ilial
 fracture with a five-hole plate
resulted in indirect reduction of
 the sacroiliac joint because the 
 pelvic floor was intact.
A
428
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 35-3. Lag screw fixation of sacroiliac luxation using a dorsolateral approach
The cat can be placed in either lateral or sternal recum-
A gliding hole is then drilled from lateral to medial
bency for unilateral injury. If bilateral stabilization is nec-
through the ilial wing. The hole is located slightly ventral
essary, the cat should be positioned in sternal recumbency.
to the center of the ilial wing height, and at a distance of
-rad si iuol soroes al on qneoidde jenaieosiop H
about 60-70% of the sacral tuber length. The hole is
formed. A 2.0- or 2.7-mm lag screw is used for
usually located on the ventral gluteal line, a small bony
stabilization.
crest on the lateral surface of the ilial wing (Fig. 35-4B).
A thread hole is drilled into the sacral body after visu-
 Screw length is premeasured from ventrodorsal radio-
alization of the luxation. The entrance point is located just
graphs to be 60% of sacral width (Fig. 35-4C). It is usually
around 20-24 mm. The screw is inserted from lateral into
dorsal to the geometric center of the sacroiliac joint (Fig.
the ilial wing until it emerges on the medial ilial surface.
 35-4A). The hole is drilled perpendicular to the long axis
The fracture/luxation is then reduced under visual control.
of the sacrum, across at least 60% of the sacral width (Fig.
 Reduction is helped by manipulating the ilium with bone-
35-4C). Drilling perpendicular to the joint space would
holding forceps, and by using a small Hohmann retractor
aim the screw into the lumbosacral disc space, because of
 on the caudal aspect of the sacral wing when reduction is
 the craniocaudal inclination angle of the sacral wing. The
difficult. The screw is advanced into the predrilled hole in
thread is cut.
the sacral body.
Figure 35-4 Insertion of a
sacroiliac lag screw from lateral.
(A) Entry point of the thread hole
into the sacral body.
(B) Entry point of the gliding hole
 on the lateral surface of the ilium
at a distance of about 70% of
the sacral tuber length. The hole
is usually located on the ventral
gluteal line
(C) Correct position of the
sacroiliac lag screw, incorporating 
60% of sacral body width. Note 
the screw is inserted 
perpendicular to the long axis of 
the sacrum, not perpendicular to
the joint surface.
1
35.4.1 Approaches to the sacroiliac joint
The dorsolateral approach to the sacrum and ilial wing or
the ventrolateral approach is used to insert a lag screw
Approaches to the sacroiliac joint include a dorsolateral
through the lateral aspect of the ilial body for treatment of
approach to the sacrum and the wing of the ilium (15), a
sacroiliac luxations. Visualization of the sacroiliac joint is
ventrolateral approach to the ventral aspect of the sacroiliac
better with the dorsolateral approach. The ventrolateral
joint (15), and a ventroabdominal approach to the ventral
approach only allows digital palpation of reduction, but
aspect of the sacrum and sacroiliac joint (12)
facilitates screw placement in correct reduction (16).
35: Pelvis
429
A
B
upeodde leuuopgeouaa e buisn suawaneid mans nelones s-se anni
(A) Preoperative radiograph of a cat with bilateral sacroiliac luxation.
(B) Postoperative ventrodorsal radiograph, showing good reduction and stabilization of both sacroiliac joints with positional screws inserted via a
ventroabdominal approach
(c) Intrapelvic radiographs can be used to further evaluate screw positioning. The left screw is placed correctly. The right screw should have been
inserted at a sightly greater angle to obtain more bone purchase in the ilial wing
A ventroabdominal approach to the iliosacral joint can be
 35-2 shows the radiographic appearance of correct screw
performed for screw insertion in a medioventral to laterodor-  positioning.
sal direction. The ventroabdominal approach allows simulta-
neous treatment of bilateral luxations, repair of sacral wing
 35.4.3 Fixation of sacroiliac fracture/luxation
fractures, identification of nerve damage, and repair of con-
using a ventroabdominal approach
current injuries of the pelvic floor and abdominal cavity (12).
Screw placement is less likely to result in malpositioning of
The insertion of transarticular screws is also possible via a
the screw into the spinal canal or disc space as compared to
ventroabdominal approach (Box 35-4) (12). Positional screws
screw insertion from lateral, but reduction of the luxation 
 are aimed from the ventral surface of the sacral wing, across
can be more difficult.
the iliosacral joint, into the ilial wing. The radiological
appearance of screw positioning using the ventroabdominal
35.4.2 Fixation of sacroiliac fracture/luxation
approach is shown in Figure 35-5. Most uni- or bilateral
sacroiliac luxations are accompanied by fractures of the
using a dorsolateral approach
pelvic floor. The ventroabdominal approach has the advan-
Knowledge of regional anatomy and correct positioning of
tage of the surgeon being able to stabilize bilateral sacroiliac
the screw are required for this fixation method. The sacroiliac
 fracture/luxations via a single approach. The approach can
lag screw should penetrate at least 50-60% of the width of  also be extended caudally to repair concurrent fractures of
the sacrum to prevent screw loosening (11, 17). Correct  the pelvic floor. Intra-abdominal injuries could also be
reduction was also shown to enhance fixation stability of the addressed with the same approach.
repair (17). Anatomic guidelines have been published for 
 The ventral nerve roots of the sixth and seventh lumbar seg-
correct screw placement in the cat (18). These are described  ments form the main part of the sciatic nerve. Both these nerve
in Box 35-3. The size of the area for safe screw insertion is
roots and the obturator nerve can be directly visualized as
smaller than 0.5 cm² (18), but correct positioning of the 
 they course ventromedially close to the sacroiliac joint. The
screws was achieved in all clinical cases, and anatomic reduc-:
 authors have seen impingement or disruption of these nerves
tion in 80% of cases, when the described guidelines where  in a handful of cases using this approach. The nerves and asso-
Kaans Sunp panoena Anares aq on aaeu siassa paien anbl parsqo nou sem Buuasool mars (ll) panoadsa 
430
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 35-4. Screw fixation of sacroiliac luxation using a ventroabdominal approach
The cat is placed in dorsal recumbency with the abdomen
Reduction of the sacroiliac joint is best achieved by
and both the hind legs surgically prepared and draped
placing Kocher forceps cranially on the ilial wing and/or
within the surgical feld. A caudal celiotomy is performed
by manipulation of the aseptically prepared unbound
extending from the umbilicus to the pelvic floor. Intra-
hindlimbs. Reduction is facilitated if the limbs are pulled
abdominal organs are retracted cranially, and the bladder
cranially, thus flexing the hip joints. A small temporary
and colon are retracted to the unaffected side. The tendon
Kirschner wire can be inserted across the sacroiliac joint
of the psoas minor muscle and the promontory of the
 to hold reduction during oscillatory drilling and insertion
sacrum are localized. The retroperitoneal fat is bluntly
of a 2.0- or 2.4-mm positional screw. The use of a self-
dissected away from the psoas minor muscle at the level
tapping screw is benefcial to avoid the risk of losing
of the promontory, without damaging the ureters, and the
reduction during tapping. The entry point of the screw
external iliac artery and vein. The psoas minor muscle is
hole is located just medial to the sacral wing, with the drill
retracted laterally, and dissection is continued medial to it 
bit angled 45? or more to the median plane in a transverse
for exposure of the ventral surface of the sacroiliac joint.
direction (Fig. 35-6). The length of the hole is measured,
The ventral nerve roots of L6 and L7 and the obturator
 and an appropriate screw is inserted. Screw length is
nerve are visualized at this point ventral and medial to the
usually around 16-18 mm.
sacroiliac joint. They are carefully retracted medially.
Figure 35-6 Diagrams showing
the angles for insertion of a
45°
sacroiliac positional screw via a
ventroabdominal approach.
(A) The entry point of the
 positional screw is located just 
medial to the sacral wing. The
screw is angled laterally. 90° to
the long axis of the spine (B).
06
and 45° to the median plane (A).
A
B
35.4.4 Ancillary fixation of
Chapter 34, Box 34-7. The technique is described using a
sacroiliac fracture/luxation
Kirschner wire. Alternativel, a customized transilial bolt and
two nuts can be used.
Ancillary fxation of a sacroiliac fracture/luxation may be
advantageous in certain cases, and can be performed using a
35.5 Fractures of the ilium
ransilial pin, or a bolt. This technique is usually done in
combination with the lateral sacroiliac lag screw or in con-
 Fractures of the ilium can be classified into simple transverse,
junction with sacral fracture repair. With significant medial
long oblique, and comminuted fractures. Long oblique and
displacement of the hemipelvis, the addition of a transilial
comminuted fractures are most common. The caudal fracture
implant through the ilial wings can increase stability of the
 fragment has a tendency to displace medially and ventrally.
   a     
The nerves of the lumbosacral plexus and the sciatic nerve
nique of transilial pinning can also be applied for repair of
course along the medial surface of the ilium and may be
fractures of the seventh lumbar vertebra, and is described in
damaged during trauma, during manipulation of the fracture
35: Pelvis
431
fragments, or while screw holes are drilled. Surgical explora-
A recent study showed that screw loosening and subsequent
tion of the pelvic trunk and sciatic nerve is indicated if sig-
 incidence and degree of pelvic canal collapse are less common
nificant neurological defcits and severe pain indicate nerve
when the plate is applied along the dorsal rim of the ilium (8).
entrapment (6).
 It is likely that a better screw purchase is achieved with dorsal
 Lateral plating of fractures of the ilium is associated with
plating, because longer screws can be inserted.
a high incidence of screw loosening (8, 19), with more than
half of the cats having loose screws with varying degrees of
35.5.1 Approaches to the ilium
pelvic canal narrowing in one study (8). The high incidence
of screw loosening is likely to be due to suboptimal screw-
 A lateral approach to the ilium with a roll-up of the gluteal
holding power in the thin cortices of the ilium, especially the 
muscles is suitable for osteosynthesis of most ilial body
ilial wing. Plates should therefore be positioned along the 
 fractures, specifcally for lateral plating, and insertion of lag
ventral border of the ilial wing, where the bone is slightly 
 screws or skewer pins (14). A dorsal or lateral approach to
thicker (5) (Fig. 35-1). Cranially located screws can also be 
 the wing of the ilium can be used for dorsal plating (14).
inserted across the sacroiliac joint into the sacral wing to
 Fractures located close to the acetabulum may be approached
enhance fixation stability.
by a cranial approach to the hip joint (14).
Figure 35-7 Stabilization of an
ilial fracture with a lateral plate.
(A) Preoperative and (B)
postoperative radiographs of a
cat with a transverse ilial and 
contralateral ischial fracture. The 
ilial fracture was stabilized with a
lateral plate, with three of the
cranial screws engaging the sacral
wing. Engagement of the sacral
wing compensates for the thin
bone and cancellous nature of
the ilial wing. but screws crossing 
 the sacroiliac joint have an
increased risk for screw
loosening.
P
B
Figure 35-8 Stabilization of an
ilial fracture with a dorsal plate.
(A) Preoperative and (B)
postoperative radiographs of a
cat with a transverse ilial fracture,
and concurrent contralateral
sacroiliac luxation and fractures
of the pelvic floor and ischium.
Longer screws can be inserted in
the dorsoventral plane than in
the lateromedial plane. The
 contralateral sacroiliac luxation
was stabilized with a lag screw.
A
B
432
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 35-5. Stabilization of simple transverse and comminuted fractures of the ilium
A lateral approach to the ilium is performed for lateral
Lateral double plating: Double plating is used for com-
plating. A dorsal or lateral approach is used for dorsal
 minuted fractures, or for simple fractures if screw purchase
plating. The caudal fragment usually has to be levered up
seems insuffcient by numbers or holding power. The frst
 in a lateral and dorsal direction. A fnger Hohmann retrac-
plate is applied to the ventrolateral surface of the ilium as
tor carefully placed between the fragments, is useful in
described above. A second plate is then positioned parallel
levering the caudal fragment laterally. Bone reduction
and dorsal to the frst one (Fig. 35-9C). Each plate should
forceps can also be placed on the greater trochanter or
be anchored to the bone, giving a combined total of at
ischial tuberosity to help bring the caudal fragment later-
least four screws in the caudal fragment, and four to six
ally and dorsally.
screws in the cranial fragment.
Lateral plating: The plate is contoured to the lateral
Dorsal plating: The fracture is partially reduced with the
surface of the ilium and is positioned along its ventrolat-
assistance of bone holders and a Hohmann retractor. A
eral border (Fig. 35-9A). It is overbent slightly more
 plate of appropriate length to allow at least three screws in 
concave than necessary to help restore the pelvic canal
the caudal and cranial fragment is selected and contoured
width. Preferably, a minimum of three screws is inserted
with a slight concave bend to it (Fig. 35-9D). The plate is
into both the caudal and cranial fragments. An L- or T-
then applied to the caudal fracture fragment. When placing
plate can be used if the caudal fragment is too small for
screws over the acetabulum, the drill bit should be aimed to
insertion of a sufficient number of screws without com-
exit the medial cortex of the pelvis. The fracture is then
promising the hip joint (Fig. 35-9B). Once the plate is
reduced and further screws inserted into the cranial frag-
secured to the caudal fragment, it can be used to help lever
ment. Drilling the holes for the screws can be done with a
the fracture into reduction. The screws inserted cranially
C-guide or by careful aiming through the medullary canal of
into the ilial wing may be aimed to cross the sacroiliac
the ilial body and wing. Care should be taken to ensure that
joint if additional bone stock of the sacral body is deemed
 the drill bit or screw does not deviate medial to the ilial wing.
necessary for fixation stability.
which could cause damage to the lumbosacral plexus.
Figure 35-9 Options for plate
osteosynthesis of simple
transverse and comminuted
fractures of the ilium.
(A) Simple transverse fracture of
the ilium, stabilized with a lateral 
plate positioned along the ventral
border of the ilium.
(B) A lateral T-plate for a caudally
A
B
located simple transverse fracture
of the ilium.
(C) Double plating for the repair
of a comminuted fracture of the 
ilium
(D) Dorsal plating for the repair
 of a transverse fracture of the
ilium.
D
35: Pelvis
433
35.5.2 Simple transverse and
However, screw-holding power is often poor in the ilial wing.
comminuted fractures
and application of two plates parallel to each other on the
 lateral surface of the ilium enhances fxation stability. Plating
Comminuted fractures are more common than simple trans-
 techniques for simple transverse and comminuted fractures
verse fractures. Even fractures that appear simple on the
 of the ilium are described in Box 35-5.
radiograph often have fssuring of the fracture fragments or
 Internal fxators are also useful for the repair of ilial frac-
avulsion of larger cortical fracture fragments, especially in
 tures, and are used similarly to conventional plates. They
young cats. The 2.0-mm DCP is the most commonly used
 provide superior stability than conventional plates, especially
plate for repairing fractures of the ilium, but a 1.5/2.0-mm
if only two screws can be inserted in a fragment (20), and
VCP can also be applied. The use of a DCP allows interfrag-
screw loosing is less likely (Chapter 24).
mentary compression in the presence of a simple transverse
fracture.
 Simple transverse fractures can be repaired with a laterally
35.5.3 Long oblique fractures
or dorsally applied plate (Figs 35-7 and 35-8). Double plating
is also possible, and may be chosen if the screws inserted into
 Long oblique fractures of the ilium are relatively common.
the cranial fragment do not hold suffciently in the thin can-
They usually course in a cranioventral to caudodorsal direc-
cellous bone of the ilial wing, or if the fracture line is close
 tion. Long oblique fractures with a fracture length equal or
to the acetabulum, with the caudal fragment too small to
larger than twice the dorsoventral measurement of the ilium
allow insertion of at least two screws. The use of T- or L-:
 are best stabilized with interfragmentary screws or skewer
plates is another option to enable insertion of a sufficient 
pins (Figs 35-10 and 35-11 and Box 35-6). This type of fixa-
number of screws in a fracture located close to the
tion compresses the fracture and counteracts the tendency of
acetabulum.
the caudal fragment to displace and rotate distaly. Interfrag-
 A lateral or dorsal plate may also result in suffcient stabil-
 mentary lag screw fixation of long oblique ilial fractures has
 en papiond sne panunuos jo nedan au ron 
 been shown to result in a stronger and stiffer fixation in
three good screws can be inserted per main fragment.  torsion, axial compression, and bending compared to lateral
A
B
Figure 35-10 (A) Preoperative and (B) postoperative radiographs of the pelvis of a cat with a long oblique fracture of the ilium, stabilized with a
2.0-mm and a 1.5-mm interfragmentary lag screw.
Figure 35-11 (A) Preoperative and (B) postoperative radiographs of the pelvis of a cat with a long oblique fracture of the ilium, stabilized with
two skewer pins and figure-of-eight wires.
434
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 35-6. Stabilization of long oblique fractures of the ilium
A lateral approach to the ilium is performed. The fracture
Skewer pins: Two Kirschner wires are inserted from the
is reduced anatomically, and is maintained in reduction
dorsal to the ventral edge of the ilium, perpendicular to
with one or two pointed reduction forceps placed perpen-
the fracture line, and equally distributed along the length
dicular to the fracture line.
of the fracture line (Fig. 35-12B). They are inserted through
Screw fixation: Two or three 2.0-mm positional or lag
the gluteal musculature, which is protected with a drill
screws are inserted perpendicular to the fracture line,
sleeve. The Kirschner wires are cut dorsally, leaving 2 or
equally distributed over the length of the fracture line (Fig.
 3 mm of a protruding tip. A fgure-of-eight wire is then
35-12A). The drill sleeve with the drill bit is gently pushed
placed around both ends of each pin and tightened later-
from dorsal through the gluteal musculature to be able to 
 ally. Tightening of the wire around the pins results in
drill the holes in the axis of the ilium. The thread is cut in
 interfragmentary compression.
a similar manner, protected with a drill sleeve. Screws can
 Dorsal plating: Dorsal plating, as described in Box 35-5,
be inserted without cutting a thread in young cats with 
can also be used.
soft bone.
Figure 35-12  Options for
stabilization of long oblique
fractures of the ilium.
(A) Stabilization using two
positional or lag screws.
(B) Stabilization with two skewer
pins with a figure-of-eight wire.
凸
B
plating in dogs (10). Positional screws may be used instead
 cats occurs in the central and caudal thirds of the acetabulum,
  s 'it) s un s id pn an un no  -odn pe pan aq s ari an e ss i 
rarily stabilized with pointed bone reduction forceps.
 area should therefore also be repaired surgically, although
 Interfragmentary compression with lag screws or skewer  conservative treatment of fractures of the caudal acetabulum
pins may not be possible in some cases with presence of corti-  is sometimes suggested. Plate osteosynthesis is the most
cal damage or fissuring of the fracture ends. Dorsal or lateral
plating is then used, but dorsal plating is more suitable for
 Other techniques, such as screw or tension band fixation, are
 long oblique fractures (Box 35-5).
 only indicated for specific fracture types.
 Anatomic reconstruction of the joint surface and restora-
35.6 Acetabular fractures
tion of stability may be impossible in severely comminuted
 fractures. Femoral head and neck excision is performed in
Most acetabular fractures have to be reduced and stabilized
these cases as a salvage procedure. Cats have an acceptable,
surgically to restore hip joint congruity, and prevent the
although not normal, limb function after femoral head and
development of severe degenerative joint disease and chronic
neck excision (Chapter 36). It can be difficult to evaluate on
pain. Conservative treatment can be indicated in immature
 preoperative radiographs if the fracture is reducible or not,
cats with non-displaced acetabular fractures. These cats are
and the decision for femoral head and neck excision is often
 confined to a cage for approximately 2-3 weeks, after which
taken intraoperatively. This should be discussed with the
 control radiographs are performed. However, surgery in
 owners prior to surgery.
these young cats is associated with excellent results and may
give a quicker return to function (21).
35.6.1 Approaches to the acetabulum
 In general, surgical fracture stabilization is indicated in all 
acetabular fractures, where anatomic reduction and stable
Several approaches to the acetabulum may be chosen. A cra-
fixation are deemed possible. The main load transmission in
 niodorsal approach to the hip joint is usually adequate for
35: Pelvis
435
simple acetabular fractures located in the cranial third of the
 manipulate the caudal fragment. Manipulation of the greater
acetabular fossa (15). A dorsal intergluteal approach to the  rochanter and hip joint also helps to achieve reduction if the
acetabulum is sufficient to apply a short plate or pin and  caudal fragment is attached to the round ligament. A nerve
tension band for simple fractures of the middle or caudal  hook placed in the obturator foramen can also help in frac-
10 Aienoduan e no sdasnoy uoonpan panuiod 'uononpan aim  -o e Huisn iuiot diq aqi on yoeoidde uy (sl) wnnqeiane
chanteric osteotomy or gluteal tenotomies gives the best  permanent Kirschner wire inserted across the fracture helps
chosen for comminuted fractures or where a wider exposure
Different plates can be used depending on fracture location
is useful. The greater trochanter is reattached at the end of  and type. These include the 2.0-mm DCP, 2.0-mm acetabular
surgery using a tension band fxation, a lag screw, or diver-1
plate, and 2.0-mm reconstruction plates. Perfect plate con-
gent Kirschner wires (Chapter 37).
 touring is necessary to obtain anatomic reduction. This is best
done preoperatively with the help of the pelvic bone of a
35.6.2 Reducible fractures in adult cats
skeleton. The plate is positioned dorsally on the tension side
of the fracture (Fig. 35-13). Short plates with only two screws
 Reducible fractures include simple transverse fractures, simple
 in each fragment can be used in simple transverse fractures.
oblique fractures, and reducible multifragmentary fractures.  Application of short plates facilitates plate contouring and
The latter is rare in cats, because the fragments are often too  carries less risk for secondary loss of reduction during plate
ment is usually dislocated or rotated ventrally due to the pull
 Internal fixators, such as the 2.0-mm Unilock plate, are a
of the hamstring muscles. Placing a Kirschner wire in or small valuable alternative to use instead of conventional plates.
Kern bone-holding forceps on the ischial tuberosity helps to Their advantages include better stability with only two screws
Figure 35-13 (A, B)
Preoperative and (C. D)
postoper ative radiographs
showing a simple oblique
acetabular fracture in a 1-year-old 
cat. The fracture was
anatomically reduced and
stabilized with a dorsolater ally
 applied 2.0-mm Unilock plate.
B
436
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 35-7. Stabilization of acetabular fractures
A craniolateral approach, caudal intermuscular approach,
can be inserted monocortically to avoid the hip joint. If
trochanteric osteotomy, or gluteal tenotomies are per-
screws need to be angled to avoid the hip joint, a non-
formed to visualize the fracture. The fracture is reduced
locking screw has to be used.
anatomically as described above, and the hip joint is
Tension band repair: The tension band repair can be
cleared of debris.
used for physeal fractures or simple transverse fractures
 Plating: The plate is positioned as dorsal as possible to
with inherent stability. One or two small Kirschner wires
achieve a tension band function, and to reduce the risk of
may be inserted across the fracture to aid maintenance of
screw insertion into the joint. Exact plate contouring is
reduction. A 1.5-2.0-mm screw is then inserted into both
 essential in order to maintain reduction. The dorsal aspect
cranial and caudal fracture fragments. Both screws need
of the feline pelvis is fairly flat, and both a straight 2.0-mm
to be placed at the same distance from the acetabular rim
dynamic compression plate and 2.0-mm reconstruction
to avoid shear and loss of fracture reduction as the inter-
plate can be successfully used for simple transverse frac-
vening wire is tightened (Fig. 35-14B). Stainless-steel
tures (Fig. 35-14A). Insertion of two screws cranial and
washers can be used under the screw heads to decrease the
caudal to the fracture is sufficient in simple fractures,
chance of the fgure-of-eight wire slipping off. The screw
because the plate is applied in tension band function.
heads are connected with a figure-of-eight wire using 0.4-
Longer plates with three screws must be used for oblique
0.8-mm orthopedic wire. A small bleb of sterile poly-
methyl methacrylate can be used on top of the implants to
the hip joint is avoided.
decrease implant loosening and increase stability of the
 Internal fixator: An internal fxator with two locking
construct. Early implant removal should be considered to
screws per fragment is applied at the same location as a
reduce the chance of premature closure in very young
plate. Secondary loss of reduction does not occur with
kittens.
internal fixators, so plate contouring is less critical. Screws
Figure 35-14 Stabilization
options for acetabular fractures
(A) Simple transverse fracture
stabilized with a 2.0-mm plate in
tension band function.
(B) Tension band repair of a
physeal fracture.
B
in each fragment (20), the possibility of using monocortical
35.6.3 Acetabular physeal fractures
screws, and that there is no risk for secondary loss of reduc-
tion, because the plate is not compressed down on to the bone
 The acetabulum can fracture through the acetabular physis
during screw insertion.
in immature cats. These can be repaired using a screw and
 Lag screw fixation can rarely be chosen for simple oblique
tension band technique (21) (Fig. 35-15). In kittens younger
fractures through the cranial or caudal acetabulum. At least
than 12 weeks, there is a possibility of premature fusion of
two lag screws are placed perpendicular to the fracture line.
 the acetabular bone, resulting in development of a deformed,
Tension band repair is also possible in some simple transverse
shallow acetabulum and hip subluxation. Early implant
fractures with inherent stability. An interfragmentary pin
removal in such young kittens may decrease the severity of
may need to be inserted additionally to prevent shearing
 deformity caused by premature physeal closure. In kittens of
motion. The repair is less stable than plate osteosynthesis,
16 weeks or older, the prognosis is good for normal acetabu-
but technically easier, and there may be less chance of loss
lar development, and implant removal is not necessary. Four
of fracture reduction. The techniques for repair of acetabular
kittens treated in this manner had an excellent outcome and
fractures are described in Box 35-7.
full limb use following fracture repair (21).
35: Pelvis
437
A
B
L
Figure 35-15 Kitten with an acetabular physeal fracture.
(A) Preoperative radiograph of a 14-week-old kitten with a displaced mildly comminuted physeal fracture and sacroiliac subluxation after falling off
a wardrobe
(B) The fracture was reduced and stabilized with small crossed Kirschner wires, two 2.0-mm screws, a 0.8-mm figure-of-eight tension band wire,
and a small bleb of sterile bone cement.
(C) Follow-up radiograph at & weeks shows fracture healing. (Reproduced with permission from: Langley-Hobbs SJ, et al. Tension band stabilisation
35.7 Fractures of the pelvic floor
It is most practical to stabilize pelvic floor fractures surgi-
cally if an approach to the area has to be performed for other
The pelvic floor is fractured in 90% of cats with pelvic frac-
reasons. Examples include repair of sacroiliac joint luxations
tures (1). Most of the pelvic floor fractures are accompanied 
 with a ventroabdominal approach (Box 35-4), and if an
the ilial body. Fractures of the pelvic floor may be classified 1
 hernias or other abdominal injuries. Symphyseal separations
as symphyseal separations, and uni- or bilateral fractures of
 can be repaired with hemicerclage wires or cerclage wires
the pubic body or ramus, and/or ischial ramus. Fractures of 1
 through the obturator foramen. Plate osteosynthesis is
the pelvic floor may result in loss of ability to adduct the 1
 required to stabilize fractures of the pubic body and ramus
hindlimbs, when one or both hemipelves are unstable due to
[Box 35-8].
concurrent lesions. Affected cats may be unable to stand and
walk.
Stabilization of concurrent fracture/luxations of the weight-
35.8 Fractures of the pelvic margin
bearing parts of the pelvic ring often results in suffcient sta-
bility and allows healing of the pelvic floor without specifc
Fractures of the pelvic margin include fractures of the ilial
treatment. A hobble sling may be applied to prevent abduc-
wing and ischial tuberosity. These fractures are caused by
tion of the hind legs (Chapter 22).
avulsion of muscle insertion sites and may be significantly
However, there are some indications where stabilization of
displaced. Avulsion fractures of the ischial tuberosity are
pelvic floor fractures is advantageous. Bilateral sacroiliac  frequently seen in cats (Fig. 35-18). They accompany other
luxations or sacroiliac luxation with a contralateral ilial frac-  pelvic fractures and injuries of other parts of the hindlimbs,
ture render both hemipelves markedly unstable, when associ-  or occur as an isolated injury. Most of these fractures can be
ated with pelvic floor fractures (Fig. 35-16). Surgical repair  treated conservatively. Reattachment will provide a more
 of the pelvic floor re-establishes the shape of the pelvic ring,  rapid and functional healing if the avulsed fragment is large,
implant loosening of sacroiliac screws and ilial plates in 
 pins or a pin and tension band technique can be used to repair
severely unstable lesions.
these avulsion fractures.
438
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
A
Figure 35-16  Repair of the pelvic floor indicated by pelvic canal narrowing.
(A) Radiograph of a cat with an ilial fracture, and bilateral pubic and ischial fractures.
(B) The ilil fracture was stabilized with a plate. On postoperative radiographs a sacral wing fracture was visible (not seen on the preoperative
films), which resulted in medial displacement of the hemipelvis.
(C) Reduction and stabilization of the pelvic floor with miniplates allowed restoration of the width of the pelvic canal
Box 35-8. Stabilization of fractures of the pelvic floor
A ventral approach to the pelvic floor is performed. Intra-
pelvic organs must be protected during reduction and
implant placement. Anatomic reduction of the pelvic floor
may not be possible if surgical repair of a sacroiliac luxa-
tion or ilial fracture has already been performed imper-
fectly. It is then stabilized as is.
Hemicerclages: One or two holes are predrilled bilateral
to the symphysis, and a piece of 0.6-mm orthopedic wire
is passed through the holes prior to reduction, taking care
not to injure intrapelvic soft-tissue structures. The sym-
physis is reduced and the wires are tightened (Fig. 35-
17A). Alternatively, the wires can be placed through the
 obturator foramen as cerclage wires. Care must be taken 
 not to overtighten the wire, which could cause overlap of
the symphysis.
A
B
 Plates: Small plates, such as 1.0-mm maxillofacial plates,
Figure 35-17  Options for stabilizing fractures of the pelvic floor.
1.3-mm hand plates, or 1.5-mm miniplates, are used to
(A) Stabilization of a symphyseal separation with hemicerclage wire.
(B) Plate osteosynthesis of a fracture of the pelvic floor, using
stabilize fractures of the pubic body and ramus (Fig. 35-
miniplates. Care is taken to avoid the acetabular fossa with the
17B). The pubic ramus is very thin and the screws must
most later al screws.
be well centered to prevent stripping. Two screws should
be inserted per fragment. The screws in the pubic ramus
are angled cranially to avoid the acetabular fossa. Mini-
plates can additionally be applied on the ventral surface
 of the ischium, as shown in Figure 35-16.
35: Pelvis
439
Figure 35-18
Radiograph of a cat
with an isolated
avulsion fracture of
the ischial tuberosity.
The cat was
 presented with an
acute onset of
lameness, which
resolved with cage
rest.
Figure 35-19 Skin necrosis after pelvic fracture in a 2-year-old cat.
The skin over the lateral abdominal and pelvic area progressively
formed a hard black eschar several days after the accident. Six weeks
 postoperatively (picture) the contracted skin had formed a scab, which
was then removed. Delayed primary closure and placement of a closed 
suction drain were necessary to close the wound completely.
35.9 Postoperative treatment
and prognosis
neuromuscular damage of the intestinal wall. Subtotal colec-
tomy is therefore indicated if clinical signs have been present
Postoperative treatment of pelvic fractures consists of cage
for longer than 6 months (23, 24).
confinement for 2-4 weeks, and restriction of activity t0
indoors for another 3-6 weeks. An appropriate analgesic
35.9.1 Sacroiliac luxation
poad aaeiadoisod aipui a u Aressnu st pooond
to improve overall well-being and food and water intake, and
Overall, the prognosis is good after sacroiliac luxation if no
promote early weight-bearing. Intravenous infusions are pro-
neurological defcits are present and the implants were placed
vided until the patient starts to eat. Inability or unwillingness
correctly. However numerous complications can occur.
to stand up or move can result in urinary retention and
These including malpositioning of the screw in the lumbosa-
obstipation. Gentle manual expression of the bladder or
cral intervertebral space or, less commonly in the spinal
placement of an indwelling urinary catheter and application
canal, postoperative nerve deficis, malreduction, generally
of enemas may be required.
concurrent with medial displacement of the caudal hemipel-
 A number of complications can be encountered after pelvic
 vis, and screw loosening in the postoperative period. Residual
 fractures. Avascular necrosis of the skin around the perineum,
lameness was described to occur in 9-33% of cats with sa-
back, and tail sometimes develops due to skin avulsion at the
croiliac luxation repaired with a lateral lag screw (11). The
original trauma (22). The skin can be left until it has formed
 incidence was lower if screw positioning was correct (11).
a scab (Fig. 35-19). The scab is then removed or resected with
Sacroiliac fracture repair with a lag screw was the most
 the remaining contracted underlying lesion treated as an open
common reason for sciatic injury in one study (25). Three of
wound. Antibiotics are administered until a healthy granula-
 the cats had tibial nerve palsy, and one tibial and peroneal
tion bed has formed. Delayed wound closure or a skin graft
nerve deficits. All four cats regained neurological function
can then be performed.
within 6 months.
 Cats with pelvic canal narrowing of more than 40% are
likely to develop chronic constipation and obstipation (Fig.
35.9.2 Illium fractures
35-20) (8). Medical management may be suffcient in mild
cases. It includes oral administration of stool softeners, a
The prognosis for fractures of the ilium is good, providing
high-fber diet, and application of enemas. Phosphate enemas 
 that adequate stability is achieved and no nerve deficits are
are contraindicated in cats because of toxicity (23). Cases 
 present. Fracture-healing disorders such as malunion, non-
which cannot be managed conservatively, and in which clini-
 union, and exuberant callus formation enhance the risk for
cal signs have persisted for less than 6 months, should undergo
 entrapment of the sciatic nerve (26). Lateral plating of frac-
surgical widening of the pelvic canal (23). Long-standing
tures of the ilium is associated with a high incidence of screw
constipation and dilation of the colon result in irreversible
 loosening (8, 19). More than half of the cats had loose screws
440
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Figure 35-20 (A) Radiographs
of a cat with constipation
(B) secondary to pelvic canal 
narrowing.
A
B
with varying degrees of pelvic canal narrowing in one study
4. Beck AL, et al. Regional load bearing of the feline acetabulum.
(8). Screw loosening is less likely with dorsal plating. The
J Biomech 2005;38:427-432.
5. Bohmer E. Beckenfrakturen und -luxationen bei der Katze.
prognosis for return of neurological function depends on the
Minchen: Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat; 1985.
severity of nerve damage. Cats with loss of deep pain sensa-
6. Jacobson A, Schrader SC. Peripheral nerve injury associated
tion of the sciatic dermatomes have a guarded prognosis.
with fracture or fracture-dislocation of the pelvis in dogs and
Overall, around 80% of dogs and cats with sciatic nerve
cats: 34 cases (1978-1982). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987;190:
 paresis associated with pelvic fractures are likely to regain
569-572.
7. Selcer BA. Urinary tract trauma associated with pelvic trauma.
good to excellent limb function (6). Regeneration of periph-
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1982;19:785.
eral nerves does take time, but if no improvement is seen after
8. Hamilton MH, et al. A review of feline ilial fractures repaired
3 months, the prognosis is poor.
by lateral plating and the use of a dorsal plate as an alternative
method of repair. Proceedings of the ECVS meeing 2006;
Seville, Spain; p. 314-317.
35.9.3 Acetabular fractures
9. Damur DM, Montavon PM. Comparison of the conventional
versus the oscillating drilling mode in pelvic surgery in dogs.
Most cats seem to regain good function after acetabular
BSAVA Congress 2001; Birmingham, England.
 fracture repair; however a variable degree of degenerative
10. VanGrundy TE, et al. Mechanical evaluation of two canine iliac
joint disease must be expected, mainly dependent on the
fracture fixation systems. Vet Surg 1988;17:321-327.
11. Burger M, et al. Sacroiliac luxation in the cat. Part 2: cases and
reduction achieved of the severity of the original fracture. In
results. Kleintierpraxis 2005;50:281-348.
the study on acetabular physeal fractures in four kittens the
12. Borer LR, et al. Ventral abdominal approach for screw fixation
outcome was excellent with no clinical signs of lameness in
of sacroiliac luxation in clinically affected cats. Am J Vet Res
2008;69:549-556.
any of the cases, despite radiographic evidence of degenera-
13. Kaderly RE. Stabilization of bilateral sacroiliac fracture-luxa-
tive joint disease (21). Iatrogenic sciatic nerve injury has been
tons in small animals with a single transsacral screw. Vet Surg
described in two cats after acetabular fracture repair one of
1991;20:91-96.
which regained neurological function (25).
14. Raffan PJ, et al. A tension band technique for stabilisation of
sacroiliac separations in cats. J Small Anim Pract 2002;43:
255-260.
References and further reading
15. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA. An atlas of surgical approaches to
the bones and joints of the dog and the cat, 4th edn. Philadel-
1. Bookbinder PF, Flanders JA. Characteristics of pelvic fracture
phia: WB Saunders; 2004.
in the cat. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1992;5:122-127.
16. Montavon PM, et al. Ventrolateral approach for repair of sa-
2. Hill FWG. A survey of bone fractures in the cat. J Small Anim
croiliac fracture-dislocation in the dog and cat. J Am Vet Med
Pract 1977;18:457-463.
Assoc 1985;186:1198-1201.
3. Messmer M, Montavon PM. Pelvic fractures in the dog and cat:
17. DeCamp CE, Braden TD. Sacroiliac fracture-separation
a classification system and review of 556 cases. Vet Comp
in the dog: a study of 92 cases. Vet Surg 1985;14:127-
Orthop Traumatol 2004;4:167-173.
130.
35: Pelvis
441
18. Burger M, et al. Surgical anatomy of the feline sacroiliac joint
 23. Colopy-Poulsen SA, et al. Managing feline obstipation second-
for lag screw fixation of sacroiliac fracture-luxation. Vet Comp
ary to pelvic fractures. Compend Continuing Educ 2005:27:
Orthop Traumatol 2004;17:146-151.
662-669.
19. Roush JK, Manley PA. Mini plate failure after repair ofilial and
 24. Washabau RJ, Holt D. Pathogenesis, diagnosis, and therapy of
acetabular fractures in nine small dogs and one cat. J Am Anim
feline idiopathic megacolon. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Hosp Assoc 1992;28:112-118.
Pract 1999;29:589-603.
20. Sikes JW, et al. Comparison of fxation strengths of locking head
 25. Forterre F Iatrogenic sciatic nerve injury in eighteen dogs and
and conventional screws, in fracture and reconstruction models.
nine cats. Vet Surg 2007;36:464-471.
J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1998;56:468-473.
26. Chambers JN, Hardie EM. Localization and management of
21. Langley-Hobbs SJ, et al. Tension band stabilisation of acetabu-
lar physeal fractures in four kittens. J Feline Med Surg
Anim Hosp Assoc 1986;22:539-544.
2007;9:177-187.
22. Declercq J. Alopecia and dermatopathy of the lower back fol-
lowing pelvic fractures in three cats. Vet Dermatol 2004;15:
42-46.
443
36 Hip joint
K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs, P.M. Montavon
The feline hip joint is commonly injured. Injuries include  pain and crepitation on manipulation of the hip joint and a
luxations, fractures of the femoral head and neck, and ace-  reduction in the range of motion.
tabular fractures. Fractures of the femoral head and neck are
 The hip joint usually luxates in a craniodorsal or caudodor-
described in Chapter 37, and fractures of the acetabulum are  sal direction. Affected cats hold the hindlimb in adduction
covered in Chapter 35. The present chapter focuses on the
and external rotation, and the affected limb appears to be
treatment of coxofemoral luxations.
 shorter than the contralateral one. Comparing leg length or
The most common diseases of the hip joint are hip dyspla-  the distance berween the bony protuberances of the pelvis
sia and coxarthrosis. Hip dysplasia has been recognized to  and the greater trochanter berween the injured and the normal
occur with a higher frequency than what would be expected  limb is an easy test to detect hip joint luxation in cats (Fig.
from the number of cats with clinical signs due to dysplasia   36-1). Radiographs are necessary to confrm the diagnosis
seen in veterinary clinics. Other diseases involving the hip  and to detect concurrent abnormalities or fractures. Latero-
joint in cats are slipped capital physes or femoral neck  lateral radiographs are the best views to take to confrm
metaphyseal osteopathy. These are also described in this  coxofemoral luxation. Orthogonal ventrodorsal extended
chapter.
and/or frog-leg radiographs should also be taken for detec-
tion of fractures of the dorsal rim of the acetabulum, avulsion
36.1 Surgical anatomy
fractures of the teres ligament, and concurrent fractures of
 the greater trochanter. The goal of treatment is to reduce the
The hip joint consists of the acetabular fossa and the femoral
 hip joint and to stabilize it sufficiently to allow fibrous healing
head. The acetabulum in cats is shallower than in dogs. The  of the joint capsule and surrounding tissue, resulting in a
most important stabilizers of the hip joint are the teres liga- stable and functional joint. Treatment options include either
ment, the joint capsule, and the ransverse ligament, which  closed reduction or open reduction with internal stabilization
 completes the acetabular fossa ventrally. The teres or round  of the hip joint. Several procedures have been described, some
ligament originates from the acetabular fossa and inserts on  of which are summarized in Table 36-1.
the fovea capitis of the femur. The joint capsule extends from 
iseidsp du se yns sunol d a jo saseas wm si
the acetabular rim to the base of the femoral neck, enclosing  and coxarthrosis, and diseases of the femoral head and neck
 the femoral neck and the proximal capital physis in growing 
are usually presented with a more chronic insidious-onset
  pap si nuon d an on kiddns poonq au 's
1 lameness, reluctance to move or jump, and muscle atrophy.
four different arteries: the medial and lateral circumflex
 Diagnosis is best obtained from ventrodorsal radiographs.
femoral arteries: the caudal gluteal artery, and the iliolumbar
artery (1). These arteries form a ring-like vascular net around
36.3 Approaches to the hip joint
the femoral neck. They supply the greater trochanter the
femoral neck, and the femoral head in adult cats. In young 
The craniolateral approach is most commonly performed,
cats the femoral head is also supplied by a branch of the 
 and is used for repair of coxofemoral luxations, and for
medial circumflex femoral artery, which courses from the 
 femoral head and neck excision (2). A partial incision of the
e pd si as  dp a o o
This branch disappears after 7 months of age (1).
mately 3 mm away from its insertion on the greater trochan-
ter. The tendon is reconstructed with a tendon suture (Chapter 
36.2 Diagnosis and treatment options
16). Caudodistal retraction of the greater trochanter with a
small Meyerding retractor improves visualization of the ace-
Trauma to the hip joint can result in coxofemoral luxation,
tabular fossa.
acetabular fractures, and fractures of the femoral head and
The hip joint can also be approached through a ventral
neck. An acute often non-weight-bearing lameness results.
 incision, with the cat in dorsal recumbency and the limbs
Clinical examination findings for all of these conditions are  abducted (2). Care has to be taken not to injure the femoral
444
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Figure 36-1 The greater
trochanter is displaced dorsally
and cranially with craniodorsal
luxation of the hip joint. The 
distance between the tuber
ischium and the greater
trochanter is therefore longer on
the affected side (A) than on the
contralateral side (B).
A
B
Type of lesion
Further classification
 Treatment options
Table 36-1. A summary of
treatment options for conditions
 Hip dysplasia and
 of the hip joint.
Conservative
coxarthrosis
FHNE or THR if
 pain persists
Conditions of the
Slipped capital
FHNE
 femoral head
 femoral physis
 Parallel pinning in
 and neck
Femoral neck
very early cases?
metaphyseal
THR?
osteopathy
Craniodorsal or
 Normal confguration
Closed reduction
caudodorsal
of hip joint and
Open reduction and
hip luxation
absence of
capsular suture
avulsion fractures
 Iliofemoral suture
sling
Transarticular
pinning
Other techniques
Avulsion fractures
Open reduction and
transarticular
pinning
FHNE if fracture
fragments are large
Severe hip dysplasia
FHNE or THR
Ventral hip
Closed reduction
luxation
Open reduction and
ventral stabilization
FHNE, femoral head and neck excision; THR, total hip replacement.
artery and vein, the saphenous nerve, and the medial circum-
dences have been reported since, ranging from 7% to 32%
flex femoral artery and vein during dissection. This approach
(5, 6). The wide variation in the reported frequency of hip
can be used for femoral head and neck excisions, and for pin
dysplasia may be due to more systematic screening, different
stabilization of femoral head or neck fractures (Chapter 37).
criteria used for radiographic evaluation of the hip joints, and
differences in breeds examined. Purebred cats have a higher
36.4 Hip dysplasia
incidence of hip dysplasia compared to domestic short-hair
cats. The prevalence for hip dysplasia in domestic short-hair
Hip dysplasia is an inherited disease that is well documented
 cats was 6% versus 12% in purebred cats in one report (5).
in several species. Feline hip dysplasia was frst described in
the 1970s (3, 4), and surprisingly high radiographic inci-
hip dysplasia include the Maine Coon, Himalayan, Siamese,
36: Hip joint
445
Abyssinian, Devon Rex, and Persian cats (5, 6). The mode of
inheritance is not yet clear, but seems to follow a multifacto-
rial pattern.
 Despite the high frequency of hip dysplasia in radiological
studies, few reports exist of cats with clinical problems due
to hip dysplasia (4, 7). Clinical signs are often more discrete
and awareness of feline hip dysplasia is lower when com-
aul jo sisouaeiprapun on Suspeal Aqeqoid 'saop o1 pared
disease. Clinical signs of feline hip dysplasia and/or coxar-
climb stairs, muscle atrophy, and crepitation and pain on
manipulation of the hip joint. Some cats with hip dysplasia
have been reported to suffer from patellar luxation concur-
rently (4-9).
 Radiographic features of hip dysplasia and coxarthrosis in
the cat are somewhat different from in the dog. The most
to hip dysplasia. The cat was presented for reluctance to jump. Note
the shallow acetabula, and degenerative joint changes most evident at
obvious radiological fndings of hip dysplasia are a shallow
the cranial border of the acetabula.
acetabulum and subluxation of the femoral head (5, 7) (Fig.
   r do o  s  -
lesser extent than in dogs. The most extensive proliferative
angle between a line drawn from the center of the femoral
and remodeling changes involve the craniodorsal aspect of
head to the cranial acetabular edge, and a line drawn between
the acetabulum. Remodeling of the femoral head and neck is
the centers of the two femoral heads. The Norberg angle of
usually absent or mild (Fig. 36-3). When evaluating feline hip
normal cats was 95°, which is lower than in dogs. This dif-
joints it should be taken into account that the normal ace-
 ference reflects the shallower acetabulum in cats. All but one
tabulum of cats is generally shallower than in dogs. However,
 cat with an angle larger than 93° were free of degenerative
less than 50% coverage of the femoral head is commonly,
joint disease. The mean Norberg angle of cats with degenera-
but not necessarily, associated with the development of cox-
tive joint disease was 84°, which is significantly lower than
arthrosis (5).
 in cats without degenerative joint changes. The distraction
The relationship between objective radiographic measure-
index is used to measure passive coxofemoral laxity. The
ments and development of coxarthrosis has been evaluated
distraction index also differed between cats with and without
 in 78 cats (6). In this study the Norberg angle and distraction 
degenerative joint disease. Cats with a distraction index lower
indices were compared between cats with and without coxo-
than 0.4 did not have signs of degenerative joint disease,
femoral degenerative joint disease. The Norberg angle is the
whereas cats with degenerative changes had a mean distrac-
tion index of 0.6. The distraction index of normal cats seems
2aq sien ieui aueipu 'sop ienou ui ueun rauaiy aq 0
more normal passive laxity in their coxofemoral joints than
dogs.
Although many cats with coxarthrosis do not display clini-
cal signs, severe degenerative changes of the hip joint will
lead to pain and discomfort. Breeders of the affected pure-
bred cats should be aware of that potential, and cats with
obvious changes should not be used for breeding, even in the
absence of conclusive criteria for exclusion of cats from
breeding programs. It appears that cats with a Norberg angle
of 84° and lower, and a distraction index of 0.6 or higher,
are likely to develop degenerative joint disease (6). These cats
should be excluded from breeding, or at least be rechecked
 to monitor for the development of degenerative changes.
Conservative treatment of hip dysplasia and coxarthrosis
 is often successful in cats and includes weight reduction, pain
Figure 36-2 A 1-year-old Devon Rex cat with bilateral hip dysplasia
medication, and the long-term application of slow-acting
The acetabula seem shallow. There is a marked subluxation of the right,
and a less pronounced subluxation of the left hip joint. The cat also
disease-modifying agents (Chapter 5). Surgical treatment
had bilater al patell ar luxation.
 options should be considered if conservative treatment fails.
446
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
A
B
C
Figure 36-4 A 1.5-year-old male castrated cat with bilateral slipped capital femoral physes/femoral neck metaphyseal osteopathy. (A-c) The
Slippage of the physes is less pronounced. Frog leg radiographs could have been performed to further evaluate physeal stability. (Courtesy of B.
Peirone.)
Tenectomy of the pectineus muscle was performed success-
tures of the femoral capital physes, pathological fractures of
fully in one cat with hip dysplasia (3). Although the use of
the femoral neck, and bone remodeling and deformation.
tenectomy or myectomy of the pectineus muscle in cats
 Two entities have been described: spontaneous capital femoral
cannot be extrapolated from a single case report, the tech-
fractures and femoral neck metaphyseal osteopathy. Consid-
nique may have advantages over femoral head and neck
ering the similarities between the two, it is also possible that
excision in some cases. It can easily be performed bilaterally,
the conditions reflect the same disease at a different stage of
may reduce pain and dorsal subluxation of the femoral head,
chronicity.
and femoral head and neck excision is still possible at a later
date if necessary. Tenotomy of the iliopsoas and neurectomy
36.5.1 Spontaneous femoral capital
of the ventral joint capsule could also be combined with
physeal fractures
pectineus myectomy as described for dogs (10).
Femoral head and neck excision is a salvage treatment
Spontaneous separation of the proximal femoral physis
option, reserved for cats with disabling clinical problems.
without evidence of trauma has been observed in a number
Although it is generally thought that cats function well after
of cats. The condition has been termed feline capital physeal
femoral head and neck excision, around one-third of cats
dysplasia syndrome, slipped capital femoral epiphysis, or
remain slightly lame and have pain on hip manipulation (11,
spontaneous femoral capital physeal fracture (13-16). Most
12). Prosthetic hips have recently been developed for cats,
of the affected cats are castrated males and they usually
and may be the salvage option of choice in the future,
present at the clinic between 1 and 2 years of age with clinical
although the limited depth of the acetabulum may make a
signs of hindlimb lameness, weakness, or inability to jump.
stable acetabular implantation diffcult. Clinical experience
The disease may be unilateral or bilateral. Bilaterally affected
with total hip prosthesis in cats is very limited at present.
cats have marked problems when trying to walk and jump,
and show muscle hypotrophy. Overweight cats are at greater
36.5 Conditions of the femoral
risk of developing spontaneous capital physeal fractures (13,
head and neck
15). Siamese cats had a higher risk for physeal dysplasia in
 one study (15). Diagnosis is based on radiographic signs,
Conditions of the femoral head and neck occur predomi-
which include capital physeal incongruity, displacement of
nantly in young male, adult cats. Both sides are usually 
 the femoral epiphysis, and femoral neck resorption, osteoly-
affected. Radiographic changes include spontaneous frac-S
sis, and sclerosis (13, 16) (Fig. 36-4).
36: Hip joint
447
The etiology of the disease is unclear. Histopathologically,
 sustained concurrent orthopedic injury (23). The degree of
the growth plate contains irregular clusters of chondrocytes,
local soft-tissue injuries varies, but parts of the joint capsule
instead of the normal columnar arrangement, with abundant
and the round ligament are always ruptured. The gluteal
cartilaginous matrix. These changes may be consistent with
muscles are torn or lacerated in severe cases. Concomitant
 delayed physeal closure or may reflect physeal dysplasia. The
regional fractures can also be present, including fracture of
bone of both the epiphysis and femoral neck is viable (13,
the dorsal rim of the acetabulum, avulsion fractures at the
15). The proximal femoral physis closes between 30 and 40
attachment of the round ligament on the femoral head, and
weeks of age in intact cats (17), but castration before that
 trochanteric fractures. Trochanteric fractures mainly occur in
age delays physeal closure significantly (18, 19). This delay
immature animals.
in closure might predispose castrated cats to spontaneous
Hip joint luxations are classified according to the direction
capital physeal fractures due to prolonged loading of the
that the femoral head has moved in relation to the acetabu-
physis. Obesity possibly also results in higher forces across
lum. It should be considered, though, that the position of the
 the growth plate and may contribute to the disease.
femoral head on radiographs does not necessarily match the
The osteolytic and sclerotic changes in the metaphyseal
initial direction of luxation or the location of the capsular
bone increase with time and pseudarthrosis develops (13).
tears. Craniodorsal luxations are most commonly seen,
 Not enough cases have been described to suggest a specifc
accounting for 72% of luxations (21). Caudodorsal luxations
therapy. In mildly or acutely affected animals without evi-
 also occur with some frequency. Ventral luxations are exceed-
dence of much metaphyseal bone resorption and lysis, stabi-
ingly rare (21).
lization of the capital physeal fracture with small Kirschner
wires may be an option. However, the disease is frequently
diagnosed in an advanced stage with marked bony changes,
and femoral head and neck excision is then the treatment of
36.6.1 Craniodorsal and caudodorsal
choice. Significant improvement of clinical signs can be
coxofemoral luxation
expected after femoral head and neck excision. Total hip
Closed reduction and conservative treatment
replacement may be another treatment option.
Closed reduction is recommended as the frst treatment
36.5.2 Femoral neck metaphyseal osteopathy
option for cats with acute craniodorsal and caudodorsal hip
joint luxations (Box 36-1). However reluxation is common
A disease similar to the capital physeal dysplasia syndrome
and appropriate case selection is necessary to improve success
was described in 17 cats (20). As with physeal dysplasia, most
rates. Reluxation has been reported to occur in approxi-
of the cats were castrated males and presented with similar
mately 50% of cats after closed reduction (23, 24). The most
clinical signs at an age younger than 2 years. About half of the
likely reason for reluxation after closed reduction is that soft
cases had bilateral disease, although sometimes the problem
 tissues such as blood clots, swollen round ligament stumps,
developed in the second limb at a later date. Radiographically,
 and joint capsule remain in the acetabular fossa, preventing
severe bone lysis of the femoral neck is evident and patholo-
 a tight ft. The location and severity of joint capsule damage
gical fractures through the physis may also be observed (Fig.
are also important for stability after closed reduction. Avul-
36-4). Histopathology showed bone necrosis, hemorrhage,
sion of the joint capsule at the acetabular rim results in
vascular congestion, and the presence of reactive fibrous tissue
unstable joints, because the fbrous labrum of the acetabulum
(20). The authors suggested that primary bone loss, similar to
is missing (25). Cats with avulsion fractures of the dorsal
Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease in dogs, resulted in secondary
acetabular rim or femoral head and cats with hip dysplasia
pathological fractures of the femoral neck. The epiphysis is
 are also at high risk for reluxation (Fig. 36-6). Consequently,
not affected, in contrast to Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease in
closed reduction is reserved for cases with an acute hip joint
dogs, but cats have a substantial blood supply to the epiphysis
luxation, without concurrent fractures, and with a normal
through the round ligament, which may preclude the epi-
hip joint conformation (Fig. 36-7).
physis from avascular changes. Treatment of femoral neck
Application of an Ehmer sling after closed reduction does
metaphyseal osteopathy is by femoral head and neck excision
not seem to influence the reluxation rate in cats (22). The
 Or, possibly, total hip replacement.
slings often are not tolerated well, and they tend to slip
because the skin is very mobile in cats (26). Confinement of
36.6 Coxofemoral luxation
the cat to a cage for the frst 10 days may therefore be more
 appropriate than relying on an Ehmer sling, which is diffcult
Coxofemoral luxations often result from motor vehicle acci-
 to apply and maintain appropriately. However, if it is felt
dents (21, 22) and many cats with hip joint luxation have 
 after closed reduction that the hip joint is stable in inward
448
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 36-1. Closed reduction of a craniodorsal coxofemoral luxation
Closed reduction of a luxated hip joint is performed under
 general anesthesia. The cat is placed in lateral recumbency.
The aim of the manipulation is to bring the femoral head
across the acetabular rim and back into the acetabular
fossa without causing additional iatrogenic damage (Fig.
36-5). The femoral head is frst externally rotated, and
pulled caudally and ventrally by exerting manual traction
on the femoral condyle. Once the femoral head is assumed
to be located at the level of the acetabulum, it is internally
rotated. A satisfying clunk should occur if closed reduction
is successful.
Correct reduction is confrmed on a laterolateral radio-
Figure 36-5 Closed reduction of a craniodorsal hip joint
luxation. The femoral head is first rotated outwards (arrow) by
graph. The femoral head is then pressed into the acetabu-
 grasping the distal femur. The femur is then pulled in a
lar fossa with the thumb, and the hip joint is manipulated
caudodistal direction (arrow). Once the femoral head is located 
carefully, through a full range of motion, to aid removal
over the acetabular fossa, the femoral head is rotated inwards
of soft tissue out of the acetabular fossa. The leg is held
al 'essoy yeingeiane aul oui yeg sdeus i! lun (moie)
in inward rotation during these manipulations. Stability is
(moue) laueuool lateah aul uo paldde si aunssaad jenibin
tested after this by putting the hip joint through its range
of motion. Excessive outward rotation of the hip and
adduction of the leg are avoided, as they will cause relux-
ation in most cases.
Figure 36-6 (A) Laterolateral and
(B) ventrodorsal radiographs of a
cat with craniodorsal hip luxation.
 Note the avulsed fragment from
the dorsal acetabular rim, visible
 on both the laterolateral and
ventrodorsal radiographs. Closed 
reduction is not recommended
for these cases, and even with
surgical stabilization there is a
high risk for reluxation.
A
B
rotation and unstable in outward rotation, an Ehmer sling as
reluxation occurs, or if closed reduction is not possible.
described in Chapter 22 can be tried.
Cats with injuries to other limbs should also be treated
surgically.
Numerous surgical stabilization methods have been
Open reduction and internal stabilization
described. These include suturing of the joint capsule, pros-
Open reduction and internal stabilization are indicated if 
thetic capsular enhancement, De Vita pinning, transarticular
the hip joint remains unstable after closed reduction, if
pinning, and an iliofemoral suture technique (21, 22, 25,
36: Hip joint
449
Figure 36-7 Radiographs of a
cat with craniodorsal hip luxation,
 treated successfully with closed
reduction.
(A) Prereduction ventrodorsal
radiograph revealing a normal
configuration of the luxated hip
with absence of concurrent 
fractures.
(B) Postreduction laterolateral
radiograph showing the reduced
hip joint. A modified Ehmer sling
was used for 10 days in this cat.
27-29). A technique using a stainless-steel rope, similar to
Asanu si nut du au un suou aul nak uq
toggle pinning but inserted via a ventral approach to the hip
 restricted. It is also useful as a salvage technique when other
joint, was also described (30). All methods of treatment bear
 options have failed, and in the presence of small avulsion
some risk for reluxation, and conclusive evidence on which
fragments of the dorsal acetabular rim.
of the methods is best is lacking. Reluxation rates range
around 10-20% for most techniques (23, 29, 30). Internal
fxation of the luxated hip joint with suturing of the joint
 36.6.2 Ventral coxofemoral luxation
 capsule and an iliofemoral suture technique or transarticular
Ventral coxofemoral luxations are exceedingly rare. The
 pinning are the techniques preferred by the authors. The De
 femoral head is displaced ventral to the acetabulum, and may
Vita pins should not be used due to the risk of sciatic nerve
become entrapped in the obturator foramen. Ventral coxo-
damage, and the diffculty in anchoring the pin in the straight
femoral luxation carries the risk of sciatic and obturator
ilial wing of cats.
nerve damage. Closed reduction is achieved by pulling the
The iliofemoral suture technique consists of a suture sling,
affected leg in a distal direction to remove the femoral head
which prevents reluxation by holding the femur in internal
from the obturator foramen, followed by lateral pressure on
rotation, adduction, and ventromedial compression (31)
the medial aspect of the femur. The femoral head should also
(Box 36-2). The technique should only be performed in the
be pushed in a cranial direction to minimize sciatic nerve
absence of avulsion fractures, and if the hip does not reluxate
damage during reduction. The hip joint is likely to be stable
intraoperatively when holding the femur in internal rotation
after reduction. A hobble sling (Chapter 22) can be applied
and applying axial compression (31). Cases in which the
for 10 days to avoid abduction of the leg, and reluxation of
dorsal joint capsule can be sutured have a greater chance of
the hip joint.
success. Braided suture material seems to be advantageous
over monoflament suture material, because it is less likely to
break. Polyglactin 910 (Vicryl) has an excellent initial size to
36.7 Femoral head and neck excision
strength ratio, and was used successfully in dogs (32).
 Temporary transarticular pinning for hip dislocation
 Femoral head and neck excision is a salvage procedure used
involves placement of a small K wire across the reduced hip
in hip joint conditions where other treatment modalities are
joint, in a similar position to the teres ligament (Fig. 36-9 and
unable to relieve pain or to provide acceptable clinical func-
Box 36-2). It was originally described for dogs (33) and can
tion. Indications include chronic hip luxations, clinically
also be used in cats (29). Selection of pin sizes used in the 
 debilitating coxarthrosis, comminuted acetabular fractures,
feline study was based on recommendations previously made
 non-unions of femoral neck and proximal physeal fractures,
for transarticular pinning in dogs (33). The pin is removed 
 and diseases of the femoral neck. The femoral head and neck
after 2-3 weeks once sufficient soft-tissue healing has
 can be excised via a craniolateral or a ventral approach to
occurred. The technique is particularly indicated for cases
 the hip joint (Box 36-3). The craniolateral approach is pre-
with other orthopedic injuries, as it allows early weight-
 ferred, particularly in the presence of a luxated hip.
450
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 36-2. Internal stabilization of craniodorsal or caudodorsal hip joint luxation
A craniodorsal approach to the hip joint is performed. If
tant holds the leg in slight inward rotation and abduction.
possible, the hip joint is reduced beforehand because dis-
 Stability is tested by moving the hip through its full range
section is easier with the hip joint in place. The joint
 of motion, and by applying axial compression.
capsule needs to be preserved for later suturing. The ace-
Temporary transarticular pinning: Pin sizes range from
tabular fossa and the femoral head are cleared of fibrin,
1.4 to 2.0 mm, but a 1.6-mm pin is appropriate for most
 blood clot, and remnants of the round ligament.
cats. If a 1.6-mm pin is going to be inserted, a 1.5-mm
 liofemoral suture sling: Two holes are drilled through
hole is drilled in a retrograde fashion from the fovea capitis
 the greater trochanter in a caudal to cranial direction with
towards the third trochanter or in a normograde fashion
a 1.2-mm pin or 1.5-mm drill bit. The pins should exit in
from the third trochanter. Using a C drill guide is advisable
the area of the base of the neck. Another hole is drilled in
for normograde drilling to ensure that the hole exits
the ventral rim of the ilium, just cranial to the acetabulum.
through the fovea capitis. The pin is inserted until the tip
 This hole should be positioned as ventrally and as close to
is just visible at the fovea capitis. The hip joint is then
the acetabulum as possible to be able to place the sling in
reduced and held slightly abducted and internally rotated.
a cranioventral to caudodorsal direction (Fig. 36-8A). Two
The pin is then carefully driven through the acetabulum
 or three strands of 2-0 polyglactin sutures, or other suture
 using a hand-held Jacobs chuck a maximum of 5 mm into
material of similar strength, are preplaced through the
the pelvic canal (Fig. 36-8B). The pin is cut short and the
holes in a fgure-of-eight fashion and are left untied. Every
end bent over taking care not to lever on the hip and pull
attempt is made to suture the joint capsule with 4-0
it out of the acetabulum. The pin is removed after 2-3
polydioxanone because this will markedly improve joint
weeks.
stability. The iliofemoral sling is then tied while an assis-
Figure 36-8 Surgical methods
for stabilizing a luxated hip joint.
(A) The iliofemoral suture sing 
should course in a ventromedial
to dorsolateral direction. It
therefore mimics the course of
the round ligament and holds the
femoral head and neck in internal
rotation to prevent reluxation.
(B) Temporary transarticular
pinning allows limited motion 
 around the axis of the pin, but 
limits rotation, abduction, or 
adduction of the hip and allows
B
fibrosis and healing of the
surrounding soft tissues.
36: Hip joint
451
Fgure 36-9 (A) Preoperative and
(B) postoperative radiographs
after use of a 1.6-mm temporary
transarticular pin in a cat with a
left craniodorsal hip luxation.
A
B
 A fbrous connection will develop between the proximal
 sutured the joint capsule and performed an iliofemoral suture
femur and the acetabulum following resection of the femoral
 sling. A clinical and radiological check-up should be per-
head and neck, allowing weight-bearing and motion (Fig.
 formed after 10-14 days to confrm maintenance of reduc-
36-11). It is important to inform the owners that although
 tion. Activity is then restricted for another 3 weeks by keeping
many cats function well after excision of the femoral head  the cat indoors, and avoiding playing and jumping activities.
and neck, complications such as chronic lamenes, muscle
After transarticular pinning the cat is also confined to a
atrophy, shortening of the leg, periarticular mineralization 
 cage. Control radiographs are taken after 2-3 weeks when
 deposition, and a reduced range of motion are common (see 
the pin is removed. In simple luxations with no other injuries,
 postoperative treatment and prognosis, below)
2 weeks is suffcient; if other legs are injured or if there are
neurological defcits, it is safer to leave the pin for 3 to maxi-
36.8 Total hip replacement
mally 4 weeks.
 The success rate for maintaining reducion after internal
A cemented total hip prosthesis is now available for use in
fixation of coxofemoral luxations with capsular sutures, aug-
cats (Biomedtrix). Indications for total hip replacement are
mentation of the dorsal joint capsule, or iliofemoral suture
basically the same as for femoral head and neck excision,
sling was around 80-85% in one study, at the time when the
although an intact femoral neck is necessary for the collar of
 cats were released from hospital (23). However, long-term
the implant to rest on. The cat has a relatively shallow ace-
results suggest a worse prognosis. Lameness and coxarthosis
tabulum, making positioning and seating of the acetabular
or neoarthrosis were seen in 42% of cases (23) (Fig. 36-12).
prosthesis technically more diffcult than in the dog. Total
In a long-term follow-up of 13 cats treated with transarticu-
hip replacement in the cat is a novel technique and there are
lar pinning, there were two reluxations, one in a cat with
currently no published reports in the literature.
bilateral injuries (29).
36.9 Postoperative treatment
36.9.2 Femoral head and neck excision
and prognosis
 Pain management and immediate physiotherapy are impor-
36.9.1 Coxofemoral luxation
tant in the immediate postoperative period to encourage early
weight-bearing and preservation of range of motion. The
An Ehmer sling is often applied postoperatively in dogs, but
 mean time to full recovery has been described to be around
these slings are not well tolerated by cats, and have a ten-
4-5 weeks (11, 12).
dency to slip. Reluxation rate does not seem to be influenced
Good to excellent clinical outcome is reported in most
by the use of an Ehmer sling (22). Cats are therefore usually  studies for cats after femoral head and neck excision (11, 34),
only cage-rested for 10 days postoperatively after having
 but functional deficits were found in many, and chronic pain
452
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 36-3. Excision of the femoral head and neck
Using a craniolateral approach to the hip joint: A cranio-
feels smooth and crepitation is not palpable during manip-
lateral approach to the hip joint is performed with the cat
ulation of the hip joint through its normal range of motion.
in lateral recumbency, and the joint capsule is incised in 
Efforts are made to suture the joint capsule and tendon of
an inverted T-pattern. The joint capsule is elevated from
 the deep gluteal muscle during closure of the incision.
the femoral neck. The femur is externally rotated by 90°
Using a medial approach to the hip joint: The medial
to perform the osteotomy (Fig. 36-10A). Two mosquito
 approach allows bilateral femoral head and neck excisions
forceps or small Hohmann retractors are placed cranial
without repositioning the cat. Anatomic orientation is
and caudal around the femoral neck for soft-tissue retrac-
 diffcult in luxated hips, and the approach is therefore only
tion and protection of surrounding tissues. The osteotomy
 used for unluxated hips. The cat is placed in dorsal recum-
follows an imaginary line between the proximal ends of
 bency, the approach is performed, and the joint capsule is
 the greater and lesser trochanter to remove as much bone
incised and dissected away from the femoral neck. Two
as possible without damaging muscle insertions (Fig. 36-
 mosquito forceps are positioned cranial and caudal to the
10A). An osteotome and mallet, an oscillating saw, bone 
femoral neck for protection of soft tissues. An osteotome
cutters or rongeurs can be used. After removal of the 
or oscillating saw is positioned at an angle of 45° with the
femoral head and neck, the osteotomy surface of the
 femoral shaft, and the osteotomy is started at the level of
femoral neck is checked digitally, and any leftover sharp
 the lesser trochanter (Fig. 36-10B). Leftover sharp edges
ends are removed with rongeurs or a rasp until the surface
 of the femoral neck are removed before wound closure.
Figure 36-10 Possible options
for excision of the femoral head 
and neck.
(A) Femoral head and neck
excision using a craniolateral
 approach. The limb is externally
rotated before the osteotomy is
performed.
(B) Femoral head and neck
excision using a ventral approach.
45°
 The osteotomy is performed at
an angle of 45° with the femoral
shaft.
45
A
B
36: Hip joint
453
Figure 36-13 Ventrodorsal radiograph of the pelvis of a cat with a
femoral head and neck excision, performed years ago, presented for
hindlimb lameness. The cat had a reduced range of motion, pain, and
epitation of the left hip joint.
Figure 36-11 Postoperative radiograph of a cat after excision of the
right femoral head and neck because of reluxation of the hip after
internal stabilization. The excision is correctly performed through an
prior to surgery had a worse outcome than animals with only
imaginary line between the greater and lesser trochanter
 a short duration of clinical signs.
References and further reading
1. Pohlmeyer K. Arteries of the articulatio coxae and the proximal
end of the femur in cats. Anat Histol Embryol 1981;10:246-
256.
 2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA. An atlas of surgical approaches to
the bones and joints of the dog and the cat, 4th edn. Philadel-
phia: WB Saunders; 2004.
3. Kolde DL. Pectineus tenectomy for treatment of hip dysplasia
in a domestic cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1974;10:564-565.
4. Hayes HM, et al. Feline hip dysplasia. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
1979;15:447-448.
5. Keller GG, et al. Hip dysplasia: a feline population study. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 1999;40:460-464.
6. Langenbach A, et al. Relationship between degenerative joint
disease and hip joint laxity by use of distraction index and
Norberg angle measurement in a group of cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1998;213:1439-1443.
7. Patsikas MN, et al. Hip dysplasia in the cat: a report of three
cases. J Small Anim Pract 1998;39:290-294.
8. Houlton JEF, Meynink E. Medial patellar luxation in the cat.
Figure 36-12 Radiograph of a cat with chronic hip joint luxation. A
J Small Anim Pract 1989;30:349-352.
false joint (neoarthrosis) has developed raniodorsal to the original
9. Smith GK, et al. Evaluation of the association between medial
acetabular fossa. The cat had a chronic low-grade lameness.
patellar luxation and hip dysplasia in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1999;1:40-45.
10. Ballinari U, et al. Pectineus myectomy, tenotomy of the iliopsoas
ment for coxarthrosis in the dog. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd
in some cats of another study (12). Out of 15 cats with a
1995;137:251-257.
follow-up period of up to 12 years, five showed a mild lame-
11. Gendreau C, Cawley AJ. Excision of the femoral head and neck:
ness at home, 13 had shortening of the leg due to proximal
the long term results of 35 operations. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
displacement of the femur seven had muscle atrophy, 11 had
1977;13:605-608.
12. Off W, Matis U. Excision arthroplasty of the hip joint in dogs
restricted range of motion, and four exhibited pain on manip-
and cats. Clinical, radiographic and gait analysis findings at the
ulation of the hip joint (12).
surgical veterinary clinic of the Ludwig Maximilians University
Unsatisfactory function is often due to inadequate excision
of Munich. Tierarztl Prax 1997;25:379-387.
of the ventral part of the femoral neck, causing bone-to-bone
13. McNicholas WT, et al. Spontaneous femoral capital physeal
contact (Fig. 36-13) (34). The duration of clinical signs prior 
fractures in adult cats: 26 cases (1996-2001). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2002;221:1731-1736.
to surgery has also been shown to have an effect on outcome 
14. Steger H, et al. Bilateral idiopathic slipped capital femoral
(11). Animals with clinical signs for more than 6 months
epiphysis in a cat. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 1999;141:47-52.
454
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
15. Craig LE. Physeal dysplasia with slipped capital femoral epiphy-
27. Meij BP, et al. Results of extra-articular stabilisation following
sis in 13 cats. Vet Pathol 2001;38:92-97.
open reduction of coxofemoral luxations in dogs and cats. J
16. Forrest LJ, et al. Feline capital physeal dysplasia syndrome. Am
Small Anim Pract 1992;33:320-326.
J Vet Res 1999;40:672.
28. Ablin LW, Gambardella PC. Orthopedics of the feline hip.
17. Smith RN. Fusion of ossification centers in the cat. J Small Anim
Compend Continuing Educ 1991;13:1379-1388.
Pract 1969;10:523-530.
29. Sissener TR, et al. Transaricular pinning of the coxofemoral
18. May C, et al. Delayed physeal closure associated with castration
joint in cats. Poster. World Veterinary Orthopedic Congress;
in cats. J Small Anim Pract 1991;32:326-328.
Keystone, Colorado; 2006.
19. Root MV, et al. The effect of prepubertal and postpubertal
30. Kawamata T, et al. Open reduction and stabilisation of coxo-
gonadectomy on radial physeal closure in male and female
femoral joint luxation in dogs and cats, using a stainless steel
domestic cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997;38:42-47.
rope inserted via a ventral approach to the hip joint. Aust Vet
 20. Queen J, et al. Femoral neck metaphyseal osteopathy in the cat.
J 1996;74:460-464.
Vet Rec 1998;142:159-162.
31. Slocum B, Slocum TD. Single-suture technique for a dislocated
21. Basher AwP, et al. Coxofemoral luxation in the dog and cat.
hip. In: Bojrab MJ (ed.) Current techniques in veterinary surgery,
Vet Surg 1986;15:356.
4th edn. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1997: pp. 1183-
22. Duff SRI, Bennett D. Hip luxation in small animals: an evalua-
1185.
tion of some methods of treatment. Vet Rec 1982;111:140-
32. Martini FM, et al. Extra-articular absorbable suture stabiliza-
143.
tion of coxofemoral luxation in dogs. Vet Surg 2001;30:468-
23. Bohmer H. Zur Luxatio ossis femoris traumatica bei der Katze.
475.
Munich: Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat; 1987.
33. Hunt CA, Henry Jr WB. Transarticular pinning for repair of hip
24. Wildgoose WH. Hip dislocation and the use of the De Vita pin
dislocation in the dog: a retrospecive study of 40 cases. J Am
in the cat. J Small Anim Pract 1983;24:261-268.
Vet Med Assoc 1985;8:828-833.
25. Piermattei DL, Flo GL. The hip joint. In: Piermatei DL, Flo GL
34. Berzon JL, et al. A retrospecive study of the effcacy of femoral
(eds) Small animal orthopedics and fracture repair. Philadelphia:
head and neck excision in 94 dogs and cats. Vet Surg 1980;9:88-
WB Saunders; 1997: pp. 422-468.
92.
26. Fry PD. Observations on the surgical treatment of hip disloca-
tion in the dog and cat. J Small Anim Pract 1974;15:661-
670.
455
37
Femur
K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs, P.M. Montavon
The femur is the most commonly fractured bone in cats, 
 skeletal fixation of femoral fractures is also well tolerated in
accounting for more than 30% of feline fractures (1, 2).
 the cat. A summary of feline femoral fractures and possible
Fractures of the femur can be divided into those involving
 stabilization methods for each fracture type is provided in
the proximal femur diaphysis, and distal femur. The shaft
Table 37-1.
and distal femur are most frequently fractured (3). Femoral
fractures are usually the result of motor vehicle accidents or
 37.2.1 Intramedullary pinning
falls from a height. Such high-velocity trauma commonly
causes concurrent injury, such as pelvic or spinal fractures
r d adsa si rn a jo d ae
      pn p
 comminuted fractures, because the position of the pin in the
examination is necessary to rule out these concurrent injuries.
neutral axis of the bone enhances bending stability in the
Surgical repair of fermoral fractures should not be overly
absence of a medial buttress, and the pin can be used to
delayed, as quadriceps contracture can develop, especially
 facilitate alignment of the main fragments. Intramedullary
following diaphyseal fractures, and in the presence of muscle
 pins should be nearly always used in conjunction with some
contusion or laceration.
kind of antirotational implants, such as cerclage or hemicer-
clage wires, plates, or external skeletal fixators.
37.1 Surgical anatomy
The diameter of an intramedullary pin should not exceed
30-40% of the diameter of the bone marrow cavity if it is
[as janxa ue no aid e um uoun un pasn  'sien un nuins isoe pue pun s ry an jo us au
The femoral neck is angled approximately 130° from the  fxator. The mean medullary canal diameter is 5-6 mm in
femoral shaft and has an anteversion angle of around 30° (4).  most cats, so Kirschner wires of a diameter of 1.4-2.0 mm
Blood supply to the femoral head mainly depends on vessels  are usually used. Thicker pins, comprising around 70% of
from an extracapsular vascular ring surrounding the femoral  the bone marrow cavity, are required if they are only com-
neck. In contrast to dogs, a substantial blood supply to the  bined with cerclage wires.
 an u aqissod si auud aperonn pue -oon  punon aun un jassn e won paaap osie si sishudida jerouay
ligament in young cats (5), but this vessel disappears in cats  (Figs 37-1 and 37-2). Normograde pinning is recommended,
older than 7 months (6). Meticulous surgical technique is  as retrograde pinning is associated with a higher risk of iat-
required during operations on the femoral head and neck to  rogenic rauma to the sciatic nerve. Sciatic nerve injury may
minimize vascular injury.
 occur either during pin placement or postoperatively from
The femoral condyle has less caudal bowing when com-1
 motion or migration of the protruding pin tip in the proxim-
e aiu se sem sinn un r a jo d e  sansu si e as e pue sol as a jo ansds so
sod p e d apnon () Apis ao u e Aoq iog sn se pue rs ies po nedar ron es
protuberances on the metaphyseal side of the physis match  of the proximal pin end, and excessive length of the protrud.
digitation helps in fracture stability after reduction of distal grade pinning allows better control of the position of the
Salter and Harris type I and II fractures.
 proximal pin to end in a more lateral position. The proximal
pin end is either cut short or bent laterally to be tied in to an
37.2 Stabilization techniques
external skeletal fixator.
Femoral fractures should be surgically stabilized, with the
37.2.2 Interlocking nailing
exception of greenstick fractures in very young cats, which
can heal with cage rest alone. The straight nature of the feline
The interlocking nail has been used with more frequency
femoral diaphysis makes it especially suitable for plate osteo-
 in the femur when compared to all the other long bones
synthesis, and intramedullary pinning or nailing. External
in the cat (8-10). The femur is an ideally shaped bone for
456
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Fracture
Fracture type
Stabilization methods
Table 37-1. Fracture types and 
their possible stabilization
localization
methods
Proximal
Femoral neck fracture
Parallel pinning
femur
 Lag screw and
 antirotational pin
Capital physeal
 Parallel pinning
fracture
Ventral cross pinning
Avulsion of greater
Tension band fixation
trochanter
 Diverging pins
 Simple subtrochanteric
 Compression plate
fracture
Internal fixator
Comminuted
 Buttress plate and IM pin
subtrochanteric
Internal fixator and IM pin 
fracture
 ESF and IM pin
Diaphysis
Simple transverse or
Compression plate
short oblique
Internal fixator
IM pin and ESF
 Interlocking nail
Simple long oblique
Lag screw and
 and multifragmentary
neutralization plate
reducible
Lag screw and internal
fixator
 IM pin and ESF
IM pin and cerclage or
hemicerclage wires
 Interlocking nail
Comminuted
 Buttress plate ± IM pin 
Internal fixator ± IM pin
ESF ± IM pin
 Interlocking nail
Distal femur
 Supracondylar simple
 Lateral plate ± IM pin
 Double plating
Supracondylar
 Double plating or internal
comminuted
fixators
IM pin and lateral plate or
 internal fxator
ESF ± IM pin
Intracondylar and
Transcondylar lag screw
Salter and Harris
and Kirschner wire
type II and IV
Condylar T or Y
Transcondylar lag screw
and:
dynamic pins
single or double plate
single or double internal
fixator
ESF
 Salter and Harris type
Cross pinning
I and II
 Dynamic intramedullary
pinning
IM pin, intramedullary pin; ESF, external skeletal fixator.
37:Femur
457
implant complication occurred in this series: this involved a
 broken proximal screw, resulting in a functional non-union 
(9].
The length of the nail to be used is determined by using the
 templates and the preoperative radiographs of the intact con-
 tralateral limb. Normograde placement of the nail is recom-
mended (see above). The nail should be aimed down the
middle of the medullary canal with the point ending level to
 the proximal aspect of the patella. The proximal aspect of
the femoral nail should be buried in the intertrochanteric
fossa to prevent muscle irritation, seroma formation, and
potential sciatic neuropathy.
A 3.5-mm titanium nail has recently been developed for
retrograde insertion from the intercondylar notch (11). It was
used successfully in 24 cats with supracondylar and diaphy-
seal fractures. No implant-related problems occurred. Stifle
osteoarthritis was seen in only one cat with a pre-existing
sciatic neuropathy.
A
B
37.2.3 External skeletal fixation
Figure 37-1 Normograde insertion of an intramedullary pin. The pin is
started at the most craniolateral aspect of the trochanteric fossa. It is
Only type I and modified type II external skeletal fxators
carefully advanced down the medullary canal, until its tip is at the level
can be used in the femur, because of the proximity of the
of the fracture. The fracture is reduced, and the pin is further advanced
bone to the abdorminal wall. Type I external skeletal fixators
into the distal fragment while maintaining axial alignment of the bone
 are appropriate for most fractures (12). The main indication
in both the mediolateral (A) and craniolateral (B) axes.
for modifed type II constructs is a comminuted fracture of
the distal femoral diaphysis or metaphysis, where there is
only room for insertion of one or two pins in the distal
fragment. External skeletal fxators in the femur are com-
monly combined with an intramedullary pin. The tie-in con-
fguration enhances fixator strength (13), and is therefore
ideal for severely comminuted fractures or in immature cats
with soft bone, where transosseus pins may be at risk for
pull-out (14). Additionally, the tie-in configuration seems to
 cause less soft-tissue morbidity than when the protruding tip
of the pin is not connected to the external skeletal fxator
(13). Closed reduction of femoral fractures is diffcult due
to the overlying muscle mass, so a minimally invasive
Figure 37-2 Retrograde insertion of an intramedullary pin. A pin with
approach and indirect reduction techniques are used. Inser-
trocar tips on both ends is used. Holding the leg in adduction, slight 
tion of an intramedullary pin prior to application of the
inward rotation (short arrow), and extension (long arrow) directs the
external skeletal fxator facilitates fracture reduction and
nail away from the sciatic nerve. The pin is aimed to exit laterally in the
trochanteric fossa.
spatial alignment of the main fragments, without necessitat-
 ing extensive soft-tissue dissection.
Transosseous pin size should not exceed 20-25% of the
interlocking nails, being straight and having a fairly uniform
bone diameter to prevent iatrogenic fractures. Positive- or
diameter from distal to proximal. The most common length
ro pazis Anedondde ane sund u-oz ppeau-aann
of interlocking nail used in the cat was 91 mm, with a range 
most feline femurs. Smaller pins, such as 1.6-mm positive-
from 79 to 101 mm (9). The 4.7-mm nail was used in 11,
threaded or smooth pins, may have to be used to pass an
and the 4.0-mm nail in one of the cats, but it was considered
 intramedullary pin. All pins are inserted just caudal to the
significantly easier to place the 4.0-mm nail compared to the
 belly of the vastus lateralis muscle, through separate skin
4.7-mm nail when the isthmus was intact, so the latter may
 incisions. The number of transosseous pins inserted per frag-
be a better option for the average-sized cat (9). Only one 
 ment depends on fracture type and location, ancillary implants
used, and age of the cat. As a rule of thumb, three pins should
 care should be taken that the screws do not come into contact
be inserted per fragment if both rotational and axial stability
must be counteracted. Two pins are suffcient to neutralize
rotational forces.
37.3 Fractures of the proximal femur
37.2.4 Plating
Fractures of the proximal femur include fractures of the
Femoral fractures are most often stabilized with 2.7-mm
femoral neck fractures, avulsion fractures of the greater tro-
dynamic compression plates (DCP) or 2.0/2.7-mm veterinary
chanter, and subtrochanteric fractures. With the exception of
cuttable plates (VCP), the latter being applied alone or in
subtrochanteric fractures, these are all usually seen in cats
sandwich function. The 2.4-mm limited contact-DCP (LC-
less than 1 year of age. Although affected cats often present
   s    q o  
with non-weight-bearing lameness, some cats with fractures
shaft renders plate contouring easier when compared to dogs.
of the femoral head and neck exhibit less obvious clinical
Long plates have to be contoured to the shape of the greater
signs, and a thorough orthopedic examination is necessary to
trochanter proximally, and to the lateral aspect of the femoral
make the diagnosis. Manipulation of the hip joint reveals
condyle distally. Special plates, such as condylar or recon-
pain, reduced range of motion, and crepitus. Definitive diag-
struction plates, may be used for fractures in the supracon-
 nosis is based on radiographic fndings.
dylar region.
 For treatment of comminuted fractures the plates should
37.3.1 Approaches to the proximal femur
be contoured before surgery, with the aid of radiographs and
 a bone specimen. In general, a DCP is applied in compression 
The femoral head and neck are most commonly approached
function for simple transverse fractures, in neutralization
via a craniolateral approach to the hip joint (16). The cra-
 function for oblique or reducible multifragmentary fractures,
and in buttress function for comminuted fractures (Chapter 
 fractures, and femoral neck fractures. The tendon of the deep
13). The plate and rod system provides additional stability in 
 gluteal muscle has to be partially incised for improved visu-
fractures with absence of a medial buttress, and has been
 alization. The tenotomy is performed in the tendinous part
applied successfully in clinical cases (15).
of the muscle, approximately 3 mm away from its insertion
on the greater trochanter in order to allow reconstruction
37.2.5 Internal fixators
later. Tendon sutures are described in Chapter 16. The joint
capsule is incised longitudinally to the femoral neck to access
Internal fixators have some indications in the repair of femoral
capital physeal fractures, and femoral neck fractures that are
fractures despite the higher implant costs. They can be used
 located within the capsule.
as neutralization or buttress implants for femoral diaphyseal
As an alternative, the femoral head and neck can be
fractures, but the main indications are distal diaphyseal and
 approached through a ventral incision, with the cat in dorsal
 supracondylar fractures, where there is little bone stock avail-
recumbency and the limbs abducted (16). The ventral
able for screw placement. The 2.0-mm Unilock mandible
approach is used for repair of avulsion fractures of the
locking plates (Chapter 24) have been found to be a versatile
 femoral head, and also allows repair of proximal physeal
implant for fractures of the distal femur. Both monocortical
 femoral fractures. The approach can be performed with or
and bicortical screws can be used, and the insertion of only
 without pectineomyectomy. Care has to be taken not to
two screws into the distal fragment results in suffcient stabil-
injure the femoral artery and vein, the saphenous nerve,
ity. Bilateral application of an internal fixator is also possible,
and the medial circumflex femoral artery and vein during
and is a useful technique for repairing comminuted supracon-
dissection.
dylar fractures.
The greater trochanter and the subtrochanteric region of
The 2.4-mm Unilock mandible locking plates (Chapter 24)
     s s   
have been successfully used for the treatment of femoral
 After incising the fascia lata the biceps femoris muscle is
diaphyseal fractures. Iatrogenic fssures or fractures have
retracted caudally. The sciatic nerve is located below the
been observed by the authors when using the 2.4-mm system
 biceps femoris muscle, and must be identifed and protected.
with bicortical screws in the femoral diaphysis in older cats.
In elderly cats it is therefore recommended to use bicortical
37.3.2 Proximal physeal fractures and fractures
screws only at the proximal and distal plate end, and mono-
of the femoral neck
cortical screws in the middle. Bicortical screws can be used
if deemed necessary in young cats with softer bones. Internal
Fractures of the capital physis and the femoral neck occur
fixators can be combined with an intramedullary pin, but  frequently in the cat (Fig. 37-3). Traumatic femoral neck
37:Femur
459
A
B
C
Figure 37-3 Examples of different fractures of the proximal femur in young cats.
(A) Proximal physeal fracture in a 10-month-old cat.
(B) Fracture through the femoral neck in a 4-month-old cat.
(C) Fracture through the femoral neck with concurrent avulsion fracture of the greater trochanter in a 3-month-old cat.
fractures are more common than fractures through the proxi-
Both traumatic capital physeal fractures and femoral neck
mal growth plate in very young cats (17, 18). Femoral neck 
 fractures are usually stabilized with two small Kirschner
fractures predominate in cats up to 6 months of age; both 1
wires (Fig. 37-4 and Box 37-1). In adult cats a lag screw can
lesions occur with an equal frequency between 6 and 12
 be used with an antirotational pin. Biomechanical compari-
months, and the incidence of both types of fractures drops 
 son between parallel and divergent pin placement suggested
after 12 months (18). The capital femoral physis closes 
 parallel pinning to be stronger (26). The pins can be inserted
between 30 and 40 weeks in intact cats (19), but closure is 
 retrograde or antegrade. Retrograde pinning facilitates pin
delayed in gonadectomized cats. Physeal fractures therefore 
placement, but normograde pinning is preferred, because less
 can occur in cats markedly older than 1 year.
manipulation of the fracture fragments is needed, and less
 Besides traumatic fractures, spontaneous fractures of the
vascular damage is caused. An applecore appearance of the
femoral capital physis and pathological fractures secondary
 femoral neck is sometimes observed after parallel pinning of
to femoral neck metaphyseal osteopathy have been described
capital femoral physeal fractures, indicating devasculariza-
in felines (20-23) (Chapter 36). These conditions must be 
 tion. As an alternative, femoral capital physeal fractures can
differentiated from traumatically induced fractures. Cats
be stabilized with pins using a ventral approach (27) (Box
with a traumatic fracture are usually presented with an acute
 37-1). The ventral approach to the hip joint requires less
unilateral lameness, whereas cats with non-traumatic frac-
soft-tissue dissection, and may preserve the blood supply
derived from the joint capsule better.
bilateral. The signalment of the cat is also an important dif-
ferentiating factor as traumatic fractures usually occur in
37.3.3 Avulsion fractures of
the greater trochanter
physeal fractures and femoral neck osteopathy generally
affect male castrated cats older than 1 year.
Avulsion fractures through the physis of the greater trochan-
Conservative treatment of femoral neck and physeal frac-
ter occur in young cats, often in conjunction with coxofemo-
 tures almost invariably results in hypertrophic pseudarthro-
ral luxation or fractures of the capital femoral physis or
ses (17, 18). Healing after surgical repair seems to be better
femoral neck (Fig. 37-4). Three out of 19 cats with fractures
in cats than in dogs (5, 24, 25), and surgical stabilization is 
of the capital femoral physis or femoral neck and one out of
the treatment of choice in acute fractures. Femoral head and
 19 cats with coxofemoral luxation had simultaneous separa-
neck excision should be reserved for comminuted fractures
tion of the greater trochanter in one study (17). The pull of
of the femoral neck, and for long-standing fractures with
the gluteus musculature causes proximal displacement of the
rounded and fbrotic fracture ends.
avulsed fragment. The fracture is not always easily detectable
460
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
A
B
aney leasud ieide e jo buuuid lalleed tte an
(A) Preoperative radiograph of an &-month-old cat with a capital physeal and trochanteric fracture.
(B) The physeal fracture was stabilized using two parallel Kirschner wires. The trochanter was reattached with two diverging pins.
(C) Uncomplicated healing is visible on the 4-week postoperative radiographs
on radiographs, and laterolateral, ventrodorsal, and frog-leg  (Chapter 13). The straight form of the femoral diaphysis in
views should be taken. Surgical stabilization with a tension  cats makes it especially suitable for plate osteosynthesis and
band is indicated to restore function of the gluteal muscula- intramedullary pinning or interlocking nailing procedures.
ture and to enhance stability of the hip joint (Box 37-2). The
 External skeletal fixation is used mainly for comminutec
tension band fxation is also used after trochanteric osteot-
femoral fractures, where other fxation methods are less prac-
(9 radeu) nuol dq au oi yooidde rog kuo
tical, and in immature cats. The disadvantage of external
skeletal fixation of the femur is the morbidity associated with
37.3.4 Subtrochanteric fractures
the pins interfering with the muscles of the thigh, especially
near the stifle joint.
Subtrochanteric fractures are rare in cats, and are generally
Open reduction is usually necessary for repair of femoral
part of a comminuted diaphyseal fracture. They are treated f
 fractures, because the surrounding muscles render closed
similarly to diaphyseal fractures, as described in the following reduction difficult. The quadriceps muscle is inspected for
sections. Both plate osteosynthesis and external skeletal fixa-
 lacerations, and/or intrafascial hemorrage and edema. Hem-
tion can be used. The main challenge in repairing these frac-
orrhage and edema can elevate intrafascial pressure, resulting
tures is to insert a suffcient number of implants into the small
in quadriceps fbrosis. Small fascial incisions, and leaving the
proximal fragment. An additional intramedullary pin helps
fascia lata open after surgery, can relieve intrafascial pressure
to reduce the number of screws or pins required in the proxi-
(Chapter 16).
mal fragment. Screw engagement in four cortices per frag-
ment is suffcient with the plate and rod technique, and two
37.4.1 Approach to the femoral diaphysis
 transosseous pins per fragment are also usually adequate with
an external skeletal fxator tie-in confguration (12).
A lateral approach to the femoral shaft is used for all stabi-
lization procedures (16).
37.4 Diaphyseal fractures of the femur
37.4.2 Simple transverse and short
Many diaphyseal femoral fractures are comminuted. Diaphy-
oblique fractures
seal femoral fractures always require surgical stabilization,
in kiens. The choice of implants is based on fracture type, common in young cats than in older cats. They can be stabi-
age of the animal, clinical factors, and surgeon preference  lized with an intramedullary pin and a type I external skeletal
37:Femur
461
Box 37-1. Stabilization of capital physeal and femoral neck fractures
Femoral neck fractures are stabilized with parallel pins
uaui si suiol dq aul 'uonsein jeisipopnes Suisn pasnpan
using a craniolateral approach. Femoral capital physeal
placed in internal rotation to hold fracture reduction
fractures can be repaired with the same technique, or with
during further pin insertion by applying digital pressure
cross pins inserted via a ventromedial approach. Meticu-
on the greater trochanter. The pins are advanced until
lous surgical technique is used to preserve as much of the
they are seated in the femoral epiphysis (Figs 37-5A and
blood supply as possible if the craniolateral approach is
37-5B). Inadvertent pin placement into the hip joint is
used.
 checked visually or by palpation of the articular surface
 Parallel pinning of capital physeal and femoral neck
with a small pair of curved mosquito forceps. The joint
fractures: A craniolateral or caudolateral approach to the
is moved through its range of motion. No crepitation
hip joint is performed, and the joint capsule is incised
 should be noted. The pins are carefully bent over and cut
longitudinally to the femoral neck for fracture visualiza-
short.
tion. The femoral head remains within the acetabulum
Cross pinning of capital physeal fractures: A ventral
due to its attachment to the round ligament, and the
approach to the hip joint is performed. Care is taken not
femoral neck is usually displaced dorsally and slightly
to disrupt the round ligament. Two divergent small
cranially. Two 0.8-1.0-mm Kirschner wires are driven
threaded Kirschner wires are inserted in a retrograde
from the caudolateral aspect of the third trochanter into
fashion from the cranial aspect of the neck in a proximo-
the femoral neck. The pin tips are advanced until they are
lateral direction into the epiphysis (Fig. 37-5C). The pins
flush with the fracture surface. The fracture is manually
are cut short.
Figure 37-5 Options for
stabilization of capital physeal
and femoral neck fractures.
(A) Stabilization of a femoral
neck fracture with parallel pins.
(B) Stabilization of a capital
physeal fracture with parallel
pins.
(C) Stabilization of a capital
physeal fracture with divergent
cross pins inserted from ventrally.
A
fxator with an interlocking nail or with a plate in compres-
sion. Long oblique fractures in young cats may be treated
sion function. Intramedullary pinning and external skeletal
with an intramedullary pin and cerclage or hemicerclage
fxation are useful in immature cats with soft bone quality
wires. A relatively thick intramedullary nail, comprising
and fast healing times (Fig. 37-7). Plate osteosynthesis or
about 70% of the diameter of the medullary canal, is used
interlocking nailing is usually preferred in adult cats. The
to provide sufficient bending and axial stability. Although
techniques are described in Box 37-3.
this technique provides less stability than others, good results
 Internal fxators could also be applied in both young and
can be achieved with appropriate case selection and good
older cats, but their advantages over other implants are not
surgical technique (Fig. 37-9). Hemicerclage wires (Chapter
huge for the stabilization of simple fractures, and may not
24) can be used as an alternative to cerclage wires, especially
justify the higher implant costs.
in shorter oblique fractures, but care must be taken not to
cause fissuring of the bone when placing and tightening them.
Hemicerclage wires are preplaced prior to full insertion of
37.4.3 Long oblique and reducible
the intramedullary pin.
multifragmentary fractures
Stabilizing long oblique fractures with a lag screw and a
 Long oblique and some reducible multifragmentary fractures
neutralization plate provides more stability (Box 37-4). A
can be reduced anatomically and stabilized under compres-
2.7-mm DCP, 2.4-mm LC-DCP or a 2.0/2.7-mm VCP can be
462
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 37-2. Tension band fixation of the greater trochanter
Figure 37-6
and the avulsed fragment is reattached with a tension band
Tensionband
fixation of an
fixation (Fig. 37-6). Depending on the size of the cat, two
avulsion fracture or
parallel 0.6-1.0-mm Kirschner wires are inserted from the
an osteotomy of the
greater trochanter.
ture/osteotomy line, and into the medial cortex. A 0.6- or
0.8-mm piece of orthopedic wire is then applied in a figure-
of-eight pattern through a predrilled hole in the caudal
 aspect of the proximal femur and around the pin ends. The 
distance between the hole in the femur and the fracture
line should approximate the distance between the fracture
line and the protruding pin tips proximally. The pin ends
are carefully bent over and cut short.
A
B
C
Figure 37-7 Simple transverse fracture of a femoral fracture in a 7-month-old cat.
(A) Preoperative radiograph showing a simple transverse mid-diaphyseal fracture.
(B) The fracture was stabilized with an external skeletal fixator in a tie-in configuration. The transosseous pins mainly serve to counteract rotational
forces, although the intramedullary pin is rather small
(C) Follow-up radiographs at 2 months show a completely healed fracture with good callus formation.
Box 37-3. Stabilization of a simple transverse or short oblique fracture of the femoral diaphysis
A lateral approach to the femoral diaphysis is performed
 ment, depending on the age of the cat. If smooth pins are
 for fracture reduction. Only a small approach is necessary
 used, they are angled 70° to the long axis of the bone to
 for intramedullary pinning and interlocking nailing.
 enhance stability, and to prevent pull-out (Fig. 37-8B).
 Interlocking nail: A 4.0- or 4.7-mm interlocking nail is
 Compression plate: The fracture is anatomically reduced
inserted in a normograde fashion, using a small surgical
 and stabilized with a 2.4-mm limited contact-dynamic
approach for reduction. The fracture is anatomically 
 compression plate or a 2.7-mm dynamic compression plate 
reduced before the interlocking nail is secured to the 
 applied in compression function. At least three screws are
 femoral cortex with two bolts or two screws per fragment
inserted in the proximal and distal fragment. It is advisable
(Fig. 37-8A ).
to use a longer plate and not fill all screw holes, rather
 Intramedullary pin and type I external skeletal fixator: A
than selecting the shortest plate possible (Fig. 37-8C). One
1.4-2.4-mm intramedullary pin is inserted in a normograde
 screw proximal and one distal are inserted eccentrically to
fashion. A small surgical approach is made for directing the
 achieve interfragmentary compression.
pin into the distal fragment. At least one, but preferably
A 2.7/2.0-mm veterinary cuttable plate can also be used,
two, 1.4-2.0-mm transosseous pins are inserted per frag-
 but interfragmentary compression is not possible.
Figure 37-8  Options for
treatment of simple transverse
and short oblique fractures of 
70°
the femoral shaft
(A) Fixation of a short oblique
fracture of the mid-shaft with a
4.0-mm interlocking nail.
(B) Stabilization of a transverse
fracture with an intramedullary
pin, and a type I external skeletal
fixator to prevent rotation.
(C) Stabilization of a simple
transverse fracture with an eight-
hole 2.7-mm dynamic
compression plate in compression
function with three screws
 proximal and distal.
A
B
C
Figure 37-9  Correct indication
and application of cerclage wires
(A) Preoperative radiograph of a
long oblique fracture in a 6-
month-old cat. (B) Postoperative
radiograph. The fracture has been
stabilized with a 1.6-mm
normograde intramedullary pin
and three 0.8-mm cerclage wires.
(C) The fracture is healed with
good callus formation after 4
weeks.
A
B
464
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 37-4. Stabilization of long oblique and reducible multifragmentary fractures
A lateral approach to the femoral shaft is conducted.
skeletal fixator comprises two 1.4-2.0-mm transosseous
 Intramedullary pin and cerclage wires: A 1.6-3.0-mm
pins per main fragment, angled 70° to the long axis of the
intramedullary pin is inserted in a normograde fashion
bone if smooth pins are used (Fig. 37-10B).
Two or three 0.8-mm pieces of orthopedic wire are applied,
Lag screw(s) and neutralization plate: The main fracture
using a wire passer, at least 5 mm away from the proximal
 fragments are anatomically reduced and the fracture line
and distal ends of the fracture line. The cerclage wires are
is temporarily compressed with pointed reduction forceps.
twisted and tightened (Fig. 37-10A). Care is taken not to
One or two 2.0-2.7-mm lag screws are inserted perpen-
 engage soft tissues between the bone and wires.
dicular to the fracture line. A plate is then applied in neu-
 Intramedullary pin and type I external skeletal fxator:
tralization function (Fig. 37-10C). The lag screws can also
'n ar no iasn aiodsa i uexy jo ad s
be inserted through the plate if fracture configuration
A 1.4-2.4-mm intramedullary pin is inserted. The external
allows.
Figure 37-10  Options for
stabilization of simple oblique or
reducible multifragmentary
fractures of the femoral diaphysis.
(A) Stabilization of a long oblique
fracture with an intramedullary
pin and three cerclage wires.
(B) Stabilization of a long oblique
fracture with an intramedullary
pin and a type l external skeletal
fixator.
(C) Stabilization of a butterfly 
fracture with lag screws and a
plate in neutralization function.
c
used. Reducible multifragmentary fractures, such as fractures
sion, fracture healing is expected to be fast due to the pres-
with a large butterfly fragment, can also be repaired with lag
ervation of periosteal blood supply. Alternatively, an internal
screws and a neutralization plate. Anatomic repair of frac-
fxator can be used.
tures requires extensive dissection of soft tissues, and should
only be attempted if anatomic reduction seems possible from
37.4.4 Comminuted fractures
preoperative radiographs. If the fragments are too small to
be stabilized with interfragmentary compression, these frac-
Interlocking nails, external skeletal fxators, and plates or
tures are better treated as comminuted fractures with a mini-
internal fixators in butress function are possible choices of
 mally invasive approach and stabilization of only the main
treatment for comminuted fractures of the femoral diaphysis
 fragrments (see section below).
(Box 37-5). The advantages and disadvantages of internal
 Plating is not an ideal stabilization method in immature
stabilization methods should be weighed against those of
cats because the periosteal blood supply is disrupted, and the
external skeletal fixation. Although application of an external
bone is soft. These fracture are best treated with an intramed-
skeletal fixator is a versatile method and causes the least dis-
ullary pin and a type I external skeletal fixator. Although this
turbance of the fracture area, some morbidity from the pin
type of fixation does not provide interfragmentary compres-
tracts should be expected, especially near the stifle joint.
Box 37-5. Stabilization of a comminuted fracture of the femoral diaphysis
A lateral approach is made to the femoral diaphysis. A
Buttress plate/internal fixator: A long 2.7-mm dynamic
small approach is suffcient for intramedullary pinning and
compression plate (DCP), 2.4-mm limited contact-DCP
interlocking nailing. An open but do-not-touch approach
(LC-DCP) or a sandwiched 2.7/2.0-mm veterinary cuttable
is used for plate fxation. Comminuted fractures are
 plate (VCP) is precontoured from the radiographs of the
 reduced with indirect reduction techniques in order not to
 contralateral limb and/or a bone specimen to achieve
 disturb the local blood supply Insertion of an intramedul-
correct spatial alignment of the main fragments. The plate
lary pin can help the reduction by providing axial align-
is secured frst to the proximal fragment, and is then used
ment of the main fragments. Large medial fragments
 to aid reduction by pulling the distal fragment to the plate.
remaining disconnected from the reduced shaft may be
At least six cortices must be engaged with the screws,
brought closer using a resorbable suture as a cerclage.
 proximally and distally.
 Interlocking nail: A 4.0- or 4.7-mm interlocking nail is
Pate and rod: A 2.7-mm DCP, 2.4-mm LC-DCP or a
inserted in a normograde fashion. The fracture is checked
2.0/2.7-mm VCP in sandwich fashion is combined with a
 for rotational malalignment prior to stabilizing it with two
1.4-2.0-mm intramedullary pin (Fig. 37-11D). The pin is
 screws proximally and distally (Fig. 37-11A). One or two
 inserted frst to align the main proximal and distal frag-
 cerclage wires can be placed in the presence of fissures if
 ments. Four cortices of screw purchase per main fragment
 they will improve fracture stability.
are sufficient with the plate and rod technique. Monocorti-
 External skeletal fixation: Type I external skeletal fx-
cal screws are inserted if the drill bit engages the intramed-
ators are normally used with an intramedullary pin. A
ullary pin. If the fracture extends proximally into the
1.4-2.0-mm intramedullary pin is placed frst to provide
subtrochanteric area screws can be angled into the femoral
axial alignment. Two to three 1.6-2.0-mm transosseous
neck area for extra purchase (Fig. 37-11D).
 pins are then inserted per fragment. The proximal end of
Internal fixator: A 2.4-mm Unilock plate is used similar
the intramedullary pin is either cut as short as posible, or
to a buttress plate, but plate contouring is not as critical
is bent laterally to be tied in to the connecting bar (Fig
as the locking plate does not need to be in close contact
u juwng iad paiiasu ae suid mnoj oi sanul (ali-8
with the bone. Bicortical screws are inserted at the proxi-
the absence of an intramedullary pin (Fig 37-11C). A
 mal and distal plate end into the wider metaphyseal bone,
external fxator system with a large connecting bar or a
double bar should be used for severely comminuted frac-
sis. At least four cortices should be engaged with screws,
tures to enhance bending stability.
 in both the proximal and distal main fragment.
B
L
D
Figure 37-11Stabilization options for comminuted fractures of the femoral shaft.
(A) An interlocking nail used to stabilize a comminuted mid-diaphyseal fracture.
(B) Stabilization of a comminuted fracture of the middle and proximal diaphysis using an external skeletal fixator in tie-in configuration
ey ad suid aan bui 'oexy lealas euaxa I ad e y ane leoa, painuo Au e po uoezer ()
shown to achieve sufficient bone purchase.
466
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
A
B
C
D
Figure 37-12 Plate and rod stabilization of a comminuted femoral fracture.
(A, B) Preoperative radiographs show a comminuted fracture of the proximal half of the femoral diaphysis in a 2-year-old cat.
(C. D) Radiographs 3 weeks after fracture stabilization with a plate and rod technique. The intramedullary pin was placed first to help align the
main fragments. The plate was then applied to the main fragments with three screws each. One additional monocortical screw was used to
stabilie the large lateral cortical fragment. Fracture healing is in progress
An intramedullary pin is often used together with an
37.5 Fractures of the distal femur
external skeletal fxator or a plate (Fig. 37-12). This is espe-
-sp ro Axond rey puxa iei sanen un nesn A
Distal femoral fractures are common in cats, and most of
tally, leaving insuffcient room for the insertion of three
them are Salter and Harris type I or II fractures of the distal
transosseous pins or screws. Pin or screw engagement into
femoral physis. Supracondylar fractures, and simple or com-
four cortices per fragment provides adequate stability in the
minuted fractures of the femoral condyle and/or trochlea, are
presence of an intramedullary pin. The intramedullary pin
occasionally seen in adult cats. Distal femoral fractures are
 often caused by falls from a height. Clinically, it can be dif-
also facilitates fracture reduction.
 Rotational malalignment is a common mistake after reduc-
ficult to differentiate between stifle joint instability and distal
tion and  stabilization of femoral diaphyseal fractures.
femoral fractures, but careful palpation of the patellar liga-
 ment and patella often helps reveals the site of injury.
Femoral fractures in cats have a tendency to be stabilized
with retroversion of the femoral head and neck. Rotational
alignment can be assessed by visualization of the linea aspera
37.5.1 Approaches to the distal femur
at the caudolateral aspect of the femoral shaft, or it may
 be controlled by evaluation of the range of motion of the
Most of the fractures of the distal femur are located within
hip joint. An internal rotation of the hip joint of approxi-
the joint capsule of the stifle joint, and are accessed by a
mately 45° and an outward rotation of approximately 90°
craniolateral parapatellar approach to the stifle joint (16).
is physiological.
Supracondylar fractures proximal to the joint capsule are
Application of a bone graft is not normally necessary
 approached via a lateral approach to the distal femoral shaft.
in femoral fractures. Even severely comminuted fractures
Repair of some fractures requires an approach to both the
ss-no a s ao a  l o p
medial and the lateral side of the distal femur. It is therefore
attachments and an adequate blood supply. Large cortical
 advantageous to position the cat in dorsal recumbency, which
fracture gaps that allow soft-tissue invasion should be
uo! as aul on uoroidde ienedened epau e moe I
grafted.
if necessary (16).
37: Femur
467
A tibial tuberosity osteotomy can be performed for maximal
visibility; this can be advantageous for repairing intracondy.
lar fractures. The tibial tuberosity is reattached with pins and
a tension band wire.
37.5.2 Supracondylar fractures
Supracondylar fractures can be a surgical challenge, espe-
cially if comminuted. Even simple supracondylar fractures do
not have inherent rotational and shearing stability after
reduction, and consequently must be rigidly stabilized with a
plate or external skeletal fixator. The main challenge is to
insert a suffcient number of screws or transfixation pins into
the distal fragment.
The use of non-standard plates should be considered to
facilitate insertion of two or three bicortical screws into the
distal fragment plates. Reconstruction plates can be adapted
 to the caudal curvature of the distal femur, permitting place-
ment of one screw more when compared to straight plates
(28). Another plate to be considered is the recently intro-
A
B
duced 2.0-mm condylar plate (29). These plates match the
Figure 37-13 (A) A distal oblique supracondylar fracture in an adult
cat (B) stabilized with a reconstruction Unilock plate and an
anatomic form of the femoral condyles and are available for
intr amedullary pin.
the left and right leg. They have three round holes distally,
and four oval holes proximally. Another plate, the supracon-
dylar distal femoral plate, has 11 holes in total and is cuttable
to the required length (Chapter 24). Anatomic fracture reduc-
condyle, or T- or Y-fracture where both the medial and
tion is mandatory if only two screws are inserted in the distal
lateral aspects of the condyle are separated from the
fragment. Additional measures are needed if this cannot be
diaphysis.
achieved. An intramedullary pin can usually be inserted distal
The medial aspect of the femoral condyle is affected more
enough to enhance fixation stability (Fig. 37-13). Some frac-
often than the lateral. Fractures of the medial part are usually
ture configurations make placement of an interfragmentary
 only minimally displaced, because the fracture fragment is
screw possible.
held in place by the caudal cruciate ligament and the medial
Bilateral plating is another option for severely comminuted
 collateral ligament. Anatomic reconstruction and stable frac-
fractures, or in cats with more than one traumatized limb 
 ture fixation with a lag screw are necessary to maintain joint
(Box 37-6). Internal fixators are ideal for double plating,
 function and prevent degenerative joint disease (Box 37-7).
because the screws can be inserted monocortically. They also
Fracture of both the medial and lateral aspects of the
have the advantage of providing superior stability to conven-
 condyle often have a T- or Y-confguration, but the supra-
tional plates when only two screws can be inserted per frag-
 condylar part of the fracture may be comminuted (Fig. 37-
ment (30). The 2.0-mm plates from the Unilock mandibular
15). Anatomic reduction of the joint surfaces and stable
locking plate system (Chapter 24) are a suitable size for the
fixation of the fracture fragments are challenging. The intra-
distal femur.
articular fracture fragments are frst stabilized with a lag
External skeletal fixators can also be used for stabilization
screw, prior to addressing the supracondylar part of the
of supracondylar fractures, but may cause some morbidity
fracture. Reconstruction plates, condylar plates, or internal
associated with the pin tracts due to the mobile soft tissue
fxators are best used for stabilization of the supracondylar
and skin around the stifle joint. A modified type II external
part of the fracture (Box 37-8). Dynamic intramedullary
skeletal fixator (31), and hybrid constructs with the IMEX
pinning or Kirschner wires provide less stability, but can be
mini circular external fixator (32), have been described.
suffcient in simple reducible fractures in young cats.
Condylar femoral fractures that differ from the standard
condylar fracture patterns, and that involve the femoral
37.5.3 Fractures through the femoral condyle
[rochlea, have been described in cats (33). These fractures are
Fractures of the femoral condyle may be simple intracondylar
often comminuted, and one or several fracture lines cross the
fractures, affecting only the medial or lateral aspect of the
 trochlea in a transverse or oblique direction. Avulsed frag-
468
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 37-6. Stabilization of supracondylar femoral fractures
A lateral approach to the distal femur and stifle joint is
described above, or one plate is applied medially and one
 performed and the fracture is anatomically reduced if pos-
laterally (Fig 37-14C). Screws can be inserted monocorti-
sible. An additional medial approach is performed for
cally, but bicortical screw placement is advisable in the
bilateral plating. The stifle joint should be held in flexion
 epiphyseal bone with its thin cortex.
 to maintain the achieved reduction in place. Bone graft 
External skeletal fixation: External fxators are mainly
should be applied for comminuted fractures to enhance
indicated for comminuted fractures. A modified type II
fracture healing.
confguration is commonly used, with or without an intra-
 Plating: A 2.0-mm dynamic compression plate, a 2.7-
medullary pin (Fig. 37-14D). A transcondylar 2.0-mm
mm reconstruction plate or a 2.0-mm condylar plate (Fig.
centrally threaded transfixation pin is inserted across the
37-14A) can be used. Simple fractures are anatomically
femoral condyle. One half pin is inserted into the proximal
reduced prior to application of the plate. At least two, and
 fragment and the lateral bar connected between the two
preferably three, bicortical screws must be inserted into
pins. One or two more half pins are then inserted into
 the distal fragment with conventional plates. Additional
 the distal and proximal fragment. The medial aspect of the
 insertion of an intramedullary pin is recommended if fewer
transcondylar pin is connected with a curved bar to
than three screws can be inserted (Fig. 37-14B).
the lateral connecting bar. An intramedullary pin tie-
 Internal fixator: Internal fixators are especially useful for
in confguration can be used additionally, particularly if
comminuted fractures. A 2.0-mm locking plate can either
the distal fragment is too small for insertion of a second
be applied in conjunction with an intramedullary pin as
pin.
Figure 37-14  Options for
 stabilization of supracondylar
fractures
(A) Reconstruction of a simple
 supracondylar fracture with an
intramedullary pin and a condylar
 plate.
(B) Stabilization of a simple
supracondylar fracture with an
intramedullary pin and 2.7-mm
reconstruction plate.
(C) Fixation of a comminuted
 supracondylar fracture with
 bilateral 2. 0-mm Unilock plates.
(D) Stabilization of a comminuted
supracondylar fracture with a
modified type Il external skeletal
fixator.
D
37:Femur
469
A
B
D
F
Figure 37-15 A 2-year-old cat with a intracondylar T-fracture of the femur. (A, B) Preoperative radiographs show an intracondylar T-fracture with
mild comminution of the supracondylar part of the fracture. (C, D) The intracondylar fracture part was stabilized with a 2.0-mm lag screw, and the 
supracondylar part of the fracture was addressed with a medial and lateral 2.0-mm Unilock plate. An osteotomy of the tibial tuberosity enabled
reflection of the patellar ligament, and therefore enhanced visualization of the articular surface during reduction. (E, F) The fracture and the
osteotomy have healed after 3.5 months.
ments from the trochlea are reattached with small screws or
 and therefore young adult cats can also sustain distal femoral
pins, depending on fragment size.
physeal fractures. The distal fragment is often displaced cau-
dally because of the pull of the hamstring and gastrocnemius
muscles (Fig. 37-18). Correct fracture alignment is necessary
37.5.4 Salter and Harris fractures
to restore stifle joint conformation and to achieve fxation
Fractures of the distal femoral physis are common injuries in
cats, and are usually Salter and Harris type I or II fractures 
 ances that fit into corresponding depressions in the epiphysis.
(34, 35). The average age of cats with Salter I fractures is 9.5
 This shape aids control and maintenance of reduction, and
months, and 6.5 months in cats with Salter II fractures (34).
 provides stability against rotational and shear forces once the
The distal femoral physis closes between 54 and 76 weeks in  fracture is reduced. Cross pinning, dynamic intramedullary
intact cats (19), but early neutering delays physeal closure 
 pinning, or conventional intramedullary pinning are all
470
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
house for 6 weeks. Cage rest is employed if deemed necessary
Box 37-7. Stabilization of a fracture of the medial
to reduce activity during the frst 1-2 weeks. Control radio-
 aspect of the femoral condyle
graphs are performed after 4-6 weeks in adult cats, and after
 2-3 weeks in immature cats. Early gentle physical therapy is
A medial approach to the stifle joint is performed. The
 indicated if the patient is not using the leg to prevent develop-
fracture fragment is reduced anatomically, and is tem-
 ment of quadriceps contracture.
porarily stabilized to the condyle with pointed bone
Uneventful fracture healing is reported in several studies on
reduction forceps. A 2.0- or 2.7-mm lag screw is then
feline capital physeal and femoral neck fractures (5, 24, 25).
inserted from the medial epicondyle across the fracture
Cats can be expected to be sound after 4-8 weeks (24, 25)
line into the lateral condyle. Anatomic reduction of
 and functional results are also good at long term (36). An
 the joint surface is critical for a satisfactory outcome.
 applecore appearance of the femoral neck, shortening of the
The lag screw is only fully tightened after insertion of
femoral neck, and osteoarthritis of the hip joint are some-
a 0.8-mm Kirschner wire from the medial epicondyle
times observed radiologically.
into the lateral cortex of the femoral metaphysis as an
 Postoperative treatment of diaphyseal fractures depends on
antirotational implant (Fig. 37-16).
the fixation method chosen. External skeletal fxation requires
frequent check-ups and monitoring of the pin-skin interface.
Figure 37-16  Lag screw and
Intramedullary pins may migrate proximally and cause soft-
Kirschner wire fixation of a
tissue irritation if not connected to an external skeletal fixator.
fracture of the medial aspect of
the femoral condyle.
ness, sof-tissue swelling medial to the greater trochanter,
pain on hip manipulation, and sciatic nerve deficits in the
worst-affected cases. Most of the femoral diaphyseal frac-
tures in cats heal without complications if adequately treated
and cats can be expected to return to full function (12).
Fracture union disorders and osteomyelitis are only rarely
encountered. The common incidence of non-unions in the
older literature was due to the fact that most femoral frac-
tures were stabilized with an intramedullary pin alone and
were therefore lacking rotational stability. Rotational mal-
union can occur particularly with comminuted or older
fractures where the hip is stabilized in retroversion. This
can cause a functional gait abnormality and lateral patellar
luxation.
The prognosis for fractures of the distal femur is also good.
A return to full function can be expected in cats with distal
femoral physeal fractures if correctly aligned and stabilized
(35), although osteoarthritis and/or meniscal calcification is
likely to develop (36). As most of the fractures occur in cats
between 6.5 and 9.5 months of age (34), significant shorten-
reported methods used for fracture stabilization (35).
ing of the femur is not common.
 Intramedullary pinning as a sole fxation method is only pos-
The prognosis for supracondylar fractures is also good
sible due to the inherent rotational stability. Cross pinning is
to excellent after adequate fracture alignment and stabiliza-
the technique most widely used (Box 37-9).
tion. Lameness and loss of stile range of motion were
 Salter and Harris type IV fractures of the distal femur are
observed in 2 of 10 cats in one study (29). Condylar and
rarely encountered. They are treated like simple condylar
trochlear fractures carry a good prognosis if the stifle joint
fractures, as described above.
is reconstructed anatomically. Despite the severity of com-
minuted trochlear fractures, satisfactory or good clinical
37.6 Postoperative treatment
outcome was reported in 85% of cases (33). Because
and prognosis
implants have to be placed close or inside the stifle joint,
they could interfere with the joint capsule and cause irrita-
Postoperative treatment depends on fixation stability achieved,
tion, and it may be benefcial to remove them after the
and implants used, but usually involves confinement to the
fracture has healed.
37:Femur
471
 Box 37-8. Stabilization of an intracondylar T- or Y-fracture
Both a medial and lateral approach is often necessary to
 reduce and stabilize T- or Y-fractures of the distal femur.
Osteotomy of the tibial tuberosity provides excellent visu-
 alization for the reduction of the condylar fragments.
The femoral condyle is frst reduced and stabilized ana-
tomically using a 2.0-mm transcondylar lag screw, The
metaphyseal part of the fracture is repaired afterwards.
 Cross pinning or dynamic intramedullary pinning using
two small-diameter Kirschner wires can be used in simple
Y- or T-fractures in young cats (Fig. 37-17A), but better
stability is provided with lateral or bilateral plates or inter-
nal fixators, as described for supracondylar fractures (Fig.
37-17B).
B
Figure 37-17  Stabilization of combined intra- and
supracondylar femoral fractures.
(A) Stabilization of a simple T-fracture with a transcondylar lag
 screws and dynamic pinning.
(B) Stabilization of an intracondylar fracture with supracondylar
 comminution using a transcondylar lag screws and a medial and
lateral 2.0-mm internal fixator.
Figure 37-18 Preoperative 
radiograph (A) of a Salter and
Harris type Il fracture of the distal
femur, stabilized with cross pins
(B).
凸
B
472
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 37-9. Stabilization of Salter and Harris type I and ll fractures
A lateral parapatellar approach to the stifle joint is per-
are being inserted at a steep angle, which avoids penetra-
 formed. A small medial parapatellar approach is also nec-
tion of the transcortex. The pins will then glide along the
essary to insert the medial Kirschner wire. The epiphysis
endosteal surface of the intramedullary canal (Fig. 37-
in young animals consists of very soft bone, and the frac-
19B). The pins do not need to be repositioned if this occurs
fractures less than 2-3 days old, manual fracture reduction
into the medullary cavity, up to the level of the greater
is usually possible. The fracture should be over-reduced
trochanter.
rather than under-reduced. Blood clots or fbrous tissue in
between the fracture gap are removed before reduction.
Reduction is more difficult in older fractures due to fibrosis
and new bone formation, which is most evident caudally.
The epiphyseal fragment is carefully dissected from the
fbrous tissue with a periosteal elevator until it can be
 manipulated suffciently. With the stifle joint in extension,
a large pointed reduction forceps may be carefully placed
between the intercondylar notch and a small hole drilled
in the cranial metaphysis of the femur both to aid fracture
reduction and to prevent distraction of the fragments
during pin insertion.
Cross pinning: The 1.2-1.6-mm Kirschner wires are
inserted from just cranial to the lateral and medial collat-
 eral ligament, and are aimed towards proximal to engage
the contralateral cortex of the femoral shaft segment. It is
A
B
important that the pins are started distal enough in the
 Figure 37-19 Options for stabilization of Salter and Harris type l
epiphyseal fragment, and that they cross above the fracture
and ll fractures of the distal femur
line to enhance rotational stability (Fig. 37-19A).
(A) Fixation of a distal physeal fracture with cross pins.
Dynamic intramedullary pinming: The technique is
 similar to cross pinning, and is used if the Kirschner wires 
pins.
References and further reading
8. Endo K, et al. Interlocking intramedullary nail method for the
treatment of femoral and tibial fractures in cats and small dogs.
1. Hill FWG. A survey of bone fractures in the cat. J Small Anim
J Vet Med Sci 1998;60:119-122.
Pract 1977;18:457-463.
9. Larin A, et al. Repair of diaphyseal femoral fractures in cats
2. Bookbinder PF, Flanders JA. Characteristics of pelvic fracture
using interlocking intramedullary nails: 12 cases (1996-2000).
in the cat. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1992;5:122-127.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001;219:1098-1104.
3. Lidbetter DA, Glyde MR. Supracondylar femoral fractures
10. Duhautois B. Use of veterinary interlocking nails for diaphyseal
in adult animals. Compend Continuing Educ 2000;22:
fractures in dogs and cats: 121 cases. Vet Surg 2003;32:8-20.
1041-1049.
11. Scoti SA, et al. Retrograde placement of a novel 3.5 mm tita-
4. Frewein J, Vollmerhaus B. Anatomie von Hund und Katze.
nium interlocking nail for supracondylar and diaphyseal femoral
Berlin: Blackwell; 1994.
oo o do d na s u s
5. Culvenor JA, et al. Repair of femoral capital physeal injuries in
211-218.
cats - 14 cases. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1996;9:182-
12. Langley-Hobbs SJ, et al. Use of external skeletal fixators in the
185.
repair of femoral fractures in cats. J Small Anim Pract
6. Pohlmeyer K Arteries of the articulatio coxae and the proximal
1996;37:95-101.
end of the femur in cats (Felis catus). Anat Histol Embryol
13. Aron DN, et al. Experimental and clinical experience with an
1981;10:246-256.
 IM pin external skeletal fixator tie-in confguration. Vet Comp
7. Fanton JW, et al. Sciatic nerve injury as a complication of intra-
Orthop Traumatol 1991;4:86-94.
medullary pin fixation of femoral fractures. J Am Anim Hosp
14. Peirone B, et al. Femoral and humeral fracture treatment with
Assoc 1982;19:687-694.
an intramedullary pin/external fixator tie-in configuration in
37:Femur
473
growing dogs and cats. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2002;15:
27. Guerrero TG, et al. Fixation of a proximal femoral physeal
85-91.
fracture in a dog using a ventral approach and two Kirschner
15. Reems MR, et al. Use of a plate-rod construct and principles of
wires. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2005;18:110-114.
 28. Lewis DD, et al. Use of reconstruction plates for stabilization
dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;223:330-335.
of fractures and osteotomies involving the supracondylar region
16. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA. An atlas of surgical approaches to
of the femur. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1993;29:171-178.
the bones and joints of the dog and the cat, 4th edn. Philadel-
29. Forterre F A new condylar plate for supracondylar fractures in
phia: WB Saunders, 2004.
cats. Kleintierpraxis 2005;50:299-304.
17. Bennett D. Orthopedic disease affecing the pelvic region of the
30. Sikes JW, et al. Comparison of fixation strengths of locking head
mat. J Small Anim Pract 1975;16:723-738.
and conventional screws, in fracture and reconstruction models.
18. Perez-Aparicio FJ, Fjeld TO. Femoral neck fractures and capital
 J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1998;56:468-473.
epiphyseal separations in cats. J Small Anim Pract 1993;34:
31. Klause SE, et al. A modification of the unilateral type 1 ESF
44.5449.
configuration for primary or secondary support of supracondy-
19. Smith RN. Fusion of ossification centres in the cat. J Small Anim
lar humeral or femoral fractures. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
Pract 1969;10:523-530.
1990;3:130-134.
20.(
Queen J, et al. Femoral neck metaphyseal osteopathy in the cat.
32. Farese JP, et al. Use of IMEX SK-circular external fixator hybrid
Vet Rec 1998;142:159-162.
 constructs for fracture stabilization in dogs and cats. J Am Anim
21.0
 Craig LE. Physeal dysplasia with slipped capital femoral epiphy-
Hosp Assoc 2002;38:279-289.
sis in 13 cats. Vet Pathol 2001;38:92-97.
33. Chico AC, et al. Trochlear femoral fractures in cats: results of
22. McNicholas WT Jr, et al. Spontaneous femoral capital physeal
seven cases. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2001;14:51-55.
fractures in adult cats: 26 cases (1996-2001). J Am Vet Med
34. Grauer GF, et al. Incidence and mechanisms of distal femoral
Assoc 2002;221:1731-1736.
physeal fractures in the dog and cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
23. Forrest LJ, et al. Feline capital physeal dysplasia syndrome. Vet
1981;17:579-586.
Radiol Ultrasound 1999;40:672.
35. Hardie EM, Chambers JN. Factors influencing the outcome of
24. Jeffery ND. Internal fixation of femoral head and neck fractures
distal femoral physeal fracture fixation: a retrospective study J
in the cat. J Small Anim Pract 1989;30:674-677.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1984;20:927-931.
25. Fischer HR, et al. Surgical reduction and stabilization for repair
36. Strodl S. Spatergebnisse nach intraartikularen und gelenknahen
of femoral capital physeal fractures in cats: 13 cases (1998-
Frakturen des Hift- und Kniegelenkes von Hund und Katze.
2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;224:1478-1482.
Munich: Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat; 2000.
26. Lambrechts N, et al. Internal fixation of femoral neck fractures
in the dog - an in vitro study. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
1993;6:188.
475
38
 Stifle joint
K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs, P.M. Montavon
Most surgical conditions of the feline stifle joint are caused
38.2 Diagnosis and treatment options
by ligament injuries. Rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament
is the most commonly encountered surgical condition of the
The diagnosis of stifle joint disorders is based mainly on clini-
stifle joint. Stifle joint disruption or luxation is also common,
cal examination fndings. A summary list of the potential
and is seen more frequently in cats than in dogs. Isolated
diseases and injuries of the stifle joint and the treatment
 ruptures of the caudal cruciate ligament and the medial col-
options is provided in Table 38-1.
lateral ligament occur rarely.
Cats with acute traumatic cranial cruciate ligament rup-
Other differential diagnoses to be considered in a cat with
tures will show a sudden-onset moderate to high-grade lame-
a stifle joint problem include articular fractures, patellar luxa-
ness, pain on extension of the stifle, and a joint effusion. A
tion, patellar fractures, meniscal calcification, degenerative
        
joint disease, osteochondrosis, and patellar tendon injury.
       
Degenerative joint disease is mostly found in older cats, and
 normal craniocaudal laxity in their stifle joints, and stability
may be secondary to cranial cruciate ligament tears or other
of the affected joint should always be compared with the
injuries. Patellar fractures can occur spontaneously and cause
contralateral side. Chronic degenerative joint disease may
an acute lameness. Diagnosis and treatment of the most fre-
 precede cranial cruciate ligament rupture, especially in older
quent stifle joint disorders are described in the following
cats. These patients tend to have a history of inactivity or
sections.
chronic low-grade lameness.
 A caudal drawer sign can be elicited with isolated ruptures
38.1 Surgical anatomy
of the caudal cruciate ligament. Lameness and pain are
usually less pronounced with caudal cruciate ligament
 The stifle joint consist of the femorotibial and the femoropa-
rupture. Rupture of the medial collateral ligament causes
tellar articulations. The cruciate ligaments and the medial
valgus instability, and rupture of the lateral collateral liga-
and lateral collateral ligament are the primary stabilizing
 ment causes varus instability.
structures. Secondary stabilizers are the joint capsule, the
Cats with stifle joint disruption are presented with non-
menisci, and the muscles and tendons that span the joint.
weight-bearing lameness, extensive soft-tissue swelling, con-
The cranial cruciate ligament prevents stifle hyperexten-
formational changes, and obvious instability or luxation
sion, excessive internal rotation, and cranial translation of
of the stifle joint. Cranial and caudal drawer tests and
the tibia. The caudal cruciate ligament prevents caudal trans-
medial and lateral stability are affected. These tests should
lation of the tibia. The cranial cruciate ligament is stronger
be performed after closed reduction of the stifle joint to
than the caudal cruciate ligament in cats (1), which may
evaluate which of the anatomic structures are damaged,
explain why isolated caudal cruciate ligament ruptures are
but stifle reduction and the manipulations are painful
occasionally seen. The collateral ligaments mainly provide
and best performed under sedation or general anesthesia
stability against valgus and varus deviation of the stifle
after cardiovascular and respiratory stabilization of the
joint.
patient.
 Four sesamoid bones are present in the vicinity of the stifle
The patella should be palpated and manipulated to detect
 joint: the patella, the medial and lateral fabella, and the pop-
liteal sesarmoid bone. Whereas the lateral fabella is consis-
for patellar luxation is provided in Table 38-2. Cats have a
tently ossifed and visible on radiographs, the medial fabella
relatively large flat patella, and more normal laxity than
is often not visible on radiographs in many cats. Radiolucent
dogs.
medial fabellas consist of fbrocartilage histologically (2).
 Radiographs of the stifle joint are performed to confrm the
Non-pedigree cats have a higher prevalence of radiolucent
clinical diagnosis and to exclude periarticular or articular
medial fabellas compared to pedigree cats (2). The popliteal
 fractures. Valgus and varus stressed radiographs can be per-
sesamoid bone is a small oval bone located within the tendon
 formed under general anesthesia to evaluate integrity of the
of the popliteal muscle.
collateral ligaments.
476
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
 Type of lesion
Further classification
 Treatment options
Table 38-1. Summary of injuries
and diseases of the feline stifle
Stifle joint
Cranial cruciate ligament
Conservative
joint and possible surgical
 Extracapsular stabilization
 treatment options
instability
rupture
TTA/TPLO
Caudal cruciate ligament
Conservative
rupture
Collateral ligament sprain
Conservative
Collateral ligament prosthesis
Stifle joint
 Dependent on the
 Surgical repair of damaged ligaments
luxation
ligaments involved
+ external coaptation
+ TESF
+ transarticular pin
Patellar fracture
Fatigue stress fracture
Conservative
 Encircling wire ± tibial quadriceps wire
± protection
 Partial patellectomy
Traumatic fracture
 Tension band repair ± protection 
 Partial patellectomy
Patellar luxation
 Different grades
 Transposition of tibial tuberosity
Sulcoplasty
 Soft-tissue correction
Tendon injury
Avulsion of the tendon of
Surgical reattachment to femur or tibia
(Chapter 16)
 the long digital extensor
muscle
Quadriceps tendon
Surgical repair and protection
rupture
TTA, tibial tuberosity advancement; TPLO, tibial plateau leveling osteotomy; TESF, transarticular
external skeletal fixator.
Grade
 Clinical features
38.3 Approaches to the stifle joint
Patella can be completely luxated with digital
The stifle joint can be approached through either a lateral (3)
A
pressure, but immediately returns into
or a medial (3) incision. The lateral parapatellar approach is
most commonly used and is indicated for exploration and
position after pressure is released
Patella can be completely luxated with digital
debridement of the joint, for application of lateral imbrica-
B
tion sutures for the treatment of cranial cruciate ligament
pressure and remains temporarily luxated
once the pressure is released
ruptures, for repair of lateral collateral ligament sprains, and
Patella luxates when the tibia is internally
for treatment of patellar luxation. Care is taken not to injure
C
rotated, without exerting direct digital
the tendon of the long digital extensor muscle, which origi-
nates in an intra-articular location on the lateral femoral
pressure
condyle.
D
 Patella is temporarily or permanently luxated
 The medial approach to the stifle joint is used for repair of
without any manipulation
medial collateral ligament injuries, for surgery of the tibial
Table 38-2. Suggestion for a grading system of patella luxation in
tuberosity, such as lateralization of the tibial tuberosity for
cats
treatment of patellar luxations or cranialization of the tibial
38: Stifle joint
477
Figure 38-1
Figure 38-2 Caudocranial
 Mediolateral
radiograph of the left stifle joint
radiograph of the
 of a 7-month-old domestic short-
stifle joint of a 12-
hair cat with medial patellar
year-old cat with a
Iuxation.
large mineralized
body located in the
 cranial aspect of the
joint, and 
 degenerative joint 
 changes. A rupture
of the cranial
cuciate ligament
was diagnosed
 clinically.
tuberosity or tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO) for
 cranial cruciate ligament when lameness and clinical signs
treatment of cranial cruciate disease.
are present. Clinical signs were relieved after excision of the
calcifed meniscus in one cat without rupture of the cranial
38.4 Meniscal mineralization
cruciate ligament (5).
Meniscal mineralization has only been described in a small
38.5 Disorders of the patella
 number of cats (4, 5) but is a frequent feature in feline prac-
tice. These calcifcations or ossifcations are generally thought
Disorders of the patella include patellar luxation and patellar
to occur in the cranial horn of the medial or lateral meniscus,
fractures. Patellar luxation is more common. Patellar frac-
but the authors have also seen areas of mineralization in the
ures in cats are often stress fractures, unassociated with
cranial attachment of the cranial cruciate ligament, the syno-
external trauma (7). Patellar aplasia has also been described
vial membrane, and the infrapatellar fat pad. They are visible
(8).
radiographically as one or several radiodense bodies located
in the cranial aspect of the joint (Fig. 38-1). Most affected
38.5.1 Patellar luxation
cats are elderly, many have concurrent gonarthrosis, and the
lesions often occur bilaterally. Evidence suggests that the
Patellar luxation is less common in cats than in dogs. Patellar
 mineralization is associated with cranial cruciate ligament
luxation can be traumatic in origin or occurring as a sequel
rupture, either occurring secondary to cranial cruciate liga-
to the conformational changes in the limb after femoral or
ment disease, or preceding it (4-6). In one study, 12 out of
tibial fractures, but most of the cases seen are developmental
14 cats with cranial cruciate ligament disease developed
(9, 10). Certain breeds, such as Abyssinian and Devon Rex
radiodense bodies in the stifle joint visible on follow-up
radiographs (6). These fndings implied that meniscal calcif-
lar luxation (11-13), but other breeds and non-pedigree cats
cation occurs as a sequel to cranial cruciate ligament rupture,
are affected as well (9, 10). As many as 38% of Abyssinian
although preoperative radiographs were not taken in the
cats had loose patellas during palpation in one study (11).
majority of cats in this series. In contrast, in another study,
The condition has also been documented in two British short-
five out of six cats with meniscal mineralization suffered
hair littermates (14). Patellar luxation seems to have a heredi-
concurrent cranial cruciate ligament rupture, and two out of
tary component, but the exact mode of inheritance is unclear.
six cats with bilateral lesions later developed cranial cruciate
Prevalence and grade of luxation are thought to be modifed
ligament disease in the contralateral leg (5). The authors
by several factors, implicating a polygenetic trait, as in dogs
hypothesized that a mineralized meniscus loses its normal
(11). Patellar luxation can also be associated with hip dys-
compliance and predisposes the joint to cranial cruciate liga-
plasia (10, 13, 15, 16).
ment rupture (5).
The patella usually luxates medially, and both stifle joints
Clinical signs associated with the abnormal meniscus are
are often affected (Fig. 38-2). Affected cats are usually rela-
not recognized in many cats. Joint stability should be care-
tively young at the time of presentation (9). One study,
fully assessed in order to rule out concurrent rupture of the
however, reported a median age of 3.3 years, which is con-
478
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Figure 38-3 A cat with
developmental medial patellar
luxation.
(A) View after incision of the
skin. The patella is in situ
(B) Minimal lateral digital pressure
on the quadriceps muscle causes 
the patella to luxate medially.
(C) The patella is luxated medially
after a lateral parapatellar
approach. Cartilage erosions are
often seen on the medial
 condylar crest and on the
A
B
retropatellar surface. The
trochlear groove is flat.
siderably older than the median age for dogs presenting with
Figure 38-4 A cat with
patellar luxation (17). Cats have a larger patella and a higher
 tr aumatic lateral patellar luxation,
physiological laxity of the patella than dogs, and the patella
caused by rupture of the medial
can be manually moved on to the trochlear ridge of the
retinaculum and joint capsule.
femoral condyles in many normal cats. Therefore, grading
systems developed for dogs should be used with caution.
Table 38-2 provides a classification system for patellar luxa-
tion in the cat. Most of the cats have grade A and B luxations;
grade D luxations are rare in cats (17). Anatomic changes
include a shallow trochlear groove and medial displacement
of the tibial tuberosity. Gross conformational changes are
 generally not present. Secondary osteoarthritis is often absent
 or mild, but older cats especially can have more severe degen-
erative changes in their stifle joints (17). Cartilage erosions
may be seen retropatellar and on the medial condylar crest
(Fig. 38-3).
Transposition of the tibial crest, or a combination of trans-
Laxity of the patella is always interpreted in conjunction
position of the tibial crest with sulcoplasty, yields more reli-
with clinical signs. Common clinical complaints are a
able results in non-traumatic patellar luxation (10).
crouched gait, inactivity, and inability to jump. Some cats
Transposition of the tibial crest towards lateral restores the
show intermittent lameness or sudden-onset distress with
normal axis of the quadriceps/patellar tendon mechanism in
vocalization and unwillingness to use the affected leg. These
signs are likely to be due to sudden dislocation of the patella.
 be combined with cranialization to reduce retropatellar pres-
Acute lameness can also occur if a cranial cruciate ligament
-rad si uosodsuen lepaN "(I-se xog) (sl) uied pue ains
rupture occurs in conjunction with patellar luxation. Trau-
formed for lateral patellar luxation. Transposition of the
matic patellar luxations will also have an acute onset.
 tibial tuberosity is avoided in immature cats to avoid damag-
 Surgical correction of the condition is indicated in cats that
ing the tibial tuberosity growth plate. Sulcoplasty deepens the
show clinical signs associated with patellar luxation. The aim
abnormally flat patellar groove, and is usually performed in
of surgery is to restore normal patellar position and improve
conjunction with transposition of the tibial crest.
femoropatellar joint function. Several procedures, used alone
or in combination, clinically improve patellar function in
38.5.2 Patellar fractures
most cats (10, 17). The techniques include tibial crest trans-
position, sulcoplasty, and soft-tissue corrections. Soft tissues
 Patellar fractures may occur spontaneously or may be caused
are secondary stabilizing structures of the joint and their cor-
by trauma. Three cases of non-traumatic patellar fracture
rection alone rarely leads to suffcient and long-term restora-
have been described in the literature (7) and data on a further
tion of functional anatomic relationships. An indication to
34 cases are in preparation for publication (19). Spontaneous
use only soft-tissue correction methods is in the rare case of
patellar fractures usually occur in both stifle joints with some
an acute traumatic patellar luxation, caused by rupture of the
delay berween the left and right limb and with no evidence
lateral or medial retinaculum (Fig. 38-4).
of trauma (Fig. 38-6). They are therefore likely to be fatigue
38: Stifle joint
479
Box 38-1. Correction of a medial patellar luxation
 A lateral or medial parapatellar approach is performed,
placed pair of pointed reduction forceps can be used to
 according to surgeon preference. The stifle joint is explored
maintain the position of the tibial tuberosity during inser-
for concurrent pathologies.
tion of the pins. Two 0.8- or 1.1-mm Kirschner wires are
Sulcoplasty: The depth of the trochlear groove is assessed,
driven from just distal to the insertion of the patellar
and a sulcoplasty is performed if deemed necessary In cats
 tendon through the tibial tuberosity in a distocaudal and
having a tibial tuberosity transposition, the sulcoplasty is
 medial direction, until the pin ends engage or just pene-
performed after the osteotomy, but before reattachment of
 trate the caudal cortex of the tibia. A 0.6- or 0.8-mm
the tibial tuberosity. A wedge sulcoplasty is usually chosen
fgure-of-eight cerclage wire is anchored around the proxi-
(Fig. 38-5A). Cats have a relatively wider patella than
mal pin ends and through a hole drilled through the cranial
dogs, so it is important to ensure the wedge is made wide
 aspect of the tibia distal to the cut (Fig. 38-5C). The wire
enough to accommodate this.
should not cross exactly over the distal aspect of the oste-
 Lateralization and cranialization of the tibial tuberosity:
otomy. Great care is taken not to strangulate the distal
An osteotomy of the tibial tuberosity is performed with an
aspect of the patellar tendon with the wire, as this may
oscillating saw or with a hand-held saw (Fig. 38-5B). If
result in avascular necrosis and tendon rupture.
using a hand saw, the cranial tibial muscle must be par-
Soft-tissue correction: For medial patellar luxation, the
tially elevated from the lateral aspect of the proximal tibia
lateral joint capsule and fascia is imbricated during closure.
before making the cut with the saw inserted caudal to the
 In severe cases, such as grade 3 and 4 luxations, the medial
patellar ligament. The tibial crest is cut in a slight oblique
fascia might have to be released to reduce its medial pull
direction, extending from just cranial to the medial menis-
on the patella. The position of the patella is evaluated
cus medially, to just cranial to the long digital extensor
 again in extension, flexion, and inward and outward rota-
tendon laterally (Fig. 38-5B). The tibial crest is transposed
tion before closure of the skin.
laterally and stabilized in its new position. A carefully
B
Figure 38-5 Surgical techniques for treatment of a medial patellar luxation.
(A) Wedge sulcoplasty. Ensure the wedge is wide enough to accommodate the patella.
oh snsuau lepau aui ot leuen isn woy apeu s! inn aul Auoso aun jo uosod bumus sueaeia uoisodsuen Aisoagnt leigl (a) 
just cranial to the long digital extensor tendon. Due to the slight oblique course of the osteotomy, lateralization of the tibial tuberosity also
results in a degree of cranialization.
(C) Stabilization of the osteotomized tibial tuberosity in its new position with a tension band fixation. Care is taken not to strangulate the
distal aspect of the patellar tendon.
480
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Figure 38-6 (A) Spontaneous
stress fractures of the patellae in
a 3-year-old indoor female
spayed Russian Blue cat that
presented with sudden-onset left-
hindlimb lameness. A fatigue
fracture of the left patella was
diagnosed and (B) treated with
an encircling wire. (C) The 3-
month postoperative radiograph 
of the left patella has a functional
non-union. (D) The right patella 
had a sclerotic appearance at first 
B
c
presentation. (E) The right patella
spontaneously fractured 3
months later. (F) The bone was
stabilized with an encircling wire
and tibial quadriceps wire. (With
permission from: Langley-Hobbs
SJ. Survey of 52 fractures of the
patella in 34 cats. Vet Rec
2009:164:80-86.)
D
E
fractures, secondary to internal stresses. Most of them are
unsuccessful, often resulting in further fragmentation of the
simple transverse fractures occurring at the level of the proxi-
 brittle bone and requiring additional surgical procedures for 
 mal third of the bone (7). Clinical fndings commonly include 
revision or removal of broken implants (19).
a sudden onset of lameness, and pain and swelling around 
Surgical repair should be attempted if the fragments are
the patella, although some cases may be asymptomatic (7).
widely displaced and lameness is marked, using an encircling
The contralateral leg should be radiographed if a patellar
wire around the patella and a tibial quadriceps wire (Fig.
fracture is diagnosed. Evidence of bone remodeling can be
38-6) or a transarticular external skeletal fxator. Tears of
seen in the normal patella prior to its subsequent fracture
the quadriceps and parapatellar cartilages should be sutured
(Fig. 38-6).
al ol Kinaiu aroisar ol suraed aiins aiedoidde qim
Minimally displaced and chronic fractures with minimal
quadriceps. Partial patellectomy is a salvage procedure and
lameness can be treated conservatively. In contrast to trau-
 is conducted when internal fixation fails or is not possible,
matically induced patellar fractures, the soft tissue around
and if clinical problems persist. Complete patellectomy should
the patella may stay intact with stress fractures, and help in
not be done in cats.
counteracting the tensile forces exerted by the quadriceps
True traumatic patellar fractures are rare. They are usually
muscle. Radiographic features of a non-treated idiopathic
diagnosed in association with distal femoral or proximal
 patellar fracture did not change over a time period of 18
tibial fractures, cruciate ruptures, and patellar luxation. The
months (7). Surgical treatment of spontaneous patellar frac-
 fracture fragments can be removed by partial patellectomy if
tures is often unrewarding because of a high likelihood of
-jains pazqeis aq pinous siusuaenj raaret 'eurs are Aal
non-union and implant failure (Fig. 38-6). Non-union
cally to restore function of the quadriceps mechanism. Surgi-
occurred in two cats with surgical stabilization of stress frac-
cal stabilization of patellar fractures is difficult, as the bone
tures, and was not necessarily associated with degenerative
is small and hard, and the large tensile forces exerted by the
joint disease and a poor outcome (7). Pin and tension band
 quadriceps muscle must be counteracted with small implants.
wire fixation of stress fractures of the patella was consistently
The implants should be applied in a tension band fashion.
38: Stifle joint
481
 Possible treatment options include insertion of a skewer pin
 joint effusion. Radiographically, a radiodense body, which is
and fgure-of-eight orthopedic wire, multiple pinning, or an  the avulsed origin of the tendon, is frequently seen in the
encircling wire and a tibial quadriceps wire as described for  craniolateral compartment of the femorotibial joint. Avulsion
spontaneous fractures. Anatomic repair is necessary to achieve  of the origin of the long digital extensor tendon has been
joint congruity. Transarticular stabilization may be applied
 described in one cat (21). Reapposition of the avulsed frag-
additionally.
ment with two small Kirschner wires resulted in complete
recovery. If it is impossible to reattach the origin of the
38.6 Tendon injury
tendon to its physiological position, it may be sutured to the
surrounding soft tissue at the level of the proximal tibia.
38.6.1 Quadriceps tendon rupture
Postoperatively, the limb is immobilized with the stifle joint
in an extended position for 3 weeks.
Rupture of the quadriceps tendon, or patellar ligament, is an
uncommon problem in the cat (20), but results in severe dis-
38.7 Ligament injuries
ability due to inability to maintain the stifle joint in extension.
Radiographs show proximal displacement of the patella.
Cranial and caudal cruciate ligament ruptures, collateral liga-
Flexed and extended views of the lateral stifle can be taken
ment sprains, and stifle joint disruption with the correspond-
to demonstrate the loss of quadriceps tendon integrity, if in
ing surgical stabilization techniques are described in the
doubt (Fig. 38-7). The tendon can be sutured with a three-
following sections.
loop pulley suture (Chapter 16). Postoperative protection
with a tibial quadriceps wire, external coaptation and splint,
38.7.1 Rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament
or a transarticular external fxator, or a combination of the
above is required. The prognosis is guarded, and breakdown
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture in cats is generally thought
and postoperative complications are common.
to be traumatic in origin. Falls from a height seem to be the
 most common cause. A positive cranial drawer sign can be
38.6.2 Avulsion of the origin of the long digital
elicited, and radiographs show joint effusion and cranial
dislocation of the tibia (Fig. 38-8). A small bony fragment
extensor tendon
may be seen at the tibial insertion site of the cranial cruciate
Traumatic avulsion of the origin of the long digital extensor
ligament in cases of ligament avulsion (22).
tendon is a condition occasionally encountered in young
However trauma is not always observed, and it is sus-
large-breed dogs. Affected patients are lame and show stifle
pected in some cases that, similar to the condition in dogs,
ligament degeneration may precede rupture of the cranial
cruciate ligament (23). Reasons for this assumption are: cats
        n
Figure 38-8
Mediolateral 
radiograph of a cat
with traumatic
rupture of the cranial
cruciate ligament
after a fall from a
height. Note the
cranial subluxation of 
the tibia. Joint
effusion and an
avulsion fragment,
A
B
possibly from the
tibial attachment of
Figure 38-7 Cat with quadriceps tendon rupture. (A) A mediolateral
the cranial cruciate
radiograph with the stifle extended shows sight proximal displacement
of the patella. (B) The radiograph with the stifle flexed demonstrates a
ligament, are also 
quadriceps tendon disruption. A small radiopaque fragment is visible;
seen.
this is an avulsion fracture of the distal patella.
482
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
cats with other types of trauma, with published mean ages
cant (26). A cranial drawer sign persisted in nearly all cats
of 7.4-8.5 years (6, 23). Some cats presenting with an acute
after conservative treatment (6, 26).
lameness in conjunction with clinical signs of cranial cruciate
No direct comparison between conservative and surgical
rupture already have degenerative joint changes and meniscal
treatment of cranial cruciate disease has been made, and the
calcifcation on radiographs (Fig. 38-1). Also, as in the dog.
choice of treatment is based on surgeon preference. Return
cranial cruciate ligament rupture has been described as occur-
to normal function was 2-4 weeks in clinical studies on cats
ring more often in overweight cats (23, 24).
with extracapsular repair of cranial cruciate ligament rupture,
The incidence and significance of meniscal injury after
comparing favorably with conservative treatment (23, 27).
cranial cruciate ligament rupture or disease are unknown in
Surgical stabilization of a stifle joint with cranial cruciate
cats, but lesions of the medial meniscus have been observed I
 ligament rupture may reduce or slow down the progression
in cats after experimental transection of the cranial cruciate
 of degenerative joint disease. Stabilization of the stifle joint
ligament (25). Osteoarthritic changes in unstable feline stifle
 also improves proprioceptive abilities, when compared to
joints seem to progress at a slower rate than in dogs (25), but
non-reconstruction (28).
osteophytes are apparent 3 months after transection of the
Overall, surgical stabilization seems to be beneficial,
cranial cruciate ligament, and degeneration of the stifle joint
although not absolutely necessary. We advise surgical stabi-
continues over a 1-year period. Osteophytes form at the
lization in obese cats, in young and active cats, if other legs
 proximal end of the patella, the proximal patellar groove,
are injured concurrently, or if lameness has not subsided after
and the mediodorsal border of the tibia (26) (Chapter 5).
3-4 weeks of conservative treatment. The lateral retinacular
Both conservative treatment and surgical stabilization have
imbrication technique is most commonly performed in cats.
been described as treatment options. Conservative therapy
Corrective osteotomy techniques, such as TPLO (Fig. 38-9)
consists of weight reduction where necessary, and confining
and tibial tuberosity advancement (TTA) (Fig. 38-10), are
the cat indoors to avoid strenuous activity. A short course of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and long-term admin-
 niques in dogs, but have not been clinically evaluated in large
istration of disease-modifying agents, can also be prescribed
numbers of cats. One cat with cranial cruciate ligament
(Chapter 5). Complete restoration of normal gait was visually
rupture and malformation of the proximal tibia was success-
observed at 5 weeks postoperatively in a clinical study on 16
fully treated using TPLO and cranial closing wedge osteot-
cats with cranial cruciate ligament rupture (6). Results from
omy (29). TTA has been used successfully by the authors.
experimental studies using force plate analysis suggest that it
Corrective osteotomy techniques may be superior to extra-
takes 3-4 months until cats return to normal or near-normal
capsular techniques in obese cats, and in cases with chronic
limb loading after transection of the cranial cruciate ligament
-   s   
(25, 26). Even after 1 year, peak forces remained slightly
throsis, but this remains to be evaluated. Lateral retinacular
lower than normal, although this was not statistically signif-
suture imbrication is described in Box 38-2.
A
B
C
U. Matis, copyright.)
38: Stifle joint
483
A
B
C
D
Figure 38-10 (A, B) Preoperative and (C, D) 8-month follow-up radiographs of the stifle joint of a 11-year-old overweight cat with cranial cruciate
ligament rupture, treated with tibial tuberosity advancement (TTA). Note that the cat has varus deformity of the distal femur, and valgus deformity
 of the distal tibia, which is rarely seen.
Box 38-2. Lateral retinacular suture imbrication
 After a lateral parapatellar approach to the stifle joint, the
Figure 38-11  Diagram showing
 joint is explored and meniscal lesions are treated by partial
the position of the lateral
retinacular suture for stabilization 
meniscectomy. Remnants of the ruptured cranial cruciate
 of a cranial cruciate ligament
ligament are carefully removed, taking care not to injure
rupture.
the cranial intermeniscal ligament. The joint capsule is
 closed and an extracapsular suture is placed through a hole
in the cranioproximal aspect of the tibial tuberosity, and
around the lateral fabella (Fig. 38-11). Either a size 0
monoflament non-absorbable suture material or 50-lb
(23-kg) breaking-strain nylon leader line is used for the
suture. Care has to be taken to avoid pressure over the
patellar ligament, and to avoid injury of the peroneal
nerve. The stifle joint is held in moderate flexion and slight
outward rotation as the knot is tied. The lateral fascia is
 then closed over the suture in an imbricating suture pattern,
and the subcutaneous tissue and skin are closed
routinely.
38.7.2 Rupture of the caudal cruciate ligament
cruciate and/or collateral ligaments in cats with stifle joint
disruption.
Isolated rupture of the caudal cruciate ligament is rare in
cats. A caudal drawer sign can be elicited, and radiographs
38.7.3 Collateral ligament sprain
may reveal caudal displacement of the tibia (Fig. 38-12).
Outcome seems to be good with conservative therapy in
Isolated collateral ligament injuries occur occasionally, but
most cases. Surgical stabilization should be considered if
collateral ligament  damage is  more often associated  with
lameness does not resolve after 3-4 weeks of activity restric-
stifle joint disruption (see below). The medial collateral liga-
tion (Box 38-3). Repair of the caudal cruciate ligament is
 ment is damaged more often than the lateral collateral liga-
also undertaken if there is concurrent damage to the cranial
 ment. Grade 1 ligament sprains cause minimal clinical signs
484
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
and are rarely diagnosed. Soft-tissue swelling is present over 
 the area of the affected ligament in grade 2 and 3 sprains.
Box 38-3. Stabilization of caudal cruciate ligament
Grade 3 sprains also cause palpable valgus or varus instabil-
ruptures
ity. Stress radiographs reveal opening of the joint space on
the affected side (Fig. 38-14). Avulsion fragments may be
A lateral parapatellar approach to the stifle joint is
seen at the ligament insertion sites.
conducted. A suture sling is anchored around the fbular
head and through the proximal aspect of the patellar
and 2 injuries and minor instability. Activity is restricted by
tendon, using monoflament non-absorbable or slowly
keeping the cat in a cage for 10 days to allow fibrous healing
absorbable suture material (Fig. 38-13). The suture
 of the periarticular structures, followed by a gradual return 
 should not be overtightened. Visualization and retrac-
tion of the peroneal nerve are necessary while the suture
is placed around the fbular head.
Figure 38-12
 Mediolateral 
radiograph of the
Figure 38-13 Diagram showing
a fibulopatellar tendon suture 
stifle joint of a cat 
 after a fall from a
sling for extra-articular 
height. Caudal
 augmentation of a rupture of the 
subluxation of the
caudal cruciate ligament.
tibia is evident,
indicating rupture of
the caudal cruciate
ligament.
Figure 38-14 (A) Valgus and
(B) varus stress radiographs of a
cat with grade 2-3 lateral
collateral ligament sprain. Note
the increased opening of the 
lateral femorotibial joint space
with the leg positioned in varus.
The cat also has grade A medial
patellar uxation.
A
B
38: Stifle joint
485
Box 38-4. Collateral ligament prosthesis
The medial collateral ligament is approached via a medial
38-15B) or alternatively, a second screw is directed from
 approach, and the lateral collateral ligament from a lateral
 the fbular head into the tibia. A 1.5-mm screw should be
approach. The stifle joint is explored for concurrent inju-
 used here due to the small size of the fibular head. A figure-
 ries. The joint capsule and the ligament ends are sutured
 of-eight suture is then applied as described above.
with a locking-loop suture pattern, using 4-0 monofla-
 ment slowly absorbable suture material. This may not
always be possible due to shredding of the ligament. A size
0 monoflament non-absorbable or slowly absorbable
suture material is usually used for the ligament prosthesis.
Range of joint motion and joint stability are checked
before closure of the wound.
 Medial collateral ligament prosthesis: One 2.0-mm
screw or suture anchor is inserted at the insertion site of
 the medial collateral ligament on the femoral condyle, and
 one 2.0-mm screw is positioned in the proximal tibia (Fig.
38-15A). The tibial screw can be directed in a slightly
 proximal direction, which will prevent slipping of the
suture from the screw head. The use of smooth 2.0-mm
stainless-steel washers also helps to prevent suture slip-
A
ping. The suture is anchored around the screw heads in a
B
fgure-of-eight fashion before the screws are tightened.
Figure 38-15  Diagrams showing medial and lateral collateral
ligament prostheses.
Lateral collateral ligament prosthesis: One 2.0-mm
(A) Medial collateral ligament prosthesis, anchored around two
screw is inserted into the lateral femoral epicondyle at the
screws.
 insertion site of the lateral collateral ligament. The suture
(B) Lateral collateral ligament prosthesis, anchored around a screw
is then passed between the fbular head and tibia (Fig.
in the femoral condyle, and the fibular head.
to activity over 4 weeks. Surgical stabilization is performed
the cranial and caudal cruciate ligaments, and the medial
in cases with unstable grade 2 or 3 injuries (Box 38-4). Surgi-
 collateral ligament (30). Concurrent meniscal injury is present
cal stabilization is likely to slow down the development of
 in nearly all cases. Peripheral avulsions are most common
degenerative joint changes secondary to prolonged instabil-
[30).
ity. The ruptured ligament ends are sutured if possible, and
Although preoperative stress radiographs can be taken, the
ligament prostheses are applied. In cases with avulsion of a
radiographs can be difficult to interpret, and the exact extent
larger bone fragment, the fragment can be reattached with a
 of injuries is usually more easily diagnosed by careful palpa-
small lag screw, with or without washer.
 tion of the anesthetized cat, and during surgical exploration
of the joint. Both a medial and lateral parapatellar approach
are often necessary to evaluate the joint fully. The goal of
38.8 Stifle joint disruption
surgery is to repair or replace all ruptured structures, and to
achieve anatomic joint reduction with adequate stability.
Stifle joint disruption is a severe injury, resulting in complete
Temporary immobilization of the stifle joint is necessary to
dislocation of the tibiofemoral joint and severe instability
protect the primary repair during the frst 2-3 weeks, and to
(Fig. 38-16). This injury is caused by rupture of several of
allow periarticular fbrosis to develop without losing joint
the ligamentous joint stabilizers, including the collateral liga-
reduction. External splints or casts do not provide rigid
ments, cruciate ligaments, and joint capsule. Several combi-
immobilization of the stifle joint, so a transarticular external
nations of ligament sprains can cause stifle joint disruption,
 skeletal fxator or a transarticular pin is commonly used (Fig.
but the most common combination of injuries is rupture of
38-16 and Box 38-5).
486
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 38-16Two options for postoper ative immobilization of a disrupted stifle joint.
(A) Preoperative radiograph showing a cranially luxated stifle joint.
(B) Postoperative radiograph of the stifle joint, temporarily stabilized with a 3.0-mm transarticular pin.
(C) Radiograph after removal of transarticular pin, 3 weeks after the injury.
(D) Another disrupted stifle joint has been stabilized with a transarticular external fixator after repair of the medial collateral and cranial cruciate 
ligament.
(E) Radiograph 3 weeks postoperatively after removal of the external skeletal fixator
Transarticular pinning combined with a lateral splint for 3
Transarticular external fxation provides rigid fxation,
weeks was performed in seven cats with stifle luxations (31).
but can be associated with a number of complications,
These cats had an arthrotomy and debridement but no 
such as pin loosening, pin breakage, or iatrogenic fractures
attempt was made to repair the damaged ligaments. The cats
through the most proximal or distal pin holes (30). Positive-
had an average weight of 4.7 kg, and pins with a size range
 threaded pins lower the incidence of pin loosening and pin
of 2.4-3.5 mm were used (average 3.0 mm). Complications
breakage. Placing the most proximal pin in the proximal
included loosening, migration, and bending of the pin, which
third of the femur and the most distal pin in the distal third
may have been the result of using too small a pin or inade-
of the tibia, is recommended to reduce the risk of iatrogenic
fractures (30). Correct pin insertion techniques, avoidance
 as excellent in four, fair in one, and poor in one cat.
of damage of the cranial or caudal cortex, and the use of
38: Stifle joint
487
Box 38-5. Stabilization of a disrupted stifle joint
A medial parapatellar approach is performed in cases with
external bar is bent to hold the stifle joint in a slightly
 suspected rupture of the medial collateral ligament. The
 overflexed standing angle. The external fixator is removed
 lateral collateral ligament can be exposed with a lateral
after 2-3 weeks.
parapatellar approach if necessary. The collateral liga-
Temporary immobilization with a transarticular pin: A
ments, joint capsule, and intra-articular structures are
 size 2.4-3.2-mm transarticular pin is placed from just
explored.
proximal to the trochlear groove, across the stifle joint to
 Repair of structures and debridement of the joint: Menis-
exit the tibia on the cranial aspect, with the joint held at
 cal lesions are treated frst, either by reattaching peripheral
 a normal or slightly overflexed standing angle. The pins
avulsions to the joint capsule, or by partial or total menis-
 are left slightly long for easy retrieval (Fig. 38-17B). The
cectomy. The joint is flushed and the joint capsule is sutured.
 pin is removed through a small stab incision over the tibia
The next step involves suturing the collateral ligaments and
application of a ligament prosthesis, as described in Box
38-4. Extracapsular sutures are then placed to stabilize the
cranial and caudal cruciate ligaments, as shown in Boxes
38-2 and 38-3. The sutures are tied carefully to avoid over-
correction and subsequent subluxation. Range of motion
and joint stability are tested before wound closure. In
severely unstable joints it can be advantageous to place a
temporary transarticular pin as described below prior to
reconstruction of the ligaments, which helps to hold the
stifle in reduction during tightening of the sutures.
 Ancillary temporary transarticular stabilization is neces-
sary in most cases.
 Temporary immobilization with a transarticular exter-
nal fixator: A type I transarticular external fxator using
2.0-mm positive-threaded pins in the femur, and 1.6-2.0-
mm positive-threaded pins in the tibia is applied laterally
A
B
(Fig. 38-17A). The most proximal pin should be located
 Figure 38-17 Options for temporary immobilization of the stifle joint.
(A) A lateral type I transarticular external fixator for tempor ary
in the proximal third of the femur, and the most distal pin
immobilization of the stifle joint.
 in the distal third of the tibia. It is important not to damage
(B) Position of a transarticular pin for tempor ary immobilization of the
the cranial or caudal cortex as these pins are inserted. An
stifle joint
pins not exceeding 25% of the bone diameter are also
The angle of fusion is estimated from the standing angle of
important.
the contralateral limb, and is around 110°. It is best to fuse
the joint in a slightly more flexed angle, rather than too
38.9 Arthrodesis
straight, because the cat may fnd use of an extended leg
cumbersome, particularly during a crouched gait. Strict atten-
Arthrodesis of the stifle joint is a salvage treatment option if
tion should be paid to surgical technique to avoid complica-
joint function cannot be preserved with other methods.
tions. These tend to occur because of the long lever arm
Arthrodesis will leave the cat with significant gait alterations,
created, which can result in fracture of the femur or tibia at
and careful consideration should be made before electing for
 the implant-bone junction. Implants should end in metaphy-
this option. Amputation of the limb may also be selected in
seal areas and not over the narrowest part of the diaphysis
certain cases. Indications for arthrodesis include crippling
to avoid this complication. Leaving the distal and proximal
degenerative joint disease, for example after sepsis or badly
plate holes empty or use of a monocortical screw in these
managed deranged stifles, unreconstructable fractures, quad-
sites may also help decrease the stress riser effects. The surgi-
riceps contracture, or genu recurvatum (Fig. 38-18).
cal technique is described in Box 38-6.
488
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
A
B
C
Figure 38-18 Cat with stifle arthrodesis.
(A) Preoperative radiograph of a 4-month-old kitten with congenital genu recurvatum.
(B) Stifle arthrodesis using cross pins and a 2.0-mm dynamic compression plate and 2.0-mm screws.
(C) Note the arthrodesis healing and bone remodeling at the proximal and distal aspects of the plate 4 weeks after surgery. (Reproduced with
38.10 Postoperative treatment
essential after repair of grossly unstable stifle joint injuries.
and prognosis
 A transarticular external skeletal fixator or a transarticular
pin is left in place for approximately 2-3 weeks, and cats are
Postoperative reatment and prognosis depend on the type
strictly confined during that time. Joint stability is tested
and severity of the injury. Prognosis is usually good even for 
 clinically after removal of the devices.
severe injuries with early intervention, but poor if treatment
 Range of motion is usually markedly reduced after 3 weeks
is delayed.
of immobilization, but will rapidly improve when the cat
resumes activity. The owners should be advised to restrict
38.10.1 Isolated ligament injuries
activity of the cat markedly and prevent jumping in the frst
2 weeks after removal of the transarticular pin or external
Activity is restricted by keeping the cat indoors or caged for 
fixator to allow gradual reorganization and remodeling of the
4 weeks after repair of single ligament injuries, such as cranial 
 fbrous scar tissue, and to prevent iatrogenic fractures through
or caudal cruciate ligament rupture or isolated collateral liga- t
 the external skeletor fixator pin holes. Cats are kept indoors
ment rupture. A splinted bandage may be applied after repair
 for 2-3 months. Despite the severity of the injury, the prog-
of collateral ligament sprains for the frst 10 postoperative 
 nosis for return to satisfactory function is good, although
days. Jumping on or off elevated objects should be prevented.
thickening and decreased range of motion and degenerative
Prognosis for return to normal function is good to excellent, 
joint disease are likely to occur (30, 31). Possible complica-
although some degree of degenerative joint disease is likely
tions are loosening, bending or breakage of the transarticular
to develop. Stiffness after rest and slight residual lameness
 or external skeletal fxator pins, and femoral or tibial frac-
were observed in cats with degenerative disease after extra-
 tures through pin holes, with secondary loss of reduction
capsular stabilization (23). Death due to cardiomyopathy 
(30). Transarticular pinning may also cause damage to intra-
was described in three cats after cranial cruciate ligament
surgery (32).
38.10.2 Stifle joint disruption
38.10.3 Patellar luxation
ae sep jo aidnos e rop aepueq nos e u paseid si qu a  jo Aau a uo Auu spuadp uo! as au jo Aqei
the sof-tissue structures and external immobilization is surgery. For medial patellar luxation the bandage is applied
38: Stifle joint
489
Box 38-6. Stifle arthrodesis
 Stifle arthrodeses can be stabilized by application of a
 trochlea. Cancellous or corticocancellous graft is harvested
cranial plate or an external skeletal fixator after appropri-
 from the osteotomized bone fragments and the iliac crest,
ate cartilage debridement and bone grafting. A lateral skin  :
 and is placed at the arthrodesis site. The femur and tibia
incision is made with the cat in dorsal recumbency, and
 are anatomically reduced and the angle is checked prior to
the stifle joint is approached from both laterally and 
immobilization with two crossing K wires of 1.1-1.4-mm
medially.
diameter.
 Preparation of the stifle joint: After elevation of the
 Plate fixation: A 2.7- or 2.0-mm dynamic compression
 cranial tibial muscle from the lateral aspect of the proxi-
plate or a 2.0/2.7 (stacked) veterinary cuttable plate is
 mal tibia, an osteotomy of the tibial tuberosity is per-
 contoured and applied to the cranial aspect of the femur
formed. Elevation of the tibial tuberosity towards proximal
 and tibia with at least three bicortical screws in each bone.
gives excellent access to the whole stifle joint. The cranial
 The length of plate selected should ensure that the implant
cruciate ligaments and menisci are resected carefully with
1 ends in metaphyseal areas and not over the narrowest part
a sharp scalpel blade. With an oscillating saw, the proxi-
 of the diaphysis. One screw can be inserted across the stifle
mal tibial plateau cartilage and subchondral bone are
 joint, either through a plate hole or separate from the
removed perpendicular to the long axis of the tibia (Fig.
 plate, as a lag screw (Fig. 38-19B). The distal and proximal
38-19A). The distal femur is cut parallel to the cut of the 
 plate holes are left empty or are filled with monocortical
proximal tibia, while the stifle joint is held in the prede-
 screws to decrease the stress riser effects (Fig. 38-19C).
termined arthrodesis angle (Fig. 38-19A). A prebent K
 The tibial tuberosity needs to be reattached to the tibia,
wire can be laid on the tibia and femur as a guide. Further
lateral or medial of the plate (Fig. 38-19D). A lag screw
cartilage can be removed from the trochlear ridges and
 or a tension band fxation can be used.
A
B
电
D
Figure 38-19  Arthrodesis of the stifle joint.
(A) The tibial tuberosity was osteotomized and retracted cranially. The osteotomy of the tibial plateau is made perpendicular to the long axis
of the bone.
(B) The osteotomy of the distal femur is made parallel to the proximal tibial cut while the stifle joint is held in the desired flexion angle
(usually 110%).
(C) Stifle arthrodesis using an interfragmentary lag screw and a cranial plate. Note that the most proximal and distal holes are only filed with
monocortical screws.
(D) The tibial tuberosity is reattached to the tibia, adjacent to the plate.
in outward rotation. The cats are confined indoors for at least
38.10.4 Arthrodesis
3-4 weeks until control radiographs confrm healing of the
osteotomy. Good function can be expected in 90% of cats
After surgery the cat needs to be exercise-resricted by
treated surgically, whereas conservative management of the
confning it to a cage or small room where it is unable to
disease fails to lead to improvement (10).
jump or climb. Radiographs are taken after 4 weeks in an
490
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
adult cat, and exercise is gradually increased by enlarging the
16. Patsikas MN, et al. Hip dysplasia in the cat a report of three
size of the exercise area dependent on the appearance of the
cases. J Small Anim Pract 1998;39:290-294.
17. Loughlin CA, et al. Clinical signs and results of treatment in
radiograph and degree of healing. Prognosis is guarded for a
cats with patellar luxation: 42 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006;
 full return to function. Cats will have a circumducting gait,
228:1370-1375.
and they may encounter diffculty when walking with a
18. LEplattenier H, Montavon PM. Patellar luxation in dogs and
crouching gait and when jumping or climbing. Possible post-
cats: pathogenesis and diagnosis. Compend Continuing Educ
operative complications include fracture of the tibia or femur
2002;24:234-298.
19. Langley-Hobbs SJ. Surgery of 52 fractures of the patella in 34
at the bone-implant junction, non-union, and infection.
cats. Vet Rec 2009;164:80-86.
20. Brunnberg L, et al. Injury to the patella and the patella ligaments
References and further reading
in dogs and cats Il: rupture of the patellar ligament. Eur J Comp
Anim Pract 1993;3:69-73.
1. McLaughlin RM. Surgical diseases of the feline stifle joint. Vet
21. Voorhout G, et al. Avulsion fracture of the tendon of origin of
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2002;32:963-982.
the long extensor muscle of the toe in a horse and a cat. Tijdschr
2. Arnbjerg J, Heye NI. Fabellae and popliteal sesamoid bones in 
Diergeneeskd 1986;111:1225-1228.
cats. J Small Anim Pract 1993;34:95-98.
22. Campos AG, et al. What is your diagnosis? Intra-articular
3. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA. An atlas of surgical approaches to
avulsion fracture at the tibial insertion of the cranial cruciate
the bones and joints of the dog and the cat, 4th edn. Philadel-
ligament. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005;227:883-884.
phia: WB Saunders; 2004.
23. Harasen GLG. Feline cranial cruciate rupture. 17 cases and a
4. Whiting PG, Pool RR. Intrameniscal calcification and ossifica-
review of the literature. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2005;4:
tion in the stifle joints of three domestic cats. J Am Anim Hosp
254-257.
Assoc 1985;21:579-584.
 24. Umphlet RC. Feline stifle disease. Vet Clin North Am Small
 5. Reinke J, Mughannam A. Meniscal calcification and ossification
Anim Pract 1993;23:897-913.
in six cats and two dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1994;
25. Herzog W, et al. Hindlimb loading, morphology and biochem-
30:145-152.
istry of articular cartilage in the ACL-deficient cat knee. Osteo-
6. Scavelli TD, Schrader SC. Nonsurgical management of rupture 
arthritis Cartilage 1993;1:243-251.
of the cranial cruciate ligament in 18 cats. J Am Anim Hosp
26. Suter E, et al. One-year changes in hind limb kinematics. Ground
Assoc 1987;23:337-340.
reaction forces and knee stability in an experimental model of
7. Arnbjerg J, Bindseil E. Patella fracture in cats. Feline Pract
osteoarthritis. J Biomechanics 1998;31:511-517.
1994;22:31-35.
27. Alexander JW, et al. Anterior cruciate ligament rupture. Feline
8. Milovancev M, Ralphs SC. Congenital patellar aplasia in a
Pract 1977;July:38-39.
family of cats. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2004;17:9-11.
28. Gomez-Barrena E, et al. Anterior cruciate ligament reconstruc-
 9. Johnson ME. Feline patellar luxation: a retrospective case study.
tion affects proprioception in the cat's knee. Acta Orthop Scand
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1986;22:835-838.
1999;70:185-193.
10. Houlton JEF, Meynink SE. Medial patellar luxation in the cat.
29. Hoots EA, Petersen SW. Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy and
J Small Anim Pract 1989;30:349-352.
cranial closing wedge ostectomy in a cat with cranial cruciate
11. Engvall PD, Bushnell N. Patllar luxation in Abyssinian cats.
ligament rupture. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2005;41:395-399.
Feline Pract 1990;18:20-22.
30. Bruce WJ. Stifle joint luxation in the cat: treatment using trans-
12. Flecknell PA, Gruffydd-Jones TJ. Congenital luxation of the
articular external skeletal fixation. J Smal Anim Pract 1999;
patella in the cat. Feline Pract 1979;9:18-20.
40:482-488.
13. Smith GK, et al. Evaluation of the association between medial
31. Welches CD, Scavelli TD. Transarticular pinning to repair luxa-
patellar luxation and hip dysplasia in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
tion of the sifle joint in dogs and cats: a retrospective study of
1999;215:40-45.
10 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1990;26:207-214.
14. Davies M, Gill I. Congenital patellar luxation in the cat. Vet
32. Janssens LAA, et al. Anterior cruciate ligament rupture assocj-
Rec 1987;121:474-475.
ated with cardiomyopathy in three cats. Vet Comp Orthop
15. Hayes HM, et al. Feline hip dysplasia. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Traumatol 1991;4:35-37.
1979;15:447-448.
491
39
Tibia and fibula
K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs, P.M. Montavon
Fractures of the tibia and/or fbula are common, accounting
minimal soft tissue. This technique is most useful for
for about 10-20% of fractures in cats (1, 2). Usually both
 comminuted and open fractures. Fracture types occurring
the tibia and fbula are fractured. The fractures are often
 in the proximal tibia, the diaphysis, and the distal bone,
caused by falls from a height, but may occur after any type
 and possible options for treating them are summarized in
of trauma (3-5). Most of the fractures of the feline tibia
Table 39-1.
involve the middle and distal diaphysis (2-4). The diaphysis
of the tibia is surrounded by minimal soft tissue, and many
39.2.1 Intramedullary pinning
tibial fractures are comminuted and/or open. The incidence
of open fractures of the tibial diaphysis has been reported to
Although the straight form of the tibia is ideal for inserting
be as high as 21-46% (3, 4). Cats with high-rise syndrome
 intramedullary pins, they are not used as commonly in the
sustain open fractures more commonly than cats with other
tibia, as compared to the humerus and femur. Intramedullary
causes of trauma (4). The high incidence of comminuted and
 pins should always be inserted in a normograde fashion into
open fractures, and the limited extraosseous blood supply
 the tibia because retrograde pinning in cats invariably results
and soft-tissue envelope, is likely to account for the higher
 in penetration of the patellar tendon (6). Intramedullary pins
 rate of complications, such as delayed union, non-union, and 
must be used in conjunction with implants resistant to rota-
 Osteomyelitis, when compared to fractures of other bones.
'adk anoen au uo suapuadap 'uoissaiduos jeixe pue uon
The size of the pin is selected according to the smallest diam-
39.1 Surgical anatomy
eter of the distal medullary cavity. If the pin is combined with
a plate or an external fxator, the size selected should be
The tibia is a straight bone with a triangular shape in the
 around 30% of the diameter of the distal medullary canal to
proximal third and a round to oval shape in the distal two-
leave room for insertion of the screws or pins. Selecting too
thirds. The fibula is very thin in cats and does not contribute
isd smanos 1o sud ssed o1 Sukn uau pue uid e sa1e
to weight-bearing, but it is important for stifle and tarsal joint
the pin can result in cortical fissures. Kirschner wires of a
stability because it serves as the attachment site for the lateral
diameter of 1.2-2.0 mm are usually adequate.
collateral ligaments of both joints. The distal fbula has a
A medial parapatellar approach to the stifle is performed
ligamentous connection to the tibia, the inferior tibiofbular
 for normograde intramedullary pin insertion. The pin entry
ligament. This ligament is important for stability of the tarsal
point is located on the medial aspect of the tibial plateau,
joint, because the medial and lateral malleolus are not only
 between the insertion of the patellar tendon and medial col-
the sites of origin of the tarsal collateral ligaments but also
 lateral ligament, cranial to the intermeniscal ligament (Fig.
serve as a medial and lateral restraint for the trochlea of the
39-1). Holding the stifle joint in 90° of flexion facilitates
talus (Chapter 40).
insertion of the pin. The pin is then advanced along the
medial cortex using a Jacobs chuck until its tip is located
close to the fracture. The fracture is reduced, and the pin is
39.2 Stabilization techniques
further advanced until resistance is felt at the distal epiphysis.
Many stabilization methods can be used to treat tibial frac-
The distal tibial epiphysis is a short piece of bone, so great
tures. The reader is referred to Chapters 13 and 24 to review
care must be taken not to push the pin into the tibiotarsal
the factors influencing the choice of treatment and implants
joint. The proximal end of the pin is cut as short as possible
for different fracture types. External coaptation with a cast
to avoid irritation of the patellar tendon and parapatellar
is successful for stabilization of certain tibial fractures in
tissue.
young cats, such as greenstick, simple transverse fractures,
and tibial fractures with an intact fbula. Indications and
39.2.2 Interlocking nailing
application techniques for external coaptation are described
in Chapter 22. The tibia is the ideal bone for closed reduction
The use of an interlocking nail for stabilization of feline
and external skeletal fixation, because it is surrounded by
tibial fractures has been described as part of a large
492
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Fracture localization
Fracture type
Stabilization methods
Table 39-1. A summary of
feline tibial fractures and selected
Salter and Harris type II
 Parallel or cross pinning
treatment options
Proximal tibia
 IM pin and antirotational K wire
 Lag screw and antirotational K wire
External coaptation
Simple metaphyseal
IM pin and:
-ESF
- plate
- internal fxator
Plate and tension band
 Internal fixator and tension band
Comminuted
 IM pin and:
metaphyseal
-ESF
- plate
- internal fxator
 Diaphysis
 Simple transverse or
M pin and ESF
short oblique
 Compression plate
 Internal fixator
External coaptation
 Simple long oblique and
 Lag screw and neutralization plate
reducible
Lag screw and internal fixator
multifragmentary
IM pin and ESF
 M pin and cerclage wire
Comminuted
 ESF (closed reduction)
ESF ± IM pin
 Buttress plate
Internal fxator
 Interlocking nail
Distal tibia
 Simple metaphyseal
 ESF and IM pin
 Plate ± IM pin
 Internal fxator ± IM pin
Comminuted
IM pin and:
metaphyseal
-ESF
- plate
- internal fixator
Salter and Harris type I
Cross pinning
IM pin, intramedullary pin; ESF, external skeletal fixator.
retrospective study involving nail use in dogs and cats (7).
mined by using the templates and the preoperative radio-
The interlocking nail was applied infrequently in the tibia in
graphs of the intact contralateral limb. The nail is inserted in
the cat, when compared to other long bones, but from the
a normograde fashion, as described in Figure 39-1. A small
information obtained from the study no complications
medial approach is made to the tibial diaphysis for fracture
occurred with its use. With the current range of interlocking
reduction and directing the nail into the distal bone. The
nail sizes, the nail can only be used in large cats with
distal tibial epiphysis in the cat is very short and there is a
fractures involving the mid to proximal third of the tibial
risk of inadvertent penetration of the tibiotarsal joint while
diaphysis.
seating the nail in the distal metaphyseal bone. Removing the
The 4.0-mm nail with 2.0-mm screws or bolts is the most
sharp point from the end of the nail and therefore making a
appropriate size to use, and the length of the nail is deter-
blunter end can help prevent penetration.
39: Tibia and fibula
493
Figure 39-1  (A) Normograde
Hgure 39-2  Diagram showing
pinning of the tibia. (B) The pin
positioning of a centrally
entry point on the medial edge
threaded transosseous pin in the
of the tibial plateau is reached 
caudal aspect of the triangular-
through a small medial
shaped proximal tibia. Screws are
parapatellar incision, and the pin
Cranial
 also inserted in this position.
is inserted along the medial
cortex of the tibia.
type I confguration provides sufficient stability for moder-
ately comminuted fractures, and fractures in younger cats.
Stability of a type I external skeletal fixator can be improved
by using fxator systems with large connecting bars, or by
using a double bar. The tubular external fxator is a valuable
B
implant for distally located fractures (Chapter 24).
-qu Aqaraas roy pndde si roiexy ieuanxa ll adki v
nuted or open fractures with longer anticipated healing times.
 Its confguration provides more stability, and reduces the risk
 of premature failure. Positive-threaded pins and the employ-
ment of a correct pin insertion technique (Chapter 24) are
ada ouasni ud ard jo touad rn pnin ose
Ⅱ external fixators, or very occasionally type II fixators, are
also indicated if the size of the proximal or distal fragment
Toxy ill adi a 'd omn no ao jo toas smo Ao
 frame has the advantage of allowing insertion of additional
pins from a different direction.
39.2.4 Plating
39.2.3 External skeletal fixation
Bone plates can be applied to repair closed fractures of the
 tibial diaphysis. Plates are positioned along the caudomedial
The main indications for external skeletal fxation are com-
border of the proximal tibia, because its triangular shape
 minuted and open fractures, and fractures located in the
allows more bone purchase caudally (Fig. 39-2). The 2.7/2.0-
distal diaphysis or metaphysis. Either a closed or an open
mm veterinary cuttable plate (VCP) and the 2.7-mm dynamic
reduction can be used. If open reduction is chosen, only a
 compression plate (DCP) are often used, although 2.7-mm
minimal approach should be performed to preserve the blood
screws are at the upper range of size for the feline tibia,
supply. Closed reduction and application of external fxation
is the treatment of choice for comminuted fractures with
2.0/2.7 VCP with 2.0-mm screws is more appropriate for the
significant soft-tissue damage, and for open fractures. Closed
diameter of the distal tibia in cats. However the 2.0-mm
reduction and external skeletal fixation were associated with
 DCP has a limited length, which is often insuffcient, and the
a higher rate of malunion compared to closed reduction in
VCP is relatively weak, unless applied in a stacked fashion
one study (4), so care has to be taken to align the main frag-
(8). Another useful plate for the tibia is the 2.4-mm limited
ments adequately.
contact-DCP (LC-DCP).
Older cats can have brittle bones, and iatrogenic fractures
In summary, simple transverse fractures are anatomically
could be created if oversized transosseous pins, especially
reduced and stabilized with a DCP or LC-DCP applied in
positive-threaded pins, or incorrect insertion techniques are
compression function, or with a single VCP. Long oblique
applied. Pin size is usually 2.0 mm for the proximal tibia, and
fractures are reduced and stabilized with lag screws, before
1.6 mm for the distal tibia. Because the proximal tibia has a
applying a plate in neutralization function. A plate applied
triangular shape, transosseous pins are inserted into the
in buttress function is used to treat comminuted fractures.
 aou ueiqo oi eiqn jeuixoid aul jo noadse jpnen rapeonq
The 2.0/2.7-mm VCP should be stacked for this purpose. A
bone purchase (Fig. 39-2).
minimally invasive approach is performed without disturbing
adki v 'pasn aq ues suoneinayuoo l adki pue I adki qiog
the soft-tissue attachment of the fragments in the commi-
I external fxator applied on the medial side of the bone is
nuted area. The plate and rod technique is also feasible
the best choice, as the pins only penetrate the skin and do
in cats, if a small intramedullary pin and 2.0-mm screws
        
are used.
494   Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Comminuted tibial fractures are also amenable to mini-3
 39.3 Fractures of the proximal tibia
mally invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO), in which the and fibula
fracture site is not approached at all (9). Two small skin
incisions are made over the medial proximal and distal 
Fractures of the proximal tibia and fbula are rare. They
 metaphysis. A precontoured plate is inserted through the i
 include Salter and Harris fractures of the proximal tibial
 proximal incision and is slid along the medial surface of the 
 physis in immature animals, or fractures of the tibial metaph-
bone towards distally. It is frst fxed to the proximal main
 ysis in adult cats. Other fractures are exceedingly rare, but
fragment through the local incision. The main fragments are
avulsion fractures of the tibial tuberosity or metaphyseal
aligned, and the plate is secured to the distal main fragment.
fractures extending into the stifle joint can occur.
Care is taken to avoid outward rotation.
39.3.1 Approaches to the proximal tibia
39.2.5 Internal fixators
and fibula
Internal fxators can be used in neutralization or buttress
The proximal tibia is approached through a medial incision
function instead of conventional plates to repair fractures of
(10). The combined fascia of the sartorius, gracilis, and semi-
the tibial diaphysis. When used for diaphyseal fractures, the
tendinosus muscles is sharply incised medial to the patellar
main advantage is the preservation of the periosteal blood
ligament along the craniomedial tibial crest, and elevated
supply, and the prevention of cortical necrosis, which is most
from the medial aspect of the proximal tibia in a caudal
beneficial in the treatment of comminuted fractures with poor
direction. Care is taken not to damage the medial collateral
vascularity. Another good indication for internal fxators are
ligament of the stifle joint.
fractures near the stifle or tarsal joint, where the size of the
 proximal or distal main fragment only allows insertion of
39.3.2 Salter and Harris fractures
two screws. The 2.4-mm Unilock mandible locking plates
(Chapter 24) are of suffcient strength for the tibial diaphysis.
The immature proximal tibia has wo separate growth plates,
The thick 2.0-mm plates can be applied to repair distal tibial
 one for the proximal epiphysis and one for the tibial tuberos-
fractures, where there is little room for screw insertion. The
ity. These two growth plates fuse to each other between 36
2.0-mm plates should be combined with an intramedullary
and 44 weeks of age, forming a cap that sits on the metaphy-
 nail if used in buttress function.
sis (11). This combined growth center then fuses to the
A
B
C
D
Figure 39-3 (A, B) Preoperative and (C, D) 4-week follow-up radiographs of a 5-month-old cat with a Salter and Harris type Il fracture of the
proximal tibial physis. The fracture was repaired with cross pins.
39: Tibia and fibula
495
Box 39-1. Stabilization of Salter and Harris type I, ll, and lll fractures of the proximal tibia
A medial approach to the proximal tibia is performed.
cortex in Salter and Harris type I and II fractures with
Fracture reduction is assisted by holding the stifle joint in
either technique. This should only be performed in cats
extension. The proximal fracture fragment is levered
without further growth potential.
forward and medially with the help of a periosteal elevator
or a mini Hohmann retractor. Delicate handling of the
epiphyseal fragment is mandatory to prevent iatrogenic
Figure 39-4
damage of the small bone fragment and the growth plate.
Options for
stabilization of Salter
A small local lateral approach is needed for insertion of
and Harris type I and
Kirschner wires from the lateral side.
Il fractures of the
Cross pinning: A 0.8-1.2-mm Kirschner wire is inserted
proximal tibia.
from the medial edge of the tibial plateau, and is advanced
(A) Repair of a Salter
and Harris type I
in a distolateral direction to penetrate the lateral cortex.
fracture with αross
A second Kirschner wire is inserted from the lateral edge
pins.
of the tibial plateau into the medial cortex (Fig. 39-4A).
(B) Internal fixation 
Unless the bone is very soft, the pin ends should be bent
of a Salter and Harris 
over to prevent pin migration.
type ll fracture with 
Intramedullary nail and antirotational Kirschner wire:
 an intramedullary pin
This technique may be advantageous in Salter and Harris
and Kirschner wire,
inserted from lateral.
type II fractures with a large lateral metaphyseal fragment.
The intramedullary nail is inserted frst, as described above.
A small Kirschner wire is then driven from the lateral edge
of the tibial tuberosity across the fracture in a distomedial
direction, until it engages the medial cortex (Fig. 39-4B).
An additional tension band or a positional screw can be
applied across the tibial tuberosity physis into the caudal
A
R
metaphysis between 50 and 76 weeks of age (11). Before
39.3.3 Metaphyseal fractures
fusion of the two growth centers has taken place, the two
physes can fracture individually, and a Salter and Harris type
Metaphyseal fractures of the proximal tibia usually occur in
I or II fracture of the proximal epiphysis (Fig. 39-3) or an
adult cats, and are more frequent than Salter and Harris
avulsion fracture of the tibial tuberosity can result. Fractures
 fractures (3). The proximal fragment has a tendency to tilt in
occurring after fusion of the two growth centers are also
 a proximocranial direction because of the tension exerted by
classified as Salter and Harris type I or II fractures.
 the patellar tendon. The main surgical challenge lies in being
The proximal epiphyseal fragment has a tendency to dis-
 able to insert a sufficient number of screws or pins into the
place in a caudolateral direction relative to the tibia. The
small proximal fragment.
resulting change in angle of the tibial plateau compromises
Treatment options for simple transverse fractures include
biomechanics of the stifle joint, and impairs its function if left
 an intramedullary pin and a simple external skeletal fixator, 
untreated. The majority of cases therefore require open
or a medial plate (Box 39-2). T- or L-plates allow insertion
reduction and internal stabilization. Possible repair options
 of two screws even in very small proximal fragrments (Fig.
for Salter and Harris type I, II, and II fractures include cross
39-6). A cranial tension band fixation is added in cases with
pinning (Fig. 39-3) or combining an intramedullary pin with
marked distraction of the cranial aspect of the fracture.
an antirotational pin (Box 39-1).
Comminuted fractures usually extend into the tibial diaph-
 Fixation stability can be enhanced by placing an additional
ysis and are treated like comminuted diaphyseal fractures,
tension band wire across the tibial tuberosity in Salter and
- ieis px l ro ll ad i pis are 
Harris type I and II fractures. The tension band should only
ators are advisable if the size of the proximal fragment only
be applied in older cats without further growth potential.
allows insertion of one or two pins.
Undisplaced proximal physeal fractures are occasionally
One author has seen several proximal transverse tibial frac-
encountered, and can be treated with external coaptation.
ures in older cats with concurrent chronic patellar fractures.
496
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 39-2. Stabilization of a simple transverse fracture of the proximal tibial metaphysis
A medial approach to the proximal metaphysis is per-
 formed. The approach is extended proximally, parallel to
 the patellar tendon if an intramedullary pin is inserted.
Intramedullary pin and type I external skeletal fixator:
 This repair is preferred in young cats. A 1.4-1.6-mm intra-
medullary pin is inserted in a normograde manner. For the
medially applied external skeletal fixator, 1.4-2.0-mm
transosseous pins are driven into the proximal fragment,
 and 1.4-1.6-mm pins are used in the distal tibial shaft (Fig.
39-5A). Smooth pins should be angled 70° to the long axis
of the bone to enhance pull-out resistance. A cranial
tension band wire as described in Figure 39-5B can also
be applied.
Plate and tension band repair: This repair is preferred in
older cats. A 2.0-mm T-plate or dynamic compression
plate in compression function can be used if the proximal
fragment allows insertion of three screws. The plate is
A
B
applied at the caudomedial edge of the tibia in order to
Figure 39-5  Options for stabilization of a simple transverse
beneft from the increased bone purchase. A 0.6-0.8-mm
 fracture of the proximal tibial metaphysis.
fgure-of-eight wire is positioned across the cranial fracture
(A) Repair of a simple proximal transverse fracture with an
line as a tension band (Fig. 39-5B). A 2.0-mm internal
intramedullary pin and a medial type I external skeletal fixator
fxator is a good alternative if only two screws can be
(B) Stabilization of a simple proximal transverse fracture using a six-
 inserted into the proximal fragment.
hole plate and a cranial tension band wire.
A
B
C
D
Figure 39-6 (A, B) Preoperative and (C, D) postoperative radiographs of a 2-year-old cat with a proximal metaphyseal tibial fracture. Use of a 2.0-
mm T-plate allowed insertion of two screws into the proximal fr agment.
39: Tibia and fibula
497
These fractures showed remodeling of the cranial cortex of
 only fractures expected to have achieved clinical union within
the tibia, and are thought to be stress fractures related to  4 weeks should be treated with external coaptation. Incom-
decreased flexion in the stifle joint, resulting in the bending 
 plete and undisplaced fractures in very young kittens may be
force in the hindlimb being transferred to the proximal tibia.  treated with a splinted bandage. For complete fractures and
Fractures will often occur bilaterally several months apart,  fractures in older cats a full cast provides more stability.
and most cats have a history of other non-traumatic fractures  Application and maintenance of bandages and casts are
of the acetabulum, ischium, or humeral condyle. An underly-  described in Chapter 22. It is important to immobilize the
-sea aul jo arnsenuos suaaaid oi uonisod paxa e ui snsin leiqn aul uaaoidun inq paisadsns si Aieunouqe auoq Su
fractures in these cats seem to heal best when repaired with 
 rocnemius muscle. Contraction of the gastrocnemius muscle
a pin and tension band, or plate and screw and tension band
 can occur within days in immature cats.
technique.
Internal stabilization or external skeletal fixation results
in faster return to function and allows immediate weight-
bearing and motion of adjacent joints. Simple fractures of
39.4 Diaphyseal fractures of the
both the tibia and fbula in adult cats are therefore usually
tibia and fibula
treated surgically. A type I external skeletal fxator, with or
Fracture healing of diaphyseal tibial fractures tends to be
without intramedullary pin, a medially applied 2.7- or 2.0-
slow, probably caused by the lack of surrounding soft tissue
mm DCP in compression function, a single 2.0/2.7-mm VCP,
and the sparse blood supply. Careful tissue handling, preser-
or a 2.4-mm LC-DCP are all implants that could be used (Box
vation of blood supply, and respecting the principles of osteo-
39-3). Open fractures are treated with external skeletal
fxation.
synthesis are crucial for success. The choice of treatment for
diaphyseal tibia and fibula fractures is mainly based on frac-
ture severity and location, age, body weight, temperament of
 39.4.3 Long oblique and multifragmentary
the patient, and implants available (Chapters 13 and 24). The
 reducible fractures
various implant systems have their own advantages and dis-
advantages. Closed reduction and external skeletal fixation of
Simple long oblique or reducible multifragment fractures of
severe tibial fractures seem to reduce the incidence of osteo-
the tibia are not very common. They are usually treated with
anatomic reduction and stable internal fxation. Anatomic
myelitis, when compared to open reduction and internal fixa-
tion methods (4). It is therefore often the method of choice
fracture reduction enhances fixation stability by creating load
sharing of the cortex, but has the disadvantage of causing
for severely comminuted and open fractures. Plate osteosyn-
 thesis has the advantage of easier postoperative management
soft-tissue trauma and bone devascularization. It should only
compared to external skeletal fixation, making it more suit-
be attempted in long oblique fractures, and fractures with
able for cats that are difficult to handle. On the other hand,
one large reducible butterfly fragment. If it seems question-
plate osteosynthesis causes more iatrogenic damage to the
able from preoperative radiographs that anatomic reduction
sparse blood supply, and tibial fractures stabilized with bone
is possible, the fracture is treated as a comminuted fracture
(section below).
plates had the longest healing times in two studies (2, 4).
Intramedullary pinning and cerclage wires, and interfrag-
39.4.1 Approach to the tibial diaphysis
mentary lag screws with a neutralization plate, are treatment
options for anatomic reduction of long oblique fractures.
The tibial diaphysis is approached via a medial skin incision.
Stabilization with a lag screw and a neutralization plate is
The saphenous vein is spared. It can be gently dissected free
preferred over fxation with an intramedullary pin and cer-
and retracted with a Penrose drain.
clage wires in the tibia (Fig. 39-8 and Box 39-4). Application
of cerclage wires around the tibia requires additional soft-
39.4.2 Simple transverse and short
tissue dissection between the tibia and fbula, and has the
 potential for further diminution of the blood supply.
oblique fractures
Long oblique fractures can also be stabilized with an intra-
Simple transverse and short oblique fractures may be treated
 medullary pin and external skeletal fixator (Box 39-4). The
with a cast after reduction. Tibial fractures with an intact
 intramedullary pin enhances bending stability, and the exter-
fbula are also amenable to be treated with external coapta-  nal skeletal fxation pins prevent axial collapse and rotation.
tion because the fbula acts as an internal splint. The disad-  This type of fixation does not provide interfragmentary com-
vantage ofexternalcoaptationis the prolonged immobilization  pression, but fracture healing should be faster because of
 of adjacent joints, which can cause cartilage degeneration, preservation of local blood supply. Open fractures are also
periarticular fibrosis, and muscle contractures. Therefore,
 treated with external skeletal fxation.
498
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 39-3. Stabilization of a simple transverse or short oblique fracture of the tibial diaphysis
Simple fractures treated with intramedullary pin and exter-
nal skeletal fixator can be reduced and stabilized in a
closed manner. A medial approach to the tibial shaft is
performed for plate osteosynthesis. The fracture is ana-
tomically reduced.
 Intramedullary pin and type I external skeletal fxator:
This combination is commonly used to treat simple frac-
tures of the tibia in young cats. An intramedullary pin is
inserted in a normograde manner to align the fracture
fragments. Two transosseous pins are then placed in each
 fracture fragment to provide rotational stability (Fig. 39-
 7A). Usually, 1.4-2.0-mm pins are used in the proximal
tibia, and 1.4-1.6-mm pins in the distal tibia.
Plate osteosynthesis: The plate is applied to the medial
tibial surface. Interfragmentary compression is exerted if a
 dynamic compression plate (DCP) or limited contact-DCP
(LC-DCP) is used. One screw on each side of the fracture
is applied eccentrically for interfragmentary compression.
 Overall, at least three screws are required per fragment. It
A
B
Figure 39-7  Options for stabilization of simple transverse or 
is advisable to select a longer plate and leave some holes
short oblique fractures of the tibial diaphysis
empty, rather than taking a short plate and filling all holes
(A) Repair of a transverse diaphyseal tibial fracture with an
(Fig. 39-7B). Care must be taken not to leave a single empty
intramedullary pin and a type I external skeletal fixator.
plate hole at the level of the fracture.
(B) Internal fixation of a short oblique tibial fracture with a
medially applied plate. Anatomic reduction is important.
Spiral fractures of the tibia with an intact fbula can be
successfully treated with external coaptation in immature
cats (12). External coaptation for long oblique fractures is
not recommended in adult cats.
39.4.4 Comminuted fractures
Comminuted and open fractures of the tibia are common.
Open fractures are commonly located in the distal diaphysis.
Closed, mildly comminuted fractures can be treated with a
plate in buttress function, if the main fragments allow inser-
tion of a sufficient number of screws. Internal fixators can
also be used as buttress implants, and have the advantage of
preserving corical blood supply and requiring only two
screws per fragment (Fig. 39-10).
External skeletal fixation is the treatment of choice for
B
4
open fractures and is also commonly used to stabilize com-
Figure 39-8  A 10-month-old cat with a long oblique fracture of the
minuted fractures. A type I or II external skeletal fxator is
tibia.
used depending on fracture location and severity. A type I
(A) Preoperative radiograph showing a long oblique fracture of the
external skeletal fixator with three ransosseous pins per frag-
distal tibial shaft
ment is adequate for mild to moderate comminuted fractures
(B) The fracture was stabilized with a 2.0-mm lag screw and a 1.5/2.0-
 in younger cats. Healing can take several months in severely
weak and short plate could be used because the fibula was intact.
comminuted and open tibia fractures (4) (Fig. 39-11), and
(C) The fracture was healed after 5 weeks.
39: Tibia and fibula
499
Box 39-4. Stabilization of long oblique or reducible butterfly fractures of the tibial diaphysis
A medial approach to the tibial shaft is performed if ana-
 tomic fracture reduction and interfragmentary compres-
sion are planned. Closed reduction or a minimally invasive
 approach can be used for external skeletal fixation.
Lag screws and neutralization plate: The fracture is ana-
 tomically reduced and reduction is maintained with pointed
reduction forceps. One or two 2.0-mm lag screws are
 inserted perpendicular to the fracture line(s). A long plate
is then applied in neutralization function (Fig. 39-9A). At
least three screws should be inserted proximal and distal
 to the limit of the fracture. If fracture confguration allows,
the lag screws can also be inserted directly through the
plate.
 Intramedullary pin and external skeletal fixator: An
 intramedullary pin is inserted normograde. The fracture
 can be held in reduction with pointed reduction forceps
while transosseous pins are inserted. Two to three transos-
seus pins are inserted per fragment (Fig. 39-9B). Size 2.0-
mm pins are usually used in the proximal metaphysis, and
A
B
1.4-1.6-mm pins in the diaphysis and distal metaphysis.
Figure 39-9 Options for stabilization of long oblique fractures, or
reducible fractures with a butterfly fragment, of the tibial diaphysis.
(A) Stabilization of a tibial fracture with a butterfly fragment with 
lag screws and a neutralization plate.
(B) Repair of a long oblique fracture in the tibial shaft with an
intramedullary pin and a type I external skeletal fixator.
Figure 39-10 (A) Preoperative,
(B) postoperative, and (C) 1-year
follow-up radiographs of a cat 
with a comminuted fracture of
the distal shaft of the tibia,
stabilized with an internal fixator
(2.4-mm Unilock plate). Note the 
small gap between plate and
bone, and that only two screws
were inserted in the small distal
fragment.
B
500
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
R
F
H
Figure 39-11 Delayed healing of a comminuted fracture of the tibia.
(A, B) Preoperative radiographs show a highly comminuted fracture.
(C. D) Radiographs taken 3 months after closed reduction and stabilization with a type Il external skeletal fixator. The most proximal pin is broken,
there is a non-union of the most proximal part of the fracture, and the proximal fragment is tilted cranially.
(E, F) Radiographs taken another 3 months after replacement of proximal pins, insertion of a cancellous bone graft, and application of a tension
band to pull the proximal fragment distally and caudally. Callus formation is now evident.
(G, H) Radiographs after 11 months finally show healing. The type I external skeletal fixator was left in place for another month.
39: Tibia and fibula
501
Box 39-5. Stabilization of comminuted fractures of the tibial diaphysis
Closed reduction can be used to apply an external skeletal
the main fragments. Two additional positive end-threaded
fixator. A surgical approach is usually performed for
 or smooth pins are then added from medial per main frag-
plating, but care is taken to disturb the soft-tissue attach-
ment as half pins.
ments of the fragments and local blood supply minimally.
Buttress plate: A 2.7-mm dynamic compression plate
The least invasive approach to apply a plate is the mini-
(DCP), a 2.4-mm limited contact-DCP (LC-DCP) or a
mally invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO) technique.
stacked 2.0/2.7-mm veterinary cuttable plate can be used.
 Bone grafting is indicated if large fracture gaps or devital-
The plate should span the whole length of the tibia, and
ized fracture fragments are present.
 should allow insertion of at least three screws proximally
External skeletal fixation: Type I and II external fixators
and distally (Fig. 39-12C). Minimal plate contouring is
are mostly used with 2.0-mm transosseous pins proxi-
necessary. The plate is fixed to the proximal fragment first.
mally, and 1.6-mm pins distally. The most proximal and
Then reduction is achieved by securing the distal fragment
 most distal positive-threaded transosseous pins are inserted
to the plate. The intervening fracture fragments are not
frst, parall to the stifle and tarsal joint. These pins are
manipulated. An intramedullary pin can give additional
end-threaded for a type I fxator (Fig. 39-12A), and cen-
bending stability, especially if the proximal or distal frag-
rally threaded for a type II fxator (Fig. 39-12B). The
ments are too short to allow insertion of three screws. The
fracture is reduced indirectly by bringing the two pins
intramedullary pin is inserted prior to plate application,
parallel to each other and connecting them with the exter-
 and helps in obtaining alignment. The disadvantage is that
nal bar. This relies on accurate pin positioning, and overall
 it may be difficult to pass the screws in the narrow distal
alignment should also be checked by flexing and extending
diaphysis.
the hock and stifle to ensure that they are bending in the
Internal fixator: An internal fxator, for example the
same plane. Care is taken to avoid valgus, outward rota-
2.4-mm Unilock plate, can be applied in buttress function,
tion, craniocaudal malalignment, and overdistraction of
 as shown in the radiographs of Figure 39-10.
Figure 39-12  Options for
stabilization of comminuted
fractures of the tibial shaft.
(A) Stabilization of a mildly
comminuted mid diaphyseal
fracture with a type I external
skeletal fixator. Three
transosseous pins are inserted per
fragment.
(B) Repair of a severely
comminuted fracture of the tibia 
with a type ll external skeletal
fixator. At least two pins should
be inserted per fragment.
(C) Internal fixation of a
comminuted fracture using a
buttress plate.
A
B
pin loosening is likely to occur during such long healing times
only allows insertion of the minimum number of pins from
if simple frames are used. Severely comminuted fractures,
[wo sides or planes (Box 39-5).
especially in older cats, are therefore best stabilized with a
An interlocking nail is another treatment option for
type II configuration. A type II or even type Il configuration
comminuted fractures in the proximal or mid diaphyseal
is also used if a small proximal or distal metaphyseal segment
area in larger cats. The tibia and its intramedullary canal
Figure 39-13 (A) Preoperative.
(B) postoperative, and (C) 3-
month follow-up radiographs of
a cat with a very distal oblique
metaphyseal fracture of the tibia
and fibula. A hybrid circular
external fixator was used for
stabilization. The fracture had
healed 3 months after surgery
B
narrow distally, so with the current range of interlocking nail   fragment can make it difficult to insert a suffcient number
sizes, the nail can only be used in large cats with fractures  of screws or transosseous pins.
involving the mid to proximal third diaphysis (7).
External skeletal fixators can often be used after closed
Fractures with devitalized fracture fragments and fractures  reduction. The tubular external skeletal fixator is especially
with large fracture gaps are at risk of developing non-union suitable for distal metaphyseal fractures because it allows
s e rao sud snossosunl jo raquu no e jo uoas n ueu al jo uoep aissanxg panena aq pious pue
(tl) suansks roexy ienaless jeuaxa rauo ueul anueis uinp papiae aq pinos sdee anin arei aueain siu
external skeletal fixation repair. Cancellous bone grafting has  (Chapter 24). A hybrid construct with a circular external
been shown to be capable of preventing non-unions of the  skeletal fixator (15, 16) (Fig. 39-13) or a fxator with an
tibia in the presence of large fracture gaps (13). Autogenous acrylic bar also allows fixation of very small fragments, and
or allogenous cancellous bone graft, or a combination of the  is useful for distally located fractures.
two, can be used. Open fractures may require delay of the 
 The small distal fragment does not usually allow insertion
grafting until the wound is considered to be free of infection. of a suffcient number of screws with a 2.7-mm DCP. A 2.0-
mm thick DCP or a 2.0/2.7 or 1.5/2.0 VCP are therefore
used. To compensate for the lower stability of these shorter
39.5 Fractures of the distal tibia and fibula
and weaker plates, an intramedullary pin can be inserted
Distal fractures of the tibia and fbula include metaphyseal
 prior to plate application if there is concern about construct
fractures in adult cats, Salter and Harris fractures in growing
 stability. The curtable plate can be used in sandwich function
to enhance bending stability. Internal fxators can also be
cats, and tarsal joint fractures. Lateral and medial malleolar
fractures are common distal tibial and fbular fractures, and
used in fractures close to joints where it is only possible to
are associated with tarsal instability.
insert two screws per fragment (Box 39-6).
39.5.1 Approaches to the distal tibia and fibula
39.5.3 Salter and Harris fractures
A medial approach is used to access the distal tibial diaphysis
 The distal physis of the tibia closes between 40 and 52 weeks
and the medial malleolus. The fbula is approached from 
of age in intact cats (1l). Fractures of the distal tibia are
laterally.
usually Salter and Harris type I or II fractures (Fig. 39-15).
Salter and Harris type II fractures have also been reported
(17). Salter and Harris type I and II fractures are best stabi-
39.5.2 Metaphyseal fractures of the distal tibia
lized with cross pins (Box 39-7). Conservative treatment with
Distal metaphyseal tibial fractures occur commonly in cats,
 a cast is an option in undisplaced Salter and Harris type I or
and the incidence of open fractures is relatively high. Closed
 II fractures, particularly in young kittens. Cats younger than
  i a id y ra  s  r i  ra r s d  pis aq  s
nal skeletal fixation. The treatment of choice for open frac-  development of growth disturbances if premature physeal
tures is an external skeletal fixator. The small size of the distal closure occurs.
39: Tibia and fibula
503
Box 39-6. Stabilization of metaphyseal fractures of the distal tibia
Although closed reduction is possible with external skele-
 Internal fixator: A 2.0-mm locking plate can be used as
tal fixation, a small medial approach to the distal fragment
 a neutralization or buttress implant, with two screws in
 is often performed for ease of pin positioning. A medial
 the distal fragment, and three in the proximal fragment.
approach is also used for plate application.
Tubular external skeletal fixator: The distal transosse-
ous pin is inserted frst, close to and perpendicular to the
tarsal joint. A 1.6-mm, or maximally a 2.0 positive end-
threaded pin, is used. The direction of this frst pin is criti-
 cal, as it will determine the position of the connecting tube,
 perpendicular to the pin. A 6.0-mm tube is secured to the
pin. The fracture is reduced and a transosseous pin is
inserted into the proximal fragment. If the distal pin is
placed correctly, the tube will be positioned parallel to the
long axis of the tibia. At least three pins are inserted into
the proximal fragment, and at least two or three are
inserted into the distal fragment (Fig. 39-14A). If an intra-
medullary pin is also used it is inserted prior to application
of the fixator.
 Intramedullary pin and plate: An intramedullary pin,
comprising approximately 30% of the diameter of the
distal medullary canal, is inserted in a normograde fashion.
A long 2.0-mm dynamic compression plate or a 1.5/2.0
A
B
veterinary cuttable plate (VCP) is then applied in neutral-
ization or buttress function. If used in buttress function,
Figure 39-14Stabilization options for distal metaphyseal fractures
consider stacking or sandwiching the VCP. Screws must
of the tibia
(A) Repair of a simple transverse fracture with a 6.0-mm tubular
 engage at least four corices in the distal and proximal
external skeletal fixator
fragment (Fig. 39-14B), but six or even eight cortices are
(B) Internal fixation of an oblique fracture with an intramedullary pin
preferred, especially in the proximal bone.
and a 12-hole 2.0-mm dynamic compression plate.
A
B
C
D
Figure 39-15 (A, B) A 5-month-old cat with a Salter and Harris type I fracture of the distal tibia, and a fracture of the distal fibula.
(C, D) Postoperative radiographs show reduction and stabilization with two Kirschner wires inserted as cross pins.
504
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
because the dorsal rim of the tibia is part of the insertion of
Box 39-7. Stabilization of Salter and Harris type I
the joint capsule. If the fragment is large enough, it is stabi-
and ll fractures of the distal tibia
lized with a small lag screw or a small threaded pin to restore
congruity of the joint surface and joint stability. If the frag-
An approach to the distal tibia and medial malleolus is
ment is too small to be reattached, it is probably best removed,
performed. The fracture is carefully reduced, using
followed by external immobilization of the tarsus for 2-3
 distal traction on the flexed tarsus and manipulation of
weeks in order to allow healing of the insertion of the joint
the foot and careful levering with a freer periosteal ele-
capsule.
vator. Anatomic reduction is mandatory for fixation
 Forunately, complex fractures of the epiphysis of the
stability. A 0.9-1.2-mm Kirschner wire is driven from
tibia are rare, but they may occur after falls and gunshot
the medial malleolus in a proximolateral direction to be
wounds. If comminution precludes anatomic and stable
seated in the lateral cortex of the distal tibia. Care has
repair of the tibiotalar joint surface, pantarsal arthrodesis is
to be taken not to enter the tibiotarsal joint. A second
the only treatment option (Chapter 40).
Kirschner wire is then inserted from the distal fbula
across the tibia, exiting through the medial cortex (Fig.
39.6 Postoperative treatment
39-16). A separate lateral skin incision is required for 
and prognosis
 pin placement. It is important that both pins are securely
engaged in the distal tibial fragment. If one or both pins
 External coaptation is usually not necessary after stable fixa-
are inserted subperiostally, loss of reduction and insta-
tion of metaphyseal and diaphyseal fractures. Follow-up
bility may occur.
radiographs are generally performed after 4-6 weeks.
 Fractures of the tibial diaphysis are more prone to develop
complications than fractures of other bones, possibly due to
Figure 39-16  Cross pinning of
the high incidence of comminuted and open fractures, and
a Salter and Harris type Il fracture
 of the distal tibia with one pin
the poor soft-tissue covering. Both fracture-healing disorders
 inserted from the medial
and osteomyelitis can occur. Fracture healing is slower for
malleolus, and one from the
comminuted and high-grade open fractures (4), and some
later al malleolus.
severely comminuted fractures may take several months to
heal. The tibia has been reported to be predisposed to
non-unions, with an incidence of approximately 15% (18).
Non-unions are most likely to develop after comminuted
fractures and open fractures, in older and overweight cats
(18). Osteomyelitis occurs in up to 15% of tibial diaphyseal
fractures (2, 4). Predisposing factors include wound contami-
nation or infection in the presence of open fractures, and
poor vascularity caused by soft-tissue trauma.
 Proximal and distal physeal fractures are expected to
heal rapidly, but a splinted bandage should be applied
are performed after 2-3 weeks to detect premature
 physeal closure, and to evaluate fixation stability. The Kirsch-
39.5.4 Fractures of the distal tibia involving the
ner wire ends may cause irritation of periarticular structures,
 and should be removed in the presence of local swelling.
tarsal joint
seroma formation, or radiographic evidence of implant
Epiphyseal fractures include malleolar fractures, cranial slab
migration.
fractures, and complex articular fractures. Fractures of the
 Prognosis after distal tibial fractures depends mainly on the
lateral or medial mallolus are the most common type of distal
ability to achieve anatomic reduction of the fragments and a
tibia and fbula fractures. The malleoli serve as a medial and
stable fracture repair. Malalignment or instability will cause
lateral restraint to the talus, and they are the insertion sites for
dysfunction and degenerative joint disease of the tibiotarsal
the tarsal collateral ligaments. Malleolar fractures result in
joint. One study reported a suboptimal outcome in 18% of
talocrural instability, and are covered in Chapter 40.
distal physeal fractures, perceptible as continued lameness,
Cranial slab fractures of the distal tibia are encountered
malunion, and reduced range of motion of the tarsal joint
occasionally in cats. These fractures cause tarsal instability,
(3].
39: Tibia and fibula
505
References and further reading
11. Smith RN. Fusion of ossification centres in the cat. J Small Anim
Pract 1969;10:523-530.
1. Hill FwG. A survey of bone fractures in the cat. J Small Anim
12. Zaal MD, Hazewinkel HAw. Treatment of isolated tibial frac-
Pract 1977;18:457-463.
tures in cats and dogs. Vet Q 1997;119:191-194.
2. Boone EG, et al. Fractures of the tibial diaphysis in dogs and
13. Toombs JP, Wallace LJ. Evaluation of autogeneic and allogeneic
cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986;188:41-45.
cortical chip grafing in a feline tibial nonunion model. Am J
3. Brunnberg L. Tibia and fbular fractures in the cat. Kleintier-
Vet Res 1985;46:519-528.
praxis 2003;48:9-23.
14. Haas B, et al. Use of the tubular external fixator in the treatment
4.1
Richardson EF, Thacher CW. Tibial fractures in cats. Compend
na sie pue shop es u sasen ieum pue [eipei [ensi jo
Continuing Educ 1993;15:383-394.
Comp Orthop Traumatol 2003;16:132-137.
5. Whitney WO, Mehlhaff CJ. High-rise syndrome in cats. J Am
15. Farese JP, et al. Use of IMEX SK-circular external fixator hybrid
Vet Med Assoc 1987;191:1399-1403.
constructs for fracture stabilization in dogs and cats. J Am Anim
6. Payne J, et al. Comparison of normograde and retrograde intra-
Hosp Assoc 2002;38:279-289.
medullary pinning of feline tibias. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
16. Clarke SP, Carmichael S. Treatment of distal diaphyseal frac-
2005;41:56-60.
tures using hybrid external skeletal fixation in three dogs. J
 7. Duhautois B. Use of veterinary interlocking nails for diaphyseal
Small Anim Pract 2006;47:98-103.
fractures in dogs and cats: 121 cases. Vet Surg 2003;32:8-20.
17. Boone EG, et al. Distal tibial fractures in dogs and cats. J Am
8. Fruchter AM, Holmberg DL. Mechanical analysis of veterinary
Vet Med Assoc 1986;188:36-40.
cuttable plate. Compend Continuing Educ 1991;4:116-119.
18. Nolte DM, et al. Incidence of and predisposing factors for non-
9. Schmokel HG, et al. Percutaneous plating of tibial fractures in
union of fractures involving the appendicular skeleton in cats:
two dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2003;16:191-195.
18 cases (1998-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005;226:77-82.
10. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA. An atlas of surgical approaches to
the bones and joints of the dog and the cat, 4th edn. Philadel-
phia: WB Saunders; 2004.
507
40
 Tarsal joint
K. Voss, S.J. Langley-Hobbs, P.M. Montavon
Injuries of the tarsal joint are common in cats and include
lateral malleolus enclose the trochlea tali and thus prevent
ligament sprains resulting in instability or luxation and frac-
mediolateral displacement. The malleoli are also the insertion
tures of the tarsal bones. Injury of the Achilles tendon also
sites for the collateral ligaments. In contrast to dogs, cats only
affects function of the tarsal joint. Tarsal injury usually
have short collateral ligaments (2). The medial and lateral
 results from motor vehicle accidents and falls from a height.
collateral ligaments é
each consist of straight and oblique
Ligament injuries can affect the tarsocrural joint, the proxi-
 branches (Fig. 40-1). The oblique tibiotalar part of the liga-
mal and distal intertarsal joints, and the tarsometatarsal
 ment on the medial side and the talofbular part on the lateral
joints. Instability and luxation of the tarsocrural joint are the
side are hidden below the malleoli, and are difficult to access
most common tarsal injuries in cats (1). Ligament injuries at
surgically.
The tars
ed of seven tarsal bones. The articula-
quently seen. Knowledge of regional anatomy and a thorough
tions betwe
clinical and radiological examination are required to diag-
central, calcaneo
 centrodistal and the tarsometatarsal
nose the exact site of ligament sprain, and to choose the
joints. The distal tibia,
 the distal fbula, and the talus con-
appropriate treatment.
tribute to
rural joint. Axial force transmission is
Tarsal injuries are often associated with open wounds.
through the distal tibia and the talus.
either caused from internal penetration of the skin by dis-
 joint is the articulation between adjacent
placed bones, or more commonly from shear or degloving
tarsal bones
 of which have specific names. For ease of
injury. General treatment of open joint injuries is described
description,
 although not technically correct, the talocentral
in Chapter 14, and treatment of skin defects is described in
oquartal joints are often
Chapter 16.
mal intertarsal joint. The joints between the small tarsal
bones are generally considered joints with low mobility, but
40.1 Surgical anatomy
some functional motion is present, especially in the talocen-
tral, calcaneoquartal, and talocalcaneal joint. The centrodis-
The distal tibia and fibula are connected to each other via the
tal and tarsometatarsal joints are tighter joints, with less
inferior tibiofbular ligament (Fig. 40-1). Both the medial and
motion.
Figure 40-1  Important
ligaments of the tarsocrural joint.
(A) The tibiofibular ligament 
complex is responsible for the
tight connection between the 
distal tibia and fibula.
(B) The short medial collateral
ligament consists of a straight
tibiocentral and an oblique
tibiotalar part. The tibiotalar part
is partially hidden under the
malleolus.
(C) The short lateral collateral
ligament has a calcaneofibular
part, and a talofibular part. The
calcaneofibular part of the lateral
collateral ligament has an oblique
and a straight branch.
B
C
508
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Numerous short ligaments span the small bones of the
Although the area of instability - dorsal, plantar medial,
tarsus. For functional reasons they can be divided into short
 or lateral - is usually easy to palpate, obtaining an exact
dorsal and plantar ligaments, and short medial and lateral 
 anatomic location of the injury is difficult by palpation alone,
ligaments. The plantar ligaments are located on the tension
 and radiographs should be taken in an attempt to obtain a
side of the limb and are therefore subject to large tensile
specifc diagnosis. Routine radiographs are performed to
forces. A long ligament is present at the plantar side of the
diagnose or rule out fractures. Stress radiographs are obtained
tarsus extending from the distal end of the calcaneus to both
in valgus and varus stress for medial and lateral instability,
the fourth tarsal bone and the base of the fourth metatarsal
and in hyperflexion and hyperextension for plantar or dorsal
bone.
instabilities.
The possibility of a tendon injury should also be consid-
40.2 Diagnosis and treatment options
ered, especially in cats with a plantigrade stance. The common
calcaneal tendon is palpated to detect tendon swelling, avul-
Tarsal injuries usually cause obvious clinical signs, such as
sion fractures, or rupture. Luxation of the superficial digital
lameness, swelling, pain, and crepitus. Crepitus can be pre-
flexor tendon is rare but has been described in one cat (3).
sent with both instability and fractures. The integrity of the
Arthritis is another potential differential diagnosis to con-
tarsal ligaments is assessed in hyperextension, hyperflexion,
sider in the presence of swollen and painful tarsal joints.
valgus, and varus stress.
Immune-mediated polyarthritis frequently manifests in the
 Valgus and varus instability is usually caused by rupture of
tarsal joints (Chapter 5), and cat bite wounds or other open
the tarsocrural collateral ligaments, but also may be present
injuries can cause a septic monoarthropathy (Chapter 14).
at the level of the talocentral, calcaneoquartal, centrodistal,
Common tarsal injuries and their treatment options are listed
or tarsometatarsal joints. Rupture of the short dorsal liga-
in Table 40-1.
ments results in hyperextension at the affected level, whereas
rupture of the plantar ligaments causes hyperflexion. Cats
40.3 Approaches to the tarsal joint
have more normal joint laxity than dogs, and comparison of
the range of motion of the contralateral normal joint helps
A medial approach to the tarsocrural joint (4) is used to
when examining cases with minor instability.
explore the medial malleolus, the medial collateral ligament,
Location of lesion
Type of lesion
Treatment options
Achilles tendon rupture
Tendon rupture, avulsion
Tendon sutures and transarticular
stabilization
Tarsocrural joint
Medial collateral ligament sprain
Ligament prosthesis
Conservative treatment
Fracture of the distal fbula
 Tension band repair
 Divergent pins
Tarsocrural luxation
Surgical repair and transarticular external
skeletal fixation
Talocentral and calcaneoquartal
 Dorsal instabiliry
Adaptation plate
joint
 Plantar instability
Partial tarsal arthrodesis
Talocalcaneal and talocentral
 Talocalcaneal luxation
Adaptation plate
joint
Talocalcaneal screw
Centrodistal and tarsometatarsal
 Dorsal instability
Adaptation plate
joints
 Dorsal tension band
Plantar instability
 Partial tarsal arthrodesis
Talus
Simple reducible fracture
Screw or pin stabilization
Extra-articular comminuted fracture
Transarticular external skeletal fxator
Intra-articular comminuted fracture
Pantarsal arthrodesis
Calcaneus
Fracture
Tension band repair
Distal fracture with plantar instability
Partial tarsal arthrodesis
Table 40-1. Feline tarsal injuries and their treatment options
40: Tarsal joint
509
and the craniomedial aspect of the joint. The joint capsule is
incised dorsal and parallel to the medial collateral ligament.
A medial approach using a malleolar osteotomy (4) is rarely
necessary, but can improve visualization, for example to
repair a fracture of the proximomedial aspect of the talus.
The lateral approach to the tarsocrural joint (4) is mainly
used to stabilize lateral malleolar fractures. Care is taken not
to injure the peroneus tendons during incision of the fascia
and extensor retinaculum.
The medial and dorsomedial aspect of the tarsal bones is
accessed by incising the fascia dorsal to the tendon of the
cranial tibial muscle (4). The tendon is retracted medially.
This approach is used for dorsal stabilization of intertarsal
and tarsometatarsal instabilities, and for stabilization of talo-
calcaneal luxation. A lateral approach to the calcaneus and
lateral and plantarolateral aspect of the tarsal bones is often
used for partial tarsal arthrodesis (4).
The calcaneus and the Achilles tendon are approached
from laterally (4). The fascial incision is made along the
lateral border of the superfcial digital flexor tendon, and is
continued along the caudolateral border of the calcaneus.
The approach can be extended distally to the lateral or caudal
Figure 40-2 A cat with rupture of the Achilles tendon. The tarsal joint 
aspect of the bones of the tarsus (4).
can be flexed while the stifle joint is held in extension.
40.4 Rupture or avulsion of the
Achilles tendon
With chronic injuries the cat may bear weight on the
affected leg but with a plantigrade stance. Causes such as a
 The Achilles tendon mechanism is composed of three sepa-
Ainu se uons suoisil eooinau no aedouonau snaqe
rate tendons: the tendon of the gastrocnemius muscle; the
 of the tibial nerve have to be considered as differential diag-
common tendon of the semitendinosus, gracilis, and biceps
 noses for a plantigrade stance. Bilateral chronic sprains of the
femoris muscles; and the tendon of the superficial digital
Achilles tendon can occur (Fig. 40-3), but the underlying
flexor muscle. The superficial digital flexor tendon courses
 pathology has not been described (Chapter 7).
over the calcaneus to insert on the plantar aspect of the
 Radiographs are obtained to detect avulsion fractures of
middle phalanges of the second to ffth digits. In cats, an
the insertion of the tendons on the tuber calcaneus, and local
additional muscle, the soleus muscle, has a small tendon
soft-tissue swelling. Radiographs of the whole crus should be
joining the Achilles tendon laterally (2). The muscles and
 obtained to evaluate the position of the fabellas. Ultrasonog-
tendons of the Achilles mechanism extend the tarsal joint and
raphy can also be used to confrm the diagnosis, and to
flex the toes.
specify further the degree and localization of the lesion
 Disruption of the Achilles tendon mechanism is relatively
(Chapter 2).
 rare in cats. Based on clinical impressions, most injuries are
Surgical treatment is indicated in most cases because of
closed ruptures or avulsions of the tendons from the tuber
disabling functional defcits. A longitudinal skin incision is
calcanei. Cats with acute rupture of the Achilles tendon
performed over the caudolateral surface of the tendon. The
mechanism usually present with a non-weight-bearing lame-
individual tendons are identified if possible. The proximal
ness and hyperflexion of the hock. Palpation of the Achilles
ends may be displaced quite far proximally. Debridement of
tendon reveals loss of continuity of the tendon, thickening.
blood clots and excision of excessively frayed tendon ends
swelling, and pain. Skin wounds are present when the tendon
may be necessary. The tendons are then individually sutured
has been lacerated with a sharp object. Diagnosis of func-
with a locking-loop or a three-loop pully pattern, using
tional deficits of the Achilles tendon mechanism is confrmed
monoflament non-absorbable suture material (Chapter 16).
if the tarsal joint can be flexed while the stifle joint is held in
The sutures can be anchored through a bone tunnel in the
extension (Fig. 40-2). If the superficial digital flexor tendon
calcaneus, if insuffcient tendon remains distally. It may not
is intact, the toes flex simultaneously.
be possible to identify the individual tendons in chronic inju-
510
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Figure 40-3  (A) Mediolateral
radiograph of the right crus, and 
(B) intraoperative appearance of
a cat with bilateral rupture of the
gastrocnemius tendon. Periosteal
proliferations are present at the
tuber calcaneus, indicating a
chronic process, and the
gastrocnemius tendon is
thickened and avulsed from the
tuber calcaneus. The cat suffered
from hyperthyroidism.
B
ries, so the tendons are sutured as one. Care should be taken 
lameness (3). Clinical symptoms included swelling over the
to obtain adequate functional tension, because the tendons 
right calcaneal tendon, and the superficial digital flexor tendon
 tend to elongate during the healing process.
could be subluxated laterally. At surgery the medial retinacu-
Postoperatively, a transarticular external fxator is usually
lum was found to be edematous and the bursa below the
applied for 3-4 weeks to immobilize the tarsal joint and
 tendon was distended. Treatment consisted of incising the
 allow formation of a fibrous scar. After removal of the exter-
 medial retinaculum, and reapposing it to the medial edge of
 roue rog padde si aepueq pauds e ronexy peaans jeu
 the superficial flexor tendon with non-absorbable suture
2 weeks. The splint does not restrict motion and tension
material (3). The tendon remained in position in the cat
completely, which allows maturation of the scar and longi-
described, and clinical outcome was excellent (3).
tudinal orientation of the collagen fbers. Tendon healing
should have resulted in strong enough tissue to sustain
weight-bearing forces after 6 weeks. Cats are kept indoors
40.6 Tarsocrural instability and luxation
Ae snonuns pioae on suuou te kiaeuxondde ro
and the possibilitry of re-rupture.
Tarsocrural instability or luxation results from various com-
binations of medial and lateral collateral ligament sprain,
malleolar or fbular fractures, and disruption of the inferior
40.5 Luxation of the superficial digital
tibiofbular ligament. Complete luxation is only possible if
flexor tendon
several of the above-mentioned structures are damaged. This
severe injury is common in cats (1).
The superfcial digital flexor tendon crosses the tuber calca-
neus during its distal course. Spontaneous or traumatic rup-
ture of the retinaculum may cause luxation of the tendon,
40.6.1 Collateral ligament sprain
which is well reported in the dog (5-8). Lateral luxation of the
superficial digital flexor tendon has been described in a 9-year-
Functional impairment of either the medial or lateral collat-
old, obese, neutered female Siamese cat, presented for chronic 
 eral ligament apparatus results in tarsocrural instability on
40: Tarsal joint
511
the affected side. Collateral ligament sprains are more
common than avulsion fractures of the ligament insertion
sites at the malleoli. Degloving injuries can result in partial
or complete abrasion of both the soft-tissue support and the
malleoli on the affected side.
medial side, resulting in medial or valgus instability. Stress
radiographs are performed to confrm the diagnosis (Fig.
40-4). Caudal subluxation of the talus is also seen occasion-
ally, and is probably caused by rupture of the oblique parts
of the collateral ligaments.
uweay ill pue ll sapena 1oy pasiape si 1iedan jesiains
sprains causing clinical and radiographic instability. The torn
ligaments are identifed. Primary apposition and suturing are
attempted, but may not be possible as the ligaments are short
and often shredded. A ligament prosthesis should also be
A
B
applied to protect the primary repair (Box 40-1). Although
Figure 40-4 (A) Valgus and (B) hyperextension stressed radiographs
ideally the ligament prosthesis is performed to imitate both
of a cat with a medial collateral ligament sprain. Note the opening of
the straight tibiocentral and the oblique tibiotalar ligament,
the medial aspect of the tibiotalar joint (A), and the caudal subluxation
of the talus (B)
Box 40-1. Medial collateral ligament prosthesis
A medial approach to the talocrural joint is performed.
 are fully inserted and the fgure-of-eight suture is tight-
The joint and periarticular structures are explored, and the
ened. If instability persists, a ligament prosthesis can be
joint is flushed. The accessible ligaments and joint capsule
 added to mimic the oblique course of the tibiotalar liga-
are sutured with 4-0 monoflament slowly absorbable
 ment. An additional 1.5-mm screw is inserted into the
suture material in a locking-loop or mattress pattern.
calcaneus, close to the caudodistal edge of the malleolus.
Ligament prosthesis using screws or suture anchors: For
 A fgure-of-eight suture is applied around this screw and
replacement of the straight tibiocentral ligament, one 1.5-
the screw in the malleolus (Fig. 40-5B).
mm screw or a small suture anchor is inserted in the medial
 Ligament prosthesis using the tunnel technique: Bone
malleolus, and one into the base of the talus or into the
 unnels are drilled through the medial malleolus and
central tarsal bone. A fgure-of-eight suture is preplaced
 through the base of the talus with a 1.1-1.5-mm drill bit
around the screw heads, using 2-0 or O monofilament non-
 or a small Kirschner wire. A 2.0 or 0 non-absorbable
absorbable suture material (Fig. 40-5A). A washer is used
 suture is passed through the tunnels in a fgure-of-eight
if the suture tends to slip off the screw heads. The screws
 pattern, and is tightened.
Figure 40-5  Options for
application of a medial ligament
prosthesis for the talocrural joint.
(A) Prosthetic replacement of the
straight tibiocentral ligament by
applying a figure-of-eight suture
around a screw in the malleolus
and a screw in the base of the
talus
(B) Prosthetic replacement of
both the straight tibiocentral and 
oblique tibiotalar ligament.
A
512
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Figure 40-6 (A) Mediolateral
and (B) dorsoplantar radiographs
of a cat with medial collateral
ligament rupture, 4 weeks after
surgical repair. Both the straight
and oblique portions of the
medial collateral ligament were
stabilized in this case.
A
B
this is diffcult in cats because the tibiotalar part of the medial
free of infection (Chapter 16). Fibrous periarticular tissue,
collateral ligament is hidden under the malleolus. The straight
which is formed during immobilization by a transarticular
tibiocentral ligament is replaced by insertion of one screw
external skeletal fixator can result in suffcient joint stability
into the medial malleolus, and one screw into the base of the
to obviate the need for specifc ligament replacement.
talus (Box 40-1). In cases where instability persists after
replacement of the straight portion of the ligament, the
40.6.2 Fractures of the distal fibula
oblique tibiotalar portion can be stabilized additionally by
the insertion of a second screw into the calcaneus (Fig.
Instability of the lateral side of the tarsocrural joint is usually
40-6).
caused by fracture of the distal fibula. Fibular fractures often
As an alternative technique, the suture can be placed
occur concurrent with disruptions of the tibiofbular ligament
through bone tunnels drilled into the tibia and the head of
 complex if they are located proximal to this connection. The
the talus. The anatomic course of the ligaments is not
loss of connection between fbula and tibia allows the frac-
fully respected with this technique, but the repair provides
tured part of the fbula to displace laterally and distally,
 protection against valgus deviation.
resulting in functional deficiency of the lateral collateral liga-
 In cases with avulsion fractures, the avulsed fragment
ment complex (Fig. 40-7). The lateral restraint of the talus
is reattached to the tibia or malleolus with tension band
by the lateral malleolus is also lost. Surgical repair is always
fixation or a small screw. A mattress suture anchoring the
indicated to restore stability. A tension band fixation or two
ligament through a small tunnel in the malleolus can be used
divergent pins can be used (Box 40-2). This injury may occur
 for very small fragments.
alone, but is commonly seen with tarsocrural luxation. Post-
 Postoperative immobilization is required after any type of
operative immobilization with a splinted bandage is sufficient
repair. A splinted bandage is usually suffcient.
in isolated injuries. In conjunction with tarsocrural luxation,
 Surgical stabilization is often delayed in cats with degloving
a transarticular external skeletal fxator provides more stabil-
injuries. Temporary joint immobilization is performed with
ity (Box 40-3).
 a splinted bandage or preferably a transaricular external
Avulsion fractures of the lateral mallolus distal to the tib-
fxator. The wound is managed appropriately until the pres-
iofbular ligament complex are rare, but also cause dysfunc-
ence of healthy granulation tissue indicates the wound to be
tion of the lateral collateral ligament complex. A tension
 40: Tarsal joint
513
Figure 40-7 (A) Dorsoplantar
and (B) mediolateral radiographs
of the tarsus of a cat with a
fracture of the distal fibula and
disruption of the tibiofibular
ligament complex. Note the
displacement of the distal part of
the fibula away from the tibia
 on the dorsoplantar view (A), and 
the tibiotalar subluxation on the
mediolateral view (B)
A
Box 40-2. Stabilization of fractures of the distal fibula with disruption of the tibiofibular ligament complex
A lateral approach to the distal fbula and the talocrural
Figure 40-8  Options for
 joint is performed. The distal part of the fibula is anatomi-
repair of a distal fibular
m en a oi pais ro p pr i
 fracture.
(A) Stabilization of the distal 
 pointed reduction forceps. Reduction is also checked at the
fibula to the tibia with two
fracture site.
divergent threaded pins.
 Divergent pins: Two 0.6-0.8-mm Kirschner wires are
(B) Tension band repair of a
driven carefully from the distal end of the malleolus into
more distally located fracture 
the tibia. The pins have to be angled towards proximal to
using a single Kirschner wire
and a figure-of-eight wire
avoid entering the talocrural joint (Fig. 40-8A). Insertion
 anchored to the tibia.
of two well-seated divergent pins often results in suffcient
pull-out resistance and stability. Pull-out resistance can be
enhanced by using 1.0-mm negative-threaded pins in cases
 with a large-enough fragment. The pins are cut short after
insertion.
Tension band fixation: A tension band wire should be
placed additionally if the pins were inserted parallel to
each other, or if only one pin could be used due to the
small fragment size. A 0.5- or 0.6-mm piece of orthopedic
wire is passed in a fgure-of-eight fashion around the distal
pin ends and through a hole drilled into the tibia, and
tightened (Fig. 40-8B).
A
B
514
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 40-3. Stabilization of tarsocrural luxations and application of a transarticular external skeletal fixator
Both a lateral and medial approach to the tarsocrural joint
are necessary to stabilize the fractured fbula, and the
ruptured medial collateral ligaments. The lateral approach
 is performed frst and the joint is explored. A transarticular
 external skeletal fixator is often applied for postoperative
immobilization.
 Primary repair of structures: If the fbula is broken and
 the inferior tibiofbular ligament complex is ruptured, the
fbula is attached to the tibia with two divergent pins or a
tension band fixation as the frst step (Box 40-2). Anatomic
reduction of the lateral malleolus is required to restore
 normal joint congruity and stability. Avulsion fractures of
 the fbula distal to the inferior tibiofbular ligament are
reattached with a small tension band fixation. The second
 step involves repair of medial collateral ligament ruptures,
as described in Box 40-1. The joint is flushed, and the joint
capsule is sutured. Range of motion and stability of the
repair are assessed prior to wound closure.
Transarticular external fixator: A type II transarticular
external fixator is used for postoperative immobilization
A
B
if considered necessary to maintain stability. Several varia-
Figure 40-9  Two examples of transarticular external fixator
tions of fixator confguration can be used with the KE, SK,
configurations for temporary immobilization of the tarsus are
 Meynard, or APEF systems. Two possible frame types are
shown
(A) Type ll transarticular external fixator with pins in the tibia and 
described.
proximal metatarsi.
Option 1 (Fig. 40-9A) - a 1.6-mm positive centrally
(B) Type ll transarticular external fixator with pins in the tibia.
threaded full pin is inserted into the proximal tibia, and
tarsal bones, and proximal metatarsi.
1.4-1.6-mm smooth or Ellis pin into the proximal meta
tarsi, medially and laterally. These pins are angled in a
slightly dorsal direction to gain purchase of at least two
Option 2 (Fig. 40-9B) - a pin is inserted into the proxi-
-is n n  sq  o o s
 mal tibia as described above. A 1.2-1.4-mm smooth pin,
lize the tarsus at an angle of approximately 100-110°, and
sod Ae no oos u-i'l e si rare 11 1
are connected to the transosseus pins. An additional 1.6-
threaded pin is inserted as a full pin, through the base of
mm smooth, negative- or positive-threaded half pin is
the metatarsi. The pins are connected bilaterally with con-
inserted into the distal tibia, avoiding placement through
necting rods, prebent to the standing angle of 100-110°.
open wounds. Two more 1.2-1.4-mm pins are inserted
Additional 1.6-mm pins are inserted into the distal tibia,
distally into the proximal third of the metatarsal bones.
and across the tarsal bones.
band repair is used if the avulsed fragment is large enough.
luxations are rare. Tarsocrural luxations are severe injuries,
 Otherwise, a collateral ligament prosthesis is performed.
but satisfactory to good functional results can be achieved in
many cats with restoration and repair of all damaged struc-
40.6.3 Tarsocrural luxation
tures. The tarsocrural joint is reduced under general anesthe-
sia, and stabilized in a splinted bandage until surgery is
The medial and collateral ligament support and the inferior 
performed to minimize discomfort and prevent further carti-
tibiofbular ligament are usually damaged in complete tarso-
lage damage. Surgery usually involves repair of the medial
crural luxations. A classification for tarsocrural luxations
collateral ligament (Box 40-1), and stabilization of the frac-
based on human literature was suggested for cats (Table
tured fbula to the tibia (Box 40-2).
40-2) (9). Type C is the most common type of luxation (Fig.
 In the presence of open tarsal luxations, early and aggres-
40-10). Type B luxations occur occasionally, and type A
sive cleaning of the wound and flushing of the joint are
 40: Tarsal joint
515
Luxation type
Injuries
Tibiofbular ligament complex
Type A
Rupture of lateral collateral ligament or avulsion fracture of
Intact
malleolus below the level of the tibiofbular joint
Rupture or avulsion of the medial collateral ligament
Type B
Fracture of the distal fibula at the level of the tibiofibular
Partially disrupted
ligament complex
Rupture or avulsion of the medial collateral ligament
Type C
 Fracture of the fbula proximal to the tibiofbular ligament
Disrupted, resulting in dislocation of
complex
the distal fbula from the tibia
Rupture or avulsion of the medial collateral ligament
Table 40-2. Classification of tarsocrural luxations according to R. Vannini (9)
imperative to prevent joint infection. The wound is usually
Figure 40-10  Cat
left to heal by second intention, because most of the wounds
with type C
have to be considered dirty (Chapter 16). Open-wound treat-
tarsocrur al luxation.
Note the
ment is conducted until healthy granulation tisue is present,
displacement of the 
allowing internal stabilization, as described above. The tar-
distal part of the
socrural joint is best immobilized with a transarticular exter-
fractured fibula away
nal skeletal fxator (Box 40-3) while the open injuries
from the tibia.
granulate. Further repair of the ruptured ligaments is often
indicating disruption
unnecessary in cases with severe soft-tissue loss, because, as
 of the tibiofibular
the granulation tissue turns into fbrous and scar tissue, suf-
lig aments.
ficient periarticular stability results.
A transarticular external fixator is also commonly used for
are especially indicated in cases where postoperative stability
seems insufficient, in heavy cats, and if other legs are injured.
Type II constructs are used, because premature loosening
of the distal pins was found to be a problem with type I
transarticular fixators (10). External splints may be sufficient
for postoperative stability in some cases. The external splint
or external skeletal fixator is usually leftin place for approxi-
sufficiently.
during weight-bearing and the dorsal side is under compres-
40.7 Intertarsal and
sion. Dorsal intertarsal and tarsometatarsal instabilities occur
tarsometatarsal instability
more commonly than plantar instabilities in the feline patient
(11).
Intertarsal and tarsometatarsal instabilities result from dis-
ruption of the short ligaments spanning the individual joints.
40.7.1 Dorsal intertarsal and
For simplicity, the talocentral and calcaneoquartal joints are
tarsometatarsal instabilities
referred to as the proximal intertarsal joint in the following
text.
 q ps si s sr s an po a
Three basic types of injuries can be encountered in the
tension of the tarsal joints. Dorsal instabilities occur most
intertarsal or tarsometatarsal area: dorsal instabilities at one
commonly at the proximal intertarsal (Fig. 40-11) and the 
of the joint levels, talocalcaneal luxation, and plantar insta-
tarsometatarsal joint level. The centrodistal joint is rarely
bilities at one of the joint levels. Plantar intertarsal or tarso-
involved. Most patients have additional medial or lateral
metatarsal ligament injuries are more disabling than dorsal
instability at the affected joint (11). The tarsometatarsal joint
ligament injuries, because the plantar side is under tension
is completely luxated in some cases (Fig. 40-12). Concurrent
516
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
R
B
L
D
Figure 40-11  A cat with a dorsomedial proximal intertarsal instability.
(A, B) Preoperative hyperextension and valgus stress radiographs. Note the opening of the talocentral joint dorsally. Only minimal medial instability
is present at the same level
ean an oui mas auo pue 'snien at jo ase aun oui paasui mas auo y aeid youn w-oz e yi pazes sm uoisal aul (a ')
tarsal bone.
A
B
C
D
Figure 40-12 A cat with tarsometatarsal luxation.
(A, B) Mediolateral and dorsoplantar radiographs showing dorsal luxation of the tarsometatarsal joint. The plantar ligaments were considered stable
on palpation after the joint had been reduced.
(C, D) Two short 2.0-mm Unilock plates were applied across the tarsometatarsal joints to prevent reluxation and to allow healing of the dorsal
ligaments.
40: Tarsal joint
517
Box 40-4. Stabilization of dorsal intertarsal and tarsometatarsal instabilities
A dorsal approach is made over the affected area. The
affected joint space is explored, flushed, and reduced. The
implants are positioned over the area of instability. They
may have to be applied in parallel if significant medial or
lateral instability is present concurrently, and for tarso-
metatarsal instabilities.
 Internal fixator: Internal fixators can be used for all types
and levels of dorsal instabilities. One or two two-hole 2.0-
mm locking plates are contoured if necessary and are
applied across the lesion. One locking screw is inserted
into the tarsal bone proximal, and one into the tarsal bone
 distal to the lesion for intertarsal instabilities (Fig. 40-13A).
For tarsometatarsal instabilities, two screws are usually
used in the metatarsal bone, and the application of a second
plate is advantageous to improve stability (Fig. 40-12).
Miniplate: This type of repair can be used for dorsome-
dial instabilities at all levels, but has the disadvantage of
A
B
C
bridging several joint rows. A 1.3- or 1.5-mm plate is
 Figure 40-13  Options for stabilization of dorsal intertarsal and
contoured to match the dorsomedial aspect of the tarsus,
tarsometatarsal instability.
from the neck of the talus to metatarsus II. One or two
(A) Stabilization of a dorsal proximal intertarsal instability using a 
screws are inserted into the base and neck of the talus, one
locking plate, with one screw in the base of the talus and one screw
in the central tarsal bone.
screw is inserted into the central tarsal bone, and two
(B) Stabilization of a dorsomedial proximal intertarsal instability with
 screws into the proximal metatarsal II (Fig. 40-13B).
a 1.5-mm miniplate. A longer plate has to be used to provide
Tension band repair: A tension band repair provides less
 sufficient stability.
stability than locking plates or the miniplate. One 1.5-mm
(C) Tension band repair of a dorsal proximal intertarsal instability.
screw is placed into the tarsal bone proximal and one distal
to the lesion. A 0.5-0.6-mm orthopedic wire or a strong
non-absorbable suture is positioned and tensioned around
the screw heads in a fgure-of-eight fashion (Fig. 40-13C).
phalangeal fractures or luxations can occur and the radio-
nism between the plate hole and the screw head, placement
graphs need to be carefully scrutinized for these.
of only one screw proximal and one distal to the lesion results
 Because the short dorsal ligaments are not under tensile
in stable fxation, allowing selective stabilization of only one
stress during weight-bearing, fbrous healing of the periarticu-
 joint level (Figs 40-11 and 40-12). Two short plates may have
lar tissue results in restoration of functional joint stability if
to be used in the presence of additional medial or lateral
the affected joint is immobilized. Partial tarsal arthrodesis is
instability.
not necessary. Minor instability of the dorsal aspect of the
An alternative method to plating is tension band fixation
 proximal intertarsal joint that is strictly limited to the dorsal
using screws or pins and a fgure-of-eight wire across the
aspect can be treated with a splinted bandage for 3 weeks. Sig-
lesion (12). Miniplates can also be applied, but at least two
nificant dorsal instability and instability that also involves the
screws are needed proximally and distally (13). The increase
medial or lateral intertarsal ligaments need to be treated surgi-
in plate length has the disadvantage that several joint rows
cally. Tarsometatarsal instability is always treated surgically.
have to be incorporated.
The affected joint space is splinted with implants to allow
The implants can be removed after a time period of 4-6
fbrous tissue healing (Box 40-4). Locking plates are ideal
weeks to avoid ankylosis of the affected joints. However,
implants for internal immobilization of dorsal intertarsal and
most owners decline implant removal because of the good
tarsometatarsal instabilities (11). Due to the locking mecha-
clinical function of their animal (11).
518
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
40.7.3 Plantar intertarsal and
tarsometatarsal instabilities
Plantar intertarsal and tarsometatarsal instabilities result
from trauma causing excessive tensile stress on the plantar
side of the tarsus. The calcaneoquartal joint and the tarso-
metatarsal joints are affected most commonly. Stress radio-
graphs are used to diagnose the lesion (Fig. 40-16). Complete
luxation at the affected joint level occurs in some cases.
Rupture of the plantar ligaments is a more severe injury
than rupture of the dorsal ligaments, because loss of the
plantar ligament support prevents weight-bearing, and the
large tensile forces do not allow healing of the ligaments.
Plantar instabilities are therefore treated by partial tarsal
arthrodesis (Box 40-6).
40.8 Fractures of the tarsal bones
Figure 40-14 Mediolateral radiograph of a cat with a dorsal
 Fracture of the talus is the most common fracture type (1).
talocalcaneal luxation. The talocalcaneal ligaments are ruptured in
addition to the talocentral ligament.
Calcaneal fractures are occasionally encountered, whereas
fractures of other tarsal bones are rare.
40.8.1 Fractures of the talus
40.7.2 Talocalcaneal luxation
Fractures of the talus are classifed into intra-articular and
The talocalcaneal joint is a tight joint, but some rotational 
extra-articular fractures. Intra-articular fractures extend into
movement between the talus and the calcaneus is normal
the tibiotalar joint, and include chip fractures along the
(14). Talocalcaneal luxation occurs if the talocalcaneal liga-
lateral or medial trochlear ridge, and transverse and commi-
ments rupture. The most common form seen in cats is dorsal
 nuted talar fractures. Extra-articular fractures include frac-
luxation of the base of the talus (Fig. 40-14). With this injury
tures of the talar body, neck, or head.
both the talocalcaneal and the talocentral ligaments are dis-
Chip fractures of the trochlear ridge are reattached with
rupted, allowing the base of the talus to slide along the
 small countersunk Kirschner wires if the fragment is large
 central tarsal bone in a dorsal direction. The injury is thought
enough (Fig. 40-18). Small fragments can be removed and
pue uoisunanadq ausnn en juq uon insan o
the prognosis is good (1). Transverse intra-articular fractures
axial compression. Plantar talocalcaneal luxation rarely
can be repaired with a small lag screw and an antirotational
occurs.
pin, taking care to restore the joint surface anatomically.
Luxation of the base of the talus is a debilitating injury if
Unfortunately, most of the intra-articular talar fractures are
left untreated because the weight-bearing axis from the talus
comminuted, rendering restoration of the joint impossible.
to the central tarsal bone is lost. These injuries have an excel-
 Pantarsal arthrodesis is then the only treatment option (Box
lent prognosis with internal splinting using locking plates or
40-7).
miniplates (11, 15). The dorsally applied plates act as a but-
 Simple fractures of the talar body or neck can be stabilized
tress by preventing dorsal subluxation of the talus, and simul-
with cross pins or with a dorsally applied 1.5-mm rminiplate
taneously stabilize the talocentral joint. The surgical technique
or 2.0-mm locking plate, as described in Box 40-4. Applica-
 is the same as described for proximal intertarsal instabilities
tion of a temporary transarticular external fixator for about
(Box 40-4).
"(e-0t xog) redai Aed a inid oi aqespe si syem g
 An alternative technique is insertion of a positional screw
Indirect stabilization of talar neck fractures in five cats with
from the base of the talus into the calaneus (Box 40-5)
a transarticular external skeletal fixator alone for a time
(12, 14). A concern with this technique is early screw break-
period of 8-12 weeks was also described (16). However,
 age due to residual motion in the talocalcaneal joint (14),
 prolonged joint immobilization is likely to reduce range of
but the technique seems to provide sufficient stability in
 motion of the joint, cause cartilage degeneration, and promote
cats.
degenerative joint disease.
40: Tarsal joint
519
Box 40-5. Stabilization of a talocalcaneal luxation
A dorsomedial approach to the talocentral joint is per-
 Figure 40-15
formed. The head of the talus is reduced, using digital
Stabilization of a
talocalcaneal luxation 
pressure.
using a 2.0-mm
 Internal fixator: A 2.0-mm locking plate is applied across
positional screw,
the talocentral joint, using one screw proximal, and one
inserted across the
distal to it, as described in Box 40-4.
talocalcaneal joint.
 Positional screw: A pair of pointed reduction forceps is
 Additional insertion 
placed between the talus and calcaneus to hold the reduc-
of a small pin across
the talocentral joint 
tion. A 1.5-mm drill hole is made from the talus into the
may improve
 stability.
inserted across the two bones after tapping the thread (Fig.
40-15).
Hgure 40-16 A cat with plantar
calcaneoquartal instability.
(A) Preoperative stress
radiographs showing plantar
instability.
(B) Follow-up radiographs 1
month after partial arthrodesis
with a 2.0-mm locking plate
 positioned on the plantar aspect
of the tarsus.
A
B
40.8.2 Fractures of the calcaneus
Fractures of the tuber or shaft are best treated by tension band
fxation. Shaft fractures can be stabilized with a plate applied
Fractures of the calcaneus are rare but disabling injuries,
to the lateral or plantar surface of the calcaneus.
because the calcaneus is subject to large tensile forces. It serves
Avulsion fractures of the base of the calcaneus are often
as the insertion site for the Achilles tendon and acts as a
associated with plantar intertarsal instability because the
fulcrum for the superfcial digital flexor tendon. Calcaneal
plantar calcaneoquartal ligaments insert at the base of the
fractures may involve the tuber calcanei, the shaft, or the base.
calcaneus. Although lag screw fixation of larger fragments is
520
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 40-6. Partial tarsal arthrodesis
The surgical approach is selected according to the method
 including a 2.0-mm dynamic compression plate (DCP), a
 of arthrodesis to be used. The cartilage in the affected joint
1.5/2.0-mm veterinary cuttable plate, or a 2.0-mm Unilock
spaces is removed with small bone curettes or a power
plate. The selected plate is contoured to the plantarolateral
bur. Cancellous bone graft is packed into the joint spaces,
surface of the calcaneus, fourth tarsal bone, and ffth meta-
and at the end of surgery any remaining graft is placed
carpal bone. Two or three screws are placed in the calca-
adjacent to the joints.
neus, one or two screws are inserted into the fourth tarsal
 Calcaneoquartal arthrodesis with a pin and tension
bone, and two screws are placed in the ffth metatarsal
band wire: A caudolateral approach to the calcaneus and
bone (Fig. 40-17B). A plantar fgure-of-eight wire can also
fourth tarsal bone is performed. A 1.2-2.6-mm Kirschner
be applied.
wire is driven into the calcaneus from its proximal end and
Tarsometatarsal arthrodesis with a laterally and/or
directed towards its base. Once the pin emerges in the
medially applied plate: A 2.0-mm DCP, 1.5/2.0-mm vet-
calcaneoquartal joint, the joint is reduced. The Kirschner
erinary cuttable plate, or a 2.0-mm internal fxator can be
wire is then further advanced into the distal aspect of the
used. A lateral plate is applied in a similar manner to that
fourth tarsal bone. It is cut short proximally. A 0.8-mm
described for calcaneoquartal arthrodesis, with three
orthopedic wire is passed through predrilled holes in the
 screws inserted distal and three proximal to the tarsometa-
calcaneus and fourth tarsal bone in a figure-of-eight
tarsal joints (Fig. 40-17C). For medial plating, a medial
fashion, and is tightened bilaterally (Fig. 40-17A). Passing
approach is made to the talus, intertarsal and metatarsal
the wire dorsal to the pin as shown proximally reduces
joints. The plate is contoured to the medial surface of the
risk of wire pull-out.
talus, central tarsal bone, and second metatarsal bone (Fig.
Calcaneoquartal arthrodesis with a lateral plate: A cau-
40-17D). One to two screws are placed into the talus, one
dolateral approach to the calcaneus, intertarsal and tarso
screw into the central tarsal bone, and three screws in the
metatarsal joints, and ffth metatarsal bone is performed.
second metatarsal bone.
Several types of plates or internal fxators can be used,
B
D
Figure 40-17  Options for partial tarsal arthrodesis.
(A) Calcaneoquartal arthrodesis for stabilization of a plantar proximal intertarsal instability using a pin and plantar tension band technique.
uoie ui pasn ag uen ai pueg uoisuan leueid  aed padde Alleanel e yi sisapoue jeenoauenie (a)
(C) Tarsometatarsal arthrodesis with a laterally applied plate
aed padde Allepaw e ym sisapouie leseieiawosiel (a)
40: Tarsal joint
521
Figure 40-18  A cat with a talar
fracture. (A) Preoperative
laterolateral radiograph showing
a small fracture fragment off the
cranial part of the lateral
trochlear ridge, which is displaced 
dorsally. (B) The fragment was
reattached in anatomic reduction
using a 1.0-mm miniscrew and a
small pin.
B
described for dogs, the avulsed fragment is likely to be too
Regardless of the method used, the affected joint spaces
small for primary stabilization in cats, and partial tarsal
have to be debrided of cartilage and cancellous or cortico-
arthrodesis as described for plantar ligament injuries is 
 cancellous bone graft is used to facilitate bony fusion (Chapter
usually necessary (Box 40-6).
14). Inadequate preparation of the joints carries the risk of
delayed union and subsequent implant failure.
40.9 Partial tarsal arthrodesis
40.10 Pantarsal arthrodesis
Partial tarsal arthrodesis is performed for conditions of the
 proximal intertarsal to tarsometatarsal joint levels, where
Pantarsal arthrodesis is indicated for stabilization of the
 pain-free normal joint function cannot be restored by other
tarsus after injuries or disease involving the tarsocrural joint
means. The main indications are plantar ligament instability
that cannot be treated by other means. These include com-
(Fig. 40-16), luxations, and comminuted fractures of the
 minuted articular distal tibial fractures, comminuted articular
distal rows of tarsal bones. Concurrent trauma of the tarso-
talar fracrures (Fig. 40-20), unreconstructable tarsocrural
-poe jesn pd aroq ino pan aq oi s io! je
luxations, and joint destruction after severely debilitating
esis is performed. Several methods have been described for
degenerative or inflammatory joint disease (22). Arthrodesis
 partial tarsal arthrodesis in dogs, some of which can also be
 of the talocrural joint alone has been shown to be associated
used in the cat.
 sid n o p rd  
Arthrodesis of the calcaneoquartal joint can be performed
dogs (23). Panarthrodesis is therefore preferred by most sur-
with a pin and tension band technique or with a plate (17)
 geons, even if only the tarsocrural joint is affected.
(Box 40-6). Although neither was proven superior, the pin
Pantarsal arthrodesis is most commonly performed with a
and tension band technique should only be used for plantar
dorsally applied plate. However, dorsal plating is less than
calcaneoquartal instabilities. In the presence of concurrent 
 ideal from a biomechanical point of view, because the plate
fractures, plating is preferred. Plates can be applied to the
is positioned on the compression side of the joint, and is
lateral or plantar surface of the calcaneus and distal tarsus.
subject to large bending forces. Implant loosening and plate
Arthrodesis of the tarsometatarsal joints is best achieved
 breakage are common consequences (24). Adequate prepara-
with a laterally or medially applied plate (18, 19) (Box 40-6).
tion of the joint surfaces, correct screw positioning, and bone
A Steinmann pin and cross-pinning technique and the use of
 grafting are necessary to obtain good results if this technique
 a type II external skeletal fixator with acrylic bars have also
 is used. The addition of an intramedullary pin placed from
been described (20, 21). Transarticular external skeletal fix-
 the tibia across the tibiotalar joint has been shown to improve
 ators are mainly indicated in the presence of open injuries.
stability when compared to dorsal plating alone (25). A
Care must be taken to ensure that the foot does not become
 common cause for poor functional results and complications
externally rotated when inserting screws into the metatarsal
 is inadequate incorporation and stabilization of the calcaneus
bones.
in the arthrodesis. This is thought to result from residual
522
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 40-7. Pantarsal arthrodesis
The standing angle of the tarsus is measured preopera-
arthrodesis plate no contouring is necessary, but the medial
tively on the contralateral leg. It is often between 90 and
malleolus and proximal metatarsal bone should be removed
110°. It is usually better to stabilize the tarsus in a slightly
 to form a smooth flat surface for the bone to lie against.
more flexed, rather than extended, angle. The surgical
The frst screws are inserted into the metatarsal bone,
approach is selected according to the method of arthrode-
then into the tibia, and fnally into the talus. The screw
sis to be used. Regardless of the surgical stabilization tech-
 through the talus should also engage the calcaneus. Care 
nique, the joint cartilage is removed from the tibiotalar,
must be taken that the foot does not become externally
and the proximal, distal, and tarsometatarsal joints. Osteo-
rotated. Altogether, at least three screws should be inserted
stixis is performed in avascular bone to create channels for
into the tibia: one into the talus and calcaneus, one into
vascular ingrowth. Cancellous bone graft is packed into
the distal tarsal bones, and two or three into the metatarsal
the joint spaces to shorten healing time. Cancellous or
bones V and IV (Fig. 40-19B). The intramedullary nail
corticocancellous graft is additionally placed around the
 or cross pins used for initial stabilization can be left in
joints at the end of surgery. An intramedullary pin, inserted
are Aaui asimrao cqeis oi ppe oi uas Kaul j ad
 's an oi ( i)  xond a o
removed.
be used in addition to dorsal or medial plating.
Pantarsal arthrodesis with an external skeletal fixator:
Pantarsal arthrodesis with a dorsal plate: A dorsal
pue saseds iuio! aul aiedaid oi pasn s! yoeoidde jesiop v
approach to the distal tibia, tarsus, and third metatarsal
insert the bone graft. A type II external skeletal fxator is
bone is performed. A 1.5/2.0-mm stacked veterinary cutta-
applied, as described in Box 40-3. Angle of the joint and
ble plate, a 2.7/2.0-mm pancarpal arthrodesis plate, a 2.4-
alignment of the limb are checked when the curved exter-
mm limited contact-dynamic compression plate, or a
nal bars have been fixed to the frst pins bilaterally.
2.4-mm Unilock plate is prebent to achieve the desired
flexion angle of the tarsus. The plate is frst secured to the
third metatarsal bone with three or four 1.5-2.4-mm bone
screws, depending on which plate is used. The plate is then
attached to the tibia with a bone clamp, and the angle and
alignment are checked. If alignment is considered correct,
 four screws are inserted into the tibia. Ideally, the most
 distal of those screws should incorporate the distal margin
of the tibia, the talus, and the calcaneus. The two remain-
ing screw holes are then filled, with the screws aimed to go
through both the talus and the calcaneus (Fig. 40-19A).
Pantarsal arthrodesis with a medial plate: A dorsomedial
approach to the distal tibia, tarsal bones, and second meta-
tarsal bone is performed. After debridement of all joints,
the tibiotarsal joint is temporarily stabilized with an intra-
medullary nail or with cross pins at the desired angle and
alignment. Angle and alignment are checked. A custom-
A
B
ized pantarsal arthrodesis plate or a 2.0- or 2.4-mm
 Figure 40-19  Options for performing a pantarsal arthrodesis.
Unilock plate can be used. The Unilock plates are con-
(A) Arthrodesis with a dorsally applied plate. It is important to
toured as necessary along their broad axis to obtain the
engage the calcaneus with one or two screws
correct flexion angle. When using the customized pantarsal
(B) Arthrodesis with a medially applied Unilock plate.
40: Tarsal joint
523
motion in the talocalcaneal and calcaneoquartal joints due to
40.11 Postoperative treatment
the pull of the Achilles tendon, so at least two screws must
and prognosis
incorporate the calcaneus (26).
 Pantarsal arthrodesis can also be performed with a medi-
40.11.1 Tarsocrural instability
 ally or laterally applied plate (27). Customized plates are
External immobilization of the  tarsus is  provided  with a
available from Veterinary Instrumentation (Sheffeld, UK) for
 splinted bandage after surgical repair of medial collateral liga-
this indication. Alternatively, the 2.0- or 2.4-mm Unilock
 ment sprains. The splint is usually left in place for 2-3 weeks.
mandible-locking plates can be used. Pantarsal arthrodesis
Care is taken to avoid pressure sores, especially over the tuber
using a type I external skeletal fxator is another good alter-
calcanei. Activity is restricted by keeping the cat indoors for
  s     d  
indication for this technique is the presence of open or
another 1-2 months. Radiographs are usually taken before
removal of the splinted bandage to check for evidence of joint
infected tarsal injuries (Figs 40-19 and 40-21).
subluxation and maintenance of position of the screws or
 suture anchors. Screws may have to be removed if they migrate
or cause other problems due to their close vicinity to the joint.
Figure 40-20  Radiograph of a
The prognosis for return to full function is good.
cat with tibiotarsal luxation and a
comminuted talar fracture.
A transarticular external fixator may be used instead of a
 Pantarsal arthrodesis is the only
 splinted bandage in the presence of large degloving injuries,
suitable treatment option for
 or if difficulties are anticipated in keeping a splint in place.
such cases.
The external fxator provides rigid immobilization during
bandage changes, and facilitates wound healing or skin graft
incorporation. The prognosis for degloving injuries is gener-
ally good (28), but a risk of joint infection and restriction of
range of motion due to scar tissue formation and wound
contracture remains.
40.11.2 Tarsocrural luxation
Postoperative immobilization is always required after tarso-
crural luxation. Temporary immobilization with a transar-
ticular external skeletal fxator provides the best stability,
A
B
C
D
Figure 40-21 Pantarsal arthrodesis using a type Il external skeletal fixator
(A, B) The fixator was applied 1 month earlier to revise an infected arthrodesis. The screw holes of the dorsal plate are still visible.
524
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
but a cast or a splint could also be used. Although the tarsus
desis to preserve function and mobility of the tarsocrural
is often immobilized for a time period of 3-4 weeks, earlier 
joint. Healing of an arthrodesis takes at least 3 months, and
mobilization may be preferred in some cases. Cats with a (
 cats should be confined indoors until radiographic healing is
cast or splint for only 10 days and early physiotherapy
evident. Control radiographs are usually performed after 6
tended to have a better outcome than cats with a splint for
weeks and 3 months. Partial tarsal arthrodesis usually results
3-4 weeks in a study on nine cats with tarsocrural luxation
 in excellent limb function and is associated with few compli-
(29). Early removal of the external immobilization device
 cations, but delayed healing, implant failure, or bandage-
after 10 days requires absolute stability of the surgical repair
 related complications can occur.
and is only used if the surgeon feels confdent with fixation
Pantarsal arthrodesis is a less benign surgical procedure,
stability. If stability of the repair is considered to be sub-
although the fnal functional outcome is usually good to
optimal, it is safer to leave the external fixation device for a
excellent. Possible complications include osteomyelitis,
 longer period.
malalignment, delayed fusion, implant loosening or break-
Activity of the cat must be strictly restricted for 4 weeks
age, and bandage complications (17, 24). A dorsally applied
after early removal of the external immobilization device.
2.7-mm DCP broke in a cat 4 months after surgery (24). Cats
Overall, cats are confined to the house for 3 months
are especially prone to develop pressure necrosis of the skin
Degenerative joint disease will develop in all cats with
if both large implants and a bandage are applied. Correct
tarsocrural luxation, and can be quite severe. Intermittent
bandaging techniques and regular rechecks and bandage
or permanent lameness may result in some cats. In a study
changes are necessary to avoid these complications.
 of nine cats clinical outcome was unsatisfactory in one cat,
The plate can be removed after healing has taken place, to
moderate in four cats, and good to excellent in four cats
reduce the risk of iatrogenic fractures at the proximal or
(29). Chronic low-grade joint infection should be ruled out
 distal plate end, but this should not be performed earlier than
in cats with less than ideal function, especially if the initial
6 months after surgery. Plates should always be removed if
injury was open. A course of antibiotics is administered if
a low-grade osteomyelitis is suspected from radiographic
infection is suspected or diagnosed (Chapters 13 and 14).
fndings and/or poor clinical function.
Treatment of degenerative joint disease is described in
Chapter 5. Pantarsal arthrodesis can be performed as a
References and further reading
 salvage procedure in patients with chronic pain and clinical
dysfunction.
1. Schmokel HG, et al. Tarsal injuries in the cat: a retrospective
study of 21 cases. J Small Anim Pract 1994;35:156-162.
2. Frewein J, Vollmerhaus B. Anatomie von Hund und Katze.
40.11.3 Dorsal intertarsal and
Berlin: Blackwell; 1994.
3. McNicholas WT Jr, et al. Luxation of the superficial digital
tarsometatarsal instabilities
flexor tendon in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000;36:
174-176.
External support is not necessary after stable internal immo-
4. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA. An atlas of surgical approaches to
bilization of dorsal intertarsal and tarsometatarsal instabili-
the bones and joints of the dog and the cat, 4th edn. Philadel-
ties with plates or internal fixators, but the cats should be
phia: WB Saunders; 2004.
confined indoors with restricted activity for 34 weeks.
5. Vaughan LC, Faull WB. Correction of a luxated superficial
digital fexor tendon in a greyhound dog. Vet Rec 1955;59:
External immobilization with a splinted bandage may be
335-336.
chosen for 10 days after having used a tension band tech-
6. Mauterer JV, Prata RG. Displacement of the tendon of the
nique with screws and wire.
superficial digital flexor muscle in dogs: 10 cases. J Am Vet Med
The implants can be removed after 4-6 weeks to prevent
Assoc 1993;203:1162-1165.
7. Reinke J, et al. Lateral luxation of the superficial digital flexor
unwanted joint fusion secondary to prolonged immobiliza
tendon in 12 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1993;29:303-
tion (11). However, signs of impeding ankylosis did not seem 
309.
to affect clinical function. Return to function is fast, and the
8. Damur DM, Montavon PM. Die chirurgische Behandlung der
 prognosis is excellent for cats with dorsomedial or dorsolat-
Luxation des oberflachlichen Zehenbeugers mittels einer
Drahtschlinge bei zwei Hunden. Kleintierpraxis 2001;46:
eral intertarsal and tarsometatarsal injuries, stabilized with
805-809.
Unilock plates (11).
9. Vannini R. Tarsal luxations in cats. AO Vet Course 2002;
Davos, Switzerland; pp. 56-57.
40.11.4 Partial and pantarsal arthrodeses
10. Owen MA. Use of contoured bar transhock external fixators in
17 cats. J Small Anim Pract 2000;41:440-446.
11. Voss K, et al. Internal splinting of dorsal intertarsal and
Postoperative immobilization of the joint is recommended
tarsometatarsal instabilities in dogs and cats with the ComPact
after both partial tarsal and pantarsal arthrodesis. Immobili-
UniLock 2.0/2.4 System. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2004;17:
zation should not exceed 4 weeks after partial tarsal arthro-
125-130.
40: Tarsal joint
525
12. Piermattei DL, Flo GL. Fractures and other orthopedic injuries
 21. Shanil J, et al. Arthrodesis of the tarsometatarsal joint, using
of the tarsus, metatarsus, and phalanges. In: Piermattei DL, Flo
type I ESF with acrylic connecing bars in four dogs. Vet Comp
GL (eds) Small animal orthopedics and fracture repair. Phila-
Orthop Traumatol 2006;19:61-63.
delphia: WB Saunders; 1997: pp. 607-655.
22. Mathews KG, et al. Resolution of lameness associated with
13. Von Werthern CJ, Bernasconi CE. Application of the maxillo-
 facial mini-plate Compact 1.0 in the fracture repair of 12 cats/2
pantarsal arthrodeses: a case report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2000;13:92-96.
1995;31:280-288.
14. Gorse MJ, et al. Talocalcaneal luxation: an anatomic and clini-
23. Gorse MJ, et al. Tarsocrural arthrodesis: long-term functional
cal study Vet Surg 1990;19:429-434.
results. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1991;27:231-235.
15. Montavon PM, et al. The mini instrument and implant set and
24. DeCamp C, et al. Pantarsal arthrodesis in dogs and a cat: 11
its clinical application. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 1988;1:
cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;203:1705-1707.
44-51.
25. Kirsch JA, et al. In vitro mechanical evaluation on the use of an
16. McCartney WT, Carmichael S. Talar neck fractures in five cats.
intramedullary pin-plate combination for pantarsal arthrodesis
J Small Anim Pract 2000;41:204-206.
in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2005;66:125-131.
17. Allen MJ, et al. Calcaneoquartal arthrodesis in the dog. J Small
26. Vannini R. Tarsal panarthrodesis. BSAVA meeting 1998; Bir-
Anim Pract 1993;34:205-210.
mingham, England.
18. Muir P, Norris L. Tarsometatarsal subluxation in dogs: partial
27. McKee WM, et al. Pantarsal arthrodesis with a customized
arthrodesis by plate fixation. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1999;35:
medial or lateral bone plate in 13 dogs. Vet Rec 2004;154:
155-162.
165-170.
19. Dyce J, et al. Arthrodesis of the tarsometatarsal joint using a
28. Beardsley SL, Schrader SC. Treatment of dogs with wounds of
laterally applied plate in 10 dogs. J Small Anim Pract 1998;39:
the limbs caused by shearing forces: 98 cases (1975-1993). J
19-22.
Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207:1071-1075.
20. Penwick RC, Clark DM. A simple technique for tarsometatarsal
29. Schmokel HG, Ehrismann G. The surgical treatment of talocru-
arthrodesis in small animals. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1988;24:
ral luxation in nine cats. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2001;
183-188.
14:46-50.
527
41
Amputations
S.J. Langley-Hobbs, K. Voss, P.M. Montavon
 aris a si  s q  
 techniques and/or arthrodesis. Reinnervation can occur but
fractures and disturbed vasculature of the distal limb, for
is often slow, and if owners are unwilling or unable to
chronic unremiting pain in the high-motion joints like the
 perform the necessary physical therapy in the intervening
elbow or stifle when arthrodesis is not the preferred treatment
period to prevent muscle contracture, amputation is
option, for congenital or acquired deformity, for severe infec-
justified.
tion unresponsive to treatment, and for excision of tumors
and irreversible neurological deficits.
Cats cope very well with the loss of a limb or appendage,
41.2 General principles of amputation
such as a tail or digit. They may function better with an
amputation than with preservation of a functionally abnor-
The surgical site should be widely clipped from the carpus or
mal or painful leg. However, except for treatment for neo-
hock to the dorsal and ventral midline, extending far enough
 plasia, amputation should be considered a last-resort salvage
 Cranially and caudally to allow adequate aseptic preparation.
 option, only to be performed if limb function cannot be
The whole leg should be draped out to permit full manipula-
preserved.
tion. Open infected wounds distal to the amputation site
 In one study it was shown that many owners were reluctant
should be covered if possible.
Aaul Aiaains iaje inq 'iad nau rop uoneindue iapisuos o1
The skin incision should be made distal enough to allow
 po ande pue a a m pis arm
for sufficient skin to close without tension. Excess skin can
animals (1). In another study, only two out of 22 cats showed
be trimmed later as necessary. The lateral skin on the limbs
a marked reduction of quality of life after forelimb or hindlimb
 and dorsal skin on the tail should be retained where possi-
amputation according to owner assessment. Quality of life
 ble, and more removed from the thinner and less densely
remained unchanged or only slightly reduced in all of the
haired skin of the groin, axilla, or ventral tail. The surgery
others. The most common minor problems were diffculties
should involve systematic and meticulous dissection and
when jumping on high objects, and when grooming or
 transection of muscles. Muscles are transected at their ten-
scratching (2).
dinous insertion sites if possible to reduce hemorrhage. The
use of cutting diathermy reduces hemorrhage from muscle
bellies. The muscles contract once cut, so ensure they are
cut sufficiently distally when it is desired that the remaining
41.1 Preoperative evaluation
tissue stumps will provide some protective cover to the cut
a pue apaond Auiaua ue Aaren si uondue u
bone ends. Avoid undermining skin to minimize dead
patient should be stable prior to surgery. Amputation is a
space.
 major procedure and a complete physical examination should
Arteries and veins are ligated separately to avoid the forma-
be done prior to surgery. Blood loss is possible and baseline
tion of arteriovenous fistulae (3). Arteries and major veins
packed cell volume and plasma proteins should be assessed
should be double-ligated. Silk or a braided absorbable suture
 preoperatively. The other limbs are carefully examined pre-
material, such as Vicryl, are appropriate suture materials.
 operatively to rule out orthopedic and/or neurological disease.
Nerves should be handled gently and are sharply severed with
Severe disease in another limb may make an animal a poor
a sharp scalpel blade. The nerve can be splash blocked with
candidate for amputation. In the presence of neoplasia, the
lidocaine prior to transection.
tumor should be staged to check for local extent and distant
 Bone should be cut neatly with a handsaw, power-driven
metastasis (Chapter 8).
saw, or Gigli wire. The use of bone cutters in diaphyseal bone
Neurological dysfunction such as brachial plexus avulsion
should be avoided in adult cats as the bone is brittle and will
 or sciatic neuropathy is confrmed and monitored by physical
tend to fissure or crack, resulting in an uneven or spiky
examination and electromyography (Chapter 2). In select
stump. After disarticulation of the hip or shoulder no special
cases the limb can be salvaged by the use of muscle relocation
treatment is required for the articular surface.
Box 41-1. Forequarter amputation
The cat is placed in lateral recumbency. An inverted Y-
medial aspect of the scapula. The suprascapular and the
shaped skin incision is made, extending from the dorsal
 nerves of the brachial plexus are severed. The axillary
spine of the scapula to the acromion. Then the incision is 
lymph node can be removed at this time if necessary. The
 extended cranially over the greater tubercle, and medially
axillary vein and artery are double ligated and severed
 in the axilla curving round at the axillary fold to meet the
(Fig. 41-1C). The superficial and deep pectoral muscles are
lateral incision at the level of the acromion (Fig. 41-1A).
transected at their attachment on the humerus to complete
The axillobrachial and omobrachial veins are ligated
the removal of the limb.
 and severed proximal to the greater tubercle. The cephalic
The cut ends of the muscle bellies are inverted and
vein is ligated and severed distal to the cleidobrachialis
apposed with mattress sutures. The lateral fascial sheaths
muscle. The brachiocephalicus muscle is transected just 
of the latissimus dorsi muscle, omotransversarius, and tra-
proximal to the clavicle. The omotransversarius and tra-
 pezius are sutured to the lateral fascial sheaths of the pec-
pezius muscles are severed along the cranial edge of the
toral muscle. Subcutaneous tissues and skin are closed
spine of the scapula (Fig. 41-1B). The latissimus dorsi
routinely, taking care to close down dead space and remove
 muscle is separated from the teres major and severed close
excess tissue from the medial axillary flap, so more of the
to its insertion on the humerus.
 thicker lateral brachial skin is preserved, to achieve a cos-
The scapula is then elevated and the insertions of the
metic result (Fig. 41-1D).
rhomboideus and serratus muscles are severed close to the
Figure 41-1  Forequarter
amputation.
(A) T-shaped skin incision for 
 forequarter amputation.
(B) Muscles are transected along 
the scapula.
(C) The scapula is retracted 
laterally. and the medial muscles
are elevated from the bone. The
brachial plexus nerves are cut,
and the axillary artery and vein
 are ligated. The remaining 
muscles are cut to release the
scapula.
(D) Muscles are apposed to
minimize dead space, and the
subcutis and skin are closed.
B
41:Amputations
529
When amputating for neoplasia, the site of amputation
removing the affected portion of the scapula with adequate
must be sufficiently proximal to give a clean margin. Veins
margins (9).
should be ligated frst to prevent possible spread of tumor
cells during manipulation. The amputated leg is submitted
41.4 Hindlimb amputation
for histopathological analysis to confrm tumor type and to
check for clean margins.
Indications for amputation of the hindlimb include neoplasia,
Muscles are apposed to close down dead space and cover
sciatic neuropathy, irreparable fractures, non-unions or
bone ends by inverting the cut edges with absorbable mattress
chronic unremitting osteomyelitis, quadriceps contracture,
sutures. Subcutaneous sutures and skin sutures are used to
and end-stage stifle conditions where arthrodesis is not an
obtain a cosmetic closure. Excess skin may need to be trimmed
option.
to avoid dog ears at the wound edges.
The hindlimb can be amputated at the level of the proximal
The decision as to what level to amputate and whether to
femur (Box 41-3) or by coxofemoral disarticulation (Box
disarticulate the joint or amputate by cutting through bone
41-4). The area of soft-tissue or bony lesion determines which
 is open to debate. However there is concern that the remain-
 of the removal techniques is indicated. Amputation by cutting
ing cartilage will not atrophy and could promote complica-
through the proximal femur is easier to perform than coxo-
tions such as seroma and infection. Conversely, amputations
femoral amputation, and will give better cosmetic results by
performed by cutting through bone and leaving a stump can
leaving the proximal aspect of the femur with its associated
be more painful, the skin over the stump can ulcerate, and
musculature (10). It is appropriate for most cases, except for
overgrowth of the bone can occur in young animals (4, 5).
neoplasia of the femur, where excision of the whole femur is
 The procedure of choice must be the one that works best for
required. Partial or total hemipelvectomy can be done for
each individual patient and veterinary surgeon.
tumors involving the pelvis or coxofemoral joint, where a
wider margin of tissue needs to be excised (11).
41.3 Forelimb amputation
41.5 Tail amputation
Indications for amputation of the forelimb include neoplasia,
severe degloving injuries of the distal limb, brachial plexus
Indications for tail amputation include degloving injuries,
avulsions, muscle contractures, fracture disease, and chronic
skin necrosis, tumors, and paralysis. The most common
debilitating joint conditions, and where fnances may not 
 reason for amputation of the tail in cats is paralysis following
permit an attempt at surgical repair (Box 41-1).
tail pull injuries after road traffic accidents (Box 41-5).
 Amputation of the forelimb can be performed at the level
of the proximal humerus, by disarticulation of the scapulo-
41.6 Metacarpal, metatarsal, and
humeral joint or by rermoval of the whole limb including the
phalangeal amputation
scapula
 - a forequarter amputation. Foreleg amputation
through the proximal humerus is an easy procedure, but is
Indications for amputation of digits and associated metacar-
restricted to cases where the abnormality is located distal to
pal and metatarsal bones include neoplasia, chronic osteomy-
 the elbow joint (6). Abrasion and ulceration of the overlying
elitis, and severe trauma. The level of amputation is not as
skin may occur if the humeral stump is left with insuffcient
 critical as with an entire limb amputation. When removing
soft-tissue coverage or if the humerus is left too long. The
 the fifth or second metacarpal and metatarsal bones the prox-
scapula is preserved with both disarticulation of the scapulo-
imal aspects should be preserved along with their ligaments,
humeral joint and amputation through the proximal humerus,
otherwise instability can result (Box 41-6).
and atrophy of the adjacent muscles can lead to a prominent
 Disarticulation through the distal interphalangeal joint is
scapular spine and acromion process, which may be disturb.
the commonest type of amputation in cats (12). Elective feline
ing to some owners (Box 41-2). The scapular spine can be
onychectomy or declaw procedure is unethical or illegal in
partially removed during surgery to prevent this.
 most countries when performed to prevent scratching of fur-
Amputation by removal of the whole forelimb including
niture, but there may be some medical indications such as for
the scapula (forequarter amputation) gives a better cosmetic
 treatment or biopsy of nail bed disease, or to remove a previ-
result and is the preference of the authors, although it involves
-p ienouqe ue un aumona si ieun me pap kisno
slightly more dissection (7). Major blood vessels and nerves
tion. It is usually performed under tourniquet and it is
are easily visualized, bone-cutting equipment is not required,
 a  ass an an le o on s
and no prominent scapular spine is left behind (8).
 crest to prevent regrowth. Either the entire third phalanx can
 For some tumors involving the proximal half of the scapula
be dissected out and removed or a small palmar portion of
it may be possible to preserve the limb function by just 
 the third phalanx can be retained. Following oncychectomy,
530
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 41-2. Forelimb amputation at the level of the proximal humerus
The cat is placed in lateral recumbency. The curved skin
 Remaining lateral muscle attachments are transected close
incision is made from cranial to the shoulder extending 
to the elbow joint (Fig. 41-2C). The attachment of the
 distally across the distal humerus, and curving back up to
 brachiocephalic muscle along the humeral shaft is elevated
the axillary fold. A straighter incision is made medially,
 from the bone from distal to proximal, until the deltoid
not extending as far distally, so the lateral skin flap can
tuberosity in the proximal third of the humerus is
later be used to cover the stump (Fig. 41-2A).
reached.
The  superficial cleidobrachialis and brachiocephalic
The humeral shaft is transected in its proximal third
 muscles are transected craniomedially. The brachial artery,
with a handsaw, oscillating saw or Gigli wire just distal
located caudal to the biceps muscle on the medial aspect
to the deltoid tuberosity (Fig. 41-2D). Meticulous hemo-
of the limb, is double ligated and transected proximally.
stasis is performed before closure. The stump of the
The brachial vein is ligated separately at the same level.
humerus is well covered by suturing the brachial and
The median, ulnar, and musculocutaneous nerves are
q a  s an on s q ss
sharply divided. The tendon of the triceps muscle, and the
needs to be well covered with muscles, especially over the
brachial and biceps muscles are transected close to their
cranial aspect of the stump. During closure of the subcu-
 insertion sites around the elbow joint to minimize bleeding
taneous tissues, preserve as much lateral skin as possible
(Fig. 41-2B).
as this is thicker with a denser hair coat, which will give
 The cephalic vein is ligated on the lateral aspect of the
a better cosmetic result. Take care to avoid dead space
limb. The radial nerve is identifed and sharply dissected.
(Fig. 41-2D).
Both structures are severed at their proximal aspect.
A
B
D
Figure 41-2Forelimb amputation at the level of the proximal humerus.
(A) Skin incision with the lateral curve extending to the distal humerus.
(B) The forelimb is reflected to reach the medial side. Vessels are ligated, and vesels and nerves are transected proximally: muscles are
transected close to the elbow joint.
(C) Laterally, the radial nerve is transected, and the cephalic vein ligated and transected proximally: muscles are transected close to the elbow
joint.
(D) The humerus is cut through at the proximal metaphyseal region, muscles are apposed to minimize dead space, and subcutis and skin are
closed.
41: Amputations
531
Box 41-3. Hindlimb amputation at the level of the proximal third of the femur
The cat is placed in lateral recumbency. The skin incision
branosus and semitendinosus muscles are transected at the
is centered just proximal to the stifle, curving from the fold
caudomedial aspect of the stifle. The leg is elevated and
of the flank to the caudal thigh and meeting medially distal
the gracilis and pectineus muscles and caudal sartorius are
to the inguinal crease (Fig. 41-3A). The medial skin inci-
transected through their tendinous bellies at their inser-
 sion should be at mid femoral level, the longer lateral flap
tions on the tibia (Fig. 41-3C).
 serves to hide the scar on the medial part of the leg and
Caudally, the adductor is elevated off the bone to expose
 protects the stump, as the lateral skin is much thicker than
the proximal third of the femur. The muscles are reflected
the medial.
and the femur is transected between the proximal and mid
The leg is elevated to reach its medial aspect, and the
thirds (Fig. 41-3D), using a handsaw, Gigli wire or oscil-
femoral artery is double ligated just proximal to the proxi-
lating bone. Hemorrhage from the bone can be controlled
mal caudal femoral artery (Fig. 41-3B). The femoral vein
with absorbable gelatin sponge. The site is closed by
is ligated at a similar level. The cranial part of the sarto-
apposing the sartorius, quadriceps, and biceps femoris 
rius, tensor fascia lata, quadriceps and biceps femoris
muscles to the semitendinosus, semimembranosus, and
muscles are severed at the level of the distal femur. The
 gracilis muscles with mattress sutures, to cover the remain-
 quadriceps muscle is transected just proximal to the patella
 ing bone. Subcutis and skin are closed while taking care
(Fig. 41-3B).
to avoid leaving dead space.
The caudolateral muscles are reflected proximally and
the sciatic nerve is transected (Fig. 41-3C). The semimem-
Figure 41-3   Hindlimb
 amputation at the level of the
proximal femur.
(A) Skin incision with the lateral
curve extending to the distal
femur.
(B) The femur is reflected 
laterally. the femoral vessels are
ligated proximally. and the
femoral nerve is transected at the
same level. Muscles are cut
through their tendinous insertions 
close to the stifle joint.
(C) On the lateral side, the sciatic
nerve is transected proximally.
A
 and the lateral and caudal
muscles are dissected close to the
stifle joint.
(D) The bone is cut at its proximal
third, muscle are closed over the
bone stump, and subcutis and
 skin are closed.
C
D
532
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 41-4. Hindlimb amputation by coxofemoral disarticulation and removal of the thigh muscles
The cat is placed in lateral recumbency with the affected
elevated from the pubic symphysis. Then the semimembra-
leg uppermost and quadrant draped. A curved skin inci-
nosus and semitendinosus are removed from the tuber
sion is made from the fold of the flank across at the level
ischium. The proximal part of the pectineus is reflected,
 of the midshaft of the femur to the ischial tuberosity. The
exposing the medial circumflex.
medial skin incision is made at a similar level (Fig.
The lateral skin incision is then undermined to the level
41-4A).
 of the greater trochanter to reach the musculature close to
The leg is elevated and the femoral artery and vein iden-
the coxofemoral joint (Fig. 41-4C). The tensor fascia lata
tified in the femoral triangle, which is bordered cranially
and biceps femoris muscles are dissected free from the
by the sartorius muscles and caudally by the pectineus. The
femoral artery is double ligated and severed proximal to
ischii. The sciatic nerve is exposed as the biceps is reflected
the superfcial circumflex iliac artery and lateral circumflex
distally and it is transected. The vastus lateralis, medialis,
iliac artery branches (Fig. 41-4B). The femoral vein is
and intermedius are not severed but are removed with the
ligated at a similar level. With the leg still elevated, the
femur. The muscles of the femoral neck are removed next.
caudal muscle bellies are frst elevated. The pectineus is
The gluteal muscles are transected at their insertions on
elevated from the iliopectineal eminence. The gracilis,
the greater trochanter and third trochanter and are reflected
adductor longus and adductor magnus et brevis are then
dorsally and cranially. The tendons of insertion of the
Figure 41-4 Hindlimb
 amputation by coxofemoral
disarticul ation
(A) Skin incision for hindlimb
amputation for coxofemoral
disarticulation
(B) The leg is elevated, the
femoral artery and vein are
ligated proximally. and the vessels
and femoral nerve are transected.
The medial muscles are cut.
(C) Muscles are transected close
to the coxofemoral joint laterally
The sciatic nerve is sharply
divided.
(D) The coxofemoral joint is
disarticulated and the leg
removed. Muscles are apposed 
over the acetabulum to minimize
dead space, and the subcutis and
 skin are closed.
D
41: Amputations
533
gemelli, internal obturator and quadratus femoris muscles
To remove the limb, the joint capsule is incised circum.
are transected at their insertions on the trochanteric fossa.
 ferentially and the coxofemoral joint is disarticulated after
The cranial thigh muscles are dealt with next. The tensor 
 ransecting the teres ligament from the medial side of the
fascia lata is dissected from its combined origin on the 
 joint (Fig. 41-4D). Hemostasis is performed, and the
tuber coxae and aponeurosis with the gluteal muscles and
 remaining muscles are sutured together with mattress
reflected distally. The cranial and caudal bellies of the 
 sutures. Apposition of these muscles should result in cover-
sartorius muscle are freed from the iliac crest and lum-
 age of the acetabulum. As there has been extensive removal
bodorsal fascia and reflected distally. The rectus femoris 
 of muscle the use of drains should be considered. Closed
 tendon, the only component of the quadriceps group to
suction drains are preferable. If open drains such as Penrose
cross the coxofemoral joint, is transected close to its tuber-
are used they should be placed to exit cranially, and are
 osity on the pelvis. The only remaining connecting muscle,
 covered with a sterile dressing. A pressure bandage should
the iliopsoas, is then freed from its insertion on the lesser
be applied if no drain is used.
trochanter.
Box 41-5. Tail amputation
Two semicircular incisions are made dorsally and ven-
Figure 41-5  Diagram showing
trally, creating two skin flaps (Fig. 41-5). The skin incision
the skin incision for tail
amputation, and a line indicating 
is made distal to the planned point of transection, and the
the more proximal cut through
skin is then pushed proximally to allow further dissection.
the coccygeal vertebral body.
The two lateral caudal vessels and the median caudal
vessels are ligated or cauterized and severed. Skin flaps are
retracted cranially, coccygeal muscles are transected, and
the coccygeal vertebrae is cut through with a pair of bone
cutters or disarticulated according to personal preference.
The dorsal skin flap is pulled over the stump and sutured
to the ventral skin flap.
 the second phalanx should be inspected and any overlapping
and eliminate dead space. The bandage may be resented by
remnants of the third phalanx resected.
 the cat, and must not be applied too tightly to compromise 
respiration.
41.7 Postoperative treatment
-rody rued ron paro s nunnd an Krns r
 mia, and bleeding. Please see Chapter 18 for information on
and complications
perioperative pain management. Postoperative hemorrhage
Drains are not usually required if adequate attention is paid
can occur as a slow ooze and swelling under the wound or
to hemostasis and atraumatic surgical technique. A padded
as a sudden catastrophic bleed. If the amount of blood loss
bandage can be applied to the thorax to minimize swelling
 is minimal, a pressure bandage should be applied if possible.
534
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
Box 41-6. Metacarpal, metatarsal, and phalangeal amputation
Depending on the level of amputation a variety of incisions
Figure 41-6Examples of levels
are used (Fig. 41-6). Adequate skin must be preserved for
for amputation of a digit.
 closure over the stump. The area to be removed is exposed
(A) Amputation of phalanges 3
and 2 of digit Il by cutting
and the arterial supply ligated or cauterized. The bones are
through phalanx 1.
removed at the required level either by disarticulation or
(B) Amputation of phalanx 3 of 
by cutting through the bone. Closure entails suturing the
digit Ill by disarticulation or
deep fascia and subcutaneous tissue to close dead space,
removal of the whole ungual
followed by routine skin closure.
crest. The digital pad must be
retained.
(C) Amputation of digit IV by
cutting through the distal 
 metacarpal bone.
(D) Amputation of digit V by 
oblique osteotomy through the
metacarpal bone 
A large or continuous amount of hemorrhage indicates a
4. Abraham E, et al. Stump overgrowth in juvenile amputees. J
bleeding vessel and the operative incision should be opened
Pediatr Orthop 1986;6:66-71.
and the vessel ligated.
5. Weigel JP. Amputations. In: Slatter D (ed.) Textbook of small
animal surgery, Znd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1993: pp.
 Skin ulceration may be caused by inaccurate skin apposi-
1901-1910.
tion, inadequate drainage, circulatory impairment due to to0
6. Trout NJ, et al. Partial scapulectomy for management of sarco-
tight a closure, or too long a stump of bone rubbing under
mas in three dogs and two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207:
the skin. Ulcerations are treated with excision of ulcerated
585-587.
7. Straw RC, et al. Partial or hemipelvectomy in the management
tissue and wound closure without tension. It may be neces-
of sarcomas in nine dogs and two cats. Vet Surg 1992;21:
 sary to resect bone at a more proximal level to allow tension-
183-188.
free closure, if the stump was left too long initially.
8. Swalec-Tobias K. Feline onychectomy at a teaching institution:
Phantom-limb pain has been reported in one cat (13). This
a retrospective study of 163 cases. Vet Surg 1994;23:274-280.
9. O'Hagan BJ. Neuropathic pain in a cat post-amputation. Aust
lnbasqns pue Kinlun aaiau oios iuon ue pu 1en
Vet J 2006;84:83-86.
hindlimb amputation. Multimodal analgesic therapy resulted
10. Budsberg SC. Amputations. In: Olmstead ML (ed.) Small
in resolution of signs of pain.
animal orthopaedics, Missouri: Mosby Year Book; 1995: pp.
531-548.
11. Daly WR. Amputation of the forelimb. In: Bojrab MJ (ed.)
Current techniques in small animal surgery, 3rd edn. Philadel-
References and further reading
phia: Lea and Febiger; 1990: pp. 802-806.
12. Harvey CE. Complete forequarter amputation in the dog and
1. Carberry CA, Harvey HJ. Owner satisfaction with limb amputa-
cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1974;10:25-30.
ton in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1987;23:
13. Knapp DW. Amputation and disarticulation of the rear leg. In:
227-232.
Bojrab MJ (ed.) Current techniques in small animal surgery, 3rd
 2. Von Werthern C, et al. Limb amputation in dogs and cats: owner
edn. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger; 1990: pp. 730-735.
response. Kleintierpraxis 1999; 44:169-176.
14. Montavon PM. Voss K. [Amputations]. In: Horzinek MC,
3. Muir P, Pead MJ. Chronic lameness after digit amputation in
Schmidt V, Lutz H (eds) Krankheiten der Katze, 3rd edn. Stutt-
three dogs. Vet Rec 1998;143:549-550.
gart: Enke Verlag; 2003: pp. 720-723.
535
42
Bloopers
P.M. Montavon
We were often wrong, but never in doubt
the proximal ulna and luxation of the head of the radius was
(Steven Birchard)
present (Fig. 42-2A). The immediate postoperative radio-
graphs showed inaccurate reduction of the proximal ulnar
Introduction
fracture, resulting in abnormal articular congruence of the
elbow joint. The surgeon had not realized that the proximal
Empirical knowledge of surgery is acquired by seeing or
doing, and it is sometimes diffcult to cover it in a book.
Surgery is not an exact science and only experience and
observation allow us to perform what can be done, although
not always achieving our desire of perfection. According to
Webster's Dictionary, a blooper in baseball is hitting a ball 
in a low arc, so that it falls between the felders. We have
selected a few clinical cases to illustrate situations we under-
estimated, scenarios we neglected, or outcomes or eventuali-
ties which resulted from unexpected conditions. These
situations depict both lucky and unlucky surgical circum-
stances in our world of small-animal veterinary surgeons. The
experience of such cases and the successful resolution should
help the surgeon to perform in a better manner the next time.
 No written theory can ever fully teach us everything.
Knowing when to cut (Fig. 42-1)
A 5-year-old female cat was admitted to the clinic at 4 a.m.
in shock, and recumbent. After intravenous perfusion, radio-
graphs were taken (Fig. 42-1A and 42-1B). The heart was
small and displaced cranially with the pulmonary paren
chyma; the thoracic vessels were small. A dorsal rupture of
 the diaphragm was present, with the stomach and a large part
of the duodenum displaced into the thorax. A calculus was
visible in the urinary bladder, and mineralizations were
present in the left stifle. The cat was placed in an oxygen cage
and given intravenous fluids at shock rates to stabilize it prior
to surgery. She died 90 minutes later due to further distension
of the stomach. Only an immediate surgical intervention,
decompressing the stomach or replacing it in the abdomen
and treating the rupture of the diaphragm, might have saved
this cat.
B
Recognizing the difference between cats
Figure 42-1  A 5-year-old female cat was admitted in the early
and dogs (Fig. 42-2)
morning to the clinic recumbent and in shock. (A) The laterolateral
chest view shows a smmall heart displaced cranially with small thoracic
An 1l-month-old female cat was presented after a fall from
vessels. (B) The ventrodorsal view confirms a rupture of the diagram
a height. A closed Monteggia fracture with comminution of
with the stomach displaced into the thorax.
536
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
B
D
R
Figure 42-2 (A) A closed Monteggia fracture with comminution of the proximal ulna (B, C). It was
inaccurately reduced, with incongruence of the elbow joint. (D, E) Adequate contouring of the 
proximal area of the plate and removal of the two implants causing disruption improved the
reduction.
ulna has a different shape in cats compared to dogs. Immedi-
The perils of a weaker plate (Fig. 42-3)
ate revision surgery was performed (Fig. 42-2B and 42-2C).
Accurate contouring of the same plate to the caudal edge of
A 2-year-old male cat had an automobile accident and sus-
 the ulna and removal of two implants that were causing dis-
tained a comminuted tibial fracture (Fig. 42-3A and 42-3B).
ruption was performed during this second surgery (Fig. 42-
He was treated with a 2.4-mm locking compression plate,
2D and 42-2E). The cat is walking without lameness at this
 'sms -i m s p u ro pa
time.
fracture was reduced with a mild valgus deviation, but
42: Bloopers
537
C
D
E
Figure 42-3 (A, B) A comminuted fracture of the tibia was present in this cat, after an automobile accident. (C, D) It was adequately reduced 
and stabilized with a locking compression plate in buttress function and 2.7-mm screws. (E, F) The plate bent at the level of the fracture one
week postoperatively. (G, H) It was replaced with a longer 14-hole 2.0-mm dynamic compression plate in a more varus position. A wave plate
(Fig. 13-23) also could have been applied.
538
 Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
E
F
G
H
Figure 42-3 Continued
otherwise appeared adequate (Fig. 42-3C and 42-3D). At 1
Avoid overdistraction (Fig. 42-5)
week postoperatively, the plate used for fixation was bent at
A male cat was 3.5 years old when he had a car accident
the fracture site, at the level of the empty hole. The locking
 and sustained a fracture of the fbula, and a communited
compression plate, with its new more flexible design involv-
ing less metal, was not strong enough to be used in buttress
fracture of the tibia (Fig. 42-5A and 42-5B). A 2.7-mm
function (Fig. 42-3E and 42-3F). It was successfully replaced
 dynamic compression plate, including the use of two mono-
with a 14-hole 2.0-mm dynamic compression plate (Fig. 42-
 cortical screws, was applied for the fracture stabilization
3G and 42-3H). Another technique could have been the use 
(Fig. 42-5C and 42-5D). A relatively large defect remained
of a second short plate, placed perpendicularly to give addi-
at the fracture site. This can allow invasion or collapse of
tional axial stability to the initial plate. A wave plate (see Fig.
 muscle and soft tissues into the fracture site and can con-
tribute to delayed fracture healing in this situation. In this
13-23) could have been applied to treat the non-union.
cat, union took over 10 months (Fig. 42-5E and 42-5F).
Three small screws can be better then two
Radiographically discrete evidence of healing is occurring at
big ones (Fig. 42-4)
 the extremities of the fracture site but a large cortical defect
is still present under the plate. The fracture was stable at
The mid-diaphyseal humeral fracture of a young cat was
this time. Unfortunately, this cat was then killed in another
treated with a laterally applied 2.7-mm dynamic compression 
 accident.
plate. The distal part of the repair failed a short time after
This type of situation is not rare after surgery on the tibia;
surgery (Fig. 42-4A and 42-4B). On the mediolateral view,
 overdistraction can also occur if the bone is forcibly reduced
one can see that only two screws were applied in the distal
with extension of the tarsus, creating a large fracture gap
fragment, with the proximal one very close to the fracture.
with plate or external skeletal fxation. Overdistraction of
A fissure developed berween the two screws. A cranial veteri-
the fracture fragments, combined with the minimal soft
nary cuttable plate in sandwich was used for revision, which
tissue around the distal tibia, can cause delayed or non-
allowed reinforcement of the distal aspect with a larger
 unions with tibial fractures. The situation might be improved
number of smaller screws directed from cranially to caudally
by placing an absorbable suture as a cerclage around the
(Fig. 42-4C). This judicious revision surgery was suffciently
butterfly fragment in selected fractures, to reduce its dis-
stable and led to healing of the fracture.
tracted position.
42: Bloopers
539
A
B
Figure 42-4 (A, B) The transverse humeral fracture was repaired with a 2.7-mm dynamic compression plate with only 2 screws in the distal
(c) Two cranial veterinary cuttable plates sandwiched with a larger number of screws was a judicious successful revision.
The consequences of surgery in a young
screw and a large intramedullary pin was placed, but was not
growing cat (Fig. 42-6)
seated well into the distal epicondyle. Additional stabilization
against rotation was provided with the tubular external
 A 6-month-old female cat, with potential for further growth,
skeletal fixator (FESSA) system, but only with very limited
was presented with a medial patellar luxation of grade C and
anchorage. The humeral reduction was poor, resulting in a
a mild varus deformity of the distal femur (Fig. 42-6A and
varus deviation (Fig. 42-7C and 42-7D). Fixation failure
42-6B). The tibial tuberosity was transposed too distally
occurred 1 week after surgery (Fig. 42-7E and 42-7F) and
during the initial surgery (Fig. 42-6C and 42-6D). A mid-
the system was revised and improved by using a larger intra-
diaphyseal fracture of the femur occurred 14 months later.
condylar screw, a thinner intramedullary pin tied in to an
The combination of securing the tibial tuberosity too distally
external skeletal fxator, and several small Kirschner wires
and tuberosity drift occurring from premature closure of the
crossing through the distal fragment (Fig. 42-7G and 42-7H).
tuberosity and continued growth of the tibial plateau have
 a   sa a a  sa r
resulted in deformity of the proximal tibia (Fig. 42-6E and
removed, just leaving the intracondylar screw (Fig. 42-7I and
42-6F). Plating of the femur and proximal reposition of the
42-7J).
tibial tuberosity were indicated. This case shows the prob-
lems of performing an osteotomy on a young growing animal,
Too large pins and a transarticular
and especially if it has been neutered, when the physes remain
fixator (Fig. 42-8)
active for longer. A better technique for a cat of this age
would have been a sulcus recession, and delaying transposi-
A 9-year-old castrated male cat presented with a disrupted
tion of the tibial osteotomy if it was warranted.
stifle (Fig. 42-8A and 42-8B) including rupture of the cranial
cruciate ligament, damage to the medial meniscus, and avul-
Insufficient stability of a small fragment
sion of the medial collateral ligament. Articular structures
near a high-motion joint (Fig. 42-7)
were repaired, with prosthetic replacement of the medial
collateral ligament. A transarticular external fxator was
A 3-month-old male European short-hair cat had a car acci-
 placed, using too large pins and double connecting bars,
dent. One elbow sustained an intracondylar fracture (Fig.
 somewhat too big and positioned too far from the bones and
42-7A and 42-7B). The fracture was stabilized with a 1.5-mm
 at the extremities of the external fxator (Fig. 42-8C and
540
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
D
E
Figure 42-5 (A, B) This comminuted fracture of the tibia with fracture of the fibula was repaired with a 2.7-mm dynamic compression plate
(C. D). The main fragments of the tibia remained distracted and a large defect was present at the fracture site. (E, F) Discrete evidence of healing is
present at 10 months, but the large cortical defect is still present under the plate. The cat was unfortunately killed in another accident so there was
no further follow up.
42:Bloopers
541
4
D
E
F
Figure 42-6 (A, B) A 6-month-old female cat with potential for further growth was presented with medial patellar luxation. (C, D) The tibial
tuberosity was transposed too distally during the initial surgery. (E, F) Tibial plateau deformity occurred with tuberosity drift leading to a mid-
would have been a sulcus recession, delaying the transposition of the tibial deformity until the cat was skeletally mature, if it was still necessary at
that time
542
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
D
二
F
Figure 42-7  (A, B) An intracondylar fracture was diagnosed in a 3-month old cat. (C, D) The fracture was stabilized with an intracondylar screw,
aed sund omi jo aesouue panun ym uoexly leaass ieuaxa iengn e pue 'abey les au ui peas Aood und Aenpaeui ael e
to provide resistance against rotation. (E, F) Failure of the fixation occurred after one week. (G, H) Revision was with a larger intracondylar screw
and a thinner intramedullary pin tied-in to an external skeletal fixator, with more pins included in the distal fragment. (1. J) The fracture healed and 
the external skeletal fixation was removed after two months.
42: Bloopers
543
Figure 42-7 Continueo
544
Part 7: Treatment of selected surgical diseases and injuries
D
E
F
Figure 42-8 (A, B) A cat with a disrupted stifle. (C, D) The joint was explored and damaged tissue debrided, the collateral ligament rupture was
repaired using two screws and a prosthetic suture and the stifle was stabilized transarticularly with pins that were too large, and a double
connecting rod. After one month, a femoral fracture occurred through the most proximal pinhole. (E, F) The transarticular fixator was removed and 
e e po sauog un au o sassas yhu ue we al buoi e aean uen sae einiesuel aeid e yi prs anuat au
42: Bloopers
545
42-8D). One month later, a fracture occurred through the
 ber cat bones are relatively thin and transosseous pins should
most proximal pin hole in the femur. The transarticular
not be too big.
fxator was removed at that time, and the fracture was suc-
cessfully plated (Fig. 42-8E and 42-8F). It is very important
Unexpected fractures (Figure 42-9)
to follow principles of using external skeletal fxators cor-
 se  e m ad n
 A 13-month-old Burmese female was presented with bilateral
frames where the long lever arms create high stresses. Remem-
 sacroiliac luxations that occurred spontaneously during
B
E
D
engage into the sacral wing and the luxation is not anatomically reduced, the sacral wing remains dorsally displaced.
sanu pue saseasip iesiains paioalas yo iuaweaii : hed  gts 
parturition. She presented with abnormal urine outflow
Conclusions
control and was lame on the hindlimbs. One of the sacral
wings also appeared to be luxated dorsally (Fig. 42-9A and
 The few cases illustrated here represent daily examples of our
42-9B). A ventral approach was used to reduce and stabilize 
life as small-animal veterinary surgeons. If these also happen 
 the right-sided sacroiliac luxation with 2-mm screws (Fig.
to you during your clinical practice, please observe them
42-9C-E). The surrounding nerves (obturator and nerve
carefully, learn from them, and have a permanent ambition
roots L6 and L7) appeared contused. The reduction of the 
to try to do beter next time. In this way you may reach the
sacral wing was not anatomically reduced. Fissured or unusu-
 position of a master and be the one successfully revising the
ally displaced dorsal fragments can render the reduction dif-
 errors, preventing them in future cases, and enthusing others
ficult in such deep wounds. After surgery, the cat benefited
in the art of veterinary surgery.
 from physiotherapy and was functioning normally 3 months
postoperatively.
index
NB: Page numbers in bold refer to figures and tables
A
ABCD emergency support system, 196
Adson suction tip, 252, 252
Anesthesia, 177-196
Abdomen, examination, 7-8, 7
Aesculap Elan system, 253
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 196, 196
Abdominal trauma, 121-124, 122
Aesculap mini Acculan system, 253
casts and, 247
wall hermias, 123-124, 123
Agenesis,52
epidural, 199-201, 200
Abdominocentesis, 121
Alcohol, 209
equipment, 188-190, 188,200
Abrasion arthroplasty, 294
Alcohol-based scrubs, 210
gas analyzers, 195
Abscesses, 58
Alfaxan, 186
general,192,243
bone, 24, 24
Algorithm, nervous system, localization in, 18
inhalation, 186-192
cavities, 174
Allografts, 147
injectable, 183, 185-186
subcutaneous, 71
Aln retractors, 251
ketamine, 192
Abyssinian cats, 47, 84, 445, 477
Alphaz agonists, 182, 184, 193, 204, 205
local, 199-201, 200
Accidents, road traffc, 107-108, 108, 112,
Alpha antagonists, 184, 184
machine,188
171, 311, 387, 447
Alphadolone, 186
monitoring, 192-195,192
Acepromazine,181
 Alpha-liponic acid, 84
mortality and, 177
Acetabular fossa, 295, 296
Alpha-mannosidosis, 41, 42, 43
physical status assessment (ASA), 177, 177
Acetabulum, 295, 295, 296
Alphaxalone, 186
premedication, 179, 182-183, 182, 183,
approaches to, 434-435
Amelia, 52
184-185
fractures, 426,434-436,440
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA),
preoperative assessment, 177-179, 178
physeal, 436-437, 437
177, 177
preparation for, 179, 180
reducible, 435-436, 435, 436
Amoxicillin, 159
record, 179,180
plates, 275-276, 276
Amoxicillin-clavulanate, 141, 146, 172
supportive care, 195-196
Acetyl-L-carnitine, 84
Amphotericin B, 80
surgical risk factors, 177, 177
Acetylcholine receptor (AChR), 84-85
Amputations, 99, 166, 199, 527-534
venous access, 179, 181, 183
Achilles tendon
elbow arthrodesis and, 368
volatile, pharrmacologic characteristics,
complex,170
forelimb, 528, 528, 529-530
187-188
rupture, 509-510, 509, 510
general principles of, 527-528
Aneurysmal bone cysts, 59
Acinetobacter spp, 208
hindlimb, 528,530,531, 532-533
Angular process, mandibular ramus, 311
Acquired myasthenia gravis, 84
metacarpal/metatarsal/phalanges, 533, 534
Ankylosis
Acromion process, 23, 329, 329, 330, 330,
preoperative evaluation, 527
secondary joint, 63
331-332, 332
postoperative treatment,533-534
temporomandibular joint, 312, 324, 324,
osteotomy of, 332, 333
stifle joint, 487
325
Acrylic pin external fixation (APEF) system,
tail, 420, 530, 533,533
Antebrachiocarpal joint, 385, 385
267,267,268, 269
toes,397
instability, 386, 387-389
Actinomyces,79
Anaerobes, 70
luxation, 388-389, 388, 395
Adaptation plates, 275, 276
Analgesia, 184
Antibiotics
Adequan, 294
adjuncts, 204-205, 204
broad-spectrum, 159
Adhesive draping material, 209
opioid, 214
oral, 159
Adson Brown forceps, 249, 250
perioperative, 199-205
perioperative,208
Adson forceps, 249, 250
multimodel,199
treatment,71,79,91,141,146,172,174,
serrated, 249,250
Anconeal process, 292, 292, 293
311
548
Index
Anticholinergics, 184-185
elbow joint, 366-367, 367, 368,368
Aseptic preparation, 207
Anticholinesterase drugs, 85
pancarpal,389,392-393,393-394,
Assessment see Patient assessment
Antimicrobial therapy, 112, 172
395-396, 395
Astra, 179
Antirotational pin, 356
plate, 276, 276
Atipamezole, 184
Antisepsis, 207
pantarsal, 521, 522-523, 522, 523,
Atropine, 184-185
Antiseptic agents, types/characteristics, 209,
524
Autogenous bone graft, 147
209
partial carpal, 389, 390, 391-392,
cancellous, 147-148, 147
AO style elevators, 257, 257
391-392, 395-396
corticocancellous strips, 147, 148
Aplasia, patellar, 52
partial tarsal, 520, 522, 524
Avulsion
Apnea alarm, 194
principles of, 159-160
brachial plexus, 165-166, 166
Appendicular osteosarcoma, 97, 99
shoulder joint, 341, 341, 342
fractures,157, 262,263
A ppendicular skeleton, radiographs, 22
stifle joint, 487, 488, 489-490, 489
fragrments, 142, 143
Aquatic therapy, 225-226, 226
Arthroplasty
greater trochanter, 461
A rbeitsgemeinschaft fir Osteosy nthesefragen/
abrasion, 294
humeral head, 339
Association for the Study of Internal
excisional, 325, 327
 metacarpus/metatarsus, 400
Fixation (AO/ASIF), 130
Arthroscope, 283-284,283,284
supraglenoid tuberosity, 334, 339, 341
Arginine, 216
arthroscopic knives, 285, 286
triceps tendon, 362-363, 362
Arrhythmias, 179, 185
Arthroscopy, 283-306
intrathoracic tracheal, 117, 121, 121
gallop, 7
elbow, 290-294, 291,292,293,294
scapula, 334-335,335
Arterial blood pressure, 193, 193
hip, 294-296,295,296
ureteral, 123
Artery forceps, 249, 250
image, storage of, 285
Awls, microfracture, 294
Arthritis
instrumentation, 283-287, 283, 284
Axial compression, 129, 130, 162-163,
immune-mediated, 34, 34,63,386
 patient preparation, 287
163
septic, 29, 158,386
postoperative care, 287
Axial tension, 129, 130
 post-traumatic, 159, 159
shoulder, 287-289, 288,289, 290
Axonal regrowth, 165
see alsa Osteoarthritis; Polyarthritis
stifle, 296-306, 297-306
Ayres T-piece, 189, 190
Arthrocentesis, 33-34, 33
Arthrotomy, 155-156
Azathioprine, 69
Arthrodesis, 52
Articular cartilage, 153
Azotemia, 123
B
Babinski reflex, 16
Bicortical screws, 272
formation, intramedullary new, 24
Back rehabilitation program, 234
Bilateral plating, 355
grafting,141,147-148,147,160
Backhaus forceps, 210
Binocular loupes, 252, 252
levers/hooks, 154
Backhaus towel clamps, 209, 210
Biomechanics, fracture, 129-130, 130
long see Long bones
Bacteria, 70
Biomedtrix, 450
overgrowth, compensatory, 148, 148
implants and, 151
Biopsy
porosity, 137
 open joint injuries and, 157
excisional, 36
principal forces on, 129, 130
Bacterial myositis, 83
techniques, 34-36
remodeling, 55, 55
Bacterial paronychia, 91, 91
Bite wounds
removal instruments, 255-256, 256
Bacteriology, synovial fuid, 34
cat, 58, 159, 169, 173-174
transforrmation, precursor tissues, 133,
Bacteroides spp, 79, 174
dog, 108, 109, 109, 112
134
Bain system, 189-190, 190
Biting forceps, 286
tunnels, shoulder joint and, 340
Balance board exercises, 231, 231
Blades, 249, 249
see atiso Fractures
Banana knife, 285
Blankets, warrm-air, 195
Bone disease, 55-62
Bandages, 171, 239-240, 240
Blastomycosis, 79-80
abscess, 24, 24
aftercare, 247,247,248
Blood
aggressive, 25, 25
contact layer, 239-240, 241
fresh whole, 114-115
non-aggressive, 24-25, 24
external layers, 240
gas analysis, 195
biopsy, 35-36, 35
indications for, 239
norrmal volume, 113
cysts, 59-60
padding layer, 240
products transfusion, 114-115
hematogenous osteomyelitis, 58-59, 59
Robert Jones, 171, 239, 240, 240, 247,
supply, long bones, 132, 133
hypertrophic osteopathy, 60, 60
362, 383
white cell (WBC) count, 34, 36
hypervitarminosis A, 57-58, 58
true pressure, 239
Blood pressure
necrosis, 136-137
wet-to-dry, 171,240
arterial, 193,193
Osteocartilaginous exostoses, 60-62
Barbiturates, 185
central venous, 193-194
rickets, 57
Basal total thyroxine, 47
monitoring, 193,193
secondary hyperparathyroidism, 55-57
B-complex vitamins, 216
Blood-brain barrier, 184-185
tumors, 97-99, 97, 98, 99
Beaver-type handles, 249
Bloopers (pitfalls), 535-545, 535-545
types of, 56
Bending, 129,130
Body composition, 228
Bone rmorphogenetic protein-4 (BMP4), 89
Benzodiazepine antagonists, 181-182
Body temperature, 177, 178
Bone screws, 271-273, 271, 272, 538, 538
Benzodiazepines, 181
Bone
bicortical, 272
Bethanechol chloride, 215
cancellous see Cancellous bone
bone purchase and, 373, 373
Biceps muscle, contracture/fbrosis, 88
cutting instruments, 255, 255
lag see Lag screws
Biceps tendon, 289, 289
deforrmation, 129
metacarpal fixation, 403
tenosynovitis/rupture, 338
examination, 9
pelvis, 425-426
transposition of, 339
flat see Flat bones
positional see Positional screws
Index
549
sacroiliac joint, 429, 430
Bradycardia, 122, 184
Bulbocavernosus reflex, 16
shoulder joint and, 340
Brain injury, 124-125
Bunny-hopping gait, 81
suture anchors, 272,273
Brain trauma, 311
Buoyancy, water, 225
types, 272
Brainstem, 19
Bupivacaine, 199
Bone-holding forceps, 253-254, 254,
Breathing
Buprenorphine, 202-203, 213, 214
435
 laboured see Dyspnea
Burrmese cats, 51, 84, 544
Borelia burgdorferi, 72
open-mouth, 118
Burrs, hand, 285
Brachial artery, 343, 343
systems, 189
Butorphanol, 202, 203
Brachial plexus
Bridging
Butterfly fracture, 350
avulsions, 165-166, 166, 330
of fracture gap, 133, 133
femur, 464
block, 199
-plate technique, 145, 145
tibial diaphysis fractures, 499
injury, 329
spondylosis, 64
Buttress plate, 277, 279
trauma to, 335
British Shorthairs, 46
femoral diaphysis fracture, 465
 Brachycephalic breeds, 311
Brodie's abscesses, 58
function, 346
Brachycephaly, 50
Bucket-handle tear, rmedial meniscus, 303,
humerus, 351
Bradyarrhythmia,184
304, 304
tibial diaphysis fractures, 501
c
Calcaneal tendon, 31, 31
Carprofen, 203
Chlorhexidine, 209, 210
 Calcaneoquartal arthrodesis, 520
Carpus, exercises, 229
diacetate, 171
Calcaneous fractures, 520, 522
Cartilage, 153-154
solution, 270
Calcification, 23
Carts, 231
Chlorpromazine, 181
Calcitonin, 55, 55
Casts, 242-244, 242, 243
Chondoprotectants, 67, 294
Calcium, 55,123
aftercare,247,248
Chronic renal failure, 84, 93
homeostasis, 55, 55
cylinder, 242
Chylomicronemia, 41
Calicivirus infections, 71-72, 94
Catalepsy, 186
Cicherelli rongeur, 165
Cameras, arthroscopic, 284
Catecholamines, 179
Ciclosporin, 92
Campbell test, 359, 360, 363
Catheters, 179, 181
Circle breathing systems, 189
Cancellous bone, 129
epidural, 200
Clamps
autograft, 147-148, 147
over-the-needle-type, 193
Backhaus towel, 209, 210
graft, 160, 356,402
urinary,214
external fixation system (ESF), 268
healing, 133-134
Caudal abdominal hernias, 123
Clavicle, 23
Cannulas, arthroscopic, 283, 284, 286, 286
Caudal cruciate ligament, 303
Clavulanic acid, 159
Capital physeal fractures, 460
rupture, 300, 300, 302,483,484
Cleft palate, 49-50, 50
Capnography, 194, 194
Caudal elbow luxation, 154
Clindamycin, 141, 146
Capsulorrhaphy, 339
Caudal joint pouch, 289,289
Clinic for Small Animal Surgery {University
Carboplatin, 100
Caudal lumbar lesions, 29
of Zurich), 129, 153, 153
Cardiac disease, 82
Caudal lung lobes, 119
Clinical approach, overview, 1
Cardiomyopathy, 83
Cavaletti poles, 232, 234
Clinical chemistry, domestic feline, 178
with thrombus formation, 81
Cefazolin, 146, 208
CliniCare Feline, 216, 217
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 196, 196
Celiotomy, exploratory, 122
Closed gloving technique, 211
Cardiovascular monitors, 192-194
Central nervous system (CNS), 17
Closing wedge osteotomy, 148, 149
Carpal agenesis, 52
inflammatory disease of, 80
Clostridium spp, 208
Carpal flexion sling/splint, 244, 244, 245
Central venous pressure, 193-194
Clostridium chauvoei, 83
Carpal joint, 385, 385-396
Central vestibular system, 18-19
Clostridium septicum,83
antebrachiocarpal instability, 386,
Cephalosporins, 141, 159, 172
Coaxial Bain system, 189, 190
387-389
Cerclage wire, 259-260, 260, 316, 316, 317,
Coccidiomycosis, 79-80
antebrachiocarpal luxation, 388-389, 388,
318, 350
Coccygeal spine, vertebral anomalies, 51
395
femoral fractures, 464
Cohesion, water, 225-226
approaches to, 387
principles for use, 260
Cold therapy, 222,287,294
arthrodesis
tibia, 497
application of, 222
pancarpal, 392-393, 393-394, 395-396,
Cerebellar dysfunction, 41
laser, 225
395
Cerebellum, 19
Collagen, 153
partial carpal, 391-392, 391-392,
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 29-30, 32, 77, 80,
fibers, 154, 170
395-396
101,200
Collars
diagnosis, 385-387, 386, 387
analysis, 36,75,78,79
Elizabethan, 245
injuries, 396
Cerebrum, 19
reflective, 107
hyperextension, 389-390, 390
Cervical hemilaminectomy, 410
Collateral ligaments, 359
primary repair, 393,395,395
Cervical lesions, 29
injuries, 22,22,154, 155,156
rare, 390-391,390
Cervical spine, 408-410, 409, 410, 411
prosthesis, 156, 156, 364, 485, 511-512
postoperative treatment, 393, 395-396
Chemotherapeutic agents, 100
sprains, 10, 29, 483-484,485, 510-512,
surgical anatomy, 385, 385
Chermotherapy, 102
511-512
treatrment options, 385-387, 386
Chest radiography, 82
tarsal joint, 507, 507
Carpal ligaments, 385, 385
Chiggers, 92-93, 93
Comminuted fractures, 142-143, 143, 162
Carpal sling, 248
Chinchilla, 246
femur, 458, 465,466,466
Carpometacarpal joint, 385
Chinese fingertrap sutures, 218, 219, 220
humerus, 347, 350, 351, 352, 352
550
Index
ilium, 431,432-433, 433
Consent, informed, 179
Cranialization, tibial tuberosity, 479
mandible, 318,320-321,321
Constipation, 440
Craniodorsal hip luxation, 450
olecranon, 374
Contact irritant derrmatitis, 94
Craniofacial anomaly, Burmese, 51
radius/ulna, 371, 379-380, 379,380
Continuous sutures, 170, 170
Crepitation, 155
scapular body, 330, 331
Contrast, radiographic, 21
Cross pinning, 261, 261, 332, 382
tibia, 498, 499, 500, 501-502, 501, 536,
Coracoid process, 329, 329
capital physeal fractures, 461
537,539, 539
Coronoid process, 292-294, 292, 293, 294,
metacarpal/metatarsal, 404
Communication, client, 179
311
pancarpal arthrodesis, 392, 394, 394
Cormpact hand systerm, 276, 276
Cortical bone, 129
Salter and Harris fractures, 471, 495
plates, 321
healing, 132-133
scapular neck, 333
 Compact maxillofacial miniplate system, 276,
Cortical changes, radiographs, 24
Crossed extensor reflex, 16
276
Corticocancellous bone
Cross-leg standing, exercises, 231, 231
ComPact Unilock system, 411
graft, 160
Cruciate ligaments, 298, 299, 300, 300, 302,
Compartment syndrome, 169
strips, 147, 148
306
Compensatory stage, shock, 113
Corticosteroids, 125, 325
rupture, 478
 Compound muscle action potential (CMAP),
Corynebacteriurm spp, 208
Cruciate sutures, 170
37
Cosequin, 67
Cryptococcosis, 79-80
Compression plates, 277, 278-279, 279,
Coxarthrosis, 64, 445-446, 445, 452
Crystalloid/colloid resuscitation, 114, 114,
346
Coxofemoral disarticulation, 532-533
115
femoral diaphysis fracture, 463
Coxofemoral luxation, 443, 444, 447-450,
Curettes, 285, 286
Computed tomography (CT), 21, 31-33, 32,
450
Cushing disease, 91
75, 76, 99
craniodorsal/caudodorsal, 447-448, 447,
Cushing reflex, 124
 Conditioning, 221
448,449
Cyanosis, 117
Condylar process, mandibular ramus, 311
postoperative care, 451-452,452
Cyclodextrins, 186
Congenital abnorrmalities
ventral, 450
Cyclooxygenase (COX) isoforms, 203
elbow luxation, 52, 361, 361
Cranial cervical lesions, 29
Cylinder casts, 242
myasthenia gravis, 84
Cranial cruciate ligament (CrCL), 298, 300,
Cysts
skeletal, 49-52
306, 481-482, 481, 482, 483
bone, 59-60
spine, 80-81, 80
disease, 301-303, 301, 302, 303, 304
spinal subarachnoid, 77, 78
Conjoined twins, 49
Cranial nerve, examination, 12, 13
synovial, 73, 361,362
Consciousness, 12, 12
Cranial tibial reflex, 15
Cytokines, 113
D
Dancing exercise, 232, 233
Dermatophyte infections, 92
Distal fibular fracture, 514
Dantrolene, 196
Desflurane, 186
 Distal radial physis, premature closure, 149,
Datex spirormetry system, 194
DeSoutter MPZ system, 253, 253
149
De Vita pinning, 449
Detail, radiographic, 21
Distal radius, fracture of, 372
Debakey needle-holders, 251, 251
Devon Rex cats, 46, 445, 477
Distal ulna
Debakey pattern forceps, 249, 250
Dexamethasone, 83
fracture of, 372
Decision-making, 3, 3
Dexmedetomidine, 184
growth plate, 371
fracture treatment, 135-141
Diabetes mellitus, 92, 390
physis,371
Decline and tunnel exercise, 232, 232
associated neuropathy, 83-84, 84
Distraction index, 445
 Decompensatory stage
Diagnostic procedures, 21-37
Distraction osteogenesis, 148, 149, 150,
early, 113
biopsy techniques, 34-36
151
terminal, 113
irmaging see Imaging, diagnostic
Diuresis, 184
Decompression, spinal, 164-165
neurodiagnostic procedures, 36-37
Diverging pins, distal fbula, 513
Decubital ulceration, 214
synovial fluid evaluation, 33-34
Dog bite wounds, 108, 109, 109, 112
Deep gluteal muscle tendon, 170
see atso Patient assessment
Doppler ultrasound, 193, 193
Degenerative joint disease, 34, 34, 63-67
Diaphragmatic hernia, 120-121, 120
Dorsal laminectomy, 408, 416
diagnosis, 65-66
Diaphyseal long-bone fractures, 135-137,
Dorsal plating
incidence, 65
136,137,138
ilium, 426, 433
treatrment, 66-67, 66
Diaphysis radius and ulna, fracture of, 372
radial and ulnar diaphysis, 377, 379
Degloving injuries, 171-173, 172
Diazelmus, 181
Dorsal stabilization, spinal injuries, 408
skin-grafting, 172-173, 172, 173
Diazepam, 181, 215
Double plating, 355
treatment, 171-172
Diphenylpiperidine, 201
Down to sit exercise, 231
Delayed union, fracture, 27, 27, 143-144
Direct fracture reduction, 141, 142
Doxorubicin chemotherapy, 99, 100
Deltoid muscle tendon, 170
Disc extrusion, traumatic, 164
Doxycycline, 71, 93
Density, radiographic, 21
Disc herniation, 162
Draping, orthopedic, 209, 210
Dental composite fixation, 315, 316
Discospondylitis, 79
Drills, slow-speed battery, 263
Dental occlusion, 312
Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs
Drugs
Derf needle-holders, 251
(DMARDs), 70
-induced polyarthritis, 71
Dermatitis
Dislocation see Luxation
narcotics, 294
contact irritant, 94
Dissecting forceps, 249, 250
sedation, 182
plasma cell pododermatitis, 93, 93
Dissociatives, 185-186
Durotomy, 102, 408, 412
Dermatomes, 15, 16, 17, 17
Distal fermoral plate, 276, 276
Dwarfism, 49
Index
551
Dynamic compression plates (IDCPs), 256,
mini- (mini-DCP), 276, 276
Dysplasia
392
pelvis,431,435,436
elbow joint, 293, 361, 361
femur, 458
radius/ulna, 373, 379
hip joint, 64, 444-446, 445
irmplants and, 274,274, 275,276
tibia, 493, 498, 502, 536
proximal fermoral, 52
limited contact- {LC-DCP), 274, 346, 426,
Dynamic intramedullary pinning, 261, 261,
shoulder joint, 338
493, 498
354, 471
Dyspnea, 107, 117-118, 117, 119
E
Ears, 124
Electromyelography (EMG), 166
Exercise therapy, 226-227
Echocardiography, 82
Electromyography (EMG), 37
rehabilitation, 229, 230, 231-232, 231,
Efleurage, 224-225
Elizabethan collar, 245
232,233,234
Egress systems, 285
Ellis pin, 381
Extensor carpi radialis reflex, 16, 16
Ehmer sling, 244, 245,246, 248
Embolectomy, 82
Extensor postural thrust reaction, 14
Elastoplast, 240
Emergency support (ABCD) system, 196
Extensor toe reflex, 16
Elbow joint, 359-368
Emla cream, 179
External coaptation, 239-248, 395
approaches to, 360-361
Empyema, spinal, 79
aftercare, 247-248, 247,248
arthrodesis, 366-367, 367,368, 368
Endocrinopathies, 208
bandages, 171, 239-240, 239, 240, 241
arthroscopy, 290-294
Endosteal reactions, radiographs, 24
casts, 242-244, 242,243
indications for, 292-294, 293,294
Endotracheal intubation, 190-191, 191
slings/muzzles/hobbles, 244-247, 244, 245,
portal sites, 290-291,291
Endplate fracture, 163
246,247
surgical anatomy, 291-292, 292
Endurance, 222
splints, 240,242, 242
diagnosis, 359-360
Enilconazole, 92
External skeletal fixation (ESF), 265-271
dysplasia, 293, 361, 361
Enteral feeding, 216-218,217
acrylic pin (APEF) system,267,267,268,269
epicondylitis, 361-362, 362
Enterobacter spp, 208
application principles, 268-270, 270, 271
exercise,229,230
Entrapment, bottom-hung windows, 82-83,
femur, 457-458, 463, 465, 467, 468
fractures, 366, 366, 367
82, 83,109-110
frarme types, 270
injuries, 360
Enzymes, functional deficiency, 41
humerus, 345, 348,351, 353
ligaments, 359, 359
Eosinophilic plaques, 92
IMEX rminiature circular systerm, 267-268,
luxations, 363-366, 367-368
Epicondylitis
267, 268
caudal, 154
chronic medial, 366
irmplants, 261, 264,265-271, 267,268
congenital, 52, 361,361
elbow, 361-362, 362
mandible, 314-316, 315, 320
with disruption of radioulnar joint, 366,
Epidural anesthesia, 199-201, 200
maxilla, 314-316, 315
366
Epidural catheter, 200
pancarpal arthrodesis, 394, 394, 395
with intact radioulnar joint, 363, 363,
Epidural space, 29
postoperative care,213,214,270-271
364
Epiphyseal fractures, 139
proximal tibial metaphysis, 496
with ligament reconstruction, 364
Epiphysis, 132, 133
radius, 371-372, 373, 377,379, 381
 radial head and Monteggia lesions,
Epistaxis, 311
stiffness, increasing, 269, 271
363-366,365, 366
Equiprment see Instruments, orthopedic
tarsocrural luxations, 514-515
osteoarthritis, 64, 294, 361
Escherichia coli, 79, 146, 208
tbia, 493,493, 498, 499, 501, 502, 503
postoperative treatment, 367-368
Esophageal stethoscope, 192
transarticular, 315, 315, 487
surgical anatomy, 359, 359
Esophagostormy feeding tubes, 216, 217-218,
unar diaphysis, 377,379
synovial cysts, 361, 362
217, 219, 220
see also Tubular external skeletal fixation
treatment options, 359-360, 360
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid {EDTA), 34
system (FESSA)
triceps tendon, avulsion, 362-363,
Etomidate, 186
Extra-articular fractures, scapular neck, 332,
362
European Short Hair cats, 540
333,334
Electrical stimulation, 223-224
Euthetic lidocaine/prilocaine, 179
Extradural lesion, 30, 30
Electrocardiogram, 193
Eutrombicuta alfreddugesi, 92
Extraosseous blood supply, 133, 137, 139-140
Electrocautery, 252,252, 287
Examination
Extraosseous blood vessels, 132, 133
Electrodactyly, 52
neurological, 10-19
Extraskeletal osteosarcoma, 97
Electrodiagnostic testing, 37, 82
orthopedic, 8-10
Extremities, malformation, 52
Electrolyte solutions, 207
physical, 6-7
Eyeballs, rostroventral rotation, 192, 192
F
Face masks, 210
Feline calicivirus, 71-72, 94
Feline syncytia-forming virus (FeSFV), 68-69,
Facial dysmorphism, 50-51
Feline chronic progressive polyarthritis
71
Facial trauma, 108
{FCPP), 68-69, 70
Femoral capital physeal fractures, 446-447,
bone fractures, 326
Feline idiopathic myositis, 83
446
Fear, 4
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), 59,
Fermoral condyles
Feeding tubes
80,81, 91, 92, 174
articular surfaces, 298, 299
advantages/disadvantages, 217
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), 7879
fractures, 467-469, 469,470
esophagostomy,217-218,219,220
Feline leukemia virus {FeLV), 59-62,
lateral,299,300
nasoesophageal,216-217,217,18
68-69, 71, 80-81, 91-92, 101-102,
medial, 299,300, 301,302,303
Feet, conditions of, 91-94
174
Femoral dysplasia, proximal, 52
552
Index
Fermoral head, 295, 295,296, 446-447, 446
Forceps
mandible, 312, 313,314, 316-321, 316,
excision, 450, 451,452,452
artery, 249,250
317, 319-321
postoperative care, 452, 452
Backhaus, 210
mandibular ramus, 321, 322
Fermoral neck, 446-447, 446
biting, 286
maxilla, 129, 312-313, 314, 326-327
excision, 450, 451,452,452
bone-holding, 253-254, 254, 435
metacarpus, 398, 399-402, 400, 401,403,
fractures, 458-459, 459, 460-461
dissecting, 249, 250
404
 metaphyseal osteopathy, 446, 447
grasping, 285,286, 294
metaphyseal,139
postoperative care, 452, 452
Halsted hemostatic, 165
metatarsus, 398, 399-402, 400, 402, 403,
Femoral nerve, 15
Kelly, 217-218, 219
404
Femur, 455-472
mosquito,313
Monteggia, 535
fractures
pointed reduction, 253, 253
occurrence, 129, 129
diaphyseal, 145, 461-466, 462, 463,
punch, 286, 304
olecranon, 366, 374, 374, 375
464, 465
Synthes plate, 256, 256
open, 371
distal, 467-470, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471
Treves, 250, 250
patellar, 478, 480,480
proximal, 458-461, 459,460-461
Verbrugge, 256
pelvic floor, 437, 438
types, 456
 Foreign bodies, 31
phalanges, 402, 404,404
postoperative treatment, 470, 472
Forelimb
preoperative care, 25-26
stabilization techniques, 455, 456, 457-458
armputation,528,528,529-530
postoperative care, 25-26, 213-214
surgical anatomy, 455
exercises, 230,231-232,232,233
radius, 373-374, 375-380, 376-379,
Fentanyl, 201-202
micromelia, 52
380-381, 381, 382, 383
patches, 213, 214
Fracture-associated osteosarcoma, 97
reduction techniques, 141-143, 142, 143,
Fibrocartilaginous embolization (FCE), 78
Fractures, 129-151,207
244
Fibula
acetabular, 434-436, 435, 436, 437, 440
sacroiliac,426,427,428-430,429,430
approaches to, 494
avulsion see under Avulsion
 Salter and Harris see Salter and Harris
fractures, 494, 497, 502, 512-513, 513,
biomechanics, 129-130, 130
fractures
514, 515, 539, 539
bone grafting, 147-148, 147
scapula, 329-332, 330, 332-334,333,
postoperative treatment, 504
bridging, gap, 133, 133
334
surgical anatomy, 491
carpal bone, accessory, 390-391, 390
shoulder joint, 341, 341
Figure-of-eight wire, 330, 332, 333,414, 514
classification systems, 130-132
simple long oblique, 141,142
Fine needle aspiration, 35, 35
comminuted see Comminuted fractures
simple transverse, 141, 142, 243
Finger T plates, 276
complications, 143-147
spine, 162-163,163,408,409
Fixation
direct reduction, 141, 142
cervical, 409, 411
external skeletal see External skeletal
disease, 146-147
sacrococcygeal, 419-420, 419, 420,421
fixation (ESF)
elbow joint, 366, 366, 367
thoracolumbar, 412-414, 413, 414, 415,
internal, 279-281,280
endplate, 163
421-422
tension band see Tension band fixation
epiphyseal,139
supraglenoid tuberosity, 334,339,341
see atso External coaptation
fermur, 145, 461-466, 462-465, 467-470,
suprahamate process, 332
Fixomed, 218, 264
467-471
talus, 518-519, 521,522
Fat bones, fractures, 137, 139
fbula, 514, 515, 539, 539
tarsal joint, 518-519, 520, 521, 522
Fat tendons, 170, 170
greenstick,139,139,243,343
temporomandibular joint, 322-324, 323
Fowmeter, anesthetic machine, 188
growth deforrnities, 148-151
tibia, 492, 539, 539
Fuconazole, 80
healing, 26-27,26, 27-28, 132-135, 133-
treatment, decision-making, 135-141
Fuid resuscitation, 114-115, 114, 115
135,213, 240, 242
ulna, 374-375, 374, 375-380, 375-379,
Fuid therapy
humeral condyle see under Humeral
380-381, 381, 382, 383
administration, 195
condyle
vertebral body, 162, 162, 163, 163
aggressive, 178
humerus see under Humerus
Frazier suction tip, 252
response to, 114
jatrogenic, 271, 281
Free abdominal fluid, 121, 122
see also Irrigation
ilium, 426, 427, 430-431, 431-434,
Free thyroxine, 47
Fluid-warming systems, 195
432-434, 439-440
Freer elevators, 257, 257
Fumazenil, 182
immature animals, 139-140, 139
periosteal, 165
Flushing, arthroscopic, 159
implant removal and, 151, 151
Front-limb see Forelimb
Footpads
indirect reduction, 142, 143
Functional deficiency, enzymes and, 41
diseases of, 93-94
intra-articular, 29, 332, 334, 374
Fungal infection, spinal cord, 79-80
examination of, 87
Jumbosacral spine, 415-416, 417, 418,
Fur, examination, 7
necrosis of, 397
419, 419
Fusobacterium spp, 79
G
Gait
visual analysis, 229
Gastrostomy tubes, 216, 217
abnormalities, 88, 90
Gamma, aminobutyric acid (GABA)
Gelpi style retractors, 155, 165, 250, 251
analysis, 228-229
receptors, 181
Genes, 51, 89
bunny-hopping, 81
Gangliosidosis, 41 
mutation, 44
examination, 8, 8, 11-12
Gas, 23
see atso Congenital abnormalities
hypermetric, 19
blood, analysis, 195
Gillie-type needle-holders, non-locking, 251
training,221,227
fow rates, 189, 189
Glaucoma, 185
uncertain, 89,90
Gastrocnemius tendon, 510
Glenoid cavity,289,289,332-334,333, 334
Index
553
Glucocorticoid, 92, 93
Goniometer, 227, 228
Greenstick fractures, 139, 139, 243, 343
Glucocorticosteroids, 83
Grafting
Griseofulvin, 92
Glycocalyx, 151
bone, 141, 147-148, 147, 160
Grooming care, 214
Glycogen reserves, 207
skin, 172-173, 172,173
Growth deformities, bone, 148-151
Glycogen storage diseases, 41
Granulation tissue, 133
Growth plate
Glycopyrolate, 185
Grasping forceps (grasper), 285, 286,
classification, 140, 140
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), 43-44, 46, 48,
294
histological zones, 140, 140
153
Greater trochanter, 444, 461
Gunshot injury, 108, 109, 341, 341, 347
H
Hair, clipping of, 208, 209
Hernia, caudal abdominal, 123
Humeral head, 289, 289
Halls Surgairtome II system, 253, 253
High-rise syndrome, 108-109, 108, 112, 491
Humerus, 343-358
Halogen light source, 284
Hirmalayan cats, 50, 445
fractures
Halothane, 186, 187
Hindlimb
diaphyseal, 344, 346, 348-352, 348,
Halsted hemostatic forceps, 165
amputation,528,530,531,532-533
349,350,351
Halsted mosquito forceps, 249, 250
exercises,232,233
distal, 344, 352-356, 366
Hamatus process, 329, 329, 332
Hip joint, 443-452
proximal,344,346-348,347
Hand instruments, arthroscopic, 285-286, 285
approaches to, 443-444
types, 344
Handling/restraint, 4, 4, 6, 6
arthroscopy, 294-296
postoperative treatment, 356-358
“Hanging drop’ techniques, 200
indications for, 296
stabilization techniques, 343-346, 344
Hansen types (disc extrusion), 75, 76
portal sites, 295, 295
surgical anatomy, 343, 343
Hard palate, 312
surgical amatomy, 295-296, 295, 296
treatment options, 344
Head, examination, 7, 7
coxofemoral luxation, 443,444, 447-450,
Hydromorphone, 201
Healing
447,448,450
Hydrostatic pressure, 225-226
fracture, 132-135, 133, 134, 135
craniodorsal luxation, 450
Hyperadrenocorticism, 92
times, 144
diagnosis, 443
Hypercapnea, 185
joint injuries, 153-154
dislocation, 296
Hypercarbia, 195-196
Heart, examination, 7
dysplasia, 64, 444-446, 445
Hyperesthesia, 420
Heart rate, 177, 178
exercises, 229,230
Hyperextension, 162-163
Heat therapy, 222-223,223
femoral head/neck, 446-447, 446, 450,
injury, 164,385, 386, 387, 389-390,
Heinz body formation, 185
451, 452, 452
390
Hermatogenous osteomyelitis, 58-59, 59
ligament, transverse, 443
Hyperflexion, 161, 162-163, 163
Hermatology, domestic feline, 178
osteoarthritis, 296
Hyperglobulinemia,79
Hematomas, subcutaneous, 124
postoperative treatment, 451-452
Hyperglycemia, 184
Hermaturia, 122
prosthesis, 446, 450
Hypermetric gait, 19
Hemicerclage wire, 259-260, 260, 316, 317,
surgical anatomy, 443
Hyperparathyroidism, 93, 142
318,321,438
total hip replacement, 450-451
secondary, 55-57
Hemilaminectomy, 102, 165,408,409, 410,
treatment options, 443,444
Hyperphosphatemia, 93
411-412, 412
Histological zones, growth plate, 140, 140
Hyperthermia
Hermimelia, radial, 52
Histopathology, 34-35, 36, 59, 83
malignant, 187, 195-196
Hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers (HBOCs),
Histoplasmosis, 59, 79-80
 postanesthetic, 201
115
History taking, 3-4, 5, 227
Hyperthyroidism, 55
Hemolysis, acute, 186
Hobble sling/tape, 244, 246-247, 247, 450
Hypertrophic osteopathy, 60, 60
Hemorrhage, 124
Hock joint, exercises, 229
Hypervitaminosis A, 57-58, 58, 63
see atso Traumatic hemorrhagic shock
Hohmann retractors, 155, 250,251, 348, 432
Hypocalcemia, 56
Hemostat, mosquito, 398
Hopping reaction, 14, 14
Hypokalemic myopathy, 84
Henry's pocket, 93
Hormones, 55
Hypokalemic polymyopathy, 81
Herbicides, 94
Horner's syndrome, ipsilateral, 165, 166
Hyporeflexia, 18
Hereditary metabolic diseases, 41-49
Humeral condyle, 292, 292
Hypothermia, 195
rickets, 48-49, 48, 49
fractures, 353,355-356, 355,356, 357
Hypothyroidism, 46-48
see atso Congenital abnorrmalities
medial aspect, 293
Hypoxia,113,125
Jatrogenic fractures, 271, 281
Imaging, diagnostic, 21-33
radiographic technique, 21-23
Ibuprofen, 204
computed tomography (CT), 21, 31-33,
ultrasonography, 31, 31
I-cell disease (mucolipidosis II), 41, 42, 43-
32,75,76, 94
 IMEX miniature circular external skeletal
44,43,44,45
fracture evaluation, 15-18
fixation (ESF) system, 267-268, 267,268
Idiopathic onychodystrophy, 92, 92
joint injury/diseases, 28-29
Immune-mediated arthritis, 34, 34, 63, 386
liofemoral suture technique, 449-450,449
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 21, 31,
Immune-mediated polyarthritis, 70, 71
Ilium, 423, 423
33,75-77,80, 99,102, 162
Immunosuppressive drugs, 92
approaches to, 431
myelography,29-31
Implants, 137, 139-140, 259-281
fractures, 426, 427, 430-431,431-434,
patterns of soft-tissue/bone response,
anchorage, 129
432-434, 439-440
23-25
breakage, 160
554
Index
external skeletal fixation {ESF), 261, 264,
overview, 237
Intervertebral disc disease {IVDD), 75-77
265-271,267,268
powered equipment, 243, 252-253
Intra-abdominal bleeding, 124
fracture, 313
surgical approach, 249-252
Intra-articular fractures, 29
interlocking nail systems, 264-265, 264,
Interarcuate stabilization, 322,324
comminuted olecranon, 374
265
immobilization, 315-316, 315, 323
scapular neck/glenoid cavity, 332, 334
internal fixators, 279-281, 280
techniques for, 321
Intra-articular ligaments, 154, 156-157
intrarmedullary pins, 261, 262-264, 263
Interarcuate wiring, 315, 315
Intracondylar humeral fractures, 355, 355
Kirschner wires, 261-262
Intercondylar notch, 299, 300, 302
with supracondylar comminution, 357
loosening/failure, 27
Interdental wiring, 313, 319
Intracranial pressure (ICP), 124-125
overview, 237
Interdigital spaces, diseases of, 92-93
Intradural lesions, 30, 30
plates, bone, 274-279,277, 278, 279
Interfragmentary wiring, 260, 261, 313, 314
Intrarmedullary lesions, 30, 31
removal, 151, 151
mandible, 318, 320, 321, 322
Intrarmedullary nail system (INN), 264, 495
screws, bone, 271-273, 271, 272
scapular body, 330, 331
Intramedullary new bone formation, 24
wire, orthopedic, 259-260,259,260,261
Interlocking nail (ILN) systems, 264, 264-
Intramedullary pinning, 262-264, 263
Incline exercise, 232
265,264,265
dynamic, 261,261,354,471
Indirect fracture reduction, 142, 143
femur, 455, 457,463, 465
femur, 455, 457,463, 464
Indometacin, 204
humerus, 345, 351
humerus, 343-345, 345, 348, 350
Induction chamber, 190, 190
tbia, 491-492, 493
metacarpal, 401, 403
Infections
Internal fixator systems, 279-281, 280
metatarsal, 402, 403
calicivirus, 71-72, 94
acetabular fractures, 436
Salter and Harris I & II fractures, 471
spine/spinal cord, 79-80
application principles, 281
supracondylar, 355
surgical, risk factors, 207-208, 208
dorsal instabilities, 517
tibia, 491,493,496, 497,498, 499,503
Infectious arthritis, 34, 34, 63
femur, 458, 465,468
ulna, 371, 373, 374
Infectious myositis, 83
hurmerus, 346,351,353,356
Intrarmedullary swelling, 164
 Inflammation, 223
mandible, 320
Intraosseous blood vessels, 132, 133
Inflammatory central nervous system (CNS)
pelvis, 426
Intrapleural disease, 119
disease, 80
postoperative treatment, 281
Intrathoracic tracheal avulsion, 117, 121,
Informed consent, 179
shoulder joint, 339, 340
121
Infraorbital artery, 311
tbia, 494, 501, 503
 Intubation, pharyngotomy and, 312, 313
Inhalation anesthesia, 186-192
ulna/radius, 373
Jodine, 210
Injectable anesthesia, 183, 185-186
Interosseous ligaments, 359
Jodophors, 209
Instruments, arthroscopic, 283-287, 283, 284
Interphalangeal luxation, 404-405, 404, 405
Irigation, arthroscopic, 285, 285
Instruments, orthopedic, 249-257
Intertarsal instability, 515-518, 516, 517
Ischemic neuropathy, 81-83, 82, 83
ancillary aids, 252, 252
postoperative care, 524
Jsoflurane, 186, 187
osteosynthesis,252-257
Intertarsal joint, 507
Itraconazole, 80, 92
Jacobs chuck, 254, 263, 294, 343, 491
 Joint examination, 9-10
immobilization, 159, 214
Jamshidi biopsy needle, 35, 35
findings interpretation, 11
instability, 154-155
Japanese cats, 47
healing complications, 28
lavage, 159,287
Jaquette style probes, 255
manipulation, 10
luxation, 154-155, 207
 Jejunostomy tubes, 216
structure/function, 153
postoperative care, 158, 214
Joint capsule, 29, 154, 443
Joint injuries, 153-160
radiographs, 28-29
Joint disease, 63-73
arthrodesis, principles of, 159-160
secondary ankylosis, 63
degenerative, 34, 34, 63-67, 66
diagnosis of, 154-155,154,155
sprains, classification, 155
osteochondrosis, 72, 72
distribution of, 153
subluxation, 154-155
polyarthritis, 67-72, 67, 68, 69
effusion, 22,33
surgery
radiographs, 28-29
end feel evaluation, 222, 223
complications, 158-159
summary, 63
fractures, 137
principles of, 155-158
synovial cysts, 73
healing, 28,153-154
Joint pouch, 289, 289, 298, 299
synovial osteochondromatosis, 73, 73
K
"Kangaroo cat', 52
Ketamine, 185-186, 192, 193, 204-205
Kirschner bender, 255
Kelly forceps, 217-218, 219
Ketoprofen, 203
Kirschner Ehmer skeletal fixation system,
Kern bone-holding forceps, 435
Kidneys, 122
266, 267,268, 269
Kerrison rongeur, 165
Kinesthesia,222
Kirschner wire, 261-262
Kessler suture, modified, 156
Kinked tail, 51
Kuhn system, 189, 190
Index
555
L
L plates, tibia, 495
Lidocaine, 199, 204, 216
Lumbosacral spine, 409, 414-419, 417, 418,
Labrum, 295,296
sprays, 191
419, 419
Lag screws, 271, 272-273
Ligaments
Lungs
condylar femoral, 470
prosthesis, 156, 156, 364, 405,485
caudal lobes, 119
elbow arthrodesis, 368
sprains, 156-157,156
contusions, 119
hurmerus, 350
classification, 154, 155
examination, 7
metacarpal/metatarsal, 400, 403
see also individual ligaments
Luxation
sacroiliac luxation, 428
Light source, 284-285
antebrachiocarpal, 388-389,388,395
shoulder joint, 341
Limbs
elbow see under Elbow joint
tibia, 497,499
deformities, correction principles, 148-149,
hip, 296
transcondylar, 355, 355, 356
149
joint, 29, 154-155, 157, 207
transcortical, 356
suspension in surgery, 209, 210
 metacarpophalangeal, 404-405, 404, 405
Laheys, 249
see also Amputations
metacarpus, 404-405,404,405
Lameness
 Lirmited contact-dynamic compression plate
metatarsus, 404-405, 404, 405
classification score, 8, 8
(LC-DCP), 274, 346, 426
palmar, 388, 388
elbow joint and, 359, 361, 366, 366
tibia and, 493, 498
patellar, 475, 476, 477-478, 477, 478,
Laminectomy, dorsal, 408, 416
Localized myositis ossifans, 90 
479, 489
Langenbecks retractors, 250, 251
Locking plate, 332
phalangeal, 404-405, 404, 405
Laryngoscope, 191, 191
Locking-jaw syndrome, 312, 325-326
radial carpal bone, 389, 389
Laser therapy, 225
Locking-loop sutures, 156, 156
radius, 535, 536
Lateral coronoid process, 292, 292
Long bones, 32, 132, 133
sacroiliac, 426, 427, 428-430, 429, 430,
Lateral recumbency, examination, 9-10, 9
fractures
439
Lateralization of tibial tuberosity, 479
classification, 130, 131
shoulder, 327, 337,339, 339, 340, 341
Lavage, 159, 171, 287
diaphyseal, 135-137, 136, 137,138
spinal, 162-163, 163, 408, 409
LED light sources, 252, 252
metaphyseal, 137, 139
cervical, 409, 411, 421-422
Leflunomide, 70
tension sides of, 279
lumbosacral, 415-416, 417,418, 419,419
Legal action, for liability, 179
Long oblique fractures, 350, 350, 378-379
sacrococcygeal, 419-420, 419, 420, 421
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease, 447
femur, 462, 464, 466
thoracolumbar, 412-414, 413, 414, 415,
Lesions, 61
ilium, 433-434, 433,434
421-422
caudal lumbar, 29
simple, 141,142
superficial digital flexor tendon, 510
cervical, 29
tibia, 497-498, 498, 499
talocalcaneal, 518, 518, 519
cranial cervical, 29
Lower motor neuron (LMN) system, 12, 17
tarsocrural, 510-515, 511, 512, 513,
extradural, 30,30
disease, 15
 514-515
intradural, 30, 30
Lowman clamp, 256, 256
tarsometatarsal, 517
intramedullary, 30, 31
Luer-Lok connector, 285
temporomandibular joint, 322-324, 323
Jurmbar, 29
Lumbar lesions, 29
vertebral, 163-164, 164
lumbosacral, 29
Lumbar spine, 409
Lyme disease, 72
moth-eaten, 25
Lumbosacral fractures, 415, 417, 418
Lymph nodes, examination, 7
thoracolumbar, 29
Lumbosacral lesions, 29
Lymphoma, 102
see also Monteggia lesions
Lumbosacral plexus, 423
Lymphosarcoma, 101
L-form bacteria, 70-71
injury, 166-167, 167
Lysosomal storage disease, 41
M
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 21, 31,
Mannitol, 125
Mayo scissors, 249, 250
33,75-77,80,99,102,162
Manx cats, 51-52, 80
Medetomidine, 184
Maine Coon cats, 445
Mapleson classification, 189, 190 
Medial collateral ligament, 292, 292
Malunion, fracture, 27, 145, 145
Mask induction, 190
antebrachiocarpal joint, 385, 385, 386,
Mandible
Mass reflex, 16
389
approaches to, 316
Massage, 224-225
sprain, 387-388,387,388
diagnosis, 311-312, 312, 313
Masseteric fossa, 311, 321
Medial coronoid process, 292-294, 292, 293,
fractures, 129, 316-321, 319, 320, 321
Materials, orthopedic, overview, 237
294
mandibular body, 316-318, 318, 319,
Mattress sutures, 170, 512
Medial glenohumeral ligament (MGHL), 289,
320, 321
Maxilla
289,290,290
symphyseal separation, 312, 316, 316,
approaches to, 326
Medial humeral condyle, 292, 292
317, 318, 319
diagnosis, 311-312, 312, 313
Medial meniscal tear, 304-305, 304, 305
postoperative treatment, 327
fractures, 129, 312-313, 314, 326-327
Medial plating, radial/ulnar diaphysis, 377
stabilization techniques, 312-316, 314
postoperative treatment, 327
Median nerve,16,343,343
surgical anatomy, 311
stabilization techniques, 312-321,
Meloxicam, 66, 66, 203, 213
temporomandibular joint disorders, 321-
314
Melphalan, 99
326,323,324, 325
 surgical anatomy, 311
Meningoencephalocele, 50
Mandibular condyles, 323
Maxillary nerve, 16, 311
Meniscal mineralization, 305, 305, 306, 477,
Mandibular ramus, 311
Maxillofacial plates, 321
477
fractures, 321, 322
Mayo Hegar needle-holders, 251, 251
Meniscectomy, partial, 303, 304, 305
556
Index
Meniscus
Meyerding retractors, 155, 250, 251, 443
Mosquito forceps, 313
lateral,300, 300,303,304,304
Meynard external skeletal fixation (ESF)
Mosquito hemostat, 398
medial, 300, 300, 302, 305
systern, 266,267,268
Motor pathways, 15
bucket-handle tear, 303, 304
Michel's trephine, 35
Motor vehicle accidents, 107-108, 108, 112,
mineralization, 305, 477,477
Miconazole, 92
171, 311, 387, 447
Mental status, examination, 12, 12
Micrococcus spp, 208
Mucolipidosis (type II),41, 42, 43-44, 43,
Mesh graft, 172-173, 172, 173
Micro-Friedman rongeurs, 256
44, 45
Metabolic pathway, Vitamin D, 49
Micromelia, forelimb, 52
Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS), 41, 42, 43-44,
Metacarpus
Microrongeurs, 255, 256
43, 44, 45, 47-48, 63
amputation, 533,534
Microserrated needle-holders, 251, 251
Multifragmentary reducible fractures, 350,
fractures, 398, 399-402, 400, 401, 403,
Midazolam, 181
350, 378-379
404
Mineralization, 306
tibia, 497-498, 499
intramedullary pinning, 397, 401
meniscal, 305, 477, 477
Multimodal therapy, 199, 199
Juxation, 398
Mini AO kit, 256
Multiple cartilaginous exostosis
 metacarpophalangeal, 404-405, 404,
Miniarthrotomy, 303, 305
{osteochondrormatosis), 61-62, 73,73,
405
Miniaturized plates {miniplates), 276-277,
102,163
postoperative treatment, 405, 406
276, 399
Multiple ligamentous instability, 303-304
stabilization techniques, 397-399, 398
dorsal instabilities, 517-518
Muscles
surgical anatomy, 397
Mini-dynamic compression plate (mini-DCP),
atrophy,223-224
treatment options, 398
276, 276
contracture/fbrosis, 87-88, 88, 89
Metaphysis, 132, 133
 Minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis
disease, 87-90
Metastatic calcinosis, paws, 93-94, 94
(MIPO), 279, 493
disorders, 81-85, 81,82
Metastatic digital carcinoma, 102-103, 103
Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC),
injuries, 169-170
Metatarsus
187, 195, 199
mass, 228
amputation,533,534
Monitoring
Musculocutaneous nerve, 16
fractures, 398,399-402, 400,402,403,
anesthesia, 192-195, 192
Musculoskeletal diseases, overview, 39
0t
arthroscopic, 284
Musculoskeletal injuries, overview, 127
intramedullary pinning, 397
blood pressure, 193, 193
Musculoskeletal tumors, common, 98
luxation, 398
cardiovascular, 192-194
Muzzles, tape, 244, 245-246, 246, 315
metatarsophalangeal, 404-405, 404, 405
physical, 192
Myasthenia gravis (MG), 84-85
postoperative treatment, 405
respiratory system,194-195
Mycoplasma spp,34,70-71
stabilization techniques, 397-399, 398
Monteggia fracture, 535
Myelography, 29-31, 162
surgical anatomy, 397
Monteggia lesions, 363-366, 365, 366, 367,
Myelomalacia, 412
treatrment options, 398
375
progressive, 162
Methadone, 201
classification, 364-365
Myelopathy, 77
Methotrexate, 70
internal fixation, 365
Myeloproliferative neoplasia, 71
Methylprednisolone succinate, 77
Morphine, 201
Myositis,83
Methyprednisolone, 83
Mortality rates, 121
Myositis ossificans, 89, 90
Metronidazole, 141, 146
anesthetic-related, 177
Myotomes, autonomous, spinal nerves,
Metzenbaum scissors, 249, 250, 291
polytrauma, 108,108
15
N
Nails
Neotrombicula autumnalis,92
classification, 190
chewing, 92
Nerve trauma, 166, 166
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
diseases of, 91-92, 91, 92
Nervous system
(NSAIDs), 66-67, 72, 76, 169
examination of, 87
localization in, 17-19, 18
elbow arthroscopy and, 294
Naloxone, 203
tumors, 101-102
surgery and, 184, 190, 199, 203-204, 204,
Naltrexone, 203
see aiso Central nervous system (CNS);
213, 214
Naproxen, 204
Peripheral nervous system (PNS)
Non-union, fracture, 27-28, 28, 143-144,
Narcotics, 294
Neurodiagnostic procedures, 36-37
144
Nasal bones, fracture, 326
Neurological deficits, classification systerm,
non-viable,144,144
Nasoesophageal tubes, 216-217, 217, 218
420
Norberg angle, 445
 National Feline Vaccine-Assisted Sarcoma
Neurological examination, 10-19
Normal blood volume, 113
Task Force, 100
Neurological injuries, 161
Normograde pinning, 263, 263
Neck, examination, 7, 7
postoperative care, 214-215,215
femur, 455,457,464
Necrosis
Neuromuscular disorders, 81
 metacarpus/metatarsus/phalanges, 399,
bone, 136-137
Neuropathy, traumatic, 165-167
401, 403
footpads,397
Neuropraxia, 165
tibia, 493
pressure, 247,248
Neutralization plate, 277, 279, 346
Nose, 124
skin,439,439
humerus, 350
Nutrition
tail, 422
tibial diaphysis fractures, 499
enteral feeding, 216-218, 217
tissue, 170, 209
Nitrous oxide (N,O), 186-187
postoperative needs, 215-218, 216,219,
Needle-holders, 251, 251
N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA), 201
220
Needle-off technique, 35, 35
receptors, 204
support,213
Needle-on technique, 35
Non-rebreathing systems, 188, 189-190, 190
Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism,
Neoarthrosis, 452
anesthetic machine, 188
55-56, 56
Index
557
0
Obesity, 65, 123, 235,446
carpal joint, 385
Osteomyelitis, 28, 28
Olecranon process, 368
elbow, 64, 294, 361, 383
post-traumatic,145-146,146
fractures, 366, 374, 374,375
hip, 296
Osteopenia, 57
Olsen-Hegar needle-holders, 251, 251
post-traumatic, 158
Osteophytes, 156, 301, 302
One-leg standing, exercises, 231
secondary, 63-64, 64,65,66
Osteophytosis, 154
Onychomycosis, 92
shoulder, 66,290,290,338
Osteosarcoma, 25, 32,97-98,97,98,99, 101
Ooliometer, 228, 228
treatment, 66
Osteostixis, 72, 160
Open fractures, 140-141, 371
Osteoblasts, 55
Osteosynthesis, instruments for, 252-257
classification, 131-132, 132
Osteocartilaginous exostoses, 60-62
Osteotomes, 255
Open joint injuries, 157-158, 157
Osteochondral fragments, free-floating, 305,
Osteotomy, 148, 149, 150
Opening wedge 0steotomy, 148, 149
306
acromion process, 332, 333
Open-mouth breathing, 118
Osteochondrodysplasia, 46, 47,63
greater trochanter, 461
Opiate receptors, 201
Osteochondromatosis, 61-62, 63, 102
Overdistraction, 539-540
Opioids,76,112, 201-203, 202, 213
synovial,73,73
Overview
analgesics, 214
Osteochondrosis, 63, 72,72
 clinical approach, 1
antagonists, 203
Osteoconduction, 147
implants,237
Oral cavity, 7, 7
Osteocytes, 55
musculoskeletal diseases, 39
neoplasia, 312
Osteogenesis, 147
musculoskeletal injuries, 127
tumors, 100, 101
distraction, 148, 149, 150, 151
polytrauma, 105
Oscillometric systems, 193
Osteogenesis imperfecta, 44-46, 45
radiographic, 21-22
Ossification, accessory centers of, 338-339,
Osteoid production, 97, 98
surgical patient, 175, 309
338
Osteoinduction, 147
Oxygen source, anesthetic machine, 188
Osteoarthritis, 29, 63-67
Osteolytic changes, 57, 57
Oxymorphone, 201
P
Packed cell volume {PCV), 114, 115, 124,
Pelvic floor, 424,426, 437,438
Peromelus ascelsus, 52
207
Pelvic limb flexor reflex, 15-16
Persian cats, 41, 45, 50, 59, 246, 312, 445
Pain managerment, 214
Pelvic limb sling, 245
Pethidine, 201
electrical stimulation, 223-224
Pelvic nerve injury, 415
Petrissage, 224-225
medication, 112
Pelvis, 423-440
Phalanges
Pain response, 9
diagnosis, 423-424, 424
amputation, 533,534
Palmar ligaments, 156-157
fractures, 129, 419
fractures, 398, 402,404, 404
Palmar luxation, 388, 388
acetabular, 434-436, 435, 436, 437
luxation, 398
Panarthrodesis, 160
classification, 130, 132
interphalangeal, 404-405, 404, 405
Panniculus reflex, 18
lium, 426, 427, 430-431,431-434,
 postoperative treatment, 405
Paracetamol, 204
432-434
treatment options, 398
 Parallel pinning, 261
pelvic floor, 437, 438
Pharyngotomy, 312,313
capital physeal/femoral neck, 460
pelvic margin, 437,439
Phencyclidine, 185-186
proximal hurmerus, 347
sacroiliac, 426, 427, 428-430, 429,430
Phenobarbital, 125
Paraneoplastic myositis, 83
types, 424,425
Phenol derivatives, 209
Parathormone (PTH), 55, 55, 56, 57
luxation, sacroiliac, 426, 427, 428-430,
 Phenothiazines, 181
Parosteal osteosarcoma, 97
429, 430
Phenoxybanzamine, 215
Pasteretta spp,70-71,172
postoperative treatment, 439-440, 439,
Phenylbutazone, 204
Patella,298,298,299,301
440
Phototherapy, 225, 225
aplasia, 52
stabilization techniques, 424-426, 424
Physeal fractures, classification, 130-131, 132
fractures, 478, 480, 480
surgical anatomy, 423, 423
Physical examination, 6-7
luxation, 475,476, 477-478, 477,478,
treatment options, 425
Physical monitoring, anesthesia, 192
479,489
weight-bearing elerments of, 424
Physical status assessment {ASA), 177, 177
reflex testing, 15, 15
Pemphigus foliaceus, 91-92, 92
Physical therapy, 213, 214, 215,215, 221
Patellar tendon, 170
Penrose drain retractors, 250, 251
Physioroll, 229, 230, 231, 232
Pathological fractures, 141, 142
Pentobarbital, 125, 185
Pinning
Patient assessment, 3-19
Perineal nerve, 15
De Vita, 449
decision-making, 3, 3
Perineal reflex, 16, 16
femur, 464
"four As', 25
Perineal region, examination, 7-8, 7
hip and transarticular, 450
handling/restraint, 4, 4, 6, 6
Perioperative analgesia, 199-205
insertion, 254-255,255
history, 3-4, 5
Perioperative antibiotics, 208
intramedullary, 261, 261, 262-264, 263
neurological examination, 10-19
Periosteal elevators, 257, 257
partial carpal arthrodesis, 391, 391
orthopedic examination, 8-10
Periosteal reactions, radiographs, 23-24, 24
pelvis, 425
physical examination, 6-7
Peripheral nervous system (PNS), 17
retrograde, 263, 263,455,457
Patient positioning, radiographs, 21
disorders, 81-85, 81, 82
Rush, 261, 469
Paw calcification, 93-94
testing,15, 16,17
skewer, 261-262,262,327
Pectus excavatum, 51, 51
tumors, 102, 102
stifle joint and transarticular, 487
Pediculectomy, 165,408, 411-412,412
 Peripheral vestibular system, 18
supracondylar humeral fractures, 353
558
Index
toggle,398,399,401,403
types, 274-277, 278
Postoperative care, 213-220
transarticular, 449, 449, 450, 451, 487,
una,373
fracture patient,213-214
543-544
Unilock, 346, 392, 435,435, 468
joint injuries, 214
transilial, 416, 417,418
see atso Veterinary cuttable plates (VCPs)
neurological patients, 214-215, 215
transosseous, 265-266, 265, 269, 345,
Pleural space disease, 117
mutritional support, 215-218, 216, 219,
457-458, 462, 493
Pneumothorax, 118-119, 118, 119
220
see also Cross pinning:
:Intramedullary
Pointed reduction forceps, 253,253
Post-traumatic osteomyelitis, 145-146, 146
pinning;
: Normograde pinning;
Polyarthritis, 67-72
Posture, examination, 11-12
Parallel pinning
classification, 67
Potassium, 84, 84
Piroxicam, 204
diagnosis, 67-68, 68, 69
Povidone-iodine solution, 270
Pitfalls (bloopers), 535-545, 535-545
drug-induced, 71
Powered equipment, 252-253, 253
 Placing reaction, 14
erosive, 68-71
Powered wire driver, 254, 255
Plantar ligaments, 156-157, 508
feline chronic progressive {FCPP), 68-69,
Prebent plates, as reduction tool, 143, 143
Plasma cell pododermatitis, 93, 93
70
Precursor tissues, transformation of, 133, 134
Plasma cell tumors, 98
immune-mediated, 70, 71
Prednisolone, 69,71,83,92
Plasma, fresh frozen, 115
non-erosive, 71-72
Prednisone, 99
Plaster of Paris, 243
septic, 70-71
Pressure necrosis, 247, 248
Plastic deformation, 129
Polydactyly,52
Pressure regulator, anesthetic machine, 188
Plate 0steosynthesis, 346, 348, 373-374,399,
Polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), 269, 410,
Primary bone healing, 132-133, 133
403, 426
416
Probes, 285, 286
tibial diaphysis fractures, 498
Polytrauma
Progressive ossifying fibrodysplasia (POF),
Plating, 160, 274-279
abdominal trauma, 121-124, 122
87, 88-90, 90
acetabular fractures, 436
approach to patient, 111-112,111
Promazine, 181
application principles, 277-279, 277, 278
brain injury, 124-125
Pronation, 376
arthrodesis, 391, 392, 393, 393-394, 488
common sites of injury, 108, 112
Propofol, 181, 185, 192, 208
comminuted fractures, 379
definition, 107, 107, 108
Proprioception, 222
compression see Compression plates;
dog bite wounds, 108, 109, 109, 112
exercises, 229,230,231
Dynamic compression plates (DCPs)
entrapment, bottom-hung windows,
Proprioceptive testing, 12, 14
equipment, 256, 256
109-110
positioning reaction, 12, 12
femur, 458,465,468
gunshot injury, 108,109
 Prosthetic collateral ligament replacement, 339
functions, 277, 278-279
high rise syndrome, 108-109, 108, 112
Prosthetic hips, 446, 450
humerus,345,353
mortality rates, 108, 108
Proteoglycans, 153
ilium, 432, 433
overview, 105
Protozal rmyositis, 83
mandible, 313-314, 320
road traffc accidents, 107-108, 108, 112,
Providone-iodine, 171
mandibular ramus, 322
171, 311, 387, 447
Proximal radius, fracture of, 372
maxilla, 313-314
scoring systerm, 108
Proximal ulna, fracture of, 372
 metacarpal/metatarsal, 403
thoracic trauma, 117-121, 117
Pseudomonas spp., 146
olecranon, 375
see atso Traurmatic hemorrhagic shock
Pudendal nerve, 16
pelvic floor, 438
Positional screws, 271, 272
Pulmonary contusion, 119
pelvis, 426
elbow, 366, 367
 Pulmonary parenchymal disease, 117
radius, 373
interfragrmentary, 317
 Pulmonary parenchymal tears, 119
removal, 279
mandibular-symphyseal separation and,
Pulse oximetry, 194
scapular body/neck, 331, 333
316
Pulsed ultrasound, 224
tibia, 493-494, 493, 496, 503
Post-traumatic osteoarthritis, 158
Punch forceps, 286, 304
Q
Quadriceps muscle, contracture/fibrosis,
Quadriceps tendon, 299
87-88, 88, 89
rupture, 481, 481
Quadriceps reflex, 15
Quality, radiographic, 21
R
Rabies, 174
fracture evaluation, 25-28
distal, 380-381,381, 382,383
Radial diaphysis, distal, 373
interpretation, 23, 30, 30, 31
proximal, 373-374
Radial head, 292, 292
joint injury/diseases, 28-29
luxation, 535, 536
Radial hemimelia, 52
Radiography, 75
postoperative treatment, 383-384,
Radial nerve, 16
chest, 82
384
Radiation
 Radiopacities, five conventional, 31
stabilization techniques, 371-373
scatter, 21
Radiotherapy, 102
surgical anatomy, 371
therapy, 99-100
Radius, 371-384
treatment options, 372
Radiocarpal ligament, 22
fracture types, 371, 372, 373
Range of motion, 222
Radiofrequency, 287
fractures
passive exercises, 229, 230
probe, 302, 303,304
diaphyseal, 375-380, 376, 377, 378,
passive therapy, 225
Radiographic technique, 21-23
379
 Rear-limb rehabilitation program, 234
Index
559
Rebreathing systems, 188,189, 189
program, 227,234,235
Rib injury, 120
anesthetic machine, 188
target areas, 221-222
Rickets,57
Reconstruction plates, 275, 276, 313, 318,
Rehabilitation therapy, 213-214
forrms of, 48
319
Reluxation,448,449,451,452
hereditary rickets, 48-49
Records, anesthesia, 179, 180
Renal failure, chronic, 84, 93
vitamin D dependent (VDDR), 48, 48, 49
Red blood cells, packed, 114-115
Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism, 56-57
Ringer's solution, 156, 159, 171
Reducible multifragmentary fractures, femur,
Reservoir bag, anesthetic machine, 188
Risk factors, surgical infection, 207-208,
462,464,466
Resistance, standing, 229, 231
208
Reduction forceps, pointed, 253, 253
Respiratory compromise, 117
Road traffic accidents, 107-108, 108, 112,
Reduction techniques, 141-143, 142, 143
Respiratory rate, 178
171, 311, 387, 447
Reflective collars, 107
Respiratory system monitors, 194-195
Robert Jones bandage, 171, 239, 240, 240,
Reflexes
Respiratory tract, examination, 7
247,362,383
bulbocavernosus, 16
Resting energy requirement (RER), 215, 216,
Robinson sling, 244, 245
Cushing, 124
217
Romifidine, 184
panniculus, 18
Resting values, true, 177, 178
Rongeurs, 165, 255, 256
patellar, 15, 15
Restraint see Handling/restraint
Ropivacaine, 199
Rehabilitation, 221-235
Resuscitation, fuid, 114-115, 114, 115
Rostral mandibular fractures, 317, 318,
active,225-227
Retractors, 155, 165, 249-251, 251, 348,
319
exercises, 229,230,231-232,231,232,
432, 443
Rotation, 162-163, 163
233, 234
hand-held, 250, 251
 Rotational malalignment, 466
factors for successful, 221
self-retaining, 250, 251
Round ligament, 296, 296
goals, 227-229, 228
Retrograde pinning, 263,263,455,457
Ruptures, 122, 122,123
passive, 222-225
Rex Fold cats, 46
Rush pinning, 261, 469
 principles of, 221, 221
Rib fractures, 119-120
Russian Blue cats, 480
S
Sacral fractures, classification, 130, 131
Scapulohurmeral luxation, 339
Shoulder joint, 337-342
Sacrococcygeal luxation, 419
Scatter radiation, 21
approaches to, 337
Sacrococcygeal spine, 409, 419-420, 419,
Schiff-Sherrington phenomenon, 17
arthrodesis, 341, 341, 342
420, 421
Schistosoma, 49, 50
arthroscopy, 287-290
Sacroiliac joint
Schwann cells, 102
indications for, 289-290, 290
ancillary fixation technique, 430
Schwannoma, 102
portal sites, 288-289, 288
dorsolateral approach, 428, 429
Sciatic nerve, 15-16, 166, 167,423
surgical anatomy, 289, 289
fractures/luxation, 426,427,428-430,
Scissors, 249,250
biceps tenosynovitis/rupture, 338
429,430,439
Scottish Fold Cat, 46
diagnosis, 337
ventroabdominal approach, 429, 429, 430
Screws see Bone screws
dysplasia of, 338
Sacrum, fractures of, 416, 418
Scrubbing, 209
exercises, 229, 230
Saffan, 186
Scruffing, 4, 4
fractures, 341,341
Satmonella sp., 59
Secondary bone healing, 133, 134
injury types, 338
Salter and Harris fractures
Secondary hyperparathyroidism, 55-57
instability/luxation, 339, 339, 340,
classification, 130-131, 132,140
Secondary joint ankylosis, 63
341
distal radius, 380, 381, 382, 383
Second-intention healing, 171
ligament injuries, 290,290
fermur, 455, 469-470, 471
Sedation, 179, 181-182, 182,184
luxation of, 337, 339,339, 340, 341
fbula, 494-495
casts and, 247
Ossification, accessory centers of, 38-339,
humerus, 346-347, 347, 352, 355, 356,
Seldinger technique, 179, 193
338
358
Self-traurma, 239
osteoarthritis, 66, 290, 290, 338
 rmetacarpal/metatarsus, 401
Sermitendinosus muscle, 88
 postoperative treatment, 341
proximal radius, 374
Senn retractors, 155, 250, 251
surgical anatomy, 337
tbia, 494-495, 494, 495, 502, 503, 504,
Sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs), 37
treatment options, 337, 338
504
Septic arthritis, 29, 158, 386
Siamese cats, 45, 51, 69, 445
type I/l cross pinning, 261, 261
post-traumatic, 159, 159
Siamese twins, 49
Sarmazenil, 182
Septic polyarthritis, 70-71
Simple long oblique fractures, 141, 142
Scalpels, 249, 249
Sequestrum, 27
Simple transverse fractures, 141, 142, 243,
Scapula, 329-335
Sesamoid bones, 23, 397, 475
348,348,376-377,376,377,378
approaches to distal, 332, 333
Sevoflurane, 186, 187-188
acetabulum, 435,435, 436
avulsion, 334-335, 335
Shavers, motorized, 286-287, 287,294,
femur, 462, 462,463
fractures
303
ilium, 431, 431,432-433, 433
body/spine, 329-332, 330, 331, 332
Shock, 107
tibia, 496, 497, 498
scapular neck/glenoid cavity, 332-334,
 see aiso Trauma; Traumatic hemorrhagic
Sit to stand exercise, 232, 233
333,334
shock
 SK external skeletal fixation (ESF) system,
postoperative care, 335
Short dorsal ligaments, 390
266, 267,268
stabilization techniques, 329, 330
Short oblique fractures, 348, 348, 376-377,
Skeletal fixation see External skeletal fixation
surgical anatomy, 329, 329
376,377, 378
{ESF); Internal fixator systerms
treatment options, 330
femur,462,463
Skeletal osteosarcoma, 97
see also Shoulder joint 
tibia, 497, 498
Skewer pins, 261-262, 262, 327
560
Index
Skin
infections, 79-80
Styloid pr0cess, fractures, 383, 383
examination,7
spinal cord, tumors, 101,101
Subarachnoid space, 29
necrosis, 439,439
fractures, 162-163, 163,408,409
cysts, spinal, 77,78
wounds,169
injuries of, 161-164
 Subcutaneous abscesses, 71
Skin-grafting, 172-173, 172, 173
diagnosis, 162, 162
Subcutaneous hematomas, 124
Skull, malformation, 49-51
luxations, 162-163, 163, 408, 409
Subjective gait analysis, 229
Slings, 231
postoperative treatment, 420-422
Subluxation, 154-155
aftercare,247-248,248
stabilization, 165, 408
joint, 29
carpal flexion, 244, 244, 245, 248
structure/function, 161
vertebrae, 162, 163-164
Ehmer, 244,245,246,248
surgery, 407-422
Subscapularis tendon, 289, 290
hobble, 244,246-247,247,450
anatomy, 407
Subtrochanteric fractures, 461
iliofemoral suture, 449-450, 449
cervical, 408-410, 409, 410, 411
Sulcoplasty, 478
pelvic limb, 245
decompressive procedures, 407-408,
patellar luxation, 479
Robinson, 244, 245
408
Superficial digital flexor tendon, luxation,
Velpeau, 244-245, 244,246, 248, 334,
diagnosis, 407
510
335, 339, 341
lurmbosacral, 414-419, 416, 417, 418,
Supination, 376
Soda lime canister, anesthetic machine,
419
Supracondylar foramen, 23
188
principles of, 164-165
Supracondylar fractures, 467, 467, 468,
Soft tissue
sacrococcygeal, 419-420,419, 420,421
470
calcification, 90
stabilization techniques,408,409
humeral,353,354,354
diseases, 87-94
thoracolumbar, 410-414, 412, 413, 414,
Supraglenoid tubercle, 330, 334, 339, 341
feet, conditions of, 91-94
415
Suprahamatus process, 329, 329, 332, 332
muscles, 87-90
Splash block, 199
Supramaximal repetitive nerve stimulation
summary of, 88
Splints, 240, 242,242
{SRNS),37
tendons, 90-91
aftercare, 247,248
Suprascapular nerve, 329, 332
tumors, 99-100, 100
carpal flexion, 244, 244, 245
Supratrochlear foramen, 23
examination, 10
internal, 330
Supratrochlear joint pouch, 298
injuries, 169-174
Sprains, 154-155,154
Surgical procedures, 207-211
cat bite wounds, 173-174
Stainless steel, 274
classification, 207, 208
degloving, 171-173, 172
Standing, one-leg, exercises, 231
growing cats and, 540
muscle, 169-170
Standing position, examination, 8-9, 9
infection and, 207-208, 208
tendon, 170-171, 170
Standing resistance, 229, 231
instruments for, 249-252
radiographs, 23, 28
Staphylococcus spp, 58-59, 172, 208
overview, 175
trauma, 109
Staphylococcus intermedius, 145
patient preparation, 207-210
Solitary bone cysts, 59-60
Steinmann pins, 262
risk factors, 177, 177
Solitary osteochondromas, 61, 61
Stellebrink synovectomy rongeurs, 256
site preparation, 208-209, 209, 210
Somali cats, 84
Sterilization, 207
stabilization, spinal injuries, 408
Spencer Wells forceps, 250
Steroids, 76
surgical team preparation, 210-211
Spina bifida, 51, 51, 80
corticosteroids,125,325
treatment, overview, 309
Spinal anesthesia, 199-201, 200
glucocorticosteroids, 83
wounds, classification, 208
Spinal canal, 411
Stifle joint, 475-490
see also Postoperative care
Spinal cord, 17-18, 29
approaches to, 476-477
Survey radiographs, 29, 30
decompression, 409,410, 411-412, 412,
arthrodesis, 487, 488, 489
Sutures
415, 416
arthroscopy, 296-306,297-306
anchors, 272,273,340
techniques, 408
indications for, 301-306
Chinese fingertrap, 218, 219, 220
diseases of
portal sites, 297-298, 297,298
continuous, 170, 170
compressive, 75-77
surgical anatomy, 298, 298, 299,
cruciate,170
congenital abnormalities, 51-52, 80-81,
300-301,300
iliofemoral technique, 449-450, 449
80
diagnosis, 475
imbrication, lateral retinacular, 483
disorders, summary of, 76
disruption, 484, 486-487, 487, 489
locking-l0op, 156, 156
dysfunction, degrees of, 76
exercises, 229
mattress, 170, 512
infarction, 78, 78
injuries, 476
slowly absorbable, 321
infections, 79-80
ligament injuries, 481-484, 481, 482, 483,
three-loop pulley, 170, 170
non-compressive, 77-79
484,485, 489
Swelling, intramedullary, 164
see atso under Spine
meniscal mineralization, 477, 477
‘Swimmer” syndrome, 51
injuries of, 161-164 
patella disorders, 475, 476, 477-481, 477,
Switching sticks/tubes, 286
diagnosis, 162, 162
478,479,480
Symphyseal laxity, 326
pathophysiology of acute, 161-162
postoperative treatrment, 487, 489-490
Syndactyly, 52
structure/function, 161
surgical anatomy, 475
Synostosis, 383
surgery, principles of, 164-165
tendon injury, 481, 481
Synovial biopsy, 36
Spinal dysraphism, 51, 51
treatment options, 475, 476
Synovial cell tumors, 103
Spinal lymphoma, 97, 98
Storage diseases, 41-44, 42, 43
Synovial cysts, 73, 361, 362
Spinal nerves, 15
Strabismus scissors, 249, 250
Synovial fluid, 33-34, 70, 153
Spinal reflexes, 14-16, 15
Strength, 222
bacteriology,34
Spine
Streprococcal species, 59
visual/cytological, 34, 34, 67-68,
diseases of, 75-81
Streptococcus spp, 70-71, 146, 208
68
congenital abnormalities, 80-81, 80
Streptococcus canis, 68,79
Synovial joints, 153
Index
561
Synovial membrane, 296, 299,301
Synthes
Syringe cap exercise, 231
Synovial osteochondromatosis, 73, 73
Colibri system, 253, 253
Systemic infectious diseases, 71
Synoviomas, 103
gliding principle and, 274
Systemic inflammatory diseases, 71
Synovitis, 290, 290, 296
plate forceps, 256, 256
Systemic lupus erythematosus, 71
T
T plates, tibia, 495, 496
Tendinopathy, chronic, 362
postoperative treatrment, 504
T-configuration, condyle fractures, 468, 469,
Tendons
stabilization techniques, 491-494, 492
470
disease of, 90-91
surgical anatomy, 491
Tachyarrhythmia, 185
injuries, 170-171, 170, 508
Tibial physis, proximal, premature closure,
Tachycardia, 185, 201
Tenotomy, 170
150, 151
Tachypnea, 118, 119
Tensile forces, 129, 130
Tibial plateau, 300, 301, 303
Tactile placing, 14
Tension band fixation, 262, 262, 263
Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO),
Tails, 51-52
acetabular fractures, 436, 436
482,482
absence of, 51-52
acromion process, 333
plates, 277,277
amputation, 420,530,533,533
dorsal instabilities, 517-518
Tibial tuberosity advancement (TTA), plates,
necrosis of, 422
fibula, distal, 513
277,277,482,483
Talocalcaneal ligaments, 518, 518
greater trochanter, 461
Tibiofibular ligaments, 507, 513
Talocalcaneal luxation, 518, 518, 519
humerus, proximal, 347
Tibiotarsal instability, 154
Talus, fractures of, 518-519, 521, 522
 metacarpal/metatarsus, 400
Tidal volume monitors, 194
Tape
olecranon, 375
Tiletamine, 185-186, 193
hobbles, 244, 246-247, 247
supraglenoid tuberosity, 334, 341
Tissue
muzzles, 244,245-246, 246, 315
tarsal joint, 516
granulation, 133
Tarsal joint, 504, 507-524
thoracolumbar fractures, 414
hypoxia,113
Achilles tendon rupture, 509-510, 509, 510
tibia, proximal, 496
necrosis, 170,209
approaches to, 508-509
ulna, proximal, 374
trauma, 109, 113
arthrodesis
Tension pneumothorax, 118
Titanium, 274
pantarsal, 521,522-523,522,523
Teres ligament, 443
Ttration, 182
partial tarsal, 520, 522
Territorial fights, 173
Toes, amputation of, 397
diagnosis, 508
Therapeutic ultrasound, 224, 224
Toggle pinning, 398, 399, 401, 403
fractures, 518-519, 520, 521, 522
Thermal agents, 222-223
metacarpal/metatarsal fractures, 403,
injuries, 508
Thermal properties, water, 225
403
instability
Thigh muscles, removal, 532-533
Tolfenamic acid, 203
intertarsal/tarsormetatarsal, 515-518,
Thiopental (thiopentone), 185, 192
Toluidine blue test, 44
516, 517
Thoracic drain, 119, 119
Tonic neck reaction, 14
tarsocrural, 523-524
Thoracic limbs
Torsional forces, 129, 130
luxation
flexor reflex, 16
Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA), 181,
superficial digital flexor tendon, 510
fractures of, 129
185
tarsocrural, 510-515, 511, 512, 513,
Thoracic trauma, 117-121, 117
Total triiodothyronine, 47
514-515
wall injury, 119-120, 120
Trachea, intrathoracic avulsion of, 121
postoperative treatment, 523-524
Thoracocentesis, 118, 118
Trail of treats, exercise, 232,232
surgical anatomy, 507-508, 507
Thoracolumbar hemilaminectomy, 411, 412
Tramadol, 203
treatment options, 508
Thoracolurmbar lesions, 29
Transarticular external skeletal fixation (ESF),
Tarsal ligaments, 507
Thoracolumbar spine, 409, 410-414, 412,
315, 315
413, 414, 415
stifle joint, 487
523-524
Thoracotomy, 199
Transarticular pinning, 449, 449, 450, 451,
Tarsocrural luxation, 510-515, 511, 512,
Thorax malformation, 51, 51
487, 543-544
513, 514-515
Three-loop pulley sutures, 170, 170
 Transarticular stabilization, shoulder joint
postoperative care, 524
Thrombus formation, 81-82
and, 340
Tarsometatarsal arthrodesis, 520
Thurston-Holland sign, 130 
Transfusion, blood products, 114-115
Tarsometatarsal instability, 515-518, 516,
Thymectomy, 85
Transilial pinning, 416, 417, 418
517
Thyroid hormone, 46
Transosseous pins, 265-266, 265, 269, 345,
 postoperative treatment, 524
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone, 47
457-458, 462, 493
Tarsometatarsal luxation, 517
Thyrotropin-stimulating hormone (TSH)
Transport boxes, 4
Techniques, orthopedic, overview, 237
stirmulation tests, 47
Transverse fractures, simple, 141, 142, 243
Temperature
Thyroxine, 47
Transverse ligament, hip joint, 443
control, 195-196
Tibia, 491-504
Trauma, 107, 178, 216
monitoring, 195
fractures
brachial plexus, 335
Temporomandibular joint, 311, 312, 314,
comminuted, 498, 499, 500, 501-502,
brain, 311
321-326
501, 536, 537, 539, 539
disc extrusion, 164
ankylosis of, 324, 324, 325
diaphyseal, 497-502,498,499, 500, 501
dyspneic,118
closed reduction of, 323
distal, 502, 502, 503, 504, 504
facial, 108
excisional arthroplasty of, 325, 327
metaphyseal, 495, 496,497
nerve, 166, 166
fractures/luxations, 322-324, 323
proximal, 494-497
neuropathy, 165-167
locking-jaw syndrome, 325-326
treatment options, 492
 post-traumatic osteoarthritis, 158
562
Index
post-traumatic osteomyelitis, 145-146,
Treadmill, underwater, 226, 226
Tumors, 97-103
146
Treves forceps, 250, 250
bone, 97-99
 post-traumatic septic arthritis, 159,
Triceps tendon, 170, 362-363, 362
metastatic digital carcinoma, 102-103, 103
159
Trochanter, greater, 444, 461
multiple cartilaginous exostosis, 102
-self, 239
Trochlearroove,999
nervous system, 101-102
soft-tissue, 109,113
Trochlear notch, 292, 292
oral,100, 101
split palate,312,326,327
Trochlear ridge, medial, 301
soft tissue, 99-100
thoracic, 117-121, 117, 119-120, 120
Trochleoplasty, 255
synovial clltumors, 103
see aiso Polytrauma
Trombicula autumnalis, 92
types,97,98
Traumatic hemorrhagic shock, 113-115
Trombiculosis (chiggers), 92-93, 93
Tungsten carbide jaw needle-holders, 251, 251
fuid resuscitation, 114-115, 114, 115
True pressure bandage, 239
Turbulence, water, 225-226
signs of shock, 113, 113
Tubular external skeletal fixation systerm
Twins, 49
stages of shock, 113
{FESSA), 266, 267, 268, 269, 381,
2α-hydroxypropyl beta cyclodextrin
Travers style retractors, 250
503, 541
{HPBCD), 186
U
Ulceration, decubital, 214
Ulnar nerve, 16
Upper motor neuron (UMN) system, 12, 15,
Una, 292, 371-384
Utrasound, 21, 31, 31
16, 17, 18
fractures
pulsed, 224
Urea, 122
diaphyseal, 375-380,376, 377,378,379
therapeutic, 224,224
Ureters, 122,122,123
distal, 371, 380-381,381, 382,383
Uncertain gait, 89, 90 
Urethra, rupture of, 122-123, 123
proximal, 374-375,374,375
Unilock plate, 346, 392, 435,435,468,499
Urinary bladder, 122-123
types, 371,372,373
condylar femoral fractures, 469
Urinary catheter, 214
stabilization techniques, 371-373
mandible locking, 280-281, 280, 426, 458,
Urinary tract injuries, 121, 122-123, 122,123
surgical anatomy, 371
494
Urine spot-on tests, 44
treatment options, 372
Unilock system, 281, 373
Uroabdomen, 122
A
Vaccine-assisted osteosarcoma, 97, 97, 98
luxation, 163-164, 164
Veterinary interlocking nail (VIN), 264-265
Vaccine-associated sarcomas, 99-100, 100
subluxation, 162, 163-164
Vetsuisse Faculty {University of Zurich), 129,
Valgus angulation, 22-23
Vertebral body
161
Valium,181
anomalies, 51
Viable non-unions, 144, 144
Vaporizers, 188, 188
fractures, 162, 162, 163,411
Vicryl, 450
Varus angulation, 22-23
tumors, 101,101
Viral infections, 71-72
Vedaprofen, 204
Veterinary cuttable plates (VCPs), 274-275,
Visual analog scale (VAS), 228, 228
Velpeau sling, 244-245, 244, 246, 248, 334,
274,275
Visual gait analysis, 229
335,339,341
femur, 458
Vital parameters, normal, 6, 6
Venous access, anesthesia, 179, 181, 183
humerus, 346
Vitamin B-complex, 216
Ventilation, 192, 192
mandible/maxilla, 313
Vitamin D, 56
Ventral slot, 408, 409-410, 410
pelvis,426,431
deficiency see Rickets
Verbrugge forceps, 256
radius/ulna, 373, 374
metabolic pathway, 49
Vertebrae
scapula, 331,332
metabolites,55, 55
incomplete/fused, 51
tbia, 493, 502
W
Warm-air blankets, 195
"Window-cat syndrorme', 82
pin insertion and, 254-255, 255
Weight-bearing
Wire, orthopedic, 259-260, 259,260, 261
placing instruments, 254, 254
asymmetry, 9, 9
bender, Kirschner, 255
powered drivers, 254, 255
exercises, 231,231
cerclage see Cerclage wire
Wounds
rehabilitation stage, 221
hemicerclage wire, 259-260, 260, 316,
debriderment, 141, 158, 171
Weitlaner retractors, 251
317,318,321, 438
lavage, 171
Wests style retractors, 250
interarcuate, 315, 315
skin, 169
Wet-to-dry bandages, 171, 240, 402
interdental,313,319
surgical, classification, 208
Wheel-barrowing reaction, 14, 14
interfragrmentary, 260, 261, 313, 314
see also Bite wounds
Wheelbarrow exercises, 231, 232
Kirschner, 261-262
Wright's respirometer, 194
White blood cell (WBC) count, 34, 36
pelvis, 425
Index
563
X
Xenon lamps, 284
X-rays see Imaging, diagnostic
Xylazine, 184
Y
Y-configuration, condyle fractures, 468, 470
Z
Zurich, University of, 129, 153, 153, 161
Zygomatic arch, 326
Zygomatic bone fractures, 326