Essentials of
AvianMedicine
&Surgery
Third Edition
Brian Coles
With Contributions from
Maria HrsutwaldH
hunshanns
SuHan E.Oror
Thomas N.Tuly
Blackwell
blnhing
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao,co m
Essentials of Avian
Medicine and Surgery
Third edition
Brian H. Coles BVSc, Dip. ECAMS,
Hon. FRcVS
With contributions from
Professor Dr Maria Krautwald-Junghanns,
 Dr med vet, Dr met vet habil, Dip. ECAMS
Universitat Leipzig
Institute for Avian Diseases
Leipzig, Germany
Dr Susan E. Orosz, DVM, PhD, Dip.ABVP (avian), Dip. ECAMS
Bird and Exotic Pet Wellness Center
Toledo, Ohio, USA
Professor Thomas N. Tully, DVM, MSc, Dip. ABVP (avian), Dip ECAMS
Louisiana State University
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Baton Rouge, USA
Blackwell
Publishing
Essentials of Avian
Medicine and Surgery
Essentials of Avian
Medicine and Surgery
Third edition
Brian H. Coles BVSc, Dip. ECAMS,
Hon. FRcVS
With contributions from
Professor Dr Maria Krautwald-Junghanns,
 Dr med vet, Dr met vet habil, Dip. ECAMS
Universitat Leipzig
Institute for Avian Diseases
Leipzig, Germany
Dr Susan E. Orosz, DVM, PhD, Dip.ABVP (avian), Dip. ECAMS
 Bird and Exotic Pet Wellness Center
Toledo, Ohio, USA
Professor Thomas N. Tully, DVM, MSc, Dip. ABVP (avian), Dip ECAMS
Louisiana State University
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Baton Rouge, USA
Blackwell
Publishing
@ 1985, 1997 by Blackwell Science Ltd, a Blackwell Publishing company
 2007 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Blackwell Publishing editorial offices:
Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Tel: +44 (0)1865 776868
Blackwell Publishing Professional, 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
Tel: +1 515 292 0140
Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd, 550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
Tel: +61 (0)3 8359 1011
The right of the Author to be identified as the Author of this Work has been asserted in accordance
with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior
permission of the publisher.
 Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject
professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services
of a competent professional should be sought.
First edition published 1985 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Second edition published 1997 by Blackwell Science Ltd, reprinted 2005
Third edition published 2007 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
ISBN: 978-1-4051-5755-1
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Junghanns, Susan E. Orosz, Thomas N. Tully. - 3rd ed.
p.; cm.
Rev. ed. of: Avian medicine and surgery / B.H. Coles. 2nd ed. 1997.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN: 978-1-4051-5755-1 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Avian medicine. 2. Birds-Diseases. 3. Birds-Surgery. I. Coles, B. H. (Brian H.) I. Coles, B. H.
(Brian H.) Avian medicine and surgery.
[DNLM: 1. Bird Diseases-therapy. 2. Birds-surgery.
3. Veterinary Medicine-methods. SF 994 E78
20071
SF994.E87 2007
636.5'098-dc22
2007018855
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library
Set in 9.5 on 11.5 pt Sabon
by SNP Best-set Typesetter Ltd., Hong Kong
Printed and bound in Singapore
by Markono Print Media Pte Ltd
and which has been manufactured from pulp processed using acid-free and elementary chlorine-free
 practices. Furthermore, the publisher ensures that the text paper and cover board used have met 
acceptable environmental accreditation standards.
For further information on Blackwell Publishing, visit our website:
www.blackwellpublishing.com
Contents
Preface
vii
1  Diversity in Anatomy and Physiology: Clinical Significance
1
2  The Special Senses of Birds - Dr Susan E. Orosz
22
3  Clinical Examination
40
 4 Aids to Diagnosis - Professor Dr Maria Krautwald-Junghanns
56
5 Post-mortem Examination
103
 6  Medication and Administration of Drugs
115
7 Anaesthesia
124
8Surgery
142
9 Nursing and After Care
183
10  Breeding Problems
196
11  Release of Casualty Wild Birds
208
Appendices
219
1 An avian forrmulary - Professor Thomas N. Tully
219
2 Bacterial diseases of birds
266
3  Viral diseases of birds
279
 4  Mycotic diseases of birds
308
5 Parasitic diseases of birds
313
6  Poisons likely to affect birds
334
A
vi
Contenls
 7  Some suggested diagnostic schedules
339
 8 Weights of birds most likely to be seen in general practice
352
 Incubation and fledging periods of selected birds
355
10
Glossary
357
11  Some useful websites
361
Furtherreading
363
References
364
Index
380
Colour plates appear between pages 184 and 185
Preface
This Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery is the third edition of the work originally
published as Avian Medicine and Surgery more than twenty years ago. Since that time
trated multi-author volumes on the subject have been published. However it was felt that
there was still a need for a small book that would enable the busy practitioner to have a
quick reference or for the student just starting out to get a basic understanding of the
subject.
 The use of molecular biology in diagnostics and the variety of imaging techniques have
advanced considerably, even since the second edition was produced. Because of the need
for up-to-date information on this aspect, Professor Maria Krautwald-Junghanns kindly
agreed to update the chapters on Aids to Diagnosis and Post-Mortem Examination.
Therapeutics is an important part of clinical practice, and so one of the forerunners in
this feld, Professor Tom Tully, generously agreed to look at and update the “Avian
Formulary'.
 A third expert in her feld, Dr Susan Orosz, very kindly agreed to write a chapter on
The Special Senses of Birds. The original author requested this because it was felt that
although the veterinarian has always considered animal welfare to be of primary impor-
tance, there is now an increasing interest on the part of the general public and an increase
in well-intentioned but sometimes ill-informed focus groups looking into this matter. It is
therefore imperative that the veterinarian should have the most up-to-date objective, sci-
entific and unemotional information on the subject when advising their clients and the
decision makers.
With the recent emergence of the importance of the viruses of avian flu and of West
Nile virus, together with the general public's desire to visit ‘exotic’ habitats around the
 a m r s r m    o  
animals, avian zoonotic diseases have been highlighted in the sections on infectious
diseases.
I am very grateful to all those colleagues who have discussed their cases with me and
photographs. I am indebted to my colleague Peter McElroy for bringing to my notice the
long ago (1917) published work of Dr Casey Woods. I am grateful to veterinary nurse
Cathy Smith for her observations on the chapter on nursing, to Adam Burbage and others
at Blackwell Publishing for their help and patience. Also my thanks go to my copy editor,
 Judith Glushanok, for her many helpful suggestions.
My thanks goes to Ms Anne Meller who provided the main cover photograph of an
Atlantic Puffn. This photograph has important conservation implications for this species.
The quality of the fsh held in the beak is of poor nutritive value. The sand eels are small
and low in fat, moreover the pipe fish has a tough indigestible skin. A species reduced to
feeding its young on such items is threatened with the combined effects of commercial
over fishing and climate change.
vii
vili
Prefaice
Again my grateful thanks to the co-authors, all of whom are very busy clinicians, for
their contributions, which have helped to make this third edition more comprehensive.
Lastly grateful thanks to my colleague Nicola Miller for agreeing to proofread the fnished
book and to my ever patient and always forbearing wife, Daphne.
Brian H. Coles
2006
Diversity in Anatomy and Physiology:
Clinical Significance
There are approximately 8900 species of living birds compared with only about 4200
species of mammals. In this chapter it is not possible to consider all aspects of anatomy
 po sd n   n  s   d p
anatomy and physiology will be considered, because knowledge of these is important when
carrying out surgery and autopsies or interpreting radiographs.
To the casual observer there are many obvious differences in size, ranging from the
hummingbird to the ostrich (Struthio camelus), in the varying forms of the bill and in the
colour and profusion of the plumage occurring in different species of birds. However
beneath this great variety of body form there is a greater degree of uniformity in the basic
anatomy and some aspects of the physiology of the class Aves than there is in many single
orders of other types of vertebrate. Even in the case of the large flightless birds, all present-
day living birds have originally evolved from a flying ancestor and the capacity to be able
to become airborne imposed quite severe restrictions on the basic anatomy and some
aspects of the physiology which have been retained by their descendants. It is because of
their ability to fly that birds have been able quickly (i.e. in evolutionary time) to reach
and exploit a wide variety of habitats. This, in turn, resulted in the evolution of many
different anatomical forms, all with the same overall basic pattern.
The feld observations of Charles Darwin on the variations in body size and bill shape
which adapted the bird to different habitats and sources of food, exhibited by
otherwise apparently closely related fnches in the Galapagos Islands, helped him formulate
his theory of the origin of species. However Darwin was primarily concerned with
the proces of divergent evolution, while we now know that convergent evolution also
takes place. Apparent externally recognised similarities are not always an infallible guide.
For instance the martins, swallows and swifts all look quite similar and all behave
similarly and occupy similar habitats. However while martins and swallows are taxo-
nomically placed in the order Passeriformes, or perching birds, the swifts are more closely
related to the hummingbirds, both being placed in the superorder Apodimorphae.
Unlike most other birds, the skeleton is not well pneumonised in Apodimorphae, a condi
tion only seen in the egg-laying female of other species. The Victorian biologists were great
anatomists and much of today's taxonomy is based on their observations, such as those
of T.H. Huxley (1867). Consequently we know quite a lot about the detailed anatomical
variations between species. We still do not know a lot about the physiological
differences.
Some Victorian-based taxonomy has been and is being overturned by present-day labo-
ratory investigation using DNA analytical techniques (Sibley & Ahlquist, 1990). New
World vultures, for example, are now considered to be more closely related to the storks
than to the Old World vultures. Most of our knowledge of physiology has been derived
from experimental work on domestic poultry (ducks and chickens) and particularly on the
2
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
domestic fowl that originated from the red jungle fowl (Gallus gallus). This particular
species is not really typical of birds as a whole.
Since the underlying skeleton of the bird largely influences the external appearance and
THE SKELETAL SYSTEM AND EXTERNAL ANATOMY
When carrying out radiography or any imaging diagnostic technique, it is important to
know what is normal for a particular species so that an inaccurate diagnosis is not made.
The skull
 p nd  r   i s a j id p   n 
skull associated with the mouthparts, as might be expected, does show considerable varia-
tion. In fact one aid in classifying birds used by the Victorian anatomists was to use the rela-
tive size and presence or absence of the vomer, the pterygoids and the palatine bones.
In hornbills (Bucerotidae) and cassowaries (Casuariidae) the frontal and nasal bones
contribute to the horn-covered casque. In the cassowary this is used to push the bird's
way through the thick undergrowth of tropical rainforest. In most hornbills the casque is
very light and cellular in texture but in the helmeted hornbill (Rhinoplax vigil) it is solid
and ivory like.
The many different types of articulation of the maxilla, premaxilla and mandible with
the skull are illustrated in Figures 1.1(a) and 1.1(b). When considering the surgical repair
Relatively small
Craniofacial hinge.
external nasal opening
This is a flexible elastic area in the facial
bones which are flattened in this area. In the
ostrich and penguin the bone is multi-
layered like plywood at this zone.
In large parrots there is a synovial joint at this
point and in large anseriformes (ie. geese
and swans) pelicans and caprimulgi
(i.e. nightjars, frogmouths etc.) there is a ball
and socket each side of the elastic zone.
Gap between nasal and
interorbital septum to
allow flexing at the
Jugal
craniofacial hinge
Quadratebone
Pterygoid and
palatine bones
(a)
Mandible
Fig. 1.1(a) Kinesis of he avian jaw (simplified and diagrammalic) - he prokinelic (hinged]
lower jaw (adapted from an illstration by King & Mclelland, 1984). This lype of jaw articula-
fion is found in most species of birds including the parrols.
As the quadrate bone rotales clockwise, horizontal forces are ransmilted via he jugal arch
[laterally) and the pterygopalarine arch (medially) to the caudal end of the venral aspect of
he upper jaw, causing his to rotate dorsally pivoing on the craniofacial hinge.
Injury to he cere is common in many birds and may involve he underlying craniofacial
hinge. Frachures of the jugal, pterygoid and palatine bones occasionally occur and need good
qualily radiographs for diagnosis. All he injuries affect prehension of food.
Diversilyin Analomy and Physiology
of a traumatised or fractured beak it is important to take into account these interspecific
variations.
The sheath of keratin overlying the skeleton of the bill also varies in thickness, composi-
tion and sensitivity. In ducks and geese (Anatidae) only the tip is hard, while in waders
(Charadridae) the bill tends to be soft, leathery and flexible, extending distally well beyond
the underlying bone. Different races of the redshank (Tringa totanus) have developed dif-
ferent lengths of beak dependent on their preferred diet. In most species of parrot and
 most raptors the beak is hard and tough. Hardness depends on the content of orientated
hydroxyapatite crystals. The hard tip of the bill of the Anatidae contains a tactile sensory
structure - the bill-tip organ - while Herbst corpuscles, sensitive mechanoreceptors, are
well distributed over the whole of the beak of waders. The beak of toucans is also a very
(0）
Distal rhynchokinesis (elastic zone nearest rostral end of upper jaw)
Seen in: woodcock (Scolopaxrusticola)
All belong to
curlews (Numenius spp)
godwits (Limosa spp)
the family
painted snipe (Rostratula bengaihensis)
Scolopacidae
(i)Intermediate rhynchokinesis(elasticzonemore or less centrallyplaced)
Found in:
ostrich
oyster catchers (Haematopus spp)
(ii)Proximal rhynchokinesis (elastic zone much nearer the brain case)
Seen in: larids (i.e. gulls and terns)
alcids (i.e. auks [guillemot, razorbill, puffin])
(iv)  Elongated rhynchokinesis (a relatively long and ill-defined elastic zone)
Occurs in the avocets (Recurvirostra spp)
(v)Double rhynchokinesis (two elastic zones)
Occurs in: plovers (Charadridae)
cranes (Gruidae)
Medium
dorsal bar
 Nasal-interorbital
Paired nasal bars
septum fused -
(incomplete in
compare prokinetic
ostrich and ratites)
jaw
Action of
Quadrate quadrate
Palatine
Pterygoid
as in
prokinetic
jaw/
Slit-like nasal opening
Paired ventral bars
Mandible
 Jugal arch 
Gliding synovial
joints with brain
(b)
case
Fig. 1.1(b) The rhynchokinetic jaw. Most of the movement of he jaw occurs rostral to he
junchion of ihe upper jaw and he brain case within he area of the 'nose'. Among he many
forms of rhynchokinelic articulation, proximal rhynchokinesis (jij most nearly resembles proki-
netic articulation, giving these birds (gulls, terns and auks) a wide gape so hat they can more
easily swallow heir prey. Rhynchokinetic articularion overall is found moshy in the order Cha-
radriiformes (i.e. waders and shore birds) which mostly feed on invertebrales and oher aqualic
organisms. Many species of hese birds probe for their food in sand or soft earth.
Essenlials of Avian Medicine cand Surgery
C.funereus
C. magnificus
C.lathami
The upper beak is 
A rather broad blunt
Has a rather
comparatively long
upper beak adapted
bulbous beak with a
and narrow with a
for crushing seeds,
comparatively broad
rather prominent tip.
hard nutsand
lower beak adapted
Adapted for digging
rotting timber.
for tearing apart the
into timber to
cones of the
extract wood-boring
casuarina tree.
larvae.
Fig. 1.2 Variations in he form of the beak among members of he genus Calyptorhynchus,
he black cockatoos (afer W.T. Cooper in Forshaw, 1978). Alhough C. funereus and C.
magnificus inhabit parts of south-western Auslralia, all hree species co-exist in parls of south-
eastern Auslralia where, because of their different feeding habits, hey are ecologically
isolated.
sensitive structure, being well supplied by branches of the Vth cranial nerve (see p. 23).
Figure 1.2 shows the variation in beak form of a closely related group of cockatoos.
The axial skeleton
The cervical vertebrae
In all species the atlas articulates with the skull via a single occipital condyle, but in some
hornbills (Bucerotidae) the atlas and axis have fused, possibly to support the very large
skull Most birds, even small Passeriformes, which have an apparently quite short neck,
have 14-15 cervical vertebrae compared with a total of seven in all mammals. The swans
(genus Cygnus), most of the large herons in the family Ardeidae, most of the storks (Cico-
niidae) and the ostrich have an obviously long and flexible neck and, as would be expected,
 m a su  an ( sms u) qn peaias jo rqu pas ue
legs since the bird needs to use its bill to perform many tasks (e.g. manipulating food,
 grooming and nest building or burrowing) all of which are often carried out by the pectoral
i  , [u e si ar (n i) s u 's u q (-aog ro)
neck between the 7th, 8th and 9th cervical vertebrae. This, when suddenly straightened,
enables the bird to thrust the beak forward at the prey in a stabbing action.
The thoracic vertebrae
In many birds the frst few thoracic vertebrae (2-5) are fused to form a notarium. This is
present in Galiformes (pheasants, turkeys, guinea fowl, grouse and quails, erc.), Colum-
Diversily in Analomy and Physiology
biformes (pigeons and doves), Ciconidae (herons, egrets, bitterns, storks, ibises, spoon-
bills) and Phoenicopteridae (flamingos).
The notarium may not be very apparent on all radiographs. In all birds some of the
posterior thoracic vertebrae together with all of the lumbar vertebrae, the sacral vertebrae
and some of the caudal vertebrae are fused to form the synsacrum, which is also fused
with the ilium, ischium and pubis. The exact numbers of fused vertebrae derived from the
various regions of the spine is not possible to define accurately.
The caudal vertebrae and pelvis
The pygostyle (4-10 fused caudal vertebrae) gives support, together with the retrical bulb
(a fbro-adipose pad), to the rectrices (the tail feathers). The pygostyle is well developed
 in most fying birds in which the tail is important to give added lift during hovering (e.g.
the kestrel Falco tinnunculus) or soaring or for accurate steerage, as in the goshawk
(Accipiter gentilis) and other woodland species. This area in the flying birds and those
which use the tail for display purposes (e.g. the peacocks and the Argus pheasant) is well
supplied with muscles, many of which are inserted into the inter-retrical elastic
ligament.
The pygostyle and the free caudal vertebrae are well developed in woodpeckers, in
which, together with specially stiffened tail feathers, they help to support the bird when
when climbing. In these many different types of birds damage to this area of the anatomy
could have an effect on feeding, breeding, flying or roosting behaviour.
The rigid synsacrum, unlike the pelvis in mammals, in most birds is open on the ventral
surface to allow passage of the often quite large shelled egg. However in the Ratides, the
large flightless birds, it is fused either at the pubic symphysis (in the ostrich) or at the
ischial symphysis. This may help to prevent compression of the viscera when the bird is
sitting.
In all birds there is an antitrochanter situated dorsal to the acetabular fossa, but even
these two anatomical structures vary between quite apparently similar species such as the
peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus) and the goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) (Harcourt-Brown,
1995). The pelvis tends to be comparatively wide in the running birds compared with the
narrower and longer pelvis of the foot-propelled diving birds, e.g. loons (Gavidae) and
grebes (Podicipedidae) which closely resemble each other in body form and behaviour but
The thoracic girdle
In most birds the scapula is long and narrow, but in the ostrich it is short and fused to the
coracoid. The clavicles are usually fused at the furcula to form a ^wishbone' and they func-
tion as bracing struts to hold the two shoulder joints apart during contraction of the supra-
coracoideus. They also act as a major attachment for the pectoral muscle; they are well
developed and widely spaced in the strongly flying birds. As would be expected, the supra-
coracoid muscle and the pectorals, as well as the other wing muscles, are reduced in some
non-flying birds. In the penguins, which literally “fy' through the water, the supracoracoid
muscle is greatly developed whilst many of the other wing muscles are tendinous.
In some birds pelicans, frigate birds and the secretary bird (Sagittarius serpentarius) the
furcula is fused to the sternum. In the ostrich the scapulocoracoid bone is not quite fused
but has a fairly rigid attachment to the sternum. In the albatrosses and fulmars
(Procellaridae) the furcula forms a synovial joint with the sternum. However in some
parrots the clavicles and the furcula are absent, being represented by a band of fbrous
tissue. The coracoid is well developed in most species but the ‘triosseal canal normally
formed between coracoid, scapula and clavicle, is completely enclosed within the coracoid
Essenlials of Avian Medicine cand Surgery
in the hoopoe (Upupa epops) and also in hornbills (Bucerotidae). Both these species belong
to the order Coraciformes and it is possible that other members of this order may have
this anatomical variation although this has not been documented.
The ribs and sternum
The uncinate processes are unusually long in the guillemots or murres (Alcinae) and the
divers or loons (Gavidae). This may help to resist the pressure of water on the thorax
when the bird is diving. Guillemots and razorbills have been recorded at a depth of 150
metres, the emperor penguin at 350 metres. Water pressure increases at the rate of 1atm/
10 m, which is approximately 1 kg/sqcm.
As is the case in the pelvic girdle, the thorax in these birds is long and comparatively
thin; consequently the sternum is long thus reducing the space between its caudal margin
and the pubic bones and so making surgical access to the abdomen more diffcult. The
keel of the sternum is well developed in the flying birds particularly the swifts and the
hummingbirds (Apodiformes). However it is absent or reduced in the ratites (i.e. with a
raft-like sternum). It is reduced in many flightless island species in which other members
of the same family are flying birds, e.g. the kakapo or the owl parrot of New Zealand
(Strigops babroptilus) which can only glide downhill, or again some of the flightless island
rails (e.g. Atlantisia rogersi). The sternal keel is well developed in penguins and in these
birds the supracoracoid muscle is greatly increased in size compared with the pectoral. In
some cranes (Gruidae) and the swans this part of the sternum has been excavated to
accommodate coils of an elongated trachea as is illustrated in Figure 1.3.
1
Whooper swan (Cygnus cygnus)
Also occurs in some other
species of swan but not all
species of Cygnus (e.g. only short
bends occur in Cygnus
TT7
melanocoryphus - the black-
necked swan and in Cygnus
atratus - the black swan.
Common crane (Grus grus)
Also like this in Anthropoides spp
(i.e. demoiselle and stanley
cranes).
Whooper crane(Grus americana)
Fig. 1.3 Various lypes of looped rachea parly enclosed in the excavated sternum (redrawn
affer King & Mclelland, 1989, by permission of Academic Press Limited, Londonj. Knowledge
of these variations is important in the interpretation of radiographs.
Diversily in Anatomy and Physiology
Head of humerus
articulates with a
very shallow
glenoid cavity
allowing the wing
to oscillate almost
through 1800
(a)
Typical hummingbird wing.
when the bird is
hovering. Very
Most of the wing of a
little movement at
hummingbird is
all occurs in the
supported by the “hand'.
other joints of the
hummingbird's
wing.
Humerus  Radius and ulna Metacarpus  Digits
(b)Typical frigate bird wing.
Fig. 1.4 The relative comparable sizes of he wing bones in hwo different lypes of bird (not
drawn to he scale of he wo speciesj.
The pectoral limb - the wing
The overall layout of the skeletomuscular system of the wing is similar in all birds.
However the relative lengths of the individual bones do vary (Fig. 1.4) (see also p. 209).
 In most specialised soaring birds, e.g. the gulls (Laridae), the humerus is short compared
with the relatively longer radius and ulna. In contrast in the albatross, which spends most
of its life soaring over very great distances, the humerus is longer than the radius and ulna.
 In the penguins, auks and diving petrels the humerus and the other bones of the wing have
become flattened. The alula is a digit corresponding to the human thumb. It is usually well
developed in most flying birds and when abducted from the wing it acts as a slot, as in
an aircraft wing, to smooth the airflow over the aerofoil section of the wing at low air-
speeds and when the wing is canted as the airborne bird comes in to land (see p. 168).
 During these conditions the airflow tends to break away from the surface of the wing and
the bird or aircraft loses lift and begins to stall. As would be expected this structure is
reduced or absent in some non-flying birds (e.g. kiwis and cassowaries). In the young
hoatzin (Opisthocomus boatzin) there are claws on the alula and the major digit which
the bird uses for climbing around the nest site. Adult cassowaries, kiwis, emus, rheas and
 the ostrich also have vestigial non-functional claws on these digits. The varying types of
avian wing are illustrated in Figure 1.5.
The legs
Again the basic layout of the hind limb is the same in all species with most of the evolu-
tionary changes having taken place in the foot. In the long-legged birds the tibiotarsus and
the tarsometatarsus are of approximately the same length. This is essential if the centre of
Type I The elliptical wing
 Has fairly low wing loading and a low aspect ratio. Enables bird to take off rapidly and
manoeuvre through narrow spaces.
(b)  Pheasant type
(a)Typical small
Typical of many galiforms.
finch or bunting
Adapted for rapid take off
This type has a large
often in dense cover.
alula and additional
slots in the wing to
prevent stalling at slow
speed.
Type ll Long wide wing
Enables bird to glide and soar at relatively low speed. Has a moderate wing loading and
medium type aspect ratio. The alula and wing slots are well developed and obvious, giving
birdreasonable manoeuverability.
(c)  Typical large eagle
(d)Typical stork
This type also seen in condors, vultures and pelicans.
Type Ill Long, relatively slim wing
With no wing slots and a tapered end to the wing. Sometimes the alula is large. These
birds glide at high speed in strong wind. High wing loading, high aspect ratio.
(e)Typical gull
(f)
Albatross
Type of wing also 
 seen in gannets
and frigate birds.
Type IV High speed wing
Long and relatively narrow with no wing slots. Tip of wing pointed and may be swept back.
High wing loading, moderate-high aspect ratio enables bird to fly at high speed to chase
prey.
(g)Typical falcon
(h)Swift
Fig. 1.5 Varying ypes of avian wing (definitely not to scale).
● Any loss of wing exlension through fraclure, hrauma or damage lo the propalagial membrane is most 
serious prognoslically in birds wih a high wing loading. Of course, if the damage is exiensive enough
● Trauma lo the carpomelacarpal region resuling in fibrosis or posble ankylosis is most grave in birds
wilth a Type I or Type ll wing plan. The cuthor has seen a number of keshrels [Faico finnuncufus, lype
IV wing plan] and gulls [lorus sp., Type ll wing plan] fly effeclively with slight damage to the carpo-
melacarpal area.
Clinical importance: assessment for release of wildlife casuallies.
Diversily in Analomy and Physiology
gravity of the bird's body is to remain above the fet when the bird is crouched and the
limb is flexed, otherwise the bird would overbalance. In flamingos there are no menisci in
the intertarsal joints. In the grebes (Podicipedidae) and divers or loons (Gaviidae), which
are foot-propelled diving birds, the tibiotarsus lies almost parallel to the vertebral column
and the limb is bound to the body by a fold of skin. The cnemial crest in these divers is
well developed, projecting beyond the stifle joint. In grebes it is fused to the patella thus
increasing the area of attachment for the crural muscles. In divers and grebes the gastroc-
nemius is greatly developed providing the main power stroke of the foot. Quite obviously
all the leg muscles are powerful and well developed in the ostrich which can run at 40 mph
(64 kph) and can produce a lethal strike forward with its foot. All the major types of avian
foot are illustrated in Figure 1.6.
Feet with four toes
Anisodactyl i.e. three forward toes and one backward pointing
toe. This type of foot is adapted for perching or grasping and is
seen in songbirds and birds of prey. This is the pattern seen in
most birds. The gannets have four webbed toes, so do
cormorants.
Zygodactyl i.e. two forwardly directed toes (digits Il & Ill) and
digits I & IV are backwardly directed toes. This foot is seen
mostly in birds which climb but also grasp with the foot, e.g.
parrots, toucans, cuckoos, woodpeckers. 1n owls, touracos and
the osprey the foot is basically of this type but digit IV can
digit IVeasilybe moved forwards.
Pamprodactyl i.e. all four toes are directed forward. This type of
foot is found in the swiff. Unable to perch on the ground but
clings to a vertical nesting site.
Syndactyl i.e. two digits are partially united, e.g. kingfishers.
digitsIll &IV
Feet with only three toes, i.e. tridacty! feet
This type of foot is seen in running birds (e.g. plovers), wading
birds, some climbing birds, some woodpeckers, the emu, diving
petrels and auks,cassowaries,kiwis,tinamous and pheasants.
Many birds with webbed feet are like this with a vestigal first
digit, e.g. gulls, penguins, loons, albatross, swans and ducks.
Feet with two toes
This is found only in the ostrich. Digits I & ll are absent and
digit Ill is much larger than digit Iv. The foot is rather like that
to running and walking over open country and grassland.
Fig-. Il.6. Varying lypes of avian foot.
clinical importance: Foot problems in birds are common. As well as obvious rauma, digis
are sometimes congenitally maldirected so knowledge of what is normal is important.
10
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
THE ALIMENTARY OR DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
The beak and mouth
Brief reference has already been made to the varying types of beak. Within the oral cavity
itself there are differences in the anatomy, which are not quite so obvious to the casual
 observer. The palate is often ridged and the pattern of ridges is usually related to the diet.
 In the Fringillidae group of fnches, e.g. the chaffinch (Fringilla coelebs) and canary (Serinus
canarius), most of which feed on dicotyledonous seeds (i.e. those of trees, shrubs and most
herbaceous plants), there is a lateral palatine ridge between which and the edge of the
upper beak the seed is lodged while it is cut by the sharp-edged lower bill. Even among
the Fringillidae there is considerable variation in bill size and shape. In two other groups
the snow bunting, Plectrophenax nivalis) and the Ploceidae, the typical weaver birds (e.g.
quelea and house sparrow, Passer domesticus), which feed on monocotyledonous seeds
(i.e. the grasses and cereal crops), there is a prominence rostral to the choanal gap against
which the seed is wedged transversely while it is crushed by the blunt-edged lower beak
Many parrots also use the transverse ridge on the rostral part of the palate to hold the
seed while it is cracked and manipulated into position by the muscular tongue (the only
avian order with intrinsic tongue muscles). The tongues of birds show a lot of variation
 in relation to the diet and some of these differences are illustrated in Figure 1.7.
(c) Gull
(a) Woodpecker
(b) Merganser
(g) Lories and lorikeets
(may look similar to
a parakeet until it is
(d) Parakeet
(e) Nuthatch
(f)Kestrel
unfolded at the tip)
Fig. 1.7 Variations in the ypes of avian tongue.
clinical importance: A completely normal tongue is more important in some species han in
olhers (redrawn affer King & Mclelland, 1979, by permission of Academic Press Limited, Londonj.
Diversily in Analomy and Physiology
11
Abscessation of the choanal gap and the tongue is common in caged parrots, and neo-
plastic lesions occasionally occur in all species. Partial amputation of the tongue or beak
owing to a ligature of nylon fishing line is seen in waterfowl. All these lesions affect pre-
hension of food.
The salivary glands, which mainly secrete mucus, are best developed in birds that
swallow dry foods. They are least developed in birds swallowing slippery foods such as
fish. In the woodpeckers the mandibular glands below the tongue secrete a sticky fluid for
mopping up invertebrates. Swifts secrete an adhesive glycoprotein which after secretion
hardens into a nest-building material.
Taste buds are variously developed in birds and these are associated with the salivary
glands. In most birds there are a few taste buds at the caudal end of the tongue, but in
some ducks, e.g. the mallard (Anas platyrbynchos), there are none in this position. Instead
they are located near the tip of the upper and lower bill and on the roof of the oropharynx.
Parrots have taste buds either side of the choanal opening and just rostral to the laryngeal
mound (see p. 36). The acuity of the taste varies between species. Bitter and salt tasting
substances are generally rejected, this is important when administering therapeutic drugs
by mouth or in drinking water (see p. 117).
Some species of bird, such as the male of most bustards (Otidae) have inflatable oral
sacs on the floor of the mouth which are used for sexual display. In the great bustard (Otis
tarda) this sac is an oesophageal structure. Those structures also occur in frigate birds,
sage grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus) and prairie chicken (Tympanuchus cupido). In
the pelican, the sac on the floor of the mouth is large and together with the flexible man-
dible forms a hoop like a fshing net to catch food.
The oesophagus and crop
The oesophagus is folded longitudinally and is very distensible in hawks, owls and cor-
morants but in swifts and some fnches feeding on much less bulky food it is quite narrow,
 a factor to consider if these species have to be gavaged. Just cranial to the thoracic inlet
is a storage region, the crop. Not al birds have a crop. It is absent in gulls and penguins,
which store the food along the whole length of the oesophagus. It is also absent in the
[oucans (Ramphastidae). In many species such as ducks and geese (Anatidae) and also in
some species of songbirds the oesophagus is only slightly increased in diameter at its caudal
end. Swellings at the thoracic inlet that may be occasionally seen in any of these species
are not due to an impacted crop.
Crop milk
Crop milk is produced by pigeons and doves (Columbidae) to feed their young. Its com-
position is similar to mammalian milk but lacks calcium and carbohydrates. Both sexes
of the flamingos and the male emperor penguin also produce a nutritive fluid which is
regurgitated to feed the young. However in the Columbidae and emperor penguin the crop
milk is produced by desquamation of epithelium, whereas that from the flamingos is a
secretion from the merocrine glands of the oesophagus.
The stomach (i.e. the proventriculus together with
the ventriculus or gizzard)
There are two basic forms of avian stomach: (1) that of the carnivorous birds in which
the food requires less trituration and alternatively (2) the more complex avian stomach
found in those birds feeding on much less digestible food, which requires to be physically
broken up before enzymatic digestion. Such types of bird are granivorous, herbivorous,
frugivorous and insectivorous. There are many intermediate forms between these two
basic types.
12
Essentials of AvianMedicine cand Surgery
     q   s    
triculus (true stomach) is not always easy to discern on external appearance. This type
 Of organ acts largely as a storage zone giving time for the digestive secretions of the
stomach to penetrate and act on the food.
2. In the more complex avian stomach the division between the thin-walled proventriculus
and the well-developed muscular gizzard is easily recognised. Although the distribution
composition of digestive secretion containing hydrochloric acid and pepsin does not
vary. The foul-smelling 'stomach oil ejected by petrels including the fulmar (Fulmarus
glacialis) as a means of defence is of dietary origin and not a secretion.
3. In the ostrich the greatly enlarged proventriculus lies caudal to the ventriculus acting
as a storage and fermentation chamber as in ruminants. Ostriches graze rather like
cattle.
The gizzard itself is lined by a tough cuticle or koilin layer. Koilin is a material secreted
by glands and hardened by hydrochloric acid. This can be stained brown, yellow or quite
intense green due to the regurgitation of bile pigment. The intensity of this colour and the
extent of staining should be noted during autopsy. Sometimes pathological bile staining
extends into the proventriculus. Some species, e.g. magpies (Pica pica) and starlings (Stur-
nidae), normally periodically shed the cuticle. In those species in which the gizzard is less
well defned the cuticle is thinner and relatively soft. Erosion and necrosis of the koilin
layer can be a sign of gizzard worms in ducks and geese and also a sign of megabacteriosis
in budgerigars.
In the carnivorous species particularly, the contractions of the stomach form a regur-
gitated pellet (called by falconers the casting) from the indigestible parts of the food, such
as pieces of skeleton, claws and teeth. A healthy hawk should regularly produce these
pellets. They should be frm in consistency and not smell offensive. It is not generally
known that many other species of bird besides hawks and owls also sometimes produce
pellets, e.g. thrushes (Turdinae), crows (Corvidae) and herons (Ardeidae).
 It is generally thought that parrots are vegetarians but some parrots will take small
pieces of meat, and the remains of invertebrates have been found in the stomachs of wilc
parrots.
Grit
Grit is taken in by many species with a well-muscled gizzard that, together with the tough
koilin layer, helps to grind up food. Although grit is mainly quartz, the size and coarseness
of the particles is related not only to the size of the bird but also to the diet. The lesser
flamingo (Phoenicopterus minor) feeds mainly on algae and diatoms fltered from the water
in which it stands so that it ingests a fne sandy grit. The ostrich, which feeds on coarse
vegetation, uses pebbles, although captive ostriches have a habit of swallowing unfamiliar
objects. The dippers (genus Cinclus), some of the diving birds and some species of duck
all feeding on molluscs and crustaceans use grit derived from molluscan shells. Even when
available not all caged birds will take grit into their gizzard and apparently do not suffer
any adverse effect.
The pylorus, the duodenum and the intestines
All show quite a lot of variation among different species. In fact the number and the way
in which the coils of the intestine are arranged was one method used by the Victorian
anatomists to classify birds.
In general, as would be expected, the intestines are relatively shorter in carnivores.
insectivores and frugivores, in which the food requires much less digestion. The alimentary
[ransit time in some frugivores is relatively short, e.g. in the hill mynah (Gracula religiosa)
Diversily in Analomy and Physiology
13
it is 1% hours, in the common buzzard (Buteo buteo) 3 hours. In the granivorous and
herbivorous birds the digestive tract is much longer, being longest of all in birds feeding
On a fbrous diet, e.g. the red grouse (Lagopus lagopus) which feeds principally on heather
(Calluna vuigaris). In fact a seasonal change may occur in the length of the intestine in
some species, e.g. the bearded reedling (Panurus biarmicus), in relation to seasonal changes
in the diet.
The caeca
Left and right caeca are usually present at the junction of the ileum and the rectum but
their shape and size varies considerably as is illustrated in Figure 1.8. These normal varia-
tions should be familiar to the pathologist.
In some species, such as the parrots, the swifts, the pigeons and toucans, the caeca are
was the breakdown of cellulose by the action of symbiotic bacteria. However this theory is
now in some doubt and the size of the caeca apparently has little relation to the type of avian
diet. However the autochthonous flora of the alimentary canal of those birds with well
developed caeca does apparently vary from those birds in which the caeca are absent.
Thegallbladder
 A galbladder is usually present in many species except for most parrots, pigeons and the
Ostrich. In the cockatiel (Nymphicus bollandicus), in rheas, the hoatzin and penguins, its
presence is variable. In woodpeckers (Picidae), toucans (Ramphastidae) and barbets (Capi-
tonidae) the gallbladder is exceptionally long in some individuals extending as far as the
cloaca.
The liver
The liver varies slightly in the number of lobes present but there is quite a lot of variation
in the normal level of liver enzymes even in apparently fairly closely related genera of birds
such as the parrots, see Table 1.1. Knowledge about liver enzymes in birds is very patchy
but is slowly accumulating. Awareness of these normal variations is important when using
this data to make a diagnosis of hepatopathy (see p. 70). Good references on normal values
are in some BSAVA manuals (Benyon 1996; Harcourt-Brown & Chitty 2005)
THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
The nares
There is a lot of interspecifc variation in the size and position of the external nares,
knowledge of which is useful when masking birds for the administration of a gaseous
anaesthetic. In toucans the nares are oval slits placed transversely at the caudal end of the
large bill and partially covered by feathers. In the Procellaridae, i.e. the tubenoses or
petrels and the fulmar, they are at the rostral end of a small tube along the dorsal aspect
of the upper bill. In parrots the external nares are circular holes in the cere. In gulls and
 cranes the external nares are placed approximately half way along the upper bill and pierce
this structure. The gannets and boobies (Sulidae), which are plunge divers, do not have
any external nares but breathe through an opening and closing gap at the corner of the
mouth. In kiwis the nostril is on the tip of the long probing beak The bird uses this,
together with an increased surface of the caudal conchal cartilage, to smell out its food
Moreover there are extensively developed olfactory bulbs in the brain.
The sense of smell is also well developed in storm petrels (members of the Procellariidae
Or tubenoses), which navigate by smell back to their nesting burrow in darkness. The
South American turkey vulture (Carthartes aura) also uses smell to locate carrion hidden
14
Essentlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
(a) Sparrow hawk
(b) Marabou stork
(c) Tufted guineafowl
(Accipiter nisus)
(Leptoptilos
(Numida
Most falconiforms
crumeniferus)
meleagris)
(hawks, eagles
Most ciconiforms
Caeca are
 and vultures) have
(herons, storks,
 generally long in
relatively small
ibis, flamingos)
 most galliforms.
caeca.
have short caeca.
Distalends
of caeca
usually
expanded in
most owls
(d)Barn owl ( Tyto a/ba)
(e) Great bustard
(Otis tarda)
Most strigiforms (owls) have
relatively long caeca.
(f)Ostrich (Struthio camelus)
(g)Emu
Also rather like this in rheas. In
(Dromaius
most birds the cacea are directed
novaehoflandiae)
cranially, but in the ostrich they are
caudally directed.
Fig. 1.8 The different forms of caeca found in birds (after King & Mclelland, 1979). In many
species he right and leff caeca may not be of equal size with one side being almost vestigial
[e.g. Ardeidae - herons], also here are many inlraspecific differences in length.
No caeca occur in Psiltaciformes (parrols), Apodimorphae (hummingbirds and swifts), some
Piciformes (woodpeckers, toucans, barbels, honeyguides, elc.), some Columbidae (pigeons
sion of Academic Press Limited, Londonj.
Diversily in Anclomy and Physiology
15
(1/lowm)
aay sond jo dnoe wun Ay Auaidde sy uym 'auah juaap u sazua juap ay jo san wn pun wxw ay u uoyi a jo asnog
Clinical significance: Blood chemisly values of liver enzymes should notbe relied upon as the only diagnostic indicalion of a hepatopathy parlicularly if the dalc has
18-71
19-144
23-70
25-71
(creatinine
(1/n)
123-875
45-565
34-204
61-531
 CPK
{lactate
147-384
46-208
203-442
66-166
LDH
(gamma glutamyl
 Blood chemistry values
 transferase)
GGT
[1/n)
1-3.8
1-10
2-5
<1-5
aminotransferase)
(alanine
ALAT
(l/n)
12-59
19-98
12-37
22-105
(aspartate
ASAT
(1/n)
54-155
57-194
52-203
58-206
 data based on
 Number of
103
2
16
[Amazona sp.]
[Cacatua sp.]
erithocus]
[Ara sp.]
Species
Amazon
Cockaloo
Macaw
16
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
below the tree canopy of the tropical rain forest. In contrast, the African vultures searching
the open savannah depend mainly on sight to locate their food. In swifts the caudal conchal
cartilage is absent as it is in some Falconides and the olfactory bulb of the brain is
small.
The nasal cavity of birds in general tends to be rather long and narrow and of the three
nasal conchae the middle cartilage is the largest and acts primarily as a heat exchanger
and water conservation organ.
The trachea
The trachea of birds show quite a lot of variation, as already indicated in the notes on the
increases the resistance to airflow and increases the dead space. To compensate for this
disadvantage, birds overall have a proportionately greater tracheal diameter when com-
pared with that found in mammals of comparable size (x1.3), which reduces resistance to
air flow, and the tidal volume is also greatly increased (x4). Moreover the rate of respira-
tion is slower than in mammals (x/s). Very few detailed interspecifc physiological mea-
surements have been made but some of those that have been determined are shown in
Table 1.2.
(a) Seen in spoonbills (Platalea spp)
and aiso in the demoiselle crane
(Anthropoides virgo).
The coils are situated in the thoracic inlet.
Some species of the birds of paradise
for example:
(b) The trumpet bird (Phonygammus
keraudrenii).
The loops are particularly long in the male
bird where there may be 8-9 loops.
The trachea can be x21 the length
compared with a bird having a more
normal length trachea and of comparable
body size.
(c)Magpiegoose(Anseranas semipaimata)
The loop lies between the pectoral
muscle and the skin and may reach the
cloaca.
Fig. 1.9 The exraordinary shapes of the looped rachea which occur in some species of bird
[redrawn affer King & Mclelland, 1979, by permission of Academic Press Limired, Londonj.
In, species where the rachea is looped ihis may be seen in male birds or, if in both male
and female, it is offen more marked in the male. It doesn't develop until adulhood and probably
has an acouslic funclion to lower he pitch of he sound of he voice. An elongated irachea
may provide an increased area for respiratory evaporalive loss.
Diversily in Anatomy and Physiology
17
Table 1.2 Diversily in some data on the respiralory system in three different lypes of bird.
Starling
Pigeon
 Black duck
(Sturnus vvigaris)
(Columba livia)
(Anas rvbripes)
Rest
Flight
Rest
 Flight
Rest
Flight
Body mass [g]
78
380
1,026
Respiralory
92
180
26
487
27
158
frequency (min-1)
Tidal volume (ml)
0.67
2.80
7.2
6.0
30.2
71.0
Dead space
0.22
2.2
6.4
volume [ml]
Minute volumes [ml]
61.64
504
187.2
2,922.0
815.4
11,218
ay go uoissaidap saujassnd os ul sse Apoq oi paai pou s isas jo uanbag aoiidsai aul aion
respiralory frequency, which is often caused by ancesthelic drugs, may be of more concern than in the
brger species.
The above informalion is exiracled from King and Mclelland, 1989, by permission of Academic Press
limiled London. This reference contains a mass of informalion on respiratory physiology of birds but
unfortunately only on a very limiled number of species.
In penguins the trachea is divided into left and right segments by a medial cartilaginous
septum which also occurs in some Procellariformes. This is important to note if introduc-
ing an endotracheal tube. In hummingbirds the trachea divides into the two primary
 sn (ii ii) s asn   p n  a  
Occurs in the caudal two-thirds of the neck. In the male ruddy duck (Oxyura jamaicensis)
and in both male and female emu (Dromaius novaehollandiae) there is an inflatable tracheal
diverticulum. All these facts may be important in correctly interpreting radiographs.
The syrinx
Amongst birds as a whole the syrinx shows considerable diversity. Few anatomical struc-
tures can have received so much study, primarily as an aid to taxonomy and because of
the interest in vocalisation and bird song. However an attempt at a logical analysis of this
structure's function has often only resulted in greater confusion. Many male ducks (sub-
family Anatidae) exhibit an ossifed dilation on the side of the syrinx called the syringual
-s sn  na si   ar s j d sn   ra
ture. This structure can often be seen on radiographs.
The lungs
In most species the lungs extend from the rib carried on the last cervical vertebra to the
cranial border of the ilium. However in the storks, geese and hoatzin it reaches almost
to the level of the hip. This results more from the relative increased size of parts of the
skeleton rather than from an actual increase in the size of the lung.
The lung is divided into paleopulmo and neopulmo - this part forms 20-25% of the
lungs of the more evolutionarily advanced birds. The paleopulmo, which allows a continu-
ous unidirectional flow of air through its parabronchi (see p. 127), is considered to be
phylogenetically the most primitive area of the avian lung, and is present in all species.
The neopulmo is progressively developed in the more ‘evolutionarily advanced birds’ and
gradually expands over the dorsal and cranial aspects of the paleopulmo starting on the
ventrolateral area of this primordial lung. In penguins the neopulmo is entirely absent, so
that the whole lung is more triangular in outline than in other species. The neopulmo is
minimally developed in the storks and in the emu. It is poorly developed in buzzards,
ducks, owls, gulls, cormorants, auks and cranes. In most other orders of bird, including
18
Essenlials of Avican Medicine and Surgery
Galliformes, pigeons and Passeriformes, it is quite well developed. Quite how the neo-
pulmo differs in physiological function from the paleopulmo is not clear except that the
parabronchi appear to be arranged more in a network than in strict lineal order as in the
Theairsacs
The air sacs vary considerably in number and size in different orders of birds. Storks have
the largest number, with each caudal thoracic air sac subdivided into two parts. In song-
birds the cranial thoracic air sacs are fused into a single large median clavicular air sac.
In hummingbirds the caudal thoracic air sac is proportionately larger than in all other
species of bird. The cervical air sac extends up the neck via the tubular extensions running
one on each side of the cervical vertebrae, with one diverticulum inside the neural canal
and another externally running through the transverse foraminae formed by the head and
tubercle of the vestigial rib. In parrots there is a clinical condition in which there is hyper-
inflation of this cervicocephalic air sac. This has not been seen in other birds. Possibly this
structure is more developed in the parrots as it extends round the caudal part of the
cranium and connects with the postorbital diverticulum of the infraorbital sinus.
The medullary cavity of some bones of the skeleton (the sternum, the scapula, humerus,
femur, pelvis and cervical and thoracic vertebrae) is pneumonised by diverticula from the
air sacs. However in swallows, swifts and some other small birds pneumonisation is
minimal. In hummingbirds it is absent. In some aquatic and diving birds, including diving
ducks, cormorants, loons, rails and penguins, pneumonisation of the skeleton is also poor
Or absent. This may be related to reducing the buoyancy of the bird when diving.
 THE FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
 Basic anatomy and physiology is the same for all species. Most species have only a left
ovary and a left oviduct. However in some species covering some 16 orders of bird among
which are the Falconides (i.e. eagles, hawks, buzzards, falcons and the Old World vultures)
and also the Cathartidae (the New World vultures) there are both right and left ovaries
and also two oviducts. Nevertheless the right oviduct may be vestigial and non-functional
Occasionally becoming pathologically cyst-like. These normal anatomical differences are
important to note when carrying out autopsies. Technicians artificially inseminating birds
only recognise the left oviduct but fertility rates do not seem to be affected. In kiwis there
are right and left ovaries but only one oviduct with a very large infundibulum extending
across the whole body which collects ova from both ovaries.
Breeding maturity in birds
Japanese quail (Coturnix japonica) are mature and capable of breeding at 6 weeks. Most
seasonal breeders are mature at 11 months and breed in their second year of life. Most
medium sized parrots (e.g. Amazon parrots) do not breed until 34 years of age (some
slightly younger). Macaws are usually at least five years old before they breed, while the
Eggs
Number of eggs, clutches and hatching
In general the larger birds lay one egg (e.g. bustards, petrels, gannets and albatrosses).
However some ostriches may lay up to 48 eggs in a clutch. In general tropical birds tend
t0 lay fewer eggs because when the eggs hatch the birds have fewer daylight hours in which
to feed the chicks (approximately 12 hours of daylight only). Birds in the more northern
l an ri a ion u pe sa ao Al si ioss aeradn uaos o
Diversily in Analomy and Physiology
19
the longer the daylight hours and the more eggs are laid even among the same species,
e.g.European robin (Erithacus rubecula).
Some species, for example the red jungle fowl, Gallus gallus, from which domestic
poultry are derived) are indeterminate layers, i.e. they go on laying eggs particularly if the
 eggs are removed from the nest. One domestic hen is recorded to have laid 352 eggs in a
year. However some hens do become “broody’ and stop laying long before this occurs.
The yellow shafted flicker (Colaptes auratus) has been recorded to have laid 71 eggs and
the wryneck (Jynx torquilla) has laid 62 eggs.
Captive cockatiels (Nymphicus bollandicus) sometimes lay large numbers of eggs (up
to 80) but this is pathological because they are determinate layers. Determinate layers lay
clutches of a fixed number of eggs, usually four. Such birds are budgerigars (Melopsittacus
undulatus), the common crow (Corvus corone corone), the (common) magpie (Pica pica)
and the Barn swallow (Hirundo rustica).
 Most birds lay one clutch of eggs a year but some species such as some of the albatrosses
and penguins lay in alternate years. Some birds such as captive barn owls (Tyto alba) will
lay more than one clutch if being well fed. The interval between individual eggs laid in a
clutch varies. Usually it is one egg every 24 hours but the eggs will all hatch at the same
time. In raptors, e.g. the goshawk (Accipiter gentilis), the eggs are laid at 48 hour intervals
and the chicks are also 48 hours apart in age (i.e. the time when they hatch). In the Andean
condor (Vultur gryphus) the eggs (1-3) are laid 4-5 days apart. In the brown kiwi (Apteryx
αustralis) this interval can be in the range 11-57 days.
With the exception of the raptors, where the age and size of chicks in a clutch are
noticeably different, in most clutches of eggs the chicks all hatch at the same time, because
they are able to communicate with each other while still in the shell and so synchronise
pipping times. Pipping, or the initial breaking of the shell, is usually accomplished by the
egg tooth on the dorsal surface of the upper bill, but in the ostrich the thick shell (up to
2mm) is broken by the arching of the powerful complexus muscle which overlies the base
of the skull and cranial end of the neck.
Superficial appearance of eggs
 generally appreciated is that the texture of the shellsurface also varies. Because of this the
porosity of the shell varies and this influences the rate at which water is lost during incu-
bation. In cormorants the egg shell surface is chalky, in flamingos it is powdery, both
surfaces being relatively porous and allowing high rates of water vapour exchange in the
microclimate of relatively high humidity in which the eggs hatch. Eggs from the same
species (e.g. ostrich) laid at the same time but by different individual birds may need t0
be sorted into batches according to their egg shell appearance before being artificially
incubated. The relative humidity of the incubator will need adjusting to suit the egg shell
texture of a particular batch. Variation in egg shell texture among farmed ostrich is due
to this ^domesticated’ bird being derived from a number of original sub-species.
THE MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
 The most important variations are in the presence or absence of a phalus. Two main types
occur:
1. The intromitent (or protruding) form found in ratites, tinamous, kiwis and Anseri-
formes (ducks, geese and swans)
2. The non-intromittent type seen in the domestic fowl and turkey and in some Passeri-
formes (the Emberizinae)
20
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
In the intromittent phallus, in the resting position, the phallus lies on the floor of the
cloaca and becomes erect by lymphatic engorgement from left and right lymphatic
bodies. Semen is conveyed in an external channel, the phallic sulcus. In the emu,
cassowaries, rheas and Anseriformes, but not the ostrich, the phallus is flled with a
blind-ended long hollow tube which, when at rest, is inverted like the fnger of a glove.
d si s s jo d a a  a oe  
Since the left lymphatic body is much larger than the right, the erected phallus has a spiral
twist.
 In the non-intromittent phallus, there are two lateral folds (the lymphatic phallic bodies)
on the ventral lip of the vent. Between these lateral bodies lies a smaller medium body.
During ejaculation, which occurs very rapidly, the lymphatic bodies become momentarily
engorged with lymph causing the ventral lip of the vent to protrude. This is then rapidly
applied to the protruding oviduct of the female. Semen is channelled in the groove formed
between the two lateral lymphatic bodies.
A third type of phallus, somewhat intermediate, occurs in the vasa parrots (Coracopsis
vasa and C. nigra). In this type the everted and swollen fleshy bag-like protrusion from
 the male's cloaca is inserted into the relatively large opening of the female's stretched and
expanded cloaca. Male and female may remain locked in copulation for up to 100 minutes
(Wilkinson & Birkhead, 1995) (see Plate 15). The cloacal protrusion in the male greater
vasa parrot (C. vasa) was estimated to be 50-55 mm long by 40-45mm wide and was
freely everted or withdrawn during the breeding season, whether the male was about to
mount the female or not. In these circumstances this structure should not be mistaken by
the clinician for a pathological prolapse (see Plate 15).
Although not documented because insuffcient research has been carried out, it is pos-
sible that phalluses of the second two types may occur in other species, although tumes-
cence and detumescence may occur so rapidly as to be not practically observable. In all
cases if surgery such as partial wedged-shaped cloacoplasty (see p. 161), for the resolution
of persistent cloacal prolapse, is carried out on the ventral area of the male (or female)
cloaca this may result in the bird becoming infertile.
IMPORTANT ASPECTS OF THE EXCRETORY SYSTEM IN BIRDS
● The kidneys in birds are relatively larger than in mammals of the same body mass
In general 26% of avian body mass is kidney, whilst in most mammals this fgure is
only 0.5 %
● The smaller the bird the larger, relatively, is the kidney
● Some species of bird, e.g. marine and desert living, have well-developed salt glands and
these birds also tend to have relatively larger kidneys
There are two types of nephron, the reptilian (situated in the kidney cortex) and the
mammalian (located in the medulla). The reptilian type is smaller with a simpler glomeru-
lus. The tubules are straight and folded on themselves but there are no loops of Henle. In
the mammalian type the tubules are much more convoluted and loops of Henle are
present.
Water conservation in birds
Many marine birds but particularly albatrosses and petrels (Procellariformes), which spend
much of their life airborne at sea a long way from land, have well-developed supraorbital
salt or nasal glands. They can cope with drinking seawater (3% salt solution). Such glands
can secrete salt solution at a concentration of 5%. Even the herring gull (Larus ridibundus)
can secrete salt solution at the rate of 0.3-0.4 ml/min/g of gland, the concentration of the
Diversily in Anatomy and Physiology
21
sodium chloride solution being 800 mEq/l, whilst that of mammalian urine is only about
30 mEq/l.The supraorbital salt glands are also important in desert-living species of birds
which, apart from the lack of fresh water, may be eating a diet containing high levels of
sodium chloride.
 Not all birds inhabiting arid areas are relatively independent of water. Budgerigars
(Melopsittacus undulus), which live in the arid central area of Australia, can go for quite
long periods without water. However zebra finches (Poephila guttata), although found in
much the same area, are always near water and are very water dependent.
The significance of the loops of Henle
Their presence or absence is important because it is here that re-absorption of water and
solutes takes place via a counter-current system as in mammals. Moreover the proportion
of reptilian to mammalian (with loops of Henle) nephrons varies in different species e.g.
Gambel's quail (Lopbortyx californicus), a desert type, has 90% reptilian and the Euro-
pean starling (Sturnus vulgaris) has 70%.
Re-absorption of water from the alimentary canal
 In some birds urine is carried by reflux anti-peristaltic action up as far as the smallintestine
where water re-absorption takes place. This is best exhibited in xerophilic species. In
Gambel's quail the caecal epithelium is modifed for this purpose, with a thin epithelium
and an extensive microvillous surface.
The renal portal system
It should be noted that only the reptilian nephrons are drained by the renal portal vein.
There is a plexus of arterioles and anastomosing venules around the tubules draining the
simple glomerulus which then leads into the renal portal vein. The venules from the mam-
malian nephrons flow directly into the portal vein. Moreover blood flow through the
kidney is controlled by the renal portal valve and a complex system of shunts (King &
McLelland, 1979). The clinical implication of this is that drugs injected into the legs are
not necessarily ‘washed out’ via the renal portal system before reaching the systemic
circulation.
The clinical signifcance of the interspecific variations of the excretory system amongst
 birds is important when considering the pharmacokinetics of different drugs and also in
some husbandry situations.
2
The Special Senses of Birds
Susan E. Orosz, PhD, DVM, Dipl ABVP (Avian), Dipl ECAMS
Bird and Exotic Pet Wellness Center Toledo, Ohio, USA
INTRODUCTION
Birds are unique and wonderful creatures and their senses are an integral part of their
makeup. A greater understanding of their senses can belp the avian clinician in his or her
daily care of their patients. There are a number of features that are unique and should be
understood when working with them. Since all birds are not created equally, different
species have different solutions to acquiring information concerning the external environ
ment in which they live.
There are a number of receptors located on the body surface for perceiving and trans
lating that information for the brain to understand. Neurologically, the somatosensory
system is classified based on the location of the dendritic zone for the head, thoracic and
pelvic limbs and the body surface. Cutaneous receptors represent the peripheral or den-
dritic endings of the spinal or cranial ganglion cells. These receptors are excited by
mechanical, thermal or noxious stimuli. Stimulation of them is then transmitted to the
system. The trigeminal system innervates the head and the spinal system transmits infor-
mation concerning the body surface and extremities. In addition to the somatosensory
into the special somatic afferents and the special visceral afferents.
The somatic afferents consist of the general somatic afferents (GSA) representing cranial
nerve V and the spinal nerves to the body. The information processed by the receptors in
these locations sends information to the brain stem and the telencephalon. The special
somatic afferents (SSA) collect information concerning “wave” function from the external
environment for processing in the brain. The SSA includes the visual system and the audi-
information travels by cranial nerve II, or optic nerve, to the optic relay area, or optic
cortex. The auditory system processes waves of sound using the cochlear division of cranial
nerve VllI, or auditory nerve.
In addition to the somatic afferents, there are visceral afferents. The visceral afferents
include those that send sensory information from the viscera of the body and the special
visceral afferents that translate and send information concerning “chemical" information
from the environment. Special visceral afferents include the chemical sense of taste from
cranial nerves VIl, IX and X and smell from cranial nerve I.
22
The Special Senses of Birds
23
PROPRIOCEPTION
The brain of any animal requires information concerning the external environment and it
needs to know where the body and the head are in three-dimensional space to react and
moment in time, is sent to the brain by the spinal system, in the case of the body, and is
termed general proprioception. Conscious proprioception allows the brain to bring to a
conscious or knowing level where the body is in three-dimensional space. Unconscious
proprioception allows the brain, and more specifically the cerebellum, to know (uncon
sciously) where the body is in three-dimensional space.
 Information concerning conscious proprioception travels from the soma or body wall
through the spinal nerves into the dorsal column of the spinal cord called the fasciculus
gracilis or cuneatus, depending on where the information originates. From here, it synapses
in the caudal medulla and then proceeds as the medial meniscus to the thalamus on to the
hyperstriatum and neostriatum. In addition to carrying information about conscious pro-
prioception or kinesthesia, this tract also carries information from the body relating t0
touch and pressure. This allows the bird to know consciously the precise location where
they have been touched and the quality of that touch. The information travels somatotopi-
cally so that information from the distal half of the body is arranged medially to the more
 proximal portion, which ascends laterally in the dorsal columns of white matter in the
spinal cord.
 In addition to conscious proprioception of the body wall, there is conscious pro-
prioception of the head. Information concerning touch, pressure, and general kinesthesia
of the head travels via cranial nerve V, or trigeminal nerve, to the brainstem (pons and
medulla), where it synapses in the trigeminal nucleus. Then, like its counterpart from the
body, that information moves to the thalamus where it synapses, then proceeds to the
neostriatum and hyperstriatum where conscious understanding of these modalities
occurs.
 As the name suggests, if there is conscious proprioception, there must be unconscious
proprioception. This system of unconscious proprioception takes information concerning
kinesthesia from the body wall and head using a separate set of white matter tracts to the
cerebellum. The information from the body wall travels via the dorsal and ventral spino-
cerebellar tracts. The dorsal spinocerebellar tract takes information concerning kinesthesia
of predominantly the wing or thoracic limb and girdle, while the ventral spinocerebellar
tract takes information from the pelvic limb and girdle to the cerebellum for processing.
 Special proprioception is defned as proprioception of the head. That information travels
via the vestibular portion of cranial nerve VllI or the vestibulocochlear nerve to the cerebel-
lum to process unconsciously where the head is in three-dimensional space. Simplistically,
the cerebellum understands where the body and head are at any moment. It can, where
 the cortex makes a wilful decision to move, provide the game plan to execute the desired
movement in an orderly and smooth fashion when all tracts and receptors are working
normally or when “all systems are go".
SOMATIC AFFERENTS OF THE SOMATOSENSORY SYSTEM
The skin of birds in most locations is relatively thin compared with mammals. However,
the nerve endings are similar in character. Like mammals, they have both free nerve
endings and encapsulated nerve endings. The free nerve endings are often supplied by
unmyelinated or thinly myelinated axons that include the C-fbers and the Ao-fibers. These
nerve endings transmit thermal information or nociception. The encapsulated nerve endings
24
Essenlials ofAvian Medicine and Surgery
are mechanoreceptors. They are supplied with thickly myelinated fbers of the group II,
group I or Aα or Aβ type. These different fber types belie the fact that these fbers transmit
their electrical signals at different velocities. For example, the C-fbers have small fber
diameters of approximately 1μm with conduction velocities of less than 2m/sec. That is
 pue un on dn yeide ie siaqy paneuu are an qm pareds mos
speeds up t0 15-35 m/sec.
Herbst corpuscles are widely distributed in the deep portion of the dermis of the skin
These multilamellar sensory receptors are similar in structure and function to the
Pacinian corpuscles of mammals. The lamellar structure, when displaced, alters the cen-
trally located axonal endings, thereby transducing the mechanical changes into an electrical
stimulus.
 Herbst corpuscles are found in the feathered skin, in the beak, legs and feet. Many
birds have a collction of these corpuscles in an interosseous membrane of the leg and/or
feet that is often described as a strand or “Herbstscher Strang" (Schildmacher, 1931). This
strand is able to detect vibrations of the ground (Schwartzkopff, 1949) and may even
detect earthquakes. Most likely, they pick up the vibrations of a Dremel grinding tool
when the avian patient is groomed.
Herbst corpuscles are also found in the beak and in shorebirds, chickens, and psittacine
birds. They are congregated near the tip of the beak as a bill-tip organ. Raptors and
psittacine birds, both Orders that use the feet and bill like the human hand for food han-
dling, have a large sensory receptor area resulting in a larger representation in the brain.
This can be likened to the “homunculus" on the lateral cortex in humans. It is a topo-
graphic representation of the human body in the precentral gyrus, the primary motor
area.
The mechanoreceptors of the skin detect changes in the feathers of the skin, including
turbulence and alterations of the plumage. These changes from normal can stimulate
preening or alter flight patterns. It is presumed that feather damage from self-induced
trauma is perceived by the brain of the bird
In addition to Herbst corpuscles, there are Merkel cells and Grandry corpuscles that
function as mechanoreceptors. Unlike the epidermally located Merkel cells of mammals,
birds have dermally located Merkel cells. These cells may occur singly or in groups and
have been found in a variety of locations including the beak and tongue (Toyoshima &
Shimamura, 1991), toes (Ide & Munger, 1978) and the feathered skin (Andres & von
 During, 1990). Grandry cells are typically stacked with axons sandwiched berween them.
They are found in the dermal layer of the bill in ducks and geese and may form part or
all of the bill-tip organ.
Thermal receptors appear as free nerve endings that alter their regular spontaneous
discharge rate when the temperature of the skin warms (warm receptors) or cools (cool
receptors) from normal. Often, when there are rapid temperature changes, there is a cor-
responding excitatory overshoot.
Nociceptors respond to those stimuli that threaten to damage the skin. This may include
mechanical stimuli as well as thermal stimuli. Varying types of nociceptor have been
described with a number of them in the feathered skin and beak. They seem to have little
spontaneous activity (Necker, 2000).
A number of techniques have been used to study the response of birds to pain. In birds
studied, there appear to be two types of response to pain: a reflex escape response (or
flight or fght response) and the immobility response (conservation/withdrawal). Pain
response was evaluated over time using debeaking experiments in chickens, and it was
observed that birds have an initial pain-free period of approximately one day followed by
a longer-lasting guarding period. These studies demonstrate that birds experience chronic
pain (Gentle, 1992), something that avian clinicians experientially deal with in their
patients.
The Special Senses of Birds
25
YISUAL SYSTEM
Of all the senses of birds, vision is by far their most important sense. Birds are exquisitely
visual animals. This is evidenced by the fact that the cross-sectional diameter of their optic
nerves is larger than the diameter of their cervical spinal cord (Portman & Stingelin, 1961;
King & McLelland, 1984; Breazile & Kvenzel, 1993). It indicates that, for birds, there is
far greater information about the visual world that is transmitted to the brain than for
any other animal. The optic nerve represents the large collection of myelinated axons from
the ganglion cell layer of the retina. In comparison, humans are highly visual primates but
have only 40% of the numbers of retinal axons per optic nerve when compared to pigeons
             1
(Fox, Lehmkuhle & Westendorf, 1976). Studies in pigeons show that they are better than
humans in their ability to discriminate luminances (Hodos et al., 1985) and discern subtle
color differences (Emmerton & Delius, 1980).
The eyes of birds represent a considerable volume of the head and are very large in
relation to brain size. The basic components of the eye are similar to mammals except for
the cornea, anterior chamber, lens and the vitreous body before it reaches the retina. It is
in the retina where light energy is converted to electrical impulses by "bleaching" of the
photoreceptors. These components of the globe or optic media are very transparent and
are able to transmit light down into the near ultraviolet spectrum (at least 310 nm)
(Emmerton & Delius, 1980). This ability to see into the near ultraviolet allows them to
discern ripeness of food items, identify birds within their own species as individuals and
to determine the sex within a species that, to us, appears visually as sexually monomorphic
(Korbel & Gropp, 1999). These factors need to be taken into account clinically as humans,
for example,determine ripeness by taste not by sight.
e  r       r       
requirements (Gintirkin, 2000). Acuity is maximized by increasing the anterior focal
length of the eye, thereby allowing the optic image to be spread out over a larger retinal
surface (Fig. 2.1). The eye of the ostrich has an axial length of 50mm, which is the largest
of any land vertebrate and twice that of a human (Walls, 1942). Another technique that
achieves the same goal is represented in the eyes of raptors particularly noticeable in the
owls (Fig. 2.2). Their tubular-shaped globes result in high visual acuity. Part of this is the
Eyeofdomesticfowl
Humaneye
Fig. 2.1 Diagram of he eye of a bird and a man superimposed, he scales being adjusted
so that he polar diameters are equal. The avian retina lies near the position of focus for all
directions of incident light, but he retina of he human eye lies anterior to he focal surface,
except at the bulbar axis. (Reprinted from Birds: Their Struchure and Function, A.S. King & J.
Mclelland, p. 286. Copyright 1984, wilh permission from Elsevier.]
26
Essenlials of Avican Medicine and Surgery
(a)
(b)
(C)
Fig. 2.2 The venral half of the left eyeball of (a) a flar eye as in swans, (b) a 'globular' eye
as in eagles and (c) a 'ubular' eye as in owls. In allthree forms he eyeball consists of a rela-
 lqaa a spa lo u uoban osod, joaydsay ssal jo ao o puo (bsous yol
somewhat asymmelrical, in hat the bulbar axis begins slightly towards the nasal side of he
midline (ro he right in hese diagrams). (Reprinted from Birds: Their Struchure and Funcfion,
A.S. King & J. Mclelland, p. 285. Copyright 1984, with permission from Elsevier.)
 t0 increase visual resolution. However, this non-pooled system requires high light intensity
to function adequately. Consequently, these daylight raptors have reduced resolution at
dusk (Raymond, 1985). Clinically, this may make it difficult for the bird in a low light
hospital cage to locate its food but it may be calmer than at higher light levels.
 Information from the retina is sent to the area which is represented as the superior col-
liculus in mammals. This is a relay station for visual information. This area is so large in
birds that it is described as the optic lobe. It sits dorsally over the midbrain. This reflex
pathway is thought to relay information concerning moving objects as occurs in mammals
(Rogers & Miles, 1972). It is also involved in enhancing contrast under dim light conditions
(Hellmann et al., 1995). This area may also be involved in pecking and food selection.
The position of the eye in the skull varies with the species. Birds with narrow heads,
 in general, have their eyes laterally placed in their skuls. Birds with broader heads tend
to have their eyes directly more frontally. Binocular vision is possible with frontally placed
eyes, and reaches its highest representation in the owls. Those birds with laterally directed
eyes have bulbar axes oriented from a large angle of 145° (as in pigeons) to a smaller angle
0f 90° (as with kestrels). The angle formed by the intersection of the line that passes
through the center of each cornea and lens to the retina represents the bulbar axis. Mon-
ocular vision is when only one eye is focused on the object at a time. This is commonly
observed clinically in parrots when they want to fx their gaze on an object. They cock
their heads so that the object is parallel to the horizontal axis of the globe so that they
can clearly visualize the object. Their highest acuity is in this horizontal line as that axis
has the highest density of cone cels in most birds.
Binocular vision occurs when both eyes are fxed on an object and the two eyes act in
concert. Birds with a wide bulbar axis have reduced binocular vision, while those with
broad heads have increased binocular vision. Binocular viewing doubles visual acuity,
while monocular vision of frontally placed objects results in much reduced acuity. Birds
tend to use their lateral visual felds (superiotemporal) for detailed inspection of distant
objects. The lateral monocular feld of vision is at the area centralis of the globe.
The Special Senses of Birds
27
Checking for visual feld impairment clinically is very difficult due to the stoic nature
of avian patients. Dropping cotton bals from various locations to demonstrate
response to lateral monocular and more centrally directed binocular vision can be
heipful.
Blindness may be determined by placing objects in the path of the patient when it is
placed on a flat, unfamiliar surface and letting it maneuver. However, this provides just
a gross clinical observation as some birds can perceive light in a darkened room but bump
into objects - suggesting partial loss of visual fields or possibly “cortical" blindness. Corti-
cal blindness occurs when the informational pathway to the brain is intact but the higher
centers scramble the image so that the bird acts blind.
Visual acuity
Birds have remarkable visual acuiry stemming from several anatomical features, including
the relative size of the eye and the focusing accuracy on the retina (King & McLelland,
1984). Birds may possess one or more foveas, depressed areas of the retina, which may
magnify the image. Further gains in acuity occur because there are no blood vessels in the
avian retina.
Visual acuity is also enhanced in birds by the makeup of the ganglion cell hookup in
 the retina. Diurnal birds have a preponderance of cones over rods over the entire retina.
Cones are responsible for visual acuity and color vision. (Humans have an even greater
cone density than birds.) The retina of diurnal birds has a one-to-one hookup between
the cone cells that synapse with a single bipolar cell,which in turn synapses with a
single ganglion cell (Fig. 2.3). This one-to-one relationship results in added “pixel" infor-
mation to the optic lobe of the brain in birds. In the diurnal hawk, the fovea has about
300,000 cones/mm', compared to a human's 147,000 cones/mm² (King & McLelland,
1984).
 Rods on the other hand are sensitive to the intensity of light, with nocturnal birds
having some cones, but mostly rods.It appears that several rods synapse with a single
bipolar cell and several bipolar cells synapse with a single ganglion cell.This convergence
enbances visual sensitivity to limited levels of light.
 Birds also beneft from the presence of oil droplets in the avian cone cells that, among
other things, increase the contrast between an object and its background.
The result of all these visual factors is that birds, especially diurnal birds, can see a
panorama as a focused whole, allowing them to identify small features across the landscape
with a glance. For example, the acuity threshold of the American kestrel would enable it
t0 discriminate 2mm insects from 18 meters when light was bright. However, birds' visual
acuity drops rapidly as light is dimmed. The visual acuity of humans, in contrast, is best
around the fovea, a very small part of their visual field.
 Birds' ability to see and follow fast stimuli at a distance may present problems in the
clinic or household. Glass windows may present too much of a view to a companion
bird, if hawks or other predators may be visible. To minimize this potential and the
stress created by this problem, the cage of companion birds should be placed partially
away from the window and with a visual escape that acts as a hide behind a partial
barrier.
Ultraviolet vision
 The combination of cone pigments and oil droplets increases the spectral sensitivity of the
avian cone, expanding the range. In addition, pigeons have been shown to see (Remy &
Emmerton, 1989) and discriminate between objects in the ultraviolet range (Emmerton,
1983). Pigeons and other species may use the UV spectrum to discriminate other birds
and the ripeness of fruit reflecting UV light (Burkhardt, 1989).
28
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Pigment
epithelium
Receptor cells
Fig. 2.3 Simplified "wiring' diagram of the relina. The four rods on the left converge onho
one bipolar neuron (B). So also do the four rods on he right. The ganglion cells [G] on he
right and left receive synapses from wo or more rod bipolar cell. Thus many rods converge
on one ganglion cell. In conirast he single cone in he middle (identified by its oil droplet)
may project onto a single bipolar cell, which in lurn may project onto one ganglion cell, thus
crearing a 'private line for the cone. The horizontal celi (H) and the amacrine cell (A) cause
divergence of neural activily from side to side. (Reprinted from Birds: Their Structure and Func-
fion, A.S. King & J. Mclelland, p. 292. Copyright 1984, wih permission from Elsevier.)
Flicker frequency
Diurnal birds are able to discern a much faster flicker of light than the ultraviolet spectrum,
with pigeons able to discern between individual flashes at a rate of 140/sec, or 140Hz
(King & McLelland, 1984). Budgerigars can distinguish between 115Hz light and steady
light (Ginsburg & Nilsson, 1971) and some raptors can distinguish as high as 160 Hz,
depending on light intensity and contrast (Korbei & Szoelgyenyi, 2001). This is in contrast
to the maximal rate in man of 70/sec (King & McLelland, 1984). Fluorescent lighting
(including low energy light bulbs), in comparison, cycles as high as 100Hz in Europe or
120Hz in the United States, perceivable to many birds, including chickens (Korbel &
Szoelgyenyi, 2001). To avoid this flicker,an increased flicker frequency of fluorescent
lighting should be used in hospitals housing avian patients (see Table 9.i).Aiternatively,
incandescent lighting may be used. Birds then are also better able to detect and follow
movement
TheSpecialSensesofBirds
29
Accommodation occurs when the eye is able to focus on objects at various distances.
Birds are able to accomplish accommodation using a number of intriguing techniques that
are species-dependent and, in part, based on the visual medium and/or water. In general,
accommodation is achieved by changes in the corneal curvature and by changes in the
shape of the lens. Additionally, the asymmetry of the globe allows some birds to keep
objects on the ground in focus irrespective of their distance. This results in lower visual
feld myopia in some species like the Ciconiformes; in these species, myopia can be over-
come by adjusting the attitude or plane of the head in relation to the ground. However,
this adaptation does not occur in a raptor, which requires a fast-paced attack.
Birds have skeletal ciliary muscles that act on the cornea and lens instead of smooth
muscle, as occurs in mammals. Although these muscles are skeletal, they are still innervated
by cranial nerve IHl, the same nerve used in mammals. Unfortunately, willful control of
pupillary constriction makes assessment of cranial nerve III (afferent) and cranial nerve
VIII (efferent) impossible using the direct and consensual light response of mammals.
Dilating the pupil for retinal examination is also technically diffcult without the use of
skeletal muscle blocking agents (d-tubocurarine) (see also p. 47). Since this is technically
difficult and may have serious consequences, dilation can be achieved by placing birds in
darkenedrooms forvisual examination.
Many of the diurnal birds compress the entire lens using the posterior sclerocorneal
muscle for accommodation. This forces the ciliary body against the lens, thereby increasing
its curvature and sharpening the image when it gets closer. Another technique used by
hawks and nocturnal birds to change the corneal curvature is compression of the front of
the lens; this alters the refraction of light. The center of the cornea is most affected
(Fig. 2.4).
-Retina
- Iris
Lens
Cornea
Ciliary body
Retina
Iris
Lens
Cornea
Ciliarybody
Fig. 2.4 Diagrammalic sagittal seclions of he eyes of the hooded merganser wilth accommo-
dation relaxed (rop) and with accommodation induced (boltom). Coordinated achion of the
sclerocorneal muscles and he sphincter muscle of he iris have forced he lens against he iris
so that the cenlral part of the lens bulges hrough he pupil. (Reprinted from Birds: Their Struchure
and Function, A.S. King & J. Mclelland, p. 287. Copyright 1984, wih permission from
Elsevier.)
30
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
    s    i   s 
corneal interface requires an additional 20 diopters of refraction due to the loss of corneal
refraction. Birds that dive handle this problem in three different ways. One method is to
keep sight suited for the air/cornea interface: Terns appear to be unable to accommodate
underwater and are therefore long-sighted or hypermetropic. However, they employ a
successful strategy of detecting fsh from above and then plunge diving. Penguins, on the
other hand, are myopic or short-sighted on land, but see accurately when underwater. A
third strategy is used by many diving birds including cormorants, diving ducks (e.g. hooded
merganser) and dippers. These birds are able to see well both in the air and underwater
by having a very soft lens and well-developed sclerocorneal muscles. In these birds, the
lens literally bulges into the pupillary space, thereby increasing the curvature to enhance
visual acuity underwater (Fig. 2.4).
Oil droplets and the perception of ultraviolet light
The lens of birds does not have the yellow flter as in mammals, a fact that allows ultra-
violet (UV) radiation to pass through the avian globe. However, many birds have oil
droplets in the cone cells of the retinas. The oil droplets have been shown to act as cut
off flters to the UV light, thus providing a protective shield like the yellow lenses of
mammals (Emmerton, 1983). The oil droplets are found in the distal inner segment of the
B   si  po s pr  r n a rn  's
range is based on the presence and the concentration of carotenoids including red, orange,
greenish-yellow, pale and transparent (Varela, 1993). These oil droplets can be mixed in
 ps    sd  p s    s j n 
sitivity, with a maxima of 370-580 nm (Chen & Goldsmith, 1986).
Another unique feature of birds is that these oil droplets have a differential distribution
droplets or “red feld" with the remainder consisting of greenish-yellw droplers or
"yellow feld" (Galifred, 1968). Data suggests that this difference resulrs in altered behav-
ior depending on the part of the retina (i.e. red feld or yellow feld) that is used. It also
(    as  p s iy ma a ii se
Pigeons have been shown to be able to discriminate between objects in the ultraviolet
range (Emmerton, 1983). This is important for discriminating the plumage between birds
to allow them to distinguish sex as wellas individuals. It is also important for determining
ripeness of their food items as ripe foods reflect UV light differently than unripe fruit
{Burkhardt, 1989).
The eye blink used in the clinical neurologic exam has a sensory and a motor compo-
 sx a 'll   n ' do     n  
the ganglion cell layer of the retina become the optic nerve when they emerge from the
globe. This nerve in birds almost entirely decussates at the optic chiasm before traveling
t0 several locations. Many of the fibers travel to areas that are involved with interpretation
of the optic stimulus. Other fbers travel to an area that is called the superior colliculus
in mammals. In birds, this area is often so large that it has been termed the optic lobe.
This large collection of nerve fbers and cells lies dorsal to the midbrain just rostral to the
cerebellum. This system associated with the optic lobe represents the centrifugal pathway
and contains two cell groups: the isthmo-optic nucleus (ION) and the ectopic isthmo-optic
neurons (EION). In seed and fruit eaters, the ION appears large, well differentiated and
laminated and is arranged somatotopically. In raptors, these cell bodies are small suggest-
ing that this system is associated with pecking and visual food selection of static stimuli
However, other studies demonstrated profound deficits in the detection of suddenly occur-
 se di s i ss 'd po-r e u r e s  
 mammals, this centrifugal system plays an important role in detecting moving objects and
The Special Senses of Birds
31
The tectofugal pathway transmits axons from the retina to the optic tectum. The optic
tectum projects to the thalamus which then sends fibers to the ectostriatum, homologous
t0 optic cortex of mammals. From here, fbers project to forebrain nuclei for interpreta-
tion. Birds have excellent visual memory as some use this for caching food while others
use this ability for homing. Clarke's nutcrackers have been found to cache up to 6,600
food items and are able to remember where they are stored. Pigeons are capable of concept
discrimination with great flexibility regardless of whether the target concept is biologically
significant or not. This information demonstrates the amazing ability of birds, particularly
of their optic system. For a long time humans were considered superior due to their cere-
bral cortex with its gyri and sulci compared with the smooth lissencephalic brain of birds.
These recent data suggest that birds have the ability to interpret and store complex visual
informationforperiodsoftime.
AUDITORY SYSTEM
The auditory system of birds is the most highly evolved among non-mammals. Birds are
endowed with sensitive hearing and are masters of vocal communication. The mammalian ear
is considered to be more specialized than birds but that does not mean it is inferior in acoustic
performance. The upper limit appears to be around 20 kHz but birds tend to hear best between
3-10kHz. There are a few birds that are able to hear infrasound, as can elephants.
The process of hearing depends on the anatomy and physiology of the ear and its pro-
cessing in the central nervous system. In general, the airborne sound waves enter the
s    a no   s e p
asso as s jo suu Aq qdopa jo t am e dn is aq s jo
the columella. This wave of fluid that is produced at the vestibular window causes move-
ment of the membrane suspended within the labyrinth (Fig. 2.5). The suspended basilar
membrane has on its surface sensory papillae or hair cells that are neuroepithelial receptors
(Fig. 2.6). Excitation of the hair cell results in stimulation of the cochlear nerve, part of
cranial nerve VIll, the vestibulocochlear nerve. Cranial nerve VIII transmits this wave
information from air to components of the brain for auditory interpretation with vocal
communication and appropriate behavioral responses.
External acoustic meatus
The external acoustic meatus opens on the side of the head caudal and distal to the eye.
Irs relatively small opening is often circular and covered by specialized covert feathers that
appear “different" to the others of the head. This is because these feathers often do not
have barbules. The lack of barbules reduces turbulence by reducing drag when the bird is
flying. Turbulence could cause sound distortion thereby reducing sound perception. Clini-
cally, the meatus should be inspected visually, particularly with concern for infection and
for accumulation of blood post head injury.
In addition to the reduction in turbulence, these coverts are often shaped to form a
funnel to direct sound into the acoustic canal. Additionally, owls have an operculum which
is a moveable flap of skin covered with feathers. This produces a cupping effect to help
direct the sound into the external ear canal. Some species, including barn owls, have a
facial ruff that helps direct sound into the meatus (Fig. 2.7). This ruff consists of small,
stiff curved feathers that channel the sound peripherally to a localized area around the
head. Owls and other birds have their ear canals located asymmetrically to each other to
enhance acoustic location. There may also be asymmetry of both the middle and inner ear
cavities within the skull as well. Diving ducks have feathers that are tightly applied to the
external acoustic meatus to keep water out while diving. Some divers are able to close
their external acoustic meatus completely when diving.
Tympanic membrane
Vestibule
Extracolumellarcartilage
Columella
Cochlear window
Columellar muscle
Vestibular window
Scala tympani
Fig. 2.5 Diagrammalic transverse seclion hrough he right middle ear of the domeslic fowl.
In ihe diagram, dorsal is upwards and lateral is to he right. Ossicular conduchion from he
ympanic membrane to the vestibular window is achieved by the columellar complex, consistling
of he exracolumellar carlilage laterally and he bony columella medially. The columellar muscle
altaches to he ympanic membrane raiher han lo he columella, but is innervated by he facial
nerve. The veslibular and cochlear windows have bolh been parly transacted by he plane of
the sechion. (Reprinted from Birds: Their Sructure and Function, A.S. King & J. Mclelland, p.
304. Copyrighf 1984, with permission from Elsevier.)
Tegmentum
Columella
vasculosum.
Fossa of
Vestubilar window
scala vestibuli
Cisterna of
scala vestibuli
Lagena
Sacculocochlear
duct
Apical
Cochlear
interscalar
Scala tympani
window
Basal
canal
 interscalar canal
Cartilage
Basilar membrane-
Bony wall of cochlea
Fig. 2.6 The cochlea of a songbird. The cochlear duct is bounded on one side by he basilar
membrane, which carries he sensory acouslic epihelium of he papilla basilaris, and on he
olher side by he hick-folded tegmenum vasculosum. The scala veslibuli is vestigial, but rem-
nanis of it persist apically as he fossa of the scala vestibuli and basally as he cistern of the
scala vestibuli. The scala lympani and the remnanls of he scala vestibuli connect with each
Their Structure and Function, A.S. King & J. Mclelland, p. 306. Copyright 1984, with permis-
sion from Elsevier.}
TheSpecial SensesofBirds
33
Facial disc.
Facial ruff
Operculum
Facial disc
Facialruff
Fig. 2.7 Facial disc, facial ruff and operculum of he barn owl. In he drawing on he leff he
facial disc is intact. In he drawing on the right the facial disc has been removed to show he
facial ruff and he operculum on each side. The leff and right opercula are asymmelrical. The
external acoustic meaus lies belween the operculum and the facial ruff. Reprinted from Birds:
Their Strucure and Function, A.S. King & J. Mclelland, p. 302. Copyright i984, with permis-
sion from Elsevier.)
The middle ear
The function of the middle ear is to transduce sound waves to fluid waves. The cavity of
the middle ear is air-filled. It sits berween the tympanic membrane and the inner ear and
is partially surrounded by bone. The tympanic membrane, forming its outer boundary, is
connected by a single bone, the columella to the vestibular window (Fig. 2.5). The colu-
mella is homologous to the mammalian stapes. The incus and malleus of mammals are
comparable to the quadrate and articular bones (see p. **), respectively, of birds. However
these bones are not involved in the transformation of sound.
Like mammals, birds have a muscle that can alter the tension of the tympanic mem-
brane, the columellar muscle. Although this muscle is homologous to the stapedius muscle
of mammals, it functions like the mammalian tensor tympani muscle. The columellar
muscle is innervated by the facial nerve, CN Vll, the cranial nerve to the second pharyngeal
arch. The tensor mainly acts to attenuate sound at the upper and lower ends of its range.
This may allow the bird to select a frequency range for hearing in the most sensitive portion
of their range (i.e. for song, a range for vocal communication in songbirds).
The sound wave vibrates the tympanic membrane which results in movement of its
attached extracolumellar cartilage. This cartilage is attached to the columellar bone that
ends at the vestibular window. Vibrations of the tympanic membrane cause movement of
the vestibular window which in turn sets up fluid waves within the perilymph. Compres-
sion by the columella into the perilymphatic space causes an outward movement at the
oval window, which is found near the vestibular window. The middle ear has to transform
large amplitude sound waves to smaller amplitudes with greater force at the cochlear or
vestibular window. The physics of this action helps defne the range that the bird is able
t0 hear. Most birds hear best above 2kHz and below 10kHz. It appears that the decrease
in amplitude results from the energy lost in the flexing motion of the extracolumellar
cartilage.
The inner ear
The inner ear of birds is basically similar to that of mammals. It consists of a bony laby-
rinth that encloses a membranous labyrinth. The bony labyrinth includes the vestibule
semicircular canals and the cochlea. The space between the bony and the membranous
labyrinths is filled with perilymph while the fluid contained within the membranous
34
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
labyrinth is endolymph. Part of the membranous labyrinth includes components of the
vestibular system which provides sensory information as to the location of the head in
three-dimensional space. These components consist of the utricle, saccule and the semicir-
cular canals. The cochlear duct transforms the fluid wave to electrical signals concerned
with hearing only - it is not involved with the position and the movement of the head.
The avian cochlea differs from that of mammals in that it is not spiral but short and
only slightly curved. However, the cochlea of owls is longer than that of other birds.
Within the cochlea is the cochlear duct. It is separated from the vestigial scala vestibuli
by the thickly folded vascular tegmentum vasculosum and separated from the scala
tympani by the basilar membrane, containing the neuroepithelial cells or hair cells. Each
hair cell contains a single kinocilium with up to 100 stereocilia and their tips are embed-
ded in the tectorial membrane. This membrane is more massive than that of marmmals.
When shearing stresses are produced by the movement of the tectorial membrane in rela-
tion to the hair cells, these negatively charged receptor cells are then electrically stimulated.
The hair cells are morphologically distinct and hence have different functions as they relate
to hearing.
It is interesting that birds have comparable acoustic acuity to mammals but have a
 sn dn a ii ae si pq a ' u pan Ais si ie ip ra
ference in a number of ways. Even though the duct is shorter, the basilar membrane is
considerably wider, allowing more hair cells per unit length. The hair cells form a continu-
ous ridge along the basilar membrane in birds and contains up to ten times the number
of hair cells in cross section. Therefore, the total number of hair cells may be similar
between birds and mammals.
Auditory performance
The auditory performance of birds differs from marmmals in several aspects. The discrimi-
nation of pitch is about the same between birds such as songbirds and parrots, and
humans. It appears that humans can hear tones slightly higher or lower than birds, but
birds have much greater temporal resolution (up to ten times greater) than humans. That
means that in songbirds in particular, their song would need to be slowed down by a
factor of ten for the human ear to hear all of the details in the song burst.
Directional analysis by the auditory system of the sound's origin depends on the species
of bird. Localization of sound appears to be similar in diurnal birds compared with
humans. When the song is repeated or contains a full range of transients, it helps improve
localization. The barn owl has the ability to localize sound better than any other terrestrial
animal and is the source for study in sound localization. Locating the sound source uses
binaural hearing, defned as information derived from the convergence of neurons from
both ears to the auditory brainstem. The main binaural cue is the interaural time difference
(ITD) detected between the two ears by the brainstem. These differences are used to create
a topographic map of ITD for spatial position in the horizontal plane using the relative
timing of the sound source from the two ears.
Owls have the ability to discriminate changes in the location of sound sources that are
as small as 3° apart and can aim their heads within 2° of the source. They have a spatial
map in their midbrains that is much larger than their behavioral perception. For example,
a typical neuron has a spatial receptive feld that spans 40° - many times wider than the
behavioral threshold (Bala et al., 2003)
Sound production and vocal learning
Hearing represents the sensory component of the motor response, vocalization. Studies of
vocalization and vocal learning are providing further information about the avian brain
and its processing. For example, the mammalian basal ganglia and its connections with
the thalamus and cortex are important for motor control and cognitive function. It appears
The Special Senses of Birds
35
that the avian brain has a closed loop for vocal learning that is similar to that of mammals
(Luo et al., 2001). This suggests that birds have an ability comparable to that of mammals
to learn and should not be relegated to second class citizen status in the animal worid.
This has important implications from a lab animal perspective and a humane one as well.
Studies in Amazon parrots of contact calls demonstrate that there are vocal dialects.
Studies show that related species in a geographic area have similar dialects. This suggests
that it is not genetics and culrure but regional diversity that promotes social learning.
AvIaN InTELLIGENCE
Social learning is thought to increase brain size regardless of species. When the brain of
corvids is compared with that of chimpanzees, its size is similar when body size is taken
into account. The forebrain of corvids and parrots is larger than that of other species of
i  so e r  i s a s i x sse  p
prefrontal cortex and this suggests that this results in an increase in intelligence. Parrots,
corvids and other birds are capable of tool use and manufacture. Tool use can be defned
as the use of an external object that acts as an extension of the mouth, beak, hand or claw
for the attainment of an immediate goal (Emery & Clayton, 2004). Birds are capable of
complex cognition in the use of tools as they can take novel materials to solve their prob-
lems for retrieving food.
Birds are able to understand time and space. This is often shown in their ability to
cache foods that are stored either seasonally or for shorter periods (see p. 316). The sea-
sonal foods are acknowledged to withstand caching for long periods while the composition
of the perishable items are understood and retrieved at appropriate times for that particular
item. This requires different cognitive abilities for caching, understanding the item and
environmental temperatures over time and retrieval. Birds are also able to understand
cache protection and pilfering. These studies suggest that certain species use causal reason-
ing and have flexibility in their strategies for learning to be successful as a species and as
an individual.
 Studies have shown that birds such as the Clarke's nutcracker have visual memory for
over 6,600 caches of stores containing 33,000 seeds (Van der Wall & Balda, 1977). The
lowly pigeon has not been considered the smartest bird but they have been found to
understand visual concepts of “animals" (Roberts & Mazmanian, 1988) as well as “same"
versus “different" (Wright et al., 1988). They are also able to rank optic patterns by using
transitive inference logic (Gitirkin, 2000; von Fersen et al., 1992). Clinical observations
by the author show that parrots know the difference between individual dogs, as they love
t0 call them by name, and they know humans as individuals as well.
Memory of visual images and working memory are also observed in birds. It was sup-
relevant information - was the consequence of a prefrontal cortex and a neocortex con-
taining grey matter. However, birds are able to handle working memory without a lami-
demonstrates that even though they do not possess the same anatomic components as
mammals, they evolved neuronal mechanisms to master equivalent cognitive demands
(Diekamp et al., 2002).
GUSTATION OR TASTE
Birds have relatively few taste buds when compared to other vertebrates, yet taste is
important in determining food acceptance and avoidance for birds (Koutsos et al., 2001).
Taste buds are distributed throughout the oropharynx, often in close association with
36
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
salivary gland openings (Berkhoudt, 1985). Parrots have been reported to have 350 taste
receptors, compared with 9,000-10,000 in humans (Berkhoudt, 1985). In parrots, taste
buds are located on the roof of the oropharynx on either side of the choanal opening, and
 On the floor of the oropharynx at the rostral end of the laryngeal mound (see p. 11). Birds
are presumed to have low acuity to taste, but pigeons may have relatively high acuity
(King & McLelland, 1984).
The avian taste bud does not open directly onto the epithelial surface. This suggests
that saliva would be important to the transference of the chemical sense to a mechanical
nerve ending associated with the taste bud. While birds do not have large organized sali-
vary glands, they have small glands sprinkled throughout their oropharynx. These glands
produce the necessary saliva for the mechanical deliverance of the chemicals from food to
the taste bud. Interestingly in chicks with a vitamin A deficiency, they did not exhibit
customary avoidance of foods they would normally reject.
Information from the taste buds is transmitted to the brain via cranial nerves Vll and
IX, with about 20-30 axons entering a typical taste bud (King & McLelland, 1984).
Although most of the chemical sense of birds is toward avoidance of a noxious compound,
their taste preferences are not well documented. Studies suggest that some species may
have keener abilities of nutrient detection, whereas others have sharper toxin avoidance
capacities (Koutsos et al., 2001). While we humans may enjoy something and project that
a bird may like it, our taste preferences may serve the bird poorly.
Many species including parrots, budgerigars and nectar feeders have a preference for
sweetness using natural sugars mixed with drinking water (Kare & Rogers, 1976; Strom-
berg & Johnsen, 1990). Yet, cockatiels favor ordinary water over sugar water. Finches in
the family of Carduelidae have a great preference for salt (Mason & Espaillat, 1990). Birds
their body fluids (Bartholomew & MacMillan, 1960). Birds may be tolerant of sour but
this tolerance is species dependent. Cockatiels are more sensitive in detecting organic acids
than inorganic acids (Matson et al., 2001). In general, birds tend to avoid inorganic acids.
Finally, studies suggest that cockatiels are more sensitive to those “ecologically relevant'
compounds (i.e. toxic secondary compounds in the case of a granivore, sugars for nectari-
vores, etc.) and less sensitive to those compounds that are unlikely to be encountered
(Koutsos et al., 2001). These data suggest that food preferences are individualized to
species.Clinicians may benefit from learning preferred foods for a species and for indi-
vidual patients; this can be especially valuable when a bird is cachexic and is being rein-
troduced to food. Their avoidance of inorganic acids most likely reflects the bird avoiding
medications and drugs which are predominantly inorganic acids.
CHEMICALLY INDUCED PAIN - CHEMESTHESIS
The chemical senses of birds include their ability to taste and their ability to smell. Chemes
thesis is the perception of chemically induced pain. Sensitivity to chemical irritants is adap
tive so that they avoid actual physical damage by avoiding noxious stimuli. The sensory
input for this chemical avoidance sense in birds appears to be components of the trigeminal
nerve (CN V). It seems that birds rarely avoid mammalian irritants even though the trigemi-
nal nerve is responsive to the chemical stimuli (Mason et al., 1989; Mason & Otis, 1990).
Many aromatic chemicals are aversive to birds on a purely chemical basis. This aversive
quality is unlearned, it appears on the initial contact, and there is no evidence that aver-
sion is altered by gastrointestinal (Gl) feedback. Further, birds do not seem to associate
aversion of the stimulus with other chemosensory cues, suggesting that conditioned flavor
avoidance learning does not occur (Clark, 1995). It has also been determined that birds
do not habituate to the stimulus so that the avoidance persists without reinforcement
The Special Senses of Birds
37
(Clark & Shah, 1994). As a result, oral medications may continue to be refused despite
frequentattemptsto habituateabirdtotheir taste.
Behavioral studies confrm that birds can distinguish certain tastes, but in general the
acuity of taste is less than that of mammals. However, pigeons have relatively high acuity
(King & McLelland, 1984).
OLFACTION
While birds rely on their sense of sight for survival, it is not the only sense used in food
identifcation or for navigation. While the optic lobe was enlarged during evolution at the
expense of the olfactory lobe, olfactory stimuli do play a significant role in physiology and
behavior. The full role is still being explored.
The olfactory region of the nasal cavity is located within the dome of the caudal nasal
concha. The nasal surface of the concha is lined by an olfactory epithelium, where odors
diffuse across the mucous membrane to receptor cells. The axonal processes of the receptor
cells form the olfactory nerve (CN I) and end in the olfactory bulb of the brain. The size
of the olfactory bulb relative to the brain varies greatly: the smallest occurs in parrots,
passerines and woodpeckers and the largest in Anseriformes such as loons and in oceanic
birds such as petrels and storm petrels. The relative size of the bulb in comparison with
the rest of the brain is an indicator of olfactory performance: a lower detection olfactory
threshold is possible for those orders of birds with larger olfactory bulbs (Clark & Shah,
1993). In other words, a larger bulb suggests a greater abiliry to detect odor stimuli. A
Leach's storm petrel (with one of the largest olfactory bulbs in comparison with the size
of its brain) is estimated to be able to detect and home in on an odor target 1-12km away
(Clark & Shah, 1992). Black-footed albatrosses (Diomedea nigripes) were reported to be
attracted to bacon drippings from as far away as 20 miles (Miller, 1942). Petrels, alba-
trosses, and shearwaters recognize krill-related odors and odors related to phytoplankton,
and may use their olfactory capabilities to build olfactory maps of their ocean range,
reflecting areas where those prey items reliably occur, including seamounts and upwelling
zones (Nevitt, 2000). Oceanic procellariforms such as the Leach's storm petrel have been
found to navigate, at least partly, by olfaction (King & McLelland, 1984).
Variations of the concha occur, depending on the species. The usual arrangement is
domelike, but the surface area is greatly increased by scroll-formation in a few species,
such as vultures, or by transverse folds, as in kiwis. A small septal concha is also present
nasal conchae; instead, the olfactory epithelium covers the roof and lateral walls of the
nasal cavity, as well as the dorsal part of the nasal septum. The degree of scrolling of the
caudal nasal conchae in birds is correlated with the relative size of the olfactory bulb (Bang
& Wenzel, 1986), and hence with a greater ability to identify odors.
As a result of these anatomical features, olfaction is possible for some birds, and of
greater or lesser importance in others. Studies suggest that most birds tested have compa-
rable olfactory capabilities to mammals (Davis, 1973). Passerines, which have the least
developed olfactory system, demonstrate behavioral responsiveness to odors.
Role of olfaction in foraging
Studies suggest that olfaction plays a fundamental role in foraging behavior (Bang, 1965 &
1966). For example, turkey vultures are attracted to ethyl mercaptan fumes associated with
carrion (Stager, 1964 & 1967) and are able to locate decomposed remains without visual
cues (Houston, 1987). As described earlier, Procellariiformes use odor cues to locate food
sources, while ravens, hummingbirds and kiwis have all been shown to be capable of using
olfactory cues to identify and discriminate between foods (Mason & Clark, 2000)
38
Essenlials ofAvianMedicine andSurgery
Role of olfaction in navigation
Studies with homing pigeons have confrmed that pigeons derive directional information
from atmospheric odors. In particular, they rely on local odors for homeward orientation,
up at the release site. Some telencephalic areas of the brain have been identified as having
roles in processing olfactory information for orientation (Papi, 1991).
Reproductive behavior
Olfaction also plays a role in the reproductive behavior of a variety of species. In breeding
studies with mallards, males whose olfactory nerves were sectioned had a signifcant
decrease in their social displays and sexual responses for intact hens. Parental care with
ring doves was decreased or lost when the young squabs were re-scented with unfamiliar
lings have been shown to recognize nesting materials by olfactory cues as they tend to
select materials used to fumigate their nests for ectoparasites and pathogens.
Other uses of the olfactory sense
Studies of chickens suggest that the sense of smell may also play a role in the formation
of attachments to familiar objects or environments. Alarm and predator-related odors may
elicit fear responses, and odors may also control aspects of feeding and drinking (Jones
& Roper, 1997).
MIGRATORY SENSES
In the spring, many species of bird migrate hundreds or even thousands of miles, driven
by instinct to fnd sources of food, to breed and to raise their young. In the fall, they
reverse direction, completing the circuit to avoid the increasing scarcity of food and open
water. But what drives birds to leave, how do they know where to go, and how do they
know where they are in relation to the goal?
Long-distance migratory birds have an internal circadian rhythm that controls the onset
of migration and the behavior prior to migration. Environmental factors such as the
amount of daylight stimulate hormonal changes that change both the behavior and physi-
ology of the bird in preparation for migration. Temperature also plays a role: several
long-distance migratory birds have advanced their spring migration to Scandinavia in
response to earlier springs in Europe (Jonzen et al., 2006). Barometric pressure also influ-
ences the onset of migration.
Navigational senses
An endogenous time and direction program may be used to help determine where a bird is
to migrate (Wallraff, 1991). This program is instinctive and species specifc and pro-
vides the species with a general road map. With this sense of destination in mind, birds
use a variety of senses to guide them on their journey, which allow them to take advantage
of celestial cues from star patterns, the geomagnetic feld, the location of the sun, polariza
tion patterns of the sun at sunrise and sunset, olfaction, geographic features, very
low-frequency sound waves and other cues. Navigational cues are likely used in combina
tion to help determine the bird's location, rather than any single cue. Some cues may be
used more by some birds and less or not at all by others, but it appears that a range of cues
migration.
Many birds orient to star patterns to identify the rotational point of the starlit sky
(north) and employ this star compass (Mouritsen & Larsen, 2001). While this confirma
The Special Senses of Birds
39
tion of night-time north is visual, it provides an important tool and check of flight for
night-time migratory flyers.
Many birds show evidence of two magnetodetection senses, one based on magnetite
near the beak and one based on light-dependent radical-pair processes in the bird's eye(s).
o As an dn  sq o jo sa a  sndr
in the eye (Mouritsen & Ritz, 2005). There is a complex relationship between the wave-
length of light and magnetoreception, which suggests the presence of more than one
receptor (Wiltschko & Wiltschko, 2002). Extracellular recordings from the nucleus of the
basal optic root and the tectum opticum revealed units that responded to changes in
magnetic north, each peaking in distinctive spatial directions. Collective processing and
integration could possibly be used by the bird to indicate compass directions. The magnetic
vector may provide a compass, whereas magnetic intensity or characteristics may provide
a map or even elicit specific responses.
Current evidence suggests that the radical pair mechanism provides directional informa-
tion and the beak's magnetie-based mechanism provides information about the bird's
position relative to its internal “map" (Wiltschko & Wiltschko, 2005). It appears that
( "n aa ) (sq A r ss ose issod p) ass ie r pd
allows birds to calibrate the magnetic compass to their geographic location, including
when they cross the magnetic equator ( Wiltschko & Wiltschko, 2005). Cue conflict experi-
 ments have delved into what happens when conflicting information about “north" is pro-
vided. In one experiment, Catharus thrushes were exposed to eastward-turned magnetic
felds during the twilight period before takeoff and then followed. Instead of fying north,
experimental birds flew westward. Yet, on subsequent nights, the same individuals migrated
cues (Cochran et al., 2004). A similar recalibration to the magnetic compass using polar-
ized light at sunrise and sunset was demonstrated for Savannah sparrows (Muheim et al.,
2006).
Many questions remain about birds' geomagnetic sense and the means by which this
information is processed. One piece of the puzzle may be found in the hippocampal for-
mation of birds, which mediates spatial orientation behaviors. This is consistent with a
map-like representation, and this formation appears to underpin long-distance navigation
across unfamiliar terrain (Jacobs, 2003).
Olfaction may play a role for some birds when migrating. Ocean procellariforms such
as storm petrels navigate in part by olfaction, and olfactory navigation close to the fnal
destination may play a role for some birds in identifying specifc burrows, nests or
rookeries.
Hearing may be used by some avian species such as pigeons to identify very low-fre-
quency sounds generated by waves lapping upon the shore. By identifying the presence of
coastline, hearing may cue birds to their position relative to aural landmarks.
Some navigational cues are instinctive and inherent, yet others must be developed or
learned. This appears to be the case for the detection of and correction for wind drift.
Adult raptors were found in one study to exhibit significantly less wind drift (29% that
of juveniles), suggesting that the adults had learned a more sophisticated orientation
system, permitting detection of and compensation for wind drift (Thorup et al., 2003).
3
Clinical Examination
CLINICAL HISTORY
Before starting to examine the bird in detail it is important to obtain from the owner as
much information as possible. Particular attention should be paid to the following
questions:
● What has the owner noticed wrong with the bird? Falconers will often notice a change
in a hawk's performance which may be an early sign of disease.
· Are there any other birds kept by the owner and have any of them been ill or died?
● Has the owner bought in any other birds recently?
· How long has the patient been in the owner's possession?
· Has the bird been ill before and has it had any treatment?
● Have there been any changes in the environment which may have put it under stress?
Some individuals within a species are more highly strung and therefore more easily dis-
tressed than others.
● Has the owner changed the food or bought in a new supply?
● In the case of raptors, was the food fresh? If the food was stored in a deep freeze was
it properly defrosted? Falconers feed their hawks with meat from a canvas bag. This
should have a separate, easily cleaned plastic lining. Some falconers become careless and
the meat becomes contaminated from a dirty bag. Ask if the droppings (calld mutes
by falconers) have changed in character.
Other relevant questions will occur to the experienced clinician and the answers should
be sought from the client. However, owners vary greatly in their powers of observation
    o      
accurate observations can be made.
EXAMINATION OF THE CAGE OR SURROUNDINGS
The character of the droppings
Always try to examine some fresh droppings. When the client makes the initial inquiry on
s a n  aq o so a  n no  nn adan a
The cloacal excreta usually consist of a dark-coloured central part (from the rectum)
and an off-white surrounding portion consisting mainly of urate crystals and also a vari-
able amount of clear fluid from the kidneys. This clear fluid can be collected and tested
40
Clinical Examinalion
41
should be confrmed by blood glucose estimation. For other causes of polydipsia/polyuria
see Appendix 7.
The consistency and to some extent the colour of the droppings vary with the species
and the diet of the bird. Fruit eaters, such as mynahs and starlings, have rather fluid drop-
pings. Even parrots, which normally feed on a seed diet resulting in a more compact faecal
mass, will develop more fuid droppings if fed with more fruit. Parrots on a proprietary
 pelleted diet produce brownish pellet-like faeces. On the other hand, geese have a more
bulky and rather more formed stool. It is therefore important that the practitioner is
familiar with what is normal for each species and the particular diet.
As to be expected in birds with enteritis, the dark, central part of the droppings becomes
more fluid; the reverse is true in constipation. An absence of the faecal fraction may be
the result in the egg-bound female, which is usually dull and anorexic. In gross worm
infestation (usually ascarids) resulting in impaction (see Plate 1) the bird is thin but often
quite bright and eating well whereas, in contrast, in the anorexic bird or one with reduced
appetite due to disease other than an enteropathy, the central (faecal) part of the droppings
tends to be of a more fluid greenish nature.
Birds with pancreatic disease show excessive droppings that are buff grey in colour and
waxy in texture (e.g. paramyxo virus in Neophema parakeets, see Plate 2). Test these for
starch with Lugol's iodine. Excessive or decreased urate crystals indicate a renal problem
Suspicious coloured urates which are orange or yellow in colour indicate a biliverdinuria
due to hepatopathy (be suspicious of Chlamydophila infection, see Appendix 3) (see
p.277).
Undigested seed or grit in the droppings is always abnormal and indicates a malfunction
of the gizzard. Blood in the droppings may come from the rectum, the cloaca, the oviduct
or the ureters. The clinician should try to decide if this blood is with the faecal or urate
 fraction of the droppings. This may indicate ulceration, possibly involving a neoplasm.
Sharp foreign bodies, such as pieces of metal, can be ingested and can reach the rectum
in some birds such as ducks.
Blood in the cage
Blood spattered round the cage may have come from the cloacal orifice or it may be from
an injury to the wings, feet, beak or body. If the blood is widely spread, it is probably
from wing trauma, possibly a damaged growing feather.
Regurgitation and vomiting
With small birds, examine the cage bars, perches, mirrors and other cage furniture for any
evidence of adherent small flecks of white material. This may be evidence of regurgitation.
Regurgitation is normal courrship behaviour in the male budgerigar. The young are also
fed in this manner. However, this normal behaviour can develop into a pathological
 neurosis and the bird will sometimes even attempt to feed its owner.
Vomiting undigested seed in parrots may be a sign of proventricular dilatation
disease (PDD) (see p. 307).This is often accompanied by undigested seed in the
droppings.
Raptors daily produce pellets or castings formed in the gizzard composed of the undi-
gested parts of the diet (skeletal tissues, feathers, fur, etc.). The colour of the castings will
depend on the diet but they should be of a crumbly, almost dry texture and have no
offensive smell. Liquid or putty-like castings or those with blood or excessive mucus are
abnormal. Many other species of bird such as thrushes (Turdidae), crows (Corvidae) and
herons (Ardeidae) sometimes produce pellets. Although doubted by some authorities, from
the author's clinical observations true vomiing occurs in many species of birds and is
always a sign of disease.
42
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Other observations to be made on the cage
 In the case of seed-eating birds, note whether the seed is being dehusked or simply being
scooped out of the feeding dish and on to the floor. In the case of psittacines, note whether
the perches or any of the toys (splintered hard plastic can cause trauma) are being chewed.
The clinician should also observe if there is any sign of rust on the cage structure or if the
cage has been galvanised with zinc. With a magnifying lens it may be possible to see signs
 Of parasitic mites on the cage fttings. These appear as minute black, red, orange or greyish-
white specks, which are seen to move. Some mites hide in cracks and crevices and emerge
to feed on the bird at night, so they are best seen with a torch in a dark room or when
the electric light is switched on suddenly.
ObSErVATION OF ThE PATIENT
If an experienced aviculturist or falconer brings you a bird and says that it is ill, even if
you cannot see anything abnormal, the chances are that the bird has something wrong
with it. The changes that take place in a bird from one that is completely healthy to one
in the early stages of illness are so subtle that it takes an experienced observer to notice
them. The problem with most sick birds is that usually by the time someone realises that
they are ill, they are very ill. The bird should have a full-rounded, bright eye, with no sign
of the membrana nictitans. An eye which is slightly oval means that the bird is not fully
alert. Any bird that spends all its time huddled in the bottom of the cage, taking no notice
Of an observer, is near death. The plumage of the bird should be sleek and lie flat over
the body. If all the body feathers are ruffled, the bird is trying to conserve heat.
Breathing
A bird that is obviously dyspnoeic, with is mouth open and gasping, may not necessarily
have a respiratory condition, but is certainly very ill. Mouth breathing in birds is seen in
 parrots with blocked nares. These birds may also sneeze. However, geese in fight normally
mouth breathe. Tail bobbing in small birds is also a sign of an impaired respiratory system.
 In both these types of abnormal breathing, a space-occupying lesion of the abdomen may
prevent the full expansion and contraction of the posterior air sacs, so that air flow through
the lungs is considerably reduced.
Cyanosis is sometimes indicated by a blue coloration of the beak and legs. If the part
of the neck in the region of the crop slightly inflates with each expiration but breathing
is otherwise normal, this may indicate some obstruction of the outlet ostia of the anterior
air sacs where these connect with the secondary bronchi. On post-mortem examination a
bird may show gross abscessation of the coelom and yet in life not show any respiratory
signs, which indicates the importance of radiography in the initial general examination.
A change in the voice, which becomes harsher, or a change in pitch in the sound from
a raptor or parrot could indicate a problem with the syrinx. Hypovitaminosis A with or
without secondary bacterial infection and abscessation involving the tissue of the syrinx
could be responsible for these signs. A partial blockage of the main airway, particularly
the syrinx, with a plug of inspissated pus is often an acute and desperate condition,
particularly in the African grey parrot. Immediate relief by cannulation of the abdominal
air sac is imperative (see p. 140).
Falconers talk of “kecks’ and ‘snits’ (sneezing) in their birds. An incessant and often
irritating high-pitched squeak in the budgerigar is sometimes due to pressure of the
enlarged thyroid on the syrinx. This is initiated by an iodine deficiency and a consequent
hypothyroidism. Hypothyroidism may also be brought about by suppression of the thyroid
asthmatic noises, which may be almost imperceptible unless carefully listened for, can be
Clinical Examination
43
caused by viral, bacterial, fungal or yeast infection of the respiratory tract or by the nema-
tode, Syngamus trachea, which affects many species of bird. In the latter case, obstruction
of the airflow in the rachea is enough to cause gaping typical of the disease.
A change of voice in a bird always indicates a pathological condition of the syrinx and
therefore prognosis is much more serious. This contrasts with the situation in the mammal
where a change in voice indicates an upper respiratory condition and the outlook is more
favourable.
Central nervous system signs
Birds may show any of the following signs: torticollis, opisthotonos, ataxia, circling.
paralysis and clonic spasms or fts (see Plate 3). All these may be caused by deficiency of
 B or E vitamins, infectious disease, poisoning, concussion, cerebral vascular disturbances
and tumours (see p. 349). A falconer may decide to change the diet, e.g. from dead hatchery
chicks to quail. The bird may refuse to eat, which in a thin bird (kept near its so-called
"flying weight') may lead to the acute onset of hypoglycaemia. Such birds may appear
"drunk' or may appear asleep or even dead. Tube feeding these birds with glucose or
administration i.v. often leads to a dramatic recovery.
Hypocalcaemia is a wellrecognised condition in African grey parrots (Rosskopf &
Woerpel, 1984). This sometimes starts with a bird which is anorexic and lethargic and
progresses to violent seizures. However, some of these birds appear perfectly normal
between fits. Confrmation of diagnosis in both hypoglycaermia and hypocalcaemia can be
 obtained by blood analysis. For the differential diagnosis of fts see pp. 348-9.
It is not uncommon for a budgerigar to be presented with an acute onset of a variety
of the above signs. Making a specifc diagnosis is diffcult and the prognosis is always
grave. Thrombosis is said by Hasholt (1969) to be uncommon in birds, but atheromata
are recorded from a range of species. Hasholt (1969) records the cases of arteriosclerosis
of the carotid arteries in three old Amazon parrots. The birds were presented because they
kept falling off their perches, and were believed to have suffered from cerebral ischaemia
- the result of arteriosclerosis. Pituitary neoplasia, resulting in CNS signs, is recorded in
 a number of species.
 In diurnal raptors hypocalcaemia and hypoglycaemia are both common causes of fis.
Most important among the infectious diseases causing nervous signs is Newcastle disease
(PMV), affecting all species. The variant of this organism, paramyxovirus (PMV-1), causes
nervous signs in pigeons both domestic and feral and some psittacine species (see p. 289).
A rhythmic swinging of the head from side to side, particularly in owls, is indicative
of vestibular disease and is equivalent to nystagmus in mammals. A flaccid paralysis with
an inability to hold the neck up (limber neck') is seen in botulism (p. 274) and lead poi-
soning (p. 336), particularly in swans but also in other birds (Borland et al., 1977). Folic
acid deficiency can also cause paralysis of the neck in turkey poults. Bilateral or unilateral
paralysis or paresis of the legs may be caused by nephropathy resulting in compression of
the lumbosacral plexus, or by Marek's disease (p. 283) or sarcoma/leucosis virus.
The clinician should always bear in mind that although it is very difficult to carry out
a clinical examination of the cardiovascular system, what appears to be a breathing
diffculty or some indication of a problem with the nervous system may well be due to a
cardiovascular problem. Krautwald-Junghanns et al. (2004) found that 99% of caged
 i d ro e p ss sd    
Wing injuries
A dropped wing may be due to a neuropathy but is most likely to be due to injury to the
bones or muscles. Some idea of the part of the wing that is damaged can be gained by
observing exactly how the wing is held. If the injury lies between the digits and the middle
of the radius and ulna, the primary feathers are usually trailing on the ground (Fig. 3.1a).
44
Eessentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
(a)
(b)
(c)
digils and the radius and ulna; (b) he elbow or humerus; (c) the coracoid or shoulder.
Injury to the elbow or the humerus very often results in the wing being held lower than
that on the normal side but the primary feathers are held up off the floor (Fig. 3.1b).
Injury to the coracoid or shoulder joint causes the wing to be rotated so that, although
the whole wing is lower, the primaries are above the level of those on the opposing side
(Fig. 3.1c).
Since there is considerable interspecies variation in the relative lengths of the different
sections of the wing (see p. 7) and, consequently, variation in the weight of these parts,
 the signs will not only depend on the nature of the injury (bone, muscle or nerve) but on
the species of bird involved. Small birds in particular may sustain quite serious fractures
of the wing bones and still look quite normal. An accurate diagnosis can only be made
by a detailed inspection and by radiography.
HANDLING BIRDS
 Before attempting to handle a small and obviously sick bird, it is wise to warn the owner
that there is a risk that the bird may suddenly die of heart failure when an attempt is made
t0 catch it. This can occur with apparently healthy birds not used to being handled.
To reduce this risk, the task can be carried out in a dark room using the light from a
torch covered with a red flter or in even more cases using blue fltered light. Two or three
layers of coloured Vetrap bandage over a smalltorch will suffce. In many species of bird
vision is severely restricted at the blue end of the spectrum. In many cases it is then possible
t0 pick the bird straight from its perch. However, some birds see better in subdued light
than others. To catch a small bird use a clean soft cloth (handkerchief) or towel draped
Over the hand. Preferably use a paper towel to be discarded after use to reduce
cross-infection.
When handling the larger birds care should be taken to control the feet of raptors,
which have a powerful grip, also to watch the beaks of the larger parrots which can cause
a severe injury. Small raptors can strike out rapidly with their feet. A hawk which is hooded
is often easier to handle, although some falconers are reluctant to use a hood. Hooding
any bird of prey (trained or wild) usually has a sedating effect and the use of a towel or
even the cut corner of a large brown paper envelope placed over the head is quite
effective.
Birds such as herons (Ardeidae), storks (Ciconidae), rails (Rallidae), gulls (Laridae)
and gannets (Sulidae) can use their beaks as stabbing weapons. Cormorants (Phalacro
coracidae) can attack with the hooked end of the beak.
Clinical Examination
45
In all these cases a strong pair of welders or industrial gloves is invaluable. Tamed
raptors and parrots used to being handled can often be handled without gloves but the
clinician would be well advised not to take any chances.
For catching and handling parrots (but not macaws or large cockatoos) a hand towel
draped over the outstretched hand is useful. A padded net with a short handle can some-
 ro p ss  rg a e n sa  rn n   s
waterfowl a long-handled crook is sometimes used and when captured a wrap-round cloth
of nylon or other tough material with quick fastening Velcro is very useful for controlling
these birds. All the large birds are best cast on a cushion or soft surface before examina-
tion. The wings need to be held gently but frmly to the body with no undue pressure
placed on the thorax.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE RESTRAINED BIRD
In a bird that is not too ill, the clinician might fnd it easier to carry out a more
thorough examination if the bird is under moderately deep sedation or light anaesthesia
(see Chapter 7).
Feathers and plumage
The plumage should be of a good, even, dense colour. Barbules should lock together so
that the feathering gives a uniform outline to the body form. In the normal bird only the
axillae are sparsely covered in feathers. If the areas of skin covering the lumbosacral
and sternal regions are thinly covered or are covered in an abnormal greyish fluff instead
of the usual contour feathers, the cause may be of nutritional or endocrine origin, e.g.
thyroid. Progressive feather loss with a typical white, flaky, but thickened skin may be due
t0 ringworm (Trichopbyton spp) (se p. 311), particularly if this is seen around the head
and neck. In poultry a zinc deficiency has caused dermatitis and failure of feather
growth.
Sometimes, particularly in parrots, there may be evidence of self-trauma. In this case,
apart from skin wounds, the vane of the flight feathers may be chewed or the shaft may
be crushed (as distinct from snapped or broken off). Some of the growing feathers may
have been plucked leaving bleeding follicles. Plucked feathers are usually replaced quickly
and new feathers can be seen emerging. In some cases the lesion may be localised suggest-
ing a subcutaneous or deeper painful lesion. Examine these new feathers to see if they are
short and club-shaped. See if they have a circumferential constriction or are curled or
deformed. Any of these signs may indicate a viral infection causing psittacine beak and
feather dystrophy (PBFD) (see p. 299) or a nutrient deficiency.
Self-mutilation may have a large number of causes and exact diagnosis is sometimes
difficult. It may be initiated by frustration or boredom or stress brought on by isolation
from a busy owner (parrots are birds which normally live in flocks) or any change in
household routine. A cardinal sign of the self-plucking bird is usually that, while any of
the other plumage is damaged, that on the head is normal. Sometimes trauma may be
self-inflicted and have been initiated by the handler savagely cutting growing flight feathers
to stop the bird flying.
Rarely, self-plucking may be initiated by mite infestation which may lead to invasion
of the feather follicle, with damage and loss of the feather. Both mites and lice cause irrita-
tion. A careful search of the plumage will show any lice situated along the feather shaft
Or On the skin surface. Healthy birds groom themselves to keep infestation in check, sick
birds do not. Examination of the skin or of the powdery remains of a feather shaft with
a magnifying lens will be necessary to identify any mites present. The initiating cause of
self-feather-damage may have been eliminated but the habit becomes established and it is
46
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
diffcult to break. Use may have to be made of Elizabethan collars or psychotrophic drugs
combined with behavioural modifcation programmes (see p. 264). Excessive allopreening
 leading to feather picking or even severe injury by an incompatible or dominant cage mate
is not uncommon. This may become worse during the breeding season.
   od i  ro s r   
usually the result of faulty nutrition (inadequate essential amino acids or vitamin defi-
ciency), but may also be the result of chewing by lice or other infection. In parrots the
yellowing of green feathers may be due to a deficiency of the amino acid lysine. Feathers
that are frayed or have the shaft cleanly broken or snapped off can result from careless
handling or inadequate sized caging.
In the budgerigar and some other psitacines the condition called French moult, in
which fledglings lose some of their primary wing and tail feathers, has been shown to be
due principally to two viral infections. Some original work by Pass and Perry (1984) on
wild Australian cockatoos and by others more recently indicates this may be one of a
number of viral infections affecting many species of psittacines. The condition described
by Pass and Perry was originally called cockatoo beak and feather syndrome but is now
known to infect many species and so is renamed psittacine beak and feather syndrome
(PBFS) (see p. 299). In these cases the emerging feather does not open up properly and
remains club-shaped. Feathers are not moulted normally and the bird's whole plumage,
q a 'sn ro pp  s sg srn a si  a 
looks abnormally shiny in cockatoos, due to lack of powder down, and has a tendency
t0 accelerated growth. In cockatoos skin pigmentation is subtly increased, but in lovebirds
(Agapornis) the skin coloration remains normal (see Plate 4). In all cases there is pruritus.
 In the black Vasa parrots ( Coracopsis sp.) the normal black feathers progressively become
white (see Plate 5). In all cases the condition is immunosuppressive and usually fatal (see
Appendix 3).
The minute structure of feathers may be permanently damaged after contamination
with mineral oil, even after this has been completely removed. The barbules may not hook
together properly. In aquatic birds where integrity of the feather covering is incomplete
due to barbule damage, inability to preen due to beak damage or with disease of the preen
gland, the bird may not be able to float properly in water. A well-recognised condition
known as 'wet feather' of ducks has the same effect. The aetiology is obscure.
Lines of decreased density and weakness across the vane of the feather, known variously
as “fret', “hunger’ or 'stress’ marks, are recognised by falconers but are also seen in birds
other than raptors. These are believed to be caused by a check in growth of the proliferat-
ing cells of the epidermal papilla during the formation of the feather in its follicle and may
be accompanied by other feather defects. Moulting or feather replacement takes place in
many birds from temperate climates that have well-defined seasons at defnite spaced
intervals - once, twice or three times a year. In a few species, such as cranes and eagles,
 (  ld ) s  m s o  q  
process tends to be continuous, with increased feather growth during breeding activity.
Nutritional or infectious conditions that cause feather abnormalities often have similar
effects on the germinative cells of the beak and claws.
 Occasionally a developing feather will fail to emerge properly from the feather sheath.
The follicle continues to enlarge pushing its way below the surface of the skin and a feather
cyst is formed - a condition most commonly seen in canaries and probably genetic in
    i         (   
inflammatory condition of the skin and causes marked irritation to the bird, so that the
bird picks at the cyst and may rupture it.
Tick bites (se Plate 6) can sometimes be responsible for subcutaneous oedema and
haemorrhage and result in acute death (Forbes & Simpson 1993). For more in-depth
investigation of plumage problems see p. 344.
Clinical Examination
47
The head region
After detailed examination of the plumage it is best to continue with an examination of
the head region, starting with the eye.
The eye
The observer may frst see a variety of conditions. Keratitis, oedema of the eyelids and
blepharospasm due to a foreign body are relatively common. Matting of the feathers
around the eye can be evidence of epiphora which may be unilateral or bilateral. If bilat-
eral, this could be due to lesions blocking the common opening of the nasolacrimal ducts,
situated together in the posterior part of the choanal opening. Swellings just above or
below the eye may be evidence of sinusitis of the supraorbital and infraorbital sinuses,
which may have progressed to abscessation (see p. 145). These are often initiated by
hypovitaminosis A. Brown, crusty eruptions around the eyelids and commissures of the
beak may be due to avian pox (see p. 392 and Plate 7).
In budgerigars the powdery white encrustations of cnemidocoptic mange mite infesta-
tion may extend from the cere to the areas around the eye and the commissures of the
beak. This may also be seen in other species (see p. 332).
Retrobulbar neoplasms of the orbit and tumours of the nictitating membrane have been
recorded. Examination of the anterior chamber of the eye may reveal evidence of hypopyon
(see Plate 8), or hyphaema, or damage of the iris. Fluorescein should be instilled on to the
surface of the cornea to detect any scars or ulcers. All these lesions are not uncommon,
particularly in owls, and may be due to fighting or to road traffc accidents (see Plate 8).
Also they may be a sign of systemic infection, e.g. with picornavirus (see p. 294, V41).
Examination of the eye reflexes is generally diffcult but is somewhat easier in raptors,
because of the proportionately larger-sized eyes. The pupillary light response is diffcult
t0 elicit, because the muscle of the iris is striated and partially under voluntary control. It
is also affected by emotional disturbance of the bird. A rapid pupillary light reflex indicates
central blindness because conscious control may have been removed due to brain trauma.
The pupils may be widely dilated after an accident resulting in concussion (see p. 27).
Consensual pupillary light reflexes do not take place in birds because all optic nerve
fbres completely cross over at the optic chiasma and representation on the cortex of the
optic tectum is contralateral. Touching the cornea produces a pupillary response and a
consensual response is shown in the other eye. If a bird is not too frightened, it will some
times show a fixation reflex towards an interesting object. This can be shown by using
food (for a raptor) or a glittering object (for a corvid) moved from side to side in front of
the eyes (see p. 27).
 A blink reflex of the eyelids or nictitating mermbrane reflex may be stimulated by a
threatening gesture of the hand, preferably carried out from behind a transparent
screen.
Cataracts are not uncommon and can be seen with or sometimes without an ophthal-
 moscope. They are occasionally reported in wild birds.
Examination of the posterior chamber with the ophthalmoscope is more difficult than
 in mammals but using the indirect method enables a greater area of the fundus to be seen.
A 30D lens is used for the larger birds whilst an 80D or 90D lens is needed for the smaller
p. 259). This dilates the pupil, which in birds is controlled by skeletal muscle. Use one
drop only (see formulary for further details) (Fig. 3.2).
The retina appears as a uniform granular tissue usually grey or brownish-red in colour.
There is no reflective tapetum in birds. The optic disc is obscured by the large vascular
projection of the choroid, known as the pecten. The shape and size of this structure varies
considerably in the different species and this was frst documented in 1917 by Casey Wood
MD (Fig. 3.3).
48
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Fig. 3.2 Examining he posterior chamber fundus oculij of a bird by indirect ophhalmoscopy:
Vecuronium drops are used to dilate he pupil. The bird's head is held steadily with the leff
hand, whilst he right hand holds a suitable condensing lens (30D-90D) just in front of the eye
being examined. Light from a focused light beam from a source mounted on a head band is
directed hrough he lens into he posterior chamber of he bird's eye, which is at he same
Fime examined by a binocular lens system (one lens for each eye) also mounted on the head
        f     s  
sraighforward direct ophhalmoscopy. If a binocular system is not available, a focused light
source can be mounted separately beside he examiner's head and a hand-held monocular
ophhalmoscope can be used to examine he eye.
Post-traumatic intravitreal haemorrhage from the pecten oculi is common (40% of
cases) particularly after road traffc accidents. This can result in the deposition of pigment,
is also a not uncommon injury.
A very useful reference with excellent coloured photographs is Korbel (2000); and
Coles & Krautwald-Junghanns (1998) has a number of coloured photographs of eye
conditions.
Many systemic infectious diseases, for instance chlamydophilosis (psittacosis) (see
p. 277), salmonellosis (see p. 267), mycobacteriosis (see p. 273) and a variety of viral
infections, including the paramyxoviruses (see p. 288) are manifested by ocular lesions.
These may include epiphora, conjunctivitis, keratitis and iridocyclitis. Conjunctival oedema
has been reported as a sign of Plasmodium infection (see p. 321) in over 40 species of
birds. Any of these signs alert the clinician to carry out further investigation for evidence
 of systemic infectious disease.
Clinical Examination
49
(a)
(b)
(C)
Fig. 3.3 Three illusrations with abbreviated descriptions, after Dr Casey Woods, to indicate
he many varied forms of the pecten oculi seen in various avian species.
·[a] The fundus oculi of the lawny owl [Strix aluco). The underlying background colour is a dull yellow
covered wilh closely packed, irregularly radialing choroidal blood capillaries, producing an overall
impression of dark orange-red. The distinct macula can be seen siluated at about '15 minutes to the
hour' and is surrounded by a bluishgrey haze.
[b]  The hundus oculi of the [common] raven [Corvus corox]. The overall background colour is light buff/
fawn sprinkled with slighily darker dots. The macula is a small dark dot situated in the middle of an
clmost colourless area at about 2 o'clock.In the lower part of the undus,around the base and sides
of the peclen, orange-red choroidal blood capillries can be seen.
● [c) The fundus oculi of the sulphur crested cockatoo [Cacarua galerita). The background colour is a
uniform greyish-blue. The macula is siluated at about 1O-11 o'clock and is an irregularly round brown-
ish area merging into the background.
50
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
Theear
The ear is not obvious in birds since there is no pinna. In most birds the external orifice
is covered by modifed contour feathers (see p. 31). In owls the ears are large and placed
asymmetrically, a condition which improves directional sensitivity. Because of its nearness
to the eye, the ear may be involved in trauma affecting the eye. Attention is drawn to otitis
externa by the feathers being matted around the external ear. Small (1969) reports the
protrusion of the tympanic membrane through the external orifice but this is a rare condi-
tion, as are neoplasms. Swelling of the infraorbital sinus may occasionally cause swelling
of the ear.
The skin of the head
The skin should be examined for any sign of subcutaneous haemorrhage due to accidents
Or wounds, such as those caused by fghting or attack from cage mates.
The cere and external nares
Look for any discharges, which may vary from catarrhal to dried exudate. Nasal exudate
is often due to hypovitaminosis A together with microbial infection, which may be an
indication of upper respiratory disease. Swabs should be obtained for microbiology and
antibiotic sensitivity testing. A more representative specimen can be obtained from the
choanal slit where there are often associated abscesses. Staining of the feathers, which may
be blood stained, above the cere is evidence of nasal discharge. Excess growth of the corni-
fied tissue of the cere, a condition often seen in budgerigars and called brown hypertrophy,
is of no clinical significance unless the nares become blocked (Fig. 3.4) (see p. 149).
In the male pigeon there may be a similar exuberant growth of the cere. In the budgeri
gar, the cere is pink in the immature bird, blue in the male and brown or buff-coloured
in the female. Birds that show some blue and brown colouring may be intersexes with
both one ovary and one testis present in the abdomen. Reversal of colour may indicate
chronic illness. Intersexes may also be seen in the ostrich, in which the plumage is not the
dense black of the male bird but more brownish like that in the female. In these birds the
phallus isn't like that of the male or the female bird.
Cnemidocoptic mange infection (see p. 382) is not uncommon in budgerigars and can
affect other species. It is shown by a greyish, scabby, crumbling texture of the cere often
the burrowing tracts of the mite can sometimes be seen in the horn of the beak. Associated
sa asa  ps sp a  an po nrd s an o pg ss are sis
contributes to the dust of breeders' bird rooms and helps in the maintenance of a high inci-
dence of this condition. Diagnosis can be confrmed by scraping the lesion. After clearing
the scrapings with 10% potassium hydroxide, examine under a microscope.
Fig. 3.4 Brown hyperlrophy of he cere
Clinical Examination
51
Trauma to the cere can be the result of a collision during flight or from a caged bird
flying at the meshwork of its cage. Damage to this area may involve the cranial facial
 iss '( 'd as soq s p iu 'ixd an mq ps s
neoplasm may involve this region (see Fig. 1.1a,b).
The beak
Examine the beak for any evidence of cracking or splitting, which may be a sign of under-
lying fractures of the premaxilla or mandible. Care should be taken when examining some
birds, such as gannets and some ducks, in which the edges of the beaks are quite sharp.
Toucans (Ramphastidae) and mergansers (Mergus spp) have a serrated edge to the beak.
Cracking of the horny beak may be traumatic or a sign of vitamin A deficiency or infec-
tion. Overgrowth or distortion of the beak may be due to a neoplasm (e.g. osteosarcoma)
or trauma to the proliferating epidermal cells or due to cnemidocoptic mite infection.
 Deficiency of vitamin D, calcium, biotin and B vitamins are all said to cause abnormal
beak formation (Altman, 1982). Raptors fed on an artifcial diet that does not need very
much tearing of the food before swallowing can develop a marked overgrowth of the
upper beak. Parrots can develop beak abnormalities brought about by wear on their cage
bars by constant climbing. The beak is a constantly growing and changing structure. Some
wild birds, e.g. oystercatchers (Haematopodidae) have a comparatively rapid growing beak
which can develop a different shape adapting the beak to different feeding habitats. Those
 feeding on cockles develop a spatulate beak, whilst those feeding on earthworms develop
a more pointed beak.
The mouth and oropharynx
In aquatic birds a piece of fishing line protruding from the pharynx may be attached to a
fish hook embedded lower down the alimentary canal. Diagnosis can be confrmed by
radiography or by endoscopy. Fish hooks may damage other birds and the author has
even seen one case in a blackbird (Turdus merula).
To examine the mouth of a conscious powerful bird some sort of speculum may be
necessary. A pair of artery forceps can be placed between the two beaks and then opened,
Or the speculum of a canine auroscope can be utilised.
Abscesses are seen sometimes on the surface of the tongue and small pin-point lesions
of candidiasis may be observed also. Both these conditions may be brought on by vitamin
A deficiency. This leads to a hyperkeratosis of the epithelium of the mucus-secreting glands
(Gordon & Jordan, 1977; Jones, 1979). Abscesses may also be seen anywhere on the
mucous membranes of the mouth, particularly around the choanae where they may block
the single central nasolacrimal opening. Closer inspection of the nasal mucous membrane
Abscesses in the mouth may be bacterial in origin or they may be the early signs of
richomoniasis (see p. 319). This is seen more usually as an extensive, cheese-like, diph-
theritic membrane covering the oropharynx and sides of the mouth. This disease occurs
in a number of species but is particularly common in pigeons (Columbidae) when it is
called écanker' by pigeon owners, and has also been known for many years by falconers
t0 occur in raptors, when it is known as *frounce'. Again, hypovitaminosis A may predis-
 pose to this condition. The lesions of both trichomoniasis and candidiasis look similar and
may 0ccasionally be confused with capillaria infection (see Plate 9) (see p. 325).
Avian pox lesions (see p. 392) may be seen at the commissures of the beak, in all species
particularly in Passeriformes, Columbiformes, raptors and psittacines. However, they are
not seen in Anseriformes.
The glottis is a slit-like opening into the larynx and trachea, lying on the floor of the
mouth usually just posterior to the root of the tongue. In some species such as herons
(Ardeidae) it lies farther back. Neoplasms and exudative lesions can affect this area,
52
Essenlials ofAvian Medicine and Surgery
resulting in partial obstruction of the airways. Sinusitis of the infraorbital sinuses can lead
t0 gross swelling, flled with catarrhal exudate, on both sides of the oropharynx (see
p. 276). This condition can be caused by mycoplasma and has been seen in a number of
species including parrots (Psittacidae), gulls (Laridae), mynah birds (Gracula spp) and
raptors. Cooper (1978) advocates digital examination of the mouth and oropharynx and
laboratory examination of any exudate obtained.
The neck
The neck should be palpated for any swelling which may indicate a foreign body impacted
in the oesophagus (e.g. a bone wedge in a raptor's throat) or an impaction of the crop
(see p. 153), which can occur in most species. A fluid swelling may be due to the condition
of 'sour crop', when there may also be excessive gas present. The crop in the budgerigar
may also swell due to thyroid enlargement obstructing the organ. This is sometimes
accompanied by regurgitation. Neoplasia of the thyroid, although rare, may be responsible
for similar symptoms (Blackmore, 1982; see also p. 42 and Plate 10).
Many seed eating birds temporarily store seed in the crop but this should not feel hard
[0 the touch. Gulls (Laridae), penguins (Spheniscidae) and cormorants (Phalacrocoracidae)
store food in the oesophagus and can easily regurgitate this food.
Examination of the body
After the thoracic inlet at the base of the neck has been examined, the clavicle and coracoid
bones should be palpated for evidence of fractures. In the latter case, observe how the
wing is held when the bird is free standing (Fig. 3.1c). Skin wounds around the
 thoracic inlet are commonly seen in pigeons (Columbidae) as a result of collision with
telegraph wires during flight. They sometimes involve the crop and associated air sacs.
Subcutaneous emphysema around the thorax may indicate a ruptured air sac, particularly
rupture of the cervical or interclavicular air sacs. Ruptured air sacs often resolve
spontaneously.
The condition of the pectoral muscles should be assessed by palpation. They should be
symmetrical but one side may be found to have undergone atrophy, in which case the
bird's flying ability will be affected. The condition of the pectoral muscles is an important
guide to the overall nutritional state of the bird. The carina of the sternum can be felt but
should not be very prominent. Decubitus of this region is common in heavy birds such as
geese and swans that are unable to walk. Accumulation of fat and lipomas are common
over this region of the pet budgerigar.
The ribs and scapulae should be carefully palpated for fractures. Auscultation of the
lateral and dorsal thorax or at the thoracic inlet may reveal abnormal sounds, though it
may be diffcult to pinpoint these. A stethoscope incorporating battery amplification is
most useful. Heart murmurs are very occasionally detectable in the larger birds, although
undoubtedly diagnosis of avian cardiac disease is much undiagnosed. There is little doubt
that many birds spending their life in a cage develop a cardiomyopathy (Krautwald-
Junghanns et al., 2004). Cooper (1978) describes some cardiovascular conditions encoun-
tered in raptors at post-mortem. The use of electrocardiography in birds has been described
by a number of authors among whom Lumeij et al. (1993 and 1994) and Lawrie (2005)
 are most useful for the practitioner.
The body from the thoracic vertebrae to the synsacrum
These areas should be carefully examined for wounds caused by predators or fghting
among cage mates. The preen (or uropygial) gland (se p. 143) should be palpated and
the tip touched with the fnger for evidence of secretion. The gland may be impacted or
show neoplastic changes.
Clinical Examination
53
The abdomen
aapa aul puokaq raai aui jo di au aedied oi aqissod aq isni eu i spq rarel au u
of the sternum. Should the liver be easily felt it is probably enlarged. This can be confrmed
by radiography or the use of ultrasound.
The ease with which the abdominal contents can be palpated will obviously depend on
the size of the bird. In birds smaller than a budgerigar this is almost impossible to do
safely without putting too much pressure on the air sacs. In some species, e.g. auks
(Alcinae), there is very litle room between the sternum and the pelvic bones. However,
even in budgerigars it is possible to distinguish a fairly large, rather irregular neoplasm
from a regular, smooth and rounded retained egg in the female. The female often has a
history of laying several eggs, and then has suddenly stopped and the bird is often notice-
ably unwell. Occasionally a solitary egg may form and cause obstruction.
In slightly larger birds, e.g. pigeons, the thick-walled gizzard is easily palpated as frm
and globular with angular margins and its retained grit can be felt to grate between the
fngers. In raptors, the full or impacted stomach can be distinguished as a rather fusiform
softer-walled structure.
Softer and more fluid enlargements of the abdomen which can become quite pendulant
in the perching bird, sometimes without apparent ill effect, may be due to either ascites
 Or rupture of the abdominal muscles. Ascites can be confrmed by very careful paracentesis.
This is carried out in the midline at the most pendulant part of the swelling. The ascites
is often due to neoplasia of the liver or gonads. In female birds, a soft abdominal swelling
may be due to an enlarged oviduct caused by salpingitis, or an impacted soft-shelled
egg, both of which may result in an egg peritonitis. Contrast radiography or the use of
ultrasound can help in the differential diagnosis.
Large cyst-like swellings over the abdomen can be differentiated from true ruptures by
radiography. The cloaca should be palpated. It may contain a calculus of impacted urate
crystals or show a prolapse. Cooper (1978) recommends digital exploration of the cloaca
in the larger bird, with a well-lubricated, gloved fnger and microscopical examination of
the evacuations. An auroscope speculum or endoscope inserted into the emptied cloaca
can sometimes be helpful to examine the mucosa. Matting of the feathers around the
cloaca together with excoriation of the surrounding skin can indicate either an alimentary
Or urinary problem. If the adherent mass is mainly composed of faecal material and the
surrounding feathering is stained green, then the problem is probably due to diarrhoea. If
the concretions are white, and especially if accompanied by an impacted cloaca, then the
bird most probably has a kidney problem (see p. 342).
Since the urodeum is the posterior part of the cloaca in which the urates from the kidney
and ureters collect, any impaction in this region due to a urate calculus will necessarily
hold up the evacuation of faecal matter in the anterior part of the cloaca or coprodeum
and the bird will become constipated. Paralysis and prolapse of the penis (see p. 163) may
Occur in some ducks when two or more male ducks kept together results in bullying and
damage to the nerve supply (P.N. Humphreys, 1984, personal communication). However,
see duck plague caused by a herpes virus (Plate 11) (see p. 283).
The body temperature of a bird can be taken via the cloaca, but since there is such a
 great interspecific variation as well as a normal diurnal variation in individuals, this is not
 especially helpful in clinical examination. The body temperature of most birds falls within
the range 40-42°C.
The wings
Examine each wing bone separately for any evidence of fractures or luxations of the joints.
Excessive mobility of the shoulder joint compared with the other side, together with a
54
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
the supracoracoid muscle (deep pectoral), which can be only confrmed by surgical explo-
ration. Swellings of the bones may be due to old fractures or to tumours or infections. In
pigeons (Columbidae) swellings and suppuration of the joints may be due to Salmonella
spp causing a chronic arthrosynovitis (see p. 267) (Gordon & Jordan, 1977). In raptors,
injury to the carpal joints may result in a bursitis (called “blain’ by falconers). Wing-tip
oedema and dry gangrene in raptors has been described by a number of authors (Forbes,
1991; Forbes & Harcourt-Brown, 1991; Lewis, Storm & Greenwood, 1993). In the
 Opinion of Forbes, the condition is most likely caused by tethering a raptor within a metre
of the ground in sub-zero temperatures at night. Forbes also suggests an unidentifed virus
or toxic factor may be involved.
In young birds, deformation of the bones may indicate metabolic bone disease due to
calcium/phosphorus imbalance in the diet. Waterfowl fed on a diet too high in protein
(over 18%) can develop an outward rotation of the carpal joint (valgus or *slipped wing')
- the primary feathers are relatively too heavy, because they grow faster than minerals
can be laid down in the bone (see p. 179).
The mobility of all joints should be checked and compared in the two wings.
Comparison should be made of the swelling and development of the muscles for signs of
atrophy. Examine the propatagial membranes, which stretch between the shoulder and
a 'papx y si sn uum m an jo spa eal an g pe s! pedrn
are often damaged in flight and may show evidence of scar tissue formation. This results
in the wing not being fully extensible or the proximal attachment of the membrane
being displaced more posteriorly. In both cases the bird's flying capability may be
affected. However, some birds can still fly, but they veer off to the normal side (see Figs
1.5 and 11.1).
Feather cysts and neoplasms are commonly found in the carpal areas. They are not
always easy to differentiate except by biopsy and/or surgical incision. Tumours in this area
are easily damaged and may bleed profusely
The legs and feet
Each of the bones of the leg should be examined for any evidence of fractures or luxations.
This may be diffcult with the femur in small birds or in such birds as auks (Alcinae) where
 this bone is well covered by muscle and dense feathering.
In fledgling raptors the tarsometatarsal bones are inwardly rotated in a “hand-holding
position. As the bird grows and begins to take weight on its legs, the feet rotate outward
to the normal position. In some young birds with metabolic bone disease this does not
happen and the gastrocnemius tendon becomes permanently displaced medially. The bird
becomes a cripple. In some artificially reared waterfowl fed on a ration too high in protein
(i.e. over 18%) the tibial cartilage can become displaced. The bird grows too fast and
becomes too heavy for the rate at which calcium and phosphorus can be incorporated into
the bone of the leg. A similar condition, called perosis, occurs in poultry and has been
seen in parrots (Smith, 1979). This is caused by manganese defciency. This mineral acti-
bone growth (Butler & Laursen-Jones, 1977).
The scales of the legs should be examined for any evidence of swelling, ulceration or
scars caused by excoriation of identification rings. In the budgerigar, captive raptors and
parrots, swelling due to a tight ring can become suddenly an acute problem (see Plate 12)
 r siu sasi oi pa u no a oi kns o n jo tr -
The feet should be examined for any evidence of abscesses. This condition, known as
"bumblefoot', is seen in cranes, penguins, waterfowl, domestic fowl and especially in
raptors; the heavier birds are at greater risk. Bumblefoot abscesses may extend as far as
the hock and may erode the bones of the foot (see p. 181). This can be confrmed by a
radiograph. Smaller birds such as budgerigars or cockatiels may show abscesses on the
Clinical Examination
55
Fig. 3.5 'Tassle foor as seen lypically in canaries.
feet that may be difficult to distinguish from the tophi of gout which are due to accumula.
tions of urate crystals.
If the suspected tophi are opened and the contents placed on a slide, confrmation that
urates are present can be attained from the following test: the crystals are mixed with a
drop of concentrated nitric acid and carefully evaporated to dryness over a Bunsen burner.
A drop of ammonia is then added. If urates are present a mauve colour will develop.
Cnemidocoptic mange mite infestation can occur on the legs of many Passeriformes,
particularly crossbills (Loxia curvirostra) and also in other species of bird causing the nails
t0 slough. In canaries the condition has long been called ‘tassle foot' (Fig. 3.5). Although
the infection is common on the head of budgerigars it is not often seen on their feet. In
Passeriformes the lesions on the legs can be confused with avian pox lesions and papillomas
a  s r p o ass, q u ae sn s '(oe d )
become broken and bleed. Frostbite has been reported in a number of raptor species and
in some aviary birds (e.g. parrots) through clinging to frost-covered wire mesh.
4
Aids to Diagnosis
Professor Dr Maria Krautwald-Junghanns
Universitat Leipzig
Institute for Avian Diseases, Leipzig, Germany
HAEMATOLOGY, BLOOD CHEMISTRY AND SEROLOGY EXAMINATION
The examination of blood samples is an important aid in the routine diagnosis of avian
disease. The veterinary clinician, having already taken into account the value of a particu-
lar case to the owner and offset this against the potential cost of the anticipated laboratory
procedures, should note that one laboratory test by itself is usually of little diagnostic or
prognostic value. Serial blood samples taken over a period of time offer a greater degree
of diagnostic precision. Some suggested diagnostic routines (incorporating haematology)
for the investigation of particular avian syndromes are given in Appendix 7.
The collection of blood samples
Anticoagulant and equipment
A variety of suitable paediatric tubes and micro-containers are available and can often be
obtained free of charge from the laboratory which is to carry out the tests. In the opinion
of most haematologists, to get the best staining results for the examination of blood cells
EDTA is the most suitable anticoagulant. Heparin can sometimes affect the staining of the
leucocytes. However, in some species (Corvidae, curassows, crowned cranes, hornbills and
the eagle owl) EDTA can cause haemolysis of the erythrocytes so that heparin is preferred.
If the bird is large enough and 1.5-2 ml of blood can be harvested, half the blood can be
placed in a tube with anticoagulant whilst the other half is immediately centrifuged and
the plasma used for blood chemistry examination.
Usually in the smaller birds a 23-25 G x §/" (0.65-0.5 x 16 mm) hypodermic needle
bent at a slight angle (approximately 10°) and attached to a 2 ml syringe is found to be
satisfactory. The bevel of the needle point is kept uppermost. The walls of avian veins are
fragile and haematoma formation easily occurs so that digital pressure should be immedi-
ately applied over the puncture site when withdrawing the needle. If too much negative
pressure is applied to the syringe plunger when withdrawing blood the vein will collapse
onto the orifice needle and blood flow stops.
The volume of blood which can be collected safely
In birds generally the circulating blood volume is usually 6-20ml/100g body weight. In
a 40g budgerigar the total blood volume may be 2.5-3.0ml. Consequently in a healthy
bird, if a state of shock is not to ensue, 0.5 ml is the maximum volume which can safely
be withdrawn from a bird of this size. In the Amazon parrot or an African grey parrot
56
Aids lo Diagnosis
57
weighing 250-400g, 2 ml of blood can safely be obtained. Overall birds can tolerate a
greater degree of blood loss in relation to size than can mammals because they are able
t0 rapidly draw upon extra-vascular reserves. However, splenic contraction in response t0
blood loss does not occur in birds.
Suitable sites for blood collection
The right jugular vein {Fig. 4.1a)
The right jugular vein is often more prominent than the left, so it is usually the easiest
place from which to collct blood in most birds including budgerigars, raptors,
penguins, flamingos and the ostrich (however, in this case the operator should take great
care not to get injured). This site is not suitable in pigeons due to the fat deposits in the
neck. Unlike in mammals the jugular vein in birds is much more mobile and can be
found subcutaneously anywhere over the right side of the neck without its lying in a def-
nite furrow. The jugular vein is often covered by a featherless tract of skin and can be
made more visible by wetting the area with antiseptic (quaternary ammonium compound)
Or alcohol. If a fnger is placed under the neck with the bird's head extended the skin can
 n   a  d aq o q     r  
the vein.
The subcutaneous uinar fbrachiall vein
To visualise this vein it is often necessary to frst pluck a few feathers and then to wet the
site with antiseptic (Fig. 3.1b). This vein can be utilised in most birds including the ostrich.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.1 (a) The posilion of the right jugular vein used for venipuncure. (b) The posilion of
he right ulnar vein used for venipunchure.
58
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
Again, the operator must take great care not to get injured when working with this bird
Or any of the larger ratites. In small birds particularly this vein is very liable to haematoma
formation, which may be a particular problem for racing pigeons.
The medial metatarsal (caudal tibial] vein
Although perhaps not the most easily visualised of subcutaneous veins the medial meta-
tarsal vein can be utilised in a variety of species. It has been used in ducks, raptors and
pigeons and is particularly useful in the conscious swan (Cygnus olor). Digital pressure
over the caudal part of the medial surface of the tibial tarsal bone, wetting and rubbing
the area with alcohol or diethyl ether usually enables the operator to raise the vein cours-
ing beneath the scaly skin. Because this vein is well supported by surrounding tissue,
            
blood vessel.
Cutting a claw (Fig. 4.2)
This method may be used for very small birds (i.e. small fnches of 10g or less). The claw
and foot is frst thoroughly cleansed with a suitable antiseptic (e.g. quaternary ammonium
compound) since blood samples taken from this area are quite easily contaminated with
a bird's droppings, soil, etc. The blood from the cut claw should be allowed to drip or be
drawn into a capillary tube (i.e. a microhaematocrit tube). It should on no account be
squeezed out of the foot, since this alters the characteristics of the sample. Blood samples
obtained from this site are from capillary blood and may contain cellular artefacts. Bleed-
 ing can be staunched after blood collection by the application of a silver nitrate pencil or
ferrous subsulphate.
Other sites for blood collection
Nicking of the external thoracic vein (i.e. running dorsal to the shoulder joint), direct
needle puncture of the heart and from the occipital venous sinus have all been used for
blood collection mainly in research establishments (Campbell, 1995).
b
(a)
Fig. 4.2 Clipping he claw for colleclion of a blood sample: (a) the correct way to clip he
claw for collection of a blood sample; (b) his tends to compress Mhe blood vessel
Aids lo Diagnosis
59
Haematology
The definition of some terms used by haematologists
Anisocytosis:
An abnormal variation in the size of RBCs.
Aplastic anaemia:
Total failure of RBC formation.
Crenation:
Collapse of the normal cell resulting in an irregular
outline.
Smudge cell:
 Cytoplastic rupture of the cell membrane usually the
result of a faulty method in making the blood
smear.
Howell-Jolly bodies:
 Small round densely staining particles in the cytoplasm
thought to be the remnants of the nucleus. Large
numbers are the result of malfunction of the erythro-
poetic tissues.
Hypoplastic anaemia:
Reduction of all the normal blood cell types, i.e. RBCs,
heterophils and lymphocytes, etc.
Poikilocyte:
An abnormally shaped RBC.
Polychromasia,polychromatic,
The cytoplasm of the RBCs, shows a variable
polychromatophia:
bluish colour.
Reticulocyte (rubricyte):
Immature RBC rather more rounded in shape than the
ovoid shape of the mature RBC. The cytoplasm shows
a darker staining reticular pattern.
Erythroplastids:
Abnormal avian RBCs without a nucleus.
Haematocrit or packed cell volume (PCV)
By using microhaematocrit heparinised centrifuge capillary tubes, determination of PCV
is quick and easy. The result provides valuable information. In most birds normal values
for PCV can be 40-55%. In the adult ostrich the PCV is 32-47% whilst in 0strich chicks
it is 25-45%. More precise details are given in standard texts such as those edited by
Petrak (1996), Fowler and Miller (2003), Samour (2006), Campbell (1994, 1995) and
Hernandez (1991). After determination of the PCV the serum can be drawn off with a
micro-pipette and used for obtaining biochemical information.
Blood smears
Only one drop of blood is needed for a smear that can provide information on blood
parasites, cell morphology and differential white cell count. Slides can be stained with
Leishman's, Wright's or Giemsa stain. However, avian blood does need a somewhat longer
staining period than mammalian blood, at least fve minutes, and the buffered water used
for washing the slide after staining needs to be more acid, pH5 instead of pH7, and should
be left on the slide for at least five minutes.
Avian white cells can be more difficult to find than the corresponding mammalian cells
Apart from the fact that the avian red cell is nucleated, the leucocytes in the blood smear
are scattered throughout the slide and not aggregated at the edges of the smear as in the
case of mammals. There is also much more variation in the appearance of leucocytes in
avian blood. Unless a practitioner is carrying out a lot of avian work, it is probably better
to fix the slide with methanol and send it to a specialist laboratory for examination. The
overall interpretation of the haemogram will depend on the laboratory and the expertise
of the technician examining the sample. Notwithstanding this, the fact is that the fresher
the blood sample is at the time of examination, the more consistent and reliable the results
60
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Useful illustrated references for avian haematology are Campbell (1994, 1995) and Samour
(2006).
Clinically significant numerical and morphological changes in the erythrocytes
The reader should note that the avian RBC is nucleated, in contrast with the non-nucleated
counting techniques. The fgures for a range of species are given in standard texts edited
by Fowler and Miller (2003), Harrison and Lightfoot (2006) and Ritchie et al. (1994). As
a general rule, although the normal erythrocyte count varies berween species, the values
for PCV (40-55%), haemoglobin (12.2-20.00g/dl) and mean corpuscular haemoglobin
concentration (28-38g/dl) are constant within fairly narrow limits across the taxonomic
range. Also as a general rule, immature birds, particularly those not fully fedged, tend to
have lower values for PCV, total erythrocyte count and MCHC than adult birds (Garcia
del Campo et al., 1991; Hernandez, 1991). They may also show large numbers of fairly
mature RBC precursor cells in the circulating blood. Blood values in wild birds also
vary with seasonal activity and depending on whether they migrate and fly at high
altitudes and low oxygen tension. As a guide, the range of values for total red cell count
is 2.1-5.5 x 1012/1 with a mean value of 3.9 x 101z/1.
Mean corpuscular erythrocyte indices
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
Erythrocyte indices can be calculated from PCV, Hb and total RBC count and when usec
together with the erythrocyte morphology and the total serum protein can give an indica
 n    1 o         o
process.
PCV x10
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) = -
[in femtolitres [fl]]
Total RBC count (millions/μl or 10°/mm')
For most birds the MCV lies between 121-200fl but for small psittacines it can be as
low as 99fl and in the cassowary it can be as high as 286fl. An increase in this value is
most useful for indicating a regenerative (i.e. macrocytic or increased cell volume) anaemia.
In a non-regenerative anaemia (i.e. normocytic or microcytic) the cells are either normal
Or reduced in size.
Mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration (MCHC)
Hb (g /100ml) × 100
 Mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration (MCHC) =
(expressed as a percentage)
PCV (%)
A reduced value (ie.a bypochromic anaemia) usually indicates a deficiency anaemia
resulting in an insufficiency of haemopoetic factors.An increase in this value does not
occur since RBCs do not become supersaturated with haemoglobin.
Mean corpuscular haemoglobin
Hb (g /100 ml) x 10
Mean corpuscular haemoglobin (MCH) =
(in picograms [pg])
Total RBC count (millions/μl or 10%/mm²
This is not such a useful index as the MCHC.
Aids to Diagnosis
61
Polychromatic index (Pl)
mature RBCs
The polychromatic index (Pl) is the ratio of polychromatic or immature erythrocytes
t0 fully mature RBCs and is expressed as a percentage. This index gives some indication
ofthe rate ofturnover oftheRBCsand isa usefulparameter together with theMCV for
indicating if an anaemia is regenerative or non-regenerative and how well the bone marrow
is responding. Hernandez (1991) indicated that in various raptors in a regenerative anaemia
the values are all above 3.5%.
Anaemias
It should be stressed that anaemia as such is only a sign of underlying disease. Anaemias
can be classified as follows:
● Haemorrhagic (both acute and chronic)
● Haemolytic (both acute and chronic)
● Depression anaemia (i.e. non-regenerative)
·Regenerative
Regenerative
 Regenerative anaemias are so named because the body's haemopoetic tissues are endeav-
ouring to replace depleted numbers of normal RBCs. These anaemias are indicated by
changes in the morphology of circulating erythrocytes. There may be an increased poly-
chromasia (with new methylene blue stain A, reticulocytosis) together with an increase in
size of the RBCs (i.e. macrocytic anaemia) or there may be an excessive variation in the
size of the RBCs (i.e. anisocytosis). Reticulocytes, the precursors of mature RBCs, stain
with new methylene blue, which stains RNA, and are equivalent to polychromatic cells
produced by Wright's stain. Polychromatic cells, the precursors of mature RBCs, occur
normally in the blood in small numbers (1-5%). They are slightly larger more rounded
cells (Campbell, 1994) than the mature ovoid RBC and have a more basophilic cytoplasm
 containing a more rounded and less condensed nucleus. These cell are often more evident
 in the normal blood of the large raptor species (Hernandez, 1991). Birds tend to develop
anaemia more rapidly than mammals because of their shorter life span.
Acute, subacute, haemorrhagic and haemolytic anaemia
This type of anaemia is usually indicated by normal cell morphology (i.e. normocytic with
normal MCV) but the PCV and Hb are reduced (i.e. it is hypochromic) if the blood sample
has been taken immediately after the acute incident. When, however, the sample is taken
some hours later, which in practice is usually the case, the haemopoetic tissue will have
had time to respond and the RBC morphology will become macrocytic (i.e. increased
MCV). Possible causes of these anaemias are:
1. Road traffc accidents or other violent trauma such as a gunshot wound, an attack
from a predator, a cage mate or even severe self trauma
2. Ulceration or rupture of an internal organ (e.g. rupture of a friable neoplasm of
liver)
3. Bacterial and viral infection, eg. salmonellosis, colibacillosis, conure haemorrhagic
syndrome, yersiniosis, Macrorhabdus-infection with proventricular ulceration (seen in
small birds and also diagnosed in ostriches), trichomoniasis in budgerigars occasionally
62
Essenlials of Avican Medicine and Surgery
results in ulceration, campylobacteriosis in juvenile ostriches, Pacheco's virus in parrots
and some other avian herpes virus infections
4. Acute toxaemias (mycotoxins, lead}
Chronic haemorrhagic and haemolytic regenerative anaemias
Both the PCV and the haemoglobin levels are decreased but the MCV is increased and
there is a reticulocytosis (indicating the haemopoetic tissues are responding). The causes
of this type of anaemia can be:
1. Blood parasitism, e.g. microflaria, Plasmodium, Lankesterella, Aegyptianella, Haema-
proteus and Leucocytozoon. There may be some interspecies variation since the latter
two parasites are often found in Spanish raptors without causing anaemia (Hernandez,
1991).
2. Gastrointestinal (GI) parasitism, e.g. Capillaria, ascarids, caecal worms, coccidiosis,
histomoniasis, giardiasis, Hexamita. Often GI parasitism is associated with a nutritional
deficiency or actual starvation which results in a chronic non-regenerative anaemia.
3. External parasites, e.g. red mite - Dermanyssus sp., northern fowl mite - Ornithonyssus
sp., hippoboscids (louse flies) and ticks.
4. Some bacterial infections.
Chronic non-regenerative or depression anaemias
In this form of anaemia usually the MCHC index is reduced. The cell morphology can be
either normocytic or microcytic (i.e. the MCV value may be normal or depressed). The
number of reticulocytes is reduced or absent. Possible causes include:
1. Chronic infectious disease, e.g. Mycobacterium avium, often leading to a chronic
debilitating disease. Other possible chronic infectious diseases are chlamydophilosis,
toxoplasmosis, aspergillosis, salmonellosis, yersiniosis, colibacteriosis, campylobacte-
riosis in juvenile ostriches (this is usually acute or subacute} and chronic forms of vira
 diseases such as polyoma disease, duck plague, Marek's disease, papillomatosis and
avian sarcoma/leucosis complex.
2. Toxaemias, e.g. lead, copper, zinc, rat poisons (warfarin), chloramphenicol, pesticides
(DDT, carbamates), aflatoxins, oak leaves and some other toxic plants.
3. Nutritional defciencies of haemopoetic factors, e.g. iron, copper, vitamin Bz, folic acid;
Overall malnutrition and starvation, secondary nutritional hypoparathyroidism, hypo-
thyroidism (iodine deficiency).
4. Hepatopathies and coagulopathies.
5. Debilitating malignant neoplasms.
Leucocytes
In birds the mammalian neutrophil is replaced by the heterophil. The cytoplasmic granules
d e si ndoa a a u og e ds ae pdri a jo
lobed and usually eccentrically situated nucleus.
Interpretation of the avian leucocyte count
Identification and differentiation of the avian white cells can be difficult for the
 inexperienced observer. The primary purpose of this handbook is not only to aid the feld
worker in the interpretation of laboratory reports but also to help that person to make
any necessary requests for a more detailed further examination of the sample. Those
persons wishing to carry out their own haematological examinations are advised to refer
t0 a more detailed text, with coloured illustrations, e.g. Campbell (1994, 1995) and
Samour (2006)
Aids to Diagnosis
63
There is some interspecies variation in the morphology of the avian leucocyte and also
quite a wide diversity in the normal numerical value not only between species but also
within a particular species. Consequently it is often more helpful to the clinician, if it is
practical and economic, when using leucocyte counts, to assess a particular case to
Also this routine is helpful if the range of normal numerical values for a particular species
is unavailable.
As a very general guide, values for the total white cell count range from 1.0-32.00 x
10/1 with percentages for heterophils 20-75%, lymphocytes 20-65%, monocytes 2-5%,
basophils 2.5-6% and eosinophils 1-4%.
Changes in the leucocyte picture indicative of certain disease processes
● Leucopenias: i.e. an overall decrease in the number of all types of circulating leucocytes.
This usually occurs with severe toxaemia by itself or associated with an overwhelming
infection. Toxic drugs or chemical poisons can also have this effect.
· Leucocytosis: i.e. an overall increase in the number of circulating white blood cells which
is usually well in excess of 10"/l. This can be caused by:
o Infection with bacteria, fungi or parasites.
0 Trauma resulting in massive tissue necrosis.
o Neoplasia with extensive tissue necrosis.
0 Lymphoid leucosis complex. In the opinion of Gerlach (1994), differential leucocyte
 a  are   sis un d a jo ar r si
there can be an overall leucocytosis.
o A marked leucocytosis with a relative heterophilia (i.e. a bias towards the heterophils)
often indicates a recent infection, as with Chlamydophila, Mycobacterium avium or
aspergillosis. In contrast, a heterophilia without an overall leucocytosis is possibly
indicative of a very early or a poor response to infection. Leucocytosis may result
from the use of glucocorticosteroids or as the result of a stress response. However,
in this case the leucocytosis is usually only slight to moderate. However, if the heter-
ophilia is dominated by large numbers of very immature heterophils, this could indi
cate a severe infection which has destroyed large numbers of the mature heterophil
population resulting in the rapid mobilisation of immature cells from the haemopoetic
tissues in the medullary cavities of the bones. A true shift to the left is not often rec-
ognised because the heterophils are already lobulated before leaving the bone marrow
so that normally immature forms are diffcult to recognise.
The presence of toxic leucocytes (i.e. loss of granulation, vacuolization and a change
in cytoplasmic staining) which are graded by Campbell (1994, 1995) as stages 1-4 als0
indicates a severe systemic illness and a poor prognosis.
· Heteropenia: This may occur as a very early reaction to a viral infection.
· Lymphocytosis: This usually indicates a chronic antigenic response to immune-mediated
disease which is often viral in origin. However it could possibly indicate a lymphoid
leukaemia with neoplastic cells and their precursors. Gerlach (1994) is of the opinion
that this does not often occur although there may be an overall leucosis exhibiting
mature lymphocytes. The presence of reactive lymphocytes (identified as medium t0
large circular WBCs with a large round nucleus in which both cytoplasm and nucleus
are deeply staining) indicates an active immune response and these cells are often
referred to as immunocytes.
· Lymphopenia: This usually indicates a chronic viral infection but could be caused by
continuous stress or the use of corticosteroids.
64
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
● The avian thrombocyte: Small, ovoid, nucleated cells about the size of small lymphocytes
but with a colourless cytoplasm. Like mammalian platelets they tend to clump in blood
flms and they are involved in blood coagulation. They are also phagocytic and the
normal count for most birds is 20-30 x 10"/1.
● Thrombocytosis: This is possibly a response to a bacterial infection or as a result of
excessive haemorrhage. Campbell (1994) describes early and late immature thrombo-
cytes and also reactive forms
● Thrombocytopenia: This is usually the result of a severe septicaemia or poor blood col-
lection techniques.
            o
phages. They are chemically attracted to such infections as Chlamydopbila and
mycobacteria.
● Monocytosis: This indicates a successful host response to a chronic bacterial
infection or to tissue necrosis. However a monocytosis takes 4-5 days to develop.
Monocytes are relatively long lived cells and can survive 45 days. Chlamydophila
(and some other pathogens) which may have been phagocytosed by these cells
remain viable within them for the whole 45 day period and this necessitates at least α
45 day treatment for birds infected with Chlamydophila or other intra cellular
pathogens.
● The avian eosinophil: An increase in eosinophils in avian blood samples may not neces
sarily indicate a parasiic infection, since the function of these cells may be different
from that in mammals. It is thought that an eosinophilia may indicate a delayed hyper-
sensitivity reaction.
● The avian basophil: This leucocyte is believed to carry out the same function in birds
as in mammals, being involved in the early acute inflammatory reaction and in reaction
t0 neoplasms with signifcant tissue necrosis.
The selection of biochemical data as an aid to diagnosis
Only those enzymes, metabolites and electrolytes which are of most value to the avian
diagnostician are mentioned in this text. However, additional information on the useful-
 ness of other blood chemistry constituents may become available.
The advised routine for the collection of blood chemistry samples
If a clinician is going to take the trouble to collect a blood sample from a bird and is to
obtain meaningful information then it is imperative that the collection procedure and the
subsequent handling of the sample should be faultless.
1. The venipuncture site, the needle and the syringe must all be clean and the equipment
should be new and unused. Water droplets in a re-sterilised syringe invalidate the
result.
 2. The correct type of microcontainer containing either no or an appropriate anti-
coagulant should be selected.
3. Preferably use plasma obtained after immediate centrifugation of freshly drawn unclot
ted blood. This should be placed in a microcontainer with a neutrally reactive gelatine
serum separator. The sooner the cellular element of the blood is separated from the
plasma the better, since nucleated RBCs continue to metabolise intracellular enzymes
until all the oxygen within the cell is used, after which the integrity of the cell wall is
vitiated and enzymes start to leach into the plasma, so affecting the assay of plasma
enzymes.
4. If an anticoagulant is used, lithium heparin (not the potassium or sodium salts) should
be used for most biochemical estimations but it should not be used for estimations of
glucose or calcium
Aids lo Diagnosis
65
5. To mix the sample with the anticoagulant, the container should be rolled along the
work surface. It should not be shaken violently which may result in haemolysis so
invalidating some results.
6. Serum can be used after the blood has clotted and the clot has been allowed to contract,
which will take a minimum of 20 minutes. Speeding the cloting process by placing the
sample above a radiator only produces erroneous data.
7. Whether serum or plasma is obtained, the sample should preferably be tested immedi-
ately. If this not practical and it has to be posted to a laboratory, it is better to frst
 freeze the sample and then pack in insulation.
How much reliance can be placed on the results?
It is important for the avian practitioner to appreciate that the biochemical data obtained
 ais e s i 'siso pu e on  qno e aq o  pq rd e o
base a defnitive diagnosis solely on the information obtained about one or two biochemi-
cal constituents after checking these against the values on the data base taken from so-
called ‘normal healthy birds. This is because there is a wide variation in both the
physiological (i.e. age, gender, moulting, egg laying, possible migratory behaviour and
circadian rhythm) and environmental conditions (i.e. whether the bird is wild or captive,
husbandry, nutrition, varying weather conditions, also possible exposure to undiagnosed
subclinical viral infection), imposed on these so-called *normal birds.
Another important factor affecting the validity of the result will be the laboratory. Dif-
ferent commercial laboratories will use variously different methodologies when assaying
for the same enzyme. All the methods used have been developed for use and comparison
 po an p an i sn sn a a 's ss pn s 
the same sample from a particular case may vary slightly from one laboratory to
another.
 During the last decade an abundance of data has been collected on those elements of
biochemistry mentioned in this text. Nevertheless often the information published by dif-
ferent groups of workers in this feld differs to a greater or lesser degree. Consequently,
here only a broad guide to the 'normal levels of blood biochemical elements is given
together with an indication of when these values for a particular species are known to be
Outside the normal pattern. All values are expressed in SI units (Systeme International
d'Unites, 1977) (conversion factors to SI units are given).
All biochemical data can only indicate a trend towards a particular clinical condition
and to be of any signifcant value most results (particularly in the case of the enzymes)
should show a result of at least a two-fold increase above the ‘normal data base. All
diagnosis is a matter of obtaining as much available evidence from as many varied sources
as possible (i.e. haematology, biochemistry, imaging and all the other different aids men-
tioned in this chapter) after which using one's clinical acumen to assess the balance of
probabilities in favour of a specific diagnosis. In addition to this the practitioner will have
to consider the economic cost of the various tests in terms of the time and cost of labora
tory fees, etc., in direct relation to the value of a particular case to the client.
The plasma proteins
These can provide important information on the overall state of health of the bird.
Total serum protein
Assessment of total protein values are probably of most use when used in conjunction
with protein electrophoresis.
 For most species the value for total serum protein willbe 3-5 g/dl. Note that the level
of plasma protein will be approximately 0.15 g/dl above the value for serum protein
because the fbrinogen will have been removed during coagulation. However, normal levels
66
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
of fbrinogen do vary, e.g. cockatoos 0.09-0.33g/dl, macaws 0.1-0.32g/dl. In the past
many avian clinicians have used a hand-held refractometer, a method which was quick
and convenient. Unfortunately the results so obtained have been shown to be unreliable.
Both haemolysis and lipaemia are only two of a number of factors affecting the result.
Hypoproteinaemia
Since most of the serum proteins are produced by the liver a reduction in total serum
protein is one indicator of the severity and progression of hepatopathy. Other possible
causes of reduced serum protein level are any disease associated with anaemia, malnutri-
parasitism, glomerulonephritis, severe trauma, prolonged stress, acute lead poisoning,
chronic infectious disease and Pacheco's disease, etc.
Hyperproteinaemia
This may be due to dehydration (PCV is also elevated), shock or acute infection. There is
also a rise in the total serum protein just prior to egg laying due to the transport of the
globulin yolk precursors to the ovary (Lumeij, 1987). Serum protein tends to be higher
in older birds. Very high levels of serum protein may be encountered with the leucosis
complex.
Aibumin
Albumin is usually 1.0-2.2 g/dl for most species of bird. This is the major protein producec
by the liver and forms most of the plasma protein, so that a hypoalbuminaemia is usually
responsible for a drop in the total serum protein. Since albumin is important in the trans-
port of anions, cations, fatty acids and thyroid hormone, a drop in the serum level of
albumin has overall serious consequences.
Globulins
This fraction of the serum protein comprises the Q-, β- and y-immunoglobulins together
with the globulin precursors of the yolk proteins. As Hochleithner (1994) has indicated,
Q- and B-globulins (one of which is fbrinogen) are acute-phase proteins and tend to rise
with acute nephritis, with a severe hepatitis and with trauma including surgery. The 
globulins are the immunoglobulins which increase with both acute and chronic infection.
Their increase should be compared with any simultaneous lymphocytosis, which may not
be present.
Hyperglobulinaemia is usually the result of subacute or chronic infectious disease;
alternatively it can occur as a result of trauma including surgery.
Fibrinogen
For psittacines, levels greater than 0.3-0.5 g/dl are significant. This is one of the significant
B-globulins and since it is concerned with the blood coagulation mechanism it has to be
determined in plasma. EDTA must be used as the anticoagulant not heparin. This plasma
The albumen/globulin ratio
For many birds the normal values are 1.44.9. As Lumeij (1987) has indicated, serial
determinations of the A/G ratio is a valuable guide to the progress of a disease process.
The ratio tends to decrease (the globulins rise and the albumin falls) during both acute
nitis). As recovery proceeds, the globulins tend to fall whilst the albumin level rises and
the ratio returns to normal. A persistent low A/G ratio together with an overall reduction
in total protein indicates liver failure.
Aids lo Diagnosis
67
The metabolite fraction of the plasma biochemical elements
These substances tend to provide more organ specifc information regarding the functional
condition of some of the body's tissues.
Glucose
For most birds, serum glucose lies in the range 200-500 mg/dl. To convert mg/dl to mmol/l
multiply by 0.05551. In the emu, the normal level can be as low as 158mg/dl.
When collecting avian blood samples for glucose estimation it is not necessary to use
fluoride as an anticoagulant provided the plasma sample has had the red cells immediately
removed. In any case, fuoride can have an inhibitory effect on some enzyme test
samples.
 In general, avian serum glucose levels are much higher than in mammals but as with
many other biochemical constiuents of avian blood the level does tend to vary with age,
diet, breeding season, stress and also diurnally. For most birds the level falls during day-
light hours and rises at night. The reverse may be true in the nocturnally active birds. In
the moulting mallard duck the normal level of serum glucose is rather on the low side at
185 mg/dl.
Depending on the laboratory technique used lipaemia may invalidate the result.
Hyperglycaemia
This state can occur during stress, including hyperthermia. It has been recorded in Amazon
parrots with lead toxicosis. Also it may be seen in some cases of peritonitis where there
is an associated pancreatitis.
A transient hyperglycaemia occurs for the frst 72 hours after the withdrawal of food
in pigeons (Lumeij, 1987) in consequence of which, except in the case of the very small
(i.e. below 100gm) birds, pre-surgical fasting has a positive advantage, especially when
gastrointestinal surgery is anticipated.
Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes melitus has been recorded in some granivorous birds, budgerigars, cockatoos,
Amazon parrots, macaws and cockatiels, also in toco toucans (which are not granivorous)
(Hochleithner, 1994). In these cases the serum glucose levels can be above 750 mg/dl and
can reach 1000-2000 mg/dl. However, this hyperglycaemia may not be due t0 an insuff-
ciency of insulin (in granivorous birds) since the hormone glucagon is more important in
the regulation of blood glucose levels. In carnivorous birds insulin may be a more impor-
tant regulator of blood glucose as is the situation in mammals. However this subject in
birds has not been well researched.
Hypoglycaemia
Glucose levels below 100 mg/dl indicate a grave prognosis. Hypoglycaemia occurs in cases
of starvation and particularly in immature raptors and can result in hypoglycaemic convul-
sions after only a few days of anorexia. How long this state of affairs takes to develop
will depend on the size of the bird and on the species. Some inexperienced falconers in an
attempt to reduce a bird's weight to its so-called flying weight will take the reduction of
food intake too far and produce relative starvation.
toxaemias resulting from neoplasia and infectious diseases developing septicaemia.
Uric acid
For most birds, the normal value for uric acid is in the range 2-15 mg/dl (to convert mg/dl
t0 μmoll multiply by 59.48). Levels of uric acid vary with age and species and they are
generally 50% lower in granivorous birds when compared with carnivorous birds.
68
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
Birds excrete 60-80% of their nitrogenous waste as uric acid (synthesized in the liver
but excreted through the kidney) in a form which is alnost independent of the rate of
flow of fluid urine through the kidney. Of this uric acid, 90% is excreted dynamically via
active cellular secretion from proximal renal tubules and glomeruli. A much smaller
amount is derived from actual glomerular fltration. The avian kidney has at least 50%
reserve capacity so that extensive nephrosis must have occurred before the amount of uric
acid in the plasma exceeds normal, providing of course other factors affecting the level of
uric acid remain normal. Abnormally high amounts of uric acid in plasma occur in starva-
tion (due to catabolism of the body's tissues), in extensive trauma, in gout (often uric acid
rises before clinical gout is seen), in toxicosis of the kidney with aminoglycosides (particu.
larly gentamycin), nephrocalcinosis caused by excessive vitamin D, and some other medi-
caments, such as occasionally sulphonamides or the azole antifungals.
Uric acid can rise after the use of corticosteroids, in dehydration, toxaemia from some
bacterial and viral infections and with gastrointestinal haemorrhage, also, possibly, due
to chronic hypovitaminosis A resulting in damage to the epithelium of the kidney tubules.
To keep the uric acid and urate crystals in colloidal suspension large amounts of mucus
have to be secreted by the healthy cells of the renal collecting tubules.
Because of the multiplicity of causes which can result in a rise of the uric acid level,
plasma uric acid is not a very useful single indicator of kidney disease.
Urea
Normal levels of urea for most birds are 2.4-4.2 mg/dl (to convert mg/dl to mmol/l multi-
ply by 0.3510). In the 0strich the normal is 1.8-3.00 mg/dl and in the cassowary it is
8.7-9.9 mg/dl.
Urea, which forms 20-40% (the actual amount varies between species - see p. 21) of
avian nitrogenous waste is excreted by glomerular fltration. In normally hydrated birds
a little is reabsorbed in the distal renal tubules but in dehydrated birds nearly all of the
urea is reabsorbed. The urea is in aqueous solution so that its excretion, unlike that of
uric acid, is entirely dependent on the rate of flow of fluid through the kidney. Conse-
quently any factor which impairs this flow, such as dehydration, cardiopathy,or post-renal
obstruction (e.g. cloacal impaction, a neoplasm or blocking of the oviducts with an egg
which may cause pressure on the ureters) or possibly the careless surgical placement of a
al jo uonedu no "it 'd aas) asdeoid e anpn oi iua au pune arns s ssind
renal tubules with urate crystals as happens in cases of salt poisoning, can all cause a rapid
rise in 2-3 days of the urea in the plasma. This rise can be as much as 15-fold particularly
if there is a concurrent increase in the level of nitrogenous waste production.
The urea/uric acid ratio
has shown that this ratio is not only an indicator of the state of dehydration (as also
demonstrated by PCV) but may also be an indicator of urinary fluid flow so that in cases
of renal failure accompanied by a reduced urinary flow, the urea/uric acid level rises sig
nifcantly. After four days' starvation (ie. resulting in tissue catabolism and increased
nitrogenous waste production) accompanied by four days’ water deprivation, the ratio
rose to 12.0 ± 2.0.
uric acid (μmol/1)
To convert uric acid in mg/dl to μmol/l multiply by 59.48.
Aids to Diagnosis
69
Creatinine
Normal values of creatinine in most birds are 0.2-0.5 mg/dl (to convert mg/dl to μmol/l
multiply by 88.4).
In the present state of knowledge about avian blood biochemistry, estimations of this
 constituent are not a lot of value to the avian clinician.
Cholesterol
Normal values for cholesterol are in the range 108-330 mg/dl (to convert mg/dl to mmol/l
multiply by 0.02586). In 0striches the range is 58.05-162.57mg/dl.
This substance is the precursor of all steroid hormones (i.e. sex hormones and corticoid
hormones) as well as the bile acids. Some cholesterol is obtained from the protein in the
diet, its level being higher in carnivores. The remainder of the cholesterol is produced in
the liver. Plasma levels of cholesterol are increased in cases of fatty liver and kidney syn-
drome. Very high levels of plasma cholesterol accompanied by a lipaemia indicate fatty
degeneration of the liver. Hochleithner (1994) has indicated that the plasma cholesterol
 s s ro a e q a ti sisx  rn r 
in an African grey parrot (Psittacus erithacus).
Lipaemia
Lipaemia may occur together with a rise in plasma cholesterol and sometimes there is a
 post-prandial increase in chylomicrons in the blood, particularly with a high fat diet. Diets
containing seeds such as sunflower, hemp, rape and safflower can produce this effect.
Lipaemia also occurs with hepatopathies (not only fatty liver), in hypothyroidism and
sometimes with egg peritonitis (egg yolk absorbed from the coelomic/peritoneal cavity).
Lipaemia can be recognised by the naked eye in plasma and serum samples. Very often
immediately the blood sample is collected it is noticed to be milky in colour. The presence
of lipaemia may invalidate or may make the carrying out of some blood biochemical tests
impossible.
Bile acids
For psittacines the range for bile acids is 18-144 μmol/l. Bile acids are produced by the
through the liver. A small amount continues to circulate in the blood stream. There is
normally a post-prandial rise in plasma bile acids. Anything which interferes with the
normal recycling process leads to a rise in plasma levels. In hepatopathy there may be an
imbalance between the quantity manufactured in the liver and the amounts being re-used
by the liver (which may drop) so that an inevitable rise in the blood level occurs. Con-
versely a reduction in liver size resulting from chronic liver disease and fbrosis leads to a
gradual wastage and fall off in the amount circulating in the blood stream. Bile acids are
therefore a good indicator of liver disease and these substances have the great advantage
that they are stable compounds unaffected by the handling of the blood sample.
Since birds produce mostly biliverdin rather than bilirubin true icterus does not usually
occur in birds, although it can occasionally be detected on the face of macaws if the level
of bilirubin exceeds 2.36mg/dl (Hochleithner, 1994).
Serum enzymes
The enzymes found in serum function normally within the confines of the individual cells
Of specific organs. Anything which disrupts the integrity of the cell can lead to an increase
in the release of enzymes into the blood stream, but in some cases of hepatic fbrosis may
result in normal plasma levels or even a fall in the normal level. In consequence their
presence and the quantity present give the clinician some indication of the degree of organ
or tissue damage.
70
Essenlials of AvianMedicine and Surgery
The amino transferases
This group of enzymes controls the transfer of amino groups in amino acids. None of
u a n pg ar s a si a sisn ods u i z a
muscle, skeletal muscle, the gastrointestinal cells, the kidney and brain. Of this group of
enzymes the most useful to the avian clinician are:
Aspartate amino transferase {AST, SGOT)
Normal plasma values for AST in most birds should normally be below 230IU/l but can
be in the range 0f 52-270IU/l. In the 0strich, the normal value is 100-160IU/1. As with
 the biochemistry of many of the blood constituents, the level varies with the age and sea-
sonal activity. Although, as already indicated, AST has a wide distribution in the body's
tissues and although it is not liver specifc it is possibly the single most useful enzyme for
indicating liver disease. However, any soft tissue damage including intramuscular injection,
particularly with irritant drugs (e.g. doxycycline and occasionally potentiated sulphon-
amides), can result in an elevation of the plasma AST. Because of this the level of AST
should always be compared with that of CPK which is much more specific for soft tissue
rauma (particularly muscle) and is unaffected by liver damage. Increases of AST occur
with any kind of hepatopathy, including Pacheco's disease and chlamydophilosis, also
[oxic chemicals (e.g. some pesticides and carbon tetrachloride) and the use of some drugs
(e.g. doxycycline injection), besides causing a rise in CPK also can result in a rise in AST.
The use of many of the azole antifungal drugs (ketoconazole, fluconazole and itraconazole)
can also increase AST levels.
Alanine amino transferase (AiT, SGPT]
Normal levels of ALT in birds vary considerably from 6.5-263 IU/l. Changes in the plasma
level of this enzyme are not a reliable index of hepatopathy in birds.
Lactate dehydrogenase (LD, LDH)
For most birds normal levels of LDH are 46-442IU/l. In the 0strich they can be 1000.0-
2000.0IU/ and in canary fnches they are approximately 1582.63 IU/l.
This enzyme is not organ specifc; in fact it is found in many tissues of the body.
However, increased blood plasma quantities are commonly noticed with hepatopathy and
myopathy. Levels of this particular enzyme tend to rise and fall much more rapidly with
acute hepatopathy so that in this respect LDH has some value in indicating acute liver
disease. Nevertheless the value of LDH should always be compared with that of CPK.
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP, AP)
Levels of ALP for psittacines are 42-479 IU/. In the ostrich they are 330-820IU/1.
This is another non-organ-specifc enzyme which is found mostly in the duodenum and
kidney (Lumeij, 1987). Some authors consider this enzyme to be a good indicator of
Osteoblastic activity (i.e. osteomyelitis, bone neoplasms, fractures, rickets and hyperpara-
thyroidism). Its level is also increased in growing birds and in egg laying birds when
calcium metabolism is increased in the medullary bone. It is suggested that ALP blood
levels may also be increased in some cases of liver disease, such as aflatoxin poisoning.
However one should also look for concurrent rises in AST and bile acids. Low levels of
ALP may be seen in zinc dietary deficiency.
Creatine phosphokinase (CPK, CK)
Normal values for CPK in birds lie between 110-480IU/l. In the 0strich they can be
400-900IU/1.
This enzyme is a specific indicator of muscle trauma. It is therefore a very useful guide
for the differentiation of muscle and liver damage when levels of AST and LDH may also
Aids lo Diagnosis
71
be raised. It should be noted that intramuscular injections given prior to blood sampling
may help to increase CPK values. Also CPK values are said to rise with neuropathies
associated with convulsions, with lead toxicity, with chlamydophilosis, with bacterial
septicaemias and vitamin E deficiency.
The blood electrolytes
Maintenance levels of these in the blood plasma are essential for many living processes.
Calcium
Normal calcium levels in most birds are within the range 8-12 mg/dl (to convert mg/dl to
mmol/l multiply by 0.25). In the 0strich they are 6.8-10mg/dl, in budgerigars they are
6.4-11.2 mg/dl and in the chicken 13.2-23.7 mg/dl.
Blood samples for calcium analysis must be collected in heparinised tubes, since all
other normal anticoagulants (i.e. EDTA, citrate and oxalate) bind calcium ions in the
blood. Because some calcium ions in the blood are bound to protein (principally albumin),
the total blood calcium level should always be considered together with the level of
albumin. A hypoalbuminaemia can result in a drop in total blood calcium. However, the
calcium bound to protein is not necessarily in an ionized biochemically active form.
Total blood caicium levels tend to be higher during ovulation (corresponding with
increased ALP) and coincident with the transport of protein-bound calcium to the shell
gland, but the level of calcium ions in the blood remains constant. Immature birds tend
to have lower blood calcium levels.
Hypercalcaemia
Serum calcium levels may be raised after use of excessive dosage with vitamin D and also
in conjunction with some osteolytic bone tumours. Also, possibly dehydration may result
in an increase in total blood calcium.
Hypocalcaemia
Normal blood calcium levels of ionized calcium falling below 6.0 mg/dl in most birds leads
to loss of muscular condition, muscle twitching and eventually to clonic and tonic muscle
spasms. In some species (e.g. African grey parrots and some raptors) the bird becomes
hypersensitive so that when suddenly startled it develops a seizure. A hypoalbuminaemia
can lead to a depression of protein-bound calcium and eventually to a hypocalcaemia.
Glucocorticoid therapy can also result in a decrease in the total blood calcium.
Chloride, sodium and potassium determinations
Chloride, sodium and potassium determinations are of questionable value in the diagnosis
of avian disease except for the confrmation of hypernatraemia which may occur in cases
of suspected salt poisoning in wild birds after draught conditions or in parrots fed on large
amounts of salted peanuts or potato crisps. Normal values for plasma sodium for most
birds are 127-170mEq/l but for the 0strich they are 113-181 mEq/l.
MICROBIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Since bacteria and fungi play an important part in the development of avian disease, the
clinician should try to establish what potential pathogens are present. However, it is very
easy to make a hurried decision and conclude that some innocent micro-organism is the
sole cause of the disease process.
Birds pick up a variety of micro-organisms from their contacts such as wild birds,
rodents, human handlers and the environment. Birds newly introduced into an aviary can
72
Essenlials ofAvian Medicine and Surgery
bring in diseases such as chlamydophilosis (psittacosis), salmonellosis, avian tuberculosis,
Newcastle disease or Pacheco's parrot disease, etc. Also, cage and aviary hygiene can
sometimes leave much to be desired, and perches, food and water containers become
contaminated.
Bacteriological swabs can be taken from a variety of sites, such as bumblefoot abscesses,
suspected cysts, wounds and natural orifices including the trachea and the crop. They can
also be taken after paracentesis of abdominal fluid. In the first instance they should be
cultured on blood agar plates and on enterobacteriaceae differential agar plates (e.g.
MacConkey's agar) at 38-40°C and the 0rganism checked for antibiotic sensitivity.
Faecal swabs are best obtained direct from the cloaca, the vent having frst been cleaned
and sterilised with a quaternary ammonium antiseptic. If this is not possible the swab can
be taken from fresh faecal droppings on a clean surface. When a bird is frst handled it
will often eject fresh faecal matter from the proctodeum and this can be utilised. A useful
method of collecting uncontaminated faeces from small cage birds is to substitute a piece
of X-ray film or aluminium foil for the sand sheet in the bottom of the cage. Faecal swabs
should be routinely cultured on blood agar and enterobacteriaceae differential agar
plates.
When Chlamydophila psittaci is suspected, collecting one combined swab of conjunc
tiva, choana and cloaca is advisable. The swab has to be dry and not wet as for other
bacteria. Chlamydophila spp live intracytoplasmically and therefore cells are needed for
their detection e.g. using the ClearviewTm (unipath) test. The use of dry swabs is also
necessary for detection of Mycoplasma.
When Salmonella spp are suspected, a bulk sample of droppings collected over a period
Of three days should be examined, using enriched culture media and special agar plates
for the culture of Salmonella spp. Salmonella spp are found in most species of pigeon and
wild birds and are easily spread to aviary birds by faecal contamination. However, Sal-
monella spp do not appear to be common in the faeces of raptors. Salmonella typhimurium
is by far the most cormmon specifc organism in this group of bacteria isolated from
birds.
 It should be noted that a wide variety of bacteria are normal commensals in the gut of
many birds and these may be pathogenic only if the bird becomes subjected to stress. A
careful assessment of the patient is necessary before one can be reasonably certain that
the organism isolated is causing the disease. To some extent the spectrum of avian gut
flora is influenced by the diet of the bird. Escherichia coli is a normal inhabitant of the
gut of most raptors and pigeons living in outdoor aviaries. Gram- bacteria are not
normally present in large numbers in the alimentary tract of grain and fruit eating birds
but may become more evident when the bird starts eating insects during the breeding
season.
Tracheal swabs can be taken in the conscious bird or, if necessary, in the sedated bird,
 and a human nasopharyngeal swab is very useful for this purpose.
When Aspergillus spp are suspected in the respiratory tract, samples from the air sacs
may also be taken endoscopically (see p. 85) in some instances and cultured on Sabouraud's
dextrose agar at 37°C for 36-48 hours.
Swabs should be taken from any eggs that have failed to hatch. The surface of the egg
should be frst sterilised with alcohol before a small hole is made in the shell and the swab
used to sample the contents. Swabs should be cultured on blood agar and enterobacteria
ceae differential agar plates.
When taking swabs from post-mortem specimens, one should take into account that
cultures obtained from birds that have been dead more than 24 hours may not be repre-
sentative. Some organisms, such as Proteus spp, that are normally present in the gut of
some birds (e.g. raptors) may rapidly invade other organs after death and overgrow other
pathogens on a culture plate
Aids to Diagnosis
73
Examination of stained smears
This is quick, and although not conclusive, it is a useful guide to examine stained smears
Of pus, faeces and exudate. These can be stained with modifed Romanowsky stain (e.g.
DiffQuik?, Hemacolor?), Gram stain, methylene blue (for bipolar staining of Pasteurella
Or, where avian tuberculosis is suspected, with Ziehl-Neelsen stain. Liver impression
smears can also be stained for acid-fast organisms.
Where Chlamydophila (psitacosis) infection is suspected these smears can be stained
by a modifed Ziehl-Neelsen (STAMP) technique to show up the intracytoplasmic inclusion
bodies. This technique is carried out as follows: the slide is flooded with dilute carbol-
fuchsin stain for ten minutes, but is not heated as in normal Ziehl-Neelsen staining. The
slide is then washed and decolourised with 0.5% acetic acid - not acid alcohol which is
normally used. Decolourisation is carried out only for 20-30 seconds until the slide is very
faintly pink. Counterstain with methylene blue in the normal manner. The tissue cells may
then be seen to contain clusters of very small red intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies.
However, because of the risk of zoonotic infection, investigation of this disease is best left
t0 specialised laboratories that have the necessary air extraction safety cabinets.
It is generally considered that the presence of Gram- bacteria is abnormal in caged
birds, however Phalen (2006) states that in healthy birds Gram- bacteria may not always
be pathogenic. To decide whether detected bacteria are pathogenic or not one should
consider the relativeamount ofbacteria isolated andwhether apure or mixed bacterial
cuiture is present. Additionally, the result of the investigation should be compared with
the clinical symptoms. Routine staining of a sample by Gram's method can help in the
interpretation of antibiotic sensitivity testing. The stain will indicate the relative numbers
 sd a si  o p q t pe - no s  p
technique may show anaerobic bacteria to be present when there is little or no growth on
a routine blood agar culture.
oisl a jo uod  ordard un-isod e u panodsns are ds sliads 
can be teased out onto a slide and treated with 20% KOH. The alkali clears the other
tissues and renders the fungal hyphae more easily seen. If necessary the slide can
subsequently be gently washed, fixed with heat and stained with lactophenol cotton blue
stain.
Serology, DNA probes and viral culture
The laboratory examination of serum samples can be a valuable aid in assessing if a bird
has already been exposed to infection by a specific micro-organism, which, particularly in
the case of some viruses, may remain latent for years. Alternatively, by using paired serum
samples taken two weeks apart the bird can be shown to be actively responding to the
infection immunologically by a rising titre. Serology is particularly valuable in making a
definitive diagnosis of viral infection where there are often no or few pathognomonic signs
and viral culture may be difficult and take weeks
Viruses can be cultured in living cells from a variety of tissues from both ante- and
post-mortem cases providing the autopsy specimen is very fresh. However, if viral culture
is to be attempted special transport media containing antibiotic (to prevent bacterial over-
growth) is needed and the swab or specimen needs to be frozen (-4°C). When intending
to use this aid to diagnosis the clinician is advised to frst consult with the laboratory
which is to carry out the culture.
There are a variery of serological tests available, e.g. complement fxation, virus
neutralisation, ELISA, haemagglutination inhibition, immunofluorescence and others.
Some of these serological tests are much more sensitive and specific than others. Which
test is to be used for a particular case is best left to the judgement of the laboratory, but
before a choice can be made the laboratory will need a good anamnesis and an indication
of what is the clinician's tentative diagnosis.
74
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a method for detection of specific DNA or RNA
of micro-organisms in any samples (for example blood, faeces, exudates, different tissues).
DNA polymerase is used to produce copies of DNA template molecules with the use of
specific primers by repeated heating and cooling. RNA must frst be converted into DNA.
Using this method viral DNA can be amplifed to detectable amounts. Advantages of this
method are high sensitivity and automation. Disadvantages are high risk of contamination
and high costs. Furthermore the DNA or RNA of the virus must already have been
sequenced. Specific PCRs which are extremely sensitive have been developed for the detec-
tion of the presence of some micro-organisms such as polyoma- and circoviruses and
Chlamydophila. In the detection of Chlamydophila infection faeces or, better, swabs from
conjunctiva, choana and cloaca are used. Nevertheless all these PCRs will only indicate
the presence of DNA or RNA of a potentially infective micro-organism; they do not give
any ndication of the activity of the infection. Table 4.1 lists various pathological micro-
organisms together with the different molecular biological tests which can be used for the
detection of that particular infection.
For more detailed information on the detection of micro-organisms consult standard
texts edited by Fudge (2000), Harrison and Lightfoot (2006) and Ritchie et al. (1994,
1995) and for more information on particular laboratory tests available in the UK contact
 the Central Veterinary Laboratory. Also for information on PCR consult: Vetgen Europe,
DAGNOSTIC CYTOLOGY
The microscopical examination of cell morphology in samples harvested from abnormal
tissue is a quick and relatively inexpensive method of making a tentative and sometimes
a definitive diagnosis. The technique has almost infnite possibilities. Specimens for exami-
nation can easily be obtained and examined immediately by the experienced clinician, so
that the result is available much more rapidly than when biopsy samples are sent away
for histopathology. However, cytology will only indicate changes in individual cell mor-
phology and will not show any structural changes in diseased tissue.
Collection of samples
Hyperplastic tissue, swellings and suspected malignancies
The surface of the tissue is frst cleaned with alcohol and allowed to dry. Using a hypo-
s  si a an s g ot e oi p (i x oath a) a 
into the tissue and a sample aspirated into the syringe. A quantity of tissue is obtained so
that it just appears above the hub of the needle in the bottom of the syringe. If too much
aspirate fills the syringe then it is diffcult to expel. Whilst aspirating the sample it is best
t0 partially withdraw the needle and reinsert it several times in different directions to get
a representative sample. The sample is then expressed onto a slide, spread into a thin
smear, fixed and stained. When making the smear the aim is to achieve a single layer of
cells. This can sometimes best be carried out by squashing the specimen between two glass
slides and then sliding these carefully apart so that two smears are obtained, one on each
of the opposing faces of the two glass slides. Each can then be stained differently.
Bone marrow samples
reveals a grossly reduced or absence of one or other of the normal cellular constituents
Alternatively such samples may be helpful in cases of non-regenerative anaemia or sus-
pected leukaemias.
Aids to Diagnosis
75
Table 4.1 Tesls for specific pathogenic micro-organisms
Micro-organism
Possible Laboratory Tests
Salmonella
ELISA, cullure
Avian Mycobocterium
Ziehl-Neelsen stain, PCR, ElISA, slide agglulinalion, culture
Chlamydophila
ELISA, DNA probe, PCR, immunofluorescence
Mycoplasma
ELISA, PCR
Avian encephalomyelilis virus
Immunod iffusion or ELISA
Avian influenza virus
Immunodifsion or ElISA, PCR 
Avian reliculoendotheliosis virus
Histologicalexamination only
Avian sarcoma leukosis virus
Histological examinalion, immunohistochemislry, possibly ElISA
Equine encephalomyeliis virus
Haemagglutination, ElISA, haemagglutination inhibilion
Eastern and Western strains
 Avian paramyxoviruses
Haemagglutinalion inhibition, viral culture [including Newcasle
disease and PMV 1 pigeon]
Parvovirus infeclion of geese
Virus neutralisation, EllSA or immunofluorescence, electron
microscopy
Psiltacine circovirus; Columbid
 Haemagglulinalion inhibilion, PCR
circovirus; Canary circovirus
 Polyoma virus
Virus neutralisation
Avian pox viruses
Viral culture; virus can be cultured from the faeces of carrier
birds; virus neutralisation or immunodiffusion; hislopathology
is best for confirming clinical cases
Avian herpes viral infections
a] Infeclious laryngolracheilis
Virus neulralisalion, immunofluorescence, ElISA, PCR
b] Duck plague virus [duck 
Virus neutralisation, PCR
virus enteritis)
c] Pacheco's parrot disease
Virus neulralisation, ElISA or immuno-fluorescence,
immunod iffusion, PCR
d]  Budgerigar herpes virus
Virus neulralisalion or immunod iffusion, PCR
e]  Pigeon herpes virus [inclusion
Virus neutralisation, ElISA or immunodiffusion, PCR
body hepalilis)
f  Pigeon encephalomyelitis
Serological tests are not at present available. Confirmalion of
[contagious pigeon paralysis]
diagnosis will depend on histopathology, ofen using elechron
microscopy
gl Marek's disease
Histological examinalion, PCR 
Adenoviruses
There are a muliplicily of
Although group-specific anlibodies are deteclable by EllSA and
adenoviruses, not all of which
immunodiffusion tests and there are also specific DNA
may be pathogenic. Some
probes for other pathogenic adenoviruses, diagnosis of some
adenoviruses may act as triggers
adenoviruses mosily depends on virus neutralisation together
wilh histopathology with a search for inclusion bodies and
clso on eleclron microscopy
Bone marrow samples can be obtained from the keel of the sternum or more easily
from the proximal tibiotarsal bone when approached from the medial aspect just distal to
the stifle joint. The skin over the sampling area is frst cleaned and sterilised with alcohol
 and a small incision made with a scalpel. A hypodermic needle containing an in-dwelling
stylet is best used (e.g. a paediatric bone biopsy needle or a 23 G spinal needle). Sometimes
a normal hypodermic needle can be used with a length of sterile stainless steel suture wire
inserted in the lumen or, as a last resort, a tunnel can be pre-bored in the bone with a
suitable diameter Steinman intramedullary pin, and the hypodermic needle inserted through
this prepared entrance hole.
76
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Abdominocentesis
Samples of abnormally present abdominal fluid can be carefully aspirated for examination.
The sampling needle is carefully inserted in the mid-point of the abdomen and directed
 st pnq au f pueq el sroieaado aun oa) pnq an jo apis pueu nua aun spremo
dorsal recumbency) so as to avoid the gizzard (ventriculus). If the needle is inserted to0
far anteriorly it is liable to puncture the liver and if too far posteriorly it will enter the
distended cloaca. Samples for cytology from the abdomen can also be obtained using
the laparoscope.
Crop washings
A blunt ended catheter Or gavage tube can be used to instil normal warm saline into the
crop (20ml/kg). A part of the fluid is then immediately aspirated but care must be taken
not to apply too much negative pressure to the syringe otherwise the mucous membrane
is liable to be sucked into and block the catheter.
Washings of the proventriculus can be obtained in the same way. However this is best
carried out under a general anaesthetic with an endotracheal tube in place. The procedure
can be carried out blind but it is safer if an endoscope is used.
Air-sac washings
A sterile flexible catheter, attached to a syringe, is inserted into the last intercostal space
of the bird, and 3ml of sterile saline (in a large bird 3kg and above) are injected and this
fluid is withdrawn immediately for culture.
Tracheal washings
A small diameter (16G or 1mm, e.g. a canine i.v. catheter) length of nylon tube,
long enough to reach the syrinx, which lies just caudal to the thoracic inlet, is passed
  h go o p   n    
flushed into the lumen of the trachea and immediately withdrawn for examination. This
bird.
Aspiration of infraorbital or paraorbital sinuses
The needle is inserted into the point of greatest distension or through the skin at the com-
missure of the mouth, passing either above or below the zygomatic arch (which can be
palpated just below the skin). Great care needs to be taken in directing the needle so that
it does not puncture the eyeball or any of the adjacent musculature and so induce profuse
bleeding.
Impression imprints from autopsy specimens
After incision through a representative area (e.g. liver, neoplasm) the cut surface is blotted
gently with paper towel to remove excess blood or fluid. A glass slide is then frmly placed
on the surface and then removed. Sometimes indurated tissue is best scraped with a scalpel
and the scrapings placed on the slide for examination.
Direct smear of the droppings
A wet swab is taken from fresh faeces and smeared onto a slide with cover slip
Blood smear
A blood sample is taken as described above; only a small drop of blood is required. The
(ono da) uis Asmouuoy peypo qm pais si ras poo
Aids lo Diagnosis
77
Processing samples
Fluid samples
After collection into the aspirating syringe and before processing, exudates are best frst
ransferred to an EDTA blood collection vial to prevent any tendency to clotting which
sometimes occurs. If the fluid is relatively clear and possibly has little suspended cellular
content it can be centrifuged at slow speed (1500rpm) for ten minutes to concentrate the
sample can be placed in a vertically supported tube and allowed to precipitate by gravita-
tion. Another method is to place a piece of flter paper with a suitable size hole (8-10 mm)
on top of a glass slide and then hold paper and inverted tube in place with a rubber washer
placed over the hole and clamped to the slide. The fluid for examination having been
placed in a glass tube placed over the centre of the hole is gradually absorbed by the flter
paper leaving the solid cellular content on the glass slide for examination.
Fluid samples should be assessed for their colour (haemolysis, milkiness - indicating
fat droplets, etc.), clarity, specific gravity and protein content (using a dipstick). Also,
the cellular content of the sample should be analysed for the presence of heterophils,
macrophages (containing phagocytosed bacteria), extracellular micro-organisms, normal
epithelial cells and cells with signs of malignancy.
Solidsamples
If the tissue from which the sample was obtained looks fatty, the smear should be stained
with Sudan IHI or IV together with new methylene blue stain (a water soluble stain). Oth-
erwise the smear can be stained with a Romanowsky stain (Wright's or Giemsa). It is often
useful to stain a second companion slide with new methylene blue since some features of
cell morphology are seen more clearly with this stain whilst other aspects of the cell are
seen best with the Romanowsky stain. In some cases, use of a bacterial stain (Gram or
acid fast, etc.) may be appropriate.
Interpretation of samples
Hyperplastic tissue, inflammatory swellings and malignancies
An attempt should be made to identify the various types of cell present in the sample and
also their relative proportions.
● Does the smear contain a high proportion of leucocytes, indicating an inflammatory
reaction?
● Are these cells mainly heterophils, monocytes or lymphocytes, indicating an acute or
chronic inflammatory response?
● Do any of the heterophils look toxic? Cell toxicity is indicated by a degranulated and
degenerative rather indistinct staining nucleus. The cytoplasm of the cell tends to stain
more basophilic (but compare this with the general background staining of the slide).
Also there may be variable granulation and vacuolation in the cytoplasm.
● Do some of the monocytes (macrophages) contain phagocytosed bacteria?
• If a sample has been obtained from the surface of a mucous membrane or from fluid
adjacent to such (e.g. alimentary canal, trachea) and has been stained with a bacterial
stain which indicates a mixed selection of extra cellular organisms, then these are most
likely representative of normal flora. If the stained smear is dominated by one particular
organism this is most likely pathogenic.
Neoplastic cells not only show an increase in the proportion of cells with mitotic fgures
in their nuclei (the presence of which is normal in a few bone marrow and liver cells) but
also the overall size of the nuclei in relation to the cytoplasm is greater than in normal
mature cells. Also the cytoplasm tends to stain more basophilic, i.e. bluish. Neoplastic
78
Essentials ofAvianMedicine and Surgery
cells overall and their nuclei in particular tend to be much more pleomorphic (i.e. they
vary considerably in size and shape).
Bone marrow
On a sample from a normal bird it should be possible to identify the normal maturing
stages of erythroblast.
Rubribiasts
The early, very immature cells, the rubriblasts, like all immature cells, are large round cells
containing a nucleus which occupies most of the cell. Although both cytoplasm and nucleus
are intensely stained, at this stage the cytoplasm is the more densely stained of the two.
As maturation proceeds, the overall size of the cell reduces and the nucleus becomes much
smaller in proportion to the cytoplasm. Also the intense colour of the cytoplasm gradually
fades, passing through a polychromatic phase with varying depths of blue staining, and
ultimately acquiring the pale pink of the mature erythrocyte. At the same time, the nucleus
shrinks and its chromatin becomes condensed and more intensively stained.
In normal bone marrow all stages of this developing process should be recognisable
and not dominated by one type.
Myeloblasts
The precursor cells of avian granulocytes (myeloblasts) are at frst similar to the rubricyte
although the cytoplasm is less deeply staining and gradually it will develop the cytoplasmic
granules typical of heterophils (fusiform light red eosinophilic), basophils (deeply staining
basophilic dark blue spherical granules) or eosinophils (round deeply staining eosinophilic
red granules).
Thrombocytes
Round cells (approximately the same size as erythrocytes) which have a large nucleus and
in which the whole cell is very intensely stained are the precursor cells of thrombocytes.
These cells gradually reduce in size and take on the shape and characteristics of small
erythrocytes, except that their cytoplasm is colourless or very faintly blue in colour.
Other cells
Also normally found in bone marrow samples are small numbers of lymphocytes, mono-
cytes, osteoclasts and osteoblasts. Some mitotic fgures are normal in some of the cells of
a bone marrow sample.
 For those clinicians wishing to pursue this subject the best references with colour illus-
trations are given by Campbell (1994, 1995).
Crop washings
· Check the pH of the aspirate, which should be around 6.5-7. A decreased pH may
indicate sour crop.
● The normal sample of crop washings should show squamous epithelial cells, a mixture
of normal symbiotic bacteria and a lot of background debris.
● If the squamous epithelial cells are excessively cornifed (use the same stain as wher
examining canine vaginal mucosa for signs of oestrus, for example DiffQuik) this may
suggest hypovitaminosis A.
● In the case of a Candida infection, one may see budding yeast cells together with short
length hyphae, both of which stain with methylene blue or the Romanowsky stains
·In direct smears, trichomonads will only be seen in freshly examined wet-mountea
samples preferably placed on a slightly warmed slide. When present the flagellated
Aids lo Diagnosis
79
protozoa can be seen to be moving vigorously. However they can also be detected in
stained smears, where their flagella are visible.
Proventricular washings
The normal PH of the proventriculus in psittacids is 0.7-2.7. Washings can be used to
check for the presence of Macrorhabdus ornithogaster (Megabacteria) which can be seen
in unstained smears or by Gram stain
Tracheal and air sac washings
● The observer should look for signs of bacterial phagocytosis.
● Also, look for signs of aspergillosis. The hyphae are long, septate and branch at 45°.
Occasionally a conidiophore may be seen. Again, these fungi stain with methylene blue
or the Romanowsky stains.
Direct smears of faeces
Especially in budgerigars and other psittacines, as well as in passerines, which are losing
weight, faecal samples should be examined directly using 40x magnification for detection
Of Macrorhabdus ornithogaster. This should also be carried out in other species, especially
parrots, raptors or pigeons; all gastrointestinal parasites are detectable using this method.
Blood smears
The stained blood smear is examined for blood parasites, such as Haemoproteus, Plasmo-
dium, Trypanosoma and Aegyptianella.
 For those who wish to look for further information on the technique of avian cytology
the most useful texts are those from Campbell (1994, 1995).
HISTOPATHOLOGY
d oe   ss s  n asa s aq  s s
in the diagnosis of skin lesions, such as those caused by avian pox virus, when the typical
inclusion bodies may be found. Biopsies may also be taken from internal organs under
direct vision via a laparoscope. Detailed explanations are given by Taylor (1994). Histol-
ogy of post-mortem tissues may be necessary to help to confrm a diagnosis of such diseases
as Pacheco's parrot disease. This often shows few signs except slight mottling of the liver
and the typical eosinophilic intranuclear inclusion bodies in the liver cells and sometimes
the kidney cells.
Histopathology may be the only method of confrming a diagnosis in some diseases
such as proventricular dilatation disease of psittacines or viral induced papillomatosis of
Amazon parrots. Liver biopsy samples may be obtained using direct vision via an endo-
scope or by making a small incision in the abdomen just posterior to the sternum.
FAECAL EXAMINATION FOR HELMINTHS
Birds carry a variety of helminth parasites. Many birds kept in outside aviaries will easily
become infected from the faeces of wild birds, which may shed large numbers of parasite
eggs. Imported birds may be carrying unfamiliar parasites from their countries of origin.
Faecal samples should therefore be examined on a routine basis. If the first sample is
negative, subsequent samples on alternate days should be examined, as some species of
helminth parasite shed eggs intermittently. Also, if the owner has recently but inconclu-
sively wormed his birds, then samples are best not examined for several days, as some
80
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
drugs, especially if used at sub-optimal doses, merely suppress egg-laying rather than
completely kill the parasites. Faecal samples can be examined by the standard flotation
and centrifugation concentrating techniques.
LAPAROSCOPY
Laparoscopy in one form or another has been used in man and animals since the early
part of the twentieth century. This technique was frst used in birds to determine the sex
of those species that do not show sexual dimorphism - the so-called technique of surgical
sexing. Other methods of sexing birds are discussed in Chapter 10. However, apart from
direct visual inspection of the avian gonads, it is also possible to evaluate the state of many
of the other organs. It is possible to see much of the kidneys, the adrenal glands, the pos-
terior surface of the lungs, the heart, the liver, the proventriculus, the gizzard and the
 intestines. It is also easy to see parts of the air sac system. Laparoscopy is therefore a useful
tool to aid in the diagnosis of many conditions.
The equipment
u jo uoodsu au rg paisp uaq aaru uordo sun rog pasn sadossopua a
joint spaces and range in diameter from 1.7-2.7mm. A larger 5mm instrument can be
used in larger birds or sometimes birds down to 200g in body weight, when it is necessary
  ix e s  e po sisiso s a d no  0
and the arthroscope, together with a trocar and cannula. The latest systems now use a
fluid-filled light guide.
The endoscope is made up of an outer bundle of glass fbres, transmitting light into the
 organ being viewed, which are wrapped around an inner core of lenses forming the viewing
telescope. The whole is encased in a stainless-steel sheath. The angle of vision varies with
different instruments from direct-forward to retrograde. The direct-forward viewing lens
is the simplest to use for avian laparoscopy (Fig. 4.3).
口
Fig. 4.3 Equipment for laparoscopy: monitor, working channel with second access, rigid
endoscope and simple working channel.
Aids to Diagnosis
81
Operative methods
Sites of entry
Various entry sites to the bird's body are favoured by different authorities for viewing the
gonads and other organs. One possibility is placing the anaesthetised bird in right lateral
this position by an assistant or by a restraining tape. In birds below 400g in body weight
it is often easier if the operator holds the left leg and left wing out of the way of the inci-
 sion site. The area of the incision is found in the angle formed just posterior to the proximal
end of the femur and anterior to the pubic bones (Fig. 4.4a).
An alternative method is to pull the left leg posteriorly and to make the incision midway
into the space between the anterior edge of the femur and the last rib. Other possibilities
are using the sternal notch, a landmark in the angle formed between the sternum and
S s        t       i  
above the angulation (Fig. 4.4c). Whichever point of entry is used, it is very important,
particularly in small birds, to get the bird correctly positioned and to be certain of the
anatomical landmarks.
Sterilisation
Before use, the instrument is sterilised using either ethylene oxide gas or by cold sterilisa-
tion with benzalkonium chloride (1 :2500). The latter is more convenient when a number
of consecutive surgical sexings have to be carried out. After cold sterilisation the endoscope
is rinsed in sterile water and dried with a sterile towel.
Surgical technique
Together with the endoscope it is necessary to have a scalpel ftted with a number 11
blade and useful to have a selection of sterile ophthalmic instruments available. The
operation can be carried out using a general anaesthetic. This allows easy and safe
control of the patient, with only little risk of damage to the internal organs by the endo-
viscera.
Having correctly positioned the anaesthetised bird, the operation site is plucked free of
feathers. Only the minimum number of feathers necessary to clear the area should be
removed. The region is then cleaned and sterilised with a quaternary ammonium antiseptic,
b
Fig. 4.4 Entry poinrs (a), (b), (c) for laparoscopy in relation to skeleton
82
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
taking care not to get the bird too wet. An alcohol or iodine preparation can be used to
 complete the process. The operation site is then draped with a transparent plastic or paper
sea aderp suaedsuen e pue siderp qoo uen iiam u raiu are asal jo og ade
the bird's respiratory rate to be monitored during the operation. Either type should contain
a small central opening.
A small incision, 4-7 mm in length, is made and any bleeding from the skin vessels is
controlled because this is liable to cloud the distal end of the endoscope during
insertion and obstruct the view. Also, any subsequent leak of air from the air sacs during
expiration will cause blood on the surface of the skin to foam and obscure the incision.
The cannula, fitted with the trocar, is next inserted through the underlying muscle
using controlled pressure and at the same time slightly rotating the trocar backwards
and forwards. To minimise trauma and reach the desired area it is most important to aim
the trocar and cannula in the right direction. If the site using the angle berween the femur
and pubic bone is used, the instrument is directed downwards and forwards at a slight
angle to the vertical away from the vertebrae so that it is travelling more or less towards
the centre of the abdominal cavity. In the other methods the trocar and cannula are
directed vertically in a direction parallel to the plane of the thoracic and lumbar
vertebrae.
 If the procedure is carried out correctly, the operator can feel the slight pressure on the
trocar is then withdrawn leaving the cannula in position so that the arthroscope can then
be inserted. Should there be any blood on the pointed tip of the trocar when it is with-
drawn, the whole operation is stopped immediately.
 During manipulation of these instruments it is best to be seated and to have the elbows
resting on the table. The left hand supports the cannula near the point of entry and the
right hand controls and directs the trocar and laparoscope. This position of the operator
allows delicate and careful control of the instruments. In small birds below 60 g and down
t0 20g in body weight, the arthroscope can be inserted after the initial incision has been
made in the muscle, by pushing a pair of mosquito artery forceps into the incision and
opening these to expand the incision. Care must be taken not to bend or break the arthro-
scope when applying this method.
Problems associated with the technique
No method is without hazard. The frst site of entry described has the slight risk that the
ischiatic nerve and femoral blood vessels may be damaged. In all methods, if care is not
taken and the instrument is pushed in with too much force or is wrongly directed the
viscera could be damaged. Obviously, rupture of the heart or of a main blood vessel will
prove rapidly fatal. However, slight puncture of the liver or kidney results in haematoma
formation which usually resolves within a few days. Penetration of the gizzard is unlikely
in the herbivorous birds because of its thick-walled nature, but in carnivorous birds the
gizzard has a much thinner wall and is much more likely to rupture, particularly if
the bird has not been starved for 12 hours before laparoscopy. However, before starving
the bird the clinician should take account of the bird's nutritional state because of the
A e su  s  si  a  s r 
and suturing the organ, as well as appropriate antibiotic cover. In the case of all sites of
entry there is a slight risk of subcutaneous emphysema through air leaking from the air
sac system but this usually resolves spontaneously.
Apart from these hazards the technique is not as easy as it might at frst appear and
much practice is required to develop the necessary skill, particularly in the smaller birds.
The practitioner would therefore be wise to learn this art on several freshly killed cadavers
before proceeding to the live bird.
Aids lo Diagnosis
83
One of the frst diffculties of the unskilled operator is failure to obtain a clear sighting
of the internal organs when frst looking down the endoscope. One may see nothing more
than an opaque pale-pink haze. This usually means that the tip of the endoscope is lying
against one of the viscera or its view is obscured by air sac or peritoneal mermbrane or it
has not properly penetrated the abdominal muscles. Very slight and slow retraction of the
endoscope and cannula, or slight withdrawal of the endoscope into the cannula, often
results in the view clearing. If nothing happens the instrument should be pulled further
ou si asn peupqe aun ieun Aial st in uaqn nuand ou si aran j pue yq
been penetrated. The endoscope should be removed, the trocar reinserted and the direction
of the penetration reassessed.
 If the internal organs can be dimly seen but they are not clear then the operator is
looking through an air sac membrane. Air sacs vary in their clarity and it may be posible
for the experienced clinician to identify an ovary or testis without proceeding any further.
However, to obtain a clearer view, the posterior abdominal air sac will have to be pene-
rated. It may be possible to do this by simply advancing the endoscope and cannula and
at the same time giving a slight twist. However, it might also be necessary to reinsert
the trocar.
 If the view down the endoscope is obscured by a blood red haze, then a blood vessel
has been ruptured or the liver or kidney has been penetrated. It is safer to cease the opera-
tion for a short period until the situation can be evaluated. If the endoscope is only partially
obscured by blood this can often be wiped free against a suitable internal organ such as
the gizzard.
Another problem is excess abdominal fat. This is not uncommonly found in captive,
inactive raptors. Also the abdomen may be partly filled with exudate as in the case of an
eggperitonitis.
 Having penetrated the abdomen and obtained a clear view, the next problem experi-
enced by the unskilled operator is orientation of the various organs in relation to each
 other. The operator must learn to appreciate that slightly advancing or withdrawing the
aq ioeqo a jo ur an u au pider kaar e s adoss
viewed.
At the end of laparoscopy the skin and the underlying muscle are brought together with
a single suture. Some operators consider this unnecessary.
Examination of the internal organs
 After examination of the air sacs, the frst organs usually to be seen and which are unlikely
to be mistaken by anyone who has carried out a number of avian post-mortems are the
lungs. The caudal ventral surface of these structures can be examined and the ostia of the
secondary bronchi, where these enter the caudal thoracic air sac, can be seen. Depending
 On which site of entry is used, the endoscope may have entered the caudal thoracic or the
abdominal air sac. It may be necessary to puncture the division berween these two air sacs
t0 see other organs clearly.
Lying ventral to the lungs (to the left in the recumbent bird) the pulsating heart can
easily be recognised. Moving the tip of the endoscope further to the operator's left, the
lobes of the liver can be seen as they approach the heart and partially envelop the gizzard.
If the endoscope is then carefully moved to find the medial caudal edge of the left lung,
the large rounded dark brownish-red colour of the left cranial division of the kidney can
be recognised. This lies posterior but very close to the lung. Immediately ventral and
slightly anterior to the kidney is situated the pink-coloured adrenal gland. The gonads lie
adjacent but caudal to the adrenal gland, so that the kidney, adrenal and gonads form the
three points of a triangle (Fig. 4.5).
84
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Fig. 4.5 Organs hat can be idenlified by laparoscopy. The shriped area indicates the exient
of The abdominal air sac. A, adrenal gland; B, main blood vessels; D, duodenum; G, gizzard;
H, liver; I, intestine; K, kidney; L, lung; T, testis.
Surgical sexing
The testis
 In the immature male the testis is a rounded, slightly oval structure very little bigger than
the adrenal gland but a little more yellow in colour. In some species the testes may be
wholly or partly pigmented dark green or black in colour. In the immature bird it may be
possible to se both testes lying one on each side of the dorsal aorta and vena cava. As
the testis matures, it increases in size and blood vessels become obvious on the surface.
The blood vessels become more tortuous with age. In the active testes during the breeding
season the organ may become very large and more diffcult to recognise. In the aged testis
the gonad is more angular in shape.
The ovary
In the immature female the ovary tends to be L-shaped and about the same length as the
cranial division of the left kidney. The colour is a buff yellow; the surface is flat and the
texture slightly granular in appearance. Sometimes the ovary is pigmented. As the ovary
matures, follicles become more apparent and these will vary in size. Gradually, as the
ovary increases in size, it begins to obscure the kidney and adrenal gland. In the active
 Ovary during the breeding season some of the individual follicles can become very large,
taking up a large part of the abdominal cavity. In the old female bird the ovary has
contracted again and while follicles can be recognised much of the ovary is occupied by
scar tissue.
cranial pole of the kidney. In juvenile birds, only the suspensory ligament characterizes
Aids lo Diagnosis
85
the female bird, because the ovary is very small and without follicles and may be not easy
t0 detect. Apart from sexing, evaluation of the ligament allows the judgement of the pos-
sible breeding performance of the bird (Lierz, 2006).
Biopsy
 Another possibility is taking of biopsy specimens under direct vision, using a secondary
cannula containing biopsy forceps or using a biopsy needle, to aid in the early diagnosis
of tuberculosis of the liver. Samples can also be taken from other organs for culture and
histopathology. Fluids can be aspirated from an air sac under direct vision or small quanti-
ties (up to 3ml in a large bird) of fluid can be instilled into the air sacs to obtain sample
washings. For further information about avian endoscopy consult Murray et al. (2o02).
Other uses for the endoscope
       n     o   g
the choanal opening. The trachea, the syrinx and bronchi may also be inspected. Before
the latter is examined the posterior air sacs are cannulated to allow the partially obstructed
respiration to proceed. The ease with which all these cavities can be viewed will obviously
depend on the size of the bird. It is also possible to visualise the oesophagus, crop and
proventriculus of a bird as small as 40g in body weight.
Laparoscopic photography
Special cameras can be used for clinical documentation of the organs viewed through the
endoscope. Adaptors and stepping rings can also be obtained so that the telescope eyepiece
can be coupled to the standard lens of any single lens reflex or digital camera. The best
results are obtained if a xenon flash tube is incorporated in the light source, but this
increases the initial cost of the equipment. For photography it is better to use a 5mm
diameter endoscope which transmits more light than the smaller diameter instruments -
less exposure of the flm being necessary. Nevertheless, it is possible to obtain reasonably
good results with a 2.7mm diameter endoscope, using traditional flm (ISO 64), with
exposures of the order of 0.25-0.50 seconds. Film with higher ISO will produce even
better results.
Digital cameras should theoretically make the task much easier as they can operate at
much lower light levels without the need for a xenon flash incorporated into the endoscope
but obviously the camera's built in flash needs to be turned off, which may not be possible
with all digital cameras. One needs a steady hand, good anaesthesia and an assistant to
operate the shutter of the camera with a cable release. The camera lens is focused at infin-
ity and set to the maximum aperture before coupling to the endoscope. If the camera has
interchangeable viewing screens a clear screen is best. All these problems can be overcome
if using the latest apparatus (Fig. 4.3), which has a built in monitor from which photo-
graphs can be obtained.
RADIOGRAPHY
As birds tend to show hardly any specific clinical symptoms and as the number of diag-
nostic methods is limited in most pet birds, radiography in avian medicine is even more
important than in mammalian medicine. It is a fast and useful, routinely performed aid
to diagnose abnormalities of the skeleton, but also of the inner organs.
Restraint
Although often performed under isoflurane anaesthesia, radiography may be routinely
carried out without anaesthesia without problems in most birds, having the conscious bird
86
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.6 (a) Reslraint for venro-dorsal position wilth a Perspex plate. (b) Restraint for latero
lateral posilion with a Perspex plate.
restrained on a custom-made radiolucent Perspex? plate (Figs 4.6a and 4.6b). The head
is fixed with a special head clamp positioned over the bird's neck; the feet are fxed by
foot straps; the wings are restrained with tapes or weights.
wild birds, however, this is not required for routine radiography in birds accustomed
to human contact. The advantage of not resorting to anaesthesia is getting through
the radiography procedure more rapidly than when employing anaesthesia and in
avoiding the possible side effects for the human operators and the birds by using
inhalation anaesthesia. The advantage of restraint using a Perspex? plate is radiation
Aids to Diagnosis
87
 ss r  si sq n rn pd sss a 'ra a o 
probably not even higher than for inducing anaesthesia. The Perspex? plate enables the
radiographer to position the bird carefully with correct centring and collimation of the
X-ray beam.
If, in exceptional circumstances, it is necessary to use manual restraint, the person
involved should have regard to the current Health and Safety regulations in force in their
country. Manual restraint is required in very sick birds likely to suffer from shock and in
large birds weighing more than 2kg. With this method the operator's hands should never
be within the primary beam, additionally they are protected from scatter radiation by use
of lead gloves. Proper correct restraint with adhesive tapes placed over the limbs and neck
and stuck to a radiotranslucent Perspex sheet can only be achieved in anaesthetised
birds.
Positioning
Radiographs, to be of maximum diagnostic value, should be obtained only after care has
been exercised to obtain a true ventro-dorsal and exact latero-lateral position of the
patient. This is tedious and needs meticulous assessment by the operator to judge by sight
and touch that in the ventro-dorsal position the sternum overlies the vertebral column.
Furthermore, in order to avoid superimposition, the legs should be stretched as far as
possible caudally and the wings stretched outwards away from the body. If correct posi-
tioning is not achieved, the two sides of the body cannot be accurately compared, which
is especially important in the ventro-dorsal view as the symmetry between the left and
right sides and any alterations may only be judged in this plane. Apparent distortion of
various structures and body cavities, which has no clinical significance, may be seen. The
air sacs on one side may look smaller than those on the other side of the body. The shadow
of the liver and the position of the gizzard may become distorted.
In the true latero-lateral position the two hip joints and the two shoulder joints should
 siam no sadi a apoq n aoqe aesip pie aq is sm au da
the legs need to be stretched caudally as far as possible so that their radiographic image
does not obstruct any part of the body which is of radiographic interest (e.g. the spleen,
the reproductive tract, the intestine).
When radiographing the wings in a ventro-dorsal positioned bird (medio-lateral projec-
tion of the wing) care should be taken not only to have both wings in a flat position and
as close to the X-ray film as possible but also to make sure that both wings are extended
to the same degree. It is very helpful in making a diagnosis to be able to compare the
radiographic image of the two wings.
The second plane necessary for proper diagnosis of wing alterations is the caudo-cranial
projection (as in latero-lateral recumbency of the body the wings would be shown in the
"headstand’ (Figs 4.7a and 4.7b), so that it is turned with the head upside down on one
edge of the table/cassette. The wing is then extended laterally as far as possible and placed
onto the cassette so that its cranial border comes to lie parallel to the edge of the
cassette.
Films and exposure factors
One of the greatest problems in the radiological examination of birds is the loss of sharp-
ness due to movement and high respiratory rates. Therefore the maximum exposure times
e a  a e sr s ss ro ss oooo s po
 or a radiographic apparatus with a minimum performance of 200-300 mA (trwo- or multi-
phase generator). Digital radiography does not automatically solve this problem - in fact
the resolution power of digitals is lower than that of flm/screen combinations commonly
used in avian medicine.
88
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.7 (a) Caudo-cranial projection of the right wing viewed from above. (b) Caudo-cranial
projeclion of the right wing viewed obliquely from a horizontal perspeclive.
the type of apparatus, the focus/flm distance, the flm, the screen types and the processing
of the film. In radiography of most pet birds the kV values should not be higher than 45-
 55 kV in order to obtain pictures of high contrast with many shades of grey. The general
distance between flm and focus should be about 1m. A possibility for lowering the radia-
tion dose is to reduce this distance, but the picture quality may be affected because of
enlargement and poor defnition of those parts of the object more distant from the flm.
Therefore only a high defnition flm/screen combination should be used, with a maximum
reduction of distance to 60-70cm. Those intensifying screens permit also a reduction of
the radiation dose and therefore of the exposure time. Compared with conventional screens
(calcium tungstate), rare-earth screens provide a greater intensification at similar defnition
Non-screen films may hardly be used to obtain greater detail, because they require a much
Aids to Diagnosis
89
higher radiation dose or increased exposure times. Mammography flms may be used,
especially for the skeletal system, however again they require higher exposure times. The
 s a   s  n si no si s po s
Interpretation
The radiographer should be aware that there is only a difference in size in the air sacs
between the inspiratory and expiratory phases of the respiratory cycle - no differences
may be noted in the lung tissue. However due to the very rapid respiratory rates of the
relatively small avian patient, it is commonly not possible to trigger or complete the whole
exposure at the end of the inspiratory phase (when the air sacs are at maximum dilation
so that optimal use is made of the natural contrast in the avian body).
Many diseases are multisystemic, so that it is a good policy to get into the habit of
examining whole body radiographs in a systematic manner. One should start with the
external outline and work inwards, so that each organ system can thus be considered in
detail. A common fault is to fx attention on an obvious lesion and to miss less apparent
abnormalities.
Radiography of the musculoskeletal system
Bone
Radiography is an aid to avian orthopaedic surgery, and is helpful in assessing the degree
of distortion and prognosis in metabolic bone disease.
Most fractures of long bones can be seen easily in radiographs, but the diagnosis of
fractures of the bones of the shoulder girdle is more diffcult because of the muscle mass
 interpretation of those bones, otherwise the coracoid and the scapula are superimposed.
Fractures of the vertebral column usually involve the last thoracic vertebra before the
synsacrum.
Apart from diagnosing the type, extent, age (fresh fracture: sharp edges; older: rounded
edges etc.) and dislocation of a fracture, radiography helps to follow fracture healing
Physiological endosteal callus is hardly seen radiographically in birds. When an osteomy-
elitis is present in a long bone, new bone tends to be formed by the cortex of the bone
and by the endosteum rather than by the periosteum as is the case in mammals. Osteo-
myelitis may be recognized radiographically after 10-14 days.
Metabolic bone disease is most often but not only seen in raptors. It occurs in fledglings
(as rickets) which have not received a balanced calcium/phosphorous intake, which should
be about 1.5 : 1.0. This results in folding distortion of the thin and weak cortex of the long
bones. Gross distortion and pathological fractures occur frst in the legs (as these are the
frst parts that have to carry the weight of the growing body), later the vertebral column
(kyphosis) and the wings, which often results in a bird becoming a permanent cripple. The
disease is most likely to occur in the case of artificially-reared birds of prey fed entirely
On a diet of meat, which contains little if any calcium. Also it is not uncommon in fledgling
parrots, particularly when hand reared. One of a clutch of chicks will sometimes develop
the condition while its siblings are normal. The condition also occurs in wild birds.
Other conditions that can be recognised by radiography include osteoporosis (radio-
graphic picture similar to rickets), neoplasia, arthritis and tuberculosis. Neoplasia tends
to be predominantly osteolytic in birds. Arthritis is sometimes seen in pigeons with
Salmonela infection. Radiography of all the limb joints in the bird is easy except in the
case of the hip joint where the shape of the ilium makes outlining of the joint difficult
 In mycobacteriosis there is often localised osteolysis together with surrounding sclerosis
accompanied by focal densities in the long bones (Pieper et al., 1991). These signs in the
skeletal tissues are often seen together with soft tissue changes in the lungs (focal densities)
90
Essentials of Avian Medicine cnd Surgery
Fig. 4.8 Latero-lateral projeclion. Female cockatiel (Nymphicus hollandicus). Formalion of
physiological medullary bone (femur and tibiotarsus).
A physiological condition, often found incidentally during radiography, is the formation
  sq   s   a o  pnnos a jo
by the medullary cavities of the long bones - normally flled with air - becorming calcified.
In this condition the bone appears much denser on the radiograph and also sometimes
involves the bones of the skull. In case of pathological alterations of the genital tract that
g0 along with increased oestrogen level (e.g. egg binding with laminated eggs, ovarian
cysts, tumours), formation of this medullary bone may be a hint that the examiner is
dealing with a genital tract disease.
Another pathological condition is polyostotic hyperostosis (Fig. 4.8). In this condition,
medullary bone formation develops excessive periosteal and endosteal hyperostosis, espe-
cially in the region of the joints. This is not uncommon in the budgerigar and is occasion-
ally seen in other psittacines. The disease was believed to be due to excessive oestrogen
imbalances but newer studies from the University of Zurich/Switzerland could not prove
increased oestrogen levels in the diseased birds. So the cause of this condition remains
unknown, however it is seen often in combination with abdominal hernia and genital tract
disease.
Muscle
When viewing radiographs of the skeleton in the diagnosis of orthopaedic problems, one
should try and get as much information as possible about the muscular system. A reduc-
tion in size of one of the pectoralis muscles due to muscle atrophy can often be seen on
a radiograph though it may not be so obvious on palpation. It may be possible to detect
slight contraction and swelling of the muscle mass of the supracoroideus after rupture of
the tendon that passes through the foramen triosseum.
In the forelimb, the shadows of the biceps and triceps muscles can be identifed. A large
part of the latter muscle originates from the surface of the humerus and is liable to sustain
Aids to Diagnosis
91
frauma in fracture of the adjacent bone. The tensor muscles and tendon of the propatagial
membrane are often damaged. This may result from collision with such objects as
telephone wires. The flexors and extensors of the carpus and digits should also be
examined.
Signs of injury to muscles are shown by a subtle increase in their density when compared
with the other wing. Some idea of how recent an injury to the skeleton is can be gauged
by the condition of the neighbouring muscles. In a very recent injury there is a noticeable
increase in the size and density of the radiographic shadow. This usually decreases con-
siderably almost returning to normal during the course of the next few days, providing
the fracture is not compound and there is no superimposed infection.
Interpretation of soft tissue radiographs
Since the radiograph is a two dimensional shadow of a three dimensional structure, it is
essential to take both ventro-dorsal and latero-lateral views when radiographing the inter-
nal organs (Figs 4.9a,b and 4.10a,b). The ventro-dorsal view is especially valuable to judge
other hand allows better differentiation and shape/size verifcation of the individual
organs.
One of the most obvious features to be seen when frst looking at the avian ventro-
dorsal view is the *waist' between the shadow of the heart and that of the liver in granivo-
rous species. In carnivorous species generally the outline is less distinct due to the more
distensible proventriculus. If the hour-glass shape in corn eaters becomes indistinct and
merges into one uniform outline, this usually indicates an enlargement of the liver or the
Gl-tract or some other soft tissue structure in this region - the latero-lateral view is neces-
sary for verification.
The heart
Concerning the shadow of the heart, the examiner may judge size, shape and radiodensity
as well as the visualisation of the great heart vessels; however the radiographic signs are
non-specific and may give frst hints only to an existing cardiac disease. A more frm
diagnosis has to be made by other diagnostic methods, e.g. echocardiography. An enlarged
heart shadow may indicate any heart disease, such as hydropericard or a dilatation of a
heart chamber. Increased radiodensity is usually a sign of inflammation or congestion.
Furthermore, alterations in the cardiac shape may be suggestive of dilation of the heart
chambers or granulomatous lesions (e.g. of mycotic/mycobacterial origin). Increased
radiodensiry of any of the great vessels of the heart, particularly in very old parrots, indi-
cates calcification, possibly arteriosclerosis.
The liver
The radiographic shadow of the liver is in the ventro-dorsal view part of the hour-glass
silhouette in granivorous species. An increase in the hepatic size may alter the hour-glass
and lead to a displacement of the proventriculus in the latero-lateral view (best seen with
barium sulphate contrast). Hepatomegaly is seen in cases of intoxication, fatty liver degen-
eration, neoplasia as well as infections (of mostly viral and bacterial origin). In mynah
birds, some other Passeriformes and toucans a degenerative iron storage hepatopathy
is often responsible for ascites. The latter leads to nearly no differentiation of the inner
Organs in the radiograph. These birds are often in respiratory distress, consequently good
radiographs of this condition are not easy to obtain.
Gastrointestinal (Gil tract
From the GI tract the crop is seen just anterior to the thoracic inlet, partly filled with food.
An apparent increase in size on the left side of the hepatic shadow may be caused by an
(a)
D1
Fig. 4.9 (a) Venro-dorsal projechion. African grey parrot (Psitacus erithacus). (b) Key to Fig.
4.9a: T, Irachea; S, syrinx; Cl, clavicula; Co, coracoid; Sc, scapula, Cl.A.S, clavicular air sacs;
L, lungs; H, heart; Li, liver; Pr, provenriculus; G, gizzard; I, intestine; Ab, abdominal air sacs.
Aids lo Diagnosis
93
(a)
H
(b)
Fig. 4.10 (a) Latero-lateral projeclion. African_grey parrot (Psitacus erihacus). (b) Key to
Fig. 4.10a: T, trachea; S, syrinx; Cl, clavicula; Co, coracoid; Sc, scapula; L, lungs; H, heart;
Li, liver; Pr, provenriculus; G, gizzard; I, intestines; Sp, spleen; Ab, abdominal air sacs; Go,
gonads; K, kidneys.
increase in size of the proventriculus. A thickening of the wall together with an increased
density of the crop/oesophagus/proventriculus, seen best in lateral projections, may indi-
cate hypovitaminosis A or chronic infections (e.g. Candida). A defnite enlargement with
the organ occupying much of the thoraco-abdominal cavity is best seen using barium
contrast and usually indicates psittacine proventricular dilatation syndrome. Macror-
94
Essenlials ofAvianMedicineandSurgery
'going-light syndrome') as well as tapeworm infestation and/or Candida infection may
Occasionally cause an enlarged proventricular shadow as well.
The gizzard is easily recognisable in granivorous birds because of the retained grit and
normally occupies a position just to the left of the midline and just below an imaginary
line joining the two hips. Space-occupying lesions may be responsible for displacing the
normal position of the gizzard shadow. In raptors the non-grit-flled ventriculus (or
gizzard) is usually just cranial to this level and not so distinct. If a granivorous bird has
been given only soluble oyster shell grit, then the gizzard may not be identified by this
method. Also, a bird may have been deprived of grit. If the amount of grit in the gizzard
is excessive, this tends to indicate malfunction of the gastrointestinal tract.
Foreign bodies such as fish hooks, lead shot and nails are not uncommonly seen lodgec
in the oesophagus, the proventriculus or gizzard of water fowl, psittacines and ratites and
are sometimes also seen in other species. They may occasionally pass further along the
alimentary canal.
alisation of the intestinal loops. This is sometimes accompanied by gas filling and disten-
sion. These signs may also be indicative of microbiological or parasitic infection. However,
gas filling is normal in some waterfowl and in game birds. Foreign body obstruction of
 ases aui si se se jo dn-pnq e Aq paueduosoe Aensn iou si spnq u ausanu au
mammals. There may, however, be enlargement and greater visualisation of the intestine.
Gastrointestinal disease is also indicated by grit and, when using barium contrast, undi-
gested seed in the intestine.
Respiratory tract
There are a few interspecies peculiarities of the respiratory tract of which the avian radi-
ologist should be aware. In some species the cervical air sac extends subcutaneously along
the ventral side of the neck. Overall there is a considerable interspecific and sometimes
intraspecifc variation in the anatomy of the air sacs and also in the pneumatisation of the
bones. In the Anatidae (ducks and geese) there is a normal, balloon-like, irregular disten-
sion of the syrinx. This increases in size with age. In swans, cranes, spoonbills and birds
of paradise, the trachea is elongated into coils which lie between the skin and the pectoral
muscles or within a tunnel in the sternum. In penguins the trachea is bifurcated for most
of its length (see Figs 1.3 and 1.9).
In good quality radiographs the two lungs can be identified by their slight honeycomb
appearance in the latero-lateral view. The diagnostician should look for any slight increase
in density or patches where there is loss of the normal reticular pattern. Such localised
densities may be discrete and nodular when caused by mycosis. When bacterial infection
 is the cause, sometimes the patches of abnormality are more diffuse and very occasionally
are accompanied by calcification if the infection has been prolonged. However, no differ-
q   aq  se a e e pe  q 
radiography.
The air sacs should be carefully examined. The extrathoracic diverticula of the clavicu-
lar sacs can be seen in the pectoral muscle mass around the proximal end of the humerus.
 There is considerable interspecific variation in these diverticula. In case of overdistension
 in rsn an jo id rm an u sis e ie s sn 's ne sn jo
looking at the caudal air sacs, absence of their outline may be due to a space-occupying
lesion, or, more likely, due to adhesions 0r gross air sacculitis (Fig. 4.11). Less severe air
sacculitis is recognised by a general haziness of part or all of the air sac spaces in the
ventro-dorsal view.
In the lateral view, striated dense lines on the radiograph represent the end-on view of
thickened air sacs. Overdistension of the caudal air sacs, so-called ‘air-trapping' is again
due to a stenosis - this time in the upper respiratory tract (e.g. due to mycotic granuloma
Aids to Diagnosis
95
Fig. 4.11 Venro-dorsal projeclion. African grey parrot (Psitacus erithacus). Absence of the
ouline of the right caudal air sacs (mycosis). Gas-filled cloaca.
formation in the syrinx). In the ventro-dorsal view the left and right thoracic and abdomi-
nal air sacs should always be compared for any signs of localised increase in density due
to mycotic or bacterial infection. In pigeons the abdominal air sacs are often considerably
reduced in size due to excessive fat. An overall homogeneous “ground glass’ increase in
density, of both thoracic and abdominal cavities accompanied by obvious distension of
the caudal abdomen is usually due to peritonitis or ascites.
Thekidneys
The latero-lateral projection provides information about the size and radiopacity of the
kidneys, since the surrounding air sacs provide a good negative contrast. Active gonads
must not be confused with kidney tumours.
In the ventro-dorsal projection, the kidneys are superimposed upon by the gastrointes-
tinal tract, therefore only high-grade alterations can be diagnosed. Enlargement of the
renal shadow is interpreted as a non-specific sign of many generalised infections, as well
 as non-infectious causes like vitamin A deficiency, kidney cysts and neoplasia. In cases of
massive enlargement of the kidneys it may be necessary to have recourse to contrast radi-
ography in order to define the kidneys against the surrounding organs. This could involve
GI contrast or renal contrast. In severe dehydration, gout and vitamin A deficiency, there
tends to be an increased density of the kidney shadow, but this is diffcult to evaluate. The
presence of radiodense deposits in the kidney is readily demonstrated in both of the stan-
dard planes. Such crystals are evenly distributed throughout the organ and are due to the
precipitation of uric acid and/or renal calcinosis. They occur in chronic kidney infections,
96
Essentials of Avian Medicine cnd Surgery
indicating renal insufficiency, often in association with a high blood uric acid level, but
they are not specific for gout. They are also seen after prolonged fluid deprivation.
Reproductivetract
Considering the gonads, one must differentiate between pathological enlargement and
physiological activity, but the clinical fndings give the necessary indications. Budgerigars
 are particularly prone to gonadal neoplasia which causes massive enlargement of the organ
resulting in pressure on the air sacs and ventro-caudal displacement of the gastrointestinal
fract (seen with barium-sulphate contrast studies). Alterations in the size and shape of the
gonads, as they occur, for instance, in cystic ovaries, are often associated with other
radiographic features such as polyostotic hyperostosis and abdominal hernia.
In some cases of salpingitis the oviduct's shadow is enlarged and more dense than
normal. In birds with egg retention the egg can often be palpated, provided it is calcified.
A radiograph is not only necessary to provide information about the form, size, number
and position of eggs, it can also help to decide berween their surgical and non-surgical
without a calcified shell or with a very thin shell and other soft tissue masses (for example
tumours or cysts) in the thoraco-abdominal cavity.
 Laminated or thin-shelled eggs may be the cause of egg-binding in birds, with or without
radiographically diagnosed medullary bone. Also in birds with ovarian cysts and gonadal
tumours, medullary bones are often seen in radiographic examination. Medullary bone is
therefore a helpful fnding in radiographs with otherwise unclear fndings. However, it is
also found in other disease processes, and no definite conclusion on the existence of a
pathological process can be made on this basis. On the radiograph, the laminated eggs
produce a distinct soft tissue shadow, but there may also be evidence of an abdominal
hernia and displacement of the gastrointestinal tract.
The spleen
The spleen is seen sometimes on the lateral projection. It shows as a relatively small round
Although in normal birds the spleen may not always be recognisable, when it is enlarged
due to neoplasia or infection it is easily seen. In psittacines a great increase in size accom-
The use of contrast media
There are positive (barium or iodine compounds) and negative (air) contrast media. The
most common contrast media are barium compounds for demonstration of the gastroin-
testinal tract. Indications for this method are, for example, diseases of the gastrointestinal
fract with retarded or accelerated passage times, suspected abnormal content of the
gastrointestinal tract, diseases with alteration of the gastrointestinal walls, diseases of the
ds is i s  ns are in so   s
and position. In the latter case contrast media can help by showing the outlines of the ali-
 mentary organs and the border between the gastrointestinal tract and anatomically related
organs.
The bird should have a more or less empty GI tract in order to judge transit time. No
anaesthesia should be used, because this may cause almost complete cessation of gastro-
intestinal motility. When perforations are suspected, non-absorbable barium compounds
 po nm poq n) sp a ou  pasn aq nou o
250mg iodine/ml solution) may be administered in these cases, transit time being much
faster in this instance. Barium sulphate suspension is infused into the crop by an oesopha
geal tube made from any suitable diameter plastic or rubber tubing ftted to the nozzle of
a hypodermic syringe. A rigid metal catheter, smooth at the distal end, can also be utilised
Aids lo Diagnosis
97
Fig. 4.12 Latero-lateral projection. Budgerigar (Melopsitacus undulatus). Conlrast radiograph
with barium sulphate, 45 minutes affer the installation; soff rissue mass displacing he Gi ract
caudo-ventrally (renal umour).
for birds such as psittacines which are liable to nip off a softer tube. When using a rigid
tube, it should be well lubricated. The dose is 20mlkg body weight of a 25-45%
suspension.
After the administration, the bird should be held in an upright position for a few
minutes in order to avoid regurgitation of the suspension. The time taken for the suspen-
sion to reach the various parts of the alimentary canal will depend on any drugs used for
premedication and anaesthesia and also on any pathological condition that may be present.
On average the barium will have reached the proventriculus and gizzard within 5 minutes
and be in the small intestine within 30 minutes. It should have reached the cloaca in about
 3 hours at the longest in granivorous species. In raptors and particularly in frugivores, e.g.
mynah birds, the passage time may be considerably shorter.
Barium sulphate suspension or one of the iodine contrast agents such as iohexol or
iopamidol can also be used retrograde to outline the cloaca and rectum. Furthermore the
double contrast technique (10mlkg air, followed by 10 ml/kg positive contrast medium
orally or cloacally) is useful for the examination of the wall of the GI tract (Figure
4.12).
ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Utrasound is an additional non-invasive diagnostic imaging technique which is especially
useful in complementing imaging information gained by radiography. Whereas a radio-
graph provides a series of superimposed shadows of the external outlines of various
98
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
 internal organs, ultrasonography gives information about the internal structural changes
Occurring within soft tissue organs.
In the present state of knowledge, unlike radiography, ultrasound is thought to be
completely biologically safe for both the operator and the patient. It is painless, quick and
can normally be used on the hand held conscious bird without anaesthesia or sedation.
The capital investment in apparatus is expensive but once acquired the running costs are
minimal. Because of this the apparatus is unlikely to be acquired solely for use in avian
practice although a practitioner may have access to the equipment if it has been purchasec
for use in other species.
Despite limiting factors for the use of ultrasonography in birds (small size, limited
coupling possibilities), it has become a valuable and important diagnostic tool in avian
medicine. Main indications are the examination of the cardiovascular system and the
urogenital tract, as well as liver alterations. For some disease processes, e.g. pericardial
effusion, it is even the only definite possibility for intra vitam diagnosis.
Whereas the ultrasonographic presentation of the inner organs in healthy birds may
sometimes be diffcult to interpret, the situation in diseased birds is often characterised by
Organomegaly, displacement of the air sacs and fluid accumulations which improve the
image quality considerably.
Technical equipment and examination procedure
The ultrasonographic examination of birds requires electronic probes with small coupling
7.5 MHz. Best results are obtained using scanners developed for human pediatric medicine
as well as for operative or gynaecological use.
For echocardiographic examinations a high frame rate is necessary to get images from
defined cardiac stages such as systole and diastole.
Since the content of the gastrointestinal tract may disturb the ultrasound beam, birds
should have a more or less empty GI tract. Anaesthesia is commonly not necessary for
Sr p r     q  nd a a 
or - better - in an upright position. There are two main approaches:
1. The ventro-median approach is the main approach. The ransducer is coupled in the
median directly behind the caudal end of the sternum.
2. The parasternal approach may be used in birds with suffcient space between the last
rib and the pelvic bones, e.g. pigeons and some raptor species.
The scanner is coupled on the right side of the bird, because on the left side the gizzarc
might disturb the penetration of the ultrasound waves. The leg is pulled either backwards
or forwards and the probe has to be pressed slightly to the body wall to compress the
underlying air sacs.
 Feathers in these areas have either to be plucked or parted only. In most psittacines,
for example, separating the feathers is suffcient in most cases. A commercially available
water-soluble acoustic gel should then be applied to ensure a good contact between trans
ducer and skin. These gels are well tolerated and can be removed from feathers and skin
easily after the examination.
Pathological alterations
The heart
The great advantage of ultrasound in examining the avian heart is the presentation of the
inner structures and therefore the morphological and the functional status may be assessed
However, due to anatomical peculiarities of the avian heart, the protocol (standardized
views) recommended for echocardiography in mammals cannot be used. M-Mode, a
Aids to Diagnosis
99
valuable tool for assessment of wall thickness and contractility in mammals, is not useful in
birds, since the avian heart is only visualized in longitudinal and semi-transversal views.
To date, B-Mode (2-D echocardiography) in birds is an established examination tech-
nique and reference values have been reported for several species. By that the inner struc-
tures of the heart, e.g. the size of the ventricles, the wall thickness of the interventricular
septum and the contractility of the ventricles are important parameters to evaluate the
cardiac morphology and function, as well as the left atrioventricular (AV) valves, the aortic
 s d n r a  a   an  s
hydropericardium and hypertrophy/dilatation of the right ventricle, which are often caused
by right-sided congestive heart failure.
The liver
The use of ultrasonography has led to a great deal of progress in the intra vitam diagnosis
of the internal structure of parenchymatous organs. The normal liver parenchyma is fnely
granulated and of homogeneous echogenicity. It is spotted with small to medium-sized
anechoic areas which, depending on the section, appear round, oval or long, have a hyper-
echoic wall and are clearly differentiated from the parenchymal structure. These areas
represent the liver vessels, but a differentiation in branches of the portal vein and hepatic
veins (which is possible in humans because of the differences in the structures of their
walls) is not possible. Dilated vessels are routinely diagnosed, e.g. in liver congestion.
Concerning the liver parenchyma, in most cases it is possible by ultrasound to differ-
entiate between inflammation, neoplasia, calcification, granuloma, cyst, fatty liver degen-
eration, etc. However it is not possible to predict the histological nature of a lesion from
its ultrasonographic appearance. Ulrasound-guided biopsies may be taken easily from
defined regions of the liver parenchyma according to the procedure as used in
mammals.
Reproductivesystem
Ultrasonographic demonstration of the gonads is only successful in sexually active birds.
The picture of active ovaries is characterised by the presence of follicles in different sizes
representing various stages of development (differentiable in the ultrasound picture) (Fig.
4.13). The active oviduct can be distinguished due to the presence of eggs and the lack of
contractility (in comparison to the intestines). Again cysts and neoplasia, as well as sal-
 pingitis and laminated eggs, are recognized routinely in the examination. Advanced inflam-
matory processes of the oviduct are also recognizable by increased thickness of the oviduct
wall.
The kidneys
 The ultrasonographic demonstration of normal kidneys is not possible due to their posi-
tion along the vertebral column and the surrounding abdominal air sacs. However, in
cases of kidney enlargement, the size and the parenchyma can be assessed not only in large
birds but also in smaller ones without problems. Again, as in the diagnosis of hepatic
parenchymal alterations, differentiation of renal inflammation, neoplasia, cysts, etc. can
e   r  i  tet  o  
tions (increased echogenicity), the renal tissue appears more inhomogeneous. However,
diagnosis of renal gout by means of ulrasound is diffcult; other techniques (radiology,
endoscopy, blood chemistry, biopsy) should be taken into account.
Gastrointestinal tract
Since studies of the use of ulrasound for the examination of the gastrointestinal tract in
diseased birds have not yet been documented, the value of ultrasound for the examination
of the GI tract in birds is limited in comparison to radiography. Identification of the normal
100
EssentlialsofAvianMedicine andSurgery
Krets
ID:2006-223
FPS:4h
06-07-2006
Pediatric
Hane:40186Bogon
6.5CLA/PU15:3年:36
5
Fig. 4.13 Ulirasound _ examinalion. Venfro-median (
 approach. Scarle-chested 
dparrot
[Neophema splendida]. Follicles in the ovary (A).
Krets
ID:2006
FPS:30
02-05-2006
neral
ne:3980d
6.5CLA/PU21:D6:22
[B]0/4.5cn]
P100DR
larus). Enlargement of he kidney (A) wih inhomogeneous echogenicily (*), umour; B, body
wall; C, total refleclion of spinal column bone.
appearance of the GI tract in the sonogram however is easy in case of the gizzard and the
intestinal loops. The gizzard is easily seen due to its large muscles and its large content of
 grit in granivorous birds as is the peristalsis of the intestinal loops. A retrograde filling of
the cloaca with fluid may help to assess the mucosa, e.g. in cases of papillomatosis.
Aids lo Diagnosis
101
Other organs in which there may be an indication for ulrasonography are spleen and
et al. (1991, 1995, 1997).
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Computed tomography (CT) is a method of using X-rays for diagnosis by producing
cross-sectional images of a body. It is a quick method for the examination of the
avian skeleton, particularly spine and skull, but also of soft tissues and the lungs. In con-
rast to conventional radiographs there are no superimpositions of tissues, and the com-
puter can produce three-dimensional images of organs. With the help of CT, radiodensity
     ssd sd e      s
indicated in patients with CNS symptoms, respiratory diseases or with swellings of tissues
of unclear aetiology. Figure 4.15 shows an example of a CT image of the head with
contrast.
Urography, sinography and angiocardiography using iodine contrast media are also
possible. Disadvantages include relatively high costs. For further information about com-
"(00) 1guuu pue 1araquadun (oo) ju za eznos insuos 0se Aqdeioui paind
Krautwald-Junghanns et al. (1993, 2005, 2006) and Helmer (2006).
Brilliance6
P
Kleintierklinik Lpz
Ex5523420060602
Vogelkinik39908Blaustirnamazone Chita
KOpfmitKM
2003Jul04M55234
Se:2539/8
AcC:6482
Im.97/194
2006Jun02
Ax1932.8
AcqTm10:26:27
KOpfmitKM
512x512
B
140.0kV
150.0mA
0.6mm-0.5:1
Tilt:0.0
0.0s
Lin:DCM/Lin:DCM/Id:ID
W:3127L:766
DFOV:6.0x6.0cm
A
Fig. 4.15 Computed tomography, conrast shudy (inrasinusoidal injechionj. Axial view. Blue-
fronted Amazon (Amazona aestiva). Solid mass (A), granuloma.
102
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) creates three-dimensional images of the patient using
an external magnetic feld. MRI is best used for the visualisation of different structures of
the CNS, abnormalities in soft tissues and tumours. It needs anaesthesia in every case,
because of the noise of the apparatus and the relatively long examination time. Very sick
patients may be at especially high risk, therefore - due to the fast examination time - CT
 may be superior for examining birds. No magnetic objects, for instance foreign bodies or
q snq an reu r i a s   m s
Helmer (2006) can give more details about MRI as an aid to diagnosis.
5
Post-mortem Examination
Amended by Professor Dr Maria Krautwald-Junghanns
Universitat Leipzig
Institute for Avian Diseases, Leipzig, Germany
There is probably no other way in which a clinician's acumen is increased than by
diagnosis will help increase the practitioner's diagnostic ability and indicate ways in which
the diagnostic routine can be improved.
 The owner of a single bird, be it a pet cage bird or a falconer's hawk, is often interested
in the cause of death and if there was anything he/she could have done to prevent death.
The client who has a flock of wild fowl or an aviary of birds that are chronically sick is
often willing to sacrifce one or a few birds to establish the cause of the problerm.
To be of maximum value, post-mortem specimens should be as fresh as possible. Owing
to the high initial body temperature of 40°C and to good body insulation of the feathers,
autolysis occurs rapidly in birds. However, sometimes a client will produce a carcass of a
soaked with cold soapy water and placed in a plastic bag with any excess air expressed.
The sealed bag should then be put in a refrigerator so that the body is kept at a tempera-
ure just above freezing but not frozen. The feathering helps to retain body heat, so cooling
    s      ssd s    
deep-frozen the fine cellular structures are ruptured by ice crystals. Such tissues are useless
for histopathology. However, in those specimens that are up to three days old and in
which no precautions have been taken to prevent autolysis, some useful information may
often still be obtained.
A post-morrem should always be carried out in a systematic and routine order so that
 nothing is overlooked or forgotten. Having a check-list to hand is invaluable.
The practitioner should realise that the gross lesions seen during post-mortem can only
provide a tentative diagnosis. Further laboratory tests will be needed for confrmation in
autopsy.
EQUIPMENT AND LABORATORY TECHNIQUES
● A check-list of all body organs to be examined
● Scalpel and blades
● Rat-toothed forceps
● Sharp-pointed dissecting scissors
· Spirit lamp or Bunsen burner
● Bacteriological culture plates, blood agar and MacConkey agar
103
104
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
● Bacteriological swabs in transport medium. However, do not use transport medium if
a swab is taken for a PCR test to detect Chlamydophila spp. The use of the transport
medium may give a false positive result. All living specimens have a better chance of
survival if placed in transport medium.
● Screw-top containers with 10% formaldehyde that should preferably be neutral
buffered. Use of buffered formaldehyde makes histological examination easier. When
harvesting solid organs, specimens should not be more than 0.5cm thick, otherwise the
formalin will not fully penetrate the tissue. At least ten times the volume of the specimen
is required as preservative.
● Screw-top sterile containers to contain tissues for bacteriological culture
● Slides. These can be used for:
o Bacteriological staining; if the slide is sterilised by heating in the flame, the bacterio-
logical swab will remain uncontaminated after the smear has been made on the sterile
slide.
 0 Slides can be used to make impression smears from liver, spleen, lung, gut, air sacs
and all organs with pathological fndings using Romanowsky stains. Liver smears can
be stained with modifed Ziehl-Neelsen (STAMP) or Macchiavello's stain for Chla-
mydophila inclusion bodies. Furthermore Ziehl-Neelsen stain can be used for the
detection of mycobacteria.
o If the bacteriological swab is rolled along the sterile slide instead of being smearec
across it, it can be stained with Wright's or Leishman's stain and then used for cyt0-
logical examination.
 o Slides can be used for simple smears of crop, proventriculus and gut content especially
in cases of Macrorhabdus ornithogaster mycosis or fresh dead birds.
● Strong scissors or even bone forceps for large birds
· Some sterile gauze swabs are sometimes useful if a blood vessel is inadvertently
punctured
● Sterile syringes and needles for the sterile collection of heart, blood and intestinal con-
tents for culture. If the ingesta are too viscid, a little sterile normal saline injected into
the lumen of the gut will make them more fluid. To collect sterile samples from the
interior of unopened hollow organs, frst sterilise the surface by searing with a hot
spatula before inserting the needle.
● At least one pair of sterile Petri dishes to collect tissues for virus isolation, as suggested
by Harrison and Herron (1984)
● Plastic tubes to collect and preserve organ samples for virological examination
● Good lighting, possibly combined with a magnifying lens
● A suitable board and dissecting needles for pinning out small birds.
which is not confned to parrots and is not uncommon in ducks and pigeons, there are
many other avian zoonoses.
EXTERNAL EXAMINATION
Before starting the post-mortem it may be helpful to X-ray the carcass, if, for instance, it
was suspected the bird was shot or suffering from metabolic bone disease or was involved
in some sort of an accident or was ill because of heavy-metal poisoning (e.g. fisherman's
lead weights, lead chewed from leaded light windows, etc.). X-rays will also show if a birc
has been microchipped.
Before opening the body a thorough examination should be carried out looking for any
of the external signs described in Chapter 3. External parasites are often a lot more obvious
Post-morlem Examination
105
on the dead body as they move away from the cooling surface of the skin. The specimen
should next be saturated with a quaternary ammonium antiseptic. This reduces the amount
of airborne feather debris. Feather dust can carry Chlamydophila spp and other organisms
and also contaminates the viscera when the carcass is opened.
The body is next pinned out on a board. In large birds the medial adductor leg muscles
can be cut and the hip joints disarticulated. Simpson (1996) suggests pinning the legs 0ver
the flexed wing tips to keep the wing feathers out of the way. Plucking the whole body is
unnecessary, however the removal of feathers along the midline in densely feathered
species, such as ducks and gannets, does help to make it easier to incise the skin cleanly
without damaging the underlying viscera.
INTERNAL EXAMINATION
The initial incision is made through the skin from the cranial end of the sternum to just
in front of the vent. The cut is then extended on each side just along the caudal edge of
toralis muscle and at the same time the condition of the muscle is observed.
The pectoralis muscle
Both sides of the pectoralis muscle should be similar and well-rounded. If the two muscles
are not symmetrical it may indicate an old injury or an inspissated and contracted abscess.
The muscle should be of normal red colour showing no sign of anaemia, hyperaemia or
bruising. The latter may be anything from bluish-black to green (within 24 hours) in colour
depending on how long previously the trauma occurred. Discoloration of abdominal
muscles may occur if they have had prolonged contact after death with the gut or gallblad-
der (if this was displaced caudally). Bacterial invasion from the gut into the surrounding
tissue can be relatively rapid in the uncooled carcass.
Incise the pectoralis muscles and look for any evidence of petechial haermorrhages in
the muscles which could indicate warfarin poisoning (Reece, 1982) (see 335) or vitamin
K deficiency. Note the observations of Fiennes (1969) mentioned in the section dealing
with disease of the lower alimentary canal. Also look for evidence of pale streaks in the
direction of the muscle fbres which may indicate sarcocytosis (see p. 317) or s0-called
leucocytoz0on infection (Simpson, 1991) (see p. 322): if suspected submit a specimen for
histopathology.
Exposing the viscera
The skin incisions are now deepened through the muscle and the lateral incisions are now
extended to the level of the costochondral junctions, which are either cut with scissors 0r
shears if very large birds, or, in small birds, dislocated by pressure from the handle of a
 r sn se ss sn ne s r  a n n n o iss
the large blood vessels leaving the heart.
The sternum now can be lifted upwards away from the underlying viscera. As this is
done examine the underside (anatomically the dorsal aspect) of the sternum together with
the general appearance of the organs. If the body cavity is flled with exudate, take swabs
for culture. There should be very little fluid in the normal coelomic cavity. Decide if the
colour of the tissues looks a normal pink or is hyperaemic, indicating a possible septicae-
mia. Discoloration on one side only, due to hypostatic congestion, would indicate the bird
 o  s a  re ais in    as r n q p
Even if heavy infestation with blood-sucking parasites had been noticed initially, there
may also be other less obvious contributing factors. The muscle may look dry indicating
dehydration or shrunken indicating cachexia.
106
Essenlials of Avican Medicine and Surgery
Examination of the viscera before removal from the body
 In egg peritonitis large quantities of yellow inspissated yolk material may cover the intes-
tines. Occasionally at this stage of the post-mortem the organs can be seen to be covered
with a scintillating sheen of urate crystals, indicating visceral gout.
Airsacs
The signs of air sacculitis may be seen and will become more evident as the post-mortem
proceeds. During the initial stages of air sacculitis the crystal-like clarity of these delicate
sheets of tissue is lost. They become increasingly opaque and thickened as exudate begins
tO collect between their two layers of cells. At frst this cloudiness is patchy but later
extends through the whole system of air sacs. Yellow caseous material becomes more
evident. There may be a varying distribution of discrete, 'suede-like', greenish-yellow,
disc-like plaques which show a necrotic centre. These may indicate Aspergillus infection
 pn ao r qms e on q p a os siso p (toe 'd as)
scopical examination.
Aspergillus lesions vary in colour from cream to bluish-grey, etc. Mixed infections of
also be taken and stained with Gram stain or lactophenol blue, when mycelia and the
sacculitis due to Escherichia coli (see p. 268), the thickened parts of air sac and caseation
tend to be more generalised and irregular in shape.
The minute black mites of the genus Sternostoma (see p. 332) may be seen in the air
sacs, particularly of fnches. Occasionally in falcons nematodes of the genus Serratospicu-
lum (see p. 327) may be seen in the air sacs (Cooper, 1978). These have also been seen
by the author in an immature herring gull (Larus argentatus).
The liver
 If the liver is ruptured and is accompanied by a large blood clot this could be due to a
blow over the sternum. In this case there will usually be signs of bruising of the overlying
muscle and skin. The liver may be bile-stained (in those species which have a gallbladder
- it is absent in many pigeons and parrots) due to bile diffusion from the gallbladder
through the dead tissue of the bladder wall- a process which takes place within a few
hours of death.
The patency of the bile duct should be checked by gently squeezing the gallbladder,
These birds may also show papillomata of the cloaca and/or oral cavity and oesophagus
The liver may be enlarged, and in fatty livers rupture will occur easily without any external
trauma. Enlargement of the liver is indicated by loss of the normal sharp edges, which
become rounded. If this is accompanied by faint areas of necrosis, which are seen at the
same time as a fbrinous or serous pericarditis and air sacculitis, death may have been due
t0 Chlamydophila psittaci (psittacosis) infection (see p. 277). An impression smear of the
liver, stained with either a modified Ziehl-Neelsen stain or Macchiavello's stain, may show
the pink intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies. Also in Chlamydopbyla spp infection the spleen
e po sr ti o dn sid p u ades u pp o prea aq nsn 
hepatosplenomegaly accompanied by subepicardial and subserosal haemorrhage may be
due to avian polyoma virus (see p. 300).
Pacheco's parrot disease (see p. 280) may cause liver lesions that mimic Chlamydophila
spp infection. These lesions tend to be more saucer-shaped and cause a faint yellow dis-
coloration which stands out against the mahogany-coloured liver. Other herpes viruses
(see pp. 280-5) affect other groups of birds and can cause necrotic foci in the liver. Prin-
cipal among these is the disease in falcons, storks and cranes. Pigeons can also be affected
by a herpes virus but this attacks mainly the young birds. In owls, herpes virus liver lesions
Post-mortem Examinatior
107
look more like avian tuberculosis, with small white or yellowish pustules up to the size of
a pea and possibly not raised above the surrounding surface. Some of the other organs
may be covered by these lesions.
Avian tuberculosis or even bovine or human TB in birds should not be confused with
the pin-head white or yellow necrotic foci of Salmonella, E. coli or Yersinia pseudotuber-
culosis. A swab stained with Ziehl-Neelsen and Gram stain may identify the organism.
Fiennes (1969) describes the liver as being a rich golden colour and somewhat swollen
and fatty in the case of septicaemic Salmonella infection.
In neonates the liver is normally a pale yellow colour due to lipidosis caused by the
metabolism of egg yolk from the yolk sac which is absorbed after several days.
In turkeys and gamebirds the black, circular lesions of blackhead due to histomoniasis
infection (see p. 320) may be found. If the liver is mottled with irregular, lighter-coloured
areas this may be neoplasia.
In fresh specimens it is possible to carry out a vitamin A analysis. A minimum of 1g
of liver is required and it should be stored and transported to the laboratory frozen.
Heartblood
If at this initial examination of the viscera there are signs of septicaemia, and the carcass
is fresh, a sterile specimen of heart blood should be taken. The surface of the organ is frst
sterilised by searing with the blade of a hot spatula. A sterile needle attached to a syringe
is then inserted into the heart for the withdrawal of blood. If the bird has not long been
dead it may be possible to make a smear and look for blood parasites. The blood obtained
should also be cultured and stained with Gram stain.
REMOVAL AND EXAMINATION OF THE ALIMENTARY
CANAL, SPLEEN AND LIvER
Removal of the digestive tract, spleen and liver should be carried out by cutting the lower
Oesophagus and incising the skin around the vent. The cloaca and the attached bursa of
Fabricius should be removed intact and care should be taken not to contaminate the rest
of the carcass. The spleen should be attached to the underside of the caudal end of the
proventriculus (anatomically the dorsal side), lying behind the gizzard.
The spleen
         q s  n r si s s
usually about one-quarter to one-third the size of the heart. Never ignore an enlarged or
angular-shaped spleen or one that may have ruptured. It may indicate Chlamydophila spp
(see p. 277) infection. However an enlarged spleen is not always present with Chla-
mydophila spp infection. If other signs are present, and the clinician is suspicious of the
presence of Chlamydophila spp, the spleen should be checked by using an impression
smear stained with the modifed Ziehl-Neelsen technique (see p. 73). If this is positive it
is wiser for the practitioner to proceed no further.
The spleen may be slightly enlarged and hyperaemic due to a septicaemic infection or,
as in the case of the liver, mottled with the foci of neoplasia. The signs of tuberculosis
(see p. 273), pasteurellosis (see p. 271), E. coli septicaemia and aspergillosis are similar t0
those seen on the liver.
The lower alimentary canal
Before dissecting out the gut, examine the pancreas, which is enclosed within the duodenal
loop and which can usually be seen before the alimentary canal is removed from the
108
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
of which is common in birds. If paramyxovirus (see p. 290) is suspected (particularly in
the Neophema parakeets) specimens of pancreas and also brain and lung should be placed
 in separate pots, cooled to 48°C and dispatched to a laboratory for histopathology.
The accompanying duodenum may look congested or distended with gas, which often
Occurs if the bird has been dead some time before post-mortem. Take a sterile sample of
 the contents, in the same way as harvesting a sterile sample of heart blood. Clostridia spp
(see p. 274) may be cultured.
If the ingesta are too viscid, dilute by injecting a little sterile saline. Examine the sample
for Coccidia, by simple smear, Gram stain and culture. The Gram stain will enable assess-
ment of the relative numbers of Gram+ and Gram- organisms. The latter should not be
predominant in most healthy birds.
Haemorrhage
Look for signs of intestinal haemorrhage, which could be generalised or patchy throughout
the intestine. If this is accompanied by pathological signs in other parts of the body it may
be an indication of Newcastle disease. However, the pathological signs of Newcastle
disease (see p. 288) vary greatly among different species and lesions may not be present
in any of the viscera. Always look at the pattern of pathological change in the intestine
together with other changes in the rest of the viscera. A single intestinal haermorrhage may
not be due to bacterial enteritis but rather caused by terminal venous congestion brought
on by right-sided heart failure as a result of toxaermia. A condition of stress enteropathy
has been described by J.R. Baker (personal communication). It is characterised by a seepage
stress can have occurred hours or days previously and the condition has often been noted
by the author.
Fiennes (1969) has pointed out that sporadic haemorrhage 0ccurring anywhere in the
body, both internally and externally and un-associated with any other signs, may be due
t0 vitamin K deficiency. Vitamin K is partially synthesised by normal gut flora. This may
have been disrupted by disease of the bowel or indiscriminate use of antibiotics. Haemor-
rhage may be due to warfarin poisoning as mentioned previously when discussing exami-
nation of the pectoralis muscle.
Caeca
Examine the caeca; these vary considerably in shape and size in different species (see Fig.
1.8). They are large and obvious in poulry, in passerines they are small and in
 o  a u sp a a u rn are ka sd pe s
turkeys, chickens and game birds, the lesions of blackhead (see p. 320) may be seen. The
caeca are swollen, the mucosa extensively ulcerated and the lumen contains a lot of
necrotic material. In Salmonella infection, the caecal wall may have a white, glistening
appearance.
Lumen
After an external examination of the bowel the whole alimentary canal should be opened
t0 expose the lumen. The interior may be filled only with a green fluid without any ingesta,
indicating anorexia. The lower intestine may contain grit or undigested seed from the
gizzard, indicating increased peristalsis. The mucosa of the bowel may be congested and
swollen or flaccid and dilated. If the lumen is flled with catarrhal exudate this could be
caused by a parasitic infection.
The contents of the bowel and scrapings of the mucosa should be examined for
Coccidia or Capillaria (up to 1cm long) or helminth eggs or even Cryptosporidia (see
p. 315). In freshly dead birds a simple smear could be helpful to look for parasites e.g.
Spironucleus spp or worm eggs. The scraping should be stained with Giemsa to confrm
Post-mortem Examination
109
diagnosis, when numerous minute spherical organisms will be seen adherent to the mucous
membrane. For parasites the specimen is best stained with Lugol's iodine. The gut may
contain ascarid worms which may be so numerous as to cause impaction and rupture
bowel.
In the case of Salmonella infection the mucosa may show small nodules of necrosis.
Even if the gut looks normal it is always wiser to take a swab for Saimoneila.
Foreign bodies such as fish hooks and small nails are sometimes found in the lumen of
the gut and occasionally penetrate the bowel wall.
Proventriculus andventriculus (gizzard)
The proventriculus and ventriculus (or gizzard) should be examined for evidence of the
cheesy exudate of trichomoniasis, which is more commonly found higher up in the ali-
mentary canal. If the interior of the proventriculus is flled with mucous content, blood
or an ulceration of the mucosa then a straightforward smear should be examined for the
detection of Macrorbabdus ornithogaster (see p. 312). The proventriculus may be enlarged
and flled with grit and undigested food. This may be an indication of psittacine neuro-
pathic gastric dilatation (originally known as macaw wasting disease) (see p. 307), which
Occurs in all species of psittacines.
Striations seen in the muscle of the wall of the gizzard may be due to vitamin E deff-
ciency. The koilin layer of the gizzard of granivorous and herbivorous birds may be stained
with bile. If staining is intense or extends into the proventriculus this may indicate
antiperistalsis.
Cloaca and bursa of Fabricius
Lastly the cloaca together with the bursa of Fabricius should be examined. The latter
should be small and involuted in the adult bird. It is only easily recognisable in the young
growing bird, when it looks like a large lymph node. A prominent bursa of Fabricius
indicates persistent B-cell production to boost humoral antibody as a response to chronic
antigen stimulation from chronic infection such as paramyxovirus (see p. 288). The cloaca
may be impacted, with urate crystals forming a crumbling calculus, or it may be flled
with blood clot as the result of damage during artifcial insemination.
The mucosa of the cloaca can show signs of inflammation or neoplastic change (papil
lomata) sometimes seen in New World psittacines such as Amazon parrots and macaws.
EXAMINATION OF THE HEART AND ASSOCIATED MAJOR BLOOD VESSELS
The exterior of the heart together with the pericardium will already have received some
attention when the carcass was frst opened, but must now be examined in greater detail.
The normal heart of a bird is roughly triangular in shape; any tendency to a spherical
shape is abnormal. The pericardial sac should be examined for any increase in fluid
content, the amount of which is normally imperceptible. If the pericardium is unusually
opaque this may be caused by infltration with urate crystals. Examine the myocardium,
endocardium and coronary blood vessels for any sign of petechial haemorrhages, which
may be a sign of septicaemia or alternatively of violent struggling just before death. Occa-
sionally the right atrium may be found to be ruptured as a consequence of massive dilation
during circulatory failure brought on by an overwhelming disease.
The major blood vessels leaving the heart should be examined. At the same time look
for any signs of air sacculitis in the cervical and interclavicular air sacs. If this is present,
it may be productive to cut through the head of the humerus and take a swab from the
medullary cavity since this is connected to the anterior air sacs.
110
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
When examining the brachiocephalic trunk and the carotid arteries leading away from
it, the crop must not be damaged. The interior of the major blood vessels, as well as those
of the abdominal aorta and renal arteries, may show atheromatous plaques and these may
be so extensive as to apparently occlude the lumen of the vessel. They may also make the
blood vessels less flexible. These lesions are not uncommon in Anseriformes, Falciformes
and ostriches. They are occasionally found in many other species such as Psittaciformes
Young turkeys commonly suffer from dissecting aneurysms of the arteries, which can lead
to sudden death.
EXAMINATION OF THE CROP
Normally the crop wall is quite thin - in small birds as delicate as tissue paper. However,
where there is infection, as with Candida or Trichomonas (see p. 319), the mucosa of the
crop can become hypertrophied and noticeably thick. If the white, caseous exudate of
Candida is scraped from the mucosa, the surface will look rather like velvet.
Physiological regurgitation of seed is normal in the budgerigar when feeding nestlings
but there is no accompanying hypertrophy of the crop (J.R. Baker, 1984, personal com-
munication). Occasionally the crop will become impacted, a condition affecting all species.
The rapped food will ferment, with superimposed bacterial infection and inflammation
 e a j A r o d ros, jo n s a d an j
Brooks (1982) reports necrosis of the crop wall in a sparrow-hawk leading t0 a fistula
probably caused by a penetrating spicule of bone. Fistulas may also result from external
wounds or from scalding in hand reared psittacines. In cases of unexplained death,
ThE OESOPHAGUS AND OROPHARYNX
The whole of the oesophagus should be opened by making a parallel cut with scissors
along each side. If a pair of strong scissors or a pair of bone forceps (in large birds) is
inserted with one blade in the mouth, the quadrate bone can be cut and the lower jaw
disarticulated. The whole of the upper alimentary ract can now be examined.
 A caseous exudate could indicate trichomoniasis or candidiasis (see p. 310), or there
may be signs of an Aspergillus mycosis. The signs of all these infections can be confused
and diagnosis should be confrmed by laboratory examination. Trichomonads are some-
times difcult to fnd under the microscope. In a newly dead bird the mucosal scrapings
should be examined using a hanging drop method after mixing with a little normal saline.
Use a 620 objective and rack the condenser down. However, if the exudate is incubated
overnight in a trichomonad culture medium, there is no diffculty (A.S. Wallis, 1984; per-
sonal communication). The clinician should be aware that signs of trichomoniasis may be
superimposed on an underlying Chlamydophila infection (de Gruchy, 1983) or indeed on
 Other infections such as avipox together with hypovitaminosis A.
Excessive mucus in this region may be indicative of capillaria infection, and the worms
are sometimes easily seen in the mucus by naked eye although microscopical examinatior
may be necessary. Abscesses in the mouths of birds, particularly parrots, are not uncom-
mon and may be due to an underlying vitamin A deficiency. However, the small white
specks sometimes seen on the roof of the mouth in pigeons (A.S. Wallis, 1984; personal
communication) are not considered to be of any clinical significance; the lesions of avipox
are much larger. For differentiation of pathological signs the use of impression smears
could be helpful.
Haemorrhage into the choanal space or into the oral cavity may be noticed when the
mouth is frst opened. This may be as a result of trauma. Both wild and pet birds will fly
Post-mortem Exa mination
111
into window panes. Sparrow-hawks, in their enthusiastic pursuit of prey, may collide with
the same window pane as their prey and both be found dead together.
THYROID AND PARATHYROID GLANDS
After the crop has been carefully dissected to one side in order to examine the carotid
arteries, the thyroid and parathyroid glands should be examined (Fig. 5.1). Neoplasia of
the thyroid is not common in birds but a number of clinicians have reported seeing occa-
sional cases in which the signs exhibited before death are similar to those of thyroid dys-
plasia. Secondary hyperparathyroidism occurs in birds that have been fed almost entirely
on seed that contains very little calcium but excess phosphorus. If these birds have been
deprived of soluble grit, metabolic osteodystrophy or secondary nutritional hyperparathy-
roidism may follow. In these cases the parathyroid glands (Fig. 5.1) are somewhat enlarged
and white in colour. In the normal bird they are often diffcult to fnd.
RIGHT
LEFT
TR
Ng
.-Ng
UB
P
SCav
-UB
SCa,v
CVC
CVC
PB
RA
RV
LV
Fig. 5.1 Venral view of he blood vessels, nerves and glands at he horacic inlet of he
domestic fowl. The carolid bodies are on he medial surfaces of he parahyroid glands. A,
aorta; BCT, brachiocephalic frunk; CCa, common carolid artery; CVC, cranial vena cava; lca,
internal carorid artery; Jv, jugular vein; LA, leff alrium; LV, left venricle; Ng, nodose (distal
vagall ganglion; O, oesophagus; OAa, ascending oesophageal artery; OAv, ascending
oesophageal vein; OTBa, oesophagolracheobronchial artery; OTBv, oesophagolracheobron-
chial vein; P, cranial parahyroid gland; P, caudal parathyroid gland; Pa, pulmonary artery;
PB, primary bronchus; PT, pulmonary runk; RA, right alrium; Rn, recurrent nerve; RV, right
venlricle; SCa, subclavian artery; SCv, subclavian vein; T, thyroid gland; TR, rachea; UB, ulfi-
mobranchial body or gland; Va, vertebral artery; Vn, vagus nerve. Affer Abel-Magied & King
[1978), with kind permission of the editor of the Journal of Anatomy.
112
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
The palatine choanal opening
 Mites may sometimes be found inhabiting this area. Look for any sign of infection in this
region. The upper beak should be cut across just in front of the cere and the sinuses
examined. They may contain catarrhal or caseous exudate or there may be a blood clot.
The glottis and trachea
 q    s a    no ss aq  
[wo paralll cuts. The mucosa may be congested or there may be signs of fungal infection.
In those birds that feed on invertebrates, and this includes a wide range of species, the
nematode Syngamus trachea (see p. 326) is commonly found, particularly in young birds.
Occasionally a foreign body such as a seed is found obstructing the trachea. Caseous
plaques are not uncommon in the region of the syrinx and may partially occlude the
airway. These lesions should be crushed on a slide and stained with lactophenol cotton
blue (methylene blue stain also works reasonably well). Look for signs of mycotic
infection.
The lungs
 The air sac system has already received attention when frst opening the carcass. The lungs
should be examined in situ and then carefully eased away from the adjoining ribs using
the handle of a scalpel. Look for any evidence of abscessation (sometimes only found on
the dorsal surface of the lung) or look for haemorrhage. If this is present examine the
adjacent rib. There may be signs of a recent or old fracture. Lungs that are dark in colour
and exude moisture when compressed are oedematous. This can be due to the inhalation
of toxic fumes, such as carbon monoxide from a faulty gas heater, polytetrafluoroethylene
(Teflon?) from a chip pan fre or from the fumes of an industrial waste plant upwind from
an aviary. Section the lung and look for smoke particles.
Haemorrhage into the lung substance may be agonal (unorganised clot) and occur as
the result of right-sided heart failure. It may also be the result of inflammatory change. If
the lung looks solid, try and float a piece in water. If there is pneumonic change the piece
of lung will sink. Also, if the lung is solid, sear the surface with a hot blade and take a
bacteriological swab through a cut into the sterilised area. Also send samples for
histopathology.
 THE GONADS, THE ADRENALS AND KIDNEYS
First look at these organs in situ. It may then be possible to strip them out in one piece
from their “bed’ ventral to the synsacrum. This is attempted by gripping the fascia just
cranial to this group of organs, peeling back gently and easing the organs out with closec
scissors. However the sacral plexus transverses the kidney and so makes complete removal
diffcult. In small birds the kidney and the synsacrum may have to be removed in one
piece.
Ovaries and testes
Both ovaries and testes vary considerably in size according to the maturity of the bird and
the breeding season. In both cases there may be a total or partial pigmentation (black or
dark green) of the gonads - which is normal in some species (e.g. cockatoos, gulls and
Others). In the ovary affected with Salmonella pullorum disease, the follicles may become
misshapen and angular instead of being globular. The disease has been diagnosed in many
species.
Post-morlemExamination
113
in the ovary, examine the bones (ribs, vertebrae, sternum, humerus and skull) to see if
there is any distortion or increase in solidity. The condition of polyostotic hyperostosis is
not uncommon in budgerigars and may occasionally be seen in other birds. It is most often
frst noticed during radiography (see p. 90) and may be associated with an increased level
of oestrogens seen in females with neoplastic change in the ovary and in male birds with
sertoli tumours.
Adrenal gland
The adrenal gland, closely associated with the cranial end of the gonad, is normally a pale
it may look almost white in colour. The adrenals may be enlarged in the chronically
stressed bird.
The kidney
The kidney may be hyperaemic, together with the rest of the viscera in septicaemic condi-
tions. Alternatively it may be grey in colour, due to cloudy swelling. The kidneys may
show any of the signs seen in the liver due to infectious disease mentioned above. The
kidney may be pale in colour, the tubules and the ureters may be prominent when impacted
   s   s   s    
Salt poisoning results in marked deposition of urates. This condition is sometimes seen
in aquatic birds in time of drought or in pet parrots fed salted peanuts or crisps
Occasionally neoplasms or aspergillosis granulomas are seen in the avian kidney. These
may result in pressure on the sacral plexus. In geese and some other Anseriformes swollen
kidneys covered in white patches may be caused by Eimeria truncata.
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
The peripheral nerves
After the kidney, examine the nerves of the sciatic plexus where these leave the spinal cord
 ae  no   rn s  s a q a p
the intercostal nerves should be examined for signs of irregular thickening typical of
Marek's disease (see p. 283), seen in poultry and occasionally in falcons, owls and pigeons,
and possibly other species. The thickening of the nerves is caused by lymphocytic infltra-
tion resulting in tumours as in the viscera. Take a length of nerve from either the sciatic
or brachial plexus, stretch it out on flter paper, leave to dry then fix in 10% formaldehyde
for histopathology.
Neoplasia of the hypophysis, or pituitary gland
In any bird but particularly budgerigars exhibiting polydipsia/polyuria and CNS signs ante
mortem this gland should be examined. It lies in a fossa dorsal to the basisphenoid bone,
which forms the cranial part of the brain case. The organ is immediately caudal to the
optic chiasma. It is roughly a 2mm globe in the budgerigar.
The brain
During removal of the skin covering the head, evidence of subcutaneous haemorrhage may
be seen. This is only signifcant if there has been a lot of bleeding. Next fnd the foramen
magnum and in small birds insert the blade of a scalpel; in larger birds a pair of strong
scissors or bone forceps will be needed. Cut around the cranium on each side and raise
 an j     no   an    a
sometimes quite extensive, are of no signifcance and are caused by blood extravasated
11 4
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
from blood vessels very soon after death. However, an organised blood clot, either over
or under the meninges or in the substance of the brain, is important. This is so, even if
the blood is not clotted, and may be evidence of concussion, particularly if there is also a
matching bruising of the skin, or haemorrhage into the nasal cavities.
THE SKELETON
Before finishing the post-mortem, examine those parts of the skeleton that were not exam-
ined when looking for Marek's disease. Open and look particularly at the joints. Greenish
discoloration in the muscles around the joints is evidence of bruising. Signs of a septic
arthritis of the joints with discharge of exudate may be signs of Salmonella infection in
pigeons and poultry. The articular cartilage may also show petechiae.
Urate crystals as well as subcutaneous tophi may be seen in the joints of those birds
affected with visceral gout. For the muroxide test to confrm the presence of urate crystals
see Chapter 3.
Cut off the head of the femur and sample the medullary cavity for blood-borne bacteria
and examine the blood corpuscles for signs of any cellular disorder.
6
Medication and
Administration of Drugs
A problem for the busy practitioner in his consulting room is being presented with an
obviously sick bird brought in by an anxious and sometimes demanding owner. He is
required to reach an instant diagnosis and to initiate appropriate and immediate treatment.
bird is suffering from a bacterial infection and to dispense a soluble antibiotic. Whereas
the original oxytetracycline powder was commonly used in the past, nowadays it may be
doxycycline (Ornicure) or one of the fluoroquinolones (enrofloxacin or marbofloxacin).
The owner is told to put some of this in the drinking water each day.
This routine is not only ineffective, it may in fact decrease the chances of the bird's
recovery by disturbing the normal bacterial flora of the alimentary canal. In addition, it
increases the chances of the emergent antibiotic resistant strains of bacteria, some of which
may be pathogenic for humans. Gerlach (1994) has shown that tetracyclines can cause a
 transient rise in corticosteroids and suppress the immune system by inhibiting the activity
of macrophages.
 If the practitioner cannot persuade the client to let him/her hospitalise the bird so that
a more accurate diagnosis can be made, it would be more logical to assume the sick bird
is vitamin deficient. The metabolic turnover of the B vitamins is rapid, many birds in cap-
tivity are maintained on a restricted diet and some are chronically short of vitamin A.
These vitamins can be given safely in the drinking water or by injection and will give the
practitioner a little more time in which to make a more considered diagnosis, aided by
taking samples for laboratory investigation.
ASSESSING THE WEIGHT OF A BIRD
To administer adequate and safe medication, the bird must frst be weighed. Today small,
inexpensive, digital scales are readily available for weighing even small birds (see Vetark
maintain them in flying condition (i.e. at optimum flying weight) and may be able to tell
you the weight of the bird. Ducks, geese and similar birds may be put in a sack, with the
head out and the sack tied around the bird's neck or may be placed in a box or other
suitable container for weighing.
If for some reason it is not practical to weigh the bird then reference may be made t0
a table of bird weights (see Appendix 8). However, the clinician should be aware that
weights in normal birds can vary at least 25% on either side of the mean weight for the
species. In sick or starved birds the deviation from the mean weight could be greater.
115
116
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
CALCULATING THE DOSE OF DRUGS
Few medicines are marketed specifically for use in birds. Doses are therefore based on
anecdotal reports or have to be extrapolated from the doses advised by the manufacturer
for use in dogs, cats and small mammals. However, birds have a higher metabolic rate
than mammals and the rate increases as the size of the creature decreases. There are also
addition, other factors, such as the density of feather covering, are involved.
 In general, the higher the metabolic rate the faster are drugs absorbed, metabolised and
cleared from the body. Nevertheless, Bush et al. (1979) have pointed out that there are
anomalies to this pattern, resulting from the many metabolic and subtle anatomical dif-
ferences even between closely related species such as the psittacine birds. The pharmaco-
kinetics of drugs in most species of bird need much more investigation, as has recently
been highlighted by Donita et al. (1995).
 If there is not a recommended or proven dose for a particular circumstance then it is
best to calculate the dose from the bird's metabolic/effective weight using a method of
allometric scaling. In general, this is derived as an exponential of the body weight raised
to the power of 0.75. For example, if the recommended dose of a drug for a cat is 2 mg/kg
the dose for a budgerigar weighing 40g will not be:
40
x 2= 0.08mg
1000
But will be
(40)D.7s
x 2 = (0.040)p.75 × 2 =0.178
(1000)
which is well over three times as much as the original dose calculated on a weight for
weight basis. This of course is the total quantity to be given in 24 hours and will need to
be divided into a larger number of fractions to be administered more frequently than is
recommended for the cat. Doses given in this book are those used by other clinicians and
the author. They are not necessarily based on the metabolic effective weight and may need
to be adjusted in the light of future experience. Always be aware of any possible toxicity,
particularly in the case of a rare, valuable or unusual species in which the drug has not
been used before.
 THE ADMINISTRATION OF DRUGS
As in the case with mammals, medicines may be given to birds by a variety of routes, some
 of which are more effective and more appropriate to certain disease conditions.
Medication of the drinking water
This is a convenient method when large numbers of birds have to be treated, such as those
in a zoological collection or at a quarantine station or in a poultry flock. A number of
drugs are formulated for use in poultry by this method. The daily dose has been calculated
on the mean water intake of an average bird during 24 hours. At a very rough approxima-
tion, 150ml of water is consumed per kilogram of avian body weight daily. However,
there may be at least a 50% increase or decrease on either side of this fgure.
Medicalion and Administralion of Drugs
117
The water consumption of healthy birds varies considerably depending on bodily condi
tion, ambient temperatures, diet and species. Fruit eaters such as mynah birds and toucans
get much of their water from their food. Raptors may not drink very much. Some birds
whose normal habitat is desert (e.g. budgerigars) are able to rely almost entirely on meta-
bolic water (Johnson, 1979) (also see p. 21).
In the diseased bird, water consumption will vary even more; not only will this depend
on the normal function of the alimentary canal and kidneys but also on the health of the
upper respiratory tract. The nasal cavities in the bird are important organs of water con-
servation. Consequently drugs given in the drinking water must have a wide margin of
safety. A bird that is polydipsic could take in much greater amounts of medicament. At
best, blood levels of the drug are liable to be irregular. Antibiotics given by this method
are least likely to reach minimal inhibitory concentrations within the lumen of the alimen-
tary canal, providing the bird is drinking some water
 Nevertheless, birds are creatures of habit and sensitive to changes in their feeding and
watering routine. If the medication colours the water or adds a taste to it the bird is quite
likely to refuse to drink and its illness is made worse. There is little doubt that birds have
colour vision. The more brightly coloured the plumage of the species the more acute is
their perception of colour likely to be (see p. 30).
n jo r a  in j as a  s i i a s 1
buds per unit area is much fewer in birds than in mammals. Work quoted by King and
McLelland (1984) has shown that, dependent on the species, birds do have a defnite sense
of taste (see p. 36). Pigeons are apparently more sensitive than the domestic fowl. Bitter-
and salt-tasting substances tend to be rejected. Therefore a drug such as levamisole, with
a bitter taste, may not be readily taken by a species with a well-developed sense of taste.
Sweet substances such as sugars (but not saccharin) produce variable responses in indi-
vidual birds. Therefore adding these to medicines to make them more palatable will have
varying results.
One advantage to medicating the drinking water of a group of birds with an antibiotic
is that it reduces the number of bacterial organisms that may have contaminated the water
supply and so helps to limit the spread of infection. Another point in favour of the method
is that it is much less stressful for the bird than having to be caught up for medication.
However, many drugs quickly lose their potency when in solution.
If drugs for water medication are to be dispensed on a regular basis, it is more conve-
nient to have ready-weighed small quantities. These can be added daily to a known quan-
tity of water. Drinking containers for cage birds vary in volume so that it is simpler if the
quantities dispensed are sufficient to be added to a common household utensil, such as a
kitchen measuring jug (500 ml). This is used as a stock solution to keep the drinking con-
tainer filled. The remainder of the stock solution is discarded when the next quantity of
drinking water is medicated. The method is wasteful but the quantities of drugs dispensed
for birds are small and the method is simple for the client. Alternatively, smaller weighed
amounts can be dispensed, for example, suffcient to be dissolved in 50 ml of water and
at the same time a 10 ml syringe is dispensed so that the client can accurately measure the
volume of water to be used.
Medication by mouth
The same drugs used for medicating the drinking water can be given orally. Also there are
a number of human paediatric preparations suitable for oral administration in birds (e.g.
Abidec paediatric drops). Galenicals such as liquid parafn and formulations containing
kaolin and bismuth may also be used.
Although it is possible to administer liquid preparations using a syringe or a dropper
(not glass for parrots), or even to let the fluid drip into the mouth from the end of a
cocktail stick, it is not very satisfactory. There is a danger of inhalation of the medication
118
Essenlials ofAvianMedicineandSurgery
Table 6.1 Suiltable volumes [in mll for oral medicalion.
Type of Bird
Suitable Volume for
Oral Dosing (ml)
Canary
0.25
Budgerigar
0.5-1.0
Lovebird
1.0-3.0
Cockaliel
2.0-4.0
Amazon Parrot
5.0-10.0
African Grey Parrol
5.0-10.0
Macaw
10.0-15.0
and it can be wasteful and messy. It is more sensible to give the preparation using an
Oesophageal or gavage tube.
For many species a piece of soft plastic (used drip tubing) or rubber tubing attached t0
a hypodermic syringe works well. The length of the tube should be measured against the
bird's neck so that when the neck is extended the tube will reach well down to the level
of the crop or the thoracic inlet. The diameter of the tube and capacity of the syringe will
depend on the size of the bird. Birds the size of small finches (zebra) to swans can be dosed
by this method. In the swan a canine stomach tube and a 60ml plastic syringe are
suitable.
In some birds, particularly the parrots, it is imperative to use either a gag or
a au sijd ioe a '(at 'd as) raaes ieiu pi e ro pu s jo uds
since the procedure can then sometimes be accomplished by one person. During this
procedure the bird may need to be restrained by gently wrapping in a towel. Protective
gloves may be necessary but can often be dispensed with once the head is controlled.
out the typical avian S-shape curve of the cervical vertebrae. Having placed the
lubricated (use liquid paraffn or K-Y jelly), rigid tube in the mouth, it is then advanced
beyond the glottis and allowed to slide down the oesophagus under its own weight. No
stomach tube should ever be forced down - the avian oesophagus is thin and easily
ruptured.
Using this method birds can be accurately dosed and fed if nutrients are added to the
medication. Experienced nursing staff and intelligent owners can be instructed to dose
birds in this way. However, strict bygiene of the tube, syringe and utensils is necessary.
Suitable volumes that can be given by this method are given in Table 6.1.
When giving medication orally or in the drinking water it should always be noted that
the absorption of drugs from the gut can be adversely affected by parasitism, a diseased
mucosa and nutritional defciencies, particularly hypovitaminosis A. The absorption of
some antibiotics, such as penicillin, ampicillin and lincomycin, is reduced in the presence
of food. Oxytetracycline has a reduced absorption in the presence of calcium and magne-
sium and so will be affected if a bird is receiving soluble grit in the diet or the antibiotic
is given with antacids.
Medicating the food
If the practitioner is dealing with a situation where a large number of birds will need
medicating on a regular basis, then it may be possible to get a feed manufacturer to incor-
porate the desired drug in the pelleted feed (see p. 193). Most psittacine birds, will accept
pelleted food, providing it is introduced into the diet gradually over 2-3 days. For a useful
guide on how to introduce an unfamiliar food see Harrison's Foods in the list of websites
in Appendix 11.
Medication and Administralion of Drugs
119
Parrots will sometimes eat powdered tablets or the powder contents of capsules if these
are spread on sweet biscuits or on bread with peanut butter or honey. It may be possible
 aa sd os so s e s s o s as i 
crushing them. Seeds can be coated with a powdered drug by moistening the seed or adding
a little corn oil. However, if given too much oil the bird may become coated in it. Never-
theless, because most seed is dehusked by the bird before being swallowed, this method
of giving drugs is unreliable.
For the prophylactic administration of chlortetracycline to psittacines exposed to Chla-
mydophila infection, Ashton and Smith (1984) recommend the following mash:
● two parts maize
· two parts rice
● three parts water
The above should be cooked to a soft, but not mushy consistency. The drug is added
at the rate of 5 mg/g of cooked feed.
The food is prepared daily and a little brown sugar and seed is added for palatability (see
p. 36). At a rough approximation, most birds eat about one quarter of their weight in food
daily but small Passeriforme birds may consume up to 30% of their body weight daily.
Medication by injection
Intramuscular injection
Undoubtedly, this is the most accurate and reasonably safe route for parenteral adminis-
 p s    s     ss n 
leg can be used. Injection should go into the middle of the muscle mass. All sites have
advantages and disadvantages.
Pectoralis
If injection is made into the pectoralis this must be carried out at the caudal end of the
muscles. The veins are better developed at the rostral end of the muscle and there is a
much greater chance of accidental intravenous injection. Quite severe inflammatory reac-
tion can 0ccur in the muscle after injection (Cooper, 1983), but this is only likely to be
of any consequence with repeated injections at exactly the same site. Some falconers and
racing pigeon owners do not like the pectoral muscle used, since they believe the fight
muscles will be damaged. If the injection is made slightly to one side of the carina or keel
of the sternum then the needle is unlikely to go beyond the lateral edge of this bone and
penetrate the underlying viscera. Take great care in fledglings in which the bone rmay not
have been fully calcifed and is still cartilaginous. It is easy to penetrate this soft bone and
give the injection directly into the underlying liver.
leg muscles
Injections into the leg muscles have the same disadvantages regarding bruising. In addition,
the large ischiadic nerve may be damaged where it courses down the posterior aspect of
the femur. Also, injections into the legs may pass through the renal portal system before
      s     
with drugs that are excreted through the kidney in an un-metabolised state. Some part
of the dose may be partly lost before it has a chance to reach therapeutic blood levels
(Coles, 1984b).
27G x 12" needle and insulin syringes with a total capacity of 0.5 ml or 0.3 ml also with
a permanently attached 29G x V" needle are useful. Many drugs in aqueous solution can
be diluted in such syringes to measure very small quantities.
120
Essenlials of AvianMedicine and Surgery
Subcutaneous injection
This method can be used, but only one or two sites are suitable because the avian skin is
not very elastic and fluids tend to leak out through the point of needle puncture. If the
 area covering the pectoralis muscle is used there is little danger of damage to vital struc-
tures, but the needle must be advanced well under the skin and only a little fluid can be
injected at this site. A much better region is the precrural fold. Greater volumes (2 ml into
an African grey parrot) can be injected here and, provided the skin is picked up with
forceps before making the injection and the needle is not inserted too far, there is little
chance of damaging the subcutaneous nerves and blood vessels. Movement of the bird's
leg helps disperse the injection. Dispersion can also be aided by adding hyaluronidase (half
an ampoule or 75oIU) to the injection. Another useful site is the skin on the dorsal base
of the neck. Care must be taken to hold the loose skin of this area away from the underly-
       o    s
practical using these sites.
Intravenous injection
This is most easily given into the brachial vein, but the superficial metatarsal vein on the
t  a rni  ai s se sq s  pas aq  e an j as i
The medial tarsal vein is particularly useful for blood sampling or injecting large waterfowl
such as conscious swans. The jugular is useful in small birds. Both the right jugular and
the brachial vein can be used in the ostrich. Intravenous injection is not always easy not
only because of the small diameter of the vein but also because of the fragility of the vein
wall. Haematoma formation after intravenous injection is a common occurrence. However,
intravenous injection is an effective and important method of treatment in an emergency
where a bird's life is threatened by disease.
Intraosseous injection
This route provides a stable access port into the vascular system. The cannula (20-22G
needle with an indweling stylet - e.g. a spinal needle) can be left strapped in with Vetrap
self-adhesive bandage and used for several days.
An approach is made to the intramedullary cavity of the distal extremity of the ulna
with the carpal/metacarpal and carpal/ulnar joints held in a flexed position (see Fig. 9.2)
The proximal tibiotarsal bone can also be used for this purpose, using a craniomedial
approach through the plateau of the cnemial crest (se p. 191).
Intracoelomic injection
This method has been used by some clinicians but is not without the hazard of entering
One of the air sacs. A small volume of fluid is probably of no great consequence, and
in fact the method is suggested by Clubb (1984) as a method of treating disease of the
air sacs.
 If the injection is only to reach the coelomic cavity, the skin and underlying muscle
must be picked up by forceps to form a ‘tent slightly to the right of the midline. The
injection is made into this area, with the needle directed almost horizontally thus keeping
away from the underlying viscera. If a 16G x 0.5 mm needle is used, the injection should
Chapter 8). This procedure is carried out most easily in the sedated or lightly anaesthetised
bird and is most useful for euthanasia.
Intratracheal injection
Intratracheal injection has been used to treat disease of the respiratory system. Ampho
teracin B can be administered by this route. In small birds this is most easily carried out
MedicalionandAdministralionof Drugs
121
by using a mammalian intravenous catheter, cut short and attached to the syringe. The
drug is then introduced very slowly into the trachea through the glottis, easily seen on the
floor of the oral cavity. The bird's neck needs to be held vertically and slightly extended
and the tongue needs to be gently restrained on the floor of the mouth. The method is not
practical in the unanaesthetised parrot unless the bird is deeply sedated. There will be
some coughing but this is usually only temporary. Obviously the volume of fluid must be
kept to a minimum, though up to 1 ml has been given to pigeons and parrots (400-500g)
by this method.
Topical applications
The local application of ointments and creams can be used but these should only be applied
sparingly using a cotton wool bud. If too much is used the plumage becomes damaged. If
larger quantities of ointment have to be used then an Elizabethan collar will be necessary
oe are ie se ieido pn ss q p an dois o
Or dry quickly, such as tinctures, are more suitable. Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) is a useful
preparation applied to the legs and feet of birds. It is rapidly absorbed and may be used
as a carrier for other drugs.
Ophthalmic preparations
Ophthalmic ointments can be used but have the same disadvantages as other ointments
Ophthalmic drops are much better but their effect is very short and their use needs constant
handling of the bird which is a disadvantage. Subconjunctival injection of slowly absorbed
drugs is more effective and less stressful for the bird. The instillation of ophthalmic drops
into the nasal cavities for the treatment of sinusitis can be used, but direct injection into
the infra-orbital sinus is more effective. Also, misting the eye with a fne spray of sterile
water with the dissolved drug has been used effectively.
Subconjunctival injections
 jo 1os a rpn d aq ts sp po (soooo) se ns 
upper eyelid. These are usually antibiotics and short-acting steroids and can be very effec-
tive when a specifc diagnosis has been made. The author has also used the NSAID car-
profen. Since the technique requires the bird to be absolutely still, general anaesthesia or
deep narcosis is essential.
Injections into the infraorbital sinus
This technique is described in the chapter on surgery (Fig. 8.2). The method has been used
for many years for treating poultry and is quite applicable to many other types of birds.
Inhalation therapy
A major problem in the treatment of disease of the respiratory system is infection of the
air sacs. These thin-walled extensions of the lungs hold about 80% of the volumetric
capacity of the respiratory system. The walls are no more than two cells thick and have
no blood vessels. There is therefore a large dead space within the bird filled with warm,
moist air that is not very accessible to the bird's cellular and humoral defence mechanisms.
This area is subject to infection, particularly by Aspergillus fungi and coliform bacteria
The lungs, which have a good blood supply, are much less liable to be infected unless
challenged by massive infection. Unfortunately, air sacculitis can be present for some time
and can become fairly extensive, before outward signs are evident.
Inhalation therapy aims to saturate the air in this dead space and reach the internal
surface of the air sacs. To be effective the droplet size of the medication must be below
5 mm in diameter otherwise the droplet does not remain suspended in the air stream long
enough to reach the target area. Vaporising the medication does not work because most
122
Essenlials of AvianMedicine and Surgery
Table 6.2 Suilable doses (in mg] for inhalalion therapy, lo be
diluted in 15 ml of saline and administered over a 30-minute period,
 3-4 limes a day.
Drug
Suitable Dose (mg)
Amphoteracin
25-100
Tylosin
150
Chloramphenicol
200
Specinomycin
200
Gentamicin
50-200
Dexamethasone
3
of the droplers are too big and condense in the upper respiratory tract. To be effective the
drug needs to be administered by a nebuliser into a chamber in which the bird is housed
during therapy. The drug is mixed with a suitable volume of saline, or, better, with a
vehicle such as tyloxapol which aids better dispersion of the medicament. Suitable doses
are listed in Table 6.2. Some custom-made hospitalisation cages for birds incorporate a
nebuliser. Alternatively, a number of companies marketing veterinary equipment now
supply nebulisers, e.g. F10biocare (see website).
THE LOGICAL USE OF ANTIbIOTICS
No antibiotic should be used unless the clinician is reasonably certain that the bird is suf-
fering from α bacterial infection. However, there is sometimes a rapid deterioration in the
condition of a young or small bird challenged by an overwhelming infection. In these cir-
cumstances the practitioner may decide to start antibiotic therapy before the results of
laboratory tests to confrm his diagnosis become available.
Selection of antibiotics
If the antibiotic is required for systemic use it must be of low toxicity. It should penetrate
all the bird's tissues easily and the minimal inhibitory concentration of the drug should
be as low as possible. A swab should be taken from the choanal space, the oropharynx
 Or the cloaca, stained by the Gram method and examined under the microscope. This will
 at least indicate if the organisms present are mainly Gram- or Gram+ and show their rela-
tive numbers.
The autochthonous gut flora of most birds consists mostly of Gram- organisms; clinical
infection is usually dominated by one organism. This may indicate whether it is safe to
use an antibiotic that is principally active against the one or the other group of bacteria.
However, in the frst instance, until subsequent laboratory tests are completed, a broad-
spectrum antibiotic will usually be chosen. Ampicillin, amoxicillin combined with clavu-
lanic acid, trimethoprim combined with a sulphonamide and the quinolones (e.g. Baytril)
are all reasonable choices. If given by injection the quinolones, amoxicillin and trime-
thoprim combination are bactericidal but the tetracyclines (including doxycycline) are only
bacteriostatic and rely on the host's immune response to be effective.The results of more
extensive laboratory investigation, such as antibiotic-sensitivity testing from swabs taken
before and after starting antibiotic therapy may show that it is necessary to change the
antibiotic being used.
Bactericidal antibiotics are probably better in the frst instance. These drugs work only
on bacteria that are dividing. There is a school of thought that considers intermittent
exposure or less frequent dosage to be a more effective way of using the antibiotic
Medicalionand Administralion ofDrugs
123
Bacteriostatic antibiotics inhibit bacterial multiplication and give time for the mobilisation
of the body's defences. However, the maintenance of a plasma concentration for several
days, well above the minimum inhibitory concentration, is essential.
The use of broad-spectrum antibiotics inevitably has some adverse effect on the host's
normal bacterial flora, particularly that inhabiting the gut. Because of this, once the patho-
genic organism causing the illness is identifed, together with its sensitivity to antibiotics,
it is wiser to select an antibiotic that has a narrow range of activity.
If the bacterial flora of the gut is disturbed, then the administration of a probiotic may
help to restore the balance. This can be given by oesophageal tube at the rate of 2 ml/mg.
It is more logical to use a custom-made probiotic, such as Avipro-plus, which contains a
combination of microbial strains specific to birds. This is soluble and can be given in the
drinking water simultaneously with the administration of antibiotic.
In some cases of chronic infection the rate of maturation of the T-lymphocytes may be
depressed and cell-mediated immunity may be impaired. In these cases it has been dem-
onstrated in birds and mammals that levamisole, used intermittently, at a lower dose than
the normal anthelmintic dose, may have a benefcial and sometimes quite marked effect
on the progress of the disease.
THE USE OF UNLICENSED DRUGS
Although some drugs are listed in this book for use in a particular species, genus or class
of birds this should not be interpreted as meaning that the drug is offcially or otherwise
approved or licensed for use in a particular species, genus or class of bird, but only that
it indicates that, to the best of the author's knowledge, the particular drug has been used
as described. Under the present day law in the United Kingdom, preparations licensed for
use in other species, including humans, may be administered under the responsibility of a
qualifed veterinary surgeon who has the birds under his/her direct care and when no other
 's jo ss r sa sds rd  u a r s si p aess
further information in the UK the reader is referred to the R.C.V.S. Guide to Professional
Conduct.
7
Anaesthesia
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
 Before selecting an anaesthetic the practitioner should take into account the reasons for
its use.
Hypnosis and restraint
 Perhaps the main indication for using an anaesthetic drug is to produce chemical restraint
while radiography, endoscopy or some other non-painful procedure is carried out. There
are several inhalation anaesthetics or combinations of injectable agents suitable for the
purpose but which may have little analgesic effect.
Analgesia
The abolition of painful stimuli may be the prime consideration. If this is to produce
analgesia of a limited surface area then local anaesthetics can be used. These have not
been very popular with many clinicians in the past, particularly the drugs of the procaine-
based group, which have a reputation for toxicity. This is most probably because many
small birds were grossly overdosed. Local anaesthetics are safe in birds if the dose is care-
fully calculated.
Some surgical procedures on poultry, such as the relief of an impacted crop or an
ovariectomy have in the past been carried out without any anaesthetic and with little
apparent distress to the bird. Although the level of sensory perception appears to be low
in many parts of the avian skin and subcutaneous tissues, in the present state of knowledge
 aun an (tz d aas) d airad era u, spq m mo nou op Aer am
ment seems to provoke much less response than stretching or undermining the skin.
However, the plucking out of two feathers in a lightly anaesthetised bird may stimulate
violent wing fapping. Those parts of the bird's anatomy that are most sensitive are the
cere, the comb, the wattles (in Galliformes), the cloaca together with the surrounding skin,
the scaled parts of the legs and the pads of the feet. However, there is some individual
and interspecies variation in the tenderness of the feet, particularly in raptors. Some general
 anaesthetic agents such as isoflurane and medetomidine are better analgesics than others,
such as ketamine.
Butorphanol
Butorphanol is an opioid, which is a kappa (k) agonist, the K opioid receptors being more
important in birds than in mammals in which the μ receptors are more important. Dose
0.3-2 mg/kg q 6-12h; the higher doses produce marked sedation and even recumbency in
124
Anaesthesic
125
some raptors. It produces good post-surgical analgesia and reduces the dose of inhalation
anaesthetics needed, Curro et al. (1994).
Some non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as carprofen (2-4 mg/kg i.m. q 24 h)
or meloxicam (200μg/kg q 24h) provide good post-operative analgesia. The author
has in the past used butorphanol at 2mg daily for a month in an African grey parrot
without marked sedation and without ill effect. However, for long-term use the non-ste-
roidals are better.
Acetylsalicylic acid
 The dose for acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) in its soluble form is 325 mg per 250ml drinking
water (Paul-Murphy, 1998).
Muscle relaxation
This may be required during surgery, particularly orthopaedic surgery when there is often
contracture of muscle groups around a fracture site. Some anaesthetic agents, although
good hypnotics, do not provide good muscle relaxation.
The relief of fear and anxiety
Although placed last on this list, it is by no means the least important consideration
Anxiety and fear in the bird considerably increase stress and reduce the chances
of survival after an operation. It is for this reason that an anaesthetic technique should be
chosen which goes some way in combining all the above-mentioned requirements of
anaesthesia and often this can only be achieved by using a balanced combination of
drugs.
ASSESSMENT OF THE AVIAN PATIENT FOR ANAESTHESIA
The clinician should be aware that there is not only an interspecies disparity in the response
of birds to a particular anaesthetic agent but there is also some individual variation. This
is probably due to differences in liver and plasma enzyme systems and the rate of detoxi-
cation and excretion of the anaesthetic. This is more evident in birds than is the case in
related mammalian species. The bird that panics when handled or is diffcult to catch will
have an increased adrenaline outflow which will increase anxiety during induction of
anaesthesia. Conversely, the bird that is too easily caught and is just picked off its perch
is also a worry - it may be more ill than suspected. Wild birds are normally frightened or
aggressive; if they are not, they are ill. It is better to delay anaesthesia in this group of
patients for 48 hours so that they have α chance to feed and reach a better nutritional
status. A falcon in flying condition or a racing pigeon is usually athletically fit. However,
many falconers keep their birds hungry (to so-called flying weight) to make them keen
hunters. If the bird becomes sick it may be very near hypoglycaemia with depleted liver
glycogen reserves.
An aged parrot (it is not uncommon to see one that is 3540 years old) may have spent
most of its life in a cage and may be obese or have an undetected impaired cardiovascular
system. Krautwald-Junghanns et al. (2004) evaluated 107 caged psittacine birds and found
99% had evidence of a cardiopathy. Small birds kept in aviaries are more likely to be ft
  e  s r   si rn   s   
aemia will have a depressed rate of detoxication of drugs. Because of all these factors, the
anaesthetist should always carry out a thorough clinical assessment of the patient before
givingtheanaesthetic.
Measure the haematocrit. If the PCV is over 55% the bird needs rehydrating with fluid
therapy, as described in Chapter 9, before anaesthesia is attempted. If the PCV is below
126
Essenlials of Avican Medicine and Surgery
20%, then, theoretically, the bird needs blood. If a donor pigeon is available blood from
this bird can be given on a once-only basis to any species. Subsequent transfusions will
produce a reaction (see p. 144). If there is any doubt about the health status of the avian
 patient and time is available it is wiser to take a blood sample and carry out a full clinical
 profle to include the minimum of AST, bile acids, LDH, urea, uric acid, full haematology
and clotting time.
Some physiological considerations
Gas Hlow rates and the control of respiration
The avian lung compared with that of a mammal of comparable size is small and non-
expansible. The evolution of the fixed-volume avian lung has taken place along with the
development of a rigid meshwork of blood and air capillaries. The largest diameter of the
air capillaries of birds is less than one-third the size of the smallest mammalian alveolus.
The very small diameter of the non-collapsible terminal airway produces a high pressure
gradient for the diffusion of blood gases (King & McLelland, 1984c). The system provides
parable body weight.
Blood flow in the lung in relation to the air flow is principally cross-current. In the
mammal the blood and gas flows are more linear. This again increases the effciency of
gas exchange in the avian lung. The air sacs take no part in gaseous exchange and act
merely as bellows, driving the air in a one way flow through the respiratory tract, as
illustrated in Figure 7.1. The air sacs do however greatly increase the dead space (approxi-
mately 34% in the chicken) (however, see p. 18).
 Because of the unidirectional air flow in the avian lung, approximately 50% of inhaled
 anaesthetic gases go first to the posterior air sacs before any gas exchange has taken place,
and are thus unabsorbed. The remaining anaesthetic gas passes through the lung again
before being exhaled via the anterior air sacs. The other 50% of initially inhaled gas passes
directly through the lung on inspiration but also in the same one-way direction as the
other secondly absorbed 50%. If apnoea should take place because too much anaesthetic
gas has been administered, and artifcial respiration has to be started, then further absorp-
tion of anaesthetic gas will take place (on the initially unabsorbed 50% portion) as it
 passes back through the lung exchange surface from that temporarily stored in the poste-
rior air sacs.
The net effect of the anatomy and physiology of the avian respiratory system results in
gaseous exchange being much more rapid and effcient than in the mammal. Volatile
anaesthetics can reach dangerous plasma concentrations very quickly.
Another physiological aspect of the rigid lung is that the chermoreceptors monitoring
changes (Fedde and Kuhlman, 1977). The PaCO, of the domestic fowl is normally about
30% lower than in mammals because of the more effcient “washout' in the avian lung.
Birds are thus much more sensitive to hypercapnoea. It is therefore important to maintain
high gas flow rates of oxygen during avian anaesthesia. These should be at least three
times the normal minute volume. Klide (1973) gives the following normal minute
volumes:
● Domestic fowl weighing 2.5 kg, the minute volume is 770 ml/min
● A small cage bird weighing 30g, the minute volume is 25 ml/min
In practice, the author uses flow rates of not less than 1l/min for the small birds and
3 l/min for birds the size of domestic fowl. Flow rates higher than this are unnecessary and
even wasteful of volatile anaesthetic. However, see Table 1.2. Marley and Payne (1964)
Anaesthesia
127
Main
bronchus
Lung
Posterior
Mesobronchus
air sacs
Anterior
air sacs
Inspiration
Main
bronchus
Lung
Posterior
Meso bronchus.
air sacs
Anterior
air sacs
Expiration
Fig. 7.1 Diagrammalic representation of the funclion of he avian respiratory system, illuslrat-
ing the uniflow of gas hrough he exchange surface of he lung.
demonstrated, when using halothane anaesthesia, that the PaCOz gradually increased
during prolonged anaesthesia even in those birds where respiration appeared to be normal.
 In birds where respiration was depressed, the PaCO, increased much more rapidly
(from 18-27mmHg to 50-75mmHg within 10 minutes). If the PaCOz rose to 80 mmHg
the bird died.
 Some volatile anaesthetics may have a depressive effect on the PaCOz chemoreceptors.
King and Payne (1964) showed that in the chicken, when the bird was placed in dorsal
recumbency, the minute volume could be reduced by a factor of 10-60%. This was
brought about by the pressure on the air sacs by the viscera. These workers showed that
 the effect was greater in the female than in the male and was less if the bird was in lateral
recumbency. Also, if a bird is in ventral recumbency, there is the pressure of the viscera
on the sternum restricting its normal movement during respiration.
Hypoxia
 is higher in all birds than in mammals of comparable size. High-flying birds and diving
and birds that are mainly terrestrial (Dawson, 1975). The gentoo and chinstrap penguins,
penguin which is a short-term diver.
128
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Many agents used in general anaesthesia are also respiratory depressants. All these
bigh flow rates of oxygen very important, whatever type of anaesthetic technique is being
used.
Hypercapnoea
Ifadequate oxygenation of the patient is not maintained,the PaCO can build up rapidhy
and without warning. Even if there is a high flow rate of oxygen, the elimination of carbon
dioxide may be ineffcient. If the bird's respiratory rate is allowed to drop to a level where
it is just perceptible the bypercapnoea may become irreversible. A condition of respiratory
acidosis quickly supervenes, the myocardium is depressed and blood pressure drops. A
raised PaCOz predisposes to atrial and ventricular fbrillation and to cardiac failure.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia affects all birds under anaesthesia, particularly the small ones (higher ratio
 Of surface area to body mass), and also helps to depress the myocardium. If the core body
temperature drops more than 6°C the bird may not recover at all. Preferably use a flexible
thermistor inserted into the oesophagus or a continually recording cloacal thermometer.
Dehydration
Because of the large internal surface area of the air sacs, there may be a high fluid loss
during prolonged anaesthesia. In an already dehydrated bird this could be critical and lead
to a reduced circulating blood volume with a fall in cardiac output, reduced tissue perfu
sion and to anaerobic respiration. This in turn leads to a fall in plasma pH and a condition
of metabolic acidosis ensues. Many anaesthetics also depress blood pressure.
Cardiac failure during anaesthesia of birds is most likely to be caused by bypercapnoea,
but bypoxia,theanaestheticagent,dehydration,bypothermiaandthe positioningofthe
patientareall contributingfactors.
SUGGESTED PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES
1. Whether employing an injectable or volatile anaesthetic agent always administer
 Oxygen. If possible have an endotracheal tube in place rather than a mask, to maintain
a clear airway and to enable artificial ventilation, should this prove necessary. If there
is a suspicion of food in the crop or distal oesophagus, pack the proximal oesophagus
with wet cotton wool.
2. It is safer to have too high a rate of flow of oxygen than one that is too low (see
legend to Figure 1.9 and Table 1.2).
3. Make sure the respiratory rate is not reduced too much and maintain as light a plane
of anaesthesia as is possible.
 4. It is safer to use intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV), either manually, by
intermittently compressing the rebreathing bag, or, better still, using a mechanical
ventilator (airway pressures should not exceed 15-20cm HzO and the end tidal pres-
sure of CO, should not g0 above 30-45 mmHg (Edling et al., 2001).
5. If possible use lateral recumbency.
6. Use some means of maintaining body temperature such as a heat pad (if this is electri-
cal it may take time to warm up) or, better still, a radiant heat lamp (poulry brooder
lamp) directed towards the body of the patient (Phalen et al., 1997). However con-
stantly monitor body temperature and don't let the body over heat.
Anaesthesic
129
there is a forced-air ventilation system, reduce any air currents to a minimum.
8. Green (1979) suggests leaving a long piece of capillary tubing, with the tip in the
oropharynx of a very small bird, to aspirate any excess mucus by capillary action. It
is useful to have a syringe with an attached piece of catheter ready, in case it is neces-
sary to aspirate any mucus blocking the airway.
9. The author has now ceased using atropine for premedication because:
a) It has a tendency to increase the viscosity of mucus
b) It may inhibit the PaCO, chemoreceptors
 c) It may lead to respiratory depression
10. Do not stretch the wings out too tightly. This may cause damage and stimulation to
the nerves of the brachial plexus.
11. In addition, if the bird is in light anaesthesia and the anaesthetic agent does not give
complete muscle relaxation of the pectoralis muscles, movement of the thorax may
be restricted.
12. Use fuid therapy if the bird is anaesthetised for any period longer than ten minutes.
This is particularly important if the anaesthetic drug is excreted through the kidneys.
Use 0.1 ml of lactated Ringer's i.m. for a 30g budgerigar, every ten minutes or, for
larger birds, 1ml/kg per hour given i.v. or intraosseously (Fig. 9.1).
13. For birds weighing more than 1kg withhold food for 12 hours before anaesthesia.
For those between 300g and 1kg withhold food for 6 hours, 100-300g withhold
food for 34 hours. For birds below 100g do not withhold food at all
Monitoring anaesthesia
Whenever possible and when practical the anaesthetised bird should be monitored and the
operator should not rely entirely on human senses, which may not detect subtle changes
in the patient's physiological state rapidly enough.
1. An oesophageal stethoscope is easy to use, is not expensive and can be used along with
the 0esophageal thermometer.
2. Since many companion animal practitioners may already possess an ECG machine,
recording the ECG of a bird under anaesthesia gives a good indication of cardiac
activity. However, the equipment should have a paper speed of 100 mm/sec with 1cm
= 1 mV and be able to record a heart beat of up to 500 beats/minute. The standard
leads are used connected directly to the metal of 25G needles placed though the skin:
lead I (propatagial fold of right wing), lead II (similarly to left wing), lead II to the
d  a          q  
Edling (2005) describes a recent and simpler technique using an 0esophageal probe
without using the usual limb leads and which is attached to the standard ECG leads
via an adaptor.
3. If IPPV is not being used, an Imp respiratory monitor (IMP Electronics (Fig. 7.2) or an
ApAlert apnoea monitor and alarm (MBM Enterprises, Australia) may provide a
warning of apnoea. Nevertheless it is wiser to use IPPV.
4. A pulsoximeter positioned on the foot can be used to indicate the arterial oxygen satu-
ration level, which should be well above 85%. Below 80% can be dangerous. However
Schmitt et al. (1998) indicated this was not a very reliable method when used in birds
and could give a false impression of safety.
5. An electronic continuously recording intracloacal or, better, intra-oesophageal, ther-
mometer is also a useful piece of equipment. The temperature of a small bird can drop
alarmingly during prolonged surgery even if it is on a heat pad.
130
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
Fig. 7.2 The Imp respiratory monitor, which can be used wih all species of bird weighing
100g or more. Also, Bethune T-piece and Portex endoracheal ubes.
6. Capnography. The measurement and continuous recording of the regularly varying
wave form (either on a video display unit or on a paper trace) of the level of end tidal
CO in birds was initially investigated by J.1. Cruz and the author in 1995. Cruz et al.
(1997) has since continued to research this subject. Also Edling et al. (2001) have since
recorded their experiences with this technique. When using this instrument, an 18G
hypodermic needle is inserted into the side of the endotracheal tube adaptor with the
bevel of the needle directed towards the bird's body. This is then connected to the
capnograph recorder. Since the level of PaCO, is one of the most important factors
controlling avian respiration and the level of end expired CO, is probably very similar
to PaCO, this method of monitoring avian anaesthesia has become more important
than pulse oximetry. Capnography can provide simultaneous information on the respi-
ratory rate and the state of the bird's respiratory system including the effciency of the
blood gas exchange barrier. It can also give information on the level of oxygenation
and the effectiveness of the anaesthetic circuit. Also capnography can give early warning
of a failing heart and of a developing cardiovascular hypotension.
LOCAL ANAESTHESIA
Indications for the use of local anaesthesia as a local nerve block, together with a sedative,
are most often likely to be used in the field for treating the larger birds where general
anaesthesia may not be very practical. When combined with low dose butorphanol (0.5 mg/
kg) it is even more effective.
Lignocaine hydrochloride 2%
Lignocaine hydrochloride 2% is quite safe in all but very small birds, which are easily
Over-dosed. For a 30g bird 0.3 ml would be fatal. It is always safer to dilute the 2% solu-
tion to produce a 0.5% solution and the injection should always include adrenaline
to limit the rate of absorption. In birds over 2kg, 1-3 ml can safely be used and in a
Anaesthesia
131
pigeon-sized bird (400g) up to 1 ml can be used. Maximum dosage rates are 1.0-4.0mg/kg
administered s.c. or i.m. Lignocaine ointment may be used sparingly around the vent after
a cloacal prolapse.
Procaine hydrochloride 2%
This has been used in the larger birds (e.g. swans and flamingos) without diffculty but
care needs to be exercised with the dosage because of the drug's narrow safety margin
Again the 2% preparation is best diluted to produce a 0.2% solution when 1-2mlkg can
safely be used.
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
Pre-anaesthetic medication and tranquillisation
In most cases, butorphanol (1mg/kg) is a useful pre-anaesthetic. It reduces the dose of
anaesthetic used and provides good post-operative pain relief. Some of the injectable
general anaesthetic agents mentioned below, which are not in themselves entirely satisfac-
tory anaesthetics, make very good hypnotic or induction anaesthetics. These can then be
supplemented with volatile anaesthetics so that the desired depth of anaesthesia can be
achieved.
Assessing the depth of general anaesthesia
This can be diffcult and although it is convenient to classify general anaesthesia into light,
medium and deep planes, the response of the individual bird to the stimulation of various
reflexes shows considerable variation. Sometimes a bird that is apparently deeply asleep
will be awoken suddenly by the stimulation of a particularly sensitive area. The skilful
clinician relies on his or her experience and knowledge of a particular anaesthetic technique
together with the response of the species on which it is being used.
The anaesthetist should diligently observe the depth, rate and pattern of respiration,
noting any sudden changes. The aim should be to maintain the patient in light-to-medium-
depth anaesthesia in which the response to stimulation of the cere, possibly the wattles
or the comb (in Galliformes) and the cloaca together with the surrounding skin is just
abolished or is sluggish.
Pinching the interdigital web of the foot or the under surface of the foot produces a
variable and unreliable response, particularly in raptors. The eyelids may be closed but
the corneal reflex, indicated by the nictitating membrane sliding obliquely across the eye,
should be sluggish but never entirely lost. If there is no corneal reffex the bird is too deep.
Obviously, if righting reflexes are not completely abolished the plane of anaesthesia is to0
light. Respiration should be regular, deep, not too slow (not much less than half the normal
resting respiratory rate), with the bird not stressed and at ease with its environment, all
of which should have been noted before starting. A rapid, shallow or intermittent respira-
tion indicates the depth of anaesthesia is too great.
Injectable general anaesthetics
When using any injectable anaesthetic agent it is mandatory that the bird must frst be
weighed accurately to enable precise computation of the dose.
Alphaxolone/alphadolone
This drug has been used widely both by intravenous and intramuscular injection - also
intraperitoneally. When given intravenously induction is rapid and anaesthesia lasts for
about ten minutes, with good muscle relaxation. When frst given there is a fall in blood
pressure and there is some respiratory depression. The drug is safe for most raptors when
132
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
given at the rate of 10 mg/kg i.v. (Cooper, 1978) and has been used in dosages as high as
36 mg/kg i.v. (Harcourt-Brown, 1978). However, Cooper and Redig (1975) reported
cardiac irregularities and deaths when using it on red-tailed hawks and Cribb and Haigh
(1977) demonstrated serious cardiac irregularities in red-tailed hawks and waterfowl.
Haigh (1980) also showed that there was a temporary apnoea lasting approximately 46
seconds after intravenous injection. Samour et al. (1984) considered it to be the injectable
drug of choice for cranes, flamingos, storks, touracos, vultures and hornbills. With the
possible exception of the above species mentioned by Samour, the author considers that
this drug has no advantages over ketamine and its various combinations. There is also the
increasedriskofbeartfailureiftheheartis nothealthy.
Propofol
Use of this injectable anaesthetic has been investigated by Fitzgerald and Cooper (1990)
It is non-irritant to tissue but is so rapidly metabolised that it gives a very short period of
anaesthesia. Because of this, and because of its narrow safety margin (Machin & Caulkert,
1996), in the opinion of the author its use in birds even as an induction agent is not very
practical.
Ketamine (a cyclohexamine)
This dissociative anaesthetic produces a cataleptic state and has been widely used in birds
both by itself and in combination with synergistic drugs. It has no anaigesic effect. It is
both a cardiac and respiratory depressant. In almost all species when given intramuscularly
relaxation are evident within 1-3 minutes of the injection and anaesthesia lasts about
10-35 minutes. The eyes may or may not remain open. A palpebral reflex is present and
blood pressure and heart rate are slightly lowered and there is some respiratory
depression.
Mandelker (1972, 1973) used it in budgerigars and other birds at doses of 50-100 mg/
kg. The author has used it in the budgerigar at a dose of 50 mg/kg for anaesthesia on three
consecutive days without ill effect. Green (1979) used it at 15mg/kg for induction of
anaesthesia which he maintained on 0.5-1.0% halothane in 50% nitrous 0xide. Altman
(1980) suggested it had an adverse effect on the thermoregulatory centre in some species.
For raptors it has been used in doses of 2.5-170 mg/kg. Ketamine is broken down by the
liver and excreted by the kidney so that it is important that fluid therapy is used if there
is any doubt about thebird being debydrated or having a hepatopathy or nepbropathy.
It is now rarely used as the sole anaesthetic agent.
Ketamine and acepromazine
Both Stunkard and Miller (1974) and Steiner and Davis (1981) have used this drug com-
bination, stating that there is a smoother recovery, with less wing fapping than with ket-
amine alone. These workers use 1 ml of acepromazine containing 10 mg added to a 10 ml
vial of ketamine containing 100 mg/ml. The dose of ketamine is then calculated at 25-
 50 mg/kg without taking into account the acepromazine in the vial. The bird is therefore
receiving a dose of acepromazine of 0.5-1.0mg/kg. However like ketamine acepromazine
induces bradycardia and is not recommended by this author.
Ketamine and diazepam (or midazolam, the aqueous equivalent)
Redig and Duke (1976) used 20-40mg/kg 0f ketamine t0gether with 1.0-2mg/kg 0f diaz-
epam. Forbes (1984) and Lawton (1984) also report using this combination at the same
dose rate given intramuscularly. The combined drugs have been used on psittacines.
Galliformes, Anseriformes, Passeriformes and raptors and the results were generally good
Anaesthesia
133
with deep sedation or anaesthesia and good muscle relaxation. However, Forbes reported
that recovery was prolonged in raptors. Both drugs have some depressant effect on respira-
tion. This combination of drugs has been used in the ostrich: ketamine (2-5 mg/kg i.v.)
with diazepam (0.2-0.3 mg/kg i.v.).
Ketamine and xylazine
This combination produces relatively safe hypnosis or anaesthesia in a wide range of
species. Muscle relaxation is fairly good and respiration is only slightly depressed. The
eyes are sometimes closed and the palpebral reflex is sluggish or absent. The depth and
duration of anaesthesia and length of recovery time to some degree depend on the dose
of ketamine used.
 n ssp on a jo son    q s  a
amount of xylazine in relation to the ketamine has very little benefcial effect since the
main effect of the xylazine appears to be to reduce the rate of breakdown of the ketamine.
Redig (1983) has two routines when using this combination of raptors:
1. Three-quarters of the computed dose is given rapidly intravenously; 1min is allowed
t0 assess the effect; then the rest of the dose is given slowly
 2. Alternatively, three-quarters of the dose may be given intramuscularly then if necessary
the rest of the dose is given intravenously, but to effect. If this does not produce suff-
cient relaxation, and there is still some wing flapping, a further one-half the original
computed dose is given.
Redig (1983) and also Haigh (1980) found that when this drug combination was given
 intravenously there were some cardiac irregularities and disturbance of the respiratory
pattern. This does not happen if the combination is used intramuscularly. Haigh at frst
used an intravenous dose of 30-40 mg/kg 0f ketamine together with 0.5-1.0mg/kg 0f
xylazine. This worker now uses a dose of 2.5-5.0 mg/kg for the ketamine and 0.25-0.5 mg/
kg for the xylazine and fnds there is no adverse effect on the heart. Anaesthesia lasts 4-15
 minutes and the bird is perching in about 30-40 minutes.
There is some individual species response to this drug combination and Redig (1983)
has worked out the optimum dose for a number of species of raptor. In general, he advises
a sliding scale of doses which is approximately 30mg/kg of the ketamine for birds in the
100-150g range, 20 mg/kg for those near to 400g in weight and 10mg/kg for larger birds
weighing 1kg 0r slightly more. In eagles weighing 4-5kg Redig uses 4.5 mg/kg. Haigh
considers, and it is also the author's experience, that the nocturnal raptors metabolise the
drugs more rapidly than diurnal raptors.
The author has also recorded (Coles, 1984a) that the genus Buteo seems unusually
 sensitive to this drug combination when used intramuscularly - going into deep anaesthe-
sia, sometimes with apnoea - and that recovery times were prolonged. Redig (1983) also
found that the goshawk and Cooper's hawk needed higher doses and that recovery time
was prolonged. Steiner and Davis gave 50 mg/kg of ketamine together with 10 mg/kg xyla-
zine intramuscularly in the budgerigar. These workers consider that induction and recovery
are somewhat rough.
 The author has used this drug combination on a wide range of species and found it to
be safe and effective. The dose used is 20 mg/kg of ketamine and 4 mg/kg of xylazine given
intramuscularly. The bird is weighed accurately and the dose of ketamine computed. An
equal volume of xylazine is then added. Signs of sedation occur within a few minutes and
induction is complete in 5-7 minutes. Using this dose, anaesthesia lasts 10-20 minutes
and birds are usually standing and able to perch in 1-2 hours. There is incoordination
and sometimes a little excitement during recovery so that it is best to roll the bird loosely
in a sheet of paper towel.
134
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
The combination is not satisfactory or safe in the pigeons or doves and several authors,
Forbes (1984), Green and Simpkin (1984), Samour et al. (1984) and Coles (1984a), have
all recorded that it is not satisfactory in the Gallinules. Ludders et al. (1989) have recorded
their experiences when using it in Pekin ducks. Also it is unsafe in the long-legged birds
which are liable to damage themselves during recovery. In penguins there is a prolonged
srel au pue saa 'sosnon 'suesead auos u anes nou ose s ll 'poad Araao
owls.
Alpha 2-adrenoceptor stimulants
Alpha 2-adrenoceptor stimulants cause a dose dependent reduction in the release and
turnover of noradrenaline at the synapses in the central nervous system. In this way it
results in sedation, muscle relaxation, analgesia, bradycardia and peripheral vasoconstric-
tion which in turn results in some rise in blood pressure.
Xylazine
When used by itself in doses of 10mg/kg i.m. xylazine produces narcosis but not true
anaesthesia. However, by itself it is not a very satisfactory anaesthetic or hypnotic agent.
 Not only is recovery time prolonged but there is nearly always excitement and even severe
convulsions during induction in some species. It can cause bradycardia and partial atrio
ventricular heart block, and there is decreased respiration and often muscle tremors.
Although the fatal dose is approximately ten times the therapeutic dose it is not a particu-
larly safe drug to use by itself. It is not satisfactory at all in the domestic fowl even in
doses as high as 100 mg/kg (Green & Simpkin, 1984). Its effects can be reversed by yohim-
bine or atipamezole.
Medetomidine
Like xylazine this is also an alpha 2-adrenoceptor stimulant. It is more potent. but it has
a wider margin of safety. Like xylazine it is best used in combination with ketamine and
      s r    
swans and other waterfowl. Its use has also been reported in a variety of species of birds
by Jalanka (1991), Reither (1993), Scrollavezza et al. (1995) and Lawton (1996). Because
of its potency the dosages of medetomidine are much less than for xylazine. A range of
doses have been used but for practical purposes the author suggests the doses shown in
Table 7.1.
ai se pasn sinp jo uouquos sun ieui rapisuos nou pip (eoo) yuaaa pue (iaung
sole anaesthetic gave satisfactory anaesthesia in pigeons. However, adding midazolam
(2mg/kg) to the combination of medetomidine (0.05mg/kg) and ketamine (10mg/kg)
makes it even more effective. The best results, however, are obtained if all drugs are given
Table 7.1 Doses of medelomidine and kelamine
Bird
Medetomidine
Ketamine
(μg/kg, i.m.)
(mg/kg. i.m.)
Diurnal raplors
100
5
Owls
100-150
10
Geese, swans and other water fowl
200
10
Psiltacines [because the health stalus of many caplive
75
5
psillacine species is offen suspect, minimum doses
dre best]
Ancesthesia
135
by slow intravenous injection (Machin & Caulkett, 1998). After induction of anaesthesia
with the above combination (which takes approximately 3-5 minutes), anaesthesia can be
maintained with very low doses (0.5-1%) of isoflurane.
Atipamezole
This is a selective alpha 2-adrenergic receptor antagonist, which reverses all the sedative,
analgesic, cardiovascular and respiratory effects of both medetomidine and xylazine. It
should be given at the same dose as the previously administered medetomidine. If given
t00 soon after induction with the medetomidine and ketamine combination (i.e. within
10-15 minutes), when the full effect of the ketamine has not yet had time to be reduced
by metabolism, some violent wing flapping may occur. Also atipamezole is metabolised
more rapidly than medetomidine so re-sedation can occur, and for this reason higher doses
of atipamezole than medetomidine are sometimes used.
General anaesthesia using volatile anaesthetics
Administration and anaesthetic circuits
Volatile anaesthesia can be induced using an anaesthetic chamber or directly from a mask,
with the gas flow delivered from an anaesthetic machine. A custom-made glass box is best
used as an anaesthetic chamber for very small birds. However, adequate monitoring of
 the patient when using this method is diffcult. Whichever method is used for induction,
the bird is maintained on the volatile anaesthetic preferably by connecting it to the anaes-
thetic gas flow via an endotracheal tube, certainly for all birds above about 300 g in body
weight. In smaller birds a mask may have to be used.
It is safer to use a non rebreathing semi-open circuit, such as an Ayre's T-piece, modi
fed Rees or a mini-Bain, since in only the very large birds is the tidal volume sufficient t0
move anaesthetic gas through a closed circuit. The author has in the distant past used a
warm the inhaled anaesthetic gas mixture. This may be particularly important if cylinders
of oxygen are stored outside in the cold, with the gas piped to the operating theatre. Also,
if possible the oxygen should be humidifed since the air sacs are regions of high water
loss. The Rees modification of the Ayre's T-piece, using an open-ended rebreathing bag
attached to the exhaust limb of the T-piece, enables manual intermittent positive pressure
ventilation (IPPV) to be applied if necessary. The Bain circuit can also be ftted with an
open-ended bag. The most useful T-piece is the Bethune T which has minimum dead space
and can be connected to a respiratory monitor.
Endotracheal tubes and face masks
Plastic endotracheal tubes oral/nasal sizes 2.5 mm and 3.0 mm suitable for birds down to
the size of a pigeon are manufactured by Portex and Cook (Fig. 7.3). Rubber, uncuffed
endotracheal tubes sizes 3 or 4 can be used for slightly larger birds, such as some Amazon
 parrots or macaws. A canine urinary catheter can be adapted by cutting the end obliquely
and smoothing the end in a flame. These catheters can be ftted to an 8 mm endotracheal
ube adaptor using the cut off nozzle end of a 2 ml plastic syringe. The length of all tubes
should be reduced as far as is practical to reduce the dead space. The tube should loosely
fit in the glottis to allow the escape of gas around it so that there is no danger of over
inflating the air sacs or trauma to the trachea which in birds has complete non expansible
rings of carilage. If the bird is in light anaesthesia, particularly when using ketamine, there
may be some temporary apnoea after the tube is passed.
The glottis can be seen just behind the root of the tongue. In some birds (e.g. cockerel
and heron) the glottis is further back in the oropharynx and in the parrots the bulbous
tongue hides the glottis, so if the finger is placed over the skin in the intermandibular space
this helps to bring the base of the tongue and glottis into view. In all cases, intubation of
136
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
Fig. 7.3 Endolracheal hube and slylet (Cook Lid). Can be reduced in length if necessary by
culting he proximal end.
Fig. 7.4 A small anaeshelic face mask made from a plastic botle with he base removed.
the trachea is made easier if the tongue is pulled forward. The tube should be slightly
lubricated (too much lubricant may block the airway) and good spot lighting is
advantageous.
The use of a mask may be the only practical way of maintaining small birds on volatile
 anaesthesia. Suitable masks can be made by cutting the base off a small plastic bottle (Fig.
7.4) or by adapting various sizes (10-60 ml) of plastic syringe case. Tall plastic bottles or
plastic drinking cups can be used to make masks for birds with long beaks (e.g. sandpip-
anaesthesia. To make a better ft the open end of the face mask can be covered with a
latex surgical glove held in place by an elastic band and this can then be pierced for inser-
tion of the bird's head. A number of gaseous anaesthetics have been successfully used in
birds.
Anaesthesia
137
Halothane
This anaesthetic has been used by many workers, among whom are Marley and Payne
(1964), and Graham-Jones, 1966. The author used the anaesthetic for over 25 years, often
as the sole anaesthetic. Many of these anaesthetic sessions lasted over an hour and Marley
and Payne used it for up to three hours. However, with introduction of isoflurane and
other volatile anaesthetics halothane is not now considered to be a safe anaesthetic for
birds.
Nitrous oxide
By itself, nitrous oxide does not produce anaesthesia in birds. Nitrous oxide, at a concen-
tration of 50%, has been used in the past to lower the level of halothane and other inhala-
tion anaesthetics required, but respiration is still depressed. Levels of PaCO, rise, and
consequently the overall risk is not decreased. Nirrous oxide is therefore better not used
 as part of the anaesthetic combination for anaesthesia in birds.
Isoflurane
Isoflurane is a fluorinated ether and it is by far the safest anaesthetic to use in avian prac-
tice. Its advantages are:
· It is relatively insoluble in plasma so that the induction and recovery from anaesthesia
is smooth and rapid; stress for the bird is consequently reduced to the minimum. On
recovery the bird is rapidly perching without any apparent hangover effect.
● The depth of anaesthesia can be altered quickly by increasing or decreasing the percent-
age of isoflurane in the gas mixture.
● It has much less effect on the myocardium and the decrease in blood pressure is largely
due to a reduction in peripheral vascular resistance.
● Cardiac arrest does not occur until several minutes after apnoea so that, unlike the case
with halothane, the anaesthetist has plenty of time to ^wash out’ the respiratory system
and so reduce the level of inhaled anaesthetic gas.
● Only 0.3% of isoflurane is metabolised by the liver so that it is much less hepatotoxic
and safer with patients with a possible undiagnosed hepatopathy. It is also less toxic to
urado un aq oi uadde iou sop uaisks auuaaos e j jis anea
● Because of its safety and the ease with which it can be given it can be administered if
necessary two or three times daily for the routine taking of blood samples, the changing
of dressings or the administration of parenteral fluids, etc. The author has used it for
the last 28 years for several thousand birds of a variery of species with very few anaes-
thetic fatalities.
The method generally used for most birds is to induce with 5% isoflurane in a flow of
Oxygen of just over 21. When light anaesthesia is achieved (usually in 2-3 minutes or less)
the level of isoflurane is maintained at 1.5-3%. Anaesthesia may take longer to induce in
waterfowl and the maintenance seting may be somewhat higher. With these species,
induction with an injectable combination of medetomidine and ketamine and then main-
tenance with isoflurane is easier. The author has used isoflurane as the sole anaesthetic
for an adult rhea (Rhea americana). A flow rate of 4l of oxygen containing 5% isoflurane
was used. Induction using a mask took approximately 7 minutes.
The vapour pressure of isoflurane is similar to that of halothane so that it is possible
t0 use the same vaporiser. However, this is not recommended because the vaporiser needs
to be thoroughly soaked and flushed out with ether after using halothane to rid it of pre-
servatives in the liquid halothane. The only real disadvantage for the practitioner when
using isoflurane is the initial capital cost of a dedicated vaporiser and the greater cost of
isoflurane compared with halothane. However, if used sensibly without using unnecessarily
138
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
high gas flow rates, which waste a lot of anaesthetic, the significant advantages far out-
weigh the increased cost.
Desflurane
Desflurane is another fluorinated ether with a very low blood solubility. It is less potent
than isoflurane and requires a specialised vaporiser. In humans it causes irritation of the
respiratory tract. It has no advantages over isoflurane and is seldom used in avian
anaesthesia.
Sevoflurane
Sevoflurane is another gaseous anaesthetic in the same class as isoflurane, but it is some-
what less soluble in plasma with consequently a lower blood gas partition coefcient (0.69
compared with 1.41 for isoflurane). Because of this, induction and recovery times are much
more rapid. Moreover, unlike isoflurane, it is not iritant to the respiratory tract so the
stress of mask induction is reduced (Klaphake et al., 2006). Its main disadvantages are
that it is considerably more expensive and, because of the more rapid induction, great care
must be taken to watch respiratory movement constantly.
ANAESTHETIC EMERGENCIES
Apnoea
The most likely causes of apnoea are too much anaesthetic, the toxicity of the anaesthetic
and hypercapnoea. Apnoea will obviously also occur after primary cardiac arrest.
In cases of apnoea, switch off any volatile anaesthetic and nitrous oxide. Increase the
flow rate of oxygen and start gentle manual (if not using a mechanical ventilator) ventila-
tion immediately, by intermittently occluding the exhaust arm of the Ayer's T-piece Or
other non-rebreathing circuit with the fnger or by using the rebreathing bag. Do not over
inflate the bag and the air sacs. Quite satisfactory ventilation can be obtained in all but
the larger birds by this method. In small birds even if an endotracheal tube is not in place,
providing the oxygen flow rate is relatively high (e.g. 2l per minute) and the escape of gas
between the bird's head and the mask is prevented by a latex surgical glove, cotton wool
Or tissue, adequate ventilation can be carried out.
Do not over-ventilate - the aim is to get a moderate excursion of the abdominal (coe-
lomic) wall (so alternatively inflating and deflating the‘abdominalair sacs) together with
slight movement of the thorax.Over-ventilation washes out carbon dioxide and inhibits
the chemoreceptors stimulating respiration.If too forceful,it may rupture the air sacs or
even damage the air capillaries.
 Even if a volatile anaesthetic is not in use it is still important to have an endotracheal
tube in place so that artifcial respiration can be carried out. Trying to ventilate a bird
artificially by rhythmically compressing the sternum is not likely to be very effective and
may well cause damage to the ribs, the liver or other organs. It is a mistake to take the
bird off the oxygen immediately at the end of the operative procedure.
If spontaneous respiration does not start within 1-2 minutes of artificial respiration
give doxapram at the rate of 7mg/kg (0.3 ml/kg). This can be diluted 1:3 and given to a
large bird by slow i.v. injection or i.m. injection. In small- or medium-sized birds it can
be dropped into the mouth so that it is absorbed through the mucous membrane. Have
the syringe already loaded before starting anaesthesia in case an emergency occurs.
Depression of the respiratory rate during
a long period of anaesthesia
Stop the operative procedure. There may be a build up of PaCO,. Increase the oxygen
flow rate and gently artificially ventilate to wash out anaesthetic from the air sacs.
Anaesthesic
139
A blocked endotracheal tube
A blocked endotracheal tube may be indicated by more forceful and exaggerated respira-
tory movement and is more likely to occur with small birds and when using fne endotra-
cheal tubes. Clicking, gurgling or high-piched squeaking sounds that could be mistaken
for the bird awakening all indicate some obstruction to the airway. Cyanosis is not usually
seen, except perhaps in chickens, and by the time it is recognised it is usually too late to
rectify the situation. Immediately insert an air sac catheter as described below and admin-
ister oxygen via this route. Remove the tube, blow it out, or preferably replace it with
another tube. If there still appears to be some mucus present in either the trachea Or the
only endotracheal tube available, aspirate using a syringe and catheter. Have α syringe
with an attached catheter ready before starting anaesthesia.
Cardiac arrest
Cardiac arrest usually 0ccurs sometime after respiratory arrest. Marley and Payne (1964),
using halothane anaesthesia in chickens, noted there was a lag of about ten minutes
between respiratory and cardiac arrest. This is not typical of birds in general, in which,
with halothane, cardiac and respiratory arrest are simultaneous. Unless some method of
monitoring the heart is in use it will not be appreciated that cardiac arrest has actually
Occurred. The practitioner can try intermittent digital pressure on the sternum but this is
not usually very successful, neither are intracardiac injections of adrenaline (0.1 mg/kg) or
adrenaline given i.v. or intraosseously. In birds above 350-400g (e.g. African grey 0r
Amazon parrot) direct cardiac massage using the finger through an abdominal incision or
using a moist cotton wool bud may be tried but is not usually successful.
SUGGESTED ANAESTHETIC ROUTINES
Short procedures lasting no more than ten minutes,;
where a quick recovery is required
There is little doubt that isoflurane (without any other supportive drugs) administered in
a gas flow of 100% oxygen is the best anaesthetic for all species for quick procedures
requiring general anaesthesia. However it must be administered carefully from an accurate
dedicated vaporiser. If available, sevoflurane could be used. In large birds always consider
whether local anaesthesia plus sedation (low dose ketamine + midazolam + xylazine Or
medetomidine) may be more applicable. If there is liable to be post-operative pain, give
butorphanol (1 mg/kg) before administering the anaesthetic (see p. **).
For prolonged anaesthesia for a period of up to an hour or more
The following routine is satisfactory for most species: before induction give butorphanol
(1 mg/kg). Anaesthesia is then induced with a mixture of ketamine and medetomidine (or
midazolam) given intramuscularly and the bird is maintained on 0.5-1% isoflurane given
in 100% oxygen. If practical, weigh the bird and compute the dose of ketamine and
medetomidine or diazepam accurately. If it is not practical to weigh the bird, estimate its
weight from the tables given in Appendix 8. Give 75% of the computed dose intramus-
cularly. Wait 5 minutes, and if narcosis is suffcient proceed with the volatile anaesthetic.
If the bird is not sufficiently sedated give a further 50% of the computed dose. Wait a
further 5 minutes before giving any gaseous anaesthetic. Always use an endotracheal tube
wherever possible. Always flush out the anaesthetic circuit with oxygen every 5 minutes.
It is a good idea to have a drip line inserted into a vein or, better, intraosseously once
anaesthesia has been induced and before the operation is started. In this way fuids
(Hartmann's or lactated Ringer's solution given at the rate of 10ml/kg/hr) can be given
to maintain the fluid balance and also serve as a route for the emergency administration
ofdrugs.
140
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Air sac anaesthesia
This method is used after induction of anaesthesia by another method or as an emergency
procedure. A plastic cannula either fashioned from a cut-off endotracheal tube or com-
mercially available from Cook Instrumentation (Fig. 7.5) is inserted into the left side of
the bird's abdomen, just posterior to the dorsal part of the last rib and above the level of
the junction of the vertebral and sternal parts of the rib cage. The purpose is to insert the
cannula into the caudal thoracic air sac and not into the abdominal air sac, which is deeper
in the abdomen. In larger birds (above 1kg) it may be possible to insert the cannula
between the last two ribs.
After surgical preparation of the selected site the skin is picked up with rat-toothed
forceps to form a 'tent'. A snick is made with scissors and their points used to spread and
enlarge the hole to reveal the underlying muscle and ribs. The point of a closed pair of
straight mosquito forceps or round pointed scissors is quickly thrust through the muscle
and into the abdominal cavity. The points of the instrument are then opened suffciently
to enable insertion of the plastic cannula which can then be sutured in place. The surgeon
                
fne suture material near to the opening and watching for fluctuation during each respira-
tion. The anaesthetic circuit can be connected to the tube and gaseous anaesthesia or just
Oxygenation maintained via this route.
The method is useful for surgery of the head or used as an emergency procedure to
relieve partial obstruction of the airway. Although Korbel et al. (1993) have demonstrated
in both pigeons and buzzards that PO, and PaCO, levels, oxygen saturation and blood
pressure are within reasonably normal limits, nevertheless considerable disruption of the
  s          
increased to maintain anaesthesia.
The altered air flow is necessarily confined to the left side of the respiratory system.
             s
cannula unless the normal main airway (i.e. the trachea) is blocked. This disadvantage can
be overcome by inserting the tube into the interclavicular air sac, but this is more difficult
heart and its major blood vessels. Total gas flows need to be higher than normal to make
sure fresh gas is always entering the caudal thoracic air sac and reaching the exchange
barrier in the lung. The air sac tube can be left in place and it will be found most parrots
will leave it alone.
Fig. 7.5 'Coles' design avian air sac cannula [Cook Lid]
Ancesthesia
1 41
RECOYERY
Do not disconnect the bird from the oxygen supply before there are signs of recovery with
slight jaw movement. Soon movement of the wings and legs can be detected. Remove the
endotracheal tube when movement of the beak takes place otherwise, particularly in
 parrots, it is liable to get chopped of. During the whole recovery period it is best if the
bird is gently held upright, wrapped in a towel, by a competent nurse regardless of how
busy is the clinic.
There is no completely safe anaesthetic method for birds, only careful anaesthetists.
There is always a risk whatever the species of bird. Always get an anaesthetic consent
form signed. (Yaakov et al., 2006)
8
Surgery
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
The assessment of avian patients for surgery
Before carrying out any sort of operation on a bird it is wise to carry out a thorough
clinical examination and if necessary a complete clinical profle on sampled blood (see
Chapter 4). Obviously, birds that are in a state of shock due to trauma are bad surgical
risks. The obese budgerigar which has been confined to its cage throughout life is also a
bad risk. However, the author has been surprised on a number of occasions by birds that
have been abnormally thin and in poor condition which have survived anaesthesia and
surgery. If possible, it is better to try to improve the nutritional state of these patients frst.
bird that is dyspnoeic or one that becomes dyspnoeic with the minimum of handling is
a bad surgical risk (see Chapter 7). A bird that has ascites or a large abdominal space-
Occupying lesion is a bad risk.
Positioning of the patient during surgery
As discussed in Chapter 7, birds placed in dorsal recumbency will have a reduced air sac
volume, consequently in birds with space-occupying lesions of the abdomen this condition
is exacerbated. Although the vast majority of surgical patients can be placed on their backs
and are less liable to be moved in this position, it is better to have them in ventral or
lateral recumbency. When in lateral recumbency care should be taken not to forcibly fold
the wings too far back above the body, as this may restrict respiratory movement.
Essential equipment
Surgical instruments
A selection of small instruments, such as those used in ophthalmic or microsurgery, should
be used. The following list is the most useful and the minimum that should be available:
1. 114 mm enucleation or strabismus scissors
 2. Tissue forceps with 1 x 2 teeth, such as Lister's conjunctival forceps; better still are
atraumatic grasping forceps, such as Harris ring tips
3. Straight Halsted mosquito forceps
4. Curved Halsted mosquito forceps
5. A blunt-ended probe; sterile cotton wool buds will serve this purpose and will also
act as swabs for clearing blood or exudates
6. Fine needle holders
142
Surgery
143
7. A Spreull needle attached to a sterile 10ml syringe is useful for suction or irrigation
 8. Suitable retractors: for very small birds, ophthalmic eyelid retractors or an Alm; in
many other cases the Lone Star retractor is useful for keeping the operation site
open
9. Haemoclips plus applicators are very useful when working deep in the abdomen
10. Suitable surgical drapes; the best are clear plastic used with an aerosol spray
adhesive
11. Suitable suturing materials, sizes 3/0 to 6/0, e.g. pseudo-monoflament polyamide,
polyglactin 910 (absorbed by hydrolysis in about 6 weeks) or polydioxanone
(PDS:Ethicon), swaged on to round-bodied, taper-cut, pointed needles. If absorbable
sutures are used in the skin the bird will not need handling again for suture
removal
12. Chromic cat gut (3/0) is not generally advised, although the author has used it many
times in the past. It causes a lot of local granulocytic inflammatory reaction because
 the heterophils and avian macrophages, unlike the case in mammals, lack myeloper-
oxidase with which to break the foreign protein down and, in most cases should be
avoided.
Lighting and magnification
When using instruments for delicate surgery the hands are under better control if the
surgeon is seated and the elbows are placed on the table. Also some form of magnification
choice but this is costly. Binocular loupes or magnifying spectacles are also useful. The
least expensive system is a combined lens and circular fluorescent light. These are marketed
by several surgical instrument companies and a number of different designs are used in
industry by persons carrying out delicate work, however the degree of magnification may
not be suffcient for the most delicate surgery. Harrison (1984) suggested mounting a rigid
fbre optic laparoscope on a flexible arm, such as that used for some table lamps, and
using this for magnifcation and lighting. This gives excellent lighting and magnification
but the feld of vision is somewhat restricted.
Radiowave surgery
Although not essential, it is desirable to have the use of a radio surgical instrument for
both incision and coagulation. The equipment should preferably have a frequency range
up to 5 MHz, such as has the Ellman Surgitron (www.ellman.com/vet/). Most other equip-
placed under the bird. Bipolar forceps with both active and indifferent electrodes incor-
porated into the same hand-held instrument are better, since the current does not have to
pass through the whole body of the patient.
The advantages of this equipment are:
● There is little co-lateral tissue damage
· There is good haemostasis
● Because of minimal tissue damage there is much less post-operative pain
● Accurate incision at the operative site
● Can be used with both local and general anaesthesia
LASER (Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation)
The CO, laser is the most useful equipment for delicate avian surgery and is probably
 n q po e  ' s pr  (o) snn  
very accurate non-contact (so absolutely sterile) cutting. The collateral damage is no more
144
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
than 0.05-0.2 mm and the thermal penetration is superficial (50-100 μm in depth). There
is minimal pain during its use, which the author can vouch for having tried it on the back
of his own hand.
During cutting the instrument coagulates blood vessels up to 0.6mm in diameter.
Haemorrhage
There is litle doubt that many avian surgical patients die of blood loss. Systemic blood
pressures in birds are high compared with mammals. Blood loss from severed vessels is
therefore rapid and the control of bleeding is of paramount importance, particularly in
small birds. However, Kovach et al. (1968, 1969) have demonstrated that several species
of bird are able to tolerate blood loss better than mammals. Circulating blood volume is
usually little more than 10% of body weight, yet Kovach has shown that pigeons can
survive blood loss of 8% of body weight during prolonged haermorrhage. Although
the blood pressure and heart rate dropped, these returned to normal within 30 minutes
to 4 hours.
This effect is apparently due to the greatly increased capillary surface area (3-5 times
that found in the domestic cat) that is available for the absorption of the reserve of extra-
vascular tissue fluid and to a very pronounced vasoconstriction in the skeletal muscles.
From the practical point of view the author has often noticed that birds presented at
the surgery because of trauma have suffered considerable blood loss, as shown by their
surroundings, and yet they have survived.
The arterial capillaries in the muscles are more influenced by autonomic nervous control
than by the level of local metabolites (H+ ions, COz, and lactic acid) than is the case in
mammals. Although the resting heart rate of many birds is lower than that in mammals
of comparable size, stress or excitement very soon leads to a much more rapid heart rate.
Struggling due to an inadequate depth of anaesthesia can result in considerable
haemorrhage.
Transfusion and plasma expanders
Both Harrison (1984) and the author have used blood transfusions in birds. It has beer
shown that blood from heterogeneous species can safely be used for a frst transfusion.
However, blood for transfusion is unlikely to be readily available, and in view of the above
mentioned observations of Kovach et al. the discrete use of blood volume expanders, the
artificial colloidal plasma substitutes, which also contain electrolytes, may be helpful.
Products available include gelatine, dextrans and bexastarcb (hydroxyethyl starch):
5-10ml/kg i.v. every 8 hours, used up to four times. Also, the haemoglobin glutamer
Oxyglobin?, given at a dose rate of 20ml/kg/h i.v. used once, may be useful if there is any
pre-operative anaemia.
 If there is any suspicion of a hepatopathy a pre-operative vitamin K injection should
be given.
Cleaning and antisepsis of the operation site
To obtain a clear operating area every feather has to be meticulously plucked. If cut, the
feather does not grow until the bird's next moult. Plucking can be tedious and it is some-
times easier using forceps. The shaft of the feather must be frmly gripped and pulled out
 a p p no si ed r a p  i an rn os 
will regenerate. Regeneration will occur in most cases within a few weeks of plucking. If
the feather is fully grown, it is a dead structure which will not bleed when plucked. If the
feather is plucked before growth is completed and the feather has not completely emerged
from its sheath haemorrhage is likely to occur.
Only the minimum number of feathers consistent with clearing the operation site should
be plucked to avoid excessive heat loss, particularly in small birds. For the same reason
Surgery
145
the surgical site should be cleansed with minimal antiseptic solution. Cleaning and sterili-
sation can be carried out using a quaternary ammonium solution, chlorhexidine, benzal-
konium chloride or one of the iodine antiseptics such as povidone-iodine.
To limit heat loss the patient should be placed on an electrically heated pad, on a rigid
hot water bottle covered in sterile cloths or a water-circulating heat pad.
SURGERY OF THE SKIN AND ASSOCIATED STRUCTURES
  s   s n nn  rn  i s no s  
feathered area the thickness and strength varies berween the feather tracts (pterylae) and
mesh of collagen fibres (Stettenheim, 1972). Surgical incisions are best made in the apteria,
parallel and midway between the adjacent feather tracts and the subsequent sutures placed
in the apteria.
The subcutis and dermis contain only a few horizontal sheets of elastic fbres so that
avian skin is not very elastic. The skin is not frmly attached to the underlying muscle, but
in some areas (the skull, the carpus, the digits and the pelvis) the skin is frmly and exten
sively attached to bone. Avian skin is therefore not very mobile and tears easily, particu-
larly where it is attached to the bone.
The skin is best sutured using suture material swaged on to atraumatic, taper-pointed
needles. There are numerous blood vessels, both capillary and larger vessels, within the
skin and haemorrhage can be a problem.
When possible, incisions should be made with a radio or laser surgical instrument. The
scalpel should not be used at all for most types of avian surgery. If the above instruments
are not available an incision can be made by slightly tenting the skin then nicking with
scissors and then blunt dissection with the scissors, after first crushing the skin with artery
forceps along the line of the intended incision.
Lacerated wounds
Lacerations are sometimes caused by attacks from aviary mates or by flying into sharp
objects, particularly during stormy and gusting weather. Racing pigeons not uncommonly
return home having been blown into telephone or barbed wire. If these wounds involve
the anterior sternum, as they often do, there may be damage to the clavicular air sac, with
resulting subcutaneous emphysema. This usually resolves spontaneously, but, if necessary,
can be defated with a hypodermic needle and syringe. Providing the wound is fresh and
haemorrhage has been controlled it can be treated on a routine basis and usually heals by
frst intention without secondary infection. If skin has been lost and the wound has started
 t0 granulate, debride the wound and then cover with a hydrocolloid dressing. Some types
of this dressing, e.g. Granuflex, are rigid enough to be lightly sutured in position and will
help epithelialisation of quite large areas.
Several workers have described the use of skin flaps and skin grafts. Where skin has
been lost over the top of the skull it is not too diffcult to mobilise a pedicle from the back
of the neck and advance this over the wound. Because of tension on the wound, skin
closure should be with horizontal mattress sutures. Hernandez-Divers and Hernandez
Divers (2003) published a useful article reviewing the subject and describing the use 0f
xenogeneic grafts using commercially available porcine small intestinal submucosa to
repair skin defects in a number of birds.
Subcutaneous abscesses
Subcutaneous abscesses are not uncommon around the head, particularly in parrots. They
often involve the paranasal sinuses around the eye but also occur in the submandibular
146
Essenlials ofAvianMedicine andSurgery
region. These abscesses are usually filled with inspissated, caseous pus. The abscess should
be opened with a scalpel ftted with a No. 11 blade, by inserting the point frst and direct-
ing the cutting edge away from the bird. The pus is then scooped out and the cavity
curetted. A Volkmann's spoon can be used, but a useful instrument for a small bird is a
canine tooth scaler with a rounded spatulate end. When opening a submandibular abscess
care should be taken to avoid the large subcutaneous blood vessels in this region.
Before suturing the skin, a bacteriological swab should be taken for culture and anti-
biotic-sensitivity testing. An injection of ampicillin may be given at the time of opening
the abscess although this antibiotic may need to be changed later in the light of the results
of bacteriological culture. In the case of very small birds of 15-20g, it may not be practical
to suture an abscess after opening. In this case the cavity can be cauterised with a silver
nitrate pencil or, better, fulgurated with the radio surgical instrument and then left to heal
by granulation.
Abscesses sometimes occur around and in the ear. The surrounding skin can become
thickened and the ear canal filled with exudate. These abscesses need great care because
 reu n si  n a on a pe a j i n jo
surface. It may be wiser to try and frst reduce the swelling using a small amount of car-
profen s.c. into the local area. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are more
commonly mentioned in the context of the relief of pain, but they act primarily by reduc.
ing the inflammatory reaction.
Feather cysts
Feather cysts are usually seen in the region of the carpus but can occur in other parts of
  s Pm jo spo  a n n  ru sq r a oq a
examined. They are most often seen in some breeds of canary (Norwich and hybrids of
this breed) but do 0ccur in other captive birds. Peer Zwart (2003) has demonstrated that
these are benign tumours, which he proposes to call plumafolliculomas. These have been
reported in the chick (Gallus gallus) and are analogous to mammalian trichofolliculomas.
They are usually dry and contain the remains of the undeveloped feather which has beer
unable to emerge in a normal manner from the follicle. Some other neoplasms may look
like feather cysts and bleed profusely when opened.
Since the feather cysts are neoplasms they will recur if they are simply opened. The
whole section of skin, including the ‘cyst', should be carefully dissected out using fne
instruments, good magnification and good illumination. Dissection is not easy without
damaging the neighbouring follicles and the skin is adherent to the underlying bone in the
area of the carpus.
Subcutaneous tumours and cysts
Subcutaneous tumours and cysts are seen in all species but are most common in the psitta.
  iq   n      s 
s e  aq ass s o a pnsass a  a  i
search out, clamp and coagulate any blood vessels supplying the neoplasm. This is particu-
   s      n 
gerigar, which often have a large blood vessel beneath them and which can bleed profusely.
s e e a    m  a s  s
For this reason any loose skin left after removing a large tumour should be trimmed and
dead space diminished.
Lipomas
In budgerigars, lipomas are best reduced before surgery by strict dietary and medical rou
tines. De Voe et al. (2003) advise the addition of L-carnitine to the diet. This is given at
Surgery
147
the rate of 1000 mg/kg of food, which is changed to a pelleted diet such as that formulated
by Harrison's diets. This also improves the general physical condition of the bird. Diluted
Lugol's iodine can be added to the drinking water. If the condition has been accurately
diagnosed as a thyroid problem the use of levothyroxine may be indicated. As the tumour
could be a liposarcoma or a lipomyosarcoma all tumours after removal should be sent for
histopathology.
Tumours of the uropygial or preen gland
Tumours of the uropygial gland may be benign adenomas or malignant adenocarcinomas
that can become adherent to the underlying bone. They must be differentiated from
abscesses. Haemorrhage is not usually a problem but if the tumour has been allowed to
reach an appreciable size some difficulty may be experienced in repair. Removal of the
preen gland does not seem to have any adverse effects. It does not seem to be essential to
o sads ro n pssa aq nou  in pe sd rq jo a a
bird, since it is absent in some species, such as many pigeons, some parrots (green wing
and hyacinth macaw), emus, cassowaries and bustards (King & McLelland, 1975). It is
also absent in woodpeckers, cormorants and the anhinga, a bird in which the plumage
actually absorbs water to become completely saturated so that the bird can easily submerge
and swim like a snake (it is called the snake bird) under water.
The composition of the uropygial secretion varies in different species but usually con-
tains a complex of water-repellent waxes, lipids and proteins. It may also contain a pre-
cursor of vitamin D (Stettenheim, 1972). The vitamin D precursor may only be important
in growing birds.
When rermoving the gland, dissection should be commenced at the caudal end proceed-
ing towards the cranial section, where there is most attachment to underlying muscle.
THE HEAD REGION
Accidental wounds
Apart from the fractures of the beak dealt with below, cranial fractures are liable to result
in instant death. However, non-fatal injury may traumatise the skin, including the eyelids
The skin over the whole of the skull in most species is not very elastic and is adherent to
the bone. Any wound more than a few days old will have contracted, with resultant fibrosis
and it will be diffcult to suture the skin edges together. If the upper eyelid is damaged at
the nasal canthus it may be possible to slide the remaining part of the eyelid forward, by
making a lateral canthotomy, as shown in Figure 8.1. Do not remove a wedge of skin
below this incision, as is sometimes done in the mammals for this type of plastic surgery
(also see Plate 13). In the bird this only results in too much tension across the lower eyelid.
In birds it is the lower eyelid that carries out most of the movement in covering the
eyeball.
The eye
Corneal ulcers
Corneal ulcers can be the result of trauma or a variety of infections, including avipox virus
and Chlamydophila. Fluorescein can aid diagnosis. Surgery for indolent ulcers can be
performed using good magnification and standard ophthalmic techniques. If suturing the
nictitating membrane over the cornea, the direction this travels across the cornea is from
the ventral nasal canthus to the dorsal temporal canthus in a somewhat different direction
than is the case with mammals.
Using good magnifcation it may be possible to suture a lacerated cornea with 8/0
polydioxanone (PDS :Ethicon).
148
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Injured area
Incision caudal to
temporal canthus
Fig. 8.1 Posilion of incisions for suuring damaged upper eyelid.
Enucleation
Before enucleation is undertaken the following factors should be taken into account. The
eye in birds is relatively much larger than in mammals of comparable size, particularly in
raptors. In fact, avian eyes are much larger than they appear to the casual observer and
 Occupy more space in the skull than the brain. The extra-ocular muscles have been greatly
reduced in size and the resulting loss of movement in the eyeball is compensated for by
an increased movement of the whole head supported by the very flexible neck.
Reduction in the eye muscles has resulted in much less space for the surgeon to work
in between the eyeball and its socket. The globe of the eyeball is much more rigid than in
the mammal. Not only is the sclera cartilaginous, but there is a ring of bony plates around
the circumference near the corneal scleral junction. There is only a thin interorbital septum
between the two eyes, which is particularly evident in the owls. In removing one eye the
optic nerve of the other eye can easily be damaged. At the back of the eye in some species
'a sdo a nns eos a ui aoq pads-n e si a
The simplest method of enucleation is by lateral canthotomy, then an incision of the
cornea to remove the aqueous, the lens and the vitreous. The sclera and choroid should
 then be carefully collapsed into the resulting free space using scissors and forceps. It may
be wiser to leave the back of the sclera with the attached tissues intact and to plug the
socket with an absorbent fbrin or gelatine sponge. The eyelids are then sutured together
after removing the margin of each lid.
Removal of the nictitating membrane
Tumours of the nictitating membrane are occasionally seen in birds. Apart from the cos-
metic aspect, which worries the owner, the surgeon should always consider whether the
removal of this membrane is absolutely necessary. As in mammals, but probably more so
' an on  ad n a e s  u a ' 
Removal of the membrane can lead to a keratitis.
Cataract surgery
Cataracts are not uncommon in birds. If bilateral surgery is justifed, it should be carried
 Out by an ophthalmic veterinary surgeon using phaecoemulsification techniques.
Cannulation of the infra-orbital sinuses
Cannulation of the infra-orbital sinuses is a simple procedure that can be carried out in a
quiet bird without anaesthetic. It may be required in any bird with chronic sinusitis (see
section on clinical examination of the head, Chapter 3).
Surgery
149
X
Externalear
Zygomatic arch palpated
under the skin
Fig. 8.2 The X shows he point of entry for cannulation of he infra-orbital sinus. This is just
dorsal to he commissure of the mouth, where he distal end of the zygomatic arch can be felt
bo impinge on he premaxilla (i.e. he skeletal element of he upper beak) (see Fig. 1.1).
The point of entry is illustrated in Figure 8.2. A 20-22G hypodermic needle is held
almost parallel to the skin surface with the needle pointed to a position halfway between
the orbital globe and the external nares. Care must be taken not to pierce the globe of the
eye. In bad cases the sinus is well distended and entry can be made without any difficulty
into the area of greatest distension. In the budgerigar the hypodermic needle needs only
to be advanced horizontally to a depth of approximately 2mm. A suitable volume of fluid
for injection is 0.1-0.3 ml. Excess fluid should exit through the nares and may also flow
into the pharynx so care must be taken that none flows down the glottis. During this
procedure it is best to have an endotracheal tube in place and to pack the oropharynx
with gauze.
Cannulation of the supraorbital sinuses
A more diffcult and hazardous procedure for the inexperienced is to trephine and
cannulate the supraorbital sinuses, which might well be involved in infection of this
region.
The sites of entry are dorsal and slightly towards the beak each side of the midline.
Incision is made through the skin, when the bone of the os frontalis will be seen. Very
carefully two holes are made in this frst layer of bone with a rotary drill. It should then
be possible to see the cavity of the supraorbital sinus and the underlying cortical bone
Overlying the orbit. If fluid is then flushed into the sinus it should exit into the oral cavity
if the supraorbital sinus has been entered. When carrying out this procedure for the frst
time the surgeon is advised to study the latero-lateral radiographs.
Hyperkeratinisation of the cere and nares
In budgerigars, a horn-like projection sometimes develops from the cere and occasionally
may obstruct the nares (see Fig. 3.4). This is purely excessive keratin that has not desqua-
mated from the basal tissues. It is dry and bloodless and can be cut with scissors or nail
clippers, care being taken not to go too close to the sensitive cere.
The larger psittacines may also develop rhinolyths, or collections of dry exudate, within
the nares, which can act like ball valves. They may partially obstruct breathing and cause
annoyance. It is a simple matter to scoop these out with a dental scaler. Some underlying
infection may be present (swabs should be taken) and the area should be cleaned with
povidone-iodine, chlorhexidine or F10.
150
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
Abscesses in the oral cavity
 Abscesses can occur anywhere in the mouth. They may be seen around and partly blocking
the choanal opening from the nasal cavity or on the tongue, particularly in parrots. They
should be opened and thoroughly curetted. It is not practical to suture those over the
choanal opening so they should be cauterised.
Beak problems
Deformities and overgrowth
Budgerigars are often seen with overgrown or distorted beaks. Often by the time the owner
presents the bird there is very little that can be done surgically to correct these defects.
Regular careful clipping with nail clippers, fnishing with a hand-held hobby (Dremel)
rotary stone or carborundum burr (but note Analgesia, p. 24), is the best routine.
Other psittacines also get overgrown beaks, sometimes through lack of proper wear,
or they may become distorted through excessive wear caused by climbing the metal bars
of their cage. Other species of bird also occasionally suffer distortion of the beak through
trauma to the germinal layer.
Metabolic bone disease not only affects the other parts of the skeleton but also affects
growth of the premaxilla and mandible so that the overlying beak becomes distorted. The
rhamphotheca, or heavily cornified covering of the beak, is a constantly growing structure.
The cornified surface of the tissue obliquely slides towards the tip of the beak (Stettenheim,
1972), the edges and surface of which are continually worn away during use. Falconers
ra i  spq ml jo sreq rd ai  r ado, 
 In all cases the beak should be trimmed to shape (not just cut off square) with nail
clippers and then smoothed off with fne sandpaper. An emery board is very suitable.
Sometimes the beak can be ground into shape with a modeller's cordless Dremel drill
fitted with a small carborundum stone. A diamond chip dental cutting disc is also a useful
attachment. If bleeding Occurs, often the heat generated when using the rotary
instrument cauterises the blood vessels. If bleeding doesn't stop, the beak can be cauterised
with a silver nitrate pencil or solution of ferric chloride after which it is neutralised
with sodium chloride. Because painful, these procedures are best carried out under general
anaesthesia.
Occasionally a beak is seen that has either developed abnormally from hatching or has
been fractured and allowed to heal in an uncorrected position. The lower beak may extend
out at an angle to the upper beak. The owner might think this is due to dislocation, but
because of the double articulation of the avian lower jaw (Fig. 1.1), dislocation is unlikely.
There are two joints of the quadrate bone, dorsally with the temporal bone and ventrally
with the articular bone, that distribute any disrupting force applied to the mandible. Also
 in young growing birds the tip of the upper beak may lie behind the lower beak resulting
 in prognathism. Another deformity is 'scissor beak', in which growth on the two sides
of the rhinotheca or upper beak is unequal, so that this is deviated to one side of the
lower beak.
All these malformations result in diffculties in prehension and with soft food tending
to lodge at the side of the beak. There are two methods of dealing with this problem in
First, the difference in the lengths of the two sides is measured carefully. The frst pro-
cedure is to remove a section of bone from the longer of the two mandibles and then wire
the bone back in position with one or two stainless steel wire sutures.
Sliding osteotomy
The second technique is to use a sliding osteotomy. This is carried out just anterior to the
commissure of the integument covering the upper and lower beaks. In this area the bone
is fairly accessible and there are no large blood vessels overlying the bone. The pseudo.
Surgery
151
temporalis muscle closing the beak (but not in parrots, in which the ethmomandibularis
is the main closing muscle) overlies the posterior part of the section to be made in the
bone. The size of this muscle depends on the species and the power of closing the beak,
which depends on the bird's feeding habits. Fortunately, most of those birds where the
operation is required have weak pseudotemporalis muscles and relatively long, straight
mandibles.
The part of the muscle which may overlie that part of the bone to be sectioned is partly
freed from its insertion onto the bone. Having decided on the direction of the oblique
section through the bone, a line of fne holes is drilled along this position. The bone is
then cut with a saw. The anterior part of the mandible can then be slid cranially in rela-
tion to its posterior half and again wired in position with stainless steel wire sutures. If
the upper pair of holes drilled for the wire are large enough, they will take a catgut, or,
better, polyglactin suture as well as the stainless steel suture. This absorbable suture can
be used to hold the pseudotemporalis muscles back in place (Fig. 8.3).
In carrying out both these methods, the integument covering the bone needs to be care-
fully stripped for a little way down on each side of the section through the bone. As far
as is practical, it is better to try and suture the integument so that the suture line does not
overlie the union in the bone but is more to one side.
For sectioning the bone a sterile junior hacksaw blade can be used. This is sometimes
easier if the blade is frst snapped in half. The wire sutures should be tight enough only
t0 bring the bone together; over-tightening usually results in the wire cutting its way
through the fne trabecular structure of the bone.
 Birds show little discomfort after both these procedures and are surprisingly rough with
 their beaks. They usually start to feed straight away. Because of this, some external support
is recommended. A splint made of hexcelite thermoplastic splinting material can be
moulded to form a cradle for the mandible. This can then be wired into position with the
wire going through the skin and over the bone.
The success of these operations will depend not only on the skill of the surgeon but
also on the correct selection of cases. The temperament of the bird is important. Ducks
usually make good subjects. Success also depends on the size and shape of the lower
beak.
Quadrate bone
External ear
Mandible
Main muscle
(pseudotemporalis muscle)
Main muscle
closing lower jaw
opening jaw
Fig. 8.3 Diagrammalic representation of he arliculation of he mandible in a ypical bird,
showing one melhod of osteotomy. The dolted line indicates where he bone is sectioned.
152
Essenlials of AvianMedicine and Surgery
One needs a relatively long and straight area on which to operate. One disadvantage
of these operations is that the mandibular branch of the ffth cranial nerve runs through
a canal in the mandible and is quite likely to be destroyed when the bone is sectioned.
When using the second method on a reasonably large bird it may be possible to cut care-
fully round the circumference of the bone providing the pre-drilling has not already
damaged the nerve. However, the nerve distal to this area is only sensory and the bird is
 nOt apparently affected by anaesthesia of this area, although subsequent searching for food
may be affected (first read p. 36).
Parrots
The techniques described above are not suitable for parrots, in which other techniques
should be used.
1. In the case of scissor beak, after appropriate trimming a prosthetic ramp of acrylic is
built up on the lower beak so that as the tip of the upper beak bears onto the lower
beak it tends to be pushed into the correct position. The ramp is fashioned from dental
acrylic or Technovit and anchored to the lower beak with a transverse Kirschner Ehmer
(KE) wire, and possibly stainless steel mesh, after the surface of the beak has been
scarified with a dental burr.
 2. A Kirschner-Ehmer (K) wire is passed transversely through the frontal bone just above
 the eyes and hooks formed on each side. A second K wire with a hook is passed through
the central area on the upper beak. Acrylic or Technovit is used to help hold this in
position. Elastic bands (or orthodonture rubber bands) are placed across the hooks to
pull the beak into position.
Both methods work best in birds that are not fully grown. For more information on
these methods see Martin and Ritchie (1994) or Gelis (2006).
Splints or fractures of the beak
If the damage is a simple crack in the bone, particularly if only one side is affected, then
a stainless steel wire suture will suffice. If only the cornified integument is damaged it can
radns, al jo auo 1o ane usai Axoda ue ausn uosod ou yoeq panla aq Aiduis uao
glues’ or, better still, bone cement (cyanomethylacrylate).
 If the beak is more seriously damaged, and is hanging by the intact integument, some-
thing more robust than simple wire suturing will be needed. Various methods have been
used by different workers. These methods nearly always involve the use of Steinmann's
of-eight stainless steel wire sutures placed around the ends of the pins. The ends of the
pins are best protected by an epoxy resin glue or similar substance. Some sort of cradling
device as described above, to give external support, can be used.
Partial loss of the beak
Partial loss of the beak can happen in any species, but is commonest in those birds with
rather large or long beaks such as the hornbill, the toucan, parrots, ducks and, occasion-
ally, wading birds. In this last group, because of the long, thin beak, the problem can be
insoluble. In those birds with a wider base to the beak it may be possible to fit a prosthesis.
If only the tip of the beak is broken off, particularly if this does not involve the underlying
Im yaq a ag rdeds m ps p p aq o yaq a 'rd
return to normal (see Fig. 1.1).
 If a small part of the premaxilla is missing, the open end needs to be frst plugged before
shaping. Surgical glue, such as a self-curing acrylic, is preferable but if this is not available
epoxy resin glues, such as those used for car body repair kits, can be used and do not
appear to be toxic when used externally.
Surgery
153
There are few papers in the scientific literature that record the ftting of a prosthesis.
Von Becker (1974) reports a problem in two hornbill ravens, damaged in transit, that
were repaired by fitting steel plating to cover the ends of the remaining stumps. Most other
reports have used a beak moulded from fibreglass or dental acrylic. The material marketed
under the name of Technovit 609 is suitable. The author has on two 0ccasions used high-
density polyethylene for a prosthesis ftted to two parrots and has also used polypropamide
beak was fashioned from the barrel of a 10 ml plastic syringe. Approximately one-third
of the circumference of the plastic tube was used and was found to have about the right
curvature. This was then overlapped on the remaining proximal half of the beak and kept
in position with stainless steel wire sutures. The bird started to feed as soon as it recovered
from the anaesthetic (see Plate 14).
  r  e    sd a  ad a 
ethylene, the material used for making human artificial hips.
The problem in both cases is the satisfactory and permanent fixation of the prosthesis
to the remainder of the beak. A surgical glue can be used, or wire sutures or Kirschner
wires used in a cruciate pattern. In all cases the attachment eventually works loose due to
the birds' constant rough usage and to pressure erosion of the bone. The bone, in any
case, is not very solid in the region of the nares, being composed of a mesh of interlocking
rabeculae enclosed in a thin, outer shell. Nature has provided a very strong and light-
weight structure admirably adapted to the function of prehension for the particular species
d a ps sd a s n  so  e s ss  i
o p a o an po di a ssie pe  qoq q on r a sis
use the beak to crack nuts. This may have been due to the fact that the natural beak has
a number of transverse ridges across the internal surface. They are used in lodging a nut
with the tongue in order to crack it with the force of the lower beak. The bird has subse-
quently to be maintained on soft foods such as seed, ground down in a food blender and
mixed with peanut butter or mashed potato (see p. 192). These birds readily eat a variety
of fruit. Oesophagostomy tubes may be required (see below).
It is questionable whether the use of a prosthesis is always justifed in parrots. Although
the device is well tolerated, apart from the improved cosmetic effect, there may be little
advantage to the bird. The birds soon learn to climb and to feed quite effectively on soft
foods without an upper beak and appear to be quite happy once the original lesion has
healed. A Tasmanian green rosella (Platycercus caledonicus) is reported to have fed and
reared its chicks normally. A prosthesis is, however, essential if the mandible is lost.
Surgery of the neck
Sometimes a foreign body will lodge in the oesophagus. This could be a long bone from
the prey of a raptor or a fsh hook in a water bird. The oesophagus in most birds is wide
and easily dilated, but the muscular wall is thin. It may be possible to extract the object
via the oropharynx in the unanaesthetised subject. In other cases an incision will have to
be made in the neck. There are no particular problems but it is as well to make the inci-
sion on the left side since the jugular vein is better developed on the right side. The external
carotid artery does not form until near the base of the skull and the internal carotids are
tucked under the cervical vertebrae.
Surgery of the crop
Impaction of the crop
This can occur through a variety of causes: foreign bodies (newspaper, hay, any nest mate-
rial) all of which may become infected, the sudden ingestion of food too high in fbrous
content. The aetiology of crop stasis in hand-reared nestlings can be similar to impaction
in adult birds but is more often caused by food given either too frequently or in too great
154
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
a quantity or at the wrong temperature. In chicks the condition can usually be relieved by
gentle flushing and aspiration with warm saline. The impaction can be felt usually as a
plastic mass, but which could be more solid, situated at the thoracic inlet.
First put in place two stay sutures. Then, providing an incision is made over the area
of greatest distension, there is little danger of damage to other structures. Both crop anc
skin should be sutured separately using a single inversion pattern.
Fistula of the crop
Fistula of the crop is also seen in hand-reared nestlings and results from scalding by food
given at too high a temperature. Surgical repair is feasible but defer surgery as long as
possible so that the chick frst reaches maximum weight. Also necrotic debris needs to be
cleared so that the edges of the wound are easily defned and the adherent crop wall and
skin can be easily defined. Have a crop tube in place during suturing to facilitate visual
differentiation of the crop mucosa and skin. If there has been extensive loss of skin it may
be possible to mobilise skin from higher up the neck. The most dangerous situation is food
rapped between the skin and the crop resulting in subcutaneous necrosis. After operation
a pharyngostomy tube needs to be put in place.
Use of a pharyngostomy tube
A pharyngostomy tube is sometimes useful after beak, neck or crop surgery, is simple t0
insert and can be left in place for a number of weeks. An incision is made through the
skin of the right side of the neck just caudal to the mandible. If possible place a fnger in
the oesophagus and dissect down onto it.
SURGERY OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Devoicing birds
 Devoicing might be requested by an owner and although carried out in the past, principally
 on the domestic cockerel or a peacock, it is not an ethical procedure for a veterinarian to
perform. In any case the long-term end result was often not satisfactory.
Acute respiratory obstruction
In psittacines, including cockatiels, and occasionally in other birds, respiratory obstruction
is not uncommonly encountered and is an emergency situation. There is usually pro-
nounced acute onset of dyspnoea accompanied by abnormal expiratory wheezing sounds.
This condition is distinct from the more slowly developing syndrome seen in the budgerigar
due to hypertrophy of the thyroid gland. In other birds it is often due to inspissated pus
and occasionally seed husks or chewed carpet material. In parrots often there is a history
of increasing respiratory disease.
In desperate cases, insertion of an air sac cannula as auxiliary airway is essential (as
described in Chapter 7) after which diagnosis can be confrmed by endoscopy. If possible
 sn q mn a mop  ssd poq g an ds on q t 
trachea with a suitable-sized hypodermic needle passed transversely just caudal to the
 obstruction. The obstruction may be removed in an African grey parrot by aspiration using
a modifed canine urinary catheter (e.g. 6 Fr, 2 mm diameter) attached to a 60 ml syringe.
This combination, if the plunger is rapidly withdrawn, produces a good negative pressure.
Sometimes two or three attempts are required.
Tracheotomy
If aspiration doesn't work, then tracheotomy may be required. Before operation the bird's
head should be elevated 45° to the length of the body. The exact location of the foreign
Surgery
155
body having been located by endoscopy or possibly radiography, a transverse incision no
more than 50% of the diameter is made in the trachea. Incision only half way through
the diameter helps maintain alignment of this structure. Fine (6/0) stay sutures on either
side of the incision can be used for manipulation. When suturing after operation place the
three days.
Always culture any aspirate, purulent or foreign material.
Trachectomy
Trachectomy may be required for neoplasm or severe stricture. It is said that most species
As pod-ard as s a s leaoil a i d jo ss e i s p j
sutures in position.
COELIOTOMY (ABDOMINAL SURGERY)
The usual clinical indications for entering the avian abdomen are:
1. Diagnostic - biopsy of liver, kidney, pancreas, gonads or possibly lung
2. The removal of foreign bodies from the proventriculus or gizzard
 3. The relief of an impacted gizzard or ventriculus
4. The removal of tumours
5. The relief of an impacted oviduct
6. Colopexy
7. Salpingohysterectomy
Some of these problems may be solved using the endoscope together with endoscopic
surgical intervention.
Midline, ventral approach
 If the endoscope is not to be used, then the approach to the abdomen can be through a
midline ventral incision, but if a neoplasm of the gonads or adrenal gland is definitely
diagnosed, a flank incision gives better access to these organs and their associated blood
supply. If using the ventral approach, take into account the possible problems with a bird
in dorsal recumbency already mentioned in Chapter 7.
The ventral incision is best made slightly to the (surgeon's) left of the midline. The
abdominal muscles are the same as those in the mammal but the extent of the linea alba
and the thickness of the muscles vary according to the species of bird. It is best developed
in strong flying birds, since the body wall is the site of the elastic and active movement
governing the bellows action of the air sacs driving air through the avian respiratory
system. Harrison (1984) suggests extending the midline incision by incisions at right
better exposure. But if these parasternal incisions are extended more than a third of the
distance from the midline to the ribs in some species, the intestinal peritoneal cavity may
be entered, which may not be necessary.
Just below these outer areas lie the left and right posterior thoracic air sacs. Also
depending on the species, the midline incision, if extended too far caudally, will enter the
above anatomical facts into consideration it is not desirable to incise and deflate all four
posterior air sacs (see Fig. 8.4).
If a careful incision is made through the linea alba, with blunt-pointed scissors, while
 picking it up with rat-toothed forceps to form a tent and hold it away from the underlying
156
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
AS
VHP
Fig. 8.4 Diagram showing he relalive positions of he coelomic cavities: AS, leff and right
caudal thoracic air sacs; IP, lef and right inteslinal peritoneal cavities. The wo cavilties are
divided by he dorsal mesentery, in which are suspended he inteshinal and reproduclive tracis.
Intimately connected with the intestine are he leff and right abdominal air sacs; VHP, leff and
right venral hepalic cavities. These are divided by he ventral mesentery. The cavilties only
contain he wo lobes of he liver; S, shernum. After Dunker (1978).
viscera, entry is made into the right ventral hepatic cavity. This initial incision is preferably
carried out with a radio-surgical instrument.
On the floor of this cavity (anatomically the dorsal aspect of the cavity) is a membrane
(right post-hepatic septum) that resembles an air sac but is one of the peritoneal mem-
branes. Contained within this frst cavity are the organs shown in Fig. 8.5. The ventriculus
is attached by the central mesentery to the abdominal wall at the midline.
Distal to the ventral mesentery lies the left ventral hepatic cavity containing the left
lobe of the liver. The ventral hepatic cavities contain no air sacs. The thickness and trans-
lucency of the post-hepatic septal membranes vary with the size of the bird (also if there
is any degree of air-sacculitis or peritonitis with adhesions). In small birds the post-hepatic
septum acts as a fat depot, obscuring the intestine beneath. The air sacs are mostly adher-
ent to and supported by the surrounding tissues and so will not collapse if punctured.
Providing entry into and destruction of the integrity of the air sacs is not extensive, it has
s u so nn u uss endsan an t e ar o
Gastrotomy: proventriculotomy/ventriculotomy
Access to the proventriculus and ventriculus may be required for the removal of foreign
bodies. These can sometimes be flushed out, with the bird's body tilted on the table tO
45° with the head downwards or, if of ferrous metal, removed by miniature magnets glued
inside a plastic tube. Sharp objects can even penetrate the ventriculus to become walled
off in the coelomic cavity.
Ventriculus
The muscular stomach, or ventriculus, is easily visible through the initial abdominal
incision. Its muscular wall varies in thickness. In the gizzard of some granivorous birds it
is very thick. In these species haemorrhage from the muscle can be a problem if a radio
Surgery
157
Fig. 8.5 Incision hrough he linea alba into he right venral hepalic cavily: AS, dotted line
shows he posilion of he right caudal horacic air sac below he level of he ventral hepatic
cavily containing the liver; L, right lobe of liver; PR, the approach to he provenlriculus; G,
gizzard altached to linea alba by the ventral mesentery; PHS, right posthepatic sepum, distal
to which lie he duodenum and pancreas in he intestinal peritoneal cavily, which is surrounded
by he abdominal air sac; Cl, cloaca - an incision in his area will enter he intestinal peritoneal
cavily; P, pubis; BW, body wall; S, skin flap; VM, ventral mesentery.
-od a e pade iaq si ssoe ieans pq jo ad s un pasn nu si au iens
ventriculus and through the isthmus into the ventriculus. In the fish- and meat-eating birds
it is much less thick and sometimes almost indistinguishable from the proventriculus.
Proventriculus
The glandular part of the stomach, or proventriculus, is not quite so visible (being partly
covered by the liver) but gentle traction on the ventriculus will bring the posterior part of
may be required and the surgical approach is somewhat different (Fig. 8.7).
Surgical access to the rest of the alimentary canal
If it is necessary, an approach can be made via the route used by Durant (1926, 1930)
and Schlotthauer et al. (1933) for ablation of the caeca. Make an incision medial and
parallel to the left pubis. There is a large artery in this area that must be avoided. This
approach gives access not only to the caeca but also the rectum and the distal part of the
ileum, the duodenum, the proventriculus, the ventriculus and the gonads (Fig. 8.8).
The duodenum and pancreas, however, are best approached via a ventral abdominal
incision. This is made through the midline into the right ventral hepatic cavity and then
through the right post-hepatic septum (described above) on the floor of this coelomic
S oe e ps s an a p si   a
access to the supraduodenal loop of the ileum and some other parts of the small intestine.
However, the intestine in birds is not as mobile as in mammals, being suspended in the
mesentery attached both dorsally and ventrally, also this mesentery is intimately sur-
rounded by the abdominal air sacs. Any traction on the intestine is liable to lead to a
158
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Stay sutures to pull
ventriculus into postion
lsthmus through
which incisionis
made
Duodenum
Proventriculus
Blood vessels from'
coeliac artery to be
avoided when making
the incision
Ventriculus
Fig. 8.6 Surgical approach to the provenriculus.
Liver
Ventriculus
Large
proventriculus acts
parly as a storage
organ since there is
no crop in the
ostrich
Fascial sheet
separating
proventriculus from
intestine
Large well-developed caeca
Intestine
immediately obvious on
entering the abdomen (see Fig. 1.8f)
Fig. 8.7 The ostrich abdomen.
tearing of these membranes and possible rupture of the associated blood vessels, together
with traction on and stimulation of the nerve of Remak, containing the autonomic
nerves.
Intussusception of the ileum
Intussusception of the ileum is usually indicated by prolapse of the bowel. It is not
common, although the author has seen three cases (two Harris's hawks and a lovebird).
 In the opinion of Gelis (2006) it is more common in gallinaceous birds. Greenwood and
Storm (1994) reported the successful reduction of intestinal intussusception in two red-
tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis) and give a useful discussion on possible aetiology in this
species.
Surgery
159
The initial incision may
need lo be extended
into the groin
Cut and reflected ribs
Pubis: note blood
vessels and nerve
along its cranial edge
Lung may be adherent
Kidney
to the last ribs
(middle division)
Gonad in the depth of
Intercostal vessels
the abdominal cavity
along cranial border
Pubis beneath skin
of ribs
Intestine
Ventriculus
Sternum
Proventriculus
Fig. 8.8 Surgical approach to he abdomen via a leff lateral coeliotomy.
All these cases are emergencies and need immediate surgery. They nearly always need
 resection of the bowel, which is a diffcult and delicate operation. When carrying out an
end-to-end anastomosis, the operation is made easier if a length of plastic tubing is inserted
into the cloaca, then through into the colon and so on up into the site of resection. This
ube can then be used as a framework around which sutures of 6/0 to 10/0 material in a
continuous suture pattern can be used. Two sutures, at 12 o'clock and 6 o'clock should
frst be inserted.
The reproductive tract
Egg retention and egg peritonitis
Egg binding can be due to a number causes, commonly hypocalcaemia, plus other nutri-
tional defciencies, both of which with infection may result in malformed eggs. Also, an
old or very young bird or a persistent egg layer may develop impaction. Neoplasms, obesity
 and torsion of the oviduct (Harcourt-Brown, 1996) may also result in impaction.
Any lesion causing enlargement of the reproductive tract is likely to displace the
stomach towards the right. An incision in the midline is therefore quite likely to pierce the
ventral mesentery, by which the ventriculus is attached to the ventral abdominal wall, and
to enter the left ventral hepatic cavity. On the floor of this cavity, and probably displaced
upwards by the enlarged oviduct, will be the left post-hepatic septum, incision of which
will expose the oviduct. If an egg is to be removed by hysterotomy it is best to put in one
160
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
In some birds there
Preplace a stay
may be quite a lot of
suture.
fat in the abdomen
Note: the oviduct wall
which will obscure the
tears easily
oviduct
Note: the egg may be located well
to the surgeon's right and may be a
lot larger than is anticipated
Fig. 8.9 Hysterotomy to remove an impacted egg.
0r two preplaced sutures before making the incision into the oviduct (Fig. 8.9). Once this
is opened the wall of the oviduct contracts and, being very thin, is diffcult to fnd and
suture.
 If there is any fluid in the abdomen, as in egg peritonitis, Harrison (1984) suggests
draining with a Penrose drain and flushing with antibiotics. This is carried out 2-3 days
before hysterotomy in the case of an egg impacted in the oviduct.
Instead of carrying out a laparotomy, Rosskopf and Woerpel (1982) describe paracen-
tesis of the egg contents by using a hypodermic needle pushed through the abdominal wall
and through the egg shell. However, the point of the needle easily slides off the surface of
the shell (particularly with thick-shelled waterfowl eggs) unless thrust in with controlled
force. When yolk and albumen have been aspirated, the egg shell collapses. Romagnano
(2005) then recommends that the bird has a prostaglandin E2 gel (Prostin E2 Vaginal
Gel/Pharmacia) applied to the opening of the cloacal oviduct (0.1ml/100g body weight)
rather than use an injection of oxytocin. Oxytocin is not produced by birds and is said to
have profound effects on the cardiovascular system together with very painful and inef-
fective smooth muscle contraction. The remains of the egg should then be expelled within
two days. Whatever other therapy is used the bird's calcium reserves need to be
boosted.
 If part of the impacted egg can be seen through the cloacal opening, the needle can be
inserted into the egg through this exposed section of shell. Alternatively an episiotomy
type of incision can be employed to exract the egg (Fig. 8.10).
 An impacted egg sometimes leads to prolapse of the oviduct, with the contained egg,
through the cloaca. If this is not dealt with quickly the tissues become congested, they can
dry and eventually become necrotic. It is essential to moisten the prolapsed parts with
normal saline. Use a lubricant such as KY jelly or liquid paraffn together with moist heat
(i.e. just above body heat) to relax the cloacal sphincter to ease the egg out through the
Surgery
161
Preplace a
stay suture in
position before the
oviduct wall is
incised
Episiotomy-type incision
Dilated vent
from cloacal sphincter into
the urodeum and oviduct
、Mucous membraneof
oviduct starting to prolapse
Fig. 8.10 Episiolomy-ype incision for removal of an impacted egg.
opening in the prolapsed oviduct. The blunt end of a sterile thermometer is very useful
for this purpose, being slowly rotated around the circumference of the egg, between it and
the wall of the oviduct.
Cloacal prolapse
 After the egg has been removed the cloaca may remain prolapsed. This may also occur
after normal egg laying in a weakened oviduct. Rosskopf et al. (1983) described the use
of No. 0 stainless steel wire sutures around the vent to retain the cloaca in a greater
sulphur-crested cockatoo.
These authors also describe cloacopexy, for persistent prolapse, by suturing the cloaca
to the abdominal wall. Push this into position using a cotton bud or, if the bird is large
enough, the fnger. The cloaca is readily accessible through a midline incision between the
 tWo pubic bones. The cloaca may also be kept in place by sutures round the last two ribs
after carrying out a coeliotomy. Great care must be taken not to trap a loop of colon
between the cloaca and the body wall, as noted by Radlinsky et al. (2004).
It should be noted that there is a grave danger that any prolapse may contain intestine,
oviduct, or ureter and may lead to obstruction of these organs. Also, persistent cloacal
prolapse may be due to a tumour (see viral papillomas, p. 301) or to a cloacitis.
As a short-term measure a purse-string suture around the vent will suffce, but be very
areful that this is placed exactly at the mucocutaneous junction, otherwise the ureters
may be rapped and the nerve supply permanently damaged. Alternatively, use two mat-
tress sutures on either side of the vent. Another solution is to remove a wedge of vent to
reduce its circumference, but do this in the male bird in the dorsal aspect (Lumeij &
Westerhof, personal communication).
Salpingohysterectomy
Removal of the oviduct but not the ovary may be required to stop persistent egg laying,
particularly in cockatiels. The procedure can be hazardous for the inexperienced and is
best carried out using radio-surgery. However, it can be accomplished without this aid if
162
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Ovary
Cloaca
Fig. 8.11 Salpingohysterectomy. Alihough he vasculalure is belter developed when he bird
is in he egg-laying condition, and some surgeons may decide lo delay he operalion because
of this, he organ is much more easily idenlified in this state.
the surgeon is carefuland has good anaesthesia (see Fig. 8.11). Greenwood (1992) reported
salpingectomy in a 4-year-old hybrid flamingo using two small laparoscopy incisions and
the use of a 2.7 mm diameter endoscope and Shae's aural forceps. Scott Echols (2002) has
reviewed this subject.
Surgical procedure
1. The primary incision is made well to the left side of the abdomen, and extended from
the cloaca to past the last two ribs. It starts just in front of the pubic prominence. Note
that only the uterus (i.e. the oviduct) is to be removed, not the ovary. Carefully puncture
 the abdominal air sac with the pointed end of a pair of closed straight mosquito forceps,
and then open the forceps still in the incision. Two layers of air sac need to be opened
 before the ovary can be seen lying in the dark in the depth of the abdomen.
 2. The oviduct and uterus are a whitish-pink, slightly corrugated organ, which may be
 much longer than anticipated. In breeding condition the oviduct may grow to four
times its size in the quiescent state.
 3. The dorsal suspensory ligament of the oviduct (mesovarian ligament) has branches of
the ovarian artery running through it. Clamp these with artery forceps, or coagulate with
radio-surgical equipment, then carefully tear the ligament by slow steady traction.
Surgery
163
4. Cut and reflect the last two ribs. There is no real need to carefully dissect the fimbria
- use gentle careful traction on the uterus.
5. Finally, ligate the distal end of the oviduct and amputate.
Neoplasia
Access to the ovary or adrenal gland, necessary because of a neoplasm, may be achieved
via a flank incision. Arafiez and Sanguin (1955) give an excellent description of this
approach for poulardisation (removal of the ovary) in the domestic fowl. The incision is
made over the last two left-hand ribs (sixth and seventh). The skin is incised, the sartorius
muscle is pushed posteriorly and the incision deepened between the two ribs. The aim is
t0 keep close to the anterior border of the seventh rib to avoid the intercostal artery. The
ribs are kept apart with a retractor.
 Below the ribs the left abdominal air sac is penetrated revealing the intestines, which are
pushed aside with a blunt probe. The ovary and adrenal gland should then be visible. In the
normal immature organ the blood supply at the base can be clamped with haemoclips then
an s  o p pe sn  ps aq  ur ai a Aaa
can be applied to the testes (see Fig. 8.8). In both cases the operation is hazardous.
In a bird smaller than the domestic fowl, or one where the gonad is enlarged and neo-
plastic, the situation can be very much more diffcult. The same approach as is used for
a salpingohysterectomy can be used. Unfortunately, by the time many of these cases are
finally correctly diagnosed they are too large for successful surgery.
The blood vessels supplying the gonads are short and not extensible, unlike the case in
the dog or cat. They are close to the dorsal aorta and vena cava, which can easily be rup-
tured. Very good illumination, magnification and meticulous surgical technique are
required for success.
Retained yolk sac in neonates
If the yolk sac is not absorbed during the normal post-hatching period it is liable to become
infected. It is possible to remove it surgically. Indications for removal are abdominal dis-
tension, anorexia, lethargy, inability to stand and infamed umbilicus. An encircling inci
sion is made around the umbilicus and this is extended by two incisions transversely or
longitudinally. Then, carefully rolling the chick over, the yolk sac is encouraged to fall out
of the abdomen. The stalk to the intestine must be ligated. Delicate surgery is required.
Do not attempt to aspirate the yolk or inject antibiotics into the yolk sac.
The penis
An occasional problem seen in male ducks is prolapse of the enlarged penis [see Plate 11].
This can be 5-7cm long and drags on the ground. It can become dry and excoriated and
necrotic. The cause is usually injury brought about by bullying from another drake
However, if several cases occur simultaneously and the ducks look rather ill, then this may
be due to duck virus enteritis (see p. 283). In the duck the penis is an extension of the mucous
membrane lining the cloaca. There is no vascular corpus spongiosum as in the mammal. The
only solution to the traumatic problem is amputation, which seems to have little deleterious
clinical effect, except to make the duck ineffective for breeding purposes. In Vasa parrots
(Coracopsis spp) there is a normal intromittent phallus which may remain protuberant for
some time after copulation, as mentioned in Chapter 1 (see p. 20 and Plate 15).
Repair of the ruptured abdominal wall
Rupture of the abdominal wall is a diffcult problem, which is not uncommon in the obese
female budgerigar. The muscle is weakened by egg laying and infltration of fat so muscle
fbres separate. Gradually the whole abdominal musculature is stretched apart along the
linea alba. The weight of the abdominal viscera causes marked enlargement and descent
164
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
of all the structures, so that the swelling becomes pendulant. The results are potentially
serious, with impaired respiratory and cardiac function. The liver may be enlarged and
infltrated with fat.
plasms can occur in the same region, diagnosis should be confrmed with radiography or
possibly ultrasound. Some of the less serious cases may not be true hernias, but just an
extended body wall and may be due to malnutrition, lack of exercise, chronic masturba-
tion, etc. All cases need thorough investigation before undertaking surgery.
 If successful anaesthesia can be achieved, with the bird in dorsal recumbency, it is best
not to completely incise the body wall since in these cases the underlying air sacs and
contained viscera are easily damaged. The body wall should be picked up so that the
underlying viscera falls away back into position. Afterwards, alternative mattress sutures
 0f 4/0 chrormic catgut together with non-absorbable pseudo-monoflament polyamide are
placed through skin and the muscle remaining at the edges of the hernia. The object is not
to pull the body wall tightly together but for the catgut to induce some fbrosis via induced
granulocytic inflammatory reaction. If possible, it is better to incorporate a supporting.
fne, non-absorbable surgical mesh attached to the eighth ribs and sternum. It is hoped
this will produce a renewed and stronger linea alba. Providing the suture needle is placed
just below the skin it will not damage the underlying viscera, which are often covered
in fat.
ORTHOPAEDIC SURGERY
General considerations
Before attempting any surgery on the bones of birds it is as well to take into account some
general considerations. During evolution the avian skeleton has undergone structural
adaptations to the biological engineering problems of support and movement imposed on
a flying vertebrate. Although the elemental structure of the bone, which is a lattice of
hydroxyapatite crystals intimately associated with a mesh of collagen fbrils, is basically
o s aoq a jo ie so an 's ui se as a
The bulk of an avian long bone is concentrated in a thin, porcelain-like shell which
shows little or no organisation into Haversian systems. The interior of the bone contains
a network of struts, or trabeculae, each one of which is orientated to counteract the exter
nal forces imposed on the bone at that particular point. The maximum stress on the bone
is at the two ends, so that it is here the bone is expanded with the greatest concentration
of trabeculae. The thin outer shell is the most efficient structure to resist the forces Of
torque imposed on the bone when it is under twisting and torsional loading, which is
exactly what is occurring during flight (see Fig. 8.12). In this situation, a thin hollow cyl-
 inder is the most effcient. All these engineering principles are used in the design of modern
jet aircraft.
In consequence of the porcelain-like shell, avian bones shatter much more easily during
surgery. Except perhaps in very large birds, the cortex of avian bones does not form a
very sound bed for bone screws. Intramedullary pinning, which in the mammal displaces
haemopoetic tissue, in the bird destroys part of the integral strength of the bones.
Avian fractures heal in the same manner as those in mammals. This has been demon-
strated by Bush et al. (1976), who showed that fibrous followed by cartilaginous callus
develops from both the periosteal and endosteal membranes. The rate at which the bone
sive displacement of the fractured ends, movement and infection all retard healing. The
so-called very rapid healing of the avian bones reported by a number of workers may be
Surgery
165
Fig. 8.12 The mechanical forces imposed on he bones of the avian wing during flight. The
aunp spussap bum u so sauoq au uo panid ssans pouoisia au mous soo pns
flapping flight. The slraight arrows illuslrate he bending momenls applied to he bone at the
same fime as he lorsional slress.
 due to the swift mobilisation of fbroblasts and the formation of collagen fbres binding
the bones together, rather than to complete resolution of the fracture with newly formed
bone. Under optimum conditions the gap between the fractured ends is flld with fibrous
tissue within five days and cancellous bone within nine days. True bony union takes 22
days and complete remodelling takes six weeks.
Apart from the healing of bone, there is little doubt that the maintenance of maximum
joint mobility is offarmore importance in birds than theattainment of perfect bone align-
ment. This is not denying that perfectly-aligned bones heal more rapidly.
 In all cases of fracture, after the initial diagnosis it is important to frst stabilise the
fracture site to prevent contraction of the soft tissue before any more intricate orthopaedic
procedure is carried out. With compound fractures take swabs then clean and disinfect
with chlorhexidine, F10, etc. Do not irrigate any exposed medullary cavities. Remove any
protruding bone. Bandage but leave the wound open for daily wound treatment, together
with the systemic treatment of antibiotics and analgesics. When the wound is clean the
surgeon can proced with the necessary orthopaedic surgery. After the orthopaedic surgery
has been performed, polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) antibiotic beads can be used around
the operation site.
Preparation of the antibiotic-impregnated beads
A good description of the method of preparation of PMMA beads is given by Remple and
with polymethylmethacrylate powder (one part of antibiotic to five parts of PMMA
powder). Enough liquid monomer is added to the mixture to make a dough. This is then
packed into a 20 ml syringe, squeezed out into a flexible rod and cut into sections before
it hardens.
166
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
The pectoral limb
The clavicle
In a survey 0f 6212 specimens, Tiemeier (1941) found 3.41% of wild Passeriformes had
are, they are best left alone with cage rest only. It is not practical to splint these bones in
any way. Note that not all species have a clavicle.
The coracoid
The coracoid is a massive bone counteracting the compressive forces of the pectoralis
muscle. In birds below 500g fracture of this bone is best treated with cage rest and a fgure
of eight bandage round the wing on the affected side. In small birds the bone will heal by
itself and the bird may be able to fly again, but this could take up to one year. If the frac-
ture is near the junction of the coracoid with the sternum and is well displaced then the
two bones will have to be wired together.
In a bird of 500g or more this particular fracture is best dealt with using an intramed-
ullary Steinmann pin. The bone is difcult to access, lying deep below the supracoracoideus
(superficial pectoral) muscle. Since this muscle is the main elevator of the wing it must not
be damaged and needs to be carefully dissected away from the clavicle, or its fibrous
equivalent, the edge of which can be felt subcutaneously at the thoracic inlet (Fig. 8.13).
If one half of the fractured coracoid has been displaced inwardly, great care must be taken
in manipulating the bone back into position, because the great vessels from the heart lie
just below this region. Unfortunately, some of these cases are associated with avulsion of
the brachial plexus, in which case surgery would not be justified and the prognosis is
guarded.
Luxation of the shoulder
meral ligament. However, the tendon of the supracoracoideus muscle is sometimes stripped
from the muscle belly. Rupture of the tendon leads to upward subluxation of the head of
the humerus.
The supracoracoideus muscle and tendon are best developed in birds with a slow
flapping flight, in those which hover and in birds which have a rapid jump take off, such
as pheasants. In fact, rupture of this tendon has only been seen by the author in pigeons
and one crow, both of which have fast-forward flight, and in gulls which are mainly
gliders.
The surgical approach to the shoulder joint is not diffcult. The fbres of the overlying
dermatensor muscle are split longitudinally in the direction of their fbres and the shoulder
joint lies underneath. However, locating and suturing the ruptured tendon back in position
is very diffcult and an almost impossible task. The retention of complete mobility in the
shoulder joint, if the bird is to fy again, is very important, more so than in any other joint
in the wing. All the mechanical forces and differential movements of the wing are concen-
trated on this joint.
The humerus
The majority of fractures of the humerus occur midshaft or at the junction of the middle
and lower thirds of the bone. These are the areas where the bone is least protected by
surrounding muscle. In most cases the fractured ends of the bone are well separated and
the proximal part is often rotated along its longitudinal axis, due to the tension caused
by spasm of the contused pectoralis muscle (Fig. 8.14). Although there is an extension of
the clavicular air sac into the medullary cavity of the humerus and damage to this structure
can sometimes be seen on X-ray in the region of the pectoralis muscle, it is usually sealed
off by blood clot. Emphysema of the tissues is not usually a problem.
Surgery
167
Head of the coracoid
bone felt beneath
the muscle
Clavicle or
sternoclavicular
ligament 
Pectoralis muscle swollen
and contracted due to
collapse of coracoid
Line of incision
Sternal carina
Coracoid lies deep
and rather inaccessible
Fig. 8.13 The surgical approach to he coracoid.
Since most of the mechanical forces imposed on the wing during flight are transmitted
o sodde nod ra se p  aio ig n nd st ll sq ai 
the bone as is possible. A slight error in rotational alignment could lead to a change in
the angle of attack of the aerofoil surface and the aerodynamic properties of the wing (Fig.
8.15) (see pp. 8 and 209). The bird may well learn to adjust to this situation in time but
this only increases its problems of rehabilitation. In spite of all this there are a number of
recorded instances in wild birds where the humerus has healed in a grossly distorted posi-
tion with non alignment of the shaft and where the bird has been found flying again (Olney,
1958/9; Tiemeier, 1941)
168
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Proximal end of humerus pulled
Scapula
medially and rotated by the
pull of the pectoralis muscle
Coracoid
Fig. 8.14 Diagram showing the raclion exerted on he proximal end of the fracured humerus
by he pectoralis muscle.
AA
Fig. 8.15 Diagram illusraring how permanent rotation of he humerus hrough a badly
aligned frachure can affect he angle of altack of the aerofoil seclion of the wing. The angle
of attack (AA) affects he airflow across he wing and its liffing qualies.
In a fractured humerus more than three days post-trauma, and notwithstanding other
considerations such as secondary infection, there is always organisation in the tissue in
response to the trauma. The smaller the bird the more rapid is the process. If extensive
dissection is needed to fnd and free the bone, there is grave risk that the nerves and blood
vessels traversing the injured area will be damaged. It is diffcult to identify the medullary
cavity of a long bone of a small bird in a mass of granulating tissue. If the subject is below
100g in weight (cockatiel size) and a captive bird, it may be wiser to leave the fractured
wing alone, except to support it with a figure of eight bandage for 2-3 days only (Fig.
8.16). Bandaging only needs to be done if the wing is badly dropped and the wing should
not be supported for a longer period, since this only leads to excessive fibrosis with resul
tant stiffening of muscles and joints.
On the other hand, if the bird is a falcon and is to fly again, some attempt at perfect
reduction will have to be made. The avian humerus is well supplied with blood vessels.
This has been studied by Joji and Popovie (1969) who have shown that there is a separate
blood supply to the proximal, middle and distal parts of the humeral shaft. The surgical
approach to the bone can be made from either the ventral or dorsal aspect. The latter is
probably the easier of the two (Fig. 8.17).
A number of techniques have been devised to repair humeral fractures.
Surgery
169
cuf into suitable widh strips according to he size of he bird. In some cases it may be neces
sary to bandage he wing to he body. With he wing bandaged in the flexed posilion he
quills of the primary fealhers act as a slrong, light-weight splint.
In some birds this area may be
M. tensor propatagialis (compound
obscured by subcutaneous fat
muscle with fibrous slips spreading
out through the propatagium)
M.biceps
brachi
Head of coracoid bone can be
palpated below the surface
M.deltoideus
M.triceps brachii (scapularis)
Radial nerve in close association
with the radial artery. Both lie
 subcutaneously disappearing under
the cranial edge of the M. triceps
Uina
Radius
Edge of skin incision shown
diagramatically larger than
necessary. Before making the
initial skin incision‘tent'the skin
with fine-toothed dissecting forceps
so as to keep it clear of the
underlying radial nerve which may
be obscured by fat and
haemorrhage around the fracture
site
Fig. 8.17 The surgical approach to he humerus from he dorsal aspect, after plucking he
covert feathers and welting he area with alcohol. The diagram is not drawn fo scale, the
humerus being relatively larger for he clarily of he illuslralion. (After Coles, 1996, BSAVA
Manual of Psiftacine Birds.}
170
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
Intramedullary pinning
Intramedullary pinning can be carried out using the standard Steinmann pin and is the
simplest method. In some species such, as the goshawk (Accipiter gentilis), the humerus
the bone away from the shoulder and elbow joints (Fig. 8.18). This is important because
any trauma to soft tissues near an avian joint usually leads to excessive fbrosis and reduc-
tion in mobility of the joint.
Intramedullary pinning also has the disadvantage that it destroys the trabecular struc-
ture of the bone. This will be regenerated when the pin is removed but it does take time.
The intramedullary pin used by itself does not guard against rotation and, because of the
 proportionately larger diameter of the avian medullary cavity, a larger and heavier pin has
to be used than in a mammal of comparable size. The intramedullary pin also does not
allow endosteal bone regeneration.
ProfessorRedig's‘tie in'technique
A modification of simple intramedullary pinning is to use the Redig ‘tie in’ technique
(Fig. 8.19). The intramedullary pin can be smaller in diameter and lighter in weight since
it only needs to fill 50% of the medullary cavity. At the pin's exit it is bent at 180°. To
s m ud a jo s a d pue us ng rae ud a inn as si o
forceps or locking surgical pliers so that when bending the pin the force of bending is not
transmitted though the pin onto the easily split humeral diaphysis. One or two further
pins are inserted transversely through the two ‘solid ends' of the bone. These should be
threaded to provide a frm anchorage in the bone. Positive threaded pins are best but
negatively threaded pins are often satisfactory. When inserting these transverse pins great
Fig. 8.18 Intramedullary pinning through cortex of curved humerus to avoid the shoulder and
elbow joinls.
Fig. 8.19 Frachures of the long bones can be stabilised using he principles of Redig's lie-in
mehod. For illusralive purposes he diagram shows he mehod used on a frachured
humerus.
Surgery
171
care needs to be exercised as the bone easily shatters. Pre-drilling with a smaller diameter
drill bit may help to prevent this happening.
The intramedullary pin which has been bent through 180° and the one or two transverse
pins are rigidly connected using any suitable epoxy resin fixative such as Aradite, car body
repair material or Technovite (horse hoof repair material) etc. After mixing the powder
and liquid components of the epoxy to form a putty like mixture this is then squeezed
around the pins as illustrated in Fig. 8.19 to so form a rigid external bar after the plastic
mixture has set rigidly in a few minutes. Alternatively, Redig (2000) uses thermoplastic
casting tape squeezed around the connections but the ends of the transverse pins are frst
 an  q a j si a on p  sa nq   ie i
achieves both longitudinal and rotational stability and is relatively light in weight.
Kirschner splints or external skeletal fixators {ESF)
ssd sd a (ia qsg  spq sre u asss pas aq s xg ix
a yanou otoe jo ae ue ie (sud papean sn ) raaq io kreiuadiad
skin and then through the cortex of the bone from one side to the other. Four pins are
used, two in the proximal half of the bone and two in the distal half. The four pins tra-
versing the bone are then clamped to a rod running parallel to the longitudinal axis of the
bone. This is the s0-called half-pin method (Fig. 8.20). If the external clamping rod can
be placed on the dorsal surface of the wing this causes less discomfort to the bird.
If the pins are pushed further through the bone they can be clamped to another pin or
bar on the other side of the bone, the full-pin technique (Fig. 8.21). In this case the pins
must be inserted perpendicularly to the longitudinal axis of the bone. The disadvantages
of this method are increased weight, the need to insert four transverse pins, so increasing
the likelihood of splitting the bone and also the more cumbersome nature of the device
when compared with the tie-in method described above.
 However, very lightweight Kirschner splints are being developed for fnger surgery in
humans and may be adaptable for birds. The technique is relatively rapid and it does allow
endosteal regeneration of the bone. This method is described by Hatt, Christen and Sand-
meier (2005) and is illustrated in Figures 8.22a,b,c.
Note: the brachial artery
The smallest diameter K wires consistent with
and vein run approximately
the size of the individual bird and rigid
below the course of the
stabilisation of the fracture should be used and
radiai nerve on the dorsal
placed at an angle as far apart as possible
surface
Leave sufficient space
between the skin and the
external stabilising bar so
that the K wires can be
cut when the splint is
removed
Hexcelite thermoplastic
Plastic tube stiffened with an internal K wire
casting tape folded over the
and made rigidly adherent to the cross K
ends of the K wires to
wires by filling with acrylic or epoxy resin glue
anchor them to the external
(Araldite)
bar
Fig. 8.20 The half-pin melhod of frachure stabilisalion, using Kirschner (K) wires. (After Coles
1996,BSAVAManua!ofPsiltacineBirds.)
172
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Fig. 8.21 The fullpin method of internal splinting α frachured bone, using the Kirschner-lype
splint made from Kirschner (K) wire and he barrels of 1 ml hypodermic plastic syringes filled
with glue. Leave enough space lo enable he pins to be cut when the splint is removed.
(a)
(b)
(C)
Swiss army for fingers, and modified by Halt et al. (2005). (b) Diagram showing he equipment
(sajoy (al papoaiu pun (oj bupe :uoyosqos jouaxe joj anbiuupa ssims ay us pasn
Kirschner pins (c); screws [d); Allen key (e). Pins may be placed perpendicular (Fig. 8.22c) or
at a 30° angle. (c) Fixalion of pin at 90°.
A modification of this method that is applicable to smaller birds (down to 200g in size)
is to use Kirschner wires and to anchor these to a piece of plastic (not rubber) tubing flled
with methyl-methacrylate-based plastic or an epoxy resin glue or dental acrylic which then
sets and holds the pins frmly. The diameter of the plastic tubing can be adapted to the
size of the bird. When the pins need to be removed they are cut through and withdrawn.
The surgeon must make sure there is enough space between the skin and the external bar
aap aun jo iuiam aun ieui st po sn jo siuape au 'io pans aq 0n sun 1og
is reduced.
Surgery
173
When placing the pins, the pins farthest apart are frst put in position, and then joined
by the external rod or plastic tube. The bone is aligned and the other pins are placed in
position. If using a tube flled with plastic epoxy, it is sometimes helpful to temporarily
anchor the transverse pins to another temporary external bar, placed parallel to the plastic
tube by using wire twisted round the junctions. When the whole splint is finished the ends
of the transverse pins must be protected with tape, otherwise the bird may be further
injured (Fig. 8.18).
The author has successfully used short intramedullary pegs made of several materials.
These were then held in place by a fgure-of-eight stainless steel wire suture. This method
keeps the bone in alignment and helps to put some compression on the fracture site to aid
healing (Fig. 8.23). The materials used for the intramedullary pegs have ranged from short
lengths of a Steinmann pin or hypodermic needles and polypropamide rods. The latter
The plunger stem is cut to approximate size and then cut down and fled to shape
during the operation, using a sterile fle. The material snaps if too long a length is used,
but only a short peg is needed to hold the bone in alignment. If the fracture is more than
a few days old, new endosteal bone will have to be reamed out of the medullary cavity.
The peg is pushed into the longer fragment frst and then reversed into the shorter piece
of the bone. The reversal is accomplished by pulling on a piece of suture material threaded
through a hole drilled at the end of the peg. Holes for the tension band sutures are then
drilled with a fne drill bit or a straight triangular needle. This can be held in a mini bone
 chuck or an instrument maker's chuck and rotated berween the fngers. One hole may go
through the intramedullry peg but the other hole must be beyond the end of the peg.
otherwise the bone cannot be pulled together. Too much tension must not be put on the
wire suture; the fragments must be carefully brought together to avoid splitting. When
passing the wire suture through the drill holes it is sometimes useful to use a hypodermic
needle as a wire guide.
Fig. 8.23 Using a peg made of cruciate seclion plaslic and a figureofeight wire suure lo
reduce a frachured humerus.
174
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
This method is only really applicable in birds larger than about 600g in weight. It can
be tedious, but it does allow some endosteal bone formation, as the peg has a cruciate
cross-section. It is also light in weight and the polypropamide is well-tolerated.
Unfortunately, many humeral fractures are compound and grossly contaminated.
Osteomyelitis does not affect birds systemically as much as mammals, but it prevents
healing. Bacteriological culture for antibiotic sensitivity should always be carried out. A
variety of organisms have been isolated but coliform organisms are common and anaerobes
are sometimes cultured.
The whole area should be cleaned and debrided. If the bone is discoloured and necrotic
it is best removed, even if this means a reduction in the length of the bone. Provided not
more than 25% of the length of the bone is lost some birds will learn to adapt and may
even fly again (Olney, 1958/9; Scott, 1968).
Post-operative care
ppin e u Apoq au on paddes isq si aum aun snnaunq aun uo aueiado a
position for 2-3 days. This short period of bandaging should not be extended because
the circulation is restricted. Low oxygen tension in traumatised tissue probably
predisposes the tissue to excessive fibrosis. A suitable perch should be provided to stop
the primary feathers trailing on the foor. Also these can be wrapped in a protective
bandage.
 Arophy of muscle through disuse can be rapid in birds. The white muscle fibres (the
glycogen users) as distinct from the red muscle fbres (the fat users) are more susceptible
t0 atrophy when subject to disuse (George & Berger, 1966). There is always a mixture 0f
the two types of fbres in the pectoralis muscle of all birds but the proportion varies with
the species. Birds that have a rapid jump take off, such as pheasants, have a higher pro-
portion of white fbres so the chances of disuse atrophy in the pectoralis of these species
is higher.
Luxation of the elbow joint
Elbow luxation is not uncommon and can be diffcult to resolve. The joint is
covered by a weak joint capsule, which also encloses the ends of the humerus, radius
and ulna. There is little surrounding muscle to give protection. Any attempt to stabilise
the joint with wire sutures is very likely to end in fbrosis and even eventual ankylosis.
J.L. Rodger (1981, personal communication) used a hinged splint successfully on a
buzzard. Martin et al. (1993) devised a method of stabilising the joint, and this has
subsequently been modifed by Forbes (1995, personal communication) as shown in
Fig. 8.24. When attempting to relocate the displaced bones, the covert feathers should be
plucked and the whole area wetted so that the anatomy of the parts can be more easily
seen.
Fractures of the radius and ulna
In about 50% of cases either the radius or the ulna is fractured, but not both. When only
One bone is fractured it is wiser to leave the fractured bone alone. The normal one will
help to splint it. Even if there is not perfect alignment of the healed fractured bone this
does not matter, the bird will manage quite adequately and fly again. Strapping of the
wing for 2-3 days only is required. However, if both radius and ulna are fractured some
method of splinting will be required.
Occasionally, when both radius and ulna have been fractured, during healing a synos-
tosis is formed and both bones become locked in the same callus. For the wing to function
normally these two bones should be able to slide longitudinally in relation to each other
The synostosis can be overcome if an ostectomy is carried out on part of the radius or
ulna (Rupiper, 1993; Tanzella, 1993).
Surgery
175
Fixators of plastic tubing
filled with Technovit or
dental acrylic
Radius
Humerus
UIna
-- K wires (or possibly
suitable size hypodermic
needles)
Place theK wires through
the tubing beforc inserting
them into thebone
Fig. 8.24 A method of stabilising he reposilioned luxated elbow joint. To get the parts in
apposition, it may be found easiest ho slightly flex and at he same time rotate the radius and
ulna as indicated, then press firmly on a flat surface. (After Coles, 1996, BSAVA Manual of
Psittacine Birds.]
Plastic splinting
material
-Polyurethane
padding
Radius
Ulna
Skin
Interremigial
ligament
Fig. &.25 Mehod of external splining of a fracured ulna, using a mesh of plastic splinting
material.
External splinting
External splinting is more applicable to the smaller birds, in which the bones may not be
thick enough to support some method of internal fxation. The simplest method is to use
a fgure-of-eight bandage combined with cage rest. However, remove the bandage every
3-4 days and very gently flex and extend the wing to encourage the circulation, after which
replace the bandage for another 3-4 days.
Another method of external splinting is to suture a piece of lightweight plastic material,
such as a length of Hexcelite or Vetcast casting tape, padded with polyurethane foam,
over the fracture site. The sutures pass through the mesh of the splinting material through
the skin and between the shafts of the secondary feathers (Fig. 8.25). It is best to remove
most of the covert feathers and to wet the area so that the anatomy of the parts can be
176
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
This part of the pin
The hole for entry of the pin should
should enter the longest
first be pre-drilled.  Start with the drill
segment of fractured
bit perpendicular to the bone then
bone
gradually redirect it along the line of
the bone. Go slowly and carefully.
Fig. 8.26 Rush pinning of a frachured ulna using a suitable K wire bent into shape. (Affer
Coles, 1996, BSAVA Manual of Psitacine Birds.)
distinguished through the semi-transparent skin. The sutures should be placed well behinc
the ulna so that the main blood vessels are avoided. However, if possible, the posterior
sutures should be placed in front of the interremigial ligament. All the sutures should be
preplaced before being tied so that they can be accurately positioned. This splint is light
in weight, is comfortable, and, providing it is properly positioned, does allow some move-
ment of the joints during healing.
A similar, but simpler, splint, using X-ray flm, is applicable to birds the size of a canary
(20g) and is described under fractures of the carpus.
internal splinting of the radius and uina
The Kirschner splint as described for use in fractures of the humerus, is quite applicable
to fractures of radius and ulna. The author also once used the barrel of a 1ml plastic
tuberculin syringe cut to size and smoothed off at the ends. This was used as a sleeve to
push over the outside of the fractured ulna of a barn owl. A cut was made along the pos-
terior side of this cylinder so that it would slide past the shafts of the adjacent secondary
firm when in position so that no further anchorage was necessary. This provided excellent
alignment and the bird was able to fy perfectly with the sleeve permanently in position
(Plate 20). The author has also used a rush pin made from a suitable Kirschner (K) wire
bent into shape. This needs to be very carefully inserted into the ulna (Fig. 8.26).
Fractures of the carpus, metacarpus and digits
 In very large birds it is possible to use a Kirschner-Ehmer splint for fractures of the carpus
metacarpus and digits, but in birds below 200g in weight the metacarpal bone is so thin
the method is not practical.
A method of external splinting that the author has found to work quite well is to use
a piece of disused X-ray flm or clear acetate sheet (thermoplastic casting tape could also
be used). This is bent over the leading edge of the wing and held in position by sutures.
The sutures pass through the skin covering the primary feathers. Just posterior to the
carpus and metacarpus is the ulnocarporemigial aponeurosis (King & McLelland, 1984).
This triangular sheet gives very good anchorage for the sutures (Fig. 8.27).
This splint is light in weight and allows some movement of the carpal joint. Many
medium sized birds (200-1000g) on which this splint has been used have been able to fly
again.
In very small birds suturing the shafts of the adjacent primary feathers together on each
side of the fracture may work - as the shafts are directly attached to the bone
Surgery
177
Fig. 8.27 External splintling of he carpus and metacarpus using acetate film.
Prevention ofFlight
The practitioner is sometimes asked to carry out these procedures on free-ranging birds
to stop them flying. Amputation of the tip of the wing may be required in those birds that
sometimes suffer from a so-called ‘slipped wing’ or ‘angel wing', a condition common
in waterfowl (Sanderson, 2006; personal communication), in a northern goshawk,
 (ts 'd 'g rde as) sq  i s  oe a p (o 'so)
lution of this condition may be possible in large birds by osteotomy and intramedullary
pinning of the large metacarpal bone. A bandage is applied for 4-6 weeks (Yeisey,
1993).
Pinioning
Pinioning can be carried out by simply cutting short some of the primary and most of the
secondary feathers to prevent flight. A sharp pair of strong scissors is suffcient for the
operation, and, providing the shaft is cut while the feather is not growing (i.e. not in their
'pins'), it does not bleed. It is best to leave the outer one or two primaries, which will
cover the defect in the wing when it is folded and lead to a better cosmetic appearance.
Only one wing is treated, since the principle is to unbalance the bird's flight. If both wings
are operated on, many birds are able to achieve short-distance flight, certainly over an
enclosure fence. Some parrot owners like to walk round with the bird perched on their
shoulder. It is wise to warn owners of pet parrots that even after clipping the wings the
bird may still be able to get over the garden fence or high into the nearest tree. Some
 parrots will persistently fall heavily onto their sternum, resulting in a chronically bruised
and ulcerated area.
Wing-tipamputation
Amputation of the wing tip for pinioning is usually carried out in fledglings through the
third and fourth metacarpal bones, just distal to the carpus. The blood supply to this area,
particularly when the feathers are growing, can be well developed. It is therefore wise to
place a tourniquet around the carpal area just proximal to the attachment of the second
metacarpal or alula digit (attachment of bastard wing) before making any incision. If the
covert feathers are well plucked from the area and the operation site is wet, the underlying
structures can more easily be seen.
An encircling incision is made through the skin at least half way along the length of
the third and fourth metacarpal bones, so that there is plenty of skin left to cover the ends
of the bone. The skin, tendons and any muscle are then dissected back to the proximal
 end of the third and fourth metacarpal bones. These are cut at this level with bone forceps
or strong scissors (Fig. 8.28). If the temporary ligature is effective, bleeding is minimal;
 s  s n  i  s no n e aq  a a
other soft tissue is then sutured so that the remaining muscle will cover the ends of the
bone.
178
Essenlials of Avican Medicine and Surgery
Radius
Fusedmetacarpals
B
Ulna
Fig. 8.28 Amputalion of the wing tip: (A), posilion of tourniquet; (B) site of amputalion.
Radius
Ulna
Humerus
人人
Fig. 8.29 Patagiechomy. The shaded area of he prepalagium is removed, after each side is
clamped with artery forceps, and he area is closed by suures placed around he humerus
and radius. The edges of he skin on he dorsal and ventral surfaces are suured.
Prevention of flightbypatagiectomy
Patagiectomy, devised by Mangilgi (1971) and later used by Robinson (1975) is to render
large birds flightless. It can also be used in some cases where a wing is so badly injured
that amputation is considered necessary. The end result is not only cosmetically more
acceptable than amputation but may well enable the bird to maintain better balance. The
technique is illustrated in Figure 8.29.
Tendonectomy
Tendonectomy of the extensor tendons on the cranial edge of the metacarpal bone has
been used to deflight birds. About 8-10mm of tendon needs to be removed. Also, wiring
the metacarpus and ulna together in permanent flexion using two or three wire sutures is
effective.
The pelvic limb
Fractures of the femur and the tibiotarsal bone
Fractures of the femur and tibiotarsal bone can all be dealt with by one of the methods
described for internal fxation of the fractured humerus. Harcourt-Brown (1996) has
described a tension band technique for proximal fractures of the femur. The surgical
approach to the femur is from the lateral aspect and is not diffcult so long as the muscles
are carefully dissected apart and split in the direction of their muscle fbres. The major
blood vessels and nerves lie towards the caudal aspect. The tibiotarsal bone is best
approached from the cranio-medial aspect to avoid the nerves and blood vessels in this
part of the leg.
Surgery
179
In the case of the tibiotarsal bone with a transverse midshaft fracture, there is a definite
tendency for the distal end of the bone to rotate outwardly. While this may not be a
problem to the bird, which often manages quite well, it is usually not acceptable to the
owner. The rotation is probably caused by the tension of the digital flexor muscles involved
in the perching mechanism. This is one reason why intramedullary pinning of the tibiotarsal
bone by itself is often not entirely satisfactory without the support of an exterior splint.
Because of the conical shape of the muscles surrounding the tibiotarsal bone, external
splinting by itself is not well adapted to this area. However, a combination of intramedul-
lary pinning and external splinting often works reasonably well, providing the fracture
site is well clear (proximal) to the distal part of the bone and the intertarsal joint. Other-
wise developing callus may entrap the free movement of the tendons of the cranial tibial
muscle and the extensor digitorum longus.
To overcome these problems, Harcourt-Brown (1996) suggests using a cross pinning
technique with rwo K wires or pins passed through the lateral surfaces of the epicondyles
of the tibiotarsal bone to enter the medullary cavity, and then “bounced off the opposing
cortex to cross each other approximately midshaft. The distal ends of the pins are hooked
around the epicondyles.
Redig (2000) suggests using a type of tie-in technique. First, a polypropylene shuttle as
illustrated in Figure 8.19 is inserted in the medullary cavity, to bring the two fractured
halves of the diaphysis into alignment. Next, up to four transverse pins are inserted, as
illustrated, and the ends of the pins having been bent at right angles are held in position
with casting tape.
Fractures of the bones below the hock joint
Except in the case of the larger birds, where Kirschner-Ehmer (K-E) splinting is quite suit-
able, external splinting often produces reasonably good results. In birds over 100g (cocka-
tiel) in weight a plastic casting material, such as Hexcelite or Vetcast tape, padded with
a 5-6 mm thick piece of expanded polyurethane, works very well. The polyurethane pad
is cut generously so that it overlaps the area to be splinted. When the softened Hexcelite
is placed in position it is moulded to the part by binding snugly with an elastic bandage
such as Vetrap. The excess polyurethane padding and any sharp projections of Hexcelite
can be trimmed with scissors.
In small birds, like budgerigars and canaries - up to cockatiel size, the use of an Altman
splint made of a strip of sticking plaster has been described by a number of authors and
is very effective. Any tape material that sticks to itself is effective, but zinc oxide plaster
is probably the best. The application of the splint is illustrated in Figure 8.30 and it can
be reinforced by incorporating matchsticks, cocktail sticks, nylon catheter tubing, etc.,
within the layers of the splint. When applying these external splints, they can always be
placed much more effectively if the bird is under light anaesthesia. This allows muscle
relaxation and better alignment. Trying to ft a splint on a struggling, conscious bird may
result in further trauma. At the proximal end of the splint, if this does not adhere very
well because of feathering, two sutures through the tape will overcome this problem.
A few birds will not tolerate the splint and will remove it in a few days. Even if the
splint is only in place for about four days it has often been found to be suffcient time in
these very small birds.
When the time comes for removal of the splint, soaking the zinc oxide splint in ether
or other suitable solvent (Zoff, available from pharmacists) will dissolve the adhesive
Again, it is safer to do this if the bird is under light anaesthesia.
Valgus deformity
Valgus deformity can be seen as bending of any of the long bones as a result of a calcium:
phosphorus imbalance or vitamin D, deficiency during the critical period of ossification
180
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
Fig. 8.30 Splint for small birds, using adhesive tape crimped together wih artery forceps.
of the bones in the growing bird. Some of these deformities can be corrected, when growth
has ceased and the diet has been corrected, using a wedge or dome osteotomy technique
and subsequently stabilising the area with a K-E splint. The condition is common in hand-
reared parrots and raptors.
Ring removal
In budgerigars particularly, but also in other birds it is often necessary to remove a metal
s o a e  si  ai i os ms oi aq a  asi 
ing of the whole foot. If this is not promptly relieved the blood supply can be cut off and
the foot becomes gangrenous. Very often the ring has become buried in the inflamed and
swollen tissues by the time veterinary advice is sought.
It is most important to have the bird held frmly on a table by another person. General
anaesthesia may be necessary. The surgeon can then hold the ring frmly with artery forceps
while the ring is cut with the points of a pair of nail clippers. There is a risk that the ring
will slip out of the grip of the artery forceps and rotate while being cut. Great care must
be taken to avoid this, otherwise the tibiotarsus may be fractured. Specially designed
cutters are available for this purpose. Also, fne hairs from bedding and nest materials can
become embedded round the ring and good lighting and magnification is needed to fnd
them. A fne cutting suture needle may be used for this purpose (see Plate 12).
Hip luxation
Luxation of the hip joint usually results in fracture of the femoral head, because of the
strong round ligament. After this injury the leg becomes fixed in extension and the only
solution is a femoral head arthrotomy. Most birds accept this surgery with little disable-
ment. A cranial approach to the joint is made and after excision a slip of iliofbularis
  (d            
posed cranially over the proximal end of the femur (i.e. the trochanter) and anchored in
through the acetabulum and under the ischiatic nerve.
Achilles tendon luxation
The Achilles tendon (hallucis longus tendon), the long flexor of the foot, tends to slip
medially away from the trochlea of the tarsometatarsal bone in cases of perosis causing
marked angular deformity of the leg and severe disablement. Before surgery the diet must
be corrected.
Surgery
181
On examination, the joint is noticeably swollen and sometimes the tendon can be
pushed back into position. One or both legs may be affected and not all chicks in a clutch
are necessarily affected. The author's method of resolving this condition is to make a
caudo-lateral skin incision over the joint and then, by careful blunt dissection, defne the
through half the tendon thickness, through a tunnel made in the lateral epicondyle of the
trochlea with a hypodermic needle (used as a guide for the suture).
Since there is some force on the tendon causing it to pull through the suture and to re-
luxate, another method used by the author is, once the tendon is pushed back into its
normal position, to insert a K wire transversely into the tibiotarsal bone to the lateral side
of the tendon, and bend this into a hook to hold it in position. It is important to insert
the pin above (proximal) to the epiphysis at the junction of the tibia and proximal tarsal
bones. Whichever method is used, apply external splinting with Verrap self-adhesive
bandage for three weeks, but watch for swelling of the foot.
For splayed legs in fledglings, see p. 206.
Bumblefoot
Bumblefoot is a septic condition of the foot leading to abscessation. It has been recognised
in poulry for many years and is not uncommon among falconers' birds. It is also seen in
water birds and occasionally in psittacine birds, even in budgerigars. It is a serious condi-
tion and can ruin a bird for falconry. It is rarely, if ever, seen in wild birds.
The infection penetrates the foot from the plantar surface because the integrity of the
sively dry or the skin is abraded. Falcons and heavy, inactive birds, constantly standing
on the same diameter perches so that their feet get little exercise, are predisposed to bum-
blefoot. Cooper (1978) discusses the subject thoroughly in his book and points out that
puncture of the metatarsal pad or sole by an overgrown claw of the frst or hind digit may
cause this condition in some falcons.
Birds' feet are covered with scales, which are modifed areas of the epidermis. The scales
are formed by areas of hyperkeratinisation. Berween therm are sulci or clefts. Some areas
of the foot are raised in papillae which increases the grip of the foot. There is constant
 growth and shedding of the skin surface through normal wear. Sometimes the scales are
shed during the moult of the feathers. Anything that interferes with this normal pattern
of skin change, such as excessive abrasion, will allow micro-organisms to reach the sub-
dermal tissues.
Any bird kept in dirty, unhygienic conditions is subject to bumblefoot. The skin is tight
and in places adherent to the underlying bone. Any swelling in this region due to an
inflammatory response is restricted and tends to track along tendon sheaths and other
planes of least resistance. Within a few days of the initial infection, fbroplasia sets in,
 possibly exacerbated by a low oxygen tension through swelling of the tissues and inactivity
of the sessile, tethered falcon. The increased fbrous tissue retards any penetration of
antibodies to the focus of infection. The whole process is a vicious circle.
The abscess may be filled with caseous or serosanguinous pus and may contain a variety
of micro-organisms. These commonly include Stapbylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli and
Proteus spp. The infection may track as far as the intertarsal or hock joint. When frst
presented for veterinary examination the lesion may be 3-4 months old or even older. The
obvious swelling is usually covered by a scab caused by hyperkeratinisation. The foot
should be X-rayed in the lateral and ventro-dorsal positions, because osteoarthritis is a
common sequel to a long-standing infection. The scab should be removed and a bacterio-
logical culture taken for antibiotic sensitivity. Swelling of the tendon sheaths and tenosino-
vitis can sometimes be detected, because even when the digits are moved under general
anaesthesia small ratchet-like projections on the inside of the tendon sheaths catch with
182
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
those on the tendons, making the movement feel jerky. This ratchet mechanism is normally
brought into play when the bird is perching and there is tension on the flexor tendons. In
the relaxed anaesthetised bird there should be no tension on these tendons and the digits
can be moved freely.
Treatmentofbumblefoot
If the swelling on the foot is very small and there is no sign of the infection tracking, it
may be treated with the appropriate systemic and local antibiotics. The local antibiotics
may be mixed with dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) to help penetration of the drugs. Vitamin
 In the vast majority of cases surgery will be necessary. This consists of opening the
abscess and carefully removing all caseous and necrotic material, taking care to avoid
nerves, tendons and blood vessels. All sinuses should be investigated with a blunt probe
and the whole area should be vigorously irrigated, preferably with chymotrypsin solution.
Before starting, it is a wise precaution to place a tourniquet around the lower part of the
tibiotarsal bone because the granulating tissue within the swelling can bleed profusely.
The tourniquet should be released periodically.
After thorough curettage the skin is accurately sutured with mattress sutures using
non-absorbable suture material, preferably placed across the line of flexion of the skin.
Use of antibiotic-impregnated beads may be indicated, see p. 165. The foot is bandaged
and the bandage may be left in place 2-3 weeks until healing is completed. A non-adhesive
dressing such as fucidin intertulle should be placed under the bandage.
As suggested by Remple (1993), better results can be achieved by using a foot cast.
After the foot has been covered with a thin sheet of polyurethane foam (obtainable from
DIY upholsterers), a cast is made of Hexcelite, dental acrylic, plastic padding or Technovit,
and while this is still plastic it is moulded to the plantar surface of the foot and kept in
position with strips of Vetrap self-adhesive elastic bandage. When the cast is set hard the
bandage is unwound and the cast is removed. A large hole is cut in the centre of the cast
and the edges smoothed off so that when re-applied the pressure is taken off the central
metatarsal pad and the surgical incision. The same principle can be applied using human
orthopaedic felt pads or the foam-covered material used for the flexible insoles of shoes.
Obviously, these materials are not so rigid or robust.
The surgeon or the owner must regularly inspect the foot to ensure it does not become
swollen and the surgical wound should be inspected every 2-3 days without removing the
cast. The bird should be allowed on to a perch padded with foam rubber or plastic foam.
The patient should be encouraged to use a variety of different sized and shaped perches
so that the foot is not constantly held in the same position and so becomes cramped. The
q is uady o uoar pus an pe papped kad aq oi paau Ae sard
the rule. The owner should be constantly aware of the problem and routinely examine the
feet for early signs of trouble.
The use of AstroTurf to cover block perches, or in the concrete enclosures of captive
waterfowl, also helps to prevent this condition. Use of an apparently unstable but slightly
moveable perch (as in the branch of a swaying tree), such as one mounted on a short piece
of metal spring, may encourage the perched bird to constantly shift its weight, helping
venous return and encouraging blood supply to the foot.
9
Nursing and After Care
This chapter is based on a paper by the author published in the Journal of Smal Animal
Practice (1984b). Sections of it are reprinted here by permission of the editor and
publishers.
 Few practices routinely hospitalise birds which is regrettable because, apart from wild
bird casualties for which the public expects immediate expert veterinary attention, diag-
nosis in individual sick birds is diffcult. A practice routine for hospitalising avian patients
gives the veterinarian time to observe and evaluate the patient, leading to a more accurate
diagnosis and a higher standard of treatment. Hospitalising birds is also advantageous to
nursing staff. The clinical state of avian patients can change hourly, often with litle
obvious signs. In developing their ability to recognise these slight changes, nurses enhance
their powers of observation of all types of patients, and because of the delicate nature of
many sick birds, proficiency acquired in nursing these creatures leads to a general upgrad-
ing of all nursing skills
The essential attributes that are common in all branches of nursing are:
1. A diligent attention to hygiene
2. A genuine concern for the well-being of the patient
 3. Accurate recording of the clinical changes
4. A methodical approach to the task in hand
Many of the techniques and skills used by the veterinary clinician and the animal nurse
have been developed and adapted from those used in human nursing. However, there are
cessful avian nursing depends on the realisation that there are fundamental differences
between the biology of birds and that of mammals, including humans.
 ASPECTS OF BIRD BEHAVIOUR
Stress
When hospitalised, birds are generally more liable to psychological stress than mammals.
 Bird behaviour is largely instinctive. A routine behavioural response is triggered by a spe-
cifc stimulus or releaser present in the environment. If there are none of the normal
releasers in the bird's hospital environment the creature becomes stressed. Similarly, a bird
will make certain ritualistic movements that act as greetings, threats, etc. to a member of
its own species. If the bird makes these to an unfamiliar handler and there is no response,
it becomes stressed.
183
184
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Stress is also related to birds' high metabolic rates and to the fact that most birds are
creatures of the air and less used to confined surroundings. Stress, caused by fright or
frustration of confinement, will vary among species and be influenced by their degree of
habituation to man. Even within species there is considerable variation. Some wild barn
owls (Tyto alba), for example, willingly eat dead hatchery chicks while others have to be
persuaded to do so - this being quite unrelated to the severity of their injuries. Most
hospitalised parrots will feed readily, but occasionally one will feed only on one part of
a presented seed diet (e.g. hemp) for which it has a particular liking. Always accept some
of the parrot's normal (usual) food if this is offered by the owner. Aviculturists recognise
familiar, but will not touch a blue dish of exactly the same type.
Some kestrels (Falco tinnunculus) are more aggressive than others. Individuals within
a species allhave different personalities and some species of bird are more easily handled
than others. Amongst raptors, buzzards (Buteo buteo) are generally much less aggressive
and nervous than goshawks (Accipiter gentilis) or sparrow-hawks (Accipiter nisus).
However, there are some aspects of avian behaviour that are common to all birds, with
relatively few exceptions. With the exclusion of the ground-living species, such as fowls
(Galliformes) and waterfowl (Anseriformes), most birds spend a great deal of their time
above human eye level, either in flight or perching. Consequently, when hospitalised, birds
are less stressed if they are kept at as high a level as is practical in a room. Their cages,
if portable, can be kept on a high shelf. In contrast to this, if one is feeding altricial nest-
 e on po  pq id e sdxa a sn ssa sa
above. If the nurse is to simulate this pattern of behaviour the chick must be approached
from above not from a horizontal direction.
Although all birds have good hearing, abnormal sounds, such as a nearby human voice
or barking of a hospitalised dog, seem to disturb them much less than the sight of, or
quick movement of, other creatures. This is particularly so with wild birds that are not
accustomed to human contact. The nurse must learn to move slowly and deliberately when
 in the bird's vicinity. Ideally, hospitalised birds are less stressed if kept in a separate room
out of sight and sound of creatures other than birds, where the light intensity can be suit-
ably reduced (see p. 27) and where higher ambient temperatures can be maintained.
stressed by the flickering of fluorescent strip lights. Korbel (2005) indicated that birds can
resolve motion pictures at a flicker frequency of 180 frames/sec compared with humans
(except for some autistics and other neurologically impaired humans) with a ficker fre-
quency of 15-80 frames a minute. Consequently most conventional fluorescent tubes
(including low energy bulbs) are not flicker free and are potentially stressful to birds (see
p. 28 and Table 9.1).
Moreover, ideally birds should be hospitalised in cages which are individually and
separately ventilated so that possible carriers of latent pathogens are effectively isolated
(see Plate 16).
If a cloth is placed inside across the bars of a cage to prevent self injury by the bird
continually bouncing or batting against the bars of its cage, this should not restrict the
nurses’ constant observation of the patient.
If birds are frequently hospitalised, a thin board, covered in easily-cleaned plastic lami
can also be used when cleaning out the cage so as to confne the bird to one corner without
actually handling it. There is less disturbance to the bird if the cage has a removable
tray.
When hospitalising birds it may be better to let the birds see each other, particularly
in the case of social species. Birds often live in flocks of the same or allied species. Some
birds, such as hospitalised psittacines, may have led a long, solitary caged existence and
Plate 1 Bourke's parrot (Neo-
phema bourki)j. This bird died of
emaciation due to a small intes-
ine grossly impacted with nema-
lodeworms.
Plate 2 Bulky droppings containing litle
associated urate content passed by a splen-
did/scarle-chested parror (Neophema splen-
didaj. These droppings had a high undigested 
starch content due lo a pancreariris secondary
to paramyxovirus-(PMv-3) infeclion.
Plate 3 This peregrine falcon (Falco peregri-
nus] exhibirs toricollis and 'star gazing'. The
bird was in good condition and showed no
external signs of rauma, but radiography
revealed a crack in he cranium and some
increased densily of adjacent soff fissue.
Plate 4 This lovebird (Agapornis spp
hybridj is infected wih psiltacine beak
and fealher disease caused by a circovi-
rus (presence of he virus confirmed by
DNA PCR). Note that unlike his disease
in some olher species the body feahers
and he beak appear normal. It is only
some of he plumage on he head which
is obviously abnormal.
Plate 5 Lesser vasa parrot (Coracopsis
nigraj. Dorsum and wings show marked
loss of normal black pigmentation due lo
psiltacine beak and feaher disease viral
infection.
o us punoy som poey sll uo sypu joaaas yim joauahpnq Aous puo padoosa siul g aod
forest area in the Netherlands. Ii was very debilitated and died shorly after being found. In
his parlicular case, because of he light colour of he plumage and he size and malurily of
he licks, their presence is obvious. In oher cases, where he plumage may be darker in colour
and he licks immahure nymphs and much smaller in size, their presence may not be so easily
noliced. The licks in this photograph are almost certainly, alhough not confirmed to be, xodes
ricinus, which can transmit louping ill, to humans. [Photo by courtesy of Dr. Jan Hooimeijer.)
Plate 7 Kesrel (Falco finnunculus] with avipox viral infeclion.
Plate 8 LiMe owl (Ahene nociua)
showing coloboma and hypopyon almost 
sion to which this species is prone. There
were no signs of inraocular haemor-
rhage from a raumalised pecten. Provid-
ing infecrion is lIreated, ihe hypopyon 
will resolve and, although he coloboma
will remain, vision is not so affected hat
Hhe bird will not be able to hunt and be
rehabilitated into he wild.
Plate 9 Tawny owl [Strixaluco) showing
Capillaria
spp
helminths in he
oropharynx.
Plate 10 This budgerigar (Melopsitacus undu-
lates) exhibils grossly enlarged ihyroid glands
due to hypohyroidism cause by a lack of iodine.
 The swollen hyroid glands partially obsruct he
oesophagus and may also cause pressure on
he adjacent syrinx, so altering he voice.
Plate 11 This domeslic duck shows a pahologi-
cally prolapsed phallus. This is often he resulf of
bullying by dominant male ducks when kept inten-
sively. If several cases occur simultaneously his
could be due to duck viral enteris, a herpes
virus.
Pate 12 The correct melhod of
culting a breeder's ring from the
tarsometatarsus of a small bird.
Specially designed cutters with a
nick on each blade near he point
are used，(
and he ring is held
firmly with a pair of forceps - in
his case hooh forceps. If this is
not done here is a tendency for
he ring to rwist forcibly whilst
being cut, with he danger of he 
bone being broken.
Plate 13 Red-tailed hawk [Buteo jamai-
censisj. On first examinalion this looks
like a neoplasm, which could be either
α papilloma, fibrosarcoma, squamous
cell carcinoma ora basal cell carcinoma.
However, the pathology report stated no
evidence of any neoplasia but only pseu-
doepitheliomatous hyperplasia. In remov-
ing the lesion great care must be taken
not to cause fibrosis and contraclion of
he lower lid.
Pate 14 Loss of he distal half
of he upper beak in a female teal
[Anas crecca], possibly caused
by being ripped off in a sruggle 
with a predator or by a conslrict-
ing ligalure of a fisherman's nylon
line. This duck has survived in he
wild but will do much better wilh
support feeding.
Plate 15 Greater vasa parrol
[Coracopsis vasa]of Madagas-
car, showing prominent swollen
phallus. This normal prouberant
phallus should not be mistaken
forapahologicalprolapse.
[Photo by courtesy of Dr R.
Wilkinson.}
Pate 16 Hospital cages for birds used at he
Universily of Leipzig in Germany. Depending on
size, he birds are retained in iheir own cages,
with which hey are familiar. The cage and bird
are hen enclosed in a separate, glass-fronted
air space with an inlet air grill near the boltom
of each cage. The pipe work of he fllered air
exraclion system can be seen at the top. Infra-
red lamps over each cage provide individually
required supplementary heating for each bird.
The individual case notes are altached to he
front of the cage in ransparent plastic bags so
hat hey do not collect dust and do not become
contaminaled when the cage is washed.
Plate 17 Young fledgling song
thrush (Turdus philomelos) being
fed using a 2mm syringe. Ir has
been filled with a soff food and
squeezed out by lhe nurse so haf
lo the bird it looks like a worm.
Plate 18 Fledgling tawny owl
[Strix aluco].
Whenthey firsht
leave he nest, hese young birds
offen fall to the ground. They are
somelimes picked up by well-
meaning walkers who wrongly
assume they are lost and bring
hem into veterinarian's clinics.
These fledglings are quite capable
of looking affer hemselves and,
if leff alone, will crawl up to he
neshing site and be fed by he
parenf birds.
Plate 19 Barn owl (Tyto aibaj being test flown in a farmer's barn before being released back
to the wild. Note both wings are held fully extended and quite slraight. As can be seen in the
radiograph shown in Plate 2O, he bird originally had frachured both ulnas. On he right side,
since ihe radius was intact, nohing surgically was done except to temporarily strap he wing
for hree days. However, on he leff side, since he radius was also frachured, he ulna was
splinted with a polypropylene ube.
Plate 20 Radiograph of he
bird shown in Plate 19. As shown,
the wings, which are he impor-
ant area of his photograph, are
α lime under exposed, ie, hey
are too dark.
Plate 21 Feaher duster syn-
drome in a British show budgeri-
gar (Melopsinacus undulaius).
Probably geneic in origin but
may be associated with a herpes
virus. (Photograph courtesy of Dr
J.R.Baker.)
Nursing and After Care
185
None [absorbs radialion below 390nm]
 UVA Portion
Praclically none ([fllter)]
According to fller
Alter Profer Rudger Kobel, Prof. Drmd ve, Drmed ve hbi, Ce.Ve Ophl, D. CAMS, LdwigMaximinsUnversily, Mh.
Described
Described
Described
None
None
ballsr
ballast
ballash
ballasl
According lo ballast
 Flicker-free?*
2CCG: operales at wice the mains supply current: 100-120HZ; ECG: operales at 30-50megaherlz frequencies.
2
According
According
According
According
According
400-1100nm, max at 950nm
Spectral Range
Natural daylight specirum 
Near UV to infrared
3-band-spechrum
80% in infrared
Full-spechrum 
Full-speclrum
DECOSTAR IRC cold-light
Acliva[Sylvania/Osram]
 reflector lamp [Osram] 
 Brand Name 
Incandescent Lamp
Vitc-lite [Duro-Test]
True-light Solux
Arcadia Birdlamp
No UVA according o Thrush 2000.
DC:operalesunder direct currenl.
Fluorescent+CF
Light Source
Incandescent
Halogen
HID
LED
186
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
sometimes seem to derive beneft from seeing or being near another similar bird. In the
become more alert and interested in its environment. Some parrots have been noticed to
reduce or cease self-plucking of their feathers.
The one type of bird that all species instinctively recognise is the predator. If hospital-
ised, this type of bird must be kept out of sight of other birds. Even parrots such as Amazon
parrots will recognise and fluff up their plumage if they see a peregrine falcon, which does
not normally occur in their country of origin. Hospitalised raptors are usually silent
so that other birds do not know they are in the same room unless they see them (see
p. 27).
Perches
Many of the birds that veterinarians treat use perches. There is little doubt this type of
bird, confned to a cage, is much happier and less stressed if it has somewhere to perch.
This instinct in some birds is so strong that even those born with feet so deformed that
 they are unable to grip willstill attempt to perch using the sides of their feet. Ideally there
should be more than one perch and these should be of varying size and surface texture so
that the muscles of the feet are constantly exercised and do not become cramped. The
standard perch used by aviculturists is made of a round wooden dowel and, although easy
to keep clean, it is not really ideal because of its uniform diameter and smooth surface.
Natural twigs or branches are better and can be replaced when dirty and worn. Branches
 from most deciduous trees (except oak) can be used, but those from rhododendron and
yew must be avoided when used for psittacines, which like to gnaw.
For medium to large birds, weighing 200-1500g, a robust, temporary block perch can
be made from a brick or an earthenware flowerpot turned upside down. This can be
covered with a piece of cloth. A block of wood covered with soft leather makes an even
better perch. These coverings need frequent replacement or cleaning (see p. 181). They
provide a good grip and protection from abrasion to the scales of the feet, which predis
poses to infection leading to bumblefoot. Another alternative emergency perch is illustrated
in Figure 9.1.
Falcons and other raptors are best kept tethered on block perches covered with Astro
Turf. All perches should be high enough to prevent soiling or fraying of the plumage
trailing on the floor. Tail feathers can be bound with Vetrap self-adhesive bandage Or
suitable paper tape. Wooden perches can be placed across the corner of the cages since
Some birds, such as owls, like to lean against the side of the cage when roosting. Perches
should be so placed that the droppings do not contaminate food or water containers -
remember that the faeces of some falcons are ejected horizontally (i.e. sliced) instead of
dropping vertically.
Bathing
Most birds bathe more frequently than most mammals, and many raptors, including owls,
 pon   ss id  o a    
where during most afternoons there is a tropical rainstorm lasting usually no more than
a few minutes. The birds will take advantage of this to have a thorough bath. Aviculturists
recognise this, and many of them regularly spray their show birds with a fne mist of water
from a spray. Aviary birds can be sprayed with a fine jet from a garden hose or the aviary
can be fited with an automatically timed sprinkler system. The birds will then purpose-
fully fly into the spray, just as aviary birds will deliberately go out into rain. Falconers
tether their birds to a perch, to weather (see p. 360) and may place a dish of water near
at hand to bathe. Consequently, whenever it is not inconsistent with other veterinary
treatment, hospitalised birds will benefit if given a bath or sprayed with a fne mist from
a household spray.
Nursing and Alter Care
187
Fig. 9.1 An emergency perch can be easily conslructed of wo full food tins over which is
srapped, wih Velrap elastic bandage, a length of suitable-diameter rod. The weight of
he food rins gives stabiliy to the perch, while he Velrap bandage provides he bird wih a
reasonably soft grip. Note hat the tail of he bird is bound with paper tape lo protect he
remiges from fraying hrough contact with he floor.
The depth of water in a bird bath should not be more than half an inch for small birds
and not more than one inch for a bird the size of a tawny owl (Strix aluco), otherwise
there is a risk of drowning. Chicks should not be bathed, since in many species the down
does not give them suffcient protection. Because of the desire of most caged birds to bathe,
their drinking water containers should not be too large and should be kept above ground
level.
The temperature of the water used for bathing should be about 40°C. Bathing keeps
the plumage clean and also encourages active preening. This is a normal activity of the
healthy bird, since the maintenance of the plumage is not only essential for flight but also
for the conservation of body temperature. In waterfowl ( Anseriformes), in gulls and waders
(Charadriformes), the skin of the feet needs constant contact with water to remain healthy,
Otherwise ulceration and infection may develop. In the Anseriformes, putting the bird into
the water of a bath may act as the releaser to encourage preening.
The advantages and disadvantages of constant handling
Tender loving care by the nurse is of particular beneft to nestlings before their eyes open
and will also beneft all ages of birds used to human contact. McKeever (1979) suggests
that with single baby owls, a piece of dark cloth hung over the top of their box, or a soft
toy to nestle up to will be benefcial and simulate physical contact with the adult bird or
with the young bird's siblings. Too much handling and attention can be disadvantageous
t0 an adult wild bird because the creature becomes tame - which may be disadvantageous
if release is intended. However, if the bird is to be regularly handled for medical treatment
then the sooner it gets conditioned to human contact the better.
188
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
PHYSIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The implications of a high metabolic rate
Energy requirements
Birds have a higher basal metabolic rate than mammalian companion animals. This is
related to the ratio of body surface area to body volume which increases with decreasing
 body weight. Allbirds tend to look larger than they really are, due to the depth of plumage
which holds a layer of insulating static air in contact with the skin. However, Kendeigh
(1970) has indicated that there are other factors, such as the weight of feathers per unit
of surface area, their microscopic anatomy and also the rate of metabolism. Moreover,
basal metabolic rate is higher in Passeriformes compared with non-passerine birds
(Lasiewski & Dawson, 1967).
High rates of metabolism result in rapid heat loss and rapid utilisation of the body's
energy reserves of glycogen and fat. This is so marked in birds, that they will regularly
and normally lose weight overnight while they are not feeding (Perrins, 1979). This is
particularly marked if the ambient temperature is low, e.g. 18?C. Consequently, healthy
birds of the order of 10g bodyweight, e.g. blue tits (Parus caeruleus), kept under optimum
conditions of minimal stress, minimal activity and an ambient temperature of 15°C prob-
ably cannot survive more than 48-72 hours without food. As size increases, survival from
inanition will be longer.
Most hospitalised birds often need frequent supportfeedingby gavage even when they
appear to be taking some food themselves. If the bird is not seen to be feeding itself,
nourishment needs to be given at least every bour. Feeding two or three times daily as for
small hospitalised mammals is just not sufficient.
 Small healthy birds need of the order of 1kcal of energy per gram of body weight
(Perrins, 1979). One gram of fat yields about 9 kcal and 1g of carbohydrate yields about
4 kcal. A 20g canary therefore needs to take in about 5g of utilisable carbohydrate a day,
Or approximately half this quantity of lipids. Perrins (1979) pointed out that great tits
(Parus major) feed nestlings 58-78 times daily. Very small birds of 20g and below this
weight which have lost condition through illness need the maximum number of daylight
hours in which to feed. It is a wise precaution with these small birds to leave the animal
room lights on throughout the night,particularly during the winter months.
 In larger birds, particularly raptors, the feeding requirements are not quite so stringent.
It is reasonable to feed these birds once or twice daily and, provided the food intake is
regular, they can with advantage go without food one day a week. The work of Kirkwood
(1981) has done much to clarify the rate at which weight is lost in raptors during
starvation.
Effectof theinflammatoryresponse
The basal metabolic rate of all homoiotherms increases as part of the body's inflammatory
response to disease. This leads to even greater energy demands and a more rapid loss of
weight, mediated by a complex neuroendocrine response (Richards, 1980). The nurse
should be constantly monitoring the condition of a sick bird by palpation of its pectoral
muscles. All hospitalised birds should be weighed daily and their weight plotted on a graph.
Suitable digital scales accurate to 1g are available (see Chapter 6). Variation in weight is
One of the most reliable and easily measurable parameters in a bird's daily progress.
The nurse will need to use discretion regarding how much stress is caused to the indi
vidual bird by weighing and should not carry this out if the bird gets too excited. The
least stressful methods of handling birds are mentioned in Chapter 3.
As a consequence of an increased metabolic rate, tissues probably heal more quickly
Such changes as fbrosis and the formation of scar tissue in traumatised muscle also occur
more rapidly in small birds than in mammals.
Nursing and After Care
189
Ambient temperature
The maintenance of a high metabolic rate results in a bird's normal body temperature of
about 40°C and in very small birds, particularly Passeriformes, it may reach 41°C. There
may be a diurnal variation of 2-3°C. All sick and severely injured birds, which are rapidly
depleting their limited energy reserves, will be less stressed if their ambient temperature is
raised to at least 26°C. Sometimes this can, with beneft, be increased to 38°C for a period
 0f 2448 hours, after which it is gradually reduced. In many veterinary premises warmth
can be provided by an infrared lamp (possibly combined with a UV lamp). It will be better
if this is controlled by an ordinary household dimmer switch; alternatively, the lamp can
be gradually moved further away or the lamp can be positioned in a corner so that there
is a heat gradient for the bird to move into and out of. Always check the temperature at
the level of the bird. A hot water bottle wrapped in newspaper and placed together with
the patient in a cardboard box with ventilation holes in the top of the box will provide
warmth in an emergency situation.
It should be remembered that contaminated oiled birds lose their normal insulation and
need emergency protection from heat loss. Special bird hospital cages are available com-
 ii p aq  so a jo an a   r
However, the thermostats in the less expensive and simpler units may not be very sensitive.
 Also, many cages do not have any means of controlling humidity and, because the volume
of the cage is relatively small, they need to be well ventilated without actually creating a
draught. One method of achieving a high degree of control over temperature and humidity
is the use of a hospital surplus premature baby incubator, but these have the disadvantage
of being internally low in height and are not very suitable for larger birds. These incuba-
tors have a facility for enriching the air supply with oxygen and controlling humidity.
Alternatively, plastic plant propagators sold in many garden centres can be adapted for
the purpose.
Disinfection and cleaning
Although the importance of cleanliness and disinfection in all hospital premises have been
appreciated from at least the time of Florence Nightingale, it is now becoming increasingly
apparent that many apparently healthy creatures carry latent pathogens which may only
be shed at times of stress. This is particularly the case with birds, in which, over the last
[Wo decades, ever more latent viruses have been discovered. In consequence, not only do
sick birds need to be isolated in biosecure hospital cages (see Plate 16) but the premises
themselves and all items of equipment must be scrupulously clean and thoroughly
disinfected.
In addition to normal cleansing and disinfection of horizontal surfaces, including those
above eye level, use of a fogging apparatus has great advantages for getting into hidden
corners and cracks. A good review of this subject is by Forbes (2005) who mentions the
use of the disinfectant F10 as being very effective and safe for this purpose in birds. For
the supply of foggers see www.f10biocare.co.uk and info@f10biocare.co.uk. Incubators
or hospital cages for sick birds are a potent source of infection not only for birds but also
for staff and need to be frequently and scrupulously cleaned.
The physiological consequences of the avian air sac system
As mentioned in Chapter 6, the air sacs are prone to infection. This is exacerbated in the
resting bird because during flying activity the action of the main flight muscles alternatively
contracting and relaxing, helps to pump air through the air sacs and at the same time
cooling hard working muscle. The continual forceful flushing of air through the air sac
system reduces the chances of pathogenic organisms contained in this warm, moist, inter-
nal atmosphere of establishing themselves on the surface of the air sac.
190
Essenlials of Avian Medicine cnd Surgery
Because of the large internal surface area of their air sacs and high body temperature,
small birds have an inherently high water loss from the pulmonary system. Many birds
obtain a lot of their water requirements from metabolised food and body fat stores. There-
fore all sick or injured birds that have not been feeding can be assumed to be dehydrated
even though this may not be obvious. Many birds normally require less water than
mammals to excrete the waste products of the gastrointestinal and urinary tracts. Conse-
quently anorexic birds with diarrhoea very rapidly become dehydrated.
Dehydration in birds
Dehydrated birds should be given fluid by mouth, by subcutaneous injection or, preferably,
by intravenous or intraosseous injection (Figs 9.2 and 9.3). The subcutaneous injection of
fluid can be made over the pectoral muscles, in the propatagial skin fold of the wing, inside
the thigh or at the base of the neck. Normal saline can be given at the rate of 20.5 ml/kg
body weight four or five times daily. This volume needs to be halved for small birds, and
Steiner and Davis (1981) recommend using 0.1ml of Hartmann's solution, which helps
t0 counteract metabolic acidosis, given every 10-15 minutes in the budgerigar, using
alternate sides of the body. The rate of absorption is increased if hyaluronidase is added
to the fluid. All fluids should be given at 39°C.
Extreme care must be taken when giving subcutaneous injections to birds, since avian
skin is not as elastic as mammalian skin and aqueous injections tend to ooze out through
the needle puncture if too much is given at one site (see p. 120). Given by slow i.v. injec-
tion the volume for the budgerigar is 1.0 ml, for a cockatiel 2.0 ml, for an Amazon parrot
8.0ml and for a large macaw or large cockatoo 12ml.
As a consequence of the common dehydration in sick and injured birds, constipation
easily occurs. Johnson (1979) states that the rectum and coprodeum are areas of active
The trocar and cannula are inserted
by a rotational screwing action just
below the dorsal edge of the distal
ulnar condyle, which can be seen and
felt subcutaneously
Detachablo
handle
The line of attachment of the
secondary feather quills indicates the
line of the ulnarmeduliary cavity
Fig. 9.2 The dorsal aspect of he carpal joint, showing he mehod of inserlion of he auhor's
modificalion of the Cook Instrumentalion inlraosseous cannula, filted wilth a detachable cork-
screw-lype handle. The joint should be flexed and, affer plucking he covert feahers, should
be wetted with alcohol or anliseptic to make he anatomy more easily definable.
Nursing and Alter Care
19 1
Fig. 9.3 'Coles' modified avian inraosseous cannula (Cook Lid).
water absorption, and reflux passage of fluid contents (urine and faeces) occurs from these
areas as far as, and into, the caeca. Other considerations apart, dehydration will lead to
the cessation of these physiological activities and devitalisation of the associated tissues,
resulting in constipation. McKeever (1979) suggests relieving this condition by manual
evacuation; the use of a warm saline enema is sometimes useful.
For continuous drip via an intraosseous catheter use a 20-22G spinal needle with an
indwelling stylet. The catheter is inserted into the distal medullary cavity of the ulna or
 into the proximal tibia (Fig. 9.2). The needle is kept in place with self-adhesive bandage,
such as Vetrap. An Arnold's pressure drip feed is a useful aid. Instead of a spinal needle,
Cook Instrumentation makes a useful custom-made catheter with a detachable handle for
easy insertion (Fig. 9.3).
FEEDING HOSPITALISED BIRDS
As Redig (1996) has stated, 'the correct use of fluid therapy and nutritional supplementa-
tion will save the lives of more birds than any other form of therapy'.
There is little problem with birds that are eating. The owner of an exotic cage or aviary
bird or the owner of a falcon will be pleased to advise on what the bird is normally fed
and will often supply a sample. However, if a falconer's sick bird is received into the hos-
pital, the nurse should be made aware that these birds are sometimes kept short of food
by their owners to make them keen hunters (i.e. kept at flying weight), and sick or injured
raptors under stress may be near starvation. Casualty wild birds may not have been feeding
for some time before being found.
The main problems for the nurse arise with the nutrition of the emergency case which
cannot, or will not, feed readily, or, in the case of the wild bird, for which there is none
of the normal diet readily to hand. As a rule a 10% solution of glucose or glucose saline
given by mouth at the rate of 10m/kg body weight will help. It should be given at least
once every half hour for at least six hours, but even then it will not meet the daily main
tenance requirements of metabolisable energy. Preparations containing amino-acids and
essential vitamins (e.g. Duphalyte 75 ml/kg) are better, since they provide a more compre-
hensive range of nutrients. These can be given subcutaneously in quantities similar to those
given for fluid therapy.
192
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
 s       s  r  s n
energy-yielding constituents, mainly in the form of carbohydrates with some vegetable
fats. The several varieties of Milupa brand baby food contain 422kcal/100g and are rela-
tively low in protein. The Milupa fruit salad or tropical fruit varieties are most suitable
for parrots, which will often take them voluntarily. The digestibility of these foods is
improved if the contents of a Pancrex-V or Tryplase capsule is mixed with the food before
administration. Emeraid Critical Care, marketed by Lafeber Company, USA, is a product
suitable for the nutritional support of sick birds. Vetark Ltd UK also market a critical care
"formula', specifcally for sick birds. Vetark's probiotic Avipro Plus can be added with
advantage to all these foods.
All these support foods can be given easily via the large diameter avian oropharynx
a (t ) aqnn (aa1) qoois e jo pie aun qm woy pinb e ui snydoso pue
stomach tube must be placed well down into the oesophagus or crop. Stomach tubes can
be devised from suitable diameter pieces of rubber or plastic tubing ftted to the nozzle of
a plastic syringe. A rigid metal stomach catheter can be used if this is well-lubricated and
allowed to slip into the oesophagus under its own weight. If the bird's head and neck are
extended in a vertical direction, there is little danger of trauma. However the tube must
not be forced down the oesophagus. When passing a stomach tube the progress of this
tube can often be seen, particularly in a long-necked bird like a swan, as it passes down
the dorsal aspect of the neck. It passes under the trachea just before the thoracic inlet.
Other types of preparation that can be used for the general feeding of sick birds are
Convalescent Diet or Hill's Prescription Diet Canine/Feline a/d which are specially formu-
carnivores. Except for some very specialised feeders, such as nectar feeders (e.g. hum-
mingbirds and sunbirds), all species of bird are probably capable of digesting this type of
food. These foods are soft and can be forced into the barrel of a 2ml plastic syringe so
that when the plunger is depressed the food is extruded from the nozzle as a small worm-
like thread which some birds will readily peck at (see Plate 17).
Fig. 9.4 Gavage ubes for he feeding and medicalion of birds [Cook Lid]
Nursing and After Care
193
Another method of administering semi-solid foods is to cut off the nozzle of the 2 ml
syringe to enlarge the orifice and then place a plug of the food into the bird's oropharynx.
Care must be taken to place the food well beyond the glottis, which in most birds is on
the floor of the mouth just behind the root of the tongue. In some birds such as the heron
(Ardea cinerea) it may be farther back.
A food that is suitable for most species of orphan bird, as well as invalid birds, is
mashed, hard boiled, or scrambled eggs mixed with an equal quantity of sweet biscuit
meal, or bread crumbs, with a little glucose powder added. This mixture should be slightly
moistened and can be given by one of the above methods. If given too dry, the food is not
easily swallowed. This mixture can also be offered to small nestlings on the tip of an artist's
brush. Some aviculturists feeding parrot nestlings use a small spoon bent up at the tip to
form a sort of scoop, shaped like the mandible of a parent bird. It is always better to feed
a little and often and make sure the crop is emptying properly.
A technique for feeding orphaned house martins (Delichon urbica), a particularly dif-
ficult species to get started, is to offer a drop of water held between tweezers. This is
usually readily taken. Follow with moistened Beta Puppy pellets, which have a high protein
content (Penny Rudd, personal communication).
All these foods require less mechanical work by the bird's alimentary canal and so a
more rapid and economical utilisation is possible.
 Once the initial emergency period of convalescence has passed, the nurse should con-
sider providing food for the patient which is as near to its normal diet as possible. If one
is dealing with a convalescent parrot always enquire what the bird has been fed on in the
past. This food may not be what you think is the right diet but nevertheless start with the
food the bird is used to and then gradually change to a more suitable diet. Birds will often
refuse to eat unless they are familiar with the food offered.
Start by adding 5% glucose to the bird's normal diet and liquidising this in a food
blender - this aids digestion. Birds are very specialised feeders with varied adaptations of
their anatomy for this function (see pp. 10-12). The more obvious differences in beak
form are also supplemented by variations in the internal anatomy, the function of the oral
cavity and alimentary canal. Although many species are quite adaptable, failure to appreci-
ate a bird's normal feeding methods could lead to diffculties in prehension and an inade-
quate food intake. Parrots, for example, vary considerably in size and need seed which is
 applicable to their size. Lorikeets, although belonging to the Psittaciformes and looking
like small parrots, are adapted to eating fruit and taking nectar.
For most granivorous species the local pet shop can usually supply suitable seed foods
and they may also be able to supply more specialised foods such as Sluis Universal which
is suitable for feeding insectivorous birds. Granivorous birds also require grit, which needs
to be the right size for a particular species. A choice of limestone grit, oyster shell and
quartz-based gravel should be offered. However, there is scientifc evidence that some birds
may be able to manage without grit.
 Most raptors can be maintained for quite long periods on the dead male chicks obtained
 from hatcheries. However there is a danger that these chicks may carry latent viruses not
dangerous to poultry but damaging to raptors. Moreover, these dead chicks are low in
calcium which could in time result in hypocalcaemia. Also they are high in cholesterol
contained in the unabsorbed yolk sac. Captive raptors are best maintained on minced hare,
rabbit or quail with an added vitamin and mineral supplement, such as SA 37 or Vionate,
and a probiotic preparation. Pieces of meat can be offered with the fngers or, in the case
m prao isq are asl jo sd au sdar m ad jo p amo aou au jo
tape to protect the points from damaging the oropharynx, and they must also be kept
scrupulously clean.
When feeding by mouth, if the sensitive vibrissae at the sides of the mouth, present in
some species, are touched the bird will often grab at the food. If the mouth has to be
194
Essenlials of Avican Medicine and Surgery
opened by hand the upper beak or premaxilla can easily be raised, and this has the effect,
through the rod-like articulations of the palatopterygoid and jugal bones connected to the
quadrate bone, of depressing the lower beak or mandible (see Fig. 1.1).
Hatchery chicks can be used for, and may be taken quite readily by, herons (Ardeidae),
cormorants (Phalacrocoracidae), birds of the crow family (Corvidae) and rails. If hatchery
chicks are not readily available, small pieces of meat supplemented with vitamins and
minerals and mixed with fur and feathers to provide roughage can be given. Always
moisten these morsels of food before feeding. Combings of hair from any cat or dog will
suffice as roughage in an emergency.
As already mentioned, all raptors and many other species of birds, regularly produce
 Oral pellets. However, some parts of the skeleton of the prey are digested and are essential,
particularly in young. growing raptors if metabolic bone disease is to be avoided. If hos-
pitalised birds of prey do not regularly produce pellets this usually means there is some-
thing wrong with the alimentary canal. Nevertheless, if there is insufficient roughage there
is no scientific evidence that the production of pellets is essential to the normal function
of the alimentary canal.
 If feeding casualty young growing birds, meal worms and maggots are not very suitable.
Their chitinous exoskeleton is relatively indigestible. Also if the mealworms have been
kept in bran the phytic acid may also be harmful.
 In the piscivorous species, the provision of a fish diet is probably not essential to health.
However, these birds will often not feed voluntarily unless the food offered looks like fish,
and even in some cases unless it is thrown into a bath of water and appears to move like
a fish. Many types of bird only recognise food presented in a familiar form. Once over
this diffculty they often thrive on an artificial diet.
 Most of the gulls will feed readily on tinned pet food, but force-feeding of this group
of birds is diffcult since food is stored in the lower oesophagus and easily regurgitated
Fulmars can eject an evil-smelling oil from the oesophagus a distance of up to a metre;
vomiting in other species of birds is usually an indication of upper alimentary disease.
When feeding gannets, care should be taken with the sharp edge of their beaks.
Always weigh the bird regularly and do not rely on what it looks like.
PHYSIOTHERAPY
Many injured birds received into a veterinary practice will have trauma to muscle and
  os q oie A au snss as on Adns aa a o pe s
sion. Although all fractures must frst be treated, much can be done by intelligent nursing
to restore the function of damaged soft tissue. The nurse must always be aware that hos
pitalised birds are like human athletes who are out of regular training. The longer they
are hospitalised the greater will be the deterioration in the cardiovascular and muscular
systems due to disuse atrophy.
Faradism has been used to restore the function in a barn owl's leg (L. Randall, 1980,
personal communication), but this is unlikely to be available in most veterinary practices.
Immersion of an injured limb in hot water at 45°C and gentle flexion and extension of
the joint as advised by J. Ratcliffe (1982, personal communication) is simple and can often
restore function. Use of an infrared 'A' lamp is beneficial to healing tissue.
 McKeever (1979) recommends the use of a sling and neck brace supports for birds with
held up. The writer has successfully suspended a pigeon in a plastic bag for a total of three
weeks whilst both fractured legs were allowed to heal, and has used also this support on
a Harris's hawk (Parabuteo unicinctus) requiring simultaneous operations on both legs.
Once function has been restored to the muscles and other soft tissues of the legs these
Nursing and After Care
195
need to be strengthened and built up again. A bird will often do this if it is kept in a large
cage or aviary but this can also be encouraged by daily exercising the patient. The bird
 can at frst be held by the legs by hand (gloved if a raptor) and gently raised and lowered
t0 stimulate wing flapping. Later exercise on a leash or creance (see p. 212) can be helpful.
The leash can be attached to all types of bird by small soft leather straps or jesses as used
           
purpose.
10
Breeding Problems
Increasing demand and monetary value together with increased conservation legislation
reducing the supply of wild-caught birds will result in more bird owners attempting to
breed from stock. Veterinary advice will be sought if these ambitions are not fulflled.
British birds and those from temperate climates breed during a few months of the
summer when there is a maximum food supply and favourable weather. Some of the cage
birds kept by aviculturists have evolved in tropical conditions but they have been bred in
captivity for so long as to be almost domesticated. They are capable of breeding through-
out the year and, even if kept in outside aviaries, sometimes during unsuitable weather.
This may be the case for parrots, exotic doves and small finches e.g. zebra and Bengalese
species.
Successful bird breeding needs luck, good management and some understanding of
the natural history of the species. The breeder should have an empathy with the birds
and anticipate their needs. The zebra fnch (Poephila guttata) breeds so easily that the
veterinarian may be asked how to balt this process. Possible solutions are either to:
1. Remove the nest boxes and nesting materials
2. Separate the sexes
3. Remove the eggs laid and replace with articial eggs
4. In some species, pierce the eggs
 FAILURE TO BREED
 Failure to breed may be due to many causes. These can be catalogued under the following
four headings:
1. Failure to mate
 2. Inability to produce a normal fertile egg
3. Failure of the fertile egg to hatch
4. Failure to rear the young
Some reasons for failure to breed have a single cause, but many are multi-factorial.
Failure to mate
A not uncommon reason for failure to mate is having a pair of monomorphic birds of the
same sex. Homosexuality sometimes occurs in birds. Two isolated male lovebirds may
copulate and appear to mate normally. The only solution is to sex the birds. The author
has seen four Cloncurry parrots (Barnardius spp), all the same age, split into two breeding
196
Breeding Problems
197
pairs. When surgically sexed, one pair was male and female while the other pair was two
males. The behaviour of both pairs was similar, but in one male of the homosexual pair
the testicles were much smaller than in the other two males of similar age.
Sexingbirds
Sexing birds can be carried out by several methods:
1. Direct visual inspection of the cloacal anatomy, as used in poultry (in other Gallifor-
mes), ratites, penguins and vasa parrots
2. Surgical sexing - the technique has the added advantage that the condition of the
gonads can also be inspected at the same time (see Laparoscopy, Chapter 4)
3. Most parrot species can now be sexed using DNA technigues on the cells attached to
a newly-plucked feather (dead moulted feathers are no good) or from a small amount
of blood (e.g. tip of clipped claw)
Stress and aggression
 Two birds of opposite sexes may not be compatible and, depending on the species, either
sex can dominate the other. At worst this can lead to death of the submissive partner Or
at least infertility due to stress. A female merlin or northern goshawk may kill her partner
if both are confined to an aviary and she is not ready to mate. The male will have to have
an escape route into an adjoining aviary. In Psittacula spp of parrot the female is usually
dominant to the male, except during breeding when their roles are reversed. Sometimes a
change of partner, a larger aviary or more feeding points or nest boxes may solve the
problem. The latter is particularly important with falcons, weaver birds and whydahs.
Persecution by other species in a mixed aviary will stop breeding. Some species are
 incompatible and in some cases, such as the small tropical doves or blue waxbills, will not
tolerate another breeding pair of their own kind.
Birds breeding in a colony in an aviary may fght for the highest nest box; consequently
these boxes should all be placed at the same height. However, aviaries with mixed species
may have nest boxes at varying heights to suit different species. The colonial aviary and
the mixed aviary should be well established long before the breeding season. Occasionally
a neurotic and aggressive bird will be encountered among a normal breeding group of
budgerigars. This one bird can upset the whole flock.
Birds need to be reasonably tame and used to their keeper. Wild birds are reluctant to
breed in captivity. It was demonstrated by Burnham et al. (1983) that peregrine falcons
taken from the wild breed less readily than those bred in captivity. Stress can be induced
by excessive noise or any change in the birds routine management. Observations of shy
breeding pairs, such as falcons, can be carried out by a one-way glass window. Prowling
predators, such as foxes, domestic cats and rodents around the aviary can disturb birds
and prevent mating. Rats, mice, stoats and weasels will get into an aviary causing havoc.
  a  e s r e r sss n s 
Jo poad e orpun oi aaey ensn Kan At 'ne Aq paodsu uau pue peoqe
quarantine before being sold to their final owners having possibly passed through a chain
of traders. Consequently these birds may take a long time to become adjusted to their fnal
place of captivity before being ready to breed.
 The breeder must realise that all birds are individuals in their behaviour during copula-
tion, courtship, etc. and allowances for this will have to be made. Budgerigars, and par-
ticularly the larger psittacine birds, as well as waterfowl, tend to form permanent pair
bonds for life, so that if one of a pair dies it may be diffcult for the survivor to accept
another partner. It may take one or two years for a breeding pair to become properly
adjusted so that they copulate and produce fertile eggs. It is wise to pair up birds well
before a breeding season.
198
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
Age and breeding condition
One of a breeding pair may not be sexually mature. Also the two sexes of a pair of parrots
may not come into breeding condition at the same time, so that there is frustration on the
part of the bird ready to breed. Many birds are mature in one year but some of the very
large birds of prey may take several years. Macaws take four years and the Psittacula
parakeets, such as the Alexandrine (Psittacula eupatria) and plum-headed (Psittacula cya-
nocephala) take three years to reach maturity. Nevertheless, in most cases if a pair of birds
have not bred after three years they are unlikely to do so.
Breeding birds should be in good physical condition, in good health and be
e n lm  a po s d  'sds n po sdxe poo
prevent a male bird from copulating. They should not be obese. This can be a common
problem with captive and disabled raptors, which are often overfed and under exercised.
However, to breed the bird must receive food in excess of its metabolic maintenance
requirement.
Weather and photoperiod
The cold weather of a late spring in temperate climates delays breeding in wild birds
because they need more food for maintenance (Elkins, 1983). Weather conditions in 2006
severely depleted the breeding of wild barn owls (Tyto alba) (A. S. Duckells, personal
communication). A sudden spell of mild weather stimulates song, courtship and pairing
in wild birds and influences captive specimens as well.
The increasing number of daylight hours has a major influence on sexual activity.
Canary breeders gradually extend the length of daylight hours over 2-3 months, from 8-10
hours to a maximum of 15 hours to stimulate breeding. However, the irregular use of
artificial lighting can have an adverse effect and therefore the process is best controlled by
a dimmer and time switch. Note the stress-inducing effect of the stroboscopic effect of
fluorescent strip lights (see Chapter 9).
Many parrot species, including budgerigars, cockatiels and lovebirds, continue t0
breed throughout the year, but these species are not normal inhabitants of the European
climate. An increase in food supply, particularly animal protein, may trigger a breeding
cycle.
Disease
Only after all the aforementioned factors have been taken into account should the clinician
consider disease. Systemic infectious disease is likely to exhibit other signs long before
breeding is affected. However, particularly note pathogens such as Salmonella spp, Esch-
erichia spp, Klebsiella spp, Enterobacter spp, Pseudomonas spp, and Candida spp. Also
budgerigar herpes virus (see p. 284), all adenoviruses, particularly adenovirus group 111
(see p. 304) and corona viruses (see p. 305} and, in young chicks, the viruses 0f polyoma
(see p. 300), proventricular dilatation disease (see p. 307), psittacine beak and feather
disease (see p. 299) and, lastly, avipox virus (see pp. 335-8).
Toxic chemicals (see pp. 335-8)
Other less common influences on breeding are toxic chemicals, such as the chlorinated
hydrocarbons used in insecticides and the polychlorinated biphenyls widely used as indus
trial plasticisers and released when plastic materials are burned. It was thought initially
that these compounds only caused thinning of the eggshell but it has been shown that they
depress breeding by their influence on 0estrogen levels (Peakall, 1970). Wood preservatives
may be detrimental to parrots. Some parrots become particularly destructive at nesting
time and will destroy wooden nesting boxes.
Breeding Problems
199
INAbILITY TO PRODUCE A NORMAL FERTILE EGG
Feeding
Breeding birds should be chosen from those individuals that will take a wide variety of
foods and are not restricted in their feeding habits. In this way a defciency of an essential
element is less likely to occur. Some parrots, for instance, will eat sunflower seed and
nothing else. Where possible, home-grown foods are better than those harvested abroad.
Bird seeds grown in places like Morocco or parts of Australia are more likely to be culti-
vated on soils deficient in some mineral elements. If the viability of seed is in doubt, sow
some in a pot and let it sprout. If the green shoots look normal the seed is probably all
right. To be successful, breeders need to feed an adequate and balanced diet. Most com-
mercially available seed mixes have multiple deficiencies.
As well as adequate calcium (soluble grit or cuttlefish bone) and vitamin D, for healthy
egg shell production, it is essential to provide increased protein in the diet, particularly
animal protein (e.g. egg food in lieu of insect food for seed eating passerines) containing
essential amino acids (particularly lysine and methionine). When not breeding the increased
protein diet only needs to be fed twice weekly.
In addition, a lack of adequate fresh drinking water will stop breeding. The whole
 problerm of inadequate diet for breeding passerine birds has been reviewed by Stockdale
(2005).
Nesting sites
 Birds seen to have mated may not have produced a fertile union because copulation took
place on an insecure perch or one or both partners was inexperienced. Birds may not lay
eggs in an aviary if there is not a suitably secure or sheltered nesting site or nesting mate-
rial available. Many breeders of raptor species use enclosed breeding aviaries open only
to the sky. It has been shown by Perrins (1979) that great tits (Parus major) and blue tits
(Parus caeruleus) lay earlier in the season if they have warmer nesting boxes. Nest boxes
for aviary birds are warmer if they are as small as is practicable. As well as warmth, some
"hole nesters', such as parrots, need a suffciently dark box to stimulate the hen to lay.
This will not be achieved if there is a crack or warped joint in a wooden nest box. For
these birds hollow logs make good nesting sites.
Some species need to have a supply of nesting materials, such as dried grass (but not
hay which may contain Aspergillus spores), leaves, shredded paper, coconut fbre or
moss.
Egg laying
In all birds it is normal for the hen to look rather sick and suffer egg lethargy as egg laying
becomes imminent. If the bird is disturbed while laying, she may drop the eggs anywhere
in the aviary or may crack the shell. Egg eating is a habit formed by some birds which
can turn into a vice copied by other birds in the aviary. This can be detected by noticing
egg yolk on the bird's face. For egg-eating budgerigars make a hole in the centre of the
nesting concavity in the base of the nest box. The laid egg can then drop through on to
sawdust beneath and be hatched under a foster parent.
Infertile eggs are more liable to be laid by an old bird or one which has been allowed
to raise too many broods in a season or a bird on an inadequate diet.
Candling
If access to the clutch can be gained without disturbing the hen, the eggs should be candled
six or seven days after being laid. This enables one to decide if the egg is infertile or clear?
and to assess the condition of the egg shell, the air cell and the position of the embryo in
200
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
 o s   pn  io  q    n a
parrots, using natural light or a pen torch. For others an artifcial light source such as
a 40 watt bulb can be used. For very thick-shelled eggs such as those laid by turkeys, some
waterfowl and large raptors, an ultraviolet source is necessary. To avoid harm, eggs
should not be exposed to the candling light for more than a few seconds. For those
inexperienced in candling a useful web site with good images, The “Easy Chicken', is
given in Appendix 11 (p. 362). Although produced for poulry breeders, this web site
has some useful pictures of candled good and bad eggs: www.homestead.com/shilala/
candling.
Artificial insemination
Artificial insemination has for many years been used routinely in poultry, and during the
last three decades been successfully developed for breeding raptors. The procedure is
described by Berry (1972), Grier et al. (1972), Temple (1972), Grier (1973), Boyd (1978),
Weaver (1983) and Wilkinson (1984). The techniques of collection of semen in
 p  j id r a s a ssa  sn  p od
abdominal regions are massaged in a rhythmic manner until a drop of semen is produced
at the papilla in the cloaca. The papilla is gently held berween thumb and forefinger so
that the semen is expressed into a syringe. There is no technical reason why this technique
could not be developed in other species of bird. Samour et al. (1986) collcted semen
samples from budgerigars and Brock (1991) has carried out artificial insemination in
parrots.
Boyd and Schwartz (1983) review the technique of semen collection used by a number
 of workers using a peregrine falcon imprinted on to its handler. An artificial pair bond is
slowly formed between the handler and the gradually maturing young bird. This occurs
after a long and intensive period of falconry training, including greeting the bird with a
vocalisation appropriate to its species and by food transfers. After this long period of
socialisation, during which time a close physical and psychological bond has been devel-
oped between bird and handler, the tiercel (see p. 360) willeventually copulate voluntarily
with a specially designed hat worn by the handler. The hat carries a neoprene gutter around
the brim which catches the semen. Using this technique semen can be collected several
times a day over a period of a number of weeks.
To be successful, the handler needs to understand and interpret correctly the
courting displays made by the bird to its artificial ‘mate'. The whole process requires
a lot of patience and complete dedication from the handler. For an excellent
description of the technique the reader is referred to the publication by Boyd and Schwartz
(1983).
Once collected the semen can be microscopically examined, or diluted with 50%
 Ringer's solution before being used for inseminating the female. Avian semen is less liable
to temperature shock than mammalian semen. Also, in those species so far examined it is
found to be less dense, but the spermatozoa should all be the same size with no abnormali-
ties of the head or tail and mobile. Semen should be collected early in the day before the
birds are fed and after defecation. It is then less likely to be contaminated with faeces and
urates.
Insemination must be carried out at the correct time in the egg laying cycle. Weaver
(1983) states this to be within six hours after the last egg was laid and favours insemina-
tion after each egg. However, in commercial poultry practice the birds are inseminated at
(mainly fowl-like birds and waterfowl) the sperm is stored in the sperm host glands situ-
ated at the distal end of the oviduct. Ferilisation, which takes place in the infundibulum
at the proximal end of the oviduct, can occur several weeks after a single insemination
Gilbert thinks this is probably the case in all birds.
Breeding Problems
201
FAILURE OF THE FERTILE EGG TO HATCH
Dead-in-shell is probably the most common problem of all breeders and often caused by
a fault during incubation. However Stockdale (2005) has indicated that with small pas-
serines a major cause of dead-in-shell eggs is overall inadequate nutrition, particularly of
the essential amino acids lysine and methionine Only approximately 30% of all raptor
eggs laid in private breeding aviaries in the UK hatch and produce surviving young, i.e.
for the peregrine, northern goshawk and merlin.
Development of the egg
During the frst few days of incubation the respiratory needs of the developing embryo
are supplied by simple diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide through the shell and its
membranes. As the oxygen demands from the embryo increase, a network of capillary
blood vessels forms in the chorio-allantoic membrane. Halfway through incubation this
network lies under the whole of the inner shell membrane and can be seen during candling.
Respiration is then taking place across the surface of the shell and oxygen is pumped round
by the embryonic heart.
Dunker (1977) states that, at the end of incubation, the embryo absorbs the amniotic
fluid and the remainder of the albumen (the so-called breakfast of the chicken). The amni
otic cavity becomes aerated and air may penetrate the inner shell membrane. Respiratory
movements become regular and serve to ventilate the lungs and air sac system before
hatching. Unlike the respiratory system of the mammalian foetus, which undergoes further
 development after birth, the avian respiratory system is virtually complete and functioning
at hatching.
The evolution of this method of development has enabled birds to create a constant-
volume lung containing extremely thin-walled air capillaries. The minimum thickness
barrier between the twin circulations of air and blood, together with a one-way flow of
 air, has made the avian lung the most effcient among the vertebrates. The developing egg
with its delicate embryo and associated blood vessels is a fragile structure. Jerky move-
ments, or vibration caused by nearby machinery, heavy trucks or children at play can all
The two most important environmental factors influencing incubation are temperature
and relative humidity.
The influence of temperature
There is a narrow range of optimal temperatures for incubating eggs, which for poultry
is 36-38°C and this has been found to be the same for falcons (Heck & Konke, 1983).
The psittacine species range is similar at 37.2-37.0°C The experienced bird will maintain
the clutch within these limits. Incubating egs can withstand some cooling, but not rises
in temperature that exceed those of the adult bird. In fact, on large commercial ostrich
breeding farms eggs are collected twice daily and stored in cooled conditions for up to a
week so that they can be incubated in batches so that hatching can be synchronised.
Persistent low temperatures due to cold weather prolong incubation and lead to small,
weakly chicks with developmental abnormalities and un-retracted yolk sacs. In wild birds,
such as swifts and sea birds, where incubating egs may have to be left for a period to
enable the parent to forage, the eggs have adapted to chilling without adverse effect (Elkins,
1983). Chilling of the eggs with other birds can occur with a careless or inexperienced
hen or from extreme weather with strong winds and rain. Draughty and damp nest boxes
can lead to chilling. If birds are being bred inside, the optimum ambient temperature is
if they were exposed to the direct rays of the sun coming through a glass window, is lethal
If the embryo survives it is likely to be deformed.
202
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
The influence of humidity
Equally important to the survival of the embryo is the humidity around the egg. Most of
the energy needs of embryonic development are supplied by fat stored in the yolk. For
every gram of fat metabolised an almost equal quantity of water is generated. If this water
is not eliminated the embryonic tissues become waterlogged. Rahn et al. (1979) have
pointed out that all eggs of whatever species need to lose as water about 15% (some
authorities say 11-16%) of their initial weight at lay. This water loss needs to be evenly
spread throughout the incubation period and leads to a gradual increase in size of the air
cell at the blunt end of the egg. Failure of the egg to lose the correct amount of water
leads to a tissue fluid imbalance. Insufficient loss of water vapour molecules through the
shell is exactly paralleled by the low exchange rate of oxygen and carbon dioxide.
The embryo becomes weak and may develop deformities.
If the correct amount of water has been lost from the egg at the end of incubation, the
shell is free to rotate around the embryo at hatching. If the egg is waterlogged, resulting
in a 'wet chick', the whole contents are too tight within the shell and this normal process
cannot take place. For this reason dead-in-shell chicks are often found to be oedematous.
Conversely, if the egg loses too much water the tissue becomes dehydrated and the air-cell
    an   s n ss n n  n  s
and is unable to force its way out of the shell. In healthy and undisturbed female birds
the desire to brood her clutch is very strong and she not only will make considerable efforts
tO maintain the eggs at both the correct temperature and humidity but will turn them
 s an r d p s e da  o ss  
fransfers heat from the parent to the egg (King & McLelland, 1975). Frith (1959) has
demonstrated that the incubator birds, the Megapodidae are able to use the beak as a
thermometer.
In an attempt to increase the humidity, some breeders will provide the nesting birds
with damp nesting material. Fortunately this usually dries out before the eggs are laid so
has little effect. Rotten wood provided as a nesting material for parrots may contain fungal
spores. Also some breeders will spray the eggs of a sitting hen with water to increase
humidity. This is of doubtful beneft and may be harmful. The bird is best left to control
the situation instinctively. Rahn et al. (1979) has shown that the relative humidity of the
nest of most wild birds is kept at about 45%, which is about right for the eggs to lose
the requisite amount of water.
Incubators
 If eggs are incubated artifcially correct hatching conditions will have to be duplicated.
Management of the incubator, even to the room in which it is kept, will have to be meticu-
lous. Temperature and relative humidity must be strictly controlled. Incubators are best
kept in a room at a temperature of 21-24°C and the relative humidity should be kept low,
  r a  s n   s  i  '  a 
liable to fluctuate. Incubator temperatures for most species are 37.2°C. For safety, incuba-
tors should be controlled by double thermostats and any draughts or hot spots within the
incubator should be identifed. Forced air incubators are better than still air incubators
since temperature control is more accurate. The eggs will need to be rotated eight times
a day through 45° in alternate directions. This can be carried out by hand or mechanically
by automatically timed rollers. Hygiene must be faultless and fumigation using a mixture
of potassium permanganate (0.4g) and formalin (0.8 ml of 37.5%) or fogging with F10
must be carried out at the end of the hatching season (see Chapter 9). The eggs must be
weighed regularly to make sure the weight loss is correct. The weight can be checked
these guidelines it is surprising that any normal chicks are ever hatched.
Breeding Problems
203
Influence of the egg shell
Apart from the relative humidity of the microclimate around the egg, the most important
factor controlling water loss is the egg shell. The exchange of water vapour, oxygen and
carbon dioxide takes place through well-defined shell pores. The pattern and complexity
of these channels varies with species. They are more complex in the larger species with
thicker shells. Ar and Rahn (1977) have shown that in eggs that are of comparable weight
and egg shell thickness the pore size is inversely proportional to the incubation period.
Any factor that affects shell quality and shell thickness will have an effect on porosity of
the shell. This will affect gaseous exchange and egg weight loss during incubation.
 In a commercial ostrich hatchery in Israel the eggs are sorted into batches according to
the texture of the egg shell, which can vary from rough to smooth. This is because farmed
ostriches originate from a variety of sub-species.
Abnormal shell may be caused by a variety of factors. There may be disease of the shell
gland due to micro-organisms such as Escherichia coli and Mycoplasma spp, etc. A sal-
pingitis can result in soft-shelled eggs. Some waterfowl and some Galliformes may get
 trematode infestations of the oviduct. Also an abnormal shell may be genetic in origin or
due to the age of the hen. A dietary calcium/phosphorous imbalance (which should be
calcium: phosphorus 1:5) may result in soft-shelled eggs or a cessation of egg laying.
Soluble grit must always be available for herbivorous birds. There may be a deficiency of
zinc, manganese or vitamin D3. Unlike mammals, birds are unable to metabolise vitamin
 D2. One breeder improved egg production in macaws by feeding chicken carcasses and
also using a good mixed diet of fruit and vegetables.
Use of sulphonamides and excessive use of antibiotics can affect shell quality. The
chlorinated hydrocarbon DDT, its metabolite DDE and dieldrin, as well as the polychlo-
rinated biphenyls have been a notorious cause of thin-shelled eggs, not only in wild raptors
but in many other birds at the top of the food chain, such as pelicans and cormorants
(Peakall, 1970). This cause is unlikely in captive birds unless insecticides have been used
in an aviary to control insects, but must always be taken into account.
Shell quality can also be affected if the bird is stressed during formation of the egg shell.
Some birds such as parrots normally lay thin-shelled eggs which may be related to the
more humid environment of a hole-nesting species. Some parrots can damage the thin
shelled egg with overgrown claws.
Thin-shelled eggs tend to be laid in very hot weather. Hyperventilation by the bird to
overcome hyperthermia leads to respiratory alkalosis. This results in a lowering of the
partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood with the result that fewer calcium ions are
available to the cells of the shell gland.
The cause of 50% of dead-in-shell embryos takes place in the last few days of incuba-
tion and is due to adverse temperature and humidity during incubation together with
malnutrition. Persistent laying of soft-shelled eggs may be an indication of hormonal
imbalance, i.e. the rate of passage of the egg along the oviduct. Cracked or damaged shells
will obviously affect water loss and can sometimes be repaired using clear nail varnish.
Hatching
At the end of incubation, which varies with species, the egg hatches. Incubation times are
given in Appendix 9. A few hours (36-48) prior to hatching, the embryo, using its egg
tooth (a small projection on the upper beak), pierces the internal shell membrane and
starts to inhale from the enlarged air cell- a process known as internal pipping. In some
species chicks may start calling to each other at this time. Next a small crack indicating
external pipping appears in the shell. The time between internal and external pipping
ranges from 3-72 hours in parrots (Romagno 2005). The area around the crack starts to
break up and eventually a flap with a sizeable hole develops. In ostrich chicks pipping is
204
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
carried out primarily by using the powerful complexus muscle running from the base of
the skull along the back of the neck. The chick arches the neck and heaves a crack in the
thick shell.
The whole process is gradual, leading to the progressive functioning of the chick's
respiratory and cardiovascular systems. Simultaneously, the yolk sac starts to retract into
the chick and the blood vessels of the chorio-allantois begin shutting down. From the start
of external pipping to the emergence of the chick may take up to 24 hours. A weak chick
will take longer.
If the chick is taking too long to hatch there is a great temptation on the part of the
anxious breeder to help it out of the shell - this is a mistake. There is a grave danger that
the respiratory system may not be ready, the yolk sac may not be retracted and the chorio-
allantoic vessels may not be completely shut down. These vessels easily tear and a fatal
haemorrhage can result. It is better to leave the chick at least 48 hours from the frst sign
of pipping or hearing the chick chirp and only then, if necessary, carefully extract it.
Using blunt ended forceps very carefully prise away bits of shell. Bluntly dissect the shell
membranes and tear rather than cut, to reduce haemorrhage. The yolk sac may require
ligating (see p. 163). Once the shell is open, fluid is lost more rapidly and prolonged
hatching may lead to a dehydrated chick which will beneft from a little subcutaneous
sterile saline.
Infection of the egg
The chick embryo has long been the laboratory tool of the microbiologist. The avian
embryo has no effective immunological defence mechanism, although passive immunity is
acquired from the hen via the yolk. However, the antibodies probably do not pass into
 the ermbryonic circulation until about half-way through incubation. Before this, the egg is
      s  r    s es
incubation due to infection.
Infertile eggs can become infected and act as a focus for pathogenic organisms. Some
breeders are in the habit of leaving unhatched eggs in the nest to give support to the chicks.
It should not be forgotten that in some species, such as parrots, owls and other raptors, the
eggs do not all hatch out on the same day. There may be several days' age between each
chick. In passerines and many other birds, although the eggs do not hatch simultaneously
 there is very little interval between hatching. The egg can become infected any time from
the start of its formation in the oviduct. However, the most common cause of infection is
from dirty nest boxes or unhygienic incubators or from excessive handling and contamina-
tion by the owner who can transfer staphylococci on the hands to the egg shell.
The hands should be washed in antiseptic and disposable surgical gloves worn. All
dead-in-shell eggs should be cultured for bacteria and fungi. Cultures should be taken from
the yolk sac, the albumen and the embryo's liver. The results of these cultures and a post-
mortem examination on the embryo may give some indication as to how and when the
egg was infected. The dead chick should be examined for any developmental abnormalities
and its age should be estimated from the size relative to the egg. If pathogenic organisms
are isolated, then an assessment of the whole nesting area and incubator together with
bacteriological sampling of these needs to be made.
In summary, the veterinarian investigating the failure of the eggs to hatch needs to
differentiate between the following common problems:
1. Eggs that are infertile
2. Waterlogged eggs
3. Dehydrated eggs with contained dead-in-shell chicks
4. Eggs which are infected or affected by toxins
Breeding Problems
205
The investigation will also need to take into account other less common causes such as
the age, nutrition and disease status of the female and if the eggs have been handled and
stored carelessly before incubation.
FAILURE TO REAR THE YOUNG
As well as deserring eggs, birds will sometimes abandon the chicks and cease to feed them
at any stage of brooding. This may be caused by stress or it may be genetic or neurotic
in origin. If a bird rears one year but not the next then stress is the most likely cause.
Similar to the situation in mammals, some birds will attack the chicks as will happen with
over-defensive cockatoos or goshawks, both species of which can be quite dangerous to
human contacts when breeding.
Fostering
 If the survivors are rescued they will have to be reared artificially or by foster parents.
These can readily be found from among such birds as zebra or Bengalese finches, redrump
parrots, budgerigars, or, in the case of raptors, other falcons. Perrins (1979) found that
wild blue tits (Parus caeruleus) will feed the young of blackbirds (Turdus merula) or
treecreepers (Certhia familiaris), and wrens (Troglodytes troglodytes) will feed coal tits
(Parus ater). Cross fostering, e.g. of the galah (Eolophus roseicapillus) with Leadbeater's
or Major Mitchell's cockatoo (Cacatua leadbeateri), has been successfully carried out by
breeders. Fostering may result in the young bird becoming imprinted on to the species of
the foster parents and may result in pairing diffculties when the birds reach sexual matu-
rity and come to breed. This has not been demonstrated in wild birds. There is an increas-
ing tendency for aviculturists to take the frst clutch of eggs in an effort to encourage
further laying by the hen. The frst group of eggs is then incubated artifcially. Double
clutching may increase productivity but it is not a practice to be encouraged unless per-
formed by trained biologists.
The needs of birds feeding young
All breeding birds should have access to a shallow pan of water. This enables them not
only to bathe but to carry water, held in the breast feathers, to the chicks or eggs if neces-
sary. Also, birds feeding young may have increased fluid requirements. Pigeons produce
crop milk during the early part of brooding and there is increased flow of saliva in parrots
rearing young. Smith (1982) suggests that this may have an effect on the activity of plant
enzymes when the seed is held for some hours in the crop of the adult bird. This may
increase the nutritive value of the food. Smith has shown that such regurgitated seed has
a higher nutritive value than that fed to the adult bird. This worker also observes that the
primitive bird, the hoatzin, may carry out fermentation in its crop similar to that taking
place in the large proventriculus of an ostrich. J.R. Baker (1981, personal communication)
notes that protozoa are normal inhabitants of the crop in the budgerigar.
 Birds feeding young need a good quality protein diet. Merlins rearing young and fed a
diet of hatchery chicks failed. The fledglings were pale and weak. If the diet was changed
t0 dead (trapped) sparrows the chicks thrived.
Most of the seed-eating birds need to feed their young on animal protein, such as cat-
erpillars and larvae of other insects. Live insects should be provided by the aviculturist
during this period, although the use of mealworms is contentious because some chicks
may not be able to digest thick chitin. If birds such as parrots are fed too much green food
or fruit, their droppings become very moist. This can lead to a damp, unhygienic nest with
flies and maggots that will attack the chicks. Many wild birds go to considerable trouble
t0 keep the nest clean, either carrying away debris or trampling it into the dry material at
206
Eessentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
the bottom of the nest. Passerines remove faecal sacs from the young and, often, egg shells
n o sp po sads u aq isu n  pn are ss peap pe
instinctively defecate over the side of the nest or, if ground nesters, wander away from the
nest to defecate. If the birds are used to the handler it is sometimes advantageous to clear
out nests daily if the birds are ‘wet’ feeders. Droppings glued around chicks' claws can
cause necrosis.
The progress of growing chicks
are adjusted to him, should be able to examine and weigh the chicks regularly. Some avi-
culturists do examine the chicks but few seem to weigh and record their progress. If the
weather is cold there may be some temporary loss of weight
 By far the commonest problem in growing chicks, particularly hand-reared chicks, is
metabolic bone disease caused by an imbalance of calcium and phosphorus and insuffcient
vitamin D3 . Occasionally, a chick may develop splayed legs, a condition seen in both
raptors and psittacines. This usually is due to a chick being reared on an unsuitable, slip.
The condition can be treated using a fgure-of-eight suture round the legs for about a week
or better still by splinting the legs in slots (i.e. splits) made in a suitable block of expanded
polystyrene foarm or by putting the chick in a cup or small bowl which tends to push the
legs under the body.
Harcourt-Brown (2003) has also pointed out that artificially reared parrot chicks (par-
ticularly grey parrots) may be encouraged, by premature ambulation or by stretching up
to be fed, to place too much mechanical stress on the main weight-bearing bone, the tib-
iotarsus, before this is fully mineralized. This could result in deformity. Other congenital
abnormalities seen in neonate chicks are opisthotonus, various other joint deviations,
scoliosis, hydrocephalus and beak abnormalities. Unabsorbed yolk sacs can occasionally
be a problem since these become infected. The yolk sac usually disappears within a few
days although it may persist in the ostrich for up to eight days (see Chapter 8 on surgery
for this condition).
Feathers
During the frst ten days of brooding, the chicks are poikilothermic and gradually become
homoiothermic (Elkins, 1983). The adult birds will brood them continuously. During this
 s   r      se    s
individual chicks, the larger and stronger chicks growing feathers fastest. At the end of
this period, when the adults begin to spend less time keeping their brood warm, the least-
feathered chicks are at greatest risk.
The initial feather cover is not a very effcient heat insulator. Many young chicks die
of chilling at this time. The chilled youngster becomes torpid, fails to beg for food and
dies of starvation. Nest boxes that are too large, poorly insulated, damp or with only one
Or two chicks can become quite cold. The larger the number of fledglings in a nest, the
 greater the body mass and the smaller the ratio of surface area to body volume. Even the
totally feathered and active precocial chicks of waterfowl sustain considerable losses if
there are adverse weather conditions during the frst weeks of life.
Artificial rearing
If chicks are reared artificially in a hatcher, the temperature will need to be reduced pro-
from their behaviour if the chicks are too hot or too cold and adjust the temperature
accordingly. A hot chick willie with wings and legs stretched out and will keep away
from other chicks. The chick will pant and the skin will look red. However redness of the
Breeding Problems
207
skin could also indicate infection. Cold chicks huddle together or, if by themselves, wander
around their enclosure. In both cases they tend to make a lot of noise because they are
stressed.
p doio sro e ju ssasse o An pious rapaarq an parer pueq oaq sro u
stomach are being flled or emptied properly. This may either be felt or seen through the
semi-transparent skin of the neck and abdomen. Slow crop emptying may be due to the
humidity of the brooder being too low or if the temperature of the food is too low.
However food given too hot can cause scalding and crop burns (see p. 154). Be wary of
food heated in a microwave in which hot spots may occur. Crops should be full but not
Over distended which may lead to impaction. Sour crop may be caused by either fungal
or bacterial infection. Aspirate the contents and examine the sample bacteriologically.
In conclusion it should be stressed that the three most common causes of death in
nestlings are hypothermia, starvation and infection. Infanticide is not uncommon and such
factors as vitamin and mineral deficiencies and chemical toxins occasionally increase mor-
tality. Also, young chicks are very susceptible to many infections such as:
· The viruses of polyoma, psittacine beak and feather disease, avipox, serositis, infectious
bronchitis (see p. 305), reovirus (see p. 306), adenoviruses (see p. 301) and duck virus
hepatitis (see p. 294)
● Trichomoniasis, coccidiosis (see p. 319), Giardia (see p. 320), toxoplasmosis (canaries)
(see p. 317) and various bacteria
All of these conditions are covered in more detail in the relevant Appendices. Prophy-
lactic measures should include meticulous hygiene, quarantine for up to 12 weeks of all
newly acquired birds, together with diagnostic testing and avoidance of bird shows and
auctions, etc. Keep visitors, particularly those from other bird collctions, away from
hatching and rearing areas.
11
Release of Casualty Wild Birds
FACTORS THAT AFFECT SURVIVAL
 n a  n q s   s    
decades about the rehabilitation of injured wild raptors. This knowledge has been devel-
oped particularly in the United States with the foundation of such organisations as the
 Raptor Research and Rehabilitation Program, based at the University of Minnesota.
Concern about raptors is important, since this group of birds is at the greatest risk of
extinction. Raptors are often in direct confict with man, and being at the top of the food
chain they are most liable to the cumulative effects of the toxic agricultural chemicals.
However, the veterinarian in practice is often presented with other groups of sick and
injured wild birds, some of which he or she will want to release.
The factors that must be taken into account when birds other than raptors are released
vary tremendously. Comparatively little has been written about this aspect of the problem
and this chapter is an attempt to examine the task as it affects all species of birds.
As will be seen in the following pages, the release of wild birds is something that should
 not be undertaken lightly. It not only requires skill as an avian clinician but also knowledge
of the bird's natural history. Cooper (1979) has pointed out that in the UK, under the
Abandonment of Animals Act 1960, “the indiscriminate release of wild bird casualties
without careful consideration of their chances of survival in the wild could amount to an
offence.? On the other hand, any person who keeps any wild bird that could be released
is guilty of an offence under the UK's Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (see Plate 18).
The factors that affect survival can be broadly divided into two areas, which are to some
extent interrelated:
1. The bird's physical and mental ftness to cope with its environment
2. The habitat into which it is to be released
The habitat is constantly changing, and unless a bird is to be released where it was
found within a few days of injury, there are many aspects that must be considered. A bird
that is in the wrong environment and not completely ft will not only be unable to feed
itself properly but will soon be spotted by a predator, even if that bird looks normal to
the casual observer. If the bird is a predator and unable to hunt effciently it will not be
able to maintain itself.
ASSESSMENT OF HEALTH
One of the frst questions the veterinarian examining a wildlife casualty must ask him/
herself is why and how has this bird become a casualty? Is this a genuine accident casualty
208
Release of Casually Wild Birds
209
such as a road accident or the bird having been blown or inadvertently flown into a high
voltage electric cable or electricity-generating windmill? Has it become poisoned by some
toxic substance? Or, more importantly, is this a chronically sick bird suffering from some
infectious disease such as avian flu or West Nile virus (see p. 297}? Of course, if so there
are likely to be other birds around with similar signs but not always - this could be the
frst of many such birds.
Apart from the zoonosis aspect, placing a chronically sick bird with an infectious disease
in a rehabilitation centre is a considerable risk to the other invalided inmates (see p. 184).
Infection by the pathogen and incubation may take place, and then the pathogen, possibly
increased in virulence, is reintroduced back into the wild if an apparently healthy individ-
ual rehabilitated bird is subsequently released. Rehabilitators don't always appreciate the
risks involved in the long-term rehabilitation of chronically sick birds. The ethical aspects
of this problem have been reviewed by Harris (2005)
So what should the examining veterinarian be on the look-out for?
● If the bird has frayed tail feathers it has probably been on the ground for some time;
this is also indicated by blunted frayed talons.
● Overgrown or blunted beaks in birds of prey indicate the bird has not been feeding
dod k o aqeun (sanf so) yoot e aas sraqun rone au adod
but wandering around a motorway service area feeding on scraps left by the public.
● Unkempt, tatty, dull plumage indicates the bird has not been preening properly.
● Loss of bodily condition and a prominent carina or sternal keel.
● Is the bird grossly infested with ectoparasites? Healthy birds keep their ectoparasite load
in check by constant preening.
● If a radiograph shows a previously healed fracture, does this mean the bird is accident
prone and not 100% fit?
If there is any suspicion that the bird is chronically ill, further heath checks may need
() s s d e essu p  e i p aq 
has aptly asked: *If an individual cannot be released because of some infirmity is it appro-
priate to keep it confned in captivity for the “term of its natural life'? There is really no
justification whatsoever for keeping a collection of invalid birds just to keep them alive.
 The author once saw a mixed flock of gulls (Larus spp), none of which could or were ever
going to fly again, kept by a well-meaning ‘rehabilitator’ on a small muddy paddock, in
the belief that they were enjoying their existence in being with their fellows.
PHYSICAL FITNESS
While it is generally true that a bird needs to be anatomically perfect and 100% ft before
release, it is not entirely necessary. How much disability a bird can adapt to will depend
a great deal on its normal patterns of behaviour.
Skeletal damage
A healed fracture of the humerus or the ulna may not be in perfect alignment and there
may have been some shortening of the bone, but many birds will still be able to fly
(however, see p. 174). There are a number of recorded instances where birds have been
found surviving with misaligned, healed fractures (Olney, 1958/9; Tiemeier, 1941; Hurrel,
1968). The author has seen several cases in raptors where the fracture had not healed
perfectly but where the bird had mated and successfully reared young. This indicates that
the bird was hunting effectively enough not only to survive but also to catch enough food
t0 feed its young. Quite obviously these birds had learned to compensate for the disparity
between the normal and abnormal wing.
210
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
What is much more important for the bird to be able to fly efficiently is movement in
its wing joints. Even here some slight loss in the range of movement may be tolerable and
s r -m e se s  Pm-os  'ie n   pq e
may be able to cope with the loss of 10% range of movement in its carpal joints. These
creatures are birds of fast forward flight with a high wing loading and a high tail-surface:
wing-surface ratio. Once airborne the momentum of the bird helps to keep it in the air.
us qm spnq ose are suoaid pue srona 'n aun uo puadp orq pue suans
broad wings and fast forward flight (see Fig. 1.5).
On the other hand, a bird such as a barn owl or harrier has quite a different mode of
flight. The wing loading is lower, particularly in the owl, and full mobility of the carpal
joints is essential for the bird's manoeuvrability. These birds need the maximum lift on
d o a yo s a n   a  s -  n s 
in the air. A barn owl with an ankylosed elbow joint was seen to be able to ascend and
to glide, but once it tried to turn it collapsed completely.
Large, soaring birds of prey slowly rising in thermals need complete mobility in the
digital and carpal joints. The muscles of this area are well developed. The large emargin-
n on m adre ue un sios  noe pe ino pds are siaa Ad pa
turbulence and increase lift. The distance between the slots is constantly being adjusted
by the bird. In the soaring gull in which the method of fight is somewhat different, mobil.
ad m a puxa uns pq ai se oi os siod os no si r! edr ai jo Ai
(see Fig. 1.5).
The hovering kestrel, searching for its prey, probably needs complete mobility in all
the wing joints, as does the hovering flycatcher. Hovering requires more energy than fast
forward flight so that it is possible that the kestrel needs to be a more efficient predator
than the sparrow-hawk. However if the casualty kestrel cannot hover but can fly it may
 us inq d e   au sa rad aod, e  n  u
Terns (Sterna spp) also hover when hunting but do not have the option of a pole perch if
partially disabled.
 Some colleagues are of the opinion that all raptors that lose a leg should be euthanised.
The author would agree with this view in the case of the larger birds, which will inevitably
develop bumblefoot on the normal side; but in the smaller species (e.g. kestrel, merlin or
even small passerines) this is not the case.
Soft tissue damage to the locomotor system
Some muscles may have been so badly damaged as to be permanently atrophied. The
 propatagial mermbrane is often injured in colisions, and if scar tissue results extension of
the wing may be severely affected. The author has seen cases where the leading edge of
the wing is placed more than one inch further back on the body than that on the normal
side. In these cases flight is affected. In a less severely disabled case the bird may be able
to fly but lift on the affected side is reduced because of a reduction in effective wing area.
The bird may compensate by trimming (slightly flexing) the normal wing so that both
wings are equal in area and also by fying a bit faster (Fig. 11.1).
Lift on an aerofoil, be it a bird's wing or an aeroplane, is not only proportional to the
effective wing area but is proportional to the square of the relative wind speed. The author
has seen a case of damage to the propatagial membrane in a Harris's hawk where the bird
was able to fly but constantly veered off to the left. Quite obviously this bird would not
have survived in the wild.
Small birds, such as wrens, blackbirds and tits, which live in dense woodland cover
and do not normally fly great distances (providing it is a species that does not migrate
annually), may survive with wings which are not quite normal. Providing the distance
between perching positions is not too great these birds will adapt. However, if they are
released in a more open habitat, where the distance between trees and bushes is greater,
Release of Casually Wild Birds
211
(a)
(b)
Fig. 1l.1 (a) The posilion of he wings in a normal bird; (b) shows how he bird trims he
wing on he uninjured (L in he diagram) side, by slight flexion to balance the abnormal wing.
The arrow indicates he position of the scarred and displaced propatagial membrane. To get
he same amount of lift, (b) flies slighhy faster than (a).
m-s a a Add a on an ae Aa 'e e ie aq lm a
hawk and ducks mentioned earlier - although they have short broad wings, the frontal
body surface area in relation to their body mass is high (i.e. the profle drag is high) and
   n  ns  n  
Small birds, such as the wren, the robin and the starling, need to be able to manoeuvre
accurately to be able to get into and out of their hole nesting sites. However, small birds
arl aieuood e ueisns us ka 'spnq ael ai iaao saeiue ue aaq o
 because the power margin (the energy available from the muscles required to lift the bird
into the air and keep it airborne, beyond the minimum power required for this activity)
is much greater in small birds. In a bird the size of a swan or large vulture, which cannot
jump into the air but has to have some distance or a strong head wind to get up relative
air speed, the power margin is low. The bird, in fact, only just makes it. Very little damage
needs to occur to the soft tissue of these large birds and they will not fly again.
 No two species of bird have the same fight pattern and probably no two individual
birds fly in exactly the same manner, just as no two people walk exactly the same. How
a partially disabled bird learns to fly again will depend on the particular disability and on
behaviour pattern of that species. So that a considered judgement can be made on these
matters it is important that the clinician carries out a thorough physical examination of
the patient before release is considered. This should include radiography and the examina-
tion of the mobility of all wing joints together with the extensibility of the wings. The
examination should be carried out systematically even if no fractures of the wings have
Occurred. Investigation of these problems can only be carried out properly if the bird is
relaxed under anaesthesia. One cannot properly compare the mobility of the joints in each
wing in the conscious bird and it is easy to miss a slightly damaged propatagial
membrane.
A bird may look normal when it is alert and perching under observation. Once the
observer has disappeared the bird relaxes and both wings may not be held
symmetrically.
212
Essentials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
A bird may feel round and in good condition, its weight may be normal for the species
and time of year, but the weight may just be fat. If a bird has been in captivity for some
time the ratio of fat to muscle may be too high. Nevertheless some fat must be present as
an energy reserve.
Testing flying ability
Having considered all the above factors there is only really one way to assess a bird's
flying ability and that is to see it fy. To a limited extent this may be possible in a large
aviary. The larger the aviary in relation to the size of the bird the better. Much informa-
tion can be gained by watching the bird fly in a large garage or barn (see Plates 19 and
20). It may be possible to give the bird daily exercise with these facilities to build up the
bird's fitness. Ideally the enclosure needs to be as high and as long as possible, the bird
can then practise gaining in height as well as propelling itself forward.
Falconers have developed methods of flying birds on a leash or creance (see p. 257).
This is light in weight and the bird is allowed to trail up to 100m, which enables it to be
controlled. A large open space is essential although, for instance, on heather moorland the
leash tends to snag on the heather. There should be no obstructions and no distractions
for the bird. Obviously the total weight of the leash must not be heavy. If possible it is
best to fly the bird uphill and with the wind behind it. This makes flying much harder
work and gives a better assessment of how well the bird can fly.
This technique is applicable to other types of bird than raptors. Such birds as pigeons,
ducks and guls, with strong legs, are suitable but the method cannot be used in those
species with long legs, such as herons or waders, or any bird with delicate legs. The method
 only tests the ability to fly in a straight line, it does not show if the bird can gain height
 Or show how it can manoeuvre. These skills really can be tested only in a large, confined
space. If, after allowing the bird to fly for a short distance, it is dyspnoeic for more than
a few seconds it is not ft to release. A normal bird should be able to fy long distances
without getting into respiratory distress.
Holz, Naisbitt and Mansel (2006) working with peregrine falcons (Falco peregrinus)
       r) s  
exercise training programmes increased the chances of the bird's successful survival after
release.
Loss of feathers and damage to plumage
Before release, the plumage must be in good order. Not only must most of the main flight
feathers be present, but the thermal insulating properties of the covert feathers must be
effective. Many birds can fly with a few feathers missing - they often do so when moulting
and can look rather ragged, but the loss of these flight feathers must not form large gaps
in the aerofoil section of the wing. Large birds have an irregular pattern of moulting
because they cannot afford to lose too many feathers at once to remain airborne. Water-
fowl become flightless during moulting.
Lorenz (1965) cut off different sections of the remiges in pigeons to see what effect this
had on flight. When most of the primary flight feathers had been removed the bird could
still fly in level flight but could not ascend. If the secondary flight feathers were progres-
sively removed level flight was affected, although height could be gained.
A new feather can be stimulated to grow by gently pulling out the stump of
the old feather. However, growth of the new feather takes time. The loss of tail feathers
is more important in some birds than others (see p. 5). Many birds can fly without
the tail but birds such as sparrow-hawks, hen harriers, magpies, gulls and kites cannot
steer properly. The kestrel, the buzzard and the tern cannot hover. The large eagles and
the owls can probably manage better than most but the precision of flying wil be
affected.
Release of Casually Wild Birds
213
Imping
Falconers use the technique of imping to replace a damaged feather with one that has been
moulted or one that has been obtained from a casualty bird. The feather does not have
to be from the same species, although it must not only be of approximately the right size
but must be of the same texture. The flight feathers of chickens and pheasants are harder
than those of other birds. The shape must be right. In many large birds, particularly the
raptors, the outer primaries are emarginated, and the vane on one side of the shaft is very
much narrower for part of its length.
The technique of imping is applicable to birds other than raptors. The shaft of the
broken feather is cut below the damaged area and the shaft of the new feather is cut so
that the upper part replaces the faulty section. The two halves are joined together with a
peg made of bamboo, a needle, or the quill of another feather of suitable diameter. Any
substance can be used so long as it is the right diameter to be inserted into the ends of the
Damage to the legs
 'm an jo i se no se nou qeqond si sa yoq jo  n a
U aal aul jo ired jo ssol pue sisoioau oi peal Aeniuaaa ues saal aui punoie padden aul
birds such as gulls or rails. Some birds lose toes through frost bite. All these birds can and
do survive. Some rotation of the tibiotarsus after healing is also quite tolerable. The legs
 are more important to a raptor, but there are reports of these birds hunting and surviving
with only one leg functional. Nevertheless the chances of a heavy bird such as a buzzard
developing a bumblefoot infection are greatly increased if it is constantly standing on one
foot. Species such as herons, storks and waders are severely handicapped in their methods
of hunting with one leg and should be euthanased.
Damage to the eyes
Fifty percent of wildlife casualties have intraocular trauma (often haemorrhage from the
pecten - see p. 48). The loss of an eye might be thought to be a severe handicap that
would affect the judgment of distance but this is not always so. Birds can manage with
one eye and are able to judge distance suffciently accurately to be able to land with preci-
sion on a branch. Dr Leslie Brown (an ornithologist in Kenya) in a personal communica-
bird survived at least two years with what appeared to be a cataract in one eye. However,
Brown notes that the breeding success of this bird was reduced after it developed disease
of the eye. It was then probably not a completely efficient predator.
In the peregrine falcon two perfect eyes are thought to be essential. These birds may
start their attack on a victim anything from 500m to 4.5 km away from the target (Brown,
1976). However, the author has heard of at least one peregrine that survived in the wild
with only one functional eye. The author has also known of two owls and a buzzard in
which loss of an eye occurred and the birds were able to survive. In the prey species the
bird may survive but its chances of eluding a predator would be reduced (see p. 26).
The importance of good hearing
In birds such as owls or harriers, that have sustained damage to the head, the clinician
should consider if the hearing of the bird is likely to be affected. Both these groups
quarter the ground they are hunting with a slow methodical flight, using their facial discs
t0 pick up the slightest sound (see p. 34). Hearing in these birds is more important
than sight.
Hearing may be important to some invertebrate feeders. Certainly the thrushes locate
earthworms by listening. Also woodpeckers, nuthatches and treecreepers may locate grubs
below tree bark by hearing.
214
Essenlials of Avian Med icine and Surgery
MENTAL HEALTH
When considering if a bird's behaviour pattern will enable survival in a given environment,
casualties can be divided into two fundamentally different groups. First there are those
birds that were mature when frst caught. These birds have learned to fnd food for them-
selves. Provided they still retain their natural fear of man and his domestic animals they
pose litle problem. If this group are not kept in captivity for more than about 14 days
they soon settle back in their old habitats. If they are released into the exact location where
they were found then they know the local geography and where the likely food sources
are situated. This group usually survives very well.
 If a bird has been captive for several months before it is released it may take a little time
t0 get back to its normal routine. Apart from being out of the habit of continually having
to search for food, the bird's food supply will have changed. Summer has changed to autumn
Or winter. Abundant supplies of insects and vegetable food have changed. Many small birds
have migrated and the countryside which yielded a plentiful supply of easily caught young
animals for the predator has disappeared. The released casualty will need support feeding
from a familiar source while it is learning to adapt to the changed situation.
Hooimeijer (2006) records that white storks (Ciconia ciconia) kept in captivity for three
 years as part of a conservation breeding program lost their normal migratory behaviour.
The group of birds that pose the greatest problem for release are the young which may
have been captured at some stage of their development. These birds, which have never
lived freely, not only may have to be taught to search for food but may develop undesir
able mental attitudes during their nursing period.
The altricial nestlings, which include the raptors, are fed by the parents not only during
the time they are in the nest but also for a period after they have left the nest. During this
post-fledgling period the young bird is not only developing the skills of flying but also, in
the case of predators, is learning to hunt and catch prey successfully. Foraging for food
in the prey species may also be partly learned by watching parents and also by natural
curiosity and investigating a range of potential food items. C.s. Jones (1984, personal
communication) has noted that the rate at which young tawny owls learn to fy and pounce
accurately on a moving prey, varies between individuals. Some birds may never become
quite as good as others and may under natural conditions not survive. Mortality in young
wild raptors through ineffcient hunting is quite high.
n si rapean a (oe d aas) a 'uo hm, pue ar au oi paey isy aui uo
t0 standard texts on falconry such as Mavrogordato's A Hawk for the Bush (1960) and
Woodford's A Manual of Falconry (1960). A raptor will learn to hunt if it is confined to
a barn where there are live mice or rats or if it is in an aviary where small mammals and
birds can get through the mesh of the netting but through which the predator cannot
escape. To feed live animals to a bird of prey is illegal in the UK under the Protection of
Animals Act 1911-1964.
 In the precocial species, such as pheasants, plovers and waterfowl, where the young
hatch fully feathered, feeding behaviour is almost entirely instinctive, but these birds do
need to be exposed to their normal habitat during the developing period so that they will
learn to investigate all types of potential food items, such as invertebrates.
Imprinting
This phenomenon, frst demonstrated by Lorenz in geese (1935 and 1937) is seen in
all species and has far reaching implications. As the young bird matures, its mental
awareness of its environment becomes more acute. The bird recognises not only its
parents, which feed it, but also its siblings, nest site and food. These images become fixed
Release of Casually Wild Birds
215
in that part of the brain (the hippocampus) controlling behaviour. Alter any of these
normal contacts in the developing bird's environment and problems of behaviour occur.
The bird fails to recognise or has diffculty in recognising its own species when it reaches
maturity. If raptors are not presented with a variety of their normal prey species they may
never learn to hunt properly. All birds have great diffculty recognising food items with
which they are not familiar even though these may be quite suitable as food. Feed a devel-
oping raptor entirely on hatchery chicks and it becomes imprinted on them. Birds often
return to the same nest site, possibly because the surrounding environment is imprinted
on them.
Young fledglings reared and hand fed by humans become imprinted on the handler
They continue to beg for food and can become totally dependent on their human benefac-
u op aan asq sids umo na q a ue ed raau K spnq asa 'r
 nn m pq nd pxis e  i  A a '(so 'd as a aso
rescuer. When such birds are released they may attack unsuspecting humans in the belief
that these persons are a natural food source or that they are a natural mate. McKeever
the more rapacious species injury to humans could be severe. Each year newspaper reports
appear, usually towards the end of the summer or in the autumn, of a demented owl which
has attacked someone. These may be imprinted birds released by well-meaning but ign0-
rant do-gooders.
 The critical period of socialisation takes place in different groups at different stages of
development. In the altricial nestling it is generally later and longer than in the precocial
chick. The rigidity of imprinting probably also varies with the species. Some authorities
 believe that imprinting can never be reversed, although there is some evidence that some
types of imprinting may be negated. Certainly it is diffcult and may take years. For the
biologist intent on the captive breeding of the rare species of raptor this may be practical.
For the veterinarian who wants to release a wild bird after treatment, imprinting can
produce insuperable problems.
Reversion to juvenile behaviour by an injured bird can sometimes 0ccur (Lack, 1975)
and the author has noticed this in an injured parrot which had lost its upper beak. Reverted
mature birds open their mouths and at the same time carry out slight fluttering movements
of the wings begging for food.
If a young bird is reared, by a well-meaning person, in complete isolation in an attempt
t0 stop imprinting on to its human contact, it becomes completely neurotic. It is hyper-
sensitive, frightened of its own shadow and fears all living things - a mental state not
confned to birds. These birds are excessively aggressive and frightened of their surround-
ings. The worst effects of imprinting can be avoided by rearing a young bird with its
siblings. A good discussion of abnormal and maladaptive behaviour which is important
to the releaser of wild birds is given by Jones (1980).
THE RELEASE ENVIRONMENT
plentiful food supply. Birds that are physically and mentally ft should have no diffculty
in finding suffcient food. However, at the beginning of the summer period, there is often
is an attempt on the part of the breeding birds to map out and familiarise thermselves with
a secure food supply on which to rear their young. An outsider of the same species or
even a competitive species released into this territory comes under considerable stress
through constant attack and harassment. This is bad for a bird that is trying to rehabilitate
216
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
itself into the environment. It would be wiser to pick a release area where the food supply
is plentiful and where the number of suitable nesting sites is restricted (Newton, 1979).
As the summer period advances, the ground cover in a wood increases and makes it
harder for the tawny owl to hunt for its food. But this is an easier time for the prey species,
including many small birds, as food is abundant and it is easier to hide from the predator.
As autumn turns to winter, the ground cover is much less dense giving fewer refuges for
the prey and the balance shifts in favour of the owl. These constantly changing circum-
stances favouring frst one group of birds, then another, take place to some extent in all
types of habitat. They should always be considered before releasing the bird.
Many birds are migratory, being only in the UK or North America or northern Europe
 rd jo si e si s rq oi r a  pd s nn e r
supply in such regions. By the time they are ft for release the food supply of insectivores
such as swifts, swallows and warblers may have gone. The short-eared owl and the hen
harrier breed on the upland moor during the summer but migrate locally to the estuaries
and lowlands during the winter.
Before any bird is released into a habitat it is essential that the releaser makes sure that
an adequate food supply is available. The habitat may look right - it does not necessarily
mean that the food, for instance the prey species, is present. It is therefore important that
to be successful in releasing casualty birds, the veterinarian should either be a competent
naturalist or have the cooperation of such a person. The County Naturalists Trusts or the
RSPB local groups (in the UK) or similar organisations can be found throughout these
areas and can be contacted for help. The correct assessment of the complex interactions
of the bird and the environment requires a wealth of knowledge of natural history and
some practical skill as a feld naturalist.
The weather
The weather is another important and complicated consideration. Prolonged heavy rain
can severely restrict the feeding of many species - from the aerial insectivores to the hover-
ing species such as the kestrel. For the barn owl and harrier, rain reduces the acuity of
hearing. Sea shore waders, and small birds feeding in dense foliage, such as the wren, are
less affected. Just after heavy rain there are often many invertebrates, particularly earth-
worms, near the surface. In dry weather, particularly if prolonged, the invertebrates
migrate deeper into the soil. In wetland areas during the drought, soil increases in salinity
so that fewer invertebrates are available.
Cold weather is important, especially if the ground is frozen. Under these conditions
the balance berween the energy intake of the bird and its energy losses in searching for
food and maintaining body temperature may be critical. It is therefore important that the
bird has adequate fat reserves before release. Even the barn owl probably only stores suf-
fcient fat reserves to last three days, and has been observed to cache food (Anthony
Duckels, 2005, personal communication). In small birds the energy reserve is much less.
Unless the cold weather is very severe the sea shore and estuarine mud is unlikely to
freeze as it is periodically warmed by the tide. However, the invertebrates travel deeper in
cold weather so that the species feeding near the surface with short beaks are disadvantaged.
The wind chill factor, with high wind in low temperature, can lead to the loss of a lot of
body heat. Prolonged frost can have disastrous effects on woodland birds feeding on the
pupae and eggs of insects secreted in the tree bark. Wind and cold have less effect near the
ground and on the leeward side of a wood but are important in the woodland clearings.
High wind churns up large expanses of water, including the sea. This stirs up botom
mud making feeding for diving species difficult. A rough sea constantly pounding a rocky
shore disturbs the purple sandpiper and the turnstone so that they can spend less time
feeding. The subject of weather and bird behaviour is very well covered by Elkins
(1983).
Release of Casually Wild Birds
217
Because of all these factors it is wise to consider the weather forecast for the next few
days before releasing a bird.
Other factors to be considered before releasing casualty birds
Birds should be released at frst light or as early in the day as possible. This gives them
the maximum feeding period before darkness and gives them as much time as possible to
orientate themselves. A prey species, such as a small tit, a plover or a starling, may stand
a better chance of survival if it is released near a flock of the same or similar species. Even
here there is often a pecking order and the bird will be under some stress until it is
accepted.
 It is unwise to release birds near a busy main road. Many owls and other species such
as crows are attracted to the small vertebrate casualties killed on the road and then them-
selves become injured or killed. Even small birds, such as wrens, robins and thrushes, tend
t0 fly low over road-ways and become casualties. Some birds of prey, such as the buzzard,
the little owl and the short-eared owl, use telegraph poles or fence posts alongside the
road as perches to watch for prey.
ad ai a ii rq si ni siise ae eu ro p oo s n u
mission and cooperation of the occupier of the land and his staff. Releasing a sparrow-
 m sq jo xad a e si an   sa p e r 
unwise. These birds often chase prey into a building and then become trapped. The netting
of a fruit farm is a similar hazard. Barbed wire fences across open farmland are a particular
hazard to barn owls. Swans need a large expanse of water with no overhead wires.
THE TECHNIQUES OF RELEASE
As stated earlier, when a bird is building up its strength and initially learning to fly, or
convalescing after injury, it can be kept in an aviary or other suitable enclosure. If this is
situated in a suitable area for release, when the time comes to let the bird go, the netting
on top of the aviary can be rolled back quietly. This method has several advantages. The
bird can see and has become familiar with the surrounding countryside. It can go back to
the aviary as a temporary refuge and this can also be a source of support food while the
bird learns to forage for itself.
A method that has been used successfully to release falcons is to use a “hack box'. This
is basically the same principle as the aviary method except that it is portable. The box is
really a small cage, the size dependent on the species. For falcons it should be about 1.8 m
X 1.2 m x 1.2m. The box is transported to the site chosen for release and left containing
the bird on site for 7-10 days. The box needs to be well protected from predators. During
this time the bird is fed from behind a screen or using a chute so that the handler cannot
be seen. The principle is to try and break the feeding bond and give the bird time to
familiarise itself with the surrounding area. At the end of the habituation period the cage
is opened but feeding continues for long enough to make sure the bird is foraging for itself.
 Support feeding may need to be gradually reduced to encourage normal hunting.
 Both of the above methods are suitable for most types of bird but may need some
modification. Raptors can be released after using standard hacking back techniques. After
fraining they can be tethered to a “hack board'. This is a wooden platform which acts like
an artificial nest site. The bird is tethered for several days, during which time it is fed and
gets to know the neighbouring terriory, and then is released. Some falconers suggest car-
rying the bird on the fist around the area surrounding the hack board for several days
before release. This helps familiarise the bird with its territory. Regular feeding on the
hack board continues and is gradually reduced to encourage hunting. Survival of all species
depends not only on the physical and mental well-being of the bird but also on it having
an intimate knowledge of its local environment so that it can fnd food and shelter.
218
Essenlials of Avian Medicine and Surgery
CONCLUSION
It can be appreciated that the problem of releasing the casualty after treatment is complex.
The work can be time consuming and frustrating, because a bird may die at any stage in
the rehabilitation process. However, it is important that veterinary surgeons should be
involved in this work and in co-operation with other natural scientists should record their
experiences and observations so that others can make use of these records and build on
them. The veterinarians’ expertise and skill used in this way can help to make some posi-
tive contribution to conservation. A good review of the subject was carried out by Brown
and Luebbert (2003).
The techniques worked out on common species can be used on the rarer birds. Today's
common bird may become tomorrow's rarity or even become extinct, like the passenger
h a jo d a an  1  n s o sm m 
century. During that period, migration flocks containing two billion birds would darken
the sky. As HRH Prince Philip has stated:
 It is absolutely inevitable that a very large number of species are going to become
extinct in spite of our best efforts.
The Prince warned that in not protecting wildlife our own days would be numbered:
. . . for we simply cannot survive without the other living species that co-exist with
us on this planet
Appendices
APPENDIX 1 AN AVIAN FORMULARY
Professor Thomas N. Tully
Louisiana State Universily
School of Veterinary Medicine
Deparment of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Baton Rouge, USA
Antibacterial drugs for use in birds
Owners commonly request the prescription and administration of antibiotics for their
birds. This request is often made without any thought as to the real need for antimicrobial
reatment in relation to the patient's presentation. There is generally an assumption that
aq m Aderau ai oi asdr pe pq ys ue ip au jo sp a aie soie,
rapid. It is incumbent upon the veterinarian to explain both the benefts and side effects
of antimicrobial therapy to owners. This information will often help with owner compli-
ance, thereby applying the therapeutic benefits that are needed to successfully treat the
presenting disease condition.
Antibiotic therapy should only be initiated when the therapeutic benefts ourweigh the
negative side effects associated with the drug. With close to 9000 different avian species,
developing a plan for administration of therapeutic agents, including antibiotics, is often
diffcult and imprecise. There is a paucity of information regarding actual pharmacokinetic
studies involving the many bird species, therefore extrapolation from research performed
on other bird species or experience is often used to determine a dose regimen. This method
of dose determination may or may not be effective. Fortunately there has been an increased
amount of information published on various drug dosages within the last few years that
 contribute to a beter understanding of determining a proper drug dose for each individual
avian patient or group of patients.
Veterinarians that are most successful in treating birds suffering from bacterial infec-
tions understand the common bacterial organisms isolated from this group of animals and
the therapeutic agents used to treat these diseases. Birds presented with a bacterial infec-
tion will recover more rapidly when the appropriate antibiotic is used and conversely they
will deteriorate rapidly if the incorrect antibiotic is used. Knowledge of the common bacte
rial infections and their presenting signs will aid the clinician in selecting the initial anti-
biotic therapy while waiting for a culture and sensitivity result of a diagnostic sample
collected from the affected area. One cannot underestimate the importance of bacterial
culnure and sensitivity when diagnosing avian bacterial infections. Often the antibiotics
that may appear to be most effective provide no clinical beneft to the patient.
219
220
Appendice:
Selection of the antibiotic also includes the capacity of the dosage administered to
penetrate the patient's body. A veterinarian may be limited in the choice of an antibiotic
drug because of the method of manufacture or the ability of the owner to give the medica-
tion. For most birds, an oral liquid, injection or therapeutically impregnated food or water
 are the methods by which an avian patient receives medication. Not only will the form in
which the drug is manufactured determine selection, but also the ability of the animal to
accept that form of drug. If an owner fnds giving a drug stressful then compliance will
be compromised regarding management of the treatment therapy. Ultimately the patient
will not respond to the treatment and remain ill because the antibiotic therapy is not being
provided. Owners must be informed of the importance of compliance and if they are
unable to meet the demands of treatment then either the bird needs to be hospitalised for
 medication or an alternative method of antibiotic presentation needs to be considered.
pounding of tablets and capsules into flavoured suspensions. Unfortunately, there have
also been problems with regulation and quality control of these compounded medications.
The main message regarding compounded medication is buyer beware. There is also little
if any information regarding the shelf life of compounded medications.
For successful avian antibiotic therapy communication and information to the client is
essential. The veterinarian's knowledge of avian physiology, antibiotic references, bacterial
infections and antibiotic methods of action will contribute to a successful treatment
 outcome in many bird cases.
Unless specifically acknowledged, the drug dosages that are new to this edition are to
be found in Carpenter (2005).
The β-lactam antibacterials (i.e. the penicillins and
the related cephalosporins)
widely distributed in the body (except for the CNS - they are not very lipid soluble). They
are rapidly excreted, unmetabolised, primarily through the kidneys although in birds when
compared to mammals a greater proportion is excreted through the bile. Depot prepara-
tions have been developed to prolong their activity in the body. They have a high therapeu-
tic index and consequently are usually relatively safe when used in birds. There are some 74
penicillins licensed for veterinary use, of which only about five are useful for birds. Resis-
tance is developed by those bacteria which produce β-lactamase - for example Stapbylococ-
cus spp, E. coli, Klebsiella spp, Pasteurella spp, Pseudomonas spp and Salmonella spp.
There are at least 13 cephalosporins (Appendix Table 1.2) licensed for veterinary use,
but only two of these have been used in birds. Cephalosporins penetrate most tissue (except
the CNS), including bone, and their prophylactic use before orthopaedic surgery is recom-
mended. Excretion of this class of antibiotics is through the kidney. The earlier generations
of cephalosporins are more effective against Gram+ organisms while the later, more
complex generation, products have a broader range of activity, including against
Gram- bacteria. The third generation cephalosporins have been used synergistically with
aminoglycosides (e.g. amikacin) in very severe bacterial infections.
The tetracyclines
The tetracycline antibiotics (Appendix Table 1.3) are one of the most widely used groups
in avian medicine for treating bacterial infections. The tetracycline class of antibiotics has
a generalised and effective tissue distribution except in the CNS. Tetracycline products are
metabolised in the liver and excreted both in the bile and through the kidneys. Injectable
preparations often cause irritation and the injection sites are often subject to tissue
necrosis. As with other antibiotic administration, this group of drugs often depresses gut
flora and causes GI disturbances.
(Continued on p.230)
poor and erralic. These
anlibacterials should be
used for a minimum of
[Continved]
Aaii jnq spq u ayos
handling and frequent
used because of the
 Not safe to use in many
procaine fraclion is
 Absorplion from the 
injection
Comment
5 days.
loxic
Bactericidal - aclive against 
 As above but more broad 
some Gram-, e.g.
elfeclive against 
Activity
150-200mg/kg q 8-12hr,
Amazon parrols
except blue front Amazon
60mg/kg q 6-8hr 
pigeons,
Dosage
water
Administration
.
p.o.
 3g phial of powcder for
150mg/ml injeclion 
 50mg and 125mg
reconstiution
Formulation
lablets
Appendix Table 1.1 The penicillins.
Procaine penicillin many lrade 
Ampicillin sodium [Omnipen-N, 
Benzyl penicillin or penicillin
Generic and Trade Names
G, e.g. Cryslapen 
Apothecon]
names
ampicillin for i.m. use in
 Amoxicillin favoured over 
 absorbed from the Gl
 Amoxicillin is belter 
considered
pigeons
Comment
Also s.c.
Also s.C.
bacterial isolates of birds; 
road speclrum bactericidal
avicn infeclions. Effective
may be elfeclive when
organisms isolated from
acid is a β lactamase 
 direct anlimicrobial
oganism is sensifive
action
Activity
B
1000-2000mg/l drinking water
25-100mg/kg q 12-24hr -
pooy yos by/6w000g-0007
15-20mg/kg q 12hr - emus
12hr - raplors
60-120mg/kg q 8-12hr -
 500mg/l drinking water -
11-15mg q 8hr - ralites
- canaries/aviary use
waler- gamebirds
canaries/aviaryuse
 and most species
[excepl emus]
 collared doves
155mg/kg q 1
b by/6us
chickens
abpsoa
Administration
p.o.
i.m.
i.m.
p.0.
1g, 2g, and 
140mg amoxicillin and
and 10mg clavulanic 
100ml phials
 10ml clavulanic
 250mg and 500mg
 35mg clavulanic
15ml dropper bolle
125mg,250mg,
suspension
10g phials
 Formulation 
500mg.1
acid/ml
40 and
Tablets 
puD
Appendix Table 1.1 Continued.
Generic and Trade Names 
Amoxicillin/clevulnate
Apothecon]
form]
文
of trealment is five days
[Continved]
Intratracheal use crgels
infechions within that
 Pseudomonas spp
analomic structure 
 Gram+ and Gram- bacteria
Aclive against some Gram-,
Gram+ bacteria
μ/6n z<
00-150mg/kg q 12hr -raplors
100mg/kg q 4-8hr - bustards 
65mg/ drinking water - ralites
100-200mg/kg q 6-12hr -
ralifes
11-15mg/kg q 8hr - ralies
jsow - 4zz b 6y/6w00
canaries
species
species
1.2
P.0
1.m.
p.0
250mg, 500mg, 1g 
125mg and 250mg
1 g and 5g phicls of 
reconshitulion.
reconstitution
phials
Amoxicilli trihydrate [Amoxicil.
Carbenicilin Pyopen [link]
Amoxidrops, Pfizer]
Amoxicillin sodium
GlaxoSmithkline;
Ticarcillin is broken down
srains of Pseudomonas,
administered every 4hr
has therefore been
 crug may need to be
produced by some
For passerine species,
bactericl infections,
combined with
Comment
below)
Aabns
Gram+ than amoxicillin but 
 More aclive against Proteus
find or a disconlinued
product in many counlries
spp than carbenicillin
 less aclive against most
antibiolic potenliator lo
more aclive against
Strepiococcus spp
Activity
fonted Amazon parrols give q
200mg/kg q 8hr - budgerigars,
 Amazon parrols, most species
100-200mg/kg q 12hr - most
200mg/kg q 6-12hr - most 
75-100mg/kg q 4-6hr -
75-100mg/kg q 8-4hr -
00mg/kg q 12hr - most
raplors, passerines
months of age
psiltacines
2-4 hr)
species
species
species
Dosage
Administration
i.m.
i.m.
'A'!
Ticarcillin 1.5g clavulanic 
1g and 5g phials of
1g and 2g phials of
reconstitution
powder for
reconstitution
powder for
4.5g phials
1.6g phials
 Formulation
Appendix Table 1.1 Conlinued.
Ticrclin and davulanicacid
Generic and Trade Names 
Piperacillin Pipril lederle]
sodium Zosyn [lederle]
i.e. Timentin [SmithKline 
Ticarcillin Ticar [link]
Beecham]
Appendices
225
Well absorbed from Gl tract
with some diurelics, e.g.
 Can be stored after making
and are resistant to β
Administralion p.o.is also
an acceplable means of
lactamase enzymes
treating raptors
Comment
Pseudomonas spp
Activity
25-75mg/kg q 8-12hr - mosl
 50-100mg/kg q 12hr -raplors
100mg/kg q 2-6hr-passerines
Adoayi Aop
100mg/kg q 12hr for 7 days
may be needed for deep
q 2-3hr in small species,
 most species, including 
100mg/kg q 6-8hr - most
- small species,
1o 1y9 b 6y/6wos-9g
species, emus
quail, ducks
quail, ducks
species
pigeons
Dosage
cucks
口
一
Administration
Route of
p.0.
p.O.
i.m
i.m.
P.O.
i.m.
 500mg, 1g, 10g phials 
50mg, 100mg, 200mg.
 50mg/ml oral suspension
 30ml and 100ml phials
Oral suspension for
Formulation
1g tablets
Appendix Table 1.2 The cephalosporins.
10ml phial
1g phials
[oily] 
Ancef [SmithKline Beecham] 
Generic and Trade Names
cephalosporin
 cephalosporin
 cephalosporin
Veterinary)
Cephalothin
Kefzol [Lilly]
Cefazolin
A
226
Appendices
 Penetrates CSF and CNS 
 Penelrales CSF and CNS
Comment
 Broad spechrum aclivily
paricularly
Activity
100mg/kg q 4-6hr - pigeons,
 75-100mg/kg q 4-8hr - most
 50-100mg/kg q 4-8hr - most 
 50-100mg/kg q 4-8hr - most
 75-100mg/kg q 4-8hr - most
 35-50mg/kg q 4-6hr - most
100mg/kg q 4hr - chickens 
25mg/kg q 8hr - ralites/
winged Amazon parrols
emus, cranes
most species
young birds
species
species
species
species
species
abDsog
Administration
p.0.
i.m.
i.m.
i.m.
i.m.
500mg, 1g, 2g phials
bwoos pun 6wosz
6
125mg/5ml oral
reconstitution
sUspension
2g phials
Formulation
capsules
Powder for
1g phial
Appendix Table 1.2 Conlinued 
Generic and Trade Names
Cephradine [Biocraft]
 second generation
third generalion
[GlaxoSmithkline)
A third generalion
A third generalion
A first generalion
 cephalosporin
Mefoxin [Merck]
 cephalosporin
Claforan [Rossel]
 cephalosporin
 cephalosporin 
 cephalosporin
Rocephin [Roche]
 cephalosporin
Ceplaz, Forlaz
Cephradine
Ceffazidime
Cefoxitin.
Appendices
227
 Oral absorplion is eralic and in
mcintain the minimal inhibitory
higher concenlralions available
uldated telracycline has been
mll in an altempt lo reduce the
[Continved]
 not be tempted to use the
necrosis
 cause muscle irrilation or
for large farm animals 
only resulls in tissue
2005]
necrosis
Comment
I flagellates
 Only bacteriostalic Broad
Pseudomonas spp Also
speclrum Effeclive 
aclive against
prolozoa and
Activity
4-12mg/l drinking water
10mg/kgq 3days-ralies
2-3
24hr -
<400g
 most species,
passerines
b6x/6w007
pooy
Dosage
2
Administration
P.0.
i.m.
i.m.
waler or for
 As the hydrochloride for
9
to drinking v
Appendix Table 1.3 The telracyclines.
Formulation
Generic and Trade Names
other lrade preparalions
iquamycin LA-200,
Oxytetracycline
228
Appendices
medical use on the confinent of
special order from Pfizer. It has
shorter in Amazon parrols and
lelracyclines but the side effecls
side effecis, both hepalic and
To counteracl, add viltamin K lo
more lipid soluble than other
however its half life is much
 cardiovascular collapse affer 
telracyclines and so belter
Has been associaled with
renal, than the other
rapid i.v. injeclion 
Haemorrhages
cnd ALT↑
injeclion
Comment
 Antimicrobicl aclivily as
for other telracyclines
but because of ils
pharmacokinelic
Activity
Chlamydophila psittaci
 25-50mg/kg q 24hr for
budgerigars 0.25 ml
-s b by/6w001-
cockaliels 0.5 ml
Irealmenls for
Dosage
days
Administration
Route of
i.m.
i.v.
W'!
100mg/5ml phials
long-acling depot 
 preparalion
 Formulation
Appendix Table 1.3 Conlinued.
Generic and Trade Names 
Vibramycin [Pfizer]
Appendices
229
Needs to be used for at lecst 45
doxycycline is excreled
The tablets are really loo large
o
occurs,reduce
r infeclion at the
 psittaci infecled passerine
 only 30% is
except for the larger birds.
 continuous treaiment
more palatable.
food
 palatabiliy and an overall
the
ma inta in plasma levels.
 thisperiod and
bile and some
 the lower levels of
psiltacine species I
reduced to 0.7%.
 Retest birds for 
pooy 
sn 
continue
the
end of r
sAop
make
bu!sn
pub
SDH
and Mycoplasma spp
 Mainly of use against 
Bacteriostalic
lablet per African grey
2.5g/kg food or 6-12
level
[without gril - pigeons
100mg/kg q6h-psilacines
 6-10mg/kg q24 hr-raplors
parrot and cockaloos
mosow iad agi go
12hr
cooked food or
 ! 
leaspoon/1-2l of
40-50mg/kg q 8hr.
drinking waler
b.
2
2
p.o.
P.O.
i.m.
 solution in drinking
Soluble powder for
225g pack
in food
Ronaxan [Rhone-Merieux]
Aureomycin Soluble
Chlorteracycline
and olhers]
230
Appendices
Oral absorption is very variable. An important clinical consideration is that tetracycline
antibiotics are chelated by calcium and magnesium salts (particularly important if admin-
istered orally to graniferous birds, which take in calcium and magnesium-containing grit
into the ventriculus). If administered intravenously, chelation of blood calcium ions can
occur, resulting in cardiovascular collapse. The tetracyclines can be immunosuppressive
and cause photosensitivity. Their toxicity is variable and dependent on the species, the
product being used and the duration of treatment. Doxycycline, a ffth generation tetra-
cycline product, is the drug of choice to treat Chlamydophila psittaci infections. The eff-
cacy of this bacteriostatic group of antibiotics is enhanced by its lipophilic characteristics,
allowing easy access through cell membranes.
The aminoglycosides
All these antibacterials have a narrow therapeutic margin and are all relatively toxic. If
possible, their systemic use in birds is best avoided, particularly in dehydrated birds or
birds with raised urea or raised uric acid or polyuria/polydipsia. This group of antibacteri-
als includes streptomycin, dihydrostreptomycin, neomycin, kanamycin, framamycin,
 gentamycin, apramycin, spectinomycin, tobramycin and amikacin. They are often the most
effective antibiotics against many Gram- bacteria.
They are all bactericidal, except spectinomycin, but enteric bacteria rapidly acquire
resistance to them. None is absorbed from the GI tract so when used p.o. they are relatively
safe. They are poorly distributed in the body and toxic to kidney and CNS (ototoxicity).
Extrapolating doses for birds from those used for mammals is very hazardous. Only those
of real use in birds are listed below (Appendix Table 1.4).
Macrolides and lincosamides
The macrolides and lincosamides (Appendix Table 1.5) include tylosin, tiamulin, erythro-
mycin, tilmicosin, spiramycin, carbomycin, leucomycin, oleandomycin, clindamycin and
lincomycin. They are variably absorbed from the GI tract and well distributed in the body
They are primarily eliminated via metabolism in the liver. Toxicity is low and is confined
to the GI tract. In some mammals some of these drugs have caused a fatal enterocolitis,
but this has not been reported in birds, in which they are generally considered to be safe
antibacterials with a high therapeutic index.
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol (Appendix Table 1.6) is lipid soluble so it is widely distributed in the
body, including the CNS and eyes. It is metabolised in the liver and is potentially toxic
for several liver functions (neonates are particularly susceptible to toxicity). Also poten-
tially toxic for the bone marrow it is excreted via the kidneys. There is known to be a
wide variation in the pharmacokinetics amongst different species of bird. Oral absorption
is erratic. Its use in birds is probably best avoided.
aplastic anaemia even with mild cutaneous contact. Therefore always wear surgical gloves
when handling.
The potentiated sulphonamides
The sulphonamides, when combined synergistically with the dihydrofolate reductase inhib
itors baquiloprim and trimethoprim, are active against a wide range of bacteria and some
protozoa (Appendix Table 1.7). They are well distributed in the body's tissues. Excretion
is primarily via the kidneys but there is also some degree of hepatic metabolism which
varies with the species. Usually five parts of sulphonamide are combined with one part of
trimethoprim or baquiloprim. They have few toxic side effects but, like all sulphonamides,
will crystalize in the kidney if used in dehydrated birds. Occasionally cause irritation and
(Continuedon p.237)
Appendices
231
 Not recommended for use in 
[Continved]
Extremely nephroloxic.
monitoring of treatment
This is the parenteral
 it is very
most avian cases.
allhough it is
nephroloxicily.
βlactams,
Comment
Gram-, parlicularly
Baclerioslalic only
Activity
1g/2l drinking water, 3-5
10-20mg/kg q 8-12hr -
1-2mg/kg q 8hr - ralies,
2.5mg/kg q 8hr -raplors
pheasants, emus, cranes
5-10mg/kg q 4hr -pigeons
 solution intranasal q 8hr
10-30mg/kg q 8-12hr
q6-12hr
raplors
waler - canaries
5mg/kg q 8hr -
 most species
except emus
sss
psillacines,
Dosage
Administration
 intranasal
p.0.
1.m.
i.m.
i.m.
1 g sachels licensed for
Injeclion as the sulphale
 40mg/ml mulidose vicl
A soluble powder for
solution in drinking 
use in pigeons
Appendix Table 1.4 The aminoglycosides.
Formulation
water
Generic and Trade Names 
Amikin [Bristol-Myers]
Speclam soluble
(s ]
Amikacini
232
Appendices
Auo asn joj papuawwosay
infeclion in which very
Has been associaled with
 Pseudomonas sppl
Licensed for poullry
licensed for poullry 
Toxic in ostriches
infections
Comment
Primarily of use against
Mycoplasma spp
 Similar lo amikacin
Saimonella spp
 25-30mg/kgq 12hr-raplors Gram+ speclrum
Activity
walerfowl
 35-50mg/kg q 12-24hr
 50mg/kg q 24hr - most
 2-5mg/kg q 12hr - mosl
10mg/kg q 12hr for 5-7
daily - most species
100mg/kg q 12hr -
waler - canaries 
days -raplors 
mosl species
25-50g/100l
psiltacines
raplors
species
Dosage
Adninistration
p.o.
100mg, 200mg, 500mg  p.0.
i.m.
P.0.
i.m.
P.0.
 Oral powder for addiion
 Soluble powder l g and
 50mg/ml suspension
100mg/ml injectable
drinking water
50g packs
 Formulation
bablets
solution
pack
Appendix Table 1.4 Conlinued.
IS-50 Water Soluble, Linco-
Generic and Trade Names
Lincomycin/Spectinomycin
Nebcin Injeclion [lilly),
Kantrim [Fort Dodge]
Tobralax [Alcan]
i.e. Apram [Elanco)
lincocin [Upjohn] 
Kanamycin
Lincomycin
Tobramycin
Apramycin
Appendices
233
 cranes the i.m. injeclion
sisisau anssl pasnnn 
 reported to have 
drinkers with a zinc
not add the oral
have been reported
Comment
三
8
Macrolides and lincosamides are
spirocheles and prolozoa [e.g.
 Bacleriostalic Brocder spechrum 
Staphylococcus aureus and
some anaerobes, some 
Aclive against Gram+, 
 only bacteriostalic
Mycoplasma spp.
han lylosin
Activity
25-50mg/kg q 24hr - mosl 
10-40mg/kg q 6-8hr - 
0- 400mg/1 drinking
40mg/kg q 24hr for 30
macaws inlracellular
waler - canaries
poullry, pigeons 
 most species
house finches
lreatmenis
infeclions
Dosage
250
8
55
Adninistration
1.m.
P.O.
p.0.
P.O.
Appendices Table 1.5 Macrolides and lincosamicles.
Oral powcler [as the
100mg/5ml and
larrate] 100g
 Oral solution for
reconshilulion 
suspension
Formulation
50ml phial
Powder for 
Injechion
pack
phial
Generic and Trade Names 
Tylan, Tylan Soluble
Denegard [Fermenta),
Tiamutin [Novarlis]
Powder [Elanco]
Zithromax [Pfizer]
Tiamufin fumorate
Azithromycin
Tylosin_
234
Appendices
for orthopaedic surgery.
 Intramuscular injeclion has 
ancerobes in raptors
 2-10 limes more aclive
been associaled with 
Hos been used by the
than lincomycin.
muscle necrosis
author lo treat 
Comment
elffecis.
Parliculcrly useful for Gram+
anaerobes, baclericidal for
Streptococcus
 Gram+ spechrum
Activity
Ol   
 50mg/kg q 24hr- passerines 
 25mg/kg q 24hr-passerines 
125mg/kg q 8hr - pigeons
lreat
jsoW =
200mg/ drinking water
100mg/kg q 12hr for 7
days treal, 5 days off
525-800mg/ drinking
 days - most species
 days - psiltacines
24hr - passerines
most species
b by/6w0z-0
passerines
- pigeons
canaries
species
abDsoa
Administration
p.0.
i.m.
250mg and 500mg p.0.
i.m.
a
 2ml and 4ml
 Formulation
 injectable
lablet
Appendices Table 1.5 Conlinued.
Generic and Trade Names
Erymycin 100 [Bimeda]
Amimycin, Matromycin,
Anlirobe [Upjohn],
Dalacin [Upjohn]
Romicil Pfizer]
Oleandomycin
Clindamycin
Erythromycin
Appendices
235
 The analogue florfenicol is less
when penetralion of the
It is antagonisic to the β
become useful in avian
medicine.
Comment
and Samonella spp, but not 
Pasteurefla spp.
Activity
- ralites, may be given s.c. or
60-100mg/kg q 8hr - pigeons
may be given i.v.
may be given i.v.
 species, 
raplors,
Dosage
i.v.
Administration
1.m.
 300mg and 1.2g
reconslilultion
Powder for
Appendix Table 1.6 Chloramphenicol.
Formulation
Generic and Trade Names
Chloromycelin Succinale
Chloramphenicol
[Parke-Davis]
Raplors with Sarcocystispp infeclion
p.o. administralion, but not after
 ltreat for at least 6 weeks.
parenlal administralion.
Comment
 Reported to be effeclive
Generally not effeclive
agginst Mycoplasma
gallisepticum and E. 
somelimes only
Many oher formulalions of corimoxazole are available; thse listed cbove are he most pplicable lo avin medicine.
Activity
Iz uoy aiow shayin pun 
days treat -
400mg/kg feed - geese
.5ml of 1.1 ml dose per
- poulry [Coccidia]
% tablet per pigeon
 20mg/kgq 12hr
days of age 
pigeon
a60so0
2
6
8
Adninistration
p.0.
P.O.
p.0.
p.0.
P.0.
P.0.
e100g
 Sulphaquinoxaline 500mg/g
Sulphadiazine 50mg and
10mg per
 sulphamethoxazole
cnd trimethoprim 
Trimethoprim and
lrimethoprim
 Oral powder
 Formulation 
 dose of 1
 Suspension
lablet
Baclrim (Roche],
preparalions
[Mycopharm]
Generic and
Trade Names
[a6pog
Devoprimh
olher
2
Appendices
237
necrosis at the site of injection. To be effective both parts of the combination are at
optimal levels in the tissues. Since their pharmacokinetics differ it is essential not to use
sub-therapeutic doses.
The baquiloprim preparations have not yet been used much or assessed in birds, but
may be more effective since the baquiloprim takes longer to be broken down and inacti-
vated in the body than trimethoprim - so frequency of dosing is likely to be less.
The Hluoroquinolones
This fluoroquinolone group (Appendix Table 1.8) includes norfloxacin, ofoxacin, per-
foxacin, enrofloxacin, ciprofloxacin and marbofloxacin. They are widely distributed in
body tissues, including intracellular tissue. They undergo some hepatic metabolism and
are excreted via the kidneys. They have low toxicity but can cause occasional GI distur-
bance due to reduction in GI flora. An additional clinical sign associated with GI side
affects is anorexia.They have potential neurological side effects so do not administer to
birds with CNS signs. They are known to cause articular defects in joint cartilage and
feather development problems in growing pigeons. They are antagonistic to tetracyclines,
macrolides and chloramphenicol. They are bactericidal, acting by blocking bacterial
DNA synthesis.
Anti-mycobacterial drugs
Treatment of tuberculosis in birds is not recommended because of the serious zoonotic
hazard and the increasingly frequent resistance of mycobacteria to available drugs.
However, in the case of a particularly valuable bird or an insistent owner who appreciates
 the hazards, treatment may be justified but does require skilled management with constant
monitoring. The dosage range is based on the treatment combination used. There are cur-
rently at least ten different drug combinations to treat avian mycobacteriosis (Appendix
Table 1.9).Always verify the drug dosage within the specific treatment combination
selected.
Antifungal drugs
Antifungal drugs are used for the treatment of aspergillosis, yeast infections, candidasis,
cryptococcosis, sporotrichosis, blastomycosis and histoplasmosis.
Compared with antibacterials, it is difficult and time-consuming to carry out antifungal
sensitivity testing. In addition:
● Many tests are not standardised
· They are expensive
· They take a long time before results are known
● Many antifungals look good when tested in vitro but turn out to be poor when used in
vivo
Therefore antifungal drug use is largely empirical. There are hundreds of strains of
Aspergillus spp with varying pathogenicity. Many antifungal agents often work best in
combined with amphotericin or flucytosine (this second combination is best if CNS
involvement is suspected).
Most of the antifungal drugs listed bere (Appendix Tables 1.10 and 1.11.) are only
fungostatic and therefore fungal infections require much longer treatment periods than
those prescribed for antibacterials. Aspergillus spp infections are often systemic, but fungal
hyphae may be identifed in locally concentrated granulomas, where the ability of the drug
t0 penetrate the lesion is important for therapeutic effectiveness.
238
Appendices
hestinal absorplion
has a bilfer laste.
 50mg/ml suspension can
 Eliminated more rapidly in 
Fe,
 gaslrointeshinal tract
Al,
Material within the
f enrofloxacin.
LM UZ
solution.
Comment
-WD
A
 Bactericidal broad speclrum 
 Chamydophila psittaci
Activity
waler×5-10
X
广
Idrinking
 -turkeys [colibacillosis]
- ratites
.5-20mg/kgq 24hr -
waler
waler
canaries 500mg/l
waler - psillacines
..
bustards
12hr-
days-pigeons
chickens,
raplors,
species
abDsoq
days
15
1
P.0.
P.0.
P.0.
p.0.
p.0.
Appendix Table 1.8 The fluoroquinolones.
uoumy] laqo bwoos
 preparations only]
 50mg/ml aqueous
 400mg lablels
lormulation
Formulation
Generic and Trade
Bayiril [Bayer)
Enrofloxacin]
Enrofloxacin
Norfloxocin
Names
Appendices
239
May produce gastrointestinal side efects.
 Originally produced for the hreatment of
asnps Aow puo slxoojoday aq Aow 
 See loxicily of he aminoglycosides
Use with ethambutol and rifabulin
Visual side-elfecis in humans, not
Human anti-tuberculosis drug.
 gastrointestinal disturbance.
Human anli-tuberculosis drug.
 gaslrointestinal dislurbance.
 documented in birds.
Human drug.
Comment
leprosy.
43-45mg/kgq 24hr 
 55-85mg/kg q 24hr
1.5-4 mg/kg q 24hr
10-15mg/kgq 12hr
15-30mg/kgq 24hr
15-45 mg/kg q 24hr 
15-20mg/kgq 12hr
80mg/kg q 24hr
15mg/kg q 12hr
30mg/kg q 24hr
30mg/kgq 12hr
5mg/kgq 12hr
Dosage
Administration
Route of
P.O.
0.0.
p.0.
p.0.
p.o.
p.o.
p.0.
p.o.
i.m
p.0.
p.0.
i.m.
100mg/5ml, 200mg/5ml oral suspension 
 p p p p ol  x
250mg, 500mg tablels 125mg/5ml
15mg, 50mg, 150mg tablels
150mg, 400mg lablels 
100mg /ml injectable
 250mg capsules
150mg capsules
 500mg tablels
300mg tablels
Formulation 
Rifabutin Mycobulin (Pharmacia]
Azithromycin Zithromax [Pizer]
Clarithromycin Bicaxin [Abboll]
Clofazimine lampreme [Geigy]
Ciprofloxocin Cipro [Bayer]
Cycloserine Seromycin [Illy 
Enrofloxocin Baylril [Bayer]
Isoniazid Niazid [Duramed]
Generic and Trade Names 
Rifampin Rifadin [Hoechsl]
 Myambutol [lederle]
240
Appendices
The imidazoles are listed here (Appendix Table 1.10) in order of their discovery and also in order of decreasing toxicity and increasing effective-
ness. Only those of current importance in avian therapeutics are discussed in detail: miconazole, enilconazole, econazole, clorimazole, ketocon-
which there are many hundreds are
dislributed in the body's lissues, but
.
food or fruit juice or dissolved - one
Aapim pun o'd paqiosgo Apoa
enzymes are somelimes elevated it
during lrectment. Ioke core if used
More toxic than later imidazoles.
Very soluble,readily absorbed p..
would be wiser lo monitor these
with_potentially nephrotoxic drugs.
宣
- therefore usually only
 in the body
reporled in humans]. Since liver
can cause hepatocellular
porentiafly hepatoroxic drngs.
Also possibly teratogenic.
with other anlifungals.
2-3 weeks.
Widely distributed
CNS.
xa
Comment
used for
water].
JOUN
豆
azole, fluconazole and itraconazole. All are absorbed with varying degrees of effectiveness from the GI tract.
yeasts
1 vilro x 100 more
Excellent against
against
Aspergillus spp
polent than
aclivily
Activity
10-30mg/kgq 12hr x 30-60
 50mg/kg/day - loucans
 days - most species
most species
saieads jsou - saop
100mg/kg soff food -
 days - pigeons
Gouldian finches
[cand idiasis]
[cand idiasis] 
days -
abDsoq
Administration
p.O.
P.0.
 slighily acid
200mg tablels 
 Formulation
media
Appendix Table 1.10 Imidazoles.
Generic and Trade Names 
Ketoconozole Nizoral
The imidazoles 
[anssen]
[Roerig]
Appendices
241
J0
ilraconazole therapy alfecis African
Irecaiment, therefore other ontifungal
nebulisalion at 1 : 10 dilution with
. Given for 5
mammals. Mosily used in birds at
wice weekly for 5 weeks. Palient
needs slrict supervision throughoul.
Well absorbed if taken with food.
10mg/kg q 24hr x 30 days +.
 lopically on lesions in air sac.
parlicle size of 5-10μ. 
Anliungal agent wih
 5-10 x more polent
 han keloconazole
 broad spechrum 
dermalophyles
aclivily
17mg/kgq 24hr x 29 days -
10mg/kgq 12hr × 35 days
2mg/kgq 24hr × 5 days -
10mg/kg q 24hr - other
falcons [aspergillosis]
psiltacines [aspergillosis,
, then q 48hr
si - y/01-g
canaries [cutaneous
: 10-1: 100 dilulion -
dilution q 24h × 
prophylaxis)
 candidiasis]
-macaws
 penguins
parrols
sAop
1mg
[intralracheal]
P.o.
p.0.
i.1.
p.0.
i.1.
cherry flavoured]
sansdos bwool
[peppermint or
 Also oral liquid
100mg/ml
 solution [(Schering-Plough]
Voriconazole Vfend [Pfizer]
dtraconazole Sporanox
[Janssen], Clinafarm
[anssen]
[Sterwin]
therefore
Turkeys
megabacleriosis
Not well absorbed po., iriltant if
norma
Not absorbed fom Gl ract. To b
effeclive must come into direct
no pog ym paxiw you sg
and raplors excrele the drug 
he liver. Not thought to be
xcreled
mammals, nevertheless
personal communicationj.
monitor kidney funclion.
the
 injected i.m. or
Beccuse the pH of
other media.
more rapidly.
arrhythmia
Comment
Causes
Give
acid :
一
Aspergilus spp resistance
Broad speclrum, aclive
yeasts,
ornithogaster
 Aclive against
Activity
300,0001U/kgq 12hr × 7-14
1.5mg/kgq 8hr x 3-7 days -
1mg/kgq 8-12hr - raplors, 
0.2ml q 12hr x 10 days -
budgerigars
days - most species,
psiltacines [tracheal
finches
[megabacteria]
-ralifes
most species
granulomas)
canaries,
Dosage
10
i.. [intrahracheal],
nebulisalion
direct into air
Slow i.v.
P.0.
p.o.
Appendix Table 1.1l The polyene anifunggals.
 5mg/ml injeclion 
Formulation
The polyene antifungals 
Drug and Trade Names 
Nystatin [Bristol-Myers
Amphoteracin-B
in the body:
Since may
have an adverse effect on the
May cause slight
May be virucidal
clmost unchanged.
:marrow,
herpes virus].
cuthor in
bone
b
syslemic fungi except in
combination with oiher
anlifungals.
bodyweightq 24hr
 finches 2.6-6.6ml/l
 75-100mg/kg q 6hr - most
drinking wcalter - psiltacines
4 days -
0.05% [0.5ml or 500mg/]
psiltccines, mynahs
14
12hr
idiasis)
[candi
Drinking waler 
chlorhexid ine,
markeled as an
 500mg lcblels
cnliseplic
[Roche]
244
Appendices
A large number of parasites infect birds: nematodes, cestodes, trematodes, protozoa and arthropods. Parasitic infection varies geographically
intermediate host is absent. However nematodes, e.g. Ascaridia spp, Syngamus trachea, are common and found in many species of bird, particu-
how it remains in suspension has
fow
species
in sheep,olherwise when used at
Even at this 
Res istant
andsome
pasoppapuaweosai a
not been shaled.
morobousforks
mebendazole, oxfendazole, oxibendazole and thiabendazole. Only those that are relatively safe to use are listed below.
Comment
Ovicidal. Also aclive 
Activity
 x 
20-100mg/kg once - most
 - oslriches
-psillacines
raplors [microfilaria,
chickens
pigeons
temalodes]
x5days
Dosage
days
83
P.O.
2.5% [(25mg/mll oral
larly those kept in outside aviaries.
 Formulation
suspension
Anti-parasitic drugs 
enbendazolePanacur
Generic andTrade
[Hoechst]
lame
Appendices
245
for ostriches. Use best
although it has been used in the
Toxic to ratites, ducks ond cranes
Not a very safe dug for birds,
 poullry and gamebirds.
licensed is not documented.
Isod
puD
Gl roundworms,
Roundworms,
 capsule per pigeon over
- raplors
X
7-14 days
100-500mg/kg once - most
formulated in
12hr x 5 days
gq 24hr x 3-5
repeat in 21 days
 body weight
- partridges, pheasanls 
-raliles
 months of age
 pheasanis, cranes 
leed
10-14 days -
mg/kgq
-raptors
6x/6w9-g
6y/6w0g
24hr
sApp
25
产
pooy u!
p.o.
p.0.
incorporation
incorporalion infeed
 25mg/g oral powder
1.2%
lo uisuadsns s
suspension
#
capsules
300ml
pack
Thibenzole [Merck]
Wormex [Hoechst]
[anssen - Cilag]
Mebendazole
when the drug has been injecled [i.m or s.c] at doses
sy - sasop ex sop l Aiaa w'! yz bby/buz
Hos o fow theropeuric index - loxicily has occurred
macaws, budgerigars, lovebirds, pigeons and ibis.
normal. It does not elevate normal funclional T-cell
body lissues for long periods, therefore, frequent 
 drop onlo the
elfeclive against air sac mite.ls rapidly absorbed,
fruit for24hr before
 immediately, therefore best 
auo
6-8hr only.
leave birds without waler or 
 out unless used
Comment
levels.
intestinal
ecloparasilic
miltes. Not ovicidal.
nemalodes, adul
and larval forms.
, air sac mile,
 Effeclive against
Cnemidocoptes
againsh
some coccidia.
Broad specirum
 anliparasilic
invertebrale
undworm,
rasites, 
intestinal
elfeclive 
Activity
SPP;
×
psiltacines, passerines,
 264-396mg/ drinking
 most species, pigeons
One lablet of 20mg per
0.2mg/kg repeat in 14
0.8-1.0mg/l drinking
days -
water - canaries
raplors
pigeon
Dosage
ralites
8
Administration
p.o.
S.C.
,100ml pack
 Note ihe injeclable
oral preparalions
Other metazoan antiparasitics
.5% [75 mg/ml]
for injection for
tablets for
500ml phicls
Formulation
pigeons
fion,
vary
20mg h
Generic and Trade
Nilverm (Pitman--
Tramisol
lvomec [Merial] 
evamisole
 vermectin
Name
Tablels are not soluble, must be suspended in waler or
Death hos occured in pigeons and some Anseriformes
For use in Gliformes cnd Anseriformes, bul do not
A fairly safe drug but can be loxic if the dose is
vegetable oil and then mixed in food.
ot recommended doses.
mixed in mash.
use in porrots.
Tapeworms. May slop
 adult tapeworm.
Aclive against
lapeworms.
 220mg/kg repeal in 10-
- most species
 - oslriches
100mg/kg repeat in 14 
4 days -
14 days - raplors
7.5mg/kg - oslriches
35mg/kgq 24hr × 2
cranes
weeks - finches
 250mg/kg once --
days - pigeons
most species
10-14 days -
gamebirds
needed -
wclerfowl
gamebirds
sAop
45-
p.o., i.m., s.c.
p.o., i.m.
feed
D.O.
p.0.
P.0.
Tablet conlaining
niclosamide
Piperazine
10g sachet
0.5g of
phial
Piperazine Biozine
Droncit [Bayer]
[aog] unsw
laboralories]
Niclosamide
248
Appendices
Licensed for use in poulry and in
culochhonous micro-organisms
the Gl Iract and so produce 
 deficiency in the host.
in cranes and Gallformes.
slrains can develop after
repealed use.
Comments
hiamine 
 Eimeria spp of coccidia 
Activity
 25mg/kg/day - pigeons
 200mg/l drinking water
60mg/l drinking water
 lrealments - walerfowl,
xbby/
5-10mg/kg q 24hr.
 days - raplors
days - cranes
most species
- cranes
Dosage
3
5-1
p.o. by adirion lo
"salsouodopue lpozoloid isujobo esn joy sbna tl'l alqpl xipuaddy
 drinking waler
Administration
Route of
p.0.
sasnndopua lpozoioud ysupbn asn lo shnua s
hydrochloride BP
[112ml enough to
BP and aqueous
 Amprolium hydro.
ireat 30 pigeons]
vehicle to 100%
amprolium
2.5mg tablels
Formulation
Waler
Clazuri Appertex [Janssen]
[M.S.D.], Corid [Merck] 
AmproliumAmprol Plus
Drug and Trade Name 
A relalively safe drug, but moy be
waler intake, and therefore dose 
 death. in lories and mynahs.
necrosis at site of injeclion.
penelrales all body lissues,
 herapeulic index. Ioxic for
Well absorbed orally and 
Not as safe a drug as
use /2 nomof dose.
Comment
laken.
and
hexamiliasis, giardiasis,
 anaerobic bacteria
Effeclive agginst
lrichomoniasis,
anaerobes
Activity
'suoa6id - sop zx yz-zl b6y/6woz-0l
 Gouldian finches
[Cochlosoma
900mg/l drinking water × 10 days, followed l
 canaries
[reatment for Irichomoniasis]
- psiltacines
walerx
psiltacines, gamebirds 
psillacines
800mg/c
Dosage
X
Administration
Route of
I.m.
P.O
P.0.
Appendix Table 1.15 Nilromidlazoles.
 200mg lablels
puo Aiujnod u!
0.5% solulion
11o 6y/600
 addiion to
 Formulation 
Nitromidazoles
[Rhone-Merieux]
Metronidazole
Emlryl soluble
Trade Names
Dimetridazole
Generic and
250
Appendices
(Appendix Table 1.16) may be effctive against the blood protozoan parasites sometimes found in birds,
Ay m jo a iny u aossp
membranes lo lurn yellow. Best used
Used in penguins. Used in conjunclion
Folic acid anlagonist, therefore effecls 
 combinalion with primaqu ine.
supplemented with folic or folinic
 Bitter taste, so crush tablet and 
Hepatoloxicily a concern with
Iact. May cause mucous
with chloroquine.
overdosage.
psiltacines.
Comment
acid.
dds unos
Plasmodium spp
Toxoplasma spp.
Plasmodium spp:
Atoxoplasma spp
Sarcocystis spp
Aclive against
 Aclive against
 Aclive against
'spnq paodu u aqissod - souosouedn suaaoued aq nou Aeu - ds snaaoudoua yds
Activity
.25-0.5mg/kg q 12hr x 30 days -
 25mg/kg body weight, then 15mg/
0.5mg/kg q 12hr × 14-28 days -
7.5mg/kg q 24hr x 7-10 days -
- sop exyz b by/bwco
mg/kg feed - gamebirds
24hr -
Tlowl
days - pigeons
Ohr
abosoq
spp]
Appendix Table 1.16 Anli-malaricl drugs licensed for human use.
Administration
Route of
Antimalarial drugs licensed for human use
P.O.
P.O.
p.0.
 5ml ampoule 
25mg, 12.5mg 
Anti-malarial drugs used in man (
 7.5mg toblels
100mg tablels 
Formulation
tablets
Chloroquine phosphate
Phosphale [Sanofi]
Generic and Trade
Aralen [Sanofi]
Fansidar [Roche]
 Alabrine [Sanofij]
Pyrimethomine
Quinacrin HCI
Maloprim
Wellcome)
Appendices
251
Safe and effective. Brush out
Safe and effeclive. Brush out
excess from hand-held bird.
Contains carbamale propoxur.
Useful for fly-blown wounds.
preparalion may damage 
Do not use the spoton
preparafion.
Comments
plumage.
 neurolransmilters in all
 exlernal parasites
Aclive against all 
Aclive against all
Aclive against all
ecloparasiles
 ecloparasites
ecloparasites
Blocks GABA
Activity
 colton wool moislened with
m saoa adim Ayi
 External cpplicalion Dust onto feathers
 Externcl applicalion  Dust onto feathers
 External applicalion Dust onto feathers
Dosage
spray
 External application
Administration
Route of
w/v sulphanilamide
Powcler with piperonyl
3% w/v coumaphos
pyrethrins 0.113%
sasnndoipa isuinbn asn la shn
 Powder containing
sap A/ m % 
 Powder containing 
'%80 apixonq
0.25% solulion in
alcoholic spray
Appendix Table 1.17 Ectoparasilics.
 Formulation
/M
2%
Drug and Trade Names 
Derris 2% [Vet Drug)
Frontline [Merial UK)
Negasunt [Bayer]
Derris powder
Coumaphos
252
Appendices
May be used in birds that have no overt clinical signs in an aviary in which
licensed for use in UK in poulry. Before use consull manufaclurers cnd DEFRA.
Herpes viruses are intranuclear and so prolected by the cyloplasm of the cell
Animal Health Trust vaccine only cvailable to members of Duck Producers 
licensed for use in UK in poultry, not pheasants. May be effeclive against
aiadsa saiads asd aos u asn a m paa s
Intervet vaccine - Anseriformes/MlV may be used during outbreak.
 Amazon racheilis but there is a risk of an undesirable reaclion.
Very few species-specific vaccines for the many pox viruses.
Associated with granuloma formalion at injeclion sile.
positive cases have been idenlified.
from the body's humoral defences.
Effectiveness and Comment
ad ministralion.
Associalion.
cockaloos.
Only very few laxon-specific vaccines available for
Freeze-dried live virus powder for reconsliulion
Homologous vaccine [Maine Biological Lab]
 Also cellassocialed live vaccines available.
Homologous vaccine [Maine Biological Lab]
 Duck virus hepalilis [Animal Health Trust]
Acli/vaccPP [Maine Biological Lab]
reeze-dried for reconstitution
 Freeze-dried live vaccine
 Freeze-dried live vaccines:
Psillimune PDV [Biomune]
ILT Vaccine [Solvay]
Marexin [Ilntervet]
Md-Vac [Solvay]
Prophylactic protection against viruses 
Poxine [Solvay]
Living vaccine
Formulation
Vaccine
Duck virus hepalilis enterilis
Infeclious laryngotracheilis
Pacheco's virus of parrols
Marek's disease virus
Psiltacine Pox
Herpes viruses
Viruses
Pigeon Pox
Canary Pox
Pox viruses
owl Pox
Appendices
253
piid saads raa u aaa aq o nq aad u  u asn ig pasal
unsubstanliated immunily from available equine vaccine in avian species. Not
Emus, ecleclus parrols and palm cockaloos should be vaccinaled and boosled
Licensed for use in the UK in poultry. Do not use live vaccines in species other
oher avian species afer a specific diagnosis has been made. Consult the
Licensed for use in UK in calle, sheep and goals but may be effecive in
Thickened skin may be noted at vaccinalion sile.
Japanese 
mcnufaclurer and DEFRA before use.
licensed in the UK for use in pigeons.
 annually in endemic areas.
A notifoble disease in UK.
licensed for avian use.
use.
文
Live virus vaccine for addifion lo drinking waler
Inaclivated + oil adjuvant louping ilvaccine
1 [Maine Biological Lab) 
West Nile - Innovator [Fort Dodge]
Poulvac H52 and H120 [Solvay]
Columbovac [Solvay Duphar]
Hitchner Bi Nobiis(Intervel]
Newcavac Nobilis [lnterve]
Live freeze-dried vaccines
Hitchner Bi [Solvay]
Inactivaled vaccines
Colum Boval [Solvay]
AE-Nobilis (lntervet)
Nobivac [lntervel]
Paramyx[Harkers]
Inacli/vacPMV1
[Solvay]
[Pilman-Moore]
Inaclivaled virus:
Triple-E [Solvay]
AE-Vac
Eastern and western equine
Avicn infeclious bronchilis 
Avian encephalomyelilis
Newcastle disease virus
Pigeon parcamyxovirus
Paramyxo viruses
Corona yiruses
louping ill virus 
encephalifis
West Nile virus
Papova viruses
Arbo viruses
Polyomavirus
254
Appendices
Suggested routines for dealing with virus infections
1. For berpes virus infections only, use acyclovir tablets or suspension, e.g. Zovirax
(Wellcome Medical) at the rate of 80mg/kg 8hr (gavage) or 240mg/kg of feed.
 a) This drug blocks herpes virus DNA polymerase in infected cells.
b) Most effective in aviary outbreaks before clinical signs are recognised.
c) May be nephrotoxic so do not use in dehydrated birds or with other potentially
nephrotoxic drugs, such as the aminoglycosides or sulphonamides.
d) Do not use the injectable formulation.
e) Acyclovir may help in some pox virus cases.
sp / 0i dn ut7 b8y/u 0t07 jo ai asop 1e (reado1d uou) pior 2qtoos as 7
This, together with zinc, has a salutary effect on the immune response.
3. Ensure the diet is adequate, particularly in essential amino acids, vitamins A, E and B
and also zinc, e.g. use Ace-High (Vetark).
4. Treat secondary invaders and any concomitant parasitic infection.
5. Practice strict aviary bygiene, noting the modes of transmission and possible latent
carriers.
a) Use a fogging machine with F10 in closed aviaries.
6. Idoxuridine blocks the replication of some DNA viruses.
a) Use Idoxuridine, Idoxene (Spodefell), 0.5% eye ointment.
b) A little applied to the eye of herpes virus infected birds may help to improve the
condition of the eyes and encourage the bird to feed.
c) May also help in some pox virus cases.
7. Use chlorhexidine (Hibiclens/Astra Zeneca; see Polyene antifungals, p. 242) or F10
(Biocare) antiseptic, diluted 1:250 in drinking water.
Appendices
255
For chronic and debilitaling disease. Should not
[Continved]
I shimulation of sexual behaviour in the male.
be used in birds with liver or renal disease.
 Fasler acling dexamethasone product for head 
birds compared with mammals (Westerhof
salpingilis. Recommended when the
be used if there is liver disease.
 Polonged aclivly over 2 weeks.
Irauma, shock.
Comment
NSAIDs
For
0.02-0.1 mg/kg body weigh, used once 
days, then q 48hr × 5 days - most
2-4mg/kg q 6-24hr - most species 
Mixed in 50% solulion with DMSO
2-8mg/kg once - most species
0.4mg/kg once or q 3 weeks -
psilltacines, raplors,busards
species [anti-inflammatory]
 5 days for 2 months
2-8mg/kg once
most species
Dosage
ralites
only
Administration
s.c., i.m., i.v.
intracloacal
Route of
i.m., s.c.
i.m., i.v.
topical
S.C.
i.m.
I.m.
Appendix Table 1.19 Hormones for use in birds.
phenylpropionate/ml
 cqueous suspension
 4 mg/ml injectable vical
injection containing
10mg testosterone
injection containing
 A sterile oily injeclion 
25mg/50mg/ml
naburally occurring
 An oily solution for 
oily solution for
ourestersof
10mg/ml clear
prostaglandin 
lestosterone
Formulation
Generic and Trade Names 
Azium [Schering-Plough]
Dexadreson [lntervel]
Dexomethasone sodium
Durateston [Ilntervel]
Nandrolin [lntervel]
Androject [lntervel]
phenypropionate
examethasone
lutalyse [Upjohn]
Hormones
Testosterone
Nandrolone
phosphate
256
Appendices
cssocialed with the use of the drug it is not a
adjo sads yo u pu sipg
Used in conjunclion with calcium borogluconale
Relaxes ulerovaginal sphincler. User must wear
gloves for applicalion - lransdermal exposure
may have adverse hormonal effecls in humans.
Neurolic regurgitation in budgerigars. Also
some feather condifions involving excessive
ancesthesia. As a parlial anlidote lo
buuosiad snoioydsoudounbio
of oxytocin.
preening.
Comment
swans.
bird.
 palpadai aq Aow asop jamoll by/niz-s'
- sajnuw og b jpadai Aow by/nis-e
5-25mg/kg repeal q 4-6 weeks as
 0.02-0.1 mg/kg applied to the
1 mg/kg [0.02ml/30g) once
-psilfacines
needed - psiltacines
in 60 minutes] 
most species
Dosage
Administration
i.m., s.c.
lopical
1.m.
S.C.
i.m.
i.m.
S.C.
uoisuadsns snoanbn
600 μg/ml, 0.6mg/ml 
 25mg/ml, 50mg/ml 
10mg/ml aqueous
aqueous solulion
sterile solution for
10mg/ml solution
10IU/ml clear
suspension
 Formulation
injeclion
1a6 6ws'0
Appendix Table 1.19 Conlinued.
Generic and Trade Names 
Depo-Provera, Promone-
[C-Vet VP]
Aedroxyprogesterone
 Prepidi Gel [Upjohn] 
[Upjohn] Perlutex 
[Bimeda] [Abboll] 
[prostaglandin E2a]
Oxylocin [Buller]
Tardak [Syntex]
[Animalcare]
Dinoprostone
Oxytocin
Atropine
[Leo]
山
Appendices
257
very soluble. May induce moull in some species
loss of weight, convulsions and ulimctely death
obtained in the UK and funclions for diagnoslic
purposes as well, providing the piluitary gland
 than either keloprofen or flunixin cnd therefore safer. A
for birds that drink litle. The tablels are not 
syslemically. Has a marked euphorbic elfecl. A beller
 An NSAID. Using the oral formulalion, one drop of the 
Available in USA but not in UK. The related 
[2 jadoy aas aisabioun pioido ur 
parrotl. A relalively safe drug.
is normal.
Comments
-Amazon parrols, African grey
Up lo 100μg/kg q 24h every 3 days 
300mg/230ml drinking water
15μg/kg once - mos species 
 200 μg/kg orally q 24 hr
 2mg/kg q 24hr
200μg/kg once
 0.1IU - cockaliels 
Jy8 b 6y/bus
 20μg/kg q 24hr
abDso
1IU/kg
Route of Administration
waler oral,
in drinking
and mixed
crushed
in feed
i.m.
i.m.
i.m.
i.m
DJO
6nooL 6usoo
Joy unos bg
 50mg/ml injeclion
1.5% oral solution
 dispersible tablels
 20 μg tablet 
lablels
Formulation
20ml phicl
Appendix Table 1.20 Analgesics.
injection
15
[d   
Drug and Trade Name
Liothyronine sodfum
[Genzyme
Acetylsalicylic acid
Soloxine [Daniels
Thyroid stimulating
 Zenocarp [C-Ve)]
Terroxin [link]
Analgesics
Ingelheimj UK
Aceryf salicyic
ocid/Aspirin
Vet-2-Vel]
Melacam
Boehringer
Meloxicam
Butorphanol
[Aspirin]
258
Appendices
Commonly seen in budgerigars. Ofen cn
 Secondary thyroid hyperplasia due lo iodine
which it easily penelrates. Is iself an anli-
overall general improvement in aclivily
 As a palliative in the treatment of chronic 
Mucolyic. May help belter penelralion of
dexlrose injeclion at the same lime.
lammalory agent, helping in the
For lrealment of secondary thyroid
 For periods longer than a week.
Solvent dissolving many drugs and
some species and to humans.
seen
and plumage is s
in budgerigars.
deficiency.
lreatment.
Comment
1970).
0.33-1.0ml (66-133 mg]/kg body
0.5-2ml [50-250mg]/kg by slow
.01-0.03 ml [2mg-6mg]/30g 
Ap sasop e jo z ou papip 
 Dilute by adding 2 parts to 28
intravenous injeclion lo effect 
walter - use for 3 weeks
100-200mg/100 ml
1 mg/kg q 4-7days
weight
Dosage
bird
in drinking water
in drinking waler
alffecled area
Administration
 Topical to
Route of
i.m.
i.m.
S.C.
'spq ui esn joy shnp snuoesw iz'l aqpi xipuaddy
20% sterile solution for
 injeclion [200mg/ml]
Joy uogos jbg
Lugol's iodine BP 
10% [100mg/ml]
Formulation
injection 
producl]
50% w/w
Miscellaneous drugs
Bromhexine hydrochloride
Drug and Trade Name 
Bisolvon [Boehringer]
Calcvim boroguconate
Dimethylsuiphoxide
Lugol's iodine
Potassium iodide
Sodium iodide
[Syntex]
odine
Appendices
259
to Form silver chloricde when bleeding has
Breaks down the polysaccharide hyaluronic
 For non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in
Used as an allernalive lo lubocurarine as a
 parasympathelic conirol [as in mammals].
Used for ingluvial inlommation cnd gastric
[Continved]
dilalion of the pupil [mydriasis], since in 
 Peripheral vasodilator used for idiopathic
han the above drug in the treatment of
 psiltacines, parlicularly budgerigars.
reclment of wing lip oedema [Forbes,
 Arteriodilator working predominanily on
ceased, to neutralise the cauterising
 conneclive lissve. Disperses fluids.
wing lip oedema [lewis, 1993].
To arrest minor haemorhage.
Bronchod ilator.
ulceralion.
action.
[995].
Dissolve V4 tablet [0.62mg] in one
 for 15 minutes until pupil dilates
V and give on
4-5 mg/kg q 6-12hr - most 
Reconsliute in 2.5ml waler
 25mg/kg body weight
 5-10mg/kg q 24hr
species, psilltacines
 allernale days 
 Split tablet in 
ralites
litre
 Apply to points
haemorrhage
Oral in drinking
Apply lopically
lo bleeding
injeclion site 
of minor
 Oral in food 
500lU per
water
Topical
P.0.
i.m.
Ampoule with 1,500lU for
105mg/5ml oral solution
 300mg/2ml injectable
30mg/g oral powder
 50mg tablels [small 
Stick or pencil
reconstitution
 2.5 mg tablels 
reconstitution
Ferric chloride solution BP also
 powder [non proprielary]
Glibenclomide BP (non
Viviltonin [Hoechst]
Vecuronium bromide
Navilox [Univel]
 Roxane [Walson]
Hyaluronidose BP
 proprielary]
Aminophylline
Silver nitrate
isoxsuprine
260
Appendices
recommended if palient has renal disease.
 Used for feather picking and sel-mulilalion 
Decreases blood ammonia levels. Used in
 cases of liver compromise. Adverse side
 A tricyclic anlidepressant used to hreat
 Trealment for cardiomyopathy. Not
 Absorplion rale of fluids significanily
Diurelic. Toxicily associcalted with
alfecis include diarrhoea.
inflammatory properlies.
 in psiltacine palienls.
improved.
Comment
 20-40mg/l drinking water - most
salsads isow - 1yzl b 6y/6w7-z
 34-40mg/l drinking waler - most 
150-650mg/kg q 8-12hr - most
 0.1-2.0mg/kg q 6-24hr - most
0.25-0.5mg/kg q 24-48hr -
16mg/l drinking waler
Amazon parrols
75-150IU/ fluids
psillacines
species
species
parrols
species
species
Dosage
2
Adninistration
p.o., s.c., i.m.,
spin o ppv
i.v., i.m.
P.0.
p.0.
p.0.
p.O.
p.0.
[tablets, liquid medicalion] 
 50mg/ml injeclable solution
2.5mg, 5mg, 10mg,
 10mg/ml injectable solution
150USP/ml hyaluronidase
Mulfiple oral formulations 
10g/15ml oral solution
10mg/5ml oral solulion
 once reconstituted
10mg/5ml syrup
Formulation
mg.
Appendix Table 1.21 Conlinued.
Diphenhydramine injectable
Injectable solution [Baxter]
Lactulose Solulion [Roxane]
[Pharmaceulical Associates]
Wydase [Wyeth-Ayerst]
Drug and Trade Name 
Diphenhydramine
Benadryl (Pfizer]
 Enacard [Merck]
Alarax [Roerig]
[Elkins-Sinn)
rosemide
fydroxyzine
octulose
Appendices
261
antibiolics, parlicularly if autochthonous flora is
 A probiolic specifially adapled for use in birds
under slress. Can be used simultaneously with
an aid in the realment of sress or infectious
oo wnios u ma siap a a pauisa 
To slop weight loss in severely ill birds. Provides
May be wasteful when mixed wilh seed. Needs
paai puy au o joddns u pi o do
short chain maltodexirin plus concenlrated
Vitamin A overdose is toxic and can produce
contains 150IU vilamin Ds/g. Valuable
skeletal abnormalities and damage lo
with other vitamin supplements.
prolein and amino acids.
liable to be alfected.
laying hen birds.
membranes.
Comment
porrots.
chick.
As
8
One scoop [provided 
Do not make up more
Follow direclions on
Follow direclions on
 0.5ml/kg supplying 
and other vilamins 
Make up 1:2 wilh
concentraled and
i.e.
rouline on pack
give orally by
500mg/kg body
wilh packj
gavage
waler
weight
Dosage
waler
pack
pack
Administration
 Orally in drink 
 Orally in food 
 Orally in food 
Routeof
 or food 
As above
 Orally
O
i.m.
Vitamins, minerals and nutritional supplements 
Iy 8l 'uaod 6z20 su 6g 42g
laclobacillus [2 species], Streptococcus 
less laclobacillus and contains glucose
 See makers' data and informalion sheels 
 See makers' data and informalion sheels
viltamins and minerals including zinc.
Waler soluble probiolic conlaining
amylase, prolease and cellulose;
wilh calcium:phosphorus ratio of
Powdered vitamin supplement v
electrolytes and vitamins
Appendix Table 1.22 Food supplemenls.
Formulation
40-50:1
of energy
Avipro Paediatric [Vetark]
Mulivitamin ond mineral
Emeraid Criltical Care
Criticl Care Formula
[lafeber Co., USA]
Mulivitamin injections
Vionate [Squibb]
Ace-High [Vetark]
Nutrobal [Vetark]
Avipro [Vetark]
[Arnolds]
Drug
262
Appendices
Cockaliel paralysis/paresis syndrome and similar
May help in cases of haemorrhage. Can be used
 Uselul in cases of 
Best resuls obtained in the severely debilitated 
Avipro.
 May help to restore gut flora after antibiotic
but be careful not to overdose.
laxalive.
product readily available.
enleroloxins.Mild
hyaluronidase.
Comment
drops/0.3ml/30g
 20-40mg/kg q 24hr
,000IU/kg q 24hr 
2ml/kg body weight
bird, every third 
24hr x 14 days
10ml/kg q 12hr
.5-0.1 mg/kg q
 0.3 ml/kg q 24hr 
× 2-4 weeks
100g/kg daily
abDsog
Aop
s人op
s.c.,very slowly
Administration
by crop lube
in drinking
waler
i.m., s.c.
 Orally
i.m.
1.m.
1.m.
[DIO
See maker's dala and information shees
 68 mg α-locopheryl acelale, 1.5 mg/ml 
liquid conaining 3.35g/5mlaculose
m/nloos'g kaowxoin  u
An injectable solution of electrolyies,
vilamins, amino acids and dexirose
 Contains lactobacifus acidophifus
 Human invalid foods that contain 
Ascorbic acid 100mg/ml
Fruit salad, tropical fruit
selenium injection
 2 mg/ml injeclion 
50,000IU /ml
2ml ampoule
Formulation
Appendix Table 1.22 Conlinuedl.
Mutivitomin oral drops
Abidec [WL, human
A, B group, C and D
Duphalyte [Duphar)
Viltesel [Norbrook]
Konakion [Roche]
 Duphalac [Duphar]
[non-proprielary]
Phytomenodione 
(synthetic vitamin
Ro-A-Vet [Roche]
Natural yogurt
Health Foods]
VitaminE
Vitamin C
VitaminK
VitaminA
actulose
Foods)
Milupa
Drug
Appendices
263
For impaclion of the cloaca ond egg binding.
For impaclion of the cloaca cnd egg binding.
restlessness and excilement in some
Mild purgalive
Comment
birds
Comment
2mg/kg q 8-12hr - raplors,
0.5mg/kg 8-12hr - most
 3ml/kg q 12hr or q 8hr
12.5mg/kg - raliles
up to 10ml/kg q 12hr 
waterfowl
 4ml/kg q 24hr
 5ml/kg q 24hr 
species
abDsoa
a6osoa
Route of Administration
 Route of Administration
i.m., i.v.
Oral per cloacum
Oral per cloacum
p.0.
e gel 1.93g 
Sodium bicarbonate BP 5% w/v
 Meloclopramide hydrochloride
Light kaolin BP 20% w/v
686
Sodium chloride 1.81g 
 30% solulion
Light kaolin 200mg/ml 
 Formulation
xide
Magnesiumchloride
Light kaolin 10.8g
Aluminium hydroxi
Pectin 4.3 mg/ml
Antidiarrhoeals without antibiotic 
15ml contains:
Formulation
Liquid parafin mineral oil
not have dliarrhoea.]
Kaogel [Parke Davis]
Sucrose in waler
Metoclopramide
Reglan [Robins]
BPC [Vet Drug]
SIat [lntervel]
Glycerine
Drug
BnJg
264
Appendices
To conlrol feather picking and seizures.
Poor muscle relaxalion. Often used in
For anaesthelic doses see Chaper 7
Clear, lcasteless, odourless fluid for the
Irealmenl of idiopathic epilepsy in
Treatment of idiopathic epilepsy in
combinalion toreduceviolent
 prolonged recovery.
plucking.
Comment
parrols.
parrots.
2.5-4.05mg/kg q 6-8hr - psilacines
20-50mg/kg - psillacines, pigeon
 0.5-1 mg/kg q 12hr - most species
sw - m p l-0
-mosl
5-30mg/kg - raptors [sedalion]
species [seizure control]
5-30mg/kg - waterfowl
-ostriches
 56mg/kg q 24hr
25mg/kg q 24hr
[sedation]
species
Dosage
Administration
p.0.
i.m.
i.m.
Sterile solution for injeclion
Crystals to be dissolved in
250mg/5ml suspension
10mg/2ml ampoules 
waler at the rale of
10mg/ml suspension
Formulation
Vetalor (Upiohn) Kelaset [Fort
Potassium bromide BP
Ketalar [Parke-Davis]
Dodge] [Aveco]
Rompun [Bayer]
 Sinequan [Pizer] 
Valium [Roche]
Primidone
Mysoline
Ketamine
Xylazine
daxo
Drug
Appendices
265
sfowly. lnjeclion s.c.may cause some
polydipsia/polyuria. May need to
 Sedative effecis variable. Small birds
will somelimes take high doses with
 cases of feather picking with
somelimes regress if the drug is
To slimulate breathing
used logether wilh EDTA.
use in cockaloos.
OCCUrS.
weeks.
week, rest 2 days and recommence 
0.1-0.15mg/kg q 12-24hr - birds
Aodsai saloads jsow - by/bwio
0.2mg/kg q 12hr - most species 
[dose increased in 0.01 mg/kg 
One drop in a small bird's mouth
Also 20-40mg/kg q 8hr
24hr [Cooke 1984]
weighing <1 kg 
for 3-5 weeks
depression]
寸
i.v., i.m., s.c.
i.m., i.v.
i.m.
 2mg/ml clear colourless and
Mulidose phials containing
A sterile solution conltaining
 odourless liquid 100ml
Oral drops and injeclion 
 20mg/ml doxapram
 50mg/ml in arachis oil
hydrochloride
 2ml ampoules
 Dopram-V [Willows Francis]
 Sodium calcium edetate BVC
Ledclair [Sinclair]
Haldol [McNeil]
Haloperidot BP
[Vet Drug]
266
Appendices
APPENDIX 2 BACTERIAL DISEASES OF BIRDS
It is important to note that a number of these diseases are zoonotic and that the symp-
toms of many of them in humans are identical to those of flu and may not appear until
several weeks after exposure. These diseases have been marked as zoonoses in the tables
that follow. Anyone who has contact with birds and subsequently becomes ill should
consider zoonotic infection as a possibility.
NB: In Appendices 2-7 all infectious diseases are numbered and prefixed by a letter, B
for Bacterial, M for Mycological, P for Parasitic, V for Viral, etc. This is to make cross-
reference easier.
A useful website for general information covering all aspects of infectious disease is
http://pathmicro.med.sc.edu/mayer.
Table 2.1 does not necessarily include all the diseases affecting poultry.
Enterobacteriaceae
These bacteria are mostly Gram- rods. Pathological strains all produce endotoxins and
most can cause septicaemia.
In many infectious diseases of birds, both bacterial and viral, the clinical signs are not
pathognomonic and the disease can only be diagnosed on post-mortem and subsequent
laboratory examination. In the case of viruses, infection may have occurred some consider-
able time previously (months) although damaged cells and immune responses may remain
impaired after this primary infection so that the bird is open to secondary infection,
however the initiating virus may have disappeared from the body systems before other
pathogens such as Stapbylococcus, Streptococcus, Proteus, Pseudomonas and Corynebac-
 asvasp fo asn ad a sem zou aun inq srapea Areps se ioe dds ua
making a diagnosis please refer to the relevant organ system in Chapter 5.
Mycoplasmas
These organisms are now considered to be bacteria that lack a typical cell wall and
the Lactobacillus-Clostridium type bacteria which lost their cell walls. They may be
saprophytic, commensals or pathogenic parasites of the mucus membranes of respiratory
and genital tract of many vertebrates but also infect insect and plant species. Approxi-
mately half the genus Mycoplasma is limited to a specifc host with some animal hosts
harbouring both commensal and parasitic forms. In most cases, cholesterol is required
from their animal host for the growth and stability of their cytoplasmic membranes. These
organisms are not stable in the environment and are susceptible to most antiseptics, but
are not affected by those antibiotics which disrupt cell wall development of normal
bacteria. There are over 100 species of Mycoplasma, only a few of which are listed as
causing disease. No doubt in time many more pathogenic species will be discovered.
Rickettsial infections
 Because these organisms are small, obligate, intracytoplasmic parasites they were once
classed with the viruses, but all are now known to be true bacteria that stain like Gram-
bacteria. Also, these life forms are able to make the metabolites necessary for growth and
have an ATP transport system (except Chlamydophila) which can therefore make use of
the host's ATP, so starving the host cell.
[Continued]
Differential Diagnosis
cofi [B3] and other
 Pseudomonas
[B4]
B13]
 Rapid slide
spp.
 Principal Clinical Signs 
subacule seplicaemic
enteritis.
subis
often localises in the
localised dermalilis 
in some parrols.
1disease
Pos-mortem [PM]
Sudden death 
cases shows
spleen.
Relative Occurrence
companion birds.
held in quaranline
may carry
Imported parrols
shrains.
stations
unusual
 Susceptible Species
when in winter
 Species wilhout
includ ing wild
and act as
flocks.
birds.
Appendix Table 2.1 Bactericl ccuses of disease.
under right
condifions.
rodenls,
Cause
S
No.
B1
B2
Disease
carrier
onella [B1)]
Differential Diagnosis
Possibly Sarmon
cullure
or waler supply.
Confirmation of
lsolation of the
and possibly.
Diagnosis
 Principal Clinical Signs 
anorexia,
liver
puo
leen, caseous
liver.
1
haemorrhagic.
SI
calarrhal or
eritonilis.
signs:
All species
1
many species some
6
secondary invader.
[oos ul apbodoj
contaminated
No.Cause
3
Appendix Table 2.1 Conlinued.
B3
B4
qeruginosaand
Colibacillosis
Disease
[Continved]
Posteurella [B1 2].
Other pathogens
，
[B1].
 invader lo
 Alcaligenes may also
faeces].
 Non-specific sick bird
death
[mortaliy high in
[often yellow 
seplicaemia.
May act as a
个
anorexia
hepalitis
damage.
signs.
PM
pass
lypical green urine.
finches
hachs.
s
ostriches.
Iransmilted to
 Probably all
walerfowl
humans.
domeslicaled and
often encapsulated
Both
nalural reservoir
Jo [sdol 
be
Pm os
hese
eiru
B6
Alcaligenes faecalis,
jejuni
Zoonosis
[Note:
An
 sac miles [P45] and
 Differential Diagnosis 
 lracheal mites which
spiral
[89]
Air：
Enterobacleriaceae,
moi6 Aai
1 selective cullure
Enterobacteriaceae.
 Confirmation of
Cullure of the
media for
Diagnosis
上
6
 Principal Clinical Signs 
. Signs 4-
 infection
anaemia, dyspnoea,
formes, and
and necrolic foci.
laddn jo suis
parlicularly
Young chicks
paralysis.
9
cm
 Susceptible Species  Relative Occurrence 
membranes.
 pun
Xow
puo spia
poultry.
immunosuppression
Citrobacter spp can
Aiopuosas asnibs
Borrelig anserine,
Cause
Appendix Table 2.1 Conlinuedl.
No.
88
Motile spiral bacteria
immunodeficient
Borrelliosis
 Non-classified
spirochceles
foecalis]
Disease
slained rounded end  Also olher paihogens
causing respiratory
 seplicaemia
Pseudoluberculosis
 seplicaemic signs.
9]
[B1
Tuberculosis [
E
May need to
fridge first. Negalive
smear
uberculosis.
rods.
6
live bird.
iliary necrolic
 changes with mulliple
and spleen
Inthe
pecloral
chronic condition
liver,
nasal discharge,
: seplicemic
enlarged.
severe
diarrhoea.
liver
PM:
rare
large flocks
 paddo-uado
ral
winter.
 crthropods
Posteurella
low temperalures
Large
 and die
conlaminate f
Pasteurella
 bupnpu!
waler.
umbers
Yersinia
veclors.
2
B11
human
3.
2
Diferential Diagnosis
hepaliis [V39],
disease
4
pleomorphic rods,
smear shows
which is
slender, rodlike
spleen or bone
Confirmation of
pleomorphic,
bacterium,
Diagnosis
 Principal Clinical Signs 
peritonitis
liver and
Usually acule death.
 in ihe air sacs.
liver,
 dead.
necrolic I
pelechiae.
mortalily.
Inspissah
Dullness
found
viaries, parlicularly
 Susceptible Species  Relative Occurrence 
 Only occasionally
Not uncommon.
winter.
Rarely
most common in 
walerfowl and
Many species.
poullry.
parrots.
parrols.
 in sea waler and
Carried
B14   Actinobacilus
Pasteurefla
B13Cytophaga
formerly
Cause
Appendix Table 2.1 Conlinued.
No.
New duck disease 
Actinobacillosis
Disease
Erysipelc
infections,
[Continved]
Or
Trauma.
 fansport med ium.
s p
shows a Gram+
oioads alnbai
shaped bacilli.
pasn s! 
OccUr.
produces
.Ancemia.
 Suspect
and thickened skin
with foci.
sistentulcerah
persistent
ulceralion or
granulomas.
 pappns
living in aqualic 
environmenis.
 sUsceplible.
from
sparrows,
have
Probably all
sUsceplible
sow aq
nalural
salpads au
Sodoi bubuaaors
environment ond
serovars. Shed in
fueces and urine.
subspecies and
Very
 infeclion is oral.
B17 Mycobacterium
A number of
u s
OCCUT.
ovium
veclors.
B16
disease, parlicularly
Treatment
 avian palients 
Mycobacterium
isteriosis
oonosis
Zoonosis.
Zoonosis
Differential Diagnosis
[N25]. In raplors,
chlorinaled
 coccidiosis.
alpha, bela and
Confirmation of
Diagnosis
loxin.
Principal Clinical Signs 
gastrilis in
in older
'anbuo
oshriches.
Relative Occurrence
ybnop
waer
6
1
 Susceptible Species
Gamebirds
free
s
pooy
u! punoy uixoi 
diet
items
paihiogen.
Cause
Jd
Appendix Table 2.1 Conlinuedl.
23
No.
sickness)
Disease
Viral dermalitis of
Other pathogens
 Culure lesions.
Localised loss of
heart muscle.
个
oedema,
sinusitis.
 subarclic regions.
Not uncommon.
Phecsants, diurnal
someparrot
Also
corvids.
sheep.
AAOU
xod q Aippuosas
Immunosuppression.
so ipo (saoy puo
mosquiloes.
epfcum
coryza.
B23
Haemophilus
respiralory
infeclions.
Differential
[P14] and
As above
As above
As above
As above
As above
jaddn
Histopathology on PM
samples of air sacs,
pidossopua pun
PCR,
 specialis
Confirmation of
Diagnosis
As above
As above
As above
As above
As above
since infeclion often
blepharilis, rhinitis,
infraorbital sinuses],
pathognomonic
associaledwilh
olher pathogens.
[swollen
serofibrinous
Iracheilis, air
asymplomalic.
These are not
conjunctivitis,
lameness.
coryza
As above
As above
As above
As above
 Relative Occurrence
worldwide where
logether. May be
Almost cerlainly
birds are kept 
intensively
wild birds.
crowded
As above
As above
As above
As above
As above
 Apart from poulry [in
other Mycoplasma
 Species Susceptible
serious problems]
dds ouspdos
(o z] ds
neslings of free
normally
anyoiher
Pigeons
membrane which
invader. Verlical
Possibly
M. gallisepticum
fansmission is
contained in
M.meleagridis
cofumborale
possible but
M. lipofaciens
with all
M.buteonis
mUcOUs
unusual.
iowa
Appendix Table 2.2 Mycoplasmas.
Cause
人ou
MMMM
No.
B25
No specific named
disease of birds
ds in the case of
pleuropneumonia]
Mycoplasmosis
calle bovine 
pneumonio]
alypical
Disease
Appendices
277
Differential Diagnosis
often together with
[Continved]
[V2], Herpes virus
lrichomoniasis,
Saimonellosis [B1]
 Avian influenza 
 ornithosis.
[V38].
 s ssm
liver. Stain modified
Examine macrophages
Macchiavello stain.
hrganism can be
isolated from fceces
 organism from
fueces and lissues.
Central Veterinary
Ziehl-Neelsen or
in stained blood
Confirmation of
carried out by
Diagnosis
 Serology.
smear.
Unthriffiness. Ocular
haemorrhage. One
somelimes serosal
necrosis.Molled
Principal Clinical
hepalomegaly,
Infected chickens
which are the
species of bird)
jou aln subis
may shed the 
palchy faint
T-sacculitis,
cyspnoea,
ricardifis,
cnd nasal
infection.
Signs
Not uncommon 
 Not uncommon 
Worldwide.
pigeons in 
Occurrence
in urban
Common
Europe.
Relative
 Species Susceptible
mammals, repliles
being susceplible.
Also infecis many
raplors. Besides
2
Also in owls and
humans infect
 and amphibian
Over 50 species
Anseriformes,
idenlified as 
parlicularly
psiltacines.
outer cell
species of
resistant.
mammal.
Rickeltsia-like DNA/
 make their own
energy parasiles.
environment and 
Ticks main source
RNA analysis
Coxiella burneti
infectionfor
jou q
[mainly
persist in soil.
Resist many
disinfectants.
oral route].
humans
Cause
Appendix Table 2.3 Rickeltsias.
No.
B26
B27
Q-Fever Zoonosis
psittacosis,
Ornithosis,
disease
Disease
278
Appendices
Diferentil Diagnosis
Chlamydophila
Macrorhabdus
[B26],
[B24].
 Small endocytoplasmic
Stain wilth Giemsa.
Confirmation of
inclusions in 
erylhrocyles.
Diagnosis
weakness, weight
death. Older birds:
 possibly jaundiced.
 enlarged liver and
PM:anaemia and
 Principal Clinical 
Young birds:
recorded.
anorexia,
spleen.
Signs
Mediterranean.
rickellsicas yet
Tropical and
sublropical
finches and
Occurrence
including
discovered.
regions
lracheal
Relative
 Species Susceptible
including ostrich.
documenled bul
probably other
 ald6ow pun
pheasanls,
susceplible.
most other 
Chickens,
imarily
rickellsias
Rickettsia
Rickettsii,
Cause
Appendx Table 2.3 Conlinued.
B28
B29
Rocky Mountain
 Spotted Fever
Aegyptianella
Disease
Appendices
279
APPENDIX 3 VIRAL DISEASES OF BIRDS
It is important to note that a number of these diseases are zoonotic and that the symp-
 toms of many of them in humans are identical to those of flu and may not appear until
that follow. Anyone who has contact with birds and subsequently becomes ill should
consider zoonotic infection as a possibility.
isnt ason nou pe pais are sanss ue un puno sasna siou ao an uo
found only in poultry. As PCR techniques are constantly and rapidly improving, many
more viral pathogens are likely to be documented and existing viral species will be subdi-
Ritchie (1995). See also list of Further Reading.
Herpesviridae
The Herpesviridae are thought to be a well-established old group of viruses that often
produce latent and persistent infections. They are enveloped, intranuclear, double-stranded
DNA viruses and replicate in the nuclei of epithelial cells, nerve tissue and B- and T-lym-
phocytes. They are therefore probably partially immunosuppressive.
280
Appendices
owl and pigeon
Sotmonell [B1],
[B26] infeclion,
Yersinio [B1 1],
may be some
belween falcon,
 Chlamydophila
herpes viruses.
[V25]
luberculosis
Candidiasis
Newcasile
Differential
bacterial
disease
Avian
[B17],
14],
[M2].
[B6]
Il is
organism by culure
may produce false 
The falcon, owl and
related serologiclly
Haemalology shows
 leucopoenia in all
Isolalion of causal
embryonaled
VN, ELISA and 
 Confirmation of
isolated alter 
culfivalion in
Diagnosis
cases.
 Ofen peracule; may be
 Principal Clinical Signs 
no premonilory signs.
anorexia.A non-
10 days is longer
han for other herpes
fthe
lethargy, anorexia,
stained faeces and
 spleen. Some
conjunclivilis and
swollen liverwith
severe depression
But the
viruses. PM: focal
green biliverdin
convulsions. PM:
Usually acute with
faintly moled,
saucer-shaped
necrolic areas.
lymph follicles
Temors→
bile ducl.
disease.
intestine.
 pup
Very often not
more common
introduced into
much
u paidsapm!
 distribulion.
birds
I colleclion.
hemisphere.
Occurrence
Worldwide
May be
northern
Relative
hang
carrier
from
The virus is specific
All Psiltacines, but
parrols seem lo
rpes
asymplomalic
carriers. In one
ecies (Phalen
isolated case,
psiltacine herp
wus isolated 
experimentally
PUOM PIO
t al. 2004).
raplors, bul
owls, some
pigeons and
on a 
mmalure
Species
flres up when
bird shressed/in
or from infected 
Asymplomalic
latent carriers.
Contaminated
Japm lo poog
Herpes virus.
caplivily.
pigeons.
Cause
No.
V1
V2
cnd 4 have similar
serolypes and can
psiltacine herpes
papillomas of the
psillcacine herpes 1
silltacine herpes
Psittacine herpes
Pacheco's parrot
genolypes of
virus are now
African grey
Falcon inclusion
body hepatitis
recognised:
give rise lo
carcinoma;
is newly
viruses
disease
parrols.
Disease
2
Appendices
281
[Continved]
As for falcon and
viruses logether
infeclion with
with pigeon
[V25]
owl herpes
Newcaslle
disease
Histopathology shows
fom the areas of 
intranuclear
and spleen.
oropharynx may look
Necrotic foci in liver,
membrane in pharynx
May be peracule wilh
Necrolic foci in the 
which can also be c
secondaryinvader.
Mainly respiralory-
necrolic foci in liver
dyspnoea,rhinifis,
  
Circling, torlicollis.
Focal diphtheroid
sudden death.
paramyxovirus.
conjunclivitis.
and larynx.
lungs.
 Squabs most at
 common than 
 epizoolics in 
May be more
some lofts.
generally
realised.
 Periodic
risk.
are in a separale
but falcons might
sUsceplible by
Believed lo occur
[barn, bay and
 also susceplible.
owls [i.e. mosl
owls] . Not in 
lhe Tytonidae.
lylonid owls
conlactwith
Pigeons
 Contaminated
laom jo pooy
Contaminated
feed or waler.
Another pigeon
herpes virus.
Herpes virus.
or infecled 
pigeons.
V3
V4
V5
Pigeon herpes virus
encephalomyelitis
paralysis of pigeons
hepalilis similar to
hepalosplenilis
virus may occurs
Owl herpes virus
hepatosplenitis,
s!boydosao
 third pigeon
[V4] above.
separale
falcons)
Contagious
(infectious
Infectious
282
Appendices
As above for the
 other herpes
virus infeclions
aviltaminosis A
mycoplasmosis
infraorbital
coryza [B25],
Newcasile
Diagnosis
visceral
sinusiltis,
infeclious
[V35],
 in diseased
 the early
slages. Growth of
inclusion bodies
ELISA tests.
Confirmation of
embryo. Virus
intranuclear
Eosinophilic
Diagnosis
三
punqy
lissue i
puD
 Principal Clinical Signs 
Acute: respiralory signs
Usually acute. Apathy
necrolic
membranes in upper
respiratory signs less
spleen,
hroughout gut in
with death in 2-3
membranes on the 
Both viruses cause
foci. Diphiheroid
 and diarrhoea.
miliary 
tract and
days. PM:
diphtherilic
 the liver,
necrosis.
cranes.
Worldwide, but
where rouline
carried out.
Occurrence
Worldwide
Relative
[Ciconidae],
canaries.
Cranes [Gruidae].
also be another
separate herpes
peafowl. May
pheasanls,
viral srain 
Susceptible
affecling
Chickens,
Species
white.
caplive birds.
Herpes virus of
Galliformes.
Two distinct,
unrelaled
viruses.
Cause
Appendix Table 3.1 Conlinuedl.
No.
67
V8
Stork herpes virus
Craneherpes
Infectious
Disease
Appendices
283
Avian influenza
avipox [V37],
 asnasip
Candida [M2],
riancholera
picorna virus.
influenza virus
Newcaslle
raplors but
 deficiency
Riboflavin 
[ccuses
Baclerial
(V21)1:
[V38],
[P14] 
Growth of the virus in
 combined with PM
Isolation of causal
chorioallanlois.
Clinical signs
 Swabs from
piclure.
lesl.
 paralysis leading lo
→ lumours of viscera,
Pseudomembranous
fracheilis with ocular
dyspnoea with rales
Dealh
from orifices. Acute:
and nasal exudate,
phalfus, inabiliy o
, which
lymphoid inflralion 
found dead. Blood
K extended,
Tumours in skin, eyes 
months' duration.
exudate. Chronic
Peracute: offen just
PM: hcemorrhagic
paralysis of the 
emacialion. PM:
peripheral nerves.
 Peracute: death.
·buybnos
to blocked
oesophagilis,
 is diagnoslic.
polyd ipsia,
Diphtherific
 and muscle.
rachea.
and 
due
 Found to be more 
 Epizoolics result
Worldwide. Prior
very common in
and sporadic in 
newly-imported
 Sporadic oul
s
virus in the
to vaccination, 
poulry. Rare
common in
environment.
olher birds.
Worldwide.
in high
domestic
breaks.
birds.
local
Possibly Bourkes's
Carriers shed virus
domeslic fowl in 
possibly canaries,
some wild birds.
 Amazon parrols.
loucans. Has
Ducks, geese,
Common in
parrol.
raplors.
climale acls as
living in cells of
May be lalent
aclive through
feather debris
Iransmission.
Herpes virus,
possible a
pond waler.
fransmission
hrough the
V10 Herpes virus
Direct and 
lransmission
becoming
Herpes virus
a lrigger.
infeclion
Verlical
indirect
cerial
V8a
V9
[Duck viral enterilis)
Amazon tracheitis 
Marek's disease
Duck herpes
284
Appendices
Differential
Diagnosis
Confirmation of
Isolation of virus
in cell cullure
blood, faeces,
viscera. VN or
from feathers,
Diagnosis
ID tests.
Acule in some flocks, 3-5
featherdustersyndrome
Often associaled with
problem [see Plate 21].
Reduced halchability.
Asymptomalic in turkeys.
 Principal Clinical Signs 
which is a genelic
 Necrolic hepalilis.
 occurs in North
Only wo cases
Probably only
Occurrence
recorded.
One isolate.
America.
Species Susceptible Relative
s sdey um p  s  z  xa
[Agapornis spp]
leucocephafus)
(Phalacrocorax
Turkeys, chickens.
double yellow
possibly other
melanoleucos)
Bob white quail
Haliceetus
particularly
scame genus.
 Budgerigars,
Amazons,
Bald eagle
cormorant
headed
pigeons.
lovebirds
eagles
lile pied
Colinus herpes virus
feathers, shed in 
ransmilted in 
V11Herpes virus
droppings.
V12 Herpes virus
V13  Herpes virus
V14  Herpes virus
V16 Herpes virus
Cause
No.
V15
Bob white quail herpes
Lovebird herpes virus
American bald eagle
Turkey herpes virus
Budgerigar herpes 
cormorant virus
herpes virus
Lake Victoria
Disease
virus
S
Appendices
285
 Chlamydophila
Clostridial
dermalilis
[B26].
[B21).
inlranuclear
inclusions in
microscopy.
Basophilic
Electron
predileclion for epithelial
morlality. Both adulls and
crusly closed eyes. Birds
sealed with exudale →
hickening of air sacs.
100%
nestlings. Dyspnoec.
Apparenily has a
Coutteel, personal
communication).
 Cloacal papilloma.
Acute illness -
lissue.
 than recognised 
 cdemonslraled.
 Possibly more
widespread
lo dale.
One case
 Some other finches
African finches.
Passeriformes.
Cockaloos,
finches.
macaws.
Conures
Immunosuppressive
  s
A common latent
infeclion in non-
humanprimates
V17  Herpes virus
Herpes virus
Conure papiloma virus  V20  Herpes virus 
possible
V18
Gouldian finch herpes
Localised dermal viral
Zoonosis porlicularly
humans, in which it
morbidily and
Cytomegalovirus
important in
mortalily.
disease
virus
286
Appendices
[V10] Marek's
old. With other
6-24 weeks
usually single.
Differential
Diagnosis
lypes of
of virus. Samples
 should be frozen.
PM:macroscopic
lesions. Usually
Conformation of
Diagnosis
(Big fiver disease) but
gans as well as long
50%
anisocylosis. Rubricytes
Periodic bleeding from
heterophilia,
 blood. Erythraemic
 Principal Clinical Signs 
parlicularly in lungs.
of bone
whole range of
dyspnoea, 
Marked
myelosis (
spleen,
.1
period may be
 Incubalion
Occurrence
months.
mosilly domeslic
All species, but 
 conure [Genus
poullry and
Galliformes.
Susceptible
Birds over
weeks old.
Aratingol.
These are non-enveloped, single-stranded RNA viruses.
Species
other
Ill-defined viral cuse,
possibly a relrovirus
hransmission occur.
ihat may be related
group which may
viruses of the 
horizontal
virus
Appendix Table 3.3 Relroviridae.
Cause
V21
V22
No.
Retroviridae
leucosis complex 
 conure syndrome
Avian sarcoma/
Haemorrhagic
Disease
Appendices
287
media, slorage
package of
on Iransport
ID tests.
sample.
 Relatively long incubation.
parenchymalous organs,
Diarrhoea, dilated liver
 Mortalily up
dn
to 100%. Mulliple smal
mucosa. Caseous infra
 small tumours in many
larged liver and
 dyspnoea. Mortaliy
orbital sinusilis. PM:
and bone marrow.
pheasanls except no
cloacal bursa, l
Mortalily 40%.
muscle.
b
 Young birds that
reached sexual
 Disease in ducks
have just
malurily.
Very rare.
Domeslic geese
 Japanese quail
 fee ranging.
Ducks, both 
Turkeys
Ducks
Immunosuppressive,
V24  Reliculoendotheliosis
virus. Transmitted
These viruses are
 shed in faeces.
both B and T.
[avian malaria].
insecls.
ReticuloendotheliosisV23
Infectious anaemia
of ducks
288
Appendices
[B26], Satmonella
loxicily.Other
infecliousdiseases
Avian pox [V37],
respiralory fracl.
infeclions (V2-
Paramyxovirus
[V8], falcon,
deficiencies.
 Differential
Diagnosis
[N26] .
 pbal
haemagglutinalion-
Swabs from faeces,
'sisou rens pue reann noq se pn sisa vn paps-aas padoaa are aoxed a
Gun
Virusisolalion and
medium and ice.
Confirmation of
inhibition test.
trachea,
Diagnosis
visceraandgreen
conjunclivitis; Gl
watery diarrhoea.
enterilis.
 Clinical signs vary
o aa p
Principal Clinical
haemorrhagic
pelechice on
virus. Severe
rhinifis and
torlicollis,
necrolic
humans.
sub!s
with 
show mild signs
Not very common
Typical Newcasile
Not uncommon
Rare. Often only
disease israre.
be
Occurrence
Worldwide
infection
but can b
Relative
severe
 Psiltciformes -
30% mortalily.
 susceplibilily:
susceplible.
 sUusceplible.
sUsceplible.
serolype
moderalely
susceplible,
Susceptible
not very
Oshrich -
s
serolype group
Other serolypes
latent infeclion.
Paramyxovirus
birds, which
may carry a
orally, vica
respiratory
Plm Auou
veclors.
hract.
Cause
1
Paramyxoviridae
V25
No.
notifiable disease
zoonotic dlisease
in the UK and 
 A relalively mild
monyofher
countries
Disease
Appendices
289
[V25], Ornithosis/
[Continved]
Pigeon herpes virus
[V4, V5],
See above
[B26].
Haemagglutination
 inhibition test and
brain but this may
virus isolation.
be negalive.
As for PMV-1
 Rather vague clinical
signs which, when
 of Newcasile
loss
1 signs
respiralory disease,
wings,lorlicollis,
being seen before
may recover in 3-
cases have been
somelimes a mild
upper respiralory
loss
However some
droppings and 
enlarged bursa.
lameness cnd
seen with just |
weakness,
weight and
 Mosily a latent
diarrhoea.
infeclion.
those 
death.
infected keslrels
1995].
 Especially Arican 
wild/fera!
pigeons. Has
 grey parrols.
Worldwide.
vaccinated.
birds not
Worldwide
Brown,
raplors,parrols,
some wild
pealowland
ducks, rails,
Some birds of
phea sanls,
Psiltaciformes.
louracos.
[endemic].
Galliformes,
Mainly in
homing
pigeons.
prey.
Some
A mulant strain of
1980s. Carried
feral pigeons.
Possibly carried
Passeriformes,
many of which
are migralory.
sparrows,
blackbirds,
especially
V26
V27
diseose in the UK
Paramyxovirus
Notifiable
(PMV-2)
Pigeon
290
Appendices
Soimonella [B1, B2),
[B26]. Mycoloxins
[van der Hage
cofi [B3].
19871.
Listerellosis
Differential
Diagnosis
Li
starch in droppings
Histopathology of 
Confirmation of
Hemorrhagic
Pancrecalilis in
with iodine.
Diagnosis
enterifis.
die, some recover.
Parrols develop CNS
cyspnoea. Some
Yellow/white chalky
eye lesions and
lot of starch and
→ die
Principal Clinical 
usually seen in
Mortalily 30%.
finches, yellow
diarrhoea,
Torficollis.
finches.
exudate,
Signs
hemisphere
Occurrence
Relative
Northern
 Domeslic pigeons 
Neophema spp;
Patycercus spp.
Psiltaciformes,
particularly
Susceptible
finches.
Species
normally in free
Probably occurs
birds.
Cause
Appendix Table 3.4 Conlinued.
No.
V28
PMV-3)
Disease
Appendices
291
Mortaliy 50%. PM:
dyspnoea, CNS
parenchymatous
Acule diarrhoea,
congeslion of
No clinical signs.
No clinical signs.
ulceralion of
Localised area of
USA and Japan.
disabled, olhers
Morlalily20%
USA and Asia.
 and circling.
Some birds
Australia.
complelely
recover
 Carried by free-
budgerigars
pun suoabid
ranging
Waterfowl.
doves.
finches.
 Kunilachi virus
virus.
V31-V34
V29
V30
V35
Twirling syndrome
Paramyxoviruses
PMV-4, -6, -8
PMV-71
(6- puD
292
Appendices
The avipox viruses are enveloped, double-stranded DNA viruses, both intranuclear and intracytoplasmic. They are, unusually, very stable outside
oesophagilis) (V4
Amazon tracheilis
[P47], candidiasis
laryngolracheitis
s
disease [V25],
Aviltaminosis A.
Trichophyton
[infeclious
Differential
'[8A] [1]
[V8a].
'(sw)
[P46],
Serology
inlracyloplasmic
inclusions seen in
the epithelium of
DIA
often not a lot of 
Confirmation of
Histopathology.
Diagnosis
the skin,
help.
sudden death. Usually
diphtheritic membranes
slarlings. Some pigeons
 Principal Clinical Signs 
 of head and legs.
because diphtherilic
subsequently develop
 in canaries. Due lo
and Passeriformes,
wartlike neoplasms.
yellowish
papules changing
brown appear on
Passeriformes and
Acute: sepliccemia,
lesions appear in 
seen in parrols,
which survive,
Relative Occurrence
More common in S.
American parrols
mosquiltoes cboul
hanAustralian
Middle East [see
localised when
in late summer.
raplors and
u uowwoy
parrols.
Plate 7).
10-15% in young
species-specific
virus. Including 
pigeon pox
virulent for
 virus for
Most species
Susceptible
Species
birds.
lal
mosquiloes, which can
oulbreak confined to
excreled in saliva so
drinkers and human
viru ses idenlified.
Mostly adapled to
bird so that some 
can contaminale
mites, licks,
Appendix Table 3.5 Avican pox.
clothing.
Cause
Avipox viruses
No.
Avian poxV37
the host.
Disease
Appendices
293
 no intranuclear or intracytoplasmic inclusions. The virus can
Differential Diagnosis
Mycoplasma [B25]
hiamydophila
 fowl cholera.
For other birds 
B26] and
Ney
selected lissues
serology.
PM signs and
puo
form: Mild respiratory
pathogenic
Principal Clinical Signs 
pathogenic
MO
offs
respiralory and Gl
Highpathogenicity→
vere
decrease in egg 
produclion and
massive die
pathogenicity →
Highly variable.
Aas
inflammation of
egg
CNS signs, S
oedema and
production.
the low p
signs,↓
hracts;
however many
proven infected
The orthomyxoviridae are enveloped, single-stranded RNA viruses. There are 1
evidence is 
eastern
equivocal,
wild birds
Occurrence
poultry.
endemic
Possibly
spread
Relative
south
0a
=
.
Also infecis cats [both
birds
domeslic and wild],
Species Susceptible
ma inly. Domeslic
other
variant. Virus also
chickens lurkeys,
be
foxes, probably
predalory and
and pigs.
in other
viruses are usually
uA!!
1-16
seroposilive} are
告
1918 Spanish flu
from the
human strains).
with
pandemic [50
三
Appendix Table 3.6 Orthomyxoviridae.
wild ducks
Cause
different influenza viruses).
A
Orthomyxoviridae
No.
V38
This is a serious
zoonotic disease
Fow pest!
pandemics.
Disease
294
Appendices
 Differential Diagnosis
selenium deficiency.
Salmonella [B1],
, duck virus
As above for V39.
Note that duck
by an ashrovirus.
Newcaslle disease
[V25], Marek's
lead poisoning.
enterilis (V9],
septicaemias,
mycoloxicosIs.
vilamin E and
bacterial
[B26],
virus
Confirmation of
embryonated
and serology
embryonated
provenlriculus,
pancreasand
Inoculalion of
 Inoculation of
eggs plus
Diagnosis
of brain,
tests.
heart.
 death within hours.
Mortaliy up lo 30%.
opisthotonos. PM:
Morlalily may be
 epidemic tremors,
 Principal Clinical
Peracute: sudden 
haemorrhages.
incoordination.
CNS signs: →
develop eye
Maybe first
signs, e.g.
pelechial
paralysis,
100%.
lesions.
Signs
Occurrence
Worldwide.
Relative
weeks.
Ducklings from 2 weeks
exolic duck species in 
 Mainly a poullry disease 
pigeons, Anseriformes,
 infected but are not
but can also alfect
Species Susceptible
sUsceplible to the 
aq aow sp
 Only mallrds and
 domestic ducks.
'a60j0
OOS.
 picorna virus
may act as a 
 picorna virus.
fueces. Rats 
mechanical
Iransmission.
spread in
Verlical
latent
carriers.
veclor.
Cause
Appendix Table 3.7 Picornaviridae.
No.
V39
V41
Picornaviridae
Ouck virus hepatitis
encephalomyelitis
V43 below]
Specific avian
Disease
Type 1
Appendices
295
 Principal Clinical Signs
 Differential Diagnosis
which is mainly a
walerfowl [V69].
Morltalily 10-50%.
Adenovirus of
Reovirus [V76],
respiralory
infection.
Hislopathology of 
VN and ElISA lesls.
Virus identification,
Confirmation of
intestine.
weight loss →
Mortalily 10-20%.
The Parvoviridae are non-enveloped, single-stranded DNA viruses exhibiting inranuclear inclusions.
enlarged liver, petechice,
Relative Occurrence
 Principal Clinical Signs 
alaxia. PM: fibrinous
Anorexia, polydipsia,
coryza, diarrhoea,
dealh.
Australian birds
affected just
nest at 8-12
cfter they
weeks.
Relative Occurrence
 Species Susceptible
cockaloos and galahs.
The Astroviridae are non-enveloped, single-stranded RNA viruses.
sulphur-crested
Ducks.
geese, Canada
Muscovy ducks.
Susceptible
domestic
Astrovirus
Species
picorna virus
Cause
Iransmilted
verlically.
Iransmilted via
oral and nasal
parvovirus
laterally
exudates.
Appendix Table 3.8 Aslroviridae.
AppendixTable 3.9Parvoviridae.
No.
V43
Cause
V42
No.
Astroviridae
Duck virus hepatitis
Parvoviridae
(anbodasoo
Cockatoo viral
Goosevirus
hepatitis
(Derzsy's
influenzo,
enteritis
Disease
Disease
 Differential
Diagnosis
Both the Toga- and Flaviridae are enveloped, single-stranded RNA viruses. They are all ransmirted by invertebrate arthropod vectors.
Hislopathology of
Confirmation of
provenlriculus,
spleen, brain,
skeletal muscle.
Virus isolation
from brain
Diagnosis
hearl and
gizzard,
 Principal Clinical
May cause CNS
signs in birds:
incoord inalion,
haemorrhagic
 Sudden death or 
abdomen with
congestionof
Mortalityup
asciles.PM:
oedema and
and hepalic
paralysis,
torlicollis.
enterilis.
distended
CNS signs.
80%. 5
serosa.
subis
he
 Mainly found in the 
 Only documented in 
Northern hemisphere.
Relative Occurrence
Caused considerable
reduction of black
moorland species.
 in other parls of 
moors in UK. 
world.
Anseriformes are most
 Species Susceptible
important latent
passerines [house
including ratites,
Macaws and rose-
parakeels.
as as
oo Ao s
susceplible,
sparrows].
sUsceplible.
bird are
parrol.
pheasanls.
Togaviruses transmitted
 flavivirus Iransmilted
by biing licks. Virus
logavirus possibly
blue mountain hare,
and domeslic dogs.
by biting insecls,
e.g. mosquiltoes.
 and Flaviridae.
of Psiltacine 
dilataltion.
Cause
V45, V46
No.
V47
V48
Eastern and western
Zoonosis, producing
 Zoonotic infection,
viral
 olten weeks after
rather like V45
after infection.
encephalitis,
Avian serositis
infeclion.
be so.
equine
Disease
8
 environmenlal
Toxicosis from
contaminants.
 Possibly avian
 olher laboralory
lests.
asymplomalicin
V49-V54 are
humans flu-like
Symploms may
o jso Aonsn
several weeks
lhese viruses
birds, but in.
 after infeclion.
headache,
viral fevers occur
worldwide.
Most species of bird
species lend to be
marine species, act
ducks. Many wild
rows, swallows
if nalive to an
introduced bird
reservoirs.
and swifls.
Also horses.
nalive
2
86
 Russia, Ssibera and
 Originated in Africa 
conlinental northern
northern hemisphere
 nolifiable disease
 All of these viruses are
mosquiltoes or similar
American tropics
 African and
hemisphere.
→Australia
France.
bifing flies.
→ USA
个
个
V49
5
V54
Murray Valley fever
Russian spring and
Japanese summer 
serious Zoonotic
summer fever
St. Louis fever
West Nile fever
Yellow fever
fever
298
Appendices
VN anlibodies can be
These are non-enveloped, single-stranded DNA viruses with both inranuclear and intracytoplasmic inclusions. Most of them propagate in divid-
Differential Diagnosis
 delected in nerve 
Plasmodia [P18],
aloxoplasmosis
Confirmation of
spol') [(P12].
sisis
tissue.
behaviour lowardshumans
Necrosis of bursca
Very occasionally birds may
silepliform fis as well as
other CNS signs → die.
Confirmation of
 Principal Clinical Signs
Diagnosis
air sacs.
show a change in
 Principle Clinical Signs 
Abdominal enlargement
杂
The Rhabdoviridae are enveloped, single-stranded RNA viruses with intracytoplasmic inclusions.
Worldwide except in
Relative Occurrence
lhe UK.
Not uncommon.
Occurrence
Birds do not usually
 Species Susceptible
develop an aclive
infeclion because 
Relative
of their rapid
produclion of
antibod ies.
s0p 0-2 0
Susceptible
common reservoir, the fox.
Species
acl as reservoirs of
Unrelated to the
psillacine beak
circovirus of
and feather
Circovirus
disease
Cause
Appendix Table 3.12Circoviridae.
Cause
No.
V55
No.
V56
Rhabdoviridae
Circoviridae
lack spot canary
Disease
Disease
1995]
Rabies
Appendices
299
[Continved]
normal, polyoma
May cause “French
Iskin
Dermatomycosis
[M5]. Suspecl all
cbnormaliies in 
budgerigars.
virus [V59).
moulr in
Histopathology
surrounding skin
Histopathology
other lymphoid
lesions usually
symmelrical.
fecthers for
intranuclear
inclusions in
 spleen and 
microscopy.
of feather 
inclusions.
bursa and
conlenls.
shows
shows
spleen.
feathers → short, club.
like feathers, frelines,
 Shiny, elongated, fragile.
parrols may show red
,clinical
Immunosuppressive 
 Diarrhoea and loss of
lurn white. Grey
rather scruffy with
palchy feather loss
lipped beak.
feathers.
 condilion.
Anaemia
 Endemic in wild
Aushralia cnd
Asia. Now
Southeast
caplive
parrols.
Unknown
parrot, but there
e-z spq bunon
Chickens less than
adulls may
3 weeks. Older
immunologically
are probably.
slrains. Young
 months old.
depressed.
latent
carriers.
birds
system, epidermis,
haemocyloblas of
ividing cells, i.e.
feather dusl and
environment in
faeces. Verlical
aduls feeding
prevalent under
bone marrow.
Circovirus of
Virus infeclion
circovirus
Persists in
 pigeons.
chicks.
and
A
Psittacine beak and   V57
D8SA
V58
feather disease
Pigeon circovirus
300
Appendices
 Differential Diagnosis
psillacine beak and
evident in polyoma.
sudden death, even
Most imporlant is
Any cause of
Differentil
Diagnosis
toxicosis.
Histopathology of
Confirmation of
other lymphoid
lesls, electron
microscopy.
I or cloacal
spleen and
Confirmation of
surface of liver.
DNA probe on
Use fluorescent
sisoubo
Intranuclear
nclusions in 
Diagnosis
anlibody.
poo
 Principal Clinical Signs 
Feather abnormalities
Young budgerigars
cites
Canary
The Papovaviridae are non-enveloped, double-stranded DNA viruses with intranuclear inclusions.
 Principal Clinical
distension, no
30-100% die.
stunted, growh
downteathers
 abnormalities.
abdominal
older birds
0 jnoqo
'runners'.
Signs
more common
Worldwide. May
more
common than
latently infectec
Probably a lot 
han hitherto
adulls may
show, sale c
environment
Occurrence
Found in
Occurrence
be much m
change of
Senegal
realised.
Relative
Relative
disease has been
undiagnosed for
manyyears, also
probably infecis
Eclectus
seen but the
Also canaries
particularly
Susceptible
Susceptible
Apart from
which the
other
species
macaws,
cause
finches.
Species
pup
prevalent under
virus. Verlical
environmentally
in feather dust 
Virus infeclion
Polyoma virus
birds. Both
Tansmission
and faeces.
horizontal
stress.
Appendix Table 3.13 Papovaviridae.
Cause
Cause
Appendix Table 3.12Conlinued.
V58b
No.
V59
No.
Papovaviridae
infection [including 
fledgling disease]
lack backed gulls
[both southern
waled hornbill 
Dove circovirus
Finch circovirus
and northern]
Black casqued
Polyoma virus
Budgerigor
Disease
Disease
Appendices
301
Dermalomycosis [M5),
The Adenoviridae are non-enveloped, double-stranded DNA viruses with intranuclear (contain virus) and intracytoplasmic (do not contain virus)
inclusions. All adenoviruses are environmentally persistent. They are found worldwide and often act as a trigger for other infectious diseases.
 Many birds are latent carriers and shed virus in faeces. Many species are known to be susceptible and many more viruses are likely to be
conure papilloma
on] n
virus [V1].
malignant bile and
cnd other birds
Histopathology.
pancrealic duct
carcinomas so
endoscopy elc.
clso have
need scans,
cloaca but also in
may see blood in
rowths [waris] on
droppings. Also 
unfeathered skin
 parrols and on
egs and feet of 
Wartlike growths
first noticed in
finches.
 Not uncommon.
Parvoviruses require their presence to complete their replication.
All parrot species,
but particularly
Amazon parrols
canaries [Dom
Some finches
[Fringillidae],
identifed in the future. Vertical transmission can occur.
by wild chalfinch,
but this could be
c dlislinct shrain.
V60Papilloma virus
Group I fowl adenovirus
Adenoviridae
302
Appendices
hexamiliasis
Newcaslle disease
Differential
[V25],
As above for [V6 1]
 As above for [V6 1]
mucus in cirways,
Hepalic necrosis.
as cbove for
inclusions in liver
epithelium. Virus
Confirmation of
PM: respiralory
syslem, excess
cloudy air-sac
and inteslinal
membranes.
intranuclear
Sis
pahcreds.
isolation.
 Sudden death and severe
 Main clinical sign is a 
 necrolic pancrealilis.
more severe signs →
Exhibited CNS signs.
dislress
Principal Clinical
death.
10
susceplible.
Occurrence
worldwide.
weeks.
Relative
 Japanese quail
 Bob white quail
Buunp uosas
May-August.
 Guinea fowl
Chickens
Appendix Table 3.14 Group I fowl adenovirus.
Iransmission.
Adenovirus of
 Adenovirus
V62Adenovirus
in racing
baskels.
Cause
No.
V61
V63
V64
V65
Japanese quail virus
splenomegaly,
Quail bronchitis
Guinea fowl
adenovirus
Disease
Appendices
303
parakeels [V27],
(ZSA)
proventricular
 Neuropathic 
psiltacine
As above
disease.
polyoma
[B26].
n
Histopathology: less
smaller intranuclear
nephritis, distended
inclusions than
above in lype I.
PM: pancrealis,
Viral
numerous and
Histopathology:
hepalocellular
necrosis and
basophilic
intranuclear
microscopy.
necrosis.
mullifocal
culture.
spuq bunox awos inq
possibly diarrhoea 
have bronchitis and
quite unalffected.
Somelimes slight
logetherwilh
 sn
emacialion. 
bepharilis.
pneumonia.
 Probably global.
worldwide.
worldwide.
Probably
Probably .
keslrel, merlin,
free
documenled
American
Mauritius
gyrfalcon,
'sbuso6
Goshawk,
kestrel,
All parrot
Ostriches
lurkey or quail.
source of food.
when birds are
 Adenovirus of
mammalian
may flare up
Best lo use
slressed in 
adenovirus
caplivily.
Adenovirus
V68  Psillacine.
V70  Un-typed
86
V66
V69
Psittacine adenovirus
Ostrich fading chick
[Raines
et ol., 2005]
disease
304
Appendices
Confirmation of Diagnosis
Falcon adenovirus
DNA probe and virus
 Differential
[V67].
isolalion.
 Confirmation of
Virus isolalion.
As for falcon
Subocute: anorexia, dyspnoea
iss
[V67].
 enlarged, molled, grey
 Principal Clinical Signs 
and diarrhoea.
 Only clinical signs
 Principal Clinical 
are sof-shelled
anorexia and
← uoissaidap
1
death in 48
mortalily.
hours; or
spleen.
dealh.
subIS
eggs.
Occurrence
Relative
Global
Global
 Relative Occurrence
Probably worldwide.
and chickens. Possibly
 Phecsants, guinea fowl
 Species Susceptible
Turkeys, chickens,
pheasanls.
ecgle owl, Bengal
 Species Susceptible
Muscovy ducks,
chickens, callle
Turkeys, geese,
asymplomalic
eagle owl,
paa wy su p
carrlers.
Faeces from latenlly infecled
Owl.
Group Il adenovirus
Group ll adenovirus 
and turkey chicks].
Group Ill adenovirus
hatchery chicks
[chicken, quail
Appendix Table 3.15 GrouplIl adenoviruses.
Appendix Table 3.16 Group Il adenoviruses.
Latenily infected
 carrier birds.
birds.
birds.
Adenovirus
Cause
Cause
No.
V71
72
No.
Group Ill adenoviruses 
V73
V74
Group Il adenoviruses 
Gallfom marble spleen 
Turkey sof-shell egg 
Raptor adenovirus
et al., 2005]
enteritis
Disease
Disease
Appendices
305
Confirmation of Diagnosis
Virus isolalion but submit
feeze
 swollen kidney and signs
provenlriculus [main food
'sis dsai aias
Necrolic hepatosplenilis
Anorexia, loss of weight,
storage and digestive
 Principal Clinical Signs 
m suis Aiosy
mcopharyngilis plus
ulceraled crop and
Respiralory signs.
oesophagus.
mortalily.
enterilis.
PM:
PM:
documenled case.
 One documenled case.
 instances of nalural
 Relative Occurrence
Only wo recorded
Worldwide, but
common in UK.
 Chicks most
sUsceplible.
Species Susceptible
Ostrich chicks and
[Kennedy
budgerigars.
 Japanese quail.
Psiltaciformes,
including
Pigeons.
Carried by chickens
Passeriformes.
Coronovirus
Appendix Table 3.17 Coronaviridae.
Cause
No.
V75
Coronaviridae
Infectious bronchitis
306
Appendices
 Adenovirus
parvovirus
 Differential 
Diagnosis
169N
goose
[V42].
Cloacal swabs or
viscera for virus
Confirmation Of
Liver, spleen, 
Diagnosis
isolation.
incoordinalion. PM: swollen
=
6
respiralory
heart, respiralory and liver
 Since immunosuppressive,
feather
dyslrophy. Morltalily up I
90%. PM: inflammalion
 the pericardium and air
and
dyspnoea,
I dullness,
Principal Clinical Signs 
secondary infeclions.
diarrhoea, weakness 
growh and 
mucoid enterifis.
 Sudden death. PM:
 Suden death or 
 Diarrhoea and c
myocardiis,
lesions.
enteritis.
Stunted 
SaICS.
Relative Occurrence
 Alfecis ducklings in
carry the virus.
Europe may
Worldwide
France
Goslings
 Species Susceptible
("spuqly jiay
probably main
susceplible than
PuD
 pun sipbuapmg
raplors are
hose of the
Galliformes
bupnou]
pheasants]
carriers.
 
Americas.
 cockatiels.
Pigeons -
Geese
virus in faeces. Not
Reovirus (Orbivirus)
Lalent carriers shed
all strains of virus
 are palhogenic.
May be spread by
biting insecls.
probably
Appendix Table 3.18 Reoviridae.
Cause
No.
9A
Reoviridae
Reovirus disease
Disease
upper GA Irach.
Pyloric obstruclion
provenlriculus.
infeclion [M7]
Megabacleria
nemalode
infestation/
deficiency.
 Differential
selenium
impaclion.
Diagnosis
E
VitaminE
debilitated bird.
Confirmation of
Barium contrast
Toventriculus.
negalive.
radiograph.
Surgically
difficult and
Diagnosis
beller,
u Ays!
impacled provenlriculus
[both heterophilia and
and alrophied → may
 Principal Clinical Signs 
Usually only seen in
Death
disease with an
 after prolonged
young birds.
PM:emacialion,
distended and
Depression.
disease.
worldwide. An
South America.
epidemic in
One suspecled
week-old bird.
increasingly
problem in 
Occurrence
Europe.
Probably
common
Relative
 Only documented
 chickens and in
jusf mocows.
 Seen in broiler
[Forbes and 
Appendix Table 3.19 Other diseases hat may well have a viral origin.
Susceptible
Simpson]
Species
 Suspect viral particles
 seen in spinal cord 
free ranging birds.
Possible virus may be
provenlriculus and
duodenum. Also
alfecls culonomic
Possibly carried by
May have a similar
brain and spinal
 shed in faeces.
husbandry may
cause lo V76
and coeliac
ganglion by
microscopy.
Deshruction of
first part of
precipitate
electron
cond ifion.
Cause
LLA
LLA
8A
No.
myoentericganglioneuritis,
birds (Macow wasting
Similar disease in Canada
dilatation of psittacine
Runting and stunting 
porrots,
Disease
308
Appendices
APPENDIX 4 MYCOTIC DISEASES OF BIRDS
It is important to note that a number of these diseases are zoonotic and that the symp-
toms of many of them in humans are identical to those of flu and may not appear until
several weeks after exposure. These diseases have been marked as zoonoses in the tables
that follow. Anyone who has contact with birds and subsequently becomes ill should
consider zoonotic infection as a possibility.
All mycotic diseases in this table are numbered and prefixed M.
Other rare mycotic infections of birds are caused by Microsporidia, Penicillium, Nocar-
dia, Rhinosporidia (from sprouted seed) and Mucor spp hyphae in vascular endothelium
of finches.
Appendices
309
Differential Diagnosis
Tuberculosis (B17),
Yersinio [B11],
[P14], Candida
fichomoniasis
parrols.
produce
[P31],
Often heterophilia,
monocylosis and
dies.
Look for lypical
'fool' cell and 
Itacheal swab,
cylology. EISA
Confirmation of
 Examine lesions
Use 20% KOH
 and stain with
6
Radiography,
laparoscopy,
hyphae and
collon blue 
abdominal
culture and
very reliable.
swabs for
Diagnosis
anaemia.
seplale
 death, parlicularly
hcemalogenously.
Isod '[s!sollbiadsn
paralysis, lesion in
obshruclion cases
 Also not uncommon
and raplors which
 and emaciation,
respiralory signs
:overfed and
 Principal Clinical 
[10% of acute
inaclive.
spine.
subis
Relative Occurrence
massive dose of
esp. young birds,
hypovilcaminosis
spores, age i.e.
umes in poorly
predisposing
challenge by
venlilaledand
steroids, elc.,
antibiolics,
ammoniacal
unhygienic
A,stress,
Common
aviarles.
 Species Susceptible
caplive and wild
possibly because
Also nol uncommon
including ostrich
 More common in
diving birds,
recirculation
and raplors
which are
overfed and
inaclive.
chicks.
Aspergillus spp, e.g.
flavs,A.niger,
least 200 species,
all of which are
saprophylic and
shraw, hay, wood
 dwop u punoy
chips, elc. The
A. fumigarus,
terreus
normally
sporesare
ubiquitous.
Appendix Table 4.1 Mycolic diseases.
Cause
A
No.
LW
 Can be a primary
bronchopneumonia,
polenlial zoonotic 
Can cause 
asthma and
Aspergillosis
occasional
generalised
infection in
infeclion
disease.
humans.
Disease
310
Appendices
Differentil Diagnosis
Trichomonicsis (P14]
[macroscopically
baclerial necrosis)
Candida lesions
which causes
gaslric dilation
Foreign bodies.
neuropathic
Other mycolic
In psiltacines
Other fungal
diseases.
infeclions,
are
wilh lactophenol
Histopathology.
 Impression smears.
with Gram stain
Confirmation of
smears slained
show budding,
 Stain ypically
or use Indian
examine the
blue, Gram
Look for thickly
0
yeast-like
organisms.
Diagnosis
hyphae (
mycelia c
seen.
anorexia, sporadic
dyspnoea, debiliy,
of crop
snboydosao pun
covered in a soff,
which the mucosa
like. Occasionally
provenlriculus.
respiralory lract
 birds can cause
emacialion, non-
viscera, lung, air
 Principal Clinical 
thickened and
ancemia and
myxomatous,
sacs and liver.
regeneralive
PM: mucosa
generalised,
necrolising,
gelatinous
and skin.
deaths.
Signs
Relative Occurrence
Galliformes and 
parlicularly in
Ubiquitous but
particularly in 
Passeriformes,
fueces of
pigeons.
birds.
Probably all species
Species Susceptible
 Potenlially all vian
but parlicularly
pigeons, lurkeys,
When kept in
partridges,
budgerigars,
psiltacines,
grouse,
caplivily.
 antibiolic and 
praclices or sress.
plant and organic
 Candida albicans
overgrow caffer
faully hygiene
uo punoy isoar
material often
Cryptococcus
neofomans
(oow)
cond ilion.
Cause
Appendix Table 4.1 Conlinuedl.
M
No.
ZW
M3
secondary infeclion
sick birds kept in
plo u suopuon
wooden aviaries.
inhalation of dust
potenlially fatal
zoonotic disease
[Moniliasis)
Cryptococcosis
serious and
Infeclion by.
Candidiasis
unsanitary
Disease
Appendices
311
 Mange mite infeclion
 Malnutrition, feather
[Continved]
As above
 picking.
Hislopathology,
Microscopical
sta in.
culture.
 of feathers. Skin
white, lifeless. Skin
has endency to be
White crust on comb
pericardilis and
liver lesions
meningilis.
corrugaled and
cause acule
influenza-like
As above for
symploms in
encrusted.
Ubiquitous
Uncommon
Probably occurs in 
As above for
parlicularly
 saprophyle found
seen by the author
Histoplasma spp.
Trichophyion spp,
 in bird faeces.
u dn ping
in a Moluccan
wilh
earthen floors
 Another soil
formed a
the vent.
aviaries
Can
b
M4
SW
M6
potentially serious
[Ringworm) (Favus)
zoonotic disease
with the same
Dermatomycosis
Histoplasmosis
Actinomycosis
causes as
Zoonosis
312
Appendices
Differential Diagnosis
Pseudoluberculosis
See the differenlial
[Yersiniosis] [B11].
diagnosis of
maximize
stain wih Gram
leen.
Confirmation of
Gram+ rod. Can
85% of cases
diagnosed on
repeated exam
smears. Well
examine under
lo thin
conlrast. Also
microscope.
Like all fungi,
X100, with
smears from
liver and sple
maximum
or lugol's
impression
contrast,
culture of
can be 
organism
difficull.
dilute
slush,
with
 Breeders describe
bird as dull and
'going lighr'. Birc
blood in faeces.
death but older 
linger.
hcemorrhage in
Principal Clinical
X-ray may show
dilatation and
provenlriculus.
PM: white, slim,
slained with
degenerated
smooth koilin
Signs
pads.
Relative Occurrence
 Probably can infecl
 buyoa ubib o
and herbivorous
Worldwide not
exhibition
increasing.
in British
birds.
Species Susceptible
budgerigars, but
chickens, turkeys,
green finches in
Australia 60%],
lovebirds, other
toucan, pigeons
also canaries,
parrol species.
[parlicularly
cockaliels,
parlridge,
and rhed
inches
ostriches
 Primarily
an opporunislic
An anamorphic
Ascomycelous
asymplomalic
carrier birds.
pathogen of 
 debilitated
 Probably
slressed,
birds.
Cause
Appendix Table 4.1 Conlinuedl.
No.
W
Macrorhabdus
Disease
Appendices
313
APPENDIX 5 PARASITIC DISEASES OF BIRDS
It is important to note that a number of these diseases are zoonotic and that the symp-
 toms of many of them in humans are identical to those of flu and may not appear until
that follow. Anyone who has contact with birds and subsequently becomes ill should
consider zoonotic infection as a possibility.
All diseases in this section are numbered and prefixed P.
Protozoal parasites
Coccidiosis and related parasitic diseases (Family Eimeridae)
The Coccidia comprise an extremely variable and large group of protozoan parasites, all
of which are in the family Eimeridae. Many species of this family are host specific. Repro-
duction within the host results in the production of an environmentally resistant oocyst
formed within the mucosal cell of the host, from which it is discharged. After maturation
in the faeces (called sporulation), the oocyst produces infectious sporozoites. Specific
diagnosis in most cases is confirmed by examination of faecal smears.
Severe disease does not always result from infection. Instead, a state in which the
organism exists as a commensal may result, with the host exhibiting little or no signs of
disease while the parasite still carries on its life-cycle. It is only when the host becomes
stressed or is otherwise immunocompromised that full-blown disease occurs.
All parasites within the group thrive in batches of stressed and overcrowded birds kept
under unsanitary conditions.The young are particularly vulnerable with the adult birds
often acting as latent carriers.
314
Appendices
Differential Diagnosis
 Salmonellosis [B1)],
[B26],
[B6].
unslained smears
each genus. In
 Faeces may lake
 Oocyst contains 2
shows oocysls
passerine birds
sporozoiles, cs
 Confirmation of
4
more oocysls
ays aq Aou
Sporulation in
 several days.
imporlant o
kidney check
dislinct from
individual
impression
sporozoites.
midday.
smears.
hosts.
二
vague signs of 
and some other
covered in white
 Principal Clinical
 Somelimes acule
Eimeria truncata
Clinical signs as
Can vary from
haemorrhage
condifion to
PMA: may be
infecis the
for Eimeria.
being an 
diarrhoea.
dilalion of
palches.
death.
Auslralia, but
Not uncommon
Occurrence
Common in
Uncommon
Occasional
Relative
Common
rarer.
Common
Parrots[except lories]
 Species Susceptible
Infecis many avian
species including
ralites, canaries,
finches and other
Poullr, pigeons,
Anseriformes
Budgerigars
passerines.
Raplors
olozoan parasites.
these hos-specific
 conlaminated by
 Eimeria and ofen 
not so pathogenic.
parasites infect
Food and waler
sell-limiting.
isospora spp
birds.
Cause
No.
2
Eimeria spp
[classical
Isospora spp
Disease
Appendices
315
Avican cholera [B12],
[B8].
6
sporocysls, each
 oocysl conla ins
sporulated when 
sporocyst, only
The Wenyonella
 Faecal exam but
dlifficult to find.
 Oocyst similar lo
Oocyst has 2
sporozoites.
sporozoites.
 4 sporocysls
each with 4
sporozoiles.
intermiltently
separaled
very small
shed, often
sporozoiles
direclly into
releasing
wilth 8
8 freely
already
laeces.
Quite pathogenic.
white lesions in
cudal intestine.
As well as Gl lract
not usually very
Haemorrhagic
respiratory tracl.
mucosor surfoces
causing excess
mucus. Marked
abdominal pain
2-12 days post
Clinical signs as
pathogenic.
wholebody,
Fabricius,
vomiting and
diarrhoea,
somelimes
humans,
persistent
infection.
Worldwide
Common
Ducks and passerines
Infecis a wide range
mammalian hoss,
[urinary trac] and 
raplors, finches 
of avian and
Psittaciformes,
 Passeriformes
including
Galliformes,
ostriches.
Ducks
 Eimeria and may be
pathogen infecling 
low rale of shedding.
an opporlunistic
Wenyonelle sp
Dorisielle sp
environmenls.
snouaopug
 infeclion.
birds.
P3
P4
Sd
P6
Wenyonella sp
An increasingly
parlicularly in
Dorisiella spp
Tyzzeria spp
infection
persons.
316
Appendices
Differential
sisns
 Faecal exam shows
encysted, stubby
kbrge oocyst
sporozoites.
conlains 2
sporozoites.
 Principal Clinical Signs 
Dependent on the host
Pathogenesis resuls
 Non-pathogenic in the
species, parasile
anorexia, mucoid,
diarrhoea, muscle
cramp or sudden
definitive host but
making them more
lisessness,
secondary host,
SUsceplible to
predation.
dealh.
May be much
documenled
Occurrence
Both species occur in  N. America 
Relative
 Species Susceptible
 owls. Rodenls are
Raplors including
intermediate
he buzzards,
lailed hawk.
host.
Appendix Table 5.2 Coidians withindirectlife cycles.
host specific.
Cause
No.
2
P8
Caryospora spp
Frenkelia spp
Disease
s
Diagnosis in birds is
sungo6l puo g -
oocyst
panods
reaction.
even
birds the parasile may
[blood-borne
: fatal
Principal Clinical Signs 
人ow
is due to
 pairrois and cause
. Can be
(as A a A a u ou a yrm ssd bu s 
pathogenic.
changes].
parrols,
6
 the environment
have reslricted
occasionally
Species Susceptible
 including
.paricularly at
ec
Cacatua glba
nalive
vertebrale
species,
risk as
Appendix Table 5.3 Other cyst forming parcasiles.
muscle of prey
.
Sarcocystis
 infected
Vectors: flies,
carcass.
Cause
.5
：
No.
P10
 P11
P9
consumplion of
zoonotic disease,
pregnant women
parlicularly in
Disease
pun
Differential
Diagnosis
heart and
necrolic enterilis,
lesions in kidney.
bone
indenta
. Use
Hislopathology:
Histopathology
hed
marbled
spleen,
hepalos
bowel.
.=
PM:
Depression, cnorexia,
.5
 Principal Clinical Signs 
alimentary canal and
nd
fatal in neslings.
Yellow
necrolicliver.
ifis.
Global distribulion
more common
 and may be 
hanrealised.
 Probably global
 Species Susceptible
green
anp ods
intensively
caplive
cause
lo
 faeces
Red mite ingess
ccling only as
 Infeclion by
unsanifary
conditions.
Cause
Appendix Table 5.3 Conlinuedl.
No.
P12
P13
'saiods busppas 
Nole many
Disease
Appendices
319
Differential Diagnosis
Trichomoniasis (P14]
Continved]
ind istinguishable.
Capillaria [P27].
squeeze out onlo
worm droppings.
If in doubt cullure
s wnm
Crop wash
Look for molile
Microscopic
membrane.
flagellae.
 Occasionally acule
PM: thick,cheesy
ilure lo thrive,
diarrhoea,
quite：
death.
seed.
Fai
 Probably global
Not uncommon
apparently
breeders of
falcons in
Auslralian
because
healthy
[Samour
amongst
2003].
finches.
many
raptors feeding
zebra
used as cross-
parenls
some
 on pigeons.
parrot finch,
 Probably all 
cockaliels.
Also infecls s
mammals.
juveniles.
foster p
mortal
Appendix Table 5.4 Moile prolozoan parasiles.
 carriers. Direcl
cond ilions for
short period]
unsanitary
uo bupaa
Trichomonas
Raplors
parasites
Parasite in
healihy
prey.
young.
Cause
[3] 
Motile protozoal parasites 
P14a
No.
P14
Cochlosoma spp
Trichomoniasis
Disease
320
Appendices
 Differential Diagnosis
E
Hexamito [P16]
Campylobacter
E
cofi [B3],
Characlerisic gross PM
Idenlification of motile
cysts
buls
arasiles in deep
see
Confirmation of
lugol's iodine.
uick-moving
above. May
Diagnosis
人pog
ELISA.
8
.5
malabsorplion. Can
diarrhoea with an
Characterislic crecm-
and unthriftiness
thereforefew PM
Principal Clinical 
haemorrhagic.
result in high
membrane,
PM: calarrhal
 
intesfine.
anp
signs.
Signs
Global, probably
worldwide and
 common than 
 common
more
carriers
diarrhoea;
Occurrence
generally
buno人
summer.
veclor.
Probably
of
common
Relative
much
cases
More 
very
often
.=
biology
Infecis a wide
verlebrales,
some parrot
wel
 underslood.
Documented
parlicularly
grouse.
still nol 
species,
ies.
$
1
 molile parasite,
with a
gcls as a veclor
for the parasite.
Hexamita spp
Aow
meleagridis
Parasilte carried
similar life
Infeclion by
Histomonas
7
history.
carriers.
Cause
remai
兜.n
 Continved.
P15
P16
Histomoniasis (Black P17
No.
Appendix Table 5.4 
Giardiasis Imporlant
In USA known as
non-baclerial
enterilis and
beaver fever'.
flatulence.
Hexamitiasis
Disease
Appendices
321
Hoemoproteus,
 Differential
Diagnosis
cre often displaced.
 Confirmation of
Diagnosis
Principal Clinical Signs
increased biliverdin.
Death within a few
 Swelling of eyelids
PM:subculaneous
anaemia.
confinedto
Amost cerlainly
influenced by
ence
of mosquitoes.
he Iropics.
Disribulion
will be
Relative
 Species Susceptible
birds. A good review of this subject is by Remple (2004).
 Probably most
Documented in
canaries,
specific.
Appendix Table 5.5 Haemalozoan prolozoal parasiles.
Passeriformes may
carriers and act as
Pasmodium spp
Haematozoan protozoal parasites 
tas latent
Cause
No.
P18
Avian malaria
Disease
322
Appendices
leucocytozoon.
 
saop so io
Differentil
Plasmodium
jou saop
[P18],
usually in leucocyles
impression smears of
 Stained blood smear
A large
imprints of liver
 spleen.
smear.
viscera.
plasma.
PuD
23
 Principal Clinical Signs 
and skeletal muscle.
Hepalosplenomegaly
prevaiing climalic
 cardiac
 non-pathogenic.
Occasionally
condilions.
In most cases
sreaks
个
occur for build-
 Global and quite
when the right
Common but nol
pathogenic.
cond ilions
Probably not
uncommon.
Occurrence
Where and
weather
common.
Relative
Common
Common
 Species Susceptible
Very pathogenic in
owls and diurnal
 aci as
I due to
blent carriers.
 in all species.
Parrol species
puo sjojid
wild birds
Owls
Hippoboscid flies,
[Culicoides
fansmils the sub-
Transmilted by.
species han
Appendix Table 5.5 Conlinuedl.
Cause
No.
6ld
P20
P21
Haemoproteus spp
Leucocytozoonosis
Trypanosormiasis
Disease
Appendices
323
[Continved]
● During faecal examination of birds of prey for helminth parasies, the eggs of parasies of the prey species, which have not hatched in the ali-
 Imported species of bird may have been infected in their country of origin long before they were imported and remain undetected for years.
 Salmonellosis [B1],
Avian luberculosis
 colibacillosis.
Differential 
Diagnosis
chronic
[B17].
jpnsn Aq sbuddoup
flotalionmethods to
Eggs in faeces look 
 Examination of
idenlify eggs.
ascarid egg.
sis
rather 
found under horny
ndui a anp
definilive host of
lining of gizzard.
larvae may cause
paralysis of legs
serosal surface of
documented.In
Principal Clinical
racoon faeces.
Racoons are
Unthriffiness. PM:
of intesline.
Bayliascaris
procyonis.
migrans
intestine.
worm
subIs
 mentary canal of the predator, may be found. This is termed pseudoparasitism.
Global. Found in 
many species
parlicularly
Occurrence
common.
Relative
 Global
allhough the
parasile may
have species-
 Documented in
Also in ducks
slodoi puo
Probably all
Susceptible
species,
Species
Auou
[rare].
picked up from
Porrocaecum spp
disinfechion.
u piboydaidoy
budgerigars.
Ascaridia spp
contaminaled
environment.
AppendixTable 5.6Helminth parcasies.
Cause
二
Helminth parasites
No.
P22
P23
Gizzard worms
Ascaridiasis
Disease
324
Appendices
[B17], chronic
colibacillosis.
 Mycoplasmosis
 Differential
Diagnosis
[B25]
Confirmation of
Ascarid egg.
Faecal exam.
Jaddn
irritation, chemosis
Unthriffiness and
Causes nodules
 Principal Clinical 
Parasile burrows
beneath horny
and inlestine.
sudden death.
membrane and
and ulceralion.
Occurs under
shruclures →
hact may
niclitating
associaled
intestine.
possible
Signs
recognised. Not 
 common than.
 Not uncommon 
May be more
pathogenic.
Occurrence
always
Relative
including owls.
Passeriformes,
Psiltaciformes,
Galliformes,
 Anseriformes
Susceptible
All found in
raptors
raplors.
u! punaj
Species
cockroach and some
intermediate hosts 
Dispharynx spp,
 intermediate host,
are crustaceans.
intermediate host.
Spiroptera spp
Intermediate hosts
Ceratospira spp.
[Habronema
cockroach is
Thelazic spp
incertum].
Cause
Appendix Table 5.6 Coninued.
No.
P24
P25
 gizzard worms
Disease
Appendices
325
[Continved]
produce similar
while necrolic
scrapings of
[P14] can
mUcosa in 
oropharynx
eggs.
[P6]
 Faecal examinalion, 
Faecal exam shows
 shed sporadically,.
Examine faeces for
 ova which are like
Aonsn 'paom
embryonaled,
herefore must
Ascarid egg.
samples.
proventriculus cnd
 Dysphagia. Worms
ropharynx (Plate 
condirion. Mucoid
necrosis of lining
noy6noy punay
pathogenic unless
here is a heavy
mucosa of caeca.
found beneath
May be
somelimes with
blood → death.
The worm iself is
 emacialion in
while
probably not
oesophagus.
infeclion →
Or
山I
Toduce
plaques i
pharynx.
Anorexia,
koilin. 
6
 Probably global
 Probably global 
uncommon.
人iaA pun 
common.
u pun
Common
All Anseriformes.
 Passeriformes,
Psillaciformes.
 Probably all
Anseriformes.
Galliformes,
call raplors, 
species.
puo
birds.
Amidostomum cnseris
lransport veclors.
Adult birds acl as
hrough a ransport
Heterakis gillinarum
 Earthworms act as
Sometimes pass
lakes 3 weeks.
hansport hosis.
Capilaria spp
cycle, but
earhworm.
host, e.g.
P26
P27
P28
specifi to ducks
jhread worms or 
Gizzard worms
[carriers of the 
Capillaria spp
asaa6 pup
hair worms]
Caecal worms
prolozoan
parasile
326
Appendices
Capillaria [P27],
Trichomoniasis
UDIAD
[P26, P23].
pox [V35]).
 Differential
raplors
parrots),
[P14],
[M2],
8
conlcining α single
 Elliplical embryonaied 
Fcecal examinalion:
embryonated egg
Faecalexaminalion:
 small, lliplical,.
eggs in faeces.
 Confirmation of
sisos
rachea.
larva.
provenlriculus and
AST↑, CK↑ Ollen
 in proventriculus.
haemorrhage
found in trachea,
Principal Clinical 
weight loss and
large numbers of
worms in caeca
Parasites cause
obshruclion →
ymphopaenia,
unthriffiness →>
PM: pairasiles
leucocytosis,
helerophilia,
monocylosis,
nodules in 
Dyspnoea →
diarrhoea.
death.
anorexia,
bronchitis,
pneumonia.
parlial
signs.
eglh.
death.
subis
个
个
Bunp siauko
reading even
hot summer
shallow waler.
Caribbean.
cand uncovered
 in epizoolics.
 Southeast Asia
cviaries with
ecrthen floors
basin, but
problem in
Occurrence
Very high
Relative
Toofs.
cockaloo and
Passeriformes
Waterfowl.
frogmouths
Probably can
species and
Susceptible
Galliformes
.
 infect all 
reservoirs.
Species
moor.
Aumo
Xuow
act as
Acuaria [Echinuric)] spp
Trichostrongylus tenuis
shnjs < sasany u! s66g
paratenic host [fresh
waler prawns, crabs,
I may pass through
a lransport host, e.g.
mammalian species
The 'rar' lung worm,
planarians → final
Direct ransmission
snails →
and beetles.
Cause
spp]
host.
6
6
Appendix Table 5.6 Conlinued.
P30A
No.
P29
P30
P31
meningilis 6-12
Trichostrongylus
Proventricular
eosinophilic
infection in
humans.
SUJOA
poultry]
Disease
SPP
Appendices
327
[Continved]
and beneath serosa.
Examine stained blood
Most easily removed
samples. Adull worm
embryonaled egg in
PM: remove eye and
accidentally seen 
Adosopua buunp
Faecalexamination:
embryonaled egg.
circlet of hooks on
PM: adult worm in
 alimenlary canal
Oval, thin-walled,
 examine orbil.
I use flotalion 
 spindle-shaped,
lechnique.
faeces.
head.
6
Parasie found in the
parrols both adult
worms and larvae
Microfilariae have
oslrich may cause
and unthriffiness if
consolidalion →
necrosis → death.
migralion, larvae
can cause severe
 orbit and nasal
u! punoj 
chamber of eye 
intestinal mucosa
causing enleriltis
present in large
inflammation.
 During visceral
swellings
beenremoved
melalarsals.
from anterior
 sa
Occasional
in lungs of
sis ss
PM: found in
localised 
around
numbers.
can
pn
 more common 
Commonly found
Not uncommon.
localised.Can
May be much
 documented.
be a serious
 sublropical
Cygnels and
ducks where
fesh-waler
reg ions.
shrimp
 ain [dds
pesen)]
UD4
Raplors [Simpson 
waders, herons,
crows, geese,
 Documented in 
Passeriformes,
 Psilltaciformes
Documenled in
 Passeriformes,
and lorikeels.
 and Harris
Also gulls
cockaloos.
walerfowl,
[including 
19921.
raplors
Falcons
found as microflaria 
Biling arthropods act
veclors. Weather
Centrorhynchus and
which may be either
aqualic or lerrestrial
 Possible predalor- 
host - earthworm.
blood stream.
favour increase in 
veclor e.g. gnals.
Acanthocephalid
invertebrate hoss
 Cyathostoma lari
Cyathostoma spp
[Polymorphous,
 specific forms 
 All have specific
intermediate
Fillicollis
Larvae of
.5
P33
P32
P34
 papay au
Cyathostoma
relaled to
 Syngamus
Filariasis
worms
328
Appendices
Raillietina spp can
produce nodules
luberculosis
Differential
Diagnosis
avian
[B17].
PM: varying degree of
present scrape and
microscopically - 
examine mucus 
show larvae with
hooks. May find
 Examine fceces for
 Confirmation of
enterilis and
one sample.
 fluke eggs.
General unthrifiness,
General debility,
may be relaied to
where flukes are
any localion, even
in vascular system,
 anaemia. Signs
siluated in body.
Principal Clinical 
found in almost
and influence 
secondary PM
pathogenic.
Often not
anorexia.
signs.
subIs
common,
except if near
Most common in
local tropical
Seen in imporled
Not uncommon
birds. 30% in
Not common
Occurrence
Occurrence
variable.
Not very
water.
regions
Relative
Global.
areas.
seed and fruit
nestlings being
imported birds.
species. Less
ealing birds
Raplors and
Occasionally
Waterfowl and
common in
Columbiformes
Probably all 
except for 
Passeriformes
Falconiformes
Psiltcaciformes
Susceptible
seen in
Penguins
owls.
usually an arthropod
he counlry of origin.
species in birds. Not
secondary host. Their
intermediate host, 
 Numerous Iremalode
pun pq jo sgou
Maybe insect or a
parlicularly host
always require a
secondary hosl.
心
usually but not
always aqualic.
which
pends
mollusc 
bird.
Cause
Appendix Table 5.6 Confinued.
No.
P35
P36
Tapeworms
Disease
Appendices
329
Aas ao aq ose a pue ssas pasaru rapun ae spnq al uaum uosas auaaq au aup asru oi spuan spi jo pe aseied au
 Other causes of
parasilic mites.
[Continved]
hippoboscids
ecloparasite.
size [slighily
irritation,
pun
Differential
Diagnosis
house fly)
any other 
Because
adous
find even on marine
hold feather up lo
lice
dark-coloured flies.
entire life cycle 
shaft of feather.
Confirmation of
, look for
dorsoventrally
flaltened, stouh
Recognilion of
Diagnosis
9.
Most lice feed on feather debris
Tesllessness. Lloss of condirion.
checkbypreeningor'anting'
cand trypanosomes.Often jump
clothing and hair and difficult
remove. Can be a problem
and not on blood but some 
feathers 'in the blood'. May
umai ay uo paay Aou
Healihy birds keep lice in 
 Principal Clinical Signs 
bb
debilitated
Very common,
Very common
Occurrence
Relative
more than one
jou pun
parlicularly host
 Almost cerlainly
punoy aq Aou
specific.Seen
parlicularly on 
pigeons, swifs,
bird, at
different sites.
Probably all
Susceptible
species
marlins,
swallows
Species
All bird lice are biting
Contributing Factors
Siphunculata] cre
found in mammals.
winglessrelated lo
complele life cycle
on host others lay
or chewing lice 
Arthropods, often
The sucking lice
lhe sheep ked.
Some species
Arthropod ectoparasites
:apioi
P36
P37
No.
hatchlings.
pathogens.
Hippoboscids
louse flies]
Parasite
.9
lice
330
Appendices
but not usually
leather picking 
ecloparasite,
in caplive
 Differential
siss
parrols.
probable source of
removed from head.
'abno ssni6 u!
amine perches by
 Identification of adult
the bird
miles wear gloves
under
Because of cross 
fadult fleaslo
Examine specimens
Confirmation of
ciscerlain the
 ihe infestalion.
α white sheel
Diagnosis
perches.
bird
8
 the roof spaice of a house.
and both eastern and western
 Can be lethal to small neslings
around the head and eyes -
Adult fleas do not jump but
 Principal Clinical Signs
 resllessness.
leave
 just found dead.
hospilalised :
Ilritation
puo
个
↑
snain busau
 Common in the 
seen
probably
imporled
han
.
 Both lypes of
puD
Occurrence
dnp
and nest
probably
realised.
Relative
Global.
boxes.
birds.
global
may 
more
6
specific as lice.
 Mainly on poullry
and raplors if
large range of
Passeriformes
Documented on
aviaries.
near poullry.
jsoy s jou
gamebirds,
both
common in 
caplive,
ubu
buol
cracks and crevices,
 Contributing Factors 
elc. Feeds on bird 
Although wingless,
rapidly in summer
[Ornithonyssus spp].
on host, therefore
 Northern fowl mite
more pathogenic.
 Many species of
 lo leap a
Can long survive
Echidnophaga
Appendix Table 5.7 Conlinued.
months.
colour]
able 
P38
P39
No.
Sticktight
Parasite
fleas
Fleas
Mites
Appendices
331
Red mites [P40],
[Continved]
feather and 
Trombicula
quill miles
Idenlificalion of larvae   Red mites 
Circovirus,
[P42].
[P41].
Examine with a hand
ens or, belter sill,
conlenls onlo a
 Skin scrapings and
Very small and off.
microscopically.
 possibly biopsy.
white in colour.
squeezethe
experl
 idenlification.
 on skin.
Need
lritation and vesicles where mite
feathers of the head, neck and
pruritus, scaly dermalilis with
cause an allergic reaclion and
: is a heavy infestation -
一
Usually not pathogenic unless
pruritus cnd feather loss wilth
has bilten and feather loss.
occasional thickening of the
powdery malerial of feather
Heavy infestalion may cause
death
100 quail
desquamalion of the skin.
t pathogenic but may be
 seen ithe floor 
skin. May be found in
without cny deaths.
brown scabs and 
sarcoplic mange
over
Author has
stumps.
there
caffer e
common than
where food is
Can be found 
badly slored 
Widespread
uncommon
 May be a lot 
recognised.
anywhere
humid
condifions.
infection
localised.
 Probably
pqo6
puo
more
.5
Not host specific
and found on
p s
Documented in
owls. Probably
jsow u sinooo
living birds.
Documented in
 quite a wide
some fime or
species and
speciesare
granivorous
infected at
passerines,
range of
species.
species.
other.
Mainly
Various species inhabit
different parls of the 
slralum corneum of
fruit. Transpored on
insecis and by wind.
Larvae of Trombicula
found on different
Found on foodstuffs,
Scavenge in birds'
invertebrates and
feather and are
paris of the body
puo dds sapo
hippoboscids
paslure during 
Many free living
 other species
feeding on
planls.
ilch' or ‘′
species.
nesis.
Harvest mites  P41
P42
P43
 P44 
Epidermoptic
Forage mites
quill mites
mites
332
Appendices
Avipox [V35]
Neoplasms of 
malnutrition.
Differential
lhe beak,
cere,
brown
[B8].
seen in air sacs by
fansillumination of
he Irachea in small
birds. Eggs may be
found in the faeces.
Gently scrape lesions
 In live bird may be
endoscopy and
very easily found.
 of condilion, dyspnoea, loss 
 Grey-while encruslalions around
ds6 bzaus i
other
in air sacs with mucus
=
head shaking, rhinilis →
beak. Often resulls i
necrosis. Also tassle foot
he cere, the beck, the
lesions on canaries and
lesions around cloaca.
 Principal Clinical Signs
pneumonia.
lower
PM:
and
common than
Occurrence
realised.
Veryvery
common.
'sba uo
Occasional.
Global,
Common,
Mostly reported in
Passeriformes,
i
Occasionally
Psiltaciformes.
Crossbils, other
Passeriformes
 Psiltaciformes,
Gouldian
many free
birds
linches.
Xuou
living
feeding but eggs in
 Contributing Factors
Cnemidocoptes spp
Sternostoma spp
uo jno paii
birds infect the 
and infect birds.
faecesmay
Appendix Table 5.7 Conlinued.
P45
P46
No.
Air sac mites
Aip>s pup
Scaly face
'Depluming
10,421.
pigeons
Parasite
Appendices
333
 Body size larger
than mites.
 Tends to feed on the 
 Somelimes easily seen
but also close and
examinalion of the
detailed bodily 
host at night.
bird.
arboviruses [e.g. louping ill →
 clso transmit Borelia spp.
 Sucks blood. Heavy infestalion
s  pau s
bedema
Meliculous care is needed to
: a lot of blood.
haemorrhage [Plate 6].
ai q  p s
→anaemia → death in 
Irritation, loss of condion,
anaemia and death if
from the affecled area.
can cause
jou op spii
lose quile
bites 
removed.
·buno
pub
Blow fly slrike is
but localised
Allacks grouse
sheep, small
lethered near
birds but can
not all that
affect chicks
lemperale
subtropical
 on moors.
 Carried by 
mammals, 
climates.
 Mostly in
lcons
poullry.
puo
Seen
nest.
oslriches. Seen
Documented on
so could reach
ihe bird has an
parlicularly if
Galliformes,
open wound.
Potenlially all
swallows.
Probably all
stations.
raplors i
Europe.
species,
Pigeons,
P48 Hard licks, e.g. lxodes
Members of the Order
Oeciacus spp Adulls
Calliphora, Lucilia and
for some lime.
environment - birds'
environment a long
 Soft licks, e.g. Argas
 cause blow fly strike
nesls. Adulls can 
survive in the
Phormia spp
s04
fime.
spp
spp.
P47
P49
Parasilic on
mammals
and birds
both
s6ng
334
Appendices
APPENDIX 6 POISONS LIKELY TO AFFECT BIRDS
This list is not comprehensive and is only a guide. A specific diagnosis of poisoning is not
always possible - much depends on the species, even the individual on circumstantial
evidence.
 The analysis of samples can be expensive and the analyst must be given a good idea of
what to look for. One should collct samples of liver, kidney and the contents of proven-
 triculus and gizzard. Collect pancreas if zinc is suspected or brain for organophosphates.
Wrap all samples in aluminium foil and freeze. Contact the laboratory to ascertain
if analysis is possible. Many poisons do not cause acute death, but in sub-lethal doses
may be responsible for lowered fertility, reduced resistance to infection and non-specific
symptoms such as sporadic nervous tremors. Few cases of poisoning are malicious; most
are due to carelessness or thoughtlessness.
For a fuller discussion of the subject of poisoning in birds the reader is referred to:
Labonde (2006), Arnall and Keymer (1975), Cooper (1978) and Cooper and Eley (1979).
In the UK: Veterinary Poisons Information Service (VPIS), London Tel. 0207 635 9195,
Leeds 0113 245 0530. In case of wildlife poisoning, contact the Wildlife Offcer of the
local DEFRA Agricultural Development and Advisory Service or use DEFRA's website,
www.defra.gov.uk/portalsite/defraweb/index.
Appendices
335
I contain theobromine which can cause hyperexcitability, cardiopathy and death. Few documented cases in
ds sprays and baihs are loxic if misused on birds. Such substances are carbaryl, dursban, malathion, elc.
ccess lo lrealed bail. Sodium fluoroacelale and fluoroacelamide are also widely
 asn pia uo sp aa r asn ds ad saa sgn o ads in wn woi paaailim
These are used lo conlrol garden and cgriculural pests slugs cnd snails) and the veclors of many helminth
Aq ualpa aq Aow puo pesyoiou aio suoabid papayy 'soain unqin u suoabid jouos ol pasn ain asay
sis i m laya - sisind ss ssam ulm - s Ansn ai suis ps
Ingested by birds afer oil spillge at sea. Also some wild birds nest in and around oil refineries.
UK for killing moles and rodenls.
chemicals is not shrict enough.
high temperalures.
Comments
used c
AIl
isechicides used to control pesls in domeslic animals.
Ammonium sulphale, phenoxyacid herbicides,
Tea, coffee, cocoa [drinking chocolate], ealing 
Appendix Table 6.1 Poisonous subslances.
rganomercury compounds. Lead arsenale.
Paraquat and diquat - herbicides.
iseclicidal and herbicidal sprays.
Phosphorothionales and malathion.
chemicals than humans.
Ticultural diesel.
Type of Poison
Aphachloralose
carbamales.
chocolate.
Molluscicides
birdsare
Rodenlicides
control.
Crude oil
336
Appendices
Raplors may pick up sub-clinical lead levels from the lissues of prey species and also inlact lead shot from their
aih aq io siq aho pasu mauo Ao puo salgo asau a ssaon aay Ao Aund so
a a uu pan aro i pan o ai saliady pu sosai pu so
, copper boat nails, copper piping and pennies.
The cardinal signs of poisoning in all species are CNS and also in Parrols hcemalurid.
 of copper are wire, parlicularly elechrical,
1980).
galvanized wire on cages elc.
plasma levels raised.
ealen by birds.
Comments
Sources
from elechric irons, ironing board covers, heatlamp
 In wutefowl the differenlial diagnosis is bolulism.
Fumes from Teflon non-sick cooking utensils, chip
Appendix Table 6.1 Conlinuedl.
[including pine disinfecianis] 
manganese, litanium]
covers [see p. 189].
pans, saucepans.
Type of Poison
Disinfectants
Raptors
ppa
Parrots
Appendices
337
 112) of alfected birds showed intense red coloralion of
Borulism: menlioned under infeclious diseases. Blow flies offen altack meat infected with Clostridium borufinum,
In the industrial process of coaling plaslic onlo melcl sheels, faully selfing of eleclrical conrols resulled in the
contain the toxins that, if they are hemselves eaten by birds, poison the bird. For example, the milkweeds
contain cardiac glycosides produced by the plant. If the insect is ealen by a bird it is poisoned.
 indirect contact through tobacco stains on a smoker's hands can be loxic to household pels
warm almosphere can accumulale loxic cyanide fumes]
quinquefolia]
astor oil plant [Ricinus communis]
Amarylls [ Amaryllidaceae]
Foxglove [Digitalis spp]
exhaust system.
Poinsellia [
Bird
ds house planis some of which may be loxic for
Other plaslics if burnt can produce loxic humes
Garden incinerators, indushrial manufaclurers of
Naturally occurring toxins
Garden and House Plants 
some species of bird
Carbon monoxide
ferlilisers.
[dioxin].
338
Appendices
 pa jo saads as jo as au u nd ssid pad ain q uaaa u pasn shp i
The 14h cenlury physician Paracelsus scaid 'Al things cre poison; nothing is wilhout poison, only the dose 
Aop auo u lla sssh ud au buduns u pun paipo aaq ioapng qnd auo - pooi
Hemlock [Conium sp.] - seeds ealen by pigeons have caused fatalies
If ealen in large amounts causes necrosis of the exlremilies
oipu u!
Varioushousehold furnilure and cleaning sprays
Narcissus [Narcissus spp, including daffodil] 
Hyacinth [Hyocinth orientalis]
had widely been used.
Brackish waler 
Paintremover
Nail varnish
Comments
Ammonia
Yew [
Appendix Table 6.1 Continued.
Aflatoxins and other mycoloxins
Pant tannins and alkaloids
A few household toxins
lalrogenic loxins
Type of Poison
Appendices
339
APPENDIX 7 SOME SUGGESTED DIAGNOSTIC SCHEDULES
Not all the procedures listed may be necessary to reach a definitive diagnosis.
Schedule 1: Basic investigation of the sick bird
A basic investigation will be carried out as a sequel to the initial clinical examination and
anamnesis, after which there is still no clear indication of the cause of the problem. If
some more defnite clinical signs are present to indicate which body system or systems are
involved then it might be more appropriate to commence with one of the other schedules
listed. If a number of birds are affected, euthanasia of the worst and subsequent post-
mortem examination may enable a more rapid diagnosis to be made.
Full haematological examination
A haematological examination may indicate an inflammatory reaction, however, two
examinations 24-48 hours apart of total white cell count (TWCC) and red cell count
(RCC) are more useful than one single sample alone. For quick results, carry out in clinic.
If two consecutive counts are low in a young bird suspect circovirus.
A differential white cell count (WCC) may not be very helpful in making a diagnosis
in birds. Take into account any previously administered steroids.
Haematology may also indicate haemoparasite infection, anaemia and its type.
Basic biochemical profile
Total protein, albumin:globulin ratio, fibrinogen
In most cases, this data will only provide a rough guide to the problem. For in-depth
interpretation of the results see the relevant sections in Chapter 4. These parameters
provide some information on the overall state of health and the presence or absence of an
inflammatory response.
AST, CPK, bile acids
These parameters may indicate a hepatopathy or only just tissue trauma (blood samples
should not be taken after i.m. injection).
I the sample is lipaemic
Cholesterol estimation will indicate possible hypothyroidism, which will also be indicated
by hypoglycaemia. Alternatively, hypercholesterolaemia may be associated with fatty liver
andkidneysyndrome.
Calcium
Latent hypocalcaemia can be an important cause of debilitation in some parrots
(particularly African grey parrots - Psittacus erithbacus) and also in raptors.
Uric acid
Increased levels of uric acid do not necessarily indicate nephropathy. Uric acid should be
considered in conjunction with the plasma levels of albumin, glucose and CPK, together
with the haematology. Changes in these parameters may indicate starvation (also indicated
by loss of pectoral muscle), or extensive trauma accompanied by haemorrhage. These
conditions may also result in an increase of plasma uric acid.
Wholebody radiography
Both ventro-dorsal and latero-lateral views should be taken, and may be supplemented
with ultrasonography. It may indicate neoplasia, respiratory disease (e.g. air sacculitis)
skeletal disease, tuberculosis, aspergillosis, splenomegaly, which, with haematology and
340
Appendices
biochemistry, may indicate an increased immune response (e.g. to Chlamydophila), changes
or displacement of the GI tract (e.g. neuropathic proventricular dilatation of psittacine
birds) or a possible cardiopathy.
Schedule 2: For the investigation of respiratory signs
To carry out some of the following procedures, light isoflurane anaesthesia may be
required. If respiratory disease is severe an air sac cannula will be needed. The clinician
should try to decide if upper or lower systemic disease is present.
 (q     r  i e om
cause respiratory signs. Also, respiratory disease may be the most obvious sign of an overall
systemic infection particularly viral in origin.
Wholebody radiography
of disease in the respiratory tract (air sacculitis, granulomata of the lungs, air trapping
etc.), space-occupying lesions (neoplasms, egg peritonitis, etc.) may be responsible for
respiratory signs.
Full haematological and biochemical profiles - including cholesterol
This should be done for the same reasons as outlined in Schedule 1. Hypercholesterolaemia
may indicate hypothyroidism, with associated hypertrophy of the gland and pressure on
the syrinx
Endoscopy and laparoscopy
Endoscopy should be performed on the trachea, syrinx, choanal aperture and posterior
nares. A laparoscopic examination of the coelomic air sacs, caudal surface of the lung and,
in larger birds, the mesobronchus, should also be carried out.
from overt air sacculitis and aspergillosis, etc., parasites such as Serratospiculum (this
should also show microflaria), Syngamus and Sternostoma may be seen. Air sac mites
in small fnches are more easily seen by transillumination of the trachea via the skin of
the neck.
Microbiology
Carry out microbiological examination of all exudates and solid lesions including the
examination of stained smears as well as culture. A variety of organisms may be isolated,
some of which will be secondary viral infection, or lesions of hypovitaminosis A may be
found. Lesions of trichomoniasis may be confused with owl berpes virus infection. Myco-
bacteria may be isolated as well as Aspergilus spp, Candida spp and Cryptococcus spp.
They may all take time to culture, so cytology is important.
Serological examination
Serological examination may confrm the presence of Chlamydophila, Aspergilus, Myco
bacteria, Salmonella (sometimes a systemic infection), Borrelia, Mycoplasma and a variety
of viral infections. Among the latter are paramyxovirus (including Newcastle disease
I  i sn a sd s p   e (
depend on the particular circumstances.
Virus isolation
Some viruses can be isolated and identifed by cell culture. However, special transport
media must be used. Check with the laboratory frst. These viruses include Amazon tra-
cheitis, infectious bronchitis and pigeon herpes.
Appendices
341
Cytology
Cytology can be carried out by either the clinician or the laboratory. Sample exudates,
washings or solid material from the paraorbital sinuses, the choanal space, tracheal wash-
ings, etc., as well as specimens obtained by endoscopy or laparoscopy. Don't forget the
use of Indian ink if searching for Cryptococcus.
Faecal examination
When investigating respiratory signs perhaps faecal examination may not be such an
obvious part of the search. However, some parasites (e.g. Syngamus, Capillaria, Sarcocystis
and Cryptosporidia) produce ova or encrusted larvae that are shed in the faeces. These
may not be released regularly so that more than one sample should be examined. Don't
forget use of Giemsa stain for Cryptosporidia.
Toxins
Industrial effluent, crop and forestry sprays, tobacco smoke, Teflon, carbon monoxide,
creosote and other timber treatments, ammonia from unsanitary aviaries or cages and
aerosols may all be responsible for respiratory signs.
Shedule 3: Investigation of gastrointestinal problems,
including hepatopathy
Faecal examination
 It is necessary to carry out a complete faecal examination for parasites and bacterial
culture.
 Not all birds with loose droppings have diarrhoea or a GI problem. They may be just
anorexic. Take note of any abnormal colour for that particular species. Bright green,
caused by excessive biliverdin, usually indicates hepatitis, often viral but may be caused
by Chlamydophila or even Plasmodium. Clay-coloured faeces may be due to maldigestion
Or paramyxovirus III in Neophema parakeets. Chalky faeces in ostrich chicks may be
caused by adenovirus.
Overt blood may be due to neoplasms, tuberculosis, bacterial enteritis (often with
mucus), lead or faecoliths. Take into account what the bird may have eaten (e.g. elder or
blackberries). Some drugs (e.g. B vitamins) may colour droppings. Absence of or reduced
faeces may be due to mechanical obstruction, parasites, cloacal impaction, intussusception
or just water deprivation.
Microscopic examination
● Stain faeces sample with Giemsa
o To detect Cryptosporidia or Giardia
· Stain sample with iodine
o Detection of excessive starch
● Stain sample with Sudan II
o Detection of fat
● Stain with Gram stain
o Differential assessment of Gram- and Gram+
● Stain with acid-fast stain
o Detection of Mycobacteria
● Examine fresh (within 10 minutes of being voided) faecal sample on warm slide
o Detection of Giardia or Hexamita - often diffcult to confirm
342
Appendices
Microbiological and cytological examination of crop and
proventricular washings
This is particularly important for the detection of trichomonads, yeasts and fungi. Use
Gram stain and lactophenol cotton blue and examine unstained fresh sample on warm
slide to detect moving trichomonads.
Microbiological examination of fresh castings from raptors
Note that some other species may also produce regurgitated castings or pellets.
Radiography
Use ventro-dorsal and lateral projections, plain and contrast media techniques (possibly
via enema). Radiography may be supplemented by ultrasonography. Imaging techniques
may indicate foreign bodies, neoplasia, ulceration, proventricular dilatation, undigested
seed in the intestine and occasionally parasitic nematodes.
Endoscopy
Endoscopy of the upper alimentary tract should be carried out as far as the proventriculus
and also of the cloaca and rectum. If necessary, inflate with air or water.
Haematology
Complete haematology profle for the same reasons as in Schedule 1.
Biochemical profile
A blood biochemistry profle as for Schedule 1 should be obtained, but in addition to
include lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), glucose and alkaline phosphate (AP). This should
give an indication of hepatopathy (this may need to be associated with radiographic and/or
ultrasonographic interpretation, liver biopsy, haematology and microbiological examina-
tion (via laparoscopy) to confrm the aetiology). There may be a need to investigate toxins.
Hyperglycaemia may indicate a pancreatitis, diabetes mellitus or lead toxicosis. Increased
AP may be a sign of aflatoxicosis.
Laparoscopy/laparotomy for biopsy of liver or proventriculus
If a hepatopathy is suspected and a liver biopsy is contemplated, give a prior injection
of vitamin K. Biopsy of proventriculus may confrm neuropathic proventricular
dilatation.
Plasma T4 estimation
Reduced thyroid hormone may indicate thyroid dysplasia in an enlarged thyroid. This may
cause possible retching, change in vocalisation. Also note any increased cholesterol.
Schedule 4: The investigation of renal disorders
It is important to appreciate that renal disease in birds is not usually suspected during the
initial examination. Nephropathy is much more likely to be revealed during the subsequent
laboratory examination or during the investigation of other body systems. It may be indi-
cated by other apparently unrelated signs, such as unilateral or bilateral lameness or paresis
of the legs or by gross abdominal changes resulting in dyspnoea.
The classical early signs of nephropathy in mammals (polydipsia, polyuria, oliguria)
are not usually notable signs of avian renal disease. The avian kidney is proportionately
larger than in mammals so that most of it will have to have become diseased before plasma
uric acid levels rise significantly or gout is seen. Also uric acid is much less toxic than urea
The physiology of avian kidneys varies considerably between species and also quite dif-
ferently from that in mammals and is not well documented
Appendices
343
Complete haematology
 't s  ssn s  r p aq pos  
kidneys are involved in approximately 50% of allcases of multisystemic diseases and also
many renal disease cases are anaemic.
Biochemical profile
A biochemical profle should be performed as in Schedule 1, but with the addition of
plasma urea. Although not hitherto considered an important parameter in the diagnosis
of nephropathy, Lumeij (1987) has demonstrated that a rise in plasma urea is the single
most important factor for diagnosis of pre-renal failure (see Chapter 4).
Note the normally high levels of postprandial uric acid in peregrine falcons and red
tailed hawks which may also occur in other raptors. Also note a hypoalbuminuria may
be the result of protein loss due to glomerulonephritis.
Urine analysis
Urine for analysis may be carried out on a sample aspirated by syringe and needle from
waxed paper or directly from the bird. Birds, especially parrots, when stressed in a clinic
often pass fluid excreta, the urinary fraction of which can be harvested. In ostriches the
urine is voided frst and separately from faecal matter.
Use Multistix dip stick tests (the test for protein is unreliable). Examine the
urine sample for castes and/or cell types which may give an indication of renal disease.
Check the specifc gravity. This should be 1.005-1.020. Check the pH. This should be
between 4.7-8.0.
 It is most important to be careful to collect only urine uncontaminated by faeces - this
may not be easy. Persistent proteinuria together with hypoalbinaemia and glycosuria with
hyperglycaemia may indicate a glomerulonephritis, also often with ascites or pedal oedema.
Red pigmentation of the urine may be due to haemoglobinuria or haematuria or porphy-
rinuria (an indication of lead toxicity). Urine positive for porphyrins fluoresces red under
ultraviolet light but blue if negative. Haematuria may be from the reproductive tract
or caused by Amazon or conure bleeding syndromes. Haemoglobinuria may be the result
of a coagulopathy, Plasmodium, bacterial or chemical toxins.
 In birds laying eggs, the pH becomes acid (4.7). Calcium deposited in the shell results
in a plasma excess of hydrogen ions. Bicarbonate is reabsorbed from the urine to buffer
this, so that the urine becomes acid.
Endoscopy of the cloaca and laparoscopy
Endoscopy and/or laparoscopy may reveal a cloacal impaction not always seen at the
initial examination. Alternatively, a cloacal neoplasm may be seen.
 Laparoscopy and examination of the surface of the kidney may show any of the fol-
lowing: the pale waxy appearance of amyloidosis, the irregular surface texrure of glomeru-
lonephritis, neoplastic change, uric acid deposits in the parenchyma or on the surface
together with signs of gout on the surface of heart or liver.
Faecal examination
Some parasites, evidence of which may be found in the faeces, notably Eimeria truncata
of geese, Cryptosporidia and occasionally trematodes, infect the kidneys.
In addition, any bird exhibiting signs of hypovitaminosis A, ie. pustules in the oro-
pharynx (particularly African grey parrots), hyperkeratosis of the feet, paraorbital sinusitis
or bilateral epiphora, should be suspected of having an underlying nephropathy caused
by metaplasia of the epithelium of the kidney tubules. This may reduce active excretion
of uric acid or affect urea excretion. Other renal toxins not already mentioned are afla-
toxin, other mycotoxins, ethylene glycol and carbon tetrachloride.
344
Appendices
Schedule 5: Signs of polydipsia/polyuria
Polydipsia and polyuria are generally not indications of nephropathy in birds. These signs
are most likely to indicate a hormonal problem, hepatopathy or the use of corticosteroids
Or they may be psychogenic. Also, excessive fruit or high protein or toxic drugs or the use
of progesterones may all precipitate this condition. Some infections, particularly para-
myxovirus in pigeons, chronic chlamydophilosis or Klebsiella infection may all be respon-
sible for a marked and prolonged polydipsia and polyuria. Always take into account
any concurrent and primary alimentary tract disease which may account for substantial
fluid loss.
Urinary glucose
See Schedule 4 for method of sampling.
Dipstick testing for glucose should be negative, but if the sample is slightly contami-
nated with faeces there may be a false positive. Only if there is a byperglycaemia should
α diagnosis of diabetes mellitus be made otherwise the cause may be glomerulonephritis
if other signs are present.
Water deprivationtest
Collect urine samples as described in Schedule 4.
This test must only be carried out on normally bydrated birds (first check the
PCV) and those in good bodily condition. Starve the bird 12 hours if a small bird or up
to 20 hours for pigeon-sized birds, to reduce the risk of faecal contamination.
Measure the urinary specific gravity at the start and after 24 hours without water. Specifc
gravity should increase to above 1.025 in the normal bird which if polydipsic/
polyuric may be psychogenic in origin. If no increase occurs and the specifc gravity
of the sample remains between 1.008 and 1.012, this could indicate nephropathy,
    e  r    s
insipidus. Psychogenic polydipsia may be related to stressors and increased secretion of
corticosteroids. It is not uncommon in recently weaned parrots, cockatoos and African
grey parrots.
The use of antidiuretic hormone
Arginine vasotocin is the principle hormone regulating water balance in birds. Mammalian
vasopressin does have some effect but is not so potent. Using a dose of 0.5 units/kg body
weight of vasopressin, the urinary specific gravity should increase with the water depriva-
tion test. If this occurs, a diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus involving the pituitary
gland can be made. There may be other signs such as exophthalmos or episodic seizures
if a neoplasm is involved.
Radiography
Barium enema with air contrast of the coprodaeum and rectum may indicate pathology
 of these areas which are important in water conservation
Schedule 6: The investigation of dermatological problems including
skin, feathers, beak, claws, feet, watfles and comb
As in mammals, the diagnosis of some of these problems can sometimes be very diffcult
and they are often complex and multifactorial.
Before considering the use of any ancillary aids or laboratory tests, it is essential to
obtain a thorough clinical history, which should include enquiry about the duration
of the condition and the relation of this to the breeding history and breeding cycle of
the bird. Information should also be sought on any previous illness and any relevant
vaccine status.
Appendices
345
Husbandry practices should be considered, including the type and size of caging, since
this affects physical ftness and behaviour. The humidity of the ambient atmosphere if to0
dry leads to brittle feathering. How much natural and artificial light the bird is subjected
t0 is important, since prolonged periods beyond what is normal for the species or decreas-
ing or increasing periods of light affect the pinealhypothalamus/pituitary complex which
has an important influence on moulting. Diet received by the bird is most important and
many pet and captive birds are defcient in one or more fractions of their diet. Hypovita-
minosis A is easy to recognise by its other signs.
In sexually dimorphic species any abnormal changes in secondary sexual characteristics
or behaviour may indicate an underlying sex hormone problem. Other abnormalities of
behaviour, particularly in household parrots, may be stress-related resulting from changes
in the routine or life style of the owner.
Next, a thorough visual examination of the affected part or parts, if necessary using
magnification and good lighting, should be carried out and much of what to look for has
been described in Chapter 3. However, when examining feathers, note further if they look
worn and frayed (i.e. not just chewed as with some parrots). Are new feathers emerging
and do they look normal? Some parrots which have been self-plucking for months or years
may have so damaged the epidermis of the follicles that they will never regenerate. A
simple but good routine is to carefully pluck a damaged feather, use it for testing, note
the exact position from which it was taken, then during the next 24 weeks watch the
new feather gradually emerge. If the epidermis and dermis have not been damaged,
  rn p  e j 
The observer should look to see if the uropygial gland is functional in those species
that have one. It is absent in ratites, rudimentary or absent in most pigeons and many
parrots. However, it is present in the African grey parrot and the budgerigar. When exam-
ining the beak, note if there is any lesion of the germinative layer and note if the claws
look normal.
Full health check (see Schedule 1)
Feather plucking, particularly in African grey parrots, can be due to chronic chlamydophi-
losis. These birds may look just like psychogenic feather pluckers. Also, chronic hypocal-
caemia can cause self-trauma in these birds. Giardia may cause self-plucking in cockatiels.
Underlying neoplasms and traumatic arthritis may also initiate localised self-trauma.
Hepatopathy may result in changes to the colour of plumage from green to yellow or black
or dark brown to black. Particularly dark-coloured or black feral pigeons often have an
underlying health problem.
Cytology and microscopy
Cytology of the pulp of affected feathers together with scrapings of cere and skin lesions
may reveal some ectoparasitic infections. Other ectoparasites may need special techniques
(see Appendix 7). Excessive dirt and debris may be seen trapped between the barbules
indicating the bird is not preening or able to bathe.
Biopsy
Skin biopsies should be preserved in buffered normal saline as for other biopsies. Always
include at least one feather follicle. A biopsy punch or scalpel can be used. Biopsy may be
necessary to confirm a suspicion of Avipox virus infection.
Microbiology and antibiotic sensitivity
Samples for microbiology and antibiotic sensitivity testing may be dry or moist. If the
sample is dry, small pieces harvested aseptically can be placed in the transport medium of
a swab tube. Squeeze feather pulp into a swab tube with sterile forceps.
346
Appendices
Microbiological pathogens may be either primary or secondary causes of skin problems,
so always search for an underlying cause. A great variety of pathogens, bacterial, yeast
and fungi, have been documented as having been isolated from avian skin and feathers.
Clostridial dermatitis is documented as causing a localised loss of feathers together with
a dark pigmentation of the skin (see Appendix 2).
Virology
Viruses, other than avipox, causing skin lesions for which histopathology may be appro-
priate are papilloma virus of the feet of some Passeriforrmes, localised dermal virus of the
feet of cockatoos, macaws and mallard ducks and berpes virus of lovebirds. The feather
o un a si iq sa e Aq ps ou aqd si siq jo as rs
(Plate21}.
 If the facility is available, use electronmicroscopy to examine newly emerging and
growing pin feathers. This has been used (courtesy of J.E. Cooper) to identify PBFD virus
in vasa parrots (Coracopsis vasa) (see Plate 5).
Test treatwithhaloperidol
 If all the above tests are negative, a presumptive diagnosis of psychogenic self-feather-
plucking may be made. Some species of parrot are particularly prone to this condition,
e.g. African greys, occasionally cockatoos and macaws, rarely budgerigars or cockatiels
The latter is more prone to self-rrauma of the prepatagium. All psychogenic cases need
nutritional support, spraying or bathing facilities, attention to light levels and other hus-
bandry improvements. Overall, complete resolution can only be expected in 20% of
cases and 30% show no improvement at all (see also other behavioural modifying drugs
Pp. 260 and 264).
Schedule 7: For the investigation of neurological signs
Many infectious diseases, toxins and traumas are responsible for neurological signs. In
will have a fair idea of the cause. Tests will then be needed to confrm the tentative diag-
nosis. Of course, in all cases, it is necessary to obtain a thorough clinical history, including
the duration of the problem, whether the bird has been recently purchased or received by
the owner, whether the signs are constantly present or occur sporadically. It is important
t0 obtain in-depth information on the husbandry and whether any medicaments have
been recently administered.
 Listed below are those conditions commonly responsible for neurological signs.
If none of those causes listed above could be the reason for any of the neurological
signs, or these have not been confrmed with subsequent tests, then a systemic examination
commencing with a thorough health check including those tests detailed in Schedule 1 will
need to be carried out. A systematic assessment of the nervous system may also have to
be implermented. The bird's alertness, signs of hyperactivity, signs of sleepiness Or any
abnormal behaviour will give an indication of the general state of the central nervous
system.
Cerebrospinal fluid
Although CFS is present, its collection from the subarachnoid space is not very practical
because of the considerable haemorrhage from the venous sinuses in this area.
Appendices
347
sin dds owydoan u uaas Auowoun on suoaid joa ui uowo
Both pathogens can cause granulomala which may start in the vertebral
Mainly Galiformes but also waterfowl and occasionally in some other
In the case of a very heavy infeclion, the encysted parasites may couse
All species can be affecled and can exhibil a variely of neurological
Rare, geographically localised, all species but moslly canaries
Mcinly Galliformes but can affect walefowl and pigeons
muscle damage and alrophy, weakness and paresis
Occasional CNS signs can somelimes affect finches 
Rare in birds but can occur in many avian species
May be the cause of muscle cramps in raplors
Quail, raptors, Psiltaciformes and walerfowl
Recorded as occurring in oshrich chicks
May have extended necks and drown
Young lurkeys - may cause lameness
Twirling syndrome in some finches
weakness, paresis and paralysis
Occasionally in other psillacines
Grouse spp and pheasanls
column, causing paralysis
Psillaciformes and geese
Paralysis of the phallus
Occasional CNS signs
parakeels.
All species
Comment
species
signs.
Sarcocyslis and the related Hommondia and Besnoitia spp
Ouck virus enteritis[duck plague] a herpes virus
 Newcasile disease [paramyxovirus serolype l]
Pigeon herpes virus [infeclious oesophagilis]
Avian encephalomyelitis [epidemic tremor]
Duck virus hepalilis [picorna virus]
Also PMV-1 mulant slrain, PMV-3
Appendix Table 7.1 Possiblecuses of neurologicl signs.
louping ill [an arbo virus]
Reliculoendotheliosis virus
A suspecled PMV virus
Reovirus [orthovirus]
Disease/disorder
Marek's disease
Mycobacteriosis
dds oiodsoo
Borna disease
Chlamydophila
Adenoviruses
Aspergillosis
Toxoplasmosis
isteriosis
Filariasis
Rabies
Giardia
Viruses (see Appendix 3]
348
Appendices
Reduced dielary vilcamins B1, B2, B6 and B12 may all cause neuropathy
May result in hepalic encephalopathy due lo raised plasma ammonia
Most common in hot weather but can occur at any fime where there is
Also possible in parrols secondary lo hepalopathy and starvalion
Can also occur in conures with conure haemorrhagic syndrome
syiam suawusy jo bupaa woq o anp sunms u uosom
Parlicularly waler birds but also raptors
secondaryhyperparathyroidism
Also household and aviary parrols
Weakness, dullness and fils
As for hypocalcaemia [above]
 possible in other species 
decaying animal waste.
Differenfiate botulism
All species
All species
Comment
leakage inlo walerways of badly slored agriculural
 lead and other heavy melals, such as zinc 
Hypovitaminosis D3, calcium deficiency 
Household pet aerosol sprays
Alaxia in conures
Hypoviltaminosis B
Hypovilcaminosis E
Disease/disorder
Hypocalcaemia
Hypoglycaemia 
Hepalopathies
chemicals
Bolulism
Appendix Table 7.1 Confinued.
Metabolic and nutritional 
Toxins [see Appendix 8]
Appendices
349
 cause pressure on the sacral plexus causing lameness,
Healed fracures but shil paralysis due lo vulsion of peripheral nerves
hesemay squeeze the sacral plexus behween synsacrum and lumour
ivermeclin,
Aggression from cage males, wild conspecifics during breeding,
metronidazole, dimelridazole, xylazine and medetomidine
levamisole,
Most water birds but any other birds drinking the water
All species feeding on grains, seeds or peanuls 
Usually pet parrols but any avicry kept birds
small size, cere may change colour
Gunshot wounds, not always obvious 
Road traffic orrailway injuries
Warm, shallow, static water
paresis or paralysis
fluoroquinolones,
12hours
predalors
Nephropathy, gonadal lumours and egg impaclion 
Neoplasia of the gonads in budgerigars 
Household plants and aviary pot plants 
 abosopiaao bnp ipripaw suabonol
Cerebrovascular episode, slrokes
Idiopathic epilepsy
Agal toxins
Aflatoxins
Trauma
Miscellaneous causes
350
ihere is almost complete decussalion of the oplic fibres so a defect on one side indicates a brain lesion on the
 aa i ro po o a ru s p  as  q p u s au s b
There is some discussion of the Irigeminal nerve in Chapter 2 under the heading Proprioception
Separate cssessment of this cranial nerve is difficult and not always praclical
First read the seclion dealing with the Auditory system in Chapler 2
Paralysis of the ongue and lack of sensalion indicale dysfunction
ISfo
musclesand
conlralaleral side
Total blindness 
read this first
Appendix Table 7.2 Assessment of cranial nerve funclion.
olhereye
Comment
birds
nervi
Vagus, Accesory and Hypoglossal (X, Xl, Xll
Oculomotor (Ill and Trochlear (IV)
Vestibulocochlear (Ill)
Cranial nerves 
Cranial Nerve (CN)
Trigeminal (V)
Abducent (V)
Olfactory (Il
Facial (VIl)
Optic ()
Appendices
351
The peripheral nervous system
The withdrawal reflexes in both wings and legs are segmental reflexes but should elicit a
conscious response if the spinal cord is intact. Similarly, the cloacal reflex is segmental.
Lesions of the thoracolumbar vertebrae are not uncommon and are indicated by conscious
appreciation of intact wing withdrawal reflex but no response by the bird to an intact leg
withdrawal reflex together with a cloacal reflex. Check by radiography.
Knuckling of the legs or an inability to grip the perch may be either an upper or lower
motor lesion.
Schedule 8: Cardiac disease
Although avian cardiac disease is probably a lot more common than is generally realised,
cardiac disease in birds. This is because of the relatively small size of the patient and the
high heart rates, leading to difficulties in the interpretation of auscultation. Signs of cardiac
disease may be complicated by other accompanying disease problems such as such as
respiratory disease, obesity and neoplasia.
The following signs in the absence of any other disease may lead the clinician to a ten-
tative diagnosis of cardiac disease:
· Chronic exercise intolerance
· General weakness and reluctance of the bird to hold itself erect on the perch
●Overall lethargy
An investigation can be carried out using radiography, ultrasonography and the elec-
trocardiograph, preferably without using general anaesthesia.
Radiography
Measurements of the dimensions of the cardiac shadow can be made on a good radiograph.
Pees et al. (2006) have indicated the following parameters: in most medium-sized psittacine
birds, African greys and Amazons (200-500g), the maximum transverse width of the
heart should be 36-41% of the length of the sternum and 51-61% of the width
of the thorax.
These workers have also detailed measurements for a limited number of other
species.
Ultrasound
Echocardiography may be useful to supplement radiography of the heart. Details are
given in Chapter 4.
Electrocardiography (ECG)
Electrocardiography is used regularly for monitoring anaesthesia in birds. However, except
q  a sds m a p sid ra u pe  said r
documented for the normal reference values for most avian species. Nevertheless the
ECG can be useful in indicating cardiac arrhythmias and conduction disorders. Detailed
information has been published by Lumeij and Ritchie (1994).
352
Appendices
This list should be used as a general guide only. In all clinical siruations birds should preferably be weighed accurately.
Weight Range (g)
228-315
008-029
008-029
340-480
850-2000
0011-018
150-180
440-470
600-685
15-270
358-500
310-460
6.6
8
2
1-8sL
18-1
1-001
1-001
8
545
268
Platycercus adscitus palliceps
I ochrocephala
Psephorus hoematogaster
Nymphicus hollandicus
Melopsitacus undufarus
Neophema chrysostoma
Cacatua moluccensis
Amazona omazonico
Poicephatus senegafus
Aratinga ocuticaudata
erythrogenys
Plarycercus floveolus
Neophema pulchella
Cocatua suiphurea 
Amazona cestiva
Amazona farinose
Amazona ventralis
Psittacus erithacus
Neophema bourkii
coflaria
DAopuo!
Pionus menstruus
Agapornis fischeri
Amozono festivo
Scientific Name 
Cacatua alba
o
nobilis
Aratinga
Aratinga
Ara
Double yellow-headed Amazon [levailnl's)]
Blue-headed parrol/Pionus parrot
lesser sulphur-crested cockaloo
Pale-headed rosella parakeet
prange-winged Amazon
Blue and gold macaw
ue-frontedAmazon
Moluccan cockaloo
Yellow-billed Amazon
Red-masked conure
Bourke's parakeet
 Common Name 
Scarlet macaw
Mealy Amazon
Hahn's macaw
bonnet
Budgerigar
Blue-winged
Appendix Table 8.1 Weighs of birds.
Cockaliel 
Blue 
6：
Psittaciformes
Order
Appendices
353
 698-1147, Females 1000-1350
Males 634-880, Females 980-1200
1100-1500
Females 970-1300
193-282
Males 500-600, Females 700-900
Males 160-170, Females 220-250
Males 560-850, Females 1
Females
145-167,
1066-089 s
8000-13,000
620-1000
1000-2000
2000-2500
3100-4090
2700-3600
690-1495
975-3500
680-1100
574-1000
200-235
001-06
1362
4540
Males
Males
800
9
Phalacrocorax aristotelis
Accipiter gentilis gentilis
 Streptopelia decaocto
Gallinula chloropus 
Anas platyrhynchos
abuteounicinctus
Vanellus vanellus
Fumaris glacialis
Branta canadensis
Cairina moschata
Buteo jamaicensis
 peregrinus
finnuncufus
Ardea cinerea
Accipiter nisus
biarmicus
Columba fivia
marinus
Sula bassana
cherrug
rusticofus
Cygnus olor
Anser fabalis
Fulica atra
Buteo buteo
Falco
Falco!
Falco l
Falco
Falco
Falcor
6
Domeslic/mallard duck
 Great black-backed
[Northern] goshawk
[Northern] gannet
ad bumdm
Redl-tailed hawk 
 Collared Dove
Herring gull
Fulmar pelrel
Bean Goose
Harris's hawk
Scker falcon
Lanner Falcon
Mute swan
Gyrfalcon
Heron
Shag
Kestrel
Charadrides [Infrcorder]
Ciconides [Infrcorder]
Columbiformes
Anseriformes
Gruiformes
Falconides
354
Appendices
Weight Range (g)
-2500
.5-20.72
262-600
0
10
.8-84.
8
150-1
-0091
45-2
30
2320
2
85
1
Gracula refigiosa intemedia
lamprotornis purpureus
Serinus mozombicus
rubecula
carduefis
philomelos
Scientific Name 
Stumus vulgaris
Poephila guttata
Carduefis tristis
Loxia curvirostra
Athene noctua
Serinus conaria
Gallus gallus
flommeus
ubo bubo
Porus major
Asio ofus
ithacus
Carduelis
Asio
6
Common] blackbird
buj
[American] goldfinch
Green singing finch
Domeslic chicken
jackdaw
American robin
[European] robin
ommon]  starling
 Common Name 
MO
thrush
Zebra finch
Barn owl
Great lit 
anary
Rook
eat
Appendlix Table 8.1 Conlinued.
Passeriformes
Galliformes
Strigiformes
Order
Appendices
355
[Continved] 
lecve nest in 24-48 hours
 Fledging Period (days)
 noqo
55-65
62-70
30-35
45-60
16-38
18-21
35-42
49-56
24-30
41-43
42-49
43-48
35-42
27-30
44-46
2
3
48
Incubation Period (days)
About 18
About 18
23-24
25-26
23-24
61-21
61-
24-27
22-24
34-40
24-30
23-29
32-35
36-38
34-38
32-35
29-32
28-31
28-31
32-34
41-49
23
Accipiter gentiis gentiles
Mefopsittacusundulates
Nymphicus hollandicus
Strepiopelia decaocio
Columba palumbus 
Parabuteo unicinctus
Psittacula krameri
Buteo jamaicensis
Trichoglossus spp
Tadorna tadorna
Falco peregrinus
Falco tinnunculus
Aquila chryscetos
 Scientific Name 
larus orgentarus
lorus ridibundus
Falco sparverius
Agapomis spp
Accipiter nisus
Falco biarmicus
Amazona spp
Columba livia
Aythya fering
lorus conus
Anser anser
Buteo buteo
Greylag/domeslic goose 
[Eurasian] sparrow-hawk
[Northern] goshawk 
Ringneck parakeet
Amazon parrols 
Domeslic pigeon
Back-headed gull
 Common Name 
Red-tailed hawk
Peregrine falcon 
[Eurasian] Kestrel
uobid pooM
Collared dove
Harris's hawk
 Golden eagle
Herring gull
Mule swan
Cockaliel
lorikeels
lovebirds
Shelduck
Pochard
Charadrides (Infrcorder]
Falconides [nfrcorder]
Columbiformes 
Psittaciformes
Anseriformes
Order
356
Appendices
Fed by parents for 28 days
Fledging Period (days)
 Fly at12-14 days
Precocial
aboul 23
About 15
About 16 
24-27
35-40
64-86
51-57
26-38
28-30
30-35
20-22
14-21
17-25
18-20
3
3
12-1
13-1
3
 Incubation Period (days)
28-30
24-28
27-28
28-29
32-34
32-34
16-20
88
8
4
4
4
6
4
3
33
4
8
4
17-1
3
12
2
2
一
一
1
一
一
1
一
一
Corvus corone corone
Phasianus colchicus
Nyctea scandiaca 
Carduelis carduelis
Corvus monedula 
Erithacus rubecula
Passer domesticus
Scientific Name
Slurnus vulgaris
Poephila gultala
oxia curvirostra
Fringill coelebs
Parus caeruleus
Serinus canaria
Gallus gaffus
Asio fommeus
Turdus merula
Strix aluco
Parus major
Asio orus
Tytoalba
Pica pica 
Common/red crossbill
[Common] barn owl 
Black-billed magpie
[Common] blackbird
 Domeslic chicken
European starling 
 Common Name
mop
House sparrow
Carrion crow
 Shor-eared
Snowy owl
Zebra finch
Pheasant
Litle owl
Chalfinch
Canary
Appendix Table 9.1 Conlinued.
Rook
Passeriformes
Galliformes
Strigiformes
Order
Appendices
357
APPENDIX 10 GLOSSARY
Acinae A taxonomic family of short-winged marine diving birds, the auks, included in 
the taxonomic infraorder the Charadrides.
Atricial nestlings Newly hatched birds born blind, helpless and without true feathers,
although they are covered in down. These chicks are nidicolous, or nest attached, and are
entirely parent dependent.
Anseriformes The taxonomic order of birds containing four families, amongst which
are the Anatidae (ducks, geese, swans).
Adeidae The taxonomic family of birds containing the herons, egrets and bitterns
Ayrie See eyrie.
Bate, bating A falconer's term; fluttering or flying off the fist or an object
Bewits Short strips of leather by which bells are fastened to the legs.
Block A cylindrical piece of wood to which the hawk is attached by a leash, and upon
which it can perch.
Calling off Luring a hawk from an assistant at a distance.
Casting Fur, feathers and bone being the indigestible part of a raptor's diet which are
periodically ejected in the form of a pellet.
Charadriformes A taxonomic infraorder of birds containing fourteen taxonomic fami-
lies and subfamilies of aquatic bird, prominent amongst which are Haematopodidae
(oyster catchers), Charadridae (plovers and lapwings), Scolopacidae (sandpipers) and
Laridae (gulls and terns).
Cockatiel The smallest member of the sub-family Cacatuinae (cockatoos) group Of
parrots and a popular pet bird.
Ciconiidae A taxonomic superfamily of birds including the storks and the New World
vultures.
Columbiformes The taxonomic order of birds containing the Columbidae and the
extinct dodos.
Conspecific Of the same species.
Coping A falconers’ term meaning to cut off the sharp points of beak and talons
Covert feathers The smaller feathers which cover the base of the shaft of the main
flight feathers.
Corvidae The taxonomic family of birds included in the order of Passeriformes, which
contains the crows, magpies and jays.
Creance A falconers’ term referring to a long line attached to the swivel and used when
'calling off' (q.v.).
DEFRA, UK Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. As from 1 April 2007
this department is known as the Animal Health Agency.
Eyess or eyas A nestling hawk taken from the eyrie or nest
358
Appendices
Eyrie (ayrie) Nest of a bird of prey perched high up.
Falcon A female hawk.
Feake When a hawk wipes its beak on a perch after feeding.
Fledgling The growing period of a young bird until it is able to fly or “fledge'.
Frounce Trichomoniasis of the oropharynx of a raptor.
Galliformes A taxonomic order of fowl-like birds including grouse, ptarmigan, pheas
ants, peacocks, partridges, quails, domestic fowl, turkeys and guinea fowl.
Gallinaceous Pertaining to the taxonomic order Galliformes.
Graminivorous Grass and cereal eating.
Granivorous Feeding on grain and seeds.
Hack, flying at Young falcons recently taken from the nest are allowed to fly freely,
only coming back to the falconer to be fed on a hack board.
               o  
Haematopodidae A taxonomic family of seashore wading birds, the oystercatchers.
Haggard A hawk which has been caught in the wild, after it has undergone its frst
moult and has got its adult plumage.
Hardbill Bird that feeds by cracking open seeds.
Hood A leather hat placed over the head of a hawk to blindfold it and to make it more
easily handled.
Hornbill Medium to large old world tropical bird with brightly coloured and large bill
that is often surmounted by a large decorative casque. Its plumage is usually black and
white.
Imping A falconer's method of repairing a broken flight or tail feather.
Interremigial ligament An elastic ligament lying within the skin fold caudal to radius
and ulna and carpus, metacarpus and digits of the wing. It unites the shafts of the primary
and secondary feathers, the remiges (q.v.).
Jack The male merlin (Falco columbarius).
Jesses The short, narrow straps of leather fastened round the legs of a hawk so that the
falconer can control the bird.
Laridae The taxonomic family of birds containing the gulls and terns.
Leash A long, narrow strip of leather attached via the swivel to the jesses (q.v.).
Long-winged hawks The true falcons; 39 species of diurnal birds of prey in the single
genus Falco, including peregrine, saker, lanner, laggar, merlin, kestrel, etc.
around a piece of meat and weighted. Sometimes two wings tied together. It is swung by
a cord in a large arc around the falconer to attract the bird.
Lutino A yellow bird (often a psittacine bird) with no other markings and red eyes.
Macaws A group of South American parrots. These are mostly, but not all, fairly large,
long-tailed birds with a patch of bare skin on each side of the face.
Appendices
359
Manning Taming a hawk.
Megapodidae The taxonomic family of robust ground dwelling birds resembling
pheasants found in Southeast Asia and Australia. Also known as incubator birds.
Mergus A genus of seaducks.
Mews A place where hawks are kept to moult (from the verb ^mew', to moult).
Mules Hybrid canaries produced by crossing the canary with other finches, such as
goldfnches and greenfnches, crossbills.
Musket The male sparrow-hawk.
Mutes The faeces of a hawk (from the verb “mute', to void faeces). Short-winged hawks
(e.g. sparrow-hawk, goshawk) are said to ‘slice', i.e. eject the mutes horizontally.
Ostringer (austringer) A falconer who flies short-winged hawks (e.g goshawk).
Pannel A falconer's term meaning the stomach of a hawk.
Parakeet A small parrot. In the USA usually refers to the budgerigar (Melopsittacus
undulates).
Passeriformes The taxonomic order of birds containing the largest number of species,
grouped into 55 families. It contains all the birds that have three forward toes and one
well-developed hind toe - an adaptation to perching (Fig.1.6).
Passerines Pertaining to the taxonomic order Passeriformes.
shags.
Picidae The family of birds containing the woodpeckers.
Pin feathers First sign of a developing feather, still retained within its sheath.
Precocial chicks Newly hatched birds born covered in downy feathers, active and able
to find their own food as soon as leaving the egg. These chicks are nidifugous or nest
leaving.
Prepatagial (propatagial) Referring to the prepatagium, a membranous fold of skin
between the shoulder and carpal joints forming the leading edge of the wing.
Primary feathers The main flight feathers attached to the metacarpal bones and
digits.
Psittaciformes The taxonomic order of birds containing one family - the Psittacidae
or parrots.
Psittacine birds Parrots and related species.
ing the popular Plum-headed and Ring-necked species.
Rallidae The family of birds known as rails, including the coots, gallinules and
moorhens.
Ramphastidae The toucans - South American tropical birds with large brightly coloured
bills.
S     s   s g      
for small rounded stones given to a raptor and sometimes taken voluntarily by both captive
   d    t  n    ' m 
360
Appendices
Raptor A bird with a hooked beak and sharp talons - a bird of prey.
Red-rump parakeet A species of small Australian parrot with red feathers over the
base of the tail or rump.
Remiges The main flight feathers of the wings (i.e. the primaries and secondaries).
Seeling a term used by falconers in the Middle East and in the past in Europe when
 are pue ymeu panes kuasn e jo spe rmo aun qnon passed are spearl
behind the head to make the bird more easily tamed and handled. The same purpose is
achieved by using a hood.
Short-winged hawks Usually taken to mean the Accipiters or bird hawks, which
include the goshawks, sparrow-hawk and Cooper's hawk. Also refers to the broad-winged
birds - the buzzards.
Softbills Birds that feed on fruit or insects.
Spheniscidae The taxonomic family of birds containing the penguins.
Split A heterozygous bird carrying a recessive colour.
Sulidae The taxonomic family of birds containing the gannets and boobies.
Swivel A metal attachment to join the jesses to a leash (q.v.) and which prevents these
Tiercel The male of any species of hawk. The female is known as the falcon, especially
in the case of the peregrine.
Tiring A tough piece of meat or tendon given to a hawk to help exercise the muscles of
the back and neck and keep the beak in trim.
Turdinae The taxonomic subfamily of birds containing the thrushes and including such
birds as the European blackbird, both American and European robins and also the
nightingale.
Ulno-carporemigial aponeurosis A triangular aponeurosis, lying on the ventral side
of the wing, just caudal to the metacarpus and joining the bases of the shafts of the meta-
carpal primary feathers.
Wait on When a hawk soars above the falconer waiting for the game to be flushed.
Weather To place a hawk on a perch out in the open. Usually an area shielded from
extreme weather is chosen.
Weaver birds Small to medium-sized passerine birds. Many species are gregarious and
include the common house sparrow. Some species are popular aviary birds.
Whydahs (widow birds) A group of brood parasitic passerines (like cuckoos) allied
t0 the weaver birds. The males usually have long tail feathers.
Appendices
361
APPENDIX 11 SOME USEFUL WEBSITES
These are some of the websites that the author has used when researching this edition and
which may be found helpful to readers.
Birds Databases
 This is an excellent site for all ornithological information, with links to searchable data
bases
 http://ecams-online.org/public/links.asp
AmericanAssociationofWildlifeVeterinarians
For all areas of wildlife health and the environment
www.aawv.net
European College of Avian Medicine and Surgery (ECAMS)
www.ecams-online.org
The European Association of Avian Veterinarians
www.eaav.org
Harrison's Bird Foods
Bird food and feeding and information for avian practitioners
www.harrisonsbirdfoods.com
Karl Storz Endoscopy
 Information on endoscopy equipment
www.karlstorz.com
Endoscopy Support Services
 Useful for the purchase of new and used endoscopy equipment, including video
www.endoscopy.com
Dremel Electric Hand-Held Tool
www.dremel.com
 University of Miami Department of Pathology
Comparative pathology laboratory and avian and wildlife laboratory for assistance in the
conversion of biochemical values. May also have data bases for reference values.
dse'noqe/dsnpequreurpaur ooqed/:dt
Lafeber Company
 Has a number of links, mainly on feeding pet parrots
www.lafeber.com.
Vetark
www.vetark.co.uk → Sponsored link www.24parrot.com/vetark
For supply of Avian electronic scales with ftted perch.
F10Biocare
For disinfectants, cleansing agents, foggers and nebulisers
www.f10biocare.co.uk
362
Appendices
The Easy Chicken for Beginners
Useful images of candled eggs and common pathological problems
www.homestead.com/shilala/candling.html
Public Library of Science
Open access online to freely available range of scientific publications
http://www.plos.org/index.php
International Journal of Systemic and Evolutionary Microbiology
http://ijs.sgmjournals.org/
Oxford Journals/Life Sciences/Toxicological Sciences
http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org
 A UK university-backed website providing a free online service and access to the best web
resources
http://www.vts.intute.ac.uk/he/tutorial/vet/
Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia Online
http://en.wikipedia.org
Further Reading
Cooper, J.E. & Eley, JT. {1979) First Aid and Care of Wild Birds. David & Charles,
London.
Elkins, N. (1983) Weather and Bird Bebaviour. T.A.D. Poyser Ltd., Carlton.
Krautwald-Junghanns, M.E., Tellhelm, B., Hummel, G., Kostka, V. & Kaleta, E.F. (1992) Atlas
of Radiographic Anatomy and Diagnosis in Cage Birds. Verlag Paul Parey, Berlin.
Mavrogordato, J.G. (1973) A Hawk for the Bush, 2nd edn. Neville Spearman, London.
Nigel Harcourt-Brown & John Chitty {eds) {200s} BSAVA Manual of Psittacine Birds, 2nd
edn. British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Quedgeley, Glos.
Ritchie, B.W. (1995) Avian Viruses. Wingers Publishing, Lake Worth, Florida.
Rosskopf, W. & Woerpel, R. (eds) (1996) Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds, 3rd edn. Wil-
liams & Wilkins, A Waverly Company, Baltimore, London, Munich.
Wallack, J.D.& Boever,W.J. (1983) Diseases of Exotic Animals; Medical and Surgical Man-
agement. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia/London.
Woodford, M.H. {1960) A Manual of Falconry. A. & C. Black, London.
In addition the reading list of the European College of Avian Medicine and Surgery
(ECAMS) is a useful resource. It is accessible on the web as Appendix A of the ECAMS
Constitution at http://www.ecams-online.org. This is a very comprehensive list of:
● Refereed journals published in previous years
●Proceedings
●Monographs
· Suggested additional reading
363
References
Ahlers, W. (1970) Report on the use of Bisolvon in small animal practice. Kleintier-Praxis, 15,
50-3.
Allwright, D.M. and van Rensburg, W.JJ. (1994) Botulism in ostriches (Struthio camelus)
Avian Pathology, 23, 183-6.
Altman, R.B. (1980) Avian anaesthesia. The Compendium on Continuing Veterinary Educa-
tion,2,8-42.
Altman, R.B. (1982) In: Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds, 2nd edn (ed. M.L. Petrak), p. 369.
Lea and Fibiger, Philadelphia.
Altman, R.B. and Miller, M.S. (1979) The effect of halothane and ketamine anaesthesia on
body temperature and electro-cardiographic changes of birds. Proceedings of the American
Association of Zoo Veterinarians, Denver, Colorado, 61-62A
Andres, K.H. and von During, M. (1990) Comparative and functional aspects of the histological
Organization of cutaneous receptors in vertebrates. In: Tbe Primary Afferent Neuron - A
Survey of Recent Morpho-Functional Aspects {eds W. Zenker and W. Neuhuber), pp 1-16.
Plenum, New York.
Ar, A. and Rahn, H. (1977) Interdependence of gas conductance, incubation, length and weight
of the avian egg. In: Respiratory Function in Birds, Adult and Embryonic, a satellite sympo
sium of the 27th International Congress of Physiological Sciences, Paris, 1977 (ed. J. Piper),
pp 227-36. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York.
Aranez, J.B. and Sanguin, C.S. (195S) Poulardization of native ducks. fournal of the American
Veterinary Medicine Association, 127, 314-17.
Arnall, L. and Keymer, I.F. (197S) Bird Diseases. Bailliere Tindall, London.
Ashash, E., Weisman, Y., Malkinson, M., Perl, S. and Mechany, S. (1995) Borna disease in
ostriches.Proceedings 3rd Conference of European Committee of the Association of Avian
Veterinarians, Jerusalem, pp 44-7.
Ashton, G. and Smith, H.G. (1984) Psittacosis in Birds and Man. The Unit for Veterinary
Continuing Education, Vet 31, The Royal Veterinary College, London.
Bala, A.D., Spitzer, M.W. and Takahashi, T.T. (2003) Prediction of auditory spatial acuity
from neural images on the owl's auditory space map. Nature, 424, 771-4.
Bang, B.G. (196S) Anatomical adaptations for olfaction in the snow petrel. Nature, 205,
513-15.
 Bang, B.G. (1966) The olfactory apparatus of tube-nosed birds (Procellariformes) Acta Anat,
65, 391-415.
Bang, B. and Wenzel, B.M. (1986) Nasal cavity and olfactory system. In: Form and Function
in Birds (eds A.s. King and J. McLelland), pp 195-225. Academic Press, London.
Bartels, K.E. (ed.) (2002) Lasers in medicine and surgery. The Veterinary Clinics of North
America, 32, 3.
Bartholomew, G.A. and MacMillan, R.E. (1960) The water requirements of mourning doves
and their use of sea water and NaCl solutions. Physiol. Zool., 33, 171.
364
References
365
Benyon, P. {ed.) (1996) Haematology and biochemistry values. Manual of Raptors, Pigeons
and Waterfowl. British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham.
Berkhoudt, H. (1985a) Special sense organs: structure and function of the avian taste receptors.
In: Birds, Their Structure and Function (eds A.S. King and J. McLelland) Academic Press,
New York, NY.
Berkhoudt, H. (1985b) Structure and function of avian taste receptors. In: Form and Function
in Birds (eds A.S. King and J. McLelland) Academic Press, New York, NY.
Bernier, G., Morin, M. and Marsolais, G. {1981) A generalised inclusion body disease in the
budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulatus) caused by Papova-like agent. Avian Diseases, 23,
1083-93.
Berry, R.B. (1972) Reproduction by artificial insemination in captive American goshawks.
Journal of Wildlife Management, 36,1283-8.
Binggeli, R.L. and Paule, W.J. {1969) The pigeon retina: Quantitative aspects of the optic nerve
and ganglion cell layer. J. Comp. Neurol. 137, 1-18.
Bird, D.M., Lague, P.C. and Buckland, R.B. {1976) Artificial insemination versus natural
Blackmore, D.K. (1982) In: Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds, 2nd edn, (ed. M.L. Petrak), p.
484. Lea and Fibiger, Philadelphia.
             
of Clostridium botulinum in the Norfolk broads. Veterinary Record, 100, 106-9.
Bortch, A. and Vroege, C. (1972) Amputation of the wing under Rompun sedation and
experimental sedation of the homing pigeon with Rompun. Veterinary Review, (3/4),
275.
Bottcher, M. (1980) Endoscopy of birds of prey in clinical veterinary practice. Recent Advances
in the Study of Raptor Diseases {eds J.E. Cooper and A.G. Greenwood), pp 101-4. Chiron
Publications Ltd, Keighley, Yorks.
Bourne, W.R.P. (1989) The role of birds in the long-distance dispersal of disease. In: Disease
and Threatened Birds,121.International Council for Bird Preservation Tech.Pub. No.10
{ed. J.E. Cooper), pp 121-8. ICBP, Cambridge.
Boyd, L.L. (1978) Artificial insemination of falcons. A Symposium of the Zoological Society
ofLondon, 43,73-80.
Boyd, L.L. and Schwartz, C.H. (1983) Training imprinted semen donors. In: Falcon Propaga-
tion, a Marual on Captive Breeding (eds J.D. Weaver and T.J. Cade), p. 10. The Peregrine
Fund, Inc. Ithaca, New York.
Breazile, J.E. and Kvenzel, W.J. (1993) Systema nervosum central. In: Handbook of Avian
Anatomy: Nomina Anatomica Avium (ed. J.J. Baumel). Nuttall Ornithological Club No. 23,
Cambridge, Mass.
Brock, M.S. (1991) Semen collection and artificial insemination in Hispaniolan parrot
(Amazonia ventralis). Journal of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine, 22(1), 107-14.
Brooks, N.G. (1982) Crop wall necrosis in a sparrowhawk. Veterinary Record, 3(22),
513.
Brown C.S and Luebbert, J- (2003) Proceedings of the Conference of the Association of Avian
Veterinarians, pp 207-19.
Brown, L. (1976) Birds of Prey: Their Biology and Ecology, p. 117. Hamlyn, London.
Burkhardt, D. (1989) UV vision: A bird’s eye view of feathers. J. Comp. Physiol. A. 164,
787-96.
Burnham, W., Walton, B.J. and Weaver, J.D. (1983) Management and maintenance. In: Falcon
Propagation, a Marual on Captive Breeding (eds J.D. Weaver and T.J. Cade), p. 11. The
 Peregrine Fund, Inc. Ithaca, New York.
Bush, M. (1980) Animal Laparoscopy (eds R.M. Harrison and D.E. Wildt), pp 183-93. Wil-
liams and Wilkins, Baltimore/London.
Bush, M. (1981) Avian fracture repair using external fixation. In: Recent Advances in the Study
of Raptor Diseases (eds J.E. Cooper and A.G. Greenwood), pp 83-93. Chiron Publishers
Ltd, Keighley, Yorks.
366
References
Bush, M., Locke, D., Neal, L.A. and Carpenter, J.W. (1980) Pharmacokinetics of cephalin and
cephalexin in selected avian species. American journal of Veterinary Research, 42(6),
1014-17.
Bush, M., Montali, R.1., Novak, R.G. and James, F.A. (1976) The healing of avian fractures
A histological xeroradiographic study. American Animal Hospital Association fournal, 12(6),
pp768-73.
Bush, M., Neal, L.A. and Custer, R.S. (1979) Preliminary pharmacokinetic studies of selected
antibiotics in birds. Proceedings of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians, 45-7.
Butler, E.J. and Laursen-Jones, A.P. (1977) Nutritional disorders. In: Pouitry Diseases {ed. R.F.
Gordon), p. 158. Bailliere Tindall, London.
Campbell, T.W. (1994) Cytology. In: Avian Medicine: Principles and Application (eds B.W.
Ritchie, G.J. Harrison and L.R. Harrison). Wingers Publishing, Inc., Lake Worth, Florida,
pp. 199-222.
Campbell, T.W. (1994) Hematology. In: Avian Medicine: Principles and Application (eds B.W.
Ritchie, G.J. Harrison and L.R. Harrison). Wingers Publishing, Inc., Lake Worth, Florida,
pp. 176-98.
Campbell, T.W. (1995) Avian Haematology and Cytology, 2nd edn. Iowa State University
Press, Ames, Iowa.Chen, D.M. and Goldsmith, T.H. (1986) Four spectral classes of cone in
the retinas of birds. J. Comp. Pbysiol. A., 159, 473-9.
Carpenter, J.W. (2005) Exotic Animal Formulary, 3rd edn. Elsevier/Saunders, St Louis, MO.
Clark, L. (1995) Modulation of avian responsiveness to chemical irritants: effects of prosta-
glandin E1 and analgesics. f. Exp. Zool., 271, 43240.
Clark, L. and Shah, P.S. (1992) Information content of prey odor plumes: What do foraging
Leach's storm petrels know? In: Chemical Signals in Vertebrates {eds R.L. Doty and D.
Muller-Schwarze), pp 421-8. Plenum Press, New York, NY.
Clark, L. and Shah, P.S. (1993) Chemical bird repellents: Possible use in cyanide ponds. J. Wild.
Manage., 57,657-64.
Clark, L. and Shah, P.S. (1994) Tests and refinements of a general structure-activity model for
avian repellents. J. Chem. Ecol., 20, 321-39.
Clubb, S.L. (1984) Therapeutics in avian medicine - flock vs. individual bird treatment regi-
mens. The Veterinary Clinics of North America {ed. G.J. Harrison), 14(2), 34S-61.
Cochran, W.W., Mouritsen, H. and Wikelski, M. (2004) Migrating songbirds recalibrate their
magnetic compass daily from twilight cues. Science, 304( 5669):373.
Coffin, D.L. (1969) In: Diseases of Parrots and Parrot-like Birds {ed. the Duke of Bedford), p.
35. T.F.H. Publications, Inc., Hong Kong.
Cole, G. and Murray, M. (2005) Suspected case of chocolate toxicosis in an African grey parrot
(Psittacus erithacus). Proceedings of the Association of Avian Veterinarians, pp. 339-40.
Coles, B.H. {1984a) Avian anaesthesia. Veterinary Record, 115{12), 307
Coles, B.H. (1984b) Some considerations when nursing birds in veterinary premises. Journal
ofSmall Animal Practice, 25(5), 275-88.
Coles, B.H. and Krautwald-Junghanns, M.E. with Herman J. Thomas (1998), Avian Medicine
Self-Assessment Picture Tests, pp 52,53,57,62,85,99,102. Mosby Inc, St Louis, MO.
Cooke, S.W. (1984) Lead poisoning in cygnets. Veterinary Record, 114{8), 203.
Cooper, J.E. (1978) Veterinary Aspects of Captive birds of Prey. Stanford Press, Gloucester.
Cooper,J.E.(1983) In:Sonderdruk aus Verhandlungs bericht des 25internationalen Sympo
siums tiber die Erkrankungen der Zootiere, pp 61-5. Wien Akademie Verlag, Berlin.
Cooper, J.T. and Eley, J.E. (1979) First Aid and Care of Wild Birds. David and Charles, Ltd,
London.
Cooper, J.E. and Redig, P.T. (1975) Unexpected reactions to the use of C.T. 1341 by red-tailed
hawks.Veterinary Record, 97, 352.
Cooper, M.E. (1979) Wild bird hospitals and the law in first aid and care of wild birds {eds
J.E. Cooper and J.T. Eley), pp 15-20. David and Charles Ltd, London.
Cribb, P.H. and Haigh, J.C. (1977) Anaesthesia for avian species. Veterinary Record, 100,
472-3.
References
367
Crosta, L., Sironi, G. and Rampin, T. (1995) An outbreak of avian pox in Neopbema parakeets.
Proceedings3rd ConferenceofEuropeanCommitteeofAssociationofEuropeanVeterinar
ians, Jerusalem, 1995, pp 23-5.
Curro, T.G., Brunson, D.B. and Paul-Murphy, J. (1994) Determination of the ED50 of isoflu-
rane and the evaluation of the isoflurane sparing effect of butorphanol in cockatoos ( Cacatud
spp).Veterinary Surgery, 23, 429-33.
Davis, R.G. (1973) Olfactory psychophysical parameters in man, rat, dog and pigeon. J. Comp.
Physiol. Psychol., 85, 221-32
Dawson, R.W. (1975) Avian physiology. Anrual Review of Physiology, 37, 441-65.
De Gruchy, P.H. (1983) Chlamydiosis in collared doves. Veterinary Record, 113(14), 327.
Diekamp, B., Kalt, T. and Gintirkin, O. (2002) Working memory neurons in pigeons. J.
Neurosci., 22(4), RC210.
Donita, L.F., Jones, M.P. and Orosz, S.E. {199S) Pharmacokinetic considerations of the
renal system in birds: anatomic and physiologic principles of allometric scaling, Part II.
Review of drugs excreted by renal pathways. Journal of Avian Medicine and Surgery, 9(2),
92-104.
Dorrestein, G.M. (1996) Cytology and haemocytology. In: The Marual of Psittacine Birds, pp
38-48. British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham, Glos.
Ducateile, R., Charlier, G. and de Herdt, P. {1993) Papilloma-like virus infections in canaries
(Serinuscanarius).Proceedingsof1993EuropeanConference onAvianMedicineand
Surgery. The Association of Avian Veterinarians and the Dutch Association of Avian Veteri-
narians. Utrecht, the Netherlands, pp 224-31.
Duncan, J.S., Reid, H.W., Moss, R., Phillips, J.D.P. and Watson, A. (1978) Ticks, louping ill
and red grouse in Speyside, Scotland. Journal of Wildlife Management, 42, S00-5.
Dunker, H.R. (1977) Development of the avian respiratory and circulatory systems; respiratory
function in birds, adult and embryonic.Satelite Symposium ofthe 27th International Con-
gress of Physiological Sciences, Paris, 1977, p. 267. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Dunker, H.R.(1978) Coelom-Gliederung der Wirbeltiere-Funktionelle Aspekte. Verhandlungen
der Anatomischen Gesellschaft, 72, 91-112.
Durant, A.J. (1926) Caecal ablation in fowls. Veterinary Medicine, 21, 14-17.
Durant, A.J. (1930) Blackhead in turkeys, surgical control by caecal abligation. Research Bul-
letin University of Missouri College of Agriculture, 133.
Durant, A.J. (1953) Removal of vocal cords of the fowl. journal of the Aerican Veterinary
Medical Association, 122, 14-17.
Edling, T.M. {2005) Anaesthesia and analgesia. In: Manual of Psittacine Birds, p. 94. British
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham, Glos.
Edling, T.M., Degernes, L., Flammer, K. and Horne, W.B. (2001) Capnographic monitoring
of African grey parrots during positive pressure ventilation. Journal of the American Veteri-
nary Medical Association, 219, 1714-17.
Elkins, N. (1983) Weather and Bird Behaviour, pp 86-90. T.A.D. Poyser Ltd., Carlton.
Emery, N.J. and Clayton, N.S. (2004) The mentality of crows: convergent evolution of intelli
gence in Corvids and Apes. Science, 306, 1903-07.
Emmerton, J. (1983a) Pattern discrimination in the near-ultraviolet by pigeons. Percept. Psy-
chopbys.,34,555-59.
Emmerton, J. (1983b) Vision. In “Physiology and Behaviour of the Pigeon? (M. Abs, ed.), pp
245-66. Academic Press, London.
Emmerton, J. and Delius, J.D. (1980) Wavelength discrimination in the ^visible? and ultraviolet
spectrum by pigeons. J. Comp Physiol., 141, 47-52.
Fedde, M.R. and Kuhlman, W.D. (1977) Intrapulmonary carbon-dioxide sensitive receptors:
Amphibians to mammals. Respiratory function in birds, adult and embryonic. Symposium
Of the 27th International Congress of Physiological Sciences, Paris (ed. J. Piper), pp 30-50.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Fiennes, T-W., R.N. (1969) Infectious diseases of bacterial origin. In: Diseases of Cage and
Aviary Birds {ed. M.L. Petrak), pp 361-9. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia.
368
References
Fitzgerald, G. and Cooper, J.E. (1990) Preliminary studies on the use of propofol in the domes
tic pigeon (Columba livia).Veterinary Science, 49, 334-8.
Forbes, N.A. (1984) Avian anaesthesia. Veterinary Record, 115(6), 134.
 Forbes, N.A. (1991) Wing tip oedema and dry gangrene of birds. Veterinary Record, 129(3),
58.
 Forbes, N.A. and Harcourt-Brown, N.H. (1991) Wing tip oedema and dry gangrene of raptors.
Veterinary Record,128(24),576.
Forbes, N.A. and Simpson, G.N. (1993) Pathogenicity of ticks on aviary birds. Veterinary
Record, 133, 21.
Forbes, N.A. and Simpson, G.N. (in press in 1997) A review and update of viruses affecting
raptors in the United Kingdom. Veterinary Record, 141f5), 123-6.
Forbes, N.A., Simpson, G.N., Higgins, R.J. and Gough, R.F. (1997) Adenovirus
infection in Mauritius kestrels (Falco punctatus). Journal of Avian Medicine and Surgery,
11(1), 31.
Forshaw, J.M. (1978) Parrots of the World. David and Charles, Newton Abbot.
Fowler, M.E. (1978) Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, London,
Toronto.
Fowler, M.E. and Miller, R.E. (2003) Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine, Sth edn. W.B. Saunders,
Philadelphia, London, Toronto.
Fox, R., Lehmkuhle, S.W. and Westendorf, D.H. (1976) Falcon visual acuity. Science, 192,
263-5.
Franchetti, D.R. and Klide, A.M. {1978) Restraint and Anaesthesia in Zoo and Wild Animal
Medicine (ed. M.E. Fowler), p. 303. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Frith, H.J. (1959) Incubator birds. In: Scientifc American: Birds {ed. B.W. Wilson), pp 142-8.
W.H. Freeman, San Francisco.
Fudge, A.M. (2000) Laboratory medicine. Avian and Exotic Pets. W.B. Saunders Company,
Philadelphia.
Galifred, Y. (1968) Les diverses aires fonctionnelles de la retine di pigeon. Z. Zellforsch.
Mikrosk.Anat.,86,535-45
Galvin, C.E. (1978) Cage bird medicine. Veterinary Clinics of North America, 14(2), 285.
Garcia del Campo, A.L., Puerta, M.L., Abelenda, M., et al. (1991) Haematology of free-living
chicks of the Greater Flamingo. Proceedings of First Conference of European Committee of
Association of Avian Veterinarians, Vienna, pp 434-6.
Gassman, R. et al. (1981) Isolierung von Adenoviren bei Wellensittichen mit Zentralnervosen
Ausfallsercheinungen I1 D.V.G.-Tagung, Vogelkrankht, 1981, Minchen, pp 44-7.
Gelis, S. (2006) Evaluating and treating the gastrointestinal system. In: Clinical Avian Medicine,
vol I (eds G.J. Harrison and T. Lightfoot), 417-23. Spix, FL.
Gentle, M.J. {1992) Pain in birds. Animal Welfare, 1, 23S-47.
George, J.C. and Berger, A.J. (1966) Avian Myology. Academic Press, New York.
Gerlach, H. (1994) Viruses. In: Avian Medicine: Principles and Application (eds B.W. Ritchie,
G.J. Harrison and L.R. Harrison). Wingers Publishing, Lake Worth, FL.
Gerlach, S. {1991) Macaw wasting disease. Proceedings of First Conference of Association of
Avian Veterinarians,Vienna, p.273.
Gilbert, A.B. (1979) Female genital organs. In: Form and Function in Birds (eds A.S. King and
J. McLelland), p. 331. Academic Press Inc. (London) Ltd.
Ginsburg, N. and Nilsson, V. (1971) Measuring flicker thresholds in the budgerigar. J. Exper.
Anal. Behav.15,189-92.
Goldsmith, T.L. {199S) Documentation of passerine circoviral infection. Proceedings Main
Conference Association of Avian Veterinarians, p. 349-50.
Gordon, R.F. and Jordan, F.T.W. (1977) Pouitry Diseases. Balliere Tindall, London.
Gough, R.E, Cox, W.J. and Devoy, J. (1992) Isolation and identification of rotavirus from
racing pigeons. Veterinary Record, 130, 273.
Green, C.J. (1979) Animal anaesthesia. In: Laboratory Animal Handbooks 8, pp 126-8. Labo
ratory Animals Ltd., London.
References
369
Green, C. and Simpkin, S. {1984) Avian anaesthesia. Veterinary Record, 115(7), 159.
Greenwood, A.G. (1992) Laparoscopic salpingectomy in a hybrid flamingo. Veterinary Record,
131(15), 349.
Greenwood, A.G. and Storm, J. (1994) Intestinal intussusception in two red-tailed hawks
(Buteo jamaicensis). Veterinary Record, 134(22), 578-9.
Grier, J.W. (1973) Techniques and results of artificial insemination with golden eagles. Raptor
Research, 7, 1-12.
Grier, J.W., Berry, R.B. and Temple, S.A. (1972) Artificial insemination with imprinted raptors.
journaloftheAmericanFalconersAssociation,11,45-55.
Gumpenberger, M. and Henninger, W. (2001) The use of computed tomography in avian and
reptile medicine. Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pets Medicine, 10(4), 174-80. WB Saunders,
Phila delphia, London, Toronto.
ophthalmology using ultrasonography and computed tomography. Proceedings, European
Association of Avian Veterinarians, pp 99-102.
Gintirkin, O. (2000) Sensory physiology: Vision. In: Sturkie's Avian Physiology, Sth edn (ed.
G.C. Whittow). Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
Hagner, D., Prehn, H. and Krautwald-Junghanns, M.E. (1995) Ultrasonography of the avian
urogenital tract. Physiology and pathological conditions. Proceedings of 3rd Conference
European Association of Avian Veterinarians, Jerusalem, pp 195-9.
Haigh, J.C. (1980) Anaesthesia of raptorial birds. In: Recent Advances in the Study of Raptor
Diseases (eds J.E. Cooper and A.G. Greenwood), 61-6. Chiron Publications Ltd, Keighley,
Yorks.
Harcourt-Brown, N.H. {1978) Avian anaesthesia in general practice. Journal of Small Animal
Practice,19,573-82.
Harcourt-Brown, N.H. {1995) Diseases of the pelvic limb of birds of prey. FRCVS Thesis,
Wellcome Library, Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, London.
Harcourt-Brown, N.H. (1996a) Pelvic limb problems. In: Marual of Psittacine Birds {eds P.
Beynon, N.A. Forbes and M. Lawton), pp 126-7. British Small Animal Veterinary Associa-
tion, Cheltenham, Glos.
Harcourt-Brown, N.H. (1996b) Torsion and displacement of the oviduct as a cause
of egg-binding in four Psittacine birds. Journal of Avian Medicine and Surgery, 10(4),
262-7.
Harcourt-Brown, N.H. (2003) Physical development of parrots, related to social development.
Proceedings of Sth European College of Avian Medicine and Surgery Scientific Meeting, p.
29.
Harcourt-Brown, N.H. and Chitty, J. (2005) Chapter 7. In: Manual of Psittacine Birds (eds P.
Beynon, N.A. Forbes and M. Lawton), pp 126-7. British Small Animal Veterinary Associa-
tion, Cheltenham, Glos.
Harcourt-Brown, N.H. and Gough, R.E. (1997) Isolation of a virus-like agent with proven-
tricular dilatation syndrome in macaws. Proceedings of the 4m Conference of the European
Committee of The Association of Avian Veterinarians, pp 111-14.
Harris, J.M. (2005) Proceedings of the Conference of Avian Veterinarians, pp 303-5.
Harrison, G.J. (1984) New aspects of avian surgery. Veterinary Clinics of North America,
14(2), 363-80.
Harrison, G.H. and Harrison, L.R. (1986) Clinical Avian Medicine and Surgery. W.B. Saunders,
Phila delphia, London, Toronto.
Harrison, G.J. and Lightfoot, T.L. (2006) Clinical Avian Medicine. Spix Publishing, Inc., Palm
Beach, Florida.
Harrison, L.R. and Herron, A.J. (1984) Submission of diagnostic samples to a laboratory.
Veterinary Clinics of North America, 14(2), 165-72.
Hartup, B.K. and Kollias, G.V. (1999) Field investigation of Mycoplasma gallisepticum infec
tion in house finch (Carpodactus mexicanus) eggs and nestlings. Avian Diseases 43(3),
572-6.
370
References
M.L. Petrak). Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia.
Heck, R.W. and Konke, D. (1983) Incubation and rearing. In: Falcon Propagation, a Manual
On Captive Breeding (eds J.D. Wea ver and T.J. Cade), p. 49. The Peregrine Fund, Inc., Ithaca,
New York.
Hellmann, B., Waldmann, C. and Gintirkin, O. (1995) Cytochrome 0xidase activity reveals
percolations of the pigeon's ectostriatum. Neuroreport. 6, 881-5.
Helmer, P. (2006) Advances in diagnostic imaging. In: Clinical Avian Medicine (eds Harrison,
G.J. and Lightfoot, T.L.), pp 653-9. Spix Publishing, Inc., Palm Beach, FL.
Hernandez, M. (1991) Raptor clinical haematology. Proceedings of First Conference of Euro-
pean Committee of Association of Avian Veterinarians, Vienna, pp 420-33.
Hernandez-Divers, S.J. and Hernandez-Divers, S.M. (2003) Xenogeneic grafts using porcine
small intestinal submucosa in the repair of skin defects in 4 birds. Journal of Avian Medicine
and Surgery, 17(4), 224-34.
Hochleithner, M. {1994) Biochemistries. In: Avian Medicine: Principles and Application
(eds B.W. Ritchie, G.J. Harrison and L.R. Harrison). Wingers Publishing, Lake Worth,
FL.
Hodos, W., Bessette, B.B., Macko, K.A. and Weiss, S.R.B. (1985) Normative data for pigeon
vision. Vision Res., 25, 1525-7.
Holz, P.H., Naisbitt, R. and Mansell, P. (2006) Fitness level as determining factor in the survival
of rehabilitated peregrine falcons (Falco peregrinus) and brown goshawks (Accipiter fascia-
tus) released back into the wild. fournal of Avian Medicine and Surgery, 20(1), 15-20.
Hooimeijer, J. (2006) Twenty-five years of white stork (Cinconia cinconia) reintroduction in
the Netherlands.Proceedings ofthe Conference of the Association ofAvian Veterinarians,
pp 333-9.
Hoop, R.K., Ossent, P. and Pfyffer, G. (1995) Mycobacterium genavense, a new cause of
mycobacteriosis in pet birds. Proceedings 3rd Conference of European Committee of Associa-
tion of Avian Veterinarians. Jerusalem, pp 1-3.
Houston, D.C. (1987) Scavenging efficiency of turkey vultures in tropical forests. Condor, 88,
318-23.
Hurrel, L.H. (1968) Wild raptor casualties. Journal of Devon Trust, 19, 806-7.
Ide, C. and Munger, B.L. (1978) A cytologic study of Grandy corpuscle development in chicken
toe skin. j. Comp. Neurol., 179, 301-24.
Ivins, G.K. (1975) Sex determination in raptorial birds - a study of chromatic bodies. Journal
of Zoo Animal Medicine, 6, 9-11.
Jacobs, L.F. (2003) The evolution of the cognitive map. Brain Bebav Evol. 62(2), 128-39.
Jalanka, H. (1991) Medetomidine-Ketamine and Atipamezole, a reversible method of chemical
restraint of birds. Proceedings First Conference of European Committee of Avian Veterinar
ians, Vienna, 102-4.
Jericova, Z. and Hublek, Z. (1993) Arboviral examination of free-living birds in the Czech
Republic.Proceedings of 1993 European Conference on Avian Medicine and Surgery.
Utrecht, The Netherlands, pp 507-21.
Johnson, O.W. (1979) Urinary organs. In: Form and Function in Birds, Vol. I (eds A.S. King
and J. McLelland). Academic Press, London.
Joji, D. and Popovi, S. (1969) Artery vascularization of certain aerated bones of domestic hen
and pigeon wings. Acta Veterinaria (Belgrade), 29, 87-95.
 Jones, C.G. (1980) Abnormal and maladaptive behaviour in captive raptors. In: Recent Advances
in the Study of Raptor Diseases {eds J.E. Cooper and A.G. Greenwood). Chiron Publications
Ltd., Keighley, Yorks.
Jones, D.M. (1979) The nutrition of parrots: the husbandry and medicine of the parrot family.
Proceedings of B.V.Z.S./Parrot Society Meeting (eds J.E. Cooper and A.G. Greenwood), p.
31. Regent's Park, London.
Jones, R.B. and Roper, T.J. (1997) Olfaction in the domestic fowl: a critical review. Physiol
Behav., 62(5), 1009-18.
Relerences
371
Jonzen, N., Linden, A., Ergon, T., et al. (2006) Rapid advance of spring arrival dates in long-
distance migratory birds. Science, 312(5782):1959-61.
Kare, M.R. and Rogers, J.G. (1976) Sense organs: taste. In: Avian Physiology (ed. P.E. Sturkie).
Berlin, Springer Verlag
Kendeigh, S.C. (1970) Energy requirements for the existence in relation to size of birds. Condor,
72, 60.
Kennedy, M.A. and Brenneman, K.A. {1995) Enteritis associated with a coronavirus-like
agent in a Rhea chick (Rhea americana). journal of Avian Medicine and Surgery, 9(2),
138-40.
Kersing, D. (2006) A clinical case of zinc toxicosis and potential copper toxicity from tooth-
brushes. Proceedings of Association of Avian Veterinarians, pp 349-51.
Keymer, I.F. {1969) Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds, 1st edn {ed. M.L. Petrak), p. 434. Lea
and Febiger, Philadelphia.
King, A.S. and McLelland, J. (1979) Form and Function in Birds, Vol. 1. Bailliere, Tindall,
London.
King, A.S. and McLelland, J. {1984a) Birds: Their Structure and Function. Bailliere Tindall,
London.
King A.S. and McLelland, J. {1984b) Special sense organs. In: Birds, Their Structure and Func
tion, 2nd edn, pp 311-12. Bailliere Tindall, Bath, United Kingdom.
King, A.S. and McLelland, J- (1984c) Birds, Their Structure and Function, pp 140-2. Bailliere
Tindall, London.
King, A.S. and McLelland, J. (1989) Form and Function in Birds, Vol. 4, pp 211-16. Academic
Press, London.
King, A.S. and Payne, D.C. (1964) Normal breathing and the effects of posture in Gallus
domesticus.journal of Physiology,174,340-7.
Kirkwood, J.F. {1981) Recent advances in the study of raptor diseases. Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Diseases of Birds of Prey {eds J.E. Cooper and A.G. Green-
wood), pp 153-7. Chiron Publications Ltd, Keighley, Yorks.
Klaphake, E., Schuemaker, J., Greenacre, C, Jones, M.P. and Zagaya, N. (2006) Comparative
anesthetic and cardiopulmonary effects of pre- versus post-operative butorphanol administra-
tion in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis) anesthetized with sevoflurane.
fournal of Avian Medicine and Surgery,20f1), 2-7.
Klide, A.M. (1973) Avian anaesthesia. Veterinary Clinics of North America, 3(2), 175-86.
Kock, M. (1983) Sexing birds. Veterinary Record, 112(19), 463.
Korbel, R. (2000) Disorders of the posterior eye segment in raptors - examination procedures
and findings. Raptor Biomedicine Ill. Zoological Education Network Inc., Lake Worth,
FL.
Korbel, R., Mlovanovic, A., Erhardt, W., Burike, S. and Hemke, J. (1993) Aerosaccular perfu-
sion with isoflurane - an anaesthetic procedure for head surgery in birds. Proceedings Euro-
pean Conference Association of Avian Veterinarians,Utrecht, Netherlands. AAV,Lake
Worth, FL.
Korbel, R. and Sturm, K. (2005) Review of light sources for bird housing under artificial light
circumstances.Proceedings 6th Scientifc Meeting ofEuropean College ofAvian Medicine
and Surgery.Arles,France.
Korbel, R.T. and Gropp, U. (1999) Ultraviolet perception in birds. Proc. Anmu. Conf. Assoc.
Avian.Vet.,77-81.
Korbel, R.T. and Szoelgyenyi, W. (2001) Vision related aspects of animal welfare in aviculture.
Medicine and Surgery, Munich, Germany, March 7, 2001, pp 12-13.
Koutsos, E.A., Matson, K.D. and Klasing, K.C. (2001) Nutrition of birds in the Order Psit-
taciformes: a review. J. Avian Med. Sturg., 15(4), 257-75.
Kovach, A.G.B. and Szasz, E. (1968) Survival of pigeons after graded haemorrhage. Acta Physi
ologica, 34{301).
372
References
Kovach, A.G.B., Szasz, E. and Pilmayer, N. (1969) The mortality of various avian and mam-
malian species following blood loss. Acta. P.N. Acad. Sci., 35-109.
Krautwald, M.E., Reidel, V. and Neumann, W. (1991) Diagnostic use of ultrasonography in
birds. In: Proceedings Association Of Avian Veterinarians Conference, Chicago, pp
269-75.
Krautwald, M.E., Schumacher, F. and Tellhelm, B. (1993) Evaluation of the lower respiratory
tract in psittacines using radiology and computed tomography. In: Veterinary Radiology and
Ultrasound,34(3),382-90.
Krautwald, M.E., Tellhelm, B., Hummel, G., Kostka, V. and Kaleta, E.F. {1992) Atlas of
Radiographic Anatomy and Diagnosis of Cage Birds. Paul Parey Scientific Publishers, Berlin
and Hamburg.
Krautwald-Junghanns, M.E., Bartels, T. and Pees, M. (2006) The use of iodinated contrast
media in avian medicine. In: Proceedings of 27" Annual Conference of the Association of
Avian Veterinarians, San Antonia, Texas, pp 69-72.
Krautwald-Junghanns, M.E., Braun, S., Pees, M., Straub, J. and Valerius, Hans-P. (2004),
Research on the anatomy and pathology of the psittacine heart. Journal of Avian Medicine
and Surgery, 18{1), 2-11.
Krautwald-Junghanns, M.E. and Enders, F. (1997) Ultrasonography. In: Avian Medicine and
Surgery (eds R.B. Altman, S.L Clubb, G.M. Dorrestein and K. Quesenberry), pp 200-9. W.B.
Saunders Company, Philadelphia, London, Toronto.
Krautwald-Junghanns, M.E. and Pees, M. (2005) Radiographic diagnosis of the head. In: Pro
ceedings of 26th Anmual Conference of the Association of Avian Veterinarians,Montery,
California, pp 51-6.
Krautwald-Junghanns, M.E., Schulz, M., Hagner, D., Failing, K. and Redman, T. (1995)
Transcoelomic two-dimensional echocardiography in the avian patient. Proceedings 3rd
Conference European Committee of the Association of Avian Veterinarians (Incorporating
1st ECAMS Scientific Meeting), Jerusalem, p. 10.
Krautwald-Junghanns, M.E., Stahl, A., Pees, M., Enders, F. and Bartels, T. (2002) Sonographic
investigations of the gastrointestinal tract of granivorous birds. Veterinary Radiology and
Ultrasound, 43(6), 576-8.
ioss aul po ssarauo aui oi pauasad 1aded y ooxi ua (aoti  apuogeg
of Avian Veterinarians, pp 191-201.
Lack, D. (1975) The Life of the Robin, 4th edn. H.F. and G. Wetherby, London.
Lasiewski, R.C. and Dawson, L.R. (1967) A re-examination of the relation between standard
metabolic rate and bodyweight of birds. Condor, 69, 13-23.
Lawrie, A. {200S} Systemic non-infectious disease. Manual of Psittacine Birds {eds N.H. Har
court-Brown and J. Chitty). British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham,
Gloucester.
Lawton, P.C. (1984) Avian anaesthesia. Veterinary Record, 115(3), 71.
Lawton, M.P.C. {1996) Anaesthesia. In: Manual of Psittacine Birds {eds P.H. Beynon, N.A.
 Forbes and M.P.C. Lawton). British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham,
Levinger, IM., Kedem, J. and Abram, M. (1973) A new anaesthetic-sedative preparation for
birds.British Veterinary fournal, 129, 296-300.
Association of Avian Veterinarians Conference, p. 111.
Lewis, J.C.M., Storm, J. and Greenwood, A.G. (1993) Treatment of wing tip oedema and dry
gangrene of raptors. Veterinary Record, 128(24), 578.
Lierz, M., Schmidt, R., Goebel, T., Ehrlein, J. and Runge, M. (2000) Detection of Mycoplasma
spp in raptorial birds in Germany. In: Raptor Biomedicine Ill (eds J.T. Lumeij, J.D. Remple,
P.T. Redig, M. Lierz and J.E. Cooper), pp 25-33. Zoological Education Network Inc., Lake
Worth,FL.
Lierz, M. (2006) Diagnostic value of endoscopy and biopsy. In: Clinical Avian Medicine {eds
G.J. Harrison and T.L. Lightfoot), pp 631-52. Spix Publishing, Inc., Palm Beach, FL.
References
373
Lierz, M. (2005) Mycoplasma spp in healthy free-ranging raptor nestlings. RCVS Thesis for
Diploma in Zoological Medicine (Avian), Library of Royal Collge of Veterinary Surgeons,
London.
Lorenz, K. (1935) Companions as factors in the bird's environment. In: Studies in Animal and
Human Behaviour, Vol. 1 (1970 edn, trans. R. Martin). Methuen, London.
Lorenz, K. (1937) The companions in the bird's world. Auk, 54, 245-73.
Lorenz, K. {196S) Die “Erfindung’ von Flugmaschen in der Evolution der Wirbeltiere. In:
Darwin hat recht gesehen. Neske Verlag.
Ludders, J.W., Rode, J.A. and Mitchell, G.S. (1989) Effects of ketamine, xylazine and a com-
bination of ketamine and xylazine in Pekin ducks. American Journal of Veterinary Research,
50, 245-9.
Lumeij, J.T. (1987) A contribution to clinical investigative methods for birds, with special
reference to the racing pigeon (Columba livia domestica). PhD thesis. Rijkuiversiteit,
Utrecht.
Lumeij, J.T. and Deenik, J.W. (2003) medetomidine-ketamine-ketamine anaesthesia in racing
pigeons (Columba livia domestica): a comparative study. Journal of Avian Medicine and
Surgery, 17(94), 191-6.
Lumeij, J.T. and Overduin, L.M. (1990) Plasma chemistry references in Psittaciformes. Avian
Pathology, 19, 235-4.
Lumeij, J.T., Ritchie, B.W. and Blanco, J.M. (1993) Avian electrocardiography: a contribution
for the practitioner. Proceedings European Association of Avian Veterinarians, Utrecht, pp
137-54.
Lumeij, J.T., Ritchie, B.W. and Branson, W. (1994) Cardiology. In: Avian Medicine: Principles
and Application (eds B.W. Ritchie, G.J. Harrison and L.R. Harrison), pp 695-722. Wingers
Publishing, Lake Worth, FL.
Luo, M., Ding, L. and Perkel, D.J. {2001) An avian basal ganglia pathway essential for vocal
learning forms a closed topographic loop. J Neurosci., 21f17), 6836-45.
Machin, K.L. and Caulkett, N.A. (1996) The cardiopulmonary effects of propofol in mallard
ducks. Proceedings of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians pp 149-54.
Machin, K.L. and Caulkett, N.A. (1998) Investigation of injectable anaesthetic agents in
Mallard ducks (Anas platyrbynchos): A descriptive study. Journal of Avian Medicine and
Surgery,12(4),255-62.
Mandelker, L. (1972) Ketamine hydrochloride as an anaesthetic for parakeets. Veterinary
Medicine/Small Animal Clinician, 67, SS-6.
Mandelker, L. {1973) A toxicity study of ketamine HCl in parakeets. Veterinary Medicine/Small
Animal Clinician,68,487-9.
birds. In: International Zoo Year Book Xl, pp 252-4.
Marley, E. and Payne, J.P. (1964) Halothane anaesthesia in the fowl. In: Small Animal Anaes-
thesia.Proceedings ofa BritishSmall AnimalsVeterinary Association/UniversitiesFederation
for Animal Welfare Symposium (ed. O. Graham-Jones), p. 127. Pergamon, Oxford.
Martin, H.D.,Bruecker, K.A., Herrick, D.D.and  Scherpelz, J. {1993) Elbow
luxations in raptors: a review of eight cases. In: Raptor Biomedicine {eds P.J. Redig, J.E.
's s j  s-6a dd  '  d T 
Minnea polis.
Martin, H.D. and Ritchie, W.B. {1994) Orthopaedic surgical technique. In: Avian Medicine:
Principles and Application (eds W.B. Ritchie, G.J. Harrison and L.R. Harrison), pp 1166-8.
Winger Publishing, Lake Worth, FL.
Mason, J.R., Adams, M.A. and Clark, L. (1989) Anthranilate repellency to starlings: chemical
correlates and sensory perception. J. Wildl. Manage., S3, S5-64.
Mason, J.R. and Clark, L. (2000) The chemical senses in birds. In: Sturkie's Avian Physiology,
Sth edn (ed. G.C. Whittow). Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
Mason, J.R. and Espaillat, J.E. (1990) Differences in taste preference between red-winged
blackbirds and European starlings. Wilson Bull. 102, 292-9.
374
References
Mason, J.R. and Otis, D.L. {1990) Aversiveness of six potential irritants on consumption by
red-wingedblackbirds (Agelaius phoeniceus)and European starlings {Sturnus vulgaris).
Wilson Bull. 102,292-9.
Matson, K.D., Millam, J.R. and Klasing, K.C. (2001) Thresholds for sweet, salt, and sour taste
stimuli in cockatiels (Nymphicus hollandicus). Zoo Biol., 20, 1-13.
Miller, L. (1942) Some tagging experiments with black-footed albatrosses. Condor, 44, 3-9.
McKeever, K. (1979) Care and Rehabilitation of Injured Owls. W.F. Rannie, Lincoln, Ontario,
Canada.
McLelland, J. (1989) Anatomy of the air sacs. In: Birds, Form and Function (eds A.S. King and
J. McLelland), pp 258-73. Academic Press, London
McMillan, M.C. (1982) Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds, 2nd edn (ed. M.L. Petrak). Lea
and Febiger, Philadelphia.
McMillan, M.C. (1996) Avian radiology. In: Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds, 3rd edn {ed.
M.L. Petrak), pp 329-59. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia, PA.
Monks, D.J., Carlisle, M.S., Carrigan, M., et al. (2o0s) Angiostrongylus cantonensis as a cause
of cerebrospinal disease in a yellow-tailed black cockatoo (Calyptorbynchus funereus)
and two tawny frogmouths (Podargus strigoides). Journal of Avian Medicine and Surgery,
9(4).
Mouritsen, H. and Larsen, O.N. (2001) Migrating songbirds tested in computer-controlled
Emlen funnels use stellar cues for a time-independent compass. J Exp. Biol., 204(22),
3855-65.
Mouritsen, H. and Ritz, T. (2005) Magnetoreception and its use in bird navigation. Curr. Opin.
Neurobiol., 15{4), 406-14.
Muheim, R., Phillips, J.B. and Akesson, S. (2006) Polarized light cues underlie compass calibra-
tion in migratory songbirds. Science, 313(5788), 837-9.
Murdock, H.R. and Lewis, J.O.D. (1964) A simple method for obtaining blood from ducks.
Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine, 116, 51-2.
Murray, M.J., Schildger, B. and Taylor, M. (2002) Endoscopy in birds, reptiles, amphibians
andfish.Endo-Press,Tuttlingen.
Murrell, L.R. (1975-76) A practical method of determining bird sex by chromosome analysis.
Annual Proceedings of the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums,
87-90.
Necker, R. (2000) The somatosensory system. In: Sturkie's Avian Physiology, Sth edn (ed. G.C.
Whittow). Academic Press, London.
Needham, J.R. (1981) Bacterial flora of birds of prey. In: Recent Advances in the Study of
Raptor Diseases (eds J.E. Cooper and A.G. Greenwood), pp 3-9. Chiron Publishers Ltd.,
Keighley, Yorks.
Nevitt, G.A. (2000) Olfactory foraging by Antarctic Procellariform seabirds: Life at high
Reynolds numbers. Biol. Bull., 198, 245-53.
Newton, I. (1979) Population Ecology of Raptors, pp 81-94. T.A.D. Poyser Ltd.
Olney, P.J.S. (1958/9) Wild Fowl Trust Report 11, p. 154. Slimbridge, Glos.
Papi, F. (1991) Orientation in birds. Olfactory navigation. EXS, 60, 52-85.
 Pass, Paul-Murphy (1998) Pain management in clinical practice. Journal of Avian Medicine
and Surgery, 12(4), 277.
Pass, D.A. and Perry, R.A. (1984) The pathology of psittacine beak and feather disease. Aus-
tralian Veterinary Journal, 61;3), 69-74.
Peakall, D.B. (1970) Pesticides and reproduction of birds. In: Scientific American: Birds {ed.
B.W. Wilson), pp 25s-61. W.H. Freeman, San Francisco, CA.
Pees, M., Straub, J. and Krautwald-Junghanns, M.E. (2004) Echocardiographic examin-
ations of 60 African grey parrots and 30 other psittacine birds. Veterinary Record, 155, pp
73-6.
Pees, M., Krautwald-Junghanns, M.E. and Straub, J- (2006). In: Clinical Avian Medicine, ol I
{eds G.J. Harrison and T. Lightfoot), p. 380. Spix, FL.
References
375
Peiper, K. and Krautwald-Junghanns, M.E. (1991) Diagnosis of tuberculosis in pet birds with
the help of radiology. Proceedings of First Conference of European Committeeof Association
Of Avian Veterinarians, Vienna, p. 186.
Perman, V., Alsaker, R.D. and Riis, R.C. {1979) Cytology of the Dog and Cat. American
Animal Hospital Association, Indiana.
Perrins, C.M. (1979) British Tits. Collins, London.
Petrak, M.L. (1982) Diseases of Cage and Atiary Birds, 2nd edn. Lea and Febiger,
Philadelphia.
Phalen, D.N. (2006) Preventive medicine and screening. In: Clinical Avian Medicine (eds G.J.
Harrison and T.L. Lightfoot), pp 573-85. Spix Publishing, Inc., Palm Beach, FL.
Phalen, D.N., Lau, M.T. and Filippich, L-J. {1997) Considerations for the safety of maintaining
the avian patient under prolonged anaesthesia.Proceedings of the Anrual Conference and
Expo of the Association of Avian Veterinarians,pp 111-16.
Phalen, D.N., Tomaszkewski, E.K. and Styles, D.K. (2004) Epizootiology, diversity and patho-
genicity of psittaccid herpes viruses. Proceedings of Association of Avian Veterinarians.
Philip, H.R.H. Prince (1984) Address to General Assembly of the International Union for
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, Madrid
 Pieper, K. and Krautwald-Junghanns, M.E. (1991) Diagnosis of tuberculosis in pet birds with
the help of radiology. In: Proceedings of First Conference of European Committee of Asso-
Ciation of Avian Veterinarians, Vienna, p.186.
Portman, A. and Stingelin, W. (1961) The central nervous system. In: Biology and Comparative
Physiology of Birds {ed. A.J. Marshal), pp 1-36.
Radlinsky, M.A., Carpenter, J.W., Mison, M.B. and Armbrust, L.J. (2004) Colonic entrapment
after cloacopexy in two psittacine birds. Journal of Avian Medicine and Surgery, 18(3),
175-82.
microscopic study of the generation and degeneration of retinal ganglion cells in the chicken.
Exp.Brain.Res.,33, 65-8.
Rahn, H., Ar, A. and Pagenelli, C.V. (1979) How bird eggs breathe. In: Scientifc American:
Birds (ed B.W. Wilson), pp 208-17. W.H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco, CA.
Raines, A.M., Kocan, A. and Schmidt, R. (1995) Pathogenicity of adenovirus in the ostrich
(Struthio camelus). Main Proceedings of Conference of Association of Avian Veterinarians,
pp 241-5. Association of Avian Veterinarians, Boca Raton, FL.
Raymond, L. (1985) Spatial visual acuity of the eagle Aquila audax: A behavioral, optical and
anatomical investigation. Vision Res., 27, 1859-74.
Redig, P.T. (1978) Raptor reha bilitation: diagnosis, prognosis and moral issues. Conference on
Bird of Prey Management Techniques, Oxford (ed T.A. Greer).
Redig, P.T. (1979) First Aid and Care of Wild Birds (eds. J.E. Cooper and J.T. Eley). David
and Charles, Newton Abbot.
Redig, P.T. (1981) Aspergillosis in raptors. In: Recent Advances in the Study of Raptor Diseases
(eds J.E. Cooper and A.G. Greenwood), pp 117-22. Chiron Publications Ltd., Keighley,
Yorks.
Redig, P.T. (1983) Anaesthesia for raptors. Raptor Research and Rehabilitation Program,
Newsletter 4, 9-10.
Redig, P.T.(1996) Nursing Avian Patients. In: Manual of Raptors, Pigeons and Waterfowl, p.
46. British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham, Glos.
Redig, P.T. and Duke, G.E. (1976) Intravenously administered ketamine and diazepam for
anaesthesia of raptors. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, 169,
886-8.
Reece, R.L. (1982) Observations on the accidental poisoning of birds by organophosphate
insecticides and other toxic substances. Veterinary Record, 111(20), 453.
Reiser, M.H. and Temple, S.A. (1980) Effects of chronic lead ingestion on birds of prey. In:
Recent Advances in the Study of Raptor Diseases (eds J.E. Cooper and A.G. Greenwood),
pp 21-5. Chiron Publications Ltd, Keighley, Yorks.
376
References
Reither, N.D. (1993) Medetomidine and atipamezole in avian practice. Proceedings European
Conference Avian Medicine and Surgery, Utrecht, pp 43-8.
Remple, J.D. (1993) Raptor bumblefoot: a new treatment technique. In: Raptor Biomedicine
(eds P.T. Redig, J.E. Cooper, J.D. Remple and D.B. Hunter). Chiron Publications, Keighley,
W. Yorks.
Remple, J.D. (2004) Intracellular hematozoa of raptors: a review and update. journal of Avian
Medicine and Surgery, 18(2), 75-88.
Remple, J.D. and Forbes, N.A. (2000) Antibiotic-impregnated polymethyl methacrylate beads
in the treatment of bumblefoot in raptors. Raptor Biomedicine Ill Zoological Education
Network, FL.
Remy, M. and Emmerton, J. (1989) Behavioral spectral sensitivities of different retinal areas
in pigeons. Behav. Neurosci., 103, 170-7.
Richards, J.R. (1980) Current concepts in the metabolic responses to injury, infection and
starvation. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 39, 113.
Richardson, J.D. (1984) Avian anaesthesia. Veterinary Record, 115(7), 154.
Riedel, V. (1991) Ultrasonagraphy in birds. Proceedings First European Conference of Avian
Veterinarians, Vienna, pp 190-98.
Ritchie, B.W. (1995) Avian Viruses. Wingers Publishing, Inc., Lake Worth, FL.
Ritchie, B.W., Harrison, G.J. and Harrison, L.R. (1994) Avian Medicine, Principles and Appli-
cation. Wingers Publishing, Lake Worth, FL.
Roberts, W.A. and Mazmanian, D.S. (1988) Concept learning at different levels of
abstraction by pigeons, monkeys, and people. J. Exp. Pyschol. Anim. Behav. Process. 14,
247-60.
Robinson, P. (1975) Unilateral patagiectomy. A technique for deflighting large birds. Veterinary
Medicine/Small Animal Clinician,70(2),143.
Rogers, J-J. and Miles, F.A. (1972) Centrifugal control of the avian retina. V. Effects of lesions
of the isthmo-optic nucleus on visual behaviour. Brain Res., 48, 147-56.
Romagno, A. (2005) Reproduction and paediatrics. In: Manual of Psittacine Birds, 2nd edn,
p. 204. British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham, Glos.
Rosskopf, W.J. and Woerpel, R.W. (1982) Abdominal surgery in pet birds. Modern Veterinary
Practice, 63(2), 889-90.
Rosskopf, W.J., Woerpel, R.W. and Pitts, B.J. (1983) Surgical repair of a chronic cloacal pro
lapse in a greater sulphur crested cockatoo (Cacatua galerita). Veterinary Medicine Small
Animal Clinician, 78(5), 719-24.
Rosskopf, W.J. and Woerpel, R.W. (1984) Clinical experiences with avian laboratory diagnos-
tics. Veterinary Clinics of North America, 14(2), 261.
Rupiper, D.J. {1993) Radial ostectomy in a barn owl. Journal of the Association of Avian Vet
erinarians, 7(3), 160.
Samour, J. (2006) Diagnostic value of hematology. In: Clinical Avian Medicine (eds G.J. Har
rison and T.L. Lightfoot), pp 587-610. Spix Publishing, Inc., Palm Beach, FL.
Samour, J.H., Baggott, G.K., Williams, G., Bailey, I.T. and Watson, P.F. (1986) Seminal plasma
Physiology, 84(4), 735.
Samour, J.H., Jones, D.M., Knight, J.A. and Howlett, J.C. (1984) Comparative studies of the
use of some injectable anaesthetic agents in birds. Veterinary Record, 115(1), 6-11.
 Samour J.H. and Naldo J.L. (2003) Diagnosis and therapeutic management of trichomoniasis
in falcons in Saudi Arabia. Journal of Avian Medicine and Surgery, 136-43.
Schildmacher, H. (1931) Untersuchungen iber die Funktion der Kerbstchen Korperchen. J.
Ornithol., 79, 374-415.
Schlotthauer, C.F., Essex, H.E. and Mann, F.C. (1933) Caecal occlusion in the prevention of
blackhead (enterohepatitis) in turkeys. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Associa-
tion, 83, 218.
Schmitt, P.M., Gobel, T. and Trautvetter, E. (1998) Evaluation of pulse oximetry as a monitor-
ing method in avian anaesthesia. Journal of Avian Medicine and Surgery, 12, 91-9.
Reterences
377
Schopf, A. and Vasicek, L. {1991) Blood chemistry in canary finches (Serinus canaria). Proceed-
ings of First Conference European Committee of Association Avian Veterinarians, Vienna,
p. 933.
Schwartzkopff, J. (1949) Uber Sitz und Leistung von Gehor und Vibrationssinn bei Vogeln. Z.
Vergl. Pbysiol. 31, 527-608.
Scott, D.C. (1968) Intramedullary fixation of a fractured humerus in a wild owl. Canadian
Veterinary Journal, 9, 98-9.
Scott Echols, M. {1998) Surgery of the avian reproductive tract. In: Seminars in Avian and
Exotic Pet Medicine, 11{4), 177-95.
Scrollavezza, P., Zanichelli, S., Palestra, L., Stella, G. and Arus, A. (1995) Medetomidine-ket-
amine association and atipamezole in the anaesthesia of birds of prey. Proceedings 3rd
Conference of European Committee of the Association of Avian Veterinarians, Jerusalem, p.
211.
Secord, A.C. (1958) Fractures in birds repaired with the Jonas splint. Veterinary Medicine, 53,
655-6.
Sibley, C.G. and Ahlquist, J.E. (1990) Phylogeny and Classification of Birds. A Study of
Molecuiar Evolution. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
Siegal-Willmot, J.L., Pollock, C.G., Carpenter, J.W. and Nietfeld, J (2005) Journal of Avian
Medicine and Surgery, 19(1), 19.
Simpson, V.R. (1991) Leucocytozoon-like infection in parakeets, budgerigars and a common
buzzard. Veterinary Record, 129, 30.
Simpson, V.R. (1996) Post-mortem examination. In: Manual of Psittacine Birds {eds P.H.
Benyon, N.A. Forbes and M.P.C. Lawton), p. 70. British Small Animal Veterinary Associa
tion, Cheltenham, Glos.
Simpson, V.R. and Harris, E.A. (1992) Cyathostoma lar (Nematoda) infection of birds of prey.
journal of Zoology {London),227, 655-9.
Small, E. (1969) Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds, 1st edn (ed M.L. Petrak), p. 354. Lea and
Febiger, Philadelphia.
Smith, G.A. (1979) Parrot disease as encountered in a veterinary practice. In: The Husbandry
and Medicine of the Parrot Family - The Proceedings of a British Veterinary Zoological
Society/Parrot Society meeting, Regent's Park, London (eds A.G. Greenwood and J.E.
Cooper).
Smith, G.A. (1982) Magazine of the Parrot Society, 16(11), 340.
Souza, M.J., Greenacre, C.B., Jones, M.P., et al. (2006) Clinical use of MicroPET and CT
imaging in birds. In: Proceedings of 27th Annual Conference of the Association of Avian
Veterinarians, San Antonia, Texas, pp 13-16.
Stager, K.E. (1964) The role of olfaction in food location by the turkey vulture (Cathartes
aura). Los Ang. Cty. Mus. Contrib. Sci., 81, 1-3.
Stager, K.E. (1967) Avian olfaction. Am. Zoo., 7, 415-20.
Stauber, E., Papgeorages, M., Sande, R. and Ward, L. (1990) Polyostotic hyperostosis associ-
ated with oviductal tumour in a cockatiel. Journal of American Veterinary Medical Associa-
tion, 196(6), 939-40.
Steiner, C.V. and Davis, R.B. (1981) Caged Bird Medicine. Iowa State University Press, Ames,
Iowa.
Stettenheim, P. {1972) The integument of birds. In: Avian Biology, Vol. II (eds D.S. Farmer,
J.R. King and K.C. Parkes), p. 7. Academic Press, New York/London.
Stockdale, B.C. (2005) The nutritional implications of producing the ^optimal egg? in captive
birds. Proceedings of the European Association of Avian Veterinarians, p. 340.
Stromberg, M.R. and Johnsen, P.B. (1990) Hummingbird sweetness preferences: taste or viscos-
ity.Condor,32, 606-12.
Stunkard, J.A. and Miller, J.C. (1974) An outline guide to general anaesthesia in exotic species.
Veterinary Medicine/Small Animal Clinician,69,1181-6.
Tanzella, D.T. {1993) Ulna ostectomy in a pale-headed rosella (Platycercus adscitus) with
multiple injuries. fournal of the Association of Avian Veterinarians, 7(3), 153.
378
References
Taylor, M. (1994) Biopsy techniques. In: Avian Medicine Principles and Application (eds R.W.
Ritchie, G.J. Harrison and L.R. Harrison). Wingers Publishing, Lake Worth, FL.
Taylor, M. (1994) Endoscopic examination and biopsy techniques. In: Avian Medicine: Prin-
ciples and Application (eds B.W. Ritchie, G.J. Harrison and L.R. Harrison), pp 327-54.
Wingers Publishing, Inc., Lake Worth, FL.
Temple, S.A. (1972) Artificial insemination with imprinted birds of prey. Nature, 237,
287-8.
Thorup, K., Alerstam, T., Hake, M. and Kjellen, N. (2003) Bird orientation: compensation for
wind drift in migrating raptors is age dependent. Proc. Biol. Sci., 270(Suppl 1), S8-11.
Tiemeier, O.W. (1941) Repairing bone injuries. Auk, S8, 350-9.
Toyoshima, K. and Shimamura, A. (1991) Ultrastructure of Merkel corpuscles in the tongue
of the finch Lonchura striata.Cell Tiss.Res.,264,427-36.
Van der Hage, M.H. and Dorrestein, G.M. (1991) Flagellates in the crop of canary bird. Pro-
ceedings of First Conference of European Committee of Association of Avian Veterinarians,
Utrecht, Netherlands, pp 303-7.
Van der Hage, M.H., Dorrestein, G.M. and Zwart, P. (1984) Pancreatitis is associated with
paramyxovirus Il in some aviary birds ( Neophema and Passeriformes). Proceedings Meeting
ofVeterinary Pathologists,Utrecht,p.28.
Van der Hage, M.H., Dorrestein, G.M. and Zwart, P. {1987) Paramyxovirus infections in Psit-
taciformes and Passeriformes. European Symposium ouer Vogelziekten, Beerse, Belgique.
 Netherlands Association of Avian Veterinarians.
Van Wettere, A.J., Winschmann A, Latimer K.S.,Redig T.P. (2005) Adenovirus Infection in
taita falcons (Falco fascinucha) and hybrid falcons (Falco rusticolus × Falco peregrinus).
journal of Avian Medicine and Surgery, 19(4), 280-5.
Varela, F.J., Pacacios, A.G. and Goldsmith, T.H. (1993) Color vision of birds. In: Vision, Brain
and Behavior in Birds (eds H.P. Zeigler and H.-J. Bischof), pp 77-98. MIT Press,
Cambridge.
Von Becker, E. (1974) Schnabelschienung bel Afrikanischen Hornraben. Praktische Tierarzt,
55(9), 492-4.
Von Fersen, L., Wynne, C.D.L., Delius, J.D. and Staddon, J.E.R. {1992) Transitive inference
formation in pigeons. J. Exp. Psychol. Anim. Behav. Process, 17, 33441.
Wade, L.L. et al. (2003) Identification of oral spiral bacteria in cockatiels (Nympbicus bollan-
dicus). Proceedings Association of Avian Veterinarians, pp 23-4.
van der Wall, S.B. and Balda, R.P. (1977) Coadaptation of the Clark's nutcracker and the
pinyon pine for efficient seed harvest and dispersal. Ecol. Mon., 47, 89-111.
Wallack, J.D. and Boever, W.J. (1983) Diseases of Exotic Animals: Medical and Surgical Man-
agement. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
Wallraff, H.G. (1991) Conceptual approaches to avian navigation systems. EXS, 60,
128-65.
Walls, G.L. {1942) The Vertebrate Eye and Its Adaptive Radiations. Cranbrook Institute of
Science, Bloomfield Hills, MI.
Weaver, J.D. (1983) Artificial insemination. In: Falcon Propagation, a Manual on Captive
York.
Westerhof, I.N.A. (1996) Pituitary-adrenocortical function and glucocorticoid administration
in pigeons (Columba livia domestica). PhD thesis. University of Utrecht.
Wilgus, H.S. (1960) Reserpine for tranquillising geese. The 2nd Conference on the Use of
Reserpine in Pouitry Production, S4-6. The Institute of Agriculture, Minnesota, St. Paul,
Minnesota.
Wilkinson, J.S. (1984) A.1. Work in France. Journal of the Weish Hawking Chub, 9-13.
Wilkinson, R. and Birkhead, T.R. (1995) Copulation behaviour in vasa parrots, Coracopsis
vasa and C. nigra. Ibis, 37(1), 117-19.
Wiltschko, W. and Wiltschko, R. (2002) Magnetic compass orientation in birds and its physi-
ological basis. Naturtwissenschaften, 89(10), 445-52.
References
379
Wiltschko, W. and Wiltschko, R. (2005) Magnetic orientation and magnetoreception in birds
and other animals. J. Comp. Physiol. A. Neuroethol. Sens. Neural. Behav. Physiol., 191(8),
675-93.
Woerpel, R.W. and Rosskopf, W.J. (1984) Clinical experience with avian laboratory diagnos
tics.In:Symposium on Caged Bird Medicine.The Veterinary Clinics of North America,
14(2), 249-86.
Wood, C.A. (1917) The Fundus Oculi Of Birds, Especially As Viewed By The Ophthalmoscope.
Lakeside Press, Chicago.
Woodford, M. (1977) A Marual of Falconry, 3rd edn. Adam & Charles Black, London.
Wright, A.A., Cook, R.G., Rivera, J.J., Sands, S.F. and Delius, J.E.D. (1988) Concept learning
by pigeons: matching-to-sample with trial-unique video picture stimuli. Anim. Learn. Behat.,
16, 436-44.
Yaakov, D.R., Rosenthal, K.L. and Shofer, F.S. (2006a) Proceedings of the Conference of the
Association of Avian Veterinarians, p. 369.
Yaakov, D.R., Rosenthal K.L. and Shofer, F.S. (2006b) Proceedings of the Conference of the
Association of Atian Veterinarians, p. 810.
Yeisey, C.L. (1993) Surgical correction of valgus carpal deformities in water-fowl. In: Proceed-
ings of the Association of Avian Veterinarians Annual Conference. Lake Worth, FL.
Zwart, P. (2003) Plumafolliculoma (feather cyst) in canaries (Serinus canaria), a benign tumour.
Proceedings 7th Meeting of Association of Avian Veterinarians, Loro Parque, Tenerife,
Spain, April 22-26, 2003, pp 241-7.
Zwart, P. and Grimm, F. (2ooo) Plumafolliculoma, feather cysts, in canary birds, a tumourous
dam, p. 126.
Abandonment of Animals
Aegyptianella pullorum
ALP (Alanine Amino
Act 1960, 208
{Piroplasmosis), 278,
Transferase), 70
abdomen
321
Alphachoralose poisoning,
coelomic cavities, 156
aerodynamics, wings, 8, 168,
335
palpation,53
229
Alphaxalone - alphadolone
 abdominocentesis diagnostic
Aeromonas, 268
(Saffan) anaesthetic,
samples,76
Aflatoxin, 338
131
abdominal muscles, 155
and chronic anaemia, 62
ALT (Alanine Amino
incision, 155
aggression, see stress
Transferase), 70
rupture/hernia,163
and breeding, 197, 215
altman tape splint, 179
Abscesses
bullying/ducks, 53, 163
alula digit, 7
infra-orbital, 145
towards humans, 205,
Amazon tracheitis (Herpes
mouth, 51,110,150
215
virus),283
subcutaneous, 145
agricultural chemicals, toxic,
ambient temperature
Acanthocephalid spp.,327
335
when nursing, 189
accommodation of the avian
air flow/lung, 17, 127
during anaesthesia, 128
eye, 29
Air sac anaesthesia, 140
Ambyloma spp.,333
and post-sclerocorneal
Air sacculitis, 94, 106, 122
Amidostomum anseris,325
muscle, 29
Air sacs, 18, 126, 156 189
American bald eagle herpes
and diving birds, 30
canulation, 76, 83, 140
virus, 284
and Terns, 30
mites, 332
Amikacin, 231
Acepromazine, 132
swabs, 72
aminoglycoside antibiotics,
Acetyl salicylic acid
washings, 76, 79
230-232
(Aspirin), 125, 257
"air trapping', airsacs, 95
Aminophylline (Roxane), 259
Achilles tendon luxation, 54,
Albatross
Amoxycillin, 222-223
180
breeding maturity, 18
Amphotericin-B (Fungizone),
Actinobacillosis, 272
 Al bumen/Globulin ratio,
242
Actinomyces spp. infection,
66
Ampicillin, 221-222
311
Alcaligenes sp., 269
amyloidosis of the kidney,
Acuaria sp.,326
Alcobon,243
343
acuity sight, 27
 Alimentary canal
anabolic steroids/
and cones, 27
and drug absorption, 117
Nandrolone, 255
taste,11, 35
content transit time,
anaemias, 61
of smell, 13, 16,37
12-13
aplastic, 59
acoustic acuity, 34
drugs acting on alimentary
diagnostic bone marrow
Acyclovir, 254
canal, 263
samples, 74
adaptation to skeletal/muscle
radiography, 91
anaesthesia
injury, 209-211
signs, autopsy, 107-109
Air sac anaesthesia, 140
adenoviruses, 301
surgery, 157
cardiac failure during, 128
lab tests, 75
ultrasonography, 99
emergencies, 138
Adrenal gland, 83
allometric scaling, 116
 general aneasthesia
signs/autopsy, 113
allopreening, 46
Atropine, 129
380
Index
381
inhalation, 135-138
selection and logical use,
Atipamezole, 135
injection, 131
122,219
Atoxoplasma sp., 318
cardiac arrest, 139
anticoagulants, blood, 56,
treatment, 250
cardiac failure causes,
64
Atropine, 129, 256
128
antidiarrhoeals, 263
Astroviridae,295
circuits, 135
Antidiuretic hormone test,
attacks on humans, 205,
depth assessment, 131
344
215
endotracheal tubes,
anti-fungal drugs, 237
auditory system, 31
135
polyene antifungals, 242
external auditory meatus,
fluid therapy, 129
anti-Malarial drugs, 250
31-32
heat pads, 128
anti-mycobacterial drugs,
 importance/casualty birds,
hypercapnia, 128
237, 239
213
hypoxia,127
anti-parasitic drugs
auscultation of the thorax,
hypothermia,128
ectoparastes, 251
52
intermittent positi ve
endoparasites, 244
autopsy, 52
pressure ventilation,
 protozoal endoparasites,
colour changes in muscles,
138
248-250
viscera, 105
masks, 135
Antirobe, 234
Avian cholera (Pasteurella),
mechanical ventilation
 AP (Alkaline phosphatise), 70
271
during, 135
apnoea
Avian encephalomyelitis,
monitoring, 129
during anaesthesia, 126,
specific/epidemic
oxygen flow rates, 126
138
tremor, 294
PaCO2,126-128,130
stimulant (Doxapram-V),
lab test, 75
 preca utions during,
138,265
vaccine,253
128-129
Appertex {clazuril), 248
Avian infuenza,209,293
 premedication and
Apramycin,232
lab test, 75
tranquillisation, 131
Arboviruses,296
Avian malaria,321
respiratory rate, critical,
Ardeidae (Herons)
effective drugs, 250
128, 138
feeding, 194
Avipox viruses, 47, 110,
volatile anaesthetics,
Argus spp., (soft ticks),
292, 392, Plate 7
135
333
vaccines, 252
importance pre-clinical
aromatic chemica ls
Avian reticuloentheliosis,lab
assessment, 125
avoidance,36
test, 75
local anaesthesia
arthropod ectoparasites,
Avian sarcoma leucosis,lab
safety,124
329-333
test, 75
physiological
treatment, 251
Avian serositis, 296
considerations, 125
Arthrosynovitis/Salmonella
Avian TB, 273
suggested anaesthetic
in pigeons, 54, 89
lab test, 75
routines,138
artifcial insemination, 200
drugs effective against,
analgesia and Analgesics,
artificial respiration, 138
237, 239
124, 257
Ascarid worms, 323
Avian typhoid (Pulorum
Anamnesis (clinical history),
ascites, S3
disease), 267
40
investigation, 76
aviary birds
Anatipestifer infection, 272
Ascorbic acid, 254
Helminth parasites, 79
Aneurysms, turkeys, 110
Aspirin {Acetyl salicylic
frostbite, SS
Angel wing, valgus
acid), 125,257
Avipro, 261,192
deformity, 54, 179
Aspergillus sp., 106, 309
Avocet beak anatomy,3
Angiostronglosis
culture, 72
Azithromycin, 233, 239
cantonensis, 326
chronic anaemia, 62
Anisocytosis, 59
clinical signs Humans,
Babesia, 321
Annulospira spp.,324
309
Bacillus anthracis, 273
anorexia
microscopical staining, 73,
Bacteria
post-mortem/a utopsy
309
 antibacterial drugs, use,
indications of, 108
treatment,237,240-243
219
droppings, 41
AST, SGOT (Aspartate
diseases, 266-278
Anthrax, 273
Amino Transferase),
infection eggs, 204
Antibiotics, 219-239
70
microbiological
eggshell quality, 203
ataxia, 43
investigations, 71
impregnated beads, 165
Atheromata, 43, 110
stained smears, 73
382
Index
Bactrim, 236
Blackhead (Histomoniasis),
surgery, 166-176,
baldness, 255
320
178-180
bandaging wings, 168
Black Spot diseases/canaries,
Bordetella spp., 269
banding rings, removal, 180,
298
boredom,45,346
Plate 12
Blain, 54
Borrelliosis, 270
Barn owl - flight, 210, Plate
Blastomycosis, 310
Botulism (limberneck), 274,
19
treatment,237
337
and facial ruff, 33
bleeding, see also
brachial plexus, avulsion,
assymetrical location ear
haemorrhage
166
canals,33
during pinioning, 177
brachial vein/injection, 45,
localizing sound, 34
from feathers, 41, 144,
46, 119
Basophil, 64
177
brain investigation, 346
Bayliascaris procyonis, 323
blepharospasm, 47
autopsy examination,113
bathing or spraying, 186
blindness, 27, 47, 350
clinical signs/disease, 43
benefit, water birds, 187
blood
stem,22
Beak, see bill
cell counts and
pons and medulla, 23
anatomical variation, 2-4,
haemoglobin, 60-62
"breakfast of the chicken",
10
chemistry reliability, 65
201
 Beak and Feather disease
chemistry samples, 64
breathing, abnormal signs,
virus, 46, 299
circulating volume, 56
42
Bill Tip Sensitive Organ,
glucose, 67
breeding
3,24
haematocrit (PCV), 59
age and breeding
change, colour, 50
in droppings, 41
condition, 198
deformity, surgery, 51,
mean RBC corpuscular
artificial insemination,
150
indices, 60
200
examination, S1
parasites treatment, 250
and disease, 198
hardness, 3
plasma collection, 65
 colony breeding, mixed
magnetite in beak, 39
sample collection,
species,197
mite infestation,
anticoagulants, 56
dead in shell eggs,
/Knemidocoptic
serum chemistries, 64-71
201-203
mange
smears, staining methods,
diet, 198, 199
Osteosarcoma, 51
59
incompata bility of
partial loss, 153
transfusions, 144
breeding pairs, 197
splits, fractures, 152
values immature and wild
toxic chemicals, 198
sensitivity, 24
birds,60
failure, 196
Beaver fever, 320
volume, 144
failure rearing young
behaviour, see aggression
BlowFlyStrike{Myiasis),333
chicks,205
brooding/fostering, 205
Blue Green Algae, 337
fostering chicks, 205
mental health birds, 214
Bob White Quail
maturity, 18,198
hot/cold chicks, 206-207
Herpesvirus, 284
nesting sites, 199
Besnoitia sp., 317
bones
weather and photo period,
bile acids, 69
autopsy examination, 114
198
Bile Duct Carcinoma, 106,
elemental structure, 164
Bromhexidene (Bisolvon),
280
secondary
258
Biliverdin/Bilirubin, 69
Hyperparathyroidism,
Bromide, potassium, 264
biochemical data
111
bronchodilator/
selection, 64
flight stresses, 165
Aminophylline, 259
collection blood samples,
healing, rate, 164-165
brood patch, 202
64
marrow examination, 74,
brown hypertrophy/cere, 50,
results reliance, 65
78
149
binocular vision, 26
Osteoporosis, 89
Budgerigars
biopsy specimens, 79
Perosis, 54
anaesthetics, 132
obtaining with endoscope,
Polyostotic hyperostosis,
conditions
85
90
Budgerigar Herpes
ultrasound directed liver,
pneumonisation
virus, 284
99
interspecific variation,
diagnostic lab test, 75
Birds/Paradise, trachea, 16
18
Cnemidocoptes mites,
Bisolvon, 258
signs/injury, wing bones,
332
biting flies, 333
44
Coccidiosis, 314
Index
383
eggs
Avipox infection, 292
Skeletal/muscle injury and
number layed, 18
beak anatomy/feeding,
adaption, 209-211
retained, 53
2-4
techniques for release, 217
French Moult
Black spot diseases,
testing flying a bility/falconry
(Psittacine Circo
298, 318
techniques, 212
virus), 299
breeding stimulation,
Cataracts, 47
Fledgling Disease, 300
198
surgery on, 148
gonadal tumours/
BudgerigarFledgling
cat bites {and Pasteurella),
radiographs, 96
disease, 300
271
Hypothyroidism, 42
Circo virus, 298
catching birds, 44
Infectious Oesophagitis
feather cysts, 46, 146
caudal medulla, 23
(PHV1), 281
susceptibility/ILT, 282
Central Nervous System signs
intersexes, 50
Tassle foot, 55, 332
illness, 43, Plate 3
lipomas, 146
Polyoma virus, 300
investigation, 346-351
Microsporidium spp.,
incubation and fledging
Centrorhynchus sp-,327
318
periods,356
Cephalexin,225
 Paramyxo virus (PMV)
weight range, 354
Cephalothin, 225
-5,291
Candida, 93, 110, 310
Cephalosporins, 225-226
tight ring removal, Plate
candling of eggs, 199
Cefoxtaxime, 226
12
chorio-allantoic membrane
Cephradine,226
regurgitation, normal
blood vessels, 201
Ceratospira spp., 324
and pathological, 41,
Canine a/d Feline diet, 192
Cere, S0
52
canker, S1
colours
taste, 36
canthotomy, 147
hyperkeratinisation,
water dependency,
Capercaillie, trachea of, 16
Budgerigars, 50, 149
20-21
Capillaria spp., 325
Cerebellum, 23
Bugs (Hemiptera spp-),
capnography, 130
body's unconcious
333
Carbenicillin, 223
awareness in space,
Bumblefoot a bscesses,
Carbon monoxide 337
23
181-182
signs/autopsy, 112
cerebral ischaemia, 43
species affected, 54
cardiac failure/anaesthesia,
Cervical vertebrae in Darters
 Bursa of Fabricus, signs at
139
(Anhinga), 4
autopsy, 109
cardiopathy
Cestoda, 328
Bursitis, see blain
diagnosis, 91, 98, 351
treatment, 247
 Bustards, oesophageal sac,
treatment,259,260
checking sight/visual
11
Carotenoids and oil droplets
impairement, 27
Butorphanol, 124
in cone cells, 30
Chelating agents, 265
Buzzards, see raptors
Carprofen,125, 146,257
chemicals, toxic, see
Frenkelia infection, 316
Caryospora sp., 316
poisoning
treatment, Appertex, 248
chemesthesis, 36
Caeca, 13,14,108
 cascade system, use of
Chicken Adenovirus
signs/autopsy, 108
unlicensed drugs, 123
finclusion body
Caecal worms, 325
Castings (pellets), 12, 41,
hepatitis), 302
cachexic birds, feeding,
194
Chicken anaemia virus,299
36
 see also regurgitation
Chicks
caching food, 31, 35
casualty birds
artificial rearing, 205
cages/hospitalisation, 184
 assessment of health and
chilling, 206
calcium
reasons why found,
congenital a bnormalities,
Calcium boroglucomate,
209
206
258
factors affecting survival,
crop impaction,153,207
total/protein bound/ions/
208
dead in shell, 201-203
blood, 71
Hack boxes, 217
fostering, 205
hypocalcaemia, 71
importance of good
hatchery dead, feeding
Campylobacter spp., 269
hearing, 34, 213
dangers, 193
in juvenile ostriches, 62
release
hatching, 19, 203
canaries
additional factors, 217
artificial assistance, 204
canary pox vaccine, 252
and the environment,
infanticide, 205
conditions
215, 217
Metabolic bone disease,
Atoxoplasma,318
and weather, 216
206
384
Index
overheated/too cold,
prolapse, 161
Conures, haemorrhagic
206-207
papillomata, 106
syndrome virus, 286
progress of growing
Clostridial spp., 274-275
Conure papilloma herpes 
chicks, 206
Cl. perfringens
virus, 285
rearing failures,205
{enterotoxaemia),274
Coots
rehydration, hatchlings,
Clostridial dermatitis, 275
Coracoid bone, 5, 166
204
Clotrimazole, 241
Corona viruses, 305
splayed legs, 206
Cnemidocoptic/
cortical blindness, 27
Vitamin A deficiency
Knemidocoptic
Copper deficiency/poisoning,
chicks, 36
mange,332
62, 336
wet chick in egg, 202
CNS, sedatives/stimulants/
Cormorants feeding
Chlamydophila, 62, 277
beha vioural
hospitalised, 194
signs at autopsy, 106,
modi fication drugs,
herpes virus, 284
107
264-265
regurgitation, 39
dry swabs for culture, 72,
Coccidiosis, 314
Cornea, 47
104
Cockatiel
ulcers, 147
effective drugs, 228, 229,
persistent egg laying, 19,
curvature changes for
233,235, 236
161-163
accommodation, 29
Ornithosis, 277
Reovirus/acute enteritis,
corneal reflex, 131
PCR DNA test,
75
306
Coronoviridae, 305
Psittacosis, 277
taste,36
Corticosteroids,255
staining of smears, 73
Trichomoniasis, 319
Corvidae (Crows)
lab tests for, 75
Cochlostoma spp., 319
feeding, 194
Chloramphenicol, 230,
Cockatoo
Cosumix, 236
235
Beak and Feather
Coumaphos (Negasunt),
Chlortetracycline, 229
syndrome, 24,45,46,
251
Chlorhexidine, 243
299
 courtship and regurgitation,
Chloromycetin, 235
Viral enteritis, 295
41
Chocolate toxicity, 335
weights, 352
simulating courtship
cholesterol, 69
Coclea nerve, 22, 31
behaviour, 200
Chorio-Alla ntoic membrane
Avian cocklea, 34
Coxiella burnetti, 277
blood vessels, 201
coeliotomy (laparotomy), 155
CPK,{Creatine
Chromic cat gut, 143
Coelomic cavities, 156
phosphokinase), 70
Ciconidae
Coffee, toxicity, 335
Cranes beak, 3
Herpes virus, 282
Coli bacillosis, 268
Herpes virus, 282
lower visual field myopia,
Colinus herpes virus, 284
Cranial nerves
29
colour vision, 27, 30
examination of, 350
Circoviridae, 298
Columella, 31-33
V,23,36;
ciliary muscles, 29
muscle,32-33
VII, 33,36;
Cimetine (Tagamet), 259
Computed tomography
IX, 36
Cimex spp., 333
(CT), 101
Craniofacial hinge2, 2
Ciproxin, 238-239
of head, 101
Creance, 257
Circoviridae, 298
concussion
Creatinine phosphokinase,
Circo viruses, lab tests for,
signs/autopsy, 114
see CPK,70
75
and pupillary dilatation,
creatinine, 69
Doves, Finches, Gulls,
47
Critical Care formula, 261,
Hornbills, 300
nervous signs, 43
192
CK (CPK), 70
conduction rates of various
Crop
Cladosporium sp, 311
myelinated fibres, 24
autopsy,110
Clavamox/clavulanate, 222
cone cells/retina and
burns/fistula, 154
clavicular injury, 166
hookup, 27, 28
infections, 110
Clavicle anatomical
oil droplets, cones, 30
impaction, 11, 153
presence, S
constipation
Milk, 11, 205
claws, sloughing, SS
 see also cloacal impaction,
presence/a bsence, food
Cleaview (unipath) test, 72
53
storage, 11
Clindamycin, 234
drugs for relief, 263
slow emptying, 207
cloaca
Contagious coryza, 275
Sour, Crop, 52, 110,
autopsy signs,
109
Contagious paralysis of
207
conditions, S3
pigeons, 281
swelling of, 52
Index
385
washings, examination,
diabetes mellitus (non insulin
dispensing, 117
76, 78
dependant),259
unlicensed use/birds, 123
cross fostering chicks, 205
diarrhoea, 40, 341
DSMO, 258
crows
Diazepam (Valium), 264
 Duck plague (Herpes
feeding hospitalised, 194
Diclofenac, 338
enteritis) virus, 62,
incubation, fledging
Dichlorvos strips, 335
283
periods, 355
digestive tract, seasonal
lab tests for, 75
weight ranges, 354
change in length, 13
vaccine, 252
cyanosis, 42
Dieldrin,335
Duck viral hepatitis,
Cyrophaga antipestifer, 272
diet changing, 193
(Picorna) types I and
Cryptococcus, 310
breeding birds, 199, 205
I1I, 294
treatment, 237
parent birds, 205
Duck virus bepatitis (Astro)
zoonotic potential, 310
dilation of pupil (mydriasis),
type II, 295
Cryptosporidium sp., 108,
259
Ducks
315
 Dimercaprol ( British Anti
Gizzard worms, 325
signs in humans, 315
Lewisite), 265
 Infectious anaemia, 287
treatment of, 233
Dimethyl suboxide (DMSO),
mode/flight, 210
Curlews, beak, 3
258
Muscovy
Curassows, trachea, 16
Dimetriadazole, 249
Adenoviruses, 303
cutaneous receptors, 22
Dinoprost, 255
Reovirus, 306
Cyanthostoma sp.,327
Dinoprostone, 256
Penis, prolapse, 19, 163,
cypermethrin, 261
Dioxins, toxicity,337
Plate 11
cysts feather, 46, 146
 Diphenhydramine
Porrocaecum infection, 323
subcutaneous, 146
(Benadryl), 260
Proventricular worms, 324
cytology diagnostic, 74
Dipterous flies/Myiasis, 333
Reovirus stunting, 306
interpretation, 77
disinfection, cleaning
Syringeal distension, 17
Cytomegalo virus, 285
hospital cages, 189
taste buds, 36
Cytophaga anatipestifer,271
disinfectants
Tyzzeria infection,315
F10, 189, 361
wet feather, 46
Dalacin, 234
Chlorhexidene,243, 254
Duphalyte, 262, 191
damping nest materials,
poisoning, 336
Duphatrim, 236
202
Dispharynx spp.,324
Duratestone, 255
Daphnia spp.,326
 Diving birds and ext.
dyspnoea and gasping, 42,
Darters (Anhinga), cervical
 auditory meatus, 31
340
vertebrae in, 4
DNA probes, 73, 197
DDT and DDE,toxaemia,
Dopram-V, 265
Eagles, see also raptors
335
Dorisiella sp., 315
American Bald Eagle
chronic anaemia, 61
double clutching, 205
Herpes virus, 284
deafness, casualty birds, 213
Dove circo virus, 300
mode/flight, 8, 210
dehydration, 190
Doves incubation and
moulting intervals, 46
due/not eating, 190
fledging periods,
ear,conditions,31,50
chicks, 212
355
ECG/anaesthesia, 129
Delmadinone, 256
weights, 353
Echinophaga gallinacean,
Depluming itch (P43, P46),
Doxapram, 138, 265
330
331, 332
 Doxepin (Sinequan), 264
Echinuria sp, 326
Dermal viral (Herpes)
Doxycycline, 228
ectoparasitic diseases, 329
disease, 285
drills, Dremel, 150, 361
treatment,251
Dermaryssus sp-,330
 drinking water, medication
EDTA, use, 265
 dermatological problems,
of, 116
eggs
344
Droncit, 247
autopsy examination, 204
Dermatomycosis
droppings
candling, 199
(Ringworm), 311
blood, in, 41
chilling, 201
Dermis and sub cutis, 145
change in character, 40
dead in shell, 201-203
Derris Powder, 251
drugs administration,
development, 201
Desflurane, 138
115-123
double clutching, 205
devoicing birds, 154
calculating dose, 116
eating, 199
Devoprim, 236
inhalation therapy, 121
Egg drop syndrome,302
Dexamethosone, 255
relative absorption from
episiotomy/egg removal,
Dextrans, 149
gut, 118
160
386
Index
excess temperature,
Embryo, respiratory system,
Pecten 0culi, 48-49
201
201
posterior chamber, 47-49
failure to hatch, 201
Emeraid Critical Care, 192,
reflexes, 47
fertility/Raptors/Passerines,
261
surgical anatomy, 147-14
201
Emphysema subcutaneous,
Eyelids, 147
hatching, 19, 203
52
subconjunctival injection,
humidity, 202
Emtryl, 249
121
impaction/binding, 96,
Emu, vestigial wing claws, 7
Eyeworms, 324
159, 168
Enalapril (Enacard), 260
Cyanthostoma sp-,327
ina bility to produce
encephalomyelitis, Avian
Thelazia sp., 324
normal, 199
specific/epidemic
incubation, 24,
tremor,294
F10, 189
environmental factors,
lab tests, 75
faecal examination, 79-80
201-203
vaccine, 253
faeces, character of, 40
indeterminate/determinate
 Encephalomyelitis Equine
Falconers
layers, 19
(Tago virus), 296
expressions used, 357
infection, causes, 204
lab tests, 75
techniques used for feather
swa bs from, 72
vaccine,253
replacement,213
laying, 199
Endolymph, 31, 34
Falcon inclusion body
lethargy, 199
endoscopy, 80
bepatitis, 280
interval between laying,
Endotracheal tubes, 135
falcons, see also raptors
19
energy requirements, 188
conditions of
malformed, 159
Engemycin, 227
Adeno virus,303
number laid, 19
Enilconazole {Imaverol), 241
eyesight,213
nutritional deficiency,
Enrofloxacin, 238-9
Infectious
203
Enterobacteriaceae, 266
hepatosplenitisvirus,
paracentesis, 160
Enterococcus feacalis,270
280
peritonitis, 69, 160
Eosinophils, 64
Serratospiculum sp.
persistent egg laying, 19,
Epidemic tremor, 294
infection, 327
161-163,256
Epidermoptic mites, 331
Trichomoniasis,319
pipping
 Epilepsy, idiopathic
mode/flying, 8
external, 19, 203
treatment, 264
semen collection, 200
internal, 203
Epiphora, 47
faradism, 194
respiration, 19, 201
episiotomy, egg removal,
fatty liver and kidney
retention
160
syndrome, 69
surgery for relief,
Ergot poisoning, 338
Favus (Ringworm), 311
159-161
Erysipelas, 272
faeces, blood in, 41
medical treatment,
Erythromycin, 234
direct smears, and
Prostagladin,
Escherichia coli, 106, 268
Helminth eggs, 79
Calcium, 256, 258
strains toxic/humans, 268
fear, anxiety, relief,
rotation during
Everglades Equine Viral
anaesthesia, 125
incubation, 202
Encephalitis,296
Feathers
shell texture/quality
Eye
Apteria,145
variation, 19, 203
anterior chamber
and quill mites, 331
tooth/egg, 203,19
conditions, 47
dermatological problems,
toxins effect, 203
blink reflex, 30
344
water logging, 202
canthotomy,147
duster syndrome, 284,
water loss during
Cataracts, 47
Plate 21
incubation, 202
surgery, 148
feather rot (mites), 332
weighing during
conjunctival oedema,
Feathers and sexing by
incubation, 202
48
DNA, 197
wet chick in egg, 202
Cornea, 47
Beak and Feather virus
Eimeriidae,314
drugs/treatment, 121
disease, 45, 299
Eimeria sp., 314
enucleation, 148
chicks, growth, 206
treatment, 248
examination, 47
conditions, 45-46
truncata/geese, 314
injury/casualties, 213
cyst (Plumafolliculomas),
elbow joint luxation, 174
lens, luxation, 48
46, 146
electro surgery
loss/survival, 213
damaged in casualties,
electrocardiography, 351
Nictating membrane, 148
212
Index
387
Feather dust and
Fringillidae finches, beaks,
Food
pathogens, 50, 105,
10
 and energy requirements,
283
"Going Light’ syndrome,
188
Fret/hunger/stress marks,
318
feeding during
46
Gouldian (Chloebia
hospitalisation and
imping, 213
gouidiae)
convalescence, 188,
loss and flight, 212
Herpes virus, 285
191-194
malformed primary, flight,
susceptibility to
medicating food, 118
46
Cytomegalovirus,
preferences in species, 36
moulting, 46
285
Forage mites, 331
plucking, self, 45
Isospora spp., 314
in G.1. tract/radiography,
awareness of self
Macrorhabdus
94
induced damage, 24
ornithogaster
fostering chicks, 205
plucking pria to surgery,
(Megabacteria)
Foveas, 27
144, 286
infection, 312
Fowl
plumage and colour
oesophagus and crop, 11
Adenoviruses, 302
vision,30
Polyoma virus, 300
Favus, 311
preening, 186
taste, 35
Fowl plague (Influenza),
protection of tail feathers
Twirling syndrome, 291
293
during nursing, 187
Zebra (Poephila guttatata)
fractures
Tail feathers during flight,
water dependency, 21
basic initial treatment, 165
24
breeding, 196
Beak, 152
Tail feathers, importance,
Fish eating birds, behaviour,
bones below hock, 179
5, 212
194
Carpus, Metacarpus and
Wet Feather/ducks, 46
fish hooks in birds, 51
Digits, 176
feeding behaviour
fits, 43, 348, 349
Clavicle and Coracoid,
captive raptors, 193
Flagellates, antibiotics active
166
during nursing, 188,
against,227
ESF, Kirschner splints,
191
Flamingoes
171
hatchery chicks, dangers
Crop milk, 11
Femur, 178
of feeding, 193
Intertarsal joint,9
grossly contaminated/
Insectivorous birds, 193
Flat flies, 329
infected,treatment,
Meal worms/Maggots,
Flaviviridae, 296
174
194
Fleas, 330
healing, 164
wild birds, and weather,
sticktight, 330
Humerus, 166-171
216
Flexispira rappini, 270
intramedullary pegs, 173
feet conditions, 54-55,
flies, dipterous,333
intramedullary pins, 170
181-182
flicker frequency, 28, 184
Radius and Ulna, 176
rotation in fledgling
flight
shorthened and
Raptors, 54
injuries affecting, 209-211
misaligned, 174, 209
types,9
lift on aerofoil, 210
tension band sutures, 173
Fenbendazole (Panacure),
mechanics, 164-165
Tibiotarsal, 178
244
modes of, 8, 209-212
Redig's Tie-in technique,
Ferric chloride, 259
 prevention by surgery,
170
ferilisation of ova, 200
177-178
Vertebral column, 89
Fibrinogen, 66
testing fitness for, 212
Wing, 166-172
Fibronyl, 251
Flubendazole, 245
Francisella tularensis,275
Filiariasis,327
Fluconazole, 240
French moult, 46
Fillicollis sp-, 327
fluid therapy, 129
see also Beak and Feather
Finches
and nursing, 190
disease, Polyoma
Air sac mites, 332
Flukes (tremadodes), 328
virus
Australian and PMV3,
Flucytosine, 243
Frenkelia spp.,316
290
 Fluorescent strip lights
Fret/Stress marks, 46
Big liver disease, 318
flicker frequency, 28, 184,
Frigate birds, Furcula of, 7
breeding, 196
198
frostbite, S5
and Budgerigar Fledgling
Fluoroquinolones, 237-238
Frounce, 51, 319
Disease, 300
flying weight, 191
Fulmar petrel weight, 535
Circo virus, 300
fogging/fumigation, 189
fulmars, oil regurgitation,
Cochlosoma spp., 319
Folic acid deficiency, 6243
12, 194
388
Index
fumes
Glucocoticoids adverse
Habronema incertum,324
toxic,336
effect, 71
Hack box, hack board,
Cherry laurel {Prunus
Glycerine, 263
hacking back, 217,
laurocerasus sp.), 337
Godwits, beak, 3
358
fumigation see fogging
Going Light Syndrome, see
Haemoglobin glutamer, 144
by birds, 38
Mega bacteria, 94,
haemoglobin value, 60
Fungizone, 242
312
Haematocrit (PCV), 59
Furcula, S
Gonads
Haematologists, terms used,
Furosemide, 260
autopsy examination,
59
112
Haemophilus spp.,275
Gall bladder, 13
neoplasia,163
Haemoproteus infection,
Galliformes
radiography, 96
322
Marble Spleen Disease,
Geese, Influenza/Plague/
haemorrhage, 144
304
Derzsy's/viral
agonal,112
Reovirus, 306
hepatitis, 295
intraocular, 213
 prescence of notarium, 4
Gout, S5
choanal space, 110
Gannets
visceral signs at autopsy,
 see bleeding during
absence of nares, 13
106
surgery, 144
Gapes, see Syngamiasis, 43,
Grandry corpuscules in
 sporadic/autopsy, 108
112, 326
beak, tongue, toes
Haemorrhagicconure
gardening chemicals, 335
and skin, 24
syndrome,286
Gastrocnemius tendon
Granivorous birds and grit,
Haemorrhagic enteritis!
displacement, 54
193
Turkeys, 304
gastro-intestinal problems,
regurgitated seed nutritive
Hair worms, 325
investigation, 341
value/nestlings, 205
Haloperidol (Hadol), 265
gastrotomy/
Granuloflex, 145
Halothane anaesthesia, 137
proventriculotomy
Grit, 12
Hammondia sp.,317
ventriculotomy, 156
amount in gizzard, 94
handling/catching birds, 44
gavaging, 118, 192
type and need for, 12,
Harrier
Geese
193
hearing, 213
Canada, Wasting
Goose virus hepatitis (Goose
flight, 210
Syndrome, 307
influenza/Plague), 295
Harvest mites, 331
droppings, 41
Gouldian finches air sac
hatching/eggs, 203-204
Gizzard worms specific,
mites, 332
hearing, 184, 213
325
Gouldian finches/
head swinging, 43
Proventricular worms,
Cytomegalovirus, 285
hearing range/birds, 34,
325
Grouse
184
reovirus infection, 306
Louping ill infection, 296
importa nce/ca sualty birds,
Gentamicin, 231
Trichostrongylus, 326
31-34, 213
Giardiasis, 320
Granuloflex, 145
Heart
treatment, 249
Guillemot beak, anatomy, 3
autopsy examination,
Gizzard (Ventriculus)
diving depth, 6
109
erosion and necrosis,
12
Guinea fowl adenoviruses,
cardiopathy
gizzard palpation, 53
302
diagnosis, 351
Koilin layer, 12
Infectious bronchitis, 305
electrocardiography, 351
radiography of, 94
Marble spleen disease,
ultrasonography, 98
staining, 12
304
Heavy metal poisoning, 336
striations on the wall of,
Trachea, anatomy, 16, 94
Helicobacter cinaedi, 270
109
Gulls
Helminth parasites, 323
surgical access, 156-158
WaterfowlAdenovirus,
treatment, 244-247
worms,323
303
Hemiptera,333
Gladosporium sp.
Beak anatomy of, 3
Hepatomegaly and
{Ringworm), 311
Black backed, Circo virus,
radiography, 91
Glass windows hazard, 27
300
Hepatozoon,321
Glibenclamide, 259
feeding, 194
Herbst corpuscles, 24
Globulins, 66
feet, keeping moist, 187
in beak, 24
Glottis
Humerus, 7
Herbstscher Strang
position, 135
regurgitation,12,194
vibrations, 24
Neoplasms, 51
flight, 8
Hernia, abdominal, 163
Index
389
Herons feeding hospitalised,
Hypocalcaemia, 43, 71, 348
Intersexes, 50
194
Hypoglycaemia, 43, 67
 Intestine blood in lumen,
Herpesviridae,279
Hypoparathyroidism, 62
108
Heterakis gallinae, 325
Hypoproteinaemia, 66
examination during
heteropenia, 63
Hypophysis
autopsy,107-109
heterophil, 62
neoplasia, 349
intussusception/intestine,
Hexamitiasis,320
Hypopyon, 47, Plate 8
158
treatment, 249
Hypothyroidism, 42, 62
intramedullary pinning, 170
Hexastarch, 144
Hypovitaminosis A, 47, 93,
intraosseus injection, 120,
Hibitane, 243
95
190
Hip, luxation, 180
hysterotomy, 160
intratracheal injection, 120
Hippoboscids, 329
Iodine, 62, 258
 Hippocampus in spatial
Iatrogenic poisoning, 338
 Iron deficiency and chronic
orientation, 39
icterus, 69
Anaemia,62
Histomoniasis (Blackhead),
Identification rings, 180,
Isoflurane, 137
107,108,320
Plate 12
Isospora sp., 314
Histoplasmosis,311
idiopathetic dullness,
Isoxsuprine, 259
potential zoonosis, 311
 Propentophyline, 259
Itraconazole, 241
signs/humans, 311
Idoxuridene, 254
Ivermectin, 246
treatment, 237
Imidazoles, 240
Hjarre's disease, 268
immunity/Levamisole
Japanese Quail Adeno virus,
Hock, luxation, 54, 180
stimulant, 246
302
homosexuality, 196
Immunocytes, 63
japanese Summer Fever,
Hoopoe, coracoid anatomy, 6
imping feathers, 213
297
Hormone treatment, 255
importance of support
Jaw articulation, 2, 3
Hornbills coracoid anatomy,
feeding, 188
joints
6
impression imprints,
autopsy, 114
Extra ocular muscles, 350
autopsy, 76
affected by Salmonella, 54
Occipital condyle, 4
imprinting, 205, 214-215
Bursitis {Blain), 54
Hospital cages, 184, Plate
Incubator birds, 202
luxations, 166, 174, 180
12
Incubators, 202
Household toxins, 338
infanticide of chicks, 205
Kakopo (Owl parrot), 6
House martins, feeding, 193
infection of the egg, 204
Kanamycin, 232
Howell-Jolly bodies, 59
Infectious anaemia of ducks,
Koagel, 263
Humerus
287
Kaolin mixtures, 263
injury and repair,
Infectious bronchitis,305
"Kecks", 42
166-174
vaccine for,253
Paramyo virus PMV-1,
surgical anatomy, 169
Infectious laryngotracheitis
288
humidity relative and egg
{ILT), 282
Ketamine, 132,264
incubation,202
lab test, 75
plus, Acepromaxine,
Humming birds, 6
vaccine for, 252
Diazepam, Xylazine,
Hunger marks, 46
Infectious oesophagitisf
132-133
Hyaluronidase use with
pigeons, 281
Ketoconazole, 240
injecta bles, 120, 190,
 Influenza, avian, lab tests,
Kidneys
259-260
75
autopsy, 113
Hydrocolloid dressings, 145
infra-orbital sinus injection,
 comparative anatomy,
Hydroxyzine, 260
148
20-21
Hypercalcaemia, 71
aspiration, 76
investigation of disease,
Hyperglobulinaemia,
,66
 Infrared lamps, 194
242
Hyperglycaemia, 67
inhalation therapy, 121
Kirschner splints, 179-182
Hyperkeratinisation/cere, 50,
injections, various methods,
Kiwis
149
119-121
external nares, 13
Hyperparathyroidism, 111
Inner ear, 33
ovaries, 18
Hyperproteinaemia, 66
Insectivores, feeding, 193
Klebsiella sp., 282
Hyperstriatum,23
insemination, 200
Knemidocoptic mange mite,
hyperthermia/
 intelligence, avian, 35
47, 50, 55,332
hyperventilation,
tool use, 35
treatment, 246
chicks, 206-207
caching foods,
35
Koilin of gizzard, 12
Hypoalbinaemia, 66
mental health, 214-215
Kyphosis, 89
390
Index
Lactulose (Duphalac), 260,
Lincomycin/Spectinomycin,
Magnetic Resonance
262
232
Imaging (MRI), 102
Lake Victoria Cormorant
Liothyronine sodium
magnetodetection in
Herpes virus, 284
(Tertroxine),257
migration, 39
Lankesterellosis!
Lipaemia, 69
Mallophaga,329
Atoxoplasma, 318
Lipomas, 146
mandible articulation, 2, 3
laparoscopy, 80
Liquid paraffn (Mineral oil ),
Manganese deficiency, 54,
photography with, 85
263
203
problems with technique,
Listeriosis,273
poisoning, 336
82
Liver
Marble spleen disease, 304
Laryngo tacheitis, lab tests
conditions/autopsy,
Marek's disease, 62, 283
for, 75
106-107
autopsy, 113
Laser surgery, 143
fatty degeneration of, 69
vaccine, 252
Laxatives, 263
Louping ill virus, 296
Marbofloxacin, (Marbocyl),
L-carnitine use of, 147
vaccine,253
238
LD,LDH{Lactate
Louse flies, 329
martins house, orphaned,
dehydrogenase), 70
Lovebird Herpes Virus,
feeding, 193
Lead poisoning, 43, 62, 336
284
mating failure, 196
and CPK, 70
Low energy bulbs/fluorescent
see fostering, 205
and Porphyrinuria, 323
strip lights, 184
Mean corpuscular
learning, vocal, 34-35
Lugol's iodine, 258
erythrocyte indices,
Ledclair (Sodium Calcium
Lungs
60
Edetate), 265
autopsy examination,
Mechanoreceptors
legs
112
skin, 23-24
bone fractures, see
Chemoreceptors, 126
detection of air turbulence
orthopaedic surgery
evolution of avian, 201
with plumage, 24
differential anatomy, 7, 9
extent,17-18
Mebendazole, 245
injured legs/survival, 213
focal densities in
Medetomidine and Ketamine
Paresis of, 43
radiographs, 89
anaesthesia, 134
physiotherapy, 194
Mechanoreceptors, 126
Medication
splayed in chicks, 206
Neopulmo/Paleopulmo,
administration of drugs,
tight identification rings,
17
115-123
180, Plate 12
Physiology/gaseous
oral, 117
Lemming Disease of Russia,
exchange, 126
persistant refusal/oral
275
Radiography, 94
medication, 37
Lens/avian eye
luxation
relative absorption from
changes in shape, 29
Joints, 166, 174, 180
gut,118
luxation, 48
Achilles tendon, 180
suitable volumes/oral
Leucocytes, 62
Lyme disease, 270
medication, 118
toxic, 63
Lymphocytes, reactive, 63
topical, ointments/creams,
Leucocytosis, 63
Lymphocytosis, 63
121
Leucocytozoonosis, 105, 322
Lymphopenia, 63
via drinking water, 116
treatment, 250
Lysine deficiency, 46
via food, 118
Leucopenia, 63
Medicines, law relating to
Leucosis/sarcoma Complex
Macaws
use of unlicensed
Viruses, 286
maturity, 198
drugs, 123
Levamisole, 246
Wasting disease/Psittacine
Medroxy-progesterone, 256
immunostimulation,123
proventricular
medullary bone, 90, 96
Lice, 329
dilatation (PDD),
"Mega bacteria",
light, influence on breeding
109, 307
Macrorhabdus
activity,198
Macrolides and
ornithogaster,79,93,
flicker frequency, 28,
Lincosamides, 230,
109, 312
184-185
233-234
treatment, 242
 Lignocaine anaesthetic,
Macrorhabdus ornithogaster
Meloxicam (Metacam),125,
130
(Megabacteria), 79,
257
ointment, 131
93,109,312
memory,35
Limber neck(Western duck
drug effective against, 242
mental health of birds, 214
sickness),274
Maggots, blow fly strike,
imprinting, 200, 214-215
Lincomycin, 232
333
Merkel cells, 24
Index
391
Metabolic bone disease, 89,
conditions of, at autopsy,
caudolaterale, working
150,206
105
memory, 35
metabolic/effective weight,
 Pseudotemporalis, 150
Neophema sp., PMV (3),
116
red muscle fibres, 174
290
metabolic rate high, energy
ruptured abdominal, 163
Neoplasia
requirements,188
Sarcocystis, 317
abdominal, 163
Medoxyprogesterone, 256
Supracoroideus muscle
bile duct carcinoma, 106,
Metoclopramide (Reglan),
(deep pectoral)
(herpes), 280
263
rupture/tendon, 53-54,
bones, 89
Metomidate, 135
90, 166
glottis, 51
Metronidazole (Torgyl), 249
 muscle, well developed,
lipomas, 146
Miconazole, 240
166
 nictating membrane, 148
microbiological smears,
white muscle fibres, 174
pituitary, 43
examination of, 73
white streaks/muscle/
preen gland, 147
Microsporidium sp-, 316
haemoproteus, 322
retrobulbar, 47
Microtetrameres spp., 324
mutes,40
nephropathy diagnosis,
migratory senses, navigation,
Mycobacteria sp., 106, 107,
346-351
38
273
nerve endings/skin, 23
Milkweeds, toxicity
and anaemia, 62
unmyelinated and thinly
appendix,337
Mycobacteriosis and
myelinated axons of,
Milupa, 192, 262
radiography, 89
23
Mineral oil, see liguid
Lab tests, 75
 nerves peripheral autopsy,
paraffin
Mycoplasmas, 266, 276
113
minute volumes/res piration,
antibiotics against, 229,
nervous signs of illness, 43,
17, 126
231-233, 239
346-351
Mites {red and northern
collection/dry swabs for
nest boxes, 197, 199
fowl), 330
culture, 72
and hygiene, 205-206
and forage, 331
lab tests, 75
nesting materials, choice of,
depluming itch or mange,
Mycotic diseases/fungal
199, 202
331
diseases
nestlings
harvest mites (Trombicula
Mycosis/ra diographs/lungs,
causes of death, 207
spp.),331
94-95, 95
some signs/autopsy,
plumage, {feather and
Mydriatics, 259
113-114
quill), 331
Myialages spp., 331
neurosis, 197, 215
mange mite
Myiasis (Blow fly strike),
Newcastie disease, 108, 288,
(Cnemidocoptes),
333
315
332
Mynah birds
vaccine,253
Sternostoma, (air sac
 droppings, 41
New duck disease
mites),331
Mysoline (Primadone), 264
(Anatipestifer),272
treatment, 246
Niclosamide (Yomesan), 247
molluscicide poisons, 335
Nandrolone, 255
 Nictating mem bra ne,
Monilia,310
Nares, 13
tumours, 148
monocytosis, 64
 hyperkeratinisation, 149
Nilverm, 246
Motile spiral bacteria, 270
Nasal cavity, 16
Nitrous 0xide, 137
moulting, 46
Nasal salt glands, 20-21, 36
Nizoral, 240
Mouth
Nasolachrymal ducts, 47
Nociceptors, 24
oropharynx conditions of,
navigational senses, 38
Norcuron, 259
51
Nebcin, 232
Norfloxacin, 238
and trichomoniasis, 51
nebulisers for inhalation
Northern fowlmite,330
multivitamin and mineral
therapy, 122
Nortripyline, 260
supplements,
Neck
Notarium, S
261-262
brace use, 194
NSAID drugs, 257
Murray valley fever,297
parrots/air sacs, 18
nursing birds, 183
Muscles
inflation time/breathing,
physiological aspects, 188
abdominal, 155
42
nutrition, severely ill birds,
atrophy,52,174
Negasunt, 251
191
Ethmomandibularis, 151
Nematodes, 323-327
deficiencies, 62
conditions/radiography,
treatment, 244-247
nystagmus, 350
90, 91
Neostriatum, 23
Nystatin, 242
392
Index
oak leaves, toxicity and
eyes, 25-31, 47-49
Pancreas, autopsy
chronic anaemia, 62
Chick fading syndrome,
examination,107
Oeciacus spp., 333
adenovirus, 303
pancreatitis droppings, Plate
Oesophagitis infectious
Infectious bronchitis,305
2
( Pigeon Herpes
intersexes, 50
Papilloma virus,301
Virus), 281
"Megabacteria", M.
chronic and anaemia, 62
Oesophagostomy/
ornithogaster sp., 61,
Papovoviridaea, 300
pharyngostomy tubes,
93,312
paraffin, liquid, 263
154
Newcastle disease, 288
Paraheamproteus,322
oil droplets, distribution/
parsley, toxicity, 33
Paramyxo viruses,288-291
retina, UV light, 30
proventriculus, 11-12
and bursa of fabricus at
Ointments/creams, 121
proventriculotomy, 157,
autopsy, 109
Oleandomycin, 234
158
lab tests for, 75
Olfaction, 37
tuberculosis, 273
vaccines,253
 in petrols, albatrosses and
toxicity of Thia bendazole,
parathyroids, 62
shearwaters, 37
245
parrots
and foraging, 37
yolk sacs (unabsorbed),
acuity of vision, 26
olfaction/navigation, 38
163, 206
Amazon, breeding
olfaction/reproduction, 38
Ovaries
maturity, 18
Olfactory bulb/brain size,
left and right, 18
Amazon tracheitis (Herpes
37
cystic seen in radiographs,
virus),283
Operculum/owls ear, 33
90,96
Aspergillosis, 309
ophthalmic treatments,
neoplasia, 163
beak surgery, 152
121
Oviduct
caeca,104
opisthotonus, 43
impaction, 159
coccidiosis, 314
Optic cortex/lobe (optic
prolapse, 160-161
Cockatoo viral enteritis,
relay area), 22,
salpingohysterectomy,
295
26-27, 30-31
161-162
beak abnormalities, head
optic nerve, 25, 30
torsion,159
and beak, 147-153
Oral sacs, inflatable, 11
Owls
eating invertebrates, 12
Orbiviruses, 306
attacks on humans, 215
enlarged spleen in
organophosphates, 335
head swinging, 43
radiographs, 96
Ornithonysstus spp,330
localizing sound, 34
feather colour changes, 46
Ornithosis
Owl herpes virus
feather plucking, 45, 186,
see Chlamydiophylia,
(Infectious
346
277
hepatosplenitis),281
intelligence, 35
Orthomyxoviridae, 293
eyes/tubular shape,
lead poisoning, 336
Ostectomy/radius or ulna,
25-26
Papilloma virus,301
174
Oxyglobin, 149
proventricular dilatation
osteoarthritis, 193
Oxyspirura spp.,324
(PDD), (macaw
osteodystrophy, meta bolic,
Oxytetracycline, 227
wasting disease), 109,
89, 150, 206
Oxytocin, 160, 256
307
osteomyelitis/osteoporosis,
Oystercatcher
Reovirus, 306
89
beaks, 3, 51
medicating food, 118
osteosarcoma/neoplasia, 89
Metabolic bone disease,
Ostriches
Pacheco's parrot disease,
89
Aegyptianella,278
280
Macaws, breeding
Anthrax,273
lab tests, 75
maturity, 18
Aspergillosis,309
autopsy signs, 106
moulting, 46
Avian pox, 292
vaccine for, 252
Neophema spp. and
Campylobacteriosis/
Pain
PMV3,290
juveniles, 62, 269
chronic pain, 24
Platycercus spp. and
chicks
chemically induced, 36
PMV3,290
pipping (hatching) eggs,
initial pain free period, 24
Polyoma virus, 300
203
perception, 124
self trauma, 45, 186, 346
Clostridial
response birds, 24
taste,35
enterotoxaemia, 274
sensitive areas, 124
Vasa (Coracopsis sp.)
eggs, artificial incubation,
pair bonding for life, 197
copulation, 20, Plate
201
Panacure, 244
15
Index
393
Parvo virus of geese, 295
diagnostic lab tests, 75
vaccine, 253
lab tests, 75
feather rot, 332
polyostotic hyperostosis, 90,
Pasteurella sp., 271
Herpes viruses, 281
96, 113
patagiectomy, 178
diagnostic lab test, 75
Porrocaecum sp-, 323
pathogens latent danger, 189
Hexamita infection, 320
Post mortem, colour changes
pathogens, micro, specific
hippoboscids in nestlings,
in muscles, viscera,
tests for, 75
329
105
PCBs ( polychlorinated
Inciusion Body enteritis
Potassium bromide, 264
biphenyls), 335
{V65},302
Potassium iodide, 258
PCR (Polymerase chain
Inciusion Body bepatitis
potentiated sulphonamides,
reaction)
{V66), 303
230, 236
For detection DNA/RNA,
Infectious eosophagitis,
 Polyene antifungals
74
281
Pox, avian, 47, 110, 292,
PCV (haematocrit), 59
intelligence, 35
392, Plate 7
PDD, (psittacine
olfaction in reproduction
lab tests, 75
proventricular
and navigation, 38
vaccines various, 252
dilatation), 109, 307
Paramyxo virus (PPMV-1),
Praziquantel (Droncit), 247
Pea fowl, histomonas
289
 Preen gland (Uropygial), 147
infection, 320
vaccine, 253
precsription diet (Hills),
 Pellets/castings, regurgitated,
Reovirus enteritis, 306
192
12, 41, 194
salmonella/joints, 54
premedication/GA, 131
Penguins avian malaria, 321
Trichomoniasis,319
presurgical fasting, 67
crop milk, 11
 pinioning/prevention of
Primaquine, 250
Emperor, diving depth, 6
flight, 177
Primidone (Mysoline), 264
hypoxia,127
Piperacillin, 224
Probiotics, 123
lungs extent, 17
Piperazine, 247
Procaine hydrochloride, 131
Ketamine and Zylazine,
 Piperonyl butoxide, 251
Procellariformes, navigation!
133-134
 piscivorous birds, feeding,
smell, 39
short sighted/myoptic, 30
194
prognathism, 150
trachea, 17
pituitary gland/autopsy,
prolapse
wing muscles, 5
neoplasia,113
Cloaca, 161
wing bones, 7
plants
Oviduct, 160
penicillins, 220-224
poisonous,337-338
Penis, 163
Penis (Thallus), 19
Platycercus spp. PMV-3, 290
Propatagial membranes, 54,
prolapse, 163, Plate 11
plasma T 4, 342
91, 210-211
perches, 186
plasma proteins, 65
Propentofylline (Vivitonin),
peritonitis, 95
Plasmodium infection, 321
259
perosis, 54
treatment, 250
proprioception, 23
Petrols sense smell, 13, 39
transmission, Infectious
Propofol, 132
pharyngostomy tube, 154
anaemia, ducks, 287
Prostaglandin E2
Pheasants
Plumafolliculomas, 146
(Dinoprostone), 160,
Histomonas infection,
post mortem specimens
256
320
storage, 103
Prosthorhynchus spp-,327
Infectious bronchitis,305
Poikilocyte, 52
Protection of Animals Acts
Marble spleen disease,
Poisoning, 335
1911 and 1964, 214
304
collection of samples, 334
protozoa/gut
physiotherapy, 194
agricultural and garden
treatment, 227, 230, 236,
Picornoaviridae,294
chemicals, 335
248
Pigeons
Diesel, 335
Proventriculus
discrimination
heavy metals, 335
autopsy signs, 109
luminescences and
insecticides, 335
neuropathic dilatation,
colour, 30, 31
 Polychlorinated biphenols
PDD, 109, 307
adenovirus infection, 302
(PCBs), 335
proventriculotomy, 156,
air sacs/radiography, 95
polychromatic index, 61
158
canker, 51, 319
polydipsia/polyurea, 344
washings, 79
Circo virus, 299
Polymorphus sp-,327
worms,324,326
Contagious paralysis,
Polyoma virus,62,300,304
Pseudomonas spp., 268
(Encephalomyelitis),
lab tests for, 75
pseudoparasitism, 323
281
P.M. signs, 106
Pseudotuberculosis spp., 271
394
Index
psittacine
Respiratory tract, 94
ripeness/fruit and UV light,
Beak and Feather disease
Spleen, 96
27
Circo virus, 24, 45,
restraint manual or
Rocky Mountain Spotted
46, 299
anaesthetic, 85
fever, 278
Adenovirus, 303
tracheal, variations, 16
rodenticide poisoning, 335
Herpes viruses, 280
positioning, 87
Rodentiosis, 271
proventricular dilatation
wings, caudal-cranial
Rods retina/vision, 27
(PDD), (Macaw
projection, 88
Rompun (Xylaxine), 264
Wasting disease), 109,
radio wave surgery, 143
Ronoxan, 229
307
Radius and Ulna fractures,
Rotavirus,322
Psittacosis
174
Russian spring and summer
see Chlamydophyllia
Rainbow lories,Paramyxo
fever,297
infection, 277
virus, 291
PTFE poisoning, 336
Raptors
SA-37, 261
Puffins, beak, 3
Adenovirus infection, 304
Saffan, (Alphaxalone/
Pullorum disease, 267
Aspergillosis, 309
Alphadolone)
 Pulseoximeter, 129
blain, 54
anaesthetic, 131
pupil, dilation of (mydriasis),
Caryospora spp., 316
Sage grouse
259
Runting and Stunting
Oesophageal sac, 11
and concussion, cortical
syndrome,307
Saint Louis Fever, 297
blindness, 27
Trichomoniasis (Frounce),
salivary glands, 11, 36
Pygostyle,5
51,319
Salmonella, 62, 267
Pyopen (Carbencillin), 223
Razorbill
affecting joints, 54
Pyrimethamine, 250
beak, 3
autopsy signs/gut, 108,
diving depth, 6
109
Quadrate bone, 2
Red mites, 330
Lab tests, 75
Q-fever, 277
Red-tailed hawk
ovary/autopsy, 112
Quail
Frenkelia infection, 316
Salpingitis/radiography, 96
Adenovirus,302
Reglan, 263
sal pingo-hysterectomy,
bronchitis,302
regurgitation, 41, 52
161-163
Coronavirus, 305
renal disease/investigation,
salt poisoning, 71, 113, 338
Herpes virus, 284
342
Sarafloxacin,238
Histomoniasis infection,
Renal portal system, drugs
Sarcocystidae, 317
320
washed out, 21
Sarcocytis spp., 105, 317
Japanese
Reoviruses, 306
effective drugs, 250
breeding maturity, 18
Reproductive system
Sarcoma/leucosis complex
Quinacrin, 250
female, 18
Retrovirus, 286
male, 19
chronic anaemia, 62
Rabies virus, 298
respiratory disease
lab tests, 75
Radiography, 86
investigation, 340
Scaly face/scaly leg, 332
contrast media,96
Respiratory system, 13
Scissor beak, 150
gut transit time,97
acute obstruction, 154
Scoprin, 236
Digital, 87
signs/autopsy, 112
sedatives/stimulants/
Film and exposure factors,
Reticulocyte, 74, 78
behavioural
87
Reticulo endotheliosis virus,
modification drugs,
gizzard, 94
287
264
G.1. tract, 91-94
lab tests, 75
seed, toxins, 338
use of grids, 89
Retinal examination, 29,
coated/agricultural
gonads, 96
47-49
chemicals, 335
Heart, 91
Retroviridae, 286
semen, collection, 200
intensifying screens, 88
Rhamphotheca, 150
sensory receptor area/brain
interpretation, soft tissue
Rhibicephalus spp.,333
like "Homunculus",
radiography, 91
Rhinolyths, 149
24
interpretation, muscle/
Rickets/fleglings, 89
Serratospiculum, 106, 327
skeletal system, 89
Rickettsial infections, 266
Serositis, avian viral, 296
Kidneys, 95
Rickettsii dermacentor,278
Serum
Liver, 91
 Rings identity/constriction, 
enzymes, 13, 69
mammography flms, 89
180, Plate 12
protein/plasma, 65
non-screen film, 88
Ringworm, 311
biochemistry, 65
Index
395
Sevoflurane, 138
splinting
hysterotomy, 159-160
sexing birds
external, 174, 177,
intussusception/gut, 158
DNA techniques, 197
179-180
laser surgery, 143
surgical, 81-82
internal, 170-171, 176
Nictating membrane,
SGOT,see AST,{Aspartate
Sporotrichosis
147-148
Amino transferase),
treatment, 237
Oesophagus, 153
70
squeaking in budgerigars, 42
orthopaedic, 164-181
SGPT (ACT), 70
Stat, 263
positioning/patient, 142
Shell gland, disease, 203
Sternostoma sp., 106,327
Preen gland (Uropygial),
Shoulder joint, luxation,
Sternum, differential
147
166
anatomy, 6
preparation/op'site, 144
sight in low light conditions, 
Stick tight fleas, 330
Reproductive tract, 159
26-27
stomach/oesophageal tubes,
use of a radio-wave
Silver nitrate/cautery, 259
118, 192
instrument, 143
Sinequan, 264
Stork herpes virus, 282
use of heat pad, 145
sinuses/infraorbital/
Streptomycin, 239
skin, 145
paraorbital/aspiration/
Streptocar spp., 30
skin graphs/flaps, 145
injection, 76, 146
 Streptococcuus faecalis, 270
suturing materials, 143
sinusitis, infra-orbital, 35
stress
torsion/oviduct, 159
Siphonaptera,330
 breeding problems, 197
yolk sac retention, 163
skin
enteropathy, 108
surgical sexing, 84
investigation/
reduction during nursing,
survival/casualty birds, 208
dermatological
183
Syngamus trachea,43,112,
problems, 344
Streptococcus feacalis, 270
326
structure, 145
Stunting syndromelreovirus,
Synsacrum,5
skeletal injury/casualties,
306
Synulox, 222
209-212
 Sucrose solution, as laxative,
 Synringeal bulba, 17
skeleton, signs/autopsy, 114
263
Syrinx, 17
slipped wing, 42
Sulphonamide drugs,
devoicing, 152
smears micrbiological,
potentiated,236
autopsy examination,
examination of, 73
Surgery
112
smell
abscesses/tumours/cysts,
sense of, 37
subcut, 146
Tagoviridae/Flaviridea, 296
swifts and falconides, 16
abdominal (coeliotomy),
Tannins, toxicity, 338
sneezing,42
155
Tail
“snits', 42
 alimentary canal, 157
bobbing, 42
Sodium Calcium Edetate
canthotomy, 147
feathers (Retrices), S
{Ledclair), 265
chromic cat gut, 143
supporting body, 5
Sodium iodide injection,
cloacal proplapse,
tape worms,328
258
161-162
Tardak, 256
Sodium chlorate poisoning,
cloacoplexy, 161
Tassle foot, 55, 332
335
crop
taste/gustation, 36
Sodium/Potassium, plasma
impaction,153
and medication, 117
levels, 71
fistula, 154
buds, 35
Soloxine, 257
electro/radio surgery, 143
Tea, toxicity, 335
somatosensory system,
endoscopic
Teflon poisoning, 336
23-24
instrumentation,155
signs at autopsy, 112
Sour crop, 52, 110, 207
enucleation of eye, 148
temperature
Spectinomycin, 231
episiotomy, for egg
 ambient/hospitalized birds,
Sperm
removal, 160
189
fertilization/ova, 200
essential equipment, 142
body, 53, 189
Host glands, 200
Feather cysts,
tendonectomy preventing
Spinal cord, afferent spinal
( Pluma folliculomas),
flight, 178
tracts, 23
46, 146
terns, long sighted/
Spirochaetacea, 270
ga strotomy/
hypermetropic, 30
Spiroptera spp.,324
proventriculotomy/
Terramycin, 227
splayed legs/chicks, 206
ventriculotomy, 156
Tertroxin, 257
Spleen signs/autopsy, 107
haemorrhage during, 144
Testes, 163
splenomegaly in TB,89
head and beak, 147-153
Testosterone, 255
396
Index
tetracycline antibiotics, 220,
Trombicula spp, 331
Vertebral column, Kyphosis,
227-230
Trypanosoma spp., 322
89
T 4 estimation plasma, 342
Tuberculosis avian, 273
fractures, 89
Thallus (penis) prolapse, 20,
autopsy signs, 107
Vionate, 261
163
anti-tuberculosis drugs,
viral diseases, 279-307
Thelazia sp, 324
239
tests,73-75
Thermal receptors/skin, 24
Tularaemia, 275
prophylactic protection
Thibendazole, 245
turkeys
{vaccines), 252
thoracic inlet, inflation, 42
adenoviruses, 304
Viral Papillomas, 280, 301
Thorny headed intestinal
Blackhead (histomoniasis),
Visceral afferent nerves,
worms, 327
320
22
threadworms, 325
Herpes virus, 284
visual system, 25
Thrombocytopenia, 64
Haemorrhagic enteritis,
perception of colour, 30
Thrombosis, 43
304
use of polarized light in
Thrombocytosis, 64
Soft shell egg disease, 304
navigation, 39
Thyroid
Twirling syndrome, old
visual memory, 31
autopsy, 111
world finches, 291
vitamin (also mineral and
see hypothyroidism
Tylosin, 233
nutritional
neoplasia,111
Tympanic membrane, 31-32
supplements),
Releasing hormone, 257
Tyzerria sp-,315
261-262
Stimulating hormone, 257
Vitamin:-
treatments, 257
ultrasonography, 97
A
Thyroxine, 257
Equipment required, 98
deficiency, 36{chicks)95,
Tibial cartilage displacement,
Examination/heart, 98
345
54
Kidneys, 99, 100
see Carotenoids and
Tiamulin, (Tiamutin), 233
Gonads, 99, 100
vision, 30
Tibiotarsal bone, fractures,
G.1. tract, 99
injection, 261, 262
178
Liver, 99
supplement, Nutrobal,
Ticarcillin, 224
ventromedian approach,
272
ticks, 333
98
B
tick bites, 270, 333
 parasternal approach, 98
Folic acid deficiency,
Timentin, 224
Ultra violet light
CNS, 43
Tobramycin, 232
vision, 27, 30
chronic anaemia, 62
Tongue
oil droplets/types, 30
multivitamin inj, 261
abscessation/trauma, 11,
unlicensed drugs, 123
B12/chronic anaemia,
51
urate crystals
62
Torulosis, 310
colour change in faeces,
C
toxic household plants,
41
injection, 262
337-338
kidneys/radiographs, 95
D
Toxoplasmosis, 62, 317
lab test, 43
preparations,262
effective drugs, 248, 264
urea levels, 68
E
 trachea variations, 16, 94
urea/uric acid ratio, 68
deficiency CNS signs,
swabs, 72
uric acid, 67
43, 71
washings,76,79
 Uropygial/preen gland
autopsy signs, 109
trachectomy, 155
function and surgery,
injection, 262
tracheotomy, 154
147
K
tree bark poisoning, 338
deficiency, heamorrhage/
Trematodes sp.,(Flukes)., 328
vaccines,viruses,252-253
autopsy, 108
Trichomonads,
valgus deformity
prior to surgery, 144
demonstration, 110
metacarpus (angel/slipped
injection,262
Trichomonas gallinae, 319
wing),54,179
Vivitonin (Propentofyline),
treatment, 249
leg bones, 179
259
Trichophyton sp.,(Ring
Vasa parrots, copulation, 20
vocal learning, 34
Worm), 45,311
Vecuronium Bromide
voice
Trichostrongylus infection,
{Norcuron), 259
change, 42
326
Venezuelan equine viral
devoicing birds, 152
Trigeminal nerve (cranial n.
encephalitis,296
vomiting/regurgitation, 41,
V), 23
Vestibular disease, CNS, 350
194
Triosseal canal, 5
see inner ear, 33
Voriconazole, 241
Index
397
vultures
Wenyonella sp., 315
Xylazine (Rompun), 134,
Diclofenac, 338
West Nile virus Fever, 209,
264
turkey, smell sense, 13,
297
xanthromatosis, 69
37
vaccine, 253
Western duck disease
Yellow Fever, 297
Warfarin poisoning, 105,
(Limber neck),274
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis,
335
Wet feather, 46
62, 271
water conservation/birds
White winged wood ducks/
entero-colitica, 271
Conchal cartilage, 16
TB, 273
Yoghurt, 262
Salt glands, 20-21
Wildlife and Countryside
Yolk sac, problems, 163,
kidney/alimentary canal,
Act 1981, 208
204, 206
20-21, 190-191
wings
Yomesan, 247
average daily
Angel,177
consumption, 116
bandaging, 169
 Zebra finches, stopping
water deprivation test,
injuries/treatment, 43,
breeding, 196
344
53-54
Zenecarp, 257
water drinking, medication,
pinioning/feather cutting,
Ziehl - Neelson {Modified
116
177
STAMP), 73
Waterfowl
Wing tip oedema, 54, 259
zinc deficiency, 45, 70
adenovirus, 303
wood
Zinc poisoning, 336
weight/flying/see glossary,
toxic species, 338
and anaemia, 62
191
head, 147
Zovirax (Acyclovir), 254