Color Atlas of
VETERINARY
PATHOLOGY
SECOND EDITION
Edited by
J.E.van Dijk
E. Gruys and
J.M.V.M. Mouwen
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
An imprint of Elsevier Limited
C: 2007, Elsevier Limiled. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any mcans, clectronic. mechanical,
pholocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the Publishers. Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Health
Scienccs Rights Departmcnt, 1600 John F. Kennedy Boulevard Suitc 1800, Philadclphia, PA 19103-2899, USA: phone: (+ 1) 215 239 3804:
fax: (+ I) 2i5 239 3805: or, e-mail: healthpermissions(@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request on-line via the Elsevier homicpage
(http:/www.elsevier.com), by selecting 'Support and contact' and then *Copyright and permission'.
First published 1982
Second cdition 2007
Rcprinted 2007. 2008
ISBN: 978-0-7020-2758-1
British Library Cataloguing in Publiceation Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Puhlication Data
A catalog rccord for this book is available from the Library of Congress
Notice
Knowledge and besl practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our knowledge, changes in practice.
trcatincnt and drug therapy may become necessary or appropriate. Readers are advised to check the mosl current information provided (i) on
procedures featured or (i) by the manufacturer of each product to bc administcrcd, to verify thc recommended dose or formula, the melhod and
duration of administralion, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of the practitioner, relying on their own experience and knowledge of the
patient. to make diagnoses, to determine dosagcs and the best treatmcnt for cach individual paticnt, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest exlent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the Editors assumes any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property
arising out or related to any use of the material contained in this book.
Ncither the Publishcr nor thc Editors assune any responsibility for any loss or injury and/or damage lo persons or property arising out of or
related to any use of the material contained in this book. It is Ihe responsibility of the trealing practitioner, relying on independent expertise and
knowledge of the patient, to determine the best treatment and method of application for the patient.
The Publisher
inthe health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
www.rlhevier.com | www.hokaid.org | www.sabrc.org
HELS:VIIRMMSAIDSsdre Foundstn
The
Publisher's
Prinnted in Spain
policy is to use 
paper manufactured
Irom sustalnable foresta
08.091010 98765 4
Foreword
describe and diagnose animal disease, and to understand the  processes that inform the spectrum of illustrated specific lesions
pathogenesis of lesions are  key  attributes of the  practising
 in each of the major organ systems. In the view of this reader
veterinarian. Recognition of gross lesions is essentially visual
 these synopses strike a good balance and should be particularly
edition of this Atlas continues an outstanding tradition of the  loaded with pathogenetic minutiae. The synopses will form
Institute of Veterinary Pathology in Utrecht in producing high  useful starting points for those who need more detailed analyses
quality illustrations of both gross and microscopic lesions. This of basic pathology mechanisms.
Atlas will remain an invaluable learning resource, in conjunction
 This Atlas is a continuing testimony to both the authors'
with other modes such as electronic databases and textbooks, experience in veterinary pathology diagnosis, research and
for all those professionals who deal with animal disease:  teaching, and to their Institute's fine practice of photographic
students, veterinarians, and pathologists at all stages of their
I recording and accessioning of lesions both common and uncom-
 continuing professional development.
mon. This edition, like its predecessor, will be welcomed through-
 A problem familiar to those involved in teaching veterinary
 Out the veterinary community of all those who learn and teach.
pathology is the ideal of striking a balance between, on the
one hand, understanding of disease processes in functional
mechanistic terms and, on the other hand, the imparting of fac-
Emeritus Professor DF Kelly
Department of Veterinary Pathology
lar stages of professional development. Probably few individuals
University of Liverpool
Preface to the second edition
Twenty-four years have passed since the English edition of the 'General morphological reactions of organs and tissues'. As this
Color Atlas of Veterinary Pathology was first published in 1982. book is also intended to be used by students, we have added
After that Greek (1982), German (1983), Japanese (1983), comprehensive general introductions to the different organs and
book came out.
while the number of photographs has been enlarged.
We are still conscious of the need to preserve the original aim of
We are grateful to all people who have contributed to the
understanding disease and disease processes. In the first edition 
 quality of this book. A special word of tharks to the 'Elsevier
this was defined as demonstrating how cellular pathology.
, crew' ie. Joyce Rodenhuis, commissioning editor, Rita Demetriou-
inflammation, circular disturbance and neoplasia are expressed in
 Swanwick, development editor, Elouise Ball, project manager,
the different organs and tissues. For this purpose again we have 
 Andy Chapman, designer and Elma Burton, who edited our
used examples of specific veterinary pathology without trying to
0 introductions to the chapters. Harry J. Kurtz gave valuable advice
 give a survey of all the different diseases possible. To make this
 to improve the English language.
more clear the title of this revised edition has been extended with
 J.E. van Dijk
E. Gruys
J.M.V.M. Mouwen
July 2006
 Department of Pathobiology
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
University of Utrecht
Utrecht, The Netherlands
Preface to the first edition
This Color Atlas of Veterinary Pathology is intended for students Because organs, tissues and cells can be changed only in restricted
of veterinary medicine. During the last two decades the knowl-  ways, various diseases may result in the same structural changes,
edge of animal pathology has been extended overwhelmingly. At knowledge of which can contribute to the understanding of the
present an overcrowded curriculum puts great pressure on functional disorder. As the understanding of disease and disease
veterinary students. Including more and more bare facts in the  processes is the primary goal of pathology courses to veterinary
undergraduate and graduate pathology courses must be avoided. students, this photo atlas is directed predominantly to the basic
Now, more than at any time, the main target of the pathology morphological changes seen in diseases of domestic animals.
course to veterinary students must be the understanding of
 The macro- and microphotographs, predominantly of domestic
disease and disease processes. However, a certain amount of animals, are mainly from the collection of the [nstitute of
 practical ability as well as some factual knowledge is required, Veterinary Pathology in Utrecht. This collection was started about
since veterinarians, unlike physicians, are expected to do post-
 twenty years ago by our mentor, the emeritus Professor S. van
mortem examinations routinely.
den Akker. We express our thanks to Prof. Dr. J. Hoorens,
 Our aim was to create a photographic atlas which can be used
1director of the Institute of Veterinary Pathology of the State
together with the currently available textbooks of pathology The University of Ghent, Belgium, for supplying some necessary
text has therefore been kept short. It is expected that the atlas will  photographs, which were absent from our collection (numbers
also prove to be of interest and value to non-veterinary students 2-31, 3-1, 13-6).
engaged in pathobiology, and to postgraduate veterinarians 
 Many people, both current and past members of the Institute,
working in laboratories, meat inspection or practice.
have contributed directly and indirectly to the contents of this
The organism exposed to the cause of disease can be affected in  book. Of the present-day technical staff especially H. Halsema, 1.
different ways, and reaction to the noxious influences and re- Heystek and J. Lek were involved in the preparation of the atlas.
storation of homeostasis are achieved by various means, which
We are much indebted to E.C. Firth for correction of the
 may involve structural alteration of organs, tissues and cells. English translation.
 J.M.V.M. Mouwen
E.C.B.M. de Groot
September 1982
 Institute of Veterinary Pathology
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
 State University of Utrecht
Utrecht, The Netherlands
Chap
The hematopoietic system
1-1  Serous atrophy  3
1-26 Hemorrhagic infarcts  9
1-2   Myeloid hyperplasia  3
1-27
 Depletion of follicles and periarterial lymphoid 
1-3  Methemogiobinemia
sheath (PALS) 9
1-4 Blood clots 3
1-28  Reactive spleen ('activated spleen')   9
1-5 Thrombus  4
1-29  Acute reactive hyperplasia (acute hyperemic splenitis.
1-6  Recanalization of thrombus  4
acute splenic tumor')   10
1-7  Thrombocytopenic purpura  4
1-30  Chronic reactive hyperplasia (hyperplastic splenitis)
10
1-8  Consumption coagulopathy and hemorrhages  4
1-31
 Chronic reactive hyperplasia (hyperplastic splenitis)  10
1-9  Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)  5
 1-32 Necrotizing splenitis, multifocal 10
1-10 Thymoma5
1-33 Gangrenous splenitis 11
1-11[
 Disease-associated lymphoid involution (atrophy)  5
1-34 Nodular hyperplasia 11
1-12
Non-specific filtering of lymph  5
1-35 Lymphoma (malignant lymphoma, lymphosarcoma, lymphoid
1-13   Acute reactive hyperplasia (acute lymphadenitis)  6 
leukosis]   11
1-14 Chronic reactive hyperplasia (chronic lymphadenitis)
6
1-36 Lymphoma (malignant lymphoma, lymphosarcoma, lymphoid 
1-15  Chronic reactive hyperplasia (chronic lymphadenitis)
6
leukosis)
11
1-16   Chronic lymphadenitis and fibrosis  6 
1-37
 Lymphoma (malignant lymphoma, lymphosarcoma, lymphoid 
1-17S
Suppurative lymphadenitis  7
leukosis)
12
1-18  Chronic caseous granulomatous lymphadenitis  7
1-38
 Lymphoma (malignant lymphoma, lymphosarcoma, lymphoid 
1-19  Chronic granulomatous lymphadenitis 
7
leukosis)
12
1-20  Chronic granulomatous lymphadenitis 
7
1-39
 Lymphoma (malignant lymphoma, lymphosarcoma, lymphoid 
1-21C
Chronic pyogranulomatous lymphadenitis  8
leukosis)
12
 1-22 Miliary abscess in pyogranulomatous
1 -40  Erythremic rmyelosis (erythroid leukosis)   12
lymphadenitis  8 
1-41
Myeloid leukemia (myeloid leukosis)
13
1-23 Amyloid deposition B
1 -42  Myeloid leukemia (myeloid leukosis) 
13
1-24  Siderofibrosis (Gamna-Gandy nodules)  8
1 -43  Myeloid leukemia (myeloid leukosis)
13
1-25 Torsion9
1-44  Mast cell tumor metastasis  13
THE HEMATOPOIETIC SYSTEM
 In addition, degenerative changes of erythrocytes, circulatory
 disturbances and abnormal deposits may occur.
The hematopoietic system includes the lymphoreticular (e.g.
mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), spleen and lymph
nodes) and lymphoepithelial tissues and organs (e.g. Peyers'
Atrophy
patches, thymus, tonsils and Bursa of Fabricius), and blood and
 In cachexia the hematopoietic tissue in the bone marrow can be
bone marrow.
displaced by gelatinous, almost translucent material, the serous
 s xo ad s o 
 atroply of bone marrow.
cytes) and protective responses to infectious and non-infectious
(Non-)infectious agents can induce atrophic changes, either by
agents (lymphoid cells, mononuclear phagocytic cells, granulo-
'exhaustion' of the response capacity of the tissue or as a direct
cytes and supportive tissues).
or indirect effect on the effector cells. High levels of glucocor-
The main patterns of reactivity of the hematopoietic system are:
ticoids may cause lymphodepletion in lymphoid tissues.
atrophy;
filtration;
Filtration
■hyperplasia;
■ inflammation; and
Filtering of lymph in the lymph nodes with deposition Or
■ neoplasia.
 processing of filtered material may reveal important information
Chapter 1
uui ydui ieu jo eae aeuap a u sassanoid o preai ym
node. The same applies to the filtering of blood in the spleen.
When characteristic inflammatory changes like suppuration,
necrosis or caseation are visible in lymph nodes or spleen,
Hyperplasia
lyinphadenitis and splenitis are appropriate terms.
replace fatty bone marrow. Mostly, the myeloid cell series is
Neoplasia
involved and the process will result in leukocytosis in the
Neoplasms of the hematopoietic system are also relatively
peripheral blood.
Because of the close relation between udaptive reactivity and
common in both companion animals and production animals
and are classified according to their histogenetic lineage. The
inflaumatory reaction these two processes are often difficult to
 a  p rd  jo s 
distinguish, especially based on gross morphology. From a
most frequent hematopoietic tumors. Characterization of tumor
functional perspective, swelling of lymph nodes and spleen in
 cell populations in companion animals is increasingly facilitated
the course of an inflammation is therefore described as reactive
 by immunohistochemical methods. In several species (e.g. feline,
hyperplasin. Humoral immune reactivity is evidenced by B-cell
bovine, chicken, rat and mice) viruses can be responsible for
hyperplasia with large secondary follicles and many plasma
tumorous proliferation of lymphoid cells or, less often, myeloid
cells in the medullary cords of the lymph nodes, and cellular
or erythroid cells.
immunity evidenced by hyperplasia of the paracortical zones
(lymph nodes) or periarterial lymph sheaths (PALS, spleen).
Most hyperplastic reactions are non-specific in that they do not
reveal the identity of the agent responsible.
 The Hematopoietic System
1-1 Serous atrophy
1 -2 Myeloid hyperplasia
Bone marrow, dia- and metaphysis of femur. Red (blood forming) and
Bone marrow, mid-diaphyseal area of femur. tncreased number of
yeliow (fatty) bone marrow displaced by gelatinous and translucent
immature myeloid cells (myeloblasts and megakaryocytoblasts), few
material traversed by small blood vessels. Atrophy of hematopoietic
normoblasts. Leukocytosis due to infection, Adult cat. HE.
tissue due to cachexia.Cow.
1-3Methemoglobinemia
1-4 Blood clots
 Brown discoloration of blood and tissue due to methemoglobin 
Concha. Random, loosely arranged meshwork of delicate fibrin fibrils,
formation (Fe++ replaced by Fet++]. Nitrate (nitrite) poisoning. Pig.
after settling out and coagulation of stagnant biood. In a neighboring 
vessel accumulation of leukocytes as a buffy coat between plasma and
red clot. Horse. HE.
Chapter 1
1-5 Thrombus
1-6 Recanalization of thrombus
Concha. Concentrically arranged, densely packed aggregations of fibrin
Skin. Surface of thrombus covered by endothelium. Formation of
fibrils, deposited in flowing blood. The thrombus is attached to the 
new canals lined by endothelium ailowing some blood flow.
damaged arterial wail, and is covered by a red clot. Pseudomembranous
Hemangioma. Dog. HE.
rhinitis. Horse. HE.
1 -7 Thrombocytopenic purpura
1-8 Consumption coagulopathy and hemorrhages
Skin. Many small hemorrhages. Defective hemostasis following
Adrenal gland, sagittal section. Extensive cortical hemorrhages due to
immune-mediated destruction of thrombocytes by maternal antibodies
consumption of clotting factors and loss of platelets by disseminated
in colostrum. Although primary plug formation by piatelets is impaired.
intravascular coagulation (0lc). Hemorrhages of similar size may also
coagulation is still possible, preventing larger hemorrhages. Porcine
be due to primary vascular damage (e.g. mulberry heart disease.
thrombocytopenia purpura. Newborn pigiet.
Fig. 2-17]. Escherichig coli endotoxic shock. Foa1.
The Hematopoietic System
5
1-9 Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DiC)
1-10 Thymoma
Kidney. Glomerular capillaries obstructed by hyaline microthrombi
Mediastinal tumor composed of epithelial cells with non-tumorous
(platelets and fbrin], causing oliguria or anuria. Protein casts in 
lymphocytes. Network of large, pale staining, epithelial cells sometimes
Bowman's space and most tubules. Hyaline droplets, due to protein
resembling stromal cels; mature fymphocytes in meshes. Insert:
pinocytosis (cf. Fig. 4-16), in tubuiar cytoplasm (arrow). Acute tubular
epithelial cells arranged in fields as abortive Hassall's corpuscles
necrosis often occurs during DlC (see Fig. 4-7). Shock following
[arrow) mixed with mature lymphocytes. Dog. HE.
experimental Trypanosoma brucei infection. Rabbit. HE.
1-11 Disease-associated lymphoid involution (atrophy)
1-12 Non-specific filtering of lymph
Peripheral lymph node. Relative cell-poor cortical and paracortica!
Lymph nodes, cut surface. Accumulation of erythrocytes in large
areas containing increased numbers of (hypertrophic) macrophages
several of which formed syncytial giant cells (arrows). Circo-virus
'marbling', and indicating hemorrhage in the drainage area. Classical
infection: postweaning multisystemic wasting syndrome (PMwS). Pig,
 swine fever. Pig.
3 months. HE.
Chapter 1
1-13 Acute reactive hyperplasia (acute lymphadenitis)
1-14 Chronic reactive hyperplasia (chronic lymphadenitis)
Bronchial lymph node. Accumulation of neutrophils and activated 
Bronchial lymph node. Reactive follicular hyperplasia with marked
mononuclear cells in sinuses (S). Note the inconspicuous lining of the
enlargement of germinal centres (B-cell activity). Slight increase of the 
medullary cord (M). Dog. HE.
interfollicular lymphoid tissue (mostly T-cells). Sinuses filled with
crythrocytes drained from the lung and some reticulo-endotheliai
Pig. HE.
1-15 Chronic reactive hyperplasia (chronic lymphadenitis)
1-16 Chronic lymphadenitis and fibrosis
Peripheral lymph node.Massive infiltration of medullary cords, mainly
Lymph node. Proliferation of reticular cells and formation of connective
by plasma celis, lymphocytes and mononuclear phagocytes. Many
tissue in medullary sinuses [fibrous transformation]. Atrophy of
mononuclear cells in sinuses (sinus histiocytosis), erythrophagocytosis
medullary cords. Cat. HE.
(arrows). Experimental Tryponosomg brucei infection. Rabbit. HE.
The Hematopoietic System
1-17 Suppurative lymphadenitis
1-18 Chronic caseous granulomatous lymphadenitis
Superficial lymph node, cut surface. Encapsulated abscess containing 
Mesenteric lymph nodes, cut surface. Granulomas with caseous
concentric larmellae, inspissated pus, sometimes greenish (many
necrosis and caicification as part of incomplete primary complex.
cosinophils). Lamellar configuration due to repetitive necrosis of
Typically, no caseation or calcification is found in avian tuberculosis of
capsulte, accumuiation of infliammatory cells and formation of a new
pigs, except in mesenteric lymph nodes. Avian tuberculosis
capsule. Corynebacterium pseudotubercufosis infection: caseous
(Mycobacterium ovium). Pig.
Iym phadenitis, 'pseudotuberculosis: Sheep.
1-19 Chronic granulomatous lymphadenitis
1-20 Chronic granulomatous lymphadenitis
Mesenteric lymph node, cut surface. Enlargement of cortical region by
Mesenteric lymph node. Infltration of groups of epithelioid cells (large 
macrophages, pale-staining cytoplasm)] in paracortex (left). Insert:
Small rim of caseation just beneath capsule (no caseation occurs in 
many red stained bacill in epithelioid cells. Paratuberculosis
cattle). Paratuberculosis (Mycobacterium avium subspecies
(Mycobacterium avium subspecies porotuberculosis). Goat. HE, insert:
poratuberculosis).Goat.
Ziehl-Neelsen stain for acid fastness of mycobacteria.
8
Chapter 1
1-21 Chronic pyogranulomatous fymphadenitis
1-22 Miliary abscess in pyogranulomatous lymphadenitis
Mandibular lymph node, cut surface. A fibrous capsule around soft,
'Sulfur granule' (blue stained colony of bacteria) with a red regular
gray-yellow, buiging granulomatous tissue containing multiple small
peripheral rim of eosinophilic clubs surrounded by viable and necrotic
abscesses. Actinobacillosis (Actinobacillus fignieresin). Cow.
macrophages and neutrophils (pus). Actinobacillosis (Actinobacillus
fignieresi). Cow. HE.
1-23 Amyloid deposition
1-24 Siderofibrosis (Gamna-Gandy nodules)
Amorphous proteinaceous substance in the red pulp cords around
Spleen. Yellow-brown (sub)capsular nodules and plaques after
lymphoid follices, resulting in a lardaceous' spleen. In other cases,
waaids ohes, e buionpoid 'saiiloy ay ot penull s uonisodap pioawe
Often found next to the hilus and edges, or in scars and trabeculae.
with tapioca-like granules. Amyloidosis. Pig. HE.
Histologically made up of fibrotic foci with macrophages and
deposition of hemosiderin and iron or calcium salts on elastic fibers and
in connective tissue. Dog.
The Hematopoietic System
1-25 Torsion
1-26 Hemorrhagic infarcts
Spleen, transverse section. The whole spleen wrapped in the major
Spleen. Prominent, blue-red, more or less wedge-shaped, firm areas,
omentum. Hermorrhagic infarction due to compression of veins. Pig.
Possible pathogeneses: α Complete arterial occfusion and infiux of
blood from anastomotic vesseis; b Partial arterial occlusion and seepage
of blood; c Venous obstruction. Thromboendocarditis by hemolytic
streptococci. Dog.
1-27 Depletion of follicles and periarterial lymphoid sheath (PALS)
1-28 Reactive spleen ('activated spleen')
Spleen. Area of white pulp around central artery lacks normal numbers
Red pulp. Marked reticuloendothelial hyperplasia; many hemosiderin-
of T-iymphocytes and B-lymphocytes. Similar morphology is seen in
containing macrophages in cords of Billroth. Congestion of sinuses and
lymphocytolysis due to excessive hypercortisolism, debilitation and 
cords. Exaggeration of features may quickly return to normai after
acute viral infections with lymphoid celi destruction. Normal red pulp.
control of infection. Experimental Trypanosoma bruceiinfection.
Fell pony syndrome. Horse, HE.
Rabbit. HE.
10
Chapter 1
1-29 Acute reactive hyperplasia (acute hyperemic splenitis, 'acute
1-30 Chronic reactive hyperpiasia (hyperplastic splenitis)
splenic tumor')
Spleen, transverse section. Enlarged, firm and pale spleen due to 
Spleen, transverse section. Erlargement mainly by active hyperemia.
marked reticuloendothelial and lymphoid hyperplasia (Malpighian
Histologically further characterized by some reticuloendothelial
corpuscles clearly visible), variable granulocyte accumulation, and many
hypertrophy and hyperplasia, and some granulocytic infiltration. This is
plasma cells in red pulp. possibly leading to fibrosis of red pulp. Chronic
a common finding in peracute systemic infections (e.g. anthrax) or
mastitis. Goat.
bacterial intoxications [e.g. Ciostridium enterotoxemia) and in passive
hyperemia, shock or barbiturate poisoning. Goat.
1-31 Chronic reactive hyperplasia (hyperplastic splenitis)
1-32 Necrotizing splenitis, multifocal
Red pulp. Widened, hypercellular cords of Billroth, containing many
Spleen, transverse section. Prominent, firm, yellowish, dull-surfaced foci
Iymphocytes and plasma cells and congested sinuses. Chronic 
 of coagulation necrosis in random distribution in contrast to peripheral
experimental Trypanosomo brucei infection. Rabbit. HE.
location of anemic infarcts. Infection with Fusobocterium necrophorum
[necrobaciliosis). Cow.
The Hematopoietic System
11
1-33 Gangrenous splenitis
1-34 Nodular hyperplasia
Spleen, cut surface. Liquid, gray, fou}-smelling focus, resulting from
Spleen. Benign, soft nodule containing an admixture of areas of
putrefaction of necrotic tissue or purulent exudate caused by
proliferated and disorganized red and white pulp. the latter seen
saprophytic bacteria (wet gangrene): generally due to perforating
histologically as large lymphoid aggregates without central artery.
traumatic reticuloperitonitis. Traumatic reticuloperitonitis. Cow.
Mainly seen in older dogs.
1=35 Lymphoma (malignant lymphoma, lymphosarcoma, lymphoid
 1-36 Lymphoma (malignant lymphoma, lymphosarcoma, lymphoid
leukosis)
leukosis)
Bone marrow, femoral diaphysis. Fatty marrow diffusely dispiaced by
Cervical lymph node, cut surface. Enlarged, soft, gray-white lymph node
very soft, gray-pink tumorous lymphoid cells. In this case many
with hemorrhages. No cortex or medulla recognizable. Primary
immature lymphoid cells in peripheral circufation [lymphoid
lymphoma in thymic region, metastases in regional lymph nodes and 
leukemia) and widespread infiltrates elsewhere; site of primary tumor
widespread dissemination (liver, spleen), no leukemia. Young cow.
unknown. Dog.
12
Chapter 1
1-37 Lymphoma (malignant lymphoma, lymphosarcoma, lymphoid 
leukosis)
1 -38 Lymphoma (malignant lymphoma, lymphosarcoma, lymphoid
Spleen. Extreme splenomegaly. grayish-pink with local dark red areas
leukosis)
(hemorrhagic or less leukotic). This can occur in primary lymphoid 
Bursa of Fabricius. Follicies replaced by tumorous lymphoblasts.
leukemia, as well as in muiticentric tymphoma. In this case neoplastic
Lymphoproliferative disorder caused by RNA-virus, primarity affecting
cells were present in peripheral circulation. Dog.
the B-cells of the bursa; later widespread dissemination. Chicken. HE.
Insert: higher magnification of tumorous lymphoblasts. HE
1-39 Lymphoma (malignant lymphoma, lymphosarcoma, lymphoid
1-40 Erythremic myelosis (erythroid leukosis)
leukosis)
Spleen. Tumorous population consists of large cells with large nuclei,
T-cell lymphoma. Identification of tumor cell lineage by
 most of them probably erythroblasts and small cells with
immunohistochemistry. Dog. Immunoperoxidase stain for CD3.
hyperchromatic nuclei and red cytoplasm (hemogiobin synthesis),
unequivocally normoblasts. Myeloproliferative disorder, erythroid 
predominance, with involvement of bone marrow, spleen and other
organs. Cat. HE.
The Hematopoietic System
13
1-41 Myeloid leukemia (myeloid leukosis)
1-42 Myeloid leukemia (myeloid leukosis)
Liver. Large tumor cells with targe nuclei between hepatocytes. Note
Myocardium and attached adipose tissue. Infiltration of numerous,
that identification of the lineage of immature blast cells only based on
mainly immature myeloid cells. Large cells with large nuclei, probably
morphology, is often very difficult and necessitates the use of specific
 myeloblasts. Smaller cells showing distinct differentiation to mature
markers. Dog. HE.
neutrophils. Myeloproliferative disorder, myeloid predominance with
involvement of bone marrow, spleen and other organs. Dog. HE.
1 -43 Myeloid leukemia (myeloid leukosis)
1-44 Mast cell tumor metastasis
Liver. Portal infiltration of numerous myeloid ce!ls, either immature, or
Peripheral lymph node. Free tumor cells in distended subcapsu lar and
differentiating to eosinophilic granulocytes. In many organs (e.g. bone
 paratrabecular sinuses, showing the (ineffective) filtering of neoplastic
marrow, heart, lymph nodes) formation of tumorous masses, called
cells. Two foci of sessile metastatic tumor celis (upper and lower
choromas due to their green color. Pig. HE.
Toluidine blue stain for metachromatic granules of mast celis.
Chapte
The circulatory system
2-1  Ostium secundum defect  17
2-19 Myocarditis  21
2-2   Anomalous origin of the right coronary artery  17
2-20  Murai endocarditis  21
2-3  Dextroposition of the aorta  17
2-21  Ulcerative valvular endocarditis   22
2-4  Valvular stenosis of the pulmonary artery   17
2-22  Valvular thromboendocarditis  22
2-5  Subvalvular aortic stenosis  18
2-23 Endocardiosis 22
2-6  Patent ductus arteriosus  18
2-24 Rupture of the aorta  22
2-7  Persistence of the rignt aortic arch  18
2-25 Amyioid deposition 23
2-8  Congenital valvular cysts  18
2-26 Atherosclerosis 23
2-9 Hydropericardium19
2-27 Atheromatosis 23
2-10  Hemopericardium  19
2~28
Calcinosis  23
2-11  Pericarditis   19
 2-29 Periarteritis nodosa
24
2-12  Chronic fibrinous pericarditis 19
2-30 Periarteritis nodosa
24
2-13  Eccentric hypertrophy of the heart  20
2-31
Verminous arteritis
24
 2-14 Dilation of the heart  20
2-32 Verminous aneurysm
2-15  Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy  20
2-33 Lymphangitis 
25
2-16 'Brown atrophy' of the heart 20
2-34
'Heart base' tumor
25
 2-17  Mutberry heart disease (microangiopathy)]  21
2-35
 Hemangioma
25
2-18 Myocarditis 21
2-36 Hemangiosarcoma
25
THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
Cardiomyopathy
The circulatory system includes the heart with its pericardial sac,
If an abnormality in the myocardium underlies the cardiac
and the arteries, veins and lymphatic vessels.
dysfunction the term cardionyopathy is used; often the cause is
The main lesions consist of:
unknown, but may include inflammation, genetic abnorma-
 congenital abnormalities;
lities in the energy metabolism or in contractile proteins of the
 hypertrophy and luminal change;
myocardial cells, metabolic disorders by deficiencies, or toxic
 degenerative changes;
dystrophies.
inflammation; and
Cardiomyopathy occurs in three patterns:
■neoplasia.
dilated (or congestive);
■hypertrophic; and
 restrictive.
Congenital abnormalities
Congenital abnormalities of the heart and vessels occur in all
Degenerative changes
species and can be hereditary. Developmental defects in septa-
Degenerative changes of the heart muscle are most often due to:
tion of the heart, abnormal origin or abnormal persistence of
arteries, and abnormalities in the cardiac valves with stenosis of
dietary deficiencies;
 the ostia are the most common findings.
 intoxications;
disturbed microcirculation (shock); and
 sepsis.
Hypertrophy and luminal change
Hypertrophy and dilatation of ventricles and atria are often the
2 Degenerative changes of the atrioventricular valves with deposi
result of congenital abnormalities, myocardial degeneration,  t
 tion of proteoglycans and increase of collagen are common in
 older dogs and may cause heart failure and, by insufficiency.
induced by hyperthyroidism, chronic anemia or raised levels of 
 atrial jet lesions. Degeneration of small vessels may cause
erythropoietin
15
16
 Chapter 2
microcirculation with diffuse intravascnlar coagulation (DIC) may
Neoplasia
also induce a henorrhagic diathesis.
The most important neoplasms in the heart and pericardium
Atlhieromatosis and atherosclerosis of arteries are found, but not
 include tumors of:
frequently. Marked deposition of lipofuscin can occur in cattle
  the glomus aorticum (chemodectoma);
without clinical signs. Vascular and endocardial metastatic and
 ectopic thyroid gland tissuc;
dystrophic caicifications are well known. Cardiac and vascular
subepicardial nerves (neurofibromas);
qyloidosis, seen as hyalin deposits, can be part of generalized
■ endothelium of cardiac vessels and endocardium (heman-
amyloidosis.
giosarcomas); and
 malignant lymphomas.
Inflammation
Inflaumations are frequent disorders. Pericarditis, myocardis, Cardiac hemangiosarcomas are most often found in shepherd
thromboendocarditis, and vasculitis are mostly caused by infec-
 and boxer dogs in the right atrium, and are the most frequent
tious agents (many species of bacteria, viruses, protozoa and 
 cause of sudden death due to a hemopericardium.
 parasites) but also immune mediated vasculitides occur. Thrombo-
endocarditis may be followed not only by cardiac failure, but
also by embolism and infarctions.
The Circulatory Systerm
17
2-1 Ostium secundum defect 
 2-2 Anomalous origin of the right coranary
A defect of the atrial septum in the region of the fossa ovalis. Pig.
artery
Right coronary artery originating from the
pulmonary trunk, dilated branches
(subepicardial)] of the left and right coronary
arteries, with several anastomoses between
 them, in the wall of the left and right 
ventricle. Slaughter cow.
2-3 Dextroposition of the aorta
2-4 Valvular stenosis of the pulmonary artery
The aorta originates from the right ventricle
Post-stenotic dilation of the pulmonary trunk (arrow) immediately
and is placed to the right of the pulmonic
dista! to the valvular stenosis of the pulmonary artery. Dog, one year.
trunk. Pig, four weeks.
18
Chapter2
2-5 Subvalvular aortic stenosis
 2-6 Patent ductus arteriosus
Narrowirg of the left ventricular outlet by a fibrous plaque directly
A persistence of the shunt (arrow) between the aorta and pulmonic
beneath the aortic valve. Marked hypertrophy of the left ventricular
trunk, normally present during embryonic life. Old dog.
wall. Dalmation dog, 8 years.
2-7 Persistence of the right aortic arch
2-8 Corgenital valvular cysts
Vascular ring, formed by the right aortic arch, the left ligamentum 
Endothelium-lined cysts filled with blood in the right atrioventricular
arteriosum and the base of the heart. This structure encircles the
valve. Can be found in all cardiac valves, and may also be yetlow (filled
esophagus and causes a stenosis of the esophagus. Prominent dilation
with serum). Still-born calf.
of the esophagus anterior to the stenosis. Cat, 6 months.
The Circulatory System
19
2-9 Hydropericardium
2-10 Hemopericardium
 The pericardial sac is overfilled with clear
The pericardial sac is filled with pure blood, as 
fluid; the pericardium is smooth and 
a result of a rupture of the right atrium, due to
 glistening. Myocarditis. Cat.
 an infarct. Dog.
2-11 Pericarditis
2-12 Chronic fibrinous pericarditis
The pericardial sac is greatly enlarged due to accumulation of
Pericardium and left ventricular wall, cut surface. On the epi- and 
serofibrinous exudate, The pericardium itself is thickened and
 pericardium a thin layer of granulation tissue is visible. Between the
cpaque. Pig.
epi- and pericardium fibrinous exudate is present. Cow.
20
Chapter 2
2-13 Eccentric hypertrophy of the heart
2-14 Dilation of the heart 
Thickening of the left atrial and ventricular wall accompanied by
Dilation of the lumen and thinning of the wall of the left ventricle. The
dilation of the lumen. Dog.
 papillary muscles are attenuated. Dog.
2-15 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
2-16 'Brown atrophy' of the heart
Left and right ventricle, cross section, formalin
A dark pigmentation of the myocardium caused by lipofuscin deposition
fixed. Idiopathic concentric hypertrophy of the
in the cardiomyocytes. Slaughter cow.
left ventricular wall, The hypertrophy of the
ventricular septum may result in a narrowing
of the aortic outflow, thus causing a muscular
 subaortic stenosis. European domestic
shorthair cat, 12 years.
The Circulatory System
21
2-17 Muiberry heart disease (microangiopathy)
2-18 Myocarditis
Subepicardial hermorrhages and myocardial degeneration due to
A diffuse spotty inflammation of the left and
fibrinoid necrosis of small blood vessels. Young pig.
right ventricular wall. Unknown cause. Dog.
 2-19 Myocarditis
2-20 Mural endocarditis
Interstitial myocarditis characterized by an infltration of mononuclear
A necrotizing inflammation in the left atrium and in the aorta
cells and neutrophils. in the nucleus of some muscular fibers a
 just above the semilunar valve. Uremia due to chronic renal
basophilic inclusiorn body is present (arrow). Parvovirus infection.
insufficiency. Dog.
Pup. HE.
22
Chapter 2
2-21 Ulcerative valvular endocarditis
2-22 Valvular thromboendocarditis
Large defects in the left atrioventricular valve due to an ulcerative
inflammation of the valve. Dog.
valve, due to Arcanobocterium pyogenes infection. Hypertrophy of the
 right atrium. Cow.
2-23 Endocardiosis
2-24 Rupture of the aorta
Shortened left atrioventricular valve with nodular thickenings.
Rectangular rupture (arrows) of the
predominantly at the free margin. The surface of the valve is smooth,
intrapericardial portion of the aorta, causing a
but the valve itself is opaque and white. Dog.
hemopericardium. No predisposing lesion was
present in the aortic wall. Horse.
The Circulatory System
23
2-25 Amyloid deposition
2-26Atherosclerosis
Intramural artery of the heart. Homogeneous, pink thickening of the
Meningeal artery. Severe invoivement of the intima and media.
vessel wall with narrowing of the lumen. Deposition of amyloid in 
 Atheromatous lesion [atheroma] composed of lipid material with
typical chotesterol clefts, foam cells, cellutar debris and fibrous tissue.
 Dog, 10 years. HE.
Massive calcification is evident. Hypothyroidism due to lymphocytic
thyroiditis. Dog. HE.
2-27 Atheromatosis
2-28 Caicinosis
 Abdominal aorta and arteries. Yeliow atheromatous plaques protruding
Metastatic calcification, possibly due to enzootic calcinosis in the
into the lumen. Hyperlipemia. Cat.
pulmonary artery. Slaughter cow.
24
Chapter 2
2-29 Periarteritis nodosa
2-30 Periarteritis nodosa
Yellow-white nodular thickening of
Fibrinoid necrosis of the media of an artery. Infiltration of neutrophils
subepicardial branches of coronary arteries.
 and mononuclear cells predominantly in the adventitia. Dog. HE.
Dog.
2-31 Verminous arteritis
2-32 Verminous aneurysm
 Abdominal aorta and cranial mesenteric artery.
Saccular aneurysm of the thoracic aorta resulting from weakening of
Verminous thromboarteritis in the root of the
the arterial wall due to Strongylus vulgoris infection. Horse.
cranial mesenteric artery caused by larvae of
Strongylus vuigoris. Horse.
The Circulatory System
25
2-33 Lymphangitis
2-34‘Heart base' tumor
Granulormatous lymphangitis in the wall of the small intestine.
Tumor at the base of the heart, localized near
Paratuberculosis (Mycobocterium ovium subspecies
the pulmonic trunk. These tumors can
poratuberculosis). Cow.
 originate from receptor ceils of the aortic body
 or from ectopic thyroid follicular cells. This
case is a chemodectoma. Dog.
2-35 Hemangioma
2-36 Hemangiosarcoma
Skin. A mass of thin-walled blood vessels filled with blood and
Myocardium. Immature endothelial cells, forming vascular spaces filled 
 separated by collagenous stroma. Dog. HE.
with blood among connective tissue stroma. Infiltrative growth (right).
Dog. HE.
The respiratory system
3-1  Acute fibrinous rhinitis  29
3-25 Diffuse pulmonary emphysema  35
 3-2  Mycotic rhinitis and sinusitis 
29
3-26 Pulmonary emphysema 35
3-3 Atropic rhinitis 29
3-27  Acute catarrhal bronchopneumonia  35
3-4 Nasal chondrosarcoma 29
3-28 Abscessation in catarrhal bronchopneumonia 35
3-5  Tracheal hypoplasia  30
3-29  Suppurative bronchopneumonia 
36
3-6  Tracheal collapse 30
3-30  Chronic catarrhai bronchopneumonia  36
3-7 Necrotizing laryngitis  30
3-31  Chronic catarrhal bronchopneumonia   36
3-8   Multifocal proliferative tracheitis  30
3-32 Fibrinous pleuropneumonia  36
3-9 Bronchial pattern  31
3-33 Fibrinous pneumonia  37
3-10 Acute bronchiolitis 31
3-34 Fibrinous-necrotizing pneumonia 37
3-11
Acute bronchiolitis with syncytial giant cells  31
3-35  Acute serous interstitial pneumonia  37
3-12  Necrotizing bronchiolitis  31
3-36  Acute serous interstitial pneumonia
37
3-13
 Chronic bronchiolitis  32
3-37 Acute serous interstitial pneumonia  38
 3-14  Chronic bronchitis with peribronchial lymphoid
3-38 Acute fibrinous-necrotizing interstitial pneumonia 38
cuffing   32
3-39  Chronic interstitial pneumonia  38
 3-15  Chronic bronchiolitis with bronchiotitis obliterans  32
3-40  Chronic interstitial pneumonia  38
3-16 Chronic bronchitis with bronchiectasis 32
3-41  Metastatic pneumonia 
39
3-17   Eosinophilic bronchiolitis  3
3-42 Metastatic pneumonia  39
3-18 Blood aspiration  33
 3-43  Metastatic pneumonia with pulmonary hemorrhage 39
3-19 Anthracosis 33
3-44  Avian tuberculosis 
69
3-20 Uremic pneumonia 3
3-45  Verminous pneumonia 40
3-21  Passive congestion and pulmonary edema  34
3-46 Echinococcosis 40
3-22  Chronic passive congestion and pulmonary
 3-47 Adenocarcinoma, bronchiolo-alveolar pattern 40
infarction 34
 3-48 Adenocarcinoma, bronchial pattern 40
3-23 Atelectasis 34
 3-49 Pulmonary adenomatosis (jagsiekte)  41
3-24 0bstructive atelectasis 34
3-50 Metastatic carcinoma  41
THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
The respiratory or gas exchange area
The respiratory system can be divided into the air-conducting
The respiratory or gas exchange area consists of numerous
 system and the respiratory or gas exchange area.
alveoli. These are air-containing sacs formed by the alveolar
septa. The latter consist of alveolar capillaries and a minimal
The air-conducting system
quantity of interstitial stromal elements, and are lined by mem-
branous pneumocytes type I and cuboidal pneumocytes type Il.
The air-conducting system includes the nasal cavity with nasal
 The latter produce and release surfactant and are also precursors
sinuses, nasopharynx (and guttural pouch), larynx, trachea, and
of the type I cells.
bronchi. Bone or cartilage provide supportive frameworks that
-onasd Aq pul are Aau saionns asu jo ssdenoo puaid
stratified ciliated epithelium with goblet cells and contain serous
The reaction pattern of the respiratory
and mucous glands in decreasing quantities from the upper to
the lower airways.
system
The smallest air-conducting struchures, the bronchioles and 
The reaction pattern of the respiratory system can accordingly be
alveolar ducts, are prevented from collapsing by radial traction
 divided into the reaction pattern of:
from the surrounding alveolar structures. They are lined by a
 the air-conducting system; and
single layer of epithelium with ciliated cells and Clara cells.
 the respiratory area.
27
28
Chapter 3
The air-conducting system
Emplysemu is defined as abnormal distention of the alveoli
The reaction pattern of cell injury, inflammation and repair is
(alveolar emphysema) and in veterinary medicine always results
from partial obstruction of the airways and subsequent air-
similar throughout the air-conducting system and may affect the
epithelium and the surrounding structures.
 trapping in the distal alveoli.
Acute injury to the epithelium may result in shedding of the
In chronic emplysem alveolar walls may become atrophic and
cilia, swelling and exfoliation of ciliated and goblet cells,
rupture and the affected lung may lose its elasticity.
formation of syncytial epithelial giant cells and necrosis of
Interstitiai emphysema occurs mainly and frequently in cattle
the epithelium.
when air breaks from the alveoli into the connective tissue of the
Chroic injury in the larger airways may result in increased
 interlobular and subpleural connective tissue.
numbers of goblet cells and, in prolonged cases, squa-
Pneumonia
 mous metaplasia of the epithelium; in the bronchioles
 Pneumonias can best be classified according to distribution and
chronic injury will result in hyperplasia of the epithelium
1  the gross and histological appearance of the affected lung tissue
and goblet cell metaplasia and rarely squamous metaplasia.
:as this often allows the prediction of the likely route of entry of
Usually, injury of the epithelium will be associated with an 
I the agent and possible etiology.
inflammatory reaction in the surrounding stromal tissue with
Lobar or foblar distributed pneumonins, usually with cranio-
increased permeability of the capillaries, extravasation of neutro-
ventral consolidation, are aerogenous infections and are often
phils (sometimes eosinophils) and macrophages, and in more
associated with bronchitis. The classification of these lobar or
 prolonged cases infiltration and proliferation of lymphocytes and
lobular pneumonias according to the gross and histological
plasma cells and fibrosis.
appearance of the affected lung tissue is based on the type of
The concomitant exudate in the lumen of the airways will
exudate:
vary according to the induced permeability of the capillaries
The exudates may grossly be fluid (catarrhal pnenonia)
(plasma fluid with or without larger proteins like fibrinogen)
 and consist of edema and neutrophils/ macrophages.
and the type and quantity of the inflammatory cells. It can be
  Complications in catarrhal pneumonia are severe focal or
classified grossly as:
diffuse accumulations of neutrophils with secondary
serous (watery);
suppurative necrosis of the lung tissue resulting in
 catarrhal (watery, slightly turbid);
focal abscessation or in diffuse sppurafive (or purnleut)
mucopurulent (glistening yellow, turbid); and
pneumonia.
fibrinous or fibrinous-necrotic (membranous, dull)
 The exudates may be more solid due to the simultaneous
presence of fibrin (fibrinos pnetimonia) associated with
The respiratory area
The reaction pattern of the respiratory area can be divided into:
erythrocytes) into the alveoli.
 circulatory disturbances including pulmonary edema;
 atelectasis and emphysema;
necrosis of lung tissue (fibrious-necrotizing pneumonin)
 pneumonia; and
with subsequent demarcation and, when the animal
 neoplasia.
 survives, encapsulation.
Circulatory disturbances and pulmonary edema
Diffuse pneumonias can be aerogenous or hematogenous in
Pilmonary edema may be the result of increased hydrostatic
origin, affect primarily the interstitium, and can be classified
 pressure, particularly seen in passive congestion, or decreased
 according to the type of exudate in acute or chronic interstitial
 Osmotic pressure of the blood, or may be due to an increased
pneumonias:
 plasma leakage into the alveoli due to injury of the alveolar
In actte serous interstitia! pneumonia the initial event is a
capillary endothelium and/or the alveolar pneumocytes
marked capillary permeability with leakage of protein-
ty pe I.
aceous fluid into the alveoli, and destruction/loss of
Edema due to increased permeability occurs in a wide
alveolar pneumocytes type I. Inspissation of the protein-
spectrum of aerogenous and hematogenous injuries, but it also
aceous material in both alveoli and bronchioles may result
forms an integral part of the inflammatory response of the
in the formation of hyaline membranes; to replace the lost
respiratory area (wide infra).
type I cells proliferation of cubic pneumocytes type II will
Atelectasis and emphysema
Occur within some days causing epithelization of the alve-
Atclectasis is defined as incomplete distention of the alveoli after
lar septa. Inflamma tory cells are usually scant or absent.
birth (congenital atelectasis) or collapse of the alveoli due to
Acute fibrinous-necrotizing interstitial pneumonias usually
complete obstruction of the afferent bronchus/bronchiole with
are the result of viral or protozoal hematogenic infections
absorption of the retained air (obstruction atelectasis) or due to
causing fibrinoid necrosis of the alveolar septa and severe
compression of the alveoli (compression atelectasis) due to space
exudation of proteinaceous/fibrinous material into the
occupying processes in the lungs or the thoracic cavity (e.g.
 alveoli often associated with a slight to moderate number
hydrothorax, thymic malignant lymphoma).
of inflammatory cells.
The Respiratory System
29
 Chronic interstitial yneumonia may result from persistent
Neoplasia
alveolar interstitial injury due to Arthus type allergic 
 Primary neoplasms of the respiratory tract can originate from
reactions as in 'farmer's lung' in man and cattle, or may
the epithelium or the supporting surrounding structures. Both
be primarily proliferative as a result of a persistent viral
epithelial and mesenchymal neoplasms, usually malignant, are
 infection like Maedi in sheep.
regularly observed in the upper respiratory tract. In the lower
respiratory tract adenocarcinomas of bronchial and bronchiolar-
Multifocal pneumonias may be hematogenous (embolic or
alveolar type are most frequently seen.
metastatic penmonia) or aerogenous in origin; the type of lesion
 depends on the organism present and may be purulent (abscesses),
 necrotizing or necropurulent, or granulomatous.
 3-1 Acute fibrinous rhinitis
3-2 Mycotic rhinitis and sinusitis
Head, longitudinal section. Congestion and a fibrinous membrane
Head, longitudinal section. Severe destructive and exudative rhinitis
overlying part of the conchae. Piglet.
and sinusitis with gray-white mycotic membranes. Aspergillosis. Dog.
3-3 Atrophic rhinitis
3-4 Nasal chondrosarcoma
Nose, transverse section. Chronic rhinitis with atrophy of the conchae
Head, longitudinal section. A large pale tumor mass replaces all the
and deviation of the nasal septum. Pig.
nasa! structures. Dog.
Chapter 3
3-5 Tracheal hypoplasia
3-6 Tracheal collapse
Cross-section. Rigid trachea with markedly decreased diameter and
 Dorsoventral flattening of the trachea with broadening of the dorsal
 Overlapping of the dorsal ends of the tracheal cartilage. English bulidog.
ligament. This syndrome is particularly seen in toy and miniature breeds 
of dogs.
3-7 Necrotizing laryngitis
 3-8 Multifocal proliferative tracheitis
Necrotizing inflammation of the arytenoid cartilages caused by
Variable sized mucosal nodules that contain parasites and a mild to
Fusobacterium necrophorum. Calf.
moderate mononuclear cell reaction. Oslerus (Filaroides) osleri Dog.
The Respiratory System
31
3-9 Bronchial pattern of puimonary consolidation
3-10 Acute bronchiolitis
Lung, pleural surface. Consolidated lung tissue. Inflammation of the
Hydropic degeneration and karyopycnosis [upper and lower right) of the
smaller airways causes a pronounced bronchial pattern. Cow.
epithelium as well as exfoliation of the bronchiolar epithelial cells. Dog.
HE.
 3-11 Acute bronchiolitis with syncytial giant cells
3-12 Necrotizing bronchiolitis
Bronchiole with some inflammatory celis in the lumen and syncytia!
Necrosis of the bronchiolar epithelium and necrotic debris in the lumen.
giant cells in the epithelial lining; congestion, collapse, and some fluid
Intranuclear viral inclusion bodies are present in the still intact 
and cellular exudate in the lung parenchyma. Bovine respiratory
bronchiolar epithelium (right). Aujeszky's disease. Piglet. HE.
 Syncytial virus. Calf. HE.
32
Chapter3
3-13 Chronic bronchiolitis
 3-14 Chronic bronchitis with peribronchial lymphoid cuffing
 Peribronchiolar mononuclear infiltrate, hyperplasia and goblet cell
Marked peribronchia! lymphoid proliferation with formation of
metaplasia of the bronchiolar epithelium, and neutrophils in the lumen
Iymphoid follicles. Mycopiasmo hyopneumonive. Piglet. HE.
and the epithelium. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Horse. HE.
 3-15 Chronic bronchiolitis with bronchiolitis obliterans
3-16 Chronic bronchitis with bronchiectasis
A fibroblastic potyp covered by epithelium protrudes into the
Lung, cut surface. Multiple markedly dilated bronchi filled with
bronchiolar lumen, Peribronchiolar fibrosis and mononuclear
mucopurulent exudate; the dilation is due to the accumulation of
inflammation are also present. Calf. HE.
exudate in the lumen and destruction of the bronchial wal due to
chronic bronchitis. The surrounding parenchyma is consolidated. Cow.
The Respiratory Systerm
33
3-17 Eosinophilic bronchiolitis
3-18 Blood aspiration
Eosinophils are present in the bronchiolar lumen, the epithelium and
Lung, cut surface. The branches of the bronchial tree are made ciearly
the surrounding parenchyma. This response may be caused by a
visible by the aspiration of blood; the large bronchi contain bloody
hypersensitivity type I reaction or migratory parasitic infestation.
froth.Pig.
Foal. HE.
3-19 Anthracosis
 3~20 Uremic pneumonia
 Lung, pleural surface. Emphysematous lung showing many dark
Lung, cut surface. Congestion, edema and metastatic calcification, the 
deposits of inhaled carbon particles. Dog.
latter giving a pumice stone aspect to the lung. Chronic interstitial
nephritis.Dog.
E
Chapter3
3-21 Passive congestion and pulmonary edema
3-22 Chronic passive congestion and pulmonary infarction
Lung, cut surface. Congestion and severe edema as fluid cozes from
the surface and white froth is present in the bronchus. The lobular
As the lungs have a dual affluent circulation provided by the pulmonary
pattern is accentuated due to edematous distention of the interlobular
and bronchial arteries, thrombosis or embolism of the pulmonary artery
septa. Pig.
only results in infarction with compromised pulmonary effluent
circulation. Dog.
3-23 Atelectasis
3-24 Obstructive atelectasis
Obstructive atelectasis of a part of the apical lobe. The atelectatic area
Obstruction of the bronchiole by exudate and collapse of the adjoining 
is depressed and has a dark red color. Dog.
parenchyma. Calf. HE.
The Respiratory System
35
3-25 Diffuse pulmonary emphysema
3-26 Pulmonary emphysema
Voluminous, pale lungs that fili the thoracic cavity and have distended 
Alveolar emphysema and chronic bronchiolitis. The emphysema is
aiveolar sacs. Cat.
characterized by diffuse distention of the alveoli and is caused by
partial obstruction of the bronchioles due to chronic bronchiolitis.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Horse. HE.
3-27 Acute catarrhal bronchopneumonia
3-28 Abscessation in catarrhal bronchopneumonia
Intact lung tissue with congestion of the alveolar septa and an exudate
Focal marked accumulation of neutrophils and subsequent suppurative
consisting of proteinaceous fluid and neutrophis and some
 necrosis of lung tissue; catarrhal pneumonia in the adjacent lung
 macrophages in the alveoli and bronchioles. Calf. HE.
tissue. Caif. HE
9
Chapter 3
3-29 Suppurative bronchopneumonia
3-30 Chronic catarrhal bronchopneumonia
Lung, cut surface. Purulent exudate with suppurative necrosis of lung
Consolidation (gray-red) of cranioventral parts of the apical, cardiac
tissue. Bordotella branchiseptica. Dog.
and diaphragmatic lobes. Chronic adhesive pleuritis between the
cardiac and diaphragmatic lobes, Porcine enzootic pneumonia. Pig.
3-31 Chronic catarrhal bronchopneumonia
 3-32 Fibrinous pleuropneumonia
Peribronchiolar fibrosis with a slight mononuclear infitrate. Fibrosis of
The consolidated cranioventral parts of the lung are swolien, firm and 
alveolar septa with type ll alveolar cell hyperplasia and a moderate
red and are covered by a fibrinous plaque. Actinobocillus
celiular exudate of macrophages and some neutrophils in the alveoli.
pleuropneumonioe. Pig.
Pig. HE.
The Respiratory System
37
 3-33 Fibrinous pneumonia
3-34 Fibrinous-necrotizing pneumonia
Acute stage: fibrinous exudate and erythrocytes in the alveoli. Cow. HE.
Necrosis of lung tissue (upper left) with demarcation zone of rounded
due to Mannheimio hoemolytica in sheep and cattle and Actinobocilus
plevropneumonioe in swine. HE.
3-35 Acute serous interstitial pneumonia
 3-36 Acute serous interstitial pneumonia
The lungs are diffusely affected, swollen and edematous due to the
Lung, pleural surface. All pulmonary lobes are consolidated and red 
presence of an alveolar and interstitial serous exudate. Circovirus
with secondary interstitial emphysema. Bovine pulmonary edema and
infection.Pig.
emphysema (fog fever). Cow.
38
Chapter3
 3-37 Acute serous interstitial pneumonia
 3-38 Acute fibrinous-necrotizing interstitial pneumonia
 The consolidated pneumonic areas are characterized by a protein rich
The consoidated lung tissue shows necrosis of alveolar septa and a
cxudate in the alveoli and bronchiole, the formation of hyaline 
proteinaceous fbrinoid, almost non-cellular exudate in the alveoli.
membranes and epithelialization of the alveolar lining by alveolar type
Grossly the lungs were diffusely affected. Herpes felis. Cat. HE.
Il cell hyperplasia. Cow. HE.
 3-39 Chronic interstitial pneumonia
3-40 Chronic interstitial pneumonia
Pale-gray, aerated, voluminous and non-collapsible lungs that have a
Aerated lung tissue with diffuse thickening of the interstitium due to
meaty consistency and increased weight. Cow.
fibrosis, increased celluiarity and increase of smooth musculature; focal 
lymphoid aggregate. Cow. HE.
The Respiratory System
6
 3-41 Metastatic pneumonia
3-42 Metastatic pneumonia
Lung, cut surface. Several pneumonic foci, consisting of central
Coagulation necrosis surrounded by a demarcation zone of cellular
 coagulation necrosis surrounded by pus. Necrobacillosis. Cow.
exudate (dark blue) and granulation tissue. Necrobacillosis
(Fusobacterium necrophorum). Cow. HE.
3-43 Metastatic pneumonia with pulmonary hemorrhage
3-44 Avian tuberculosis
Lung, incised through the lesion. Pulmonary hemorrhage due to
Lung, cut surface. Multiple gray-white hyaline tuberculous foci that
metastatic pheumonia with subsequent necrotizing arteritis, aneurysm
have spread along the interstitium; no evidence of cascous necrosis.
formation and rupture of the pulmonary artery. Necrobacillosis
Avian tuberculosis (Mycobacterium avium). Pig.
(Fusobacterium necrophorum). Cow
40
Chapter 3
3-45 Verminous pneumonia
3-46 Echinococcosis
Lung, diaphragmatic lobe. Subpleural gray-white pneumonic nodules
produced by the adult worms, eggs and larvae of Muelierius capillaris.
surrounded by a fibrous capsule. Cow.
Sheep.
3-47 Adenocarcinoma, bronchiolo-alveolar pattern
3-48 Adenocarcinoma, bronchia! pattern
 The tumor is frequently seen in cats and characterized by solid areas or
differentiated columnar cells with basal nuclei. Dog. HE.
multilayered tubular structures of pale large ce!ls; often goblet cells
and sometimes ciliated epithelial ce!lls are present. Metastases occur
frequently. particularly to the digits, and usually cause the first clinical
signs. Cat. PAS.
The Respiratory System
41
 3-49 Pulmonary adenomatosis (jaagsiekte)
3-50 Metastatic carcinoma
Lung, multiple nodules showing adenomatous and papillary growth.
Metastases of a mammary carcinoma in the lungs. Cat.
Sheep. HE.
he urinary system
4-1  Cortical cysts  44
4-25 Glomerular lipidosis  50
4-2Medullary cyst 44
4-26  Exudative glomerulonephritis  50
4-3 infarct 45
4-27  Subacute interstitial nephritis  51
4-4Infarct 45
4-28  Chronic interstitial nephritis   51
4-5 infarct 45
4-29Chronic diffuse interstitiat nephritis  51
4-6 Subinfarct 45
4-30  Chronic interstitial nephritis  51
4-7 Cortical necrosis
¥46
4-31  Focal interstitial nephritis  52
4-8 Cortical necrosis 46
4-32 Parasitic nodules 52
4-9 Medullary necrosis 46
4-33 Parasitic nodule 52
4-10 Lipofuscinosis 46
4-34  Confluent granulomatous lesion 
52
4-11
Lipoid nephrosis  47
4-35  Embolic purulent nephritis
53
4-12  Medullary calcification 
47
4-36 Acute pyelonephritis 53
4-13 Gout 47
4-37  Chronic ureteropyelonephritis  53
4-14  Uric acid concrements 
47
4-38  Pyelonephritis
53
4-15  Hemoglobinuric nephrosis  48
4-39  Acute purulent nephritis
54
4-16  Hemoglobinuric nephrosis  48
4-40  Primary renal carcinoma 
54
4-17  Chronic toxic tubulonephrosis  48
4-41
Primary renal carcinoma  54
4-18 Septic tubulonephrosis
¥48
4-42  Malignant lymphoma
54
4-19  Chronic glomerular amyloidosis
49
4-43  Malignant lymphoma
55
4-20 Glomerular amyloidosis 49
4-44 Hydronephrosis 55
4-21  Membranous glomerulonephritis  49
4-45  Urolithiasis  55
4-22  Membranous glomerulonephritis  49
4-46 Urolithiasis 55
4-23  Membranoproliferative-sclerozing
4-47 Follicular cystitis 56
glomerulonephritis  50 
4-48  Hemorrhages in urinary bladder  56
 4-24  Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis  50
4-49  Urolithiasis 56
THE URINARY SYSTEM
Rarely, renal cortical necrosis due to a generalized Shwartzman
 phenomenon or renal vein thrombosis may occur.
The urinary system includes the kidneys and lower urinary tract.
Lesions are rather common in domestic animal species. Most of
Amyloidosis
them concerm inflammatory reactions, but congenital cysts and
Glomerular amyloidosis is a major glomerulopathy (glomerulo-
hydronephrosis also may be frequently cncountered. Degenerative
 processes and primary neoplasms are less common.
medullary interstitial tissue and arterial walls. The glomerula1
amyloid involvement, however, has more clinical impact due to)
The kidneys
impairment of the blood flow through the glomerular tuft and
impaired filtration rate.
 Degenerative processes
Degenerative lesions, mainly of convoluted tubules (tubulo-
Inflammatory processes
nephrosis or acute tubular necrosis), but also of glomeruli (glorme-
In general, renal inflammatory processes can be divided into those
rulopathy) are scen in:
resulting from glomerulopathy and those resulting from hubulo
septicemia;
interstitial lesions. Most inflanmatory glomerular lesions are asso-
■
 intoxications (nephrotoxic tubular necrosis);
ciated with deposits of immune complexes. Bacterial emhofization
 anoxemia, especially in cases of shock (ischemic necrosis);:
 may result in focal glomerutitis.
and
Glomerular immune complex depositions
■ increased or abnormal depositions, e.g. concrements, pro-
 Depending on their method and place of deposition, various
teins, pigments, or lipids.
patterns may develop which are associated with different
4.3
 Chapter 4
histopathological types of glomerulonephritis. Just as glomerular
 widening, tubular cellular loss and increase of interstitium
amyloidosis also immune complex glomerulonephritis is often
(inflammatory cells, fibroblasts and matrix).
associated with loss of filtration selectivity resulting in widened
tubular lumens filled with protein-containing contents.
Neoplasms of the kidney
Secondary glomerular involvement
Primary renal neoplasms consist of  renal tubular carcinomas,
Wilm's tumors and pelvic transitional epithelial cell tumors. In
When tubulointerstitial proceses prevail a secondary glomerular
the kidneys metastatic tumors are common, especially of the
involvement may occur, especially when the processes are
lymphoid system.
associated with chuonic loss of nephrons and adaptive phenomena
in remnant nephrons. A primary glomerular involvement can also
The lower urinary tract
be followed by tubulointerstitial lesions.
Tubulointerstitial diseases
Inflammatory lesions
Tubulointerstitial diseases are mainly due to infectious agents or
 In the lower urinary tract, beginning with the pelvis, inflamma-
failure. In cases of inner medullary (papillary) necrosis or inflamma- or due to ascending infections. In dogs the latter may be
tion (pyelonephritis) secondary cortical lesions often develop.
 promoted by congenital abnormalities in the ureteral-bladder
Focal cortical lesions often represent infarcts and inflammatory
 junction.
 processes (or their scars) resulting from enbolism. In production
animals this is frequently seen in association with septic emboli.
Neoplasms of the lower urinary tract
In glomerular lesions (degenerative and inflammatory) as  Most neoplasms of the bladder and urethra are transitional
well as in tubulointerstitial nephritis the gross and histo-
 epithelial cell tumors. The lower urinary tract tumors may be
pathological features of the kidneys are the result of tubular
 associated with secondary hydronephrosis
4-1 Cortical cysts
4-2 Medullary cyst
Renal surface. Multiple small prominent cysts in the cortex, due to
Renal cut surface. A single large cyst in the medulia. The cysts may be
dilation of parts of the nephrons (Bowman's capsules andjor tubules)
multiple and smaller. They are usually the resuit of dilated collecting 
associated with accumulation of glomerular filtrate. In other cases, the
tubules and represent incidentaily found congenital lesions. The fibrosis
cysts may be solitary andfor larger; most are incidentaly found
in the overlying cortex of the present case may be secondary to the
congenital lesions. Slaughter cow.
expansion of the cyst. Slaughter pig.
Note that in some animals hereditary deleterious cysts may occur
which increase in number and size during aging, such as in the
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (PKD) of Persian cats.
The Urinary System
45
4-3 Infarct
4-4 Infarct
Rena! surface. Large red-colored hemorrhagic infarct due to subtotal
Renal cut surface. iarge anemic infarct due to total thrombotic
thrombotic occlusion of renal artery branch. The necrotic area is
occlusion of renal artery branch. The necrotic area involving areas of
slightly raised and sharply defined from surrounding tissue. On cut
the cortex and medulla, is pale-colored, slightly raised and sharply
surface wedge-shaped lesions involving cortex and medulla are found.
defined frorm surrounding tissue by a hemorrhagic zone. Cow suffering
Cow suffering from thromboendocarditis.
from thromboendocarditis.
4-5 Infarct
4-6 Subinfarct
Histopathological specimen of former photograph. Note pale necrotic
Cut surface of two renal lobes. Yellowish-white mottled area in the
tissue in cartex and medulia surrounded by a clearly blue and red
cortex and subcortical layer. Ischemic necrosis and dystrophic
colored demarcation zone. HE.
calcification of the highly susceptible proximal tubules, resulting from
incomplete vascular occlusion. Frequently found with full infarcts (see
Fig. 4-3). Thromboendocarditis. Cow.
46
Chapter 4
4-7 Cortical necrosis
4-8 Cortical necrosis
Renal cut surface. Diffuse hemorrhagic necrosis of the greater part of
Multipfe areas of necrosis and hemorrhage in the renal cortex that are
the renal cortex as a consequence of glomerular capillary thrombosis
readily visible. Herpes virus infection. Newborn puppy dog.
(disseminated intravascular coagulation). Possibly secondary to
endotoxemia (lipopolysaccharides) of Gram-negative bacteria
(Schwartzman phenomenon). Pig.
4-9 Medullary necrosis
4-10 Lipofuscinosis
Renal cut surface. Diffuse necrosis of the renai crest [inner medulla].
Dark brown discoloration of the renal cortex. Characteristic reticulate
Such a lesion may be found after long term treatment with analgesic
design of the renal surface (below) and radial dark lines in the cortex
drugs, which may be associated with blockade of prostaglandin
on cut surface. Microscopically, lipofuscin pigment is present in
synthetase and associated renal meduliary hemostasis. Dog.
lysosomes of the proximal tubular epithelial cells. Slaughter cow.
The Urinary System
47
4-11 Lipoid nephrosis
4-12 Medullary calcification
Renal surface. Swolfen and pale renal lobes with a typical pale yellow
Renal cut surface. White discoloration of the papillae due to peritubular
reticulate design on the surface. Microscopically, anisotropic lipids
deposition of calcium salts in basement membranes and interstitial
accumulate in the proximal tubular epithelial cells. This appeared to
tissue [dystrophic calcification]. Potentially it might cause polyuria. In 
result from severe impairment of glomerular perm-selectivity due to
most cases, however, it is an incidental finding. Dog.
amyloidosis. Cow.
In other cases of renal lipidosis tubular accumulation of neutral fat can
 occur pathologically (fatty degeneration with isotropic lipids, for
 instance in fasting dwarf breed puppy dogs), or physiologically (in adult
cats, or in the inner cortex of cattle in pregnancy).
4-13 Gout
4-14 Uric acid concrements
Kidney and heart of bird with deposition of uric acid and urate crystals
 Renai cut surface. Yellow radial striation of renal papilae due to
in the kidney and on the epicardium. Domestic fowl.
intratubular deposition of uric acid and urate. The lesion is associated
with increased nuclear catabolism and dehydration. It is frequently
seen in starving and hypoglycemic piglets. Newborn piglet.
48
Chapter 4
4-15 Hemoglobinuric nephrosis
4-16 Hemoglobinuric nephrosis
Renal surface. Black discoloration of the kidneys due to concentration
Renal cortex. Proteinaceous material in tubular lumina resulting from
of (metjhemoglobin. Massive acute hemolysis caused by chronic copper
hemoglobin filtration. Green-blue homogeneous globules (hyaline
poisoning. Sheep.
droplets) in tubular epithelial cells, are due to reabsorption and
lysosomal accumulation of the filtered hemoglobin. Moreover, hydropic
degeneration and necrosis of tubular celis. Hemoglobinuria caused by 
chronic copper poisoning. Sheep. Fast blue stain for hemoglobin.
4-17 Chronic toxic tubulonephrosis
4~18 Septic tubulonephrosis
Renal cortex. Dilated tubules ined by flattened epithelial cells with
Renal cut surface (left) and surface (right). The kidneys are large and
variable sized nuclei containing yellowish intranuclear inclusion bodies
(lead protein complexes). Reactive fibrosis and infiltration of
from cioudy swelling to necrosis of epithelium, mainty of corticai
inflammatory cells. Chronic Iead poisoning. Calf. HE.
tubules. Petechiae are prominent (right). Bacteremia. Sheep.
The Urinary System
49
4-19 Chronic glomerular amyloidosis
4-20 Glomerular amyloidosis
Renal surface. Enlarged kidney with swollen, whitish-yellow, discolored
Deposition of amyloid on the inner aspect of the violet stained
and irregularly surfaced lobes, caused by dilation and degeneration of
glomerular basement membrane. In some places penetration of the
tubules, interstitial inflammation and fibrosis. These tubulointerstitial
basement membrane by small spicular projections of amyloid at its
lesions are secondary to glomerular dysfunction resulting from amyloid
outer aspect has occurred. Neighboring tubules contain pink
deposition. AA-amyloidosis. Cow.
proteinaceous material and violet casts. AA-amyloidosis. Dog. PAS-stain
for neutral sugars and glycoproteins.
4-21 Membranous glomerulonephritis
4-22 Membranous glomerulonephritis
Thickening of the capillary walls of a glomerulus due to deposition of
Glomerulus. Granular fluorescence along the glomerular basement
immune compiexes, and thickening of the glomerular basement 
 membrane due to deposition of immune complexes. In most
membrane. Patent capillary lumina. Lack of hypercellularity. Dog. HE.
spontaneous cases it represents an idiopathic lesion. Dog. Rabbit
 antidog IgG immunofluorescence.
50
Chapter 4
4-23 Membranoproliferative-sclerosing glomerulonephritis
4-24 Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
 Segmental thickening of the glomerular basement membrane with
Granular flvorescence along some segments of the glomerular capilfary
narrowing of capillary lumina, and proximally an increase of mesangial
tuft and mesangial (centrally located) accumulation of fluorescent
matrix (sclerosis] and protiferation of mesangial cells. Adhesions
material. Dog. Rabbit antidog IgG immunofluorescence,
[synechiae) between the glomerular tuft and Bowman's capsule. Dog.
Jones' methenamine silver stain.
4-25 Glomerular lipidosis
4-26 Exudative glomerulonephritis
Glomerulus. Mesangial accumulation of large lipid-containing foam
Hypercellularity of the glomerular tufts (intracapillary
cells in a segment of the glomerular tuft. Note the localization within
glomerulonephritis). A semilunar mass of exudate within Bowman's
the superficial black-stained basement membrane. Incidental finding in
capsule of the right glomerulus, containing serum, fibrin and some 
dogs. Jones' methenamine siver stain for basement membrane.
neutrophils (extracapillary glomerulonephritis) demonstrates that
subendothelial imrmune complexes have initiated complement
activation and subsequent exudative inflammation. The left glomerulus
shows a proliferative extracapilfary reaction of the Bowman's capsule.
There is prominent interstitial fbrosis. The lesion frequently is found in
swine with necrotic skin lesions [porcine dermatitis and nephropathy
syndrome (PDNS)). Pig. HE.
The Urinary System
51
4-27 Subacute interstitial nephritis
4-28 Chronic interstitial nephritis
Renal cortex. Heavy interstitiat infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma
Shrunken, sclerotic left kidney. Cat.
cells. Slight dilation of tubular lumina. This type of lesion is found 
especially in canine leptospirosis (Leptospira canicolo). Dog. HE.
4-29 Chronic diffuse interstitial nephritis
4-30 Chronic interstitial nephritis
Renal cut surface. lrregular narrowing of the cortex due to massive loss
 Renal cortex. Almost complete replacement of nephrons by fibrous
of nephrons. Obliteration of originai cortical and medullary tissue. The
tissue, which contains random accumulations of mononuclear
cystic diation of tubufes in the medulla may result from cicatrization
inflammatory cells. Remnants of tubules. glomeruli situated close
(tubules with thin epithelial layer), or it represents a compensatory
together, dilated urinary spaces filled with proteinaceous material, and 
phenomenon (tubules with thick, multilayered epithelium). Dog.
atrophic glomerular tufts are evident. Adhesions between Bowman's
capsule and a tuft of a compensatory-hypertrophied glomerulus (left).
Dog. HE.
52
Chapter 4
 4-31 Focal interstitial nephritis
4-32 Parasitic nodules
Renal surface. Multiple grayish-white prominent nodules (white-
Renal cortex with various small whitish granulomatous foci, a
spotted kidney) in the renal cortex due to a proliferative inflammation.
characteristic lesion for parasitic nodules. Dog.
Histologically characterized by lymphocytic, plasmacellular and 
histiocytic infltration, and fibrosis. May be caused by different bacteria
e.g. Escherichia coli, Salmonello, Brucella. Veal calf.
4-33 Parasitic nodule
4-34 Confluent granulomatous lesion
 A focal granulomatous inflammation surrounding cross-sections of a
Surface of kidney contains a confluert granulomatous lesion at caudal
parasitic larva. The granufoma consists of an inner zone of mainly
pole. The abdomen, moreover, contairs straw-colored fluid and fibrin 
histiocytes, and an outer zone of plasma cells and lymphocytes with
strands. Cat with felire infectious peritonitis (FIP).
occasional eosinophils. Such a lesion develops as a result of migrating
larvae of Toxocorg canis. Dog. 1 year. HE.
The Urinary System
53
4-35 Embolic purulent nephritis
4-36 Acute pyelonephritis
Cut surface and pelvis of kidney. Multifocal papillary necrosis
cortex due to microabscess formation, mainly originating from
demarcated by a zone of reactive hyperemia accompanied by purulent
glomeruli hematogenously infected by pyogenic bacteria. Extension to
pyelitis. The lesions are a sequel of ascending urinary tract infection or
the medulla and the pelvis frequently occurs. Arcanobacterium
descending hematogenous infection. tikely etiology is Actinobaculum
pyogenes. Cow
suis. Pig.
4-37 Chronic ureteropyelonephritis
4-38 Pyelonephritis
 Renal cut surface and opened ureter. Enlargement of the ureter due to
 Papillary necrosis (right) demarcated by a rim of neutrophils. Multiple
ditation of the lumen and thickening of the wall. Widening of the renal
round and elongated foci of suppurative inflammation (blue) and areas
pelvis (calyces). A rim of reactive connective tissue in the medulla
of fibrosis (pink) in the cortex, suggesting a descending pathogenesis of
bordering the pelvic cavity. White streaks of scar tissue in cortex and
the necrotizing papillitis. Cow. HE.
medutla. Cow.
54
Chapter 4
4-39 Acute purulent nephritis
4-40 Primary renal carcinoma
 Renal surface. Predominantly polar localization of muitiple raised
 Renal surface (right) and cut surface (left). A large, bulging tumor mass,
grayish-yeliow foci surrounded by a zone of hyperemia, some depressed
repiacing the greater part of the kidney. Dog. 16 years.
 chronic inflammatory foci are also present. Tnis typical distribution has
been described in experimental reflux pyelonephritis in swine. Pig.
4-41 Primary renal carcinoma
4-42 Malignant lymphoma
 Histological features of a renal carcinoma. Note dilated tubular
Kidney with several gray-whitish protruding nodules. Sheep.
structures in tumor (right) with remnant of original kidney tissue (left).
Dog. HE.
The Urinary System
55
4-43 Malignant lymphoma
4-44 Hydronephrosis
Right (left in figure) and left kidney with protruding grayish
Renal cut surface, ureter, and opened urinary bladder. Unifateral
nodules. Cat.
dilation of the renal pelvis and ureter (hydroureter) associated with
atrophy of renal tissue, caused by impairment of urinary flow due to a
transitional cell carcinoma in the neck of the bladcer. Muscular
hypertrophy of the bladder is present. Dog.
4-45 Urolithiasis
4-46 Urolithiasis
 Cut surface of one kidney. Note large stone in pelvis and some gray
Distended, acutely hemorrhagic urinary bladder due to urethra!
colored descending streaks of interstitial nephritis. Cow.
obstruction of male cat suffering from feline lower urinary tract
disease. Cat.
56
Chapter 4
4-47 Follicular cystitis
4-48 Hemorrhages in urinary bladder
Mucosal surface of urinary bladder. Multipie small gray-white nodules
Mucosal hemorrhages. Classical swine fever. Pig.
surrounded by a zone of hyperemia. Microscopically consisting of
 accumulations of lymphocytic cells forming follicular structures. Dog.
4-49Urolithiasis
Distal male urethra. A number of small, spherical, smooth, gray-white 
urinary calculi causing acute urethritis. Steer.
Chapter
Ihe liver
5-1  Congenital cysts  60
5-24 Hepatic steatosis with zonal distribution65
5-2  Congenital hepatic fibrosis  60
5-25 Vitamin A intoxication 66
5-3 Cholestasis 60
5-26 Acute hepatitis, apoptotic body 66
5-4B
Extrahepatic cholestasis  60
5-27
Acute hepatitis, confluent necrosis 66
5-5 Acute extrahepatic cholestasis
61
5-28  Interface hepatitis (piecemeal necrosis)  66
5-6  Neutrophilic cholangitis  61
5-29 Massive hepatic necrosis 67
5-7(
 Chronic cholangitis due to liver fluke
5-30
Macronodular cirrhosis  67
infestation  61
5-31
Cirrhosis 67
5-8
 Congenital portosystemic shunt, intrahepatic 61
5-32
 Micronodular cirrhosis
67
 5-9  Congenital portosystemic shunt 
62
5-33
Lobular dissecting hepatitis
68
 5-10 Acute passive congestion 62
5-34
Inherited copper toxicosis 68
5-1t
Chronic passive congestion
62
5-35
 Contagious canine hepatitis
68
5-12
 Chronic passive congestion
62
5-36
Multifocal miliary necrosis
568
5-13  Chronic passive congestion  63
5-37
 Acute hepatitis, focal necrosis
69
5-14
 Multiple portosystemic collaterals due to portal
5-38
Necrobacillosis
¥69
hypertension 
63
5-39
Acute fascioliasis 69
5-15
Thrombosis of the portal vein 
63
5-40L
Leptospirosis
69
5-16
6Teleangiectasis
63
5-41
Leptospirosis
70
5-17
Amyloidosis
64
5-42
Hepatic abscesses and omphalophlebitis  70
5-18
 Steroid induced hepatopathy  64
5-43
 Avian tuberculosis  70
5-19
 Hepatic steatosis and liver rupture  64
5-44
 Avian tuberculosis
70
5-20
 Macrovesicular hepatic steatosis
5-45
White spot, granulomatous type 71
5-21
 Microvesicular hepatic steatosis
65
5-46
 Nodular hyperplasia
71
5-22
 Microvesicular hepatic steatosis 
65
5-47
 Nodular hyperplasia  71
5-23 Zonal or lobular pattern  65
 5-48 Hepatocellular carcinoma
71
THE LIVER
 congenital hepatic fibrosis, characterized by diffuse porto-
 portal bridging fibrosis with dilated abnormally structured
The various disorders of the liver can be differentiated into four
bile ducts;
categories, each with its own reaction pattern:
disorders of the biliary system;
 adult polycystic diseasc, characterized by the presence of
■ disorders of the circulatory system;
multiple grossly recognizable cysts; and
 congenital dilatation of the large and segmental bile ducts
 disorders of the parenchyma; and
(Caroli's disease).
neoplastic disorders.
Cholestasis and cholate-stasis
Disorders of the biliary system
Cholestasis or bilirubinostasis is morphologically characterized
The main biliary disorders can be grouped into:
 s o d sy o i  p  ae 
 congenital cystic discases;
canaliculi, bile granules in hepatocytes and Kupffer cells) and
cholestasis and cholate-stasis; and
 may have an intrahepatic or extrahepatic origin.
cholangitis.
Intrahepatic cholestasis is associated with a wide spectrum
of liver diseases; microscopic lesions apart from the
Congenital cystic diseases
cholestasis are related to the primary hepatic disease.
Congenital cystic diseases are considered to be ductal plate ano-
In extrahepatic cholestasis the prescnce of bile in the paren-
 malies, which can be divided into three different subtypes:
chyma is evident in acute cases but may be absent in
57
58Chapter 5
chronic cases. The characteristic lesions in extrahepatic  Outflow disturbances
fs asd us  o s m  a  pr  sis
ducts into the connective tissue of the portal tracts. This liver with transudation of plasma and erythrocytes through the
causes an acute (edema, neutrophils) or chronic inflamma-
 liver capsule and fibrin deposition on the liver.
tion (fibrosis, bile duct proliferation, neutrophilic and
 Acute passive congestion is histologically characterized by
mononuclear infiltrate) in the stromal tissue of the portal
 central-central  bridging  congestion  and  subsequent
tracts, and leakage of bile from the bile ducts into the
 atrophy and loss of centrolobular hepatocytes.
periportal parenchyma causing insudation and necrosis
 Chronic passive congestion in addition causes perivenous
of hepatocytes (bile infarct).
 fibrosis extending into the centrolobular parenchyma
and adaptive periportal regenerative hyperplasia Of
Cholate-stasis is thought to occur as a result of chronic retention
hepatocytes.
of bile acids in the hepatocytes and is characterized by swollen
 pale hepatocytes with centrally located copper containing gran-
 Outflow disturbances of the liver usually result from cardiac
ules, preferentially in the periportal region and often associated failure or obstruction of the thoracic part of the caudal caval vein.
with bile duct proliferation.
Portal hypertension
Cholangitis
Portal hypertension may result in the formation of multiple
Cholangitis can be differentiated into:
 portosystemic collaterals (splenorenal, mesenteric, cardio-
 neutrophilic cholangitis, usually resulting from a bacterial
esophageal) and ascites. It mainly results from chronic primary
ascending infection; it is characterized by the presence of
liver disease, particularly cirrhosis. Portal hypertension may
neutrophils in the lumen of the bile ducts possibly ex-
also be the result of primary vascular lesions such as primary
tending into the surrounding portal cornective tissue and
hypoplasia of the portal vein or obstruction (thrombosis) of the
 the periportal parenchyma;
 lymphocytic cholangitis, a specific disorder in cats, that is
portal vein.
 characterized by a marked infiltration of lymphocytes in
the portal areas often associated with fibrosis and bile
Disorders of the parenchyma
duct proliferation;
necrotizing and destructive cholangitis, which may occur as
Parenchymal disorders can be classified as:
 a result of viral or toxic insult or as an idiosyncratic drug
 hepatic atrophy and hyperplasia;
 reaction, are characterized by necrosis of the biliary epi-
 reversible hepatocellular injury and hepatic amyloidosis;
acute and chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis including hepato-
thelium or destruction and loss of bile ducts, respectively;
pue
cellular apoptosis and necrosis; and
chronic cholangitis associated with liver fluke infestation,
 non-specific reactive hepatitis, hepatic abscesses and
characterized by marked portal and periductal fibrosis
granulomas.
and inflammation within the portal area and exudation
into the lumen of the bile duct.
Hepatic atrophy and hyperplasia
Hepatic atropny, diffuse or focal, results from reduced portal
Disorders of the circulatory system
venous flow due to shunting of the portal blood or due to
Circulatory disorders of the liver can be grouped into three
 compression of the sinusoids. With extensive atrophy in one part
of the liver, the remaining part will show regenerative hyper-
 major categories:
 congenital portosystemic shunts;
plasia and increase in size until the original volume of the liver is
  disorders with outflow disturbances resulting in passive
restored.
 congestion of the liver; and
disorders associated with deranged inflow of portal blcod
 Reversible hepatocellular injury and hepatic amyloidosis
and portal hypertension.
degeneration, glycogen storage (steroid induced hepatopathy)
Congenital portosystemic shunts
 distribution of the lesions the liver is characterized by focal or
vascular anomalies that directly connect the portal venous system diffuse swelling, a focal, zonal or diffuse pallor or yellow-tan
with the systemic venous circulation. Histologically, the liver discoloration, and a friable consistency with increased fragility
shows the stereotypical lesions of portal venous hypoperfusion of the liver. Hepatic amyloidosis is characterized by deposition of
characterized by a hypoplastic or non-recognizable portal vein, amyloid in the space of Disse and this also results in hepatic
and an increased number of arteriolar cross sections because of S
 swelling, diffuse or zonal pallor, and increased fragility of the
compensatory arterial flow
liver.
The Liver
59
 Acute and chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis including hepatoceliular
In both acute and chronic hepatitis it is essential to mention the
apoptosis and necrosis
activity and stage of the disease reflected by the extent of the
Hepatocellular apoptosis and necrosis, and the often accormpanying
hepatocytic necrosis and inflammatory reaction, and the
 Secondary inflammation, are the hallmarks of hepatitis. They may
 presence and extent of fibrosis and nodular transformation of
the liver.
present as:
 apoptotic or acidophilic bodies, characterized by shrunken
 intensely acidophilic hepatocytes with a condensed nucleus
Non-specific reactive hepatitis, hepatic abscesses and granulomas
surrounded by an empty halo;
Non-specific reactive hepatitis is a morphological entity that re-
 focal, confluent and bridging or massive necrosis charac-
 presents a non-specific response to a variety of extrahepatic
terized by swollen coagulated cells with karyopycnosis,
 processes or the residual lesions of previous inflammatory intra-
karyorrhexis o1 karyolysis (coagulative necrosis) or by
 hepatic processes. The lesion is characterized by a neutrophilic,
s  sdr p s p 
 mixed or mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate, depending on
collapse of the reticulin network (lytic necrosis), sometimes 
 the chronicity, in portal areas and parenchyma without evident
with replacement by erythrocytes and /or infiltration of
 hepatocellular apoptosis or necrosis.
ceroid laden macrophages; 01
Hepatic abscesses usually result from bacterial infections, are
 piecemeal necrosis (interface hepatitis) characterized by
destruction of the limiting plate, probably by apoptosis,
 neutrophils and are later surrounded by a fibrous capsule.
and a mononuclear infiltration at the interface of
Hepatic granulomas may be multifocal or diffuse (granulo-
 parenchyma and (newly formed) connective tissue.
matous hepatitis) and present as aggregations of activated
In acute hepatitis, the inflammatory infiltrate may consist of
 panied by lymphocytes and plasma cells.
neutrophils, eosinophils, macrophages, lymphocytes and plasma
cells.
Neoplasia
Chronic hepatitis is characterized by fibrosis, hepatocytic necrosis
Primary neoplastic disorders of the liver are usually of epithelial
and a variable mononuclear or mixed inflammatory infiltrate;
 origin and comprise hepatocellular adenoma and hepatocellular
cirrhosis is an endstage of chronic hepatitis characterized by dif-
carcinoma, or cholangiocellular adenoma (very rare) and cho-
fuse fibrosis associated with abnormally structured parenchymal
hyperplastic nodules. Two morphological categories can be
langiocellular carcinoma. The malignant tumors often meta-
distinguished:
 stasize extensively within the liver along the branches of portal
veins and lymph vessels. Nodular hyperplasia occurs partic-
 macronodular cirrhosis with small and large nodules of
different size; and
ularly in older dogs and cats and often multiple nodules are
 micronodular cirrhosis with nodules less than 3 mm (the
seen.
size of the normal lobule) and of regular size; a specific
form of the latter is called lobular dissecting hepatitis.
60
Chapter 5
5-1 Congenital cysts
5-2 Congenital hepatic fibrosis
Liver, serosal surface. Multiple cysts in the liver filled with a clear.
Marked portoportal bridging fibrosis with irregularly shaped.
convoluted and slightly dilated bile ducts. Persian cat. HE.
columnar biliary epithelium. Dog.
5-3 Cholestasis
5-4 Extrahepatic cholestasis
Liver. Bile plugs are present in the canaliculi. Intrahepatic cholestasis.
A large gall stone is present in the lumen of the opened common bile
Dog. HE.
duct causing obstruction of the normat bile flow. Horse.
The Liver
67
5-5 Acute extrahepatic chotestasis
5-6 Neutrophilic cholangitis
Liver. Portal edema and inflammation (neutrophils, mononuclears) and 
Liver. Neutrophils within epithelial layer and lumen of bile duct with
a bile infarct in the adjacent parenchyma. Horse. HE.
secondary portal inflammation (edema, neutrophils, mononuclear cells).
Cat. HE.
5-7 Chronic:cholangitis due to liver fluke infestation
5-8 Congenital portosystemic shunt, intrahepatic
Liver, cut surface. Fibrosis, cholangitis and pericholangitis resulting in 
Liver, abdominal surface. Intrahepatic congenital portosystemic shunt
thickened fbrotic walls, with debris and adult flukes in the lumen;
at the site of the original ductus venosus. The shunting of portal blood
calcium deposits are often present in the altered bile ducts. Fosciola
along the persistent ductus venosus may result in atrophy of the liver
hepotica.Cow.
due to diminished portal flow through the liver parenchyma. Calf,
6 months.
62
Chapter 5
5-9 Congenital portosystemic shunt
 5-10 Acute passive congestion
Liver. The portal tract shows the stereotypicat tesions of portal venous
Dark swollen congested liver with deposition of fibrin on the serosal
hypoperfusion characterized by a hypoplastic or non-recognizable
surface. Cow.
portal vein and an increased number of arteriolar cross sections
because of compensatory arterial flow. Dog. HE.
5-11 Chronic passive congestion
 5-12 Chronic passive congestion 
Liver, cut surface. Dark congested tiver with pale arborescent areas of
Centrolobular congestion with bridging between adjacent lobules;
hepatoceilular regeneration around vesseis. The latter results from loss
fibrosis around the central veins. Dog. HE.
of hepatocytes in the congested centroiobular areas and subsequent 
hyperplasia of remaining hepatocytes in the periportal areas. Cow.
The Liver
63
5-13 Chronic passive congestion
5-14 Multiple portosystemic collaterals due to portal hypertension
Liver. Fibrosis and diated lymphatics around the central vein.
Atrophic cirrhotic liver and marked presence of dilated, tortuous
Congestion of the sinusoids and atrophy of the hepatic cords in the
mesenteric, spleno-renal and cardioesophageal coltateral portosystemic
centrolobular area. Hyperplasia of liver cells, evidenced by bilayered 
veins. Dog.
hepatic cords, is seen at the periphery of the lobule (lower right). Dog. HE.
 5-15 Thrombosis of the portal vein
5-16 Teleangiectasis
Liver, abdominal surface. A large red thrombus is present in the opened
Liver, serosal surface. Well circumscribed, depressed, dark red areas
portal vein. Thrombosis of the portal vein is mostly associated with
 of varying size consisting of cavernous dilation of groups of
disorders with increased hypercoagulabifity of the biood or with the
sinusoids.Cow.
nephrotic syndrome. Dog.
64
Chapter 5
5-17 Amyloidosis
 5-18 Steroid induced hepatopathy
Liver. Amyloid deposition between the endothelium and the hepatic
Swelling of the liver cells with reticulation of the cytoplasm, caused by
cords in the space of Disse with secondary atrophy of the liver cell
glycogen storage and hydropic degeneration. Hyperadrenocorticism.
plates. Horse. HE.
Dog. HE.
 5-19 Hepatic steatosis and liver rupture
5-20 Macrovesicuiar hepatic steatosis
Liver. Fatty change of liver cells present as single or multiple iarge fat
yellow-colored liver that ruptured in several places due to increased
droplets of varying size, which may displace the nucleus to the
fragility, Hyperlipoproteinemia. Pony.
periphery of the cells. Hyperlipoproteinemia. Pony. HE.
The Liver
65
5-21 Microvesicular hepatic steatosis
5-22 Microvesicular hepatic steatosis
Fatty change of liver cels, present as many small fat droplets, uniform
Fatty change of liver cells with many small dark-staining fat droplets.
in size and smaller than the centrally located nucleus. Diabetes
uniform in size. Juvenile hypoglycemia. Dog. Yorkshire terrier. Os04
mellitus. Dog. HE.
stain.
 5-23 Zonal or lobular patterm
 5-24 Hepatic steatosis with zonal distribution
Liver, serosal surface. Pale liver with a pronounced zonal or lobular
Liver. Pronounced lobular pattern, in this case caused by the periportal
pattern, in this case caused by periacinar or centrolobular hydropic
 distribution of the steatosis. Ketosis. Sheep. HE.
degeneration of the hepatocytes. Goat.
66
Chapter 5
5-25 Vitamin A intoxication 
5-26 Acute hepatitis, apoptotic body
Liver. Accumulation of small and large fat droplets in fat storing cels,
Liver. Acidophilic (apoptotic] bodies and strongly increased cellularity.
probably hepatic stellate cells (to cells), protruding into the lumen of
due to Kupffer cell proiferation, lymphocytes, pigment-laden 
the sinusoids. Cat. HE.
macrophages and some neutrophils. Dog. HE.
5-27 Acute hepatitis, confluent necrosis
5-28 Interface hepatitis (piecemeal necrosis)
Liver. Centrolobular confuent necrosis characterized by lysis of liver
Liver. Portal inflam mation of predominantly mononuclear character,
cells, collapse of the reticulin network and increased cellularity.
extending over the limiting plate and infitrating the lobular
Dog. HE.
parenchyma, with necrosis of liver cells. Dog. HE.
67
5-29 Massive hepatic necrosis
5-30 Macronodular cirrhosis
Liver, cut surface. Degeneration (yeliow raised areas) and massive
Liver, serosal surface. Atrophic liver with pale fibrotic areas and
hepatic necrosis (red depressed areas), as may be seen in hepotosis
hyperplastic nodules of irregular size most measuring more than 3 mm:
dietetico (vit E deficiency). Pig.
fatty changes are often seen within the hyperplastic nodules. Dog.
5-31 Cirrhosis
5-32 Micronodular cirrhosis
Liver. Hyperplastic parenchymal nodules separated by fibrous bands.
Liver, cut surface. The liver is enlarged; hyperplastic nodules are of
with distortion of the normal liver architecture; moderate infiltration of
regular size, and most are 3 mm or less in diameter. The variable rusty
mononuclear cells. Dog. Van Gieson.
color of the liver is caused by the varying Fe-content.
Hemochromatosis. Cow.
68
Chapter 5
5-33 Lobutar dissecting hepatitis
5-34 Inherited copper toxicosis
 Fibrous dissection of the liver parenchyma into individua! and smal!
Extreme deposition of copper (dark green) in the liver, complicated by
groups of tiver cel; also multinucleated syncytial liver clls may be
chronic hepatitis. The copper is present in the hepatic cords as well as
present. Lobular dissecting hepatitis particutarly occurs in neonatal and
in macrophages within the pale areas with fibrosis and, or
juvenile animals. Calf. HE.
inflammation. Dog. Bedlington terrier. Rubeanic acid stain for copper.
5-35 Contagious canine hepatitis
5-36 Multifocal miliary necrosis
Necrosis of liver parenchyma (lower ieft) and large amphophilic
Liver. Randomly distributed mitiary foci (<1 mm] of necrosis and
intranuclear adenoviral inclusion bodies in the intact hepatocytes.
inffammation. Abortigenic equint herpes 1. Foal.
Dog. HE.
The Liver
69
5-37 Acute hepatitis, focal necrosis
5-38 Necrobacillosis
Liver. Multifoca! necrosis with moderate (left) or strong (right)
Liver, cut surface. Acute coagulative necrosis, caused by Fusobacterium
proliferation of Kupffer cells and infiltration by phagocytes, as seen in
necrophorum, surrounded by a zone of hyperemia. Cow.
several septicemic infections. Salmonellosis. Calf. HE.
5-39 Acute fascioliasis
5-40 Leptospirosis
Liver, serosat surface. Tracks of migratory flukes in acute Fasciolo
Jaundice. Hemorrhages in the lungs and in the serosa of the stomach.
hepotica infestation. Sheep.
The liver is usually grossly normal, but may show some zonal
degeneration. Leptospira icterohgemorrhagica. Dog.
70
Chapter 5
5-41 Leptospirosis
5-42 Hepatic abscesses and omphalophlebitis
Liver. Mitotic figures and double-nucleated hepatocytes. The
Liver, serosal surface, diaphragmatic aspect.
characteristic liver cell dissociation is markedly exaggerated by
Metastatic hepatic abscesses originating from
postmortem changes, since in liver biopsies dissociation mosty is not
 an omphalophlebitis (arrowhead) and severe
recognized. Leptospira icterohgemorrhagica. Dog. HE.
atrophy of the left side of the liver (arrows)
due to occlusion of the left branch of the 
portal vein associated with the ascending
omphatophlebitis. Calf.
5-43 Avian tuberculosis
5-44 Avian tuberculosis
Proliferative interstitial hepatitis with Langhans' cells and, very limited,
the interlobular septa and infiltrating the lobules. Avian tuberculosis 
caseous necrosis. The inflammatory process infiltrates into the lobular
(Mycobocterium ovium). Pig.
parenchyma. Avian tuberculosis (Mycobacterium avium). Pig. HE.
The Liver
71
5-45 White spot, granulomatous type
5-46 Nodular hyperplasia
Liver, serosal surface. Focal chronic interstitial
Liver, serosal surface. Nodular hyperplasia of liver parenchyma with
hepatitis, with a network of thickened
fatty change, as is commonly observed in old dogs. Dog.
interlobular septa, due to migrating larvae.
Ascariasis (Ascaris suum]. Pig.
 5-47 Nodular hyperplasia
5-48 Hepatocetlular carcinoma
Liver. Well demarcated non-encapsulated hyperplastic nodule 
Liver. Broad multilayered trabeculae of neoplastic liver cells separated
consisting of bilayered hepatic cords, and slight compression of the
by thin bands of capiliary stroma and sinusoids. Malignancy is
adjacent parenchyma. Dog. HE.
determined by the extent of cellular pleiomorphism and the number of
mitotic figures. Cat. HE,
Chap
The alimentary tract
6-1  Cleft palate (palatoschisis)  75
6-33 Gastric erosion 83
6-2 Polydontia 75
6-34 Gastric ulceration 83
6-3 Enamel hypoplasia
75
6-35 Gastric carcinoma 83
6-4  Dental caries
6-36 Smali intestinal membrane atresia  83
6-5
 Acute stomatitis
76
6-37
 Atresia ani
84
6-6  Necrobacillosis  76
6-38  Intestinal diverticulum  84
6-7 Actinobacillosis 76
6-39 Rectal stricture 84
6-8 Actinobacillosis 76
6-40  Hernia diaphragmatica
t8
6-9
 Fibrinous periodontitis 
77
6-41
Volvulus
6-10
Fibromatous epulides
77
6-42
 Intussusception
85
6-11
 Ameloblastoma 
77
6-431
infarction  85
6-12 Ameloblastoma
77
6-44
4  Protein-losing enteropathy
85
6-13
 Ranula
78
6-45
 Acute catarrhal enteritis
86
6-14
Megaesophagus
78
6-46
Villous atrophy
86
6-15 Esophageal obstruction 78
6-47
 Hyperregenerative villous atrophy 
86
6-16
 Stenosis of the esophag us
78
6-48
 Hemorrhagic enteritis 
98
6-17
 Reflux esophagitis
79
6-49
 Hyporegenerative villous atrophy
87
6-18
Sarcosporidiosis  79
6-50  Acute fibrinous enteritis
87
6-19
 Esophageal papillomatosis
79
6-51
Fibrinous-necrotizing enteritis
87
6-20
 Esophageal papilloma 
79
6-52
 Fibrinous-necrotizing enteritis 
87
6-21
 Parakeratotic hyperkeratosis
¥80
6-53 Erosive enteritis
88
6-22
Chronic necrobacillary rumenitis 80
 6-54  Proliferative enteritis
88
6-23
 Traumatic reticulitis  80
 6-55 Proliferative enteritis
¥88
6-24
Fibroma80
6-56
 Canine histiocytic ulcerative colitis (CHUC)
88
6-25
Gastric dilation/voivuius syndrome  81
6-57
Canine histiocytic ulcerative colitis (CHUC)
68
6-26
Gastric edema
81
6-58 Atrophic colitis 89
6-27
Uremic gastropathy
81
6-59 Tuberculosis 89
6-28
Ostertagiosis
81
6-60 Tuberculosis 89
6-29
Familiar stomatocytosis hypertrophic gastritis
6-61  Coccidiosis 90
syndrome
82
6-62
Cyathostominosis (Redworm Infestation] 90
08-9
Hyptrtrophic gastritis  82
6-63 Leiomyoma
¥90
6-31
 Atrophic gastritis 
82
6-64  Anal sac carcinoma
90
6-32  Follicular gastritis 
¥82
73
Chapter 6
THE ALIMENTARY TRACT
this may be characterized as hyporegenerative (primary alteration
of crypt epithelium resulting in shortening of villi) or
The alimentary tract includes the oral cavity, salivary glands,
hyperregenerative (primary alteration of villus epithelium with
pharynx, esophagus, forestomachs, stomach, and small and
shortenirg of villi and adaptive lengthening of crypts). Vilus
large intestine.
atrophy can also be induced by food hypersensitivity or toxic
The most common lesions consist of:
 agents without (evident) inflammation. The differentiation from
 congenital anomalies (for example cleft palate, polydontia,
enteroblasts into enterocytes or goblet cells may change into
 small intestinal membrane atresia, atresia ani);
 predominantly goblet cells, a process called goblet celhyperplasia.
displacement (for example gastric dilation/volvulus
syndrome, hernia diaphragmatica, volvulus, intussus-
Typhlitis, colitis and proctitis
ception);
The proliferative infammation of the large intestine without
 luminal changes (for example intestinal diverticulum,
changes of the mucosal thickness may be classified as superficial,
rectal stricture);
diffuse or follicular; with changes of the mucosal thickness as
 circulatory disturbances (for example gastric edema,
hypertrophic or atrophic. The follicular inflammation may resemble
 infarction, protein losing enteropathy);
lymphoma, especially in biopsies.
 cellular pathology (for example enamel hypoplasia,
 Depending on the type and the severity of the gastroenteritis
dental caries, parakeratotic hyperkeratosis);
the mucosal barrier (mucus, epithelial and lymphoreticular
 inflammation; and
layers) may be altered functionally.
 neoplasia.
Neoplasia
 The most important lesions are associated with inflammatory
 The reoplasns in the alimentary tract can be classified according
 processes and neoplasia.
to their cells or tissues of origin, namely the squamous or glan-
dular epithelium, melanocytes, soft tissues, hemopoietic cells,
Inflammatory processes
salivary glands, odontogenic tissues, neuroendocrine cells
The inflammatory processes, which may cause superficial or deep
(carcinoid tumors) and mesothelium.
lesions, are found throughout the alimentary tract and are
Gastro-intestinal tumors may result in luminal occlusion
classified as catarrhal, purulent, phlegmonous, erosive, ulcerative,
fibrinous, necrotizing, proliferative and granulomatous.
plastic signs by secretion of (ectopic) polypeptide hormones.
The inflammation of the cutaneous mucous membranes may
 also result in papular and vesicular lesions.
Maidigestion, malabsorption and malsecretion
 ln addition, there are some special general characteristics
Morphological alterations of the alimentary tract may interfere
related to inflammation of the gastric, small and large intestinal
with the functions of:
mucosa.
 prehension, taste and mastication (oral cavity and pharynx);
Gastrifis
■transport and regurgitation (ruminants) of food
 In proliferative gastritis the thickness of the mucosa may be reduced
(esophagus);
fermentation (forestomachs);
of the gastic pits and/or glands. Proliferative gastritis without
motility, secretion and digestion (stomach);
changes in the mucosal thickness may be superficial, difuse or
■ motility, secretion, digestion and absorption (small
follicular. Follicular gastritis may erroneously suggest lymphoma.
intestine); and
In the fundic area of the stomach the differentiation of the
 motility, microbial fermentation (in strongly developed
mucinous neck ceils into parietal and chief cells can be changed
 intestinal compartments, as in large intestines of horses),
into mucinous cells; this process is called psevdopyloric metaplasia.
secretion and absorption (large intestine).
Enteritis
So, functionally these alterations result in maldigestion, mal-
With inflammation of the small intestine the mucosal thickness may  absorption and maisecretion. These basic functional disorders may
be reduced (atrophy) or increased (hypertrophy) due to changes be evidenced by the main clinical symptoms of regurgitation,
 The Alimentary Tract
75
6-1 Cleft palate (palatoschisis)
6-2 Polydontia
Head, view into the opened mouth. Inadequate
Supranumary incisor teeth (8 instead of 6 teeth), and double left and
growth of the palatine shetves resulting in
right first premolar (arrows) in the maxilla. Boxer. Dog.
communication between the oral and nasal
cavities. Kitten.
6-3 Enamel hypoplasia
6-4 Dental caries
Enamel defects in the permanent incisors and premolars, caused by
Caries media of the first ieft maxiltary molar, with destructive 
degenerative changes of the ameloblasts. Distemper. Dog.
decalcification of the enamel and the dentine, accompanied with a
brown-black discoioration of the centre of the tooth (arrow). Dog.
76
Chapter 6
6-5 Acute stomatitis
6-6 Necrobacillosis
Superficial epithelial defects of the oral mucosa (erosion) and deeper
Large, well-demarcated, yellowish-gray, dry areas of coagulation
lesions which extend into the substantia propria (ulceration), both with
necrosis in the tongue. The necrotic areas are locally separated from
acute inflammation in the underlying propria. Mucosal disease-Bovine
the surrounding viable tissue [sequestration). Fusobacterium
Virus Diarrhea (MD/BVD). Cow.
necrophorum. Calf.
6-7 Actinobacillosis
6-8 Actinobacillosis
Tongue, sagittal section. Small bulging white spots: actinobacillary
Tongue, cross section. Diffuse sclerosing
granulomas. Histologically characterized by a colony of bacteria
actinobacillosis [aiso called 'wooden tongue').
surrounded by dense cosinophilic material with clubs, and more
The tongue is enlarged, white, and firm as a
result of a severe proliferation of connective
(see Fig. 1-22). Artinobacillus lignieresil. Cow.
tissue which replaces the muscular tissue.
Actinobacillus fignieresii. Cow.
The Alimentary Tract
77
6-9 Fibrinous periodontitis
6-10 Fibromatous epulides
Hyperemia and fibrinous exudate on the surface of the gingival mucosa,
Muitiple benign tumorous masses on the gingival mucosa.
especially around the incisor teeth. Destruction of the periodontal
Histologically composed of periodontal ligament-type stroma and often
membrane. Cow.
cords of (odontogenic) epithelium, dentin, cementum and bone.
Frequently together with hyperplasia and proliferative inflamma tory
ameloblastoma, canine acanthomatous ameloblastoma (formerly:
acanthomatous epulis), other odontogenic tumors or melanomas, most
of them with local destructive growth. Brachycephalic dog.
6-11 Ameloblastoma
6-12Ameioblastoma
A firm nodule of soft tissue growing expansively, destroying a large
infiltrating and destructive, but non-metastasizing tumor. In a
portion of the normal mandibie at the site of the first right incisor
coliagenous stroma are irregular islands consisting of a centre with
tooth. Cow.
loosely connected, angular stellate cells, surrounded by a layer of 
cuboidal or columnar cells, which are similar to normal ameloblasts.
Cow. HE.
78
Chapter 6
6-13 Ranula
6-14 Megaesophagus
A cystic distention (arrow) of the sublingual salivary duct, or a salivary
The dilation, which involves the whole circumference of the esophagus,
is most obvious in the thoracic region. Erosive esophagitis caused for
tissue in the foor of the mouth. Dog.
example by food stagnation or regurgitation. Possibly congenital.
Young dog.
6-15 Esophageal obstruction
6-16 Stenosis of the esophagus
A foreign body (potato) in the distal esophagus causing coagulation
Local ulcerative esophagitis and cicatrization causing constriction of
 necrosis, demarcated by an acute inflammatory reaction. Dog.
the lumen. Leukoplakia at the proximal border of the ulceration,
Dilation of the proximal esophagus. Foal.
The Alimentary fract
79
6-17 Reflux esophagitis
6-18 Sarcosporidiosis
Linear erosive inflammation of the distal esophagus, more diffuse near
Excised portions of esophagus and trachea (below). Ovoid, white
the cardia, resulting from protracted vomiting and exposure to a
noduies, projecting from the adventitial surface of the esophagus. The
combination of gastric juice (hydrochloric acid and pepsinogen) and
cysts are located in the striated musculature. Sarcocystis gigantea (syn.
bile. Dog.
S. ovifelis). Sheep.
6-19 Esophageal papiflomatosis
6-20Esophageal papilloma
Multiple papillomas covering the whole esophageal mucosa, causing
The tumorous epithelium is continuous with the normai squamous
stenosis of the lumen. The virus induced papillomata are pedunculated
epithelium. Arborescent connective tissue cords are arising from the
 or sessile with a rough surface, giving a cauliffower appearance. Cow.
underlying mucosal stroma. Cow. Van Gieson.
08
Chapter 6
6-21 Parakeratotic hyperkeratosis
6-22 Chronic necrobacillary rumenitis
Rumen. Excessive thickness of the stratum corneum, which may be
Multiple necrotic fesions surrounded by scar tissue. Fusobacterium 
caused by an increased rate of production and/or a decreased
necrophorum. Cow.
 exfoliation. In addition, parakeratosis is present. Cow. HE.
6-23 Traumatic reticulitis
6-24 Fibroma
 A mucosal fold has been penetrated by a nail which has caused a
Forestomach. Multiple fibromata with a smooth surface consisting of a
 granulomatous inflammation without perforation of the reticulum
thin layer of squamous epithelium, in the area of the esophageal
wall. Cow.
 groove. As a result, disturbance of regurgitation may occur. Cow.
The Alimentary Tract
81
6-25 Gastric dilation/voivulus syndrome
6-26 Gastric edema
A ciockwise torsion of the stomach with passive congestion of the
Thickened mucosal folds, especially in the fundus and corpus, caused by
stomach wall. The spleen has rotated with the stomach, and had
severe edema of the mucosa and the submucosa. Often in combination
assumed a V configuration at its middle. Great Dane. Dog.
with proteir-fosing enteropathy. Dog.
6-27 Uremic gastropathy
6-28 Ostertagiosis
Diffuse redness of the mucosa caused by active hyperemia and
Abomasal mucosa. Proliferative abomasitis characterized by diffuse,
hemorrhages; in the lumen, free blood and mucus without ingesta.
irregular thickening of the mucosa caused by an infection with
 This pattern also resembles a hemorrhagic gastritis. Dog.
Ostertogia ostertagi. Cow.
82
Chapter 6
6-29 Familiar stomatocytosis hypertrophic gastritis syndrome
6-30 Hypertrophic gastritis
Irregular thickened mucosal folds, especialfy in the fundus and corpus.
Folding of the corpus mucosa caused by glandular hyperplasia and
caused by a proliferative inflammation. The macroscopic appearance.
folding of the muscularis mucosae and submucosa. Focal cyst
reminiscent of the gyri and sutci of the brain, resembles that of 
formation. Drentse patrijshond. Dog. HE.
Menetrier's disease in man. Specific for the Drentse patrijshond. Dog.
6-31 Atrophic gastritis
6-32 Follicular gastritis
 Decrease of the mucosal thickness. Loss of fundic glands with
White spots in the mucosa caused by an increased number and size of
 pseudopyloric metaplasia (left) and diffuse round cell infiltration.
lymphoid follicles. Such a picture can also occur in fymphoma. Dog.
Dog. HE.
The Alimentary Tract
6-33 Gastrikc crosion
6-34 Gastric ulceration
Multiple erosions in pylorus. Such defects are recognized as significant
Large ulcer on the greater curvature of the abomasum, with damage of
complications of many diseases and of drug therapy. nonsteroidal
two blood vessels (arrows), which resulted in fatal hemorrhage. Cow.
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) being one of the most common
causes. Cat.
6-35 Gastric carcinoma
6-36 Small intestinal membrane atresia
Circufar stenosing scirrhous carcinoma with deep ulceration at the
Jejunum (opened). Focal obstruction formed by a membrane (arrow)
transitional zone between the corpus and antrum (predilection 
with dilation of the intestinal umen proximal to the occlusion site. The
area). Dog.
membrane consists of connective tissue covered bilaterally by a
mucosal layer. Two other types of intestinal atresia are cord and blind-
end atresia. Calf.
84
Chapter 6
6-37 Atresia ani
6-38 Intestinal diverticulum
 Persistence of the anal membrane, resulting in bulging of the perineal
An outpouching of the coionic lumen; such a diverticulum may be
region. Rectovaginal fistula. Swollen belly, Siamese kitten, 12 days.
congenital or acq uired. Cow.
6-39 Rectal stricture
6-40 Hernia diaphragmatica
A long severe stricture, about 10 cm proximal to the anus, with dilation 
 Acquired rupture of the diaphragm. Displacement of omentum and
and ulceration of the proximal rectum; there is a sharp border between 
 small intestine into the pleural cavity. Cat.
the dilated rectum and the colon, which is also dilated and has a ribbon
 patternm caused by circular muscle hypertrophy. Often occurring after
rectal proiapse. Pig.
The Alirmentary Tract
85
6-41 Volvulus
6~42 Intussusception
360* clockwise rotation of the small and large intestines. Intestinal
Small intestinal intussusception, producing a three-layered tube.
dilation. Passive congestion of the intestinal wall. Pig.
Passive congestion and edematous sweling of the intussuscepted
intestinal seg ment. German shepherd dog.
6-43 Infarction
6-44 Protein-losing enteropathy
Clearly defined area of ischemic coagulation necrosis in the
Ectasia of a fymphatic lacteal in a jejunal villus. Dog. HE.
jejunum. Foel.
86
Chapter 6
 6-45 Acute catarrhal enteritis
6-46 Villous atrophy
Small intestine. Hyperemia and swelling of the mucosa with an 
Duodenum, stereomicroscopic view. Broad leaf- and tongue-shaped
increased amount of mucus overlying a Peyer's patch as can be
villi. Calf.
found in Bovine Virus Diarrhoea-Mucosal Disease (BVD/MD]. Cow.
6-47 Hyperregenerative villous atrophy
6-48 Hemorrhagic enteritis
Duodenum. Short vili with elongated crypts; in addition, increased
Jejunum. Severe redness of the mucosa (below) as a result of active
number of goblet celhs and a slightly increased celluiar infltration of
hyperemia and hemorrhage. Free blood in the fumen. Irregular serosal
the lamina propria (top). Control (bottom). Dog, 8 years. HE.
surface (upper), which also is hyperemia. Parvovirus infection.
Young dog.
The Alimentary Tract
87
6-49 Hyporegenerative villous atrophy
6-50 Acute fibrinous enteritis
Jejunum. Rermnants of villi and damaged crypts with alteration of crypt
Jejunum. Redness caused by active hyperemia. A yellowish fibrin cast
cells. Syncytial giant cells [arrows), superficial necrosis, slight active
on the mucosai surface. Parvovirus infection (panieukopenia). Cat.
hyperemia and increased number of mononuclear cells and
neutrophils. At the left a less altered crypt is visible. Parvovirus
infection. Dog. HE.
6-51 Fibrinous-necrotizing enteritis
6~52 Fibrinous-necrotizing enteritis
Hleum. lrregular serosal surface reminiscent of the gyri and sulci of the
Colon, lrregular areas of enteritis, sometirmes covered by fbrin (black
brain leftj. A diffuse thick layer of fibrin and coagulation necrosis is
arrow), sometimes with hyperemic defects (white arrow) surrounded by
adherent to the mucosa (diphtheritic membrane, right). Salmonellosis.
a black rim of pseudomelanosis (so-called 'map design'). Pig.
Similar changes can be caused by Lowsonia intracefularis. Pig.
88
Chapter 6
6-53 Erosive enteritis
6-54 Proliferative enteritis
Jejunum, mucosal surface. Extensive erosive enteritis (red) with pale
Jejunum. Severe circular folding caused by mucosai thickening.
islands of remaining mucosa, Dog.
Paratuberculosis (Mycobacterium avium subspecies porotubercufosis).
Cow.
6-55 Proliferative enteritis
6-56 Canine histiocytic ulcerative colitis (CHUC)
Jejunum. Thickening of the mucosa caused by an accumulation of small
Colon. Irregularly thickened wali caused by a proliferative enteritis:
lymphocytes, large epitheloid cells and multinucleated Langhans-type 
extensive ulceration with focal remnants of mucosa (white areas).
giant cells (arrow). Granulomatous inflammation, predominantly in the
Boxer dog.
villi. Paratuberculosis (Mycobacterium avium subspecies
parotubercufosis).Cow.HE.
The Alimentary Tract
89
6-57 Canine histiocytic ulcerative colitis (CHUC)
6-58 Atrophic colitis
Thickening of the mucosa by granuiomatous infammation
Coton, forceps biopsy. Proliferative inflammation characterized by
characterized by lymphocytes, plasma cells and PAS-positive
round cell infitration. Reduced mucosatl thickness. Decreased number
histiocytes. The histiocytes are mainly located at the basal layer of the
of crypts of Lieberkihn. Dog. HE.
lamina propria. Boxer. Dog. PAS.
6-59 Tuberculosis
6-60 Tuberculosis
Jejunum. Multiple ulcers with distinct raised edges. Mycobocterium
Jejunum. Granulomatous inflammation characterized by confluent
bovis. Cow.
caseous tubercles localized in the submucosa. Ulceration in the center
of the lesion. Mycobacterium bovis. Cow. HE.
06
Chapter 6
6-61 Coccidiosis
6-62 Cyathostominosis (Redworm Infestation)
Intestine. Small white foci in the jejunum projecting into the opened
Colon, mucosal surface. Grayish foci, ca.1 mm, due to reaction to the
Iumen (iower left), also visible through the serosa. Eimerio orloingi.
visible fourth stage larvae, or brown-black spots, ca. 0.1 mm, due to
Goat.
hemorrhage ('pepper and salt design'). Horse.
6-63 Leiomyoma
6-64 Anal sac carcinoma
Duodenum. Neoplastic proliferation of smooth muscle cells at the site
A carcinoid tumor originating from apocrine giands of the anal sac
of the circular muscle [X). Central calcification. Expansive growth
[arrow). This tumor can produce and release parathormone-related
pattern. Gastrointestinal leiomyomas may induce a paraneoplastic
peptide (PTHrP) resulting in bone resorption
Syndrome characterized by hypoglycemia, as a result of synthesis and
(pseudohyperparathyroidism). Dog.
release of an insulin-like growth factor l-ike peptide. Dog.HE.
Chaptei
The pancreas (exocrine)
7-1  Ectopic splenic tissue  92
7-5  Hemorrhagic pancreatitis  93
7-2 Calculi 92
7-6  Hemorrhagic-necrotizing pancreatitis  93
7-3  Pancreatic atrophy 92
7-7  Chronic atrophic pancreatitis  93
7-4 Pancreatic necrosis 92
 7-8  Chronic atrophic pancreatitis  93
THE PANCREAS (EXOCRINE)
Acute hemorrhagic and hemorrhagic-necrotizing pancreatitis
Acute henorrhagic and hemorrhagic-necrotizing pancreatitis, though
The most common lesions occurring in the pancreas include:
infrequent, often are fatal lesions; they may be induced by
 congenital anomalies (for example hypoplasia and ecto-
 pic splenic tissue in the pancreas);
mechanical trauma (sometimes even after surgical maripulation)
regressive changes (for example atrophy, calculi and
 but pancreatic proteolytic enzymes may also be released other-
■1
necrosis);
wise, for instance by an impaired microcirculation during shock.
hyperplasia;
inflammation; and
Chronic pancreatitis
neoplasia.
Chronic pancreatitis is rather common and may be hy pertrophic
or atrophic. Sometimes, it is due to an ascending inflammation of
lipomatosis with loss of acinar tissue and replacement by fat f
the ducts, caused by a bacterial infection or a parasitic infestation
cells is seen in old dogs. Most congenital anomalies have only  (ascariasis!) in the smallintestine.
limited or no clinical significance.
Neoplasia
Hyperplasia
Neoplasms of the exocrine pancreas are rare, although carcinomas
Nodular hyperplasia of exocrine pancreatic tissue is a common
do occur.
finding in old animals.
Inflammation
Functionally, very important lesions of the exocrine pancreas are
acute and chronic inflammations.
91
92
Chapter 7
7-1 Ectopic splenic tissue 
7-2 Calculi
Hard white stones of variable size in the dilated pancreatic duct.
composed of splenic tissue with normal red and white pulpa. Pig.
Composed of mineral salts (carbonates and phosphates of calcium). Cow.
7-3 Pancreatic atrophy
7-4 Pancreatic necrosis
Flattened remnants of pancreatic tissue (in mesentery of duodenum)
Cut surface of pancreas. Multiple discrete yellowish-white, du!l-
with obvious pancreatic ducts (arrow). Overfiling of the small
 surfaced spots of coagulation necrosis. Pig.
intestine caused by exocrine pancreatic dysfunction. Pancreatic atrophy
can be induced by malnutrition or cachexia or may result from
postinflammatory fibrosis and/or obstruction of the ducts. It is frequently
reported in dogs six months to one year of age. German shepherd dog.
The Pancreas [Exocrine]
93
 7-5 Hemorrhagic pancreatitis
7-6 Hemorrhagic-necrotizing pancreatitis
Local swelling, redness and edema. Dog.
Pancreatic tissue with extensive hemorrhage, infitration of
granulocytes and focal necrosis. Dog. HE.
7-7 Chronic atrophic pancreatitis
7-8 Chronic atrophic pancreatitis
 The entire pancreas is reduced in size, irregular, pinkish-white and 
Corpus pancreatis and duodenum. Chronic inflammation. Loss of
firm. Dog.
 pancreatic tissue, as well as hyperplasia of acini. Dog. HE.
Chapt
The peritoneum
8-1  Hemorrhagic colitis   96
8-5 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) 97
8-2  Acute serofibrinous peritonitis   96
8-6 Tuberculosis 97
8-3 Yellow fat disease 96
8-7 Cysticercosis 97
8-4 Steatitis 96
8-8 Mesothelioma 97
THE PERITONEUM
Inflammation
The peritoneum consists of a flat mesothelial layer and the Peritonitis is very common, and may be differentiated into sero-
underlying connective tissue.
n    o s
Its main lesions are:
ized or more generalized. Peritonitis is often caused by bacteria
  abnormal abdominal content;
(Hacmophiluus suis, E. coli, Mycobncteriu thiberculosis, etc.), some-
  inflammation; and
times by parasites (Fasciola hepatica, Echinococcus, etc.) or viruses
■neoplasia.
(feline infectious peritonitis, etc.). Peritonitis can also have a
toxic/chemical cause by leakage of pancreatic enzymes or bile.
Abnormal abdominal content
Focal or massive necrosis of omental or retroperitoneal fat can
Occur, mainly in male cattle. A generalized steatitis, known as
In the abdominal cavity abnormal contents are frequently found.
00n pue 3 sisoueaoday Aq pasnes aq ueo 'asusip uf moai
Most often these are ascites, blood or inflammatory exudate, but 
much unsaturated fatty acids in the diet.
also foreign bodies, gastrointestinal contents, urine and bile are
sometimes encountered.
Neoplasia
Ascites
Primary neoplasns of the peritoneum are mesothelioma and,
 especially in horses, lipoma in the mesenteries.
Ascites, the accumulation of noninflammatory transudate in the
Secondary neoplasms, like melanoma or squamous cell
 peritoneal cavity, due to diminished removal or overproduction
of fluid, can occur under different conditions. Liver changes are
 carcinoma of the esophageal part of the stomach in horses, are
 important causes, next to systemic illnesses with lowered albu-
well-known, just as implantations from ovarian tumors.
min levels (lowered osmotic pressure).
Hemorrhages
Henoperitoneum is mostly caused by traumatic injury of the
spleen or liver but may result from spontaneous rupture of a
tumor, most often a hemangiosarcoma.
95
96
Chapter 8
8-1 Hemorrhagic colitis
8-2 Acute serofibrinous peritonitis
 Colon. Redness of the serosa of the spiral labyrinth caused by petechial,
Distended abdomen. Inflammatory hyperemia. Yellow-white fibrinous
ccchymotic and diffuse hemorrhages; a few fibrinous threads are visible
exudate as a solid rubbery plaque on the peritoneum, with a yellow
on the serosa. Swine fever. Pig.
serous exudate. The brown staining of the left hind limb is caused by
intramuscular iron injection. Bacterial infection. Pigiet.
8-3 Yellow fat disease
8-4 Steatitis
 Diffuse steatitis of thoracic and abdominai adipose tissues. Yellow color
Multiple white foci in the abdominal adipose tissue representing focal
 because of accumulation of ceroid-lipofuscin. Vitamin E deficiency.
necrosis. In most cases caused by pancreatic damage. Dog.
Horse.
The Peritoneum
97
8-5 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
8-6 Tuberculosis
Smalt intestine and mesentery. Focal depositions of gray fibrinous 
Abdominal wall, cross-section. Conglomerate of grayish translucent
 exudate on the peritoneal surface. In the underlying subserosal tissue.
nodules surrounded by connective tissue, adjacent to the peritoneal
 necrosis and a pyogranulomatous inflammation is present. Corona
surface. Central caseation necrosis (yellow) with dystrophic
virus. Cat.
calcification (white). Mycobocterium bovis. Cow.
8-7 Cysticercosis
8-8 Mesothelioma
Omentum. Many mature, transparent cysticerci cysts. In some of them
Parietal peritoneum. Muitiple, variable-sized, smooth-surfaced nodules.
a scolex (white spot) is visible. Cysticercus tenuicollis. Sheep.
No caseous necrosis. Remarkable resemblance to the pearly granulomas
of bovine peritoneal tuberculosis. Cow.
Chapt
The endocrine glands
9-1   Atrophy of thyroid epithelium  101
 9-12 Adrenal nodular hyperplasia 103
9-2  Parenchymatous goitre (microfollicuiar hyperplasia)  101
 9-13 Adrenocortical hyperplasia 104
9-3  Parenchymatous goitre (microfolicular hyperplasia)  101
9-14 Suppurative hypophysitis 104
9-4  Colloid goitre (macrofollicular hyperplasia)  101
 9-15 Diffuse basophilic cellular hypertrophy and
9-5  Lymphocytic thyroiditis  102
hyperplasia 104
9-6 Multinodular 'adenomatous' hyperplasia 102
9-16 Pituitary tumor 104
9-7  Diffuse parathyroid hyperplasia 102
9-17   Basophilic pituitary tumor  105
9-8  Diffuse parathyroid hyperplasia  102
9-18Vacuolar change in islet of Langerhans 105
 9-9  Functional adrenocorticat carcinoma   103
9-19 Pancreatic tumor of DNES cells (gastrinoma)  105
9-10 Adrenocortical atrophy 103
 9-20 Tumor of DNES cels (medullary thyroid carcinoma,
9-11 Adrenalitis 103
parafollicular cell or C-cell carcinomal 105
THE ENDOCRINE GLANDS
Hypertrophy and hyperplasia
The endocrine glands include the pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid,
 Diffuse hypertrophy and hyperplasia of thyroid or adrenals are
adrenal glands and the Diffuse NeuroEndocrine System (DNES).
associated with raised levels of TSH or ACTH and physiolo-
 The hypothalamic-pituitary-endocrine gland axes offer impor- g
 gically, they are signs of adaptation. Such a gland may be hypo-
pasii o jeou e inq juauaienu sh jo ads un jeuum [euape piin au jo suoisl Au puisiapun o sanio pu
 cortex and gonads. Lesions of the endocrine glands include:
function is also possible.
 atrophy and degeneration;
Uptake of goitrogens or iodine deficiency may cause micra-
 hypertrophy and hyperplasia;
follicular hyperpiasia in thyroids. Inborn errors affecting the syn-
  inflammation; and
thesis of hormones are rare but well-known causes for diffuse
neoplasia.
hyperplasia of thyroids and adrenal cortex. Absence of a negative
feedback to the pituitary (as in congenital hypothyroidism and
Atrophy and degeneration
adrenogenital syndrome or after castration) may induce a diffuse
Atrophy of thyroid or adrenals is, in most cases, due to lowered
 hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the involved type of pituitary
levels of the pituitary trophic hormones TSH or ACTH. This in
 cells.
tum may result from loss of functional pituitary tissue or sup-
 Hyperplasia of parathyroids often indicates a raised level of
 pression of pituitary function by iatrogenic administration of
a asd aq  h inq 'ennoday w ssan  H
thyroid hormone or corticosteroids.
when hypocalcemia is not (or no longer?) present. High levels
 In the parathyroids atrophy results from raised blood levels of
Aaa pe rr an   a ro
calcium.
hyperplasia of calcitonin-secreting parafollicular cells (C-cells).
 Pancreatic insular insufficiency with diabetes mellitus can be
due to hypoplasia as well as aplasia of the islets of Langerhans,
necrosis of the islets (as part of an acute pancreatitis), insular
infiammotion
amyloidosis, and destruction by tumor growth. Vacuolar
 Inflammation is not a frequent finding in endocrine glands.
degeneration of insular β-cells and even of epithelial cells of Inflanmatory destruction of an endocrine gland (pituitary, thyroid,
small exocrine pancreatic ducts is often seen in diabetic animals:
 adrenals) with loss of function is mostly due to infiltration by
and is thought to be a consequence, not a cause, of diabetes
lymphocytes and macrophages caused by an (auto)immune
mellitus.
 disorder. Grossly, this may result in severe atrophy.
 Degenerative lesions are not frequent findings in endocrine
Local or systemic infections, such as tuberculosis, may rarely
glands.
 cause destruction and hypofunction of endocrine glands.
66
100Chapter9
Neopiasia
Hyperthyroidism in animals is almost always due to secreting
 neoplastic (or at least nodular hyperplastic) lesions in the thyroicd.
Neoplasms of endocrine glands can be an uncontrolled source of
 Sometimes, the cells in endocrine neoplasms have lost their ability
hormone, resulting in secondary diseases, such as:
to synthesize and secrete hormones; if such a neoplasm destroys
 ACTH producing pituitary tumors with Cushing's disease;
the non-neoplashic part of the endocrine gland by infiltration or
corticosteroid producing adrenocortical tumors with Cush-
pressure the final outcome may be a hypofunction of that gland.
ing's syndrome;
$ T, and T, producing thyroid tumors with hyperthyroidism;
and
 DNES derived tumors, such as calcitonin secreting medul-
lary thyroid carcinoma with hypocalcemia; pancreatic
hypersecretion, etc.
The Endocrine Glands
101
9-1 Atrophy of thyroid epithelium
 9-2 Parenchymatous goitre (microfollicular hyperplasia)
Thyroid. Distended follicles, flat epithelial cells. Absence of resorption
Thyroid. Symmetrical entargement due to diffuse microfoilicular
vacuoles of the colloid at the border with the epithelium: absence of
hyperplasia, based on hereditary congenital dyshormonogenesis. Small
TSH stimulation. Hypophysectomy because of pituitary tumor with
goat (cretin) with sporadic non-toxic goitre due to inability to
Cushing's disease. Dog. HE.
synthesize normal thyroglobulin and resulting in hypothyroidism. Goat.
9-3 Parenchymatous goitre (microfollicular hyperplasia)
9-4 Colloid goitre (macrofollicular hyperplasia)
Thyroid. Hyperplastic stage of goitre. Columnar follicular cells, and
Thyroid. Symmetricai enlargement with severely distended folicles
small, even slit-ike follicles with scanty colloid and papillary
(cysts). In contrast to microfollicular hyperplasia, most epithelial cells
proliferation. Sporadic non-toxic goitre due to dyshormonogenesis 
are flattened, the septa become atrophic and may disappear. Locally,.
(defective thyroglobulin synthesis] resulting in hypothyroidism.
papillary proliferations occur and hypertrophic cells may still remain.
Goat. HE.
 goitre due to unidentified type of dyshormonogenesis. Sheep.
102
Chapter 9
9-5 Lymphocytic thyroiditis
g-6 Multinodular 'adenomatous' hyperplasia
Thyroid. Diffuse infitration of tymphocytes, plasma cells and
Thyroid, surface (top) and cut surface (bottom]. Entargement due to
macrophages between the follicles with invasion and destruction of the
multiple hyperplastic nodules. Autonomous hyperthyroidism. Cat.
epithelium. Hyperactive normal follicle (upper left) with numerous
Formalin fixation.
resorption vacuoles. Relative increase of intact pre-existing calcitonin-
producing cels (arrows). Primary, possibly autoirmmune,
hypothyroidism. Dog. PAS stain.
9-7 Diffuse parathyroid hyperplasia
9-8 Diffuse parathyroid hyperplasia
Parathyroid glands attached to craniat pote of rormal-sized thyroids.
 Parathyroid gland. Hyperplastic and slightly hypertrophic epithelial cells
Bilatera! diffuse enlargement of parathyroids (long axis at least 2 ×
forming sheets or cords, often arranged along blood vessels in a 
normal length). Secondary renal hyperparathyroidism. Dog.
palisading fashion, with the apical cytoplasm directed towards the
vessel (pseudoglandular appearance). Secondary renal
hyperparathyroidism. Dog. HE.
The Endocrine Glands
103
9-9 Functional adrenocortical carcinoma
9-10 Adrenocortical atrophy
Adrenal giands, cut surface. Large yellow tumor of adrenai cortex [left).
Adrenal cortex. Narrowed cortex composed of intact zona arcuata (A)
Cortical atrophy in non-tumorcus part (arrow) and in contralateral
and distinctly atrophic zona fasciculata (F). The zona reticularis (R) is
non-tumorous adrenat gland (right), indicating depressed ACTH 
mainly made up of fatty remnants of disintegrated cortical cells.
stimulation due to hormonalfy functional tumor. Cushing's syndrome.
Unaffected medutla (M). latrogenic chronic secondary hypoadrenatism
Dog.
after longstanding giucocorticcid administration and suppression of
ACTH-output. Similar morphology can be seen after therapeutic o.p.-
DDD administration or in presence of functional tumor in opposite
adirenal (see Fig. 9-9). A higher dose of o.p.-DDD also involves the zona
 arcuata, and willresult in iatrogenic Addison's disease. Dog. HE.
9-11 Adrenalitis
9-12 Adrenaf nodular hyperplasia
Adrenal cortex. Round cell infiltrate (mainly lymphocytic) in adrenal
Adrenal glands, surface (left), cut surface (right and middle). Yellow
cortex [zona arcuata and fascicuiata) with destruction of cortical
sphericai noduies in and upon the capsuie, in cortex and medulla, the
tissue. Possibly due to autoimmunity. Leads to idiopathic atrophy and
latter two showing normal thickness. Histologically, they consist of 
Addison's disease (chronic primary hypcadrenalism). Dog. HE.
tissue as in zona arcuata and/or fasciculata. Common, incidental
finding in oider animals. Dog, 7 years.
104
Chapter 9
 9-13 Adrenocortical hyperplasia
9-14 Suppurative hypophysitis
Adrenal glands, cut surface (formalin fixed). Bilateral diffuse
Head, median section. Abscess {arrow] below the cranial cavity in the
enlargement of cortex due to hyperplasia of zona fasciculata and
sella turcica and covered by the diaphragma sellae. Remnants of the
reticularis. Hyperplastic nodule in medulla (upper right). Caused by
pituitary in centre of abscess. Cow.
increased ACTH-activity, possibly due to tumor of ACTH-producing
cells, or congenitai cortisol deficiency. Hypercortisolism (Cushing's
syndrome). Dog, B year5.
9-15 Diffuse basophilic cellular hypertrophy and hyperplasia
9-16 Pituitary tumor
Pituitar gland, anteriorlobe.Diffusehypertrophyand hyperplasiaof
Brain. Large, red, tumorous mass (arrows). just behind the optic chiasm.
basophilic (TSH-secreting) cells. Decreased basophilia is probably due to
Histologically, proliferation of basophilic cels. Cushing's syndrome;
rapid secretion of granular content, The same morphology is seen after
clinical signs related to increased intracranial pressure. Dog.
castration, or after stimulation of ACTH-secreting cells. Lower left:
normal acidophilic cells. Congenital hypothyroidism due to unidentified
type of dyshormonogenesis (see Fig. 9-4). Sheep. HE.
The Endocrine Glands
105
 9-17 Basophilic pituitary tumor
9-18 Vacuolar change in islet of Langerhans
Pituitary gland. Tumor composed of basophilic cels. Many sinusoidal
Islet of Langerhans surrounded by exocrine pancreas. Large vacuoles
blood vessels. A few pre-existing acidophilic cells (arrow). Cushing's
containing glycogen and water, often found in β-cells (insulin-
syndrome. Dog.HE.
secreting cells) of patients with diabetes melitus. Significance in
 pathogenesis of diabetes melitus unclear. Diabetes mellitus. Dog. HE.
9-19 Pancreatic tumor of DNES celis (gastrinoma)
9-20 Tumor of DNES cells (medullary thyroid carcinoma, parafollicular
Pancreas. Tumor cells (gastrin-secreting cells) in sheets, and arranged
cell or C-cell carcinoma)
along smalt biood vessels; cytoplasm directed to the vessel for secretion
Thyroid. Solid mass of calcitonin-secreting, large cells with large pale
of hormone. Non-tumorous area of pancreatic acini (right). Same
nuclei and pale granular acidophilic cytoplasm. Mostly found in dogs
morphology in insulinoma. Gastrin hypersecretion, resulting in gastric
and aged bulls. Hypocalcemia. Dog. HE.
acid hypersecretion (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome). Dog. HE.
Chap
he genital
tem
10-1  True hermaphrodite (hermaphroditismus
10-22 Amniotic plaques 114
ambigionduioris)  109
10-23 Amniotic plaque 114
10-2 Ovarian cysts 109
10-24  Allantochorionic calciffcation  114
10-3 Granulosa cell tumor
109
10-25 Edema of the fetal membranes 115
10-4 Teratoma 109
10-26 Acute fibrino-necrotizing placentitis 115
10-5 Uterine apiasia110
10-27 Fetal mummification 115
10-6  Adenomyosis (uterine endometriosis)   110
10-28 Fetal maceration 115
10-7 Double cervix 110
10-29  Fibrino-necrotizing vaginitis  116
10-8 Uterine torsion  110
 10-30 Granular vaginitis (follicular vaginitis)
116
10-9  Cystic Endometrial Hyperplasia (CEH)-pyometra
10-31  Testicular degeneration   116
complex 111
10-32 Abdominal cryptorchidism 116
10-10
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH)  11
10-33  Torsion of the spermatic cord  117
10-11
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH)  111
10-34 Fibro testis
117
10-12
 Cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH)-pyormetra 
10-35
 Leydig cell tumor (interstitial cell tumor of the
complex 111
testis)
117
10-13
 Cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH)-pyometra
10-36
Leydig cell tumor (interstitial cell tumor of the
compiex 112
testis)
117
10-14
 Acute fibrino-necrotizing endometritis  112
10-37
Seminoma 1
118
10-15
Uterine carcinoma
112
10-38
 Sertoli cell tumor  118
10-16  Allantochorionic invagination 
112
10-39 Prostatic squamous metaplasia  118
10-17
 Avillous areas on the chorion 113
10-40 Prostatic hyperplasia
118
10-18 Endometrial cups 113
10-41 Prostatic hyperplasia and hyperrophy 119
10-19  Adventitial placentation (semiplacenta diffusa)
113
10-42 Prostatic adenocarcinoma, alveolar papilary
10-20
 Adventitial placentation (semiplacenta diffusa)
113
type 119
 10-21  Amniotic squamous metaplasia with
10-43  Ulcers in preputial diverticulum  119
cornification 114
10-44  Fibropapilloma on the glans penis  119
THE GENITAL SYSTEM
Ovarian cysts
 The genital system comprises female genital organs, including
 Ouarian cysts most frequently originate from Graafian follicles.
the placenta; and the male genital organs.
The most common lesions in the genital system include:
Displacement
 congenital abnormalities;
Displacement of the genital organs can affect the uterus (c.g.
■ovarian cysts;
torsion), placenta (e.g. chorionic invagination) or testicle (e.g.
displacement;
abdominal cryptorchidism or torsion of the spermatic cord).
 inflammation; and
Hypertrophy hyperplasia and metaplasia
 neoplasia.
Hypertropiny and hyperplasia as spontanneous disorders frequently
occur in the canine endometrium (cystic endonetrial hyperplasia,
Congenital abnormalities
CEH) and prostate gland. These lesions mostly result from
Congenital abnormalities can be found at all levels, from the gonads
 disturbances in the levcls of sex steroids. In farm animals these
 to the vagina or prepuce, including the accessory glands. Absence
abnormal proliferations, often with metaplasia to (cornifying)
or hypoplasia and defective diferentiation in male or female
 squamous epithelium in the glands of Bartholin and the prostate
dircchion can often be cxplained by disturbances in embryological 
 gland, are mostly caused by (illegal) use of growth promoting.
or fetal development and hormonal or chromosomal aberrations.
steroids.
107
108
Chapter 10
Squamous metaplasia also occurs in the placenta (amniotic
 In the mare endometrial cups may mimic ulcers.
plaque).
In males, nonspecific infections by a variety of organisms
cause inflanmation of penis and prepuce (halanoposthitis). In dogs
Inflammation
prostatitis is not uncommon, often together with hyperplastic
lesions.
 Inflammation is mostly caused by ascending infections after
parturition or mating or by hematogenous infections.
Neoplasia
In females, mostly the uterus is involved (endometritis, metritis).
 [During pregnancy also the cotyledon/caruncle complexes and the
 In females neoplasms most often occur in the ovary (mainly
nd s xs sas s m n-sonu und e jo saug pa oq  sq jea
uterus often results in fetal death and abortion. Severity may range uterus (mainly carcinoma and leiomyoma), vagina (fibroma), and
from a  serous inflammation to  a fibrinous-necrotizing one,  vulva (squamous cell carcinoma).
sometimes with accumulation of much suppurative exudate
 In males neoplasms are mainly found in the testis (seminoma,
(pyometra) in the uterine cavity. In dogs a pyometra is often  Leydig cell tumor, Sertoli cell tumor), prostate gland (carcinoma)
associated with cystic endometrial hyperplasia, Chronic endo-
 and penis (squamous cell carcinoma). Sertoli cell tumors may
metritis often is the cause of reduced fertility
secrete enough estrogens to induce feminization.
The Genital System
109
10-1 True hermaphrodite (hermophroditismus ambiglandularis)
10-2 Ovarian cysts
Gonadal tissue of both sexes, Testis on the right, ovary on the left side.
Multiple cysts, varying in size up to about 14 cm. They can be cystic
The uterus is partialy opened to show a fetus. This is an exceptiona!
Graafian follicles or cystic corpora lutea. Sow.
case; true hermaphrodites are mostly sterile. Pig.
10-3 Granulosa cell tumor
10-4 Teratoma
Ovary. Large (13 kg) tumor with many ffuid-filled cysts and
Ovary, cut surface. Solid areas, as well as cystic parts containing hair. A
hemorrhages. Granulosa cefl tumors in mares and cows are frequently
wide variety of tissues is often present. Dog. 10 years.
large and polycystic, can produce sex steroids leading to stallion-like
behaviour or nymphomania, but seldom metastasize. Horse.
110
Chapter 10
10-5 Uterine apiasia
10-6 Adenomyosis (uterine endometriosis)
Aplasia of the right uterine horn. The right uterine ligament (with fatty
Uterus. Endometrial glands and stroma in the myometrium. This may be 
tissue) and the right ovary (arrow) are present. Dog.
a congenital anomaly, or due to hyperplastic overgrowth of the
endometrium. Sow. HE.
10-7 Double cervix
10-8 Uterine torsion
Persistence of the medial walls of those parts of the Mullerian ducts 
Torsion of the pregnant right horn. The fixed points are the mesovarium
which develop into the cervix. Depending on the degree of persistence.
and the border between uterine horn and body, resulting in passive 
an incomplete or complete double cervix occurs. Cow.
congestion. Cat.
The Genital System
111
10-9 Cystic Endometrial Hyperplasia (CEH)-pyometra complex
10-10 Cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH)
 Uterus. Extremely distended uterine horns, containing large quantities
Slightly enlarged uterus. Solid hyperplastic nodules in the endometrium
of exudate. This disease is frequently referred to as pyometra, but the 
as well as endometrial cysts up to approximately 5 mm in diameter,
inflammatory reaction is superimposed on the CEH. In the bitch,
Dog.
excessive progesterone stimulation probably plays an important role in
the pathogenesis of CEH. Dog.
10-11 Cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH)
10-12 Cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH)-pyometra complex
Cystic endometrial glands. Some have papilliferous growth. Dog. HE.
CEH with superimposed exudative and proliferative inflammatory
reaction. Distended endometrial glands with tall epithelial celis and
exudative as well as proliferative irflammatory cells in the endometrial
stroma. Cells in the lumina of the glands are predominantly neutrophils.
Dog. HE.
112
Chapter 10
10-13 Cystic endometrial hyperplasia [CEH)-pyometra compiex
10-14 Acute fibrino-necrotizing endometritis
CEH with superimposed inflammatory reaction. Distended endometrial 
Postpartum uterus. Coagulation necrosis of the superficial part of the
gland having papillary growth. There are tall epithelial cells with foamy
cndometrium. Redness and extensive edema below the necrotic layer.
(fatty) cytoplasm suggesting progestin induced changes. Many plasma
Sow,
cells in the endometrial stroma. Dog. HE.
10-15 Uterine carcinoma
10-16 Allantochorionic invagination
Multiple carcinomas, varying in size. Histologically the tumor is an
Part of the allantochorion of one fetus (left side) invaginated into the
adenocarcinoma. Numerous metastases in the lungs (left). The
 aliantochorion of the other fetus. Absence of villi on the invaginated 
incidence of endometrial carcinomas in rabbits is very high, especially
parts. Inflammation of the allantochorion on the left side. Mare.
in those over 4 years of age that have never mated. Rabbit, 5 years.
The Genital System
113
10-17 Avilous areas on the chorion
10-18 Endometrial cups
Allantochorion, chorionic side. The cccurrence of avillous areas opposite
Uterus, mucosal surface (left). Prominent oval structures, with distinct
the endometrial cups (see Fig. 10-18) is normal. Equine fetus.
equine chorionic gonadotrophin (eCG)-producing celis of embryonic
origin between the endometrial glands. eCG is secreted into the blood
(also known as Pregnant Mare Serum Gonadotrophin, PMSG). The
development of the cups starts at approximately the 35th day, and they
have disappeared at about the 12oth day of pregnancy. Mare.
10-19 Adventitial placentation (semipiocenta diffuso)
10-20 Adventitial placentation (semiplacento diffusa)
Uterus. Development of accessory caruncles. The adventitia!
Placenta fetalis. Intercotyledonary placentation. Development of
placentation probably represents a compensatory mechanism for an 
accessory cotyledons opposite accessory caruncles [see Fig. 10-19)
inadequate number of placentomes (see also Fig. 10-20). Cow.
between normal cotyledons [arrows). The red color, obvious on the left,
is caused by acute inflarmmation. Cow.
114
Chapter 10
10-21 Amniotic squamous metapiasia with cornification
10-22 Amniotic plaques
 Amniotic side of the allanto-amnion. White to yellow elevated spots
Amniotic side of the allanto-amnion. White to yellow plaques,
varying in size to several centimeters. These lesions possibly represent
approximately 2 to 10 mm in diameter. The plaques become smaller
the persistence of the amniotic plaques (see Figs. 10-22 and 10-23).
towards the end of pregnancy, and at birth most have disappeared.
Term pregnancy. Cow.
Amniotic plaques are normal. 7 months pregnancy. Cow.
 10-23 Amniotic plaque
10-24 Allantochorionic calcification
Many layers of cells that are characterized by distinct cell borders and
Multiple white spots due to calcium deposition. The deposits are mainly
small dark nuclei, mostly lying in the center of the cells. The pale 
 on the allantoic side and involve large parts of the allantochorionic
cytoplasm contains glycogen. Pregnancy, 7 months. HE. Cow.
membranes. The presence of small amounts of calcium deposits is
normal in many species. Pregnancy, 7 months. Horse.
The Genita! System
115
10-25 Edema of the fetal membranes
10-26 Acute fibrino-necrotizing placentitis
Marked thickening of the mermbranes by edema in a case of
 Allantochorion, chorionic side. Hyperemia. Pseudomembranes
 hydrallantois accompanied by fetal anasarca. Pregnancy, 7 months.
 consisting of fibrin and coagulation necrosis. Total or partial
Cow.
disappearance of chorionic villi as a consequence of necrosis (especially
upper right). Equine placenta.
10-27 Fetal mummification
10-28 Fetal maceration
 Dry, firm, shrunken fetus. Death probably caused by strangulation by
Only the fetal bones have resisted the maceration process. Bovine fetus.
the umbilical cord. Bovine fetus.
116
Chapter 10
10-29 Fibrino-necrotizing vaginitis
10-30 Granular vaginitis (follicular vaginitis)
Vagina, mucosal surface. Hyperemia and coagulation necrosis of the
Vestibulum vaginae. Muitiple pale nodules, most of which are
mucosa. Postparturient cow.
hyperplastic submucosal lymphoid folicles. Probably a local
immunological reaction. Pig.
10-31 Testicular degeneration
10-32 Abdominal cryptorchidism
Nuclear pyknosis of necrotic cells. There are many multinucleated giant
Testis. Seminiferous tubules lacking spermatogenic epithelium are
ce!ls in the lumen of the seminiferous tubules, probably formed by
completely lined with tall Sertoli cells. The cooler environment of the
fusion of degenerated spermatogenic cells. Dog. HE.
scrotal sac is probably necessary for normal epithelial development and
spermatogenesis. Dog. HE.
The Genital System
117
10-33 Torsion of the spermatic cord
10-34 Fibrotie testis
 Passive congestion, hernorrhage and edema of the spermatic cord,
Cut surfaces of fibrotic (ieft) testis. Smal, pale, firm with white areas,
epididymis and the testis. Most cases occur in abdominal cryptorchids
predominantly consisting of fibrous tissue. Right testis is normal. Bull.
 as in this specimen. Boar.
10-35 Leydig cell tumor (interstitial cel tumor of the testis)
10-36 Leydig cell tumor (interstitial cell tumor of the testis)
Testis. Many Leydig cell tumors are characterized by the yellow color
Large round or polyhedral tumor cells with abundant vacuolated
and the hemorrhages in the tumor. Dog
cytoplasm; scanty stroma. Seldom malignant. The differentiation
between hyperplasia and a benign tumor of Leydig cells is arbitrary.
Dog. HE.
118
 Chapter 10
10-37 Seminoma
10-38 Sertoli cell tumor
Testis. Solid tumor replacing seminiferous tubules, composed of large
ounn bupesed pue patebuola 'pios yiim salngnt papuaisa 'ssal
polyhedral cells with prominent nucleoli resembling spermatogenic 
ceils having pale cytoplasm separated by thick bands of partially
cells. Scanty stroma. Lymphoid accumulation at right. Dog. HE.
hyalinized fibrous tissue. Dog. HE.
10-39 Prostatic squamous rmetapiasia
10-40 Prostatic hyperplasia
Prostate. Squamous metaplasia of gtandular epithelium (right side). This
Symmetrical prostate enlargement, with the surface irregularly nodular.
metaplasia starts as a hyperplasia of 'basat cells' 'reserve celis)
Urinary bladder (left), urethra (right). Dog.
between the gianduiar epithelium and the basement membrane (left
tubule), followed by disappearance and replacement of the original 
glanduiar epithelium. The histogenesis of metaplasia as described above
is called indirect metaplasia or prosoplasia. Dog with a Sertoli cell
tumor accompanied by hyperestrogenism. HE.
The Genital System
119
10-41 Prostatic hyperplasia and hypertrophy
10-42 Prostatic adenocarcinoma, alveolar papillary type
Diffuse hyperplasia characterized by tall epithelium and papillary
Papillary growth of epithelium into aiveolar-like spaces, which are
growth into the lumen. Some cystic glands as well as broad sheets of
surrounded by bands of connective tissue. The spaces are almost
hyperplastic fbromuscular tissue. Dog. HE.
completely filled with tumor cells and necrosis. Dog. HE.
10-43 Ulcers in preputial diventicuium
10-44 Fibropapilloma on the glans penis
Preputial diverticulum. Multiple plaques, varying in size up to 10 mm
Firm tumor with a cauliflower-sike growth on the glans penis [arrow).
and consisting of hyper- and parakeratotic epithelium (leukoplakia)]
This tumor is probably caused by the virus that causes bovine
with ulceration in the center of the plaques. A boar with these lesions
cutaneous papillomas. Bull.
can be a source for infection of gilis with Actinobaculum suis (formerly
Corynebacterium or Eubacterium suis), which may induce pyelonphritis.
Boar.
Chapter
The nervous system
11-1 Internal hydrocephalus  124
11-29  Cerebellar coning  131
 11-2  Cranium bifidum with meningoencephalocele 124
11-30 Cerebral edema
131
11-3  Spina bifida aperta 124
11-31 Cerebral edema 131
 11-4  Arnold-Chiari malformation 
124
11-32 Spongy vacuolation 131
11-5 Cerebellar hypoplasia
125
11-33  Fibrinopurulent leptomeningitis 
132
11-6   Hypomyelination 
125
11-34  Fibrinopurulent leptomeningitis
：132
11-7 Normal cerebellum  125
11-35  Viral polioencephalomyelitis   132
11-8 Hypomyelination 125
11-36
 Microglial nodule 
132
11-9 Glycogenosis
126
11-37
Viral inclusion bodies 
133
11-10  Globoid cell leukodystrophy 
126
11-38
 Granulomatous inflammation   133
11-11  Neuronal chromatolysis  126
11-39
 Necrotizing encephalitis  133
11-12  lschemic cell change 
126
11-40
 Vasculitis, thrombosis and infarction 
133
11-13
Neuronophagia
127
11-41
 Inflammation of extradural spinal roots 
134
 11-14  Ncuronal pigmentation
127
11-42
 Inflammation of extradural spinal roots
134
11-15
 Spongiform encephalopathy 127
11-43
 Extradural hematoma
134
11-16
Cerebrovascular amyloid
127
11-44
Spinal cord injury due to intervertebral disc extrusion  134
11-17
Axonal swelling
128
11-45
 Spinal card compression 
135
11-18
Axonal swelling
128
11-46
 Avulsion of the brachia! plexus 
135
11-19
Reactive astrocytes ('gemistocytes')   128
11-47
Acute cerebrat infarct
135
11-20
 Gitter cells (phagocytic macrophages)  128
11-48
 Spinal cord infarction 
135
11-21
 Demyelination
129
11-49
 Cholesteatoma
136
11-22
 Primary demyeination  129
11-50  Oligodendroglioma
136
11-23
Secondary demyelination (Wallerian degeneration)  129
11-51
 Meningioma
136
11-24
 Acute polioencephalomaiacia
129
11-52
 Plexus papiloma 
136
11-25
 Subacute polioencephalomalacia
130
11-53
Neurofbrosarcoma 137
 11-26  Chronic leukoencephalomalacia
130
11-54
 Intradural-cxtramedullary spinal cord tumor
137
11-27 Symmetrical cncephalomalacia 
130
11-55
 Dura mater osscous mctaplasia
137
11-28 Malacia130
11-56 0sscous metaplasia 137
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
Congenital anomalies
The nervous system includes the central nervous system (brain
Malformations of the central nervous system are relatively common
and spinal cord), and the peripheral nerves.
 in domestic animals. A large proportion of these malformations are
The most common lesions of the central nervous system
 developmental defects with a gross morphological appearance,
consist of:
either inherited or caused by in utero exposure to certain viral
congenital anomalies;
agents. Malformations as a consequence of these viruses
Wcytopathological changes;
include hypoplasia following destruction of progenitor cells
■
 demyelination;
and atrophy following destruction of already differentiated
malacia;
growing tissue.
circulatory disturbances;
 Other developmental defects may result from a primary func-
■
 inflammation;
tional lesion, for example those which arise as a consequence of
■
 traumatic injury; and
inherited biochemical disturbances (such as the lysosomal storage
neoplasia.
 diseases), and some remain unexplained.
721
122
 Chapter 11
Cytopathological changes
include disorders of myelin synthesis and maintenance resulting
in the formation of abnormal myelin (the leukodystroplies) (r a
The central nervous system (CNS) has unique populations of
diminished quantity of myelin (hypomyelination diseases). Many of
cells (neurons, neuroglia, microglia and choroid plexus cells)
 these diseases have a hereditary metabolic basis
and the terminology used to describe cytopathological charnges
o  e   s s   
 (such as in spongy degeneration) and destruction of myelin or
tissues. These constituent cells vary in their susceptibility to
myelin-forming cells in demyelinating diseases.
injury with neurons being the most sensitive.
Demyelination refers to destructior of a normally formed
myelin sheath and may be primary or secondary.
Neurons
 Primary demyelination, characterized by selective destruc-
 Distinctive changes in neurons include:
tion of the myelin sheath with an intact axon, is rather
uncommon in domestic animals and associated with a
 prolonged stimulation of axons (also referred to as the
few viruses such as canine distemper virus.
axonal reaction);
Much more common is secondary demyelination (Wallerinn
 ischientic cell change following ischemia and other injurious
degeneration) where the loss of myelin is a consequence of
influences;
 axonal degeneration. A local lesion of the axon results in
  cytoplasmic accumulation of metabolic products typical
degeneration of axon and myelin distal to the point of
for (lysosomal) storage diseases; and
 injury of the nerve. The focal ovoid or round eosinophilic
■deposition of lipofuscin pigment related to aging.
distentions of these axons are referred to as spheroids.
 pax  po a  sunu ou go s
 phages (microglia) in a process referred to as neuronophagia.
Maiacia
 Intranuclear or intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies may be pre-  Malacia means softening and is used to describe liquefaction
sent in neurons, for instance in certain viral infections. Cytoplasmuic
 necrosis of central nervous tissue.
Circulatory disturbances
lopathy (BSE).
Edema
Glial cells
Edema of the CNS can be distinguished in zasogenic and cytotoxic
Glial cells (astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, ependymal cells and 
1 edema. The accumulation of fluid may occur extracellularly,
 microglial cells) are more resistant to injury than neurons.
resulting from increased vascular permeability and referred to
 Astrocytes may undergo hypertrophy (reactive ustrogliosis) as vasogenic edema, or intracellularly with normal vascular
or proliferation (astrocytosis), in longstanding lesions re
permeability and referred to as cytotoxic edema.  Injury  to
sulting in a fibrillary gliosis or glial scar
the CNS may cause both vasogenic and cytotoxic edema
 In chronic degenerative conditions, astrocytes with
concurrently.
abundant pink cytoplasm and eccentric nuclei termed
Vasogenic edema predominantly affects the white matter
gemistocytic astrocytes or gemistocytes may be observed.
 and is recognized adjacent to hematomas, contusions.
infarcts, inflammatory foci and reoplasms or may be seen
 Perineuronal oligodendroglia may hypertrophy and proli-
in certain toxicities.
ferate in a process referred to as satellitosis.
Cytotoxic edema is often due to ischemia and/or hypoxia
W Responses of ependymal cels to injury include atrophy.
in which both the gray and white matter of the brain may
degeneration and necrosis.
be affected.
 The mesoderm derived sessile microglia, in response to
 injury, may react by activation (rod cells) and proliferation.
Infarction
Microglial proliferation may be focal, forming a glial nodule
 The gross appearance of the infarction may differ according to
to remove a tiny focus of necrosis or a dead neuron, or be
the pathogenesis.
diffuse.
  Infarction after complete occlusion of an artery causes
Blood-born macrophages, functionally comparable to micro
ischemic necrosis (bland or pale infarction).
glia, may accumulate in the CNS in response to injury.
 Partial occlusion or reperfusion of an ischemic infarction
 A p e  A  si 
is responsible for abnormal permeability of the wall of
laden cytoplasm due to ingested myelin debris, often
vessels and seeping out of blood into the infarct. Thus it is
referred to as gitter cells.
referred to as hemorrhagic infarction.
Demyelination
Infarction involving the gray matter tends to be hemorrhagic
A number of conditions primarily involves CNS myelin and may
 whereas infarction of the white matter is often pale. Areas of
be manifest by a reduced quantity and/or quality of myelin. They
y infarction eventually become soft because of liquefaction necrosis.
The Nervous System 123
inffammotion
Spinal cord trauma can involve concussion, contusion, lacera-
tion (with disruption of the architecture of the tissue), transection,
The most common histological features of infammation of the
CNS comprise:
perivascular cuffing;
Neoplasia
■gliosis; and
■ neuronal degeneration.
Primary neoplasms of the CNS are most common in the dog and
cat. These include neoplasms of:
The nature of the inflammatory infiltrate may vary according
 neuronal cells;
to the etiology but the following simplified guidelines are
■ neuroglial cells;
 applicable to inflammation caused by infectious agents.
choroid plexus; and
Polymorphonuclear  cells  predominate  in  bacterial
 mesodermal tissue.
infections.
■ Lymphocytes are the main cell type in virus-induced
Meningioma is the most common.
conditions with lesser numbers of plasma cells and
macrophages.
Peripheral nervoussystem
 Granulomatous inflammation is seen in infections due to
 A significant number of conditions affecting the CNS may also
fungi, protozoa, parasites and some intracellular bacteria
(for example Mycobacterium species).
cause lesions in the peripheral nerzous system (PNS) which is
 explained by injury to neuron cell bodies residing in the CNS or
Lesions that may accompany the encephalomyelitis include menin-
because the PNS is equally vulnerable to the condition. For
 gitis, ganglioneuritis, vasculitis, necrosis and demyelination.
example, in certain viral or protozoal infections concurrent
 Meningitis concerns the leptomeninges (the pia mater, sub-
 inflammation in the CNS and PNS may occur.
 arachnoid space and adjacent arachnoid mater) and /or the dura
Inflammation of the PNS may include:
(poly)radiculoneuritis (implying inflammation of peri-
that initially involve the meninges, most commonly the lepto-
pheral nerves and spinal nerve rootlets); and
 meninges, can secondarily invade the nervous tissue. On the
ganglionitis (inflammation of spinal ganglia).
other hand, processes that primarily affect the nervous tissue can
 Congenital anomalies and disorders of myelin formation and
secondarily affect the (lepto)meninges. Leptomeningitis can be
acute, subacute or chronic and, depending on the cause, the
 maintenance in the PNS are rarely seen.
inflammation may be primarily purulent, mononuclear or
The reaction pattern following traumatic injury to peripheral
granulomatous as described above.
nerves is similar to that described in the CNS and may include
Wallerian degeneration distal to the point of injury of the nerve.
Primary neoplasms of the PNS are uncommon and mostly
Traumatic injury
reported in dogs and cattle. Most of them are derived from the
Blunt trauma to the brain may result in concussion, usually not 
 peripheral nerve sheath (mostly Schwannoma).
associated with gross lesions, or contusion, characterized by focal
brain injury that is grossly detectable, usually as hemorrhage.
124
Chapter 11
11-1 Internal hydrocephalus 
11-2 Cranium bifidum with meningoencephalocele
Brain, transverse section through diencephalon. Severe dilation of the
uenq pue sabuusw yo ses leussy paly ping sabiel e jo uoisnoid
ventricular system causing atrophy of neural parenchyma,
tissue through a defect in the skull. The sac is covered with skin of the
Aew 1! bop >yt u! pue paunboe io leljuabuos aq Aeu snjeydaooupAH
forehead, Piglet.
often result from obstruction to the flow of cerebrospinal fluid. Dog.
11-3 Spina bifida aperta
11-4 Arnoid-Chiari malformation
Lumbosacral region. Soft, well vascularized mass of neural tissue
Displacement of brain in caudal direction due to undersized cranial
directly exposed to the exterior. Anomaly represents a closure defect of
cavity. Protrusion of hemispheres into the posterior fossa (note
neural tube with failure of separation from ectoderm and defective
V-shaped impression of tentorium cerebelli) and coning of cerebeilum
induction of skeletal investment. Piglet.
and caudal brainstem into foramen magnum. Calf.
The Nervous Systerm
125
11-5 Cerebellar hypoplasia
11-6 Hypomyelination
Markediy smaller cerebellum (right) in comparison with normal (left).
Cross section through cerebellum and medulla oblongata. White matter
Hypoplasia due to interference of normal development by selective
not visible due to paucity of myelin. β-Mannosidosis. Newborn calf.
destruction of external germinal layer by the panleukopenia virus 
during perinatal growth. Kitten.
11-7 Normal cerebellum
11-8 Hypomyelination
 Portion of cerebellum showing normal myelin staining of white matter
Deficiency of myelin due to hypomyelination in the cerebellar white 
(M). Newborn calf. Kiuver Barrera stain for myelin.
matter. There is reduced staining for myelin (M) when compared to
cerebellum of control calf (see Fig. 11-7). Intrauterine bovine vira!
diarrhea virus (BvoV) infection. Newborn calf. Kluver Barrera stain for
myelin.
126
Chapter 11
11-9 Glycogenosis
11-10 Globoid cell leukodystrophy
Olivary nucleus. Reticulation of the cytoplasm of neuronal cells due to
Cerebral white matter. Loss of myelin and perivascular accumulations
glycogen storage, caused by a metabolic error of lysosomal catabolism.
of characteristic (PAS-positive) cells with large cell bodies and mostly 
Glycogenosis type il. Lapland dog. HE.
eccentric nuclel. These cells are of histiocytic origin and have
accumulated β-galactocerebroside. West Highland White terrier dog. HE.
11-11 Neuronal chromatolysis
11-12 lschemic cell change
 Spinal ganglion. Several neurons are swollen with peripheral
Cerebral cortex. Acute neuronal necrosis due to hypoxia. Affected
displacerment of the nuclei (short arrow), the cytoplasm stains lightly
neurons are shrunken, have eosinophilic cytoplasm and hyperchromatic
eosinophilic dueto disappearance of Nissl substance and canbe finely
or pyknotic nuclei (arrowheads) contrasting with normal neurons
vacuolated. In addition to these characteristics of chromatolysis, some
(arrows). Newborn calf. HE.
neurons contain central, deeply eosinophilic 'inclusions' (long afrows)
as seen in grass sickness (dysautonomy). Horse. HE.
The Nervous System
127
11 -13 Neuronophagia
11-14 Neuronal pigmentation
Cerebral cortex. Necrotic neuronal cell body (arrow] surrounded and
Midbrain. Accumulation of yellowish brown pigment resembling ceroid
 invaded by hypertrophic microglial cells. Process of phagocytic removal
and lipofuscin in neuronal cell bodies. Neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis.
 especially seen in viral polioencephalomyelitis. Distemper. Dog. HE.
Sheep. HE.
D
11~15 Spongiform encephalopathy
11-16 Cerebrovascular amyloid
Medutla oblongata. Weli delineated empty vacuoles in the cytoplasm of
 Cerebrum. Pale eosinophilic amorphous material (arrows) consistent
neurons and in the neuropit; characteristic for the spongiform
with amyloid deposition associated with blood vessels. Scrapie.
encephalopathies such as scrapie, bovine spongiform encephalopathy
Sheep. HE.
128
Chapter 11
11-17 Axonai swelling
11-18 Axonal swelling
Spinal cord white matter, transverse section, Multiple eosinophilic
Cerebeliar peduncle. Globular and fusiform axonal swellings (spheroids;
swoilen axons (spheroids] within distended myelin sheaths. Spheroid
 arrows) adjacent to an area of malacia (not shown on picture - see Fig.
formation is possibly due to a blockade of axoplasmic flow and is often
11-28). Focal symmetrical encephalomalacia. Sheep. Luxol fast blue-
 seen in acute injury associated with mechanical trauma and vascular
Holmes stain for myelin and axons, respectively.
lesions. Spinal cord compression. Horse. HE.
11-19 Reactive astrocytes ('gemistocytes')
11-20 Gitter cells (phagocytic macrophages)
Cerebrum. Hypertrophic astrocytes with swollen, eosinophilic,
Cerebellar peduncle. Area of malacia showing phagocytosis of myelin
homogeneous cytoplasm and large eccentric nuclei. These astrocytes
and necrotic tissue by macrophages derived from monocytes and
may form slender, long processes giving the neuropil a fibrillary
microglia! cells. These ceils (referred to as Gitter cells) have large
 appearance. Cat. HE.
rounded cell bodies, granular and often vacuolar cytoplasm and 
eccentric nuclei. Some remnants of neuropil (N). Focal symmetrical
encephalomalacia. Sheep. HE.
The Nervous System
129
11-21 Demyelination
11-22 Primary demyelination
Cross section through spinal cord. Bilateral myelin pallor in dorsal,
 Cerebellar white matter. Focal area of myelin loss characterized by
dorsolateral and lateral funiculi histologically associated with
initial preservation of axons and swelling of myelin sheaths. There is
demyelination, axonal swelling and reactive astrocytosis. Lesions
concurrent astrocyte hyperplasia and microglial proliferation. Normal
consistent with leukoencephalomyelopathy. Leonberger dog, 2 years.
white matter left top (N). Distemper. Dog. HE.
Kluver Barrera stain for myelin.
11-23 Secondary demyelination (Walierian degeneration)
11-24 Acute polioencephalomalacia
Spinal cord white matter, parasagittal section. Longitudinal chain of
Cerebral cortex. Multiple microcavities, resulting from swelling of
digestion chambers containing axon and myelin debris and small
astrocytic processes (intracellular edemal, produce a spongy
phagocytes with indistinct cell bodies, vacuolated cytoplasm and
appearance of the superficial laminae in the cortical parenchyma. Note
the laminar distribution. Extensive neuronal necrosis, hyperplastic
secondary to neuronal (axonal or perikaryal) damage. Sheep. HE.
capillaries and eosinophilic infiltration (not visible at this
magnification) can be present, even in the structurally intact middle
laminae. Salt poisoning. Pig. HE.
130
Chapter 11
11-25 Subacute polioencephalomalacia
11-26 Chronic leukoencephalomalacia
Brain, transverse section through diencephalon. Liquefactive necrosis
Transverse section of cerebrum. Irregular often confluent areas of
(malacia) of cerebral cortex, partly removed by phagocytosis (arrows).
malacia, cavitation and hemorrhage affecting the white matter.
This process starts in the deep cortical laminae causing cleavage of
Leukoencephalomalacia caused by the toxin fumonisin B produced by
cortical remnants from the subjacent intact white matter. Thiamine
the fungus Fusarium moniliforme. Horse.
deficiency. Goat.
11-27 Symmetrical encephalomaiacia
11-28 Malacia
Brain, transverse section, through cerebellum. Symmetrical paie areas
Cerebellar peduncle. Area of malacia (N} evidenced by necrosis of
[arrows) in cerebellar medulla due to edema and necrosis of
neuropil and loss of myelin. Note distended myelin sheaths and swollen
parenchyma. Lesions are the result of the action of Clostridium
axons in adiacent white matter. Focal symmetrical encephalomalacia.
perfringens type d toxins on the vascular endothelium. Focal
Sheep. Luxol fast blue-Holmes stain for myelin and axons, respectively.
symmetrical encephalomalacia. Lamb. HE.
The Nervous System
131
11-29 Cerebellar coning 
11-30 Cerebral edema
Caudal brain, dorsal view. Tongue-shaped distortion of posterior
 Cerebral white matter. Perivascular accumutation of protein rich fluid
cerebellar vermis due to herniation through foramen magnum. Caused
by ventricular distention by exudate (pyocephalus) following canulation 
Enterotoxemia. Sheep. HE.
 of third ventricle. Also seen with edematous brain swelling, intracranial
tumors and other space occupying lesions. Goat.
 11-31 Cerebral edema
11-32 Spongy vacuolation.
Cerebrum. Droplets of hyaline, cosinophilic material accumulate around
 Medutla oblongata. The white matter contains numerous empty, more
small biood vessels in the neuropil at the glia limitans. The initial lesion 
or less irreguiar vacuoles representing intramyetinic edema. Note
 manifests as perivascular edema due to vascular injury. Edema disease.
absence of inflammation. Hepatic encephalopathy. Dog. HE.
Pig. HE.
132
Chapter 11
11-33 Fibrinopurulent leptomeningitis
11-34 Fibrinopurulent leptomeningitis
Cerebral surface. Accumulation of grayish-yellow exudate in 
Cerebral cortex with sulcus. Accumulation of inflammatory celis,
subarachnoid space overlying the suici, obscuring blood vessels. In 
 predominantly neutrophils, and serofbrinous exudate in subarachnoid
young animals, especially calves, piglets and foals, it is usually caused
space. Extension along Virchow-Robin's spaces (cuffing of blood
by a hematogenous bacteriat infection. Calf.
vessels). Stight invasion of superficial cerebral parenchyma. Calf. HE.
11-35 Viral polioencephaiomyelitis
11-36 Microglial nodule
Cerebrum. Lymphocytic inflammation of the gray matter, perivascular
Brain. Focal aggregation of proliferating microglial cels in the neuropil
cuffing, neuronal necrosis (arrow) and neuronophagia. These lesions are
referred to as a microgial noduie (long arrow). Note perivascuiar
characteristic features of viral infections of the central nervous system.
cuffing (short arrow). Aujeszky's disease. Piglet. HE.
Rabies. Cow. HE.
The Nervous Systerm
133
11 -37 Viral inclusion bodies
11-38 Granulomatous inflammation
Left: neuron containing an cosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusion
Cerebrum. Infitration of macrophages and lesser numbers of
body in which an inner body is present (Negri body: arrow).
lymphocytes and plasma cells consistent with granulomatous
Rabies. Cow. HE.
inflammation around blood vessels and in the neuropil.
Right: Astrocyte showing an eosinophilic intranuclear inclusion body
Encephalitozoonosis. Dog. HE.
resulting in margination of chromatin (arrow). Distemper. Dog. HE.
 11-39 Necrotizing encephalitis
11-40 Vasculitis, thrombosis and infarction 
Cerebrum. Necrosis of the neuropil (N) and infiltration of mononuciear
Cerebrum. Vasculitis with fibrin thrombosis [long arow), a vessel
 cells within and adjacent to the necrotic focus. Note protozoal cysts
containing bacterial coionies (short arrow), infiltration by neutrophils 
(arrows).Toxoplasmosis. Cat. HE.
(left top) and pale-staining neuropil due to infarction. Thrombotic
meningoencephatitis caused by Hoemophijlus somnus. Cow. HE.
134
Chapter 11
11-41 Inflammation of extradura! spinal roots
11-42 Inffammation of extradural spinal roots
Caudal spinal cord with dura mater reflected. Note red discoloration
Sacrocaudal nerve bundles, transverse section. Infiltration of 
and multiple grayish noduies due to granulomatous inffammation of
mononuclcar cells into epi-, peri- and endoneurium with resultant
the extradural nerve roots (arrows). Neuritis of the cauda equina. Horse.
demyelinization and degeneration of axons. Occasional giant ceil
formation and marked epineural fibrosis are seen. Neuritis of the cauda
equina. Horse. HE.
11-43 Extradural hematoma
11-44 Spinal cord injury due to intervertebral disc extrusion
Dense blood ciot overlying left hemisphere between dura mater and
Lower thoracic spinal cord, transverse section. Areas of malacia mainly
skuli, causing cerebral compression. Usualy due to skull fracture with
invoiving dorsal and lateral funiculi. Note diffuse Wallerian
laceration of a biood vessel. Cat.
degeneration in ventral funiculi. 12 day survival, Cocker spaniel. HE.
The Nervous Systerm
135
11 -45 Spinal cord compression
 11-46 Avulsion of the brachial plexus
Lumbar spinal cord after removal of vertebral laminae, dorsal view.
Spinal cord, cervical intumescence, ventral view. Hemorrhagic remnants
Severe compression of spinal cord by extradural malignant
of left C7, C8 and T1 root sleeves contrasting with normal roots on the
lymphoma. Cat.
opposite side. Complete intradural avulsion of dorsal and ventral roots.
due to traction during excessive abduction of left fore leg. 4 day
survival. Dog.
11-47 Acute cerebral infarct
11-48 Spinal cord infarction
Frontal lobes, transverse section. Well demarcated hemorrhagic infarct
Spinal cord segment, transverse section. Well-defined necrotic area [N]
in right cerebral hemisphere, targely confined to the cortex. Edematous
swelling of adjacent white matter. Dog.
matter. An artery is occluded by an alcianophilic cartilagenous embotus
(arrow), originating from intervertebral disc material.
Fibrinocartilagenous embolic myelopathy. Dog. Alcian blue stain for
glycosaminoglycans.
136
Chapter 11
11-49 Cholesteatoma
11-50 0ligodendroglioma
Tumor-like nodule in choroid plexus of right lateral ventricle.
Brain, transverse section through frontal lobes, frontal view. Soft
Granulomatous inflammation induced by deposition of cholesterol.
hemorrhagic tumor mass in the region of the left caudate nucleus
Occurs frequently in old horses, may attain a large size, and
(typical location). Almost complete obliteration of the lateral ventricie,
occasionally causes obstructive hydrocephalus. Horse.
with distortion of adjacent structures. Relatively common, especially in
brachycephalic dogs. Boxer dog.
 11-5t Meningioma
11-52 Plexus papilloma
Caudal brain stem and cerebellum, sagittal section. Welt-defined tumor
Brain, transverse section through optic chiasm. Well-circumscribed
mass with fibrillar pattern on cut surface. Severe compression of
meduila oblongata. Shetland shcepdog.
third ventricle with consequent obstructive hydrocephalus. Usuaily
benign tumor of choroid plexus epithelium, occurring in any of the 
cerebral ventricles or at the cerebellopontine angle. Dog.
The Nervous System
137
11-53 Neurofibrosarcoma
11-54 Intradural-extramedullary spinal cord tumour
Spinal cord, cervical intumescence, dorsal view. Elongated tumor mass
11 spinal cord segment, transverse section. Tumor mass occupying most
involving right C6 spinal roots, ganglion and spinal nerve distally to the
 of the intradural space and dispiacing the spinal cord. Mixed tumor.
brachial plexus. The tumor extended intradurally and compressed the
composed of neuroepithelial elements and squamous epithelial cysts,
 spinal cord. There was associated neurogenic atrophy of the scapular
probably of embryonal origin. Thoracolumbar spinal cord tumor of
muscles. Labrador retriever dog.
young dogs. Bull terrier dog. 2 years. HE.
 11-55 Dura mater osseous metaplasia
11-56 0sscous metaplasia
Spinal cord, formalin fixated. Several very firm, red-brownish plaques in
 Cross section of spinal cord. The dura mater is distended by plaques of
the dura mater seen as an incidental finding in old dogs. Dog.
lamellar bone containing hematopoietic elements (arrows). The spinal
cord is not compressed or otherwise affected. Dog. HE.
Chapter
The locomotory system
12-1 Fetal chondrodysplasia 142
12-36 Hypertrophic (pulmonary) osteoarthropathy  150
12-2 Periosteal melanosis 142
12-37
Hemarthros 151
12-3  Congenital porphyria (porphyrio congenito) 142
12-38
Suppurative osteomyelitis 
151
12-4  Hypoplastic osteoporosis due to scurvy
142
12-39
 Suppurative osteomyelitis
151
12-5 Hypoplastic osteoporosis 143
12-40
Granulomatous osteomyelitis 151
12-6  Myelosclerosis 
143
12-41
 Acute arthritis  152
12-7 Rickets 143
12-42
Subacute arthritis 152
12-8 Rickets
143
12-43
 Deforming arthritis  152
12-9 Resorptive osteoporosis due to toxicity with reactive
12-44
Chronic arthritis
152
periosteal bone formation   144
12-45
 Avian amyloid arthropathy
153
12-10
Hypo-ostotic fibrous osteodystrophy  144
12-46
 Avian amyloid arthropathy 
12-11Fibrous osteodystrophy (osteodystrophia fibrosa)
153
144
12-47
Osteosarcoma
153
12-12 Hyperostotic fibrous osteodystrophy (hypertrophic
12-48
 Osteosarcoma
153
 osteodystrophy) in juveniles
144
12-49
 Chondrosarcoma
154
12-13
Fibrous osteodystrophy (osteodystrophia fibrosa)
145
12-50
Chondrosarcoma
154
12-14 Metaphyseal osteopathy (hypertrophic osteopathy or 
12-51
Synovial sarcoma
154
osteodystrophy)
145
12-52
Metastatic melanotic bone tumor
 Metaphyseal osteopathy (hypertrophic osteopathy or
154
12-15
12-53
Myofibrillar hypoplasia (congenital
osteodystrophy)
145
splayleg)
155
12-16
 Secondary fracture healing
145
12-54
Congenital articular rigidity (arthrogryposis
12-17
Retained enchondral cartilage spur  146
congenito)
155
12-18
Avian tibial dyschondroplasia
146
12-55
Neurogenic muscular atrophy
12-19
Femoral osteochondrosis/dyschondroplasia
155
146
12-56
 Muscular regeneration
Femoral osteochondrosis/dyschondroplasia
155
12-20
146
12-57
 Nutritional myodegeneration
Femoral osteochondrosis/dyschondroplasia
156
12-21
147
12-58
Hyaline degeneration
12-22
Osteochondrosis dissccans
156
147
12-59
Exertional rhabdomyolysis 156
12-23
Osteochondrosis dissecans 147
12-60
Back-muscle necrosis
156
12-24
 Chronic osteochondrosis, brood capsules 
147
12-61
Blackleg (gangrenous myositis)
12-25
Ulnar osteochondrosis
157
148
12-62
Blackleg (myositis) -
Uinar osteochondrosis
157
12-26
148
12-63
3Muscular dystrophy
Osteochondronecrosis (Legg-Calve-Perthes disease)
157
12-27
148
12-64 Muscular dystrophy
Joint mice 148
157
12-28
12-65 Muscular steatosis (pseudonyperrophia
12-29
Hip dysplasia
149
lipomatoso)
158
12-30 Osteoarthrosis/osteoarthritis 149
12-66
Bovine eosinophilic myositis
12-31
 Degeneration of intervertebral disc 
158
149
12-67
Bovine eosinophilic myositis
12-32
Degeneration and herniation of intervertebral disc149
158
12-68
Canine eosinophific myositis
12-33
158
 Spondylosis
150
12-69
Sarcosporidiosis
159
12-34
Spondylosis  150
12-70
Sarcosporidiosis
Hypertrophic (pulmonary) osteoarthropathy (acropachy.
159
12-35
12-71
Cysticercosis
Marie-Bamberger's disease)  150
159
12-72 Trichinosis
159
139
140Chapter 12
THE LOCOMOTOR SYSTEM
thormone, vitamin D, steroid hormones and IGF-I, in low
 The locomotor system includes bones, joints, tendons and muscles.
concentrations, activate anabolism. When higher concentrations
 The most common lesions are:
occur, catabolism is stimulated.
congenital anomalies;
metabolic disorders;
Catabolic processes, RANK/RANKL system
■ inflammation; and
Catabolic processes are evidenced by bone removal through
■ neoplasia.
osteoclasts. The latter are stimulated by cytokines that originate
mostly from the osteoblasts (Diag. 12B).
Bones
 An important component in this process of bone resorption is
a receptor on the osteoclast, i.e. the receptor activator of nuclear
 In bone some specific points that influence the pathogenesis of
factor kappa B (RANK).
Jesions need to be considered.
 This receptor can be stimulated by RANK-ligand (RANKL)
young growing and adult full-grown animals (Diag. 12A). 1
 loss, or can be blocked by osteoprotegerin (OPG) froim the same
chondral growth in the physeal growth plate and in the mones (glucocorticoids, vitamin D, estrogen) and cytokines
bone-facing layer of the articular cartilage.
(TNFα, interleukins). RANKL and OPG play a crucial role in
Disorders associated with the growth of cartilage and its extraskeletal calcium metabolism (calcification, development of
 transformation to bone develop at both sides, near the a lactating mammary gland during pregnancy) by their influence
n   r  s   d s
 on bone, and thus, in the pathogenesis of metabolic bone diseases
in the epiphysis.
Osteoclasts are also stimulated by other pro-inflammatory
 The subchondral tissue is highly vascularized, with hairpin
 cytokines released by osteoblasts and other mesenchymal cells,
loop microanatomy of blood vessels, which favors 
 such as inflammatory cells.
bacterial embolism and osteomyelitis.
 Longitudinal growth of bones is favored by various factors,
Joints
such as insulin-like growth factors I and Il, by transforming
as ae sassd roe a ooed g 
 growth factor beta (TGFβ) in the cartilage, by apoptosis of
 chondrocytes, and by mineralization of the surrounding
 cartilage degeneration related to dyschondroplasia in grow-
 cartilage matrix. Multinucleated chondro- and osteoclasts
ing animals;
remove the calcified cartilage, followed by ingrowth of 
■ cartilage degeneration related to mechanical (relative)
highly vascularized mesenchymal tissue with osteoblasts
 overloading of young and adult animals; and
 responsible for bone apposition. Growth is stimulated,
 inflammation.
among other factors, by food, insulin, thyroxine, androgens
 and TGFβ. Inhibition is caused by malnutrition, estrogens
 Clinical symptoms during inflammation are merely related to
and glucocorticosteroids.
 inflammatory reactivity rather than to the morphological changes.
 In ndult domestic animals the physis is closed and the
 spectrum of pathological mechanisms is less variable than
Muscies
in juveniles.
Cellular lesions with a nutritional/ toxic, metabolic or hereditary
■ Primary neoplasms develop more frequently in older
 origin, dominate muscular pathology.
animals; in addition to primary tumors, metastatic tumors
Most nutritional/toxic disorders affect oxygen-related
may occur in the bones.
metabolic processes, leading to lesions of slow-reacting
mitochondrion-rich, red colored aerobic muscle fibers.
In bone tissue the mesenchymal stroma (in particular the osteo-
 Metabolic and hereditary lesions more often affect the
blust) is the leading structure in anabolic as well as in catabolic
rapid reacting pale colored anaerobic muscle fibers.
processes.
In addition, inflammatory lesions frequently occur in muscles.
Anabolic processes
Along with different etiologies zoonotic agents have to be
Anabolic processes result in bone formation by osteoblasts.
considered.
Regulating factors, such as growth hormone, calcitonin, para-
The Locomotory System
141
Juvenile
Adult
Joint cartilage
Epiphysis
Physis
Epiphysis
Metaphysis
Physis
Cortex
Metaphysis
Medullary
cavity
Diaphysis
Diaphysis
Cancellous
bone
Epiphyseal vessel
Diagram 12A. Growth regulation
Locally in cartilage and systemicaly from liver, resp. lgF-l
Endplate
and IgF-l stimulate mitoses in growth plate (TGFβ).
Resting chondrocytes
 After apoptosis of chondrocytes, calcification of matrix and
rermoval by chondro-osteoclasts, bone formation occurs.
Proliferativechondrocytes
Stiutation of growth by food. insulin, thyroxine. androgens,
TGFβ: inhibition by mainutniion, estrogens and grucocorticoids.
Mature chondrocytes
Hypertonic chondrocytes
Calcified cartilage
Woven bone oncalcified
cartilage spicule
Capillary loop
Anabolism
Catabolism
GH,CT,ViD,PTH,Steroid,IGF-
VitD,PTH,Soids,GH
Diagram 12B. Growth regulation
Csteoclastnas
CT
=
calcitonin
GH
growthhormone
Kappa (RANK)
ODF
 osteoclast differentiation factor
RANKL/ODF
RANK-Ligand (RANKL)
OPG
 osteoprotegerin
IGF-1,IL-1
PG
=
prostaglandins
TNFα,IL-6,PG
PTH
=
parathormone
OPG blocks the RANK
VitD
=
 vitamin Dg
Osteoid
Mineralization of osteoid:
Osteoclasts are inhibited by
Ca, P, VitD, CT
unmineralized osteoid and CT,
and via osteoblasts: TGFβ. OPG
142
Chapter 12
12-1 Fetal chondrodysplasia
12-2 Periosteal melanosis
Fetal skeleton. Retardation of chondral growth, resuiting in shortening
Black-stained periosteum of base of skull (arrows) due to melanin
of all enchondrally formed bones, including the cranial base ('buildog 
formed by ectopic melanocytes. Cow.
calf'). Neonatal calf.
12-3 Congenital porphyria (Porphyriα congenita)
12-4 Hypoplastic osteoporosis due to scurvy
Femur, sagittal section. Diffuse brownish discoloration of the
Rib, costochondral (from left to right) junction. Irregularity of the
mineralized canceilous and corticat bone. Cartilage and bone marrow
cartilage surface adjacent to secondary fracture (arrows) of compacta
 are normal-colored. Teeth (not shown] have pink colour. Calf.
and spongiosa with deposition of fibrinous material in primary
spongiosa. Proliferation of loosely arranged mesenchymal cells in
metaphysis, proliferation of poorly differentiated periosteal fibroblasts
and finally normal bone marrow (left). Hemorrhages in surrounding 
musculature. Defective osteogenesis caused by hypovitaminosis C is
 often found in guinea pigs receiving rabbit food. Guinea pig.
 Demineralized section. HE.
The Locomotory System
143
12-5 Hypoplastic osteoporosis
12-6 Myelosclerosis
Vertebral body, sagittal section. Severe deformation and coliapse,
Femur, mid shaft, sagittal section. Large irregular mass of dense
growth plates producing insufficient bone tissue, and severe reduction
cancellous bone (arrow) in the primary marrow cavity, caused by
of cancellous bone, all caused by diminished activity of osteoblasts. Cat,
hyperplasia and hyperfunction of osteoblasts. Hyperplastic bone
5 months. Demineralized section. Van Gieson.
marrow is present. Chronic anemia. Adult dog.
12-7 Rickets
12-B Rickets
Ribs. Note rosary formation (arrows) on costochondral junction due to
Rib, costochondral junction on sagittal section. Deep, irregular
widening of the metaphyseal area. Beigian Tervueren sheepdog, 6
metaphyseal growth plate (right), with local absence of provisional
months.
mineralization of cartilagenous matrix and newly formed osteoid. Some
black-stained mineralized bone trabeculae {left) with broad seams of
osteoid (red) and trabeculae consisting of only osteoid (rachitic
metaphysis/rachitic rosary). Goat, 1 year. Non-deminerafized section.
Von Kossa's method for calcified tissue.
144
Chapter 12
12-9 Resorptive osteoporosis due to toxicity with reactive periostea!
12-10 Hypo-ostotic fibrous osteodystrophy
bone formation
Femur, sagittal section. Very thin cortices, wide primary marrow cavity.
Spine, macerated specimen. Multiple confluent exostoses with severe
diminished cancellous bone, greenstick fracture in the distal diaphysis
ankylosis on the dorsolateral aspects of the cervical and thoracic
[(arrow]. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism. Collie dog,
vertebrae. These exostoses are a response to resorptive osteoporosis in
5 months.
the underlying bone, associated with longstanding uniform liver diet
that resulted in chronic hypervitaminosis A. Cat.
12-11 Fibrous osteodystrophy (osteodystrophiao fibroso]
12-12 Hyperostotic fibrous osteodystrophy (hypertrophic
Soft reddish bones of the skuil and maxilla (arrows). The subperiosteal
osteodystrophy] in juveniles
bone is resorbed, and replaced by vascularized fibrous tissue. Secondary
Greatly thickened jaws (arrow) due to the influence of dentition on the
hyperparathyroidism due to renal failure. Aduit dog.
osteodystrophic process. Secondary hyperparathyroidism due to familial
nephropathy. Dog, 6 months.
The Locomotory System
145
12-13 Fibrous osteodystrophy (osteodystrophia fibrosa)
12-14 Metaphyseal osteopathy (hypertrophic osteopathy or
Numerous multinucleated osteoclasts resorbing bone and thus forming
osteodystrophy!
Howship's lacunae. The bone resorption is associated with exchange of
Thickening of distal metaphysis of radius and ulna due to a catabolic
bone for fibrous tissue. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism.
Great Dane dog, 5 months. Demineralized section. HE.
connective tissue, cartiage and bone, such as in fracture healing.
Softening of metaphyseal bone due to increased osteoclasia associated
with exudative inflammation, microfracturing and cyst formation,
pnui sra sad waisi ane saissod pasodod rumouun st asne
vaccine viruses, other viruses and bacterial infections. Vitamin C
deficiency is unlikely since dogs can synthesize it in their liver. Boxer
dog, 5 months.
12-15 Metaphyseal osteopathy (hypertrophic osteopathy or
12-16 Secondary fracture healing
osteodystrophy)
Rib, longitudinal section. Old fracture with dislocated fragments.
Normal growth plate, disorganized primary spongiosa with abnormally
 Extensive external (periosteal) and internal (endosteal) callus
long spicules of remaining cartilage, absence of trabeculae, remnants of
formation, both consisting of irregular bone trabeculae and
necrotic bone, hemorrhage, cyst formation, inflammatory celf 
cartiagenous tissue. Foal. Demineralized section. HE.
infitration and fibrosis. The sparse irregular trabeculae are due to
increased resorption in the secondary spongiosa. Boxer dog. 5 months
[see Fig.12-14). Demineralized section. Van Gieson.
146
Chapter 12
12-17 Retained enchondral cartilage spur
12-18 Avian tibial dyschondroplasia
Distal radius/ulna, sagittal section. Large retained cartilage spur (arrow)
Irregular core of non-calcified transitional cartilage tissue (arrow) of
representing a rermnant of not-for-bone interchanged cartilage in the
the proximal tibial growth plate. Broiler, chicken, 4 weeks.
metaphysis formed by the distal ulnar growth plate. The lesion resuited
Undemineralized section. Von Kossa's method for calcified tissue.
in retardation of ulnar growth, shortening of the ulna, and bowing of 
the distal radius (Radius-curvus syndrome). Secondary deformation of
the ulnar metaphysis is also present. Borzoi dog, 1 '/2 months.
12-19 Femoral osteochondrosis/dyschondroplasia
12-20 Femoral osteochondrosis/dyschondroplasia
Medial femur condyle. X-ray photograph showing loss of mineralized
Medial femur condyle. Nodular cartilage remnants (arrow) in epiphyseal
subchondral bone near the joint and near the growth plate
spongiosa indicating arrest of interchange for bone during growth
(arrows). Pig.
(dyschondroplasia). Slaughter pig. Azan.
The Locomotory System
147
12-21 Femoral osteochondrosis/dyschondroplasia
12-22 Osteochondrosis dissecans
 Distal femur, articular surface. Remnant iesion from osteochondrosis
Proximal humeri. Roughly spherical elevated areas of thickened white-
dissecans in the lateral part of the medial femoral condyle (arrow). The
 colored articuiar cartilage in the caudal central areas [arrows]. In the 
defect is filled with reparative fibrocartilaginous tissue. Proliferation of
right-sided humerus, there is loss of a smal piece of abnormal
the synovia! membrame. Dyschondroplasia/osteochondrosis syndrome.
cartilage. Dyschondroplasia/osteochondrosis syndrome. Bouvier des
Slaughter pig.
Flandres dog, 6 months.
12-23 Osteochondrosis dissecans
12-24 Chronic osteochondrosis, brood capsules
Flap of articular cartitage due to loosening of articular cartitage (right
 Chronic cartilage lesions are associated with formation of regenerative
arrow) with reaction of underlying bone showing thickening and cyst
clusters of chondrocytes forming nodules, 'brood capsules: Pig.
formation (ieft arrow). Pig. Demineralized section. HE.
 Deminerafized section. Azan.
148
Chapter 12
12-25 Ulnar osteochondrosis
12-26 Ulnar osteochondrosis
Distal radius/ulna, median section. Disturbed enchondral ossification
 Distal ulna, median section. Disturbed enchondral ossification with lack 
of trabeculation and cyst formation in the distal uinar metaphysis
(right), due to dyschondroplasiajosteochondrosis in the distal uinar
[arrow] due to dyschond ropilasia/osteochond rosis in the distal growth
 growth plate cartilage [arrow). Clinical signs of 'Leg weakness.
plate. Clinical signs of 'Leg weakness: Slaughter pig. Azan.
Slaughter pig.
12-27 Osteochondronecrosis (legg-Calve-Perthes disease)
12-28 Joint mice
Femoral head with osteochondrosis and necrosis of the superficial bone
Femoro-patellar joint. Three loose bodies (joint mice, arrow) consisting
layer and cartilage (upper arrow) in dwarf breed dogs. The overlying
of cartilage and bone in association with deforming arthrosis of the
articular cartilage has detached (lower arrow). Toy poodle dog.
ridge of the trochlea. Overfilling of the joint cavity with clear, watery
6 months.
 synovial fluid. Villous proliferation of the synoviat membrane. The
patela is on the left. Chronic arthrosis. Horse.
The Locomotory System
149
12-29 Hip dysplasia
12-30 Osteoarthrosis/osteoarthritis
Shallow acetabulum with extensively thickened joint capsule (left
 Chronic degeneration of articular cartitage of both stifle joints with
arrow) and broad, flattened femoral head with erosions [right arrow) in
reactive bone apposition, among others visible as marginal exostoses
the articular cartilage (deforming arthrosis]. German shepherd dog.
[arrows]. Oid dog.
1'/2 years.
12-31 Degeneration of intervertebral disc
12-32 Degeneration and herniation of intervertebrai disc
Intervertebral discs, transverse sections. Normal disc (lower left) with
Several intervertebral discs have bulging towards the spinal canal
jelly-like center (nucleus puiposus)] surrounded by the onnulus fbrosus.
[arrows). One of them has ruptured revealing a debris mass originating
Calcification of degenerated nucleus puiposus (lower right).
from a degenerated pulpous nucleus, part of which is sticking to the
Degeneration of nucleus pulposus with ruptured onnurus fibrosus
spinal cord. Dachshund dog. 4 years.
(upper left and right). Dachshund dog, 2 years.
150
Chapter12
12-33 Spondylosis
12.34 Spondylosis
Thoracic vertebrae, sagitta! section. Ankylosing spondylosis, fusion of
Lumbal vertebral junction, lateral aspect, X-
the vertebrae by new bone formation on ventral aspect of vertebral
ray photograph. Note ventral bony bridge
bodies (arrows]. Horse, 17 years.
between two vertebrae. Dog.
12-35 Hypertrophic (pulmonary) osteoarthropathy (acropachy.
12-36 Hypertrophic (pulmonary] osteoarthropathy
Marie-Bamberger's disease)
Radius, transverse section. Periosteal hyperostosis; the newly formed 
Macerated specimens of humerus, radius, ulna and metacarpals.
trabecular bone,perpendicular to the surface, is clearly distinguishabte
Extensive diffuse osteophyte formation (hyperostosis) on the periosteal
from the original cortex [compact bone]. Dog had extensive lung
surfaces, predominantly of the metacarpals and radius/ulna. Extensive
tumors. Dog. Demineralized section. HE.
lung tumors were present. Dog.
The Locomotory System
151
12-37 Hemarthros
12-38 Suppurative osteomyelitis
Tarsocrural joint. The joint cavity is filled with bfood. Warfarin@
Spine, sagittal section. Large abscess in the spinal process of a thoracic
 poisoning (cumarine-derived vitamin K antagonist). Fattening pig.
vertebra resulting in compression of the spinal cord (arrow), secondary
paralysed hindquarter.
12-39 Suppurative osteomyeitis
12-40 Granutomatous osteomyelitis
Medial femoral condyle, sagittal section. Large cystic lesion (arrow)
Spine, sagittal section.Various granulomatous lesions in vertebral
with necrotizing and suppurative osteomyelitis in thesubchondral
bodies. Avian tuberculosis (Mycobacterium gvium]. Pony.
bone. Osteolysis and inflammation extending into the joint cartilage.
Reactive osteosclerosis surrounds the cyst. Rhodococcus equi
infection. Foal.
152
Chapter12
12-41 Acute arthritis
12-42 Subacute arthritis
Talocrural joint. Joint cavity is filled with serofbrinous exudate, with a
Carpat joint. Smali and large ulcers on articular cartilage, filed with
hyperemic and edematous synovial membrane. Escherichia cofi
proliferation of hyperemic granufation tissue [ponnus);: swollen and
infection. Foal.
 edematous synovial membrane with fibrin deposition. Caif.
12-43 Deforming arthritis
12-44 Chronic arthritis
 Femora! joint, sagittal section. Unilaterai total destruction of joint 
Stifie joint, submerged in water. Enlargement of the villi of the synovial
cartilage (arrow) due to septic arthritis [right). Compared to normal
 membrane due to chronic inffammation and hyperplastic changes. Pig.
joint [left)]. Streptococcus zooepidemicus infection. Foal, 10 weeks.
The Locomotory System
153
12-45 Avian amyloid arthropathy
12-46 Avian amyloid arthropathy
Overfiled joint cavity with orange-colored amyloid (arrows). Galinoe
Green colored, birefringent material indicative for amyloid.
often develop amyloid deposits in joints with chronic arthritis.
Enterococcus foecolis infection. Commercial 'brown' layer, 10 weeks.
 Enterococcus foecalis infection. Commercial 'silver' layer chicken,
Congo red stain.
15 weeks.
12-47 0steosarcoma
12-48 0steosarcoma
Proximaf humerus, sagittal section. Irregular tumor mass in the
 Polymorphic ntoplastic osteogenic ceils that have prod uced some smail
pue paieitigui sey pue suog leuibo sun psoeldau sey sisydenau
irregufar, homogeneous, eosinophilic masses of osteoid (arrows).
destroyed the cortical bone and surrounding tissues. The tumor had
Mitotic figure (arrowhead). Bouvier de Flandres dog. 7 years.
 grown into the epiphysis. Marked endosteal and periosteal new reactive
Undemineralized section. HE.
bone. Airedale terrier dog, 9 years.
154
Chapter 12
12-49 Chondrosarcoma
12-50 Chondrosarcoma
Rib, costochondral junction, sagittal section, Hyafine proliferative tumor 
Polymorphic neoplastic chondrocytes. Dog. HE.
 mass with necrosis has replaced the originai bone and has grown
 Outwards. German shepherd dog.
12-51 Synovial sarcoma
12-52 Metastatic melanotic bone tumor
Stifle joint, sagittat section. Tumors in and around joint cavity with
Thoracic vertebral body. Intertrabecular growth of melanin-producing
metastases [arrows). The articular surface remained free of the
tumor cells and osteolysis of the original bone tissue. Primary oral
 malignancy. Dog.
 malignant melanoma. Note the black-stained tumor masses (arrow).
Dachshund dog. Demineralized section. HE.
The Locomotory System
155
12-53 Myofibrillar hypopiasia (congenital splayleg)
12-54 Congenital articular rigidity (arthrogryposis congenito) 
The rear legs are extended forward and laterally as a result of transient
Flexion and articular rigidity of the forelimb joints. Piglet.
myofibrillar hypopiasia. To prevent further spreading of the legs, they 
 are taped together. Piglet, one day.
12-55 Neurogenic muscular atrophy
12-56 Muscular regeneration
Cross-section of the dorsat cricoarytenoid muscle. All fascicles contain
Characteristic row of centrally located nuclei (arrow) in regenerating
 atrophic angular muscle fibers between fibers with normal diameter
muscle cells after repair of a wound. Dog. HE.
aesip e sisleed peshue Aepaih siaay paudonaday pue
 associated with neuronal foss in brain stem nuclei. Bouvier des Ftandres
dog, 6 months. HE.
156
Chapter 12
12-57 Nutritional myodegeneration
12-58 Hyaline degeneration
Longitudinal section. Swollen, coarse-structured, pale, soft muscie
Homogeneous, cosinophilic, fragmented muscle fiber undergoing 
tissue (white muscle disease). Histologically, a variable degree of
phagocytic removal. Nutritional deficiency (selenium/vitamin E).
degeneration was present in the muscle. Vitamin E deficiency.
Calf. HE.
Donkey foal.
12-59 Exertional rhabdomyolysis
12-60 Back-muscle necrosis
Muscle with pale areas containing necrotic muscle fibers with loss of
Longissimus muscle, transverse section. Sharply demarcated, elevated,
cross-striation and loss of purple staining of myofibrillary cytoplasm.
pale, dull areas of coagulation necrosis. Clinically, signs of 'Banana
 Exertional rhabdomyolysis after tying-up. Horse. Phosphotungstic acid
disease' after transport to the abattoir. Malignant hyperthermia/stress
hematoxylin.
syndrome. Slaughter pig.
The Locomotory System
157
12-61 Blackleg (gangrenous myositis)
12-62 Blackleg (myositis)
 Pelvic muscle, cut surface. The muscle is dark red in coior, dry, friable,
Hindquarter muscle with hemorrhage, necrosis, edema and gas.
 and porous due to the presence of gas bubbles. The fascia is edematous.
Ciostridium chauvoei infection. Cow. HE.
Clostridium chauvoei infection. Cow.
12-63 Muscular dystrophy
12-64 Muscular dystrophy
 Swollen, pale-colored diaphragmatic muscuiar tissue. Hereditary
Diaphragmatic muscie, transverse section. Great variation in muscle
glycogenosis. Dog.
fiber diameter,vacuolar degeneration, fiber splitting,centra! cores,
phagocytosis, endomysial fibrosis. Bovine familial muscular dystrophy.
Meuse-Rhine-Yssel cow, 5 years. Gomori's trichrome.
158
Chapter 12
12-65 Muscutar steatosis [pseudohypertrophia fipomatoso]
12-66 Bovine cosinophilic myositis
Replacement of muscle by adipose tissue. Slaughter cow.
Semitendinosus muscle. Rather well circumscribed, elevated, pale-
greenish areas, indicative of infiltration of many eosinophilic
granulocytes.Cow.
12-67 Bovine eosinophilic myositis
12-68 Canine eosinophilic myositis
Semitendinosus muscle. The inflammatory pattern is dominated by
Atrophy of masseter muscies due to chronic eosinophilic myositis.
eosinophilic granulocytes. Cow. HE.
German shepherd dog.
The LocormotorySystem
159
12-69 Sarcosporidiosis
12-70 Sarcosporidiosis
 Skeletat muscle. Multiple small white foci due to inflammatory
Sarcosporidial pseudocyst in muscle fiber. in cattle and pigs such
reactions deveioping after death of sarcosporidial cysts. Cow.
histological cysts (without inflammatory reaction) give no gross
features and are overlooked. Lesions appear when the parasite dies and
become larger and then they are grossly recognizable (Sorcocystis
gigontea (syn. S. ovifelis) infection). Sheep. HE.
12-71 Cysticercosis
12-72 Trichinosis
Masseter muscle. Ellipsoidal, 0.5-1 cm, cystic structures, with clear
Trichineila spiralis in muscle fiber. Haematoxylin-safranin, Wid boar.
contents and with a white scolex in each. Cysticercus inermis
infection. Cow.
Chapter
The skin
13-1 Macules 164
13-28  Degranulation of eosinophils around collagen fibers in
13-2 Papule 164
dermis 170
13-3 Vesicle/pustule
164
13-29
 Sebaceous adenitis
171
13-4 Pustule 164
13-30  Nodular panniculitis 
171
13-5 Nodules
165
13-31  Panniculitis/steatitis 
171
13-6 Wheals 165
13-32
 Panniculitis/steatitis
171
13-7
Crusts 165
13-33
Alopecia
172
13-8
 Lichenification 
165
13-34
 Follicular and dermal atrophy with telogen hair 
13-9
 Orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis
166
folticles
172
13-10
 Parakeratotic hyperkeratosis
166
13-35
Follicular atrophy with catagen hair follicles  172
13-11
 Epidermal dysplasia 
166
13-36
 Sweat gland cyst
172
13-12
 Epidermal spongiosis
166
13-37
 Papilloma 
173
13-13
Acantholysis
167
13-38
 Papilloma
173
13-14
Apoptosis
167
13-39
 Squamous cell carcinoma  173
13-15
 Epidermal necrosis
167
13-40
 Follicular cyst
173
13-16
 Deposition of calcium salts
167
13-41
Pilomatricoma
174
13-17
 Foilicular dysplasia
168
13-42
 Infundibular keratinizing acanthoma 
174
13-18
 Perivascular dermatitis
168
13-43
 Infundibular keratinizing acanthoma
174
13-19
 Dermatitis
168
13-44
 Trichoblastoma
174
13-20
Interface dermatitis
168
13-45
 Sebaceous gland hyperplasia  175
13-21
Furuncle
169
13-46
 Sebaceous gland adenoma
175
13-22
 Foiliculitis and furunculosis 
169
13-47
 Perianal gland adenoma 
175
13-23
Alopecia
169
13-48
Equine sarcoid 175
13-24
 Parasitic folliculitis
169
13-49  Melanoma (malignant)
176
13-25
 Dermatitis and crust formation 
170
13-50
 Canine histiocytoma
176
13-26
 Fungal infection
170
13-51
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
176
13-27
 Granulomatous dermatitis 
170
13-52 Epitheliotropic lymphoma
176
THE SKIN
bulla (large blister; fluid-filled raised area, ≥5 mm);
pustule (circumscribed, pus-filled, raised area);
The skin consists of epidermis, dermis, adnexa (hair follicles,
sebaceous glands, sweat glands) and subcutis.
■
wheal (itchy, transient, elevated area with variable blanch-
ing or erythema, due to dermal edema); and
Gross evaluation of the skin is synonymous with a clinical or
■
 cyst (circumscribed cavity, filled with clear fluid, hom or
dermatological evaluation of the skin.
sebaceous material).
Reactions of the skin may result in primary or secondary
lesions:
Identification of primary skin lesions and assessing their diag-
 A primary lesion may be defined as the initial lesion that devel-
nostic significance is an essential step in formulating a diagnosis
 ops as a direct reflection of an underlying disease. These include:
or differential diagnoses.
 macule or patch (circumscribed flat area of any size,
Secondary lesions evolve from primary lesions or are induced by
usually characterized by its color);
external factors such as trauma. Secondary lesions include epider-
papule (elevated solid area, ≤ 5 mm) or
 mal collarette, scar, excoriation, erosion or ulcer, lichenification,
 nodule (elevated solid area, ≥ 5 mm) or
and callus.
plaque (elevated flat-topped area, ≥ 5 mm);
A number of gross lesions may be primary or srrondary such as
vesicle (fluid-filled raised area, ≤ 5 mm); or
 alopecia, scales, crusts, comedones, or pigmentary changes.
161
62
Chapter 13
At the histological level, the general reaction patterns of the skin  keratinocytes. This process of acantholysis may be mediated by
can be divided according to the localization or according to the  immune mechanisms, as in pemphigus foliaceus.
type of lesion (mainly inflammation and neoplasia). Based on 
localization, the reaction pattermns can be divided into those Other epidermal lesions
affecting the epidermis, dermis, hair follicles, sebaceous glands, Other epidermal lesions include dysplasia, exocytosis (the
sweat glands, and subcutis.
migration of leukocytes into the epidermis), necrosis, and hyper-
and depigmentation.
Epidermis
Dermis
The most common lesions are:
 epidermal hyperplasia;
 Dermal changes may consist of:
 epidermal atrophy:
■an increase or decrease in collagen;
hypergranulosis, hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis and dys-
 collagen degeneration which includes dystrophic minerali-
keratosis;
zation and the deposition of various substances such as
 epidermal edema;
amyloid, lipid, or glycosaminoglycans as in mucinosis.
■acantholysis; and
 other epidermal lesions.
Hair follicles
Hair follicles may show keratosis, hypertrophy, atrophy, or
Epidermal hyperplasia
dysplasia.
Epidermal hyperplasia is an increase in the number of nucleated
In some conditions the hair follicles show excessive trichilemma!
 cells. Acanthosis is often used as a synonym for epidermal hyper-
keratinization, also referred to as 'catagen arrest follicles'
plasia although, strictly speaking, acanthosis refers to hyper-
plasia of the stratum spinosum.
Sebaceous glands
Sebaceous glands may show hyperplasia or atrophy.
Epidermal atrophy
Fpidermal atrophy is uncommon.
Sweat glands
 Pathology of apocrine sweat glands is rare and they are often
Hypergranulosis, hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis and dyskeratosis
activated in dermatitis.
Hypergranulosis denotes an increase in the width of the stratum
granulosum.
Pattern analysis of inflammatory skin disease
indicates an increase in width (hyperplasia) of the stratum
 Inflammation may involve each of the components of the skin
 and may be classified on the basis of:
although the quality of the keratin may be abnormal.
the affected structure;
In parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, usually shortened to parakera-
 type of inflammatory cell(s) present;
tosis, the mode of keratinization has been disturbed, characterized
 lesion distribution; and
by retention of the nuclei of the keratinocytes in the stratum
chronicity
corneum
and degeneration of the nucleus are individual (groups of) cells inflammatory skin disease was developed to aid in the histological
below the stratum granulosum that have undergone abnormal q
diagnosis of skin disease. The pattern selected to characterize an
and premature keratinization. They are difficult to distinguish individual disease is considered the most typical and therefore
 from apoptotic cells.
the most diagnostic. However, one specific condition may
exhibit different patterns at successive stages of its development
Epidermal edema
whereas several different diseases may manifest the same
 pattern. Furthermore, some patterns are more diagnostic than
Epidermal cdema can be intercellular between keratinocytes 
 major patterns are recogrized (variations may occur between
epidermis are referred to as microvesicles, vesicles or bullae.
 Perivascular dermatitis: this is the most common and the
least diagnostic pattern. Lesions are characterized by
Acantholysis
vasodilatation of dermal blood vessels and perivascular
Acantholytic keratinocytes, identified as rounded cells with hyper-
 inflammatory cell infiltration.
cosinophilic cytoplasm and morphologically normal nuclei, are 
■ Interface dermatitis: in this pattern superficial dermal
formed by the loss of intercellular connection between viable
inflammation is orientated tightly to and often obscuring
The Skin163
 the dermal-epidermal junction. The pathogenetic mechan-
Neoplasia
ism of this pattern of inflammation reflects immune-
 Neoplasms of the skin are frequently diagnosed in domestic
mediated damage to epidermal basal cells, the basement
 animals and they are broadly classified as:
membrane or melanocytes.
■epithelial;
Intraepidermal or subepidernal vesicuiar and/or pustular
mesenchymal; and 
dernatitis: lesions are characterized by intraepidermal
melanocytic.
vesicles, bullae and/or pustules or by separation of the
dermis from the epidermis without/with pustule forma-
 In recent years, immunohistochemical characterization of cyto-
tion, respectively. Pustules may contain variable types of
plasmic or surface markers has become a powerful tool in the
inflammatory cells, but predominantly leukocytes.
diagnosis of several types of cutaneous tumors.
■ Nodular and/or diffuse dermatitis: this pattern is charac
terized by multifocal nodular inflammation, which tends
Epithelial neoplasms
towards confluence or a diffuse pattern,
Epithelial neoplasms are separated into epidermal, follicular, seba-
 Vasculitis: small or large vessels are the target of the inflam-
 ceous, sweat gland and nailbed epithelial tumors.
matory response. Distinguishing between primary and
secondary cutaneous vasculitis may be difficult. Most cuta-
 neous vasculitides in dogs and cats affect small vessels.
Mesenchymal neoplasms
■ Folliculitis, furunculosis and sebaceous adenitis: folliculitis
Mesenchymal neoplasms include spindle cell tumors, vascular
may be luminal or/and mural; furunculosis signifies the
tumors and round cell tumors. Round cell tumors comprise a
rupture of hair follicles due to inflammatory damage and
 heterogenous group of tumors that have in common more or less
usually is the result of luminal folliculitis; sebaceous ade-
spherical cells. This group includes histiocytoma and cutaneous
nitis may be a primary condition in the dog and cat while
histiocytosis, mast cell tumor, lymphoma, plasmacytoma and
sebaceous glands also may be caught up in conditions
 transmissible venereal tumor.
causing folliculitis and /or furunculosis.
Pannirlitis: a common reaction pattern characterized by
Melanocytic neoplasms
inflammation of the subcutaneous fat tissue that lies
Melanocytic cells are derived from the neural crest. The melanomus
between the derimis and the fascia.
may exhibit melanin containing cells, but amelanocytic melanomas
Atrophic dermatosis: in this non-inflammatory patterm,
also occur. The cells may show a rather epithelial pattern, but in
atrophic changes in hair follicles and other adnexa and,
 other melanomas spindle cells as in mesodermal tumors dominate.
less commonly, in the dermis and epidermis are present.
 Melanomas are mostly seen in dogs, cats and horses.
164
Chapter 13
13-1 Macules
13-2 Papule
Partially shaved skin. A solid elevation up to about 5 mm in diameter
difference in color when compared to the surrounding skin. Several
due to a process in the epidermis (epidermal papule) or dermis (dermal
brown-black pigmented macules are present. Macules may also occur
papule]. Such lesions may be due to intercellular or intracellular edema.
due to a lack of pigment in a dark skin or by hyperemia. Dog.
 or the proliferation of epidermal or dermal cells (inflammation,
 (s-el biy aas) sainpou palles ae suoisal ahien (eiseldou
13-3 Vesicle/pustule
13-4 Pustule
A single vesicle or pustule in a skin biopsy of a dog. Vesicles are less
 A subcorneal pustule filled with neutrophils is elevated above the
than 5 mm in diameter and may be intra-epidermal (subcorneal or
surface of the skin. Suspected subcorneal dermatosis. Dog. HE.
suprabasal] or subepidermal, contain fluid and can be formed by
intercellular edema, intracellular edema (ballooning degeneration] or
|ack of cohesion between epithelial cells (acantholysis). Pustules
contain inflammatory ceils, especially granulocytes. Dog.
The Skin
165
13-5 Nodules
13-6Wheals
Several nodules in the dermis due to the
Wefl-circumscribed raised areas with a flat surface, caused by dermal
 proliferation of mesenchymal cells and
edema, sometimes in combination with hyperemia. A condition in 
deposition of mucins (giucosaminoglycans) in
which many wheals are present is called urticaria or hives. Erysipelas.
the interceliular matrix. Myxomatosis. Rabbit.
Swine.
13-7 Crusts
13-8 Lichenification
Dermatitis with distinct crusts composed of dried exudate, sebum,
 Axillary area. Thickening of the skin with exaggerated superficial skin
keratin and dirt: exudative epidermitis (generalized form). Greasy pig
markings. Usuaily the epidermis as well as the dermis is hypertrophic.
disease (Staphylococcus hyicus). Piglet, 3 weeks.
This secondary change can occur in cases of chronic dermatitis, as
shown here. Dog.
166
Chapter 13
13-9 Orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis
13-10 Parakeratotic hyperkeratosis
Increased thickness of the stratum corneum is referred to as
Increased thickness of the stratum corneum with retention of
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis (often shortened to hyperkeratosis). There
keratinocyte nuclei is referred to as parakeratotic hyperkeratosis
is a layer of anucleated keratin covering a hyperplastic epidermis with
(usually shortened to parakeratosis]. Note maintenance of nuclei in
hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the basal celi iayer and prominent
superficial cornified layer. Dog. HE.
nucleoli. Note large, pale keratinocytes [known as koilocytes) and large
 purple keratohyalin granules (arrow). Viral papilloma, Dog. HE.
 13-11 Epidermal dysplasia
13-12 Epidermal spongiosis
There is irregular epidermal hyperptasia with disorganized maturation
Spongiosis or epidermal edema is characterized by separation of
of ceils, anisokaryosis, hyperchromasia and prominent nucieoli. Note
keratinocytes by intercelular edema fluid; it may result in a vesicle. in
involvement of foilicuiar epithelium (arrow). Dermal invasion is not
this case there is also exocytosis of lymphocytes into the epidermis
present. Bowenoid in situ carcinoma, Cat. HE.
(arrow]. Dog. HE.
167
13-13 Acantholysis
13-14Apoptosis
 Pustule con taining large numbers of neutrophils and acantholytic
Several deeply eosinophilic, shrunken apoptotic cels with pyknotic
epidermal cells. Acantholytic cells have hypereosinophilic cytoplasm
nuclei in the basai and spinous layers of the epidermis. Erythema
and generally contain normal nuclei (arrow). Pemphigus foliaceus.
multiforme. Dog.
Dog. HE.
13-15 Epidermal necrosis
13-16 Deposition of calcium salts
 Fufl-thickness necrosis of the epidermis and necrosis of folicular
Nodule excised from the lateral aspect of the
 cpithelium. Several intracytopiasmic viral inclusions within the
tarsus. White calcium deposits in dermis and
cytoplasm of follicular epithelial cells are present (arrow). Cowpox virus 
Subcutis, surrounded by gray fibrous tissue.
infection. Cat. HE.
Calcinogranuloma (calcinosis circumscripto).
600
168
Chapter 13
13-17 Follicular dysplasia
13-18 Perivascular dermatitis
Abnormal clumping of melanin in dysplastic hair follicles and in hair
The superficial dermis reveals perivascular inflammation [arrows] with
shafts. Color mutant alopecia. Doberman pinscher dog. HE.
dilation of dermal capillary blood vessels. This reaction pattern is shared
by many common skin diseases especially allergic dermatitis. Dog. HE.
13-19 Derrmatitis
13-20 Interface dermatitis
 Dermatitis involving the perioral, periocular and nasal skin. Lesions at
There is a moderate mixed superficial dermal inflammation partially
the mucocutaneous junctions often have an immune-mediated 
obscuring the dermal-epidermal junction. Note pigmentary
pathogenesis. Toxic epidermal necrolysis. Dog.
incontinence (arrow). Discoid fupus erythematosus. Dog. HE.
The Skin:
169
13-21 Furuncle
13-22 Folliculitis and furunculosis
 Suppurative inflammation originating in a hair follicle and extending
Luminat folliculitis (arrow] followed by rupture of follicular epithelium,
 into the surrounding dermis. Dog.
release of hair shafts into dermis and severe perifollicular 
 pyogranulomatous inflammation, typical of furunculosis. Dog. HE.
13-23Alopecia
13-24 Parasitic folliculitis
Areas of aiopecia on the head and neck. Demodicosis. Dog.
Luminal folliculitis (arrow) and perifoliculitis with numerous Demodex
mites within follicular lumens. inset: Demodex mite to illustrate whole
mite; note iegs. Demodicosis. Dog. HE.
170
Chapter 13
13-25 Dermatitis and crust formation
13-26 Fungal infection
Circumscribed area with alopecia and crust formation. Dermatophytosis
Hair shaft contains arthrospores and hyphae. In the dog, Microsporum
(syn. 'ringworm') caused by Irichophyton infection. Cow.
conis is the most common cause of dermatophytosis. Dog. PAs stain.
M
13-27 Granulomatous dermatitis
13-28 Degranulation of eosinophils around collagen fibers in dermis
Thickening of the upper lip. Histologically.
Brightty stained, eosinophilic, amorphous debris (degranulation of
there are three possible differential diagnoses
eosinophils) and collagen fibers; known as 'flame figure' (arrow).
for these lesions in the lips of cats: indolent
Surrounded by a layer of macrophages (M) and numerous intact
ulcer, eosinophilic granuloma or eosinophilic
eosinophils in the dermis. Eosinophilic granuloma. Cat. HE.
plaque. Cat.
The Skin
171
13-29 Sebaceous adenitis
13-30 Nodular panniculitis
 Periadnexal granulomatous inflammation at the site of previous 
The subcutis contains a circumscribed nodule of inflammation. Nodular
 sebaceous glands [arrow]. Sebaceous adenitis. Dog. HE.
 panniculitis. Dog.
13-31 Panniculitis/steatitis
13-32 Pannicvlitis/steatitis
Cross-section of fatty crest dorsal to the nuchal ligament (L) of two
 Necrosis of fat tissue, chronic granulomatous inflammation with
ponies. Swelling and multiple yellowish lobules of necrotic fat tissve (at
 multinucleated giant cells (arrow) and macrophages containing 
left) in pony with nutritional steatitis ('yellow fat disease'). Fatty crest
yellowish pigment (P). Infiltration of inflammatory cells in and around
and nuchal ligament of normal pony at right.
ruptured adipocytes. Nutritional steatitis. Pony. HE.
172
Chapter 13
13-33 Alopecia
13-34 Follicular and dermal atrophy with telogen hair follicles
Bilaterally symmetric alopecia and a pendulous abdomen due to
The infundibula of hair follicles are filled with keratin plugs (follicular
hypercortisolism (Cushing's syndrome). The alopecia is caused by
keratosis). The dermis is atrophic. In the lower part of the picture some
atrophy of the hair matrix. This type of alopecia may also by caused by
atrophic (telogenic) hair matrices can be observed (arrow).
other hormonal imbalances. Dog.
Hypercortisolism (Cushing's disease), Dog. HE.
13-35 Follicular atrophy with catagen hair follicles
13-36 Sweat gland cyst
Follices in catagen stage with extensive tricholemmal keratinization
Cystic space, filled with a clear fluid.Microscopic examination of the
 also referred to as flame follicle (at left). Note atrophic hair bulb
wall revealed an inner lining composed of cuboidai cells characteristic
attached to outer root sheath (long arrow] and calcification of
of apocrine sweat gland epithelium. Dog.
connective tissue (short arrow),. Hypercortisolism [Cushing's disease].
Dog. HE.
The Skin
173
13-37 Papilloma
13-38 Papilloma
Benign papilliferous tumor of the
 Exophytic papilloma with papillary projections covered by hyperplastic.
epidermis. Cow.
hyperkeratotic epithelium. Viral papilloma. Dog. HE.
13-39 Squamous cell carcinoma
13-40 Follicular cyst
Squamous cell carcinoma (arrows) infiltrating into the phalangeal bone
In this follicular cyst of the matrical type the wallis composed of
(8). Nailbed squamous cell carcinoma. Dog. HE.
 basaloid epithelial cells. There is abrupt keratinization and the cyst
cavity contains keratin in which numerous pale nuclear outlines ('ghost
celis') are present. The structure of the wall in matrical cyst is similar to
the walls lining cystic structures in pilomatricoma (see Fig. 13-41).
Most follicular cysts (of the infundibular type) are lined by a layer of
 squamous epithelium. Dog. HE.
174
Chapter 13
13-41 Pilomatricoma
13-42 Infundibular keratinizing acanthoma
Macroscopic view of a calcified pilomatricoma (syn. necrotizing and
This tumor (syn. keratoacanthoma or intracutaneous cornifying 
calcifying epithelioma of Malherbe) in the dermis and subcutis. Dog.
sey Alensn pue (sjainpou aldiinw do Aenios se siuasaid (ewroauiida
an opening to the skin surface through a pore; this can be seen on the
ydesboioud aut yo jed yaddn aui ie uo-ssoo aut ui pue aoeuns
(arrows). Dog.
13-43 Infundibular keratinizing acanthoma
13-44 Trichoblastoma
A keratin-flled cystic structure (C) is lined by a wallcomposed of horn
Ribbon type trichoblastoma consisting of epithelial celis arranged in
cysts and cords and trabeculae of epithelial cells. The tumor in the
columns with their nuclei orientated perpendicular to the long axis of
dermis is well-encapsulated (arrow). Dog. HE.
the columns. Dog. HE.
The Skin
175
13-45 Sebaceous gland hyperplasia
13-46 Sebaceous gland adenoma
Small wart-like tumors on the ear. Dog.
Lobules of reserve cells and muitiple clusters of sebaceous cells. Some
ducts at left (D). Dog. HE.
13-47 Perianal gland adenoma
13-48 Equine sarcoid
The tumor is encapsulated (C) and composed of lobules of large
 Dermal spindle-cell tumor extending to the dermal-epidermal junction.
 polygonal cells (hepatoid aspect) with small reserve cells at the
Long epidermal rete pegs [probably remnants of hair folicles) are
periphery. Lobules of normal hepatoid glands at left (arrow). Dog. HE.
characteristic. Horse. HE.
176
Chapter 13
13-49 Melanoma (malignant)
13-50 Canine histiocytoma
 Digit with nail (arrow). Black tumor, consisting of heavily pigmented
Intradermal round cell tumor with tumor cells arranged in sheets and
melanocytes. Dog.
 groups. The tumor cells are Langerhans cells. Lymphocytic infitration at 
right. Dog. HE.
13-51 Epitheliotropic lymphoma
13-52 Epitheliotropic lymphoma
 The epidermis and superficial dermis are infiltrated by neoplastic
Immunohistochemical staining of a skin section of a dog with
lymphocytes. The intraepithelial ceis form a discrete aggregate referred
epitheliotropic lymphoma using an antibody raised to CD3. Note
to as Pautrier's microabscess (arrow). Dog. HE.
abundant positive staining of neoplastic lymphocytes in the epidermis
and dermis indicating T-cell lymphoma. Dog.
Chapter
The mammary gland
14-1  Acute mastitis  178
14-10  Fibroadenomatous change (fibroepithelial
14-2  Acute necrotizing mastitis 178
hyperplasia]  180
14-3 Subacute necrotizing mastitis 178
14-11
 Fibroadenomatous change (fibroepithelial
14-4  Acute necrotizing mastitis  178
hyperplasia]  180
14-5  Chronic purulent galactophoritis and mastitis   179
14-12 Mammary gland carcinoma 180
14-6 Subacute mastitis  179
14-13 Simple adenoma 181
14-7  Metaplasia of cisternal epithelium  179
14-14 Complexadenoma 181
14-8 Granulomatous mastitis 179
14-15 Benign mixed tumor  181
14-9 Duct ectasia 180
14-16  Adenocarcinoma
181
THE MAMMARY GLAND
Neoplasms
The most common pathological processes of the mammary glandDogs
and cats.
structure as well as biological behavior. The morphological
 classification of canine mammary tumors depends on several
Inflammatorylesions
characteristics including the way of growth and the cell type
 Inflammatory lesions are classified according to their distribu-
 involved, i.e. luminal epithelial cells and/or myoepithelial cells
tion and the nature of the inflammatory reaction.
and /or mesenchymal cells.
Parenchymatous mastitis
Simple tumors
In simple mammary fumors one cell type either resembling
Parenchymatous mastitis refers to inflammation of the secretory
 epithelial cells or myoepithelial cells, is involved.
portion of the gland (acini, intralobular ducts and interstitium).
gangrenous mastitis). Affer demarcation the necrotic part may  In complex tumors both luminal epithelial and myoepithelial
be shed.
 components are present.
Galactophoritis
Mixed tumors
Mixedtumors  arecharacterized  by  an epithelial  component
Galactophoritis refers to inflammation of the larger (interlobular)
 (luminal and/or myoepithelial) and mesenchymal cells that have
draining ducts.
produced cartilage and /or bone and /or fat.
Interstitial mastitis
Inflammatory carcinoma
Interstitial mastitis refers to inflammation of the stromal tissue.
A highly malignant type is the anaplastic carcinoma that, due to
Abscess formation
clinical aspects of inflammation and is therefore referred to as
Suppurative inflammation may lead to abscess formation.
inflammatory carcinoma or 'mastitis carcinomatosa'.
Granulomatous inflammation
Cats
Granulomatous inflammation is usually characterized by the pre-
 In cats, mammary tumors are mostly malignant and are pre-
sence of nodular lesions.
dominantly tubular or solid adenocarcinomas.
A common non-neoplastic lesion in the cat is the fibroadeno
matous change orfibroepithelial hyperplasia associated with increased
exposure to endogenous or exogenous progestogens.
177
178
Chapter 14
14-1 Acute mastitis
14-2 Acute necrotizing mastitis
In the inflamed quarter there is a distinct hyperemia, which is absent in
 Dark blue discoloration of the skin of a swollen hindquarter, caused by
the normal quarter. The,inflammation was caused by Escherichio coli
a severe necrotizing inflammatory process, which is surrounded by a
and streptococci. Cow.
small hyperemic demarcation zone. The mastitis followed teat injury
and was caused by Escherichia coli and Clostridium perfringens. Cow.
14-3 Subacute necrotizing mastitis
14-4 Acute necrotizing mastitis
One extensive area and a few smaller areas, with coagulation necrosis
Focus of necrosis containing bacteriai colonies (N) surrounded by a
 of mammary tissue in which the lobular pattern is still visible. Some 
demarcation zone of intact and necrotic neutrophils. Mildly infiamed
grayish granulation tissue can be seen around the necrosis.Escherichio
mammary gland tissue at right. Note corpus amylaceum (arrow).
coli mastitis. Cow.
Cow. HE.
The Mammary Gland
179
14-5 Chronic purulent galactophoritis and mastitis
14-6 Subacute mastitis
The cisterns and ducts are filled with purulent exudate. Fibrosis has
Acini contain inflammatory celis predominantly neutrophils. 1n some 
developed in the periductular and glandular part of the udder.
acini destruetion of epithelial cells is seen (arrow). There is an increase
This pattern is mainly seen in streptococcal and staphylococcal
in interstitial connective tissue that contains mononuclear cells
infections. Cow.
especially lymphocytes and plasma cells. Cow. HE.
14-7 Metaplasia of cisterna! epithelium
14-8 Granulomatous mastitis
Opened teat. There is metaplasia of cistermal epithelium, which has
Cut surface. The udder contains numerous yeliowish-brown, often
changed into cornifying stratified squamous epithelium. The change is
coalescing nodules caused by granulomatous inflammation. Mastitis
due to Staphylococcus sp. Cow.
most commonly seen as a consequence of chronic galactophoritis. Cow.
180
Chapter 14
14-9 Duct ectasia
14-10 Fibroadenomatous change (fibroepithelial hyperplasia)
Excision from a mammary gland of a dog. There are several irregular
Multiple firm, large, well-circumscribed nodules in the mammary 
cavities within the mammary gland. On histology marked ectasia of 
 glands. Cat.
mammary gland ducts were present. Dog.
14-11 Fibroadenomatous change (fibroepitheliai hyperplasia)
14-12 Mammary gland carcinoma
Mammary gtand.Proliferation of intralobular ducts surrounded by
 Ulcerated tumor in the thoracic region of a bitch, Dog.
edematous fibrous stroma. Cat. HE.
The Mammary Gland
181
14-13 Simple adenoma
14-14 Complex adenoma
Skin on mammary gland. Neoplasm is composed of tubuleslined by a
Mammary gland. Portion of a tumor lobule composed of tubular
 single iayer of epithelial ceils. There is scant fibrous stroma. Bitch.
 structures lined by epithelial cells and myxoid tissue containing
Dog. HE.
proliferating myoepithelial cells. Bitch. Dog. HE.
14-15 Benign mixed tumor
14-16 Adenocarcinoma
Mammary gland. The lower part of the photomicrograph shows the
Mammary giand. Tumor iobule comprising numerous small tubules (at
epitheliaf part of the tumor. Other elements, such as cartilage (C) and
left} surrounded by fibrous connective tissue (desmoplasia; C). There is
bone including marrow-like structures (upper left), are visibie. (Tissue
 a tumor embolus within a lymph vessel (arrow). Atso note necrosis 
Not demineralized),. Bitch. Dog. HE.
within tumor (N). Cat. HE.
Chapter
The eye
15-1  Microphthalmia  185
15-11  Normal drainage angle  187
15-2 Microphthalmia 185
15-12 Goniodysgenesis 187
15-3 Persistent pupillary membrane 185
15-13  Luxation of the lens  188
15-4  Corneal ulceration  185
15-14 Cataract 188
15-5 Corneal rupture with scar tissue and retrocorneal
15-15  Retinal dysplasia 188
fbrovascular membrane  186
15-16 Retinal atrophy 188
15-6 Hypopyon 186
15-17  Retinaf detachment 189
15-7 Iridocyclitis 186
15-18  Squamous cell carcinoma 
189
15-8 Glaucoma
186
15-19 Melanoma (malignant) 
189
15-9  Normal pectinate ligament  187
15-20 Melanoma (malignant) 189
15-10  Dysplastic pectinate ligament  187
THE EYE
 Abnormal retinal development is histologically characterized
by the formation of rosettes as occurs in animals with hereditary
The eye is made up of several highly specialized tissues and
retinal dysplasia, or as a consequence of viral infections during
structures all contained in an enclosed environment in order to
pregnancy.
facilitate the registration of visual stimuli
Inflammation
Effects of reactivity on function
 The nomenclature of inflammation in the globe is related to the
General reaction patterns of ocular tissues are comparable to9
 structure affected. Inflammation frequently originates from the
nba e si sn sind) pals s! pue ioen ian Aa au jo asnaq 'aamo poq aul jo sed sao u aso
strict tissue-specifications, ocular reactions may have more (
 component of most intraocular diseases due to the high vascu-
 severe or even disastrous consequences with regard to the func-
 larity of the uveal tract. The uvea is a contiguous structure but
tion of the affected structures, and consequently also to the 
the individual constituents of the uveal tract (iris, ciliary body.
function of the eye.
 choroid) may be inflamed separately (iritis, cyclitis, choroiditis)
For instance, edema results in loss of translucency of the
 Inflammation involving all tunics of the eye is called a
 cornea or causes retinal detachment and has grave consequences
panophthaimitis,
for vision.
 Wound healing in the cornea is similar to wound healing in 
Glaucoma
the skin. Nevertheless, formation of granulation tissue will lead
 Glaucoma, increased intraocular pressure, is subdivided in open-
to loss of transparency of the corneal stroma and loss of function.
 angle and closed-angle glaucoma, or in primary and secondary
glaucoma.
Developmental defects
The embryological formation of the eye is an intricate interaction
 Primary glaucoma
 between different germinal layers, which results in the formation
 Primary glaucoma is usually defined as idiopathic, as the cause
of the highly differentiated tissues, optimally equipped for their
 is mostly unknown.
respective functions (light transmission through cornea, aqueous,
 In several canine breeds a hereditary, primary, open drainage-
lens and vitreous, and light registration in the retina). Devel- angle glaucoma can develop due to abnormal formation of the
 opmental defects are common in domestic animals, especially in pectinate ligament and trabecular meshwork, also known as 
the dog, and can lead to different, sometimes complex morpho- goniodysgenesis.
logical abnormalities with a varying degree of loss of function.
induction of several other ocular structures and subsequent Secondary glaucoma is associated with an underlying intra-
microphthaimia.
(cular pathology (e.g. inflammation, lens luxation).
183
184 Chapter 15
Cataract
Retinalatrophy
The lens is completely of epithelial origin, surrounded by a thick  The retina is derived from the neurectodermal germinal layer and
basement membrane (the lens capsule) and is translucent by contains photoreceptor cells. The retina is typically composed of
virtue of its crystalline composition and lack of pigment and ten different layers and communicates with the brain through the
blood vessels. Because of this lack of vascularization, an inflam- optical tract that enters the retina in the optical papilla.
matory reaction from within the lens is impossible.
Atrophy is a general response of the retina and can be the
 Reduced transparency of the lens is called cataract and has
 consequence of glaucoma, but is also known as a progressive
different causes (e.g. intraocular inflammation, trauma, toxins).
 hereditary trait in some canine breeds.
Histologically, cataract is characterized by a limited set of
lesions. Morphological changes can affect:
Neoplasia
the capsule (e.g. thickening, thinning, rupture);
Neoplasms in the globe are relatively common in comparion
 the epithelium (e.g. degeneration, necrosis, proliferation):
 animals. They may be primary ocular (e.g. iris melanoma, irido-
and
ciliar adenoma), metastatic or associated with periocular tissues
 the lens fibres (e.g. degeneration, sclerosis).
like the eyelids. Post-traumatic sarcomas are a well-known pheno-
Distinctive histological lesions in the cataract lens comprise
menon in cats.
bladder cells (large swollen epithelial cells) and Morgagnian globules
(fragmented and disintegrated lens fibers).
The Eye
185
15-1 Microphthalmia
15-2 Microphthalmia
Enucleated cye, sagittal section. Small, normal-shaped eye with
Microscopic aspect of the conical structure (see Fig 15-1] consisting of
pigmented cornea. No recognizable anterior chamber, ciliar apparatus
stromal tissue and a cystic structure, and covered with partly dysplastic
or lens. A white conical structure with a black rim and black spots is
retinal tissue. Texel sheep. HE.
attached to the optical papilla. Texe! sheep.
15-3 Persistent pupillary membrane
15-4 Corneal uiceration
Enucleated eye, cornea removed. Frontal view of the iris and Iens.
Enucieated eye.Frontal view of the cornea and sclera.Centrat necrosis
Strands of pigmented fibrous tissue, which are remnants of the anterior
and inflammation of the cornea with ulceration. Dog.
tunica vasculosa lentis, running from the iris to the lens. Focat anterior
cataract (white areas). Golden retriever dog.
186
Chapter 15
15-5 Corneal rupture with scar tissue and retrocorneal fbrovascular
15-6 Hypopyon
membrane
Accumulation of purulent exudate in the anterior eye chamber due to a
Cornea with a ruptured, curled Descemet's membrane (arrow). In the
suppurative uveitis. Escherichia coli infection. Foal.
course of wound healing. scar tissue in the corneal stroma (asterisk)
and a retrocornea! fibrovascular membrane (arrowhead) have been
formed. Dog, HE.
15-7lridocyclitis
15-8Glaucoma
Infiltration of trabecular meshwork, iris (l], ciliary body and cornea
Entarged left eye with severe edema of the cornea (the cornea appears
(arrow) by mononuclear inflammatory cells (mainly plasma cetls).
opaque). Blockage of the drainage angle by accumulation of exudate.
Dog. HE.
resulting in an increased intraocular pressure (secondary glaucoma).
and in this case enlargement of the eye (buphthalmus). Iritis. Cat.
The Eye
187
15-9 Normal pectinate ligament
15-10 Dyspiastic pectinate ligament
Enucleated eye, sagittal section. Stereomicroscopical view of the
Enucleated eye, sagittal section. Stereomicroscopical view of the
drainage angle between the cornea (arrow) and iris Il revealing fine
drainage angle between the cornea (arrow) and iris (l). Note the
filaments (arrowhead) of the pectinate ligament. This normal
abnormally shaped (shortened, thickened and fused) trabecula of the
arrangement of the flaments allows unobstructed outfiow of aqueous
pectinate ligament (arrowheads).Dysplasia may lead to obstruction of
into the trabecuiar meshwork. Bouvier des Flandres dog.
the aqeous and a subsequent rise in intraocular pressure (giaucoma).
Bouvier des Flandres dog.
15-11 Normal drainage angle
15-12 Goniodysgenesis
Normal drainage angle between the cornea (arrow) and base of the iris
Open drainage angle between the cornea [arrow) and iris [l), but
(1 with a portion of the pectinate ligament (arrowhead). Note the very
complete coflapse of the trabecular meshwork. A distinctive pectinate
loose aspect of the trabecular meshwork (upper left). Dog. HE.
ligament is not distinguishable. Dog. HE.
188
Chapter 15
15-13 Luxatior of the fens
15-14 Cataract
Enucleated eye, sagittal section. Luxation of the lens in the vitreous
Severe sweiling of lens epithelium (bladder cells; arrow) and spherical
body. Cataractous lens (mature cataract). Dog.
remnants of the lens matrix (Morgagnian globules; arrowhead). Note 
the normat capsule (asterisk). Dog. HE.
15-15 Retinal dysplasia
15-16 Retinal atrophy
Rosettes [arrow] are typical morphological lesions in a dysplastic retina.
Narrow retina with absence of the rod and cone layer and
The rosette consists of layers of differentiated neural cells surrounding
disappearance of the outer nuclear layer. Only disorganized remnants
 a central lumen. This eye also had retinal detachment with a typical
 of the inner nuclear layer remain. The ganglion cel layer is normal.
'tomb-stone'appearance of the retinal pigment epithelium (not visible
Dog. HE.
in this picture]. Dog. HE.
The Eye
189
15-17 Retinal detachment
15-18 Squamous cell carcinoma
Enucleated eye, sagittai section. Detachment of the retina. The retina
 Enucleated eye. Ulcerated neoplastic mass localized in the third
 remained attached to the oro serrato and the optical papilla onily. Dog.
eyelid. Cow.
15-19 Melanoma (malignant)
15-20 Melanoma (malignant)
Enucleated eye, frontal view. A circumscribed brown tumor in the
Enucleated eye, sagittal section. Diffuse
iris.Dog.
thickening of the iris with a tumor which has
a dark-brown color. Cat.
Chapter
The ear
16-1  Chronic otitis externa   192
16-3  Suppurative otitis media  192
16-2  Chronic otitis extema   192
16-4  Ceruminous gland carcinoma  192
THE EAR
The external ear canal
The ear is composed of external, middle and internal components.
Proliferative otitis externa
The main lesions consist of:
In the external canal of the ear a condition called prolijerative
 congenital malformations;
characterized by hyperplasia of the sebaceous and ceruminous
 inflammation; and
■neoplasia.
glands, which occasionally are cystic.
Morphological alterations of the ear may result in vestibular
 in the ear canal, most often in dogs.
dysfunction or deafness.
Neoplasia
In the ear canal, ceruminous gland adenomas or carcinomas are
The external ear
common, along with papillomas and squamous cell carcinomas.
The pinna
The middle eor
Skin disease
 Lesions of the pinna may be an extension of a generalized skin
Otitis media
disease. The etiology of these skin diseases may be bacterial,
pan aq aeu no eaxa so i panbas e aq Ae mpu s
 parasitic, furgal, immune mediated or vasculat.
 by iatrogenic causes.
Swellings
Tympanic rupture
Swellings caused by trauma (such as othematoma) and abscesses
Tympanic rupture may be a complication of otitis externa. In cats
most frequently occur in cats, dogs and pigs.
the most common cause of tympanic rupture is a middle ear polyp,
which invades the external ear.
Neoplasia
 Neoplasms of the pinna are similar to those occurring as skin
tumors. Histhiocytoma and mast cell tumors are common in dogs.
The inner ear
White cats are susceptible to squamous cell carcinomas.
Labyrinth damage
The inner ear labyrinth may be damaged due to labyrinthitis (often
the sequel of an otitis media), ototoxicity, trauma, or other
sequelae of a middle ear disease.
191
192
Chapter16
16-1 Chronic otitis externa
16-2 Chronic otitis externa
Chronic inflammation of the external ear canal with narrowing of the
External car canal (cross-section]. Predominantly proliferative
lumen caused by polypous proliferations. Dog.
inflammation with infiltration of mononuclear cells (macrophages.
lymphocytes, plasma ceils] and some granulocytes and fibrosis. There is
hyperplasia of sebaceous and ceruminous glands. The ceruminous
glands have cystic dilation and are filled with eosinophilic
homogeneous debris and inflammatory cells. Dog. HE.
16-3 Suppurative otitis media
16-4 Ceruminous gland carcinoma
Ventral view of the skull, after dissection of the ventral wall of the bulia
External ear canal (cross-section). Tumorous proliferation of
tympani Both bullae are flled with puruient exudate. Streptococcus
 ceruminous gland epitheliust, lnfitration of tumor cells into the
conis infection. Kitten.
superficial squamous epithelial layer. In addition there is a slight
 mononuclear cell infiltration. Cat. HE.
A
Ameloblastoma
Atherosclerosis, meningeal artery, hypothyroidism, dog
Abdominal mesothelioma, parietal peritoneum, cow 97
nodule appearance, cow 77
22
histopathology 77
Atresia ani, kitten B4
Abscess
Amniotic plaques
catarrhal bronchopneumonia, calf 35
Aujesky's disease
 hepatic, omphalophlebitis calf 70
 amniotic side of allanto-amnion, bovine fetus 
microgliaf nodule, piglet 132
miliary. pyogranulomatous lymphadenitis, cow 8
114
necrotizing bronchiolitis, piglet 31
Pautrier's microabscess. dog 176
histopathology, bovine fetus 114
Avian amyloid arthropathy, Enterococcus faecofis
Acantholysis, Pemphigus fofiaceus infection, dog 167
Amniotic squamous metaplasia with cornification,
infection
Acanthoma, infundibular keratinizing, dog 174
bovine fetus 114
histopathology 153
Acropachy, and hypertrophic pulmonary
Amyloid deposition
joint cavity 153
osteoarthropathy. dog 150
cerebrovascular, scrapie causing 127
Avian tibial dyschondroplasia, broiler chicken 146
Actinobacilfus fignieresi (actinobacillosis)
joint, avian 153
Avian tuberculosis [Mycobacterium avium)
miliary abscess in pyogranulomatous lymphadenitis,
Amyloidosis
 chronic caseous granulomatous lymphadenitis, pig 7
cardiac, dog 23
cut surface of lung. pig 39
cow B
glomerular
 granulomatous osteomyelitis, pony 151
tongue
6tbop
hepatic tubercles, pig 70 
cross section, cow 76
with fibrosis, sagittal section, cow 76
cow49
interstitial proliferative hepatitis pig 70
hepatic, horse 64
Axonal swelling
Actinobacius pleuropneumonioe infection 
fibrinous pleuropneumonia, pig 36
lipoid nephrosis due to. cow 47spleen, pig 8
focal symmetrical encephalomalacia, sheep 128
fibrinous-necrotizing pneumonia, pig 37
Anal sac carcinoma, dog 90
spinal cord compression, horse 128
Actinobucufum suis infection, acute pyelonephritis. pig
Analgesic therapy. renal medullary necrosis and long-
53
term, dog 46
Anemia, myelosclerosis and chronic, dog 143
B
ulcers in preputial diverticulum, boar 119
Aneurysm, verminous, Strongyius vufgoris infestation.
Back muscle necrosis, malignant hyperthermia/stress
Adenomyosis (uterine endometriosis), sow 110
Adrenal hyperplasia, nodular, dog 103
horse 24
syndrome, pig 157
Ankylosing spondylosis
 Bacteremia, septic tubulonephrosis, sheep 48
Adrenalitis, autoimmunity and, dog 103
Adrenocortical atrophy, iatrogenic chronic secondary 
dog 150
Bacterial infection, and suppurative osteomyelitis. due
hypoadrenalism. dog 103
horse 150
to tail biting, pig 151
Ankylosis, resorptive osteoporosis and exostoses,
Blackleg [gangrenous myositis]
Adrenocortical carcinoma, Cushing's syndrome, dog
chronic hypervitaminosis A, cat 144
Clostridium chauvoei infection
103
Adrenocortical hyperplasia, Cushing's disease, dog 104
Anthracosis, dog 33
cut surface of peivic muscle, cow 157
Aorta, dextroposition, pig 17
histopathology. cow 157
Adventitial placentation (semiplacenta diffusa)
Aortic arch. persistence of right, cat 18
Blood
placenta fetalis, cow 113
Aortic rupture, horse 22
 aspiration, pig 33
uterus, cow 113
Alimentary tract, overview
Aortic stenosis. subvalvular, dog 18
clotting of stagnant, horse 3
Arcanobacterium pyogenes infection, valvular
 Bone tumor, metastatic, primary malignant melanoma,
anatomy 74
thramboendocarditis, cow 22
dog 155
inflammatory processes
 Arnold-Chiari malformation, calf 124
Bordetella bronchisepta infection, suppurative
classification 74
Arteritis, verminous, Strongyfus vufgaris infestation,
bronchopneumonia, dog 36
enteritis74
horse 24
 Bovine eosinophilic myositis
gastritis 74
large intestine 74
Arthritis
appearance of muscle 158
acute, E. coli infection, foal 152
histopathology 158
malabsorption 74
chronic, stifle joint, pig 152
Bavine familial muscular dystrophy 158
maldigestion 74
deforming, Streptococcus zooepidemicus infection,
Bovine pulmonary edema and emphysema (fog fever),
malsecretion 74
foal 152
EMO)
neoplasia 74
Allantochorion
subacute. carpal joint, calf 152
 Bovine respiratory syncytial virus, acute bronchiolitis.
 avillous areas on chorion, equine fetus 113
Arthrogryposis congenita (congenital articular rigidity),
calf 31
calcification, equine fetus 114
piglet 155
Bovine virus diarrhoea-mucosal disease
invagination, mare 112
Arthrosis, joint mice in chronic, horse 148 
acute catarrhal enteritis 87
Allergic dermatitis, perivascular, dog 168
Ascariasis, white spot on liver, pig 71
acute stomatitis 77
Alopecia
Aspergillosis, rhinitis and sinusitis, dog 29
Brachial plexus avulsion, dog 135
Cushing's syndrome causing
Astrocytes, reactive, cat 128
Bronchial pattern, cow 31
dermal and follicular atrophy, dog 172
Atelectasis, obstructive
Bronchialitis
symmetric alopecia, dog 172
apical lobe. dog 34
acute
demodicosis, dog 169
 bronchiole obstruction, calf 34
 bovine respiratory syncytial virus, calf 31
follicular dysplasia in colour mutant, dog 168
Atheromatosis, hyperlipemia, cat 23
LE bop
193
194
Index
Bronchiolitis (cont'd)
Cholesteatoma, horse 136
 Cystic endometrial hyperplasia
eosinophilic, foal 33
Chondrodysplasia, fetal, calf 142
histopathological appearance, bitch 111
necrotizing. Aujesky's disease, piglet 31
Chandrosarcoma
nodules and cysts, bitch 110
Bronchiolitis, chronic
 chondrocyte appearance, dog 154
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia-pyometra complex
alveolar emphysema, horse 35
costochondral junction of rib, dog 154
distended uterine horns, bitch 110
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, horse 32
nasal, dog 29
histopathology bitch 111
Bronchitis, chronic
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Cysticercosis (Cysticercus inermis], cow 159
with bronchiectasis, cow 32
chronic bronchiolitis, horse 32
Cysticercosis ( Cysticercus tenvicolis), sheep 97
with bronchiolitis obliterans, calf 32 
 pulmonary emphysema, horse 35
with peribronchial lymphoid cuffing. M.
Circulatory system, overview
hyopneumonine, piglet 32
cardiomyopathy 15
D
Bronchopneumonia
 congenital abnormalities 15
Demodex mite infestation (demodicosis)
abscessation in catarrhal, calf 35
degenerative changes 15-16
causing alopecia, dog 169
 acute catarrhal. calf 35
hypertrophy and luminal changes 15
parasitic folliculitis, dog 169
chronic catarrhal
inflammation 16
Demyelination
lobar consolidation, pig 36
neoplasia 16
distemper, dog 129
peribronchiolar fibrosis, pig 36
Cleft palate (polatoschisis), kitten 76
leukoencephalomyelopathy, dog 129
Suppurative. Bordetelia bronchisepta infection, dog 36
Clostridium chauvoei infection, blackleg
secondary, sheep 129
Brood capsules, chronic osteochondrosis, pig 148
cut surface of pelvic muscle, cow 157
Dental caries, dog 76
'Bulldog calf (chondrodysplasia) 142
histopathology. cow 157
Dermal hemangioma, dog 25
Clostridium perfringens, E. col, subacute necrotizing
 Derrmal nodules, in myxomatosis, rabbit 164
mastitis, cow 178
Dermatitis
C
 Clostridium perfringens type D, symmetrical
crust formation and. ringworm, cow 169
 Calcinogranuloma (calcinosis circumscripta, calcium
encephalomalacia, sheep 130
crusts in greasy pig disease. piglet 165
salt deposition], dog 167
Coccidiosis [Eimeria arloingd. goat 91
granulomatous, cat 170
Calcinosis. pulmonary artery, cow 23
Colitis, atrophic, dog 90
interface, lupuserythematosus, dog 168
Canine eosinophilic myositis, masseter muscle atrophy.
Colonic hemorrhage,swine fever 96
perivascular, dog 167
dog 159
Congenital articular rigidity (arthrogryposis congenito).
toxic epidermal necrolysis, dog 168
Canine hepatitis, contagious 68
piglet 155
 Dermatophytosis, dog 169
 Canine histiocytic ulcerative colitis
Congenital hepatic cysts, dog 59
Dermatosis, subcorneal, dog 164
 granulomatous infla mmation 90 
Congenital hepatic fibrosis, cat 59
Diabetes mellitus
ulceration and thickening 89
Congenital hypothyroidism, diffuse basophilic
hepatic steatosis, dog 64
Canine histiocytoma 175
hypertrophy and hyperplasia of pituitary, sheep
vacuolar change in islet of Langerhans, dog 104
Canine leptospirosis [Leptospira conicolo), subacute
204
 Diffuse neuroendocrine system 100
interstitial nephritis, dog 51
Congenital megaesophagus, dog 79
 calcitonin-secreting medullary thyroid carcinoma
Cardiac dilatation, dog 19
Congenital porphyria (porphyria cangenito) 142
with hypocalcemia. dog 105
Cardiac hypertrophy, eccentric, dog 19
Congenital porto-systemic shunt 
gastrinoma tumor with gastrin hypersecretion, dog 105
Cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic, cat 20
calf 61
 Disc degeneration, intervertebral
Caries, dental, dog 75
19 6op
dog 149
Cartilage spur, retained enchondral, in radius-curvus
 Congenital splayleg (myofibrillar hypoplasia), piglet
and herniation, dog 150
syndrome, dog 146
155
Cataract
Congenital cysts, atrioventricular valves, calf 18
dog 134
histopathology, dog 187
Consumption coagulopathy and hemorrhages, E. coli
Disseminated intravascular coagulation, glomerular
luxation of lens and, dog 187
endotoxic shock, foal 4
 capillaries, rabbit 4
overview 184
Copper toxicosis. inherited, dog 67
Distemper
Cauda equina neuritis, see Neuritis of cauda equina
Corneal rupture, dog 185
demyelination
Cerebrovascular amyloid, due to scrapie, sheep 127
Corneal ulceration, dog 185
cerebellar white matter, dog 129
Cerebellar coning
Corona virus, feline infectious peritonitis, cat 97
neuronophagia, dog 127
Arnold-Chiari malformation, calf 124
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis
viral inclusion bodies, dog 133
pyocephalus, goat 131
(pseudotuberculosis] infection, suppurative
enamel hypoplasia, dog 76
Cerebellum, hypoplasia, panleukopenia virus, kitten 125
lymphadenitis, sheep 6
 Drainage angle, normal, dog 187
Cerebellum, normal. calf 125
Cowpox virus infection, epidermal necrosis. cat 167
Drug-induced gastric erosion, cat 84
Cerebral infarct, acute. dog 135
Cranium bifidum with meningoencephalocele. piglet 
 Duct ectasia, mammary gland, dog 180 
Cerebral edema
124
 Dura mater metaplasia, osseous
enterotoxaemia, sheep 131
Cryptorchidism, abdominal, dog 116
spinal cord cross section, dog 137
edema disease, pig 131
Cushing's disease
red-brownish plaques, dog 137
 Cerebral inflammation, granulomatous.
 adrenocortical hyperplasia, dog 103
Dyschondroplasia
 encephalitozoonosis, dog 133
dog 172
avian tibial, broiler chicken 146
 Cerebrovascular amyloid, scrapie 127
bop Kydoe eyauda pioku pue AuooasydodAy
femoral osteochondrosis
Cervix, double, cow 110
100
distal femur. pig 146, 147
Chemodectoma, as 'heart base' tumor, dog 24
pituitary tumor, dog 105
medial femur condyle, pig 146, 147
Cholangitis
Cushing's syndrome
 chronic due to liver fuke infestation in cow 61
adrenocortical carcinoma, dog 103
E
neutrophilic, cat 60
alopecia
Ear, overview
Cholestasis
dermal and follicular atrophy, dog 172
external ear 191
extrahepatic, horse 60
Symmetric alopecia, dog 172
middle ear 191
intrahepatic, dog 60
Cyathostominosis, horse 91
inner ear 191
Index
195
de3
Equine sarcoid 175
Fracture healing, secondary, foal 146
ceruminous gland carcinoma, cat 192
Erysipelas, wheals, swine 164
Fumonisin B toxicity (Fusarium moniliforme), chronic
chronic otitis externa 192
Erythema mutiforme, epidermal apoptosis, dog 166
leukoencephalamalacia, horse 130
overview 191
Erythemic myelosis (erythroid leukosis). cat 12
Fungal hair shaft infection, dog 169
suppurative otitis media, kitten 192
Erythroid ieukosis (erythemic myelosis), cat 12
Furuncle, dog 168
Echinococcosis, hydatid cyst, cow 40
Escherichia coli infection
Furunculosis, folliculitis and, dog 168
Edema disease, cerebral edema, pig 131
acute arthritis, foal 152
Fusorium moniliforme infection,chronic
Eimeric oroingi (coccidiosis), goat 91
acute mastitis, cow 178
leukoencephalomalacia due to fumonisin B
Enamel hypoplasia, distemper causing. dog 76
acute necrotizing mastitis, cow 178
toxicity, horse 130
Encephalitis, necrotizing, toxoplasmosis, cat 133
and endotoxic shock, consumption coagulopathy and
Fusobocterium necrophorum (necrobacillosis). see
Encephalitozoonosis, granulomatous cerebral
haemorrhages, foal 4
Necrobacillosis (Fusobacterium necrophorum)
inflammation, dog 133
hypopyon, foal 185
Encephalomalacia
subacute necrotizing mastitis, cow 178
focal symmetrical, lamb 130
Esophagus
G
causing axonal swelling, sheep 128 
destruction due to foreign body. dog 79
Galactophoritis
Clostridium perfringens type D toxins cause, sheep
papilloma, cow 80
cisternal epithelial metaplasia and chronic, cow
130
papilomatosis, cow 80
179
Gitter cells, sheep 128
stenosis, foal 79
mastitis and chronic purulent, cow 179
Endocardiosis, dog 22
Extradural hematoma, cat 134
Gamna-Gandy nodules [siderofibrosis], dog 8
Endocarditis
Extradural spinal root inflammation, neuritis of cauda
Gangrenous myositis, see Blackleg
 mural, uremia due to chronic renal insufficiency, dog
euinba
Gastric carcinoma, dog 84
21
nerve bundles, horse 134
Gastric dilation/volvulus syndrome, dog 82
 ulcerative valvular, dog 21
spinal cord, horse 134
Gastric edema, protein-losing enteropathy and, dog 82
Enchonalcatilaetainedrdi
Eye, overview
Gastric erosion, drug-induced, cat 84
syndrome 146
cataract 184
Gastric ulceratian, cow 84
 Endocrine glands, overview
developmental defects 183
Gastrinoma, dog 105
 atrophy and degeneration 99
effects of reactivity on function 183
Gastritis
hypertrophy and hyperplasia 99
glaucoma 183
atrophic. dog 83
hypothalamic-pituitary-endocrine gland axis 99
inflammation 183 
familial stomatocytosis hypertrophic
inflammation 99
neoplasia 184
appearance, Drentse patrijshond 83
neoplasia 100
retinal atrophy 184
histopathology, Drentse patrishond 83
 Endometrial cups, mare 112
Eyelid squamous cell carcinoma, cow 188
follicular, dog 83
 Endometritis. acute fibrinous-necrotizing sow 111
Gastrointestinal leiomyoma, dog 91 
 Endometriosis, uterine, sow 109
'Gemistocytes' (reactive astrocytes), cat 128
Enteritis
F
Genital system, overview
 acute catarrhal, bovine virus diarrhea-mucosal
Familial stomatocytosis hypertrophic gastritis syndrome
congenital abnormalities 107
disease, cow 87
gross mucosal appearance, Drentse patrijshond 83
hypertrophy and hyperplasia 107
 acute jejunal fibrinous, parvovirus infection, cat 88
histopathology. Drentse patrijshond B3
inflammation 108
erosive jejunal. dog 89
Fasciofa hepatica (fascioliasis) (liver ffuke infestation]
metaplasia 107-8
fibrinous necratizing colonic. 'map design', pig 88
acute, sheep 69
neoplasia 108
fibrinous necratizing ileal, salmonellosis, pig 88 
chronic cholangitis in cow 61
 organ displacement 107
hemorrhagic, parvovirus infection, dog 87
 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
ovarian cysts 107
 proliferative jejunal. paratuberculosis
peritoneal fibrinous exsudate, cat 97
Gitter cells, focal symmetrical encephalomalacia,sheep
circular folding. cow 89
renal granulomatous lesion, cat 5 
128
granulomatous inflammation, cow 89
 Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD), urolithiasis.
Glaucoma
Enterococcus faecalis infection
55 1e3
overview183
 avian amyloid arthrapathy
Felponysyromeletionof follcleand
secondary
histopathology 153
 periarterial lymphoid sheath, horse 9
due to dysplastic pectinate ligament, dog 186
joint cavity 153
Fetal maceration, bovine fetus 115
due to iritis, and buphthalmus, cat 186
 Enzootic pneumonia, chronic catarrhaf
Fetal membrane edema, bovine fetus 114
Globoid cell leukodystrophy, dog 126
bronchopneumonia in porcine 36
Fetal mummification, bovine fetus 115
Glomerular lipidosis, dog 50 
Eosinophilic granuloma
 Fibroadenomatous change, feline mammary gland 
Glomerulonephritis
degranulation of eosinophils and flame figure, cat
 gland appearance, cat 180
exudative, pig 50
170
histopathology, cat 180
membranoproliferative, dog 50 
 granulomatous dermatitis may be due to, cat 170
Fibrous osteodystrophy, see Osteodystrophia fibrosa
membranoproliferative-sclerosing, dog 50
 Epidermal apoptosis, erythema multiforme, dog 166 
Focal symmetrical encephalomalacia, malacia, sheep 130 
membranous
Epidermal dysplasia, bowenoid in situ carcinoma, cat 166
Fog fever [bovine pulmonary edema and emphysema).
capillary wall thickening, dog 49
Epidermal necrosis, cowpox virus infection. cat 167
 acute serous interstitial pneumonia due to 37
immune complex deposition, dog 49
Epidermal spongiosis, dog 166
 Follicular atrophy, with catagen hair follicles,
Glycogenosis type Il, alivary nuelei, dog 126
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
hypercortisolism, dog 172
Goitre
Pautrier's microabscess. dog 175
Follicular cyst,dog 173
colloid, dyshormonogenesis, sheep 101
skin section, dog 176
Follicular dyslasia, colrmutant alopecia dog167
parenchymatous
Epulides, fibromatous. dog 78
Folliculitis
 gland hyperplasia 100
Equine chorionic gonadotrophin [eCG}-producing cells
and furunculosis, dog 168
histopathology, goat 101
112
 parasitic, Demodex mite infestation, dog 169
Goniodysgenesis, dog 187
Equine herpes virus, hepatic necrosis in foal due to
Forestomach, fibroma, cow 81
Gout, domestic fowl 47
abortigenic 68
parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, cow 81
Greasy pig disease [Staphylococcus hyicus)], piglet 165
196
Index
H
Hernia diaphrogmotico, cat 85
Jejunal villous atrophy, hyporegenerative, parvovirus
Herpes felis pneumonia, cat 38
infection, dog 88
Heart, 'brown atrophy, due to lipofuscin deposition,
Herpes virus infection, renal cortical necrosis, newborn
Joint mice, chronic arthrosis, horse 149
cow 20
puppy dog 46
 Juvenile hyperglycemia, hepatic steatosis, dog 64
"Heart base' tumor, chemodectoma, dog 24
Hemangioma
Hip dysplasia, dog 149
dermal, dog 25
Histiocytama, canine 175 
Hyaline degeneration, muscle, selenium/vitamin E
K
recanalization of thrombus in, dog 3
Hemangiosarcoma, myacardiat, dog 25
deficiency, calf 156
Ketosis, zonal hepatic steatosis, sheep 65
Hemarthos, warfarin poisoning, pig 151
Hydatid cyst, liver, cow 40 
Hematoma, extradural, cat 134
Hydrocephalus, internal, dog 124 
Hematopoietic system, overview
Hydronephrosis, dog 55
L
Hydropericardium, myocarditis, cat 18
Laryngitis, necrotizing, due to necrobacillosis, calf 30
atrophy 1
Hyperadrenocortism 63
Lead poisoning, chronic toxic tubulonephrosis, calf 48
filtration 1-2
Hypercortisolism, see Cushing's disease; Cushing's
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease (osteochondronecrasis], dog 
hyperplasia 2
syndrome
148
inflammation 2
Hyperkeratosis
neoplasia 2
Lens, in cataract
Hemachromatosis, micronodular cirrhosis in cow 67
orthokeratotic, viral papilloma, dog 165
histopathology, dog 187
 Hemopericardium
parakeratotic, dog 165
luxation, dog 187
aortic rupture, horse 22
parakeratotic, rumen of cow 81
Leptomeningitis, fibrinopurulent 
infarct, dog 18 
Hyperlipemia, atheromatosis due to, cat 23
cerebral cortex with sulcus, calf 132
Hepatic abscesses, due to omphalophlebitis, calf 69
Hyperlipoproteinemia, hepatic steatosis due to. pony 64
cerebral surface, calf 132
Hepatic amyloidosis, horse 63
Hyperparathyroidism
Leptospira conicoio (canine leptospirosis), subacute
Hepatic cirrhosis
secondary
interstitial nephritis, dog 51
macronodular, dog 66, 67
fibrous osteodystrophy due to renal failure
Leptospira icterohoemorrhogica[leptospirosis]
micronodular, hemochromatosis, cow 67
causing, dog 144
hepatocytic changes 69
Hepatic congestion
hypo-ostotic fibrous osteodystrophy caused by
internal organs appearance, dog 69
acute passive 61
nutritional., dog 144
Leukemia, myeloid, see Myeloid leukemia
hyperostotic fibrous osteodystrophy due ta familial
Leukodystrophy globoid cell, dog 126 
chronic passive
nephropathy .dog 145
Leukoencephalomalacia, chronic, fumonisin B toxicity.
cow 62
7g bop
secondary renal, see under Parathyroid hyperplasia
horse 130
Hepatic cysts, congenital, dog 59
Hyperthyraidism, autonomous. multinodular
Leydig cell tumor (interstitial cell tumor of testis)
Lel bop 'uoelonsea Aouods Kyiedoleydasus sedah
'adenomatous' hyperplasia, cat 101
haemorrhages, yellow color, dog 117
Hepatic fibrosis, portoportal bridging, congenital, cat 59
Hypertrophic pulmonary 0steoarthopathy, dog 150. 151
histopathology. dog 117
Hypoadrenalism, adrenocortical atrophy due to
Lichenification, chronic dermatitis. dog 165
Hepatic necrosis
centroiobuiar confluent, in acute hepatitis, dog 66
iatrogenic chronic secondary, dog 102 
Lipofuscin deposition, in myocardium, cow 20
contagious canine hepatitis, dog 68
Hypoglycemia, juvenile, due to inanition and leading to 
Lipofuscinosis, renal, cow 46
massive, vitamin E deficiency as possible cause, pig
hepatic steatosis, dog 64
Liver
Hypomelination, intrauterine bovine viral diarrhea virus
 nodular hyperplasia, dog 70, 71
66
 multifocal. miliary
(BVDV) infection, calf 125
white spot due to ascariasis, pig 70
abortigenic equine herpes virus, foal 68
Hypomyelination, beta-mannosidosis, calf 125
see also Hepatic entries
salmonellosis, calf 69
Hypophysitis, suppurative. purulent 
Liver fuke, see Fasciota hepotica (liver fluke)
meningoencephalitis, ox 103
Liver, overview
Hepatic steatosis
diabetes mellitus causing microvesicular, dog 64
Hypopyon, E. colinfection, foal 185
biliary system disorders
hyperlipoproteinemia causing macravesicular, pony 64
Hypothyraidism, congenital, diffuse basophilic
cholangitis 58
juvenilehypoglycemiacausing microvesicular,dog64
hypertrophy and hyperplasia in pituitary, sheep
 cholestasis and cholate-stasis 57-8
lobular pattern, ketosis. sheep 65
104
 congenital cystie diseases 57
vitamin A intoxication causing fat accumulation in
Hypovitaminasis C (scury)], hypoplastic osteoporosis,
 circulatory system disorders
stellate cells cat 65
guinea pig 143
 congenital portosystemic shunts 58
Hepatic telangiectasia, cow 63
outfiow disturbances 58
 portal hypertension 58
/
neoplasia 59
acute
apoptotic bodies, dog 65
Intestinal diverticulum, cow 85
 parenchymal disorders
Intestinal villous atrophy
confluent necrosis, dog 66
hepatic abscesses 59
multifocal necrosis, in salmonellosis, calf 68
hyperregenerative, dog 86
hepatic atrophy and hyperplasia 58
multifocal necrosis, in equine herpes, foal 68
hyporegenerative, Parvovirus infection, dog 87
hepatic granulomas 59
contagious canine 68
stereomicroscopic view, dog 86
hepatitis 59
interface type, piece meal necrosis, dog 66
Intrauterine bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) infection,
hepatocellular apoptosis and necrosis 59
lobular dissecting, calf 67
hypomyelination, calf 125
reversible hepatocellular injury and hepatic
Hepatocellular carcinoma, cat 71
Intussusception, dog 86
amyloidosis 58
Iridocyclitis, dog 186
Hepatocytic hydropic degeneration, zonal or lobular
Locomotory system, overview
pattern, goat 65
Islet of Langerhans cells, vacuolar change due to
bones
Hepatosis dietetica, see Vitamin E deficiency
diabetes mellitus, dog 104
anabolic processes 140
Hereditaryglycogenosis,muscular dystrophydo157
catabolic processes 140
Hereditary laryngeal paralysis, neurogenic muscular
factors affecting pathogenesis 140
 growth in young vs adult animal 141
atrophy, dog 155
Hermophroditismus ambiglandularis (true
Jaagsiekte (pulmonary adenomatosis), sheep 41
joints 140
hermaphrodite), pig 108
Jejunal infarction, foal 86
muscles 140
Index
197
Lupus erythematosus, dermatitis due to discoid. dog
Mast cell tumor metastasis, peripheral lymph node, dog
Necrobacillosis (Fusobacterium necrophorum)
168
13
hepatic, cow 68
Lymph, non-specific filtering, 'marbling' of lymph nodes, 
Mastitis
metastatic pneumonia
swine fever 5
acute
Necrobacillosis (cont'd)
Lymphadenitis
E. coff infection, cow 178
coagulation necrosis, cow 39
 acute reactive, branchial lymph node in dog 5
histopathology cow 178
cut lung surface, cow 39
chronic caseous granulomatous, avian tuberculosis,
acute necrotizing, E. cofiand C. perfringens infection,
haemorrhage. cow 39
pig 6
cow 178
necrotizing laryngitis. calf 30
chronic granulomatous, paratuberculosis, goat 7
chronic, hyperplastic splenitis, goat 9
necrotizing splenitis, cow 10
chranic reactive, bronchial lymph node in pig 5 
chronic purulent galactophoritis and, cow 179
tongue necrosis, calf 77
miliary abscess in pyogranulomatous, actinobacillosis 
granulomatous,staphylococcal infection, cow 179
Nephritis
causing. cow 7
reactive metaplasia of cisternal epithelium, cow 179
acute purulent, pig 54
Suppurative. pseudotuberculosis, sheep 6
subacute, cow 179
chronie diffuse interstitial
Lymphangitis, granulomatous, paratuberculosis, cow
Megaesophagus, congenital, dog 79
renal cortex, dog 51
24
Meningioma, dog 136
renal cut surface, dog 51
Lymphatic lacteal ectasia, protein-losing enteropathy.
Meningoencephalitis
chronic interstitial
dog 86
suppurative hypophysitis. ox 103
cat 51
Lymphoid involution, disease-associated, peripheral
thrombotic, Hoemophitus somnus infection, cow 133
and uremic pneumonia, dog 33
lymph node. piglet 51
Methemoglobinemia nitrate poisoning, pig 3
embolic purulent, Arcanobacteriumpyogenes ox53
Microangiopathy (mulberry heart disease) 20
focal interstitial, veal calf 52
Microphthalrmia, sheep 184
 subacute interstitial, canine leptospirosis 51 
M
Microsporum canis dermatophytosis, dog 169
Nephrosis, lipoid, cow 47
Malacia, focal symmetrical encephalomalacia, sheep
Migroglial nodule, Aujesky's disease, piglet 132
Nerve roots, inflammation of extradural 
128. 130
Muefferius capilforisinfestation, verminous pneumonia,
 nerve bundles, horse 134
Malignat herhemia/stressydrmebacmscl
sheep 40
Nervous system, overview
necrosis. pig 157
Mulberry heart disease (microangiopathy] 20
circulatory disturbances ↑22
Malignant lymphoma
 Multinodular 'adenomatous' hyperplasia,
 congenital anomalies 121
bone marrow, dog 11
hyperthyroidism, cat 101
cytopathological changes 122
bursa of Fabricius, chicken 12
Muscular atrophy, neurogenic, due to hereditary
demvelination 122
cervical lymph node, cut surface, cow 11
laryngeal paralysis, dog 155
inflammation 123
 and follicular gastritis, dog 83
Muscular dystrophy
malacia 122
renal nodules
bovine familial, cow 158 
neoplasia 123
cat 55
hereditary glycogenosis, dog 157
traumatic injury 123
sheep 54
Muscular necrosis, of back, malignant
Neuritis of cauda equina
 spinai cord compression due to extradural, cat
hyperthermia/stress syndrome, pig 157
 inflammation of extradural spinal roots
135
Muscularregenerationfollwing njd5
nerve bundles. horse 134
splenomegaly, dog 11
Muscular steatosis (pseudohypertrophia lipomatosa),
Neurofibrosarcoma, dog 137
T-cell ymphoma identification, dog 12
cow 158
Neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis, neuronal pigmentation,
Malignant melanoma
Mycobacterium avium, see Avian tuberculosis
sheep 127
brown tumor in iris
Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis, see
Neuronal chromatolysis, horse 126
cat 189
Paratuberculosis
Neuronal necrosisischaemic cell change,calf 126
dog 189
Mycobacterium tuberculosis var. bovis, see Tuberculosis
Neuronal pigmentation, neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis.
digit with nail, dog 175
Mycoplosma hyopneumoniae infection, chronic
sheep 127
Mammary adenocarcinoma, cat 181
bronchitis, piglet 32
Neuronophagia, distemper, dog 127
 Mammary adenoma
Myeloid hyperplasia, infectious leukocytosis, cat 2
Nitrate [nitrite) poisoning.methaemoglobinaemia, pig 3
 benign mixed, bitch 181
Myeloid leukemia (myeloid leukosis), iver
 Nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and 
complex, bitch 181
eosinophilic, pig 13
 gastric erosion, cat 84
simple, bitch 181
immature blast cells, dog 13
Mammary carcinoma
 neutrophilic, myocardium and adipose tissue, dog 
bitch 180
13
0
 pulmonary metastases, cat 41
Myelosclerosis, chronic anemia, dog 143
 Oligodendroglioma, dog 136
Mammary fibroepithelial hyperplasia [fibroadenomatous
Myocardial hemangiosarcoma, dog 25
Omphalophlebitis, metastatic hepatic abscesses, calf
change)
Myocardial infaretion, hemopericardium, dog 18
69
gland appearance, cat 180
Myocarditis
 Orthokeratatic hyperkeratosis, viral papilloma, dog
histopathology. cat 180
dog 20
165
Mammary gland, overview
hydropericardium due to, cat 18
Osterus (Fiaroides) osteri infection, multifocal
 inflammatory lesions 177
parvovirus infection, dog 21
proliferative tracheitis, dog 30
neoplasia 177
Myodegeneration, vitamin E deficiency causing
Osteoarthropathy. hypertrophic pulmonary, dog 150,
Mannheimia hgemolytica infection, fibrinous
nutritional, donkey foal 156
151
 pneumonia, sheep 37
Myofibrillar hypoplasia (congenital splayleg), piglet 
Osteoarthrosis/osteoarthritis, old dog 149
β-mannosidosis, hypomyelination, calf 125
155
Osteochondronecrosis [Legg-Calve-Perthes disease). dog
'Map design', fibrinous necrotizing colonic enteritis. pig
 Myxomatosis. dermal nodules, rabbit 164
148
88
Osteochondrosis
Marie-Bamberger's disease (hypertrophic pulmonary
brood capsules in chronic. pig 148
osteoarthropathy), dog 150. 151
N
femoral
 Masseter muscle atrophy, canine eosinaphilic myositis
Nailbed squamous carcinoma, dog 173
distal femur. pig 147
159
Nasal chondrosarcoma, dog 29
medial femur condyle, pig 146
198
Index
Osteochondrosis (cont'd)
Parathyroid hyperplasia, diffuse, due to secondary renat
metastatic, necrobacillosis
ulnar
hyperparathyroidism
coagulation necrosis, cow 39
distal radius/ulna, median section, pig 148
gland appearance, dog 102
cut surface of lung, cow 39
distal ulna, median section, pig 148
histopathology, dog 102
with pulmonary hemorrhage, cow 39
Osteochondrosis dissecans
 Paratuberculosis (Mycobacterium avium subspecies
uremic, and chronic interstitial nephritis, dog
flap of articular cartilage. pig 147
porotubercufosis)
33
proximal humeri, dog 147
chronic granulomatous lymphadenitis, goat 7
verminous, and Muefferius capifaris infestation,
Osteodystrophy
granulomatous lymphangitis. cow 24
sheep 40
fibrous, nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism,
 proliferative jejunal enteritis
Polioencephalomalacia
dog 145
circular folding 89
acute, salt poisoning. pig 129
hyperostotic (hypertrophic), secondary 
 granulomatous inflammation, cow 89
 Subacute, thiamine deficiency, goat 130
 hyperparathyroidism due to familial
 Parvovirus infection
Polioencephalomyelitis,rabies, cow 132
nephropathy. dog 145
acute fibrinous enteritis, cat 87
Polycystic kidney disease (PKD), and cortical cysts due
hypo-ostotic fibrous
hemorrhagic enteritis, dog 86
to autosomal dominant disorder in Persian cat 
nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism, femur,
hyporegenerative jejunal villous atrophy, dog 87
44
dog 144
myocarditis, dog 21
Polydontia, dog 76
renal-failure-related secondary
Patent ductus arteriosus, dog 17
Porcine dermatitis and nephropathy syndrome (PDNS).
hyperparathyroidism, skull and maxilla, dog 144
 Pectinate ligament
exudative glomerulonephritis, pig 50
Osteomyelitis
dysplastic, dog 186
Porcine mulberry heart disease (microangiopathy)
granulomatous, avian tuberculosis causing pony 152
goniodysgenesis and, dog 187
20
suppurative
normal, dog 186
Porcinethrombocytopenic purpura, newbon pigle4
bacterial infection of tail wounds causing. pig 151
Pemphigus fofioceus infection, acantholysis, dog 166
Porphyria congenita (congenital porphyria) 142
Rhadococcus equi infection, foal 151
Penile fibropapilloma, bull119
Portal hypertension, porto-systemic collaterals.
Osteaporosis
Perianal gland adenoma, dog 175
dog 62
hypoplastic
Periarteritis nodasa
Portal vein, thrombosis 63
due ta scurvy guinea pig 143
fibrinoid necrosis of arterial media, dog 23
Porto-systemic shunt, congenital
vertebral body, cat 143
nodular thickening. coranary artery, dog 23
calf 61
resorptive, reactive exostoses, chronic
Pericarditis
dog 62
hypervitaminosis A, cat 144
chronic fibrinous, cow 19
 Postweaning multisystemic wasting syndrome (PMWS),
Osteosarcoma, dog 153, 154
serofibrinous. pig 19
 disease-associated lymphoid involution
Ostertagiosis (Ostertogia ostertogl. cow 82
Periodontitis, fibrinous, cow 78
(atrophy]. in piglet 5
 Ostium secundum defect, pig 16
Periosteal melanosis, cow 142
Preputial diverticulum, ulcers, boar 119
 Otitis externa, chronic, dog 192
Peritoneum,overview
Primary hypothyroidism, lymphocytic thyroiditis, dog
Otitis media, suppurative, kitten192
abnormal abdominal content 
101
Ovarian cysts. sow 108
ascites 95
Prostatic adenocarcinoma, dog 118
 Ovarian granulosa cell tumor, mare 109
hemorrhage 95
Prostatic hyperplasia
 Ovarian teratoma, bitch 109
inflammation 95
in dog 118
neoplasia 95
and hypertrophy. dog 118
Peritonitis
 Prostatic squamous metaplasia, Sertoli cell tumor
P
 acute serofibrinous. bacterial infection, pig 96
accompanied by hyperestrogenism, dog 118
Pancreas [exocrine]
feline infectious, corana virus, cat 97
 Protein-losing enteropathy
atrophy, dog 92
tuberculosis. cow 97
and gastric edema, dog 82
calculi, cow 9
 Pilomatricoma, dog 173
lymphatic lacteal ectasia, dog 86
coagulation necrosis, pig 92
 Pituitary gland
Pseudohyperparathyroidism, anal sac carcinoma.
ectopic tissue, pig 92
basophilic tumor, Cushing's disease, dog 104
16 bop
Pancreas (exocrine). overview
diffuse basophilic hypertrophy and hyperplasia,
Pseudohypertrophia lipomatoso (muscular steatosis).
 acute hemorrhagic and hemorrhagic-necrotizing 
 congenital hypothyroidism due to
cow 158
pancreatitis 91
dyshormonogenesis, sheep104
Pseudomembranous rhinitis, thrombus, horse 3
chronic pancreatitis 91
Placentitis. acute fibrinous-necrotizing, equine fetus
'Pseudotuberculosis' (Corynebacterium
 congenital anomalies 91
114
pseudotubercufosis infection], sheep 6
hyperplasia 91
 Pleuropneumonia, fibrinous, Actinobaciltus
Pulmonary adenocarcinoma
1 eiseldou
pleuropneumonige infection,pig 36
bronchial pattern, cat 40
Pancreatitis
Plexus papilloma, dog 136
bronchio-alveolar pattern, dog 40
chronic atrophic
Pneumonia
Pulmonary adenomatosis (jaagsiekte), sheep 41
 appearance of, dog 93
acute serous interstitial
Pulmonary artery, valvular stenosis, dog 17
histopathology, dog 93
circovirus infection, pig 37
 Pulmonary congestion
hemarrhagic, dog 91, 93
fog fever, cow 37
and infarction, dog 34
hemarrhagic-necrotizing, dog 91, 93
histology. caw 38
and edema, pig 34 
Panleukopenia virus, cerebellar hypoplasia due to, kitten
chronic interstitial, lung appearance, cow 38enzootic.
 Pulmonary emphysema
125
chronic catarrhal pneumonia. pig 36
and chronic bronchiolitis, horse 35
Panniculitis, nodular, dog 170
enzootic, reactive hyperplasia bronchial lymph node.
diffuse, cat 35
Panniculitis/steatitis ('yellow fat disease'), pony 171
pig 5fibrinous, acute stage, cow 37
Pulmonary haemorrhage, necrobacilosis, cow 39
 Papilloma
fibrinous-necrotizing 37
Pulmonar infarction, chronic passive congestion and.
skin, cow 172
Actinobacilfus pleuropneumonioe infection,
 60p
oesophagus, cow 79
pig 37
 Pulmonary metastases, mammary carcinoma, cat 41
skin, dog 172
herpes felis infection, cat 38
Pustule, subcorneal, dog 164
Parakeratotic hyperkeratosis. dog 165
Mannheimia haemolytica, cow 37
Pupillary membrane, persistent, dog 185
xapul
199
Pyelonephritis
Ringworm (dermatophytosis), Trichophyton infection
nodular hyperplasia, dog 10
acute. Actinobocutum suis infection, pig 53
causing, cow 169
reactive, Tryponosoma brucei infection, rabbit 9
chronic, cow 53
Rumen. parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, cow 81
torsion of, pig 8
papillary necrosis, cow 53
Ruminitis, chronie necrobacillary 81
 Splenitis
chronic reactive hyperplasia/hyperplastie, due to
chronic mastitis, goat 9
R
 gangrenous, due to traumatic reticuloperitonitis, cow
Rabies
Salmonellosis
10
viral inelusion bodies, cow 133
acute hepatitis, multifocal, calf 68
hyperplastic, frypanosoma brucer infection, rabbit 10
viral polioencephalomyelitis, cow 132
fibrinous necrotizing enteritis, pig 88
multifocal necrotizing, necrobaeillosis, cow 10
Rachitic rosary. goat 143
Salt poisoning, acute polioencephalomalacia pig 129
 Spongiform encephalopathy, scrapie causing. sheep
Rodius-curvus syndrome, retained enchondral cartilage
Sarcocystis gigontea (syn. S. ovifetis), see
127
spur, dog 146
Sarcosporidosis
lel hop kyiedoieudaoua seday 'uoelonsea Ahuods
Ranula, dog 79
Sarcoid, equine 175
Staphylococcal infection
 Rectal stricture, pig 85
Sarcosporidiosis
chronic purulent galactophoritis and mastitis, cow
Reflux oesophagitis, dog 80
inflammatory foci, cow 159 
179
Renal carcinoma. primary in dog
oesophagus (Sorcocystis gigonteo (syn. S. ovifefis).
granulomatous mastitis, cow 179
histology 54
sheep 80
Staphylococcus hyicus (greasy pig disease). piglet 165
renal surface and cut surface 54 
 pseudocyst in muscle fibre, sheep 159
Steatitis
 Renal cortex, parasitic nodules
Schwartzman phenomenon, and renal cortical necrosis,
diffuse, yellow fat disease, horse 96
cross section of granuloma, dog 52
pig 46
and pancreatic damage, dog 96
granulomatous foci, dog 52
Scrapie
Steatosis
Renal cortical cysts, cow 44
cerebrovascular amyloid. sheep 127
hepatic, see Hepatic steatosis 
 Renal cortical necrosis
 spongiform encephalopathy due to 127
muscular, cow 158
herpesvirus infection,newbornpupp46
Scury (hypovitaminosis C),hypoplastic steoporosis.
Steroid induced hepatopathy, dog 63
 possibly due to Schwartzman phenomenon,
guinea pig 143
Stomatitis, acute, bovine virus disease-mucosal disease
pig 46
Sebaceous adenitis, dog 170
77
Renal granulomatous lesion, feline infectious
Sebaceous gland adenoma, dog 174
Streptococcal infection
peritonitis, cat 52
Sebaceous gland hyperplasia, dog 174 
 acute mastitis, cow 178
Renal infarction, due to thromboendocarditis in cow
Selenium deficiency, muscle fibre, hyaline degeneration,
 chronic purulent galactophoritis and mastitis. cow
histopathological specimen 45
calf 156
179
renal cut surface 45
Semiptacento diffuso (adventitial placentation]
Streptococcus canis, suppurative otitis media due to,
renal surface 45
placenta fetalis, intercotyledonary placentation,
kitten 192
Renal lipidosis, amyloidosis leading to, cow 47
cow113
Streptococcuszooepidemicus infection,deforming
Renal medultary calcification, dog 47
uterus, accessory caruncles, cow 113
septic arthritis, foal 152
Renal medullary cyst. cut surface, pig 44
Serous atrophy, cachexia leading to, cow 2
Renal medullary necrosis, and long-term analgesic
Sertoli cell tumor, testis, dog 117
Strongylus vufgoris infestation
therapy. dog 46
Siderofibrosis [Gamna-Gandy nodules), dog 8
verminous aneurysm. horse 24
Renal subinfarction, due to thromboendacarditis in cow,
Skin, overview
verminous arteritis, horse 24
cut surface 45
dermis 162
Subcorneal dermatosis, subcarneal pustule in suspected,
Respiratory system,overview
epidermis 162
dog 164
 air-conducting system
hair follicles 162
Sweat gland cyst, dog 172
acute injury 28
localization vs type of lesion 162
Swine fever
anatomy 27
neoplasia 163
colonic hemorrhage. pig 96
chronic injury 28
pattern analysis of inflammatory skin disease 162-3
'marbling' of lymph nodes due to non-specific
respiratory/gas exchange area
primary vs secondary lesions 161
filtering of jymph, pig 5
anatomy27
sebaceous glands 162
mucosal hemorrhages in urinary bladder, pig 56
 atelectasis and emphysema 28
sweat glands 162
Synovial sarcoma, stifle joint, dog 154
neoplasia 29
Small intestinal membrane atresia, calf 84
pneumonias 28-9
Spermatic cord torsion, boar 116
 pulmonary edema 28
Spina bifida aperta, piglet 124
T
Retinal atraphy, dog 188
Spinal cord compression, extradural malignant
Teat cisternal epithelim,metaplasia to cornified
Retinal detachment, dog 188
lymphoma.cat 135
 squamous epithelium, cow 179
Retinal dysplasia, dog 188
Spinal cord infarction. dog 135
 Telangiectasia, hepatic, cow 63
Rhabdomyolysis, exertional. after tying up, horse
Spinal cord injury, intervertebral disc extrusion, dog 134
Teeth
156
Spinal cord tumor, intradural-extramedullary, dog 137
ameloblastoma 78
Rhinitis
Spinal degeneration, intervertebral disc, dog 149 
polydontia, dog 76
 acute fibrinous. piglet 29
Spleen
see oiso Dentat entries
atrophic, pig 29
 acute reactive hyperplasiafacute hyperemic
Testis
pseudomembranous. thrombus, horse 3
splenitisf'acute splenic tumor', goat 9
 degeneration, nuclear pyknosis dog 116
and sinusitis, due to aspergillosis, dag 29
amyloid deposition, pig 8
fibrosis, bull 116
Rhodococcus equiinfection, suppurative osteomyelitis.
 depletion of follicles and periarterial lymphoid
interstitial cell tumor, see Leydig cell tumor
foal 151
sheath, fell pany syndrome, horse 9
 seminoma, dog 117
Rickets, rib
erythremic myelosis, cat 12
sertoli cel tumor, dog 118
dog 143
Gamna-Gandy nodules 8
Thiamine deficiency, subacute polioencephalomalacia.
goat 143
hemorrhagic infarcts, dog 8
goat 130
Right coronary artery, anomalous origin, cow 16
 malignant lymphoma, dog 11
 Thrombocytopenic purpura, porcine, newborn piglet 4
200
Index
Thromboendocarditis, valvular, Arconobacterium
U
Verminous aneurysm, Strongyius vulgoris infestation,
 pyogenes infection, cow 21
Ulcerative colitis, canine histiocytic
horse 24
Thrombus
 granulomatous inflammation 90
Verminous arteritis, Strongyfus vufgaris infestation,
horse 3
ulceration and thickening 89
horse 24
recanalization, dog 3
Ulcers in preputial diverticulum, boar 119
Verminous pneumonia, Muellerius copitaris infestation.
Thymoma, dog 4
Uremia, and mural endocarditis, dog 21
sheep 40
Thyroid carcinoma, medullary, dog 105
Vesicle/pustule in skin biopsy, dog 164
Uremic gastropathy, dog 82
 Thyroid epithelial atrophy, hypophysectomy in Cushing's 
Uremic pneumonia, chronic interstitial nephritis. dog
Viral inclusion bodies
disease, dog 100
E
astrocyte, distemper, dog 133
 Thyroid hyperplasia, multinodular adenomatous,
Ureteropyelonephritis, chranic, cow 53
hepatocytes, contagious canine hepatitis. dog 68
autonomous hyperthyroidism, cat 101
 Uric acid concrements. renal papillae, piglet 47
neuron, rabies, cow 133
Thyroiditis, lymphocytic, primary hypothyroidism, dog
Urinary bladder
Viral papilloma, dog 172
101
follicular cystitis, dog 56
Viral polioencephalomyelitis, rabies, cow 132
Toxic epidermal necrolysis, dermatitis, dog 168
mucosal hermorrhages, swine fever 56 
Vitamin A intoxication, large fat droplets in stellate 
Toxocara canis, parasitic renal nodule
muscular hypertrophy, transitional cell carcinoma in 
cells, cat 65
cross section of granuloma 52
neck of bladder, hydronephrosis, dog 55
Vitamin E deficiency
 granulomatous foci on cortex 52
Urinary system, ove rview
hepatosis dietetica, massive hepatic necrosis, pig
Toxoplasmosis, necrotizing encephalitis, cat 133
inflammatory processes 43-4
67
Tracheal collapse, dog 30
kidneys
hyaline degeneration, muscle fibre, calf 156
Tracheal hypoplasia, dog 30
amyloidosis 43
nutritional myodegeneration, donkey foal 156
Tracheitis, multifocal proliferative, Oslerus osleri
degenerative processes 43
yellow fat disease, horse 96
infection, dog 30
lower urinary tract, inflammatory lesions 44
Volvulus, intestinal pig 86
Traumatic reticulitis, cow 81
neoplasia 44
Traumatic reticuloperitonitis, gangrenous splenitis, cow
Urolithiasis
10
feline lower urinary tract disease, cat 55
W
Trichinosis (Frichinelfo spiralis], wild boar 160
renculus cut surface, cow 55
Wallerian degeneration (secondary demyelination]
Trichoblastorma, dog 174
ureter, with acute urethritis, cow 56
sheep 129
Trichophyton infection, ringworm, cow 169
 Uterine aplasia, bitch 109
spinal cord injury due to intervertebral disc extrusion.
Trypanosoma brucei infection
Uterine carcinoma, rabbit 112
dog 134
chronic lymphadenitis, rabbit 6, 10 
Uterine endometriosis (adenomyosis], sow 109
 Warfarin poisoning, hemarthros, pig 151
reactive spleen, rabbit 6
Uterine torsion, cat 110
Wheals, erysipelas causing, swine 164 
shock causing DiC, kidney, rabbit 4
White spot, ascariasis causing. pig 70
Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium bavis)
abdominal wall cross section 97
V
jejunal ulcers 90
Vaginitis
tubercles due to granulomatous inflammation 90
fibrinous-necrotizing postparturient cow 115
Y
Tubulonephrosis
follicular. pig 116
'Yeliow fat disease' (panniculitis/steatitis)
septic, bacteremia, sheep 48
granular, pig 115
thoracic and abdominal adipose tissue, horse 96 
toxic, lead poisoning, calf 48
Valvular cysts, congenital, calf 18
fatty crest on nuchal ligament, pony 171