EDITEDBY
CAROL GRAY
ANDJENNYMOFFETT
HANDBOOKOF
VETERINARY
COMMUNICATION
SKILLS
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Handbook of
Veterinary
Communication
Skills
Edited by
Carol Gray, BVMS, MRCVS, PGCert Med Ed
Lecturer in Veterinary Communication Skills, University of Liverpool
Registered Practitioner, HE Academy, UK
Jenny Moffett, BVetMed (Hons), MSc,
Dip Mar Comm
Director of Communications, Ross University of Veterinary Medicine, St. Kits, West Indies
Foreword by
Dr Cindy L. Adams, PhD, MSW
Associate Professor of Veterinary Medicine-Clinical Communicafion
University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Introduction by
Dr Jane R. Shaw, DVM, PhD
Assistant Professor, Veterinary Communicafion, and Director, Argus institute
James l. Voss Veterinary Teaching Hospital, College of Veterinary Medicine
and Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University, USA
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A Johr Wiley & Sonis, Ltd, Publicatiori
This edition first published 2010
 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
programme has been merged with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical, and Medical business to form
Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered office
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom
Editorialoffices
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, United Kingdom
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book, please see our website at
www.wiley.com / wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accord ance with the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
publisher.
be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
Ul pasesua pou st raustiqnd aui teu Suipueisiapun aui uo plos st hI paiaaoo taeu palqns aut ot piegal
rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a
 competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Adams ; introduction by Jane R. Shaw.
p.;cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
medicine. 3. Veterinary medicine-Practice. 4. Veterinarians-Psychology. I. Gray, Carol, BVMS. I1.
Moffett, Jenny.
[DNLM: 1. Communication. 2. Interpersonal Relations. 3. Veterinarians-ethics. 4. Veterinarians-
psychology. _ 5. Veterinary Medicine. SF 610.5 H236 2010]
SF610.5.H364 2010
636.0890696-dc22
2009033003
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 9.5/12 pt Palatino by Aptara Inc., New Delhi, India
Printed in Singapore
12010
Contents
Contributors
vii
Foreword
ix
Acknowledgements
xi
Introduction
!!!x
Chapter 1 I
 Basic communication skills
1
Mary Kirwan
Introduction
1
Background and origins
1
The importance of communication
2
Definition of key terms
3
Models of communication
4
Verbal and non-verbal communication
7
Listening
15
The cultural context of communication
21
Summary
22
References
22
Chapter 2 A framework for the veterinary consultation
25
Alan Radford
Introduction
25
iv
Contents
A guide to the veterinary consultation based on the
 Calgary-Cambridge observation guide
27
The physical examination
37
 Closing the consultation
37
Summary
38
References
38
Chapter 3 Professional, ethical and legal aspects of
communication
39
Carol Gray
Introduction
39
Communicating professionalism
39
Gathering information from clients
41
Giving information to clients
42
Informed consent
47
References
59
 Chapter 4  Compassionate communication: working with grief
62
Susan Elizabeth Dawson
Introduction
62
The HCAB
63
Review of quality-of-life indicators
93
 Setting up and running continuing care clinics
95
PET loss support groups
96
CPD opportunities
26
Resources and useful websites
46
References
98
Chapter 5
 Dealing with difficult situations
100
Carol Gray and jenny Moffett
 Introduction
100
 The use of veterinary communication skills at the end-of-life
100
 A seven-step approach to communication at the end-of-life
102
Euthanasia - before, during and after
105
Contents
Welfare concerns
109
 Informed clients
110
Communicating cost
112
Dealing with anger
115
Commurication of mistakes
118
References
122
Chapter 6 Communicating with colleagues
127
Geoff Lile
Introduction
127
The team and its leader
128
Induction schemes and mentoring
131
Appraisals
132
Exit interview
133
 Delegation
134
Standard operating procedures
136
Staff suggestion scheme
139
Practice meetings
142
 Reporting structure
144
Rotas
145
 Interpractice communication
145
References
147
Chapter 7
 Communicating with a wider audience
149
Jenny Moffett
 Public speaking for beginners
149
Veterinary medicine and the media - a meeting of two worlds
155
References
166
Chapter 8  Communication and self-care in the veterinary
profession
168
Communication, stress and the individual
168
Martina A. Kinsella
The first step to inner freedom
169
vi
Contents
Moving from victim to victor
170
Implementing change
171
 Learning assertiveness skills and becoming an assertive
individual
173
Beyond words: communication, social relationship
and health
176
David Bartram
 The disclosure phenomenon
177
Importance of social relationships
180
The role of telephone support helplines
183
Summary and conclusions
185
Acknowledgements
185
References (Communication, stress and the individual)
185
Further reading (Communication, stress and the individual)
186
References (Beyond words: communication, social
relationships and health)
186
Index
190
Contributors
David Bartram, BVetMed, DipM, MCIM, CDipAF, MRCVS
Veterinary Practitioner, Fareham, UK
Susan Elizabeth Dawson, MBACP, PhD, MEd (SEN), BA (Hons), PGCE, Dip.
Couns, Cert Health Ed., MlFL
Consultant Anthrozoologist Animal-Kind, Practising Grief Counsellor, Manchester, UK
Carol Gray, BVMS, MRcVS, PGCert Med Ed
LIVE Lecturer in Veterinary Communication Skills, University of Liverpool, UK
Martina A. Kinsella, BSc, ITEC Dip
Private Counsellor and Psychotherapist, Ermniscorthy, Ireland
Mary Kirwan, RGN, BNS, MSc
Lecturer, School of Nursing, Dublin City University, Ireland
Geoff Liftle, MVB, MRcVS
Communications Training Associate at the Veterinary Defence Society, Knutsford, UK
Jenny Moffett, BVetMed, MSc
Director of Communications, Ross University of Veterinary Medicine, St. Kitts, West Indies
Alan Radford, BSc, BVSc, PhD, MRcVS
Senior Lecturer in Small Animal Studies, University of Liverpool, UK
vii
Foreword
In 1994, I was awarded a fellowship at the Ontario Veterinary College to study the effect of
companion animal death on humans. At the time, awareness was increasing on preparing
entry-level graduates to deal with this aspect of practice. End-of-life curricula varied be-
tween schools in terms of the time available to teach as well as the subject that was taught.
The growing awareness of the need for effective commurication with clients when their pets
were close to death or deceased increased acceptance of the importance of communication
in general.
When I graduated in 1998 and began my career in veterinary medicine, I was in a po-
sition to develop a research programme and communication curriculum that went beyond
the issue of end of life to broader communication. This focus prepared graduates to deal
with several issues in practice using a core skills set that varied depending on the context,
urgency, and so on. At the time, only a smattering of veterinary schools in the United King-
dom and Australia were drawing attention to the importance of teaching communication in
veterinary curricula. In general, traditional curricula paid little or no attention to communi-
cation. Practitioners communicated in a manner that was aimed at satisfying the veterinar-
ian's need for data to solve patients' problems. The expansive literature in the medical field
the veterinary profession. Good communication was considered a mechanism for making
money, and any strategies for economic success were largely anecdotal rather than based on
research evidence.
Over time, some influential studies revealed that the veterinary profession was lacking in
terms of achieving results that included 'compliance' and employee and client satisfaction.
The suggested strategy for ameliorating this situation was to teach students how to commu-
nicate, work in a team, and develop and manage a good business. Industry partners were
starting to draw attention to the relationship between practice protocols such as ‘compli-
ance’ and satisfaction; however, there was little awareness of how to distil communication
into skills or ways to achieve the desired results.
ix
X
Foreword
A decade later, major changes have taken place and we are able to improve communi-
cation substantially. Veterinary schools worldwide have started to devote time to teaching
communication and assessment. In addition, faculty members have begun to learn both com-
munication skills and how to integrate communication teaching into courses on discipline
and skills.
A great deal of communication research that has taken place in the medical field is appli-
cable to veterinary medicine. Communication research into comparing the professions has
also been carried out in veterinary medicine. Models for teaching communication have en-
 abled veterinarians to develop more quickly than medical practitioners simply by adapting
the models to our profession. We have been using textbooks from medicine to teach in vet-
erinary medicine, and while this is useful to a point, there comes a time when the literature
must reflect the context in which it will be applied.
 To be successful, any textbook emphasizing communication in veterinary medicine needs
to be practical and context specific. It needs to teach as well as convince the reader that com-
munication is a necessary skill. The textbook needs to persuade the reader that communica-
tion is not ‘psychobabble' but a core clinical skill that is no longer optional. Without skills
and a commitment to continual learning, practice success and patient care are at risk. The
Handbook of Veterinary Communication Skills meets all these requirements. The authors have
done a superb job of describing communication skills and the major issues in the profession,
including end-of-life situations using a skills-based approach. In addition, the handbook
raises awareness of the various contexts in which practitioners need communication skills.
The handbook examines a topic that has been largely untouched - self-care. So many tasks
inherent to the profession, such as euthanizing animals, have previously been treated as in-
consequential. The chapter on self-care now remedies this situation by promoting reflective
practice to encourage the professional to engage in healthy coping strategies and take care
of clients and colleagues in challenging aspects of practice.
Communication is poised to expand in our profession. The Handbook of Veterinary Com
munication Skills will provide teachers and students with a much-needed resource for
both teaching and learning. All veterinary educators, students and veterinary profession-
als would benefit from reading this book
Cindy L. Adams
AssociateProfessor of Veterinary Medicine-Clinical Communication
LIniversity of Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Acknowledgements
This book would not have been possible without the help of the following people. We thank
them all very much.
 Drs Jonathan Silverman, Suzanne Kurtz and Juliet Draper, for their unfailing support
and advice on communication skills, and for allowing us to adapt the Calgary-Cambridge
observation guide for use in veterinary medicine.
 Dr Cindy L. Adams, from the University of Calgary, for her encouraging foreword and
her enthusiasm for the project.
Dr Jane Shaw, from the University of Colorado, for her thoughtful introduction and words
of wisdom.
 Pete Wedderburn, Brayvet, Ireland, for his contribution to the chapter on 'Communicat-
ing with a wider audience'.
Everyone at the LIVE Centre for Excellence in Veterinary Education, the Royal Veterinary
College, London, for their support and encouragement.
xi
Introduction: The
veterinarian-client-patient relationship
INTRODUCTION
To set the stage for the conversations that follow in this book, it is helpful to take an in-
depth look at the veterinarian-client-patient relationship. This relationship serves as the
foundation for all that we are trying to achieve in veterinary medicine, including satisfying
the client, caring for the animal and promoting professional fulfilment. The dynamics of the
veterinarian-client-patient relationship are complex with multiple dimensions to take into
consideration.
As you read on:
1.  Reflect on what approach meets your style. Often, we recognize a pattern that suits us
most, is our dominant style and is our default pattern during times of stress. We are in
our comfort zone in interacting with clients in this manner.
2. Take time to identify the relationship style preference of your clients. The overall goal
is to demonstrate elasticity in your client communication so that you can tailor your
approach to meet the client's needs and to enhance clinical outcomes. Frequently, com-
munication challenges result from a mismatch in communication styles. Expanding your
repertoire will enable you to meet the needs of a diverse clientele.
3.
As an initial assessment, ask yourself, 'Who is doing the talking?' This is a simple litmus
test for assessing your communication style. Are you doing all the talking, or are you cre-
ating space for the client to share their story and take an active role in the conversation?
How much time do you spend listening to the client during the clinical interview?
A PARADIGM SHIFT
Recent societal changes have caused a paradigm shift in the veterinarian-client-patient re-
lationship. Over the past decade, these changes have caused substantial transformation in
xili
xiv Introduclion
the veterinary profession. One of the major changes is the increasing recognition of the re-
asked about their relationship with their pets, 85% of pet owners reported that they viewed
their pets as family members (Brown & Silverman 1999). In conjunction with this, there is
a growing recognition that provision of veterinary services in a manner that acknowledges
the human-animal bond will lead to better outcomes for veterinary practices and their pa-
tients (Brown & Silverman 1999). Appreciating the impact of animal companionship on the
d r  nd u  mu e san s jn m e 
fessionals' responsibilities have expanded to include the mental health and well-being of
their clients, as well as those of their clients' pets (Blackwell 2001).
With the advent of the internet, today's veterinary professionals are faced with educated
clients armed with questions and greater expectations. Veterinarians’ responsibilities for
addressing questions and providing client education are increased. In an increasingly liti-
gious society, consumers are not forgiving of unprofessional services (Blackwell 2001). Most
complaints to regulatory bodies are related to poor communication and deficient interper-
dissatisfaction.
An adaptive response is integral to successfully addressing these societal and professional
changes. Given growing client expectations, the strong attachment between people and their
pets and increasing consumer knowledge demands a shift in communication style from the
   s       
content with taking a passive role in their animal's health care and want to take an active
role in decision making on their pet's behalf
VETERINARIAN-CLIENT-PATIENT RELATIONSHIP STYLES
The relationship dynamic between veterinarian and client is based on three criteria (Emanuel
and Emanuel 1992):
1. Who sets the agenda for the appointment (i.e. the veterinarian, the veterinarian and
client in negotiation, or the client).
2. Importance placed on the client's values (i.e. the veterinary team assumes that the
client's values are the same as the veterinarian's, the veterinary team explores the client's
values with the client, or the veterinary team does not explore the client's values)
 3.Functional role of the veterinary professional (i.e. guardian, advisor or consultant).
Paternalism
On the basis of these criteria, three veterinarian-client-patient relationship styles have been
described (Shaw et al. 2006). At one end of the relationship spectrum lies paternalism, char-
acterized as a relationship in which the veterinary professional sets the agenda for the ap-
pointment, assumes that the client's values are the same as the veterinarian's, and takes on
the role of a guardian. Traditionally, paternalism is the most common approach to med-
ical visits. Shaw et al. (2006) reported in veterinary medicine that 58% of all visits were
Introduction
XV
paternalistic, and, specifically, in 85% of problem visits veterinarians use a paternalistic ap-
proach. The topic of conversation is primarily biomedical in nature, focusing on the medical
condition, diagnosis, treatment and prognosis (Shaw et al. 2006)
In a paternalistic relationship, the veterinary team does most of the talking and the client
plays a passive role. This approach is often referred to as the 'data dump' and symbolized
 on the delivery, the information to be delivered is large in mass and it is challenging to
receive the message. Intuitively, it seems like this directive approach enhances efficiency and
promotes time management. The challenge is that the agenda and subsequent diagnostic or
treatment plan may not be shared between the veterinarian and client, compromising the
ability to reach agreement, move forward and achieve full compliance. This could result in a
roadblock, taking steps backward to recover and regain clients' understanding, commitment
andtrust.
Consumerism
At the opposite end of the spectrum lies consumerism, which is characterized by a reversal
of the traditional power relationship between veterinarians and clients: the client sets the
agenda for the appointment; the veterinary team does not explore the client's values; and
the veterinary team plays the role of a technical consultant, providing information and ser-
vices on the basis of the client's demands. The consumerist approach was not reported in
veterinary visits and seems to be an infrequent approach (Shaw et al. 2006). While the pa-
ternalism model has been criticized for ignoring the client's perspective, the consumerism
model errs in limiting the role of the veterinary team. The challenge in this situation is to
engage with the client as a working partner and to build trust with the veterinary team to
reach an agreement between the client and the veterinarian agendas.
Partnership
Between these two extremes is relationship-centred care, which represents a balance of
 power between veterinarians and clients and is based on mutuality (Tresolini & Pew-Fetzer
Task Force 1994; Roter 2000). In the relationship-centred model, the relationship between
veterinarians and clients is characterized by negotiation between partners, resulting in the
creation of a joint venture, with the veterinarian taking on the role of advisor or counsellor.
Respect for the client's perspective and interests and recogrition of the role the animal plays
in the life of the client are incorporated into all aspects of care. Shaw et al. (2006) reported
that 42% of all veterinary visits were characterized as relationship centred, and specifically
 in 69% of wellness visits, veterinarians used a relationship-centred approach.
The conversation content of relationship-centred visits is broad including biomedical top-
ics, lifestyle discussion of the pet's daily living activities (e.g. exercise regimen, environment,
travel, diet and sleeping habits) and social interactions (e.g. personality or temperament, be-
haviour, human-animal interaction and animal-animal interactions) (Shaw et al. 2006).
 In addition, a relationship-centred approach encompasses building rapport, establishing
a partnership and encouraging clients' participation in the animal's care - all of which have
the potential to enhance outcomes of veterinary care. This collaborative relationship is sym-
bolized by a 'Frisbee' (Silverman et al. 2005). In playing Frisbee, the interaction is reciprocal,
xvi
Introduction
the intent is on dialogue, the delivery is airy, light and free. Small pieces of information are
 delivered at a time and the deliverer and the receiver adjust their message to stay on target.
Intuitively, it seems like this facilitative approach takes more time; however, it was found
that relationship-centred care appointments were shorter in length due to achieving com-
mon ground between the veterinary team and the client (Shaw et al. 2006).
Communication style has implications for the veterinary team, client and patient out
comes, based on research on the physician-patient communication that reported a positive
satisfaction, patient health outcomes and a reduction in malpractice risk.
Specifically, the following principles of relationship-centred care are associated with sig-
nificant outcomes:
1.  Broadening the explanatory perspective of disease beyond the biomedical to include
lifestyle and social factors is related to expanding the field of inquiry and improved
diagnostic reasoning and accuracy (Silverman et al. 2005).
2.
(Silverman et al. 2005), patient satisfaction (Bertakis et al. 1991; Buller & Buller 1987;
Hall & Dornan 1988) and physician satisfaction (Levinson et al. 1993; Roter et al. 1997).
 3. Encouraging participation, negotiation and shared decision making promotes patient
satisfaction (Bertakis et al. 1991; Buller & Buller 1987; Hall & Dornan 1988), adherence
(DiMatteo et al. 1993) and improved health (Stewart 1995).
SHAREd DECISION MAKING
Shared decision making is a key component of relationship-centred care. There is two-way
exchange between the veterinarian and the client, identifying preferences and working to-
wards consensus. An interactive approach (e.g. Frisbee) is promoted in giving information,
in contrast to direct transmission (e.g. shot-put) (Silverman et al. 2005). With a direct trans-
mission approach, the sender assumes that his or her responsibilities are complete once the
message has been formulated and sent, whereas with an interactive approach, the interac-
tion is considered complete only if the sender receives feedback about how the message was
interpreted, whether it was understood, and what impact it had on the receiver.
Silverman et al. (2005) recommend using a 'chunk and check' method (e.g. Frisbee) when
giving information, to avoid giving a one-sided speech and providing a large amount of
information all at once (e.g. shot-put). The aim of this technique is to increase recall, un-
derstanding and commitment to plans. It consists of giving information in small pieces (i.e.
chunks), followed by checking for understanding before proceeding further (i.e. check). In
this manner, the information-giving process is responsive to the client's needs and provides
an opportunity for the client to participate in the conversation, provide feedback or ask for
clarification
Taking the client's perspective into account and establishing mutual understanding and
agreement encourage the client to fully participate in the discussion and commit to the diag-
nostic or treatment plan. This entails encouraging the client to contribute to the conversation
(e.g. check) ('What questions do you have?'), picking up on client cues ( You seem a little hes
itant about surgery'), asking for the client's suggestions ('What options have you and your
Introduction    xvii
husband discussed?') and checking for the client's understanding ('What will be the most
difficult for you?′). Use open-ended inquiry to explore the client's perspective ('How do you
feel Max is doing since the surgery?); ascertain the client's thoughts ('What do you attribute
to his good progress?); and assess the client's starting point (What do you know about
the risks of arthritis?). Extrapolating from medical communication outcomes-based studies)
obtaining the client's expectations, thoughts, feelings and fears about the pet's health or ill-
ness enhances client participation in the appointment, with the potential to increase client
satisfaction and adherence to veterinary recommendations (Stewart et al. 1995).
CONCLUSION
The questions posed at the begirning of this chapter included the following: 'Which relation-
ship style reflects your approach?', 'What is your client's style?' and 'Who does the talking
in your visits?' Given the answers to these questions, what steps would you like to take
to expand your repertoire to meet the needs of your client? Flexibility in your approach is
instrumental in meeting the diverse preferences of your clients. It seems appropriate to in-
corporate both paternalism and partnership in your toolbox and to interchange your pattern
to meet that of your client. Matching the relationship between the veterinarian and the client
enhances the potential of achieving significant clinical outcomes, including enhancing client
satisfaction, improving patient health and, as a result, professional fulfilment.
REFERENCES
Bertakis KD, Roter DL, Putnam SM (1991) The relafionship of physician medical interview style
to patient safisfaction. Journal of Family Practice 32:175-181.
 Blackwell MJ (2001) The 2001 Inverson Bell Symposium Keynote Address: Beyond philosophical
differences: the future training of veterinarians. Journal of Veterinary Medical Education 28:148
152.
Brown JP, Silverman JD (1999) The current and fufure market for veterinarians and veterinary
medical services in the United States.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
215:161-183.
Buller MK, Buller DB (1987) Physicians' communication style and patient satisfaction. Journal of
Health and Social Behaviour 28:375-388.
DiMafteo MR, Sherbourne CD, Hays RD (1993) Physicians' characteristics influence pafient's ad-
12:93102.
Emanuel EJ, Emanuel LJ (1992) Four models of the physician-patient relationship. JAMA
267:2221-2226.
Hall JA, Dornan MC (1988) Meta-analyses of safisfacfion with medical care: descripfion of re-
search domain and analysis of overall safisfacfion levels. Social Science and Medicine 27:637-644.
Levinson W, Stiles WB, Inui TS (1993) Physician frusfration in commuricafing wifth pafients. Med-
icalCare31:285-295.
Roter DL (2000) The enduring and evolving nafure of the patienf-physician relafionship. Patient
EducationandCounseling39:5-15
xvili Introduclion
 Roter DL, Stewart M, Putnam SM (1997) Commuricaftion pafterns of primary care physicians.
Journal of the AmericanVeterinary MedicalAssociation 277:350-356.
Russell RL (1994) Preparing veterinary students with the interactive skills to effectively work with
clients and staff. Journal of Veterinary Medical Education 21:40-43.
Shaw JR, Bonneft BN, Adams CL (2006) Veterinarian-client-patient communication pafterns used
during clinical appointments in companion animal practice. Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association 228:714-721.
Silverman J, Kurtz SA, Draper J (2005) Skills for Communicating with Patients. Radcliffe Medical
Press, Abingdon, UK.
Stewart MA (1995) Effective physician-patient communication and health outcomes: a review.
Canadian MedicalAssociation Journal152:1423-1433.
Stewart M, Brown JB, Weston WW (1995) Patient-Centered Medicine: Transforming the Clinical
Method. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Tresolini CP, Pew-Fetzer Task Force (1994) Health Professions Education and Relationship-Centered
Care: Report of the Pew-Fetzer Task Force on Advancing Psychosocial Education. Pew Health Profes-
sions Commission, San Francisco, CA.
Basic communication skills
MaryKirwan
Introduction
This chapter introduces the veterinary student and practitioner to the skills necessary for ef-
fective communication with clients (owners), animals, colleagues and support workers they
meet on a daily basis. The importance of communication for all professionals is explored,
making particular reference to health professionals. The skills required for successful com-
theories examined. Some of the models used to describe the communication process are out-
lined and their relevance is considered. A circular model that may be useful in the context of
the veterinary consultation is proposed. The verbal and non-verbal aspects of communica-
tions are explored, and it is hoped that the reader will recognize the interdependence of both
elements in communicating effectively. The ability to be able to ask effective questions is rec-
ognized and some general guidelines are offered. Following this, the importance of listening
as a core element of communication is considered. Finally, the influence of the environment
and culture on the communication process is considered.
BACKGROUND AND ORIGINS
The topic of communication and its importance in establishing and maintaining human con-
 taqe jo ramo an go Ans pasa Pio a u aa an 0i xeq paen aq 1 po
builders of the Tower to the Heavens were punished and given different tongues. They
were separated according to their language, with each group banished to a different land
(Sundeen et al. 1998). Later in the New Testament, the story of Pentecost further illustrates
the importance of communication: the disciples of Christ were given the 'gift' of tongues so
2  Handbook of Veterinary Communication Skills
that they could be understood by people of all languages (Sundeen et al. 1998). Neverthe-
less, in the field of health care, such as medicine, nursing and physiotherapy, communication
skills training is a relatively recent addition to curricula. The notion that 'talking isn't working'
was identified in nursing in a number of papers published in the early 1980s (Melia 1982). In
relation to medicine, there is a view that effective medical consultations are still difficult to
achieve despite the vast amount of communication literature (Roberts et al. 2003).
THE IMPORTANCE OF COMMUNICATION
'It is impossible not to communicate.' This idiom is often used by communication theorists
(Laurent 2000). Communication helps us to learn about others and ourselves and is con-
cerned with what is transmitted, how it is to be conveyed and what hinders or aids the
process (Arnold & Underman-Boggs 2007). We are also reminded that interpersonal com-
munication is vitally important to all caring professionals, and it is suggested that many of
   a o  dm s s a
health professional's communication skills (Ley 1988). The lack of effective communication
is a constant facet of complaints received by those dealing with complaints in health facili-
ties (Roberts & Bucksey 2007). Hence, communication between health professionals and the
client for whom they provide the care is important so that the client has a positive experience
of the interaction (Roberts & Bucksey 2007)
 In the field of medicine and nursing, communication has long been seen as a core com-
petency for elucidating the patients’ symptoms, problems and concerns and, according to
recent research, an important clinical skill for ensuring health promotion, treatment and
compliance (Ammentorp et al. 2007). Effective communication is largely considered to be
a key factor in client satisfaction, compliance and recovery (Chant et al. 2002; Rider & Keefer
at the heart of all patient care', is pertinent to any discussion on the importance of commu-
nication. Studies have shown that when clients are involved in decision making they are
more likely to adhere to the recommendations (Rainer et al. 2002). The statement written for
nursing students and nurses is equally relevant to those in the veterinary profession. Inter-
 nationally, the teaching and assessing of interpersonal and communication skills are now
accepted as an integral component of medical and related education programmes (Rider &
Keefer 2006; Roberts et al. 2003).
Despite this increasing awareness of the importance of good communication in health
care, a sigrificant number of patients’ complaints still relate to communication problems
(Ammentorp et al. 2007). Misinformation, lack of information and lack of responsiveness are
deemed to be at the forefront of such complaints in patients' satisfaction ratings (Ammentorp
et al. 2007). The interface between communication skills and clinical skills is a common
source of debate (Chant et al. 2002; Noble & Richardson 2006). In the medical literature, an
example of the centrality of communication is illustrated in relation to cancer care in which
the researchers predict that oncologists conduct between 150 000 and 200 000 consultations
with patients and relatives during a 40-year clinical career (Noble & Richardson 2006).
It is imperative that health care providers develop an awareness of what exactly con-
stitutes effective communication. Previous researchers and theorists have attempted to
Chapler   Basic communicalion skills 
enumerate the skills required for effective communication. According to MacLeod Clark
(1983), the following may be included:
●Observing and listening
●Reinforcing and encouraging
●Questioning
●Responding
*Giving information
Thus, to communicate is more than just the utterance of words but also the exchange of
ideas and information between two or more people. In developing the Calgary-Cambridge
framework to the medical interview, its authors established the importance of guidelines
for doctors and medical students (Kurtz et al. 2003; Silverman et al. 1998). The veterinary
time-limited and focused (Arnold & Underman-Boggs 2007).
DEFINITION OF KEY TERMS
Communication is the basic element of human interaction that allows people to establish,
 i ss    s  sn h 's     
ted, how it is conveyed and what hinders or aids the process. There is inconsistency in the
literature as to what constitutes a communication skill, if this skill is the same as an interper-
sonal skill and if it differs from a social skill (Chant et al. 2002). The literature would suggest
that these terms are often used interchangeably (Chant et al. 2002; Hargie 2007). This poses
difficulty in presenting an all-inclusive definition. This variant is particularly evident in the
area of human resources. In the current era of competency requirements, many employers
require candidates applying for a post to have high levels of social, interpersonal or commu-
nication skills.
 Communication is the process of understanding and sharing meaning. Communication
experts now appear to accept communication as a process with no beginning and no end
(Hargie 2007; Wolvin & Coakley 1996). As such, it is continually occurring and constantly
changing because no two interactions are the same (Wilson & Sabee 2003). This poses a dif-
ficulty if competence in the skill of communication is to be assessed (Hargie 2007). Some
guidance in this area is provided in the work of Wilson and Sabee (2003), who suggested
that competence is related to three qualities, namely knowledge, motivation and skill (Hargie
2007).
At a simple level, communication is the 'act of imparting of /or transmitting' and the word
'comumunicate' means 'to impart, to transmit, to be connected'(Simpson & Weiner 2005). For
those in the helping professions, the latter 'to be connected' appears to be the most impor-
tant. Communication skills are also associated with outcomes where the objective of the
interaction is to achieve a particular outcome, as is generally the case in face-to-face inter-
actions and professional consultations (McConnell 2004). Noticeably, some of the literature
involving communication emphasizes the importance of the two-way function, the exchange
of information between a sender and a receiver, while others stress the importance of under-
standing and feedback (Odell 1996).
4  Handbook of Veterinary Communication Skills
Hargie (2007) proffers that communication emerges in childhood as a skilled performance
and views interpersonal communication as a skill. He equates the acquisition of communica-
tion skills in the same way as gross or fine motor skills. Given that the basic elements of social
skills are verbal and non-verbal behaviours, we begin to acquire a repertoire of social skills
to a greater or lesser extent from infancy. In attempting to differentiate between social in
asserts that there are elements of commonality with social skills and other skills. He cites the
six basic elements identified by previous studies (Michelson et al. 2007) as central to social
skill acquisition:
1.Are learnt
 2.  Are composed of verbal and non-verbal behaviours
 3. Entail appropriate initiation and responses
4.  Maximize available rewards from other
 5.  Require appropriate timing and control of specific behaviours
 6.Are influenced by prevailing contextual factors
Based on the assumption that these elements are central to the skill aspect, the following
definition of social skills is presented (Hargie 2007):
A process in which the individual implements a set of goal-directed, interrelated, situ-
ationally appropriate social behaviours which are learned and controlled.
In order to put this definition in context, the theoretical components of communication,
which are believed to have a basis in three areas, are presented (Arnold & Underman-Boggs
2007):
1. The knowledge that underpins practice - includes theory from psychology and manage
ment.
 2.The technical factors such as the skills used in practice, for example communication skills
such as listening.
 3. The creative component, the personal contribution of self.
This belief is resonant with the principles suggested by the enhanced Calgary-Cambridge
framework (Kurtz et al. 2003), which clearly emphasizes these three elements, if in a slightly
different order. The creative component (from self) and the technical skills are needed in
initiating the interview and building the relationship, and providing structure to the process.
in explaining and planning the follow-on care. The creative element of self is important in
closing the session and ensuring that the client/owner has received and understood the
message(s) transmitted.
MODELS OF COMMUNICATION
Prior to examining models of communication, let us examine the elements involved in the
communication process. These elements are the sender, the message and the receiver. The
communication process is initiated by the sender who encodes the idea, feeling or thought
a luposap go ssaord a sag pue aessa papoua au saaianai cm sosiad raoue o
Chapler 1 Basic communicalion skills
Channel
 Sender
Message
Receiver
Figure 1.1l   A basic linear model of communicalion.
content. Textbooks on communication illustrate this process as a model in an effort to highh-
light the core elements. A model can be described as 'a description or analogy used to help
visualize something that cannot be directly observed' (Simpson & Weiner 2005). Figure 1.1
depicts this model as a linear process (Grover 2005). This shows a sender and a receiver and
the channel through which the message is sent and received, such as the auditory channel.
-paqua are saessau uapp Kuanban ixauon rennonied e umm suas st asessau y
ded in the verbal interaction (Ellis et al. 2006). A sender may intend to convey a particular
thought or feeling; however, more than the exact message may be transmitted in the in-
teraction. This is an important aspect of the communication process (Ellis et al. 2006). The
receiver may grasp the message that was intended, in addition to other aspects. As the en-
counter continues, the sender and the receiver interact with each other, both modifying their
responses in the light of the feedback from the other person (Ellis et al. 2006). The simple
 model outlined in Figure 1.1 fails to capture the important element of the two-way process
of ongoing feedback. Attempts have been made to improve the model by adding a feedback
loop (Figure 1.2). Adding the feedback loop recognizes the hidden messages conveyed in the
non-verbal aspect of the process. A message is encoded by the sender and decoded by the
receiver. Feedback is therefore an ongoing and two-way process. Therefore, the sender must
transmit the message effectively for the receiver to interpret or decode the message (Grover
2005).
By using a circular model to illustrate, the communication process can be visualized as
a cyclical process rather than a linear process. This conveys the idea of a process that is
 ongoing, changing and contingent on feedback. This is particularly useful when we examine
possible barriers to communication later on. This circular model (Figure 1.3) depicts seven
stages of the communication process and illustrates how some of the stages are subject to
influences such as the appropriateness of the charnel chosen.
Channel
Sender
Message
Receiver
Feedback
Figure 1.2 This model akes into account the feedback loop of the process. The message is encoded
by the sender and decoded by the receiver. Feedback is, therefore, an ongoing and two-way process, Qs
indicated by the arrows.
6
Handbook of Velerinary Communication Skills
hcluding
1. Sender has decided
Sender chooses
non-verbally
to send message
appropriate channel
7. Receiver
2. Message
Level of
responds
sent
Environmental
knowledge
issues, e.g.
/understanding
 noise and
non-verbal
6.Recalls any
previous messages
3 Message reaches receiver
(includes non-verbal)
5.Feedback
begins
4. Message processed
byreceiver
Level of
kniowledge/understanding
do au so yons saouangui al inelgns ain sabois ay jo awos 'sseooid uoyosiunwwon au ui sabois uiow
 propriateness of the channel chosen, environmental issues and the level of knowledge and underslanding
of the receiver.
ing noise in the environment in which the communication is taking place? It is advisable to
have well-written information leaflets available to supplement oral communication as this
will improve the process, as will locating a quiet area to reduce unnecessary noise. Addi-
tionally, the amount and depth of knowledge conveyed, or if the receiver understands the
information, will determine whether or not the encounter is successful. The element of un
derstanding is the key element when communication is defined (Odell 1996). Avoiding the
use of jargon and unnecessary medical/veterinary terminology is an important considera-
tion, as is allowing time for questions and answers. The circular model presented in Figure
1.3 is applicable to both verbal and non-verbal aspects of the communication, especially in
the context of any veterinary consultation, as several messages are sent and received by the
professional and the client/owner
The concepts outlined in both the original Calgary-Cambridge model and the 2003 en-
hanced model are congruent with the notion of communication being a cyclical process, as
outlined in Figure 1.3 (Kurtz et al. 2003; Silverman et al. 1998). This circle will be traversed
several times during any veterinary consultation. Barriers to communication, and particu-
larly to understanding the message being transmitted, can occur at any point in the circle.
Some of these are the choice of channel, the appropriateness of the non-verbal cue, an aware-
ness of the environment and ascertaining the level of knowledge and understanding of the
client/owner
Within a veterinary consultation, stage 1 involves the professional preparing for and initi-
ating the process. The charnel chosen and the words and tone used will set the scene for the
consultation. As rapport develops, the process moves to stage 2, which involves considering
environmental factors such as noise, comfort and non-verbal aspects of the client/animal
and the veterinary professional. As the encounter progresses into stage 3, information
Chapler 1  Basic communicalion skills 
gathering begins. The process of information gathering proceeds through stages 4 and 5,
which will include the physical examination and past history of the animal being recalled
(stage 6). It is important at this stage that there is mutual understanding so that explana
tions or treatment options are understood. As the relationship builds during the process,
the consultation may come to a conclusion withi a question-and-answer session to allow for
clarification and the cycle starts again
VERBAL AND NON-VERBAL COMMUNICATION
Human communication is distinguished from other forms of communication by the use of
tory (hearing) and the kinaesthetic (feeling), although all five senses (including smelling and
tasting) can be used. Human forms of communication involve, to a greater or lesser extent,
the use of these three channels. Throughout our childhood, adolescence and adulthood, we
learn and unlearn how to see, observe, hear, listen, feel and react to situations.
Non-verbal communication
Communication refers not only to the content but also to the feelings and emotions con-
veyed in an interaction. Much of the mearing derived from communication comes from
non-verbal cues. Non-verbal communication is defined as 'communication that involves all
forms of communication other than the spoken word' (Ellis et al. 2006; Mirardi & Riley 1997;
Roberts & Bucksey 2007). The old proverb that states 'actions speak louder than words’is
very relevant to non-verbal aspects of an interaction between the veterinary professional
and the client (Kurtz et al. 2003). There are many problems identified with the study of non
verbal communication such as the picking up of cues, which can be ambiguous, continuous.
involve multiple channels and are culture-bound. The aspects of non-verbal communication
discussed here cannot be considered in isolation from the other aspects of this chapter such
as questioning skills, listening and the impact of culture on the communication process
Functionsofnon-verbafcommunication
Non-verbal behaviours have a number of functions; they convey interpersonal attitude and
emotional states of the sender or receiver. They can support or contradict the verbal commu-
nication, give the receiver cues about what is being communicated (in this case it is necessary
 to be aware that the person may tell us what they think we want to hear) and adds meaning
to the verbal communication. They also substitute for language when speech is not possible
(Argyle 1988; Arnold & Underman-Boggs 2007; Caris-Verhallen et al. 1999; Kagan & Evans
adoa umone Aq uooung Aoienan e aau sinonauaq leqiaa-uou uanbasuo (too
to take turns, give and receive feedback and demonstrate attentiveness to the other person
(Kagan & Evans 2o01). Non-verbal communication can have five times the effect of verbal
communication on a person's understanding of a message, compared with words spoken
(Argyle 1988).
8
 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Components ofnon-verbalcommunication
Human communication, especially face-to-face communication, is largely non-verbal. Non-
verbal communication is essential to convey acceptance, warmth, interest, love, respect and
support and is essential to build rapport with other people. There is some variation in the
communication literature concerning the number of components to be included when de-
scribing non-verbal communication. Variations of the list are common in many texts and
include the following:
●Facial movements and expressions
 Gaze and eye contact
Head movements
+
Body movements and posture
 Proximity (interpersonal distance) and orientation
 Interpersonal touch
Voice or paralinguistic features
Personal appearance
Environmental cues
*Time
Hargie (2007) uses just seven categories:
1.Kinesics
2.
Paralanguage
3.1
 Physical contact (touching)
4. Proxemics
5.
The physical characteristics of people, such as colour or race
 6.Artefacts and adornments, such as clothing and jewellery
 7. The environment such as the setting where the communication takes place
There are ten aspects of non-verbal communication listed in the Calgary-Cambridge lit-
erature (Kurtz et al. 2003; Silverman et al. 1998), whilst the veterinary consultation model
has shortened the list of examples to four key aspects: facial expression, eye contact, pos-
ture and position movement, and use of tone. By combining non-verbal behaviours, they
can mean different things, and any movement can change the meaning. As these non-verbal
examine the main components with reference to their application in practice.
Facial movements and expressions
Facial expressions (Figure 1.4) provide a rich source of non-verbal information, especially
 in conveying emotion. Our faces provide our identity and, according to research (Knapp
2000), the face reveals six primary emotions: surprise, fear, anger, disgust, happiness and
sadness. Facial expressions are therefore cues that help evaluate emotions and determine if
the message was received appropriately (Grover 2005).
The various regions of the face can add further non-verbal information. These include
the eyebrows, nose, cheek, forehead, mouth, eye region and movements, mouth region
and tongue. Information about the primary emotions is conveyed in facial expressions, for
a e yno 'angaau as ands an uaaa o d panod, 'smqaa past, andxa
Chapler l   Basic communicalion skills
Figure 1.4Facial expressions.
subtle change in facial muscles, it is possible to convey a range of emotions (Redmond
2000).
Information gleaned from facial expressions will tell you if the listener is pleased, puzzled
 or even annoyed by observing particularly the eyes and mouth area (Ellis et al. 2006). It is
[ qu a  pn si ss qa a p p Aaa aoaa
 expression. Previous research undertaken suggested that the power of facial expressions far 
outweighs the power of the actual words used (Arnold & Underman-Boggs 2007).
10 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Gaze and eye contact
Making eye contact is one of a number of skills known as attending skills. Attending be-
haviours let the other person know that you are focused on understanding and ready to
listen (Arnold & Underman-Boggs 2007).
The appropriate use of eye contact is one of the most powerful cues we have for opening
and maintaining communication (Sheldrick Ross & Dewdney 1998). Looking at the person
with whom you are communicating is an indication of your desire to convey interest, empa-
thy and warmth. Therefore, eye contact both regulates and synchronizes conversation.
 Making eye contact should not be confused with staring or with a fixed eye gaze, which
may be unnerving or may make the listener uncomfortable. Eye gaze is not merely a way of
sending signals but also of receiving signals. Therefore, eye contact needs to be at a comfort-
able level for both the sender and the receiver. It is important to note that what accounts for
appropriate eye gaze is bound up with culture and varies from culture to culture (Sheldrick
Ross & Dewdney 1998)
Head movements
 Head movements include gestures such as nodding, shaking or tossing the head (Kagan &
Evans 2001). These movements can be used in a positive or negative way. In Western cul-
tures, nodding suggests agreement whilst shaking the head means either disagreement or
even disbelief. Appropriate head nods in the listening process will increase the speech du-
ration of the client, a signal that you are interested and can encourage a fuller disclosure
(Wolvin & Coakley 1996).
Gestures can replace speech and head nods are considered as attending behaviours in
listering and are a positive indication to the speaker that their story is being listened to. As
such, head nods are deemed to be a sign of a desire to be helpful in the interaction (Wolvin &
 Coakley 1996). Furthermore, people who use appropriate head nodding are considered to
be more empathic, open and warm, all desirable attributives of a caring professional.
Body movements and posture
The way you sit or stand (Figure 1.5) can signal your mood or attitude to the other person
(Sheldrick Ross & Dewdney 1998). A slumped posture can indicate boredom; a relaxed pos
ture may suggest a person is calm and unnerved. A shifting posture may indicate unease
or discomfort. It is essential to realize that your body posture can give the client a power
ful message (Arnold & Underman-Boggs 2007). Whether you are sitting or standing, your
 body should be relaxed and the upper part of your body inclined slightly towards the client
(Arnold & Underman-Boggs 2007). Matching or mirroring a posture may be used to indicate
congruence and establish empathic rapport. Certain non-verbal skills can be used to visibly
tune in to the client. These skills provide a way of identifying and remembering the type of
behaviour that encourages effective listening (Metcalf 1998). The acronym SOLER is useful
when applying the behaviours in practice (Egan 2002):
S
Sit squarely in relation to the client/owner
 O  Maintain an open position
L
Lean slightly forward
E
 Maintain appropriate eye contact
RRelax
Chapler l  Basic communicalion skills 
11
Figure 1.5 Body languoge.
These behaviours, however, may require adapting when communicating with different cul-
tures (Egan 2002).
Proximity and orientation
Body zones were identified as far back as the 1950s when Hall identified four zones mark-
ing the areas of social interaction, namely intimate, personal, social and public (Wolvin &
 Coakley 1996). We all have an area that we consider our personal space and feel uncomfort-
 able if this space is breached. The term 'proxemics' refers to the use of space in interpersonal
relationships.
The intimate space is generally up to 45 cm (18 in.) and is reserved for intimate thoughts
and feelings. The personal distance ranges from 45 to 120 cm (from 18 in. to 4 ft) and is used
for less intense interpersonal exchanges. Both the intimate space and the personal space are
influenced by age, sex and culture (Ellis et al. 2006; Wolvin & Coakley 1996). Professionals
such as doctors and nurses frequently, in their professional capacity, have permission to
invade this space. The same applies to vets if, for example, they need to get the assistance
of an owner during a physical examination of an animal. The social distance ranges from
1.2 to 3.6 m (from 4 to 12 ft) and is generally the distance used for formal exchanges. Most
interactions during a consultation happen in this space.
12 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Interpersonal touch
municating caring, i.e. touches between the mother and the baby (Fredriksson 1999). How
we use touch will give information about the nature of the relationship and the degree of
friendliness between the two people (Ellis et al. 2006). The use of appropriate touch is consid-
ered one of the non-verbal signals of a friendly and caring attitude (Argyle 1988; Fredriksson
1999). Messages such as affection, emotional support, encouragement and personal attention
tion with the client (Fredriksson 1999). However, it is important to bear in mind that touch
is governed by social norms and is also influenced by the cultural context.
Voice or paralinguistic features
'Paralinguistics' is the term used to describe the tone, volume, pitch, timbre and intonation,
emphasis and fluency which accompanies speech (Sheldrick Ross & Dewdney 1998; Sully &
Dallas 2006). Paralinguistic features accompany words to make up the true meaning. These
features help in the interpretation of the message by giving the receiver clues about the
sender's state of mind (Ellis et al. 2006). The tone of a speaker's voice can have a dramatic
impact on the meaning of the message. A person's emotional state can directly influence
the tone of voice. Sometimes this effect is unconscious and the words send one message
s,uosiad e ol ano e aq ues auol anioa 'arojanaul 'asessa ansoddo a spuas auon a am
emotional state. Fear, anger and grief are emotions conveyed through intonation and pitch
of the voice. The paralinguistic aspects of an interaction are of particular importance when
the other person is not visible, such as in telephone consultations. Hence, a warm voice can
convey empathy and loud tones may be anxiety provoking and therefore act as a barrier to
the communication process (Sully & Dallas 2006).
Personal appearance
Appearance plays a significant role in determining how a message sent or received is in-
terpreted or understood. Hence, how one dresses and looks is a component of non-verbal
l aui cn Suprosne Area ues aouereadde anqeidasoe ue rog apos ssaip aui uogeonnos
mediate task and the culture. People form an impression of one another in anything from
20 seconds to a few minutes. The phrase 'a glance across a crowded room', usually used in
relation to eye contact that occurs in romantic human relationships, is equally apt to describe
this aspect of non-verbal communication.
The use of artefacts such as cosmetics, hair, accessories and possessions, such as make of
car, provide prompts to the person's physical well-being, personality, social status, religion,
culture and self-concept.
Environmental cues
The physical environment of the consultation influences the ability of both parties to com-
municate, and therefore to set up a successful communication one must attend to the en-
vironment (Arnold & Underman-Boggs 2007). The environmental context consists of those
factors outside the people involved in the communication. It includes the physical factors
such as location, the furnishings and their arrangement, as well as size of treatment room
and waiting room, if relevant. One can arrange furniture to enhance or restrict the commu-
rication process. Also included are comforts such as heating, lighting and ventilation. Noise
Chapler 1Basic communicalion skills
¥13
is an important facet when considering the environment (Redmond 2000). Radios, stereos
and background noise from traffic are all relevant. Another aspect of this is the time of day
that the consultation takes place. The environment may be either at the client's home or farm
or in the consulting room. In either instance, the environment needs to be considered during
the consultation. Including a relative or friend whom the client trusts can greatly increase
the comfort of the client if the ensuing conversation is likely to produce anxiety (Arnold &
Underman-Boggs 2007).
Time
Timing is fundamental to the success of the interaction. The professional may need to take
account of the client's emotional readiness to accept a particular diagnosis or course of ac-
tion. Remember that the client may be anxious or even angry at the event leading up to the
consultation. Hence, planning the communication when the client is more receptive and able
to participate is both time efficient and respectful of the client's needs (Arnold & Underman-
Boggs 2007).
 In summary, non-verbal communication is intrinsic to all messages sent and received
during the communication process. A number of functions are identified including adding
meaning to verbal commurication, aiding feedback and sometimes substituting for verbal
 communication. Various taxonomies relating to aspects of non-verbal communication are
 available in the literature, and each aspect can influence the interaction positively and nega-
tively for both parties in the interaction.
Verbal communication
Questioning skills
In our daily lives we all ask and answer many questions. Asking questions is a fundamental
skill for all health professionals (Balzer-Riley 2000). This section examines some skills and
practices that may make the process more effective. In Chapter 2, the structure of the veteri-
nary consultation is dealt with in detail. The purpose here is to examine the skills required
in a general way. The more effective you are at asking questions, the more time you will save
(Balzer-Riley 2000).
 It is possible to improve questioning skills by becoming aware of the different types
of questions that can be asked. In addition, using a variety of questioning styles to elicit
different types of information will improve the communication encounter. The main reason
for asking questions is to obtain essential data that will assist in providing quality care
for the client (Balzer-Riley 2000). One way of achieving quality care is to provide an equal
opportunity to the client to ask, as well as answer, questions. This will allow the professional
to clarify issues as well as explore and prescribe treatment options (Geist-Martin et al. 2003).
It is important to consider that professional relationships can have an imbalance of power
and asking questions can mark status differential between the professional and the client
(Hargie 2007).
Functionsof questions
A question is defined as 'any statement or non-verbal act that invites an answer’ (Hargie
2007). The essential function of a question is to elicit a verbal (or, if not possible, a
14 Handbook of Veterinary Communication Skills
non-verbal) response from the other person. Questions can be used to open a conversation o1
to initiate social interaction (Kagan & Evans 2001). Other functions of questions include con-
veying interest, obtaining information, identification of problems, seeking clarification and
ascertaining the extent of knowledge and understanding of the client (Hargie 2007; Kagan &
Evans 2001). The type of question asked will influence the extent to which the various func-
tions are fulfilled (Hargie 2007; Kagan & Evans 2001). Questions are also part of the listening
process (detailed later in this chapter) when the question is used to encourage the client to
continue or elaborate on the topic (Kagan & Evans 2001).
Types of questions
There are a number of different ways to classify types of questions. The main categories are
either open or closed questions and the remainder are subgroups of these. This list represents
some of the common classifications:
● Closed questions
* Open questions
●Reflective questions
Probing questions
●Focused questions
*Leading questions
A closed question is used when there is only one answer such as ‘yes' or 'no'. This type
this method is useful in eliciting facts (Kagan & Evans 2001). Closed questions make it eas-
ier for the interviewer (questioner) to control the talk, but conversely, may make the client
feel threatened due to the limitations and restrictions imposed (Hargie 2007). Most closed
Example: 'Did the tablets work OK?'
Answer: ‘Yes'
Open questions, in contrast, aim to get the client to tell a story. They invite the client to
elaborate in a direction of their choosing (Balzer-Riley 2000). The idea of opening an inter-
action with an open question is recommended by many researchers and experts, and some
suggest gradually reducing the level of openness by a process called funnel sequence (Hargie
2007). This approach provides clients with an opportunity to discuss the issues high on their
agenda at the outset in a manner that comes naturally to them (Hargie 2007). It is impor-
tant for the professional not to ask more than one question at a time, or move on to another
topic, until the current topic is explored in adequate depth. In any interaction it is important
to watch out for non-verbal as well as verbal responses. Open questions allow the client to
describe their experiences, feelings and understanding of the issue under discussion (Sully
& Dallas 2006). This approach can lead to pertinent, yet unexpected, information (Bradley &
Edinberg 1986). Open questions usually start with words and phrases such as 'tell me .. ',
"how would you .. .', 'what seems to be ..' and 'which .. .
Example: 'What seems to be the problem with Toby?
Answer: 'We were in the park and he ..'
This gives the listener an opportunity to follow up for more detail.
Chapler 1Basic communicalion skills
15
Reflective questions can be considered as a subdivision of either open or closed ques-
tions. This type of question is useful if it is necessary to soften the questioning process and
also demonstrates to the client (speaker) that you are really listening to their story. Generally.
reflection involves summarizing what the person said and therefore is similar to paraphras-
ing. In this instance, the client gets feedback and is aware that they have been listened to.
may become ineffective.
 Probing questions are used as a follow-up to the initial question to elicit the scope of
ability to probe effectively is therefore at the core of effective questioning. A probe can follow
on from either an open or closed question. It can take a great deal of sensitivity to determine
how far to go in this line of questioning (Bradley & Edinberg 1986). Non-verbal cues are
important - note that the client may tense up if uncomfortable with the line of questioning.
There are different ways to approach probing depending on the purpose of the information
that is being sought. For example, one may wish to seek clarification on a particular aspect
or require the client to expand on a particular element. Accuracy probes can be used to check
the correctness of what has been said. Probes can also take a non-verbal form such as raising
the eyebrows (Hargie 2007).
 A focused question is neither open nor closed but includes characteristics of both. The
function of a focused question is to limit the area to which a client can respond but encour-
ages more than a yes or no answer (Bradley & Edinberg 2007).
( looz sueag x uesey) 1amsue paioipaid e ol peal 'sisasans wial aut se 'suonsanb Suipea7
Hence, the phrase 'putting words in your mouth' is used in this context. Leading questions
can be subtle and encourage the acceptance of ideas, but may limit the possible replies (Ka-
gan & Evans 2001). Using this format may imply that the person should respond in a partic-
ular way and so may limit the information that is transmitted.
In summary, it is important to remember that the same question can be used in different
ways and in each circumstance a different response may be elicited. Knowing how and when
to use different types of questions is useful in order to obtain essential data that will assist
you in providing quality care for your client. Open questions encourage the client to open up
and expand on the information. Closed questions are useful to close down an overly wordy
or rambling response or encourage a more concise answer. Probing questions are useful for
added detail. Reflective questions are useful to get the other person back on track. Leading
questions have limited use in health and related professions. Critical to the success of ques-
tioning strategies is the use of attentive and active listening skills (O'Gara & Fairhurst 2004).
LISTENING
Any discussion on communication usually refers to the act of listening. To 'be listened to' is
considered a core attribute in organizations, businesses and services and is a critical compo-
2007; Sundeen et al. 1998; Wolvin & Coakley 1996). Expertise in the art of listening is essen-
tial when interacting with clients and colleagues (Metcalf 1998). Conversely, poor listening
skills are cited in a large percentage of medical negligence cases and one of the main reasons
   s      
16 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Listening and attending are cited as the two most important elements of therapeutic com
munication, with ‘overtalking' the least productive (Burnard 1992). Listening and attending
require hearing and understanding of both verbal and non-verbal cues such as eye contact
and paralinguistic aspects of the message alluded to earlier in this chapter. Perception is
closely related to listening as surrounding stimuli are taken into account when a message
is being conveyed (Redmond 2000). Together, the art of listening and perceiving involves
decoding or interpreting the message and gives information about whether the listener un-
derstands the information transmitted.
Defining listening
There are many definitions of listening, such as 'the selection and retention of aurally re-
ceived data' (Weaver 2007), or 'the process by which spoken language is converted to mean-
ing in the mind' (Hargie 2007). Some theorists regard listening as a purely auditory activity.
a process that takes place ‘when the human organism receives data aurally’ (Hargie 2007;
 O'Gara & Fairhurst 2004). In making a distinction between hearing and listening, hearing is
regarded as a physical activity while listening is a mental process. A more comprehensive
definition by Wolvin and Coakley (1996) describes listening as 'the process of receiving, at-
tending to, and assigning meaning to aural and visual stimuli'. This definition captures the
complexity of listening and includes the three core elements of listening - receiving, attend-
ing and assigning meaning - as described in most communication texts.
Some literature describes the concept of listening with the addition of one of three pre-
fixes: active, reflective and therapeutic (Fredriksson 1999). Additionally, these prefixes are
used interchangeably, but the term ‘therapeutic' is generally associated with helping rela-
tionships such as the relationship between a client and a health care professional.
In terms of interpersonal interaction, the emphasis is on the process by which spoken
language is converted to meaning. Just as we see with our eyes but read with our brains,
eu oi mo uieal oh paau jou op am 'suerq ino ym ais inq siea ano yim rea am os
but we have to learn how to listen (Wolvin & Coakley 1996). In this sense, listening is not
sa a uaaaq Aea suaddey ran inq 'siea a u Aenisaud suaddeu en uaos
and is a deliberate and active behaviour (Fredriksson 1999). Aural definitions of listening
ignore the non-verbal cues emitted by the speaker during social interaction. Yet, such clues
can have an important effect on the meaning of the communication to be conveyed during
social interactions. As a result, listening is often conceived as encompassing both verbal and
non-verbal messages.
Functions of listening
The goal of listening is to understand as fully as possible what the other person is trying
to communicate. The functions of listening, in a health care context, can be summarized as
follows (Metcalf 1998):
● To focus specifically upon the messages being communicated by another person
 To gain a full and accurate understanding of the other person's problems/issues
To convey interest, concern and attention for the other person
To encourage full, open and honest expression
*To develop a client-centred approach during the interaction
Chapler 1 Basic communicalion skills
17
Successful communication is dependent on effective listening. This is crucial to satisfy the
other person's goals and needs, as well as our own. Effective listening is a specific interper-
sonal skill that can be developed and practised in professional interactions. Earlier research
 on listening was conducted in academic institutions and the assumption was that college
students learnt by reading textbooks and listening to lectures (Hargie 2007). More recent ed-
ucational research, which focuses on student-centred education, emphasizes how listening
and other communication skills are only part of the learning process. Contemporaneous re-
search concludes that listening is more than just hearing and therefore is an active rather
than a passive process (Stickley & Freshwater 2006)
Listening as a communication skill
Most communication textbooks consider listening a core communication skill, which would
imply that it can be learnt and practised (Fredriksson 1999; Redmond 2000). It is important
not to confuse the skill of conversation with the skill of listening as great talkers do not
always make good listeners (Stickley & Freshwater 2006). Listening at the beginning of the
consultation is fundamental to the success of the interaction. In medical practice, listening
to the patients’ story contributes to almost 85% of diagnosis without further examination or
2003; Silverman et al. 1998) as the professional gathers data on which to base diagnosis and
 treatment (Cocksedge & May 1999). The merit of picking up both verbal and non-verbal cues
early in the consultation and the option to engage in 'the listening loop' (Cocksedge & May
1999) can contribute positively to the outcome for the client.
-de puodsan 0h lapno un rauo a ch uosiad auo ony steuois jo Suaianar pue Supuas yoq
Supuas are Aau ym salessa au oi uouae Aed on Aressanau si l 'siauo on Aanenrdoid
and relate future responses to these messages, specifically to engage in active listening. This
is clearly evident if we refer to the circular model of communication described in Figure 1.3.
Types of listening
Wolvin and Coakley (1996) have identified a number of different types of listening. They
describe these as a hierarchy using a tree and its branches to illustrate how each type fits a
particular purpose:
1. Discriminative listering is at the root of the tree where the listener attempts to distin-
guish auditory and visual stimuli. At this level, the listener is making a rapid assessment
of the problem and it may be as simple as reading facial expressions.
2.
 Comprehensive listening is at the next level but located within the tree trunk. It occurs as
one attempts to understand the message in order to recall a previous message or retain
it for use later in the interaction. Some examples of comprehensive listening include
attending lectures, listening to radio or watching news and current affairs on television.
The emphasis is on listening for central facts, main ideas and critical themes in order
to fully comprehend the messages being received. It is suggested that discriminative
listening at the root of the tree and comprehensive listening as the trunk are the two
18 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
elements that support the other types, which form the branches of the tree and shape
listening behaviours.
 3. Therapeutic listening is one of the three branches when we listen to provide support,
help and empathy to someone who has a need to talk and be understood by another
person. In the context of this text, this is representative of the client/owner who presents
for the veterinary consultation. Here, the listener demonstrates a willingness to attend
to and attempt to understand the thoughts, beliefs and feelings of the client.
4. Critical listening is the second branch described, where the intention is to evaluate the
purpose of the message. This is described as similar to meeting with sales people or
listening to advertisements on the radio or TV. The speaker is trying to persuade the
other person by attempting to influence attitudes, beliefs or actions. In this context, it
is considered important to use the three other types described to make a critical judge-
 ment. Additionally, taking account of non-verbal as well as verbal messages is vital to
the process.
5.
 Appreciative listening is the final branch. This form of listening requires that the listener
distinguishes auditory and visual cues in the message, comprehends the message, pro-
cesses the message and appreciates the content, so as to respond. Listening to music is
an example of appreciative listening.
These types of listening can be linked to methods or used as the reasons to listen ap-
propriately in a particular interaction, with each method having appropriate and inappro-
priate uses (Redmond 2000). Listening methods include listening objectively to gain infor
mation and achieve understanding (Redmond 2000). This compares with comprehensive
listening described above (Wolvin & Coakley 1996). Redmond (2000) lists listening critically
as a method and describes it as analysing and evaluating messages. This requires the listener
to evaluate all information received by stepping back from the emotion and to use critical
thinking before responding. Listening appreciatively, conversely, advises you to suspend ob-
jectivity and be open-minded and open to emotional reactions. Finally, listening personally
is presented as a method of engaging the client; this is likened to the type of therapeutic
listening described above (Redmond 2000).
Passive and active listening
 Communication literature pertaining to health care generally considers listening to be either
an active or a passive process. Many people share their ideas, concerns and feelings if suf-
ficient encouragement is received. All this requires is a verbal or non-verbal cue 'mm', 'ah'
or 'really', a smile, a nod of the head, a lean forward or a 'tell me more'. This is known as
passive listening or minimal listening (Kagan & Evans 2001). Passive listening occurs when
 minimum acknowledgement to the other person is provided, but it is sufficient for that per-
son to feel comfortable about talking.
Active listening is similar to therapeutic listening as described by Kagan and Evans (2001).
Active listening occurs when an individual displays certain behaviours, which indicate that
 he or she is overtly paying attention to another person. In using this skill one is actively
involved. It is sometimes called reflective listening as one reflects back the ‘music of the
message' received from the other person. Active listening requires the professional not only
to hear but also to interpret the meaning and to give feedback (Arnold & Underman-Boggs
Chapler 1  Basic communicalion skills 19
2007). Active listening requires the listener to ask questions, guide the flow of communica-
fion and seek clarification (Redmond 2000). An active listener shares responsibility with the
speaker in order to reach understanding. Consequently, active listening is considered a dy-
namic, interactive process in which the listener suspends judgement (Arnold & Underman-
Boggs 2007). Active listening involves giving time, attending to and observing behaviours
recognizing and responding to verbal and non-verbal cues and being aware of words and
gestures including one's own. Additionally, in some incidences all that is required is to be
comfortable with silence.
 Metacommunication and listening
All messages include non-verbal instruction from the speaker. This is described as meta-
communication or ‘the third level' of communication (Sundeen et al. 1998). It is more than
hearing someone speak. It involves being with the other person so that we give them time,
attend to their non-verbal signals and listen to what they are saying. It includes telling the
sender both verbally and non-verbally that you are interested (Arnold & Underman-Boggs
2007). The professional non-verbally communicates acceptance, interest and respect for the
client/owner through eye contact, body posture and head nodding, and even by smiling.
Listening is a basic principle to ensure that communication is congruent by endeavouring
that all three levels of communication - verbal, non-verbal and metacommunication - are
( t a a) ass as a 
Guidelines to improve listening
In order to consider how to improve listening skills, it is useful to reflect on the aspects of
listening. There are four main aspects which need to be considered in relation to the process
of listening. These are the characteristics associated with the listener, the speaker, the mes
sage and the environment. Communication moves in a circular manner, alternating between
the speaker and the listener over the course of the interaction.
Characteristicsassociatedwith the speakerand the listener
The non-verbal aspects already discussed all impinge on the listening process. A number
of positive correlations have been found between the characteristics of the listener and the
ability to listen effectively. These include:
+Linguistic aptitude: Those with a wider vocabulary are better listeners.
● Motivatior: If the listener is highly motivated, he or she will remember more of the infor-
mation
 egories facilitates listening. Good listeners can identify the key elements of the messages
received.
●Physical condition: Listening ability deteriorates as fatigue increases, an important consid-
eration for busy professionals and clients.
20 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
*Disposition: Introverts are usually better listeners than extroverts, as they are generally
content to sit back and let the other person be the centre of attention.
+Anxiety: This reduces the ability to listen. If worried about self, animal or others, we do
not listen carefully (Hargie & Dickson 2004).
* Feedback: When given appropriately, it assists with the art of listening.
Characteristics associated with the message
This refers to the ability to use clear, unambiguous language, avoiding unnecessary jargon
and medical terminology. Each sentence used to convey a message must be structured to get
one significant point across to the listener. Non-verbal behaviours are carried in all messages
Silence
Silence used deliberately and carefully is a powerful listening response (Arnold &
Underman-Boggs 2007). Sometimes, all that is required is to sit quietly with another per-
son, using touch if appropriate. Silence, coupled with a relaxed approach, gives the client
time to think. Some people are uncomfortable with silence and rush in very quickly with
words or interrupt with words; however, the overuse of words has the effect of covering up
feelings and may stop ideas emerging. Sometimes, to pay attention to what is not being said
is as important as attending to the words spoken. Another use of silence is to emphasize
important points that you want the client to reflect on.
 Some listeners are uncomfortable with silence during their interaction and attempt to
interrupt their silence by talking. Silence, as with many aspects of communication, is culture-
bound and in some cultures it is viewed in a negative way (Ellis et al. 2006). Listeners can
make use of silence in order to promote communication instead of being intimidated by it
(Davidhizar & Newman Giger 1994).
Summary of listening
 an ae pn sa pn o go pa ao e si 
the definition of listening include receiving, attending to and assigning meaning to messages
received aurally. The functions of listening relate nicely to the definition. The central aim is
to understand, as fully as possible, what the other person is trying to communicate, and suc-
cessful communication is dependent on effective listening. Listening is deemed a skill that
can be learnt and practised and is integral to the veterinary consultation as this is the time
that the professional gathers data on which to base diagnosis and treatment, as well as to
build rapport with the client. Different taxonomies are used to classify listening; these aim
to give guidance on the best approach to use in response to the circumstances of the consul-
tation. Active or therapeutic listening requires the professional not only to hear but also to
interpret the meaning and to give feedback. Metacommunication is linked to listening and
includes verbal and non-verbal communication in addition to overtly making the speaker
aware of the importance of their story. In order to improve the art of listening, it is necessary
to take account of the characteristics of the listener, the speaker, the message and the envi-
ronment in which the interaction is taking place. In some instances, it is appropriate to listen
in silence and to allow appropriate time for the emotional aspects of the message.
Chapler 1  Basic communicalion skills 
21
THE CULTURAL CONTEXT OF COMMUNICATION
As the world is geting smaller and travel becoming easier, people from many different cul-
tures interact in their daily lives. Veterinary practitioners and clients/owners are more likely
to have cross-cultural professional interactions as individuals from other cultures settle and
become part of the population. Culture has been defined as 'a learned set of shared interpre-
tations about beliefs, values and norms that affect a relatively large group of people' (Red-
mond 2oo0). It is important, therefore, to consider the impact of culture on commurication.
References to culture have already been made in relation to several aspects of non-verbal
communication. More recent research focuses on non-verbal cues within different cultures
(Arasarathnam & Doerfel 2005). Non-verbal communication such as tone of voice, eye gaze,
hand gestures, self-disclosure and use of touch are cited as areas that influence the interac-
tion by the culture of the persons involved (Argyle 1988). This is a complex area; it requires
time and understanding on the part of the veterinary professional and client (Ellis et al. 2006).
An example of this may be gestures used in greeting such as embracing and kissing, whilst
normal in some cultures, these are reserved for close family and special friends in an Irish
or British context (Ellis et al. 2006). In some cultures, respect for other people is conveyed
by avoiding eye contact, yet in other cultures this would show lack of interest. Emotional
expression varies between cultures, and this may particularly impact on how the veterinary
practitioner prioritizes telephone calls.
How individuals relate to each other is influenced by cultural heritage and values and
beliefs (Sully & Dallas 2006). All cultures are composed of individuals of differing socioeco-
nomic groups, educational background and ethnic and racial heritage (Sundeen et al. 1998)
It is vital that individuals are not stereotyped according to their culture as differences within
a culture can be as great as differences between cultures. A number of definitions of inter-
cultural communication are provided in the literature, i.e. ‘people of two different ethnic
 groups or cultures trying to communicate', or intercultural communication occurs when ‘a
 message produced in one culture must be processed in another culture' (Arasarathnam &
Doerfel 2005). Hence, cultural differences are more than national boundaries and include
values and beliefs.
Rogers (2003) suggested that three principles - genuineness, warmth and empathy
alongside demonstrating unconditional positive regard are the cornerstones of effective in-
terpersonal relations. Such an approach will give guidance in maintaining a person-centred
approach, as advocated (Arasarathnam & Doerfel 2005; Rogers 2003). When communicating
with individuals from other cultures, these principles offer a road map for the veterinary
 professional in facilitating intercultural dialogue and relations.
Clearly, no discussion on intercultural communication would be complete without ref-
erence to the use of different languages. Words have power because we respond to them
(Redmond 2000). Therefore, it is necessary to choose words carefully when communicating
with a person whose first language differs. Initially, pronouncing a client's name correctly
will set the scene for the interaction. Some word meanings change with cultural groups and
this can lead to misunderstanding of the message being communicated (Sundeen et al. 1998).
 Consequently, the professional needs to check understanding during any interaction.
 Professionals are required to develop an awareness of the cultural context and adopt a
It is important to establish the cultural norms when communicating with a client who
22 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
appears to be anxious or stressed. Culture will predetermine behaviours that are outside
the norm.
SUMMARY
References to the topic of communication date back to biblical times. The importance of
communication in the heath care arena is firmly established; despite this, problems that re
late to lack of communication and miscommunication still abound and remain the subject of
much client dissatisfaction. This chapter attempts to present an all-encompassing definition
of the skill of communication. There is agreement that communication is a process, which
is ongoing. The definition of a social skill as presented by Hargie (2007) is a valuable and
practical method of considering the communication skills required by professionals such
as veterinary practitioners. The use of a model is a way of considering the central elements
embedded in the communication process, the sender, the receiver, the message and the chan-
nel. The circular model attempts to depict the cyclical nature of the communication process
and fits well with the veterinary model of consultation. Interpersonal communication en-
compasses both verbal and non-verbal aspects. Professionals need to attend to both aspects
Questioning skills and the selection of the most suitable type of question are central to good
practice and the best use of valuable time. Listening is a core communication skill and cen-
 tral to the art and science of the caring practitioner. Finally, culture and the awareness of
how a cultural heritage impacts on a consultation is a worthwhile attribute for the skilled
veterinary professional.
REFERENCES
on medical doctors’ and nurses’ self-efficacy: a randomized confrolled trial. Patient Education
and Counseling 66(3):270-277.
Arasarathnam LA, Doerfel ML (2005) Intercultural commuricafion competence: idenfifying key
components from multicultural perspectives. International Journal of Intercultural Relations
29:137-163.
Argyle M (1988) Bodily communication, 2nd edn. Routledge, London.
Arnold E, Underman-Boggs K (2007) Interpersonal Relationships: Professional Communication Skills
for Nurses, 5th edn. Saunders, St Louis, MO.
Balzer-Riley J (2000) Communication in Nursing, 4fth edn. Mosby, St Louis, MO.
Century-Crofts, Norwalk, CT.
Burnard P (1992) Counselling: A Guide to Practice in Nursing. Bufterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Caris-Verhallen WMCM, Kerkstra A, Bensing JM (1999) Non-verbal behaviour in nurse-elderly
pafient commurication. Journal of Advanced Nursing 29(4):808-818.
Chant S, Jenkinson T, Randle J, Russell G, Webb C (2002) Communicafion skills: some problems
in nursing educafion and practice. Journal of Clinical Nursing 11(1):12-21.
Chapler 1  Basic communicalion skills  23
Cocksedge S, May C (1999) The listening loop: a model of choice about cuies wifhin primary care
consultafions. MedicalEducation 39:999-1005.
 Davidhizar D, Newman Giger J (1994) When your patient is silent. Journal of Advanced Nursing
20:703-706.
Egan G (2002) The Skilled Helper, 7th edn. Brooks/Cole, Ausfralia.
Ellis RB, Gates B, Kenworthy N (2006) Interpersonal Communication in Nursing, 2nd edn. Churchill
Livingstone, Edinburgh
Faulkner A (1998) Effective Interaction with Patients. Churchill Livingstone, New York.
touch and listening. Journal of Advanced Nursing 30(5): 1167-1176.
Geist-Martin P, Berlin Ray E, Sharf BF (2003) Communicating Personal Cultural and Political Com-
plexities. Thomson Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.
Grover SM (2005) Shaping effective communication skills and therapeutic relationships at
work: the foundation of collaboration. American Association of Occupational Health Journal
53(4):177-178.
Hargie O (2007) The Handbook of Communication Skills, 3rd edn. Routledge, London.
Hargie O, Dickson D (2004) Skilled Interpersonal Communication: Research, Theory, and Practice, 4th
edn. Routledge, London
Kagan C, Evans J (2001) Professionat Interpersonal Skills for Nurses. Nelson Thornes, Cheltenham,
UK.
Knapp ML (2000) Non-verbal behaviour and human interaction. In: Redmond MV (ed.), Commu-
nication: Theories and Applications. Houghton Mifflin, Boston.
Kurtz SM, Silverman JD, Draper J (2003) Teaching and Learning Communication Skills in Medicine,
2nd edn. Radcliffe Medical Press, Oxford.
83-87.
Helm, London.
Macleod Clark J (1983) Verbal communication in nursing. In: Faulkner A (ed.), Recent Adva nces in
Nursing 7: Communication. Churchill-Livingstone, Edinburgh.
McConnell CR (2004) Interpersonal skills: what are they, how to improve them and how to apply
them. The Health Care Manager 25(2):177-187.
 Melia KM (1982) Tell it as it is': qualitative methodology and nursing research: understanding
the student nurse's world. Journat of Advanced Nursing 7(4):327.
Metcalf C (1998) Stoma care: exploring the value of listening. British Journal of Nursing
7(6):311-318
Michelson L, Wood R, Sugai D, Kadzin A (2007) In: Hargie O (ed.), The Handbook of Communication
Skills, 3rd edn. Routledge, London, Part 1, Chapter 1, p. 13.
Mirardi HA, Riley MJ (1997) Communication in Health Care: A Skills-Based Approach. Bufterworth-
Heinemarn, Oxford.
 Noble LM, Richardson J (2006) Communication skills teaching: current needs. The Clinical Teacher
3(1): 23-28.
Odell A (1996) Communication fheory and the shift handover report. British Journal of Nursing
5(21):1323-1326.
O'Gara PE, Fairhurst W (2004) Therapeufic commurication part 2: strategies that can enhance the
quality of the emergency care consultation. Accident and Emergency Nursing 12:201-207.
24  Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
primary care office: a systematic review. Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine
15(1):2538.
Redmond MV (2000) Communication: Theories and Applications. Houghton Mifflin, Boston.
 Rider EA, Keefer CH (2006) Communication skills competencies: definitions and a teaching tool-
box. Medical Education 40:624-629.
 Roberts L, Bucksey SJ (2007) Communicating with pafients: what happens in practice? Physical
Therapy 87(5):586-594.
Roberts C, Wass V, Jones R, Sarangi S, Gillett A (2003) A discourse analysis study of 'good’ and
'poor communication in an OSCE: a proposed new framework for teaching students. Medical
Education37:192-201.
Rogers C (2003) Client-Centered Therapy: Its Current Practice, Implications and Theory. Constable,
London.
Sheldrick Ross C, Dewdney P (1998) Communicating Professionally, 2nd edn. Library Association,
London.
Silverman JD, Kurtz SM, Draper J (1998) Skills for Communicating with Patients. Radcliffe Medical
Press, Oxford.
Simpson JA, Weiner ESC (eds) (2005) Compact Oxford Dictionary. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Stickley T, Freshwater D (2006) The art of listening in the therapeutic relationship. Mental Health
Practice 9(5):12-18.
Sully P, Dallas J (2006) Essential Communication Skills for Nursing. Elsevier Mosby, Edinburgh.
Nursing Process, 6th edrn. Mosby, St Louis, MO.
Weaver C (2007) Human listening: process and behaviour. In: Hargie O (ed.), The Handbook of
Communication Skills, 3rd edn. Routledge, London.
Wilson SR, Sabee CM (2003) Explicating commurication competence as a theoretical term. In:
Greene JO, Burleson BR (eds), Handbook of Communication and Interactive Skils. Lawrence Erl
baum, Mahwah, NJ.
Wolvin A, Coakley CW (1996) Listening, 5th edn. MeGraw-Hill, Boston, p. 69.
A framework for the
veterinary consultation
Alan Radford
Introduction
I am guessing that if you are reading this, you are an adult and you work in some part of
the veterinary health care profession. That means you are at least 16 years old (and probably
a lot older). However old you are, you will have had about the same number of years of
developing your own communication skills. So with this wealth of experience, why should
you read any further? Surely we know all there is to learn about communication, in both
our private and professional lives? I suspect that the people who truly believe this statement
will never actually read this chapter. For me there are two main reasons to carry on reading.
Firstly, if we are honest, we all make mistakes in communication in our day-to-day lives. We
even have an expression for some of these mistakes: it is that 'foot in the mouth' experience,
when we realize we should not have said what we just did. More often, perhaps, it is that
gut feeling when we realize that an interaction with someone has gone horribly wrong, but
we cannot quite figure out why. And if we make mistakes in our personal communication,
we surely do in our professional communication.
The second and main reason to keep reading is that not only are we imperfect commu-
nicators, but we can all improve. That is good news. As with all learning, we really have to
want to learn, otherwise we are unlikely to get very far. But once we are motivated, we can
then learn through experience. But how can we learn about our communication skills? In
m uen mo u se isni ue 'asn am ss po a ai am un mou rnid
identify the things we could improve? At one level, you know if you get a thank-you card or
a present that you must have done something right - but what? Conversely, we may get the
occasional complaint, and nearly always that means there has been a breakdown in commu-
nication between our veterinary practice and clients - but where? The interaction between
ourselves and our clients is highly complex and multi-faceted. Where can we start to learn
25
26 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
about this process? The way we can learn most efficiently is by breaking such complex tasks
down into their component parts.
For those of you who have ever been for a golf lesson, I suspect the following scenario will
ring true. After first watching you hit a few balls, the golf professional systematically decon-
s ms  a 'd a 'ais a shed ja A shn oun ms ano sinns
 ing the ball and the follow-through. For those less impressed by a golfing analogy, imagine
you went out for a meal one evening to a restaurant, and the next day a friend or colleague
asks you what it was like. What we tend to do again is break the experience down into its
parts. For this example that might be the venue, the starter, the main course, the pudding
(my Yorkshire background peeking through there), the value for money and the quality of
the service.
And what does this compartmentalization do? It puts things in order and it helps us not
to miss things out. It helps us understand what was good about an experience or a task, and
what could be improved upon. It allows for constructive criticism and promotes the learning
experience.
 So, how does this relate to the art of communication? Can a process as natural as com-
munication be similarly deconstructed when you get to adulthood? Well, I guess you may
not be surprised to hear that it can. Otherwise, this would be a very short chapter What
we will do in the rest of this chapter is learn about one framework or model that has been
used to break down communication, in this context the medical consultation, into its com-
  sisa s A adoa  am sa n sd p
now widely used to train doctors and other professionals allied to medicine at all stages of
their careers, from undergraduate to consultant, in the clinical skill that is the consultation
process. More recently, these have been adapted and are being introduced into veterinary
schools as a basis for teaching veterinary students. In this chapter we will learn about one of
these models. It has a name, even though not a very catchy one: 'A guide to the veterinary
consultation based on the Calgary-Cambridge observation guide'. The Calgary-Cambridge
guide is one of the models that are widely used in medical education (Silverman et al. 2006).
As we will see, the model breaks the consultation down into seven key parts: preparation,
the opening, gathering information, giving information, providing structure, building a re-
lationship and, finally, closing the consultation.
And who am I to take you through this process? Well, I was part of a group that developed
the use of this model for veterinary training (Radford et al. 2006), and I have had the privilege
to use it for almost 10 years, mostly with undergraduates. But none of that is important here.
What is important is that I am someone who passionately believes that good communication
is at the heart of best clinical practice. The learning experiences I remember, almost above
all others from my time in veterinary school, relate to communications skills. How, when I
watched a consultation by a now retired dermatologist, he always started by asking us what
we thought about the clients and their reactions, rather than by asking about their animals
skin. And when I was 'seeing practice', how struck I was by the privileged position we have
in the animal health business, and how, through communication, we can have either a very
positive or a very negative impact on our clients. Seeing practice as a veterinary student is a
wonderful thing; you rarely get to see other people consulting once you leave the veterinary
school. Fundamentally, if we communicate well, then our clients will be happier, our patients
will get well quicker and we will all enjoy our jobs more. So, let us take this wonderful and
complex thing, the veterinary consultation, break it down into its component parts, and look
Chapter 2 A framework for the velerinary consulialion 27
at the skills that we use in each phase. Time does not permit much recourse to the scientific
literature available in the medical field that underpins this and other models. Instead, I shall
personal time in practice to illustrate key points, but better still, I hope that you will come
up with examples from your own practice.
A GUIDE tO ThE VETerINaRY CONSULtaTION baSED ON
THE CALGARY-CAMBRIDGE OBSERVATION GUIDE
The summarized version of the consultation guide is shown in Figure 2.1. Not the most
beautiful of things on paper, is it? But let us briefly look at its structure, before we delve more
deeply into its individual sections. The central spine of the model is simple and applies to all
types of communication. We should prepare. We must open the communication (otherwise
we would never talk to anyone), we must close the communication (otherwise we would
be talking forever - I am sure we can all think of people who are good at doing that). In
between, we give information and receive it. Communication is always a two-way process.
The sidebars are where things get professionally more interesting, and they are arranged
down the sides to reflect the fact they are happening throughout the consultation. We should
build a professional relationship with our clients and we should structure the consultation.
The clinical examination is represented as the jam in the consultation process. This model
can be used for all types of veterinary consultation, whether our clients own one Yorkshire
terrier, a horse or a herd of dairy cows. And it works for all staff involved in the work of
the veterinary practice, whether you are a veterinarian, a nurse or one of the other people
involved in client care. As often happens in chapters such as this, I will include some phrases
in quotes to illustrate points. There are no prescriptive scripts. It is really important you
always use phrases that you are comfortable with and suit your own communication style.
Models such as this are not meant to turn us all into professional clones. They are tools that
allow us to explore and improve our own consultation style, in a fashion that must be very
personal to who we are as individuals.
PREPARATION
It is nice to feel special that you are important for who you are and not just the next in a long
line of clients (Figure 2.2). And that is what preparation should allow us to do - to ensure
that when we first meet our client, we are focused on them and their animals, and not on
anything else, whether it is personal or professional.
Create a professional, safe and effective environment
Clearly, there are very practical issues here to do with the safe and secure handling of our
patients. I speak as someone who had a patient escape me in my first job. The owner hunted
the streets for several days, eventually finding his dog - he knew it would be with children.
 But what does our client need and expect? In small animal surgeries, the classic environment
28
Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skill
Preparation
→Establish context
● Create a professional, safe and effective
environment
Initiating the consultation
▪ Establish initial rapport with clients and
 animals
● Identifying the reasons for the
 consultation
Building the
Providing
relationship
Gathering information
structure to
with the client
the consultation
Exploration of the client's presenting
complaints to discover
● The clinical perspective (disease - short-
 Non-verbal behaviour
term history)
+Making oganization
Developing rapport
The client's perspective (include animal's 
overt
+ Involving the client
purpose)
●Attending to flow
 Ivolving the animal
Essential background information (long-
term history)
Physical examination
Exploration and planning
Providing the appropriate amount and type
of information
●Aiding accurate understanding and recall
+ Achieving a shared understanding:
incorporate the client's perspective
● Planning: appropriate shared decision
making
Closing the consultation
Summarize
Forward planning
Figure 2.1
 A guide lo the velerinary consultalion based on the Calgary-Cambridge observalion
guide.
is a fairly bare room with an examination table that divides the room into the client's half
and the vet's half. This separation has been used for years to reinforce the professional status
of the veterinarian. But what about chairs? Some less able people may well need to sit. One
place where I used to locum had a low, broad window ledge and a chair, which allowed
both me and the client to sit and talk, rather than having me towering over them. Even for
 the able-bodied, sitting creates an impression of dedicated time for communication, and may
be appropriate, particularly where there is no need for a lengthy physical examination.
We also need to think here about how we appear. Whether we realize we do it or not, we
often use a person's appearance to form our initial impression of them. This is not the place
to be prescriptive, suffice to say we should have a professional appearance, appropriate to
Chapler 2 A framework for the velerinary consultalion
29
Figure 2.2  The busy velerinarian
the animals we are seeing and in the environment in which we are going to be examining
them (for more information on professional appearance, see Chapter 3).
Establish context
Whether it is in between clients in a busy small animal surgery, or during the trip out to
visit a farm or a stable, there is always some time to prepare for the consultation. We should
familiarize ourselves with the owner, the animal, the stated reason for the consult and any
appropriate history. We can then start the medical process in our minds even before we meet
the client. Another lecturer I remember, this time in equine studies, used to say when driving
to the stable, 'switch Radio Two off and think about case'.
INITIATINGTHECONSULTATION
This part of the consultation takes you from first meeting your client and patient to finding
out why they have come to see you. There is a really important distinction to be made here.
If you want your clients to be happy, then one of the most important things to discover is
Establish initial rapport with clients and animals
How do you feel when you go and see the doctor or dentist? Are you at your relaxed and
eloquent self? Almost definitely not. If you are anything like me, you are frequently nervous,
and are concerned about the visit and what may be wrong with you or about to happen to
you. This can make me inarticulate, often stumbling over my words. This whole feeling is
reinforced by the fact that we rarely see the same professional these days. And the same is
often true in veterinary practices. That is what many of our clients will be feeling like as
they wait to see us - stressed, apprehensive and nervous - and this can create a barrier to
efficient communication with you. And if you do not communicate well, you will diagnose
less efficiently and your patient care will suffer.
30 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
There are many ways we can start to break down this barrier. Clearly, it is polite to have
a round of introductions: who you are, and who the person is that you are consulting with.
This may not always be the owner, and this is important to find out, especially in relation to
permission to treat. Some people shake hands at this stage, but this is a personal decision. It
is nearly always appropriate to acknowledge the patient. After all, we do work in an animal
welfarebusiness.
 Providing it is not an emergency consultation, we can then engage in a bit of idle 'chit
chat'. We all have our own way of doing this - it is whatever we are most comfortable with.
The English are said to love talking about the weather. I used to enquire whether people
had been kept waiting for long. If you already know the client, you are in a great position
to build on previous consultations by, for example, enquiring about the client's holiday. If
you are lucky enough to be on a visit, then you can talk about the environment you are in
This is not wasted time. We might gather some useful information and will be starting to
relax the client. It is also important to understand that people learn how to behave with each
other right at the very beginning of a relationship, and this learnt behaviour is very hard to
change. If you have an open and relaxed style with your clients from the beginning, then
your client will quickly learn to be open and relaxed with you. Conversely, if you are closed
at the beginning, you are likely to only get answers to the questions you ask.
ldentifying the reason(s) for the consultation
A slight apparent tangent is coming up here. If I were to tell you I had just come back from
a special holiday with my family and to ask you to find out about it, how would you do it?
Stop and have a think for yourselves before you read on. Okay, most people start by asking
really obvious questions. 'Where and when did you go?' is a good start. For how long did
you go?' 'Did you stay in a hotel or was it self-catering? Whom did you go with?' All
do ao yse ci si em raag ry e ing 'sonsanb paso angisuas aaa jo sandexa are asa
question, such as, "Tell me about your holiday'. And this is a great way to start the clinical
phase of the consultation. We all have our own phrases and it is important to use one you are
comfortable with. 'What can we do for Buster today?', or 'What seems to be the problem?' If
    s   s  s g    s  o an
ask the open question, then we should shut up and listen. There is good evidence that whilst
many medical professionals start with an open question, they interrupt after approximately
18 seconds and start focusing on their agenda (Beckman & Frankel 1984). What this does
is educate the client to move into a closed mode, and only respond to questions they are
directly asked. It is much better to let them finish. Again, the evidence is clear. Very few
people talk for more than 30 seconds in response to this first open question. And if we listen,
we will gather a large part of the clinical history, and probably a lot more than if we had just
asked closed questions.
So, you have asked your open question and you have shut up and listened. The client
will likely tell you about their major concern. But what about all their other concerns? Most
 people are worried about more than one thing. One easy way to address these other concerns
is to acknowledge the owner's initial (or major) presenting complaint and then to repeat the
open question. So, for example, ‘apart from Bonnie's vomiting, is there anything else you
are worried about?' And again, we shut up and listen. Essentially, we can repeat this loop
until the owner says that that is everything. This is known as summarizing and is a useful
Chapter 2 A framework for the velerinary consultation
31
techrique at each stage of the consultation. There should then be no nasty surprises at the
end of the consultation. A good example of this is a pyometra in a bitch. The owner may
respond to our initial open question by telling us that Bornie is off colour and vomiting. This
might initially lead us to have a gastroenteric diagnosis at the top of our list. If, however, we
do ask, ‘Is there anything else?', then they may tell us that Bonnie is also drinking a lot.
This is a very rapid and efficient way of setting the scene for the rest of the consultation,
and critically allows the owner to share all their concerns. And remember, owners' concerns
need not necessarily just relate directly to their animal's medical condition. An equally valid
concern is the farmer who is desperately worried about the financial implications of your
visit, and such concerns also need to be addressed during the consultation. All we have
 ss oo ao  sas r ssn o aa 'oa s  is si o c
fairly complicated conditions, without ever having heard of the actual condition in guestion
GATHERINGINFORMATION
Having already established all the owners' concerns through this repetitive loop of open
questioning and listening, we can now use our clinical knowledge to finish collecting the
history.
 The order in which this is done is not really important, but this is one time when it is nice
to explain to the owners how we would like to proceed with the consultation, by making the
structure of the consultation overt. For example, 'I am going to start by asking some general
questions about your farm and your herd, and then I will come back to your concern about
the number of lame cows you have ... is that okay??
The clinical perspective (disease - short-term history)
This is where we drill down on the specifics of the presenting complaint. It is the duration,
aq 0l spaau h puy "uaan sjuauea Aue oi asuodsai pue uoissaioid Kouanbany Xaaas
done for all presenting complaints. It need not (and should not) be a big, long list of closed
questions. We can still start with an open question style and fill in the critical gaps with more
closed questions
Essential background information (long-term history)
Much of this may be available to you through your previous experience of the client or from
the records. However, these are not always correct. Important information includes signal-
 ment (age, sex, breed), how long the animal has been in the owner's possession, management
(housing, feeding, use), routine procedures (vaccinations, worming, surgery), past medical
and surgical history including medications, and where appropriate, the health status of in-
contact animals including the owner and their family. To avoid the possibility of asking a
lot of questions that some owners may feel you should know the answer to, it is sometimes
useful to impress them with the knowledge you have gleaned from their records during the
preparation phase, and then ask them if this is correct. For example, I have not met you be-
fore, but according to my records, Rover is 6 months old, you bought him as a puppy from
the breeder, he has not been castrated, but we did vaccinate him here when he was 3 months
old - is that correct?' This can inspire confidence in you and your practice (unless, of course)
the owner comes back and says, No, this is Bonnie, she is 12 years old, was neutered when
32 Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
s asr  a  h m   (aa aq a s p o r  sm a
is no substitute for good records; we just need to make the time to read them.
The client's perspective (including animal's purpose)
This is a really important part of the consultation and reflects the wide diversity of our
clients, their previous experiences and their relationship to our patient. There is the clear
stereotype of farmers being motivated by money rather than welfare, and small animal own-
ers being motivated by length of life and less about money. But what about the pet goat and
the racing greyhound? Whilst some people do not worry much, others may be very worried.
Consider the owner whose horse probably has mild spasmodic colic, but whose previous
horse died of torsion of the large colon, or the owner of the dog with lymphoma, whose
 partner recently died of leukaemia. This is sometimes referred to as 'emotional baggage'.
Understanding these concerns is critical to the treatment of our patients. Whilst we may feel
our concerns are for the animal, the animal is treated via its owner, and our job in the veteri-
nary profession is to help our owners make informed decisions about the treatment of their
animals. For some of us, this can be extremely scary stuff because it exposes us to things that
are personal. It may uncover emotions, and we are likely to need to show a good deal of
empathy. (For more information on dealing with clients’ emotions, please see Chapter 4)
GIVING INFORMATION - EXPLANATION AND PLANNING
You have taken your history and finished the physical examination, and come to your pro-
fessional conclusion. It is now time to explain everything to the owner. Sometimes this may
be very simple, but more often than not, we need to impart a lot of complicated information.
And it is not sufficient just to tell our owners. It is also our duty to help them to understand
and recall, so that they can make not just a decision, but a truly informed decision. In times
gone by, receivers of medical care were told what to do, the advice of the medical profes-
sional being gospel. However, those days have now gone, and decision making is generally
much more of a partnership between you and your clients that necessitates imparting all
the necessary information to allow the client to balance the advantages and disadvantages
of each treatment option. In those cases where clients truly want you to make decisions for
them, it is still necessary to carefully explain the reasoning for choosing a preferred option,
and the reasons for ignoring other options.
Providing the appropriate amount and type of information
It may be necessary before undertaking complex explanations to find out what a client's
current knowledge base is. I am sure we have all had to give information to medical doctors
about their animals. When I go to the doctor I usually tell them I am a vet. For me this
means I can have a more meaningful discussion about my reason for visiting. It may also be
that some of our clients have had experience of a particular condition before. It is certainly
ae os 'no cn a Aa arojaq ,pm, pue ,palooo, aae sano Aue eun ann Aluseau!
variably informed or misinformed. Deciding how much information to tell someone requires
careful judgment, and is best decided in consultation with the owner. A simple place to start
Chapler 2   A framework for the velerinary consultalion
33
can be by asking the owner, Have you any experience of this condition?' This allows the
owner to say no, without feeling foolish.
Aiding accurate understanding and recall
There is no point telling a client anything if they cannot use the information or remember
it. That is a waste of your time, belitles the client and has a negative impact on the rela-
tionship between the client and the practice. Suppose a car driver pulls up next to you and
says they are running out of petrol and could you tell them the way to the nearest petrol
station. How do you do it? Not only must you tell them the directions, you must help them
remember Common skills you can use are to break the information down into bits and ex-
plain this to them. 'First Ill tell you how to get to the cathedral, and then I will explain how
known landmark closer to the petrol station. If they do, then there is no need to explain the
whole thing to them, leaving them free to concentrate on the bit they really need to remem-
ber. You could ask them to go over the route afterwards to see if they got it right. This is
actually something a lot of people do for themselves. 'Okay. Can I just check I have got this
right .. .'. All these skills apply to complex medical information. We should break the in-
formation down into small chunks, we should prioritize it, we should use repetition and
summaries to reinforce the information, and avoid using overly complicated words if they
are unnecessary. Of course, we may not need to rely only on verbal communication: they
say pictures paint a thousand words, so we should make use of them when we can. There is
now also an increasing number of models, professional artwork and owner leaflets that can
all be used to aid understanding.
Achieving a shared understanding: incorporate the
client's perspective
Although this part of the consultation is supposed to be about giving the client the infor-
mation, it should not be a one-way process. We must relate our explanation to the owner's
presenting complaints, and make sure we have answered all their concerns. For example, in
the earlier example of the pyometra, we may say, Does that help you to understand why
Bonnie is not only vomiting, but also drinking a lot? We should give our clients the op-
portunity to ask clarifying questions, and even if they do not, we should be alert to their
non-verbal communication for evidence that they do not understand. It is our professional
responsibility not just to give the right information but to make sure clients have understood
it, so that then, and only then, can they make an informed decision.
We must also realize that telling people a lot of information can have a profound emo-
tional impact on them and we should acknowledge this. It is all part of showing empathy:
I'm sorry to give you all this information. I realize it is a lot to take in. Is there anything you
want to ask me?'; Listen, I can see this is very upsetting for you, just take your time'. By
using phrases such as these, we show we understand as well as provide a practical solution
to our client's predicament.
Planning: appropriate shared decision making
We have to remember that, at the end of the day, we are aiming to give clients information so
that they can make an informed decision about what is best for the treatment of their animals.
34 Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
Therefore, we must encourage the client to contribute their thoughts, ideas, suggestions and
preferences so that ultimately we can negotiate a mutually acceptable plan. Treatment plans
are about offering choices rather than giving directives. For more information on decision
making,please see Chapter3.
PROVIDING STRUCTURE TO THE CONSULTATION
This is one of my favourite parts of the consultation model. It is such a simple thing, but it
can help all the parties in the consultation enormously. It ensures we do not miss things out,
which is especially important as clients do not know the order we are planning to do things
in, and it helps the client know where they are in the process.
Attending to flow and making organization overt
This is our professional responsibility. It is about making sure we stick to time whenever
possible. And it is also about structuring the consultation in a logical order, one that satisfies
the needs of both the client and the vet. But more than this, it is about explaining to owners
how the consultation will be structured. This is sometimes referred to as 'signposting'. If you
structure the consultation well and explain that structure, it puts clients at ease and helps
everyone make best use of the limited time available. As an example, our family recently
made use of the UK's NHS maternity services, and we were very impressed with the level of
care we received. But there was one strange day when we went for a routine check-up, one
of our first. We did not know how the system worked, nor did we really know what would
happen to us. We were passed from health care professional to health care professional,
from administrators, to care assistants, to nurses, to junior doctors and eventually to the
consultant. At no stage in the process did we know what or who was coming next. It was
quite urnerving and meant we probably asked all the right questions but at the wrong time
to the wrong person. If someone had simply explained the order of the process, it would
have put us much more at ease, and ultimately made the process more efficient both for us
and for the medical professionals we saw that day.
We have come across this signposting a little already. It is really good if we can explain to
owners the order in which we are going to take the history, and we can say to owners that we
are going to give them lots of information, but there will be plenty of time at the end to ask
any questions. Or we can even give them the ‘permission' to interrupt at anytime. Someone
0 Suo are noA 1eum wan tal 0 isny si a1iol e aai 01 Aem poo e 1e a pin ao
tell them, then to tell them, and finally, tell them you have told them. This same principle
probably also works in the consultation
BUILDING A RELATIONSHIP
This is the part of the consultation process that can often be overlooked, yet it is probably one
of the most important. It uses a lot of those skills that we develop throughout our lives. With
some thought, however, we can modify our behaviour to ensure a better clinical outcome.
Chapter 2  A framework for the veterinary consultation 
35
Non-verbal behaviour
S o e ing uam sdeua ro pies si im s u jo i oh pu am
 also communicated from our perception of each other's body language. There is a really
simple exercise you can do here. Ask a friend or colleague to listen to you for 2 minutes
while you talk about yourself. Then, swap round and listen to them doing the same. The
only rule is that the listener cannot talk. When you have finished, ask yourselves, what did
the listener do that made it easier for you to talk? And conversely, was there anything the
listener did that put the speaker off? If you do this simple exercise, you will learn a lot about
listening . .. and probably find out a few surprising things about the speaker too.
m sas m yo on sn ry Aeo Aqqd si l  ra si io a
we are speaking. When we are listening, however, eye contact is critical. If a client seeks eye
contact with us whilst they are talking, but we are looking out of the window, the clear mes-
sage the client will get is that we are bored. It is almost impossible to look at a watch whilst
listening without at the same time conveying boredom. As well as eye contact during listen-
 ing, we can support a speaker by nodding, and saying encouraging things, such as I see' or
'that's helpful', or even those funny little words that we all use that are in no dictionary and
are really hard to spell such as 'mmm' and 'aha'. Laughing at the appropriate time is really
supportive, but smiling at the wrong time can be really off-putting. Our posture is important
as well and will be affected by the room set-up. People often ask about the use of a computer
or taking notes. It is likely that these are best left to when the client has gone, but if we feel it
necessary, then all we have to do is ask the client's perrmission.
This is probably the best time in this chapter to think about physical contact (Figure 2.3).
As veterinary professionals, should we touch our clients? We spoke earlier about shaking
hands, but what I am thinking about here is how to comfort an emotional client, and in
particular should you hug them or place a reassuring hand on their shoulder, arm, back,
hand or knee? Of all the sections in this book, if not this chapter, how you comfort upset
clients has to be matched to your own personality and governed by what you are comfort-
able with. There are no rules. However, some people do say you should never touch a client
Figure 2.3 Physical contacl.
36
 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
for fear of being sued. Whilst I see the logic, I do not like rules that are made up to try and
prevent what are extremely rare occurrences, being applied to everyday practice. Nor am I
going to say the converse - you must touch an upset client. That is clearly stupid. However,
you may feel with a particular client that some physical contact at a time of high emotion is
appropriate. Clearly, it can be easier to interact this way with a client you have known for
some time. But, even for someone you have met for the first time, a hand rested on the upper
 q Keda no Kaauos dau sn m Ao jou 'lam auo 'andodde aq us aog
can help the client at a difficult time, when sometimes there are no words to be said. And
also, I firmly believe that for some people, and here I am thinking about you, the veterinary
professional, such emotional consultations can offer the greatest professional satisfaction.
Some of the most satisfying consultations can be those where we have been involved in the
life and death of an animal, sometimes over several years, have got to know the client, and
been able to, in some small way, help them through the death of their animal, especially if
this was a euthanasia. So, to summarize physical contact, there are no rules, and above all
stay true to yourself. It is clearly not compulsory, but equally I do not think it should be
banned, and where appropriate can have a positive impact on clients and vets alike.
jeum aenaue Apoq ino Aq inq spiom ino Aq isn!ou os op am 'aesnunuruoo am uaum
 is really amazing is that when, as listeners, we receive conflicting information (such as when
words say one thing, but body language says something else), we tend to pay more attention
to the body language. So, if we are listening to someone and saying all the right things, but
our body language says we are bored and disinterested, that is the impression our clients are
likely to go away with. This highlights the power of our body language. To summarize this
section, some people think of listening as a passive process. But it is not, or at least it should
not be. Active listening promotes the gathering of information, and that is what a large part
of a good consultation is about (see Chapter 1 for more information on active listening).
Developing rapport
Rapport means a harmonious relationship. It implies a connection between people, and
moves the consultation away from just the exchange of facts, to a true professional rela-
tionship. One definition for rapport is camaraderie. I like that. It suggests the vet and the
client are in this together. It puts us on the same side.
There are many ways to achieve this camaraderie but perhaps the most important is em-
pathy. In the medical consultation it has been described as 'appreciation of the patient's
emotions and expression of that awareness to the patient’ (Stepien & Baernstein 2006). Em-
pathy therefore implies not only a personal recognition of how a client may be feeling but
letting the client know of our awareness. This can be summarized by the simple phrase ‘I
 can see you are very upset'. I suspect empathy is where many of the boxes of chocolates
and thank you cards come from. We can show empathy for lots of things. For the difficult
financial market our clients may be working in. For the difficult decision we have just asked
them to make. For the bad news we have just given them. For the size of the bill they have
tice suggests that our clients will be more satisfied and more likely to adhere to treatments
(Haslam 2007). Unfortunately, other research in medicine suggests that for many physicians,
empathy becomes eroded over time. I guess this is something many of us can empathize
with. But it is something to be guarded against.
Chapter 2 A framework for the velerinary consultalion 37
However, simply showing empathy is not enough. We must also, wherever possible, pro-
vide our clients with the support they need to get through what are often very difficult
situations. These can be very practical offers of help such as an advice leaflet, or a sugges-
tion they phone back later if they have any further questions. One of the scenarios we ask
our students to do is to tell an owner their kitten died under anaesthesia for routine neu-
tering. Clearly, this can raise a lot of emotions in the client. But what this particular client
is concerned about is how to tell his young daughter for whom the kitten was bought. This
scenario resolves best when the student recognizes and acknowledges how difficult this sit-
uation is for the owner, and then provides a practical solution by offering to speak to their
daughter with them. Empathy requires us to acknowledge our client's predicament, to show
them that we understand and to provide practical solutions where possible
Involving the client
The old way to practise medicine essentially centred on the health care professional. They
knew best. Patients simply answered what they were asked, listened to what they were told,
and followed instructions. There is now clear evidence that satisfaction and clinical outcome
improve when the consultation revolves around the client and patient rather than around the
health care professional (Abood 2007). We must aim to involve our clients in the decision-
making process, and show that they themselves, their animals and their concerns are central
to the consultation at all times.
Involving the animal
There is not an owner on the planet who does not appreciate it when a vet acknowledges
be said. We should ignore the client's animal at our peril. I guess, as workers in the animal
health industry, we tend to be quite good at this.
THE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
In the model, the physical examination is sandwiched between gathering and giving infor-
mation. Clearly, as we become more efficient, then we will start to merge these two processes.
But we must never let the physical examination interfere with our communication. Clients
may feel they are not being listened to if we are also examining a leg. We just need to explain
 to them what is happening. However, we should leave some time in the consultation for just
communicating with our client. It is part of making them feel special and important, and
will really help build up a good working relationship with them.
CLOSING THE CONSULTATION
The end of another consultation has arrived. Now is the time to make sure we are all singing
from the same song sheet. We can achieve this through careful summarizing. At this stage
we, as the professional, as well as our clients, need to be sure of our ongoing responsi-
bilities. This includes what to do if the agreed plan is not working, and when and how
38 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
our client should seek help. Just before we finish, we should check again that the client is
happy with the outcome and ask if everything has been covered. 'Have I missed anything?"
HO, 'dues suan inoqe suasuon aos asiei Ae sl mou I 'uonsanb annoay A s!
yes, whilst I am here, I did notice that .. .'. But if we established all the owner's concerns at
the beginning of the consult, this is very unlikely. And it can be very satisfying when they
say, 'No, thank you, that is everything'. Finally, it only remains to thank the client and say
 goodbye ... and then it all starts again with the next one.
SUMMARY
Some people raise concerns that applying such a model as this will lead to impossibly long
consultations. However, the evidence from our medical colleagues is that good communica
tion developed within such frameworks is more efficient and does not take any extra time
(Marvel et al. 1998). Other people are concerned that following such an apparently strict
methodology will remove their individuality as communicators. However, that really is nof
what this is about. There is endless scope within the model to develop our own style, and
it is very important we do. We are not actors, and we cannot deliver a script. We can, how-
ever, talk from the heart. And if we use a model like this one, we can break the consultation
down into manageable chunks, allowing us to evaluate our own consultation style in a logi-
cal framework, and improve our own performance. The evidence is clear - we can all learn
to consult better. And if we do, we will enjoy our jobs more, have more satisfied clients, and
last, but not least, have healthier patients
REFERENCES
Abood SK (2007) Increasing adherence in practice: making your clients partners in care. Veterinary
Clinics of North America: Small Anima! Practice 37(1):151-164
Beckman HB, Frankel RM (1984) The effect of physician behavior on fhe collection of data. Annals
of Internal Medicine 101(5):692-696.
Haslam N (2007) Humanising medical practice: the role of empathy. Medical Journal of Australia
187(7):381-382.
Marvel MK, Doherty WJ, Weiner E (1998) Medical interviewing by exemplary family physicians.
Journal of FamilyPractice 47(5):343-348.
Radford A, Stockley P, Silverman J, Taylor I, Turner R, Gray C, Bush L, Glyde M, Healy A, Dale
V, Kaney S, Magrath C, Marshall S, May S, McVey B, Spencer C, Sutton R, Tandy R, Watson P,
Winter A (2006) Development, teaching, and evaluation of a consultation structure model for
use in veterinary educafion. Journal of Veterinary Medical Education 33(1):3844.
Silverman J, Kurtz S, Draper J (2006) Skills for Communicating with Patients, 2nd edn. Radcliffe
Medical, Abingdon, UK.
Stepien KA, Baernstein A (2006) Educafing for empathy: a review. Journal of General Internal
Medicine 21:524-530.
Professional, ethical and legal
aspects of communication
Carol Gray
Introduction
The legal basis of the veterinary surgeon-client relationship is contract. The contract in this
case is between the client, who either brings an animal to the veterinary practice or requests
a visit to home or business premises, and the professional whom they have consulted for
veterinary services. Professional behaviour and an appropriate attitude to this contract are
therefore important components of veterinary surgeon-client communications. In the first
half of the consultation, the process of gathering information from clients is governed by
professional ethical (confidentiality) and legal (data protection legislation) boundaries. How-
ever, it is the second half of the consultation, giving information to clients, that involves the
 more contentious and ethically challenging debates surounding informed decision making
and consent. This chapter looks at some of the communication issues involved in these areas.
COMMUNICATING PROFESSIONALISM
Many aspects of our personality are conveyed in our communication style, including non-
verbal and verbal behaviours. It is essential that members of a professional practice team
convey a suitable attitude via how they appear, what they say and what they do. A major
part of this projection is to get the ‘preparation' phase of communication right. Preparation
allows you to check your appearance and the environment, to get rid of any baggage from
previous consultations or encounters, and to greet the client with a professional state of
mind.
 The definition of professional appearance may vary between practices and clients. Re-
search carried out in medicine has produced variable results. In one survey, patients pre-
ferred doctors to wear a white coat rather than scrubs, business dress or casual dress and felt
39
40
Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
Figure 3.1  Professional appearance insills rust and confidence.
that such attire instilled trust and confidence (Rehman et al. 2005). This confirms the findings
of an earlier survey, which showed that 49% of patients in an emergency department thought
that doctors should wear a white coat (Colt & Solot 1989). However, a survey of outpatients
in an obstetrics and gynaecology department showed that they had no preference between
doctors in business attire, casual clothing or scrub suits (Figure 3.1) (Fischer et al. 2007).
 A larger range of options were given to patients in a New Zealand study, with semi-
formal (blouse or shirt/tie with dark coloured skirt or trousers) attire being the preferred
option, over formal attire with white coat. The addition of a smile improved the score for all
styles of clothing. Items of clothing or appearance that were disliked by patients included
facial piercings, brightly dyed hair, long hair in men, long earrings, short tops or skirts in
women, T-shirts, training shoes and sandals. Interestingly, a tie depicting a cartoon character
was more disliked than no tie at all (Lill & Wilkinson 2005). Although these studies refer to
patients' impressions of their doctors' appearance, it would be reasonable to generalize the
findings to any medical setting, including veterinary practices. A professional appearance
is important in getting the veterinarian-client relationship off to a good start. However, it
appears that this aspect of professionalism is not as important to patients as other attributes
such as compassion and having plenty of time for them (Wiggins et al. 2009).
Methods of opening the consultation or interview will vary too, with everyone having an
individual style. What does the literature suggest as best practice for a professional greet-
ing? In a telephone survey of 415 patients, 78.1% wanted their doctor to shake hands with
them at the start of the consultation, but, interestingly, older patients were less likely to want
their doctor to shake hands (Makoul et al. 2007). Although shaking hands when greeting
professionalism.
Name badges and formal introductions also seem to be important in radiating a profes-
sional manner. In one survey, 76% of patients thought that a doctor should always wear a
name badge, with most preferring the breast pocket as the ideal site (Lill & Wilkinson 2005).
Chapler 3  Professional, ethical and legal aspecis of communicalion 
41
In the same survey, the preferred method of introduction by the doctor was title, first and
second name, for example, My name is Dr John Smith'. Whatever the practice protocol on
dress and introductions, the client's preference for how they wish to be addressed should be
elicited ('What would you like me to call you?' or 'Is it all right to call you Mr Bradley?′).
GATHERING INFORMATION FROM CLIENTS
Data protection and client confidentiality
Information is gathered from clients as soon as they enter the veterinary practice, starting
in the waiting room. Is there any legal aspect to this information gathering? In the UK, the
Data Protection Act 1984 sets out obligations regarding storage and use of personal details,
and the rights of individuals to request access to their records. lt is therefore important to
bear this in mind when writing clinical records. Clinical records must be accurate, up-to-date
and free from any insulting language or abbreviations/acronyms, as clients are entitled to
have these explained to them. As the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (RCVS) Guide to
Professional Conduct (2008a) states:
It follows that the utmost care is essential in writing case notes or recording a client's
personal details to ensure that the latter are accurate (particularly in relation to finan-
cial details) and that the notes are comprehensible and legible.
There are also problems over ownership of radiographs and other images. The RCVS sug-
gests that fees could be 'for diagnosis or advice only' rather than for taking radiographs. If
clients are specifically charged for radiographs, they are entitled to have them (RCVS 2008a).
The Data Protection Act also governs closed-circuit television images. They must be
stored securely, and only for as long as necessary. However, video recording for re-
search/training purposes requires specific consent from the client. This is discussed later.
As stated in the opening paragraph, the legal basis of the transaction between the animal
 owner and the veterinary practice is contract. The contract is for the practice to provide a
service to the client. Some practices have wriften contracts for clients to agree to before they
will provide a service (known as ‘terms of business′). Usual contract rules apply. The three
components of a contract are offer, acceptance and consideration. There must be an offer
from the practice to provide the service (it does not need to be in writing). The offer becomes
  s s      s     
to be in writing. The consideration is the price the client pays for the service. From a legal
aspect, there must be the intention to create legal relations, but all commercial agreements
are assumed to have this basis. The offer is made as an advertised (fixed) or estimated cost of
treatment, often written into the consent process. By signing the form, or verbally agreeing to
treatment in the consulting room or on the farm, the client is accepting the offer, and becomes
legally bound to pay the consideration if the service is performed. We return to contract and
consent later in this chapter.
 One interesting aspect of commurnication with clients is the notion of 'client confiden-
tiality', a principle that has been upheld as an essential component of professional conduct.
However, this is being gradually eroded as more exceptions to the maintenance of confi-
dentiality are listed. For example, confidentiality can be broken in suspected cases of animal
42 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
abuse or disputes over ownership of a microchipped animal (note that in the UK, the RCVS
should be consulted first). Client records may be requested in court proceedings or at RCVS
disciplinary hearings.
If a client has come from another practice, it is ethical (and polite) to contact the previous
practice. What if the client refuses to agree to this? It can be written into practice policy
that only those new clients who allow contact with, and access to records from, previous
veterinary practices, will be taken on. It is more appropriate to cite animal welfare as the
 main reason for this (for example, prevention of repeating tests already carried out), rather
than professional courtesy.
 Client confidentiality is also broken in cases of referrals (implied consent can be assumed
if the client requests the referral, but consent to pass on details should be obtained if the
veterinary surgeon suggests this course of action) and for insurance claims (although, again,
implied consent is assumed if the client brings in the claim form for completion). We look at
implied consent later in this chapter.
 In the USA, the issue of veterinarian-client confidentiality is even more confusing. In
some states (e.g. Kansas), there are statutory confidentiality requirements in veterinary prac-
tice acts. In others (e.g. Louisiana), state veterinary medical boards have broad confidential-
ity regulations, which although less 'weighty’ than state legislation, can lead to disciplinary
action if they are breached (Babcock & Pfeiffer 2006).
GIVING INFORMATION TO CLIENTS
Informed decision making
The minefield of giving information to clients can be made slightly more negotiable by re-
membering the reasons for giving the information. Traditionally, there was an overwhelming
air of paternalism about the veterinary consultation, with veterinary surgeons held in high
esteem and revered for their knowledge about animal disease and treatment, which they did
not choose to share with their clients
 The aim in most modern-day veterinary practices, especially companion animal prac-
tices, is to involve the client in shared decision making that takes into account the unique
human-animal bond (Figure 3.2) and the client's individual circumstances. In order to
enable the client to make an informed decision, the veterinary surgeon, as the partner with
professional knowledge, skills and experience, should aim to provide the client with all of
the information necessary to make the decision. This, in itself, can cause problems.
 First, the options for treatment need to be presented to the client in accessible language.
How much does the client know already? It is vitally important to find out the client's start-
ing point and to tailor the explanations accordingly. This is an area of veterinary communica-
of Liverpool, in none of the recorded consultations did the veterinary surgeon find out about
the client's level of knowledge and experience (Gray et al. 2005).
Many veterinary surgeons will present only one or two options for treatment, leaving out
other options totally for a variety of reasons. These reasons may be client-based (perceived
lack of money, doubts about client's ability to follow treatment instructions, incorrect assess-
ment of human-animal bond) or veterinary surgeon-based (lack of experience of treatment
Chapler 3 Professional, ethical and legal aspecls of communicalion 
43
Figure 3.2The human-animal bond.
option, desire to try out a new technique, reluctance to offer referral). This brings in ethical
considerations. Is it ever ethical to withhold information from clients? A similar debate has
recently taken place in medicine, where an article in the British Medical Journal on deceiving
patients provoked a highly charged response (Sokol 2007).
When financial considerations are involved, the debate becomes very difficult for physi-
cians. A survey of 1000 Califorrnian doctors found that 46% of respondents disagreed with
the statement: 'If a medical intervention has any chance (no matter how small) of helping
the patient, it is the physician's duty to offer it regardless of cost' (Ginsburg et al. 2000).
So, what is good practice in giving information for shared decision making with clients?
Some authors have proposed three basic communication styles: guardian, where the vet-
 erinarian provides the information and makes the decision; teacher, where the veterinarian
 provides information but the client also obtains information from other sources, and is re-
sponsible for making the decision; and collaborator, where the veterinarian and the client
both provide information and reach a shared decision (Cornell & Kopcha 2007).
Initially, all the options should be listed, without further explanation (signposting - ‘First
I will tell you all of the options we have for treatment, including estimated costs'). This may
 include the 'do nothing' option, because it is often useful to explain what will happen if we
do nothing. The client then realizes that a decision has to be made on the other options
What about clients who do not wish to be involved in the decision-making process? There
will always be a proportion of clients who want the veterinary surgeon to make the deci-
sion for them. A survey of human patients found that 52% wanted to leave decisions to
their doctors, although interestingly, 96% of the same sample wanted to be offered choices
and asked for their opinions (Levinson et al. 2005). In truly client- or relationship-centred
 practice, clients should be allowed their wishes to abdicate decision-making responsibili-
ties. How can we make this safe for all concerned? In order to avoid problems with a de-
an ne Any aqnosp c aonad poo si h as Areaiaa an Aq Aaos uan noi
treatment options available, and then to explain why the particular option is chosen. It
should be documented that this has been done on the clinical record, and the fact that the
44 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
client requested that the veterinary surgeon makes the decision on treatment should also be
documented.
Models of decision making
 Two main models of decision making have been proposed. These are known as the 'agency-
based' and the 'informed treatment' decision-making approaches (Gafni et al. 1998).
Each of these models gives a different role to the health care professional, but both ac-
knowledge this role as being the professional one in the relationship. As Gafni indicates,
the choice of model requires a completely different approach by the veterinary surgeon.
If the client wishes the veterinary surgeon to make the decision, it is important that the
role adopted is that of a 'perfect agent' (Evans 1984), both for the client and for the patient.
This means that the veterinary surgeon must endeavour to discover the client's preferences,
where the animal fits into their life, and must act as an advocate for the animal regarding the
best choice for quality of life /welfare.
To take on the role of perfect agent, the veterinary surgeon must work hard during the
first half of the consultation, gathering information from the client about, for example, their
hopes, concerns, financial situation and expectations, while carefully observing and examin-
ing the patient and evaluating the human-animal bond. The decision on preferred treatment
is made by the veterinary surgeon, but based on the information gathered from the client and
from examination of the patient. As mentioned above, the options, plus costs and benefits of
each, should still be carefully explained to the client and documented as such
The second model, informed decision making by the client, requires the veterinary sur-
geon to act as the source of technical and professional knowledge, which is shared with the
client in such a way as to enable them to make a decision.
With this option, the client's preferences, motivation, financial situation, etc., may not
even become apparent (although it is still good practice to find out the client's ideas, concerns
and expectations during the first half of the consultation; see Chapter 2).
This model of decision making requires exemplary communication skills from the veteri-
nary surgeon. Clients must be given the information about the treatment options in language
free from jargon, in bite-sized chunks with opportunities for clarification and questions, with
frequent summarizing to aid recall and without bias towards one option over another (un-
less there is a clear welfare concern with any of the options).
Decision making in practice
As an example, we will consider the decision-making process for a dog with a severely trau-
matized right forelimb following a road accident. There is a compound, comminuted frac-
ture of the radius and ulna, with extensive degloving injury from elbow to carpus. Assuming
that the dog has been given appropriate first-aid treatment, we now have to guide the owner
through the decision-making process.
We can first of all explain why doing nothing is not an option (compromised welfare via
infection, non-union, pain). We are left with three options: attempt to salvage the limb in
this practice, refer for salvage surgery and amputate the limb. How should we present the
options?
Chapler 3 Professional, ethical and legal aspecis of communicalion 
45
First, we should signpost the three options:
 Mr Client, there are three options for treating these injuries - we can try to save the leg in
this practice, we can refer Dog for treatment at a local referral hospital or we can decide
to amputate the leg.
The client already knows the extent and severity of the injuries, so the mention of ampu-
tation should not be too much of a shock to him. We can then go on to explain in more detail
the costs (not just financial) and benefits of each option. A suggested checklist of factors to
consider in this case is as follows:
●Non-treatable injuries
●Available expertise
*Financial constraints
+Concurrent injuries
+Patient factors
●Owners' commitment
●Welfare implications
+Cost-benefit analysis (Ness 2002)
The patient should have been assessed for non-treatable and concurrent injuries at the
do aseales e ino anni pinom Aiddns poonq no aaiau cn aseep Auy "uoneuasand jen
eration, but the owner should still be told why this option is impossible. The expertise of
available staff should not influence the decision whether to salvage or amputate - if there is
no one capable of performing the surgery in the practice, then referral would be the method
of salvage.
We will assume that there is an experienced orthopaedic surgeon available in the practice,
but there is also a referral hospital 10 miles away with an orthopaedic specialist and an
intensive care unit.
 In presenting our three treatment options, we would therefore take a non-judgemental
So, Mr Client, let's go through the three options carefully. In my opinion, the leg is sal-
vageable, but it will be a long and intensive healing process. Mr Bone is our orthopaedic
surgeon in the practice, and he can perform the surgery to try to get the pieces of bone
0h shsia paieada1 Aueu aaqoaui m 1 'leay oh punom us aun iao cn pue iaqaooi yoeq
the surgery and several surgical procedures for Dog. We are talking about an expensive
series of operations, bandages, X-rays, etc. I'd estimate we are talking around fxdo0 in to-
epas rapun Aieqord 'sasur aeq pe sdn-a roy Aenan oa uq daa
tion or general anaesthesia, so you might have to leave him for several hours. However, I
think the chances of eventually having a useful leg are good. Have I explained that well
enough? Do you have any questions about this option at the moment?
46Handbook of Veterinary Communication Skills
After each treatment option, it is good practice to check on the client's understanding.
and invite any questions, before proceeding to the next option.
We also have the option of sending Dog to Topdog Hospital for treatment. It will be more
expensive, but they have the latest equipment and are trained in the latest techniques for
Hnsai poog A1aa e jo aoueup 1auo e Soq aal8 Alqissod pinoo AauL A1as1ns jo adk s
They will be more expensive, and it is further to travel for you and for Dog, especially if
you need to leave him for treatment. Your commitment to the treatment will therefore be
higher. I'm afraid I cannot give you an estimated cost, but I can find out a figure for you
before you make your decision. Do you have any other questions about this option?
Again, affer presenfing the pros and cons for this option, the clienf is given the opporfu-
nity to ask for clarification or for any additional information.
Finally, we can consider amputation. Although this will give the poorest result cosmet-
ically, it will return Dog to being pain-free in the shortest time. He is small enough to
be able to get around pretty well on three legs and, as far as we know, dogs don't have
psychological problems with losing a leg. It is also the least expensive and most quan
tifiable treatment financially, as it is a single procedure. We would charge approximately
x00 for this; that's an estimate as we can't predict how long the surgery will take. Is
             
discuss?
The next factor to consider is the length of time the client can take to decide. Obviously.
the dog cannot be left for too long before further treatment is carried out. However, the
client needs to go through the options, and will possibly need to discuss them with other
members of the family. There may be financial enquiries to carry out (some owners will even
re-mortgage houses or take out personal loans to pay for veterinary treatment).
Notice that we have not mentioned insurance yet. This is deliberate. We should not allow
insurance to influence decision making. All options should be presented before enquiring
whether the animal is insured. We should never rule out an option in an uninsured animal
on grounds of expense. We cannot possibly know the client's financial situation, or how far
the client is willing to go to find the money. A survey of doctors in the USA found that clinical
 decisions in non-life-threatening cases varied depending on the patients' type of insurance,
and the influence of this factor on decision making was stressful for the doctors involved
(Shen et al. 2004).
We have presented the three options with advantages and disadvantages of each. Are
there any other ways we can help the client to decide?
We can also look at the quality of life. This is an area of veterinary science that is receiving
increased interest and attention (Anon 2006). With chronic conditions, there can be a problem
with assessing how the arimal is responding to the treatment. If we can help clients to assess
and monitor quality of life in the animals they live with, this can be a useful tool to help with
decision making. How can we do this? Recently, a quality-of-life questionnaire has been
Chapler 3 Professional, ethical and legal aspecis of communicalion   47
designed and evaluated for owners to use (Wojciechowska et al. 2005). This assesses non-
physical quality of life, and could be used with a patient who is suffering from a chronic
disease, to help the owner to decide whether the treatment is working, and whether to go
on. Indeed, Rollin (2006) suggests that an essential part of the veterinarian-client relationship
should be to ask the client, who knows the animal better than anyone, to be involved in
helping to define quality of life for that animal, at an early stage. Veterinary surgeons can
then keep the quality of life for the animal as the central focus in decision making, and this
can make end-of-life decisions, in particular, more of a joint venture rather than a decision
taken by the veterinary surgeon. Again, there will be clients who will not want to be involved
in making the decision, and this should be respected. See Chapter 4 for more information on
decision making and euthanasia.
Decision making often leads to the necessity to obtain consent from the client for the
proposed treatment option.
INFORMED CONSENT
'Informed consent' is an emerging area of concern in veterinary practice. It is probably accu-
rate to suggest that we are light years behind medicine in our approach to the topic (although
the practical experiences of the consent process in medicine are sometimes far removed from
the theoretical aspects discussed in the relevant literature).
So, what is 'informed consent'? According to Flemming and Scott (2004), the consent pro-
cess for veterinary procedures should contain the following:
+The diagnosis or nature of the patient's ailment
* The general nature of the proposed treatment and any alternative
* Treatments and the purpose or reason for each treatment
●The risks or dangers involved in the proposed treatments
* The probability or prospects of success with each alternative treatment
● The prognosis or risk if the client refuses treatment
+The costs of the various alternative treatments
● If the treatment involves surgery, the individual who will actually perform that surgery
if not the same as the individual obtaining consent 
* The location and method of transportation to that location if the treatment is to be admin-
istered at another site
 Can we draw parallels between consent in medicine and veterinary medicine? At first
glance, the answer would seem to be'no'. Consent in human medicine was famously defined
by the presiding judge in a case in the USA, where a surgeon failed to obtain consent for a
hysterectomy:
Every human being of adult years and sound mind has a right to determine what shall
be done with his own body. (Schloendorff vs Society of New York Hospital 1914)
Surgery without consent in humans is described in criminal terms as battery' (Aitken-
head 2006). Does the same offence apply to surgery without consent in animals? Well, the
answer is no, and further investigation reveals why not.
48
 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
It concerns the legal status of animals. Although there have been moves to change this,
especially in the USA, animals are still regarded as their owners property, to do with as they
wish, subject to animal welfare and animal health legislation.
There has been a campaign in the USA to have animals recognized as 'sentient property'
(Matlack 2004) and owners reclassified as 'guardians', both of which would have a substan-
tial impact on animal law.
Currently, consent for surgery on an animal involves the owner's consent as a 'surro-
l0 'ssedsan, jo anuao ue saneao [ee au uo Aiasins Ingmen Auy Axoid, ro aes
interference with someone's property without consent. However, the dissimilarities do not
end there. Medical consent involves a mainly ethical process: '.. . respect for autonomy and
self-determination of patients' (Bernat 2002), whereas consent for veterinary procedures also
involves a contract between the client and the veterinary practice, and this can complicate
matters. Most consent forms also constitute written contracts, involving estimates (or, less
frequently, quotes) for the treatment involved (see Chapter 5). This can take the empha-
 sis away from the actual consent procedure. Indeed, some sources recommend a move to-
wards having separate forms for recording the consent process and the financial contract
(Dye 2006).
The blurred distinction between consent and contract also appears when considering who
can legally give consent. In the UK, persons of 16 years and more can give medical consent
for procedures (General Medical Council 1998). However, in England a contract is only valid
if both parties are 18 years or more (Family Law Reform Act 1969). In Scotland, the age limit
for contract is 16.
ul jo mana un inq juasuos nog nu ae aui las ol anaum jo ansun are sannoeid Aue
necessity to collect adequate fees for veterinary services, 18 years of age would seem to be a
Aan h sasuon uiqo tn cm jo uonsanb a ch sn shuq oshe si i ae aqisuas
suggests that a 17-year-old veterinary nurse is an unsuitable person to do so.
What is the RCVS' advice on consent and fees?
When dealing directly with the owner, or the owner's agent whose consent to treat-
ment must be given, it is important to obtain that consent in writing on a properly
drafted form which should include any estimated charge. (RCVS 2008a)
The question of'owner's agent' is an interesting one. What constitutes an 'owner's agent'?
And what is their status in law? Certain agents are fairly obvious, for example, a racehorse
trainer or greyhound trainer has a legal relationship with the owner. Similarly, a livery sta-
ble or boarding kennel owner would have an 'agency' clause written into a contract with
the owner. The situation becomes tricky when dealing with non-formalized relationships.
Family members can act as agents in the absence of the owner, but there have been cases of
malicious agency, for example, the estranged husband or wife requesting euthanasia of the
partner's animal. To be absolutely safe, all owners' agents should have written 'authority to
0h sdais anqeuoseai saen oum uoains Areuaiaa Aue 'aaamoH rao au Aq pauis oe
sentation.
This may be as simple as asking of anyone bringing in an animal for treatment 'Who is
the owner?' and documenting the reply in the clinical records.
What constitutes informed consent? In reality, ‘informed consent’ does not exist as a legal
term. It is accepted that for any consent to be valid in law, it must be informed. In practice,
Chapler 3  Professional, ethical and legal aspecis of communicalion   49
we can divide the term up into its component parts - firstly, informing the patient (client)
and, secondly, documenting the process (Childers et al. 2009).
In the UK, the RCVS advises that veterinary surgeons should:
obtain the client's informed consent to treatment unless delay would adversely affect
the animal's welfare (to give informed consent, clients must be aware of risks)
and, expanding on this advice,
informed consent can only be given by a client who has had the opportunity to con-
sider the options for treatment, and had the significance and risks explained to them
(RCVS 2008a)
Compare this with the advice on consent available to medical colleagues. Valid consent
to medical treatment is made up of three main components:
1. Adequate information for the patient to make a rational decision
2.
Capacity (competence) of the patient to make a decision
3.
Decision freely made without coercion (Bernat 2002)
However, the RCVS has produced additional notes on consent and contract in response
to the high numbers of complaints involving consent issues (RCVS 2008b)
Communication of risk
The information given to the patient (in the medical environment) should include options for
treatment and ‘material risks’ of each. A material risk is one to which a reasonable person
in the patient's position would attach sigrificance (Aitkenhead 2006). For example, with
a general anaesthetic, the risk of death, although small, is a material risk. There is some
debate over whether postoperative complications should be included, but this is particularly
relevant to human patients as they may not regain consciousness and be able to make the
decision in that situation. With animals, the owner could be contacted for consent in a similar
situation.
There is a wealth of research in medicine on how best to communicate risk and the size
of that risk. This has valid application to veterinary medicine. In order to make an informed
decision, clients must be made aware of the risks involved with a proposed treatment or
surgical procedure. Under UK law, the legal standards for disclosure of risk in medicine are
'what a reasonable doctor would disclose' (Palmboom et al. 2007). In the same paper, it was
discovered that the most difficult situation for clinicians to decide whether to disclose is in
may include the risk of death in general anaesthesia of healthy animals, but it would seem
sensible that this risk falls into the 'material risk' category.
According to Epstein et al. (2004), the clinician should differentiate evidence-based rec-
ommendations from those generated by personal experience or bias, including financial or
convenience factors. However, in the era of clinical audit, it is suggested that individual
practice records relating to success of treatments or risks of general anaesthesia should be
equally valid.
50 Handbook of Veterinary Communication Skills
The way in which risks are presented to the client may have a bearing on the resulting
decision. Risk framing refers to the way in which the absolute risk is described. For example,
'this will affect one in 100 animals' is viewed differently to '99 out of 100 animals will not be
affected' (Crowson et al. 2006). The suggested solution is to use both phrases simultaneously:
‘out of 100 animals, one will be affected and 99 will not'.
Interestingly, although studies have shown that people understand graphical displays of
risk (bar charts, pie graphs or icons) more easily than numerical presentations (Edwards
et al. 2002), there is also evidence that they find numerical risk information less threatening
(Timmermans et al. 2004).
Klein and Stefanek (2007) looked at patients' understanding of numerical information and
found that they tended to overestimate risk and place too much weight on the numerators
(top line) of fractions. Their suggestion was to present risk as a percentage (e.g. 8%) along
with two or more frequencies and associated denominators (e.g. 8 of 100 or 80 of 1000). The
advice to prevent risk framing described above should also be used with these presentations
Why does this matter? A review by Trevana et al. (2006) found that clinician training
in a patient-centred approach to risk communication led to improved patient satisfaction,
knowledge, perception and consultation processes.
Competence to give consent
With animals, the second criterion of informed consent is never achievable, as we are always
dealing with 'never-competent' patients. This puts animals on the same level as infants and
preschool children, incapable of making decisions or expressing their wishes.
Surrogate or proxy consent, which always applies to consent given by veterinary clients,
consists of three levels of decision making. The preferred level is 'expressed wishes', where
the patient has indicated what they would like to happen by writing it down (e.g. living
wills). The next level is 'substituted judgement', where the proxy bases the decision on the
patient's values and treatment preferences as understood by them. With animals, the third
level is the only method possible, where the patient's best interests' are calculated by look-
ing at benefits of treatment and burdens to the patient (Bernat & Peterson 2006).
The professional expertise of the veterinary surgeon allows the owner to make this type
of decision, by providing all the necessary information. It is not the veterinary surgeon's re-
sponsibility to make the decision, unless the owner is not contactable and it is an emergency
situation.
Bernat and Peterson (2006) describe the process of consent as ‘an ongoing bidirec-
tional process of communication, education, question answering and listening'. How do we
achieve this ideal in veterinary practice?
The ‘two-way' comumunication described comprises two essential components - giving
the information (adequate explanation of the procedures and their alternatives, and the risks
 involved with each) and an indication of understanding (comprehension of these procedures
and risks). How does this work in practice? As discussed in Chapter 2 and earlier in this
chapter, giving information to clients involves well-defined communication skills, including
the giving of small pieces of information and checking for understanding of each ('chunking
and checking), avoiding the use of jargon and structuring the information by the use of
signposting and summarizing. This also applies to the consent process. Here is an example,
Chapler 3 Protessional, ethical and legal aspecis of communicalion 
51
In summary, Ms Client, we have discussed the reasons for your visit today, and we have
decided that Puppy needs further investigation for his vomiting. We have several options.
We could wait and see, we could do some diagnostic X-rays, and, in both cases, we could
end up having to do an operation. Ill take you through these one at a time.
 Here, the veterinary surgeon is using signposting to structure the explanation for the
client.
First of all, if we wait and see, by giving some anti-vomiting treatment, and observing
Puppy for the rest of the day, we avoid having to give Puppy an anaesthetic. Unfortu-
nately, I feel that Puppy may have eaten something, and if I am right, he will get worse
during the day and be in a worse condition if we have to anaesthetize him later. Does that
make sense to you?
The veterinary surgeon uses chunking and checking to present the options to the client.
Our second option is to give Puppy a general anaesthetic to allow us to take some X-rays
of his tummy. If he has eaten something, we should see it on the X-ray. We would then
know what we are dealing with and what we have to do next. The drawback is that if
we let him wake up, he may need another anaesthetic to carry out the surgery. Have I
explained that clearly?
 Our third option is to give him a general anaesthetic with a view to taking the X-rays, but
also going on to do any surgery required. This will mean a longer anaesthetic, but will
avoid having to give a second anaesthetic. Have I explained that well enough?
The veterinary surgeon then summarizes the three options for the client and screens
to check that the client has no further questions. It is suggested that it is good practice to
keep screening, by asking. 'Do you have any further questions?' until the client says, 'No'
(Flemming & Scott 2004).
So, to sum up, we can do a bit of a 'wait and see', but Puppy's condition may get worse,
we can give a short anaesthetic to take X-rays, or we can give a longer anaesthetic to take
X-rays but also go on to do any surgery required, for instance, to remove any object we
see on X-ray Is that okay? Do you have any questions about the options?
Obviously, this extract merely introduces the options for treatment in this case, and does
not include discussion of the risks of general anaesthesia or of the possible surgical proce-
dure. The veterinary surgeon indicates the preferred option. Is this ethically correct?
52 Handbook of Veterinary Communication Skills
The client has consulted the veterinary surgeon for a professional opinion. It is perfectly
acceptable for the professional to indicate the medically preferred option; after all, the client
does not have equivalent medical knowledge. However, bear in mind that consent must
never be coerced from a client. One example of this is using the phrase, 'if it was my dog.
I would .. .', which can be regarded as emotional blackmail. Veterinary surgeons can never
put themselves in clients’ shoes. It is better either to offer no opinion on which is the best
option or to recommend an option using professional experience and medical knowledge
without personal input (see earlier description of patterns of communication and decision-
making models). However, this changes in cases of compromised animal welfare. If there is
really only one option in terms of welfare, the veterinary surgeon has a responsibility to act
as an advocate for the animal. After all, animal welfare comes above all else in the RCVS's
ten guiding principles (RCVS 2008a).
A more extreme form of patient advocacy involves paying scant regard to the client's
wishes, and advocating on behalf of the animal for the treatment that offers the best outcome
with the least risk, regardless of costs (Fettman & Rollin 2002).
Refusal of consent for a procedure that is required to prevent pain and suffering to the
animal can be a problem in veterinary practice, but the overwhelming duty of care is to
the animal. In extreme cases, animal welfare organizations and/or the police may need to
be involved. If the client is not present and an animal requires life-saving surgery, then the
0 sg uoaans Areaiaa a jn 'as s ui ley un qasto 1nom peae o us Arains
carry out the surgery, or put an end to the animal's suffering in some way, it may well be
considered an offence under the Animal Welfare Act 2006
In the example above, all three of the treatment options may be equally valid. If the vet-
erinary surgeon could not feel a foreign body on physical examination, then a 'wait-and-see?
option is acceptable. If, however, a foreign body was palpable in the small intestines, and
clinical signs showed that the puppy was unlikely to be able to pass it, then surgery is the
only option and the client should be guided to this decision.
Now, what constitutes ‘informed consent' in the above scenario? Let us assume that the
sey anq 'sheix ieunopqe roy snaisanue jeiauag e 'uondo puosas a roy pando se uai
asked that the veterinary surgeon telephones her if the results suggest that surgery is re-
quired.
Here is the consent process:
Okay, Ms Client, we have decided to give Puppy a general anaesthetic to X-ray his ab-
domen, his tummy. Do you have any questions about what is going to happen?
 Now, I'd like to go through the procedure with you. Puppy will be given a sedative,
and then when he's quite sleepy, we will give him an injection of anaesthetic into his
vein to send him to sleep. He will then have a tube placed into his windpipe and he will
be given anaesthetic gas to keep him asleep. This will allow us to take pictures of his
ss aos se snasaeue jeiaua a inq 'ajes annb si annpanond Aei-x aul yewois
associated with it. One of these risks, although it is extremely rare, is death. In our prac-
tice, the risk is less than 1 in 5000 animals. However, it is a risk, no matter how small
Another risk is vomiting while under anaesthetic, which can lead to choking or to pneu-
monia, if the vomit is inhaled. This is less of a risk once the tube is in place in Puppy's
windpipe. Obviously, I have to advise you of these risks, although the chances of them
happening to Puppy are small. I will be performing the procedure, assisted by a qualified
Chapler 3 Professional, ethical and legal aspecls of communication 
53
veterinary nurse, who will monitor the anaesthetic. Do you have any questions about this
information?
Please read the consent form. It details the conversation we have had. If anything is
unclear, please ask me. If you are satisfied with the information, please sign it at the
bottom.
 Is there anything else that the veterinary surgeon could do to improve the consent pro-
cess? It has been suggested that getting the client to repeat back the information ensures that
they have understood (Lashley et al. 2000). This may be the 'gold standard' for informed
consent, as it confirms that the client is (1) competent to make the decision, and (2) has been
 given the information in an appropriate format.
P             s
to obtain truly informed consent, then yes, we must. This is particularly important for
apn suaed uenu uu yeap jo ys ra e aaeu op sheue se Kiains Aeuaaa
anaesthetic (see earlier section on commurication of risk). Cats have a risk of death of 0.24%
or 24 deaths per 10 000 (Brodbelt et al. 2007) compared to a human risk of 1.4 deaths per
10 000 (Arbous et al. 2001). Many veterinary surgeons feel uncomfortable mentioning the
risk of death when obtaining consent for elective procedures on healthy animals, but it
must be done or the consent is not valid. If the client then decides not to go ahead with the
procedure, then that is their informed decision.
It is recommended that the risk of death should be clearly stated on the consent form
for anaesthesia. For example, a form of words such as, 'I understand and accept that all
treatments, anaesthesia and surgical techniques involve risk to the animal, including risk of
death . . ', would be suitable (Wright 1995).
-[oy sainpasoid jesibins pue eisaqsaeue 1oy oy juasuon e 1oy eoy cid pansasans y
lows. In designing the ‘ideal' consent form, the advice to have two separate forms has been
heeded, and the need to mention the very low risk of a very severe complication (such as
death) has been noted. Using the RCVS's own suggestion for a consent form (RCVS 2009)
as a basis, the forms shown in Figures 3.3 and 3.4 are suggested as a model for consent for
anaesthesia and surgical procedures in practice.
 In the case described previously, the consent process is taking place immediately before
the procedure will be carried out. This is the usual situation for emergency procedures. How-
ever, it is also common practice to obtain consent for elective procedures on the morning of
the operation. Is this good practice?
In medicine, the current recommendation is that the consent process should take place
 se sisasns (goo) heaio 'eisasaeue (eauag /Aiains roy toissnpe jo asueape 
 is ‘bad timing to present the consent form for the first time on the day of elective surgery,
when all concerned have convened for one purpose'.
 Some veterinary practices have a policy of seeing clients for appointments in advance of
elective procedures, to go through the consent process with them. This often involves giving
them a copy of the consent form to take home, so that any further questions can be dealt with
when admitting the patient. This is good practice in obtaining consent, and ensures that the
client has a copy of the form that they have signed.
Must consent be in writing? The answer is 'no', although it makes record keeping easier,
and it is useful to give the client a copy of the form to take away. One instance where it may
54
 Handbook of Veterinary Communication Skills
PART 1 - FORM OF CONSENT FOR ANAESTHESIA AND SURGICAL
PROCEDURES
Species and Breed
Name
Colour
Age
Sex
M
NM
NF
Microchip/Tattoo/Brand
Owner's Name
Address
Home/Work* telephone
Mobile
(*delete as appropriate)
Operation/Procedure
I hereby give permission for the administration of an anaesthetic to the above animal and to
the surgical operation/procedure detailed on this form together with any procedures necessary
to save life in an emergency. The nature of these procedures has been explained to me and I
understand that all anaesthetic techniques and surgical procedures involve some risk to the
animal, including the risk of death. I accept that the likely cost will be as detailed on the
attached estimate, and that in the event of further treatment being required or of complications
occurring which will give rise to additional costs, I shall be contacted as soon as practicable
so that my consent to such additional costs may be obtained.
Notes and Instructions:
Signature
Owmer/Agent Name (Block Capitals)
Address (if not owmer)
Contact telephone no (if not owner)
Date of Signature
Figure 3.3  Suggestled form of consent for angesthesia and surgical procedures based on RCVS spec
Chapler 3  Professional, ethical and legal aspecls of communicalion
55
PART 2 - CONTRACT FOR ANAESTHESIA/SURGICAL PROCEDURES
(to be kept with part 1)
Name of animal
Nature of surgical procedure(s)
The estimated cost of the procedures described above (tick as appropriate)
口
will be: f
口
will be within the range: f.
to f
Inclusive of:
VAT
Post-op Exam
Post-op Treatment
And I agree that I will pay for the treatment on collection of the animal
Signature
Date of signature
Figure 3.4 Suggesled conlract for angesthesia and surgical procedures based on RCVS specimen
be more humane to accept verbal rather than written consent is the terminal patient who has
 arrived for euthanasia with a distressed owner. The insistence on written consent may only
increase the risk of responsibility grief (see Chapter 4) with this type of client. Indeed, the
Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland do not believe that a formal signed
consent form is necessary for anaesthesia, as a signed consent form does not increase the
validity of consent (Aitkenhead 2006).
 Consent for anaesthesia and consent for euthanasia are quite different, however. It is use-
ful to compile a checklist on practice policy for different situations involving requests for
euthanasia, which may look as follows:
1.
2.
Known client with new patient - Again, check ownership carefully (some people have been
known to kidnap' local problem animals and request euthanasia - why have you not
seen this animal before?). Obtain written consent.
56 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
3.Known patient with new client - It may be that this is a member of the family that you
have not yet met, but it is sensible to check ownership (or agency) carefully and obtain
written consent.
4.Krown client and patient -If you have been discussing the timing of euthanasia over sev-
eral consultations, and the time has arrived, then verbal consent is kinder for everyone.
You have plenty of written evidence that this has been carefully planned.
5.Telephone consent,for example, ifa patient is anaesthetized on the operating table -Itis recom-
mended that, if possible, two people listen to the client's verbal consent and everything is
carefully documented. Obviously, the other requirements for consent should be present,
i.e. that the client is competent to make the decision and that they have had their choices
clearly explained to them.
A suggested pro forma for a consent form for euthanasia is shown in Figure 3.5. This is a
model of a form for written consent for euthanasia, again, based on the RCVS version (RCVS
2008c).
Implied consent
The concept of implied consent is interesting. If a person, by their actions, suggests that they
are consenting to a procedure, then implied consent is valid. When in hospital, for example,
the act of opening one's mouth to have a thermometer inserted is taken as implied consent to
having one's temperature taken, and a consent form does not have to be signed for this (Dye
 2006). We can use this premise to argue that a consent proces is not required for animals
presented to the veterinary surgeon for treatment or vaccination. The action of bringing the
animal to the surgery, or requesting a visit by the veterinary surgeon, is surely enough to
imply consent by the client? However, it may be implied, but is it informed? It could be
argued that certain side effects or severe reactions to drugs or vaccinations are common
enough to require explicit consent from clients. This need not be in writing, but it is good
practice to document that the client was informed of these risks before the vaccination or
drug was given. In the case of 'off-label use, where the drug or vaccine being used is not
licensed for use in that species (e.g. most drugs used for treatment of exotic animals), written
and informed consent is advisable.
Consent for research
What about consent for research and for procedures that are perhaps not in the best interests
of the animal? Research may involve the animal being used for a clinical trial or the client
being involved in research into attitudinal aspects of owning animals.
Clinical trials involve the testing of a veterinary medicinal product after administration of
the correct dosage (Directive 2001/82/EEC 2001). They can be either dose-confirmation stud-
ies or verification studies to test the acceptability and efficacy of the product (Derrison &
Leach 2006). It is necessary to obtain the informed consent of the client before enrolling a
patient in a clinical trial:
[T]he informed consent of the owner of the animals to be used in the trial shall be
obtained and documented .. . (Directive 2001/82/EEC)
Chapler 3  Professional, ethical and legal aspecls of communicalion
57
FORM OF CONSENT FOR EUTHANASIA
Species and Breed
Name
Colour
Age
Sex
M/ F/ NM/ NF
Microchip/Tattoo/Brand
Owner's Name
Address
Telephone:
Home
Work
Mobile
I hereby confirm that:
口
I am the owner of the animal described above OR
口
I have the authority of the owner of the animal described above
And I request euthanasia of the animal
Signature
Name (Block Capitals)
Address (if not owner)
Contact Telephone No (if not owner)
Date of Signature
oissiwad ymi woy uawleads saoy uo pesog pisouoyine joy luesuon jo woy pasabns s'e ane
from the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons].
58 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Informed consent for clinical trials must be non-coercive, and include the reassurance that
participation is voluntary, with no effect on subsequent veterinary treatment by the practice,
should the client refuse. The client must be given full details of the drug or product being
tested, possible risks or side effects and whom to contact should there be a problem. Practice
staff should also be aware of which clients and patients are participating in the study, in case
of adverse reactions.
While, in the above situation, consent must be obtained from clients on behalf of their
animals, there may be some research carried out in practice that involves clients them
selves. Research on human subjects involves the four principles outlined by Beauchamp and
Childress (1994).
The principle of justice includes the right to privacy (e.g. anonymization of results) and
the right to fair treatment (whether choosing to participate or not). The principle of auton-
ormy involves being given all the information needed to make an informed decision without
coercion. It is good practice to give all potential participants a written information sheet 
containing the following details:
●The purpose of the study
Why they have been chosen
That participation is optional and will not affect their treatment
+
Description of what will happen should they participate
Disadvantages of participation
 Benefits of participation
*Complaints
*Confidentiality
●What will happen to results
*Who is funding the research
+Ethical review
·Contact details for the researcher and practice staff involved (Pullen 2006)
The principle of non-maleficence requires that the researcher avoids doing harm to the
participant. This may involve sourcing qualified counsellors who can provide appropriate
support for theparticipants if required.
The principle of beneficence means that the researcher should try to maximize the good
for the participant. The participant may get a feeling of satisfaction through taking part,
feeling that they have benefited others by doing so, but it also helps to share the results with
participants should they wish.
Consent for video-recording consultations for any purpose (research, postgraduate train
ing, etc.) involves the same consent process with clients. It is good practice to obtain consent
before the consultation, but also to give clients the option of changing their minds after the
consultation. This can be achieved by asking them to sign an agreement that they are still
happy to have the video included after the consultation has ended.
obvious benefit to the patient. The client may feel a sense of satisfaction in that they have
used their own animal to help another animal, but there can only be risks, and no benefits,
for the donor animal. It is therefore up to each individual client to decide on a personal
ethical viewpoint for this situation, and no client should be coerced into agreeing to allow
an animal to donate blood or other tissue.
Chapler 3 Professional, ethical and legal aspecls of communicalion 
59
REFERENCES
ical Anaesthes iology 20(4):507-524.
Anon (2006) What do we mean by quality of life? Veterinary Record 159:430-431.
Arbous MS, Grobbee DE, van Kleef JW, de Lange J, Spoormans HHAJM, Touw P, Werner FM)
Meursing AEE (200l) Mortality associated with anaesthesia: a qualitafive analysis to idenfify
risk factors. Anaesthesia 56(12):1141-1153.
Babcock SL, Pfeiffer C (2006) Laws and regulations concerning the confidentiality of veterinarian-
client commuricafion. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 229(3):365-369
Beauchamp TL, Childress JE (1994) Principles of Biomedical Ethics. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Bernat JL (2002) Informed consent in pediatric neurology. Seminars in Pediatric Neurology
9(1):10-18.
Bernat JL, Peterson LM (2006) Patient-centered informed consent in surgical practice. Archives of
Surgery 141: 86-92.
Brodbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, Wood JL (2007) Risk factors for anaesthetic-related deaths
in cats: results from the confidenfial enquiry into perioperative small animal fatalifies. British
Journal of Anaesthesiology 99:617-623.
Colt HG, Solot JA (1989) Attitudes of patients and physicians regarding physician dress and de-
e  a  s     
Cornell KK, Kopcha M (2007) Client-veterinarian communication: skills for client centered dia-
logue and shared decision-making. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal 37:37-47.
Crowson CS, Therneau T, Mafteson EL, Gabriel SE (2006) Primer: demystifying risk - understand-
ing and commuricafing medical risk. Nature Clinical Practice in Rheumatology 3:181-187.
Derrison T, Leach M (2006) Animal research, ethics and law. In: Pullen S, Gray C (eds), Ethics
Law and theVeterinary Nurse.Elsevier,Edinburgh.
Directive 2001/82/EC (2001) Official Journal of the European Communifies.
Dye K (2006) Consent to treatment in veterinary practice. In: Pullen S, Gray C (eds), Ethics, Law
and the Veterinary Nurse.Elsevier,Edinburgh.
pictures.BritishMedicalJournal324:827-830.
Epstein RM, Alper BS, Quill TE (2004) Communicating evidence for participatory decision mak-
ing. JAMA 291(19):2359-2366.
Evans RG (1984) Strained Mercy: The Economics of Canadian Health Care. Butterworths, Toronto,
Canada.
Family Law Reform Act (1969) HMSO, London.
 Fettman MJ, Rollin BE (2002) Modern elements of informed consent for general veterinary prac-
fitioners. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 221(10):1386-1393.
Fischer RL, Hansen CE, Hunter RL, Veloski J (2007) Does physician attire influence patient sat
Gynecology 196:186.e1-186.e5.
Flemming DD, Scott JF (2004) The informed consent doctrine: what veterinarians should tell their
clients.Journal of the American Veterinary MedicalAssociation 224(9):1436-1439
60 Handbook of Velerinary Communication Skills
Gafni A, Charles C, Whelan T (1998) The physician-pafient encounter: the physician as a perfect
agent for fhe pafient versus the informed treatment decision-making model. Social Science and
Medicine 47(3):347-354.
General Medical Council (1998) Seeking Patients’ Consent: The Ethical Considerations. GMC,
London.
Ginsburg ME, Kravitz RL, Sandberg WA (2000) A survey of physician affifudes and practices
 Goldblatt D (2006) Patient-physician communication using consent forms. Archives of Surgery
141:715.
Gray C, Eaves RE, Walsh SJ, Wilson CJ (2005) A final year special study module in veterinary com-
municafion skills. Association for Medical Education in Europe Conference Abstracts 2o05, AMEE
Dundee, p. 188.
psychology of risk perception. CA Cancer Journal for Clinicians 57:147-167.
Lashley M, Talley W, Lands LC, Keyserlingk, EW (2000) Informed proxy consent: communication
Levinson W, Kao A, Kuby A, Thisted RA (2005) Not all patients want to participate in decision
making. Journal of General Internal Medicine 20:531-535.
Lill MM, Wilkinson TJ (2005) Judging a book by its cover: descriptive survey of patients' prefer-
ences for doctors'appearance and mode of address. British Medica! Journal 331:15241527.
Makoul G, Zick A, Green M (2007) An evidence-based perspective on greetings in medical en-
counters. Archives of Internal Medicine 167:1172-1176.
Matlack CB (2004) More on the senfient property debate. Jou rnal of the American Veterinary Medica!
Association 225(10):1526-1527.
 Ness M (2002) Decision making in the management of severe limb trauma. In Practice 24:302-309.
 Palmboom GG, Willems DL, Janssen NBAT, de Haes JCJM (2007) Doctors' views on disclosing or
withholding informafion on low risks of complicafions. Journa! of Medical Ethics 33:67-70.
Pullen S (2006) Research on people: ethical considerations. In: Pullen S, Gray C (eds), Ethics, Law
and the Veterinary Nurse.Elsevier, Edinburgh.
Rehman SU, Nietert PJ, Cope DW, Osborne Kilpatrick A (2005) What to wear today? Ef-
fect of doctor's aftire on the trust and confidence of patients. American Journal of Medicine
118(11):1279-1286.
Rollin BE (2006) Euthanasia and quality of life.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
228(7):1014-1016.
Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (2008a) Guide to Professional Conduct. RCVS, London.
nexes e: communication and consent. Available online: hftp: / /www.rcvs.org.uk /Templates /
PreviousNext.asp?NodeID=89767&int2ndParentNodeID=89738&int1stParentNodeID=89642
(accessed 31 May 2009).
online: hftp: / /www.rcvs.org.uk/Templates/PreviousNext.asp?NodeID=89767&int2ndParent
NodeID=89738&int1stParenfNodeID=89642 (accessed 31 May 2009).
Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (2009) Suggested form of consent for anaesthesia and
surgery. Available online: http: / /www.revs.org.uk/ Templates /PreviousNext.asp?NodeID=
 89767&int2ndParentNodeID=89738&int1stParentNodeID=89642 (accessed 4 September 2009).
Schloendorff vs Society of New York Hospital (1914) 211 N.Y. 125, 105 N.E. 92.
Chapler 3 Protessional, ethical and legal aspecis of communicalion 
61
                
method on clinical decision-making. Medical Care 42(3):297-302.
Sokol DK (2007) Carn deceiving pafients be morally acceptable? British Medical Journal 334:984-986.
Tirmmermans D, Molewijk B, Stiggelbout A, Kievit J (2004) Different formats for communicating
54:255-263.
Trevana LJ, Davey HM, Barraft A, Butow P, Caldwell P (2006) A systematic review on communi-
cating with patients about evidence. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice 12(1):13-23.
Wiggins MN, Coker K, Hicks EK (2009) Pafient percepfions of professionalism: implicafions for
residency educafion.MedicalEducation 43:28-33.
Wojciechowska JI, Hewson CJ, Stryhn H, Guy NC, Patronek GJ, Timmons V (2005) Development
American Journal of Veterinary Research 66(8):1453-1460.
Wright M (1995) Consent forms - a necessary evil. In Practice 17:482-484.
Compassionate communication:
working with grief
Susan Elizabeth Dawson
Introduction
Working in veterinary medicine and animal welfare presents specific and complex chal-
lenges, not least because of the extremes and intensity of human emotions encountered and
experienced at times of crisis and loss. Compassionate communication enables a fusion of
genuine care and professionalism, facilitating development of trusting working partnerships
between professionals and owners, that brings about a greater depth of understanding of
the individual relationships between people and their pets - the human-companion animal
bond (HCAB).
Whilst the HCAB is not a new concept, understanding of human emotions arising as
a consequence of 'the bond' is relatively recent. The relevance of this is particularly perti-
 nent to the veterinary profession and animal welfare organizations because of the existence
 of the option of active euthanasia, which gives rise to a distinct category of loss (Dawson
 2007a). The unique type of human grief resulting from owners' direct personal responsibil-
ity for the death of their companion animal by euthanasia is known as responsibility grief
(Dawson 2007a). Veterinary and other animal welfare professionals too may also experi-
ence a type of professional responsibility grief directly linked to repeated and sustained pro-
fessional responsibility for, and exposure to, euthanasia (Dawson 2007a). Within practice,
responsibility grief requires recognition, sensitive management and specific approaches to
emotional support.
Human emotional responses to a range of companion animal welfare issues, e.g. com-
pliance with treatment protocols, pet obesity, palliative treatment and care, are all further
complicated by the ambiguous status of comparnion animals in society. Current research,
however, firmly shows that most people perceive and relate pets as valued family mem-
bers (Barton Ross & Baron-Sorensen 2007; Cohen 2002; Dawson 2006, 2007a, 2007b), but
despite this, emotions associated with human-animal relationships are often dismissed as
62
Chapler 4  Compassionale communicalion
63
 or no support from others, including close family members, and as a result naturally turn to
the veterinary profession for understanding, validation and emotional support in response
to multiple situations arising as a consequence of the HCAB.
This chapter provides a brief outline of what the HCAB is and explores key practical
skills and interventions, enabling compassionate communication, facilitating more sensitive
working with human emotions encountered in practice. As a fundamental basis for enabling
in-practice provision of client-centred emotional support, the concept of bond-centred vef-
erinary practice (BCVP) is introduced, locating straightforward practical steps facilitating a
bond-centred approach to working with human emotions including the following:
* An insight into the relevance of the HCAB in veterinary practice.
●How to recognize human emotions arising from the bond, including responsibility grief
(Dawson2007a).
●BCVP principles incorporating development of emotional support protocols, facilitation
of bond-centred euthanasia practice and an emotion-friendly environment.
+Compassionate communication skills for responding to the emotional needs arising from
HCAB, including applied use of illness trajectory mapping (Dawson 2007a) as a clinical
communication tool, facilitating review of quality-of-life indicators during palliative care.
●Practical solutions for provision of on-site emotional support, including continuing care
(palliative care) and bereavement clinics, incorporating an outline of considerations for
dnoojoddns ssol lade Sununi pue dnSuas
A continuum of human emotions is encountered in practice ranging from the shock, numb-
ness and denial at receiving a terminal prognosis, to the deep and very real distress of re-
questing and witnessing the death of a loved comparion animal at the time of euthanasia. No
two clients are the same; adopting a bond-centred approach to working with human emo-
tions essentially involves taking a holistic perspective in trying to gain an understanding of
the client in the wider context of their life-world and circumstances. This means responding
sensitively to specific animal welfare needs, whilst taking into account the relationship be-
tween the pet and the person. To be able to do this effectively within clinical practice involves
gaining a richer understanding and insight into the HCAB.
THE HCAB
The HCAB is what ultimately motivates owners to seek out veterinary care for companion
animals. The AVMA (American Veterinary Medical Association) provides a statement defin-
ing the HCAB (which in the USA is referred to as the human-animal bond - HAB), locating
its relevance at the heart of veterinary practice:
The human-animal bond is a mutually beneficial and dynamic relationship between
people and animals that is influenced by behaviours that are essential to the health
and well being of both. This includes but is not limited to emotional, psychological
and physical interactions of people, animals and the environment. The veterinarian's
role in the human-animal bond is to maximize potentials of this relationship between
people and animals (AVMA 2006).
64
 Handbook of Velerinary Communication Skills
The AVMA further recognizes the following:
·The existence of the HAB and its importance to the client and community health
★The HAB has existed for thousands of years
+
The HAB has major significance for veterinary medicine because, as veterinary medicine
serves society, it fulfils both human and animal needs (AVMA 2006)
 In the UK, the human-pet bond is generally referred to as the HCAB, whereas in the USA
HAB is the preferred term for all human-animal relationships and interactions, including
those with companion animals (Dawson et al. 2007). The language used to talk about pets
and pet-keeping has evolved, particularly over the past decade, reflecting the change in sta-
tus of companion animals as legitimate family members (Cohen 2002; Dawson 2006, 2007a).
The preferred term now used by animal welfare professionals is companion animal, which rec-
ognizes the mutuality of the relationship (Lagoni et al. 1994), whereas the term pet is more
- pasn ae san omi asa iandeo s um (dsiaumo, wim paeosse Auanba
terchangeably in recognition of this evolution over time. Falls in human birth rates in the
Western world and increased social mobility have been given as possible reasons for the
increased popularity of companion animals as an alternative choice of family structure
man emotions traditionally more exclusively associated with human-human relationships
are also present as a consequence of the HCAB
There are a number of scientific theories applied for understanding the HCAB that can
help shed light on the human emotions arising as a consequence of the bond. Tradition-
 ally, Wilson's (1993) biophilia hypothesis has been applied for understanding more generic
human-animal interactions, that is the HCAB. This theory states that people have a nat-
ural affinity with other living things, both plants and animals: ‘Biophilia if it exists, and
 I believe it exists, is the innately emotional affiliation of human beings with organisms'
(Wilson 1993). Biophilia could explain the natural human fascination and need for contact
with other animals that some people experience, but does not provide a basis for urravel-
ling and understanding the more intricate personal facets of the HCAB. It is these facets that
most commonly give rise to the strong emotions encountered in practice, such as love.
'Many people openly and enthusiastically admit to loving their pets' (Crawford et al.
2006). As a result, it is not surprising that theories of human-human attachment are most
usually applied to explicate the HCAB. Bowlby's attachment theory (1969, 1979, 1980, 1988) is
frequently applied in understanding the strong affectional ties between people and their pets
(Beetz 2007). Attachment theory is rooted in an evolutionary understanding of the HCAB
and studies investigating mother-child relationships (Bowlby 1969). Characteristics associ-
ated with attachment include seeking proximity, distress at separation, pleasure at reunion
 and general orientation to the primary caregiver.
The purposes of attachment are safety, provision of a secure base (emotionally
safe place), anxiety reduction and promoting emotional and self-development. When a
human-companion animal attachment is threatened or lost, the animal is grieved for as an
individual, perceived as possessing urique characteristics that have often been described,
by owners, as being a personality (Dawson 2007a). It is understandable that at a time of loss
or threat of loss/trauma within the bond, owners naturally experience a range of emotions
comparable to, or sometimes surpassing, that of human-human attachments. It is the depth
and quality of a relationship that shapes the intensity of the grief experienced when the
relationship is lost. Understanding the nature of the person-pet attachment can enable em-
pathic responding from the veterinary team and a greater understanding of the relational value
of the companion animal in the owner's life-world.
Current researchers investigating the HCAB (Brown 2004a, 2004b; Dawson 2007a) have
explored the relational value of companion animals in the lives of their owners, investigat-
animal. This gives insight into the function of the pet, such as surrogate, social lubricant/
facilitator or friend. Companion animals can provide vital functions in the life-world of
their owners (Brown 2004a; Dawson 2007a) - which are known as self-object functions in
Owners' experiences of these functions possess characteristics and qualities likened to those
ofkey human relationships:
●Parent-child - In providing opportunities to care and be responsible for the companion
animal.
● Child-parent - Whereby the companion animal's presence provides feelings of security
and comfort for owners.
●Sibling-sibling - Through generating opportunities for play and fun, companion animal
likened to 'kid brother or sister' in that owners feel responsible for the welfare and well-
being of their pet.
●Advocate-best friend - A relationship of equality/partnership in which owners assume the
role of advocate at times of need for the companion animal (Dawson 2007a).
Companion animals play important roles in the lives of people, as attachment beings and
relational partners. It is therefore understandable that when it comes to their welfare and
care, human emotions will be integral within this process.
Facets of the HcAB
In order to be able to recognize and respond to the specific human needs and emotions aris-
ing as a consequence of the HCAB, it is essential to gain an understanding of the individual
facets (qualities) that contribute to building the bond between pets and people. This can be
further relevant in enabling compassionate communication at times of crisis and loss, diffus-
ing and deflecting emotions in conflict situations, encouraging compliance with treatment
protocols, facilitating joint review of quality-of-life indicators during palliative treatment
and care, developing a bond between owners and the practice team based on mutual trust
and encouragement and maintaining client loyalty to the practice.
Recent research (Dawson 2007a), investigating human-companion animal relationships
in the UK has identified what has become known as the facets of the HCAB, essentially re-
vealing the 'ingredients' that can make up a close human-companion animal relationship:
 e Aq panaaid /uasou Suaq 'um puoq ,liads, e luaeu jo asuas y - Aasnxg ●
panion animal.
*Caring, nurturing role - This included rescuing animals and the nurturing of young ani-
mals.
·Personality/perceived individuality of the companion anima! -Experienced and related to as
Aeuosiad, e Surssassod pue anbrun pue anqeaseldainl 'enpiaipu
66 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
●Perceived reciprocity - Involving talking to a companion animal, mutual trust and non-
sexual love.
* Companion animal family member status - This extends to the use of human familial
metaphors to describe human-companion animal relationships, e.g. like a brother /sister,
like a child or surrogate parent (further revealing the relational qualities experienced by
owners).
● Duration of time spent together - Length of ownership, amount of time spent together dur-
ing the day and right.
●Proximity (emotional and physical) - A sense of closeness, sustained need for actual phys-
ical proximity of the companion animal.
* Compatibility - With the caregiver's personality (either complementary or similar), ap-
pearance and behaviour (Dawson 2007a).
Active awareness and understanding of the facets of the HCAB enable greater ability to
recognize and respond to human emotions arising from particular facets of the bond; for
example, a client may be deeply distressed that their pet died during the surgery without
them being present at the time. The origin of this distress could be located in the perceived
mutual trust owners feel they share with their companion animals and a sustained need
for proximity. Verbally acknowledging this as being 'normal' within an attachment relation-
ship can help validate owners' feelings and enable understanding of their origins. Similarly,
as giving pets human-like characteristics and traits. 'Human emotions and behaviours are
thus often attributed to animals despite the fact that litle or no scientific evidence exists to
support the presence of such characteristics' (Lagoni et al. 1994). It can be easy, as a profes-
context that construct owners' emotional responses that could be linked to anthropomor-
phism. These reactions may then be perceived as exaggerated, abnormal or even hysterical
if taken out of context, when in actual fact these are simply normal, natural consequences
of the bond. Verbally acknowledging the conferred personhood that some owners bestow
tionship, enabling a greater self-understanding of these associated emotions. Having briefly
explored what the HCAB is, it becomes obvious that human emotions are an integral part of
people-pet relationships. It is helpful at this point to explain more fully what emotions are.
Human emotions
The word ‘emotion' comes from the Latin meaning to move, excite, stir up or agitate.
Stratton and Hayes (1999) define emotion as ‘'the experience of subjective feelings which
have a positive or negative value for the individual'. Emotional responses possess different
components, known widely by psychologists as the ABC:
●Behavioural - Movements or actions a person performs (voluntary and involuntary), for
example, increased heart rate and muscle tension, shouting, which could be associated
with feelings of anger.
*Cognitive - Thinking, decision making, reason.
Chapler 4   Compassionale communicalion 
67
Emotions usually arise spontaneously rather than through a conscious process and are often
involuntary (outside conscious control). Pet owners' felt and expressed emotions will be re-
lated to personal feelings; perceptions and beliefs; relationships between beliefs and feelings
that may involve past experiences (both the animal and the human); elements from reality
and imagination; culture, religion, age, gender and social class.
 Our own culture and life experience with companion animals may also lead to making
assumptions about which emotions are 'right' and 'normal' to feel and express about our
relationship with pets. Frequently observed and encountered emotions in veterinary and
animal welfare charity practice will now be examined from a bond-centred perspective.
There are widely recognized human emotions associated with attachment to a companion
animal:
*Anticipation/excitement - Linked with newly acquired/adopted/rescued animals.
*Grief - This is the reaction to loss or threat of loss; it is a normal reaction for people at-
tached to their companion animals and can be manifested behaviourally (e.g. crying).
psychologically (e.g. feelings of depression), cognitively (e.g. thoughts of blame) and
 physically (e.g. insomnia and vomiting).
● Happiness - Generates a sense of cohesion between people and pets and is often conta-
gious to others.
+ Joy - Obvious in facial expression, lots of smiles and laughter.
●Love - Could be verbally articulated openly in the surgery, may be visibly expressed by
lots of tactile contact and could also be associated with feelings of embarrassment in some
people.
*Pride - May be linked to a working animal, assistance animal partnership or 'show' ani-
mals.
● Responsibility - Expressed in nurturing, caring and rescuing behaviours; can be recog-
nized through information seeking about welfare issues, intent listening during consults
and meticulous compliance with treatment protocols.
snau/o auasad a n nas jo asas a u  siaumo ao - ni 
with their companion animal and could present in a reluctance to leave the companion
animal at the practice without them being present; signs of hyperattachment and overt
distress at the possibility of separation or threatened loss; may be explicitly tactile with
the animal; seeking emotional and physical proximity.
● Trust (usually perceived as two-way interaction between people and pets) - Owners may
talk to their companion animal, providing a verbal explanation/commentary of events
in a consult; may result in a desire to oversee/be involved in consultation examinations;
reluctance to leave companion animal in the surgery without being there; attention to
ensuring the animal appears calm with no outward signs of visible discomfort or distress.
Positive human emotions often feel easy to be in the presence of and can be contagious to
others, creating feelings of optimism, whereas it can feel difficult to be in the presence of hos-
tile and more negative human emotions such as anger or distress. Self-awareness in practice
enables reflection on the origin of our own moods, helping us to identify if we have been
contaminated by the emotions of others. It also enables identification of possible prejudices
 grounded in our own past experiences and personal belief systems. This can be particularly
important when working in highly emotionally charged and distressing situations, such as
at times of loss.
68 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
An inevitable consequence of attachment is grief on separation and loss. ‘Love and loss
are two sides of the same coin, we cannot have one without risking the other' (Parkes 2006).
When the HCAB is broken, lost or under threat of loss, owners and veterinary team mem-
bers experience loss. ‘Loss is defined as an ending or as a point of change and transition
(Lagoni et al. 1994). It can be helpful to be familiar with the different types of loss that may
be encountered in veterinary practice.
Types of loss
Bereavement refers to the loss of a significant other. Grief is the term used to describe reac-
tions to loss. Companion animal death is only one type of loss. Relinquishment, such as due
to relocation or owner's ill health, theft, pets straying or going missing are all further ex-
amples of companion animal loss giving rise to bereavement. Lagoni et al. (1994) identify
understanding of four types of loss as being pertinent to the veterinary profession:
1.Primary loss
2.S
 Secondary loss
3.Ambiguous loss
4.Symbolic loss
Primary loss
Primary loss is the loss of the actual companion animal, for example where the death of
owner's pet is the main origin of their grief. The animal is perceived as intrinsically valuable
and missed in its own right.
Secondary loss
Secondary losses are the associated disruptions and stresses caused by the primary loss.
These losses tend to focus more on the relational value of animals in the life of their owners
and have the greatest impact on those who rely on their pets for their only source of social
support, companionship, motivation and purpose. Other important and often overlooked
secondary losses can be the loss of the caring relationship with the veterinary team, and the
 discontinuation of regular visits to the surgery, which could provide the only opportunity
for extended contact with others (e.g. for some older people).
Ambiguous loss
These types of losses leave questions in owners' minds, for example, the whereabouts of a
pet, in the case of a missing or stolen animal or where the causes of death remain unknown.
Feelings of confusion, incompletion and a relentless need to gather further information about
the circumstances of the loss are characteristic within grieving patterns. Actively, verbally ac-
knowledging the stress and turmoil that ambiguous loss brings about is important for the
caregiver as it normalizes often very uncomfortable, chaotic feelings. Providing practical in-
formation, such as the contact details for The Missing Pets Bureau and The Blue Cross /SCAS
 Pet Bereavement Support Service (PBSS), can provide further validation of feelings of grief,
Chapler 4  Compassionale communicalion 
69
as well as much-needed access to practical help and support. It is essential to validate feel-
ings of grief as being normal.
Symbolicloss
may be a last link to a deceased spouse, friend or a special place or time of life that has now
ended. The loss of the pet removes the final connection. Although the companion animal
loss is significant in and as itself, the grief experienced may be intensified when past losses
are grieved in parallel to the existing loss. Verbally acknowledging and validating this in-
tensification can be helpful. Sensitive referral to an external agency working with human
losses, such as Cruse Bereavement Care, helps to make clear the limitations of support that
can be provided by the practice. Referral information should include website and helpline
numbers. Suggestions can also be made to seek referral for counselling via their general
practitioner.
enable an emotionally supported transition through the different types of loss associated
with pet bereavement, providing space to remember the relationship that has been lost with
understanding compassionate others. These practical interventions for supporting grieving
clients are described more fully later in this chapter. To be able to provide effective support
essentially involves having awareness and understanding of human emotions associated
with grief.
Grief and companion animal loss
Grief is the reaction to loss. Frequently encountered human emotions associated with com-
panion animal loss include feelings of abandonment, anger, confusion, denial, depression,
doubt, fear, guilt, numbness, regret, relief, responsibility, sadness, shock and searching.
Feelings of abandonment occur where companion animals have provided 'parental' qual-
ities in their owners' life; for example, a sense of security, acceptance and comfort, and could
involve intensified feelings if the owner perceives the veterinary team have not been sup-
portive before, during and immediately after the loss. Providing options for structured be-
-dns ssol lad as-uo 'snnu puaaaeaaq paieej-asinu andexa roy 'oddns juamaaea
port group or enabling access to external organizations such as The Blue Cross/SCAS PBSS
Anger may be directed at self, other family members, veterinary professionals involved
in caring for the animal or even the pet for dying, and can be expressed behaviourally (exter-
nalized) through shouting, swearing, becoming physically abusive and violent to others or
(internalized) directed inwards towards self, which may involve self-punishing behaviour,
feelings of deep frustration and self-loathing. In extreme cases it could result in self-harm:
alcohol abuse or self-cutting. Anger is a natural response to distress and/or challenge for
some people. There may be situations where the anger is actually valid, for example, when
 an animal is involved in a road traffic accident because someone left the gate open or in-
stances of medical negligence /error. An important first step in working with more hostile
emotions is to allow owners to have their say, followed by verbally acknowledging feelings
70 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
of anger: 'It sounds like you're very frustrated with Sooty's illness, it's difficult waiting for a
diagnosis.
 Confusion is closely linked to shock and denial. Owners may find it difficult, if not impos-
sible, to absorb and understand clinical information at times of distress. This requires careful
and patient re-explanations of information. Clarification with written information sheets can
be useful. Provision of the option of nurse-facilitated clinics (palliative/continuing care clin-
ics) can be valuable in providing further clarification and re-explanation of clinical informa-
tion and treatment protocols, enabling extended opportunities for owners to ask questions,
helping to eliminate and lessen confusion associated with stressful situations such as antici-
pated illness trajectory or treatment protocols.
Denial often originates from unconscious and subconscious needs for self-protection.
Owners may carry on exactly as before a diagnosis/prognosis or a loss. This can result in
veterinary professionals feeling frustration, annoyance, impatience and sometimes outright
 cols such as weight management programmes. At a time of terminal prognosis, denial may
present as an apparent lack of response or anticipated reaction. Denial can function as what
self. Helping owners accept the reality of the situation involves patience and sensitivity,
being congruent (saying what is felt) and attempting to make information more concrete,
for example, by reinforcing through supplementary written material, practical visible ex-
amples. Encouraging owners to talk about the situation can be facilitated by repetition of
information and through the use of open questions; for example, What practical informa-
pa s,aids ym ados on aiqe iaaq laay no diau an e a won paau no op uon
murmur?
 Depression is a much misused term in describing feelings of deep sadness. True depres
sion involves a reduced state of both psychological and physiological functioning, such that
it impairs everyday life. Common symptoms are loss of interest and inability to enjoy expe-
riences, sadness, loss of appetite, sleep disturbances (especially in the early hours), passivity.
suicidal thoughts or intentions - although very severe depressions may involve only a few
of these symptoms (Stratton & Hayes 1999). Depressed owners, when encountered, may be
apathetic towards treatment advice, unable to comply with protocols and may require help
from a human mental health professional, for example, a community psychiatric nurse or
social worker. Some owners may react to the loss of their companion animal by becoming
depressed. Providing ongoing support for truly depressed owners is outside the remit and
scope of emotional support provision within veterinary practice and may require sensitive
referral to their family doctor, community psychiatric nurse or social worker - this can only
be done after discussion with a client directly and with their full informed consent if the re-
ferral is made by the practice, in order to protect client confidentiality and ensure adherence
to the professional code of ethics.
For a client deeply attached to their pet, uncertainty related to euthanasia decision mak-
ing, particularly retrospectively, is frequently encountered. Doubt is a natural and normal
part of euthanasia-related responsibility grief (Dawson 2007a). It can result in a need to
 exhaustively re-visit the euthanasia decision-making process in an effort to clearly iden-
tify a selfless and sound clinical basis for the euthanasia decision, in order to reduce feel-
ings of guilt, which are directly associated with responsibility for the death. Allowing time
pre-euthanasia for discussion and review of the illness trajectory, discussion of personally
Chapler 4Compassionate communicalion
71
important facets of the bond, illuminating both subjective as well as clinical quality-of-life
indicators within a continuing (palliative) care clinic, can be very helpful in lessening or
eliminating feelings of doubt post-euthanasia. In this way, feelings of lingering guilt may be
lessenedfor owners.
Some owners can experience fear in relation to illness trajectories, their ability to care
for a terminally ill companion animal, witnessing deterioration and decline of a loved pet,
requesting and witnessing the euthanasia event and imagining what their companion animal
may experience at the time of death. It is crucial to remember that owners may be unfamiliar
with the euthanasia procedure and because of this they could conjure up imagined horrors,
which leave them traumatized. Fear can be linked to thoughts about the companion animal,
perceiving or knowing what is going to happen at the time of euthanasia (anticipation of
their own death). This can raise some intense feelings of regret, betrayed trust, guilt and
doubt in relation to the appropriateness of the timing and the decision itself (Dawson 2007a)
Allowing enough time pre-euthanasia to explain and clarify detailed information relating to
the course of a disease process and the process of euthanasia is a key in managing owners
fear in relation to end-of-life care for a terminally ill pet.
Integrally linked with owners’ personal responsibility for the euthanasia of their com-
 e  ns  ss     n p s  
to find someone to blame. Usually, this blame is internally directed (self blame), but it can
also result in blaming the veterinary team responsible for the care of the companion arimal
 and the euthanasia event itself. In some instances where the euthanasia has been more com-
plicated, for example, difficulty finding and raising a vein, or a dog becoming aggressive
towards the vet/nurse during a home euthanasia and struggling just before death, members
of the veterinary team may also experience feelings of guilt, which are linked directly to
professional responsibility. Bringing these feelings into conscious awareness and recogniz-
ing them as normal reactions is the first step in learning to work effectively with these more
challenging emotions in self and others.
Numbness is closely associated with denial and may present behaviourally in owners
 being uncommunicative. Outwardly, they may appear uncompassionate, uncaring and un-
moved by events. This can result in a misconstrual that the owner does not care about the
pet and provoke feelings of rising antagonism in veterinary teams, with a tendency to judge
owners unfavourably. Knowing that people respond individually and differently to poten-
tially stressful or traumatic events should enable veterinary professionals to be accepting of
reactions that may appear initially strange or out of context. Communicating this acceptance
to owners is essential within an empathic relationship.
Feelings of regret could be linked to accidental death and a sense of responsibility for
this which could be actual or perceived, failure to adhere to treatment protocols, inability
to leave a violent partner who threatened to kill a loved companion animal; most usually,
feelings of regret are associated with euthanasia retrospectively and can be in relation to the
timing of the euthanasia (perceived as being too soon/waited too long), how the procedure
progressed, not having been present. Interestingly, there are few reports of feelings of regret
at being present. In fact, remaining with an animal at the time of euthanasia may actually
function as a protective factor in enabling a sense of continuing care, trust in the euthanasia
uosme yeap go a a ie pauaddeq Aenie peum jo apamor lunqeua un pue uoisiap
them to stay with their companion animal.
72 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Relief can be accompanied by feelings of guilt as owners perceive it to be wrong to feel
relieved; relief may be openly expressed by tears or other behavioural responses that could
-eap eqiaa uado ue io iaune uus se yons aedoiddu aou suaq se pannsuos aq
ration of relief at being freed from long-term caring commitments. It is essential not to judge
owners and to communicate acceptance of their feelings.
Responsibility is often confused with feelings of guilt in relation to euthanasia; owners are
enabled to accept personal responsibility for the care and welfare of their companion animals
 including direct responsibility for euthanasia, and actually appear to be more emotionally
robust in coping with the loss of a companion animal. Responsibility needs to be positively
framed highlighting its centrality within the HCAB and animal welfare. The professional
responsibility of the veterinary team for informing the euthanasia decision through provi-
sion of clinical information, review and assessment along with responsibility for the actual
euthanasia procedure must be made visible to owners enabling a sense of shared responsi-
bility for the death of their companion animal.
People grieve individually, but sadness is often recognizable through behaviour, for ex
ample, crying, sobbing, becoming quiet and withdrawn, looking miserable, lack of interest
in activities once enjoyed and increased pessimism. Unlike depression, sadness usually lasts
for a shorter duration of time, is not as intense and does not significantly impair everyday
function or require medical intervention
Shock is linked to numbness and denial; people in shock may look visibly dismayed and
ask lots of questions, becoming ‘information hungry' in an effort to process events or al-
0l readde pue uoneogi ui ael oh anqeun aq 'umop inus Aeodan Ae Aiaaeua
withdraw.
Observed across species as a symptom of grief, it is not uncommon for someone who has
experienced a loss to search for the lost object; for example, owners may repeatedly come
back to the surgery on the day and time of the death, subconsciously searching for the de-
ceased pet. In instances of ambiguous loss, where pets have gone missing, some owners may
spend literally hundreds of hours and pounds searching for the lost animal; a few owners
have reported physically wandering, engaging in actual searching behaviour, calling out the
name of the pet after it has died and, whilst cognitively knowing it is not possible to see/be
reunited with the deceased animal, experiencing a compelling urge to search and relocate
the deceased (Dawson 2007a).
 Grief is a universal human experience, a natural and spontaneous reaction to loss (Lagoni
et al. 1994) and is the personal process of adjustment to loss. It is not an event, or a pre-
dictable, linear journey. What is usually understood as being 'normal grief’ is not time lim-
ited; it may last for days, weeks, months or even years, depending on the personal signifi-
cance of the relationship that has been lost. Grieving involves a continuum of emotions from
feelings of being able to cope with thoughts of being overwhelmed and temporarily suicidal.
Grief does not go away, but rather lessens in its intensity and rawness with the passage of
time as it moves from being at the centre of conscious awareness to partly inhabiting the sub-
conscious, until brought back into immediate consciousness through triggers and reminders.
The range of reactions experienced within what is frequently understood to be 'normal grief'
is shown in Table 4.1.
It is essential to understand though that grief does not just occur at the time of actual loss,
but can begin beforehand in anticipation of what is to come. This type of grief is known as
anticipatory grief (Rando 1986).
Chapler 4  Compassionale communicalion
73
Table 4.1  The range of reaclions experienced within what is frequenily underslood to be 'normal grief
Physical Reactions
Cognitive (Thinking)
 Insomnia - not sleeping
Blame - self, vet, others including the animal for geling ill
Crying
Informalion seeking - about the medical condition 
Diarrhoea/vomilting
 Thinking about the animal and talking about the animal
Tiredness
'processing oul'
Lack of concentralion
Reliving the event of the deaih
Somalizing - physical symploms
similar lo the deceased animal
Emotional/Psychological
Social
Sadness
Temporary increased dependency or withdrawal from
 Depression - exireme and
human others 
 overwhelming sadness
Feeling isolated and alone
Shock
Loss of idenlily as an animal caregiver
Denial
Need to take some lime off work
Guilt
From Dawson and Campbell (2005) and Stewart [1999)]-
Anticipatory grief
Recent research (Dawson 2007a) has revealed that a process of anticipatory grieving for com-
panion animals may begin at the first visible onset of disease or decline or at the time of
terminal prognosis by the veterinary surgeon. Grief can begin when there is a threat of loss
or of disruption of the bond. This is known as anticipatory grieving (Rando 1986) and is
frequently encountered in relation to the HCAB and veterinary practice. It can involve the
following:
+Denial, shock, avoidance of reality
●Panic, anxiety - sometimes inhibiting ability to listen to information being given and to
follow instructions
 Information-seeking behaviour (about the disease process, anticipated trajectory) or para-
+
doxical denial
●Hypervigilance - close observation, anxious watching of the companion animal
●Rumination on the causes/course of a disease
●Rehearsing the euthanasia decision-making process
 Rehearsing the death and its consequences (anticipating the personal impact of both pri-
mary and secondary losses)
+
 Meticulous reviewing of quality-of-life indicators
●  Feelings of deep sadness, tearfulness, being unable to cope
 Insomnia, interrupted sleep through night-time care-giving to sick companion animals
]
 Practical preparation for the death event and after-death body care, for example visiting
pet crematorium and choosing pet cemetery plot (Dawson 2007a)
74 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Meyers (2000) notes that there is no socially sanctioned or accepted way of dealing with
anticipatory grief over a dying companion animal and as a result it is often dealt with by
prematureeuthanasia.
Excruciating grief is quickly put an end to with logic, rationale and well-meaning advice
of friends, family or insensitive professionals who make comments such as 'Why put her
through it? He is 14 years old after all .. .' (Meyers 2000).
When owners lack knowledge of alternatives available and have no previous experience
of providing end-of-life care for a companion animal, euthanasia is often turned to as a way
of relieving perceived pain and of preventing future pain, without taking into account the
actual disease process and illness trajectory, and available medication/treatment to manage
this effectively. Sensitive, clear information about options and choices provided in a warm,
empathic, supportive environment can enable informed decision making. This includes a
review of subjective as well as clinical quality-of-life indicators through the use of illness
trajectory mapping (Dawson 2007a) within continuing (palliative) care clinics with owners.
 Ilness trajectory mapping can be used as a clinical communication tool to enable support-
ive management of emotions associated with anticipatory grief (Dawson 2007a), essentially
 involving owners in the process and creating a sense of empowerment. Being able to put a
 name to the uncomfortable feelings of anticipatory grief can also be very helpful for a major-
ity of people; for example, “These feelings that you are experiencing are normal - it's what
is called anticipatory grief, this is a way of preparing yourself for what is to come at a later
stage through rehearsing possibilities. I'm wondering what information can I give you that
could be useful?
 Clarifying owners' understanding about the anticipated course of a disease process is es-
sential in enabling management of anxiety within anticipatory grief. It is common for owners
 to feel powerless at the time of terminal diagnosis/prognosis. In gaining information about
what can be expected to happen, it enables greater preparation and identification of what
actions are needed to ensure the comfort of their pet, for example, compliance with admin-
istering medication, following a special diet, and weight reduction. Assuming responsibil-
ity for what it is possible to control re-affirms owners as active agents for the continued
welfare and protection of their pet, which is essential in retaining their role and reinforc-
ing their identity as primary caregivers. Whilst re-affirming and making visible owners' re-
of personal responsibility evoked from the euthanasia decision leads to a unique type of
grieving found almost exclusively within veterinary medicine - responsibility grief (Dawson
2007a).
Responsibilitygrief
Companion animal euthanasia has been revealed as being a distinct category of loss, in that
owners have direct personal responsibility for the death of their companion animal (Dawson
2007a). Veterinary professionals have responsibility for clearly communicating clinical infor-
mation to help inform euthanasia decision making and for the actual euthanasia procedure.
The practice of active euthanasia is almost exclusive to veterinary medicine, as human eu-
thanasia is illegal in most of the world. Despite hopes that pets will die natural deaths, eu-
thanasia remains the major agent of death for companion arimals in the Western world.
Chapler 4   Compassionale communicalion  75
Comparion animal euthanasia results in the unique type of grief known as responsibility
grief (Dawson 2007a), which possesses the following characteristics:
*The presence of direct personal responsibility for requesting the intentional death of an-
other living being for whom one has care-giving/ guardianship responsibility.
* A period of anticipatory grief (experienced before the death, involving feelings of anxiety
 in rehearsing the possible death scenarios and the potential feelings arising from having
direct personal responsibility for the death, by active euthanasia).
● Feelings of impotence and powerlessness over the illness and anticipated illness trajec-
tory.
●Reviewing of subjective quality-of-life indicators in an effort to locate pivotal (final de-
ciding) and key (contributory) moments informing euthanasia decision making.
of personally construed opposite emotions and thoughts, integral within this are inter-
changeable feelings of responsibility and guilt; doubt is usually present in relation to the
 timing, appropriateness of choice and motivation (altruistic or egoistic) for the euthana-
sia.
●Feeling of disenfranchisement, i.e. being alone and unrecognized as a legitimate griever
coexisting alongside feelings that the relationship itself (the HCAB) is unrecognized as
sigrificant by others, fear of minimization of the loss (by others), personal ridicule and
judgement. A sense of having to keep both the sigrificance of the relationship and the
gravity of the loss secret, further complicated by paradoxical feelings associated with
having requested the death - by euthanasia.
Animal welfare professionals may also experience a type of professional responsibility grief
(Dawson 2007a) arising from emotions associated with repeated exposure to, and responsi-
bility for, multiple euthanasias. It is essential within emotional support protocols that path-
ways for staff to access support are made explicit, for example, through employee assistance
programmes, buddying systems at work, the Vetlife website and telephone helpline, or ac.
cess to private counselling. The characteristics of professional responsibility grief include the
following:
* The presence of direct professional responsibility for the intentional death of another liv-
ing being under one's professional care.
* Rumination over clinical decision making, past euthanasia procedures.
+Negative anticipation of future euthanasias.
*Anxiety and dread related to euthanasia decision making.
●Anxiety and unease arising from the sense of powerfulness evoked from actively ending
life; fear of the potential for abuse of this power.
*A psycho-ethical dialectic (dialogue with self), integral within this process involving in-
ssa d  a  s r s 
for multiple deaths by euthanasia.
● Feelings of disenfranchisement arising from a sense of having to keep personal emotions
hidden and secret for fear of being accused of being unprofessional, incompetent and
unstable and of reprisals from this in the workplace
Figure 4.1 illuminates the coexistence of strong contradictory emotions within a dual process
through which owners try to locate evidence of altruistic (genuine, other-centred) decision
76
 Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
A blessing
A nightmare
Selless
Selfish
Personification
Objectification
 No option
Doubt
Responsibility
Guilt
Response-ability
Caring
Killing
And
 Powerless
 Powerful
Proximity (stay)
Distance (go)
 Supported
Alone
Relief 
Grief
 Sentimentality
Figure 4.1 The dialeclics of responsibiliy grief (Dawson 2007a): an inlrapersonal dialeclic of coex-
isting contradictory thoughis and emotions.
making and motivation for the euthanasia. Owners' very sense of self (as a loving, caring
person) can be temporarily, sometimes permanently, threatened or lost as a result of feelings
of guilt and doubt in relation to the timing of and motivation for the euthanasia. Compas-
sionate communication when working with people experiencing responsibility grief needs
to involve verbal recognition of the individuality of the companion animal; for example,
'Oliver had such a big personality, he was unique. I can understand how you came to be so
attached to him'; and acknowledgement of the significance of the relationship, for example,
ynon no pada s,aus 'am nno jso no anuis yn os uno no ym uaq seu a
some tough times'.
Caregivers should be given clear, easy-to-understand information about the disease pro-
cess, both verbal and written, together with opportunities for clarification of information
and asking of questions in nurse-facilitated continuing (palliative) care clinics. Clear verbal
and written information about, and access to options for, further tests (to confirm diagno-
sis) /referral and for palliative treatment and care should be given. It is vital not to make
 assumptions based on value judgements about owners' assumed financial situations; every-
 one should be given equal access to a range of options and practice/referral services. It is
helpful to have an option for home euthanasia, if practical in terms of animal welfare, and
to give a sensitive and thorough explanation of the euthanasia process with opportunities
for asking questions. It is useful to offer a cognitive reframing of euthanasia as a caring, re-
sponsible act within a continuum of a duty of care for our companion animals; for example,
'You've always done everything you can for Hovis and cared for him so well. A last option
within palliative care is euthanasia, enabling him to die peacefully without any pain. This is
a responsible option even though it's never an easy one'
 Offers of emotional support by familiar veterinary nurses, to enable owners to be present
at the time of euthanasia, can be offered simply; for example, 'We've all become fond of
Sooty whilst we've been caring for her, I've spent a lot of time with her over the past few
weeks and if you would like I could be with you at the time'.
Chapler 4   Compassionale communicalion 
77
Owners should have enough dedicated time not to have felt rushed in making important
decisions, such as choices about further medical investigations, palliative treatments and
care options, review of subjective (from owners' perspective) and clinical quality-of-life in-
dicators, euthanasia decision making, deciding about after-death body care, at the time of
the euthanasia itself and when collecting ashes from the surgery, and should feel enabled
to make the right choice (for themselves) regarding options for after-death body care (home
burial, individual cremation, communal/routine cremation and pet cemetery burial). En-
couraging rituals for remembrance and enabling continued respect for pets' bodies after
death can be powerful in validating grief and making owners feel visible as legitimate griev-
ers mourning the loss of a significant family member.
After death, owners should be supported and encouraged in acceptance of personal re
sponsibility for the euthanasia, with an emphasis that this is a caring act within a continuum
of a duty of care for their pet and is grounded in clinical information and advice from the
veterinary team responsible for the care of their companion animal. They should be given
verbal and written information about grief related to pet loss, including where and how to
access pet loss support (such as pet loss support group at the practice, Blue Cross/SCAS
PBSS and written details of extended support if needed, for example, Cruse Bereavement 
Care for issues related to grief arising from human deaths).
sionals in relation to owners' need for clearly, simply explained clinical information, enabling
review of options for treatment and care. Where the veterinary team has not enabled collab-
orative review of quality-of-life indicators within euthanasia decision making, the likelihood
of owners experiencing protracted feelings of doubt and guilt in relation to both the timing
and the appropriateness of euthanasia is significantly increased. This may complicate the
sponsible for the care and death of their pet. It may further lead to a reluctance and inability
to acquire or even contemplate acquiring a new pet and failure to return to the practice again
if a new pet is acquired. Compassionate communication is therefore right at the heart of vet-
erinary practice directly influencing personal experiences of grief, professional responses to
management of loss and, ultimately, client loyalty and retention. It makes sound business
s  g s (   sda n  s ad  a
challenge within practice for owners and professionals alike and respond to this positively
and proactively.
The unique human needs arising from responsibility grief (Dawson 2007a) can be more
 adequately met through the introduction of the following:
●Bond-centred practice protocols enabling equality of provision of emotional support
+
 Ongoing development and review of key skills facilitating compassionate communica-
 tion, for example active listening
●Provision of nurse-facilitated continuing (palliative) care clinics
● Introduction of ilness trajectory mapping as a clinical communication tool
Enabling access to nurse-facilitated bereavement clinics - functioning as natural exten-
sions of continuing care clinics
●Provision of grief information, details of access to pet bereavement support, for example
The Blue Cross/SCAS PBSS
78 Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
+ Attention to environmental and physical resource considerations, for example
°having a dedicated family/quiet room where stressed and distressed owners can
spend time with their companion animals and practice staff
sending of condolence cards to bereaved owners
° having resources to enable making of Tinking items', for example clay paw moulds,
paw print making, fur swatch envelopes
These are all crucial resources in communicating genuine compassion and acknowledging
the personal significance of the individual person-pet bond.
Pet loss is a contextual loss, which means it does not occur in isolation but within the
wider context of people's lives and experiences. Some owners by virtue of their circum
stances and life stage may be more vulnerable to the impact of grief. Recognizing vulner-
ability factors is important in supporting owners to access the emotional support they may
need.
Vulnerability factors
Professional interactions with owners give just 'a snapshot in time', providing merely a frag
ment of the wider context in which both attachment and loss to companion animals occur.
There are, however, known factors which increase vulnerability to loss:
+Living alone
+
Coexisting or multiple losses, for example previous miscarriage/elective abortion and
other human deaths
 Long-term physical chronic illness/other additional needs
Absence of a support network, for example friends, work colleagues and faith community
Previous/current emotional health difficulties, for example chronic depression
 Not in current employment/recent redundancy
+
Homelessness - living on the streets
+
Loss due to traumatic circumstances, for example animal abuse as in domestic violence;
natural disasters such as floods, mandatory slaughter due to FMD (foot and mouth dis-
ease) outbreak
●Witnessing traumatic death, for example abusive death, road traffic or other accident
+
 Older age groups with histories of multiple loss and sometimes limited support networks
 Where the pet provided main source of friendship, motivation and purpose
Where the pet functioned as a linking being for owners, i.e. a living connection with
a deceased/absent loved one; practice staff may be unaware of this wider significance
individual reactions to loss, which are always contextual
Owners may be reminded of past pets and human losses when visiting the surgery, becom-
ing absorbed in their own thoughts or avoidant of particular consult rooms. These are all
normal human responses to grief and sensitive management can be worked with to enable
owners to be in the here and now of the consult with their present companion animal. Tak-
ing a BCVP approach can enable an increased ability to recognize and respond to owners
individual needs. Putting bond-centred principles in place, ensuring protocols for provision
Boy aro po Aenba baai apiaoid to 'on paanpe pe paae are poddns ponoa go
Chapler 4   Compassionale communicalion 
79
all owners. BCVP enables compassionate communication at multiple levels. It is therefore
useful at this point to clarify what BCVP is.
BCVP focuses on relationships:
+of people with their pets, the HCAB
●between practice team members and pet owners (staff and clients);
+between practice team members and companion animals cared for;
+between each other as practice team members.
Undoubtedly, professional concerns relating to the possibility of accusations of sentimen-
tality, along with a perceived need to retain some clinical detachment, have inadvertently
prevented veterinary professionals from facing the less comfortable teritory of navigating
human emotions. Essentially a bond-centred approach to veterinary practice does exactly
this - it involves veterinary profesionals recognizing, acknowledging and responding to
owners' emotional needs through provision of appropriate emotional support.
A bond-centred practice supports and responds to emotional needs created by the HCAB
(Lagoni et al. 2001). Owners' emotional needs can be identified as follows:
●Trust in the veterinary team - gained through honesty, familiarity, a sense of equality
generated by involvement in decisions regarding treatment and care.
● Personalized focused attention - a bespoke service, for example enabled through unin-
 terrupted consults, allowing enough time for each consultation, active verbal recognition
of the individual pet-person bond.
● Information - from multiple sources, for example practice website, given verbally in
consultations; written information in leaflet/handout form; verbal and written in nurse-
facilitated clinics.
* Acknowledgement of and response to the HCAB - verbal recognition of the individuality
 of the comparion animal; validation of the relationship between pets and people; active
support to maintain the bond, for example through provision of community nursing for
housebound owners or those with other additional needs, access to practice-enabled tem-
porary pet fostering at times of crisis.
●Knowledge about animal behaviour, how to solve problems and access to referrals to
 other competent professionals if needed.
+Confidence in the veterinary team's ability to identify and respond to sensitive issues
·● Validation of intuition, observations and perceptions regarding their pet's health - in-
volving listening to and valuing owners' subjective perspectives, which can be enabled
through applied use of illness trajectory mapping (Dawson 2007a).
+Compassionate communication skills to soothe arxiety and fear, resolve conflict and en-
able exploration of treatment and care options.
● Direct honest communication - for example avoiding the use of confusing euphemisms
Angasead aip ol padjau, yim Suoelda1 ,'daars ct ind, se yons 
●A feeling of partnership during decision making and treatment procedures, enabled
through developing active listening skils, utilizing clinical communication tools, for ex-
ample illness trajectory mapping and through provision of a diverse range of nurse-
facilitated clinics, for example nutrition and weight management; continuing care (pal-
liative care), dental and behaviour clinics.
80 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
●Access to veterinarian/other professional approachable available staff, developing a
Aod ,roop uado, ue ym aninosai Amununuon e se Aiasins au jo asuas
* Skilled, professional, boundaried support (not spiling over into personal friendships,
e.g. giving out home telephone numbers, trying to provide counselling about wider is-
sues when not trained, insured or supervised to do so); support during crises - whilst
cline support offered, a majority will value additional time spent with them in a sup-
portive capacity, for example terminal diagnosis /prognosis, euthanasia decision making.
pre-, during and post-euthanasia of their companion animals. It is essential to keep this
intervention within clear boundaries, in terms of not befriending clients, but instead of-
fering professional, time-limited, emotional support that recognizes and is governed by
limitations and competencies.
● Empathy - trying to see the world 'as if' we were the client ourselves, without losing that
'as if quality. Empathy can provide a unique window into a client's emotional world,
enabling identification of issues that may obstruct a client acting in the best interests of
an animal's welfare (adapted from the original guidelines as developed by Lagoni et al.
2001).
Bond-centred practice protocols
Protocols need to be agreed and invested in by the whole team and not imposed by one
dominant team member What is practical, given operational and envirormental limitations,
needs to be taken into account. Staff training needs should also be identified and addressed
as provision of a quiet area or room for use during crises where owners will not feel rushed
or be interrupted.
Particular focus areas for consideration for development of BCVP protocols (see Table 4.2)
which enable effective working with human emotions in practice include the following:
+Animal selection, advice on choice of pets before acquisition
 Behaviour management
+
Puppy socializing
Weight management
●Enabling and supporting compliance
Table 4.2  Areas for bond-cenlred velerinary praclice prolocols
Community-Centred
Client-Centred Guidelines Staff-Centred Guidelines
Guidelines
Client 'quiet room' / comfort 
 Protocol for delivering terminal
Hospice care
room
prognosis
Handouls
 Protocol for staff debriefings
Self-help support groups
Grief information packs
PBSS details
Chapler 4  Compassionale communicalion
81
* Crisis response, for example temporary fostering of animals for owners
● Responding to suspected non-accidental injury including agencies to be informed, for
example social services, Police CPU (Child Protection Unit), and the Royal Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA)
Palliative treatment and care
+Euthanasia
●Pet loss support
●Staff communication
* Staff support
networks, for example, peer support by colleagues, enabling external access to professional
counselling if needed. Provision of appropriate training for practice team members should
always be included along with identification of environmental and resource implications,
enabling effective implementation.
Example: euthanasia emotional support protocols (Dawson 2007a)
To ensure continuity and equality of access to care, putting in place euthanasia protocols can
enable practice staff to feel more confident in supporting owners in the time leading up to,
the time of, and following, the euthanasia of the companion animal. Suggested issues for in-
clusion within euthanasia protocols for communication and client care are listed below with
at what can be a difficult and stressful time:
1. Development of a dedicated quiet/family room or area, enabling owners to spend time
with their pets as a family; provision of paper tissues, water /hot drink easily available,
comfortable seating, a comfortable area for the pet to lie or sit on (alternatives to consult
tables such as soft mats). Generation of a less clinical environment through integration
of plants and pictures of animals, attention paid to the colour of the room walls, for
-oa yoos pue wen je sinonos aq on paaiaad are uaan aied pue aniq aled aidexa
tions.
education packs, children's books about pet loss
3.Veterinary teams being prepared for the euthanasia beforehand (where possible), for ex-
ample communicating why Mrs Jones is bringing Pippa in at the end of surgery to avoid
inadvertent creation of the wrong emotional environment or inappropriate/insensitive
uis jo pno auas eiseuna an paedad uae uoins Aruaaa au rsa
of owners, knowing the weight of the animal beforehand. This communicates sensitiv-
ity and respect for the animal and owner It can also lessen stress for both owners and
professionals.
4. Extended appointment time with a veterinary surgeon, or nurse, familiar with the indi-
vidual animal and disease trajectory, enabling adequate information gathering and time
for a physical examination to inform the euthanasia decision making within a personal
context. This is essential in facilitating a thorough review of quality-of-life indicators
(subjective and clinical) and in confirming the decision to euthanize as being in the in-
terest of the animal's welfare (altruistic motivation). This is very important in lessening
82 Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
feelings of doubt and guilt, clarifying owners' altruistic motivation and reducing the
potential for feelings of hostility and resentment towards the professionals responsible
for the euthanasia, an important consideration in client retention when acquiring new
pets in the future.
5.  Clear explanation and clarification of the euthanasia procedure including possible ob-
served physiological responses of the animal, for example agonal gasp, involuntary
urination/defaecation, the eyes remaining open after death; enabling questions which
should be answered honestly, avoiding confusing euphemisms such as 'put to sleep'
and instead using more truthful explanations, ‘helped to die peacefully without any
 pain or distress'. This helps to prepare owners and eliminate unpleasant imaginings
 generated through ignorance. Using honest terms to reinforce the irreversibility and se-
riousness of the event is helpful in enabling acceptance and essentially generating an
understanding of what the procedure results in - the death of the animal.
6.
 Enough time allowed for euthanasia decision making and for the euthanasia event,
for example schedule an end-of-surgery appointment where possible. Can be useful in 
reducing doubt in relation to the appropriateness and timing of the euthanasia. Enables 
a sense of dignity for owners and companion animals; communicates respect.
 7.An option for home euthanasia by the regular veterinarian responsible for the compan-
ion animal without protracted time delay for an appointment where operationally pos-
sible and practical in terms of animal welfare. Can be vital to owners' sense of agency,
validates family member status of the pet and communicates respect for the individu-
 ality of the relationship and needs arising from this.
8. Ensuring familiarity of the veterinarian or nurse present with the companion animal
(where feasibly possible), very significant in personalization of the procedure, recogni-
tion of the individuality of the companion animal.
9.  Pre-euthanasia examination of the animal validating the euthanasia decision. This is
essential in confirming there are no current alternative options available other than eu-
thanasia (if this is truthfully the case). Can lessen feelings of doubt and associated guilt
10.Owners not being required to be active agents in the process of euthanasia, for example
responsibility and guilt associated with euthanasia.
11.
Having an option of physically comforting an animal during the euthanasia procedure
for example owners holding their animal's head to provide comfort and lessen dis-
tress; integral in recognizing the family status of most pets, enabling a sense of main-
tained trust and continued care. This passive involvement can increase owners' sense
of agency within the euthanasia process, whilst not actively involving them in the pro-
cedure itself.
12. Active confirmation of death in front of owners - involving the veterinary surgeon vis-
ibly listening for a heartbeat with a stethoscope and verbally confirming death. This
was revealed as being fundamental in helping acceptance of the reality of the loss and
pivotal in slowing down the rapid flux of the dynamic dialectic of responsibility grief,
13.  After-death continued care - arranging the pet's body in a sleeping position, cleaning
up any urine or faeces, closing the eyes. Refraining from putting the pet into a clin-
ical waste bag in front of owners and, where the owners are taking the body home
for disposal, having blankets available for discrete and sensitive removal. If polythene
Chapler 4  Compassionale communicalion
83
sheets/body bags are needed due to body fluid leakage, sensitive explanation should
be given to owners of why this is advisable. If veterinary team members treat deceased
companion animals' bodies with continued care and respect at all times, this commu-
nicates integrity, genuineness, compassion and care towards both companion animals
and owners. It further validates the significance of the individual companion animal
and the status of owners as legitimate grievers worthy of treatment with respect and
dignity.
14. Enabling owners to spend time post-death with their companion animal, ideally
through provision of a'quiet room' to compose self and spend time with their deceased
animal before leaving the practice, which should ideally be via a separate exit not in-
volving them walking through the waiting room.
 15. With the owner's permission, creating linking items for remembrance - this involves
cutting a swatch of fur (which should be given to owners sensitively in a small dedi-
cated plastic bag - not a biohazard bag), making a paw print for owners to keep or a
clay paw mould (see Figure 4.2). Helps to create rituals for remembrance, validates the
loss as significant and communicates respect for the pet's individuality.
16.
 Sensitive explanation of options for after-death body disposal, such as cremation, in-
cluding information about alternatives (e.g. home or pet cemetery burial). This is essen-
tial in enabling rituals of remembrance and active respect for the companion animal.
17. Giving verbal acknowledgement of the personal significance of the individual com-
panion animal, the bond between the owner and the animal, and the significance
of the impact of the death. Integral within the dynamic of responsibility grief is the
HovIS
2004
Figure 4.2  Clay paw mould.
84 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
disenfranchisement of this loss. In having their grief validated this helps put a name to
the uncomfortable feelings experienced and normalizes them as acceptable within this
context.
18.
ticularly uncomfortable feelings such as guilt, egoism, selfishness and doubt. Enables
recognition and naming of emotions, alongside practical information about accessing
extended support, for example through in-practice bereavement clinics or via The Blue
Cross/SCAS PBSS.
19. Provision of a back door exit to leave the surgery to avoid walking through the waiting
room. Important in communicating recognition of the significance of the loss and of the
caregiver as a griever, worthy of sensitive and digrified treatment.
 20. Not having to pay the veterinary bill at the time of euthanasia as a request for payment
can be perceived as insensitive; alternatively, taking payment over the telephone at the
time of booking the euthanasia appointment, before the event or sending the bill (to
known clients) a few days afterwards can be more thoughtful ways of setling associ-
ated financial transactions.
 21.Providing the option of talking through feelings and memories with a nurse who knew
the animal personally at the time of collecting the ashes from the veterinary surgery.
rather than picking these up from the reception desk, which could be perceived as
impersonal and objectifying. This could be a vital function of a practice bereavement
clinic. This can enable validation of both the relationship and the loss as significant,
rather than inconsequential or routine. It importantly creates a lasting positive memory
and association with the practice, enabling return if another animal is acquired, or for
the treatment of remaining pets.
22. Sending out a personalized bereavement card from the practice, written by the attend-
ing members of the team who knew the animal. Handwriting should always be legible;
the card ideally should depict a tranquil scene (avoiding the potential for offence if ani-
mals are pictured, which may not be the right breed or type, as this could cause further
distress or offence for owners) and should be sent 2-3 days after the death. A packet
of forget-me-not seeds for planting in remembrance can be an excellent, subtle way of
orientated cards to respect the diversity of different faiths of owners and those who do
not hold any religious beliefs.
23. Provision of time-limited pet bereavement support by the practice, for example pet loss
consist of grief information and referral details of how to contact The Blue Cross/SCAS
PBSS.
 24. Each consulting room and reception should carry contact details and information on
referral agencies for pet loss support and extended support. Team members should en
able clients to have the option of contacting the PBSS for immediate pet loss support. In
more critical situations, where a client expresses a need for wider support, staff should
feel confident in verbally recommending a client to seek referral from their general prac-
presenting issues of a more serious and urgent nature, for example in relation to human
bereavements and/or other coexisting emotional health issues.
Chapler 4   Compassionale communicalion 
85
 25. Vulnerable clients perceived to be at risk should be offered the option of a member of the
the death. Alternatively, in some circumstances, with the client's permission, referral to
social services by the practice may be appropriate. Written and verbal details of how to
contact the Samaritans should also be provided for clients experiencing more extensive
emotional health issues (adapted from Dawson 2007a, Pp. 477-480).
oddns ssae pue ha uen es anaum jo uonenai pdxa apnut pinous shonrii
for themselves, both within and outside the practice, for example, from a named member
of the practice team, Vetlife website, referral via employee assistance for dedicated external
support. It should never be assumed that being in the presence of the intense emotions of
others on a daily basis and having professional responsibility for ending life do not impact in
some way on everyone in practice. Just as with clients, professionals do not live in a vacuum.
but experience these stresses in the context of other events happening at home. Team mem-
bers may not be consciously aware of the emotional impact of repeated exposure to owners'
distress or responsibility for euthanasia is having on them, but this does not mean that the
impact is any less real or serious. Communicating clearly about what support is available
and how this can be accessed is important within BCVP as a fundamental of developing and
sustaining positive relationships between team members that naturally extends to provision
of cohesive approaches to client care.
Staff emotional support sessions are a useful tool to facilitate open communication
amongst team members about the emotional consequences of working with human grief
and other emotions on a daily basis. These should be facilitated by someone who is able
to manage the session, enabling everyone who wants to have say, to do so and sum up
-aq paeraui aq pnon asa 'shud uooe Aue e 'saed pue saa uaa
fore regular staff team meetings, but should not be optional, as ideally, most of the staff team
should attend. A weekly staff emotional support session will help to:
develop a culture of safety and care for team members, as well as clients, based on keep-
 ing communication channels open;
* negotiate agendas, reduce uncertainty about change and implement/evaluate emotional
support protocols;
* build a supportive environment for open discussion and sharing of feelings, essentially
extending the emotion-friendly environment created for owners to staff;
*motivate whole practice participation in emotional support for owners and for each other,
fostering a sense of collective responsibility;
+
share information;
● resolve conflict and feelings of anger in a secure environment;
 encourage staff to accept feedback and reflect on the practice of emotional support provi-
sion.
Acknowledging and working with both the emotions of owners and veterinary team mem-
bers contribute towards the creation of a culture of care and an emotion-friendly envi-
ronment. Central within this is compassionate communication, which enables veterinary
professionals to retain personal composure and maintain a professional distance, whilst si-
86 Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
Compassionate communication skills
Burnard and Morrison (1997) reflect that caring and communicating are inseparably linked.
Clear, respectful communication is as vital to the success of bond-centred practice as high-
quality medical care. Trust is the foundation of effective communication and of healthy work
environments. 'A bond-centred practice creates work environments characterized by high
levels of trust and skilled communication' (Lagoni et al. 2001).
(1986), writing about communication in health care, posits that communication is important
for two main reasons: it facilitates the sharing of information and it enables relationships
between people.
Communication is thus a two-way process. There are different types of communication
that can be used to convey compassion and offer support.
example, 'I think I know how much Fernel meant to you, Zoe; please take all the time you
need now, there's no rush to leave'. Body language (non-verbal communication) involves, for
example, a relaxed open posture and the use of eye contact. Written communication involves
sending a personalized sympathy card, for example.
There are key skills and orientations involved in communicating compassionately and
these are now introduced and discussed with examples related to veterinary practice
Empathy
This is more a way of being, an orientation rather than a skill, that can be learned and prac-
aul pueisiapun pue oui raua on Aqe au suaq se Aeda sauap (9sel) uesg pan
world of another person and communicate this understanding to him or her. The crucial
Adg s c huaa si Aa Aim sn un nb ji se, ue an si ro
involves both an intellectual and emotional understanding of the other person's experience.
Egan (1986), however, also identifies empathy as being a communication skill, that of accu-
rately communicating understanding of the emotions and thoughts of another. In this way,
the skill of empathizing with another's experience is grounded in active listening
Active listening
Listening is different to hearing; we can hear sounds without making sense of them. Listen-
ing involves giving full attention in an effort to understand what is being said, verbally and
non-verbally. For more information on listening, please see Chapter 1. Veterinary profes
sionals' active listening involves communicating this understanding to companion animal
 owners effectively, both verbally and non-verbally, through the following:
+Tone of voice and pace of speech - for example, mirroring owners' pace of speech can
also communicate empathy.
Eye contact.
C tuae aso d are no p aos cn un saoan - a
what is being said and expressed, for example use of relaxed, open body language.
Chapler 4   Compassionale communicalion 
18
● Clarifying - a central skill in communicating care is building understanding by checking
out what the person has said. This can be done through paraphrasing, restating and the
use of open questions.
a lal noA ueo, 'aldexa nog uogsanb Arojeioidxa ue si aqoid e - siduond pue saqoid *
more about what is worrying you about Angel's cancer? This type of question usually
follows on from a previous answer given; for example, I'm just worried about the cancer.?
Prompts are short questions or words which you offer to someone in order to prompt an
answer; for example, 'Does Angel seem distressed?' Be aware, however, that it is better
to avoid such leading questions outside end-of-life discussions.
·Summarizing
There are extremely emotionally charged times in practice, however, as illustrated in Case
Study 4.1, that challenge professionals' active listening and demand a need for further ex-
pansive compassionate communication skills.
Case Study 4.1 Baby
Baby was an 8-year-old female Staffordshire bull terrier that was dead on arrival at the
out-of-hours emergency hospital, as a result of multiple injuries sustained in an RTA (road
traffic accident). Sandy had owned Baby since she was 3 years old, when she adopted her
from an RSPCA animal centre. Sandy is 32 years old and has three children, Kylie aged 4
years, Bethany aged 7 years and George who is 10 years old. George was holding Baby's
lead at the time she slipped her collar just before the accident and blames himself for her
death. Sandy, whilst distraught at Baby's loss, did not seem to blame George. However,
Liam (Sandy's partner and George's father), was extremely angry towards George and to-
wards the practice team for letting Baby die'. He was shouting uncontrollably at George,
swearing at the vet and nurse, who found it impossible to calm him down. Other people
in the waiting room were also becoming anxious and distressed because they could hear
what was going on.
The whole family accompanied Baby to the surgery and the consulting room was very
crowded. The vet and nurse were eager to get Liam out of the hospital. Sandy appeared
numb and in a state of shock. The vet explained that Baby had died before she had arrived
at the hospital and emphasized that nothing could be done now to help her. The nurse
was concerned to watch that Kylie and Bethany did not touch anything in the room as
the girls were actively exploring this new environment and seemed unaware that Baby
was dead.
The family were not provided with the information regarding individual cremation
and left Baby's body at the hospital for communal cremation, which Sandy later deeply
regretted.
This case study highlights diverse factors that can impact on human grief in relation to pet
loss:
*Sudden, unanticipated death of a younger animal
● Possible existence of responsibility /culpability for the death
88 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
●Traumatic death, for example accident
*Unfamiliar veterinary team, presenting issues of questioning trust in competency
+Rescued animal
The emotional climate is highly charged, presenting multiple layers of differing needs.
Liam's anger is a natural part of grief, particularly in relation to accidental death. Sandy's
shock and disbelief is making it easy to overlook Sandy, as all the attention may have inad-
vertently been focused on calming Liam down. The children in the family present different
levels of understanding about death and dying; Kylie and Bethany appear not to understand
the gravity of the situation and need simple explanation to help them realize what had hap-
pened to Baby. George, as a child, is taking the full burden of responsibility for Baby's death.
which he understands was preventable and is a permanent state, and this is further compli-
cated by Liam's anger towards George.
The veterinary team do not know the family personally and therefore do not have a foun-
dation of trust and familiarity to work from. It becomes essential to manage this traumatic
loss situation compassionately and calmly for the family by the following:
* Identifying immediate priorities for concern - diffusing Liam's anger by remaining gently
spoken when talking to Liam, advising him, that feelings of anger are a natural part of
grief particularly in relation to accidental death.
*Allowing Liam a few minutes to externalize his feelings without interrupting him and
not becoming angry in response.
●The vet further clarifying that it is normal, but not helpful to want to blame someone for
accidental death.
●Offering to explain Baby's injuries that led to her death in front of the family and doing so
when the environment becomes more stable and focussed to enable greater understand-
ing.
 Ensuring that Sandy and Liam have somewhere to sit down.
* Providing the option for involvement of the children or alternatively offering a member
of staff who could talk to the children in a separate room about the loss, whilst the vet
works with Sandy and Liam.
Missing My Pet by Alex Lambert (aged 6) is an extremely helpful resource for explaining
death to children in practice and could be used by the nurse with the children; ideally, the
book should be available to give to the family before they go home, included within the grief
down-to-earth guidance on explaining pet death to children. Use age-appropriate language
with the children, avoiding euphemisms such as 'gone to sleep/passed away,' instead use
the words 'dead' and 'died', clarifying that this means that Baby's heart has stopped beating.
'paag rou st aus pe ued jan nou saop aus ua paddos su auss
The family as a whole, including the children, should be allowed to say their goodbyes
to Baby, touch her if they would like to (helpful in accepting the reality of the loss), make
[ r Ao ue aa p a aqa diau cn n md A /d md e
(enabling expression/externalization of feelings).
Chapler 4  Compassionale communicalion
89
Ideally, the family should be able to decide together about options regarding after-death
body care, and should be provided with different alternatives for this; decisions could be
made the next day. It is important not to rush the family, who are struggling to come to
    s        s
cumstances and possible limitations.
It is essential that the veterinary care team involved in working with the family are pro-
vided with an opportunity to take a few minutes to collect their own thoughts before work-
ing with new clients, if possible. Opportunities for staff to debrief with an identified team
member should be ensured at the end of each shift; this may be face to face or by telephone.
Further compassionate communication skills that can help generate a more emotion-
friendly environment, typical of a bond-centred practice, include the following:
●Acknowledging - recognizing the existence of personal truth or the reality of a situation
for another person. It involves observational comments and statements about the bond
between owners and their pets as well as honest communication about stressful and emo-
human emotions associated with grief and loss; for example, 'Baby's death has come as a
massive shock to all of you and it looks like everyone in the family is trying to cope with
thisin their ownway'
+Normalizing - this lends credibility to another's thoughts, beliefs, behaviours and expe-
riences and enables owners to know that their reactions are 'normal'. It involves offering
validation to owners about the emotions associated with grief and other stressful situa-
tions such as euthanasia, 'Feelings of anger and wanting to blame someone are a natural
part of grief, particularly in association with accidental death'.
● Giving permission - encouraging owners to articulate their needs and wishes without
anxiety and without feeling judged. Owners perceive and relate to veterinary profes-
sionals as authority figures, sometimes owners need to have permission to be able to
make choices regarding their pets' welfare and care such as ending treatment or review-
ing quality-of-life indicators; Sandy may need permission to grieve; for example, 'Would
 you like to spend some time alone with Baby? It's OK to do this if you need to, and we
can make a print of her paw if you'd like this .. .'.
*Gentle confrontation, 'Baby slipped her collar, this wasn't anyone's fault and nobody is
to blame, it is likely she died at the scene of the accident. There was nothing we could do
for her when she arrived'.
*Immediacy, 'Would it help if Lisa took the children next door for a few moments whilst
you and your wife spend some time with Baby and the vet?
Natural human reactions to working with Baby's family could include frustration, irritation
 and avoidance. In remaining calm and mirroring what is the desired way of being, the vet-
erinary team generate a climate that can lessen conflict, rather than exacerbate it. Empathy
enables understanding of the source of Liam's anger that, whilst difficult to work in the
presence of, is based in shock, distress and grief. In focusing on working with the person and
their emergent needs rather than responding to the emotions, professionals are better able
 to deflect anger and avoid it escalating into aggression.
 Case Study 4.2 illustrates how compassionate communication skills can enable an emo-
tionally supported transition for owners at the time of terminal prognosis and euthanasia of
their companion animal.
O6
Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
CaseStudy 4.2willow
Bill purchased Willow (a Siamese cat) from a breeder as a present for his wife's birth-
day, 10 years ago. He describes Willow as being 'the most beautiful kitten' he had ever
seen and talks of her becoming 'his cat', although he had initially bought her for his wife.
Bill and his wife, Mary, live in a rural area of Cheshire and have two grown-up chil-
dren who live overseas. Bill is a retired university lecturer, in his late 60s. Mary, also in
her late 60s, has multiple sclerosis (MS) and uses a wheelchair. Bill describes Willow as
being friendly, very communicative and sociable. She was 10 years old when she was
 aq r e r as sm   s  a   
eventually died. When the lesion first appeared on Willow's nose, Bill hadn't thought it
was serious, but when he finally went to see his vet, Willow was diagnosed as having a
malignancy and the vet operated to remove this. The vet provided straightforward infor-
mation about Willow's cancer, describing the anticipated trajectory. He did not assume
that because Bill was a university lecturer he would automatically understand medical
 on    ass s    s sm  
to support Willow during her palliative treatment and care. He was advised to attend a
continuing care (palliative) clinic at the surgery. This is facilitated by a qualified nurse,
fully trained in provision of pet bereavement support. He attended four appointments
(one per month after prognosis), each lasting around 20 minutes. During the consulta-
tions Bill was able to talk about his relationship with Willow, explore his fears and anxi-
eties about Willow's cancer, identify practical steps he could take to ensure Willow's com-
fort, locate and explore key quality-of-life indicators (Willow's mobility, the appearance
and size of the tumour, appetite and zest for life), access information about euthanasia
and options of where this could eventually take place. Bill had talked with Mary and
they had decided that Willow would be buried at home in the garden, where she en-
joyed playing; consequently, they did not require details of cremation or pet cemetery
services. The nurse advised Bill that Willow's grave would need to be dug to a depth
of 1.25 m, as this was a legal requirement, but she also commented that home burial
seemed an appropriate choice for Willow, as she enjoyed being out in the garden so
much.
Willow, despite her terminal prognosis, recovered from surgery and had 'a good sum-
mer, but as winter approached she got rapidly worse. She was losing weight, the tu-
mour returned and visibly bled; Bill talked of it being 'obvious' by May of the follow-
ing year that 'she was not herself anymore.' Willow had 3 weeks in a ‘fairly low state',
and eventually got so she was not moving around and the tumour had caused consid-
erable facial disfigurement. Bill identified that Willow was in discomfort. Willow's fa-
miliar vet and the continuing (palliative) care nurse came to Bill's home to euthanize
Willow. The vet examined Willow thoroughly, talking Bill and Mary through this exam-
ination, verbally validating the reasons for the euthanasia decision. The vet explained
the euthanasia procedure to them, identifying aspects which may have caused distress
or alarm, for example, the possibility that Willow's bowels and bladder may empty, that
her eyes would remain open after death and that she may sound as if she was sigh-
ing or gasping, clarifying that this is a reflex after death and not a sign that she was in
distress. After allowing an opportunity for questions, the vet briefly outlined what the
Chapler 4 Compassionale communicalion 
91
euthanasia consent form was and why it was needed, before asking Bill to complete it.
Mary felt she couldn't stay in the room at the time of the euthanasia, but Bill remained
and stroked Willow whilst the vet injected her. Bill was not required to raise a vein. The
procedure went peacefully and Bill said he was in no doubt that it was the appropri-
ate choice for Willow at this stage to prevent her from suffering. Mary was invited back
into the room. The vet acknowledged that he would miss Willow, as she had a big per
 sonality and was such a sociable cat. The continuing care nurse provided Bill and Mary
with written contact details of where he could access pet bereavement support should he
need it, ensuring he had contact details for Blue Cross/SCAS PBSS. The vet and attend-
ing nurse sent a handwritten bereavement card to the couple, from the practice, the next
day. The invoice for euthanasia was sent 1 week after Willow's death. Neither Bill nor his
wife pursued the option of external bereavement support, but talked of appreciating hav-
ing the information, which gave them a choice. Bill commented that he felt the practice
 had been compassionate and very genuine in relation to Willow's illness and eventual
death.
It could have been easy for Willow's vet to make assumptions about what Bill, as a
university lecturer, might want and need in terms of information and potential pet be-
 a o  x   sa aq  o  l s a
thanasia, had there not been an option for home visits, as the practice did not have easy
access for people who use wheelchairs. Despite the fact Mary felt she could not remain
in the room at the time of death, she was able to participate in the part of the process she
felt more comfortable with, enabling validation of the euthanasia decision and clarifica-
tion of the appropriateness of its timing. In the practice, being committed to equality of
access and continuity of care, the vet and the nurse were able to respond more flexibly to
owners' individual needs. The practice team worked with Bill (and also with Mary when
able to do so) in a person-centred way from their frame of reference, using empathy and
enabling recognition of Mary and Bill as individuals with different ways of coping with
anticipatory grief and at the time of Willow's euthanasia. Compassionate communica-
tion and practical support were enabled by the vet and nurse following collaboratively
agreed practice protocols for provision of palliative and bereavement care. Key areas of
importance within this included the following:
●Verbal recognition of the HCAB (validating the relationship)
+
 Acknowledgement of the individuality and significance of the companion animal
abling Willow's owners to identify what role they could take in her continuing care
(owner empowerment)
+An option for home euthanasia, if preferred
·Pre-euthanasia examination of Willow, followed by discussion of quality-of-life indi-
cators, making visible the reason for the euthanasia and its timing, lessening the po-
tential for doubt and associated feelings of guilt (locating altruistic motivation for the
death)
● Providing details of how and where to access support should it have been needed
● Pet bereavement is always contextual, i.e. happens within the wider context of
people's lives; it is therefore helpful to be aware of potential vulnerability factors, for
:adexa
76
Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
°Coexisting multiple losses experienced by Bill and Mary, for example Bill's re-
tirement, Mary's MS and subsequent loss of mobility. Extended support may be
needed from other agencies such as social services, MS Society, Age Concern.
Access to support networks/structures, for example family members. Both of Bill
and Mary's children live overseas; therefore, it could be useful to check out if they
have contact with other family members, friends, faith/social groups they can eas-
ily access.
Intensity of the HCAB within owner dyads, for example Bill's identification that
Willow was 'his cat', illuminating the special bond he perceived they shared.
Older age-related factors, for example emergent anxiety in owners relating to thein
own mortality brought into consciousness as a result of pet bereavement.
'Last pet syndrome', older people sometimes feel they cannot responsibly assume
a caring commitment for another animal because of fear that they may outlive the
pet, gentle reassurance of home for life schemes with details of these can be helpful
if owners want to have another companion animal; providing written information
about the Cinnamon Trust (pet fostering and rehoming charity for elderly pet own-
ers) may be crucial in enabling future acquisition of a new pet. Owners can also be
advised of older animals in need of new homes.
° Guilt associated with aspects of the caring responsibility, for example Bill may have
felt guilty for not having taken Willow to see the vet sooner, as by the time of
diagnosis the cancer had already spread; Mary may also feel guilty she felt unable
to remain with Willow at the time of her death.
Supportive actions taken by the practice care team that were useful in working with the
human emotions associated with these vulnerability factors included the following:
an a upan pis an mn sa - uon aisso ra
nal prognosis, informing Bill that the tumour was malignant, making it clear that the
surgery was palliative and not curative; explanation of the suspected illness trajectory.
clear description of euthanasia procedure with opportunities for questions.
Access to continuing (palliative) care clinics at the practice, enabling more expansive
discussion, review of the pet-person relationship, locating important factors within
quality of life and empowerment of Bill within the palliative care process for Willow,
enabling him to identify options and clarify his own role as Willow's primary care-
giver.
 An option for home-based euthanasia by the regular, familiar practice care team,
which gave Mary the option to be present at the time of Willow's death.
 ing not to be present during euthanasia and in relation to the timing of Bill bringing
Willow for initial investigations.
Pre-euthanasia examination of Willow and discussion/review of quality-of-life indi-
cators informing the euthanasia decision, validation of this from a clinical perspective,
illuminating shared responsibility for Willow's death between the owner and the vet-
erinary care team, essential in lessening feelings of doubt in relation to the appropri-
ateness of the timing of the euthanasia and subsequent feelings of guilt.
Chapler 4  Compassionale communicalion  93
● Information about where to access pet bereavement support if needed - enabling
choice, but respecting how owners choose to grieve and what support they decide
they need to access.
This case study highlights the importance of both generic procedures and individual re-
sponses when working with human emotions associated with palliative care and bereave-
ment in practice. Whilst it is essential to have emotional support protocols that ensure min-
imum provision of information and access to extended support, it is also necessary to work
in a person-centred way, using empathy to identify the more personal needs arising from
individual contexts and particular loss circumstances.
REVIEW OF QUALITY-OF-LIFE INDICATORS
In addition to developing compassionate communication skills, there are some potentially
useful clinical communication tools that enable more empathic person-centred approaches
to working with human emotions relating to reviewing quality-of-life indicators within eu-
thanasia decision making and palliative treatment and care. Essentially, these tools gen-
erate a sense of real partnership between owners and professionals. Illness trajectory, or
-d st nq 'ar pue sa ra jo as  ie psn aq us 'ud uq,
ticularly relevant to palliative and bereavement care. Illness trajectory mapping, devel-
[ee uonedos ou paeiau nssasnns uaaq oste sey (ezoo) uosmea Aq pado
bereavement counselling as a means of making visible the factors that influenced and
informed euthanasia decision making (see Figure 4.3). The purpose of illness trajectory
mapping is:
●to identify personally important facets of the HCAB (located as the roots of the map);
+to locate key moments within the illness trajectory, for example owners' first awareness of
disease process/terminal decline, veterinary diagnosis/prognosis, subjective and clinical
quality-of-life indicators;
*to identify the pivotal moment, i.e. informing/deciding factor for the euthanasia - which
could be generated by a number of key moments or be a discrete event, for example
sudden onset of paralysis;
+ to make visible the limitations, both in terms of clinical treatment and personal circum-
stances. For example, is someone at home on a daily basis to care for a terminally ill
animal and can the financial costs associated with palliative treatment be managed?
The map also enables identification of factors which help limit feelings of doubt, such as vet-
erinary validation of euthanasia decision, or confirmation of terminal prognosis. Options for
 se yns 'so sis ae o  nu 'i ae sn
ily members. Owners' personal responsibility for the care and welfare and ultimately the
euthanasia of their companion animal is made visible at each step of the mapping process
when appropriate.
94
Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
Sensory
Emotional
Behaviour
Personal
Emotional
Physical
identification
Intuitive
Empathy
 Limitations
Multi-sensory
Signs of suffering 
Projected feelings
Observation
Options available
Self
Confirmation
 Pivotal moment
 Familiarity with animal
veterinary terminal
Awareness
prognosis
Responsibility
By vet
 Options
Anticipation fears
Time/place
Visible onset of
HCAB
illness/disease
Involvement
of significant others
Caregiver identified
important factors
Figure 4.3  Template: illness Irajeclory mapping [Dawson 2007a].
Professionals' responsibility for the clinical care ensuring animal welfare, clinical informa-
tion informing euthanasia decision making and, ultimately, for the euthanasia event is made
visible, constructing a sense of continued partnership between owners and the veterinary
care team.
The map is not considered to be a clinical record nor a crude decision-making tool, but
rather a personal review process facilitated by a professional usually working within a con-
tinuing (palliative) care clinic.
Owners can be given a photocopy of the map with written information on it, or alterna-
tively the template can be used as a way of identifying verbal discussion areas. It is useful to
 integrate a written component if possible and appropriate, as this can be valuable for owners
 to review following the death, revisiting the circumstances informing the decision making. It
should always be emphasized, preferably in writing on the template, that this is not a clinical
record of euthanasia decision making,
At times of crisis, owners can become
confused, panicked or fearful and avoidant of sit-
uations that may cause anxiety and further stress,
s, for example reviewing quality-of-life in-
dicators. It can be useful to put into place a structured option to enable owners to face these
 situations with support. Offering continuing (palliative) care clinics, facilitated by a dedi-
cated qualified nurse, can provide structured opportunities, enabling illness trajectory map-
palliative treatment and care.
Chapler 4  Compassionale communicalion
95
Table 4.3 The purpose of conlinving (pallialive care] clinics
Review HCAB
What is qualily of life?
Identify key factors influencing decision
Idenlify subjeclive faclors
 Provide an opportunily for informalion seeking
 Are there physical, emolional, financial, liming
related to illness
limitations?
Oplions for euthanasia, chance lo enable
Dignily - does the animal still have dignily?
understanding of procedure
Explore fears/anxielies about euthanasia
Enabling a supporled presence
After-dealh body care oplions
Memorialization of the animal
SETTING UP AND RUNNING CONTINYING CARE CLINICS
The purpose of a continuing (palliative) care clinic (see Table 4.3) is to create a supported
space in which owners can talk for a longer duration with a continuing care nurse about all
aspects of palliative care, including more subjective experiences integral within the HCAB,
which may help illuminate companion animals’ quality of life. This partnership in practice is
ued care through enabling access to information, referrals and practical advice, for example
possible, suitable food for terminally ill pets.
Access should be open from the time of terminal diagnosis/prognosis, and this should be
enabled by an introduction to the dedicated nurse by the vet responsible for the companion
animal's care. Posters in practice can also advertise clinic times, in an owner-friendly way
(focusing on practical information and advice available and not on euthanasia and death of
the animal). The practice may want to produce a dedicated leaflet outlining the purpose
and times of continuing care clinics. Appointment times should be longer, allowing 15-
20 minutes for each. Ideally, space permitting, a dedicated quiet/family room should be
used for these consults. This should be made to look less clinical by adding framed pictures
of companion animals, include an area to make hot drinks, have tissues to hand and have
comfortable seating. If a separate room is not available, simple measures can be taken to add
 greater comfort for owners and animals in existing consulting rooms.
Access to continuing care clinics does not end at the time of the companion animal's
death, but naturally extends beyond this to provision of pet bereavement support, embracing
the concept of continuing care for the owner. It is essential to keep offers of pet bereavement
support within boundaries, ensuring that owners are aware that the appointment time is
for 20 minutes and that what is being offered is support and not counselling. Professional
counsellors have been trained to work with human emotions in a therapeutic context; they
are insured and supervised to work in this way. Veterinary professionals are not trained
counsellors and have not entered into a contract for working as counsellors with veterinary
clients. Pet bereavement support should involve the following:
● Practical advice about after-death body care, individual or routine (communal) crema-
tion, home and pet cemetery burial.
+Grief education.
+Provision of details about how to contact the PBSS.
96 Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skill
●Details of local qualified counsellors willing and able to work with pet bereavement,
check out the BACP (British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy) website for
details.
· Contact information relating to other loss issues, for example Cruse Bereavement Care
(human losses).
+
Book of Remembrance, ideas for making a memory box.
+Review of the bond shared with a companion animal.
Review of end-of-life care, enabling visibility of owners' positive actions.
●Review of euthanasia decision making, enabling identification of altruistic (other-centred)
motivation for this (if present) and locating the key and pivotal moments, informing the
timing of the euthanasia
●Information about local or on-site pet bereavement support groups.
+
 Offering between 2-3 sessions, pet bereavement support helps to ensure that this provi-
sion remains within boundaries. Pet bereavement support will not be wanted, nor indeed
needed, for a number of owners. It is important not to make assumptions, but to enable
access without forcing these options onto owners. One of the most appropriate times for
offering this type of appointment could be at the time of picking up pets' ashes from the
surgery, rather than doing this at reception in front of a waiting room full of people. It
could be more appropriate to allow a longer time duration, adding of the pet's name to
the Book of Remembrance and giving owners an option of talking about the pet and/or
the loss if needed. Similarly, if available, details of local or practice pet bereavement sup-
port groups could be given at this time, reinforcing a positive link with the practice, rather
PET LOSS SUPPORT GROUPS
Support groups are centred in enabling self-help. Facilitated by a professional, individuals
are supported to share their experiences and listen to the experiences of others, drawing
inner strength from connecting with people who have shared similar crises and situations
and learning about possible coping strategies that others have successfully employed.
The practicalities
Running a pet loss support group requires a quiet space to hold meetings, for example, the
reception area when the centre is closed, or more ideally a different room such as an on-site
meeting room. It is important that the group is not seen or disturbed. Tissues should be at
hand, as should refreshments
Facilitator
This is a sensitive, demanding role that requires appropriate communication skills, enabling
everyone who wants to have a say to do so. It can be useful to have basic counselling skills
training, to enable emotional containment and reflecting back to the group what have been
Chapler 4   Compassionale communicalion 
16
the core themes of the meeting, identifying coping strategies that individuals have found
helpful.
Timing
A meeting for an hour once every 2-3 weeks is probably the most sustainable option. Whilst
a time limit cannot be placed on grief, it can be helpful to have referral contacts at hand and
include the reinforcement at the opening of each session that the group is designed not as a
social group, but as a support group to help people through a crisis point in their lives. It is
important to be clear about what the group is and what it is not.
Vicarious traumatization
While listening to other people's stories of loss and emotional pain, it is possible to feel
worse rather than better. The traumatic experience of others may be internalized as the self's
experience, which can be unhelpful or even damaging. It is advisable to think very carefully
about the practicalities of seting up and running a pet loss support group on-site, not least
because of the emotional demands this places on the staff responsible for facilitating the
group. Pet loss support groups, if run well, can provide a positive, continued association
with the practice and can support owners, enabling them to consider pet ownership again.
Working with human emotions in practice can be personally draining and professionally
demanding and requires that staff have adequate and ongoing training and support to avoid
burnout and stress.
CPD OPPORTUNITIES
evening continuing professional development (CPD) sessions, daylong and distance learn-
ing programmes (externally accredited by the Open College Network).
Blue Cross/SCAS Pet Bereavement Support Service
www.scas.org.uk - telephone 01993 825539
RESOURCES AND USEFUL WEBSITES
Blue Cross/SCAS PBSS provides a confidential support line for pet owners and pro-
fessionals relating to all aspects of pet loss, staffed by trained support volunteers
Sunok pue ua1pio 'shnpe 1on) 9099 960 00s0 au 1oddns (ud 0e's-ue 02"8)
people)
 Online pet memorials - www.bluecross.org.uk
 Email support pbssmail@bluecross.org.uk
 Information, advice and training on all aspects of pet loss and pet loss support
pbsstraining@bluecross.org.uk
 The British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy - www.bacp.co.uk
86
Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
Childline - confidential helpline for children to call enabling access to telephone coun
selling www.childline.org.uk - telephone 0800 1111
CinnamonTrust (national
charity
yfor the elderly and their pets)
www.cinnamontrust.org.uk
Cruse Bereavement Care counselling, advice and support related to human deaths only.
does not offer pet loss support. Useful in supporting owners who are experiencing
multiple losses and requires more extensive support in relation to human bereavement.
www.crusebereavementcare.org.uk
Helpline (9.30 am-5.00 pm) 0808 808 1677
Young People's Helpline 0844 477 9400
Family-friendly grief resources for use in practice, Missing My Pet by Alex Lambert
(aged 6) with accompanying parent/carers' pamphlet
RSPCA Home for Life - www.homeforlife.org.uk
The Missing Pets Bureau - www.petsbureau.co.uk
 Understanding and working with responsibility grief for companion animal owners and
 professionals - www.responsbilitygrief.co.uk
Vetlife website support for veterinary professionals - www.vetlife.org.uk
REFERENCES
American Veterinary Medical Associafion (AVMA) (2006) JAVMA news: board acts on human-
animal bond issues. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 228(2):167-
194.
Barton Ross C, Baron-Sorensen J (2007) Pet Loss and Human Emotions: A Guide to Recovery, 2nd edn.
Routledge, New York.
Beetz AM (2007) The development of empathy in children through interaction with animals. Ple-
nary paper, IAHAIO Conference: People and Animals: Partnership in Harmony, Tokyo.
Bowlby J (1969) Attachment. Basic Books, New York.
Bowlby J (1979) The Making and Breaking of Affectional Bonds. Tavistock Publicafions, London.
Bowlby J (1980) Loss. Basic Books, New York, p. 93.
Bowlby J (1988) Secure Base. Basic Books, New York.
 Brown SE (2004a) The human-animal bond and self psychology: toward a new understanding.
Society and Animals, Journal of Human-Animal Studies 12(1):67-86.
Brown SE (2004b) The human-animal bond: self psychology offers special insight. PSYETA (Psy-
chologists for the Ethical Treatment of Animals) News 24(1):4.
Burnard P, Morrison P (1997) Caring and Communicating: Interpersonal Relationships in Nursing.
Palgrave, Basingstoke, UK.
Cohen SP (2002) Can pets function as family members? Western Journal of Nursing Research
26(6):621-638.
the use of the term'aftachment.' Anthrozoos 19(2):98112.
 Dawson SE, Campbell W (2005) Companion animal loss: understanding and supporting older
people. In: Dono J, Ormerod E (eds), Older People and Pets. SCAS, Oxford, pp. 152-153.
Dawson SE (2006) A disenfranchised loss, companion arimal death. Funeral Services Journal
121:96-103.
Chapler 4  Compassionale communicalion
66
 Dawson SE (2007a) Comparion animal euthanasia: the lived paradox of the human-comparnion
animal bond. Doctoral Thesis. School of Health, Psychology and Social Care, Manchester
Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK, pp. 380, 395-400, 415, 428.
 Dawson SE (2007b) Companion animal bereavement. The Society of Practising Veterinary Sur-
geons' Review, pp. 31-32.
 Dawson SE, Fowler J, Ormerod E, Sheridan E (2007) New perspectives on bonding. Veterinary
Review 132:30-33.
Egan G (1986) The Skilled Helper. Brooks/Cole, Monterey, CA.
Kohut H (1971) The Analysis of Self. Internafional Universities Press, New York.
p.32.
Lagori L, Morehead D, Brannan J (2001) Guidelines for Bond-Centred Practice. Colorado State Uni-
versity, CO.
Lambert A (2006) Missing My Pet. BGTF, Horbling, Lincs, UK.
Meyers B (2000) Anticipatory mourning and the human-animal bond. In: Rando TA (ed.), Clinical
Ones and Their Caregivers. Research Press, Champaign, IL, p. 549.
Parkes CM (2006) Love and Loss: The Roots of Grief and Its Complications. Routledge, London, p. 1.
Rando TA (ed.) (1986) Loss and Anticipatory Grief. Lexington Books, Lexington, ID.
Stewart M (1999) Companion Animal Death. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, pp. 38-39.
Stratton P, Hayes N (1999) A Student's Dictionary of Psychology. Arnold, London, pp. 74, 90.
Thompson TL (1986) Communication for Health Professionals. Harper and Row, New York.
Wilson EO (1993) Biophilia and the conservafion ethic. In: Kellert SR, Wilson EO (eds), The Bio-
philia Hypothesis. Island Press/Shearwater Books, Washington, DC, p. 31.
Dealing with difficult situations
Carol Gray and Jenny Moffett
Introduction
 In this chapter, we look at difficult situations that occur in veterinary practice, and how good
communication can make a difference. We cover financial aspects of practice, dealing with
'informed' clients, dealing with anger, dealing with mistakes and communication in end-of-
life situations.
THE USE OF VETERINARY COMMUNICATION SKILLS AT
THE END-OF-LIFE
It has been said that the one thing that we can be sure of in life is death. And for those who
work in general veterinary practice - and are involved in everything from the killing of farm
animals for meat, through to the euthanasia of a much-loved pet - the death of their animal
patients is a regular occurrence.
Some deaths are, however, more stressful to the client and vet than others - notably the
death of animals to which clients have formed an emotional bond. In this section we con-
centrate on the issues surrounding the loss of a companion animal such as a dog or cat.
However, most, if not all, of the communication techniques described below will be equally
applicable to larger companion animals such as horses and ponies, or other species to which
clients have become attached.
Whether the death of a companion animal comes after the result of a long and happy life
or following an accident or a distressing illness, there are several communication techniques
that can help both the client and the veterinary team cope with this stressful time. In this
100
Chapter 5 Dealing with difficull siluations
101
section we look at the difficulties associated with‘end-of-life' communication and evidence
from the medical and veterinary literature as to best practice in this area.
Difficulties associated with end-of-life communication
Talking about death and other end-of-life topics can be difficult, and significant barriers to
end-of-life communication have been identified in both the medical and veterinary litera-
The death of a companion animal, whether by natural causes or as a result of euthanasia,
can involve many emotionally charged issues, including unfavourable prognoses, treatment
failures, time constraints, unease with death or dying, financial dilemmas and difficult de-
cision making (Larson & Tobin 2000; Shaw & Lagoni 2007). Here, we investigate the issues
which may affect the client and the vet at such times
Client factors
There is some debate as to whether people experience the same type and duration of grief
when a pet dies, as when a human companion dies. A study by Adams et al. (1999), for
example, found that the grieving experience for most owners was 'short and practical as
daily demands took over'. Participants in this study said that although they felt'extremely
sad' at the loss of their pet, their experience was 'not marked by the depth of depression that
is often experienced when a human companion dies' (Adams et al. 1999).
However, that is not to say that clients do not grieve and suffer when a pet dies - the
death of animal can have adverse psychological, emotional and even physical effects on
owners (Adams et al. 1999, 2000; Hart et al. 1990). One study (Adams et al. 2000) found
that approximately 30% of clients experienced 'severe grief' at the death of their companion
animal.
Further to this, there is the suggestion that owners' expressions of grief at the loss of a pet
(Adams et al. 1999). Owners have said that they struggled with the 'contradiction between
how they felt after their pet had died and the perceived absence of support for their feelings
from others, or society in general' (Adams et al. 1999).
It is also true to say that different people react to a companion animal's death in different
ways. There are countless factors that contribute to this variability, including the client's
personal beliefs, their stage of life, how demanding their job is and their previous exposure
to a pet or human death (Adams et al. 1999, 2000). In some cases an owner may be so attached
to their pet that they may be reluctant to permit euthanasia, even where it is required, in the
best interest of the animal (Wensley 2008).
Beyond sadness, the loss of a loved one can also trigger other emotions such as anger
and guilt (Hart et al. 1990; Shaw & Lagoni 2007; Weissman 2004). In one investigation into
owners' attitudes to the euthanasia of their pet, 45% of the participants reported feeling
guilty about making the decision to euthanize, whilst 16% said that they felt like a 'mur-
derer' (Adams et al. 2000). Add to this emotional backdrop, we often ask clients to make the
difficult decisions under time-limited circumstances, and we can see why end-of-life com-
munication can be so traumatic for clients. Susan Elizabeth Dawson covers this area in much
greater detail in Chapter 4.
102 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Veterinary factors
It is not just clients that find end-of life discussions difficult. Evidence from the medical and
veterinary literature reveals that health care professionals also find this a challenging area
(Amiel et al. 2006; Hart & Hart 1987; Hart et al. 1990; Silverman et al. 2005; Tinga et al. 2001).
When it comes to breaking bad news to clients, for example, it is clear that many profession-
als feel underconfident and inadequately trained (Amiel et al. 2006; Girgis & Sanson-Fisher
1998; Schmid Mast et al. 2005; Silverman et al. 2005; Tinga et al. 2001).
This is a worrying thought as, at least in the medical literature, there is an abundance of
evidence to suggest that how bad news is communicated can have real and adverse effects
on the patient and his or her family (Girgis & Sanson-Fisher 1998; Lowden 1998; Schmid
Mast et al. 2005). Although there is a relative lack of veterinary-specific research in this area,
it is likely that breaking bad news in a poor, or inappropriate, manner will have a negative
effect on the owner of an animal to whom the bad news pertains.
Other examples of end-of-life communication, such as the euthanasia appointment, have
been documented as having either positive or negative effects on clients (Adams et al. 1999)
As Adams et al. (2000) say:
It is unclear whether a supportive veterinarian can modify the duration or magnitude
of grief reactions, or make clients feel better about a pet's death. However, it is likely
that supportive veterinarians actually validate and normalize their client's reactions
which, in turn, gives clients permission to grieve. Negative experiences at a veterinary
practice certainly impact owners' responses.
It has also been reported that, in equine practice, more than 65% of client loss may be traced
to insensitive handling of the euthanasia process (Brackenridge & Shoemaker 1996). All these
factors generate extra pressure on a veterinarian who may be facing other issues at the end
of an animal's life, such as their own attachment to the animal, their own experiences with
aenba mouauos pinos paned a jo ssot aun se Aqissod a pue (t6it ie pa qoei) sso
A SEVEN-STEP APPROACH TO COMMUNICATION AT THE
END-OF-LIFE
End-of-life communication covers a wide range of veterinary situations and experiences.
Because of this, it is important to recognize that a 'one size fits all' approach to cases and
clients does not work. However, during times of end-of-life communication, such as break-
ing bad news, relationship-centred models of communication have been highlighted as the
most successful course of action (Schmid Mast et al. 2005). In this section, we look at how to
impart bad news using a relationship-centred model of communication in conjunction with
the seven-step communication tool of von Gunten et al. (20o0), which imposes structure and
a logical progression on the proceedings. This approach involves the following steps:
1.Prepare for the discussion.
2.
 Establish what the client (and family) knows.
 3. Determine how information is to be handled.
Chapter 5  Dealing with difficult situations
103
4. Deliver the information.
5. Respond to emotions.
6. Establish goals for care and treatment priorities
7.Establish a plan.
Preparation for the discussion
When you know you have bad news to impart to a client, it is important to prepare how
you will impart that information. Identify who needs to be involved in the discussion (ask
yourself, Who makes the decisions in this family?' and 'Does the client need moral sup-
port?') and then arrange a face-to-face consultation (Girgis & Sanson-Fisher 1998; Weissman
2004). When it comes to breaking bad news or serious discussions, avoid doing this over the
telephone where at all possible (von Gunten et al. 2000).
Make sure you have established the facts of the case by looking at notes and discussing
the case with other members of the veterinary team who have been involved. Then, choose
an appropriate environment to hold the consultation - a quiet and private room is best (von
Gunten et al. 2000; Ptacek & Ptacek 2001). Prepare the room by adding chairs and removing
any barriers between where you and the client(s) will sit. It is also useful to have facial tissues
 available in anticipation of tears.
Schedule the appointment so that you have enough time to complete the consultation and
make sure that you have no interruptions (Billson & Tyrrell 2003; Girgis & Sanson-Fisher
1998).
Establish what the client knows
When meeting a client to discuss bad news, it is important to find out what has been happen-
ing since you last met (Silverman et al. 2005). Summarize where things have got to and what
has happened since you last saw the animal (Silverman et al. 2005). Use open questions such
as, 'How has she been since I saw you last?' Open questions can also be used to establish
what the client's understanding of the animal's situation is to-date (von Gunten et al. 2000).
Determine how the information is to be handled
              
know about their animal's situation. Medical patients can be divided into 'seekers' (around
      a  n g ,  (
more information by their doctor, whilst avoiders cope better with less. It is thought that
some of the factors involved in this difference of attitude include ethnic background, level
The literature suggests, however, that the majority of patients and owners want to know
about all treatment options prior to making a decision (Benbasset et al. 1998; Girgis &
Sanson-Fisher 1998; Slater et al. 1996). Each client should be treated on a case-for-case ba-
sis, and one of the clearest ways to determine how much information to deliver is to ask the
client directly (Girgis & Sanson-Fisher 1998; Silverman et al. 2005).
104 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Deliver the information
When breaking bad news, it is good practice to give the client some warning that you have
difficult information to impart - a 'warning shot' (Ptacek & Ptacek 2001; Silverman et al.
d  n ro  s a s 'xa r ' l  a o s (
room or a verbal cue along the lines of: T'm afraid the news isn't as good as we had hoped'
 Deliver the information in a sensitive but straightforward manner, avoiding jargon or
euphemisms (Girgis & Sanson-Fisher 1998; Larson & Tobin 2000). Do not overwhelm the
client (Billson & Tyrrell 2003; Silverman et al. 2005) - break the information down into small
chunks and allow them time to absorb the information. It may be necessary to repeat im-
pue soal passoioun ym 'ainisod uado ue asenauel Apoq anos jo ateme ag spuiod jueiiod
Sis /us pue ja a ym ps aa po aae sh se 'anns sso st 'ss
at the same level.
The veterinarian should neither overstate nor understate the implications of the news
  q   ro ,  s (    o)
worst' (Schmid Mast et al. 2005; Tulsky 2005; Weissman 2004) or, as Silverman et al. (2005)
call it: 'hope tempered with realism'
Fundamentally, though, the information should be truthful. As Weissman (2004) says,
truthful information 'is often the single most important piece of information that patients
need to make informed choices'. Specific prognostic information and the range of possible
outcomes should also be discussed at this stage (von Gunten et al. 2000).
Respond to emotions
Bad news can trigger a wide range of emotional reactions for clients (von Gunten et al. 2000).
One major example is 'anticipatory grief', a grief reaction that occurs in anticipation of an
impending loss (Casarett et al. 2001). The veterinarian needs to be able to read and respond
to such reactions empathetically. The veterinarian should aim to convey respect, acceptance
and support to the client and can achieve this by using communication techniques such as
active listening, questioning and paraphrasing (Larson & Tobin 2000). Non-verbal cues can
also be used to convey warmth and reassurance, such as good eye contact, facing the patient,
nodding encouragingly, giving full attention and not interrupting or writing notes while the
client is talking (Girgis & Sanson-Fisher 1998; Silverman et al. 2005). It is also important to
use pauses and silence - the client needs time and space to respond (Billson & Tyrrell 2003;
Girgis & Sanson-Fisher 1998; Silverman et al. 2005).
Tulsky (2005) recommends attending to the client by following these five steps:
1.  Acknowledge the emotion: 'This must be difficult news to take in'
 2. Identify loss: 'I bet it's hard to imagine life without Snowy
3.
 Legitimize the feelings: It's quite common for someone in this situation to have a hard
time in making decisions'
4. Offer support: 'Whatever lies ahead, I will be here to help you'
5.  Explore: You mentioned feeling angry. Can you tell me more about this?"
Again, Chapter 4 deals with client emotions in greater detail.
Chapter 5   Dealing with difficult situalions 
105
Establish goals for care and treatment priorities
Key to this relationship-centred model is that clients must sense that their ideas, feelings,
expectations and fears are understood (Epstein et al. 1993) and that they are being actively
involved in the decision-making process.
A review of the available medical literature (Larson & Tobin 2oo0) shows that human
patients and their families, when facing a life-threatening illness, value the following: clear
tion of autonomy and a sense of control, and the avoidance of a prolonged death. It is likely
that some of these can be extrapolated to a veterinary situation. Open-ended questions such
ae jeuM, 1o ,2mou noA on ueodui s,1euM, '2auuaddey aas on al noA pmom jeuM, 'se
you hoping for?', should help you to elicit a client's goals for his or her animal.
If, say, the discussion is likely to involve euthanasia as an option, you may want to
use this occasion to explore the client's ideas of quality of life for their pet. According to
health but they cannot easily ascertain the dog's mental well-being - it is down to the client
to provide information about the dog's experience and perspective as they are most familiar
with his or her personality, behaviour and daily routine.
Note, however, that some people may be so overwhelmed with the initial bad news that
they will not be able to discuss goals and this must be done at a later session (von Gunten et
al. 2000).
Establish a plan
Once you and the client have discussed the situation, the next step is to establish a plan for
future events. If possible, do not rush the client into any decisions - follow-up meetings or
telephone calls can be scheduled if required. In addition, clients can be supplied with more
 information (reading material, videos, etc.) on their animal's condition or, say, on euthanasia
(Girgis & Sanson-Fisher 1998).
Remember that, at this stage, reassurance is also important. Clients will want to know
that, despite the bad news, they are not being ‘abandoned' (Larson & Tobin 2000; Weiss-
-ed a roy ars isaq a jm ose no je ma puan Aua o diaq Ae 1 '(ooz u
tient and to reinforce that you are working with the client to achieve this (von Gunten et al.
2000).
 Summarize what you have discussed and check that the client is OK with the arrange-
ments. After the consultation, you should document the information you have given to the
client, as well as discuss the proceedings with other relevant members of staff (Billson &
Iyrrell 2003; Girgis & Sanson-Fisher 1998; Silverman et al. 2005).
EUTHANASIA - BEFORE, DURING AND AFTER
The euthanasia appointment is the commonest point where veterinary professionals interact
with clients at the end of an animal's life. It can be an unpleasant, and unfortunately frequent,
106 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
be one of the best ways of cementing a veterinary-client relationship. As the old adage goes,
'clients don't care how much you know until they know how much you care'.
Euthanasia - before
A pre-euthanasia appointment is highly recommended. At this appointment, you will be
able to discuss the procedure and the choices that the client will have.
First, by explaining the procedure and what to expect, the client can make a decision as
to whether they want to be present at the euthanasia or not. It has been reported that vets
may be against offering client-present euthanasia because of such factors as time limitations,
having to deal with clients'emotions and their own emotions, or the fear that something may
go wrong with the procedure (Lagoni et al. 1994; Tinga et al. 2001). However, it is important
that clients have been given the choice to be present or not (Adams et al. 1999; Hart et al.
1990; Lagoni et al. 1994; Martin et al. 2004) - in one study, 70% of owners said that they
wanted the option to be present (Adams et al. 2000). Witnessing a peaceful euthanasia can
help clients come to terms with the death, but it is important that it is their decision - be
 careful not to talk a client into being present if they do not want to (Lagoni et al. 1994).
Second, you can ascertain if the client wants to have the euthanasia carried out at home. A
home euthanasia is often the least stressful option for an animal or owner, especially where
the animal is very old, sick or debilitated.
Third, offer the choices for cremation and burial. Clients are often unaware of what hap-
pens to an animal's body after death and what each choice of disposal entails (Hart et al.
1990). It is necessary to be honest about what happens to an animal's body in each instance.
In one anecdotal report, Lagoni et al. (1994) talk of an elderly woman who decided to let her
veterinarian dispose of her dog's body. The woman was told that the dog was being buried
in a 'mass grave’ and the dog's body went to a local landfill site. However, the vet was left
in a tricky situation a month later when the woman returned to enquire about the grave's
Fourth, plan the logistics of the euthanasia - make an appointment and enquire whether
the client would like to sign the consent form and pay the bill in advance (Lagoni et al. 1994).
On leaving, the client can be offered pet loss support reading material or videos/ DVDs.
Euthanasia - during
A euthanasia appointment should, where possible, be scheduled for a quiet time of day, such
 as at lunchtime or after hours (Hart et al. 1990). When clients arrive for such an appointment,
they should be ushered straight into the consulting room and not left in the waiting room
(Hart et al. 1990). At this stage, you can discuss the procedure with the client again, offering
options and confirming choices (Hart et al. 1990). Ask clients if they want a little time alone
with their pet before the procedure. Make sure you have someone to help you restrain the
animal and raise the vein. Take any consulting room phones off the hook, turn off pagers or
mobile phones and talk to the practice reception staff to make sure that you are not inter-
rupted during the procedure.
Have all of your necessary equipment ready, including the needles and syringes, and clip
and prep the animal for injection. Some authors recommend pre-placement of a catheter in
either the cephalic or the saphenous vein (Hart et al. 1990) - remember, in this instance, to
Chapter 5Dealing with difficull situalions
107
use heparin flush before introducing the euthanasia solution. In some older, sicker animals
you will not be able to do so. You should warn the client of this and that it may be difficult
to locate a vein. In other cases, sedation or tranquilization of an animal may be required
At this point, you can remind the client of the bodily reactions, which should have been
brought up at the pre-euthanasia appointment. Reactions to discuss include bladder and
bowel evacuation, twitching muscles, failure of eyes to close and the fact that the pet may
call out or gasp deeply on death.
After injecting the solution, allow the animal to sink to the table gently and then use
your stethoscope to check there is no heartbeat. Simply state that the animal is dead. At this
point, touch, such as resting your hand gently on the client's arm, can be an effective way
of expressing compassion (Hart et al. 1990). Be aware, however, of cultural differences or
individual attitudes.
During the euthanasia consultation, what you do and say, and how you do and say it, are
important indicators to the client as to the sigrificance of the situation (Adams et al. 1999).
Ideally, a client should feel comfortable enough to express emotion in front of the veterinary
team. Although clients do not expect their vet to provide counselling skills (Adams et al.
1999), they do at least deserve to receive a level of compassion and understanding.
Specifically, Lagoni et al. (1994) recommend the following:
*Acknowledging that the pet has died: do not be afraid to talk about it.
*Normalizing the situation for the client: lend credibility to their feelings, behaviours, ex-
periences and thoughts - allow the owner to cry without feeling embarrassed (Adams
et al. 1999).
●Giving permission: encourage clients to voice their needs and wishes without fear of
judgement
Avoid clichés such as 'I know how you feel','He had a long life', or switching to your own
thoughts, 'When my dog died . . '. Instead, use open-ended questions and exploring state-
ments to encourage the client to open up about their own feelings and perceptions; for ex-
 ample, "Tell me a bit about Sooty ...'. Most veterinary communication experts advise against
recommending obtaining another pet during the euthanasia consultation (Hart et al. 1990;
Lagoni et al. 1994),
Remember also that although some clients can appear abrupt or uncaring by veterinary
staff, it may be that this is simply a strategy to retain control over their emotions in front of
the veterinarian (Adams et al. 1999). It may also mean that the client is going through a form
of shock or'delayed grief'.
At this stage, the idea of counselling or pet loss support helplines can be introduced,
where required (AVMA 2005; Hart et al. 1990). Chapter 4 has more information on these
facilities.
Euthanasia - after
Ask the client if they would like time alone with their animal and give it to them. Even if the
[ee paseanap a aas waul ial oh aonoeid pooa si lt 'eiseuena aul ie juasaid jou st juai
(Hart et al. 1990). Present the body compassionately: clean up any blood, remove the catheter
and place a bandage and cover with a blanket (von Gunten et al. 2000). Also, if they would
108
Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
With
Heartfelt
Sympathy
ONTHELOSSOFYOUR
GOODFRIEND
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1  [a] Example of velerinary condolence card. Reproduced with the permission of Sarah
Brown, Sarah Brown Cards. (b) Example of velerinary condolence card. Reproduced wih kind permission
from Pe-Urns.com
like to clip a little fur or take the animal's collar, etc., then make sure they feel comfortable
doing so.
If the owner is taking the animal home with them, do not handle the body roughly o1
awkwardly and make sure that you use appropriate coverings; anecdotally, clients do not
want to receive their animal's body in a cardboard box or plastic bag (Lagoni et al. 1994).
Also, if an animal goes for cremation, it is better to return ashes in a private room rather
than across the desk in reception (Adams et al. 1999).
When clients are ready to leave, they should, where possible, be escorted out of a back
or side door. Amend the animal's records and discuss the event with other staff so that
the whole veterinary team is aware of the animal's deceased status. Follow-up letters and
condolence cards (Figure 5.1) are often welcome additions to clients, but use your discretion
and assess each client on a case-by-case basis - in one study, a few condolence card recipients
were offended by this practice (Adams et al. 1999).
Euthanasia can be a sad and stressful time for the veterinarian. There has even been the
suggestion that performing a large number of euthanasias can alter the veterinary profes-
sionals' attitude to mortality. Persaud (2007), for example, says that it is possible that vets
can start to see death as 'a ready and available solution to problems'. In a study of how
veterinarians handle euthanasias, the top stressors for vets were accidental deaths in their
hospital, needless euthanasia of healthy animals or those that could have been saved with
veterinary care and losses by long-term clients (Hart et al. 1990). Veterinary staff should also
be wary of particularly demanding cases or several euthanasias carried out in a short space
of time (Hart et al. 1990)
 It is essential that veterinary professionals are aware of the ideas and emotions that eu-
thanasia evoke within them. After a stressful euthanasia, it is necessary that vets are allowed
to take time out and to acknowledge their reactions. They should not be afraid to grieve or
to show emotion. A debriefing system or staff emotional support network is a good way to
Chapter 5   Dealing with difficult silualions
109
bringing challenging emotional situations out into the open. Further details on stress and
coping mechanisms are provided in Chapter 8.
Summary
Death and dying are two of the most difficult topics for people - clients and veterinary pro-
fessionals alike - to discuss. In the veterinary consultation this leads to a number of extra
barriers to the communication process. However, there are several learned communication
techniques and practices which can help. An example is the seven-step approach to com-
munication at end of life. This includes preparing for the discussion, establishing what the
client (and family) knows, determining how information is to be handled, delivering the in
formation, responding to emotions, establishing goals for care and treatment priorities and
establishing a plan. Euthanasia consultations are a major example of where to put these com-
munication skills into operation.
WELFARE CONCERNS
An area of difficult communication for any veterinary professional is when there is concern
over animal welfare. This could include neglect (e.g. failure to treat a condition until it be-
comes untreatable), prolonging treatment when euthanasia would be in the animal's best
interests and non-accidental injury (NAI).
 If an arimal is showing signs of neglect, the veterinary surgeon should try to find out
from the client what has been happening. For example, a client brings in an extremely thin
dog. The veterinary professional must hide any shock or temptation to blame the client for
the animal's condition, and instead try to get the client to discuss the problem:
He's not looking very happy, and I'm worried about his weight - can you take me through
what has been happening with him?
A team approach to caring for a suspected case of neglect may turn things around with
dietary advice, regular weighing and routine investigations to see if there is an explanation
for the weight loss; this may be enough to deal with it.
Other cases where ‘neglect' is a factor include rabbits with blowfly strike (maggots),
grossly obese dogs or cats and severe cases of flea-allergic skin irritation. It is sometimes
difficult to avoid apportioning blame, but trying to look forward rather than backward will
often work.
It's good that you have brought him along to the practice now, and we will work together
to try to make things better as quickly as possible.
110 Handbook of Veterinary Communication Skills
If the condition has progressed so far that euthanasia is the only treatment option from a
welfare perspective, the veterinary surgeon must act as advocate for the animal:
We really can't do any more for him; I'm so sorry - we need to do what's best for him and
let him go now.
is to get a second opinion from a colleague at the practice. If this does not persuade the client
of the correct course of action, what can the veterinary surgeon do? If it is not possible to
supply pain relief to keep the animal comfortable while the client makes a decision, then
the veterinary surgeon must sometimes make the difficult decision to get an animal wel-
fare authority involved (Morgan & McDonald 2007). This is, of course, a last resort, as the
veterinary surgeon-client relationship may not recover from such an action. The veterinary
surgeon would have to be sure that there was no other option
It is suspected that NAI is under-reported in veterinary practice. In a study undertaken
by Munro and Thrusfield (2001), 48.3% of respondents had suspected or seen cases of NAI.
Suspicions are aroused if an animal's injuries do not correspond with the owner's descrip-
tion of how they occurred, or if there are discrepancies in the history between members of
the family. The fact that an animal has been abused should be enough motivation for the vet-
erinary surgeon to want to do something to prevent it happening again, but there is an even
bigger motivation with the well-documented links with child abuse and domestic violence.
 Mandatory reporting of suspected NAI has been advocated for the veterinary profession
in the United Kingdom, but the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (RCVS) view is that
its current guidelines are sufficient (Anon 2007). However, it is a legal requirement in some
states of the USA (Babcock & Neihsl 2006). This is one of the occasions when client confiden-
tiality can be breached.
 NAI? One approach would be to ask: I'm still not clear how the injuries were caused - could
you go back over what happened again??
 In this case, the vet would not summarize the history to check with the client, but would
be looking for inconsistencies in the repeated narrative. Obviously, it would be necessary to
get enough information to confirm suspicions. Would it also be necessary to avoid arous-
ing suspicion in the client? Probably not, as if this does turn out to be a case of NAI, the
veterinarian-client relationship would be irretrievably damaged anyway. If it does not turn
out to be the case, then the client would probably not even notice the way the questioning
was carried out.
INFORMED CLIENTS
A particular area of difficulty for communication seems to be when dealing with informed
clients (Figure 5.2). We are mainly talking about two different types of client here - those
with knowledge gained through experience (farmers, horse owners, clients with the same
disease as their pet or who have someone close to them with the same disease, dog and cat
Chapler 5   Dealing with difficult situations
111
Figure 5.2 The informed clienl.
breeders) and those with knowledge gained through their own research (increasingly, this
means knowledge gained by searching the internet).
Why do such clients pose problems for veterinary surgeons? This may hark back to the
'old days' of paternalistic veterinary practice. The veterinary surgeon knew best and there
was no discussion with the client, merely giving them instructions for what would happen
next. There may have been a feeling that keeping clients in ignorance kept them bound
Aaa asa ( srem) dsnan paaap e un uns raa a o
surgeons must have been shocked when clients started answering back, or asking questions,
     s ,         
every consultation, and if they have done their own research or bring their own experience
 to the table, surely that should make the veterinary professional's job easier? Rather than
having to explain findings or plans in great detail, he/she merely has to check that the client's
 information is correct, and temper any explanations accordingly.
For example, a new client brings in an elderly cat, and hands the veterinary surgeon a
stack of printed pages with information about renal disease in cats: I know what's wrong
with Tinkerbell - it's her kidneys'.
An initial temptation to take the pile of paper and put it straight in the bin must be re-
sisted. Instead, the veterinary surgeon needs to become part of the team involved in the cat's
care.
Well, Mrs Client - I am very encouraged by your enthusiasm for researching Tinkerbell's
condition, and you may wellbe right. Let's have a chat about what has been happening 
with her, and then we'll have a look at her and see if everything points towards kidney
problems, and we'll take it from there.
After taking a thorough history and examining the cat, the vet is more convinced that the
cat is hyperthyroid. The client still needs to feel involved, however, and this can be achieved
112 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
by directing her research:
So, as we've discussed, it looks more likely that Tinkerbell has a problem with her thyroid
gland. I've writen the name of the condition down for you, and also the addresses of
some reliable websites. While we admit her for tests, perhaps you could do some research
on caring for a cat with thyroid problems.
This should result in a client who feels part of the team, and has been credited for her
research rather than feeling belittled.
Informed client groups
There has been a move in medical practice to create so-called expert patients, who are more
involved in the management and treatment of their own disease by being given access to
educational materials to help them to understand their condition. It would seem sensible
that such a scheme would lend itself to veterinary practice, with 'support groups' being set
up in each practice for common conditions, where clients, led by a member of the practice
team, would help each other to cope with the problems of caring for an animal with that
condition. However, the 'expert patient’ scheme has had mixed reactions, and the initial fear
that such patients would take up more physician time (Shaw & Baker 2004) has been proved
correct in several studies looking at lay-led programmes (Griffiths et al. 2007). It seems that
Jo apou paisaoans a yim insoo pinom se yons 'jeuoissajoid e Aq pal aauos joddns e
delivery in veterinary practice, is actually more effective (Griffiths et al. 2007).
COMMUNICATING COST
Financial discussions are often problematic for veterinary surgeons. It is not difficult to un
derstand why this should be the case. In a Canadian study on how pet owners and practi-
tioners view monetary issues (Coe et al. 2007) one participant remarked:
[P]et owners view those working in the veterinary profession as being there out of a
genuine love for and interest in animals, rather than for strict monetary gain.
This can lead to a feeling of being undervalued, certainly in small animal practice. This
feeling can be exacerbated by the tendency of practice principals to underprice services such
as neutering and vaccination in order to compete with neighbouring practices.
However, the same has happened in large animal practice, where the emphasis has tradi-
tionally been on supply of drugs and vaccines, so the veterinary surgeons:
... practically gave away their time and expertise just to sell these other things.
(Whitford 2004).
This does not mean that the veterinary profession is alone in being reticent about dis-
cussing costs. A study to determine how well the medical profession copes with this has
been conducted in the USA, where physicians discussed costs and/or insurance with only
12% of patients prescribed new medication (Tarn et al. 2006). They were also more likely to
discuss costs with patients earring less than $20 000 arnually
Chapter 5   Dealing with difficul situalions
113
So, how do we discuss costs with clients? One suggestion is that they should be discussed
with specific reference to the animal's health and prognosis (Coe et al. 2007). We should not
feel embarrassed about proposing expensive treatment options, provided they are in the
best interests of the animal, so that what we are actively selling is good welfare (Main 2006).
However, in some cases this may mean advocating the treatment that is least profitable for
the practice (euthanasia). If the animal's welfare is always used as the basis for decision
making, it is difficult to see how the client would get the impression that the practice was
interested only in profit. For example, if the veterinary surgeon decides that the proposed
best treatment option is beyond the capability of the primary care practice, then referral
should be offered, with the reasons why the vet feels that this is the best option. This is more
likely to bring the client back to the primary care practice after specialist treatment than to
result in a request for permanent transfer. Contrast this with the situation where the client
requests referral due to dissatisfaction with the primary care practice, which is less likely to
result in the client returning (Osborne 2002)
This approach could impact on veterinary surgeons working for practices where ATV
(average transaction per vet) is the sole criterion for success. The pressure to 'sell' products
 and services that may not be in the animal's best interests may cause ethical problems for
members of the practice team. As Osborne (2o01) observed, there is:
... an ethical difference between the motive behind generating value-based free en-
terprise fees-for-service needed to maintain the fiscal vitality of properly staffed and
equipped veterinary hospitals, and the motive behind peddling unnecessary services
and products to increase fees to a maximum determined by what the traffic will bear
Each individual must make a decision about whether to continue working for such prac-
tices, if this type of business approach causes discomfort.
 Raising the subject of cost should be an integral part of explaining and planning with the
client. Clients should never have to bring up the subject of costs; they should be included
in the cost-benefit analysis used by the veterinary surgeon to aid in decision making. Sign-
 posting should indicate to the client that costs will be discussed. For example:
There are three options for treating this condition, with a range of costs associated with
them. I will take you through each one in turn, and you can ask if you need more infor-
a cn inp h pu suains Areuaaa Au os Aum o ramsue ue aau Ae am
properly for their services. As a nation renowned for caring for animals, we feel that there
should be a ‘collective responsibility' for animal care, and that veterinary surgeons choose
their career because of an overwhelming interest in animal welfare rather than financial
reward. This latter fact would appear to be true, as annual income for veterinary surgeons
compares unfavourably with figures for other health professions; for example for 2007, an
average annual salary of 78 882 for medical practitioners compared with an average of
36 335 for veterinary surgeons (GMB 2007).
Of course, the other compelling argument is that animals are their owners' property,
luxuries rather than necessities, and owners must take on the responsibility of paying for
114 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
treatment when they decide to own animals. There has long been a movement to bring back
dog licences in Great Britain (they are already restored in Northern Ireland) since their abo-
lition in 1987, or to have some sort of qualification for owning animals. This may emphasize
the financial responsibility involved.
Does waiving fees, or undercharging for services provided, actually do the profession
any good? It may be that not charging appropriate fees gives veterinary surgeons a higher
standing as far as public opinion is concerned, but it also means that the ongoing, fixed costs
me san r a sns Araa ao l aq po  annrd e i jo
of the running costs involved (it costs fxxxx per day just to keep the surgery open'), but
should we really have to justify the fees charged in such detail? Does this not devalue the
profession? Clients should be willing to pay a fair price for the service provided because
they are receiving a professional service (Klingborg & Klingborg 2007).
 Clients with private medical insurance may appreciate the cost of surgical procedures, as
they are used to the itemized billing for private medical care. For example, with the average
cost of a hysterectomy in private hospitals in the UK being f4-5000, a bill of f350 for a
similar procedure in a large-breed dog will not seem unreasonable. However, with most
clients using the NHS for their own treatment, they will not be aware of the sort of costs
 involved in, for example, general anaesthesia or surgical time. It is extremely important to
provide an itemized bill for all surgical or in-patient procedures so that the client is aware
of how the bill is calculated (RCVS 2008). Obviously, the client should be given an estimated
cost of any procedure beforehand, as part of the informed consent process (see Chapter 3).
One solution that has been proposed is to use ‘estimate sheets’ with the costs involved
for all of the most common conditions presented in practice. These sheets then become an
integral part of every decision-making discussion (Milani 2003).
What is the difference between a quote and an estimate? A quote is a fixed price for an
agreed service, while an estimate is an approximate price based on what the 'expert' believes
will have to be done to remedy the problem. As the study by Coe et al. (2007) discovered,
'... vets view them as estimates, and clients view them as quotes . . '.
 to keep adding to a bill without informing a client of what is happening. Is this ethical? No.
According to the RCVS, clients should be kept informed of running totals, and their consent
given before adding to the bill (RCVS 2008).
For example, a dog is hospitalized for investigation and treatment of a suspected heart
condition. The estimate of f250 for initial work-up is reached on day 2, and there are still
tests that the vet would like to perform. The client is contacted by telephone:
 Mrs Anderson - we are phoning you to bring you up-to-date with Bruno's progres. He's
had a comfortable night, and is eating a litle better. He had about half of his normal meal
this morning. His heart condition is stable, but we are still worried about the fluid build-
up in his chest. We'd like to do some more investigations to see if we can safely drain this
fluid, to make him more comfortable, but I'm afraid that will add another f150 to the bill
Would you be willing for us to go ahead? If not, we can keep him on the water pills to try
to get rid of the fluid, and we would hope that these drugs would remove it, but it may
take a few days. Your current treatment bill is f239.
Chapler 5Dealing with difficull situalions
115
What about pet insurance? The effect of prepaid health plans has been studied in the
medical profession in the USA. Bradley and Gehlbach (1988) found that such plans actually
improved clinical decision making, but also increased the number of patient visits.
 It is suggested that the people who really need pet insurance are the least likely to have
it (Roen 2001). One view is that veterinary surgeons should inform clients at first visits (e.g.
with a new puppy or kitten) of the true cost of veterinary treatment (Montgomery 2001). It
is suggested that this could be achieved by members of the practice team giving clients an
example of one common disease and one accidental injury, with detailed costs breakdown
for each, and a recommendation that they take out insurance. However, it is impossible to
 predict how much an owner is prepared to spend on an animal, and lack of insurance should
 never limit the treatment options presented, no matter how expensive they may be.
Often, the most difficult conversations take place when the owner carnot afford to have
the arimal treated, and opts for euthanasia. This is common in equine practice, happens fre-
quently with small pets, and is increasingly a dilemma with cancer treatment of companion
animals. In this situation, the euthanasia option should be presented as a valid 'treatment'
option, not as a last resort. Saying to the client that 'these are the options for treatment, and
the only other thing we can do is put him to sleep' will increase feelings of guilt if the client
has to choose euthanasia as the only affordable option. Sometimes, the best welfare option
will involve euthanasia of the animal, and as the advocate for animal welfare, the veterinary
surgeon should make sure that this option is among the first given.
DEALING WITH ANGER
 ure 5.3). Indeed, many of our undergraduate veterinary students find dealing with angry
clients the most difficult challenge for them during communication skills training sessions.
Figure 5.3The angry client.
116 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Angry clients may not be able to communicate their concerns effectively, are more likely to
be non-compliant and may be more likely to sue over minor mishaps (McCord et al. 2002).
In medicine, one study found that physicians rated greater than 15% of patients as 'dif
ficult', with the result that they felt uneasy and hoped that such patients would not return
for follow-up visits (Jackson & Kroenke 1999). Often, the problem with these patients is un-
met expectations, with most of these related to physician communication (33% of patients
had unmet expectations concerring diagnosis, and 51% had unmet expectations concerning
prognosis) rather than physician action, such as prescription of a medication, appointment
for a diagnostic test or referral to a specialist (Jackson & Kroenke 2001). It would seem log-
ical that a first step in dealing with them is to find out what their expectations were, how
they were unmet, and how this made them feel. Lazoritz (2004) suggests asking the ques
tions, giving the patient a 'magic minute' without interrupting, listening to the responses
and then asking, 'What would make you feel better?
Using empathy
 Empathy is an effective strategy when dealing with anger, although when faced with an
angry client, it may be the most difficult tool to fetch from the toolbox.
An empathic response ‘accurately identifies the factual content ... as well as the nature
and intensity of .. . feelings, concerns or quandaries' (Coulehan et al. 2001)
Platt and Keller (1994) advise the following strategy:
1. Be aware - listen for strong feelings.
2. Reflect - identify the feeling internally: “This client sounds angry'.
3.
further explanations or treatment - just be with the client: ‘It sounds like you are very
angry about this'.
4. Make sense of the feeling - ask for an explanation if it does not make sense: I can tell
that you feel strongly about this, but I'm not sure if I understand exacly how you feel -
can you tell me?
 5. Affirm the feeling - summarize what has made the client angry, then add, Yes, I can see
how that would make you feel angry'.
6. Offer help - 'Let's see what we can do to make this better'.
A practical guide for dealing with anger
Wasan et al. (2005) suggest Five 'As' for dealing with hostile patients:
1.Acknowledge the problem
 2. Allow the patient to vent uninterrupted in a private place
3.Agree on what the problem is
4.Affirm what can be done
5.Assure follow-up
So, if we have an angry client to deal with, should we aim for a similar protocol? There is
Aie pue sai Aue taamiaq sanuana uauny are araun ie ssaans on uiou
patients, or any other type of angry individual. We need to deal with the emotion (anger) to
Chapter 5   Dealing with difficult silualions
117
enable the person to rationalize what has happened and to try to move forward to a possible
solution.
Our first step should be to take the client into a private room - an office or a consulting
room would be suitable. This acknowledges that they are upset about something. There
should be two chairs available and the client should be offered a seat. If they do not wish to
sit down, it is often an effective strategy for the veterinary professional to sit down and to
 continue to offer the client a seat. Removing one person to a lower level than the other is an
effective non-verbal cue that may result in lowering the anger level.
Next, the client should be invited to explain why they are angry, and the veterinary pro-
be enough to dissipate anger on its own, but it also introduces an aura of respect and con-
cern, which may be enough to encourage the angry individual to reflect similar atitudes
(Egan 1975).
The veterinary professional should periodically summarize, to check back on the details,
and should also use empathic statements:
Let me see if I have got this right (a clarifying statement to introduce the summary)
I can imagine how you might have felt (empathic statement)
Is there anything else? (screening)
The next step is to ask the client what they think should happen next: 'How can we make this
 better for you?' The client's demands may be unrealistic, but at least there is now a starting
point for resolution. Note-taking during the meeting also validates the client's concerns.
Finally, give the client a point of contact in the practice to keep them updated on the progress
of their complaint, and keep them informed, preferably in writing.
Apologizing is usually an effective technique for dealing with anger, but it needs to be
done correctly.
What works best to dissipate anger?
In one of the few studies looking at effective techniques for dealing with anger, where pa-
tients were angry due to being kept waiting, ownership of the apology ('I apologize for your
long wait') was rated significantly higher than apology without ownership (I'm sorry that
you have been kept waiting'). If this apology was accompanied by an explanation for the
wait, it scored even higher. Following the apology and explanation, most patients wanted
the follow-up questions to lead directly on to the medical interview rather than to an explo-
ration of their feelings (McCord et al. 2002). So, it seems that apologizing with ownership of
the problem, explaining why there was a problem, and then moving on to the reason for the
visit were the most effective techniques for dealing with anger due to being kept waiting, a
common cause of anger among users of health care services.
Other techniques to bear in mind when dealing with anger include non-confrontational
body language and non-verbal behaviour. We have already mentioned trying to sit down
118 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
and to get the client seated too. It is also useful to pay attention to tone of voice. It is easy to
'match' the client's tone of voice, but this is likely to inflame the situation. Try to keep your
tone of voice lower and quieter than that of the client. Rate of speech is also important - a
pause before answering any questions, and being deliberate over words used, acts to 'slow
 down' the ping-pong tendency of an angry exchange. We have already mentioned active
and empathic listening. Maintain appropriate eye contact, which may be more difficult if
you are taking notes, and encourage the client to speak by using facilitative responses, such
as nodding and minimal expressions ('mmm','uh-huh).
Finally, remember that dealing with angry clients can be rewarding if you manage to
resolve the situation to the satisfaction of bothparties
COMMUNICATION OF MISTAKES
'Everyone makes mistakes', 'You're only human!' It seems that part of the human condition
is the ability to make mistakes and, whilst these may be shrugged off or smiled at under
ordinary circumstances, they are no laughing matter in the context of our working lives. Yes,
we all make mistakes, but that is of little comfort when faced with a severely ill, or dead,
animal and the prospect of a lawsuit.
So, when we talk about errors or mistakes in a clinical situation, what do we mean? In the
medical literature, Wu (2000) defines an error as:
[A] commission or an omission with potentially negative consequences for the patient
that would have been judged wrong by skilled and knowledgeable peers at the time it
occurred, independent of whether there were any negative consequences.
In the USA, medical error results in 44 000-98 000 human deaths and 1 million injuries
each year (Weingart et al. 2000). Studies have revealed that surgical mistakes are the most
common form of error, but that complications from drug treatment, therapeutic mishaps and
diagnosfic errors can also occur ( Weingarf et al. 2uuu). Whaf litfle work has been carried out
in veterinary circles mirrors this variety of errors. In their survey of mistakes made by recent
veterinary graduates, Mellanby and Herrtage (2004) found that:
The most common mistakes involved the failure to perform an appropriate diagnos-
tic test, surgical mistakes during non-neutering procedures and the administration of
inappropriate drugs or medical treatment.
There are several factors that can help bring about medical or veterinary mistakes. These
include errors of judgement, differences in species, poor communication, carelessness, as
well as staff issues such as high workloads, inadequate supervision and limited knowledge
or experience (Bonvicini et al. 2009; Rosner et al. 2000; Short 1994; Weingart et al. 2000)
Mellanby and Herrtage (2004) discovered that 78% of recent graduates admitted to hav-
ing made a mistake in their first years of practice. Of those that admitted to an error, and
went on to describe the event in further detail, 74% cited their ‘lack of experience’ as a
factor.
Chapler 5Dealing with difficull silualions
119
What do patients and veterinary clients want?
When an eror in veterinary practice takes place, it is usually the animal that will bear any
physical consequences. However, with 85% of small animal pet owners describing their pet
as a 'family member', it is possible that a veterinary error may also have adverse emotional
consequences for clients (Brown & Silverman 1999).
Medical research shows that patients who have experienced an error in their health care
can feel a mixture of emotions, including sadness, anxiety, depression, anger and frustration
(Gallagher et al. 2003). Furthermore, patients report that 'the way the error was disclosed to
them directly affected their emotional experience of the error' (Gallagher et al. 2003).
After a mistake has occurred, patients want good communication with their doctor and
information about what happened. Effective communication can make the difference being
patients perceiving an error as 'an honest mistake’ or as 'incompetence or malicious intent
(Duclos et al. 2005).
However, explanations alone do not necessarily result in patient satisfaction (Mazor
et al. 2004). Patients also require an appreciation of the trauma they have suffered, assurances
that lessons have been learned from their experiences and a genuine apology (Gallagher
et al. 2003; Liang 2002; Vincent et al. 1994). According to Vincent et al. (1994), those who do
not receive such information and assurances, or who feel they have been handled insensi-
tively, are more likely to take legal action. This is supported by Forster et al. (2002), who
say:
When patients or their families are confronted by silence or evasion, they may see the
threat of litigation as the only tool to rectify the imbalance of power and knowledge.
In contrast, those patients that had perceived good communication with their health care
providers said that they felt less emotional trauma as a result of the mistake, were less likely
to take legal action and were more likely to continue to see their doctor following the adverse
event (Duclos et al. 2005; Vincent et al. 1994).
What do health care professionals provide?
We now have an idea of what patients want but, should an error occur, what do health
care providers actually do? Much of the research has shown that healthi care providers do
not always respond adequately to patients' needs following medical errors or complications
(Duclos et al. 2005; Forster et al. 2002) and, in general, patients expect more detailed infor-
mation than doctors believe they should give (Hingorani et al. 1999)
The medical literature strongly supports disclosure (Fein et al. 2007; Gallagher et al. 2003;
Mazor et al. 2004; Rosner et al. 2000); the health care provider admits to an error whilst ex-
plaining its consequences, as well as why and how it happened. Full disclosure by health
care providers is, however, uncommon (Gallagher et al. 2003). Research shows that, on av-
erage, only one in four medical errors is disclosed (Fein et al. 2007). In addition, clinicians
are particularly reluctant to apologize when a mistake has occurred (Gallagher et al. 2003;
Mazor et al. 2004).
There are several reasons why practitioners are reluctant to speak out following an error.
fear of losing patients' trust, a fear of being sued and a fear of appearing incompetent or
120 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
inadequate (Hingorani et al. 1999). In addition, practitioners can find disclosure a time-
consuming, difficult and unpleasant task (Gallagher et al. 2003; Hingorani et al. 1999).
Although a fear of litigation is a legitimate fear for health care providers, it should be
pointed out that much of the current research suggest that, paradoxically, a failure to provide
patients with adequate information and an apology increases the risk of legal action (Forster
et al. 2002; Gallagher et al. 2003; Hingorani et al. 1999). As Forster et al. (2002) say, 'When
patients and their families are sad about the outcome but content with the doctoring, they
are unlikely to ever set foot in a lawyer's office'.
The art of mistake communication
If we accept that making mistakes in veterinary practice is inevitable, we can propose that a
measure of good communication can help install a 'safety net' in anticipation of an adverse
event. We cannot prevent mistakes from happening but we can, as O'Connell and Bonvicini
(2007) explain, ‘[Ensure] that clients have realistic expectations and understand the uncer-
tainties in diagnosis and treatment'.
Should a veterinary practitioner make an error, there is a certain amount of professional
guidance available. In the UK, for example, the RCVS (2008) advises that:
A sympathetic approach should be used in response to a complaint rather than imme-
diate denial and defensiveness. An expression of sorrow that an animal has died or
that someone is distressed by what has happened is appropriate and does not in itself
amount to an admission of liability.
Similarly, the Veterinary Defence Society Ltd (2003) provides guidelines for coping with
client complaints (Box 5.1), a frequent consequence of a clinical mistake
Box 5.1 Guidelines for coping with client complaints
When a client complains to you in person or by phone, the most important thing is to
make sure they feel you are really listening. If you can take the time and space to listen
Here are some useful tips to bear in mind:
Stay calm.
 Take the client to a private, seated area or transfer their call to a quiet zone.
 Thank the client for bringing the matter to your attention.
 Ask them to tell you the full story from the beginning.
 Just listen and keep listening - do not interrupt or argue.
 Empathize - but it is generally better to avoid phrases such as 'I know how you feel
(you cannot).
(aeu s,lad) x 1noqe panunom Aiaa uaaq aaeu snu noy, 8'a spiom Aax uo dn yd
Take notes - and check the client agrees with what you have written.
 Summarize for the client what has been said to make sure you have not misunderstood
or missed anything.
Say sorry and mean it
Chapter 5  Dealing with difficult situations
¥121
Once you have listened carefully, express regret that the client is dissatisfied. This is
often all the client needs, but it must sound genuine. So:
+Be sincere - the person you are talking to will detect and resent an automatic response.
●Remember, an expression of regret will make the client feel heard and understood. It
does not mean you are admitting liability - it simply means you are acknowledging
the upset and are 'sorry that something has happened', not 'sorry it was caused by
anyone'sfault'
 Try not to make apologies on behalf of someone else - or let someone else apologize
for you. The client may feel fobbed off and could end up unhappier than before.
●Get the client on your side by saying things such as, 'How can we solve the problem?'
Explainquicklyandclearly
A prompt and thorough explanation can work wonders too. Here are some key points
that might help, most of which apply to written explanations too:
· Focus on the key issues the client is concerned about - and ask in what order they
would like you to cover them.
Use clear language and explain any veterinary jargon.
+Encourage the client to ask questions throughout
 Check they have understood, for example 'I'm not sure I've put that clearly. Did that
make sense?
 Ask the client if your explanation has answered their concerns.
 Reassure them that the matter will be dealt with promptly and that you'll keep them
informed of progress.
 To identify the specific issues of a complaint, it may be helpful to ask the client to put
something in writing.
Never blame other members of staf.
Reproduced with permission from Veterinary Defence Society Ltd (2003).
 In addition to these general guidelines, the medical literature suggests that several factors
should be taken into consideration when a veterinary practitioner is faced with a medical
Mazor et al. 2004; Rosner et al. 2000):
+Clients should be made aware of all harmful errors that occur. An explicit statement that
an error occurred should be conveyed in a caring, concerned and respectful manner. The
disclosure should be clear, accurate, complete and non-evasive.
●An objective description of what happened, why and how, should be provided, using
relationship-centred communication tools (e.g. empathy, active listening and summariz-
ing). Clients should be allowed the opportunity to ask questions, but the vet must ensure
that they do not have to 'search' for answers.
● Clients should be advised as to how, as a result of the error, lessons have been learned
'anny aul u sunuaddey wony pauaaand aq uen nota ue yns mou pue
· Clients should be reassured that their case will be managed until a resolution, that is
satisfactory to them, has been achieved.
122 Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
Clients should, where appropriate, not incur financial liabilities because of the error. They
Another vital part of dealing with medical errors is the apology. Clients should receive
y Aan pasdn Ae sapamoe pue asioan auna saaon um ao Konode ue
experienced. (See 'What works best to dissipate anger?’ earlier in this chapter.) According
to Bonvicini et al. (2009), there are two types of apology: one of sympathy (e.g. 'I'm sorry
that this has happened to you'′) and one of responsibility (e.g. 'I'm sorry that this error has
happened and for the problems it has caused to you and your pet'). Evidence from human
medicine suggests that patients can discriminate between the two. One review of the litera-
ture (Mazor et al. 2004) concludes that where a breach in the standard of medical care had
caused harm, those patients that had received full disclosure with an apology of responsi-
bility reported more trust and satisfaction in their doctor. A caveat to this is that, where such
an adverse event occurs, it is wise to check with your professional indemnity insurers before
offering such an apology, as they may require the use of a certain form of words. In instances
where an animal or client has had a problem that has not resulted from medical error, an
(00g e pa tuuog) aendondde si Aedus jo soode
Finally, it is also important to investigate the effects of mistakes on the veterinary prac-
titioner. Making mistakes affects health care providers unfavourably (Bonvicini et al. 2009;
Newman 1996), and research has shown that they can experience feelings of guilt, anxiety.
disappointment or physical problems such as sleeplessness and difficulty concentrating, as
a result (Gallagher et al. 2003; Mellanby & Herrtage 2004). Some even consider moving job
or changing career (Mellanby & Herrtage 2004). Mellanby and Hertage said that the im-
pact of mistakes on the recent graduates in their study was 'often considerable, with many
respondents describing feeling depressed and suffering from low self-esteem following a
mistake'.
Thus, it is important that vets, following a mistake, attend to self-care or actively seek
nM (96l ueman) ss [enn pue qaaeuu asen na maaa se lam se joddns
2000). Finally, another way of decreasing the effects of blame on the individual is to adopt a
'systems approach', rather than a 'human approach' to human fallibility. Under the systems
approach, a mistake is seen as a failure of the system, not of a person; humans are seen
as fallible and errors are to be expected (Reason 2000). According to Reason (2000), When
an adverse event occurs the important issue is not who blundered, but how and why the
defences failed'.
REFERENCES
Adams CL, Bonnett BN, Meek AH (1999) Owner response to comparion animal death: develop-
ment of a theory and practical implication. Canadian Veterinary Journal 40:33-39.
Adams CL, Bonneft BN, Meek AH (2000) Predictors of owner response to comparion animal
death in 177 clients from 14 practices in Ontario. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association 217(9):1303-1309.
port Service. Available online: hftp: / /www.avma.org/issles/policy/pet.loss.asp (accessed
4 September 2008).
Chapler 5  Dealing with difficult silualions
123
Amiel GE, Ungar L, Alperin M, Baharir Z, Cohen R, Reis S (2006) Ability of a primary care physi
cians to break bad news: a performance based assessment of an educafional intervenfion. Pa-
tient Education and Counselling 60:10-15.
Anon (2007) Arnimal law expert calls for mandatory reporting of suspected animal abuse. Veteri
nary Record 161:836.
Babcock S, Neihsl A (2006) Requirements for mandatory reporting of animal cruelty. Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association 228:685-689.
Benbasset J, Pilpel D, Tidhar M (1998) Patients' preferences for participation in clinical decision
making.Behavioural Medicine 42(2):81-94.
Billson A, Tyrrell J (2003) How to break bad news. Current Paediatrics 13:284-287.
Bonvicini KA, O'Connell D, Cornell KK (2009) Disclosing medical errors: restoring client trust.
Compendium Continuing Education for Veterinarians 31(3):105-112.
Brackenridge SS, Shoemaker RS (1996) The human/horse bond and client bereavement in equine
practice, part 1. Equine Practice 18:19-23.
Bradley DW, Gehlbach SH (1988) Effect of prepaid health plans on a family practice residency.
Journal of Medical Education 63(8):611-616
Brown JP, Silverman JD (1999) The current and future market for veterinarians and veterinary
medical services in the United States. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
216:161-183.
Casareft D, Kutner JS, Abrahm J (for the End-of-Life Care Consensus Panel) (2001) Life affer death:
a practical approach to grief and bereavement. Annals of Internal Medicine 134(3):208-215.
Coe JB, Adams CL, Bonnett BN (2007) A focus group study of veterinarians' and pet owners'
perceptions of the monetary aspects of veterinary care. Journal of the American Veterinary Medica!
Association 231(10):1510-1518.
Coulehan JL, Plaft FW, Egener B, Frankel R, Lin CT, Lown B, Salazar WH (2001) Let me see if I
have this righf': words that can help build empathy. Annals of Internal Medicine 135:221-227
Curtis JR, Patrick DL (1997) Barriers to communicafion about end-of-life care in AIDS pafients.
Journal of General Internal Medicine 12(12):736-741.
after adverse events. International Journalfor Quality in Health Care 17(6):479-486.
Egan G (1975) The Skiled Helper: A Model for Systematic Helping and Interpersonal Relating. Brooks
Cole, Monterey, CA.
Epstein RM, Campbell TL, Cohen-Cole SA, McWhirney IR, Smilkstein G (1993) Perspectives on
patient-doctor commurication. Journal of Family Practice 37:377-388.
Fein SP, Hilborne LH, Spirifus EM (2007) The many faces of error disclosure: a common set of
elements and a definition.Journalof GeneralInternal Medicine 22:755-761
Forster HP, Schwarz J, DeRenzo E (2002) Reducing legal risk by practicing patient-centred
medicine. Archives in Internal Medicine 162:1217-1219.
Gallagher TH, Waterman AD, Ebers AG, Fraser VJ, Levinson W (2003) Patients' and physicians'
affifuides regarding the disclosuure of medical errors. JAMA 289(8):1001-1007.
Girgis A, Sanson-Fisher RW (1998) Breaking bad news 1: current best advice for cliricians. Behav-
ioral Medicine 24(2):53-59.
GMB (2007) UK Pay League. Available online: http:/ /www.gmb.org.uk/Templates/PressItems.
asp?NodeID=96372 (accessed 14 September 2008).
Griffiths C, Foster G, Ramsay J, Eldridge S, Taylor S (2007) How effective are expert pafient (lay
led) programmes for chronic disease? British Medical Journal 334:12541256.
124 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
1:20-21.
Hart L, Hart BL, Mader B (1990) Humane euthanasia and companion animal death: caring for
the animal, the client and the veterinarian.Journal of the AmericanVeterinary Medical Association
197(10): 12921299.
Hingorani M, Wong T, Vafidis G (1999) Patients' and doctors' aftitudes to amount of information
given after urintended injury during treatment: cross sectional, questionnaire suurvey. British
MedicalJournal318:640-641.
 Jackson JL, Kroenke K (1999) Difficult patient encounters in the ambulatory clinic: clinical predic-
tors and outcomes. Archives in Internal Medicine 159:1069-1075.
Jackson JL, Kroerke K (200l) The effect of urmet expectafions among adults presenfing with
physical symptoms. Annals of Internal Medicine 134:889-897.
Klingborg DJ, Klingborg J (2007) Talking with veterinary clients about money. Veterinary Clinics
ofNorthAmerica:SmallAnimalPractice37:79-93
Lagori L, Bufler C, Hefts S (1994) The Human-Arimal Bond and Grief. Saunders Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO, pp. 144, 151, 172, 201, 203, 209.
Larson DG, Tobin DR (200o) End-of-life conversations. Evolving practice and theory. JAMA
284(12):1573 1578.
Lazoritz S (2004) Dealing with angry patients. The Physician Executive May-June, 28-31.
Liang BA (2002) A system of medical error disclosure. Quality and Safety in Health Care 11:
64-68.
Lowden B (1998) The health consequences of disclosing bad news. European Journal of Oncology
Nursing 2(4):225-230.
Main DCJ (2006) Offering the best to pafients: ethical issuies associated with the provision of vet-
erinary services. Veterinary Record 158:62-66.
Marfin F, Ruby KL, Deking TM, Taunton AE (2004) Factors associated with client, staff, and stu-
dent safisfacfion regarding small arimal euthanasia procedures af a veterinary teaching hos-
pital. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 224(11):1774-1779.
Mazor KM, Simon SR, Gurwitz JH (2004) Commuricating with pafients about medical errors: a
review of the literafuure. Archives of Internal Medicine 164:1690-1697.
at the physician. Family Medicine 34(5):331-336.
Mellanby RJ, Herrtage ME (2004) Survey of mistakes made by recent veterinary graduates. Veteri-
nary Record155:761-765.
Milari M (2003) Practical bond considerations: acknowledging clients’ financial limits. Canadian
Montgomery DJ (2001) Views on insurance and veterinary economics: author's response. Jou rna!
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 218(2):194.
Morgan CA, McDonald M (2007) Ethical dilemmas in veterinary medicine. Veterinary Clinics of
North America: Small Animal Practice 37:165-179.
Munro HMC, Thrusfield MV (200l) Baftered pets: feafures that raise suspicion of non-accidental
injury.Journal of Small AnimalPractice 42:218-226.
Newman M (1996) The emotional impact of mistakes on family physicians. Archives of Family
Medicine 5(2):71.
O'Cornell D, Bonvicini KA (2007) Addressing disappointment in veterinary practice. Vet Clinics
of North America: Small Animal Practice37(1):135-149.
Chapter 5   Dealing with difficull situalions
125
Osborne CA (2001) What are veterinarians worth? Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Asso-
ciation 219(3):302-303.
Osborne CA (2002) Client confidence in veterinarians: how can it be sustained? Journa! of the Amer-
ican Veterinary Medical Association 221(7):936-938.
Persaud R (2007) Questioning 'culture of death': why are vets prone to suicide? Veterinary Times
November 19, pp. 6-7.
Platt FW,Keller VF (1994) Empathic communicatior: a teachable and learnable skill. Journal of
General Internal Medicine 9:222-226.
Ptacek JT, Ptacek JJ (2001) Patients' perceptions of receiving bad news about cancer. Journal of
Clinical Oncology 19(2):4160-4164.
Reason J (2000) Human error: models and management. British Medica! Journal 320:768-770.
Medical Association 218(2):194.
errors. Archives in Internal Medicine 160:2089-2092.
Schmid Mast M, Kindlimann A, Langewitz W (2005) Recipients' perspective on breaking bad
news: how you put if really makes a difference. Patient Education and Counselling 58:244-251.
Shaw J, Baker M (2004) Expert pafient - dream or rightmare? British Medical Journal 328:723-724.
and euthanasia decision making. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice
37:95-108.
Short D (1994) Learring from our mistakes. British Journal of Hospital Medicine 51:250-252
Medical, Oxford.
Slater MR, Barfon CL, Rogers KS, Peterson JL, Harris C, Wallace K (1996) Factors affecting freat-
ment decisions and satisfaction of owners of cats with cancer. Journal of the American Veterinary
MedicalAssociation 208:1248-1252.
Tarn DM, Paternifi DA, Heritage J (2006) Physician commurication about the cost and acquisition
of newly prescribed medications. American Journal of Managed Care 12(11):657-664.
Tinga CE, Adams CL, Bonnett BN, Ribble CS (2001) Survey of veterinary technical and profes-
Veterinary MedicalAssociation 219(7):924-931.
Tulsky JA (2005) Beyond advance directives: importance of communication skills at the end of
life.Journalof theAmerican MedicalAssociation 294(3):359-366
Veterinary Defence Society Ltd (2003) The VDS: Complaints and How to Deal with Them -A Guide
for Veterinary Practices. The Veterinary Defence Society, Knutsford, Cheshire.
Vincent C, Philips A, Young M (1994) Why do people sue doctors? A study of patients and rela-
tives taking legal action. Lancet 343(8913):1609-1613.
von Gunten CF, Ferris FD, Emanuel LL (2000) Ensuring competency in end-of-life care: commu-
ricafion and relafional skills. JAMA 284(23):3051-3057.
Waldsmith JK (2003) Horse owner education for practice development: financial benefits of horse
owner educafion. Paper presented af 49th Arnual Convenfion of the American Associafion of
Equine Practitioners, 2003, New Orleans, LA.
Wasan AD, Woofton J, Jamison RN (2005) Dealing with difficult pafients in your pain practice.
Regional Anaesthesia and Pain Medicine 30(2):184192.
126 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
             
BritishMedicalJournal320:774-777.
Weissman DE (2004) Decision making at a fime of crisis near the end of life. JAMA
292(14):1738-1744.
Wensley SP (2008) Animal welfare and the human-animal bond: considerations for veterinary
faculty, students, and practifioners. Journa! Veterinary Medical Education 35(4):532-539.
Whitford RE (2004) Future prosperity depends on consumer trust. Journal of the American Veteri-
nary Medical Association 225(12):1824-1825.
VeterinaryMedicalAssociation226(5):722-728.
Wu AW (2000) Medical error: the second victim. British Medical Journal 320:726-727.
Communicating with colleagues
Geoff Little
Introduction
'No man is an island' (Donne 1624), and when it comes to veterinary practices, even those
that are designated 'single-handed' are not really true to the strict definition. Even the small-
est practice will comprise more than one individual, and once there is more than one, com-
munication, or lack of it, becomes an issue.
One would think that in a relatively small enterprise the presence of good communication
could be taken for granted. After all, how difficult can it be to ensure that a small number of
 individuals, working as a team, in a relatively small area, know exactly what the objectives
 of that business are, what policies are in place and what each individual's role is in making
it happen?
 Let us not assume for a minute that the practising arm of our profession is unique in
having a problem in communicating with colleagues, but it does seem to be an all too often
finding by those who are called in to review the business side of practices, and we know that
or misconduct.
The word 'communication' comes from the Latin communicare meaning to impart, to share
 or to make common. As the word suggests, it is not a one-way event, and communication
needs to flow in all directions to ensure the smooth running of an effective and efficient
business. It is said that in face-to-face' communication, the words account for only 7% of
what is conveyed, the rest being through body language and tone of voice. When it comes to
communicating with colleagues, either in the same practice or between practices, words may
be important, but how we treat colleagues in terms of our attitude and our body language is
just as important.
In this chapter, we look at some of the ways in which communication between colleagues
can be improved for the benefit of all, including our clients and our patients. We shall address
127
128
Handbook of Velerinary Communication Skills
Figure 6.1 Every team deserves a good leader.
the subject of intrapractice communication as it affects the practice in isolation, as well as
the ever-increasing challenge of interpractice communication as more and more practices 
 network over referrals and out-of-hours emergency work.
THE TEAM AND ITSLEADER
Every team deserves a good leader (Figure 6.1) who has the vision to see where they want
to take their business, the confidence to know that the destination they are heading towards
is the correct one, and the wisdom to know when, along that journey, adjustments need to
be made to alter course. Leaders must have the ability to communicate that vision to the
team as a whole and must know its constituent members well enough to understand what
motivates each and every one of them, thereby ensuring everybody's efforts are channelled
in the same direction, and that as a result the destination is reached with as many of the
team on board as possible. In reality, the destination should be a rolling horizon, with the
business constantly looking at where it is heading. Although it is said that the enjoyment is
all too often in the travelling rather than in the destination, nothing motivates like success
and it certainly pays to have specific milestones along every trip, where one can rest briefly
and celebrate the achievement, before setting off on the journey again.
What constitutes good leadership in today's veterinary practice is no different from what
succeeds in other business sectors. Most veterinary practices are small in terms of person-
nel numbers, dictating a flat management structure, which encourages flexibility, innovation
and commitment rather than the more traditional hierarchical structure found in larger busi-
nesses, which is now somewhat out of fashion and which relied on command and control,
Chapler 6  Communicaling with colleagues  129
adherence to strictly laid down procedures, with clear and narrow responsibilities. This lat-
ter method of managing teams is probably best represented in the armed forces where it still
has a place, but in today's veterinary practices, the more successful ones are empowering
team members and delegating areas of responsibilities to them.
When team members are asked what is important to them in their job, the following
responses will usually appear high on the list of responses:
+Confidence in the leader
●A sense of belonging
●Excitement in the job
Although 'confidence in the team leader’ may be something team members express, it
is a reflected opinion and more than likely the result of that leader behaving in a specific
way. If one were to ask why that confidence exists, it would probably be because that leader
 possessed some or all of the following attributes:
●Vision
+Enthusiasm
+Adaptability
*Integrity
●Toughness
●Fairness
*Warmth
●Humility
Confidence
That is quite a shopping list, and at first glance some of the attributes may appear to be con-
tradictory For example, how can one exhibit warmth and toughness at the same time? How
can one be confident and at the same time be humble? The answer lies in two of the other
attributes on the list, fairness and adaptability. Abraham Maslow, the American psycholo-
gist, said, 'When the only tool you have is a hammer, all problems tend to resemble nails
(Maslow 1966).
The effective leader will have a comprehensive toolbox and will know just when to reach
for a different tool, when to apply it, and will know just the correct amount of strength
and/or leverage to apply to get the job done.
This is not a book about leadership as such, but the role the leader plays is so important
and has a major part to play in the success or otherwise of the team. Everything the leader
does communicates something to the team, and so it is totally justifiable and appropriate to
spend a little more time considering the role of the leader.
In considering the list of traits required to lead a team, some may be in-built features of an
individual's personality, whereas others may have to be learnt and /or developed. The leader
should lead by example, but all too often when it comes to adhering to standard operating
procedures (SOPs) in a practice, the main culprit or culprits are those who the rest of the
team should be looking to for example. If the boss flouts the rules, then it must be okay for
the rest of the team to do likewise.
130 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Types of people
If we exclude start-ups, practice teams are established units, comprising individuals func-
tioning at varying levels of effectiveness and efficiency. A good deal of research has been
carried out into the types of people that make up teams, including the ways in which they
communicatewith eachother.
There is a whole industry out there, employing various methods of analysing individuals,
seeking to categorize and label them according to their responses to questionnaires. And
 once labelled, these individuals are expected to respond in certain ways to differing sets of
circumstances and because of that to contribute to teams in different ways. For example,
some individuals may exhibit leadership skills, other will be the ideas people and yet others
will be the ones at the sharp end dutifully following SOPs. Reading the horoscope pages
in some publications, one could be excused for thinking that the predictions for individuals
born under the star sign Taurus read remarkably like the forecasts for those born under the
star sign Scorpio, or indeed for those born under any of the other ten star signs. However,
the traits for the different types, as defined by the Belbin, Myers-Briggs or other industry-
standard typology methods (see suggestions for further reading), are sufficiently diverse,
recognized and repeated in individuals to lend credibility to the belief that people can be
categorized and that within those categories individuals will behave in certain ways.
Why should this be of interest to veterinary practices? Well, as has already been men-
tioned, practices are teams, however small that team may be, and the success or otherwise of
each team will depend on, not only the individual skills within the team, but how the team
functions as a cohesive unit. A good team will produce results, which are consistently better
than the expected sum of the abilities of the individuals within that team.
Replacing and/or recruiting new team members
The introduction of a new practice member is a golden opportunity to introduce new skills
into the team or to strengthen existing ones. Too many practices spend too little time on max
imizing this opportunity. All too often like is replaced with like; self-clones are appointed or
'the best of a bad lot' is selected.
In taking on a new employee, there are responsibilities on both sides. There is a responsi-
bility to new appointees in terms of doing everything possible to ensure their succes in the
team. The mature employee will probably be leaving another post in the hope of bettering
themselves, while the first-time employee is at a vulnerable point in their career and needs
a supportive environment in which to develop. In both cases, the onus is on the employer to
facilitate a smooth integration into the existing team for the sake of the individual, the team
and the business.
Communication with new employees starts at the advertising stage. The advertisement
needs to impart enough information to appeal to a sufficient number of suitable individ-
mau nau asooqo cn ym ony lood qonoua aiel e ym raonda a apiaond cn sien
team member(s). Reference has already been made to 'employing the best of a bad lot', and
sometimes this is the fault of the advertisement in as much as it has not provided sufficient,
accurate information. As practice teams increase in terms of numbers, roles become more
specialized and as a result employers need to be more specific in terms of the search criteria
they include in their advertisements. For example, if a practice needs to recruit a receptionist,
Chapler 6  Communicaling wilth colleagues
the advertisement should make it clear that this role involves working with people as op-
posed to with animals. All too often, the word 'veterinary' in an advertisement conveys the
prospect of working with animals to those reading it.
e ape sasnnd e si saenpeo juasan ong sendon uoon pso aul jo auo
interviews have not been kept. Promises of regular practice meetings, appraisals, personal
development plans and support during the first few weeks in a new practice are regularly
cited as being mentioned during the interview but never materializing. It would appear that
employers know what is wanted by new graduates and so they know what noises to make
at the interview but, for a variety of reasons, fail to deliver. The interview is an important
opportunity for both sides to communicate just what is on offer from the practice and what
the potential new recruit wants. The written word, in the form of the job advertisement, on
the one side, and the application letter and the CV, on the other, can communicate only so
 much. The face-to-face meeting allows the gaps to be filled and provides the opportunity to
probe deeper into what has been written. From the prospective employee's point of
view, they need to know not only all the details of the job on offer but get a feel for the
practice and the culture in place. Interviewees should attend the interview with a clear pic-
ture of what they need to know about the job on offer. They should go armed with a list
of questions they want to have the answers to and should not be afraid to refer to the list
during the interview, to double check all areas have been covered. At the end of the formal
interview, both sides should have a clear picture of the position on offer and the suitability of
the candidate to fill that role. The interviewee should leave with a copy of the job description
and the terms of employment.
As the new recruit will be joining the rest of the team, it makes sense to extend the formal
interview into an opportunity for the rest of the team to meet and provide feedback on
the perceived suitability of the potential new member. Spending some informal time in the
practice, with other team members, will also provide the interviewee with the opportunity
to talk to the colleagues they may subsequently be working with.
INDUCTION SCHEMES AND MENTORING
 A new member of the team can feel very isolated, in particular recent veterinary graduates
who will have come from a very supportive network of friends at university and at home.
In the majority of cases, it will be the first time they have been away from direct, structured
support, and despite modern communications, they often perceive themselves as isolated,
having to cope with a whole new set of circumstances and associated challenges. A support-
ive practice may well have structures in place such as a set of SOPs, which the new team
member can refer to and will hopefully offer direct support, should the new graduate have
 to cope with out-of-hours calls, but having a structured induction scheme and appointing a
mentor to look after new recruits can provide so much more for the benefit of all concerned
It would serve all those who own and run their own practices to recall just what it was
like during those initial few days and weeks in their first job; how different it was to be
the one who now had responsibilities to clients and other team members as opposed to
one's previous role perhaps as an undergraduate undertaking EMS (extramural studies) and
having somebody else to take those ultimate decisions.
132 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
It would also serve those who own veterinary businesses to remember that they are plac
ing new recruits in front of and amongst the two most valuable assets they have. No, it is
even appear on the balance sheet. What are they? The first is the client base and the second
is the practice team members. Without either, there is no business. All too often though, new
recruits, whose only prior contact with the practice may have been at a relatively short in-
terview, are let loose in the practice with the assumption that they either have what it takes
 or that they will pick things up as they go along. And when it comes to the latter attitude,
all too often the problem can be compounded by allowing those new recruits to learn from
others who themselves have picked things up in a haphazard way.
It is far better to take stock of just what it says in the new recruit's job description, what
their CV tells you about their level of experience, where they will be working in the prac-
tice, what their tasks will include and who they will be working with. If all that is taken
 practice, may include the shadowing of different people in the practice, for varying peri-
ods. The aim of this initial investment in new team members should be not only to provide
them with adequate knowledge of the business's services, products and working practices,
but it should also instil in them enough insight to allow them to promote the business with
confidence.
APPRAISALS
There are certain words or phrases that seem to elicit a less than positive response, ‘ap-
praisals' being one of them and 'mission statement' another. If, on the other hand, instead of
an appraisal we were to speak about a structured process that has two main objectives: the
first to develop the individual within the team and the second to improve the effectiveness of
that team, I believe the majority of individuals would buy into it. Just do not call the process
an appraisal. Similarly, if the practice team were tasked with drawing up a list of what they
wanted the practice to achieve when it came to patients and clients in terms of the service
provided and the practice itself where working conditions were concerned, there would not
be too many objections. Just do not call the list a mission statement.
Let us start by looking at the downside of carrying out appraisals. Done well, they are
time-consuming as they need to be carried out on a regular basis, say, every 6 months; a greaf
 deal of thought and preparation needs to be given to the structure, process and the content
of each appraisal, and in the ideal world everybody in the team, including the bosses, should
be appraised.
Because most employees either will have had first-hand experience of or will have pre-
conceived ideas of appraisals, it is best to introduce the concept at a full practice meeting. In
that way, the benefits can be extolled and fears can be allayed.
The process itself is fairly straightforward and comprises the following steps:
1.
 The appraiser completes an appraisal form for each team member.
2.
The appraisee completes a similar form.
3.
At the appraisal meeting, the contents of the two forms are discussed and compared
4.By the end of the meeting, a way forward is agreed and a date is set for the next appraisal.
Chapler 6  Communicaling wilth colleagues 
133
Bearing in mind the raison d'etre is to help to develop the individual, vital elements of
the process are for the appraiser to have a clear understanding as to both the appraisee's job
description and how well that team member has performed against criteria agreed at the last
appraisal.
The forms facilitate the process as both the appraiser and the appraisee complete these
prior to the meeting. The forms cover the activities of the individual, their responsibilities
and their aspirations, and sufficient time must be allowed for both sides to consider their
responses. Although there will be a general theme where the forms are concerned, there
will be a need to compile different appraisal forms to suit the varying practice roles. The
completed forms can be contrasted and compared at the appraisal meeting, the outcome of
which should be the following:
●A consensus as to how well the individual is performing
●A reassessment as to the individual's role and responsibilities within the team and a re-
alignment if necessary
●An agreed way forward and, where appropriate, a setting of SMART objectives, meaning:
 Specific
Measurable
Achievable
Realistic
 Timed - a date in the diary for the next appraisal
Appraisals are part of the way of life in large businesses and, believe it or not, young
employees in those organizations look forward to their appraisals. They regard the process
as positive in that it is the time they receive positive feedback on how they have performed
since their last appraisal. In addition, at the end of the meeting new goals are set for them
n pue pdns ssanu an m n d  nd ur nnd si d e pe u 
to reach those goals. lt is all part of the vital task of developing the person who in turn will
develop your practice. And remember, if you do not develop your people, the good ones
will find somebody else who will
EXITINTERVIEW
When it comes to the employer-employee relationship, the exit interview completes the cir-
cle. The employment interview is an opportunity to find out more about the interviewee
and to fill the gaps between the lines on the CV. It is also the time to inform the prospective
new team member about your practice. The exit interview reverses those roles in as much
as it provides the opportunity for the soon to be ex-team member to tell you about your
business and you as an individual. Inevitably, individuals leave practices and one should
not miss the opportunity to benefit from those individuals' insights into the team and the
way the practice is run from their perspective and those they work with. Irrespective of how
 good communications are within a practice, groups develop with barriers between them. In
wellrun practices where communications are good, those barriers are low and porous and
information flows between the groups, but in badly run practices those barriers are insur-
mountable, and whereas information fails to breach the barriers, misinformation seems to
have little difficulty in filtering through. To compound the problem, communication within
134 Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
each group appears to function well, allowing rumours to flourish, resulting in an entrench-
ment of views and ever-rising barriers.
In the exit interview, it is important to have an objective, depersonalized, constructive
discussion with the individual who is leaving. From the employer's perspective, the object
of the exercise is to gain information from the departing employee that will prove useful to
improve the ongoing business. They may shed light on how the practice could be improved
in terms of the service to clients or on what changes could be introduced to improve the
working conditions, which, in turn, could lead to a more contented and cohesive team, and
would almost inevitably have the knock-on effect of providing a better service to clients and
patients alike, a win, win, win situation.
DELEGATION
 One of the key objectives of any practice owner, leader or manager is to achieve their goals
through the efforts of others (Figure 6.2). There may well be differences between individuals
in terms of qualifications and abilities, but the one thing we all have an equal amount of is
'hours in the day'
 Unfortunately, all too often it is a case of abdication rather than delegation with team
members being left to get on with it with little or no instructions or backup. The other major
fault is too much interference having delegated the task, with bosses leaning over the shoul-
ders of others, pointing out how they would have done things. The result is an undermining
of confidence, an attitude of, 'Why don't you do it yourself?' and a reluctance to volunteer
to take on further tasks.
To achieve our objectives we have to motivate and delegate to others. The basic compo-
nents of successful delegation are as follows:
1.Communicate to the individual(s) what it is you want them to do. If it is a specific task,
make it SMART or ideally SMARTER. (See p 135)
2.
 Provide the necessary support in terms of materials and training and advice.
3.
Monitor progress without interfering.
4.  Encourage feedback and continue to offer support.
Figure 6.2
Molivation.
Chapler 6  Communicaling wih colleagues 
135
SMARTER Objectives
The term SMART Objectives is originally attributed to Peter Drucker; it appeared in his 1954
management book, The Practice of Management, with the acronym usually standing for:
Specific
 Measurable
Achievable
 Realistic
punoq-au
There have been many variations on the original theme, some of which are as follows:
S
Stimulating
Simple
M
Molivaling
A
 Appropriale
Allainable
Accepled
Accountable
Agreed
Actionable
R
Relevant
T
Timed
Trackable
Traceable
It is understandable that the original SMART acronym tends to follow the thinking of the
1950s in as much as it has that slight dictatorial note to it, and one can imagine the SMART
objective being imposed from on high, without too much discussion with those who are then
instructed to carry out the task.
Looking at some of the alternatives to the letters above, such as 'accepted' and ‘agreed',
one can see the transition to a more modern approach to managing teams, more commu-
nication and a greater involvement of team members. The acronym SMARTER introduces
the new words, 'extending’ and ‘rewarding', which highlight the importance of engaging
 individuals. SMARTER objectives can also be employed in agreeing and setting the personal
development goals for team members. Provided that adequate support is in place, reward-
 ing individuals for their achievements in coping with, and hopefully excelling at, extending
 tasks is a very powerful motivational force.
A management objective to increase the number of appointments being booked in by
receptionists is not a SMART objective. Neither is a plan to introduce a nurse-run senior pet
clinic into the practice some time during the current year. The following, however, can be
classed as SMART management objectives:
From 3 months' time, a minimum of 85% of available appointment slots will be filled
when averaged over the calendar week.
Within 6 months, the nursing team will have planned and conducted two senior pet
clinics and one such clinic will be run each month thereafter.
When introducing new ideas into a practice, it is much better to target easy winners.
There is nothing like success to motivate individuals and the team to move on to the next,
more ambitious task.
136 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Motivation
How does one create a motivated workforce? What can you do to motivate others? One way
to answer this question is to look at the end result. In other words, what does a motivated
veterinary practice look like and how does it behave? What would you see and experience
if you were a client or a potential new employee and were to walk into such a practice? As a
client, you would see people enjoying their work, individuals who are knowledgeable and
who, although they may not know the answer to all the questions, do know where to go ol
whom to ask in order to find out, personnel who take pride in the place they work and who
keep their promises.
What would it be like to work alongside such motivated individuals? You would see
results and celebrating success, team members who avoid blaming others when difficulties
arise but who look to find solutions to problems.
In looking for the answers to what we can do to motivate others and to create a team that
functions as described above, it pays to take time out to ask ourselves who or what motivates
us. In other words, what gets us out of bed in the morning?
The reality is that different things motivate different individuals and different things mo-
tivate the same individual at different times during their life and career. All too often, we
assume that money is the prime motivator of others, whereas as long as the financial remu-
neration is fair for the role being undertaken, the prime motivators are intrinsic rather than
extrinsic and include such things as:
*Having an interesting job
*Working within a fair environment
Having goals to strive for
 Receiving recognition and being regarded as an important member of the team
Extrinsic factors such as financial bonuses can play a role in motivating individuals and
teams but do need to be used with care. It must always be borne in mind that every action
can have an opposite and not always equal reaction. Rewarding one individual financially
may incentivize that person but may well demotivate all the other team members, and the
one incentivized member may require ever-increasing rewards to keep them motivated. If
one wants to use money as a motivator, it should be done with caution. To be meaningful, a
financial bonus needs to be of a reasonable magnitude compared with the basic salary. The
criteria on which the bonus is paid, or not, as the case may be, need to be simple, transparent
and under the direct control of the individual or individuals the incentive applies to. They
need to be SMART and a great deal of consideration needs to be given to those criteria, as
the consequences to both the individual and the business of the bonus not being paid must
be considered.
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES
Communication comes in many forms, and when there is a need to disseminate important
information, for example, statutory matters such as ionizing radiation regulations, man-
ual handling operations, special waste regulations and the host of other health and safety
Chapler 6  Communicaling with colleagues
137
regulations a practice has to deal with, clear, relevant information in a written format is best
suited to the job.
Written SOPs are also the best medium when it comes to ensuring team members adhere
to agreed methods when carrying out specific, frequently occurring procedures in the prac-
tice. SOPs can cover such diverse topics as registering new clients, credit policy, admitting
and discharging patients, etc.
 In essence, an SOP should provide detailed written instructions to achieve uniformity of
the performance of a specific function. When it comes to producing an SOP, it is advisable to
ask those most involved in the process to have the first stab at producing a draft. All too often
SOPs are produced and imposed by management who may not have first-hand knowledge
of the situation, resulting in a list of instructions to be followed that are impractical. It is
hardly surprising that team members fail to follow the protocol.
[ a  rg s a a cn p i a se n 'anxa rog aaq r
area or the feeding of in-patients, but only after they have been given advice and training on
how to write an SOP. In its simplest form an SOP should have a title; the person writing it
should write down what they do and those who are involved in that process should do what is
written down. It is as simple as that. The aim is to have a written procedure that is agreed and
utilized. It should be written in terms that are easily understood by all. Some SOPs are best
written as narratives, others as flowcharts or tables. The draft document should be circulated
throughout the team and comments are sought before the final SOP is adopted.
 If one considers why SOPs fail in the workplace, we can take steps to ensure their usage.
Common reasons are as follows:
*They are difficult to find.
* They are written in a foreign language'.
+Instructions and general information are mixed.
* The procedure is described in an unfamiliar way.
●Users know a better method and can do the procedure 'in their sleep'.
Senior members of the team often fall into the category of those 'who know a better
method' - after all they have been doing it their way for years and SOPs are for the staff,
not for them. When it comes to SOPs it is very important to lead by example. If you do not,
it will hardly be surprising if others take short cuts too, sometimes with disastrous results.
It is best to aim to end up with the SOP on one side of A4 and in large font. Stick to
simple words and short sentences. Think the process through in your mind and capture the
procedure in a list of instructions, 'Do this', 'Do that'. Make sure the list is in the correct
order and separate instructions from information. Incorporate diagrams or tables, but only
if it helps to simplify and clarify the SOP. Provide references at the end. These may include
a reference to another SOP.
SOPs should be regarded as living documents, ones that the team become familiar with,
but beware the danger of familiarity breeding complacency SOPs should be either displayed
in a prominent area or easily accessed in, for example, a folder or on the practice intranet.
 Having them on the intranet not only allows easy access but facilitates amendments, which
should be carried out as and when needs arise. Another common reason why team mem-
bers fail to adhere to SOPs is that as time moves on, new medicines become available, new
equipment is introduced and the existing SOP becomes outdated. When it is discovered that
138 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
a number of team members are not adhering to an SOP, it may not be them that need looking
at but the SOP
As time evolves, the number of SOPs in use will inevitably increase and most practices
find themselves with a 'Practice Bible’ to house all the paperwork that can be issued to all
team members to read, inwardly digest and to use for reference. The Practice Bible' also
serves as a useful publication to issue to new employees as part of their induction. Some
  a  p a  s  s m  n  h p sr
understood the contents; some practices, in the belief that it is all too easy to sign to say you
have done something. put new team members through a brief test to ensure they have read
and fully understood the contents.
Box 6.1 shows an example of an SOP for euthanasia, setting out easy-to-read, clear in
structions, for all team members to follow.
Box 6.1 A standard operating procedure for euthanasia
Euthanasia is considered by many to be the most important procedure that we are asked
to carry out as veterinarians. It is a very emotive time for clients and where possible such
consultations should be booked in at a time when suficient, quality time can be devoted
to the procedure. It is a procedure that must never be hurried.
The euthanasia procedure must be discussed with the client before any action is carried
out. The veterinarian should inform the client that there might be some post-mortem
muscular spasms, 'reflex breathing', and that their pet's eyes may remain open.
The owner should be given the option to be present or not when the procedure is
carried out. If they decide not to remain with their pet, they should be given the option
to see their pet afterwards.
Disposa!
Before euthanasia is carried out, the disposal of the body is to be discussed with the
owner or their agent. The following options are to be offered:
*Home burial
·General cremation
Private cremation
Burial at the pet cemetery
Cremation or commercial burial
If the client opts for cremation or burial, all options, with associated costs, should be
discussed with them. Their decision should be recorded on the patient's clinical records
and the appropriate paperwork should be completed.
Consent form
Go through the Euthanasia Consent Form and ensure that the client or the client's
agent signs the form before the procedure is carried out.
Procedure
Intravenous phenobarbitone via the cephalic vein is the procedure of choice in cats and
dogs. If the owner wishes to hold their pet and it is deemed safe for them and the opera-
tors to do so, they should be permitted. The patient should be restrained by a member of
support staff to facilitate the administration of the intravenous injection. Where manual
Chapler 6Communicaling with colleagues
¥139
restraint or muzzling is considered to be too stressful for either the pet or its owner or
dangerous for the operators, a sedative may be administered to the patient prior to the
intravenous injection. Where hospitalized cases have an indwelling intravenous catheter
is in place, it should be used to administer the phenobarbitone.
Accidentalinjection
Extreme care must be taken to avoid accidental injection of personnel. If accidental
injection should occur, seek medical attention immediately and record the incident in the
accident book.
Hospitalized cases
Where hospitalized cases are to be euthanized, the owner or the owner's agent is to be
given the option to be present when the procedure takes place. It is not necessary to insist
onssnad inq 'og sasuo eisung e uis on aneid a uuae pa a uo
must be obtained and details of that permission must be recorded on the clinical notes.
Payment
The option of paying for the procedure in the consulting room should be given to
avoid the upset of clients being embarrassed at reception. Clients may also be given the
Records
Details of the euthanasia along with the chosen route of disposal must be entered onto
the computer records. An appropriate tag must be completed to identify the body and the
chosen method of disposal. This tag must accompany the body until it is collected from
the practice. Details of the pet, its owner and the tag number must also be entered in the
pet crematorium record book.
Storage
When the body has been placed in the appropriate disposal bag and labelled with the
client's and pet's details, it must be placed in the freezer to await collection.
STAFF SUGGESTION SCHEME
Outside the corporate world, virtually all practice owners are self-appointed and have ar-
rived in that position through hard work and having made decisions at various times during
the life of the business. We live in a world where the rate of change is exponential, where
information is coming at us from all directions and different sectors of the marketplace have
differing wants and needs. Take, for example, the differing ways in which the various gen-
erations communicate, the ways in which they differ in terms of seeking and acting upon
information, the ways in which they conduct business. Ten years ago, nobody would have
come into a veterinary practice clutching a wad of printed information gathered from the
internet in an attempt to help the veterinary surgeon to work their way through a compli-
cated set of symptoms and laboratory results, in an attempt to clinch a diagnosis. We may
not always agree with the direction in which so-called progress is taking us, but the only
constant is change. The leader of any team has to be aware of what is happening in the
140 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
marketplace and should be making the best use of the market intelligence that may be avail
able under their noses, in other words, within the team members.
The list of qualities required to be a good leader are many, and established leaders will
have some or all of those qualities in varying degrees. Having said that, the production of
good ideas is not the sole prerogative of the leader and others in the team may well have
an idea or ideas that could enhance the business, or one aspect of it. A germ of an idea may
reside within any team member and at any time; it may come from a seasoned member of
the team who is conversant with the way the business is currently run; it may come from a
new member of the team who has brought knowledge with them gained from working in
another veterinary practice, or indeed another line of work, or it may come from the most
junior individual, fresh out of school, who has not yet had the flair and enthusiasm knocked
out of them.
Tom Peters, author of In Search of Excellence (Peters & Waterman 2004) and a world-
renowned business consultant, when called in to advise a board of directors that had been
informed by a number of their customers that ‘their products were boring', took one look
at the board and told them that it was no wonder their products were boring and asked
them when they had last taken a critical look at themselves as they were boring, all men in
their late 50s, all dressed in dark suits, white shirts and plain dark ties. His advice to them
was to bring some interesting people into the boardroom who had done something different
 in their lives and who came from different backgrounds. Perhaps they could do something
interesting with the company's products.
From a veterinary perspective, we no longer frown on those who have taken a year off
to do something else. Indeed, this may lead them to suggesting innovative ideas for change
when they return to practice.
We all have greater expectations when it comes to service industries, and veterinary prac-
tice is no different. Our clients have ever-rising expectations, and practices need new ideas
and better processes to ensure we continue to best look after them and the animals under
rely on management to come up with all the 'right answers'. Today's successful practices
 need to encourage all team members to come up with a steady flow of new ideas and solu-
tions, especially from those who are most intimately involved with and are affected by the
processes and from the clients, those at the sharp end. Good ideas for improving processes
in the kennel room are less likely to come from the large animal partner in a mixed practice,
and much more likely to come from those who spend their day in that particular part of the
building.
 Having good ideas is one thing, but capturing them and progressing them is another thing
altogether There needs to be a process in place to encourage the generation of good ideas.
The mere existence of a structure lets the whole team know that the process of generating
ideas is encouraged. The process needs to be explained to the team at a practice meeting.
and although the discussion may well be far and wide ranging, the only two questions that
really need to be answered are, who will benefit from it and how is it going to work?
Who will it benefit?
It must be remembered that whenever one is trying to 'sell' anything to anybody, although
that product or service will have features and functions, people are seeking to buy benefits.
Chapler 6  Communicaling with colleagues
141
The features of a certain MP3 player may include 8 Gb of memory, USB connectivity, 24 hours
of battery life following a full charge that takes only 90 minutes, all in an impact-resistant
case with armband. All very interesting, but most people, however, will decide to purchase
it because those features allow it to store up to 5500 audio tracks or 32 hours of video files, it
is quick to charge and can be used all day before it needs to be recharged and the 'it comes
 in an impact-resistant case with armband' means it can be used in the gym and while out
jogging.
Before introducing any new concept to the team or to clients ask yourself, 'Why should
they be interested in it?', or 'What's in it for them?
How will it work?
In introducing the idea of a staff suggestion scheme, it is important to follow the theme of
benefits and to provide guidance as to what areas the suggestions should cover. For example,
the message could go out that suggestions should be aimed at looking at the following:
●Ways of enhancing working conditions within the practice
●Ways of improving current SOPs
+Ways of enhancing the current service to clients
+New services and products that should be introduced
There needs to be a mechanism in place to capture the suggestions. Like all processes, the
easier it can be made, the more likely it is to be used and the greater the uptake is likely to be.
Suggestions should be submitted on forms that are easy to complete, and which facilitate
the capturing of the idea, why and how to introduce it into the practice and who will benefit
from its introduction.
Once submitted, there will naturally be an air of expectation from the individual who
generated the idea, and because of that there needs to be a guarantee in place that all sug-
gestions will receive an initial response in writing within a prescribed period, say, 1 week. If
the response is no, that needs to be conveyed. If it is a winner and can be introduced with-
out further deliberation, state when it will be introduced. If it is a qualified yes, provide a
date for further reply and stick to that commitment. It may well be appropriate to involve
the individual or individuals who promoted the idea in a working party to move things for-
ward. A practice would need to decide whether to make the process public when it comes to
replying to suggestions, posting responses on a designated notice board or in a printed up-
date or by electronic mail. The argument for a public response is that quite often, when one
individual submits an idea, he or she is voicing what is on the minds of a number of team
 members and that the entire team should be included in the feedback. The argument against
d uen  shenaiun ha Ae nee sqnd e ssord au une e si s
Another decision a practice will have to take when it comes to a suggestion scheme
 is whether there should be a monetary reward involved for those whose suggestions are
adopted by the practice. This is common practice in big business and can take many forms.
Some schemes involve a multi-step evaluation process, with those who submitted the suc-
cessful ones eventually receiving either a fixed sum or one related to the anticipated value
of the idea to the business.
An alternative approach would be to dedicate a fixed amount to the scheme, which is then
distributed on a monthly basis, with fixed sums being awarded to the best idea or ideas each
142 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
month. Once the staff know that you are serious about the scheme and they see the benefits
on a monthly basis, the suggestion box should be filled with suggestions to consider The
real benefits, of course, will be seen by all team members in a better run and more enjoyable
place to work.
PRACTICE MEETINGS
If you speak to individuals who carry out independent practice reviews where all mem-
bers of the team are asked, amongst other things, to carry out a SWOT analysis (strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities and threats) on their business, lack of communication will fea-
ture on most people's responses, along with a desire to have more practice meetings. These
sentiments are repeated over and over again whenever the subject of improving practice
is discussed. It is common to hear young graduates tell of unfulflled expectations in their
first job, of promises made at interview that remain mere promises 15 months later Most
employers seem to acknowledge the importance of regular practice meetings as they would
appear to be a common topic of conversation at interview, but in too many instances they
fail to materialize. And there are all too many excuses as to why they remain an intention
, ro  o   's p a e  cn  s,    m
 tried practice meetings, they go on forever and just end up as slanging matches and anyway
 nothing constructive every happens afterwards, so we stopped having them'.
Practice meetings are the most effective way of ensuring good communications within
the practice at all levels, but only if they are structured to be efficient and effective.
There are a number of key decisions to take when it comes to deciding on the nature and
number of practice meetings to be held. Amongst the questions that need to be answered are
the following:
*Which types of meeting need to be held and what are the functions of each type?
Who should attend each type of meeting and why?
Which types of meeting need to be held on a regular basis, and how often?
* Is there a call for one-off meetings?
It is probably fair to say that the larger the practice, the greater the need to have regular
structured meetings, but even the smallest single-handed practice may well benefit from
regular meetings rather than relying on discussions held over the operating table or as and
when time permits.
Types of meeting
Every business needs to be led and as such there needs to be a plan for people to follow, and
those team members need to be provided with the motivation and the tools to follow that
plan.
Assuming there is a business plan in place, a plan that has defined SMART objectives,
meaning they are specific, measurable, achievable, realistic and timed, there will be a need
to hold regular meetings to monitor progress to ensure the business is on track, and if it
is not, to decide on measures to introduce to get it back on track. In a larger business this
would be the equivalent of board meetings which directors and executive would attend. The
Chapler 6  Communicaling wilth colleagues
143
equivalent in the practice would be the partners and the practice manager, and depending
on where a practice is in terms of its journey, the meetings may be held monthly if it is at the
start of its journey or bimonthly or even quarterly, if it is well on track.
Decisions taken at board level are then passed on to executives to implement, and it is
the role of the executives and managers to ensure the plan is achieved through the efforts of
the team members. Generally speaking, veterinary practices, because of smaller personnel
numbers, tend to have flatter management structures than those found in bigger businesses
and, as a result, do not have the numbers to allow for a vertical management structure with
well-defined, singular roles.
Irrespective of the type of meeting, there are some essentials that will help to ensure their
effectiveness and efficiency.
Scheduling
 It is very difficult to find a time that suits everybody when it comes to fixing a date for
subsequent meetings. If the last item on the agenda is 'date of next meeting', there is the
inevitable fumbling for diaries to find a date when all members of the group are next free, in
say, 2 months' time. There will be those who did not bring their diaries, those who brought
the wrong diary and those who will have to check their partner's diary and the calendar on
the kitchen wall when they get home to find a free date. It is much better to fix the dates
well in advance so that these commitments can go in diaries for the foreseeable future. If
the meetings are to be held bimonthly, set the dates, for example, for the second Tuesday
of every other month. That way there can be no excuse for people not knowing when the
meetings are to be held.
Agenda
All meetings should have an agenda, which should be published in good time ahead of the
meeting date. Depending on the type of meeting, it may be useful to have a mechanism
whereby those attending the meeting can contribute to the agenda items. If that is the case,
there should be a deadline in place by which additional agenda items can be submitted.
Minutes and action points
It is traditional to take minutes at meetings and it can be useful to record the minutes of some
meetings, but it must be remembered that taking minutes is a skill and my guess is that we
have all been in the position of reading minutes that were taken at a meeting we attended
that left us wondering if the minutes related to an entirely different meeting. It is always
useful to ask the question 'why?': 'Why are we taking minutes?' The answer will probably
be, 'Because we need a record of what was said at the meeting'. The second 'why?' is more
Suole Sunaos Aidan e ha Aeqord pinom ch papuodsa sem h Jn pue ramsue ch sno
the lines of ‘Because we need records of what the results of the various discussions were'
And yet another but why?' may bring the final, exasperated, but all important real reason
for taking the minutes and that may well be, 'Because it's important to document what was
said in relation to what needs to be done about certain issues, so we need a record of what
was agreed and, moreover, we need a record of what was said so it can be referred to at the
144 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
next meeting'. Those who are tasked with taking minutes at any meeting may like to refer to
the following checklist for guidance:
Preparation and planning
What is the precise purpose of the meeting?
What overall objective(s) do I have?
Who will read my minutes?
How best to record the minutes?
●How can I be sure the information is accurate and reliable?
Writing the minutes
●How should I write and review my minutes?
What final checks should I make before the minutes are issued?
●Summary
The use of English
●What basic rules in the use of English should I know?
+ What common errors in the use of English should I avoid?
Irrespective of whether traditional minutes are taken at a meeting or not, it is far more
important to have a set of action points against each topic that was discussed. After each
minuted item, following the main discussion points, there should be a note of who is going
to do what and by when. With the best will in the world, there will be items that crop up
at subsequent meetings that are 'work in hand', but urless there are specific realistic, timed
action points, most items on subsequent agendas will remain 'work in hand' and attendees
will become disillusioned with meetings.
One of the greatest criticisms one hears about practice meetings is that they are ‘talking
shops' and no progress is ever made. The chairman's first role is to ensure the discussion
centres around the agenda items. A good chairman will ensure that all those attending the
meeting have their say on matters that concern them and will be conscious of those who
need to be tempered when it comes to contributing to the discussion and of those who need
to be encouraged to speak. As far as making progress following meetings goes, having ac-
tion points that have individuals' names and deadlines against them will go a long way to
ensuring this happens. Another common criticism of practice meetings is that they last too
long. Ideally, meetings should have both a start and a finish time and it is one of the chair
man's jobs to ensure meetings finish on time. It is far better, within reason, to have more
frequent, shorter meetings, when minds are fresh and people are keen to contribute, than to
have irregular meetings that go on into the night, with everybody doing little else but look
at their watches.
REPORTING STRUCTURE
To ensure good commurications within a practice, there needs to be a well-defined report-
ing structure, which is accepted and understood by the team. The reporting structure is
there to facilitate the transmission of information in both directions, from the top down as
Chapler 6  Communicaling with colleagues 
145
well as from the bottom up. A well-defined, detailed reporting structure, in the form of a
schematic or organogram (a chart showing the lines of responsibility between departments
 pasun aq o paau j saessa ansua c m uo e o pinous uozro ue jo
sent through the correct channels to those who need to know. The schematic or organogram
should provide details of which topics should be communicated to whom within the prac-
tice. For example, where the rota is concerned, everybody in the practice should know whom
001 un uaddeu ol spuat ieum Xeplou s,xaam e 1o yo Aep e isanba1 oi yoeoidde cl paau Aau
many practices is that those who want to take holidays or a day of at an inconvenient time
know only too well the line of least resistance within the practice and approach them with
their request, and all too often this can lead to the practice being short staffed, which in turn
stresses those who are left working. Far better to have one point of call in the practice, the
 practice manager, or one of the partners who is the only individual who can sanction time off.
The schematic or organogram should facilitate any member of the team who needs to
l0 aldoad jo dnoo e 'jenpiaipun lauoue oh uogenopt jo aoard syoads e Aaauos 1o isanbai
indeed to the entire team.
ROTAS
The working rota is all too often a source of internal friction and complaints. Time off is
precious and those working within the practice team need to know when they are on duty.
when they are on call and when they have a long weekend off, etc. Failing to publish the rota
well in advance and last-minute changes to the publicized rotas are the biggest sources of
friction. It should be feasible at the beginning of each calendar year to complete a master plan
for the forthcoming 12 months, indicating who is working which weekend and where possi-
ble major blocks of holiday periods as requested by individuals, through having a deadline
a system in place whereby there is an order in which individuals may select their holidays.
For example, in a three-vet practice it may be the year Vet A has the first and sixth choices as
to when she takes her holidays, with a maximum of 3 weeks in the summer; Vet B may have
the second and fifth choices, leaving Vet C with the third and fourth choices. The following
year, everybody moves up the ladder, when this year's Vet C will have the first and sixth
choices.
As far as the weekly rota is concerned, it is extremely useful for all concerned, if there can
be a rolling 5 or 6 weeks published for all to see. If such a system is in place, it is important
for all concerned that requests for all days off, half-days, etc. are submitted to the individual
who has the responsibility for drawing up the rotas by a specific date, for example, 2 weeks
pue pausand apeae ue asuuo on waiss s apun uonsanb ut aep rennned au arojaq
circulated rota, except under exceptional circumstances, is fair neither on the individual who
draws up the rota nor on the remainder of the team. If an individual does want to alter an
already publicized rota, it should be up to that individual to swap with somebody else on
the rota, thereby affecting only those two individuals.
INTERPRACTICE COMMUNICATION
There is always the danger of pigeon-holing a book in time, with some contemporaneous
comment or other, but I think it fair to say our profession, for the foreseeable future, is going
146 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
to see an ever-increasing flow of clients travelling between practices. The main drivers be-
hind this traffic are twofold. First, with increasing specialization, the number of clients that
are referred is bound to keep growing, and secondly, with the changes in the way out of
hours work is now often channelled to practices that are geared up to cope with such work
at unsocial hours.
In both cases, the factoring in of another practice, along with clients who may be stressed
because of the nature of their animal's condition, makes the need for good communication
id on uo pou su jo st aiea e si aa asnaq 'sodi os saoad uamiq
 and the stakes are generally higher if and when they do go wrong.
Interpractice communication can be looked at from two distinct, though related, areas.
Firstly, from a business-to-business perspective, and secondly, where the relationship im-
pacts on the clients.
 From a business perspective when one practice wants to attract customer from another,
whether that be for referrals or for their out-of-hours service, it pays to ensure lines of com-
munication are as efficient as possible. What attracts one practice to 'do business’ with an-
other? The main factors are as follows:
*Quality of product or service
●Cost
+Location
When it comes to doing business, especially repeat business, where the quality of com-
peting suppliers is roughly equal, businesses will tend to gravitate to those who make it easy
to do business with them; they will take the line of least resistance.
As far as money is concerned, although the cost of a referral or out-of-hours service is
nearly always picked up by the client, the first opinion or primary practice may well be
involved in explaining the cost of a particular procedure or out-of-hours charge to their own
client. Hopefully, the second practice will have played their role in explaining the costs to
the clients, making it easier to deal with this situation, should it subsequently arise.
problems in this area, two major things can be done when it comes to interpractice commu-
nication. In the first instance, practice B can provide its customer practices with a referral, or
out-of-hours pack, which contains both information for the referring practice and informa-
tion to hand on to clients. As this chapter is devoted to communication between colleagues,
sufice it to say that as far as clients are concerned, the information a referring practice will
find useful to pass onto its clients is as follows:
●A map with written directions on how to find the referral practice
●A leaflet from the referral practice, describing their business
● An instruction sheet providing details of how and when to present their pet to the referral
practice
 From the referral practice's perspective, the most important information to get across is
about the service it can offer to those who are likely to avail themselves of it. As the Ameri-
can essayist Ralph Waldo Emerson said, 'Build a better mousetrap, and the world will beat
a path to your door'. True, but only if they know it exists. So, the first task is to produce
a referral pack which can be sent to potential referring practices. Why a pack as opposed
to a simple letter and what should this pack contain? It is one thing knowing about the
Chapler 6  Communicaling with colleagues 
147
location of the individual who has invented the better mousetrap, but one is not going to
beat a path to their door unless you know you have a mouse problem. With that in mind, the
pack should contain information aimed at the referring practice team, detailing the services
and/or procedures on offer and should include additional information and detail on when
it would be advisable to refer. The referral pack should include the wherewithal to make
that it will not be long before all this communication will be taking place over the internet.
The referral pack should include a price list that the referring practice can use to provide
their clients with estimated costs. As has already been written elsewhere in this chapter, cost
go wrong, can be a triggering factor when it comes to complaints and claims. With this in
mind, it is vital that the communication of cost and value for money is kept in mind during
the entire process of referring clients. This starts with the referring practice and the provision
of a rough estimate, a 'ball park' figure. Hopefully, this rough estimate is refined by the
referral practice and they keep the client fully informed about the ongoing costs within the
referral centre. This whole area of the final cost to the client bearing litle resemblance to
the initial estimate is all too common, and practices should have the mechanisms in place to
keep clients up-to-date with ongoing additional costs.
Having been to the referral or out-of-hours emergency centre, our client will be return-
ing to their home practice for a follow-up consultation. It is vitally important for the clinical
history, along with a copy of the client's bill, to arrive at the client's home practice before
they do. In the case of the referred client, the practice will hopefully remember they referred
their client, but the clients who are seen at the out-of-hours clinic the night before may well
turn up at the practice without phoning first. With this in mind, it is most important for the
referral or out-of-hours practice to ensure full clinical and financial details of every case seen
with the express intention of having those records with the client's own practice before they
arrive. Sending details of the case with the client is one method of transferring the infor
mation, but this method, on its own, does not provide the necessary forewarning that is so
beneficial for all concerned.
A little forethought can save everyone a lot of time and trouble, and can ensure that com-
munication with the returning client gets off to the best possible start. So, in this chapter
we have looked at leaders, teams, motivation, meetings and so on, but we have returned to
the pivotal aspect of this book, the communication between the veterinary surgeon and the
client.
REFERENCES
Donne J (1624) Meditation XVIl. In: Donne J, Raspa A (eds), Devotions upon Emergent Occasions.
Oxford University Press, New York.
Drucker PF (1989) The Practice of Management. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Maslow AH (1966) The Psychology of Science: A Reconaissance. Regnery, Chicago.
Peters TJ, Waterman RH (2004) In Search of Excellence: Lessons from America's Best-Run Companies.
Harper Buisiness Essenfials, USA.
148 Handbook of Velerinary Communication Skills
FURTHER READING
Belbin RM (1993) Tea m Roles at Work. Bufterworth-Heinemarn, Oxford
 Belbin RM (2004) Management Teams: Why They Succeed or Fail, 2nd edn. Elsevier Butterworth-
Heinemann, Oxford.
Communicating with a wider audience
Jenny Moffett
PUBLIC SPEAKING FOR BEGINNERS
As veterinary professionals, we most commonly communicate with clients and colleagues
on a one-to-one basis. However, as with most professions, there will come a time when we
will be called upon to talk to larger groups. For vets this may mean holding a herd health
evening or presenting a case at a regional clinical meeting. For vet nurses this could include
hosting puppy parties, talking to school groups or speaking during practice open days. Even
veterinary students, faced with group-learning sessions and clinical rounds, need to learn
the basic skills of speaking to groups.
Mark Twain once said, 'There are two types of speakers: those that are nervous and those
that are liars'. Nearly 100 years later, public speaking still remains one of people's greatest
fears (Figure 7.1). There is, for example, anecdotal evidence to suggest that some individuals
 are more scared of public speaking than dying (Wallechinsky & Wallace 2005). Why is this?
One American survey (Stein et al. 1996), which revealed that one third of people reported
excessive anxiety when they spoke to a large audience, reported that the speaker's fears
included 'trembling, shaking, or showing other signs of anxiety','one's mind going blank',
'doing or saying something embarrassing', being unable to continue talking' and 'saying
foolish things or not making sense'.
 If you tend to avoid public speaking like the plague, it is possible that this could hin-
der your personal development and career. Whilst an ability to speak in public comfortably
widens your career opportunities and makes you more attractive to a potential employer, a
proficiency in public speaking has been linked to effective critical thinking as well as aca-
demic and professional success (Morreale & Hackman 1994). Grice and Skinner (1995) pro-
pose that public speaking is an excellent way of sharpening critical thinking skills such as
gathering and recalling, organizing, analysing and evaluating information. In addition, the
149
150
 Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
Figure 7.1 Fear of public speaking.
 process of 'discovering' your topic, shaping it into a message and delivering it orally are
comparable to writing in that it is a learning process (Nicosia 1997).
Preparation: what to say
When it comes to public speaking, Tilton (2002) says, Nothing can substitute for quality
preparation'. You would not dream of performing your first cruciate ligament repair without
reading up on the procedure and making sure that you had all the surgical equipment; an
oral presentation needs a similar approach.
Knowing your audience is the first step of this preparation. Before you can plan your pre-
sentation, you need to know who will be there to listen to it and why (Petrini 1990; Raveen
thiran 2005). You may have organized the presentation or meeting yourself, for example, for
a farmer's information night or a practice open day; in this case, you will have some idea of
your audience. However, if you have been asked to speak by a third party, such as the local
school or a veterinary college, you will need to ask several questions. Ask, who will make up
the audience? Do they have any prior knowledge of what I will be talking about and, if so, at
what level? What size of a group will be there? It also helps to identify why you have been
Chapler 7Communicaling with a wider audience
151
asked to talk - What do the organizers hope to achieve from the talk? What is the motivation
of those attending? Who else will be there and what will they be talking about?
u a st jeum - ssoe jag on pem noe aessa jeum apioap 0h paau noe Xen
point of this presentation for you (Petrini 1990)? If it is a practice open day, for example,
want to let them know about new facilities, new staff or price changes, or are you simply
keen to communicate the quality of the service at your practice? Furthermore, it is useful to
identify angles on this message that you are particularly passionate about. A speaker who is
-on aun on tn no aenns ch sm no aessa pem paapi aae no au
tent of your presentation accordingly. Assessing the right amount and level of information
required is important.
Raveenthiran (2005) says it is:
●boring to talk about what the audience already knows;
+futile to talk about what the audience cannot understand;
*arrogant to talk about what you know and ignore the interests of your audience; and
+dangerous to talk about things you are not sure about.
Overfamiliarity of the audience with a topic, says Raveenthiran (2005), gives way to'con
tempt'. In other words, do not address a roomful of veterinary radiologists with the basics of
how an X-ray machine works. In contrast, unfamiliarity with a topic gives a way to frustra-
tion and you risk losing your audience's attention (Raveenthiran 2005; Tilton 2002). Unless
you are addressing a group of colleagues, do not use technical terms, jargon or unfamiliar
acronyms. If you must use these terms, be careful to spell them out at the beginning of the
presentation so that you do not alienate those in the audience who do not understand
Preparation: how to say it
Rehearsing your presentation is also an important act of preparation (Petrini 1990; Prasad
et al. 2000). It may seem time-consuming, but doing a 'dummy run' will help iron out any
difficulties and build your confidence. Go through your presentation out loud. This will al-
low you to proofread your slides for spelling or grammar mistakes, as well as work out
whether you are finishing before or after the time limit on your presentation. Try to remem-
ber key points, but do not memorize your speech word for word; itis possible that you could
go blank (Petrini 1990).
If you perform this rehearsal in front of a mirror, or record it on a video, you will also
be able to look at your own body language when delivering the presentation. Watch out for
telltale signs of nerves such as crossed legs and arms or wringing hands. Also, if some of your
material is particularly complicated or controversial, rehearse it in front of a trusted friend
or colleague. Get them to play devil's advocate so that they can highlight what questions or
objections to your ideas may arise (Petrini 1990; Prasad et al. 2000). This will reinforce the
importance of knowing your topic, especially recent developments or controversial aspects,
inside out.
Where practical, performing this dummy run at the actual venue of the presentation is the
gold standard'. If this is not possible, make sure you know what facilities will be there - Can
electronic presentations or slides be used? Are there video and audio facilities? Although it
152 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
is not helpful to obsess over 'worst case scenarios', having a plan for technical problems, say
a computer failure, will help you feel more confident.
Finally, achieving the right frame of mind prior to delivering the presentation is also im-
portant. If you are nervous, there are certain techniques such as visualization of a positive
outcome, deep breathing and body stretches that can be used to relax (Petrini 1990). Sim-
ilarly, it can also help to put the presentation into perspective. As oral presentation skills
coach James Anderson says, do not let it get out of perspective: 'What's the worst thing that
could happen? Even if it does, you'll live. Yes this presentation is important, but it's not brain
surgery' (Petrini 1990).
According to communication consultant Gary Cosnett, it is important to set realistic goals
for yourself:
 You may set out with the unexamined goal of engaging 100% of the audience 100%
of the time. Anyone who's had any speaking experience knows that that's impossible,
but many people expect it (Petrini 1990).
Cosnett advises not to 'focus on the 10% or 15% who are not listening' as this takes your
attention away from the larger group of people who are listening (Petrini 1990). Also, if you
are worried that your nerves will show during the presentation, remember that the audience
response is more likely to be empathic rather than hostile or derisive (Petrini 1990).
The presentation as a consultation
Approaching an oral presentation is, in many ways, similar to conducting a consultation
with a client. You are there to deliver a message but also to listen to your audience and
gauge how they are reacting. Do they look confused? Are they nodding off? Here, it is useful
 to consider two key factors in the veterinary consultation model (Chapter 2): providing a
structure to the proceedings and building a relationship with the client (or audience).
 In providing structure to the proceedings, an oral presentation should have a beginning.
middle and end that are arranged in a logical sequence (Petrini 1990). An example of this is
the concept of: "Tell them what you're going to say, tell them and then tell them what you
have just told them' (Petrini 1990).
A strong opening is important. As Raveenthiran (2005) explains, it is the crucial time to
convince your audience that you have something interesting to say. Get your main point
out early and give the audience a good reason for being there. A herd health meeting with
farmers, for example, may begin with a welcome and a short statement such as: "Today I'm
going to talk about mastitis and the three easiest ways to keep your herd cell count down'.
As in a consult, you need to eliminate uncertainty and inform your audience what to expect:
"Today I'm going to talk about BVD. I have a short presentation that should take a half hour
and, after a period for questions, we'll break for lunch'.
The end of your speech is also important. If you want your audience to leave with your
message resounding in their ears, you need to end on a strong note. Summarize the main
points of the presentation or leave the audience with a question. If you end abruptly or dwin-
dle away at the end ('and that concludes my talk on .. .), your audience may feel somewhat
confused or anticlimactic. Some public speaking professionals advocate planning the ending
 of their presentation first (Petrini 1990). In this way your entire presentation builds up to this
final, key message.
Chapler 7 Communicaling with a wider audience 153
 Public speaking also reflects the veterinary consultation model in that it is important to
build up a relationship with the audience. Creating a rapport will put you, as well as the
audience, at ease. The key is to pretend that you are talking to just one person, not a whole
audience.
'What makes speakers so nervous is that they haven't connected with the audiences', ex
plains professional speaker Garrison Wynn (Sullivan 2005). So, how do you make this con-
Sno isnf pou are no od Aaa si ansu poq 'hnsuo e un s zuona
verbally throughi your speech and slides, you are also doing so non-verbally, with your body
language.
Non-verbal communication with your audience
If you can imagine yourself in conversation with your audience, and adopt body language
that appears comfortable and confident, it will help your audience to listen (Natarajan &
Kirby 2005). Aim to achieve as open a body posture as possible. This means coming out
from behind a lectern, standing up, facing the audience at all times and using open body
axeads e aieiandde sanuaipne - oon atnus soal pue sie passonoun Supnioui - abensue
who appears friendly and enthusiastic.
Eye contact is also key to involving the audience, and not just eye contact with the front
row. It may feel rather unnerving at first. Woolf and Kavanagh (2006) suggest:
Start by finding the person in the audience who is willing you to succeed (there's nearly
always one), then look around at the rest of the audience.
 Use hand gestures to emphasize interesting or important points and try to move around
the stage rather than standing in one place. Do not overdo either, however, and avoid fid-
dlling or fidgeting.
Your voice is another form of non-verbal communication. When you are nervous, your
voice naturally speeds up and increases in pitch, so consciously slowing down the rate of
d noa un uonna ssn louon pue anuapoo jo aessa e no aaio m yaads rnon
and rate of speaking will help prevent you from sounding monotonous. Also, as in a consul.
tation, pauses and short silences can be useful to allow an important piece of information to
sink in.
As in a consult, body language is a two-way process. During your presentation, you need
to be tuned in to your audience's non-verbal feedback - Do they look bored or confused, for
example? Do you need to go over an idea or complicated slide again?
Visual aids
When you give a presentation, visual aids such as charts, tables, graphs, movies and images
can help support your speech and keep your audience interested (Petrini 1990). The key to
visuals, however, is simplicity. Visuals should support rather than distract from your ideas
(Prasad et al. 2000). They should complement your speech rather than replace it - it shows
lazy presentation skills to stand in front of an audience and simply read slide after slide
verbatim.
154 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Public speaking experts (Essex-Lopresti 1980; Natarajan & Kirby 2005; Petrini 1990;
Raveenthiran 2005) have several recommendations for using an electronic presentation ap-
plication such as Microsoft PowerPoint:
+Use no more than one slide for every 2 minutes of your speech.
● Use contrasting colours, i.e. a light text on a dark blue or black background or vice versa
Inogon uaano-pan noy lequajod aul jo asnesaq uaana 1o pa1 ym uaxel aq pinous are
blindness in the audience.
*Use an appropriate style of text. Universal and Arial are the most popular fonts. Avoid
calligraphy, sans serif or italicized fonts. Do not underline text and do not use words or
sentences made entirely with upper case letters.
● Use an appropriate size of text. Text should be visible from the back row; try 36 points for
titles and 28 points for the body of the text.
●Limit the amount of information on the slide. Sentences should be short and punchy like
newspaper headlines. Five points on each slide, consisting of five words each, is a good
rule of thumb.
*Ensure there is consistency between slides. Make sure they are the same size, colour, have
the same background and that you use the same font throughout.
*Minimize animation and flashy gimmicks such as bullet point sounds. An exception to
aeads aui asuo Auo sieadde piod panq e se os apis e hueuy ixat paanq si s
has reached that point is a good way of keeping the audience in time with the speaker.
● Simplify diagrams and use clear, bold pictures. If there are unnecessary elements to a
slide, eliminate them.
Any questions?
The question-and-answer session is a valuable part of any presentation. It is the ultimate
listening tool for a public speaker that allows you to gain feedback on your performance
whilst addressing the needs of the audience. Questions can be taken either during the course
of the presentation or at the end. lf you are new to the experience, it may be simpler to
have the audience save questions for after the talk (Petrini 1990). In this way it will be easier
for you to keep on track and on time. Questions should be answered as concisely and clearly
as possible, and it is good practice to direct the answer to the entire audience - not just the
person that asked the question. When finished, ask: 'Does that answer your question?"
Sometimes you may be faced with tricky questions. Woolf and Kavanagh (2006) say:
People who ask difficult questions often do so to show off their knowledge. These
questions often begin, ‘Isn't it true that...' or, 'But what about ..' and can often be
answered by simply thanking the questioner. Alternatively, ask the questioner for their
opinion. They will probably be happy to expound on the subject as this is the reason
they spoke up originally.
Similarly, it is important not to react defensively to a question. As Strikwerda (2006) says:
 o  a n s q u s p   , tn no
learn, and not lose your cool. The most important thing hostile questioners want is to
be heard. If they overdo it and you listen respectfully, you win.
Chapler 7  Communicaling with a wider gudience   155
Other useful techniques include asking for the question to be repeated or asking another
member of the audience if they would like to answer the question (Woolf & Kavanagh 2006).
If all else fails, a simple 'I don't know, but I will find out' is an honest reply
As you can see, investing a little time in rehearsing for questions, as well as building up
later.
VETERINARY MEDICINE AND THE MEDIA - A MEETING
OF TWO WORLDS
Seminars and lectures have their uses, but what if we want to contact an even bigger or
wider type of audience? A vet in private practice, for example, may want to highlight a new
service to clients or an unusual clinical case to peers. Similarly, a vet involved in research
may want to highlight his or her latest findings. Veterinary professionals have the potential
to reach enormous numbers of people through the national, regional and local media, as well
as to target their message at particular audiences, for example, other vets or researchers.
The media world, in the form of TV broadcasting and print journalism, has not been a
traditional habitat for the veterinary profession, but this has changed considerably over the
last 10-15 years. An explosion of veterinary programmes such as Vets' School, Vets in Practice,
Vet Safari and Super Vets has demonstrated a huge public interest in the subject. Although it is
easy to write off such media coverage as 'light entertainment', it has several positive features.
Aside from helping to open up the profession to the public, the media allows veterinary
professionals to promote better animal welfare and responsible pet ownership. It also allows
us to give advice and direction on matters of public concern such as food safety and the
control of infectious diseases.
On an individual level, working with the media can be used to develop one's career. In
academia, for example, the reporting of research findings can enhance citation rates and
boost the public profile of research institutions (Phillips et al. 1991). In addition, favourable
media reporting can attract political and economic support for research (Salisbury 1997 cited
 in Allan 2002), whilst in the case of public-funded research, the media can inform the tax-
 payer how their money is being invested (European Commission 2007a). One only has to
look at the amount of money that governments and large corporations invest into advertis-
ing and media management to see how importantly they value positive media coverage.
 Despite all these opportunities, it has been observed that vets find dealing with the media
'difficult and fraught with danger' (Anon 2007). However, vets are not alone in these percep-
tions - other scientists and their representative bodies have highlighted an uneasy relation-
ship between their field of expertise and the world of journalism. Research has demonstrated
the barriers to reporting science on both sides. A recent EU-wide study (European Commis-
sion 2007a), which examined researchers’ views of the media, revealed that scientists had a
number of negative associations with science reporting. These included the following:
●The belief that the covering of a scientific topic can be driven by imperatives other than
the science itself, for example, a political agenda
●The fear that prominence is given to the need to have an attention-grabbing angle at the
expense of factual accuracy
156  Handbook of Veterinary Communication Skills
*The belief that a modern preoccupation with celebrity culture means that 'popular scien
tific communicators' are used on scientific topics for which they are not appropriate
The Biotechnology and Biological Science Research Council (Anon 2000) expands on this:
Whereas scientists are concerned with their work and often work to exactitudes and
over long periods of times, journalists are working to find the newsworthy angle and
to turn a story around in the shortest pace of time. Whilst journalists can see scientists
as slow, unhelpful and pedantic, scientists will talk of misrepresentation.
 As Gregory and Miller (2000) explain, 'the differences between journalistic and scientific
practices can sometimes lead to friction'.
However, science stories can and do make the front page regularly, and once they do,
they can have a profound effect on public thinking and individual actions. Entwistle and
Hancock-Beaulieu (1992), for example, describe two cases where the media had a direct in-
fluence on the health behaviour of individuals. In the first case, press coverage of research
which showed links between oral contraceptive use and breast and cervical cancer resulted
in a decrease in use of 'the pill'. In the second case, the Bristol Cancer Help Centre experi-
enced a drop in attendees following news coverage of a paper (which proved to be substan-
tially flawed) that suggested that attendance at the centre worsened the prognosis of women
withbreastcancer.
Press coverage, say Entwistle and Hancock-Beaulieu (1992), also has a huge role in bring
ing a topic to the table for discussion. ‘One unquestioned effect of press coverage', they
issues'. One of the most infamous examples of this agenda setting, in the veterinary field, is
h a a jo siso ( sdaa ods aq  as
Case study - how BSE evolved from veterinary
to mainstream news
When the first British cow died from BSE, in early 1985, it was an event of veterinary signif-
icance only. An unusual neurological condition that bore some resemblance to scrapie, BSE
was, initially, 'insufficiently newsworthy' to merit the pages of the national press. For this
 ioyno asasip mau se o aao p '(o) ra pe Aroa Aes os
late 1980s, was 'confined to the specialist scientific press and the science pages of the quality
daily press'.
The British government's Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food was first informed
about BSE by the Chief Veterinary Officer in June 1987 (Allan 2002). At this stage, litle was
known about the disease and whether it could be transmitted to humans. However, faced
with the prospect of a public health panic and the potential collapse of the livestock export
su jaq usig, aunnssean jo aessa e aen on asoo jaaao a 'ae
safe'.
Around this time, the government and its veterinary advisors made a number of dam-
aging communication errors. In November 1988, for example, the UK's Chief Veterinary
Officer, Keith Meldrum, announced that there was no risk of transmission of BSE to humans
through milk. A month later, the sale of milk from cows with BSE was banned. In January
1990, Meldrum proclaimed that BSE was 'not a risk to people'. However, a few days later
     a g s s o a  e
Chapler 7  Communicaling with a wider audience  157
announced, and Meldrum claimed that it was ‘too early’ to say that there was no risk to
people from BSE (Gregory & Miller 2000). At best, the government and its veterinary de-
partment were seen as giving out premature reassurances and, at worst, they were seen as
being untruthful. To add to this confusion, several scientific figures were offering opinions
that conflicted with that of the government. Professor Richard Lacey, a professor of clinical
microbiology at Leeds University, was one of the most vociferous. Professor Lacey, according
to Gregory and Miller (2000), said:
Since the incubation periods for spongiform encephalopathies were in the order of
tens of years, no-one would know if people had caught BSE for some time, and that we
might find out that an entire generation had been wiped out. The only logical approach
for the human population was to avoid all beef products.
The lack of clear-cut, reassuring scientific knowledge, and the conflict of scientific voices,
created a degree of uncertainty. This uncertainty can be a valuable tool for the media. As
Gregory and Miller (2000) explain:
In times of uncertainty, it is a clear message that wins the day, both for personal psy-
chological comfort and for social action: it allows us to know both how to feel and what
to do.
On 20 March 1996, 'government "spin" was decisively unravelled once and for all' as
the then Health Secretary, Stephen Dorrell, announced to members of the House of Com-
mons that there was a 'probable link' between BSE and the human prion disease variant CJD
(Creutzfeld-Jakob disease) (Allan 2002). Any trust that the public had in its government and
their veterinary advisors was now in tatters.
When it comes to the handling of the BSE crisis, science journalist Jane Gregory Payne
(1998) says thiat there are many valuable lessons to be learnt.
e wony uoneonn leney pue paaa apiaond on Aroiepueu si l, :sureldxa aus
credible source to support emotional and controversial claims during the announce-
ment/definition stage of the media coverage. Without faith in the source of the mes-
sage .. . or guidance from credible experts, the media tended to seek out explanations
which often were based more on speculations than hard science'.
When the scientist's message lacked clarity and credibility, she concludes, 'it invited the
press to "fill in the blanks".
How to work safely and effectively with the medio
As with public speaking, communicating through the media is not unlike communicating
with your client in the practice setting - the same verbal and non-verbal skills are important.
You should, however, be aware that communicating through the media has introduced a
'middle man' into the equation. Instead of giving your message directly to your client, or
target audience, there is now a chain of people between you. Whilst you have a message you
need to communicate, it will be done according to the 'rules and constraints' of the world of
journalism (Friedman 1986 cited in Allan 2002).
The media, or more correctly the mass media, is a collective term used to describe a
method of communication that reaches a large audience. Print media usually refers to news-
papers and magazines but also includes directories, newsletters and event programmes.
Electronic media includes the internet and broadcast media such as radio or television.
158 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
As a veterinary professional, there are two broad reasons for working with the media -
either a journalist needs information from you or you have information that you want to
communicate to a wide audience, usually via a journalist. Note, however, that there is a
growing section of 'media vets' who act as TV figures or writers that bypass this journalist
stage (Box 7.1).
Box 7.1 Vet in the public eye
Pete Wedderburn is a small animal practitioner from Bray, Co. Wicklow. He has worked
on TV, radio and has several columns in UK and Irish newspapers. Here, Pete shares his
experiences of being a vet in the media:
Nine years ago, our receptionist interrupted me between consultations: “There is
someone on the phone from TV3 - can you talk to them?' I did not realize at the
time that the subsequent conversation would lead to ann entirely new branch in my
veterinary career.
Ireland's only independent television channel of the time had recently launched
nationwide breakfast time television, known as Ireland AM'. The producers of the
show had spotted the growing interest in pets in Ireland, and they wanted a vet to
come in for a regular 10-minute feature. Would I be interested?
of extending this to television appearances was intriguing. After discussing the idea
-odde sn rensan A 'o pod pe y pue 's, pies I 'siad A m
ments on Wednesdays did not start till 11 AM. Instead, I was busy being on telly.
 u P a s a m  si Pn u om 
dreds of thousands rather than in millions, and the performance pressure is simi
larly toned down. The producers, camera crew and researchers seem very relaxed
and unfazed. If there is a small mistake on air, it is not disastrous.
At any level, however, live television is exciting. Sometimes, I find myself
looking at the camera and thinking 'What the heck am I going to say now?' Over
the years, I have learnt to raise my eyebrows and smile to get over those difficult
moments.
Over the 6 years, the format of the show has remained similar. I bring one of
my patients into the studio with me. I have 5 minutes to 'show and tell', which
gives me a chance to communicate a message about the particular problem of my
patient. Once this section is finished, I have 5 minutes to deal with viewer queries.
At first, we used to take live phone calls, but it became difficult to prevent the callers
from going into lengthy details about their pets' idiosyncrasies. At some point, the
producer made the wise decision to take queries in the form of mobile phone texts.
These are requested on air half an hour before the vet spot, and I am presented
with a list of queries to choose from. The questions are usually simple: 'My Rotty
barks 2 much. Wat can I do?', 'Wat shud I feed my Westie puppy?', but occasionally,
noA op quaann eum X eioadorv se Sop An, auuauo anou aq uen Aa
recommend?
There is no rehearsing, and it is always 'ad libbed'. There is the continual possi
bility of absolute disaster in front of hundreds of thousands of people, yet somehow,
Chapler 7 Communicating with a wider audience
159
that is part of the fun. I know that it is not living on the edge in the same way as
climbing mountains or paddling down the Amazon, but in its own way, it does give
me a weekly internal injection of adrenaline.
The weekly preparation for the show is simple. Every Tuesday, I get a phone
call from the television researcher. What am I bringing in the following day? I have
spent the week scanning my patients for television suitability. The television team
 generally leave this choice up to me, and over the years I have covered most aspects
of pet care and common diseases. Fat cats, balding dogs, dentistry, skin tumours,
cataracts: these subjects may seem mundane to vets, but to the public, every case
is new and interesting. As I explain the case over the phone to the researcher, they
type up notes for the presenters, and when I arrive the next day, the television team
has been briefed and everything is ready for me to walk onto the set.
I have an early start every Wednesday, leaving home at 7.00 AM and collecting
my patient-of-the-week on the way to the television studios. I take the pets in my
own car, usually without the owners. Most folks have to go to work, and they are
delighted to lend me their animals for their 15 minutes of fame. I always need to
reach the studios well in advance of my appearance time. I am not renowned for
good time-keeping, but when live television is involved, there is no room for late-
ness. I usually arrive an hour before I am due to go on. This allows plenty of time
for preparation and for unexpected incidents such as traffic delays.
While I am waiting for my slot each week, I am called into the make-up room. My
pale, tired, pasty face is manipulated by an efficient, friendly lady with brushes and
 powders. Within minutes, I have every appearance of having just returned from a
2-week holiday in the sun. It is a pleasant session of gentle pampering. Even my
eyebrows are carefully combed and my hair is subtly gelled and positioned. It is
the only time in my life that my appearance receives such close attention. Once
the show is over, I am supposed to remove the make-up with baby wipes, but it is
easy to forget, and I am sure some of my clients must give me odd looks on these
Occasions. Why is the vet wearing make-up?
 The weekly television appearance does mean that I am well known in a very
vague way by the public in Ireland. Most folk who recognize me carnot remember
where they have seen me before. Much as I would love them to swoon and say 'Oh,
the TV vet!', the most common comments are 'Where have we met before?' or 'How
do I know you?' There are times when it is not so good to be easily recognized. I
was once asked to open a pet shop in a town in the middle of Ireland. As Ileft at the
end of a busy day of pet talk, I told my wife how relieved I was to be leaving ‘Pete
the Vet' behind so that I could relax. When we arrived at the hotel, and a fellow
 guest said loudly, 'Aren't you the vet from the television?', I was forced to present
the ‘Pete the Vet' persona again, which was exactly what I did not feel like doing. I
will never need sunglasses and a hat to hide from legions of fans, but there are just
a few occasions when anonymity would be a blessing.
The most enjoyable aspect of television work is the variety of new challenges
that it injects into my weekly work routine. I have to come up with an interesting
to arrange for their pets to feature beside me. And, on the day, I have to arrange my
160 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
thought processes clearly so that I can send out the message that I want to pass
on, rather than the mumbled vagueness which could easily come out of my mouth
when under pressure. I also enjoy working with a range of colleagues in the media
who live in an entirely different world to my normal veterinary sphere. They have
their own jargon, with terms such as OB (outside broadcast), LVO (live voice over)
and PTC (piece to camera). And yes, people really do say 'It's a wrap'. There is
  g a n  e  n n   e s
generally no better than much veterinary work, it can be fun mingling with 'media
types' and bumping into occasional genuine'celebrities'.
When looking for a science or veterinary story, journalists get their information from sev-
 eral sources, which include journals, meetings, press conferences and press releases, as well
as from more general breaking news stories, unsolicited calls and their own sources (Green-
berg 1997 cited in Allan 2002).
If you have information you need to communicate via the media then you will need to
make the initial approach. The usual way to do this is by releasing the information in a
traditional format, such as a media or press release, or by contacting a journalist directly.
 However, as with public speaking, preparation of how you choose to communicate your
information is essential.
If you have information that you want to be used as a news story, you should ask yourself
the two following questions:
1.  What do you hope to achieve?
2.How do you hope to achieve it?
If we take the example of a veterinary practitioner who is launching a new canine hy-
drotherapy pool at his practice, we can look at what sort of answers these questions might
receive.
What do you hope to achieve?
● We would like to make more people - clients and other veterinary practices - aware of
the new facilities.
·We would like to attract more clients to use the facilities
●We would like to encourage our existing clients to use the facilities.
*We would like to make more people aware of the benefits of canine hydrotherapy.
How do you hope to achieve it?
We will place an advertisement in a local paper.
●We will get editorial coverage in the local newspaper.
●We will get coverage on the local radio channel.
·We will send a brochure out with all of this year's vaccination reminders.
These two basic questions form the bones of a communication plan, which you can use
to locate which medium you want to target. If, as in the above-mentioned example, you
have a local interest story, your ideal targets would be the local newspapers and radio
Chapler 7  Communicaling with a wider gudience   161
stations - perhaps even a regional TV station. If you want neighbouring practices to know
that they can refer a dog to your hydrotherapy clinic, the national veterinary press may also
be appropriate. If you are working in the field of veterinary research, your story may find a
its newsworthiness (see below).
Remember, competition for news coverage can be high, and you have to convince jour-
nalists that you have a story worth telling, with the minimum of effort on their part. So how
do you do this?
What makes a good story?
There are two main ways of framing a story in the media - either as a hard news article or
as a feature article (Randall 2007). A hard news article is generally short, fact-based and to-
the-point. Usually, the most important points of the story (e.g. what happened, when, where
and to whom?) are covered in the first few sentences. Feature stories, on the other hand, are
generally longer and have more freedom of expression. However, for a piece of information
to merit translation into either a hard news article or a feature article, it must be what we call
But what is newsworthiness? As the old adage, accredited to US journalist and author
Charles A. Dana, says: 'If a dog bites a man, that's not news. But if a man bites a dog, that's
news!
When it comes to science stories, as many veterinary stories are framed, there are several
2007b) study highlighted the following as the most important:
1. Relevance - the news item must be relevant to everyday life.
 2. Novelty - a news item must tell something not previously known.
3.1
 Understandable - a news item must be easy to understand and mean something to the
reader
4.
 Proximity - news which relates to the particular country where a newspaper or TV sta-
tion is based is more newsworthy.
5.  Political or controversial - many journalists look for a political angle to a story.
6.
 Sensation and originality - stories that can 'touch' readers are more newsworthy.
Other news values (Rensberger 1997 cited in Allan 2002) include reliability of the results,
i.e. whether the scientific work is from a reputable source, and timeliness. Time is of the
essence in news circles and news should as up-to-date as possible. The turnaround on news
articles can be extremely quick, and journalists often work to deadlines that are in the order
of hours or even minutes.
The newsworthiness of a story is often increased if one can find a human angle (Allan
2002). Taking the example of our vet with the hydrotherapy pool, a journalist would view
the option of an interview with a satisfied client, or a veterinary nurse that works at that
clinic, as an attractive addition to the story.
Similarly, a good quality image can also make the difference between an article being pub-
digital images that are well lit and not blurred. Further to this, pictures of people and animals
are much more welcome than those of items or buildings (Anon 1999).
162 Handbook of Veterinary Communication Skills
Forming a media release for veterinarians
Once you have an idea of the story you want to tell, you must now reproduce it in a format
that is easily recognizable to a journalist. Typically, this means drawing up a media (or press)
release - a piece of written communication, which is emailed or faxed to journalists and
editors at newspapers, magazines and /or TV or radio broadcasting networks.
A media release (Figure 7.2) should include the following parts (Anon 2000; Martineau
2007; PRWeb 2007):
●Announcement - ‘press release' or 'media release' usually appears at the top of the doc-
ument. (1)
+Headline - this is used to grab the attention of the reader and briefly summarize what the
release is about. (2)
● Subheading - a single sentence under the headline, which expands on the content of the
release.(3)
●Date - when the release has been sent. (4)
·Location - where the release has come from. (5)
● Introduction - this explains briefly the major points of the news release, for example,
Who? Where? What? Why? (6)
● Body - this represents the second and subsequent paragraphs of the release, which con-
tain greater detail about the piece of news, i.e. further explanation, statistics, background
or other relevant details. As with other forms of communication to a non-technical audi-
(/) 'spiom Suol pue suAuoioe 'uosie! pioae ol An 'aoua
●Contact information - this includes a designated media contact who is willing, able and
available to take media enquiries. Details should include the job or title of the person (so
a  rag x g a ra r s m  'x cn  id  s
and postal addresses. If there is a relevant website, include this too. (8)
●Notes to editor - this includes brief background information on the people, events or or-
ganizations mentioned in the story If you have photos, add 'photos available on request'
at this point. If you are emailing your release, you can attach one good example to catch
the journalist's interest. (9)
● End - to indicate that the media release has come to an end, it is normal convention to
A media release is designed to catch, and hold, the reader's attention. In the same way
that a CV should be tailored to a potential employer, a media release should be tailored to
its specific media target. With our canine hydrotherapy example, a media release to the local
newspaper, for example, could concentrate on the people and location of the clinic, whilst
a release tailored to a national veterinary magazine may concentrate more on the facilities
available and the actual hydrotherapy. Also, as with a CV, the information should be kept
short and to-the-point, and the important points should not be hidden' at the bottom of the
release. If a release is to be used and needs to be shortened, newspaper and magazine editors
tend to cut from the bottom upwards (Anon 2007).
Finally, as discussed above, finding a human angle is important. In a media release, a
quote from one or two sources will help to give the piece 'colour'. Keep the quotations short
as, according to Chambers (2006), 'quotes which are short and concise are more likely to be
printed, and printed in their entirety'.
Chapler 7  Communicaling with a wider audience 
¥163
MEDIA RELEASE (1)
New Enniskillen hydrotherapyfacilityrepresents a first for dogs in NorthernIreland.
(3)
July 10, 2008. For immediate use (4)
Enniskillen, Co. Fermanagh, Northern Ireland (5)
A vet has launched the first hydrotherapy facility for dogs in Northern Ireland. The
Canine Rehabilitation Clinic, set up by Richard Hamilton, practice principal at Forest
Veterinary Practice, Enniskillen, was opened on July 10, 2008. (6)
The clinic, situated adjacent to the existing Forest Veterinary Practice premises, is
open to dogs of all ages and breeds. Appointments can either be made through the
practice or following referral from other veterinary practices.
for animal species. During a hydrotherapy session, the dog is placed in a pool
of warm water The temperature ofthe water allows muscles to relax, easing pain and
stiffness, making it easier for the dog to exercise. The water also supports the dogs,
especially useful in relieving painful joints and increasing the range of movement in
joints and improving muscle strength.
Speaking at the launch ofthe clinic, Mr Hamilton said: *I am delighted that we now
have such a facility up and running in Enniskillen. It is an incredibly valuable tool to
help in the rehabilitation of animals after surgery or after car accidents so it's a real
boon to the practice.' (7)
For further information contact:
Richard Hamilton
Forest Veterinary Practice
13 Ballyroan Street
Enniskillen
Co.Fermanagh
BT74 3LW
Tel: 0044 28 6565 3334
Fax: 0044 28 6565 3333
Email: rhamilton@forestvets.co.uk
Web: www.forestvets.co.uk (8)
Notes to editor:
Forest Veterinary Practice is a six-vet practice that was established in 1999. Vets at
 the practice specialize in companion animal medicine and see clients with cats, dogs,
Veterinary College, London in 1981. He has a specialist qualification in veterinary
surgery.
Attached photos shows practice principal Richard Hamilton with three-year-old
Labrador Spike and Spike's owner, Laura Moore. A range of photos taken at the
launch are available on request. (9)
###ENDS ###(10)
Figure 7.2 An example of a media release for a local newspaper.
164 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Now that you have created your media release, you need to use it as effectively as pos-
sible. First, you must locate the best destination for it. If you are drawing up a news story
for your local paper, call the news office to find out how they prefer to receive stories, for
example, by email or fax. Then find out the contact details of the news editor and send it
directly to them. You can also post your press release on a commercial press release distribu-
tion service such as 'AlphaGalileo' (www.alphagalileo.org) or on your practice or personal
website, if you have one (Martineau 2007). After you have sent out your media release, make
follow-up telephone calls to ensure that it has reached its destination. Be prepared to resend
it as releases can often get lost or mislaid.
Second, you must choose the most appropriate time to release the story. If possible, avoid
busy news periods, for example, around a governmental budget or general election. This
0l orequa ue asn oste ues noy iseopeorq 1o pustqnd sunae jo saoueuo inoa aseaiun lm
your advantage. An embargo is a date and/or time issued along with a press release, which
informs the media when a story can go to press. Mark this clearly at the top of the press
release: 'embargoed until . . '. The Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
nd jo sasueuo 1noA aseanoun cn creqa ue Suisn spuaosa1 (oooz uouv) (staa)
cation:
Towards the end of the week journalists are often looking for stories for Monday edi-
tions of programmes and papers. Providing them beforehand with something embar-
 goed for Monday may increase the chances of your release being used.
If you do not want to place an embargo on your release, mark it as available for immedi-
ate use' (Figure 7.2 (4)). Whether you place an embargo or not, do make sure that the contact
you mention on the release is available immediately (Anon 2007) and has not, ′[disappeared]
for a two-week conference in the middle of nowhere' (Anon 1999).
Media interview skilfs
A successful CV often leads to an interview, and so too does a successful press release. If
your release is sufficiently newsworthy, you may be contacted by a journalist, seeking further
information via an interview.
Interviews can take many forms - they can be carried out in person or over the phone,
and they can be used to write an article or produce a TV or radio piece (either prerecorded
 or live). They can also be short and to-the-point or longer and more in-depth.
Whether your interview is being recorded for television or over the phone, it is akin to
public speaking: preparation is essential (Anon 2000; Royal Society 2000). You need to give
some consideration to what you want to say and how you want to say it. When someone calls
to set up an interview, find out some basic information about the set-up of the interview -
what will be the line of questioning or, even better, what questions will be asked? Will the
interview be live or recorded? Who else, if anyone, is appearing? How long will the interview
take? What level of audience will this be aimed at - what publication does the journalist
represent? If the interview is to be broadcast, will it be as part of a scientific programme or a
'human interest' programme?
As with giving a presentation, you should decide in advance on your key messages 
what do you want to get across? If your topic is somewhat controversial, it is also wise to
Chapler 7 Communicaling with a wider audience 165
prepare for tricky questions. Imagine being interviewed by a competitor or someone who
disagrees with your opinion - what sort of questions would they want to ask you?
In addition, consider how the public will perceive you. Even if you are being interviewed
tive of the veterinary profession. Because of this there are certain recommendations, such as
 those of your professional body, to take into consideration. The Royal College of Veterinary
Surgeons (RCVS) (2006), for example, says:
[V]eterinary surgeons must ensure that any statement is factually correct, distinguish-
ing clearly between personal opinion or political belief and established facts .. . They
should be careful not to express or imply that any view is shared by the profession at
large unless previously authorised by the RCVS, BVA or other professional body.
 If you are to be interviewed on television, another part of preparation is your physical
appearance. Think about how you want to come across: neat, professional attire is usually
best (Science Media Centre 2007). Achieving the right body language is also important. As
with public speaking, it is usually best to adopt an open, relaxed appearance. Siting or
standing with uncrossed arms and legs, whilst achieving good, consistent eye contact with
the interviewer, are the basic guidelines. Try not to worry about the camera and concentrate
on speaking with as normal a tone, pace and pitch as possible.
When it comes to the content of the interview, make sure that you are making sense to
the interviewer. Do not speak in technical jargon, even to an industry specialist (Anon 2007),
and if you must use big words, explain them. Also, be aware of what you want to have re-
ported and what you do not. There can be some confusion about journalistic conventions
such as being 'on' or 'off the record. As the Department for Business, Enterprise and Reg-
ulatory Reform (formerly known as the Department of Trade and Industry) explains (Anon
1999):
 be used, so it is best not to say anything on this basis) and 'unattributable' (use it but
don't say who told you).
If you are in any doubt about mentioning something, do not (Royal Society 2000).
 In some situations, vets as scientists may be called on to discuss a controversial or 'break-
ing news' story, which can bring extra challenges. If you are cold called by a journalist in
the light of an emerging news story, it is good practice to ask for 10 minutes to retrieve
something to refer to, and collect your thoughts (Anon 1999). Remember, however, that the
journalist may be working to a tight deadline and you may need to keep the delay brief. Ask
the journalist about their deadline and their subject, and then call them back or give them a
time to call you back (Anon 1999).
The most difficult types of interviews are those which involve controversial subjects or
uncertain areas of science. The Science Media Centre (2006), an independent organization
that helps scientists to work with the news media, has several guidelines when it comes to
controversy:
*Do not be afraid to say 'We simply don't know'.
*Stay calm. Be honest, frank and open.
*Do not be afraid of saying that something is not 100% safe.
166 Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
*Avoid ducking the question.
●Think about what your audience needs to know - address their concerns.
The Royal Society (2000) advises interviewees not to feel pushed into an answer:
Although a reporter may want a straightforward yes or no answer, don't be pressur-
ized into making a response that you will later regret. If you do not know the answer
to a particular question, say so. Never lie.
 Ensuring that you have prepared yourself thoroughly and taking the few simple guide-
lines above into consideration can make the media interview as stress free a procedure as
possible.
REFERENCES
Allan S (2002) Media, Risk and Science. Open University Press, Philadelphia, PA.
Anon (1999) Going Public: An Introduction to Communicating Science, Engineering and Technology.
DTI Publications, London.
Anon (2000) Communicating with the Public.Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Coun-
cil, London.
Anon (2007) Dealing with the media spotlight. Veterinary Record 160(15):495.
 Chambers D (2006) Killer virus arrives': how Defra press releases regarding avian influenza were
processed by the wriften press and interpreted by the public. MSc thesis, Liverpool Uriversity,
UK.
 Entwistle V, Hancock-Beaulieu M (1992) Health and medical coverage in the UK national press.
Public LInderstanding of Science 1:367-382.
 Essex-Lopresti M (1980) Mluminating an address: a guide for speakers at medical meetings. Medi-
cal Education 14:8-11.
Report, European Commission. December 2007.
European Commission (2007b) European research in the media: what do the media professionals
think? Report, European Commission. December 2007.
Gregory J, Miller S (2000) Science in Public: Communication, Culture and Credibility. Perseus, New
York, pp.176, 243.
Gregory Payne J (1998) Media coverage of the mad cow issue: introduction. In: Ratzan SC (ed.),
The Mad Cow Crisis: Health and the Public Cood. New York University Press, New York, p. 134.
Grice GL, Skinner JF (1995) Mastering Public Speaking. Allyn and Bacon, Boston.
Marfineau N (2007) How do I write a press release? SciDevNet. Available online: hftp: / /www.
scidev.net/en/practical-guides/how-do-i-write-a-press-release-.html (accessed 5 September
2008).
 Morreale SP, Hackman MZ (1994) A communication competency approach to public speaking
instruction. Journal of Instructional Psychology 21(3):250
Natarajan A, Kirby JA (2005) A guide to oral presentation skills. Student British Medical
Journal 13:353-396. Available online: www.studentbmj.com/issues/05/10/careers/376.php
(accessed 5 September 2008).
Chapler 7 Communicaling with a wider audience 
167
Nicosia G (1997) Implementing public speaking skills across the curriculum. Community Review
15:74-81.
Petrini CM (1990) A survival guide to public speaking. Training and Development Journal 44:15-25.
Phillips DP, Kanter EJ, Bednarczyk BT, Tastad, PL (1991) Importance of the lay press in trans-
mission of medical knowledge fo the scientific community. New England Journal of Medicine
325:1180-1183.
Journal of Postgraduate Medicine 46:193-198.
PRWeb (2007) Tips, guidelines and templates for writing an effective press release. Available on-
line: www.prwebdirect.com/pressreleasetips.php (accessed 5 September 2008).
Randall D (2007) The LIniversal Journalist, 3rd edn. Pluto Press, London.
Journal 13:353-396. Available online: www.studentbmj.com/issues/05/10/careers/374.php
(accessed 5 September 2008).
RCVS (2006) Guide to Professiona! Conduct. RCVS, London.
Royal Society (2000) Scienfists and fhe media. Guidelines for Scientists Working with the Media and
Comments onaPress Code ofPractice.Royal Society,London.
Science Media Centre (2006) Commuricafing risk in a soundbite: a guide for scientists. Avail-
able online: http: / /www.sciencemediacentre.org/uploadDir /admincommunicating-risk.pdf
(accessed 18 September 2008).
Science Media Cenfre (2007) Top fips for media work: a guide for scienfists. Available online:
http:/ / www.sciencemediacentre.org/pages / publications/ (accessed 18 September 2008).
 Stein MB, Walker JR, Frode DT (1996) Public speaking fears in a community sample: prevalence,
impact on functiorning, and diagnostic classificafion. Archives of General Psychiatry 53:169-174
Strikwerda C (2006) Jokes and quote: tips on public speaking for hardworking deans. Academic
Leader 22(2):5-6.
Sullivan VK (2005) Public speaking: the secret weapon in career development. LISA Today
May:24-25.
 Tilton JE (2002) Advenfures in public speaking: a guide for the beginning instructor or public
speaker.FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin February:15-19.
Wallechinsky D, Wallace A (2005) The Book of Lists. Canongate Books Ltd, Edinburgh.
Woolf K, Kavanagh J (2006) Giving presentations without palpitations. British Medical Journal
Career Focus 332:242-243.
Communication and self-care in the
veterinary profession
Communication, stress and the individual
Martina A. Kinsella
Things which matter most must never be at the mercy of things which matter least.
(Goethe)
The veterinary profession fails to talk aloud about the ‘internal struggles' and ‘demons' it
experiences (Connolly 2004). Therefore, what we have today among veterinarians is a pro-
fession with an unacceptable level of suicide, mental illness, alcoholism and drug addic-
tion (Mellanby 2005). With respect to suicide, recent research by Bartram et al. (2009) has
highlighted a range of factors which may predispose members of this profession to such be-
haviour, including high levels of anxiety and depressive symptoms, higher 12-month preva-
lence of suicidal thoughts, less favourable psychosocial work characteristics, lower levels of
positive mental well-being and higher levels of negative work-home interaction.
A prerequisite for admission into a veterinary degree course is to be a gifted and highly
intelligent student. Maintaining such an elevated existence right through veterinary train-
ing, alongside the competitive nature of vet school, inevitably sows the seeds of extreme
 expectations that vets will continue to demand from themselves in their working career.
This, attached to the seemingly endless list of professional demands and sources of stress
(Table 8.1), can have far-reaching consequences for those not equipped with the necessary
skills to cope (Halliwell & Hoskin 2005; Voracek 2004).
Further to the role of being a veterinarian, there is life off the job to contend with. Tech-
nological advances such as laptops and mobile phones mean one is never far from the job.
Role conflict may arise as a result when:
the attitudes, values and behaviours required for one role, may be incompatible with
those needed in another These opposing behavioural expectations may create tension
within individuals as they make the transition from one environment to another.
(Cooper et al. 2001)
168
 Chapler 8 Communication and self-care in the velerinary profession
169
Table 8.1 Mulliple sources of stress and professional demands in the velerinary profession
Workplace Interpersonal
Workload
Client Issues
Relationships
Overwork
 Difficult or demanding clienls
 Staff relations
Excessive tosk demands  Unreasonable clienls alfiludes 
 Problems with peers
Being on call 
Complainls
Lack of support
After-hours work
Unhappy clients
 Slalf management [for managers)]
Time pressure
 Clienis' poorly controlled animals Difficullies with management for employees 
Deadines 
Unreliable/unpunctual clienis 
Organizalional communicalion
Long hours/days
Concerns over clienls' finances
Mistakes
Dealing with clients' grief
Criticism
Work Outcomes
Work Constraints
Other Stressors
Unsuccessful treatments 
Paperwork
 Own feelings of inexperience
Dificull cases
 Poor equipment or facilies
Desire lo do the best job possible
Bureaucracy
Desire to keep skills up-lo-dale
Involvement with other agencies
 Financial concerns
Audits
Balancing work and family commitments
 Unclear accountabilies
High level of responsibiliy
Work interruplions
Risk of ligation
 Social isolation
Travel
Monotony
 Physical demands
Repelilive work
Weather
Lack of career advancement
 Organizalional changes
Reproduced with kind permission from Gardner (2005}.
THE FIRST STEP TO INNER FREEDOM
What lies behind us and what lies before us are tiny matters, compared to what lies
within us.
(Oliver Wendell Holmes)
Recognizing and embracing the complexity of being human, one's own individuality,
combined with both inherited and acquired personality traits is an invaluable starting point
 in discovering the pathway to inner freedom. Although there are many external factors con-
 tributing to the problems for veterinary professionals, the state of the inner mind, its deep-
 rooted thinking and natural responses have the capacity to determine whether a situation is
either a good or bad experience for the vet. Additionally, the tendency to suffer stress and
its severity can be measured by careful analysis of the emotional, physical and behavioural
symptoms of stress. Table 8.2 serves as a good indicator in determining the intensity of one's
own stress levels.
170
 Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
Table 8.2 Recognizing the symploms of stress
Emotional Symptoms
Physical Symptoms
Behavioural Symptoms
Anxious/nervousness
 Dry mouth
Impalience
Anger/frusiralion
Resllessness/uplight
Hyperaclivily
Mood swings
Palpitations
Aggressiveness
Ilrritability
 Nausea/vomiting
 Accident-prone
Tearfulness
Muscle tension/cramps
 Smoking more
Loss of humour/enjoyment
Pain/increased illness
Substance/alcohol abuse
lsolation
Faligue/loss of energy
Poor performance/work
Lack of confidence
Weakness/dizziness
 Absenteeism
Butterflies in stomach 
 Uncooperalion
 Diarrhoea/constipation 
 Compulsive-obsessive behaviour
Loss/increase of appelile
Loss of sex drive
Source: Kinsella (2006)
MOVING FROM VICTIM TO VICTOR
Internal dialogue has the ability to be either constructive or destructive to the human
spirit. Messages of doom and gloom, critical self-analysis, fear, anxiety, thoughts of fail-
ure, feelings of inadequacy, low self-esteem/value, and so on, will undoubtedly create a
state of consciousness that is crippling to achieving. The obvious result is exactly this - nonr
achievement. Thus, the reinforced negativity sends another spiral of negative messages to
the brain, further compounding the previous. A self-fulfilling prophecy develops, where
 negative thoughts give rise to negative feelings, resulting in negative outcomes. The person
is convinced that they were right all along - they knew it would go wrong and it did. This
sets the pattern for future problems if not corrected (McGraw 2004; Needleman 1999).
Roet (2000) stated that if we give minimal attention to the possibilities of a situation, and
live our life by the probabilities, there is a greater chance the possibilities we feared might
never happen. For example, the vet is called to a sick animal urgently. The probability is
he/she will call out, examine, diagnose, attend and treat the animal for the illness it suffers
and all will be well. The possibilities could be that the vet gets a puncture on the way and,
in the panic, breaks the expensive botle of medication required for the animal. They are
delayed for an hour and the animal deteriorates (or has died) by the time they arrive. The vet
 might make an improper diagnosis, and if the farmer is aware of this, they could conclude
that this vet is incompetent, convincing the vet of the fears and low self-value they already
believe about themselves. The chances are that a negative approach to any given situation
will serve as a very strong influence in obtaining the wrong outcome. Of course, one must
not be naive in thinking that things will not ever go wrong, and that thinking positively
about situations will automatically see them right. No, what is being said is to be aware
 at a level, one must be prepared for the unexpected occurring and that personal effort is
required in most situations. However, balanced thinking and not giving too much weight
to problems prior to them happening, but dealing with them as they arise, is a far better
approach and less draining on the mind and body. According to Needleman (1999), there are
Chapler 8  Communicalion and self-care in the velerinary profession
171
a number of factors likely to contribute to self-defeating behaviours and response patterns
being maintained by individuals:
1.  Individuals may be unaware of adaptive strategies relating to their problems. Failure to
find adaptive strategies can arise from high levels of physiological arousal, and extreme
levels hinder thinking, creativity and effective problem solving.
sponses in turn result in their expectations being fulfilled.
3. Ongoing negative treatment by others, particularly significant others, can eventually
lead to individuals forming negative core beliefs that perpetuate their distress.
4. Anxiety resulting from a belief that they would become an entirely different person by
-ldae isisa1 Aiuons 0i aldoad sasnes reag <saiens aaiseanad wai-suol e dn Suaa
ing new approaches to their difficulties.
 5. Individuals with ongoing problems may feel hopeless with regard to their ability to
-ssannsun saaq aae ae au on sidae snonaar 'sad ueagap-fs au
ful in the past, thus feelings of hopelessness can mean lack of motivation in attempting
change.
6.  Maintaining self-defeating patterns as a result of immediate reinforcing strategies. Con-
sequences that follow immediately after a behaviour tend to have a more powerful effect
on subsequent behaviour than do consequences that are delayed. For example, the im-
mediate, although short-term, relief from depression that some can derive from alcohol
 can be sufficient to keep the individual drinking to excess - despite the fact that it may
make the depression worse over the long term.
 7. Maladaptive behaviour patterns are often reinforced intermittently. An intermittently
reinforced maladaptive pattern is much harder to stop if occasionally it is seen by othi-
ers/society as good. For example, passive people sometimes gain positive praise about
their 'nice quiet personality' from colleagues, to keep them from speaking out against
behaviour they do not agree with.
8. Social environments can unintentionally reinforce maladaptive behaviour patterns. For
example, a person receiving more support and attention when depressed could continue
the maladaptive behaviour for the continuation of support and attention.
9. Some self-defeating behaviours and response patterns are encouraged and reinforced
the hunger for material possessions serves to drive people to live beyond their means
Alcohol and drugs can be seen as 'cool' in society, thus individuals may constantly use
these to 'fit in'.
IMPLEMENTING CHANGE
It does not matter how the wind blows, the only thing that matters is how you set your
sail.
(Peiffer 1999)
The human mind is the most fascinating and mysterious creation conceivable. It has
the capability to withstand numerous difficulties and sometimes horrendous experiences
against all the odds, yet its capacity to self-destruct or suffer a complete battering in seem-
ingly smaller, less upsetting situations serves to remind us that effective self-management
172 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
plays a primary role in the growth and evolution of the mind. According to Covey (1999)
there are four dimensions of renewal necessary for us to effectively manage ourselves. These
include the following:
1.  Physical - which involves eating proper food, rest, relaxation and regular exercise.
2.
d a i h ' o si s sna ron cn  s - l
drawing upon your sources of inspiration that uplift and join you to beliefs about hu-
manity.
 3. Mental - entailing our learning through formal education, interesting programmes,
books, etc.
 4. Social/emotional - this implicates others in our lives, interpersonal relationships, coop
eration and communication along with showing consideration for other people around
us.
Our ability to communicate effectively can only develop through self-awareness - being
  a  ss    a   
oped over time. So how might this be done? "Thought is one of the greatest faculties that
God gave to us human beings' (Peale 1998). Therefore, understanding oneself lies in delib-
erately observing, exploring and employing energy into our patterns of thinking. Particular
attention to our automatic thoughts is paid, then to the feelings that emerge from our think-
ing and finally to the behaviour that results from our feelings. This need not be a very big
exercise, but through habitually practising the exploration of self, positively rewarding dis-
coveries manifest themselves. Many people, however, are unclear what is meant by feelings.
Table 8.3 displays a number of examples of feeling words to help the reader identify his/her
own experience.
By simply keeping a daily record over a period, it is possible to investigate contributing
factors to our personality traits. These valuable techniques can be an asset to people in trans-
forming their attitudes. If followed by a commitment to learning new ways of being and
integrating them in life, many more rewarding skills will ensue, such as tremendous self-
 confidence, assertiveness skills and the ability to speak with conviction, thus transforming
one's life. Figure 8.1 is a thought evaluation worksheet, followed by a sample form (Fig-
ure 8.2), a thought evaluation worksheet that shows some sample ideas for keeping records
(Needleman 1999).
Table 8.3 Feeling words
Types of Feelings  Feelings Words
Happy feelings
Calm, confident, content, curious, ecstalic, focused, interested, loved, ployful,
 proud, relaxed
Feelings of sadness
Alone, anxious, bored, delached, disappointed, discouraged, exhausled,
helpless, indifferent, lonely, miserable, numb
Feelings of anger
Aggravaled, aggressive, angry, annoyed, disgusted, frustraled, furious, hurt,
impatient, jealous, mean, mischievous, resentful, torn
Feelings of fear
Crazy, envious, paranoid, resistant, scared, shocked, shy, sceplical, surprised,
terrified, worried
Adapted from Tindall [1 994]
Chapler 8  Communicalion and self-care in the veterinary profession
173
Triggering stimuli
Thinking
Feelings
Behaviour
Figure 8.1 Thought evalualion worksheel.
Applying your own experience to the sample sheet, attempt to record in the four columns
how the situation lies with you, in other words, what triggers your thinking, the feelings that
follow and how these feelings impact on your behaviour. You may record negative experi-
ences only or negative and positive experiences on the same or separate sheets. Recording
both negative and positive opens your awareness to corrective methods of dealing with neg-
ativity. According to Burns (1999), 'Sometimes the vulnerabilities we try so hard to hide can
be our greatest asset in terms of getting close to others'. Being closer to others gives greater
scope for requesting help when in difficulty.
LEARNING ASSERTIVENESS SKILLS AND BECOMING
AN ASSERTIVE INDIVIDUAL
Half the misery in the world comes of want of courage to speak and to hear the truth
plainly, and in the spirit of love.
(Harriet Beecher Stowe)
According to Tindall (1994):
Assertiveness skill enables one to stand up effectively for one's own dignity, respect
and courtesy without violating the rights of others while at the same time helping
others to recognise and more completely obtain their rights.
174
Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
Triggering stimuli
Thinking
Feelings
Behaviour
 Department
He will see I'm no
Anxious
Become nervous,
inspection due
good, I always mess
Worried
forget important
up, I'm useless.
things. Perform
poorly.
Ring girlfriend and
Why doesn't she
Anger
Retract intimacy,
 she's too busy to talk
want to talk with
Sceptical
behave in a cold
rightnow
me? My mother
manner, withdraw
 never had time to
and be angry with all
talk with me either.
women.
Some colleagues
They don't want me
Upset
Be uncooperati ve and
head out together for
 or they would have
μnH
refuse to help them.
lunch
 asked me along. I'm
 Disappointed
Stay moody and
too boring, a loser.
annoyed all day,
beating yourself up
about the situation.
Assigned extra work
I know a lot about
Confident work,
horses, I grew up
Delighted
in practice with
enjoy performing
Focused
horses
with them, I love
tasks and company of
Interested
horses and can do
pnoid
owners, perform
very well with them.
exceptionally well.
Boss asks you to
0 Bu10 5,3H
Talk fast, not really
Fear
come see him
criticize me. He may
listening or
Resentment
 stop me doing some
Anger
concentrating on
calls or cut my
Paranoid
anything. Maybe pick
wages.
up the wrong
message.
10
Go quiet, say
nothing, tremble
inside holding an
outer front of
bravery.
Sun is shining
I love the sun, it
Happy
Perform tasks much
makes me feel
easier, great work
 good, I enjoy the
done and feel really
heat.
good.
Last call/task of the
 Stress disappears,
Great I'm off
Calm
Kep
tonight, I can go
Relaxed
much more relaxed.
home meet my
Job doesn't seem
Excited feeling inside
 quite so bad after all.
family and friends
 and have a good
time.
Figure 8.2 Sample thought evalualion worksheel.
Chapler 8  Communicalion and self-care in the velerinary profession
 Once an individual has established a clearer picture of their thoughts, feelings and be-
haviour patterns whether by using the above-suggested thought evaluation worksheet or
by another method more suited to their needs, they will then be more equipped for be-
having assertively and reflecting when dealing with other people. An assertive person
will be more specific about their wants and needs, having carefully decided whether their
aaisa-jas 'ssauuado isauo andoad iao jo soi aun uodn Subundu are sisanba
and clarity all develop further, with each successful experience at practising assertive-
ness. Appropriate criticism can be accepted more readily and seen by the listener as a
uo Aiaa uen 1nonaeuaq aaissed 1o aaissanoy umop-ind e ue rauei aaino Sunien
be the response from non-assertive individuals, leaving a trail of hostility and bad feeling
behindit.
 Many factors influence a person's likelihood of attaining an assertive personality. Family
background and the people we grow up with are predominantly responsible for teaching us
productive life skills. Love, understanding and appraising the positives, while respectfully
pointing out areas that may be letting us down, build a solid foundation in influencing our
emotional growth (Lindenfield 2001). However, all is not lost if we did not have the ideal
start in life. It is possible to train ourselves and satisfactorily learn assertiveness. There are
some widely recognized and helpful pointers used by educators and trainers in prepara-
tion for assisting people in assertiveness training courses. These include speaking calmly.
expressing your feelings and beliefs directly and honestly, 'owning' them by using 'I' state
ments, maintaining good eye contact and standing up for your rights in a respectful manner
(Tindall 1994).
 Here are some examples of assertive expressions in comparison to aggressive and passive
expressing.
I feel upset when you say I am no help to you because I have made a huge effort, even
working overtime to clear the backlog. Your lack of appreciation completely undermines
me as a person. (Assertive)
 You ungrateful so and so, can't you see how much work I have done, even working
 over time to clear the backlog? Maybe if you did a little more yourself instead of sipping
cups of tea we wouldn't ever have a backlog? (Aggressive)
 I am really sorry because I thought my overtime was useful in clearing the backlog. Ill
try harder from now on, would that be helpful? (l'assive)
Modelling assertive behaviour, constantly rehearsing and practising this new way of be-
ing is a liberating experience. The most rewarding thing is, together with the advantages for
 oneself, many other people will see you as a role model for them, so make sure you are a
auopooo
Creating and cultivating a culture of self-care, self-analysis, acknowledgement of self as
OK, and learning self-assertiveness, will eventually lead to good communication, thus help-
ing to release the snares that so tightly bind the voice of vets, keeping them silent about
their inner turmoil and distress. It is up to veterinary professionals to 'plant the seed and the
universe will give you the tree. Be careful what seeds you sow!' (Reynolds 2000)
Beyond words: communication, social
relationship and health
David Bartram
There is no agony like bearing an untold story inside you
(Hurston 2006)
If Only They Could Talk, James Herriot's first volume of veterinary adventures (Herriot 1970),
implies his regret of the diagnostic limitations imposed by animals' inability to speak, but
it could equally lament the emotional inarticulacy of some veterinary professionals and the
consequences for their mental and physical health.
h    sm pe pg  sa  d o sisq a s
Mellanby 2005) and Scotland (Stark et al. 2006), and similar estimates in the USA (Miller &
Beaumont 1995), Australia (Jones-Fairnie et al. 2008) and Norway (Hem et al. 2005), veteri-
nary surgeons appear to be at particularly high risk - around four times more likely than
the general population to die by suicide and approximately twice as likely than other health
care professionals.
While many factors are likely to influence the suicide rate in the veterinary profession (for
a review, see Bartram & Baldwin 2008), work-related stress is likely to play an important role.
Veterinary work is perceived as stressful by over 80% of UK veterinary surgeons (Robinson &
Hooker 2006). Using a short, validated stress evaluation tool to measure and compare a num-
 ber of work-related stressors and stress outcomes across occupations in the UK, Johnson et al.
(2005) showed that veterinary surgeons reported lower psychological well-being than most
other occupations. A cross-sectional survey of work-related stress in the veterinary profes-
sion in New Zealand (Gardner & Hini 2006) showed that of those working in small animal
and mixed practice, women and younger veterinarians reported the highest levels of stress,
primarily associated with long working hours, clients' expectations and unexpected clinical
outcomes. Other possible sources of stress include after-hours on-call duties, relationships
with peers, managers and clients, lack of resources, emotional exhaustion or 'compassion
fatigue' (due to, for example, euthanasia of animals and dealing with clients’ grief), inad-
equate professional support, travelling for ambulatory duties, concerns about maintaining
176
Chapler 8   Communicalion and Self-Care in the Velerinary Profession 
177
skills, personal finances, making professional mistakes and the possibility of clients' com-
plaints and litigation.
Communication can have adverse and beneficial effects on health. Communication in
the context of interpersonal conflicts or in giving bad news to animal owners, in relation
to euthanasia of companion animals (Ptacek et al. 2004), compulsory slaughter of live-
stock or advising of a poor medical prognosis for example, can be stressful events for
veterinary surgeons. In contrast, disclosing information, thoughts and feelings about trau-
matic, stressful or emotional events (self-disclosure), has been found to result in improve
ments in both psychological and physical health, in non-clinical and clinical populations.
This chapter reviews some of the empirical research into those beneficial effects and of-
a a n ss   o a  ss   e s
communication.
THE DISCLOSURE PHENOMENON
When people transform their thoughts and feeling about personally upseting experiences
 into language, consistent and significant physical and mental health improvements follow.
Individuals who were victims of violence and who kept this experience silent were signifi-
cantly more likely to have adverse health effects than those who openly talked with others
(Pennebaker & Susman 19s8). In short, having any type of traumatic experience is associated
with elevated illness rates; having any trauma and not talking about it further elevates the
risk.
 If keeping an upsetting experience secret is unhealthy, can talking about it, or in some
way putting it into words, be beneficial?
Most studies which compare writing alone to talking either into a tape recorder
(Esterling et al. 1994) or to a therapist in a one-way interaction (Donnelly & Murray 1991;
ing about emotional experiences are both superior to writing about superficial topics. Speak-
ing has the added benefit of allowing an additional mode of emotional expression - vocal
expression - that may arouse more emotions and increase task involvement more than verbal
expression alone (Murray & Segal 1994), but on the basis of existing research, writing and
talking probably have similar outcomes for people's health and well-being (Lyubomirsky
et al. 2006). By contrast, merely thinking about traumatic life events does not result in ben-
eficial outcomes. The search for meaning and understanding that typically follows the ex-
perience of a traumatic event, although deemed necessary and beneficial, has the potential
to degenerate into rumination, a series of negative, repetitive and intrusive thoughts. Nu-
merous studies have documented that self-focused rumination produces a host of adverse
outcomes (Lyubomirsky & Tkach 2004)
Interestingly, a systematic analysis of positive events can be counterproductive as it re-
moves any uncertainty or mystery around positive experiences, transforming them from
something surprising, thrilling and extraordinary into something mundane, ordinary and
less emotionally intense; thinking repetitively about positive events can, however, be bene-
ficial for the individual (Lyubomirsky et al. 2006).
178 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
 Pennebaker and Chung (2006) suggest the following instructions for using expressive
writing as a therapeutic tool:
For the next 4 consecutive days, write for a minimum of 15 minutes continuously a day
on your deepest thoughts and feelings about an extremely important emotional issue that
has affected you and your life.
In your writing, really let go and explore your very deepest emotions and thoughts.
10 juasand 1noA ssed 1noA on 'siao ym sdnusuogean on sidoy inok an uanu noy
your futures, who you would like to be or who you are now.
You may write about the same general issues or experiences on all days of writing or
about different topics each day.
Do not worry about spelling, grammar or sentence structure. You can write by hand
adet e opui Xel osie uen noA 'anm oh aiqeun are noA jI iainduon e uo adk ues noA 10
recorder.
All of your writing is completely confidential and no feedback will be given.
The immediate impact of expressive writing is usually a short-term increase in distress,
negative mood and physical symptoms, and a decrease in positive mood compared with
controls. However, at long-term follow-up, many studies have continued to find evidence
of health benefits in terms of objectively assessed outcomes and self-reported physical and
emotional health outcomes. For example, Baikie and Wilhelm (2005) found the following
longer-term benefits of expressive writing:
Health outcomes
Fewer stress-related visits to the doctor
口
Improved immune system functioning
口
 Reduced blood pressure
口
 Improved lung function
口
 Improved liver function
Fewer days in hospital
口
 Improved mood/affect
° Reduced depressive symptoms before examinations
°Fewer post-traumatic intrusion and avoidance symptoms
* Social and behavioural outcomes
°Reduced absenteeism from work
Quicker re-employment after job loss
口
 Improved working memory
口
 Improved sporting performance
 Higher students' grade point average
Altered social and linguistic behaviour
Chapler 8Communication and Self-Care in the Veterinary Profession
179
Expressive writing may be most effective at least 1-2 months after an upheaval, and the
benefits occur even if the writing is not read by anyone else (Pennebaker and Chung (2006).
Proven benefits of expressive writing
A meta-analysis of 13 studies using expressive writing by healthy participants (Smyth 1998)
suggests that for physically and psychologically healthy individuals, the effects produced
are similar in magnitude to the effects of other psychological interventions, many of which
are more involved, time-consuming and expensive. In clinical populations, a meta-analysis
of 9 studies (Frisina et al. 2004) found a significant benefit for health. The effect was stronger
for physical than for psychological healthi outcomes. A recent meta-analysis of 146 studies
(Frattarolli 2006) supports these observations.
How does expressive writing work?
Although the exact mechanism by which expressive writing confers health benefits is still
unclear, there have been a number of potential explanations. There is probably not a single
mediator.
There is little support for the initial hypothesis that expressive writing operates through a
process of emotional catharsis or venting of negative feelings. Although experiencing emo-
tions while writing is a necessary component of the expressive writing effects, writing only
about the emotions associated with a trauma is not as beneficial as writing about both the
event and the emotions (Pennebaker & Beall 1986).
Another possible explanatory theory is inhibition (Pennebaker & Beall 1986). Actively
- e s sas oa saan sa on oq sg p sno 
mulative stressor on the body and is associated with increased physiological activity, ob-
sessive thinking or rumination about the event and longer-term disease. Confronting a
trauma through talking or writing about it, and acknowledging the associated emotions,
is thought to reduce the physiological work of inhibition, gradually lowering the overall
stress on the body. Such confrontation involves translating the event into words and en
abling understanding, which further contributes to the reduction in physiological activity
associated with inhibition and rumination. This theory has intuitive appeal but mixed em-
benefits.
Pennebaker and Chung (2006) advance an analogue-to-digital conversion theory to ex-
plain the emotional processing effects of disclosure: verbally labelling an emotion is much
like applying digital technology (language) to an analogue signal (emotion and the emo-
tional experience). It is hypothesized that if an emotion or experience remains in analogue
form, it cannot be understood or conceptually tied to the meaning of an event. The only way
by which an emotion or experience in non-linguistic form can leave awareness is through ha-
bituation, extinction or the introduction of a new or competing emotion. Once an experience
-pipun ue ym un r jenidasuon e un passanord aq ues h 'alensuei oun paneisuen st
ual can assign meaning, coherence and structure. This allows for the event to be assimilated
and ultimately resolved and/or forgotten, thereby alleviating the maladaptive effects of in-
complete emotional processing on health.
180 Handbook of Velerinary Communicalion Skills
This analogue-to-digital theory of processing emotions through language is supported by
observations using computerized text analysis systems (Pennebaker et al. 2001) to explore
the use of positive and negative emotion words (happy, sad), causal words (because, reason)
and insight words (understand, realize) in relation to various health outcomes. The devel-
opment of a coherent narrative over time, reflecting increasing cognitive processing of the
pears to be critical in enabling an individual to reach an understanding of a problem and in
changing their perspective. Written language demands more integration and structure than
spoken language.
 Disclosure leads to further disclosure - writing encourages people to talk openly with
others about their experiences.
IMPORTANCE OF SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS
The centrality of social connection to our health and well-being cannot be overstated. Hu-
mans are powerfully motivated by a pervasive drive to seek out and maintain strong, stable
and positive interpersonal relationships (Baumeister & Leary 1995). Most scientists would
agree that a desire to form and preserve social bonds has an evolutionary basis. Human
beings would not have been able to survive or reproduce without such a motivation.
There is considerable evidence that social factors such as social support and social inte-
gration are associated with health outcomes (Cohen 2004). Social support refers to a social
network's provision of psychological and material resources intended to benefit an individ-
ual's ability to cope with stress. Social integration (or connectedness) refers to participation
in a broad range of relationships.
Social support is often differentiated into three subtypes: instrumental, informational and
emotional. Instrumental support involves the provision of material aid, for example, finan-
cial assistance or help with daily tasks. Informational support refers to the provision of rele-
vant information intended to help the individual cope with current difficulties and typically
 takes the form of advice or guidance in dealing with one's problems. Emotional support in-
volves the expression of empathy, caring, reassurance and trust and provides opportunities
for emotional expression and venting. All forms of social support are important, and veteri-
 narians have been shown to make good use of their social networks to seek out information
and assistance in solving work-related problems, especially from 'informal' networks such
as family, friends and work colleagues more than resources such as mentors, professional
associations and helplines (Gardner & Hini 2006).
There are a number of reasons why veterinary professionals might feel isolated, such as
relocation, unsupportive work colleagues or employers, shyness or simply the constraints
an area where they do not have ready personal and professional support networks. They
have previously been surrounded by fellow students during their undergraduate course
and may suddenly find themselves in an unfamiliar small town or rural location with few
friends or colleagues near for company (Stobbs 2004). We all need to be able to share our
thoughts, feelings, successes and failures with someone who cares. Stobbs (2004) recom-
mends the strategies listed in Box 8.1 for coping with isolation. The mechanisms through
which social relationships influence health are summarized in Table 8.4.
Chapler 8 Communicalion and Self-Care in the Velerinary Profession
181
Box 8.1:
 Strategies for coping with isolation
 Try to realign your thinking towards the positive present and future outcomes of your
relocation.
 Get to know colleagues better by showing an interest in their families and hobbies.
Try to negotiate the on-call rota so that you can have the same evening off each week
'suang mau axe uen no anaum sse e uof no Aqqou e ansind o1
 Make lots of acquaintances rather than just one close friend. If you forge a close rela-
tionship with somebody, make sure you do not neglect your relationships with others.
Establish and maintain professional links by attending study days, conferences and
meetings, especially if you are working in a small practice.
 Maintain your links with family and old friends by phone and email.
 Book time of in advance for holidays and meetings with friends and family.
If there is discord or lack of support in the workplace, discuss the issues with your
colleagues or employers, maintain your own sense of self-worth and keep your links
with other professional colleagues to help buffer you against any feeling of alienation.
Reproduced with permission from Stobbs (2004)
Positive effects on health
Striking evidence for stress buffering in the physical health realm is reported in a prospective
study of healthy Swedish men aged 50 years and over (Rosengren et al. 1993). Those with
high numbers of stressful life events in the year before the baseline examination were at
substantially greater risk for mortality over a 7-year follow-up period. However, this effect
was ameliorated among those who perceived that high levels of emotional support were
available to them. In contrast, perceived emotional support made no difference for those
with few stressful events.
Table 8.4  Mechanisms through which different ypes of social conslrucls influence physical health
Social Construct
 Mechanism
Specific Processes
 Social support
 Stress buffering
Eliminales or reduces effecls of stressful experiences
by promoling less threatening interpretalions of
Social integralion
Main effect [independent Promoles posilive psychological stales [e.g. idenlity,
of stress]
purpose, self-worth and posilive effectl that induce
health-promoling physiological responses. Provides
informalion and is a source of molivalion and social
pressure lo care for oneself.
Negalive interaclions  Relationships as á source I
 Elicits psychological stress and in lurn behaviour and
of stress
physiological concomitanls that increase risk for
disease
From Cohen [2004]
182
Handbook of Velerinary Communication Skills
Figure 8.3Despair.
Social cornectedness is beneficial irrespective of whether one is under stress or not.
 DeLongis et al. (1988) showed that people with unsupportive social relationships were more
 likely to experience an increase in psychological and physical health problems both on and
following stresful days, even if they generally have litle stress in their lives. The benefits
come through the promotion of positive psychological states and the effect of social con-
trols and peer pressures that influence normative health behaviours. For example, social
networks might influence whether an individual takes exercise, has a healthy diet, smokes
or takes illicit drugs. Role concepts that are shared among a social network help to guide
interaction by providing a common set of expectations about how individuals should act
in different roles. In meeting these normative role expectations, individuals gain a sense
 of identity, predictability and stability, of purpose, and of meaning, belonging, security and
self-worth. These positive thoughts and emotions are presumed to be beneficial because they
reduce psychological despair (Figure 8.3), result in greater motivation to care for oneself,
 or result in suppressed neuroendocrine response and enhanced immune function (Cohen
2004).
An association between social integration and reduced mortality has been replicated
 in many studies (reviewed by Berkman & Glass 2000), and other studies have found that
 greater integration predicts survival from heart attacks, less risk for cancer recurrence, less
depression and anxiety and less severe cognitive decline with aging (Cohen et al. 2000). Fur-
thermore, social integration has been shown to confer resistance to infectious illness. Cohen
et al. (1997, 2003) showed that active participation in social roles reduces susceptibility to
 developing a cold after experimental challenge with common cold viruses. Although socia-
bility is associated with more and higher-quality social interactions, it predicted disease sus-
ceptibility independently of these variables and independently of immunity to the viruses
at baseline. A recent, large pan-European study (Knesebeck & Geyer 2007) confirmed that
emotional support is positively associated with self-rated health.
Chapler 8 Communicalion and Self-Care in the Velerinary Profession 
183
Developing and maintaining close personal relationships affects psychological well-being
 more than any other single factor. Diener and Seligman (2002) in their study of the upper
10% of consistently very happy people found a key difference between the happiest and
less happy groups. The very happy people had rich and satisfying social relationships with
friends, family and a romantic partner, spent the least time alone and the most time so-
cializing. The authors conjectured that good social relationships are universally important
to human mood. It is not known whether rich social lives cause happiness or if happiness
causes rich social lives, but it is interesting that social relationships form a necessary but not
sufficient condition for high happiness - that is, they do not guarantee high happiness, but
it does not appear to occur without them.
Negative effects on health
Social environments and one's responses to them can have powerful detrimental effects.
Social isolation can be a stressor in its own right, increasing negative effect and a sense of
alienation, loneliness and stress while decreasing feelings of control and self-esteem. There
induced by a lack of social support (Berkman & Glass 2000).
Further, social conflicts can also increase susceptibility to disease. Subjects with enduring
problems with spouses, close family members and friends were more than twice as likely
to develop the common cold after experimental challenge as persons without any chronic
stressors in their lives (Cohen et al. 1998).
THE ROLE OF TELEPHONE SUPPORT HELPLINES
Sometimes, rather than sharing our distressing thoughts with those known to us, we may
prefer to speak to someone anonymously and in complete confidence, what TS Eliot de
scribed (in his play, The Cocktail Party 1949) as 'the luxury of an intimate disclosure to a
stranger'.
The effectiveness and utility of telephone helplines are generally well established. One
measure of the effectiveness of such services has been the assessment of suicide rates in
communities served by the centres. In England, Bagley (1968) compared suicide rates in 15
towns with suicide centres with the rates in two samples of towns which were matched
for sociodemographic variables and did not have such centres. He also compared the rates
during 3 years before and 3 years after the establishment of the centres. He found that there
was a decline in suicide rates in the towns with suicide prevention centres compared to
control towns, which experienced an increase in suicide rate. Lester (1997) conducted a meta-
analysis of studies that presented data as to whether suicide prevention centres prevented
suicides in the communities served. Twelve of the 13 studies reported a preventive effect,
although the effect failed to reach statistical significance in one, and in many the size of
the effect was small. When the results for each of the studies were combined, a significant
preventive effect was identified.
Helplines (Figure 8.4 and Table 8.5) vary in the type of support provided. Support gener-
ally takes the form of active listening (e.g. validation of emotions, reframing, moral support,
reflection of feelings and showing understanding) and/or collaborative problem solving
184
 Handbook of Velerinary Communication Skills
Figure 8.4 Helplines.
(e.g. asking fact questions on the problem, questioning about resources and discussing pos-
sible ways to solve the problem) (Mishara et al. 2007).
A less directive approach involving active listening was significantly related to reduction
in suicidal urgency for new callers; with repeated callers there may be greater benefits from
using a more directive approach (Mishara & Daigle 1997), such as collaborative problem
solving.
Kalafat et al. (2007) demonstrated significant decreases in non-suicidal callers' crisis states
and hopelessness during the course of the telephone session, with continuing decreases in
the following weeks. In the same study, Gould et al. (2007) demonstrated significant de-
creases in the suicidality of suicidal callers, with continuing decreases in hopelessness and
 psychological pain in the following weeks.
Table 8.5  Examples of available lelephone helplines
Telephone
Contact
Vet Helpline
07659 811 118 [UK]
 A 24-hour peer-support telephone helpline service staffed by
trained volunteers
Samaritans
08457 909 090 [UK)
jo sbujeey ym adoed ja jioddns puooue buuais!l,
distress or despair, including those which could lead to
suicide
Befrienders Worldwide
Contact telephone numbers for many
Works worldwide lo provide emolional support and reduce
countries can be obtained from the
suicide
websile www.berienders.org
Chapler 8   Communicalion and Self-Care in the Velerinary Profession 
185
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The purpose of this chapter has been to provide an overview of the empirical evidence for
the mental and physical health benefits associated with communication and social connect-
edness.
Not talking about a traumatic experience is associated with a breakdown of one's social
network, a decrease in working memory, sleep disruptions, substance misuse and an in-
creased risk for further traumatic experiences. Expressive writing or the unfettered talking
about trauma can often short circuit this process (Pennebaker & Chung 2006).
Talking or writing forces people to stop and re-evaluate their life circumstance and en-
ables thoughts and images to be integrated into a coherent narrative. Language is, by its
nature, highly structured. Speaking or writing prompts us to think in causal terms (e.g. A
may have led to B, which may have led to C), thereby triggering an analysis that can help
us find meaning, enhanced understanding and, ultimately, a sense of control. When an ex-
when it is represented by a chaotic and painful jumble of thoughts and images. Translat-
ing emotional experiences into words demands a different representation of the events in
the brain, in memory, and in the ways people think on a daily basis. As recent studies have
indicated, this can bring benefits including improved mood and enhanced immune function.
All these cognitive changes have the potential for people to come to a different under-
standing of their circumstances. The cognitive changes themselves now allow the individu-
als to begin to use their social worlds differently. They talk more; they connect with others
differently. They are now better able to take advantage of social support. And with these cog-
nitive and social changes, many of their unhealthy behaviours abate (Pennebaker & Chung
2006).
There is much truth in the old adage that 'a problem shared is a problem halved'. Trans-
lating emotional experiences into words, whether by means of expressive writing, talking
 ea lauens e ym shuaag pue sno no sus ro somiau ios ano ui aso 0
telephone helpline, is not a panacea but it is an effective and readily available coping tool.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
of the psychology department of the University of Texas at Austin for his comments on the
draft manuscript.
REFERENCES (COMMUNICATION, STRESS AND
THEINDIVIDUAL)
-m pue ve euau po Aps euooas-sson y (aoo) sa umpea ' renresape la uenreg
being and their associations in the UK veterinary profession. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
Epidermiology March 18. details [Epub ahead of print].
Burns David D (1999) The Feeling Good Handbook. Penguin Books, Harmondsworth, UK.
186 Handbook of Veterinary Communicalion Skills
Connolly D (2004) Stress in the veterinary profession. Irish Veterinary Journal 57: 315-316.
Cooper CL, Dewe PJ, O'Driscoll MP (200l) Organisational Stress - A Review and Critique of Theory
Research and Applications. Sage Publications, London.
Covey SR (1999) The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People. Simon & Schuster, UK Ltd, London.
Gardner D (2005) Work Demands, Coping, Satisfaction and Stress Among Veterinarians. School of Psy
chology, Massey Uriversity, New Zealand.
Halliwell REW, Hoskin BD (2005) Reducing the suicide rate among veterinary surgeons: how the
profession can help. Veterinary Record 157(14):397.
Kinsella M (2006) Self-Care and Stress Management. Lectfure, University College Dublin, Ireland.
Lindenfield G (2001) Assert Yourself. Thorsons Publishers, Hammersmith, England.
MeGraw P (2004) Family First. Simon & Schuster, UK Ltd, London.
Mellanby RJ (2005) Incidence of suicide in the veterinary profession in England and Wales. Veteri-
nary Record 155: 415-417.
Needleman LD (1999) Cognitive Case Conceptualization. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, New Jersey.
Peale NV (1998) The Positive Way to Change Your Life. Vermilion, Ebury Press, Random House)
London.
Peiffer V (1999) Positive Thinking. Element Books, New York
Reynolds Q (2000) Intuition - Your Secret Power. Advenfures in Astonishment Publishers, Dublin.
Roet B (2000) The Confidence to Be Yourself.Judy Piatkus Publishers, London.
Tindall JA (1994) Peer Power: Becoming an Effective Peer Helper and Conflict Mediator. Accelerated
Development Publishers, Indiana.
sonality and Individual Diferences 37(3): 543-553
FURTHER READING (COMMUNICATION, STRESS AND
THEINDIVIDUAL)
Humphreys T (1996) The Family - Love It and Leave It. Gill & Macmillan, Dublin
Humphreys T (20u0) Work and Worth - Take Back Your Life. Gill & Macmillan, Dublin
Humphreys T (2002) Examining Our Times - for the Way We Live Now. Gill & Macmillan,
Dublin.
REFERENCES (bEYONb WORDS: COMMUNICATION, SOCIAL
RELATIONSHIPSANDHEALTH)
Bagley G (1968) The evaluation of a suicide prevention scheme by an ecological model. Social
Science and Medicine 2:1-14.
Baikie KA, Wilhelm K (2005) Emotional and physical health benefits for expressive writing. Ad-
vances in Psychiatric Treatment 11:338-346.
Bartram DJ, Baldwin DS (2008) Veterinary surgeons and suicide: influences, opportunifies and
research direcfions. Veterinary Record 162:36-40.
Chapler 8  Communicalion and SelfCare in the Veterinary Profession
187
Baumeister RF, Leary MR (1995) The need to belong: desire for interpersonal aftachments as a
fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin 117:497-529.
Berkman LF, Glass T (2000) Social integration, social networks, social support, and health.
In: Berkman LF, Kawachi I (eds), Social Epidemiology. Oxford University Press, New York,
pp. 137-173.
Cohen S (2004) Social relafionships and health. American Psychologist 59:676-684.
Cohen S, Doyle WJ, Skoner DP, Rabin BS, Gwaltney JM, Jr (1997) Social ties and susceptibility to
fhe common cold. JAMA 277:1940-1944.
Cohen S, Doyle WJ, Turner R, Alper CM, Skoner DP (2003) Sociability and susceptibility to the
common cold. Psychological Science 14:389-395.
Cohen S, Frank E, Doyle WJ, Skoner DP, Rabin BS, Gwaltney JM, Jr (1998) Types of stres
sors that increase susceptibility to the common cold in adults. Health Psychology 17:214
223.
Cohen S, Gottlieb B, Underwood L (2000) Social relationships and health. In: CohenS, Underwood
L, Gottlieb B (eds), Measuring and Intervening in Social Support. Oxford University Press, New
York, pp. 3-25.
DeLongis A, Lazarus RS, Folkman S (1988) The impact of daily sfress on health and mood: psycho
Diener E, Seligman MEP (2002) Very happy people. Psychological Science 13:81-84.
 Donnelly DA, Murray EJ (1991) Cognitive and emotional changes in wriften essays and therapy
interviews. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology 10:334350.
London.
Esterling BA, Antori MH, Fletcher MA, Margulies S, Schneiderman N (1994) Emofional disclo
sure through writing or speaking modulates latent Epstein-Barr virus antibody titers. Journa!
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 62:130-140.
 Fraftarolli J (2006) Experimental disclosure and its moderators: a meta-analysis. Psychological Bul
letin 132:823-865.
closure on the health outcomes of clinical populations. Journal of Nerrous and Mental Disease
192:629-634.
Gardner DH, Hini D (2006) Work-related stress in the veterinary profession in New Zealand. New
ZealandVeterinary Journal54:119-124.
Gould MS, Kalafat J, Murfakh JLH, Kleinman M (2007) An evaluafion of crisis hotline outcomes
Part 2: suicidal callers. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior 37:338-352.
Hem E, Haldorsen T, Aasland OG, Tyssen R, Vaglum P, Ekeberg O (2005) Suicide rates according
to education with a particular focus on physicians in Norway 1960-2000. Psychological Medicine
35:873880.
Herriot J (1970) If Only They Could Talk. Michael Joseph, London.
New York, p. 176.
Johnson S, Cooper C, Carfwright S, Donald I, Taylor P, Millet C (2005) The experience of work-
related stress across occupaftions. Journal of Managerial Psychology 20:178-187.
Jones-Fairrie H, Ferrori P, Silburn S, Lawrence D (2008) Suicide in Australian veterinarians. Aus-
tralian Veterinary Journa! 86(4):114116.
188Handbook of Velerinary Communication Skills
Kalafat J, Gould MS, Murfakh JLH, Kleinman M (2007) An evaluation of crisis hotline outcomes
Part 1: nonsuicidal crisis callers. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior 37:322-337.
Kelly S, Bunfing J (1998) Trends in suicide in England and Wales, 1982-96. Popuiation Trends
92:29-41.
Knesebeck O, Geyer S (2007) Emofional support, education and self-rated health in 22 European
countries.BMC Public Health 7:272.
Lester D (1997) Effectiveness of suicide prevention centres - a review. Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behaviour 27:304-310.
Lyubomirsky S, Sousa L, Dickerhoof R (2006) The costs and benefits of writing, talking and
thinking about life's triumphs and defeats. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 90:
692-708
Lyubomirsky S, Tkach C (2004) The consequences of dysphoric ruminafion. In: Papageorgiou
C, Wells A (eds), Rumination: Nature, Theory, and Treatment of Negative Thinking in Depression.
Wiley, Chichester, UK, pp. 21-41.
Mellanby RJ (2005) Incidence of suicide in the veterinary profession in England and Wales. Veteri-
nary Record 155:415-417.
Miller JM, Beaumont JJ (1995) Suicide, cancer and other causes of death among Califorria veteri
narians, 1960-1992. American Journal of Industrial Medicine 27:37-49.
 qd  a  o s  'a sa  aea   a 
Bermarn, A (2007) Comparing models of helper behavior to actual practice in telephone crisis
intervenfion: a silent moritoring sfudy of calls to the US 1-800-SUICIDE nefwork. Suicide and
Life-ThreateningBehavior37:291-307.
Mishara BL, Daigle M (1997) Effects of different telephone intervenfion styles with suicidal callers
af two suicide prevenfion centers: an empirical invesfigafion. American Journal of Community
Psychology 25:861-895.
Murray EJ, Lamnin AD, Carver CS (1989) Emotional expression in wriften essays and psychother-
apy. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology 8:414-429.
Murray EJ, Segal DL (1994) Emotional processing in vocal and wriften expression of feelings about
traumatic experiences. Journal of Traumatic Stress 7:391-405.
tion and disease. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 95:274-281.
Pernebaker JW, Chung CK (2006) Expressive writing, emotional upheavals, and health. In: Fried-
man HS, Silver RC (eds), Foundations of Health Psychology. Oxford University Press, New York,
pp.263-284.
Pernebaker JW, Francis ME, Booth RJ (2001) Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC). Erlbaum
Publishers, New Jersey.
enceandMedicine26:327-332.
Ptacek JT, Leonard K, McKee TL (2004) I've got some bad news ...: veterinarians' recollec-
tions of commuricating bad news to clients. Journal of Applied Social Psychology 34:366
390.
Profession Conducted by the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons. RCVS, London.
Rosengren A, Orth-Gomer K, Wedel H, Wilhelmsen L (1993) Stressfil life events, social support
and mortality in men born in 1933. British Medical Journa! 307:1102-1105.
Chapler 8 Communicalion and Self-Care in the Velerinary Profession
189
ables. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 66:174184.
 Stark C, Belbin A, Hopkins P, Gibbs D, Hay A, Gunnell D (2006) Male suicide and occupation in
Scotland. Health Statistics Quarterly 29:26-29.
Stobbs C (2004) Isolafion in the workplace: taking confrol, finding a way forward. In Practice
26:336-338.
Note: Italicized page numbers refer to boxes, figures and tables
A
anticipatory grief, 73-4, 104 
active listening, 86-93. See also
appraisals, 132-3
compassionate communication
appreciative listening, 18
acknowledging in, 89
assertiveness skill, 173-5
case studies, 87, 90-3
 attending, listening and, 16
giving permission in, 89
 attire of doctors, 39-40
human grief in pet loss and, 87-8
average transaction per vet (ATV), 113
normalizing in, 89
vs. passive listening, 18-9
B
techniques, 86-7
BACP (British Association for Counseling
traumatic loss and, 88
 and Psychotherapy), 95-6
advocate-best friend relationship, 65
battery, 47
agency, 48
Befrienders Worldwide, 184f
agency-based decision making. 44
 beneficence, principle of, 58
agenda items, 143
body language, 11f
ambiguous loss, 68-9
body movements, 10-1
analogue-to-digital theory, 179-80
body zones, 11
anesthesia, consent for, 53-5
 bond mapping, 93-4
anger, 69-70
bond-centred veterinary practice (BCVP)
dealing with, 115-8
protocols, 80-5
dissipating, 117-8
relationships and, 79
empathy as strategy in deal with, 116
book of remembrance, 95-6
anger, feelings of, 172t
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE),
animal law, 48
156-7
animal welfare, 109-10
British Association for Counseling and
announcement, in media release, 162
Psychotherapy (BACP), 95-6, 97
190
Index
191
 BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy),
interpractice, 145-7
156-7
listening, 15-20
burial, 106, 138b
non-verbal, 7-13
skill acquisition, 4
C
skills, 3
Childline, 98
verbal, 13-5
child-parent relationship, 65
communication models, 4-7
Cinnamon Trust, 98
cyclical process, 6-7
circular communication model, 5-6
linear model, 4-5
clients, 41-4
communication of mistakes, 118-22
communication of mistakes,119
apology, 122
complaints, 120-1
 guidelines for coping with client
confidentiality of data, 41
complaints, 120-1
gathering information from, 41-2
handling, 121
giving information to, 424
health care professionals, 119-20
impressions of doctors' appearance,
medical errors, 118
39-40
patients and clients, 119
informed, 110-2
 systems vs. human approach, 122
informed decision making and, 42-4
compassionate communication, 62-98
as source of stress, 169f
 active listening, 86-93
clinical trials, consent for, 56-8
 bond-centred veterinary practice and,
dlosed questions, 14 
80-5
 closed-circuit television images, 41
continuing care clinics, 95-6
colleagues, communication with, 127-47
continuing professional development, 97
appraisals, 132-3
empathy, 86
delegation, 134
human emotions and, 66-8
exit interview, 1334
human-companion animal bond and,
 induction schemes, 131-2
63-5
interpractice communication, 145-7
 pet bereavement support, 95-6
leader, 128-9
 pet loss support groups, 96-7
mentoring, 131-2
quality-of-life indicators, 93-4
motivation, 136
resources, 97-8
practice meetings, 142-4
responsibility grief and, 74-8
 recruiting new members, 130-1
skills, 86
 replacing members, 130-1
vulnerability factors and, 78-80
reporting structure, 144-5
web sites, 97-8
rotas, 145
comprehensive listening, 17-8
 staff suggestion scheme, 139-42
confidentiality, 41-2
types of people in, 130
consent, 47-58
commercial burial, 138b
age limit for, 48
communication, 1-22
 competence to give, 50-6
 background and origins of, 1-2
vs. contract, 48
circular model, 5-6
for euthanasia, 55-6, 57f
cultural context, 21
implied, 56
definitions of, 34
pro forma for consent form, 53-4, 57f
importance in healthcare, 2-3
process, 52-3
192
Index
consent (continued)
D
proxy, 48, 50
Data Protection Act of 1984, 41
refusal of, 52
decision making, 42-7
for research, 56-8
agency-based, 44
surrogate, 48, 50
informed, 424
written, 54-5
models of, 44
consent form, 53-4, 57f, 138b
in practice, 44-7
consultation, 27-38
denial, 70
building relationship, 34-7
depression, 70
closing, 37-8
discriminative listening. 17
context, establishing, 29
developing rapport in, 36-7
E
environment, 27-9
electronic media, 157
establishing rapport with clients and
emotional blackmail, 52
animal, 29-30
emotional dimension of renewal, 172
gathering information in, 31-2
emotional social support, 180
 background information, 31-2
 emotional support protocols, 80-5
client's perspective, 31-2
emotions, 66-8
dinical perspective, 31
associated with companion animals, 67
giving information in, 324
components of, 66
amount and type of information, 32-3
empathy, 80, 86, 116
incorporating client's perspective, 33
end-of-life communication. See also
 shared decision making, 33-4
euthanasia
understanding and recall, 33
client factors, 101
guide to, 28f
overview of, 100-1
identifying reason for consultation, 30-1
steps in, 102-5
initiating, 29-31
care and treatment priorities, 105
involving animals in, 37
delivering information, 104
 involving clients in, 37
 establishing plan, 105
non-verbal behaviour, 35-6
 establishing what client knows, 103
physical examination, 37
handling information, 103
preparation, 27-9
preparing for discussions, 103
professionalism in, 40
responding to emotions, 104
structure of, 34
veterinary factors, 101
contact information, in media release, 162
envirormental cues, 12-3
 continuing care clinics, 95-6
errors, medical, 118-22
continuing professional development
apology for, 122
(CPD), 97
common,118-22
contracts, 41
definition of, 118
vs. consent, 48
 effects on veterinary practitioner, 122
cost, communicating, 112-5
factors in, 118
cremation, 106, 138b
guidelines for coping with client
critical listening, 18
complaints, 120-1
critical thinking skills, 149-50 
handling, 121
Cruse Bereavement Care, 98
incidence of, 118
culture and communication, 21-2
estimate sheets, 114
Index
193
euthanasia, 105-9. See also end-of-life
denial and, 70
communication
depression and, 70
animal welfare and, 109-10
emotional reactions, 73f
consent for, 55-6, 57f
fear and, 70
emotional support protocols, 80-5
loss of companion animal and, 69-78
handling situations after, 107-9
physical reactions, 73t
handling situations during, 106-7
psychological reactions, 73t
owners' guilt and, 70-1
regret and, 71
pre-euthanasia appointment, 106
responsibility, 62, 74-8
responsibility grief and, 75
responsibility and, 72
standard operating procedure for,
shock and, 72
138-9b
social reactions, 73f
 accidental injection, 139b
guardians, 48
consent form, 138b
cremation or burial, 138b
H
disposal, 138b
handshake, 40
hospitalized cases, 139b
head movements, 10
payment, 139b
headline, in media release, 162
procedure, 138-9b
helplines, 183-4
records, 139b
human emotions, 66-8
storage, 139b
human-animal bond, 43f
exit interview, 133-4
human-companion animal bond (HCAB),
expert patients, 112
63-5
expressive writing, 177-80
emotional needs and, 79-80
 analogue-to-digital theory, 179-80
facets of, 65-6
inhibition theory, 179
loss of companion animal, 68-9
long-term benefits of, 177-8
eye contact, 10
I
illness trajectory mapping. 93-4
F
implied consent, 56
facial expressions, 8-9
induction schemes, 131-2
fear, 70
informational social support, 180
fear, feelings of, 172t
informed clients, 110-2
feeling words, 172t
informed consent, 47-58
feelings, types of, 172t
animal law and, 48
financial discussions, 112-5
for clinical trials, 56-8
focused questions, 15
communication of risk, 49-50
competence to give consent, 50-6
G
components of, 49
gaze,10
implied consent, 56
grief, 69-78
process, 47
anger and, 69-70
informed decision making, 424
anticipatory, 73-4, 104
 inhibition, 179
cognitive reactions, 73
 injuries, decision making and, 45
confusion and, 70
inner freedom, 169
definition of, 69
instrumental social support, 180
194
Index
intercultural communication, 21-2
acknowledging in, 89
 interpersonal relationships, workplace,
case studies, 87, 90-3
169t
giving permission in, 89
interpersonal touch, 12
human grief in pet loss and, 87-8
interpractice communication, 145-7. See
normalizing in, 89
also communication
techniques, 86-7
factors in, 146
traumatic loss and, 88
out-of-hours practice, 147
loss, 68-9. See also grief
 referral pack, 146-7
ambiguous, 68-9
interview
primary, 68
professionalism in, 40
secondary, 68
skills, 164-6
symbolic, 69
intimate space, 11
introductions, formal, 41
M
 isolation, coping with, 181t
 mad cow disease, media coverage of, 156-7
 mandatory reporting, 110
T
media, 155-66
 justice, principle of, 58
career development and, 155
definition of, 157
L
interview skills, 164-6
leader, 122
mad cow disease in, 156-7
 leading questions, 15
press coverage, 156
linear communication model, 4-5
press release, 162-4
listening, 15-20. See also communication
science reporting in, 155-6
active, 18-9
veterinary shows, 155
attending and, 16
media release, 1624
characteristics associated with message,
medical errors, 118-22
20
apology for, 122
characteristics of listeners, 19-20
common, 118-22
as communications skill,17
definition of, 118
definitions of, 16
 effects on veterinary practitioner, 122
functions of, 16-7
factors in, 118
guidelines to improve, 19-20
guidelines for coping with client
metacommunication and, 19
complaints, 120-1
overview, 16
handling, 121
passive, 18-9
incidence of, 118
silence and, 20
 meetings, practice, 142-4
types of, 17-8
action points, 143-4
appreciative, 18
agenda,143
comprehensive, 17-8
criticisms of, 144
critical, 18
minutes, 143-4
discriminative, 17
scheduling, 143
therapeutic, 18
types of, 142-3
listening, active, 86-93. See also
 mental dimension of renewal, 172
communication
mentoring, 131-2
Index
195
metacommunication, 19
P
minutes (meetings), 143-4
palliative care clinics, 95-6
Missing My Pet, 88
paralinguistics, 12
 Missing Pets Bureau, 98
parent-child relationship, 65
mistakes, communication of, 118-22
passive listening, 18-9
apology, 122
paternalism, 42
 guidelines for coping with client
patients, 41-4, 110-2
complaints, 120-1
communication of mistakes, 119
handling, 121
complaints, 120-1
 health care professionals, 119-20
confidentiality of data, 41
medical errors, 118
gathering information from, 41-2
 patients and clients, 119
giving information to, 424
 systems vs. human approach, 122
impressions of doctors' appearance,
motivation, 136
39-40
informed, 110-2
N
 informed decision making and, 42-4
name badges, 40
as source of stress, 169t
 neglect of animals, signs of, 109-10
 personal appearance, 12
non-accidental injury (NAI), 109-10
personal space, 11
non-verbal behaviour, 35-6
 pet bereavement support, 95-6
non-verbal communication, 7-13. See also
pet insurance, 115
 communication; verbal
pet loss support groups, 96-7. See also
communication
grief
 body movements and posture, 10-1
facilitator, 96-7
components of, 8
practicalities, 96
environmental cues, 12-3
timing,97
facial movements and expressions,
traumatization in, 97
8-9
physical dimension of renewal, 172
functions of, 7
physical examination, 37
 gaze and eye contact, 10
posture, 10-1
head movements, 10
 practice meetings, 142-4
interpersonal touch, 12
action points, 143-4
paralinguistic features, 12
agenda, 143
 personal appearance, 12
criticisms of, 144
proximity and orientation, 11f
minutes, 143-4
 in public speaking, 153
scheduling, 143
time, 13
types of meetings, 142-3
voice, 12
 pre-euthanasia appointment, 106
notes to editor, in media release, 162
press coverage, 156
press release, 162-4
0
price quote, 114
 online pet memorials, 97
primary loss, 68
open questions, 14
principle of beneficence, 58
 out-of-hours practice, 147
principle of justice, 58
 owner's agent, 48
 principle of non-maleficence, 58
196
Index
print media, 157
reflective listening. See active listening
probing questions, 15
reflective questions, 15
professionalism, 39-41
regret, 71
appearance, 39-40
relationship-centered, 43, 102, 105, 121
in consultation or interview, 40
reporting structure, 144-5
formal introductions and, 41
responsibility, 67, 72
name badges and, 40
responsibility grief, 62, 74-8
proxy consent, 48, 50
characteristics of, 75
 psychological defence mechanism, 70
communication demands on
public space, 11
professionals, 77
 public speaking, 149-55. See also
dialectics of, 76f
communication
euthanasia and, 75
career opportunities and, 149
measures for, 77-8
critical thinking skills and, 149-50
risk framing, 49
knowing audience in, 150-1
risks, communication of, 49-50
non-verbal communication with
role conflict, 168
audience in, 153
rotas, 145
preparing for, 150-1
 Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons
presentation as consultation, 152-3
(RCVS), 41
question-and-answer session, 154-5
RSPCA Home for Life, 98
rehearsing for, 151-2
topic in, 151
S
types of speakers, 149
 sadness, feelings of, 172t
visual aids, 153-4
Samaritans, 184t
scheduling meetings, 143
Q
science reporting, 155-6
quality of life
secondary loss, 68
 decision making and, 46-7
security, 67
illness trajectory mapping. 934
self-defeating behaviours, 170-1
indicators, 93-4
self-fulfilling prophecies, 170-1
question-and-answer session, 154-5
self-management, 171-3
questioning skills, 13
sentient property, 48
questions, 13-5. See also verbal
shock, 72
communication
sibling-sibling relationship, 65
cosed, 14
signposting, 34, 51
focused, 15
silence, 20
functions of, 13-4
SMARTER objectives, 135
leading. 15
social connectedness, 182
open, 14
social constructs, 181f
probing, 15
social dimension of renewal, 172
reflective, 15
social integration, 181t, 182
types of, 13-4
social relationships, 180-3
quote, 114
isolation and, 180-1
R
mortality and, 182
radiographs, 41
negative effects on health, 183
referral pack, 146-7
positive effects on health, 181-3
Index
197
social space, 11
U
social support, 180, 181t
undercharge for services, 114
spiritual dimension of renewal, 172
unlawful surgery, 48
staff suggestion scheme, 139-42
benefits to members, 140-1
V
procedure for, 141-2
verbal communication, 13-5. See also
standard operating procedures (SOPs),
communication; verbal
136-9
communication
for euthanasia, 138-9b
public speaking, 149-55
reasons for failure of, 137
questioning skills, 13
written, 137
types of questions, 14-5
stress
Vet Helpline, 184t
sources of, 169t, 176
veterinarians and mass media, 160-4
symptoms of, 170f
goals, 160-1
subheading, in media release, 162
interview skills, 164-6
suicide rates, 183
media release, 162-4
surgical procedure, consent for, 53-5
press release, 162-4
surrogate consent, 48, 50
stories, 161
symbolic loss, 69
television work, 158-60b
veterinary consultation, 27-38
T
 building relationship, 34-7
teams, 127-47
closing, 37-8
appraisals, 132-3
context, establishing, 29
delegation, 134
developing rapport in, 36-7
exit interview, 133-4
environment, 27-9
induction schemes, 131-2
establishing rapport with clients and
interpractice communication, 145-7
animal, 29-30
leader, 128-9
 gathering information in, 31-2
mentoring, 131-2
background information, 31-2
motivation, 136
client's perspective, 31-2
practice meetings, 142-4
clinical perspective, 31
recruiting new members, 130-1
giving information in, 324
replacing members, 130-1
amount and type of information, 32-3
reporting structure, 144-5
incorporating client's perspective, 33
rotas, 145
shared decision making, 33-4
staff suggestion scheme, 139-42
understanding and recall, 3
types of people in, 130
guide to, 28f
telephone support helplines, 183-4
identifying reason for consultation, 30-1
terms of business, 41
initiating, 29-31
therapeutic listening, 18
involving animals in, 37
thought evaluation worksheet, 173f, 174f
involving clients in, 37
time, non-verbal communication and, 13
 non-verbal behaviour, 35-6
trauma,177
physical examination, 37
treatment options, decision making and,
preparation, 27-9
45-7
 professionalism in, 40
trust, 67,79, 86
structure of, 34
198
Index
veterinary practice, 127-47
video recording, consent from client,
appraisals in, 132-3
41
delegation in, 134
visual aids, 153-4
exit interview, 133-4
voice, 12
induction schemes in, 131-2
vulnerability factors, 78-80
interpractice communication, 145-7
leader, 128-9
M
 mentoring in, 131-2
waiving fees, 114
motivation in, 136
web sites, 97-8
 practice meetings, 142-4
work alcoholism, 171
recruiting new members in, 130-1
work constraints, 169t
 replacing members in, 130-1
work outcomes, 169f
reporting structure, 144-5
workload, 169t
rotas, 145
written consent, 54-5
staff suggestion scheme, 139-42
stress level and, 176-7
Y
types of people in, 130
 Young People's Helpline, 98