Diagnostic Atlas
of Veterinary
Ophthalmology
Dr Keith Barnett
MOSBY
ELSEVIER
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
DiagnosticAtlas
of Veterinary
Ophthalmology
Second Edition
Dr Keith Barnett
ConsultantOphthalmologist,CentreforSmallAnimalStudies,AnimalHealthTrust,OBE,MA,PhD
DVOphthal,FRCVS,DipECVO
MOSBY
ELSEVIER
Edinburgh LondonNewYork OxfordPhiladelphiaSt LouisSydney Toronto2006
MOSBY
ELSEVIER
KCBarnett1990
2006,Elsevier Limited.Allrights reserved
theprior permission of thepublishersora licence permittingrestricted copying in theUnited
Kingdom issued by theCopyright Licensing Agency,90TottenhamCourtRoad,LondonW1T4LP
Permissionsmay be sought directly fromElsevier's HealthSciences RightsDepartment in
Philadelphia,USA:phone:（+1）2152387869,fax:（+1）2152382239,e-mail:
healthpermissions@elsevier.com.Youmayalso completeyourrequeston-line via theElsevier
homepage(http://www.elsevier.com),by selectingCustomer Support'and then'Obtaining
Permissions.
First Edition 1990
Second Edition 2006
ISBN0723432805
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Acataloguerecord for thisbookisavailablefrom the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalogrecord for thisbookisavailable from the Library of Congress
NOTE
Knowledgeandbestpracticeinthisfieldareconstantlychanging.Asnewresearchand
experiencebroadenourknowledge,changesin practice,treatment anddrug therapymay
become necessary or appropriate.Readers are advised to check the most currentinformation
provided(i）on procedures featured or(i) by themanufacturer of each product to be
administered,toverify therecommendeddoseorformula,themethod and durationof
administration,andcontraindications.ltistheresponsibility of thepractitioner,relying ontheir
own experience and knowledgeof the patient,to make diagnoses,to determine dosages and the
best treatmentfor eachindividual patient,and to takeallappropriate safetyprecautions.
To the fullest extent of the law,neither the publisher nor the author assumes any liability for any
injury and/or damage.
The Publisher
Printed in Spain
The
your source for books.
ELSEVIER
Publishers
SCIENCE
journalsandmultimedia
policyistouse
in the health sciences
papermanufactured
www.elsevierhealth.com
from sustainable forests
Workingtogethertogrow
librariesin developing countries
www.elsevier.comwww.bookaid.orgwww.sabre.org
ELSEVIER
BOOKAID
SabreFoundation
International
Contents
Acknowledgements vii
Prolapse of the nictitans gland 26
Deformityof the cartilage26
Preface vili
Neoplasia 27
Chapter1
Globe and Orbit 1
Chapter4Lacrimal System29
Introduction 1
Introduction 29
Enophthalmos2
Punctalabnormalities 30
Exophthalmos 2
Prolapse4
Chapter5
Conjunctiva,Limbus,Sclera 35
Microphthalmos4
Introduction 35
Buphthalmos 6
Conjunctivitis 35
Hydrophthalmos 6
Chemosis 37
Phthisis bulbi7
Conjunctival haemorrhages 37
Strabismus7
Subconjunctival masses 38
Nystagmus 8
Symblepharon 38
Foreign bodies 41
Chapter2
Upper and Lower Eyelids 9
Conjunctival dermoid 41
Introduction9
Conjunctival cyst 41
Entropion10
Neoplasia 42
Ectropion 13
Scleritis and episcleritis 42
Distichiasis 14
Ectopiccilia 14
Chapter6 Cornea47
Trichiasis 16
Introduction 47
Blepharitis16
Keratitis 48
Meibomianitis 18
Corneal ulcers 52
Hordeolum 18
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca(KCS)53
Meibomian cyst 18
Corneal oedema60
Eyelid neoplasia 18
Lipid keratopathies 63
Congenital anomalies21
Corneal sequestrum 65
Trauma and foreign bodies 66
Chapter3
Nictitating Membrane 23
Neoplasia 68
Introduction 23
Congenital anomalies 68
Prominence of the nictitating
membrane 23
Chapter7
Uveal Tract 69
Trauma and foreign bodies 23
Introduction69
Inflammation 23
Clinical signs of anterior uveitis 70
Contents
Sequelae70
Other typesof cataract 113
Cysts78
False cataracts 113
Neoplasia78
Lensluxation 120
Congenital anomalies78
Chapter 10 Vitreous 129
Chapter8
3GlaucomaandAqueous89
Introduction 129
Congenital 129
Introduction 89
Clinical signs 90
Acquired 131
Primaryhereditary glaucoma
Chapter 11 Fundus 135
in theUK 93
Introduction 135
Secondary glaucoma 93
Thenormal canine fundus 135
Gonioscopy 94
The normal feline fundus 150
Aqueous 96
The normal equine fundus 153
Chapter9
9Lens97
The normal bovine and ovine
Introduction 97
fundus 157
Primary hereditary non-congenital
The fundus of other species 160
cataracts 98
Diseasesoftheretina-the
Congenital cataractsand
retinopathies 160
associatedanomalies 106
Chapter 12The0pticNerve203
Cataractssecondaryto another
Introduction 203
eye disease or condition 110
Conditions of the opticnerve 203
Metabolic,toxic and nutritional
cataracts 113
Acknowledgements
All the ilustrations in this book are taken from the Fleming,Sally Turner, Christine Heinrich and Heidi
collection at the Comparative Ophthalmology UnitFeatherstone.Ialsoacknowledge the referring
of the Animal Health Trust. Several were taken by veterinary surgeons, the owners and breeders and,
colleagues and residents I greatly enjoyed workingmost particularly, the animals themselves whose
withover a number ofyears.These now well-patience enabled us to photograph their eyes.
recognisedveterinaryophthalmologistsincludeRoger
I should also like to thank the staffwhowere
Curtis,Arnold Leon,NickMillichamp,JaneSansom,involved in the production of this bookat Mosby
TonyRead,Beverly Cottrell,David Williams,LorraineElsevierfor theirinterest and expertise.
Preface
Inmy preface to the first edition,A Colour Atlas of help,together with the illustrations,in a more
Veterinary Ophthalmology published by Wolfe in accurate diagnosis of the many eye conditions,
1990,I stated that the bookwas intended forboth theincluding many hereditary eye diseases in the dog
veterinary student with interests in eye disease.Thisstill intended as an atlas,and I hopewill provide a
editionwaslittlemorethan acollection offavourite
evaluablepictorialresourceforcliniciansand
photographs and although thegreatmajority have
complimenttheincreasingnumberof textbookson
been reproduced in this second edition, together
rveterinaryophthalmology.
with severalfurther illustrations,I have also
included some textand tableswhichI believemay
KCBarnett
Chapter
Globe and Orbit
Introduction
Retropulsion,through theuppereyelid,willalsobe
Thisfirst chapter covers theglobe asa whole-and
ofhelpand the two eyes should be compared.A
the orbit -the following chapters dealing with
detailed examination of all the other parts of the
specific parts of the eye,e.geyelids, cornea,lens,
eye should follow and must include examination of
fundus,etc.Therefore, some overlap is inevitable
the contralateral eye,even if this appears normal on
between this chapter and those that follow and
naked-eye examination (Table 1.2).
certain figures depicted here could appear in
All three companion animals (horse, dog and
subsequent chapters.
cat)have largeglobes,very large andprominent in
A naked-eye examination of the globe,perhaps
the horse.Both the dog and the cat have an open or
aidedby apen torch,should notetheposition of the
incomplete orbit,whereas the horse has a complete
globe within the orbit and the size of the globe,
bony orbital rim and an enclosed orbit.
togetherwithocular movements and thepresence
Conditionsaffecting the globe and orbit can be
or absence of an ocular discharge or lacrimation.
divided into two groups:
Theglobeshouldbeexaminedfrombothdirectlyin
1.Position of the globe inrelation to the orbit,
front and above, which will greatly assist the
e.g. exophthalmos (proptosis) and
differential diagnosis between increased size of
enophthalmos (Tables 1.1 and 1.2).
the globe and abnormal position of the globe.
2.Size of the globe,e.g.microphthalmos,
medical buphthalmos,hydrophthalmos,
phthisis. Also note strabismus and
Table 1.1-Position of globe:differential diagnosis
nystagmus.
Enophthalmos (+nictitating membrane prominence)
The differential diagnosis is not always obvious
1.Normal variant-breed-related,e.g.Flat-Coated Retriever
and the position,prominence or retraction of the
2.Unilateral or bilateral
3.Pain
nictitating membrane may help or confuse.
4.Microphthalmos,phthisis
Radiography and CT or preferably MRI scans can
5.Orbital neoplasia （uncommon)
be of considerable assistance.
6.Atrophy of orbital tissue
7.Horner's syndrome(+miosis,ptosis)
Table 1.2-The painful eye
Exophthalmos(+nictitating membrane prominence usual)
Signs
Normal variant -breed-related,e.g.Pekingese
2.Unilateral or bilateral
Lacrimation,blepharospasm,photophobia,enophthalmos (globe
3.Retrobulbar space-occupying lesion
retraction) in some cases.
Acute-
Pain
1.
Orbital disease [abscess, cellulitis)
Abscess
2.
Endophthalmitis-uncommon
Haemorrhage
3.
Supernumerary eyelashes
Cellulitis
4.
Eyelid abnormalities and blepharitis
Chronic-
No pain
5.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Neoplasia
6.
Conjunctivitis-mild
4.Prolapse
Cornealulcers
Exophthalmos may also beconfused with an enlarged eye
8.
Uveitis(acute)
(hydrophthalmos and buphthalmos)
9.
Glaucoma (acute)
Globe and Orbit
Enophthalmos(Figs 1.2-1.3)
Enophthalmos is sinking or recession of the globe
into the orbit and has a variety of causes.Degrees of
enophthalmos areanormalvariant ina number of
dog breeds, such as the Rough Collie and Flat-
Coated Retriever,with deep-set eyes and often
mucus accumulation at the inner canthus.A painful
eyecanbewithdrawnintotheorbitbytheretractor
bulbi muscle and,in Horner's syndrome,enoph-
Fig.1.3 Enophthalmos Orbital adenocarcinoma pushing
the globe backwards into the orbit.Note that in this
case,due to the position of the tumour,protrusion of the
nictitating membrane is not evident.
thalmos,together with ptosis and miosis,are the
classical presenting signs.Enophthalmos also accom-
panies a small globe in casesof microphthalmos and
phthisis and is an uncommon sign in cases of orbital
neoplasiawithextensionof the tumourinto theorbit
pushing the globe more deeply into the orbit
(exophthalmosisa much more common sign with
retrobulbar tumours).Atrophy of orbital tissue also
Fig.1.1 The normal eye (Greyhound,young adult)
leads to degrees ofenophthalmos.In all these cases,
Note the shape and perfect apposition of the eyelids to
the globe,the absence of any discharge and the regular
the enophthalmosisaccompanied byprominence of
the nictitating membrane.
corneal reflection.
Exophthalmos (Figs 1.4-1.8)
Exophthalmos,or proptosis,is the prominence of a
normal-sized globe and associated with a retro-
bulbarspace-occupying lesion.It isusuallyunilateral
and often,but not invariably （see later),accom-
panied byprominence of thenictitatingmembrane.
The degree of natural exophthalmos,and enoph-
thalmos, is related to breed differences, e.g. the
Pekingese and the Pug. Obviously prolapse (dis-
location of the globe to a position in front of the
eyelids)
occursmuch more readilyin the
brachycephalicbreedswith theirprominenteyesand
shallow orbits.With a space-occupyingretrobulbar
lesion protrusion of the nictitating membrane is
usual. Other clinical signs include strabismus,
Fig.1.2 Enophthalmos (Rough Collie,young adult)
periorbital swelling, conjunctival congestion and
The small eye normal in certain breeds.Note the small
chemosis,ocular discharge and pain,together with
sunken globe with prominence of the nictitating
difficulty in opening the mouth. Causes include
membrane.
retrobulbar abscess and haemorrhage and orbital
Exophthalmos
Fig.1.4 Exophthalmos(Labrador Retriever,8years
Fig.1.6 ExophthalmosProminenceof theglobe and
old) Note the prominence of both the globe,with
third eyelid with central exposurekeratitis and ocular
changed shape of the palpebral orifice,and the
discharge.This acute case was accompanied by pain and
nictitating membrane,togetherwith mild lacrimation on
was due toa retrobulbar abscess.
the right side.Thistumourproved to bea glioma of the
opticnervewhichwasclosely applied to thebackof the
globe and the causeofa small retinal detachment.
Fig.1.5 Exophthalmos(German Shepherd Dog.3years
Fig.1.7 Exophthalmos (English Springer Spaniel,
old)Obviousprominenceofbothglobe and third eyelid,
aged) Chronic case with considerable prominence of the
together with periorbital swelling and ocular discharge.
globe,together with conjunctival congestion and
Theretrobulbar massproved tobea spindle cell
exposurekeratitis due to inability to close the lids over
sarcoma.
the globe.The causewas a retrobulbar tumour.
Globeand Orbit
Fig.1.8 Exophthalmos(DomesticShorthaired (DSH)
cat,9years old) Prominence of the globe and
Fig.1.9 Eyeball prolapse(Miniature Poodle,young
adult)Following trauma,the globe is trapped in front of
nictitating membranewithperiorbital swelling and
change in the shape of the palpebral aperture.The cause
the eyelids andprevented from returning to the orbit.
isaretrobulbar lymphosarcoma.
Note theintraocular and subconjunctival haemorrhage.
cellulitis all carrying an acute history. Other causes
include neoplasia,particularlyin the dog,and have
a chronic, slowly progressive, and usually non-
painful,history.
Prolapse (Figs 1.9-1.10)
Prolapse,sometimesreerred toasproptosisish
forward displacementof theglobewhichbecomes
trapped between theeyelids sopreventing itsreturn
to the orbit.It always follows trauma,israre in the
cat and horse,and is particularly seen in the
brachycephalicbreeds on account of their shallow
Fig.1.10 Eyeball prolapse（French Bulldog) Prolapse of
orbits.It is always a dire emergency; is often
both globes in this brachycephalicbreed,followinga
accompaniedbyopticnervedamage;and,following
road traffic accident.Note the absence of the
replacement,the eye often exhibits a divergent
strabismus.
haemorrhage present in the previous figure and the
divergence of both globes following theprolapse.
Microphthalmos(Figs 1.11-1.15)
Microphthalmos is an abnormally small globe;is
may well be the presenting sign.Microphthalmos
congenital,and in the dog,some cases are inherited;
：variesinthe degreeofseverityfrom a small but
isunilateral or bilateralinwhich case the two eyes otherwise normal eye (nanophthalmos) to cases
may be similar or show differing degrees.It is with multiple ocular defects (MOD）.The microph
common in the dog,also occurs in the horse,but is thalmic eye usually showsdegrees of enophthalmos
rareinthecat.Microphthalmosisoften accompanied accompanied by prominence of the nictitating
by other ocular defects,particularly cataract which membrane.
Microphthalmos
Fig.1.11 Microphthalmos(Collie puppy)Severe
bilateral microphthalmosin a deaf and blindwhite
puppy resulting from a blue merlexblue merle mating.
Fig.1.13 Microphthalmos(Shetland Sheepdog.puppy)
Note the prominence of the third eyelid and
enophthalmos in this Shetland Sheepdog puppy.
2
Fig.1.14 Microphthalmos with MOD(German
Fig.1.12 Microphthalmos （Thoroughbred,foal)
Shepherd Dog.puppy)Note the dense white partial
'Button eye'occurs congenitally in all breeds of horse
non-progressive cataract,together with fine persistent
and is.often,asin this case,accompanied by other
pupillarymembranes.
ocular defects.This figure shows differing degrees in the
two eyes of the same foal;other cases may show only
one apparently affected.
6
Globe and Orbit
Hydrophthalmos（Figs1.17-1.19)
Hydrophthalmos is also an enlargedglobe dueto
glaucoma,primary or secondary, but is not
congenital.Theincreased intraocularpressure occurs
usually in adult life. Corneal changes are usually
Fig.1.15 Microphthalmos with MOD (Cavalier King
Charles Spaniel,puppy)Note the irishypoplasia and
anterior cataract.
Fig.1.17 Hydrophthalmos (Great Dane,7 months old)
Unilateral case following primary glaucoma.
Fig.1.16 Buphthalmos（DSH cat,9 weeksold）
Bilateral congenital glaucoma.
Buphthalmos （Fig 1.16)
Buphthalmosisan enlargedglobe due to congenital
glaucoma;it is congenital but not inherited;it is
unilateral or bilateral and is seen more regularly in
Fig.1.18 Hydrophthalmos(Sealyham Terrier,6years
the kitten than the other species. The eye is
old)Due to secondary glaucoma following lens luxation.
prominent due toitsincreasedsize and thecorneais
usually opaque and may be vascularized. The
Note theretraction of the nictitating membrane in both
this and theprevious two figures with relative increased
nictitatingmembrane is oftenretracted and thereis
little evidence of pain,in spite of the increase in
sizeofglobeincomparison to thecasesofexophthalmos
inwhich the globeis ofnormal size.
eyeball size.
Strabismus
Fig.1.19 Hydrophthalmos (horse, grey)The cause of
this secondary glaucoma was a ciliary body melanoma.
Fig.1.21 Strabismus(English Springer Spaniel
2yearsold) Convergent squint due toaretrobulbar
adenocarcinoma.
Fig.1.20 Phthisis bulbi (polo pony) Shrivelled and
sunken enophthalmic globe,again with prominence of
the third eyelid,following severe trauma.Note the
ocular discharge.
evident, in particular fractures in Descemet's
Fig.1.22 Strabismus（Boxer puppy.9 weeks old)
Divergent squintfollowing traumaandprolapseofthe
diffuse corneal oedema, sometimes with corneal
globe.
vascularization.Thecondition ispainful and the eye
is irreparably blind.
Phthisis bulbi (Fig 1.20)
Strabismus（Figs1.21-1.23)
Phthisis is a shrunken and enophthalmic globe
following some severe insult, trauma,inflammation Convergent bilateral strabismus is said to be
or glaucoma.Again the eye is irreparably blind,the inherited in the Siamese breed and odd cases are
nictitating membrane prominent and the condition  seen in both the dog and horse and are sometimes
maybe accompaniedby an ocular dischargedue to
congenital.Divergent strabismus ofa previously
the small eyein a normal-sizedorbit.
prolapsed globeis common.
Globeand Orbit
Nystagmus
Ocular nystagmus,intermittent and oscillatory,is
inherited in the Siamese breed with or without
strabismus.Ocularnystagmus also often accompanies
casesofmicrophthalmoswith MOD.
Fig.1.24 Neoplasia (Hereford cow,adult)Squamous
cell carcinoma of the globe.
Fig.1.23 Strabismus(Shetland Sheepdog,puppy)
Unilateral congenital strabismus.
Chapter
Upper and Lower Eyelids
Introduction
drooping of the upper lid, commonly seen as part
Eyelid disease is common in the dog, cat and horse,
ofHorner's syndrome,together with miosis and
particularly the former which exhibits several
enophthalmos, usually presenting as prominence
inherited anomalies,basically entropion and
of the nictitating membrane; there is a remarkably
ectropion.Supernumerary eyelashes (distichiasis,
highincidenceofHorner'ssyndromeintheUKin
ectopic cilia and trichiasis)also account for much
the GoldenRetriever.Ptosis is usually idiopathic.
eyelid disease and, in the dog, are due to an
Neoplasia affecting the eyelids is important in all
inherited factor.
the species, particularly the aged animal. The
Inflammation of the eyelid (blepharitis)
tumourmay bemalignant or,moreusually,benign
is
uncommon, as are other localized infections such as
and tumour types include papilloma,adenoma,
meibomianitis and cyst,chalazion and hordeolum
melanoma,adenocarcinoma,histiocytoma,lym-
or stye.The periorbital region carries a thin skin
phoma,mast cell,squamous cell carcinoma and
with a good blood supply and is sometimes
sarcoid in the horse.
involved with parasitic skin diseases such as
Congenital anomaliesincludecolobomas,which
sarcoptic and demodectic mange, ringworm
may affect anypart of the lid (centre or lateral),and
infection and also atopicdermatitis.
oneorboth lidsandeyes.Colobomas aremore
Injuries,often full thickness,occur frequently in
all species, usually due to fight wounds,barbed
well beassociatedwith colobomas affectingother
wire and other accidents. Suturing is often
parts of the eye. The other congenital anomaly of
required,particularly for vertical wounds as
the eyelid is the dermoidwhich may extend from
opposed to horizontal wounds,and the excellentt
the eyelid onto the conjunctiva and possibly
blood supply is an important factor in healing.Abeyond.Dermoids are considered to beinherited in
further eyelid condition in this category is ptosis orthe Birman cat.
10
Upperand Lower Eyelids
Entropion （Figs 2.1-2.12)
affected by facialconformation,in particular the
Entropion,in-turning of the eyelid margin,is
desiredeye shape,the amount of skin,usually
common,particularlyin thedog and is breed,and toexcessive,and wrinkles or folds in the periorbital
or both lids and one or both eyes. Entropion isusually up to 1 year,in different breeds;occasional
Fig.2.1 Entropion (German Shorthaired Pointer,
Fig.2.3 Entropion (Rottweiler,4years old)Upper and
14weeks old) Simple lower lid entropion.Note the
lower lid entropion.Note the age in this breed and
signs of irritation caused bythe eyelid in-turning with
comparewith the ages in theprevious twofiguresand
consequent enophthalmos and prominence of the
following two figures.Also note thesmall corneal
nictitating membrane and lacrimation,but no corneal
opacityand ulcer.
changes.
Fig.2.2 Entropion(Chow,8 months old) Classical
upperand lower lid entropion withprofuse lacrimation.
Fig.2.4 Entropion (Great Dane,7weeks old）Upper
and lower lid entropion withcorneal changes including
vascularization.
Entropion
Fig.2.7 Entropion (same dog as in previous figure)
Fig.2.5 Entropion (Cocker Spaniel,10years old)
Note themarked enophthalmos,prominent nictitating
Senile upper lid entropion.Seealso Fig 2.14.
membrane and severe corneal changes.
Fig.2.8 Entropion (Chow,13 months old)Corneal
granulation tissueresulting from the chronic irritation
duetoentropion.
Fig.2.6 Entropion (Shar Pei,12 months old) Entropion
associatedwith multiplefacial folds.Note theclosed eye
and lacrimation.
12
Upper and Lower Eyelids
Fig.2.11 Entropion （DSH cat,adult) Lower lid
entropion.
Fig.2.9 Entropion[Golden Retriever,8months old)
Typical signofdepigmentationof the lower eyelidwhich
hasbeen rolled inwards and in contact with the tear film
forsometime.
Fig.2.10 EntropionPembroke Corgi,6weeksold)
Fig.2.12 Entropion （Dorset Horn lamb,3 days old)
Traumaticentropion following a spliteyelid.
Lower lid entropion.Congenital and hereditary.
Ectropion
cases are not inherited and usually due to trauma granulation tissue (Fig 2.8),ulceration and possible
(Fig 2.10).The mode of inheritance is not known but
globe penetration.Entropion is rare in the cat.
islikelytobecomplexbecauseof therelatedfactors.
In the horse and sheep（Fig 2.12)it is usually
Ectropion (Figs2.13-2.17)
congenital.Entropion due to irritation caused by the
hairs of thelid margin on the cornea leads to pain
Ectropion,out-turning of the eyelid margin,is
and often profuse lacrimation (Fig 2.2),corneal uncommon but again breed and agerelated.Itaffects
oedema and vascularization (Fig2.7)and even the lower lids and isusually due to too long a lid.
Fig.2.13 Ectropion （Beagle,young adult) Simple lower
Fig.2.15 Ectropion (Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,
lid ectropion due to toolong a lid.
puppy)Ectropion of both upper and lower lids with
eyelidswelling dueto juvenilepyoderma.Notealso the
affectedmuzzle.
Fig.2.14 Ectropion(Cocker Spaniel,aged) Senile
ectropionof thelower lid.Note the low ear carriage and
Fig.2.16 Ectropion(Clumber Spaniel,young adult)
excess skin on the head and face.This situation is
Diamond eye with ectropion at the kinkin the centre of
typically seen in the English Cocker Spaniel and note
both upper and lower lids complicated by entropion on
also the senile entropion of the upper lid in Fig 2.5.
eitherside.This situation is also seen typicallv in the
St Bernard,Bloodhound and Basset Hound.
14
Upper and Lower Eyelids
Fig.2.17 Ectropion/entropion (St Bernard) Grossly
abnormal diamond eye. Note also corneal changesand
prolapsed nictitans gland.
Fig.2.18 Distichiasis Miniature Longhaired
Ectropion doesnotcause the irritation of entropion
Dachshund,young adult) Note the long supernumerary
but exposure of conjunctiva leads to some inflam-
cilia in the lower lid producing a slightincrease in the
mation andnormal tear drainagemay be affected,
tear film but no other clinical signs andno corneal
leading toa degree of epiphora.
damage.
Distichiasis (Figs 2.18-2.25)
Distichiasis, extra or supernumerary eyelashes
arisingfrom ornear themeibomiangland orifices,is
common in the dog and inherited,usually occurring
at a fewmonthsofage,sometimesyounger.Itisrare
in other species.Distichiasis may ormay not cause
a clinical problem, depending upon the length,
direction and number of the supernumerary
eyelashes. It may be accompanied by lacrimation,
blepharospasm and sometimes corneal ulceration
(Fig2.20).
Ectopic cilia （Figs2.23-2.26)
Ectopic cilia are extra lashes emerging from the
palpebral conjunctiva and usually impinging directly
onto the cornea,often causing acute blepharospasm
Fig.2.19 Distichiasis(Miniature Longhaired
Dachshund,1year old) Several shorter cilia in the upper
and lacrimation, and sometimescorneal ulceration.
The ectopiccilia may be single orin groups and the
lid and of different lengths,but still not causing corneal
condition is usually associated with degrees of
damage or any other clinical sign.Distichiasis is
distichiasis.Again,thereisa strongbreed incidence.
particularly commonin thisbreed.
Ectopiccilia
Fig.2.22 Distichiasis（Flat-Coated Retriever,2years
old)Two supernumerary ciliaarising from the
meibomian gland openings.
Fig.2.20 Distichiasis（Pekingese,young adult) Short
supernumerary lashes causing a corneal ulcer.
Fig.2.23 Distichiasisand ectopic cilia (Flat-Coated
Retriever,young adult) Note marked blepharospasm and
Fig.2.21 Distichiasis(Shetland Sheepdog.young
increased lacrimation.Anotherbreed often exhibiting
adult) Several lashes causing irritation.Note the
thisproblem.
enophthalmosand prominence of the nictitating
membrane.Another breed often involved with this
condition.
16
Upperand Lower Eyelids
Fig.2.24 Ectopic cilia(Flat-Coated Retriever,
7months old) Note the origin of the aberrant cilia well
inside the upper eyelid margin.
Fig.2.26 Ectopiccilia(ShetlandSheepdog.4months
old) Several potential ectopiccilia lying beneath the
palpebral conjunctiva.
Trichiasis (Figs 2.27-2.28)
Trichiasis is normal facial hair in contact with the
cornea and/or conjunctiva from nasal folds;it is
occasionally traumaticin origin.
Blepharitis（Fig2.29-2.30)
Blepharitis,eyelidinlammation,susuallyassociatd
withaprimary dermatologicalproblemandwith
secondary conjunctival involvement. Clinical signs
depend upon the primary condition and the degree
Fig.2.25 Distichiasis and ectopic cilia(Pekingese,
ofseverity and include ocular discharges sticking
1year old) These two conditions are frequently found in
to the lashes and periorbital region,irritation and
thesame eye.
hairloss.
Blepharitis
17
Fig.2.29 Blepharitis(Cocker Spaniel,6years old)
Note the discharge sticking the eyelashes together,the
associated earlyvascularkeratitis and the prominence of
the meibomian gland openings.
Fig.2.27 Trichiasis(Pekingese,puppy)Pronounced
nasal fold.Note the tear streak.
Fig.2.28 Trichiasis（Pekingese,4yearsold) Irritation
Fig.2.30 BlepharitisSecondary to keratoconjunctivitis
and corneal ulcer due toa nasal fold.
sicca.
18
Upper and Lower Eyelids
Meibomianitis (Fig 2.31)
Meibomian cyst(Fig 2.33)
Meibomianitis,inflammation of the meibomian
Meibomiancystis thecysticdistension ofthegland
glands,maybe acute or chronic andmay accompany
and is mainly visible on the conjunctival side of
blepharitis or conjunctivitis.
thelid.
Hordeolum -external (stye)（Fig 2.32)
Eyelid neoplasia （Figs2.34-2.44)
Infection of one ormore of themeibomianglands.
Eyelidneoplasia iscommon,particularlyin theolder
Fig.2.31 Meibomianitis (CavalierKing Charles
Fig.2.33 Meibomian cyst（Beagle.young adult) Cystic
Spaniel,4years old) Note the secretion from the
distension ofmeibomian gland visible on the
meibomian glands.
conjunctival side of thelid.
Fig.2.32 Hordeolum or stye (Labrador Retriever,
Fig.2.34 Eyelid tumour(Golden Retriever.1 year old)
8weeksold) Infectedand distended meibomian glands.
Viral papilloma.
Eyelid neoplasia
19
Fig.2.35 Eyelid tumour (lrish Setter.7years old)
Papilloma.
Fig.2.38 Eyelid tumour(Beagle,10 yearsold)
Melanoma.
Fig.2.36 Eyelid tumour （Pembroke Corgi,9years old)
Papilloma.Note the extension of the tumour into the
substance of thelidvisible only on the palpebral surface.
Fig.2.39 Eyelid tumour(Boxer,9years old)Mast cell
tumour.
Fig.2.37 Eyelid tumour(LabradorRetriever,9years
old) Squamous papilloma.
20
Upperand Lower Eyelids
Fig.2.42 Eyelid tumour(NewForestmare,13years
old)Sarcoid.
Fig.2.40 Eyelid tumour(DSH cat,14years old,tabby
and white)Squamous cell carcinoma in the
unpigmented skin of the lowerlid.Note theaffected
area isin unpigmented skin and the age of the animal.
Fig.2.43 Eyelid tumour Welsh pony gelding.8years
old)Sarcoid.
Fig.2.41 Eyelid tumour(DSH cat,10 years old,white)
Lymphosarcoma of the upper lid.Note the chemosis
affecting thelower lid.
Congenital anomalies
21
dog, although occasionally tumours occur in
Congenital anomalies （Figs 2.45-2.50)
younger animals,even puppies (Fig 2.34).The type
Colobomasand dermoids.
of tumour is oftenrelated to the age of the animal.
Tumours,depending upon their size and position,
may cause irritation,blepharospasm,lacrimation
and corneal ulceration.
Fig.2.46 Coloboma or agenesis (DSH cat,13 months
old)Upper eyelid absence with consequent trichiasis
causing a mild vascular keratitis.
Fig.2.44 Eyelid tumour(Welsh Cob stallion,5years
old)Sarcoid.Note theulcerated surface of part of the
tumour.
Fig.2.47 Coloboma(Staffordshire Bull Terrier,
Fig.2.45 Coloboma oragenesis（DSH cat,1year old)
2weeks old] Congenitalabsence ofpart of the lower
Congenital absence of the outer half of both upper
lid.Rare in this species.
eyelids.
22
Upper andLower Eyelids
Fig.2.50 Dermoid （Birman kitten,10 weeks old) The
condition is inherited in this breed.
Fig.2.48 Eyelid deformity(Labrador Retriever,
6weeks old) Gross congenital deformity of the eyelids.
Fig.2.49 Dermoid （Labrador Retriever,6weeks old)
Pigmented and hairy dermoid of lid and conjunctiva.
Chapter
Nictitating Membrane
(almost invariably unilateral);dysautonomia in the
Introduction
cat (bilateral) and also,in some cases,chronic
Theappearance of the nictitating membrane (third
diarrhoea in this species.
eyelid or haw) is often a presenting sign in
A non-pigmented third eyelid will look more
veterinary ophthalmology and prominence,or
prominent than a pigmented third eyelid and is a
protrusion,is the commonest clinical condition
common cause of concern,particularly when
affecting one eye only (Fig3.1).
and is due to a variety of causes.
Trauma and foreign bodies
(Figs3.2-3.3)
Prominence of the nictitating
The third eyelid is prone to injury （Fig 3.2),both in
membrane (Table3.1)
catsandbycats!Also thepocketattheinner canthus
behind thethird eyelidisa favouritesiteforforeign
Prominence,unilateral or bilateral,may be accom-
paniedbylacrimation andblepharospasm indicating
bodies,in particular grass awns (Fig 3.3).
pain,usually anterior segment, e.g.glaucoma (see
also Chapter 1).
Inflammation（Figs3.4-3.10)
Prominence also accompaniesseveral conditions
affecting the globe,including some cases of enoph
Both surfaces of the nictitating membrane are
thalmos (Fig 1.2),also exophthalmos (Figs 1.4-1.8),
covered by conjunctiva(palpebral)and may therefore
microphthalmos (Fig 1.13) and phthisis (Fig 1.20).
exhibit forms of conjunctivitis (see also Chapter 5).
Prominence may also indicate tetanus (bilateral
These include follicular conjunctivitis （Figs 3.4-3.5),
and intermittent in thehorse);Horner's syndrome
chemosis (Fig 3.6) and conjunctival cysts (Fig 3.7).
Table 3.1-Prominence ofnictitating membrane
1.Unilateral or bilateral
2.Pain-anterior segment with globe retraction;lacrimation
and blepharospasm
3.Enophthalmos
4.Exophthalmos
5.Microphthalmos
6.Phthisis
7.Tetanus (bilateral)
8.Horner's syndrome （unilateral）+miosis,ptosis
9.Dysautonomia
10.
Chronic diarrhoea (cat)(bilateral)
Fig.3.1 Prominence of a normal non-pigmented third
11.Cartilage deformity (scrolled)(dog)
eyelid.
23
24
Nictitating Membrane
Fig.3.3 Nictitating membrane foreign body Grass awn
Fig.3.2 Torn and prolapsed nictitans gland and
behind the third eyelid.Note the corneal granulation
nictitating membrane following trauma.
tissue.
Fig.3.5 Follicular conjunctivitis （DSH cat,1 year old)
Note the depigmentation in the region of the follicles
and the serous ocular discharge.
Fig.3.4 Follicular conjunctivitis Usually affecting both
aspectsof the nictitating membrane and otherpalpebral
conjunctiva and a not uncommon cause of lacrimation
due to the irritation.
Inflammation
25
Fig.3.6 Chemosis(DSH cat,11 years old) Bulbar and
Fig.3.7 Conjunctival cyst(English Setter,8 months
palpebral conjunctiva are affected.Unknown aetiology.
old) Subconjunctival cyst at the base of the third eyelid
resulting in mild prominence of the third eyelid.
Fig.3.9 Plasma cell infiltration (German Shepherd
Dog.7years old) Note depigmentation of the affected
area.This condition frequently accompanies pannus.
Fig.3.8 Granuloma of thenictitating membrane
(Persian cat,18 months old)Bilateral,unknown
aetiology.
26
Nictitating Membrane
Fig.3.10 Plasma cell infiltration (German Shepherd
Dog,8years old) Again note depigmentation and the
accompanying pannus.
Fig.3.11 Prolapse of the nictitans gland (Bulldog.
2years old) Note the visiblefree border ofthe
A specific,immune-mediated,bilateral but not
nictitating membrane.
necessarily symmetrical conjunctivitisis plasma cell
infiltration (Figs 3.9-3.10)which frequently accom-
panies pannus in the German Shepherd Dog and
others.Another important cause ofinflammation is
habronemiasisin the horse.
Prolapse of the nictitans gland
(Figs3.11-3.12)
A condition mainly seen in the dog,unilateral or
more frequently bilateral,and usually one eye
following the other;often in young dogs including
puppies,and known as‘cherry eye'.
Deformity of the cartilage
(Figs3.13-3.15)
Sometimes referred to as scrolling of the cartilage;an
unusual butnot uncommon condition,particularly
in thelarger breeds of dog,butrarein other species.
Fig.3.12 Prolapse of the nictitans gland (Bulldog.
Bilateral orunilateral;the cartilagedeformity usually
10 weeks old) Note age and breed in this case.
Neoplasia
27
resultsin thefreeborder ofthe third eyelid rolling
Neoplasia (Figs3.16-3.18)
outwards (Fig 3.13),and more rarely inwards (Fig
Various neoplasms may be involved but are
3.14).It is another cause of prominence of the
comparativelyrareinthedog andcat,although the
nictitatingmembrane andmaybeaccompaniedby
nictitatingmembraneis acommon siteforsquamous
mild epiphora and mucoid discharge.
cell carcinoma in the horse （Fig 3.18), often
presenting as a case of persistent ocular discharge.
Fig.3.13 Cartilage deformity(German Shepherd Dog.
Fig.3.14 Cartilage deformity(Weimaraner,5years
7monthsold) Freeborder of the third eyelid rolled
old)Freeborder of the third eyelidrolledinwards.
outwards.
28
Nictitating Membrane
Fig.3.16 Nictitating membrane tumour(Labrador
Retriever,3 years old) Lymphosarcoma.
Fig.3.15 Cartilage deformity(Great Dane,8months
old)Similar to Figure 3.13,but note similarity to
prolapse of the nictitans gland(Figs3.10-3.11)and
tumour（Fig3.15).
Fig.3.17 Nictitating membrane tumour (Siamese cat)
Adenocarcinoma.
Fig.3.18 Nictitating membrane tumour
（Thoroughbred,8years old) Squamous cell carcinoma.
Note the ocular discharge in this case.The third eyelid is
a common site for this tumour in the horse.
Chapter
Lacrimal System
Introduction
The lacrimal system is responsible for two
2.The fluorescein test-fluorescein into the
important,and often presenting,clinical signs of
conjunctival sac and the appearance,or
‘wet eye'and ‘dry eye'.The lacrimal system has
otherwise,of a green stain after a fewminutes
two functions:secretory (tear production)to
at theipsilateralnostril(Fig4.2)(when stain
produce the important pre-corneal tear film （ptf)
appears it proves that the nasolacrimal duct
and excretory (lacrimal drainage) via the puncta,
system is patent but when no stain appears it
canaliculi, sac,nasolacrimal duct and its opening.
doesnotprove that the system is blocked-
The dry eye,or keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS),is
resort then toirrigation,usuallyvia theupper
described inChapter6（Figs6.35-6.44),as it usually
punctum).
presents as a keratitis with a considerable ocular
discharge.KCSis a relatively common eye disease
The wet eye has two components(Table 4.1):
in the dogbut seldom diagnosed in the cat or horse.
1.Lacrimation,or overproduction of tears,a
common clinical condition denoting pain
There are two important aids to diagnosis for the
lacrimal system:
and/orinflammation andoften accompanied
1.TheSchirmer tear test 1-oneminutewith no
by blepharospasm (Fig 4.3).
use of topical anaesthesia (Fig 4.1).
2.Epiphora,abnormal orimpaired drainage.
Fig.4.1 Schirmer tear test Paper strip folded under the
Fig.4.2 Fluorescein patency test Fluorescein put into
lower lid and left for 1 minute.
the conjunctival sac and appearing at the nostril
(proving patency of the nasolacrimal duct system).
29
30
Lacrimal System
Table 4.1-The wet eye
Lacrimation (unilateral or bilateral)
1.Anterior segment pain with globe retraction
2.Entropion
3.Ectropion
4.Distichiasis
5.Ectopic cilia
6.Trichiasis
7.Foreign body
8.Eyelid tumour
Epiphora (unilateral or bilateral)
1.
Imperforate ormicropuncta
2.Trauma
Fig.4.4 Epiphora （Golden Retriever,6monthsold)
3.Foreign body
Imperforate lower punctum.
4.Infection
5.Nasal neoplasia
6.Symblepharon (cat)
Fig.4.5 Tear streak(Golden Retriever,6 months old)
Typical brown staining due to imperforatepunctum
Fig.4.3 Lacrimation An early sign of bovine
causing epiphora.See also Fig 5.5 and note the similarity
in the case of lacrimation associated with atopy.
keratoconjunctivitis.
Punctal abnormalities
upper punctum,with anormal lower punctum,the
Congenital imperforate and micropuncta may
presenting sign would beunlikely to occur as the
present,depending upon whether both upper and
lower punctum drains the greater part of the tear
lower puncta areinvolved,asaweteye(Fig4.4)with
film under normal conditions,i.e.no increased
a typical tear streak or stain （Fig 4.5)or more
lacrimation.In the horse it is usually the nasal
commonly asa purulent dischargein the horse Figs
opening of the nasolacrimal duct that is involved
4.6-4.7).One or both eyes may be involved,in
and often with a variable distalportion of the
addition tooneorbothpunctawhichmaybeeither
nasolacrimal duct.In the cat thecondition is rare but,
imperforate or micro.In the dog there is almost
when present,is often accompanied by absence of
certainly a hereditary component with a definite
thecanaliculi orpart oftheduct.
breed incidenceintheGolden Retriever andthe
Other causes of punctal occlusion include trauma
English Cocker Spaniel.In the dog it is usually the (Fig 4.12),foreign body (Fig 4.13)and infection of
lower punctum that is involved but ifit were thesome part of the nasolacrimal duct system (Figs
Punctalabnormalities
31
4.14-4.15),sometimes due originally to a foreign
body,or neoplasia affecting adjacent structures or
teeth.Perhaps the commonest cause of punctal
occlusion in the cat is symblepharon (Fig 4.16;see
alsoFigs5.13-5.18).
Fig.4.6 Imperforate punctum(Thoroughbred foal,
Fig.4.8 Thenormal punctum in the lower eyelidofa
8months old)Purulent ocular discharge with atresiaof
dog
the nasal opening of the nasolacrimal duct-the usual
situation in the horse.
Fig.4.9 Micropunctum (Cocker Spaniel,8 months old)
Note the thickened edge of the small opening.
Fig.4.7 Ocular discharge(horse) Mild purulent ocular
discharge,the presenting signof another case of absence
of thenasal opening of thenasolacrimal duct.
32
LacrimalSystem
Fig.4.10 lmperforate punctum(Golden Retriever,
6 months old) Note absence of any opening.
Fig.4.12 Occluded punctumCrossbred terrier,
6months old) Scar tissue following trauma.
Fig.4.11 lmperforate punctum （Basset Hound,
Fig.4.13 Nasolacrimal duct foreign body(Old English
14months old) Note the depression in the conjunctiva
Sheepdog.14 months old) Grass awn protruding from
covering the opening of the lower punctum.
the lower punctum following irrigation via the upper
punctum.
Punctal abnormalities
33
Fig.4.16 0ccluded nasolacrimal puncta (cat,young
adult) Due to severe symblepharon.The nictitating
membrane is fused to the cornea and the conjunctival
fornicesobliterated,together with the nasolacrimal duct
puncta.
Fig.4.14 Nasolacrimal duct infection Mucus strand
from the lower punctum followingirrigation of the
lacrimal system via the upper punctum.
4.15Nasolacrimal duct infection (Rough Collie,
6years old) Note thepersistent and purulent ocular
discharge and bead of pusfrom the lower punctum at
theinnercanthus.
Chapter
Conjunctiva,Limbus, Sclera
Introduction
Table 5.1-The red eye
The conjunctiva (bulbar,palpebral and nictitating
Unilateral or bilateral
parts) is frequently influenced by diseases of
Acute or chronic
the eyelids (Chapter 2),nictitating membrane
Local ocular diseaseor systemicwith pyrexia(bilateral)
(Chapter 3),lacrimal system(Chapter4)and cornea
Conjunctivitis
(Chapter 6).Inflammation,or conjunctivitis,is
Primary or,more commonly,secondary (ocular or systemic)
probably the commonest eye condition in vet-
Traumatic(subeonjunctival haemorrhage)
Glaucoma
erinary ophthalmology,occurring in all species
2
Breed-specificforprimarysome secondarycases
butwith a difficult classification as the exactcause
Unilateral at first presentation
isoften unknown (Table5.1).
3.
Uveitis
The conjunctivamay indicate systemic disease in
Photophobia
all animals, the changes being bilateral.Examples
4.
Episcleritis/scleritis
Uncommon,usually no pain
are canine distemper,respiratory tract viruses in
5.
Keratitis
both the cat and the horse,blood dyscrasias,
Including corneal ulcer (pain)
jaundice and anaemia (Fig 5.6). Primary con-
Orbital disease
junctivitis has a varied aetiology-often bacterial
Endophthalmitis
but also viral, trauma, etc.
Panophthalmitis
Retrobulbar (inflammation,neoplasia)
Prolapse
Conjunctivitis （Figs5.1-5.5)
Conjunctivitis may be acute (Fig5.1) with clinical
signs of hyperaemia,chemosis,lacrimation and a
Conjunctivitis may be unilateral or bilateral;affect
variable discharge,or chronic (Fig 5.2) with a dull
any age including the neonate;and maybe primary
redness, thickening and less and drier discharge.
or secondary to another eye disease and it may be
Follicular conjunctivitis （Fig 5.3)mainly affects the
difficult to decide which is the primary condition,
palpebral conjunctiva and carries a non-specific
e.g.keratoconjunctivitis. Conjunctivitis is not nor-
aetiology.Atopic conjunctivitis also mainly affects
mally a painful condition but does cause a degree of
the palpebral conjunctiva (Fig5.4)and accompanies
irritation and therefore may be accompanied by
atopicdermatitis,often in theperiorbital region and
lacrimation and blepharospasm (Table 5.2).
with an increased lacrimation (Fig5.5).
35
36
Conjunctiva,Limbus,Sclera
Fig.5.1 Acute purulent conjunctivitis（young dog)
Fig.5.3 Follicular conjunctivitis(cat) Note some
Note that the discharge isnot adherent to the cornea
chemosisand ocular discharge.
and iswashed away onto theeyelidmarginsby the
increased lacrimation.
Fig.5.2 Chronic conjunctivitis Note the dryer nature of
Fig.5.4 Atopic conjunctivitis (Labrador Retriever,
the discharge and itsposition and the clear cornea.
adult) Note theinvolvement of thepalpebral conjunctiva
only visiblewhen thelid iseverted
Table5.2-Conjunctivitis:differential diagnosis
Pupil
Intraocularpressure
Pain
Vision
Discharge
Conjunctivitis
No change
No change
No change
Serous-purulent
Glaucoma
Dilates
Blind
Lacrimation
+++
Uveitis
Constricts
++
Minor effect
Lacrimation
Conjunctival haemorrhages
37
Fig.5.5 Atopic conjunctivitis Note the excessive
lacrimation causing a typical tear streak and compare
with the tear streak due to epiphora in Fig 4.5.
Chemosis (Figs 5.6-5.7)
Fig.5.6 Chemosis （DSH cat,3years old) Conjunctival
Chemosis, or conjunctival oedema,usually accom-
oedema ina catpositive for Chlamydia
panies acute conjunctivitis or trauma and occurs
particularly in the cat (Fig 5.6) and horse (Fig 5.7).
Conjunctival haemorrhages
(Figs5.8-5.10)
Trauma is probably the commonest cause of
conjunctival and subconjunctival haemorrhages and
may be quite spectacular (Fig 5.8).However, there
are a number of other causes of haemorrhage to
mucous membranes that may aid diagnosis ofa
more serious condition(Fig5.9).
Fig.5.7 Chemosis （Pony) Severe case obscuring the
globe and due to trauma.
38
Conjunctiva,Lmbus,Sclera
Subconjunctival masses
(Figs 5.11-5.12)
Occasionally retrobulbar fat may appear subcon-
junctivally and hasbeen reported in the horse in
association with the nictitating membrane.Fig 5.12
shows a rare case ofconjunctival calcinosis in the
dog causing a vascular keratitis and corneal ulcer.
Symblepharon(Figs 5.13-5.18;
see also Fig 4.16)
Symblepharon is a conjunctival adhesion to the
Fig.5.8 Subconjunctival haemorrhage(Spaniel)
conjunctiva or cornea.It is common in the cat but
Haemorrhage followinga golf club injury.
rare in the dog and may be congenital or more
Fig.5.9 Subconjunctival haemorrhage(Cocker
Fig.5.10 Subconjunctival haemorrhage Thisparticular
Spaniel) Haemorrhage due to Warfarin poisoning(see
case was reaction to a paint stripper.
also Fig 11.206).
Symblepharon
39
Fig.5.11 Subconjunctival fat prolapse (Cairn Terrier,
8yearsold)
Fig.5.13 Symblepharon(DSH cat,2years old)
Adhesion ofpalpebral conjunctiva to the cornea
obliterating the conjunctival fornices.
Fig.5.12 Conjunctival calcinosis(Munsterlander,
Fig.5.14 Symblepharon（DSH cat,6months old)A
5months old) Calcinosis with bulbar conjunctiva and
mild case not affecting vision.
outer aspect of thenictitating membrane affected and
causing a vascularkeratitis and corneal ulcer.A rare case
of unknown aetiology.
40
Conjunctiva,Limbus,Sclera
Fig.5.15 Symblepharon(cat,young adult)Severe case
Fig.5.17 Symblepharon(cat,young adult)Unilateral
causing blindness.
case causing a narrowedpalpebral aperture.
Fig.5.16 Symblepharon （DSH kitten,5weeks old)
Fig.5.18 Symblepharon(CavalierKing CharlesSpaniel,
15weeks old) Congenitaladhesion of conjunctiva to
cornea.This condition israre in this species.
Conjunctival cyst
41
particularly due toneonatal infectionwith FEHV-1;F
Foreign bodies (Fig 5.19)
burns are another factor in aetiology.The condition is
The conjunctival fornices are favourite sites for
painlessbut maybe accompanied by discharge due
foreign bodies,particularly of organic origin,and
to drainage problems;the degree is very variable,
should alwaysbesearchedunder localanaesthesia in
mechanically causingblindness in severe cases.
cases of acute uniocular conjunctivitis often with a
purulent discharge.
Conjunctivaldermoid （Figs5.20-5.22)
Epibulbar dermoids occur on the conjunctiva in all
the species and three examples are shown.
Conjunctival cyst （Figs5.23-5.24)
Twoexamples are shown;the first in a puppy and
the second,ina cat,associated with symblepharon
Fig.5.19 Conjunctival foreign body (Yorkshire Terrier,
adult) Grass awn in the left upper conjunctival fornix.
Fig.5.21 Conjunctival dermoid (Dogue de Bordeaux.
1year old) Unusual case causing a corneal ulcer.
Fig.5.20 Conjunctival dermoid (Birman kitten,
Fig.5.22 Conjunctival dermoid(Crossbred puppy)
12 weeks old) The condition is hereditary in this breed.
Involvement of conjunctiva,limbus and lateral canthus.
Conjunctiva,Limbus,Sclera
42
Fig.5.24 Conjunctival cyst together with
symblepharon (DSH cat)
Fig.5.23 Conjunctival cyst(Golden Retriever,
Scleritis and episcleritis
6monthsold)
(Figs 5.33-5.35)
Classification and nomenclature is confusedand
Neoplasia(Figs5.25-5.32)
variablebuttheseareinflammatoryandusuallynon-
The conjunctiva,particularly palpebral, and limbus
painful conditions and arenot neoplasticin spite of
are favoured sites for squamous cell carcinoma in the their appearance. Episcleritis may be nodular or
horse, a relatively common tumour in this species.simple (diffuse),occurring near to the limbus with
conjunctiva in a dog and a lymphosarcoma of thecornea.The conditionmay be unilateral or bilateral
conjunctiva in a cat.In addition limbal melanoma in and there is a predilection in the Golden Retriever.
the dog is shown,a benign tumour to be Nodular episclerokeratitis is usually bilateral,
distinguished from iris and ciliarybody tumours in
involvingmoreof thecornea and particularly occurs
in the Rough Collie and Shetland Sheepdog.
this and other species (see Chapter 7).
Seleritisandepiscleritis
43
Fig.5.27 Conjunctival tumour (Hunter-type,17years
old) Squamous cell carcinoma in a similar position to
previousfigure.
Fig.5.25 Conjunctival tumour(Hunter-type,13years
old,palomino) Squamous cell carcinoma of lower
palpebral conjunctiva and nictitating membrane.
Fig.5.28 Conjunctival tumour (Horse)Squamous cell
carcinoma at thelimbus.Note the typical pale grey
appearance in this case.The horse was affected in both
eyes.
Fig.5.26 Conjunctival tumour (Connemara pony.
8years old) Squamouscell carcinoma at thelimbus and
bulbar conjunctiva.
Conjunctiva,Limbus,Sclera
44
Fig.5.31 Conjunctival tumour(Labrador Retriever,
adult) Limbal melanoma.Note the appearance at the
limbus and adjacent sclera andparticularly the lackof
involvement of irisand pupil. Compare with Fig 7.41.
Fig.5.29 Conjunctival tumour [Gordon Setter,11
years old) Benign haemangioma.Lower conjunctival
fornix.
Fig.5.32 Conjunctival tumour(Golden Retriever,
adult) Limbal melanoma.Again note the appearance
with no evidence of irisinvolvement.This tumour occurs
particularly in thisbreed aswell asthe Labrador
Retriever(previous figure).
Fig.5.30 Conjunctival tumour(DSH cat 11 year old)
Lymphosarcoma affecting palpebral conjunctiva and
nictitatingmembrane.
Scleritis and episcleritis
45
Fig.5.33 Episcleritis(Golden Retriever) Nodular
Fig.5.35 Episcleritis(Rough Collie,young adult)
episcleritis. Note the corneal oedema adjacent to the
Nodular episclerokeratitis,bilateral case.Note the
tumour.
adjacent cornealarcus.
Fig.5.34Episcleritis（Airedale Terrier,5yearsold)
Diffuse episcleritis.Note hyperaemia of overlying
conjunctiva.
Chapter
Cornea
Introduction
the reflection may be broken or irregular (Fig 6.1)
Corneal disease and keratitis are among the most
indicating a superficial lesion with interference
common eye diseases in all the domestic animals
of the corneal epithelium, or regular （Fig 1.1)
andwitha widevariety of causes and appearances.
indicating no interference with the epithelium,the
The presenting signs of corneal disease vary
lesion being
within the corneal s
stroma
OT
considerablybetween case,severity and cause and
endothelium.
in a number,particularly in the dog,the aetiology
Keratitis may be accompanied by conjunctivitis
remains unknown.Pain is an important sign and
(keratoconjunctivitis)and also,if severe or chronic,
will accompany most forms of keratitis,whatever
the cause,with the classical triad of blepharospasm,
ment.Formsof keratitis may occasionally indicate
photophobia and lacrimation.However,the degree
systemicinvolvement.
of pain in corneal disease is again variable,from
Congenital and hereditary abnormalities affecting
severe in cases of corneal ulceration and trauma,to
the cornea are uncommon-the epibulbar dermoid
non-existent in cases of corneal oedema and most
and microcorneabeingthemostimportantofthe
other forms of opacity.The presence or absence of
congenital anomalies. However,certain specific
ocular discharge,inaddition tolacrimation,should
corneal conditions have an interesting and
be noted,as should the presence of pigment in the
significant breed susceptibility in the dog,for
cornea which ismore common in the dog than the
example keratoconjunctivitis sicca in the West
other species. Corneal opacity is another variable
Highland White Terrier, pannus in the German
and important presenting sign (Table 6.1),
Shepherd Dog,corneal lipidosis in the Shetland
involvingthewholecornea,forexampleincases of
Sheepdog and others. Corneal tumours are also
corneal oedema,or only part of the cornea in cases
relatively rare, although squamous cell carcinoma,
oflipid infiltration,abscess or scar formation.The
particularly in the horse, is important. Corneal
lipidkeratopathiesare a complexbut an important
cysts are veryrare.
groupwith different appearances,often familial in
The main responses to corneal insult are (1)
the dog and usually with little or no effect on
oedema,(2)vascularization and （3)pigmentation
vision.In fact,vision loss is an uncommon sign of
and any or all of these may act aspresenting signs
corneal disease generally in spite of the history
but are not,in themselves,specific diseases.
from the owner who imagines the animal cannot
The classification of corneal disease is complex;
see because of the appearance of the eye(s).The
it isperhaps best categorized by aetiologybut the
presence or absence of corneal ulceration should
cause of a number of conditions is still not known.
also be checked by suitable staining,both at the
Corneal disease will be described here and
initial clinical examination and subsequently,if
illustrated under several headings, although it
considered necessary. The corneal reflection to a
must be realized that certain specific conditions can
light source can be most useful in deciding the
be included in more than one section.
depthof thelesion within the cornea;for example
47
48
Cornea
Table 6.1-Corneal opacity:differential diagnosis
Unilateral or bilateral
Partial or complete
Diffuse or dense
Temporary or permanent
1.Corneal oedema
Neonate puppy
Endothelial degeneration,eg.Chihuahua
Corneal ulcer with lossof epithelium
Corneal wound or burn
Uveitis (blue eye)
Glaucoma (+ conjunctival oedema)
Descemet's membrane tears
Anterior lens luxation- subcentral,oval
Anterior segment neoplasia (uveal melanoma)
2.
Lipid keratopathies (infiltrations and degenerations)
Corneal abscess
4.
Corneal scar
5
Congenital anterior synechia (persistent pupillary membrane)
6.
Conjunctival adhesion (symblepharon)
7.
Epibulbar(corneal) dermoid
Fig.6.1 Superficial keratitis Note the blood vessel
crossing the limbus and the irregular branching;also the
uneven corneal surface with break up of the corneal
reflection.
Keratitis (Figs 6.1-6.5)
Superficial
Interstitial (stromal)
Punctate
Pigmentary
Exposure
Chronic superficial (pannus)
Eosinophilickeratitis (cat)
Fungal keratitis (horse)
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (cattle).
Chronicsuperficial keratitis(pannus)
(Figs 6.6-6.12)
Pannus is a type of superficialvascular keratitis often
with laterpigmentation.It isusuallybilateralbutnot
necessarily
symmetrical;often one eye is more
severely affected than the other.Pain and discharge
are moderate and blepharospasm is usuallypresent.
The disease is immune-mediated witha strong
Fig.6.2 Interstitial keratitis Note the appearance of
tendency to recur with cessation of treatment.A
bloodvessels on the corneal side of the limbus,unlike
conjunctival component is invariably present and
Figure 6.1,and the typical more regular vascular
frequently thenictitatingmembraneisinvolvedwith
branching.
a plasma cell infiltration (Fig 3.10). The German
Keratitis
49
Fig.6.5 Exposure keratitis（Pekingese)Due to inability
to spread thetear film across thewhole cornea in cases
of globe prominence,as depicted here;also with lid
paralysis (Fig 6.24)and keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Fig.6.3 Punctate keratitis（Shetland Sheepdog)
Aetiology unknown but usually bilateral and thesmall
grey areas may takefluoresceinstain.Hasbeen
described asanepithelial dystrophy and theShetland
Sheepdog,as in this case,is mainly involved.
Fig.6.4 Pigmentary keratitis Often accompanied by
Fig.6.6 Chronic superficial keratitis[pannus)(German
vascularization,as in this case,and also fibrosis.
Shepherd Dog,3yearsold) Early casewith superficial
Pigmentation is a classical sign ofkeratitis,particularly
vascularization typically affecting the lower lateral
in the dog,and may accompany other forms ofkeratitis,
quadrant.
especially chronic cases,e.g.pannus（Fig 6.9)
keratoconjunctivitis sicca（Fig 6.42)orcorneal oedema
(Fig6.48).
50
Cornea
Fig.6.7 Chronic superficial keratitis(pannus)（German
Shepherd Dog,4years old) More severe than previous
case with granulation tissue.Note break-up of corneal
reflection and earlypigmentation from the lateral
limbus.
Fig.6.9 Chronic superficial keratitis（pannus)(German
Shepherd Dog,9years old) Chroniccasewith
pigmentation.
Fig.6.8Chronic superficial keratitis(pannus)(German
Shepherd Dog.6 yearsold) Note involvementof the
whole cornea and early scarring.
Fig.6.10 Corneal granulation tissue(Crossbred,
6yearsold) Superficial keratitisfollowing a chemical
burn.
Keratitis
Shepherd Dog is the breed usually affected but also
Eosinophilickeratitis(Figs 6.13-6.16)
Belgian Shepherd Dogsand Lurchers.Ageincidence
Typically seen in the cat;the cause is unknown and
is the young adult (3-5 years) and pannus
recurrence following treatment isusual,as is the case
commonly,but not invariably,starts in the lower
with pannus. Initially eosinophilic keratitis is
lateral quadrant,justoccasionallymedially.
unilateral,later becoming bilateralif left untreated.
Figures 6.10-6.12 show other forms of chronic
Diagnosis is aided by the appearance of a number
superficial keratitis for differential diagnosis.
Fig.6.11 Corneal granulation tissue(Boxer,7years
old)Following recurrent corneal erosion (seealso Figs
6.20-6.22).
Fig.6.13 Eosinophilickeratitis（DSH cat,1year old)
Note vascularkeratitis andgreyplaque-like lesion.
Unilateral case and note slight prominence of nictitating
membrane due to retraction of the globe due to pain,
and mild ocular discharge.
Fig.6.12 Cornealgranulation tissueChow,8 months
Fig.6.14 Eosinophilickeratitis（DSHcat,3yearsold)
old)Associated with long-standing case of entropion.
Bilateral caseand note typical white spots.
Cornea
52
Fig.6.15 Eosinophilickeratitis（DSH cat,4yearsold）
Fig.6.16 Eosinophilickeratitis （DSH cat,3years old)
An early case with fine vascularization and raised
Severe case.Note ocular discharge.
irregular white spots.
ofsuperficialwhiteroundraisedspotsof different
Cornealulcers （Figs 6.20-6.34)
sizes and superficial vascularization;a conjunctival
Thecornealulcer iscommon,usuallyunilateral,the
component is present.Pain is mild with a slight
appearancevaryingconsiderably accordingto the
ocular discharge.
cause and stage of the ulcer.It is invariably painful
and accompaniedbyblepharospasm andlacrimation.
Fungalkeratitis(Fig 6.17)
Diagnosis can be confirmed by staining with
Keratomycosisin the horse hasbeenwell recognized
fluorescein to show areas of denuded epithelium
in theUSAfor a number ofyearsbut onlyrecently
(Fig 6.20)andRose Bengalto show areasof
has been diagnosed with certainty in the UK.There devitalized epithelium (Fig 6.21).Causes include
are a number of different clinical presentations of trauma, including self-inflicted and that due to
ulceration with furrowing,ulceration with‘cake
eyelid abnormalities (supernumerary eyelashes,
frostingappearance and stromal abscessation.The
neoplasia,entropion), thermal and chemical burns,
condition isunilateralwith moderate toseverepain
immune-mediated, facial paralysis and forms of
and associated uveitis,corneal vascularization and
exposurekeratitis and absence of theprotective tear
film;alsoinfections with bacteria,viruses and fungal
chemosis.
elements. The appearance of the corneal ulcer is
Infectiousbovinekeratoconjunctivitis
dependentupon size,depthandtime,varyingfrom
a faint opacity （oedema） to a clear,central,usually
(IBK)(Figs 6.18-6.19)
circular, deep and non-staining keratocoele.
IBK or New Forest disease in cattle is usually
Vascularizationisusual,exceptin theindolent ulcer
unilateral with a central opacity,leadingto（recurrent epithelial erosion,Fig 6.22).If severe or of
lceration,surrounded by anopaque cornea,duetosomestanding,anassociated uveitis,with hypopyon
oedema,and circumcorneal hyperaemia.Pain can be (Figs 6.27-6.28) and hyphaema (Fig 6.29)will be
severe and there is an associated iritis. Ocular present.Pain is variable, from mild to severe,
discharge becomes mucopurulent,originally being
gparticularly when uveitis is present.
clearprofuse lacrimation.Superficialvascularization
towardthe primary lesion occursandthecornea
clears from the periphery.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)
53
Fig.6.17 Fungal keratitis (Arab-cross mare,12 years
Fig.6.19Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
old)Large central deeparea of ulceration with
(Friesian calf) Note central opaque area with
furrowing.
vascularization following a previousulcerin this
position.Peripheral cornea now clear.
Fig.6.18 Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
Fig.6.20 Corneal ulcer Case of recurrent corneal
(Friesian calf) Note corneal opacity due to oedema,
erosion showing area of denuded epithelium stained
vascular fringe and mild conjunctival congestion.
with fluorescein.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Kcs)
common in chronic cases （Fig 6.42) and a con-
junctival component is always present. KCS of
(Figs6.35-6.44)
various causesis a common eye condition in thedog:
KCS is not primarily a keratitis but a deficiency of
most cases are immune-mediated and classically
the pre-ocular tear film (aqueous portion),although
occurring in the UK in the middle-aged,often
it usuallypresents asakeratitiswith a copious,tacky
female,West Highland WhiteTerrier.Other cause
(Fig 6.37),purulent-like,discharge adherent to the
are systemic disease(canine distemper),metabolic
cornea (Fig 6.38) and often present in the con-
disease(hyperthyroidism),surgical,traumatic,neu
junctival fornices (Fig 6.39). Severity varies from 
mild (Fig 6.35) to severe （Fig 6.36). Ulceration is
nose)and idiopathic.An importantgroup are due to
unusual butwhen present is often deep and circular
lacrimotoxic drugs e.g.sulphasalazine(Fig6.43)and
andwith vascularization (Fig 6.41).Pigmentation is
recently a congenital form ofKCS(Fig6.44),together
Cornea
Fig.6.21 Corneal ulcer[Pembroke Corgi） Case of
Fig.6.23 Cornealulcer（DSH cat,young adult)
recurrent corneal erosion stained with Rose Bengal to
Superficial dendriticulcersin acute felineherpesvirus-1
show large areaof devitalized epithelium surrounding
infection.
theactualulcer.
Fig.6.22 Cornealulcer（Boxer,7years old)Recurrent
Fig.6.24 Corneal ulcer Ulceration and subsequent
corneal erosion case.Note mild corneal oedema of the
vascularization in a case of facial paralysis.
ulcerated areaand the epithelium at the edge of the
ulcer.An early case,but see also Fig.6.11.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)
55
Fig.6.25 Cornealulcer（Pug,8months old)The
coagulase or melting ulcer.Note the stromal involvement
Fig.6.27 Corneal ulcer Deep ulcer and iritis.Note the
and clearer central portion indicating very thin
hypopyon and themild miosis.
remaining cornea,together with marked corneal oedema
of the remaining non-ulcerated cornea.
Fig.6.26 Corneal ulcer(Hunter-type,7years old)
Coagulase or melting ulcer.Note the gelatinous
discharge over thelower lid and adherent to the
eyelashes;considerable pain.
Fig. 6.28 Corneal ulcer Deep ulcer and note the dense
hypopyon and corneal vascularization.
Cornea
56
Fig.6.29 Corneal ulcer Note the hypopyon and
Fig.6.31 Corneal ulcer Largekeratocoele with
hyphaema in this case.
surrounding granulation tissue and vascularization.
Fig.6.32 CornealulcerSmall deep ulcerwith clear
keratocoele;in this region theepithelium and stroma
have been lost leaving only Descemet'smembrane and
endothelium.Note also the vascular fringe and oedema
of the surrounding stromalregion.
Fig.6.30 Corneal ulcer Note the corneal oedema,small
clear circularkeratocoele andvascularization in the
lower clear cornea.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)
57
Fig.6.33 Corneal ulcer Ruptured keratocoele with
clearer central area and surrounding corneal oedema and
Fig.6.35 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (West Highland
vascular fringe.Note the shallow anterior chamber due
WhiteTerrier,male,3yearsold)Early case withmucoid
to early anterior synechiae and lossof aqueous.
filaments on the cornea but no corneal pathology.The
Schirmer tear test result waszero.
Fig.6.34 Corneal ulcer(Thoroughbred mare) Deep
ulceration with surrounding granulation tissue,oedema
andvascularization.
Fig.6.36 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca Jack Russell
Terrier,female,4yearsold) Advanced case of xerosis.
58
Cornea
Fig.6.37 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (West Highland
Fig.6.39 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (West Highland
WhiteTerrier,male,8yearsold)Moderately severecase
WhiteTerrier,fmale,2yearsoldNoteocular
with typical discharge.
discharge in the conjunctival fornix.
Fig.6.38 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Samoyed,female,
Fig.6.40 Keratoconjunctivitissicca（Bichon Frise,
6years old) Typical discharge stuckon cornea and eyelid
male,3yearsold) Note typical conjunctival hyperplasia.
edge. Compare with Fig 5.1of purulent conjunctivitis in
which the ocular dischargeiswashed off thecornea by
the associated lacrimation.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)
59
Fig.6.41 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (West Highland
Fig.6.43 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Yorkshire Terrier,
female,2years old)latrogeniccase following
White Terrier,female,7 years old)Typical deep circular
ulcerand keratocoele.
sulphasalazine therapy for colitis.
Fig.6.42 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca West Highland
Fig.6.44 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca(Cavalier King
White Terrier,male,5years old)Long-standing case
Charles Spaniel,female,16 weeks old) Congenital case
with secondary pigmentarykeratitis
associated with skin condition.
Cornea
60
with a skin disease (ichthyosis),has been described.but many cases are idiopathic.It is,together with
KCS isusually bilateral but the two eyes may differ vascularization and pigmentation,one of the classic
in the degree of severity and the condition ismore responses of the cornea to insult
uncomfortable than painful.Diagnosis is based on
Corneal oedema may affect one or both eyes and
the clinical signs,together with a Schirmer tear test 1to the same or differing degrees.Although the eye
tomeasure tear secretion.
may appear blind',there is little or no effect on
vision.Other parts of the eye maywell be involved
with corneal oedema,including uveitis (Fig 6.45),
Cornealoedema （Figs6.45-6.55)
lens luxation (Fig 6.53) and glaucoma (Fig 6.54).
Corneal oedema is not a specific disease but results
Corneal oedema is not painful, but in severe cases
from a failure of the corneal pump mechanism,
may develop into a bullouskeratopathy in which
usually damage to the corneal epithelium or,more
disruption of the bullae does cause pain (Figs
commonly,the endothelium.Corneal oedema is an
6.46-6.47).Cornealoedemaleadstoa thickened
opacityandresentsassuch,varyingindensityand
cornea and sometimes to an obvious keratoconus
is either focal or diffuse. There are a number of
(Fig6.49).
known causes,including trauma and inheritance,
Fig.6.46CornealoedemaDense0edema,togetherwith
a fewclearbullae.
Fig.6.45 Cornealoedema(AiredaleTerrier,4months
old)Dense corneal oedema and vascular fringe occurring
12 daysaftervaccination with live attenuated canine
adenovirus-type-1 vaccine;referred to as'blue eye
Cornealoedema
61
Fig.6.47 CornealoedemaSeverebullouskeratopathy.
Fig.6.49 Cornealoedema Slit-lamp photograph
showing thickening of the central cornea dueto the
oedema andkeratoconus.
Fig.6.48 Corneal oedema (Longhaired Dachshund,
Fig.6.50 Corneal oedema (English Springer Spaniel,
6months old) Long-standing case with corneal
9years old) Note the typical mottled appearance of the
pigmentation.Another post-vaccination case(see
oedema in the central region,togetherwith one or two
Fig.6.45).
small bullae.This is a case of endothelial dystrophy
presenting as corneal oedema in this breed
62
Cornea
Fig.6.51 Corneal oedema （Chihuahua,5years old）A
Fig.6.53 Corneal oedema Jack Russell Terrier,5years
bilateralcase with severeoedema againdue toan
old) Central or subcentral corneal opacity associated
inherited corneal endothelial dystrophy.
with primarylens luxation.The anteriorly dislocated lens
ispushed against the corneal endothelium causing the
oedema.lf thelenslaterbecomesdislocated into the
posteriorsegment,this corneal opacity will persist.
Fig.6.54 Corneal oedema (American Cocker Spaniel,
5yearsold)Diffuse oedema associatedwithprimary
glaucoma.Note also the slight conjunctival oedema
(chemosis).
Fig.6.52 Corneal oedema （Friesian calf) Bilateral
condition inherited in this breed.Again,note an
associated keratoconus.
Lipid keratopathies
63
Lipid keratopathies （Figs 6.56-6.62)
Lipid deposition in the cornea, sometimes in
correctlyreferred toasacornealdystrophy(correctly
dystrophy is a primary inheritedbilateral condition
affecting any part of the cornea and not associated
with inflammation),occurs inanumber of not fully
understood conditions which present as a corneal
opacity.
The commonest form of lipid keratopathy,often
referred to ascorneal lipidosis (Figs 6.56-6.59),is a
usuallybilateral,not alwayssymmetrical andsome
timesstartinginonly one eye,central orparacentral,
subepithelial (non-staining with fluorescein), silver-
grey metallicoval opacity.It isprogressive toa stage
but not further and sometimes regressive,and not
associatedwith any inflammation or pain.It usually
occurs in young adults and with a definite breed
incidence (Rough Collie, Shetland Sheepdog
Fig.6.56 Lipid keratopathy(corneal lipidosis)（Rough
CavalierKing CharlesSpaniel,Afghan and Siberian
Collie,3yearsoldypicalappearance,bilatral
Husky)andissometimesrelatedtotheoestralcycle
condition,approximately symmetrical,central cornea.
although it alsooccursin themale.
Note the perfect corneal reflection indicating normal
overlying epithelium.
Fig.6.55 Corneal oedema (Half-bred mare,7years
Fig.6.57 Lipid keratopathy(corneal lipidosis)
old)Bilateraland asymmetrical,partial oedema ina
（CavalierKing CharlesSpaniel,female,3 years old)
vertical stripeandof unknown aetiology.This
Typical age,breed and sex.Note the crystalline
distribution of oedema has onlybeen seen in the horse.
appearance of the lesion.
64
Comea
Fig.6.60 Lipid keratopathy(corneal lipidosis)（German
Shepherd Dog)A caseof primary hypothyroidism.Note
the perfect corneal reflection,the incomplete arcus
superiorly and a clearband ofcornea immediatelyinside
thelimbus.
Fig.6.58Lipid keratopathy （corneal lipidosis)
(Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, female,3 years old)
Largerand less dense lesion than that shown in the
previousfigure.
Fig.6.61 Lipid keratopathy (lipid and calcareous
degeneration)(Golden Retriever,3yearsold) Perilimbal
lesion with epithelial involvement andvascularization.
Fig.6.59 Lipid keratopathy(corneal lipidosis)
(Siberian Husky.3years old) Another typical breed.
Corneal sequestrum(cat)
65
Arcus lipoides(Fig 6.60)is another bilateral,but obvious breed incidence with several of thecorneal
notnecessarily symmetrical,accumulation of lipid in conditions described above;for example,recurrent
the peripheral cornea adjacent to thelimbus,in dogsepithelialerosion or indolent ulcer of theBoxer and
withhypothyroidism and secondaryhyperlipopro-
Pembroke Corgi has also been called epithelial
teinaemia.It occurs particularly in the German
basementmembranedystrophy;corneal lipidosisor
ShepherdDogbut hasbeenreported in other breeds.
crystalline stromal dystrophy in several breeds;and
Lipid and calcareous degeneration (Fig 6.61)
endothelial dystrophy presenting as corneal oedema
Occurs in young adult Golden Retrievers presenting
in the Chihuahua and English Springer Spaniel, as
asopaquewhitesausage-shapedlesionsagaininthe
well as others.
peripheral cornea inside the limbus.They are
stromal inpositionand the overlyingepithelium is
Corneal sequestrum (cat)
missing. They are often vascularized and may give
(Figs 6.63-6.65)
discomfort and consequent blepharospasm.
A further lipid keratopathy,unilateral orbilateral
This can be unilateral or bilateral in predisposed
and also with vascularization present （Fig 6.62),
breeds such as the colourpoint and other Persian
breeds.It has a striking,but variable,appearance
occurs witha variety of other anterior segment
abnormalitisnludingoreignbodyfocalratit
with a clearly defined dark brown/black plaque-
keratoconjunctivitissicca,tumour,etc.
like lesion often raised above the corneal surface,
There isconfusion over the terminology of this
which is central or paracentral,stromal and of
group oflipid keratopathies,aswell as the corneal
varying shapes,and often vascularized.There is
dystrophies,in the dog partially due to lack ofsome discomfort and often a slight black-stained
knowledge on aetiology and inheritance. However,
ocular discharge.
there is an interesting familial pattern with an
Fig.6.63 Corneal sequestrum(Colourpoint cat,4years
old)Small-medium sized,central and no vascularization.
Note the slight pigmented ocular discharge on the upper
lid immediately above the sequestrum.
Fig.6.62 Lipid keratopathy （Pug.13 months old)
Unilateral,subepithelial and associated in this case with
acorneal scar,pigment and anterior synechiae.
Cornea
66
Fig.6.64 Corneal sequestrum Large well-defined
Fig.6.65 Corneal sequestrum(Persian cat,4years old)
sequestrum surrounded bygranulation tissue and much
Medium-sized sequestrum with vascularization.Both
corneal vascularization.Note also the prominence of the
eyes of this catwere involved.
nictitating membrane due to globe retraction due to pain
and again the black discharge on the upper lid.
Trauma and foreign bodies
(Figs 6.66-6.70)
Corneal foreign bodies are common in all the
domestic species and vary considerably in their
nature.Corneal reaction,usually following a sudden
onset,varies according to the size,depthand nature
of the foreign body:pain,blepharospasm or a closed
eye. The ocular discharge varies from clear
lacrimation topurulent.
Corneal trauma is also common in thehorse,dog
and cat,particularly in the former with its large
prominent eyes.Trauma varies from blunt trauma
with corneal oedema toapenetrating injury with
Fig.6.66 Corneal foreign body（DSH cat,2years old)
loss of aqueous,haemorrhage whichmaybe profuse,
Small thorn foreign body.recent case.This cat presented
loss of anterior chamber and prolapse of iris.Pain
with acute blepharospasm.
may be severe.
Corneal abscess (Fig 6.70) appears as a small
focal non-painful raised swelling, associated with
vascularization,and usually adjacent to the limbus.
Trauma and foreign bodies
67
Fig.6.67 Corneal foreign body(Border Terrier.7years
Fig.6.69 Corneal trauma (Cavalier King Charles
old)Leaf foreign body of 3 weeks'duration.Note the
Spaniel,3years old)Corneal rupturewith iris prolapse
profound corneal reaction to this foreign body of organic
plugging the wound.Note the surrounding corneal
material.
oedema and vascular fringe.
Fig.6.68 Corneal trauma (German Shepherd Dog.
Fig.6.70 Corneal abscess (English Springer Spaniel,
10weeks old)Penetrating corneal woundwith
3years old) Note the raised appearance of the lesion
coagulated aqueousand prolapse of iris tissuebutno
which is subepithelial and thevascularization.In this
haemorrhage in this case.Of recent origin.This injury
case the lesion was non-painful,the dog presenting with
was due to a cat scratch -a typical history.
a focal area of corneal opacity.
68
Cornea
Neoplasia (Figs 6.71-6.72)
Congenital anomalies （Figs 6.73-6.74)
Corneal neoplasia in the dog and cat is rare but
Microcornea is usually associated with microph
squamous cell carcinoma in the horseisanimportant
thalmosand multiple congenitalanomalies(Fig1.12.)
condition. The appearance is of a pinkish grey
Epibulbar dermoids (Figs6.73-6.74) occur on the
granular tumour spreading across the eye and
cornea,particularly in the dog.They are usually
usually associatedwith a slight ocular discharge and
pigmented and contain hair and cause surprisingly
a degree ofblepharospasm.
little discomfort.
Fig.6.73 Corneal dermoid (German Shepherd Dog.
3months old) Pigmented epibulbar dermoid containing
hairbut apparently causing little discomfort.
Fig.6.71 Corneal tumour(Hunter-type,10 yearsold)
Squamous cell carcinoma of cornea and limbus. The
nictitating membrane of this horse had been removed,
probablyalso due toasquamouscell carcinoma.
Fig.6.74 Corneal dermoid (German Shepherd Dog.
Fig.6.72 Corneal tumour （Pony.9yearsold)
3monthsold) Fleshyand hair containing.Epibulbar
Squamouscell carcinoma.Notethe typical greyish
dermoids are typically seen in thisbreed (see also
appearance of the tumour.
Figs2.49-2.50and5.20-5.22)
Chapter
Uveal Tract
Introduction
Table 7.1-The red eye
The uveal tract consists of iris and ciliary body,
Unilateral or bilateral
together with the choroidwhich isbest included in
Acute or chronic
the fundus (Chapter 1l).
The uveal tract is
Local ocular disease or systemic with pyrexia (bilateral)
important inveterinary ophthalmologyin dog,cat
1.Uveitis
and horse; it may present as a uniocular or
Photophobia
2.Glaucoma
binocular eye disease or condition and may
Breed-specificforprimary,somesecondarcases
indicate local (ocular)orsystemic disease(Table
Unilateral at first presentation
7.1). Diagnosis can be difficult and aetiology is
3.Conjunctivitis
often obscure (Table 7.2).The uveal tract is prone to
Primaryomorecommonlysecondary(ocularorsystemic）
trauma and also exhibits several congenital, some
Traumatic(subconjunctival haemorrhage)
4.
Episcleritis/scleritis
hereditary, conditions in addition to cysts and
Uncommon,usually no pain
tumours.
5.Keratitis
The colour ofthe irisvaries considerably and is
Including comealulcer（pain)
associated with coatcolour.Most irides in the dog
6.Orbital disease
Enophthalmitis
and horse areshadesofbrownand in thecatyellow
Panophthalmitis
or gold and often metallic.However,pale blue
Retrobulbar (inflammation,neoplasia)
irides,either partial or total,are notuncommon in
Prolapse
all three species and usually are accompanied by
areas of subalbinism in the fundus.Furthermore,a
change in iris colour may denote disease.The pupil
shape also differsconsiderably in the threespecies
and niay change with disease.
Table 7.2-Uveitis:differential diagnosis
Pupil
Pain
Vision
Discharge
Intraocular pressure
Uveitis
Constricts
++
Minor
effect
Lacrimation
Blind
Glaucoma
Dilates
+++
Lacrimation
Conjunctivitis
No change
No change
No change
Serous-purulent
69
70
Uveal Tract
Clinical signs of anterior uveitis
(iritis or iridocyclitis)
The clinical signsvarywith thecause,severity
and species but are not specific to the aetiology:
Pain-may be considerable and presenting
withtheusual triad oflacrimation,
blepharospasm and photophobia.
Miosis （Figs 7.1-7.3,7.5).
Intraocularpressure low.
Iriscolour-in the brown iris the colour is
dulleranddarker,particularly evidentin the
chronic case (Fig 7.2) and a useful clinical sign
to indicate a previous iritis;in the yellow (cat)
orblue iris thecongested bloodvessels are
obvious (Figs 7.11 and 7.13),known as
rubeosis iridis.
Flare(Figs 7.7,7.11,7.29),hypopyon
二
(Fig 7.10),hyphaema (Figs 7.9,7.12-7.13)-
Fig.7.1 Iritis (Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,10 years
cells (white andred blood cells) in the
old)Acute traumatic iritis.Note the marked miosis and
anterior chamber.
the conjunctival injection.
Conjunctival and episcleral hyperaemia-
particularlyin the ciliary region(ciliary flush)
(Fig 7.1).
Synechia formation-commonlyposterior
with adhesion to anterior lens capsule
producing irregular pupil shapes (Figs
7.15-7.19);occasionally anterior (Fig 7.28)
leading to secondary glaucoma.
Chemosis and corneal oedema (Figs 7.5-7.6
and 7.24-7.25).
Vascularization-usually as a fringe in the
peripheral cornea (Figs 7.5-7.6);occasionally
bloodvesselsextendingonto the anterior lens
capsule.
Vitreous-cloudy and turbid.
Chorioretinitis-see Chapter 11.
Sequelae
Cataract (Figs 7.23,7.26)-by far the most
Fig.7.2 lritis (Miniature Poodle,10 years old） Chronic
common,usuallyanterior capsular,cortical,
iritis.Note the darkened irispigment on anterior lens
sometimes total.May ormay not be associated
capsule togetherwith smallposterior synechiae,and
with posterior synechiae.
miosis.
Sequelae
71
Fig.7.3 Iritis（Thoroughbred,6years old) Equine
recurrent uveitis.Note occlusion of pupil due to miosis
and posterior synechiae and dull dark iris.
Fig.7.5 Iritis (Weimaraner,3 months old) Note miosis
fine vascular fringe from superior limbus,marked corneal
oedema and keratoconus.See also Figs 6.45-6.48of
corneal oedema and uveitis associated with canine viral
hepatitis and vaccination.
Fig.7.4 Iritis[Miniature Poodle,6years old)Vascular
Fig.7.6 lritis Equine recurrent uveitis.Note corneal
corneal fringe,together with haemorrhage on the lens
vascularization from the superior limbus and mild
and cataract.Note the herniated uveal pigment around
cornealoedema.
thepupil edge.
72
Uveal Tract
Fig.7.7lritis Airedale Terrier,2years old) Acute iritis,
Fig.7.9 Iritis（Crossbred dog.14years old)Note
showing plastic endothelial deposit and flare.idiopathic
diffuse cloud ofhaemorrhage and dull iris.Idiopathic
case.
case.
Fig.7.8 Iritis（DSHcat,15years old)Acaseof
Fig.7.10 Iritis(DSH cat,10 monthsold)Note cloudof
toxoplasmosisshowingkeratitisprecipitata(KP).
white cells obscuring thepupil.Another toxoplasmosis
case.
Sequelae
73
Fig.7.11 Iritis Rubeosis iridis and flare (visible in the
Fig.7.13 Iritis（DSH cat,8yearsold) Hyphaema and
pupillary area).
rubeosis iridis.A further case of toxoplasmosis and note
the difference in presenting signs between Figs 7.8.7.10
and7.13.
Fig.7.12lritis （DSH cat,1 yearold) Hyphaema ina
Fig.7.14lritis[Crossbred dog,4years old)Case due
cat with felineinfectiousperitonitis.
to trauma showing swollen iris,miosis and haemorrhage.
74
UvealTract
Fig.7.17Iritis[Jack Russell Terrier,6years old)
Posterior synechiae and secondary glaucoma.
Fig.7.15Iritis(CavalierKing Charles Spaniel,4years
old) Posterior synechiae and eccentric pupil.
Fig.7.16 lritis(Miniature Poodle,10 years old)
Fig.7.18 Iritis(Border Collie,9yearsold) Iris bombe
Posterior synechiae and cataract.
due toposterior synechiae and secondary glaucoma.
Sequelae
75
Fig.7.21 lritis(Thoroughbred)Irisrests.Idiopathic
case.
Fig.7.19 Iritis(DSH cat) Posterior synechiae and mild
irregularity ofpupil.Idiopathic case.
Fig.7.22 Iritis Equine recurrent uveitis.Posterior
synechiaeproducing irregularityof the pupil.
Fig.7.20 Iritis（DSHcat,18months old)Irisrests
(posterior synechiae)
76
Uveal Tract
Fig.7.23 Iritis（Thoroughbred,12years old) Equine
Fig.7.25Iritis（GermanShepherd Dog.3yearsold）
recurrent uveitis.Posterior synechiae and cataract.
Ehrlichiosis.Note the multiple haemorrhages on the iris
and the cornealoedema.
Fig.7.24 Iritis(Connemara pony.3years old) Equine
recurrent uveitis.Dull and faintly opaque cornea with
miosis.
Fig.7.26 Iritis(Akita,young adult) A case of Harada's
disease,or Voght-Kayanaga-Harada (VKH).Note posterior
synechiae and cataract.
Sequelae
77
Fig.7.27 Iritis Lens-induced uveitis in a diabetic dog.
Note the irregularity of the anterior lens capsule,the
darkened iris andposteriorsynechiae.Seealso Fig 9.24.
Fig. 7.29 Trauma Penetrating corneal injury.Note the
foreign body,flare particularly evident in the pupil,
miosis and herniation ofposterior uveal pigmentin the
superior part of thepupil.
Fig.7.28 Trauma Penetrating corneal injury with
Fig.7.30 Trauma (English SpringerSpaniel,3years
anterior synechiae andhealed corneal scar with fine
old)Iris prolapse following a shot injury.Note the
vascularization.
subconjunctival haemorrhage.
78
Uveal Tract
Fig.7.31 Trauma (cat,young adult) Penetrating
corneal injury with iris haemorrhage.
Sequelae(continued fromp.70)
Lens luxation.
Glaucoma (secondary)-uveitis commonly
Fig.7.32 Uveal cysts (Crossbred dog. 7 years old) Two
attached at pupillary margin and one free in anterior
precedes cases of glaucoma in the horse.
Phthisis-the result of severe inflammation,
chamber. Dense cysts.
again usually in the horse.
The causes of uveitis are many and varied,and
include trauma (Fig 7.14),reflex (corneal ulcer),
immune-mediated,lens-induced,viral,Rickettsial,
bacterial, fungal and parasitic. Uveitis may be
uniocular or binocular and accompanies several
systemic diseases in the three species (Figs 7.8,7.10,
7.12-7.13,7.25-7.26).Many cases remain idiopathic.
Cysts(Figs7.32-7.38)
Not uncommon inall three species
Neoplasia (Figs7.41-7.54)
Melanoma is themostcommon(particularlyingrey
horses),but also adenoma,adenocarcinoma,medullo-
epithelioma andmulticentriclymphosarcoma.
Congenital anomalies (Figs 7.55-7.67)
Fig.7.33 Uveal cyst （Labrador Retriever) Single thin-
Persistent pupillary membranes(Figs7.59-7.67).Not
walled cyst.
uncommon in all three species andmay crosspart of
the iris or thepupil orbe attached to anteriorlens
capsuleorposteriorcornea and present as opacities
in these positions.
Colobomas (Figs 7.55-7.58) Occur in all species
but arerarein thecat.
Congenitalanomalies
79
Fig.7.36Uveal cysts(DSH cat,5years old)Several
Fig.7.34 Uveal cysts (Labrador Retriever,9 months
old) Cataract and associated cystsaround thepupillary
free cysts in the anterior chamber.
border following uveitis.
Fig.7.35 Uveal cyst (Labrador Retriever,adult)
Ruptured cyst adherent to the posterior cornea.
Fig.7.37 Uveal cysts [Hunter-type,9years old) Cysts
attached topupillary margin.
08
Uveal Tract
Fig.7.38 Uveal cyst (Welsh pony.7years old,grey)
Fig.7.40 Corpora nigra trauma(Thoroughbred,
Stromal cystoririshypoplasia.Typically occursin the
4years old)Whiplash type injury resulting in tearingof
superior mid irisregion in a heterochromic iris.
the corpora nigra.
Fig.7.41 Tumour(English Springer Spaniel) Iris and
ciliary body melanoma.Notethe early distortion of the
pupiland compare with thelimbal melanoma(Figs
Fig.7.39 Corpora nigra hyperplasia (Hunter-type,13
5.31-5.32).
yearsold)Note the complete obliteration of the centre
part of thepupil.Theother eye showed no abnormality
and there was no further progression.
Congenital anomalies
81
Fig.7.42 Tumour(Afghan Hound,7years old) Ciliary
Fig.7.44 Tumour(Greyhound,7years old) Ciliary body
body melanoma.Notethe large swelling with gross
adenocarcinoma.Note the appearance of the tumour
distortion of the pupil.
through the pupil.
Fig.7.43 Tumour(Staffordshire Bull Terrier,6years
Fig.7.45 Tumour (Labrador Retriever,9yearsold)
old) Ciliary body adenocarcinoma.Note the unpigmented
Ciliary body adenoma.Note the small haemorrhage on
pink mass in the anterior chamberwith distortion of the
the anterior lens capsule and the appearance of the
pupil.
tumour through the pupil.
82
UvealTract
Fig.7.48 Tumour（DSHcat,9years old)Diffuse iris
melanoma with pigmentary depositson theposterior
cornea.
Fig.7.46 Tumour[English Springer Spaniel,5years
old) Multicentric lymphosarcoma.Note the secondary
glaucoma due to obliteration of the angle of filtration.
Fig.7.47 Iris freckles （DSH cat) Flat pigmentary
Fig.7.49 Tumour(DSH cat) Irismelanoma.Note the
change of the anterior iris surface with no distortion of
raised areas of iris and pupil distortion.
thepupil.
Congenitalanomalies
83
Fig.7.50 Tumour (DSH cat,7years old) Iris melanoma.
Note the pigmented mass appearing in the pupil and the
Fig.7.52 Tumour（DSH cat,3yearsold) Multicentric
increasedvascularization of the iris on that side.
lymphosarcoma.
Fig.7.53 Tumour (Pony,13years old,grey) lris
melanoma.The tumour is touching the posterior cornea
and producing an area of corneal oedema.
Fig.7.51 Tumour(DSH cat,16years old)Multicentric
lymphosarcoma.The kidneys were also involved.
84
Uveal Tract
Fig.7.54 Tumour [Pony.7 years old,blue-eyed cream)
Amelanotic melanoma.
Fig.7.56 Coloboma [Miniature Poodle,3yearsold)
Partial thicknessiris coloboma at 2o'clock.Note
distortion of the pupil shape.
Fig.7.55 Coloboma(Miniature Poodle,5yearsold)
Fig.7.57 Coloboma (Great Dane,3 months old,blue
Mid-irisfull thicknesscoloboma at 10 o'clock.The
merle)Partial thicknesscoloboma atthe typical position
cataract is unrelated.
of6o'clockin the pale blue iris.Note thered fundus
reflex.
Congenitalanomalies
85
Fig.7.58 Coloboma (Pony.5yearsold） Complete
(1o'clock)and partial (10 o'clock)colobomas.Both eyes
Fig.7.60 PPM (Labrador Retriever,6months old)
of this animal were affected butasymmetrically.
Multiple PPMs,orcongenitalanteriorsynechiae,with
focal corneal opacities.
Fig.7.59 Persistent pupillary membranes(PPM)
Fig.7.61 PPM(Beagle,3months old)Similar to the
(Rottweiler,11 weeksold) FinePPMs crossing the pupil.
previous figuresbut lesssevere and with a larger diffuse
Note theirregular pupil due to irishypoplasia in addition
cornealopacity.
to thepupillary membranes.
86
Uveal Tract
Fig.7.64 PPM Bull Mastiff,5weeksold)Persistent
pupillary membranes together with corneal opacity.
PPMs are known to be inherited in this breed,as well as
some other breedsincluding the Basenji.
Fig.7.62 PPM(Cairn Terrier,6years old)Pupillary
membrane attached to theanteriorlens capsule with
associated focal cataract.
Fig.7.65PPM(Bengal cat,9months old)PPM and
cataract.
Fig.7.63 PPM (Old English Sheepdog,3months old)
Pupillary membranes ina pale blue iris.
Congenitalanomalies
28
Fig.7.66 PPM (Cat,adult,white) PPM and obvious
Fig.7.67 PPM (Part-Arab mare,8years old) PPMsand
associated pigmented capsular cataract.(See alsoFigs
cornealopacity.
9.43-9.44and9.46-9.47)
Chapter
Glaucoma and Aqueous
Introduction
Table 8.1-The red eye
The glaucomas are a complex group of diseases
Unilateral or bilateral
with an increased intraocular pressure(IOP)which
Acute or chronic
damages the opticnervehead and retinal ganglion
Local ocular disease or systemicwith pyrexia (bilateral)
cells leading to irreversible blindness. In animals
1
Glaucoma
theraised IOPis due to a decrease in drainage not
Breed-specificforprmary,somesecondarycases
Unilateral at first presentation
an over-production of aqueous).
Glaucoma is an important disease in veterinary
Conjunctivitis
Primary or,more commonly,secondary (ocular or systemic)
ophthalmology. It is a painful disease; acute
Traumatic (subconjunctival haemorrhage)
glaucoma in the dog can be extremely painful,
3.Uveitis
causing inappetance,depression and evenvomiting.
Photophobia
Glaucoma canbe a difficult diagnosis as several of
4.Episcleritis/scleritis
Uncommon,usually no pain
the clinical signs may be found in other eye
5.
Keratitis
diseases(Tables8.1 and 8.2)and a reliable diagnosis
Including corneal ulcer （pain)
requires tonometry;subjective symptoms are absent.
Orbital disease
6.
Gonioscopy isparticularlyhelpful for diagnosis of
Endophthalmitis
the canine primary glaucomas.Furthermore, treat-
Panophthalmitis
Retrobulbar(inflammation,neoplasia)
ment,both medical and surgical,is difficult and too
Prolapse
often ends with a blind, swollen and painful eye.
The glaucomas are usually classified as:
Congenital (buphthalmos)(Fig 1.16)-rare in
the dog and horse.
Primary-rare in the cat and horse.
Secondary- the most common glaucoma in the
dog.
Table 8.2-Glaucoma:differential diagnosis
Pupil
Intraocular
Pain
Vision
Discharge
pressure
Glaucoma
Dilates
+++
Blind
Lacrimation
Conjunetivitis
No change
No change
+
No change
Serous-purulent
Uveitis
Constricts
Minoreffect
Lacrimation
++
89
90
Glaucoma and Aqueous
Clinical signs
The presenting signs vary according to the
speed ofonsetof thedisease,theseverityf
therise inIOP,the duration,thecause and the
age of the animal.Both primary and
secondaryglaucoma almost invariably
presentasa uniocular diseaselaterbecoming
binocular,particularly in the primary
(hereditary)cases.
The signs are:
Pain,evidenced by lacrimation and
blepharospasm and also degrees of
enophthalmos withprominence of the
nictitatingmembrane.
Head-shyness and resentment to handling
may occuir in severe cases.
Corneal oedema (Figs 8.1-8.2,8.7-8.8).
Conjunctival chemosis(Fig8.2)
Fig.8.1 Primary glaucoma (Welsh Springer Spaniel,
Conjunctival and episcleral congestion
5years old) Note dilated pupil and‘steamy'cornea due
(Figs 8.3,8.5).
to mild oedema.
Deep corneal vascularization as abrush
border'advancing from the limbus through
360°(Figs 8.4-8.8).
Superficial corneal vascularization with
branching vessels which can be seen crossing
the limbus,unlike the deep vessels of the
brush border (Fig 8.9).
Mydriasis (Figs 8.9-8.12)-not always
present,particularly inglaucoma secondary
to a uveitis.
Hydrophthalmos (Figs 1.17-1.19 and 8.12).
Fractures in Descemet's membrane(Figs
8.10-8.11).
Lens subluxation with an aphakic crescent
口
(often in an inferior position) (Figs 8.10, 8.13)
Cataract (Fig 8.8).
Phthisis bulbi.
Optic disc cupping with retinal changes of
bloodvessel attenuation and tapetal hyper-
reflectivity (Figs 12.8-12.9).
Fig.8.2 Primary glaucoma (Welsh Springer Spaniel,
Vision loss due to the above fundus changes.
18months old) Note conjunctival chemosis,mild
corneal oedema and dilated pupil.
Introduction
91
Fig.8.5 Glaucoma Note early vascular fringe plus
conjunctival congestion and corneal oedema
Fig.8.3 Glaucoma （Beagle,9years old)Note
conjunctivaland episcleral congestion.
Fig.8.4 Primary glaucoma(English Springer Spaniel,
Fig.8.6 Primary glaucoma (Welsh Springer Spaniel,
11years old) Note early vascular fringe advancing from
9monthsold) Later vascular fringe.
thelimbus.
92
Glaucomaand Aqueous
Fig.8.7 Primary glaucoma Typical vascular fringe and
Fig.8.9 Secondary glaucoma (post-iritis)(Standard
cornealoedema.
Schnauzer,14years old) Note posterior synechiae
resulting in eccentricand dilated pupil.Also the
superficial vascularization withbranching vessels
crossing the limbus.
Fig.8.8 Glaucoma (Miniature Poodle,11 years old)
Fig.8.10 Primary glaucoma(Basset Hound,7years
Late fringe and marked corneal oedema.
old)Fractures inDescemet's membrane and dislocated
lens(secondary).
Secondary glaucoma-causes
93
Fig.8.11 Glaucoma (Thoroughbred,aged) Fractures in
Descemet's membrane and early hydrophthalmos.
Fig.8.13 Primary glaucoma(Welsh Springer Spaniel,
4yearsold) Secondary lens dislocation-note the
direction of the dislocation in thiscase.
Openangleglaucoma(chronic)
NorwegianElkhound.
The breed and ageare important factorsin diagnosis.
Secondary glaucoma -causes
Fig.8.12 Hydrophthalmos and exposure keratitis
Primary lens luxation
(DSHcat).
Uveitis
Intraocular haemorrhage
Intumescent cataract
Primary hereditary glaucoma in the
Neoplasia
UK-breeds affected
Pigmentaryglaucoma or ocular melanosis in the
Cairn Terrier (Fig 8.14).
Closed angle or goniodysgenesis(acute)
Spaniels (English Cocker,American Cocker,
Gonioscopy
EnglishSpringer,WelshSpringr)
Examination of the angle of filtration usinga
Retrievers (Labrador,Golden,Flat-Coated)
Basset Hound
goniolens and topical anaesthesia,and ofparticular
Siberian Husky
value in distinguishing primary glaucoma in the
Great Dane
dog,as in cases of primary glaucoma the second,
Samoyed
probably normotensive,eyewill reveal evidenceof
Dandie Dinmont Terrier
goniodysgenesis (abnormal or closed angle) (Figs
8.15-8.21).
Others,particularlyinother countries.
94
Glaucoma and Aqueous
Aqueous
直
Hypopyon (white cells in the anterior chamber)
(Fig 8.22).
Hyphaema (red cells in the anterior chamber)
(Fig 8.23).
Fig.8.16 Goniophotograph(Crossbred,3years old)
Fig.8.14 Pigmentary glaucoma (Cairn Terrier).
Openangle.
Fig.8.15Goniophotograph (lrish Setter,1year old)
Fig.8.17 Goniophotograph (Welsh Springer Spaniel,
Openangle.
2years old)Open angle.
Aqueous
95
Fig.8.18 Goniophotograph (DSH cat,6years old)
Fig.8.20 Goniophotograph Welsh Springer Spaniel
Openangle.
2years old) Closed angle.
Fig.8.19 Goniophotograph (Welsh Springer Spaniel,
Fig.8.21 Goniophotograph (Welsh Springer Spaniel,
4years old) Closed angle.
4years old) Closed angle.
96
Glaucoma and Aqueous
Fig.8.22 Hypopyon.
Fig.8.23 Hyphaema.
Chapter
Lens
Introduction
is,in part, due to the considerable number of
There are two main conditions thataffect thelens:
primary (hereditary) cataractswhich occurinmany
cataract and luxation. Congenital anomalies
breeds of dogbutwhich,apart from cataract in the
(coloboma,microphakia),except for cataract which
Morgan horse,are not,to date,proven to be
is usually associated with another abnormality e.g.
inherited in the other species.Primary lens luxation
microphthalmos,are rare in all species.
is also inherited in several breedsof dogbut not in
Cataract is simply defined as an opacity of the
the other species where it is secondary to some
lens and/or its capsule and with suitable equip
other eye condition,in particular uveitis and
ment (ophthalmoscope, slit lamp biomicroscope)
glaucoma.
should not present any problem in diagnosis.
Cataract may be partial or complete;unilateral
However,senilenuclear sclerosis,a normal ageing
orbilateral;the two eyes similar in degree or not;
change in all animals,and not a true cataract as it
progressive or stationary or temporary or under-
is not an opacity,is often confused with cataract
going resorption.There are a number of known
and wrongly diagnosed as cataract due to the
causes of cataract (heredity,trauma,other ocular
opalescentbluish-grey appearance of the centre of
disease,metabolic) but a significant number, to
the lens in direct light (Figs 9.80-9.81）.Distant
date,areof unknown aetiology.Otherclassifications
direct ophthalmoscopy should immediately
may rely on the age at onset (congenital,juvenile,
distinguish it from cataract.
senile)and the stage of development (incipient,
Cataract and lens luxation are common in the
immature,mature,intumescent,hypermature
dog butrelatively rare in the cat and the horse.This
Morgagnian).
26
98
Lens
Primary hereditary non-congenital
specific(see Table9.1）and this,togetherwith the age
ofonset,areimportantfactorsfor accuratediagnosis
cataracts (Figs9.1-9.31)
and therefore prognosis.As the title suggests,these
These are cataracts that are not present atbirth but
cataracts are not associated with any other eye
develop later in life with a variable age onset
disease and are inherited with an importantbreed
according to breed.Their appearance is breed-
incidence.The cataracts are usually, but not
Fig.9.1 Posterior polar cataract(Golden Retriever,
Fig.9.3 Posterior polar cataract(Golden Retriever,
1year old) Subcapsular,dense focal opacity.
4years old) Subcapsular,faint inverted-Yopacity.
Fig.9.2 Posterior polar cataract(Golden Retriever.
4yearsold) Similar cataract to previous figure,but with
few fine extensions.
Fig.9.4 Posterior polar cataract(Golden Retriever,
18months old) Subcapsular,dense triangle with
extensions along the suture lines
Primary hereditary non-congenital cataracts
99
Fig.9.7 Posterior polar cataract (Labrador Retriever.
3years old)Subcapsular,dense focal opacity.
Fig.9.5 Posterior polar and cortical cataract(Golden
Retriever,4years old) Corticaland progressive opacities
and dense posterior polar cataract.
Fig.9.8 Posterior polar cataract (Labrador Retriever.
4 years old)Typical example of subcapsular opacity.
Fig.9.6 Total cataract (Golden Retriever,2years old).
100
Lens
Fig.9.9 Posterior polar cataract (Labrador Retriever,
Fig.9.11 Posterior polar cataract (Labrador Retriever,
3years old) Subcapsular opacity.
9years old) Large cataract with extensions.This dog
retained good vision.
Fig.9.10 Posterior polar cataract (Labrador Retriever,
Fig.9.12 Total cataract (Labrador Retriever,4 years
6yearsold) Dam of the dog shown in the previous
old)Note the density of theinverted-Yposterior suture
figure.
lines.Tapetal reflex still visible and dog retains
reasonable vision.
Primary hereditary non-congenital cataracts
107
Fig.9.13 Early cataract（Boston Terrier,8weeksold)
Fig.9.15 Total cataract （Boston Terrier,3years old)
Central opacity,bilaterally symmetrical cataract.
Mature cataract.
Fig.9.14 Early cataract (Boston Terrier,4 months old)
Fig.9.16 Cataract (Boston Terrier,6years old)Late-
Progression of central opacity.
onset type cataract.
102
Lens
Fig.9.17 Cataract(Staffordshire Bull Terrier,2years
Fig.9.19 Central cataract[Leonberger,2years old)
old)Progressivebilaterally symmetrical cataract,similar
Some variation of the opacity occurs in this breed but is
inappearance to the first typein the Boston Terrier
usually central and bilateral.
(Figs 9.13-9.15).Note also the cataract associated with
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous(PHPV) in this
breed （Figs 10.4-10.5).
Fig.9.18 Total cataract(Afghan Hound,2years old)
Fig.9.20 Posterior polar cataract[Norwegian Buhund,
Bilaterally symmetrical cataracts.
10 months old) With extensions.
Primary hereditary non-congenital cataracts
103
Fig.9.21 Posterior polar cataract (Norwegian Buhund,
Fig.9.23 Two foci of cataract (American Cocker
6monthsold) Large posterior polar opacity.
Spaniel,3yearsold) Cataract in this breed is markedly
pleomorphic andoften asymmetrical but usually
bilateral.
Fig.9.22 Cortical cataract (Norwegian Buhund,
Fig.9.24 Total cataract [American Cocker Spaniel,
21months old) Progressive,peripheral,cortical cataract
5years old)Lensresorption with folding of the lens
plusposterior polar opacity.
capsule visiblefrom 10o'clock.
104
Lens
Fig.9.25 Partial cataract(American Cocker Spaniel,
3years old) Note the normal iriscolour.
Fig.9.27 Cataract(German Shepherd Dog,4 months
old)Bilateral and progressive.
Fig.9.26 Total cataract with associated uveitis
Fig.9.28 Cataract (German Shepherd Dog.9 months
[American Cocker Spaniel,4 years old) Note the iris
old) Bilateral;the two eyes are not always identical.
colour in comparison to the previous figure and the
presence of multiple pupillary cysts.
Primary hereditary non-congenital cataracts
105
Fig.9.29 Cataract(Welsh Springer Spaniel,8weeks
Fig.9.31 Cataract(CavalierKing Charles Spaniel,
old) Bilateral,symmetrical and progressive.
18months old) Bilateral,total and progressive.This
cataract is not congenital. See also Figs 9.35-9.38.
Table 9.1-Primary hereditary cataracts
Congenital (with mild microphthalmos)
Cavalier King CharlesSpaniel
Schnauzer,Miniature
Non-congenital (usually bilateral,equal and progressive)
Belgian Shepherd Dog
Boston Terrier (two forms)
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel (two forms-see also
congenital)
German Shepherd Dog
Leonberger
Munsteriander,Large
国
Norwegian Buhund
Poodle,Standard
Retriever,Chesapeake Bay
营
Retriever,Golden
Retriever,Labrador
Setter,lrish Red and White
Siberian Husky
Spaniel,American Cocker
SpanielWelshSpringr
Fig.9.30 Cataract[Standard Poodle,12 months old)
Staffordshire Bull Terrier
Bilateral and progressive.The two eyes are similar.
106
invariably,bilaterallysymmetrical and are
Congenital cataracts and associated
commonly progressiveproducing defective vision
anomalies(Figs9.32-9.49)
and often blindness,the exception being posterior
polar cataract in the retriever breeds which often
These cataracts are present at birth and are almost,if
only progresses toa certain point and does not
not always,associated with some other ocular
anomaly,in particularmicrophthalmos,which may
interferewithvision.
Fig.9.32 Nuclear cataract (Miniature Schnauzer,
Fig.9.34 Nuclear cataract (Miniature Schnauzer,
6monthsold) Bilateral and associated microphthalmos.
14months old) Cataract plus cortical wedge.
Fig.9.33 Nuclear cataract (Miniature Schnauzer,
Fig.9.35 Nuclear cataract(Miniature Schnauzer,
6months old)Note extension at9o'clock.
6months old) This type is usually non-progressive.Note
the wide clearperipheral lens.
Congenital cataracts and associated anomalies
107
Fig.9.36 Nuclear cataract(Cavalier King Charles
Fig.9.38 Cataract and posterior lenticonus(Cavalier
Spaniel,6monthsold) Microphthalmosandnotealso
King Charles Spaniel,7 weeks old) Postmortem
the anterior capsular involvement.
specimen showing mild posterior lenticonus.The same
eye asshown in the previous figure.
Fig.9.37 Cataract and posterior lenticonus(Cavalier
Fig.9.39 Cataract and posterior lentiglobus (Cavalier
King Charles Spaniel,7weeks old)
King Charles Spaniel,7 weeks old) The other eye of the
same dog as shown in theprevious figures.
108
Lens
Fig.9.40 Cataract and microphthalmos(Cocker
Fig.9.42 Cataractand microphthalmos (Cocker
Spaniel,14weeksold) Bilateralandnote the
Spaniel,10 weeks old) Dense white anterior capsular,
prominenceof the nictitating membrane,together with
sometimes pyramidal,cataract.
irishypoplasia.
Fig.9.41 Cataract and microphthalmos(Cocker
Fig.9.43 Cataractand microphthalmos(English
Spaniel,14weeks old)Littermate to the animal shown
Springer Spaniel,13weeks old) Microphthalmos,
in Fig.9.40 following mydriasis to demonstrate the
congenital cataractand persistent pupillary membranes.
extentof the cataract.
Congenital cataracts and associated anomalies
109
Fig.9.46 Cataract andmicrophthalmos(Old English
Sheepdog,6monthsold) Microphthalmos,congenital
cataract and persistent pupillarymembranes.
Fig.9.44 Cataract and microphthalmos(West
Highland White Terrier,11 weeks old) Microphthalmos,
congenital cataract and persistent pupillary membranes.
Fig.9.45 Cataract and microphthalmos(Old English
Fig.9.47 Cataract and microphthalmos(Crossbred,
Sheepdog.9months old) Note themarked miosis and
11 months old) Microphthalmos,congenital cataract,
few small uveal cysts around the pupil,but no current
persistent pupillary membranes,lens coloboma and poor
evidenceofuveitis.
limbal differentiation.Multiocular defects (MoD),as with
allthe above examples of congenital cataract.
110
Lens
Fig.9.49 Nuclear cataract（Friesian calf)Bilateral and
congenital,of unknown aetiology.Non-progressive and
often affectsseveral calves in a herd.
Fig.9.48 Nuclear cataract(Arab foal) Congenital
central cataract in theArabian horse ismore common
than in the Thoroughbred and is usually bilateral. In this
animal the cataract is central butit may take other
forms.No direct evidence of inheritance.
Cataracts secondary to another eye
well be the primary condition.They are sometimes
disease orcondition（Figs9.50-9.59）
included as multiocular defects but cataract is
common to all.Some of these congenital cataracts
This is a varied group, the commonest being
have been proven to be inherited,e.g.Miniature
cataracts associated with uveitis,the cataract being
Schnauzer,others aresuspected of being inherited as
either theresult or the cause of the uveitis (see also
they show a strong breed predisposition (Cavalier
Figs 7.23 and 7.26).Included in this group are
King Charles Spaniel and English Cocker Spaniel);
cataracts inwhich the lens is undergoingresorption
whereasotherswouldseem tobe isolatedexamples
(Figs 9.73-9.76),aphenomenon thatoccurs
ofa congenital non-inherited anomaly,sometimes
particularly in young animals and which may
Occurring in crossbreds. Congenital cataracts may be
present as a uveitis which always accompanies the
bilateral and symmetrical ornot;are usuallynon-
lens resorption. Cataracts secondary to uveitis are
progressive;and have a limited effect on vision,
the commonest in the cat and horse. Traumatic
puppies not normally presenting with blindness.
cataracts are also invariably associated withuveitis
Cataracts associated with other congenital lens
(Figs 9.71 and 9.77-9.79) and may be due to
anomalies,e.g.persistent hyaloid artery (Fig 9.59),
penetrating corneal injuries and rupture of the
coloboma （Fig 9.58)and lenticonus （Fig 9.57),are
anterior lens capsule; they often result from cat
furtherexamples.
scratches and occur frequently incats andpuppies.
Othercongenital cataracts that may beincluded in
Cataract may also develop from blunt injury.
this category are capsular cataracts associated with
Traumaticcataracts are almost alwaysunilateral and
persistent pupillary membranes (Figs 7.62,7.65 and
the uveitis may become quite severe following
7.67) and persistent hyperplasticprimaryvitreous
damage to thelenscapsule and subsequent escape of
(Figs 10.4-10.5 and 10.7-10.8).
lensmaterial.
Cataractssecondary to another eye disease or condition
111
Fig.9.50 Cataract secondary to retinal disease-
Fig.9.52 Cataract secondary toretinal disease-
generalized progressive retinal atrophy (Miniature
generalized progressive retinal atrophy (Miniature
Poodle,7years old)Typical appearance of anterior and
Poodle,5years old) Total cataract but note the tapetal
posterior cortical and progressive cataract.
glow visible through thelens.
Fig.9.51 Cataract secondary to retinal disease-
Fig.9.53 Cataract secondary toretinal disease-
generalized progressive retinal atrophy(Tibetan Terrier,
generalized progressive retinal atrophy (Miniature
5yearsold) Typical wedgesofcortical vacuoles
Poodle,5years old) Total dense and mature cataract.
112
Lens
Fig.9.54 Cataract secondary toretinal disease-
Fig.9.56 Cataract secondary to glaucoma (Border
central progressive retinal atrophy or pigment
Collie,5years old) Note the congested bloodvessels
epithelial dystrophy(Labrador Retriever,10 years old)
and dilated pupil.
Anoccasional finding.
Fig.9.55 Cataract secondary toretinal disease-
Fig.9.57 Cataract and posterior lenticonus (Labrador
multifocal retinal dysplasia (English SpringerSpaniel,
Retriever,18 months old)Aunilateral case.
8months old) Again an occasional finding.
Lens luxation
113
Fig.9.58 Cataract and coloboma [Old English
Fig.9.59 Cataract and persistent hyaloid artery
Sheepdog,3months old) This case had multiple
(Border Collie,young adult) Another unilateral case.
congenital ocular abnormalities.
See also Figs 10.1-10.3.
Secondary cataractsalso occur witha number of
much slower in onset. Diabetic cataract in the cat
retinal diseases （Figs 9.50-9.55) including the
does occurbutismuchlesscommon.
progressive retinal atrophies,retinal dysplasia and
There are a few reports ofnutritional cataract
retinal detachment.Glaucoma isanother eye disease
(Figs9.63-9.64)and several reports of toxic cataracts
in which cataract may occur (Fig9.56) and cataract
due to a variety of substances(Figs 9.65-9.67).
also accompaniessuch congenital lens abnormalities
as lenticonus,coloboma and persistent hyaloid
Other types ofcataract
artery (Figs 9.57-9.59).
(Figs 9.68-9.72)
Metabolic,toxic and nutritional
Cataractmaybeclassified accordingto theposition
of the opacity in the lens.Figs 9.68-9.72 show five
cataracts (Figs9.60-9.67)
examples.
These cataracts are also secondary but to a systemic
disease or condition.Diabetic cataract in the dog is
False cataracts (Figs 9.80-9.86)
relatively common andmay be the presenting sign of
Thefinalgroupof lensopacities arenot true cataracts
the diabetes (Figs 9.60-9.62).It is always bilateral
but are often confused with cataract or are only
and usually symmetrical and often sudden inonset,
temporary opacities.
although there is also a pre-senile type which is
114
Lens
Fig.9.60 Diabetic cataract[Crossbred,12years old]
Fig.9.62 Diabeticcataract(Pembroke Corgi,9years
Bilateral,symmetrical and frequently sudden in onset.
old)Pre-senile type- slower in onset than the previous
Note thewater clefts.
diabeticcataracts.
Fig.9.61 Diabetic cataract (Labrador Retriever,6years
old) Again,note the obvious water clefts.
Fig.9.63 Nutritional cataract (Foxhound puppy)
Probablydue to a deficiency of the vitamin B complex.
Several puppies in the pack were affected.Congenital.
Lensluxation
115
Fig.9.66 Toxic cataract (Beagle) Total bilateral
cataract.
Fig.9.64 Nutritional cataract （Tiger cub) Bilateral
cataract in a hand-reared animal.Cataracts of this type
have been examined in several,alwayshand-reared,big
cats.
Fig.9.65 Toxic cataract(Beagle)Partial cataract
Fig.9.67 Toxic cataract (Beagle)Unusual appearance
affecting theposterior cortex and the ends of the suture
of the lensnucleus due to dimethyl sulphoxide toxicity.
lines.Cataracts of various forms are a common finding in
toxicity trials and can be caused bymany compounds.
116
Lens
Fig.9.68 Anterior polar cataract (Lurcher.6years old)
Bilateral in this case.
Fig.9.69 Lamellar cataract(English Springer Spaniel,
6years old)Feather-like opacity around partof the
edge of the nucleus.
Fig.9.70 Subcapsular cataract(Border Collie,
Fig. 9.71 Partial cataract (Hunter-type,7years old)
18months old) Multiple focal dots,particularly
Traumatic cataractand note thecorneal scar at5o'clock
involving the suture lines;bilateral.
nearthelimbus.
Lensluxation
117
Fig.9.72 Total cataract（Thoroughbred,5yearsold)
Fig.9.74 Cataractresorption (Lakeland Terrier)Green
Mature cataract of unknown aetiology (pupil dilated).
tapetal reflexnowvisible.Note uveitis and posterior
synechia at9o'clock.
Fig.9.73 Cataract resorption (English Springer
Spaniel,18 months old) Note the metallic appearance
of the lens and the pupillary cysts.
Fig.9.75 Cataract resorption(American Cocker
Spaniel,18 monthsold) Note the slitbeam on the
anterior lens capsule showing it to beflat and uneven
with a deep anterior chamber.
118
Lens
Fig.9.76 Cataract resorption (Great Dane,4years old)
Fig.9.78 Traumatic cataract Jack Russell Terrier,
Note thewrinkled anterior capsule andvisible green
4months old) Note corneal puncture wound at
tapetal reflex.This eye wasvisual,although it hadbeen
6o'clockwith bloodvesselsfrom the limbusand lens
blind prior to the cataractresorption.
material in the anterior chamber.The result of a cat
scratch.
Fig.9.79 Traumaticcataract（DSH cat,9years old)
Corneal wound and cataractouslens material in the
anterior chamberwhich will promoteasometimessevere
uveitis.
Fig. 9.77 Traumatic cataract Jack Russell Terrier,
2years old) Note also the uveitis and irregular pupil.
Lensluxation
119
Fig.9.80 Senilenuclear sclerosis {Beagle,13years
old)Lens appears opalescent in direct light but there is
no opacity on distant direct ophthalmoscopy.A normal
agechange.
Fig.9.82 Pigment on anterior lens capsule [Cocker
Spaniel,5 years old) Particularly common in this breed.
It appears asa lensopacity with distant direct
ophthalmoscopy butis actuallya remnant of the
pupillarymembrane.
Fig.9.81 Senile nuclear sclerosis (Labrador Retriever,
14years old) The appearance witha slit beam.
Fig.9.83 Temporary opacity (Miniature Longhaired
Dachshund,13weeks old) Opacities(cataracts)at the
endsof the anterior suture lines.
120
Lens
Fig.9.84 Temporary opacity（Beagle,6 months old)
Fig.9.85 Temporary opacity (Cardigan Corgi puppy)
Small focal cataracts on both anterior and posterior
Similar to the previous two figures.
suture lines.
Lens luxation (Figs9.87-9.112,
Table9.2)
Lens luxation,or dislocation,occurs in the dog,cat
and horse but primary or hereditary lens luxation
hasonlybeenreportedinthedogand itis therefore
muchmore common in thisspecies.Table9.2lists the
breedsinwhichhereditarylensluxation isknown to
occur in the UK. Although a simple recessive
inheritancehasbeen shown in the Tibetan Terrier,it
isalso seen,not uncommonly,in crossbred terriers.
Table 9.2-Primary lens luxation-breeds
Border Collie
BullTerrier (Miniature)
FoxTerrier (Smooth)
FoxTerrier (Wire)
Lancashire Heeler
Parson JackRussell Terrier
Fig.9.86 Temporary opacity(Miniature Longhaired
Sealyham Terrier
Dachshund,4 months old) Extensive opacities affecting
Tibetan Terrier
the suture lines andviewed against the tapetal reflex.
Webster Terrier
There was no sign of these opacities a few weeks later.
Lensluxation
121
Theclinical signs of lens luxation areillustrated in
opacity is permanent even when the lenshaspassed
Figures9.87-9.112,with theexception of iridodonesis,
into the posterior segment of the eye. The clinical
a tremblingof theiriswitheyemovementdue to the
signs associated with the secondary glaucoma
lackof support of theirisfrom the lens followingitsi
include pain, which can be severe, conjunctival
change of position.The clinical signs can be divided
congestion,hydrophthalmos and eventual phthisis
into twogroups:thosewhich are associatedwith the(seealso Chapter8).
luxation of the lens(change in position of the lens),
Secondary lens luxation also occurs in thedog and
in themselves of little consequence,and thosewhicht
the cat and horse. The causes are trauma,uveitis,
areassociatedwiththesecondaryglaucoma
glaucoma and cataract.Dislocated lenses of some
following the lens luxation and which are the causes
standing also become cataractous and cataractous
of pain,often considerable,and,if uncontrolled,
lenses aremore likelytodislocatethan non-
eventual swelling of the globe and irreparable
cataractous lenses.The distinction between primary
blindness.The first group, in addition
to
glaucoma and lens luxation (secondary) and the
iridodonesis,include:the appearance of vitreal
secondary glaucoma due to hereditary (primary)
strands appearing in front of the lens at the pupil
lens luxation can be difficult, particularly when it
margin;the aphakic crescent appearing in the pupil
occurs in breeds in which primary lens luxation
between itsmargin and the edge of subluxated lens;
occurs,e.g.terriers.
the totally luxated lens,either in the anterior
Primary lens luxation is essentially a bilateral
chamberoftheeyebetweenthe iris and thecornea,
condition,although the lens luxationusually
or the posteriorly luxated lensinthevitreous;finally
presents as a uniocular condition, the second eye
aclassical subcentral corneal opacitywhere the lens
becoming involved some time(days tomonths) later.
has been,or still is,in contact with the posterior The age incidence of primary lens luxationis usually
cornea resultingin an area ofcornealoedema-this3-6years.
Fig.9.88 Vitreous in the pupil Jack Russell Terrier.
5years old)Note the swirling vitreous in front of the
lens from the edgeof thepupil.
Fig.9.87 Vitreous in the pupil Jack Russell Terrier,
4years old) Note the appearance of vitreous on the
right side of the pupil. lridodenesis was also present.
122
Lens
Fig.9.89 Early luxation （TibetanTerrier,3 years old)
Fig.9.91 Anterior luxation (Border Collie)Lens
Fine aphakic crescent superiorly and early breakdown of
dislocating through a dilated pupil.Again,note the
some of thezonular fibres.Pupil dilated with mydriatic.
swirling vitreous superiorly.
Fig.9.90 Anterior luxation (Crossbred terrier,5years
Fig.9.92 Anterior luxation (Sealyham,4years old)
old)Note the light on theedge of the lens as it passes
Lenscompletely through thepupil.Note the corneal
through thepupil.
opacityjust below the centre of the cornea due to
pressure of the lenson thecorneal endothelium and
subsequent area of corneal oedema.
Lensluxation
123
Fig.9.93 Anterior luxation (Wirehaired Fox Terrier,
Fig.9.95 Anterior luxation Jack Russell Terrier.
4years old]Note the distortion of thepupil due to the
4yearsold)Anteriorlydislocated lensbecoming
position of thelensand theedgeof the pupil visible
cataractous.Note the adhesion from the pupil edge to
through the lens.
thelenscapsuleat2o'clock.
Fig.9.96 Subcentral corneal opacity （Tibetan Terrier,
3yearsold)Area of corneal oedemaremaining where
the lens has been in contact with the cornea.
Fig.9.94 Anterior luxation Jack Russell Terrier,
4yearsold)Pupil blockandsecondaryglaucoma with
corneal vascularization.
124
Lens
Fig.9.97 Subcentral corneal opacity(Smooth-haired
Fox Terrier,4years old) Extensive areaof corneal
oedema remains,although the lensisnow dislocated
posteriorly.
Fig.9.99 Aphakic crescent Jack Russell Terrier,
5yearsold) Note theruptured zonular fibresvisible on
the lens periphery.
Fig.9.98 Aphakic crescent Jack Russell Terrier,
Fig.9.100 Aphakic crescent [Shetland Sheepdog,
4yearsold]Tapetal reflexvisible over the upperborder
17months old)Partial dislocation with stretching of the
of the lens.
zonular fibres.
Lensluxation
125
Fig.9.103 Secondary glaucoma(Welsh Terrier,4years
Fig.9.101 Posterior dislocation(Sealyham Terrier,
old)Hydrophthalmoswith scleral ectasia in the ciliary
6years old) Aphakicdilated pupil with lensin the
region.
vitreous.
Fig.9.104 Secondary glaucoma(Sealyham Terrier,
Fig.9.102 Secondary glaucoma(Sealyham Terrier.
7years old) Phthisisbulbi following hydrophthalmos,
5years old) Note early conjunctival congestion and
theprimary condition being lens luxation.
'steamy'cornea.
126
Lens
Fig.9.107 Lens luxation Jack Russell Terrier,5years
old) Primary lens luxation with secondary cataract
formation.
Fig.9.105 Extruded lens(Sealyham Terrier,5years
old)Lens dislocated anteriorly and forced outthrough
the cornea.An unusual case.
Fig.9.106 Luxated cataract (Cavalier King Charles
Fig.9.108Lens luxation secondary toprimary
Spaniel,6years old)The primary condition in this case
glaucoma Note the dilated pupil and conjunctival
is cataract,with luxation followed by glaucoma.
congestion.
Lensluxation
127
Fig.9.109 Anterior luxation (Persian cat) Early
cataractous changes.
Fig.9.111 Dislocated cataract （DSH cat,10 years old)
Fig.9.110 Anterior luxation（DSH cat,5years old)
Fig.9.112 Dislocated cataract （DSH cat,10years old)
Note theevidence of a uveitis:probably the primary
Mature cataract dislocated anteriorly.
condition.
Chapter
Vitreous
Congenital (Figs 10.1-10.8)
Introduction
Persistent hyaloid artery (PHA)(Figs 10.1-10.2)
Vitreal anomalies and conditions do not figure
protrudesintotheanteriorvitreousfromalocalized
highly in veterinary ophthalmology;few have an
non-progressiveposterior capsular opacity.No effect
effect on vision,unless particularly severe,and
on vision.
none are painful.Vitreal haemorrhage, particu-
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous and
larlyinthecat,usuallyindicateshypertensionand
persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis
is probably the most important clinical sign.
(PHPV/PHTVL)(Figs 10.3-10.8)are hereditary and
Conditions of the vitreous can be conveniently
congenital conditionsin theStaffordshireBull Terrier
classified into congenital and acquired.
and Dobermann with odd cases in other breeds,
bilateralinthetwobreedsnamedbutwithvariable
severity and usually notbilaterally symmetrical.The
clinical signs vary from pigment spots to a fibro-
vascular plaque on the posterior capsule,together
Fig.10.1 PHA(Cavalier King CharlesSpaniel,7 weeks
Fig.10.2 PHA(Shetland Sheepdog,8weeks old)
old) Note the suture lines in relation to the position of
Extensive hyaloid artery and haemorrhage.This puppy
the hyaloid artery,i.e.not at the confluence of the
also had an optic disccoloboma(CEA).
suture lines.
129
130
Vitreous
Fig.10.3 PHPV/PHTVL(Staffordshire Bull Terrier,
Fig.10.5 PHPV/PHTVL(Staffordshire Bull Terrier,
5months old) Posterior plaque and PHA. Bilateral and
6monthsold) Posterior lenticonus and intralenticular
haemorrhage.
hereditaryin this breed.
Fig.10.4 PHPV/PHTVL(Staffordshire Bull Terrier,
Fig.10.6PHPV/PHTVL(Dobermann,4years old)
5monthsold)Posterior plaque,secondary cataractand
Pigment foci on the posterior lens capsule.The condition
capsulopupillary vessel.
is also hereditary in this breed.
Acquired
131
Fig.10.7 PHPV/PHTVL (German Shepherd Dog.
Fig.10.9 Syneresis（Labrador Retriever,2years old)
6monthsold) Leucocoria-a differential diagnosis to
Inflammation of the anteriorvitreousof unknown
aetiology.
cataract.
with congenital anomaliesof the lens e.g.coloboma
and lenticonus,cataract and intralenticular haemor-
rhage and PHA.In the Dobermann progressive
cataractandblindness havebeen reported
Acquired (Figs 10.9-10.11)
Syneresis or liquefaction is shown in Fig 10.9.
Asteroid hyalosis (Fig 10.10)- small refractile
particles suspended throughout the vitreous. No
effectonvision.
Synchysis scintillans (Fig 10.11)-fine particles in
a liquefiedvitreouswhich settleventrally intheeye
atrest butbecome temporarily dispersedwith eye
movement. Often found in conjunction with retinal
diseases.
Haemorrhage（Figs 10.12-10.15)
Fig.10.8 PHPV (Cocker Spaniel,6months old)
Causes:trauma;clotting abnormalities;hypertension
-particularly important in the cat.Variableeffect on
Unilateral case showing large persistent hyaloid artery.
vision depending on the severity;usually uniocular.
posterior plaque and vascular rete.
Foreign bodies(Figs 10.16-10.17)
Occasionally;uveal cysts and parasites have both
been recorded.
132
Vitreous
Fig.10.10 Asteroid hyalosis (Crossbred,6years old)
Fig.10.12Vitreal haemorrhage(Chihuahua,4years
Particlesin thevitreous which are stationary,unlike the
old]Haemorrhage in the anterior vitreous dueto
case in synchysis scintillans (Fig 10.11).
polycythaemia.
Fig.10.11 Synchysis scintillans[Golden Retriever,
Fig.10.13Vitreal haemorrhage(English Springer
11years old) Extensive retinopathy also present with
Spaniel,3years old) Haemorrhage in theposterior
liquefiedvitreous.
vitreous following trauma(shotin the eye).
Acquired
133
Fig.10.14Vitrealhaemorrhage(cat) Diffuse
Fig.10.16 Cyst invitreous (Golden Retriever,9 years
haemorrhage in a cat with hypertension.
old) Uveal cyst in front of the retina.
Fig.10.15Vitreal haemorrhage(cat) Haemorrhage in
Fig.10.17 Cyst invitreous(Flat-Coated Retriever,
the posteriorvitreousin front of theretinal vessels,
2yearsold) Oval non-pigmented cyst of unknown
together with some small retinal haemorrhages.Another
origin.An incidental finding.
catwith hypertension.
11
Chapter
Fundus
The normal canine fundus
Introduction
The tapetal fundus(Figs11.1-11.11)
The ocularfundus is the ophthalmoscopicview of
the posterior segment of the globe.The fundus
The extentof the tapetal fundusin thedogisshown
comprises the tapetum,tapetum lucidum or
in Fig 11.1.It isbest developed in dogs that hunt by
tapetal fundus; the tapetum nigrum or non-
sight-the so-called‘sight hounds'or'gaze hounds'
tapetal fundus; the optic disc, papilla or optic
In the toybreeds,the tapetum maybe onlypartially
nerve head (Chapter 12);and the retinal blood
developed,extending to abouthalf of that shown in
vessels.Depending upon the presence or absence
Fig11.1 and it is always thelateral half that ispresent
of pigment in the retinal pigment epithelium and
and the medial half absent.The tapetum may also be
the choroid,parts of the choroid and
its
completely absent,particularly,but not always,in
circulation,and thesclera,canbe seen
dogs with degrees of subalbinism and a merle coat
The ocular fundus differs considerably
colour.
between species and there is also considerable
The commonestcolour of the tapetum lucidum is
variation in the appearance within each species,
yellowwith a green and outerblue border (Fig11.2),
particularly in the dog.This normal variation
butmainlyyellow,green andblue coloursdo occur
must be known and understood before a
(Figs 11.3-11.5). Sparsely scattered tapetal colours
diagnosis of abnormality can be made. In certain
over a pale fawn background occur in dogs of a
cases this variation can lead to difficulty in
numberof breeds,and in particular lines or families
diagnosis and in distinguishing between the
within a breed (Figs 11.6-11.7).
normal and abnormal fundus,and even to
Itshouldbeknown thatthe tapetumispart of the
misdiagnosis.
choroid and underlies the retina when viewed
Certain features and colours of the fundus are
ophthalmoscopically.The tapetum can onlybe seen
related to both coat and iris colours,and even to
as,in this area,the retinal pigment epithelium lacks
coat length.In the dog and cat the development of
pigment and the appearance of the tapetum is
the adult appearance of the fundus takes up to
through the retina.It follows,therefore,that if the
12-14weeks,but nthe caseof the horse,cow and
retina ismissing(detachment) orthinned (atrophy or
sheep the adultappearance ispresentfrom birth,
degeneration),the reflection from the tapetal area is
the foal,calf and lamb being born with the eyes
enhanced and the situation is described as ‘hyper-
open.
reflectivity'.Hyper-reflectivity is a cardinal sign of
retinal degeneration,of whatever cause.
Islands of pigment (non-tapetal fundus) may
sometimes occurwithin the tapetal fundusregion
(Figs 11.5and 11.10-11.11)and islets,or spots,of
tapetal colours may be found in the non-tapetal
region (Fig 11.10).
Changes in pigmentation and the presence of
abnormal pigment,in both tapetal and non-tapetal
areas,are further common signs of retinal degen-
erations,of both inherited and post-inflammatory
cauises.
135
136
Fundus
Fig.11.1 The fundus (Greyhound,young adult)
Fig.11.3 The tapetum (Cocker Spaniel,2years old,
Posterior segment of the canine eye showing the extent
gold)Yellow tapetal fundus.
of the tapetal fundus.
Fig.11.2 The tapetum(Greyhound,young adult,
Fig.11.4 The tapetum (Miniature Poodle,1 year old.
brindle) Mainlyyellow tapetal fundus witha green and
black) Green tapetal fundus.Note the complete
blue border.
pigmented border to the disc.
Thenormalcanine fundus
137
Fig.11.5 The tapetum(Boxer,3years old,red） Blue
Fig.11.7 The tapetum (Shetland Sheepdog,1 year old.
tapetalfundus.
merle)Sparsely scattered tapetal colours.
Fig.11.6 The tapetum (Labrador Retriever,1 year old,
Fig.11.8 The tapetum (Shetland Sheepdog,5years
yellow)Sparsely scattered coloursover apale fawn
old,merlewith brown iris)Pale fawn fundus.
background.
138
Fundus
Fig.11.9 The tapetum(Shetland Sheepdog,2years
Fig.11.11 The tapetum (Golden Retriever, 6 years old)
old,merle)Similar to the previous figure,but with a
Demarcated island ofnon-tapetum within the tapetal
poorly developedtapetum.
fundus area.Note the normal course of the retinal blood
vessel.An unusual finding.
sudden change between the two areas (Fig 11.13).
Remarkably,the former usually occurs in long-
coated dogs and the latter inshort-coated dogs,even
in varieties of the same breed,e.g.the Border Collie
or Dachshund,and in comparison between the
Golden Retriever (long-coated) and Labrador
Retriever(short-coated)
Thenon-tapetalfundus（Figs11.14-11.19)
The usual appearance is of a dark grey/brown
homogeneous area (Fig 11.14),but the upper part of
the non-tapetal fundus may be paler and more
brown than the rest(Fig 11.15).
The non-tapetalfundusin dogsofa brown coat
Fig.11.10 The tapetum (Border Collie,1 year old,
colour （or chocolate or liver) is less heavily
tricolour) Break-up of tapetal fundus by patchesof
pigmented and appears paler(Fig11.16),sometimes
non-tapetal fundus.
with the tigroid choroidalvascular pattern visible
(Fig 11.17).
An unusual red fundus, known as ‘ruby eye
(Fig 11.18),andno tapetal development alsooccurs,
Thetapetaljunction（Figs11.12-11.13)
as does the complete absence of any tapetal
The tapetal junctionmay appear as a gradual merging
development (Fig 11.19),in dogs and not associated
of tapetal into non-tapetal fundus (Fig 11.12) or as a with any degree of subalbinism.
The normal canine fundus
139
Fig.11.12 The tapetal junction(Golden Retriever,
Fig.11.14 The tapetum nigrum (Greyhound.4years
4years old) Gradual merging of tapetal into non-tapetal
old,fawn)The usual appearancewith a dark grey-brown
fundus.
homogeneousregion.
Fig.11.13 The tapetal junction (Pembroke Corgi,
Fig.11.15 The tapetum nigrum (Labrador Retriever,
10 months old,red) Sudden demarcation between the
4years old,yellow)The upper non-tapetal fundus may
tapetal and non-tapetal fundus.This picture is usually
be more brown and paler than below.
seen in short-coated dogs,whereas the previousfigure
occurs in the long-coated varieties.
140
Fundus
Fig.11.16 The tapetum nigrum (Labrador Retriever,
Fig.11.18 Red fundus [Beagle,9 months old,tricolour
1year old,chocolate) The non-tapetal fundus in dogs
with pale lemon iris)Known as'ruby eye'due to thered
ofa brown,chocolate or liver coat colouris less heavily
ocular reflex.Rare.
pigmented than dogs of other coat colours and appears
paler,as does the iris.
Fig.11.17 The tapetum nigrum (Pointer,3 years old,
Fig. 11.19 Absence of tapetum(Boston Terrier,8years
liver) More marked variation than the previous figure
old,brindle)Absence ofany tapetal development ina
(Fig 11.6),with the choroidal vascularpattern producing
non-merle dog.Unusual.
a tigroid non-tapetalregion.
Thenormal caninefundus
141
Thesubalbinoticfundus（Figs11.20-11.25)
doesnotcorrespondtotheamountofheterochromia
oftheirisandoften thetwoeyesaredissimilar.
Complete,orsegmentsof,subalbinismof thefundus
These subalbinotic areasmay be confusing in the
commonlyoccurinmerle-coateddogswithpaleblue
diagnosisofthe chorioretinal dysplasiain casesof
orheterochromicirides.The degreeofsubalbinism
Fig.11.20 Subalbinotic fundus [Shetland Sheepdog.
Fig.11.22 Subalbinotic fundus (Shetland Sheepdog.
3yearsold,merle with pale blue iris] Absence of
1year old,merle) Note the absence ofa tapetum and
tapetum andmuch of the choroidal pigment showing
the segmentof subalbinism at2o'clock.
choroidal vessels superimposed on the scleral background.
Common in dogs with this coat and iris colour.
Fig.11.21 Subalbinotic fundus (Shetland Sheepdog.
Fig.11.23 Subalbinotic fundus (Shetland Sheepdog
2years old,merle) Similar to previous figure(Fig 11.20).
5monthsold,merle)Subalbinism,mainly peripapillary
andabovethedisc.
Fundus
142
Fig.11.24 Subalbinotic fundus (Rough Collie,1 year
Fig.11.25 Subalbinotic fundus(Shetland Sheepdog,
old,merle) Subalbinism below the disc.
10monthsold,merle)Similar to previous figures.Note
thehaphazard distribution of the areas ofsubalbinism in
these examples and compare with pathological
chorioretinal dysplasia in Collie eye anomaly ina
subsequent section.
Collie eye anomaly (see later section）.However,
visible in the centre of the disc(Fig 11.37).Some discs
in the normal fundus they are haphazard in their
have apigmentedringaroundpart or thewholeof
position, whereas in Collie eye anomaly the
their border (Figs 11.38-11.39);others have a hyper-
dysplastic region is always lateral to the optic disc
reflective ring(conus),an example of normal hyper-
(again,see later section)
reflectivity (Fig 11.40).Changes in colour,usually
pallor,occur with degeneration.
The opticdisc（Figs 11.26-11.40)
Theretinal bloodvessels(Figs 11.41-11.44)
The optic disc in the dog exhibitsgreatvariation in
its appearance.The position is usually just inside theT
The canineretina is described as holangiotic,with a
tapetal fundus when viewed ophthalmoscopically
directand visibleblood supply.Thereareusually3-5
but,depending upon the extent of the tapetal
major veins which may form a venouscircle,
fundus, the disc may appear completely inside it orpartially or completely visible on the surface of the
11.26-1l.28).The size and shape and colour of the of the disc.Tortuosity is variable and may be quite
disc are other variables and,to some extent,are marked in certain individuals.The tortuosity of the
dependent upon the degree of myelination of the arterioles is usually greater than the veins.The area
opticnerve fibreswhich can extend considerablecentralis(greatest cone density) is an area devoid of
distances into the rest of the fundus.It should be retinal vessels,but encircled by fine branches,
remembered thatmyelination occurspostnatally andsituated lateral (temporal)and slightly dorsal to the
the sizes and shapes of the optic discs in Figuresoptic disc(Fig 11.44).
11.26-11.40 should be compared with those in
Attenuation,or narrowing, of the retinal blood
Figures 11.45-11.51,which show the development ofvessels,particularly the arterioles and later theveins,
the canine fundus. The normal physiological pit inoccurs secondary to retinal degeneration.It may be
the dog is a small grey spot which is sometimesthemost obvious ophthalmoscopic change but it is
Thenormal canine fundus
143
Fig.11.26 The optic disc(Greyhound,young adult,
Fig.11.28 The optic disc(Crossbred,6yearsold,black
fawn)The usual position of the disc isjust inside the
and tan) Occasionally the disc appears inside the non-
tapetal fundus.
tapetal fundus.These discpositions simplyreflect the
extent of the tapetal fundusand not the position of the
opticnerve as it enters the eye.
Fig.11.27 The optic disc (Labrador Retriever,
Fig.11.29 The optic disc (Miniature Longhaired
7months old,yellow)Occasionally the disc appears
Dachshund,10 months old,black and tan]The disc
completely inside the tapetal fundus.
variesconsiderablyin sizefrom large(above)to small
(seeFig 11.30).
144
Fundus
Fig. 11.30 The optic disc (Beagle,10 months old,
Fig.11.32 The optic disc(Chihuahua,4years old,
tricolour)Micropapilla-normal variant with normalvision
blackand tan]Pale disc but normal retinal blood vessels.
and pupillary lightreflex.Compare the above discwith
Compare with optic atrophy (Figs 12.6-12.7).
pathological optic nerve hypoplasia （Figs 12.11-12.12).
Fig.11.31 The optic disc(German Shepherd Dog.
Fig.11.33 The optic disc（Briard,5yearsold,black)
1year old)Variations in colourrangefrom deeppink
Physiological pit-small grey spot in the centre of the
(above)to white(see Fig 11.32).
disc.
The normal canine fundus
145
Fig.11.34 The optic disc [Yorkshire Terrier,1year old,
Fig.11.36 The optic disc(Golden Retriever,2years
black and tan)Partial pigmented ring to the disc.
old) Shape of the disc varies considerablyin the dog.In
this figure the discis oval with a pigmented area on one
side.
Fig.11.35 The optic disc（Beagle,6 months old
Fig.11.37 The optic disc（Labrador Retriever,1 year
tricolour) Complete pigmentedring to the disc.
old,black)Hyper-reflectivity around the edge of the
disc,knownas conus.
146
Fundus
Fig.11.38 The optic disc(German Shepherd Dog.
Fig.11.40 The optic disc(German Shepherd Dog.
2years old,black and tan)Shamrock-shaped disc.
1year old) Medullated fibresextending some distance
awayfrom thedisc.
Fig.11.39 The optic disc (German Shepherd Dog.
Fig.11.41 Retinal blood vessels(English Springer
10months old) Large disc due tomedullatednerve
Spaniel,2yearsold)Well-developed vascular pattern
fibres,sometimes called pseudopapilloedema.This
aboveand below the area centralis.
appearance iscommonly seen in the German Shepherd
Dog and the Golden Retriever.
The normal canine fundus
147
Fig.11.42 Retinal blood vessels (Border Collie,1 year
Fig. 11.44 Retinal blood vessels(English Springer
old,black and white)Four primary veins.
Spaniel,2years old,liver and white)An unusual
vascular pattern.
not the primary change. Changes in the appearance
of the vessels may indicate a systemic disease,e.g
anaemia,polycythaemia,lipaemia,etc.Thepresence
and appearanceofretinal haemorrhagesmay also
indicate systemic disease,e.g.hypertension
diabetes,etc.
Developmentof the caninefundus
(Figs11.45-11.52)
The eye of the newborn puppy is normally closed at
birth;the kitten is similar but this is not the case in
the foal,calf andlambwhere the eyeisfullyopen at
birth and the fundus appearance is similar to that of
the adult.In the puppy it is difficult to examine the
fundusbefore21 daysof age dueto the presence of
temporary corneal oedema and the pupillary
membrane.At first thereisno differentiationbetween
tapetal and non-tapetal areas,but at 4-5weeks the
Fig.11.43 Retinal blood vessels (Rough Collie, 1 year
old,tricolour)Note the tortuosity of the retinal
lilac colour with a darkening of the non-tapetal
arteriolesin comparison to the veins.Normal variant.
fundus.The adult form is present by 12-16weeks of
age.Figs 11.45-11.52 depict the changing appearance
over the first6months of lifeof a Greyhound puppy
('gaze hound'), Figs 11.46-11.52 being the same
animal.
148
Fundus
Fig.11.45Canine fundus(Greyhound puppy)Very
Fig.11.47 Canine fundus(Greyhound puppy)27 days
early appearancewith no differentiation between tapetal
'pio
and non-tapetal fundus.
Fig.11.46 Canine fundus(Greyhound puppy)23 days
Fig.
.11.48Canine fundus(Greyhound puppy)51 days
old
The normal canine fundus
149
Fig.11.49 Canine fundus(Greyhound puppy)58 days
Fig.11.51 Canine fundus(Greyhound puppy)3months
old.
old.
Fig.11.50 Canine fundus（Greyhound puppy)65 days
Fig.11.52 Canine fundus(Greyhound puppy)6months
old.
old.Normal adult appearance.
150
Fundus
The normal feline fundus
tapetum or with visible choroidalvesselsin places
occurs intheblue-eyed white,and thereisa tigroid
(Figs11.53-11.64)
due to the choroidal vessels,in the non-tapetal
The fundus of the cat exhibits considerably lessfundus of the seal-point Siamese.The area centralis
variation than that of the dog.The cat has aislateral to the opticdiscandisdevoid ofsuperficial
triangular and well-developed,highly reflective blood vessels. The vascular pattern is classified as
tapetum.The colour is usually yellow to green and holangiotic, as in the dog.The feline optic disc is
Occasionally blue; subalbinism with absence of thesmall,usually circular,and cupped with a well-
Fig.11.53 Yellow tapetum (DSH cat,adult)
Fig.11.55Yellow-green tapetum (DSH cat,adult)
Fig.11.54 Yellow-green tapetum(DSH cat,adult)
Fig.11.56 Blue-green tapetum (DSH cat,adult)
The normal feline fundus
151
Fig.11.57 Retinal blood vessels（DSH cat,adult) Note
Fig.11.59 Tigroid non-tapetal fundus (Siamese cat,
the blood vessels surrounding,but not crossing.the area
2years old,seal-point)
centralis.Right eye (OD)
Fig.11.58 Retinal blood vessels (DSH cat,adult) Note
Fig.11.60 Subalbinism (DSH cat,tabby)Patch of
the region lateral and immediatelyopposite the optic
subalbinism around disc
disc,thearea centralis,withretinalvesselsabove and
below.Left eye (OS).
152
Fundus
Fig.11.61 Subalbinism (DSH cat,young adult,blue-
Fig.11.63 Subalbinism of the whole fundus（DSH cat,
eyed white)Note appearance and colours of tapetal and
young adult,blue-eyed white)
non-tapetal fundus.
Fig.11.62 Subalbinism (DSH cat,young adult,blue-
Fig.11.64 Fundus development (kitten,8weeksold)
eyed white) Choroidal vesselsinnon-tapetal fundus
Note comparison to Fig 11.49.
region.
The normal equine fundus
153
defined edge.The disc is greyin colour andnot Sometimes thecourse of the choroidalveins
myelinated,although occasionally myelinated or converging toa point dorsal to the optic disc appear
opaque nerve fibres arevisible ophthalmoscopically.as blue topurple streaks through a thinned tapetum,
Pigmented and hyper-reflective peripapillary ringsparticularly in the subalbinotic fundus. The non-
are sometimes present.Development of the felinetapetal fundus iswell pigmented,except for a small
fundus,inparticular that of thetapetum,issimilar to
area above the upper disc border and the junction
the picture described in the dog.
with the tapetum.Irregular areas of subalbinism
show as reddish colorationin a less densely
The normal equine fundus
pigmented non-tapetal fundus. The optic disc is
usually roughly oval,sometimes more round.It is
(Figs11.65-11.81)
granular and pink in colour with a variable edge,
Theocularfundusof the horsevariessomewhat,assometimeswith anotchon theventral border and an
might be expected,but again not aswidely as in theodd bloodvessel ortwo on the surface.Myelination
dog.The tapetum is more extensive than in theof the optic nerve fibres is an occasional finding and
carnivores,is dorsal to the optic disc and varies from usually occurs at the lateral and medial ventral
yellow to green to blue,and sometimes two colourscorners of thedisc.The equine fundus is described as
paurangiotic with many fine straight arterioles
frequently prominent in the horse, appearing as
radiatingoutwardsfrom the discmargin.
small dark dots scattered throughout the tapetum.
Fig.11.65 The fundus（Thoroughbred,adult) Posterior
Fig.11.66 The tapetum [Hunter-type,6yearsold,
segment of the equine eye showing the extent of the
black)Yellow-green tapetal fundus.
tapetal fundus.Compare with Fig 11.1.
154
Fundus
Fig.11.67 The tapetum [Hunter-type,6 years old
Fig.11.69 The tapetum （Thoroughbred,4years old,
grey)Blue-lilactapetal fundus.
chestnut) Pattern due to underlying choroidal vessels.
Fig.11.68 The tapetum (Welsh pony.7years old,blue
Fig.11.70 The tapetum(Welsh pony,1 year old,
skewbald)Heterochromic iris;similar pattern toprevious
roan)Two-coloured tapetum(green and yellow).
figure.
The normalequine fundus
155
Fig.11.71 The tapetum (Hunter-type,6years old,
Fig.11.73 The optic disc(Thoroughbred,9 years old,
grey) Island of non-tapetal fundus within the tapetum.
bay) Large and in the usual position just inside the non-
tapetal fundus.
Fig.11.72 Subalbinism (Palomino × albino pony.
Fig.11.74 The optic discShetland pony.4 years old
8months old,white) Note the poorly developed
brown) Small irregular-shaped disc.
tapetum and the visible choroidal vesselsin the non-
tapetal fundus.
Thenormal equine fundus
155
Fig.11.71 The tapetum (Hunter-type,6years old,
Fig.11.73 The optic disc（Thoroughbred,9years old,
grey) Island of non-tapetal fundus within the tapetum.
bay) Large and in the usual position just inside the non-
tapetal fundus.
Fig. 11.72 Subalbinism (Palominox albino pony.
Fig.11.74 The optic discShetland pony.4years old
8months old,white)Note thepoorly developed
brown) Small irregular-shaped disc.
tapetum and thevisible choroidal vesselsin the non-
tapetal fundus.
156
Fundus
Fig.11.75 The optic disc （Thoroughbred,1year old,
Fig.11.77 The optic disc (Thoroughbred,3yearsold,
chestnut) Disc with a double edge in places.
chestnut) Indentation along the lower border of the disc.
Fig.11.76 The optic disc（Pony,15years old,skewbald)
Fig.11.78 The optic disc（Thoroughbred,1year old
Darkred disc with heavy pigment along the base.
bay)Faintmedullated nerve fibres around the disc,
givinga halo-like effect.
The normal bovine and ovine fundus
157
Fig.11.79 The optic disc(Welsh pony,8years old
Fig.11.81 The fundus (donkey.young adult)
roan) Medullated nerve fibresparticularly at the inferior
lateralangle.
The normal bovine and ovine fundus
(Figs11.82-11.91)
Theocular fundus of thecowand sheep aresimilar
but quite unlike the previous species described.
Usually a tapetum is present and the non-tapetal
fundus is pigmented and dark.The optic disc occurs
at about the junction;in the bovine it ismore or less
circular and the ovine disc tends to be kidney-
shaped.Thecolour of the discvaries from pale pink
to dense white, depending upon myelination of the
optic nerve fibres.In a number of cases the disc
appears dark grey and pronounced myelination is
rare. The retinal blood vessels show the greatest
difference to the dog, cat and horse.The veins are
large,relatively straight and dark bluish-red;the
arteriesnarrowerandwithadistinctwhitereflective
linealong theircourseand brightred in colour.The
difference between vein and artery is obvious in
Fig.11.80 The fundus (Thoroughbred foal,1 day old)
these species.The fundus of the calf and lamb is as in
Notethe similarity to theadult fundus in thisspecies
theadult.
and compare with the dog in theDevelopment of the
canine fundus'section(Figs 11.45-11.52).
158
Fundus
Fig.11.82 The fundus(Shorthorn calf)Note the
Fig.11.84 The fundus (Jersey cow)Note the dark
obvious difference between artery andvein.
colourofthe disc.
Fig.11.83 The fundus(Shorthorn calf) Note the conus
Fig.11.85 The fundus(Charolais calf) Note the
vestigialisin the centre of the disc.
absence of medullatedfibresin thisyoung animal.
The normal bovine and ovine fundus
159
Fig.11.86 The optic disc(Friesian cow) Medullated
Fig.11.88 Sheep fundus(adult ewe)Note similarity to
fibres in the lower part of the optic disc.Unusual.
thebovine fundus with obvious difference between
arteryand vein.
Fig.11.87 The opticdisc[Friesian cow)Medullated
Fig. 11.89 Sheep fundus (adult ewe) Note the
difference in colour of the optic disc with the previous
fibres of the whole optic disc.Unusual.
figure(Fig 11.88).
160
Fundus
Fig.11.90 Sheep fundus (Clun cross,adult ewe)Non-
Fig.11.91 Sheep fundus (adult ewe) Note medullated
medullated opticdisc.
fibresfrom the discon therightside and appearanceof
the tapetum nigrum.
The fundus of other species
Diseasesof the retina-the
(Figs 11.92-11.97)
retinopathies
Note the absence of a tapetum in all these animals,The classification ofretinal disease is complex and
including the pig, and the presence of an variable,and will be illustrated here according to
ophthalmoscopicallyvisiblemaculaintheprimates.
species and the condition with notes on diagnosis.
In the dog there are fourwell-defined hereditary
diseases of the fundus,two abiotrophies (gener-
alized progressive retinal atrophy and retinal pig
mentepithelial dystrophy)and two congenital
conditions (Collie eye anomaly and retinal dys-
plasia).The non-hereditary retinopathies are mainly
post-inflammatory and with neither breed nor age
incidence.Unless very severe,they are rarely
presented to the veterinary surgeon with a history
of defective vision,particularly in the UK,and
carry a poorly understood aetiology.A few other
eration (SARD), haemorrhages and detachments and
coloboma, are illustrated.
The cathas two forms of a hereditaryretinopathy,
bothin theAbyssinianbreed.One or two otherretinal
degenerations areshown aswell as an unusual and
highly specificretinopathy due to a deficiency of the
sulphur-containing amino acid taurine.
In the horse post-inflammatory retinal degen-
erations are illustrated,together with a few other
oddconditions.
Diseases of the retina -the retinopathies
161
Fig.11.92 Human (young adult) Note the presence of
Fig.11.94 Pig (Large White,adult)Note the absence
themacula.
ofa tapetum in this species.
Fig.11.93 Monkey (baboon,young adult) Note the
Fig. 11.95 Rabbit (young adult, albino)
macula.
Fundus
Fig.11.96 Rat (young adult,albino)
Fig.11.97 Bird(Tawny Owl) Note the pecten.
The sheep exhibits an interesting toxicretinopathy
ultimately total blindness.Occasionally, owners
due to the ingestion of bracken,apparently specific
notice a glow in the eyes in certain lights due to the
to this species.
dilated pupils and increased tapetal reflectivity.
Cataractsa frequent,ifnotnvariable,equelinhis
The dog
species (Figs 9.57-9.60).
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy(RPED)or
(Figs 11.98-11.119)
central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA)
In the dogGPRAishereditary,bilateral andusually
(Figs 11.120-11.131)
symmetrical but,where the two eyes are not
RPEDorCPRAisanother,butdissimilar,bilaterally
identical,the differencein the degree ofseverity is
symmetrical or nearly so, progressive retinal
minimal,and always progressive. GPRA has been
degeneration causingdefectivevision andultimately
subdivided into dysplasias and degenerations
endingn total blindness,althoughnot inall cases as
accordingto thetime atwhich therodsandcones
some dogs retain usefulperipheral vision into old
age.The condition is not congenital,but affects
incidence inthe differentbreeds.However,clinically
young adult dogs. There is a distinct breed predis-
(ophthalmoscopically)all the forms look alike.There
position andRPEDwas considered tobe inherited in
is a marked and important breed incidence(see Table
those breeds named in Table 11.2,but recently an
11.1) and certain breeds may exhibit two types.
association of extremely low plasma levels of
GPRA is not congenital but occurs later in life
vitamin Ein affected dogs has been shown and it is
(abiotrophy)and the age incidencevariesfrom a few
this thatmay be inherited.Ophthalmoscopically the
months to several years.To date inheritance has
presence of brown spots of pigment scattered
alwaysbeenviaa simple,autosomal,recessivegene
throughout the tapetal fundus,and with hyper-
(cf.the Abyssinian cat),except the Siberian Husky
reflectivity present between the spots,is the main
which hasbeen reported asX-linked in theUSA.The
diagnostic sign.Attenuation of the retinal blood
historyis usually of defectivevisionnoticed either
vesselsis a later change and the condition progresses
at night or in dim light, hence the term night
to involve the non-tapetal fundus.Occasionally
blindness',always deteriorating to day blindnessand
cataracts are present (Fig9.61).
Diseases of theretina-the retinopathies
163
Fig.11.98 Rod/cone dysplasia (lrish Setter,3 months
Fig.11.100 Rod/cone dysplasia (Cardigan Corgi.
CPIO
ageasinFig 11.98.
Fig.11.99 Rod/cone dysplasia (lrish Setter,3months
Fig.11.101 Rod dysplasia,cone degeneration
old)Littermate to thepuppy in Figure 11.98.Note the
[Elkhound,20 months old) Typical changes of GPRA
obvious difference on comparison between normal and
abnormal inboth tapetal hyper-reflectivity andblood
vessel attenuation.
164
Fundus.
Fig.11.102 Rod/cone degeneration (Miniature Poodle,
Fig.11.104 Rod/cone degeneration (Miniature Poodle,
5years old)Note the narrowedretinalbloodvessels
8yearsold)Advanced degeneration withpallor of the
away from the disc.
discand visible choroidal vessels.
Fig.11.103 Rod/cone degeneration(Miniature Poodle.
Fig.11.105 Rod/cone degeneration (Cocker Spaniel,
5yearsold) Typical appearanceof thenon-tapetal
2yearsold) Early ophthalmoscopicchangesof tapetal
fundus.
hyper-reflectivity.
Diseases of theretina-the retinopathies
165
Fig.11.106 Rod/cone degeneration (Cocker Spaniel.
Fig.11.108 Progressive retinal atrophy (Tibetan
4years old,blue roan)Right eye showing obvious
Terrier,15 months old) Early ophthalmoscopic signs.
ophthalmoscopic signs of blood vessel attenuation and
increased tapetal reflectivity.
Fig. 11.107 Rod/cone degeneration (Cocker Spaniel,
Fig.11.109 Progressiveretinal atrophy（Tibetan
4years old,blue roan) Left eye of the same dog as in
Terrier,18 monthsold) Ophthalmoscopic signs more
Figure 11.106,showinglessobviousophthalmoscopic
obvious.
signs due to subalbinism of the fundus and absence of a
tapetum.
166
Fundus
Fig.11.110 Progressiveretinalatrophy(Tibetan
Fig.11.112 Progressiveretinalatrophy(English
Spaniel,4years old) Typical signs.
Springer Spaniel,21 monthsold,liver and white)
Typical hyper-reflectivityin the tapetal area.
Fig.11.111 Progressive retinal atrophy (Tibetan
Fig. 11.113 Progressive retinal atrophy (Miniature
Spaniel,4 years old) Changes in the non-tapetal fundus.
Schnauzer,4yearsold)
Diseases of theretina-theretinopathies
167
Fig.11.114 Rod/cone degeneration (Labrador Retriever,
Fig.11.116 Cone/rod dystrophy MiniatureLonghaired
6years old) Tapetal hyper-reflectivity and early changes
Dachshund,8monthsold) Early ophthalmoscopic
in the non-tapetal fundus.
changes.
Fig.11.115 Rod/cone degeneration(Golden Retriever,
Fig.11.117 Cone/rod dystrophy (Miniature Longhaired
4years old)Early changesin tapetum.
Dachshund,14 months old) Poor differentiation of the
tapetum,butobviousblood vessel attenuation.
168
Fundus
Fig.11.118 Cone/rod dystrophy Miniature Longhaired
Fig.11.119 Cone/rod dystrophy (Miniature Longhaired
Dachshund,17 months old) Advanced case.
Dachshund,3years old) Very advanced case.
Collie eye anomaly(CEA)(Figs 11.132-11.164)
Table 11.1-Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA):
breeds affected
CEA isboth inherited and congenital and it isnon-
progressive. CEA is bilateral but not infrequently the
Australian Cattle Dog
two eyes are dissimilarin the degree of severity.CEA
Collie (Rough)
affects basically the collie breeds (see Table 11.3)
Dachshund (Miniature Long-Haired)
Ophthalmoscopically there are twomain lesions.
Finnish Laphund
Irish Setter
Chorioretinal dysplasia (CRD),or choroidal
Lhasa Apso
hypoplasia,is thecharacteristiclesion always found
Norwegian Elkhound
lateral to the optic disc,either adjacent to the discor
一
Papillon
two to threediscdiameters away from it.In the more
Poodle(Miniature)
severe cases of CRD,the lesion may extend to
Poodle (Toy)
Retriever (Chesapeake Bay)
surround the discbut in such cases the severest part
Retriever (Golden)
is always lateral to the disc.The second lesion is a
Retriever (Labrador)
coloboma which may affect a part of the disc or the
口
Schnauzer,Miniature
whole ofthe disc and sometimes the peripapillary
Spaniel (American Cocker)
region.The visual deficit varies from no apparent
Spaniel (Cocker)
Spaniel (English Springer)
effect （mild CRD cases) to total blindness,the
Tibetan Spaniel
former beingmuch more common than the latter.
Tibetan Terrier
Intraocular haemorrhage,including hyphaema,
Welsh Corgi (Cardigan）
sometimes occurs and may be the presenting sign,
and total retinal detachment is also anoccasional
finding.Although the condition is considered to be
congenital, these latter two signs of haemorrhage
and detachment,both causing blindness,may occur
Diseases of the retina-theretinopathies
169
Fig.11.120 Pigment epithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Fig.11.122 Pigmentepithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Retriever,2years old) Note the early change in the area
Retriever,5 years old) Same dog as in Figure 11.121,but
centralis.
oneyearlater.
Fig.11.121 Pigment epithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Fig.11.123 Pigment epithelial dystrophy (Labrador
Retriever,4yearsold) Note the pigmentary change in
Retriever,6years old) Same dog as in Figs 11.121,
the tapetal fundus.
11.122.Note the progression of the pigmentary change
with fewer but more dense pigment spots.
170
snpuny
Fig.11.124 Pigment epithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Fig.11.126 Pigment epithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Retriever,10years old) Advanced stage with a few
Retriever,6yearsold) Note the increased tapetal
dense pigment spotson a hyper-reflectivebackground.
reflectivitybetween the pigment spots.
Fig.11.125 Pigment epithelial dystrophy (Labrador
Fig.11.127 Pigment epithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Retriever,5years old) Note the pigmentation along the
Retriever,4years old) Note the difference in the form
course of the retinal blood vessels.
orshape of the pigmentspotsfrom theprevious two
figures (Figs 11.125,11.126).
Diseasesof theretina-theretinopathies
171
Fig.11.128Pigmentepithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Fig.11.130 RPED （Rough Collie,5years old)
Retriever,3years old)Note the cystic appearance of the
pigmentspots.
Fig.11.129 RPED （Border Collie,6years old)
Fig.11.131 RPED （Briard,3/2yearsold)
172
Fundus
Table 11.2-Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy(RPED):
breeds affected
Border Collie
Briard
Collie (Rough)
Collie(Smooth）
mPolish Lowland Sheepdog
Retriever （Golden）
Retriever （Labrador)
Shetland Sheepdog
Spaniel (Cocker)
Spaniel (English Springer)
Welsh Corgi(Cardigan)
inyoungadultdogs.Inheritanceisthoughttobedue
to a simple autosomal recessive gene but recently
some doubt has been expressed as to this opinion
and,althoughthelesions appearophthalmoscopically
Fig.11.132 Chorioretinal dysplasia(Border Collie,
the same inall thebreeds affected,thisfact hasyet to
4years old) Minor change in the typical position lateral
beprovedgenetically.
to the optic disc.
Retinal dysplasia,total (TRD)and multifocal (MRD)
(Figs 11.165-11.184)
Retinal dysplasia (RD)is the second congenital and
inheritedabnormalityoftheretina inthe dog and
with similarities toCEA.Itisusuallybilateral butby
no means always on ophthalmoscopic examination.
It is not progresive and the degree of severity of
MRDvaries considerably.The types ofRDand the
breeds affectedareshownin Table 11.4.In total RD
both eyes are affected and an infundibular type of
retinal detachment is present in young puppies
which are blind and may show forms ofocular
nystagmus.In multifocal RD,including the so-called
geographicform,retinal folds,varyinginnumber
from one to many, occur in the tapetal fundus
usually immediately above the optic disc in the
central region.In the geographic form a large
circumscribed horseshoe-shaped to circular area,
sometimesassociatedwith several fine and tortuous
bloodvessels,salsofoundin the tapetal fundusbut
Fig.11.133Chorioretinal dysplasia(Shetland
usually much further away from the discand
Sheepdog.7months old) More severe change away
towards the edge of the tapetum in the central
from the disc.
region.Sometimesretinal foldshave been known to
disappear with time,evenin breeds with primary
Diseases of the retina-the retinopathies
173
Fig.11.134 Chorioretinal dysplasia(Shetland Sheepdog.
Fig.11.136 Chorioretinal dysplasia (Rough Collie,
7months old) More severe change than in Fig 11.133,in
2yearsold,blue merle)Typical appearance of the lesion
a similar position but adjacent to the disc.
ina subalbinotic fundus.
Fig.11.135 Chorioretinal dysplasia(Shetland
Fig.11.137 Chorioretinal dysplasia (Border Collie.
Sheepdog,2years old) Severe change lateral but not
2years old) Posterior segment of the eye showing the
adjacent to the disc.
pale patch'(dysplastic area)opposite the optic disc.
Note also the coloboma of the optic disc.
174
Fundus
Fig. 11.138 Chorioretinal dysplasia (Rough Collie.
Fig.11.140 Coloboma (Rough Collie.1year old,blue
8weeks old)The appearanceof the lesion in ayoung
merle)Small coloboma at 12o'clock(note dipping of
puppy-note the early tapetal development.
discvessels),together with chorioretinal dysplasia.
Fig.11.139 Chorioretinal dysplasia (Shetland
Fig.11.141 Coloboma(Shetland Sheepdog.3years
Sheepdog,3years old,bluemerle) Extensive
old,sable) Shallow coloboma of the lowerpartof the
chorioretinal dysplasia in a subalbinotic fundus.
optic disc,together with chorioretinal dysplasia.
Diseases of the retina -the retinopathies
175
Fig.11.142 Coloboma （Border Collie,3years old)
Fig.11.144 Coloboma （Rough Collie,7yearsold)
Medium-sized coloboma in the centre of the disc,
Large disccoloboma,togetherwith chorioretinal dysplasia
together with chorioretinal dysplasia.
and retinal detachment on the left side of the figure.
Fig.11.143 Coloboma (Rough Collie,1 year old,
Fig.11.145 Coloboma(Shetland Sheepdog.3years
tricolour]Medium-sized coloboma of the ventral disc.
old)Shallow disccoloboma at7o'clock.
176
Fundus
Fig.11.146 Coloboma(Shetland Sheepdog,9months
Fig.11.148 Coloboma[Shetland Sheepdog.4years
old)Deep disccoloboma at5o'clock.
old)Twosmall colobomasat 6o'clock.
Fig.11.147 Coloboma(Shetland Sheepdog,16months
Fig.11.149 Coloboma (Shetland Sheepdog.2years
old)Whole disccoloboma with mild chorioretinal dysplasia
old)Coloboma in atypicalposition at3o'clock,together
andretinal detachment in theupperright quadrant.
with chorioretinal dysplasia.
Diseases of the retina -the retinopathies
177
Fig.11.150 Coloboma(Shetland Sheepdog,3years
Fig.11.152 Coloboma(Shetland Sheepdog.13 weeks
old)Large disc coloboma and adjacentperipapillary
old) Same eye as theprevious figure but focused to
region affecting both retina and choroid.
show the persistent hyaloid remnant-a frequent finding
in conjunction with colobomasin all species(see also
Fig12.28).
Fig.11.151 Coloboma(ShetlandSheepdog.13 weeks
Fig.11.153 Coloboma (Shetland Sheepdog,adult,blue
old)Extensive disc coloboma.
merle) Extensive coloboma,and note the retinal blood
vessels dipping over the edge of the crater.
178
snpuny
Fig.11.154 Coloboma (Rough Collie,6 months old)
Fig.11.156 Retinal detachment (Shetland Sheepdog
External appearance of coloboma of the optic disc-
9months old) Extensive retinal detachment.
note the cystic appearance and the optic nerve deflected
to theright-hand side.
Fig.11.155 Retinal detachment(Rough Collie,1year
Fig.11.157 Retinal detachment(Shetland Sheepdog.
old)Flatretinal detachment to theleftof the opticdisc.
17 months old)The appearance of total retinal
detachment through a dilated pupil.
Diseases of theretina-theretinopathies
179
Fig.11.158 Retinal detachment (Shetland Sheepdog.
Fig.11.160 Excessive vascular tortuosity(Rough Collie,
9months old) Retinal detachment and disinsertion.
6monthsold) Note also the coloboma of the disc.
Fig.11.159 Retinal detachment (Rough Collie.
Fig.11.161 Excessive vascular tortuosity(Rough
Collie,6months old) Again,excessive tortuosity and
6months old)Detachment and disinsertion (post
mortem specimen).
disccoloboma.
180
Fundus
Fig.11.162 Vascular anomaly (Shetland Sheepdog.
Fig.11.164 Hyphaema （Rough Collie,18 months old)
3yearsold)Aberrant arteriolar loop at the edgeofthe
Intraocular haemorrhage,may be the presenting sign of
dise at 7o'clock protruding forwardsinto thevitreous.
collie eye anomaly.
Table 11.3-Collie eye anomaly:breeds affected
Border Collie
Collie (Rough)
Collie (Smooth)
LancashireHeeler
Shetland Sheepdog
hereditaryMRDand in theyoung adulttheretinal
folds may become hyper-reflective and even
pigmented with a distinct similarity to post-
inflammatory chorioretinitis.Furthermore,it has
been reported that the geographic lesion is not
Retinal folds not infrequently occur in association
withmicrophthalmosand other ocular anomalies
and in some breeds with skeletal abnormalities.
Hereditary RD,in thosebreeds inwhichit hasbeen
Fig.11.163 Vascular anomaly (Rough Collie,7weeks
studied,is due toa simple autosomal recessivegene.
old)Aneurysmon theretinal bloodvessels at 6o'clock.
Diseases of the retina-the retinopathies
181
Fig.11.165 Total retinal dysplasia (Sealyham Terrier,
Fig.11.167 Infundibular detachment (Sealyham Terrier,
8weeksold) The ophthalmoscopicappearance of total
3monthsold) Similar toFig 11.166,showing funnel-
retinal detachment(TRD).
shaped total detachment around the edge ofthelens.
Fig.11.168 TRD（Labrador Retriever,puppy)Bilateral
retinal detachment.Total retinal dysplasia and similar to
previous three figures(Figs 11.165-11.167)of Sealyham
puppies.
Fig.11.166 Infundibular detachment (Sealyham
Terrier.4months old) Post mortem specimen showing
total infundibular detachment(lens removed)
182
Fundus
Fig.11.169 Multifocal retinal dysplasia(MRD)
Fig.11.171 MRD （English Springer Spaniel,5months
(Labrador Retriever.13months old) Area of detachment
old)Typical retinal folds in tapetal fundus superior to
in the typical area ofsuperior tapetal region,well above
disc.
the optic disc.Note the abnormal blood vessels.
Fig.11.170 MRD(LabradorRetriever,adult)MRD with
Fig.11.172 MRD (English Springer Spaniel,6 months
minor changesof two smallretinal folds
old)Similar toFig 11.171 butmore severe.
Diseasesof the retina -the retinopathies
183
Fig.11.173 MRD (English Springer Spaniel,15months
Fig.11.175 MRD(EnglishSpringerSpaniel,2years
old) Retinal folds;note the area ofretinal degeneration
old) More severe casewith some retinal detachment.
with hyper-reflectivity andpigmentation to theleft of
themainretinalvein.
Fig.11.174 MRD (English Springer Spaniel,2years
Fig.11.176 Extensive retinal detachment(English
old)Similar changes toFig 11.173with foldsand area of
Springer Spaniel,5monthsold)
increasedreflectivity and pigmentation above the disc.
Fundus
184
Fig.11.177 TRD （English Springer Spaniel,8months old)
Fig.11.179 MRD(CavalierKing Charles Spaniel,
Ophthalmoscopic appearance of infundibular detachment.
7weeksold) Geographiclesion and folds superior to the
Note similarity to Fig 11.165in a Sealyham puppy.
disc in an immature tapetal fundus.Note thevascular
tortuosity.
Fig.11.178 MRD English Springer Spaniel,7weeks
Fig.11.180 MRD(CavalierKing CharlesSpaniel,
old)Retinal foldsvisible in an immature tapetal fundus.
young adult) Geographic lesion of detachment in
superior tapetal fundus.
Diseasesof the retina- theretinopathies
185
Fig.11.181 MRD (Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,
Fig.11.183 Retinal folds (Rough Collie, 10 weeks old)
5monthsold) Retinal folds in tapetal fundus.
Retinal folds in the non-tapetal fundus.Originally,and
incorrectly.thought to be part of CEA.Possibly
associatedwith degree of microphthalmos.
Fig.11.182 Retinal folds(Golden Retriever/]x
Fig.11.184 Retinal folds（Beagle,3months old)
Labrador Retriever(/)Congenital retinal foldsresembling
Transientretinal folds in the non-tapetal fundus.
hereditary MRD but ina cross-bred.Unknown aetiology.
186
Fundus
Table 11.4-Retinal dysplasia.total (TRD)and multifocal
(MRD):breeds affected
Bedlington Terrier-TRD
CavalierKing CharlesSpaniel-MRD
Retriever (Golden)-MRD
Retriever (Labrador)-TRD and MRD
Rottweiler-MRD
Schnauzer,Giant-MRD
Sealyham Terrier-TRD
Spaniel (English Springer)-TRD and MRD
Spaniel (American Cocker)-MRD
However,there are acquired forms of RD due to
othercausesg.caninerpesvirusirradiaton.
Total RD causes complete blindness but it is rare for
MRD to have anyeffecton vision andmost cases
showingretinal folds,and even geographic lesions,
Fig.11.185 Post-inflammatory retinopathy(Sheepdog.
are onlydiagnosed on ophthalmoscopicexamination
1year old) Note the area of increased reflectivity.
and the ownerisunawareof anyeffectonvision.
denoting retinal degeneration,in theupper right
quadrant.Aetiology unknown.
Other retinopathies（Figs11.185-11.212)
Asstated above thenon-hereditaryretinopathiesin
the dog are mainly post-inflammatory,often of
unknown aetiology andrarely are active at the time
of examination.They mustbedistinguished from the
hereditary retinopathies as obviously they have no
significance as far as parents,progeny andrelatives
are concerned. Non-hereditary retinopathies may
affect one or both eyes and to considerably differing
degrees.In addition, the part(s) affected are often
clearly defined and haphazard in their distribution
in the fundus. There is,of course,no breed or age
incidence. Cases of bilateral severe retinal degen-
eration may sometimes be difficult to distinguish
from a hereditary retinopathy in a breed in which
GPRA is recognized,but a history of sudden
defective vision, as opposed to progressive loss of
vision,coupledwith theageof theanimal,mayhelp
to distinguishonefrom theother.
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration (SARD) is
now awell-recognizedretinopathy,but of unknown
aetiology.Cases present with sudden blindness and
with no changes in the ophthalmoscopic appearance,
Fig.11.186 Post-inflammatory retinopathy(Labrador
Retriever,8years old) lncreasedreflectivityin the
later at subsequent examinations.
tapetal region,together with some pigmentary
Retinal haemorrhages havea variety of causes and
disturbance in thelowerleftquadrant adjacent tothe
occasional casesofanidiopathicretinaldetachment
optic disc.Aetiology unknown.
may be seen.
Fig.11.187 Post-inflammatoryretinopathy
Fig.11.189 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (Border
[Greyhound,2years old) Generalized but patchy
Collie,13years old)Focal areaof post-inflammatory
increased reflectivity,together with early changes of
retinal degeneration lateral to the disc.The other eye of
optic atrophy.This was an unvaccinated dog and other
this dog had a generalized retinopathy.
littermateswere affectedwithretinal degeneration.
Fig.11.188 Post-inflammatory retinopathy(Labrador
Fig.11.190 Post-inflammatory retinopathy(German
Retriever,5years old) Generalized retinal degeneration.
Shepherd Dog.7years old)Typical changes with increased
Note the change in colour from green to gold in the
reflectivity and abnormal pigmentation and of post-
more severelyaffected parts.
inflammatory origin.The other eye of this dog was normal.
188
Fundus
Fig.11.191 Chorioretinitis（Sheepdog,6years old)
Fig.11.193 Post-inflammatoryretinopathy
Post-inflammatory chorioretinitiswith heavy pigmentation
[Greyhound,2yearsold] Elongated focal areaofretinal
in the centre of the lesion lateral to the disc.
degeneration,peripapillary and extending laterally.This
dog had shown clinical signs of canine distemper.
Fig.11.192 Post-inflammatoryretinopathy (Crossbred,
Fig.11.194 Post-inflammatory retinopathy(Crossbred
1year old) Abnormal reflectivity and pigmentation.This
6years old)Peripapillary lesion on the medial sideof
dog wasknown to have had canine distemper.
thedisc.
Diseasesof the retina -theretinopathies
189
Fig.11.195 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (Crossbred,
Fig.11.197 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (English
6years old) Theother eye of the dog in Fig 11.194
Springer Spaniel,3 years old) Note the exudate and
showing more extensive areas of retinal degeneration
neovascularization in theregion above the disc.
and demonstrating the asymmetry of the two eyes.This
dog wasknown to have had pyrexia and fits ata
younger age.Lesions in both eyes were non-progressive
overseveral years.
Fig.11.196 Post-inflammatory retinopathy
Fig.11.198 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (Labrador
Retriever,10 years old)Pigmentary retinopathy.Note
(Dobermann,8years old) Advanced and severe retinal
degeneration and optic atrophy.
the difference to central PRA.
190
Fundus
Fig. 11.199 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (Labrador
Fig.11.201 Post-inflammatory retinopathy
Retriever,8 years old) Another pigmentaryretinopathy
(Greyhound,18months old) Post-inflammatory
with focal areas of tapetal hyper-reflectivity.Again,quite
retinopathy with focal areasofdepigmentation in the
unlike central PRA.
non-tapetal fundus.
Fig.11.200 Post-inflammatory retinopathy(Afghan
Fig.11.202 Retinal degeneration (Smooth-haired Fox
Hound,5yearsold)
Terrier,7years old) Retinal degeneration due to
glaucoma.Note the dislocated lensin the lower part of
the photograph.
190
Fundus
Fig.11.199 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (Labrador
Fig.11.201 Post-inflammatoryretinopathy
Retriever.8years old)Another pigmentary retinopathy
(Greyhound,18 monthsold) Post-inflammatory
with focal areas of tapetal hyper-reflectivity.Again,quite
retinopathy with focal areas of depigmentation in the
unlike central PRA
non-tapetal fundus.
Fig.11.200 Post-inflammatory retinopathy(Afghan
Fig.11.202 Retinal degeneration (Smooth-haired Fox
Hound,5yearsold)
Terrier,7 years old) Retinal degeneration due to
glaucoma.Note the dislocated lensin the lower part of
the photograph.
Diseasesof theretina-theretinopathies
191
Fig.11.203 Sudden acquired retinal degeneration
Fig. 11.205 Retinal haemorrhage (Standard Poodle,
[SARD)(Whippet,8yearsold) Note the earlyoverall
8yearsold) Diabeticretinopathy,the diabetes of several
reflectivity visiblein the tapetal region.This dog was
yearsduration.
presented with sudden blindness but with no
ophthalmoscopic changes in the fundus until the
subsequentexamination.
Fig.11.204 Retinal haemorrhage(Crossbred,6years
Fig.11.206 Retinal haemorrhage [Cocker Spaniel,
old) Hypertensive retinopathy with renal disease.
6yearsold)Warfarin poisoning-note the retinal
haemorrhage and anaemia of theretinal vessels.
192
Fundus
Fig.11.207 Retinal haemorrhage (Crossbred,13 years
Fig.11.209 Retinal detachment (Miniature Poodle,
old)Retinal haemorrhage in a caseofgeneralized
4years old) Total retinal detachment in both eyes.
Aetiologyunknown.
lymphosarcoma.
Fig.11.208 Retinal haemorrhage(Labrador Retriever,
Fig.11.210 Retinal detachment[Crossbred,7years
12years old) Multiple retinal haemorrhages in an aged
old) Serousor exudative retinal detachment withblisters
dog and of unknown aetiology.
of detached retinavisible through the dilatedpupil.
Diseases of the retina- the retinopathies
193
Fig.11.211 Retinal detachment(Crossbred,9years
Fig.11.212 Coloboma(Beagle,14months old)
old)Another case of serous retinal detachment.
Atypical coloboma of retina and choroid.Both eyeswere
affected,but asymmetrically.
Retinopathiesin other species
Thehorse(Figs11.233-11.243)
Retinopathies (chorioretinopathies)in the horse
Thecat（Figs11.213-11.232)
rarely present withevidence of defectivevision,but
The cat exhibits twoforms of a hereditary
arenoted at a routine ophthalmoscopic examination.
generalizedprogresiveretinalatrophybilateraland
They are almost invariably inactive and non-
symmetrical,with the classical signs of a retinal
progressive. Ophthalmoscopic signs are typically
degeneration of increased tapetal reflectivity and
tapetal hyper-reflectivity and pigmentary changes.
attenuation of theretinal bloodvessels.Both forms
The aetiology is usually unknown. Occasional cases
are in the Abyssinian breed:the first,a rod/cone
of retinaldetachment,uniocularandbinocular,occur
dysplasia in kittens,is due to a simple autosomal
but again the aetiology is usually obscure apart from
dominant gene (Figs 11.213-11.218);the second is a
the odd case of known trauma.
degeneration occurring ata later age in young adults
and due to a simple autosomal recessive gene.
The sheep(Figs 11.244-11.246)
Odd cases of advanced retinal degeneration (Fig
Bright blindness in sheep is a primary toxic
11.219)and focal post-inflammatory degeneration
retinopathy due to the ingestion of bracken.It is
(Fig 11.220) occur occasionally,and hypertensive
bilateral,symmetrical and progressive unless the
retinopathy, usually presenting with sudden
cause isremoved.There is an associated leucopaenia
blindnessdue to haemorrhage and/or detachment,
and ophthalmoscopically the classical signs are
isnowwell recognized inthisspecies.
evident.Pupils are dilated and the eyes have a bright
Taurine deficiency retinopathy(Figs 11.221-11.226),
reflectiveglow.
starting at the area centralis and progressing in a
band above theopticdisctobecomegeneralizedin
advanced cases,is an interesting and unusual
condition only affecting the cat. Occasional cases
occur inpetcats.
194
Fundus
Fig.11.213 Progressive retinal atrophy (Abyssinian,
Fig.11.215 Progressive retinal atrophy(Abyssinian-
6months old)Rod/cone dysplasia showing classical
cross, 10 weeks old) Early changes.
ophthalmoscopicsigns of tapetal hyper-reflectivity and
blood vessel attenuation.Hereditary and due toa
dominantgene.
Fig.11.214 Progressive retinal atrophy (Abyssinian.
Fig.11.216 Normal fundus (Abyssinian-cross,10
12monthsold) Advanced rod/cone dysplasia.Note the
weeks old) Littermate control tokitten in Fig 11.215.
tapetal degeneration in the area centralisregion.
Diseases of theretina -the retinopathies
195
Fig.11.217 Progressive retinal atrophy(Abyssinian,
Fig.11.219 Retinal degeneration (DSH tabby and
6months old)Note increased tapetal reflectivity and
white,3yearsold)Advancedbilateralretinal
attenuated blood vessels.
degeneration with only ghost vessels remaining.
Aetiologyunknown.
Fig. 11.218 Normal fundus (Abyssinian,6 months old)
Fig.11.220 Focal retinal degeneration (DSH,5years
Littermate to the catin Fig 11.217,showing normal
old)Several areasoffocal retinal degeneration.
tapetal reflectivity and normal retinal blood vessels.
Aetiology probably toxoplasmosis.
196
Fundus
Fig.11.221 Taurine deficiency retinopathy
Fig.11.223 Taurine deficiencyretinopathy
(experimental DSH) Note the early small focal spotat
[experimental DSH)Area ofretinal degenerationnow
the area centralis,lateral to the optic disc.
approaching theoptic disc.
Fig.11.222 Taurine deficiencyretinopathy
Fig.11.224 Taurine deficiencyretinopathy
(experimental DSH) Larger oval reflective area in the
(experimental DSH) The two areasofretinal
same position.
degeneration have now met in a bridge immediately
superior to the opticdisc.
Diseases of the retina-the retinopathies.
197
Fig.11.225 Taurine deficiency retinopathy
Fig.11.227 Hypertensive retinopathy(DSH.13years
(experimental DSH) Extension of thebridging
old) Serous retinal detachment and sudden blindness.
degeneration above the disc.
Fig.11.226 Taurine deficiency retinopathy
Fig.11.228 Hypertensiveretinopathy（DSH,12years
(experimental DSH) Generalized retinal degeneration in
old) Retinal haemorrhages.
an advanced case.Vision now defective but.prior to this
stage,no effect on vision was apparent.
198
Fundus
Fig.11.229 Diabeticretinopathy（DSH,10 years old)
Fig.11.231 Retinal detachment (DSH,4 months old)
Retinal haemorrhages and detachment visible through
Total detachment in both eyes.Note the central hole in
thepupil following prolonged administration(8years)of
theretina.Probably a congenital anomaly and rare.
megoestrolacetate.
Fig.11.230 Retinalhaemorrhage（DSH,10yearsold)
Fig.11.232 Coloboma （DSH,12 monthsold)
Retinal haemorrhage following trauma.
Colobomas affecting the retina,choroid and optic disc.
Diseases of the retina-theretinopathies
199
Fig.11.233 Chorioretinopathy(Hunter-type.7years
Fig.11.235 Chorioretinopathy （pony,25years old)
old)Focal linear lesions in the non-tapetal fundus.
Peripapillary and pigmentary degeneration.
Fig.11.234 Chorioretinopathy(Hunter-type,7years
Fig.11.236 Retinopathy （Hunter-type,12years old)
old)Similar lesionstoFig 11.233,peripapillary and on
Focal lesions of retinal degeneration.Note the change in
both sides of the disc.The so-calledbutterfly'lesion.
colour and hyper-reflectivity,together with pigmentary
disturbancein the tapetal fundus.
200
Fundus
Fig.11.237 Retinopathy （Thoroughbred,8years old)
Fig.11.239 Retinopathy（Thoroughbred,1 year old)
Focal areas of retinal degeneration in the non-tapetal
Generalized progressiveretinal atrophy,bilateral and
fundus,peripapillary and away from the disc.Some optic
resulting in defective vision.Note the typical signs and
atrophy.
similarity to GPRA in the dog and cat.Arare case
Fig.11.238 Senile retinopathy(Shetland pony,aged)
Fig.11.240 Retinal detachment(Hunter-type
Peripapillary pigmentary changes and loss of choroidal
6months old) Total detachment in both eyeswith total
circulation.
blindness,probably congenital.
Diseases of the retina-the retinopathies
201
Fig.11.241 Retinal detachment (Hackney pony.
Fig.11.242 Retinal haemorrhages (Thoroughbred foal,
3weeks old) Bilateral and congenital.
few days old) Multiple small retinal haemorrhagesin
Convulsive Foal Syndrome(post mortem specimen).
Fig.11.243 Coloboma （Thoroughbred,2months old)
Retinal colobomas in the typical position below the disc.
202
Fundus
Fig.11.244 Retinal degeneration(Hill Breed ewe)
Fig.11.245 Retinal degeneration (Hill Breed ewe)
Bright blindness or primary toxicretinopathy due to the
Note the attenuation of theretinal bloodvessels.
ingestion ofbracken.
Aetiology as previous figure.
Fig.11.246 Retinal degeneration (Hill Breed ewe)
Note the increased tapetal reflectivity.Aetiologyas
previousfigures.
12
Chapter
The Optic Nerve
Introduction
The optic nerve (cranial nerve Il,or more
particularly the optic nerve head or optic disc as
it appears as part of the fundus (Chapter 11),
exhibitsa few important conditionswhichwill be
illustrated. The normal appearance of the optic
discin all the species is shown in the previous
section and there will be a degree of overlap
between the two chapters,as conditions of the
fundus,in particular choroid and retina,not
infrequently involve the optic nerve and are
visible ophthalmoscopically.
The degree of medullation in all the species
varies considerably and this fact doesnot help in
diagnosis.Similarly,the size and colour of thedisc
also exhibit normal variations,as well as being
important factorsin pathology.
Fig.12.1 Papilloedema (West Highland White Terrier,
7years old)Note the enlarged size of the discand
congestion of the retinal veins,in particular the fine
ones on the discitself.Thepapilloedema wasbilateral
and a pupillary light reflex was present.
Conditions of the optic nerve
neuritis usually presents as sudden loss of vision
(Figs 12.1-12.29)
with dilatedpupilsand absenceof the pupillary light
reflex. Papilloedema is very rare in both the cat
Acquiredconditions
and the horse,but isimportant in cattle as it is the
well as pseudopapilloedema due to excessive deficiency,with ultimateopticatrophyand blindness
medullation);in optic neuritis;in some disc developing if untreated. Blindness in one or two
colobomas (see Chapter 1l, section on CEA);and in animals in a group is usually the presenting sign of
tumours (see Fig 12.10).Papilloedema and optichypovitaminosis A.
neuritis appear similar ophthalmoscopically.
Decrease in size of the optic disc occurs in casesof
However,the former isnot accompanied by loss ofopticatrophy inallthe speciesinoptic disccupping
vision unless and until optic atrophy develops,due to glaucoma,butmainly in the dog;and inoptic
although theremaybeother signs of adisturbance of
nervehypoplasia
the central nervoussystem.On the other hand,optic
203
204
The Optic Nerve
Congenital conditions
Congenital conditions affecting the opticdisc include
opticnerve hypoplasia (dog)and coloboma (dog,cat
and cattle);hereditary abnormalities include optic
nerve hypoplasia （dog)and coloboma of the optic
nerve (dog, cat and cattle).
For a summary of causes of blindness, see Table
12.1.
Fig.12.3 Papilloedema(Miniature Poodle,8years old)
Note the swollen discprotruding forward into the
vitreous.
Fig.12.2Papilloedema (Griffon,4yearsold) Again note
size of disc,fuzzy outline to discand dipping of the blood
vesselsastheypassover theedge of theraised disc.
Fig.12.4 Opticneuritis (Maltese Terrier,7years old)
Presenting signs were sudden loss ofvision and absence
of the pupillary light reflex.Note the similar
ophthalmoscopic appearance to papilloedema.
Conditionsof the opticnerve
205
Fig.12.5 Optic neuritis (Labrador Retriever,18 months
Fig.12.7 Optic atrophy （Lhasa Apso,18 months old)
old)The other eye was affected but not as severely.This
Optic atrophy following prolapse of the globe several
eye showed optic atrophy months later.
been blind since the accident.
Fig.12.6Optic atrophy （Border Collie,5years old)
Fig.12.8 Optic disccupping Welsh Springer Spaniel,
Post-inflammatory optic nerve atrophy and retinal
2years old)Severe cupping of thedisc due to primary
degeneration of unknown aetiology.The eye was blind.
glaucoma.
206
The OpticNerve
Fig.12.9 Optic disc cupping (English Springer Spaniel,
Fig.12.11 Opticnerve hypoplasia [Toy Poodle,2years
5years old) Cupped disc,together with retinal
old) Hereditary in this breed.There was absence of the
pupillary light reflex and the dog was blind.Note the
degeneration,due to primary glaucoma.
large sizeof the retinal veins on the discand compare
this figure with micropapilla (Fig 11.30).
Fig.12.10 Optic nerve tumour[Miniature Poodle,
Fig.12.12 Opticnervehypoplasia[Shetland
7years old) Retrobulbar meningioma.Note the vascular
Sheepdog.7weeks old) Unilateral in this case,the
congestion on the surfaceof the discand thevitreal
othereyebeingnormal andwithagoodpupillary light
degeneration,particularly evident to theright-hand side
reflex.The affected eye had no direct pupillary reflex.
ofthedisc.
Conditionsof the opticnerve
207
Fig.12.13 Coloboma (Basenji,10 years old) Typical
Fig.12.15 0pticatrophy（Thoroughbred,6yearsold)
coloboma of theoptic diseat 6oclock.Note dipping of
Unilateral optic atrophy,the other eye being normal,and
vessels,particularly the one at 6o'clock.Inherited in this
a consensual light reflexpresent.Opticatrophy,usually
breed in association with persistent pupillary membrane.
due to trauma,is not uncommon in this species.
Fig.12.14 Coloboma （Beagle,1yearold)Typical disc
Fig.12.16 0ptic atrophy（Thoroughbred,1yearold)
coloboma at 6o'clock.Unilateral in thiscase and with
Bilateraloptic atrophy withsecondary retinal degeneration.
no evidence of heredity in this breed.
Note the grey disc with absence of retinal vessels.
208
The OpticNerve
Fig.12.17 0ptic atrophy (Welsh Cob,5yearsold)
Fig.12.19 Proliferative opticneuropathy（Thoroughbred,
Note thevery pale disc(the shape of the disc isnot
4years old)Extrusion ofglial material into thevitreous
significant).
following a massivehaemorrhagenot involving the eye.
Fig.12.18 Normal disc(Welsh Cob,5yearsold) The
Fig.12.20 Papilloedema (Ayrshire calf) Papilloedema
other eye of the same horse shown in Fig 12.17,to
in vitamin A deficiency.Note the smallflame-shaped
compare the disc colour and shape.
haemorrhageat5o'clock.
Conditionsof the optic nerve
209
Fig.12.21 Papilloedema (Shorthorn calf)Advanced
Fig.12.23 0pticatrophy (Shorthorn heifer,18 months
papilloedema due to vitamin A deficiency.Note the
old)Optic nervedegeneration followingpapilloedema
due tovitaminA deficiency.
enlarged discwith fuzzy outline,congestedvesselson
the disc andvessels dipping over the edge of the disc.
Fig.12.22 Papilloedema （Friesian bullock) Note the
Fig.12.24 0pticatrophy and retinal degeneration
large haemorrhage at the edge of the disc.Another
(Guernsey calf) Linear pale areas in the non-tapetal
vitamin A deficiency case.
fundus in an advanced case ofvitamin A deficiency with
early optic disc atrophy.Note the similar appearance to
the secondary retinal degeneration with optic atrophy in
thehorse(Fig 12.16).
The OpticNerve
210
Fig.12.25 Coloboma(Charolais,2years old) Mild
Fig.12.26 Coloboma (Charolais,male) Mild coloboma
colobomatous change with pigmentary disturbance in
at thelower edge of the disc and again note the
the non-tapetal fundusbelow the disc.
pigmentary change below the disc similar to Fig 12.25.
Fig.12.27 Coloboma(Charolais,male)Triangular
coloboma immediatelybelow the disc.
Conditionsof theopticnerve
211
Fig.12.28 Coloboma[Charolais,female,4months
Fig.12.29 Coloboma (Charolais bull) Severe coloboma
old) Coloboma of the whole discand peripapillary
of the disc and the surrounding area.This was the only
region.Note the abnormal and persistent hyaloid artery.
animal in thisseries with evidence of defective vision.
Table 12.1-The blind eye
Vision lossasa presenting signisusually due toa bilateral
at presentation but flat ERG
condition,as uniocularblindness israrelynoted by owners unless
Intracranial lesion-neoplasia:ERGmay be normal
there is an accompanying sign,e.g.pain or altered appearance of
Toxicity.e.g.bright blindness in sheep
theeye.
Taurine deficiency (cat)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)-slowly
Causes
progressive:breed incidence
Trauma,e.g.prolapse
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED)-progressive but
Uveitis-red,painful ye
total blindness uncommon:breed incidence
Glaucoma-dilated pupil andpain
Collie eye anomaly(CEA）-blindnessrare:breed incidence
Cataract (diabetic cataract can be sudden in onset and is
Retinal dysplasia:breed incidence
bilateral)
-Total retinal dysplasia (TRD)-total blindness
Haemorrhage-trauma,coagulopathy,neoplasia,Collie eye
Multifocal retinal dysplasia (MRD)-defective vision rare
anomaly (CEA)
Papilloedema-eventual vision loss
Retinal detachment
Optic neuritis-blindness
Chorioretinitis-inflammatory lesion,sudden or progressive
Optic atrophy-blindness
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration(SARD)-fundus normal
ex
A
and cataracts 113
corneal68
eyelids21
eyelids22
Abscess,corneal 67
fundic176-8,193,198
Development
Acute purulent conjunctivitis36
opticdisc206-7.209-10
of canine fundus 147-9
Adenocarcinoma,ciliary body 81
retinal201
of feline fundus 152
Adenoma,ciliary body81
Amelanotic melanoma 84
uveal tract78,84-5
Diabetic cataract 114
with chorioretinal dysplasia 174-5
Diabeticretinopathy198
Anterior polar cataract 116
Cone dysplasia163
Dislocationoflens 113,120-7
Aphakic crescent 124
Cone/rod dystrophy167-8
Distichiasis14-16
Aqueous 94,96
Conjunctiva
Asteroid hyalosis 131-2
Dry eye29-30
calcinosis39
Atopicconjunctivitis36-7
cysts25,41-2
E
dermoids41
B
haemorrhages37-8
Ectopiccilia 14-16
Enophthalmos2
Blepharitis 16-17
Conjunctivitis35-7
Blindeye211
Epiphora 29-30
acute purulent 36
Bloodvessels,retinal 142,146-7,151
atopic36-7
Episcleritis 42,45
Excessive vascular tortuosity 179
Buphthalmos6
chronic36
follicular24,36
Exophthalmos2-4
infectious bovinekeratoconjunctivitis(IBK)
Extensiveretinal detachment 183
C
Eyelids
52-3
Cartilage deformity26-7
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS）29-30,53,
blepharitis16-17
Cataracts 70,78
57-60
distichiasis14-16
andmicrophthalmos108-9
Cornea
ectopic cilia 14-16
bilateral104-5
congenital anomalies68
ectropion 13-14
central 102
dermoids68
entropion 10-13
cortical 103
hordeolum-external 18
granulation tissue50-1
dislocated 127
introduction9
introduction 47
early101
meibomian cyst 18
keratitis48-52
late-onset 101
meibomianitis 18
keratoconjunctivitissicca（KCS) 53,57-60
nuclear106-7.110
lipid keratopathies 63-5
neoplasia 18-21
partial104
lipidosis 63-5
trichiasis 16-17
posterior polar98-100,102-3
neoplasia68
posterior synechiae and 76
oedema60-2
F
progressive 104-5
opacity123-4
secondary to glaucoma 112
Fluorescein patency test 29
sequestrum 65-6
secondary to retinal disease 111-12
Focal retinal degeneration 195
trauma and foreignbodies66-7
symmetrical 105
Follicular conjunctivitis24,36
ulcers52-7
total99-105
Foreign bodies
Corpora nigra 80
two fociof103
conjunctival fornices 41
Cysts
Central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA)
corneal66-7
conjunctival 25,41-2
162
nictitating membrane 23-4
uveal tract78-80
Chemosis25,37
vitreal 131-3
vitreal133
Chorioretinal dysplasia (CRD) 168,172-4
Freckles,iris82
Chorioretinitis188
Fundus
D
Chorioretinopathy199
diseasesof the retina 160-202(see also
Chronic conjunctivitis36
Deformity of cartilage26-7
specific disease)
Collie eye anomaly(CEA)162,168-72,180
Dermoids
introduction 135
Colobomas
conjunctival41
normal bovine and ovine 157-9
213
214
Index
Fundus,cont'd
eosinophilic51-2
opticnerve206
normal canine 135-49
exposure49
uveal tract 78,80-5
normal equine153-7
fungal52
New Forest disease52-3
normal feline 150-3
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis(IBK)
Nictitans gland 24
other species 160
52-3
Nictitating membrane
interstitial48
inflammation23-6
pigmentary 49
introduction 23
G
punctate49
prominence of 23
Generalized progresiveretinalatrophy
Keratitis precipitata (KP) 72
trauma and foreign bodies23-4
(GPRA）111-12,161-2,168,200
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca(KCS)29-30,53,
Non-tapetal fundus138-40,151
Glaucoma
57-60
Normal eye2
cataract secondary to 112
Nutritional cataract 114-15
clinical signs90-2
Nystagmus8
gonioscopy94-6
L
introduction 89
Lacrimal system
0
primary hereditary-breeds affected 93
introduction 29-30
secondary 93,125
punctal abnormalities 30-3
Occluded nasolacrimal puncta33
Globe and orbit
Lamellar cataract 116
Occluded punctum32
buphthalmos6
Lens
Ocular discharge31
enophthalmos2
Oedema,corneal 60-2
cataracts secondary to another condition
exophthalmos 2-4
110-13
Opacity
hydrophthalmos 6-7
congenital cataracts 106-10
corneal123-4
introduction1
false cataracts 113
temporary 119-20
microphthalmos4-6
introduction97
Optic atrophy205,207,209
nystagmus8
lens luxation113,120-7
Opticdisc
phthisis bulbi7
metabolic,toxicand nutritional cataracts
bovine 159
prolapse4
113
canine 142-6
strabismus7-8
primary hereditary non-congenital
cupping205
Gonioscopy 94-5
cataracts 98-106
equine155-7
Granuloma,nictitating membrane 25
Limbal melanoma44
Opticnerve
Lipid keratopathies 63-5
acquired conditions203
H
Liquefaction 131
congenital conditions 204-11
Lymphosarcoma44.82,83
hypoplasia 206
Haemangioma 44
introduction 203
Haemorrhages
tumour206
conjunctival 37-8
M
Optic neuritis204
retinal 186,191-2,198,201
Meibomian cyst 18
Orbit see Globe and orbit
vitreal 131-3
Meibomianitis18
Orbital adenocarcinoma 2
Harada's disease76
Melanoma
Hordeolum,external 18
amelanotic84
Hydrophthalmos6-7
P
ciliary body 80,81
Hypertensive retinopathy 197
Pannus48-51
iris80-3
Hyphaema73,94,96,180
limbal44
Papilloedema203-4,208-9
Hypopyon 94,96
Persistent hyaloid artery（PHA）113,129
Microcornea68
Microphthalmos4-6.108-9
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
Micropunctum 31
(PHPV)102,129-31
Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
Imperforate punctum 30,31,32
Multicentric lymphosarcoma 82,83
lentis（PHTVL)129-31
Multifocal retinal dysplasia （MRD)112,172,
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis(IBK)
Persistent pupillary membranes(PPM)78,
52-3
180,182-6
85-7
Inflammation of nictitating membrane 23-6
Phthisis bulbi7
Infundibular detachment 181
N
Pigment epithelial dystrophy 112,169-71
Iridocyclitis70-8
Nasolacrimal duct
Pigment on anterior lens capsule 119
Iris
foreign body32
Plasma cell infiltration 25-6
freckles82
infection33
Post-inflammatory degeneration 193
hypoplasia80
Neoplasia
Post-inflammatory retinopathy 186-90
iritis70-8
conjunctival42-4
Posterior lenticonus 107,112
corneal68
Posterior lentiglobus 107
K
eyelid18-21
Posterior synechiae74-6
Keratitis
globe8
Progressive retinal atrophy 111-12,165-6,
chronic superficial (pannus）48-51
nictitating membrane 27-8
194-5
Index
215
Prolapse
Synchysis scintillans131-2
Akita76
globe4
Syneresis 131
American Cocker Spaniel 62,103,104,117
nictitans gland 26
subconjunctival fat39
T
B
Proliferativeopticneuropathy208
Tapetum
Basenji 206
Pseudopapilloedema203
canine135-9
Basset Hound 32,92
Punctal abnormalities30-3
equine153-5
Beagle13,18-19,85,91,115,119-20,140
Pupil,vitreous in the 121
feline150
144-5,185,193,207
tapetal fundus 135-8
Bichon Frise 58
R
tapetal junction 138-9
BorderCollie5,74.112-13,116,122,138.
Red eye89
tapetumnigrum 139-40
147,171-3,175,187,205
Taurine deficiencyretinopathy193,
Resorption,cataract117-18
Border Terrier67
Retina
196-7
Boston Terrier 101,140
bloodvessels142,146-7.151
Tear streak30
Boxer7,19,51,54,137
degenerationof190,193,195,200,202,
Temporary opacity119-20
Briard 144,171
209
Tigroid non-tapetal fundus 151
Bull Mastiff 86
detachment of178-9,183,192-3,198.
Total retinal dysplasia （TRD)172,180-1,184,
Bulldog26
201
186
diseases of the(see also specific disease)
Toxic cataract115
C
canine 160-93
Toxoplasmosis72
CairnTerrier39,86,94
equine 193,199-201
Trauma
Cardigan Corgi 120,163
feline193-8
corneal66-7
CavalierKing CharlesSpaniel 6,13,18,40.
ovine193,202
nictitating membrane 23-4
59,63-4,67,70,74,105,107,126
haemorrhage86,92,98,
traumatic cataract 118
129,184-5
multifocal retinal dysplasia (MRD) 172
uveal tract 77-8
Chihuahua 62,132,144
180,182-6
Trichiasis 16-17
Chow10.11,51
retinal atrophy 111-12
Tumour see Neoplasia
Clumber Spaniel13
retinal folds185
CockerSpaniel11,13,17,31,38,108,119,
retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
U
131,136,164-5,191
(RPED)162,171-2
Ulcers,corneal52-7
Crossbred41,50,72-3,78,94,109,114
total retinal dysplasia （TRD)172,180-1,
Uveal tract
132,143,188-9,191-3
184,186
clinical signs of anterior uveitis70
Crossbred terrier32,122
Retrobulbar meningioma 206
congenital anomalies 78-87
Rod/cone degeneration 164-5,167
cysts78-80
D
Rod/cone dysplasia 163,193
introduction 69
Rubeosis iridis73
Dobermann 130,189
neoplasia78,80-5
Dogue de Bordeaux 41
sequelae70,76,78
S
trauma 77-8
Uveitis70-8,104
E
Schirmer tear test29
Scleritis 42,45
Elkhound 163
Senile nuclear sclerosis 119
V
English Setter25
Senileretinopathy200
EnglishSpringerSpaniel3.7,61,67,77,80,
Vascularanomaly180
Sequelae 70,76,78
82,91,108,112,116-17,132,146-7,
Vitreous
Squamous cell carcinoma
166,182-4,189,205
acquired131-3
conjunctival 43
congenital 129-31
globe8
F
in the pupil 121
nictitating membrane 27-8
introduction 129
Flat-CoatedRetriever 15,16,133
Strabismus7-8
Voght-Kayanaga-Harada (VLH)76
Foxhound 114
Stromal cyst80
French Bulldog4
Stye18
W
Subalbinism 151-2,155
G
Subalbinotic fundus 141-2
Warfarin poisoning38
Subcapsular cataract 116
Wet eye 29-30
German Shepherd Dog 3,5,25-7,49-50,64,
Subconjunctival fat prolapse 39
67-8,104,131,144,146,187
Subconjunctival haemorrhage 38
German Shorthaired Pointer 10
Indexof
Breeds
Subconjunctival masses38
Golden Retriever12,18,30,32,42,44-5,64
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration (SARD)
A
98-9,132-3,138-9,145,167,185
186,191
Gordon Setter 44
Afghan Hound 81,102,190
Symblepharon 38-41.42
Airedale Terrier45,60,72
GreatDane6,10,28,84,118
216
Index
Greyhound2,81,136,139,143,148,187-8,
R
D
190
Rottweiler 10,85
Donkey157
Griffon204
Rough Collie 2,33,45,63,142,147,171
173-5,178-80,185
H
Horse5,7,20-1,28,31,37,43,53,55,57.
Irish Setter 19,94,163
S
63,68,71,75,76,79-80,83-5,87,
Samoyed58
93,110,116-17,153-7,199-201,
SealyhamTerrier6,122,125-6,181
207-8
Shar Pei11
Human 161
JackRussellTerrier57,62,74,118,121
Shetland Sheepdog5,8,15-16,49,124
123-4,126
129,137-8,141-2,172-80,206
M
Siberian Husky64
Monkey161
L
Smooth-hairedFoxTerrier124,190
LabradorRetriever3,18-19,22,28,36,44,
St Bernard14
Staffordshire Bull Terrier21,81,102,130
P
78-9,81,85,99-100,112,114,119
131,137,139-40,143.145.167.
Standard Poodle105,191
Pig161
169-71,181-2,186-7.189-90,192,
Standard Schnauzer 92
204
R
Lakeland Terrier117
T
Rabbit 161
Leonberger 102
Tibetan terier111,122-3,165-6
Rat162
Lhasa Apso 205
Toy Poodle206
Longhaired Dachshund 61
S
Lurcher 116
W
Sheep 12,159-60,202
Weimaraner 27,71
M
WelshSpringerSpaniel 90-1,93-5,105,
T
Maltese Terrier 204
205
Tiger115
Miniature Longhaired Dachshund 14,119-20,
WelshTerrier 125
143,167-8
West Highland WhiteTerrier57-9,109,203
Miniature Poodle 4,70-1,74,84,92,111,
Indexof Conditions
Whippet191
136,164,192,204,206
WirehairedFoxTerrier 123
C
Miniature Schnauzer106,166
Munsterlander39
CongenitalAbnormalities5.6,8,12,21-2
Y
30,40,47,59,68,78,84-7,89,97,
YorkshireTerrier 41,59,145
106-10,113,114,129-31,160,162,
N
168,172-86,198,201,204,206-7
Norwegian Buhund 102,103
B
209-10
Bird 162
0
H
Old English Sheepdog32,86,109,113,186
Hereditary Conditions12,14-17.22,30,41,
Species Index
188
47,62,93,97,98-106,135,160
161-2,163-86,193-5,200,204
C
P
206-7,209-10
Cat6,12,20-2,24-5,28,33,36-7,39-42
Pekingese 15-17,49
44,51-2,54,65-6,72-3,75,78-9,
Pembroke Corgi 12,19,54,114,139
82-3,86-7,95.118,127,133,
N
Pointer 140
150-2.194-8
NeoplasiaCases2,3,4,7.8,18-21,27-8
Pug55,65
Cattle8,30,53,62,110,158-9,208-10
42-4,47,68,78,80-4,206
DiagnosticAtlas
ofVeterinary
Ophthalmology
This second edition of the outstanding reference,
Features:
VeterinaryOphthalmology,hasbeenrenamed
DiagnosticAtlasof Veterinary Ophthalmology.
·Completelyrewrittenand expanded
Over7o0 colourphotographs from the author's
reflecting the completelyrewritten andexpanded
unique collection
Addition of tablesof differential diagnoses
Nowwith over7o0exclusivephotographs,the
defining the mostsignificant facts
bookisnot just a simple collectionof imagesbut
an aid to diagnosisanddifferential diagnosis
Anumber ofnewconditionsillustrated
Remains onlyveterinary ophthaimic atlas
covering all domestic species and entirely aimed
with all theyneed toknow.The textisalso used
at diagnosis
todraw thereaderto features associated with
diagnosis.
DiagnosticAtlasofVeterinaryOphthalmology
includesextensiveserieson thewidevariation
of thenormal fundusparticularly in the dogbut
also the cat,horse and cowaswell as examples
ofother animals. Many of thepathological
conditions featured in the new edition illustrate the
variations and differing degrees inseverityof the
abnormalitiesconsideredvital inleading thereader
to an.accurate diagnosis.
MOSBY
ELSEVIER
www.elsevierhealth.com