Ophthalmology
of Exotic Pets
DAVID L.WILLIAMS
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Ophthalmology of
Exotic Pets
Ophthalmology of
Exotic Pets
David L. Williams
MA VetMB PhD CertVOphthal CertWEL FHEA FSB FRCVS
AssociateLecturer inVeterinary Ophthalmology
Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine
University of Cambridge, UK
MWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sonis, Ltd., Publication
This edition first published 2012 @ 2012 by David Williams
Wiley-Blackwell is an irmprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific,
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered ofice: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex.
PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial offces: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/
wiley-blackwel]
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the
UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the
publisher.
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
professional services. lf professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a
competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Pubtication Data
Williams, David L., MA.
Ophthalmology of exotic pets / David L. Williams.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4443-3041-0 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1.Title.
[DNLM: 1. Eye Diseases-veterinary-Handbooks. 2. Pets-Handbooks. SF 891]
LC classification not assigned
636.08977-dc23
2011034163
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books.
Set in 10/12.5 pt Times by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
12012
Line illustrations by Samantha Elmhurst
Foreword
The light of the body is the eye: therefore when thine eye is single, thy whole body also
is full of light: but when thine eye is evill, thy body also is full of darkenesse.
Gospelof St Luke 11: 34.King James Version (1611)
The importance of the eye, in terms of health, is emphasised in the quotation above. St
Luke is believed to have been a physician. The eye in its different forms has long attracted
interest and attention.
In geological time light-sensitive structures appeared long before the vertebrate eye.
Photoreceptors in single-celled organisms permitted the latter to be aware of light and,
if necessary, to respond to it by moving or changing behaviour (photoperiodism) but the
cells were not sufficiently complex to facilitate detailed navigation nor, indeed, to inter-
pret light in any detail. Simple photoreception has, however, enabled many extinct and
extant single-celled organisms to take maximum advantage of sunlight for photosynthesis
and move towards it. Insofar as complex eyes are concermed, fossils representing the
early appearance of such date back 500-550 million years ago, to the period of rapid
evolutionary change that is commonly called the ^Cambrian Explosion'. This resulted in
the appearance of a wide range of ocular structures, which differed in acuity, the range
of wavelengths that they could detect and whether they could differentiate colours.
The origin and evolution of the eye has attracted much scientific investigation and,
interestingly, both academic and public debate. The detail and apparent sophistication of
the mammalian eye even prompted Charles Darwin at one stage to query whether such
a structure could really have evolved as a result of tiny changes over a period of time
This same question and the argument it provokes continue to fascinate many of different
persuasions who, rather than studying and analysing the diverse information and opinion
that is available, prefer to use the issue to promulgate their views about the origin and
significance of life. Whatever the rights and wrongs of the different arguments, none of
the discussants expresses any doubt about the exquisite beauty of the eye and its impor-
tance in biology and survival!
 In this book, David Williams, a veterinary surgeon with a deep interest in comparative
medicine and many years’ experience as an ophthalmologist, provides information and
guidance about the ocular disorders of ^exotic pets'. He interprets the latter term as
meaning those species that are commonly kept as companion animals but which fall
outside the traditional teaching remit of the veterinary curriculum (in his words, ‘non-
dog-and-cat species'). His approach in the text is refreshingly personal, the prose often
taking the form of familiar conversational English or expressed as a rhetorical question.
This helps make this a very readable book as well as a volume that is steeped in extensive
 personal experience, sound clinico-pathological description and strongly evidence-based
advice.
 I have known Dr David Williams for many years and have always been impressed by
his energy, industry and enthusiasm. These attributes have spanned the period since he
worked with me as a student - and brought a new dynamism to my laboratory - to the
present day, when he has evolved into a respected academic and a much appreciated
teacher and mentor. His deep interest in the history of his subject, as illustrated in the
introductory chapter of this book as well as his choice of images, prompts me to liken
him to one of my own heroes. Jan Swammerdam (1637-1680) was a member of the
Dutch school of anatomy, and, amongst many other scientific and religious pursuits,
despite a traumatic period in his life, dissected and described the morphology of a whole
range of vertebrate and (especially) invertebrate animals. In particular, Swammerdam
performed the first comprehensive scientific studies on the anatomy of the honey bee,
Apis mellifera, which included research on the compound and simple eyes of the species.
He showed that painting over the eyes of honey bees caused them loss of sight and, using
very basic microscopical equipment, he sketched the minute ocular structures that he
saw, such as pigment granules and the cormeal facets, those elongated crystalline cones
that are typical of the species. David williams is very much in the same mould; he shares
Swammerdam's fascination with the mysteries of the natural world and he is endowed
with comparable dedication to his subject and attention to detail.
'Nanos gigantium humeris insidentes'; those of us with a passion for the study of com-
parative medicine and its application to diverse species are mere dwarfs compared with
the pioneers who, decades ago, investigated and marvelled at what were described by
Darwin as ^endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful'. David Williams is con-
scious of these antecedents and in his book he pays generous tribute to those, both from
the present and the past, who have helped pave the way for his many achievements.
The provision of proper veterinary attention to exotic pets is essential if these animals,
which play an important part in society by providing companionship and education, are
to thrive. Specialist texts are greatly needed and this volume by David Williams will
admirably fill the gap as far as the ophthalmology of exotic pets is concermed. It will, I
believe, not only provide advice of the highest quality but also prove fun to read and to
use. I wish it well.
John E Cooper, DTVM FRCPath FSB CBiol FRCVS
RCVS Specialist in Veterinary Pathology
Diplomate, European College of Veterinary Pathologists
European Veterinary Specialist, Zoological Medicine
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Nairobi, Kenya
Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, UK
Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology (DICE),
The University of Kent, UK.
Contents
Foreword
!!IA
Acknowledgements
X
Dedication
xi
Chapter 1
Introduction
1
Reference
2
Chapter 2
A brief history of comparative ophthalmology
3
References
8
Chapter 3
Common features of exotie animal ophthalmology
9
Ocular examination
9
Ancillary tests
11
 Ocular pharmacology
13
References
13
Chapter 4
The rabbit eye
15
Introduction
15
Anatomy and physiology of the rabbit eye
15
What do rabbits see?
18
Adnexal disease
21
Diseases of the orbit
36
 Diseases of the comea
39
Diseases of the lens
44
Diseases of the iris
46
Glaucoma
49
Retinal disease
52
References
52
Chapter 5
The guinea pig eye
56
Anatomy and physiology of the guinea pig eye
56
What do guinea pigs see?
56
Diseases of the guinea pig eye
57
References
72
vi Contents
Chapter 6
The ferret eye
73
Anatomy and physiology of the ferret eye
73
What do ferrets see?
73
Diseases of the ferret eye
75
References
84
Chapter 7
The rat and mouse eye
86
Anatomy of the eye
86
A note on ophthalmoscopy
87
What do rats and mice see?
88
Ophthalmic disease in rats and mice
89
References
106
Chapter 8
The eye of other mammalian exotic pet species
109
Introduction
109
Hamsters
109
Gerbils
110
Chinchillas
111
Degus
111
Hedgehogs
112
Primates
114
References
116
Chapter 9
The avian eye
119
Introduction
119
Anatomy and physiology of the avian eye
119
What do birds see?
127
Evaluating the avian eye
130
Orbital disease
131
Lid and adnexal disease
135
Comeal disease
143
Uveal disease
146
Lens disease
148
Retinal disease
151
Homer's syndrome
152
Enucleation
153
References
155
Chapter 10 The reptile eye
159
Introduction
159
Anatomy and physiology of the reptilian eye
159
Biology of the reptilian spectacle
162
What do reptiles see?
164
 Diseases of the reptile eye
167
References
193
Contents vi
Chapter 11
The amphibian eye
197
Anatomy and physiology of the amphibian eye
197
What do amphibians see?
199
 Diseases of the amphibian eye
200
Enucleation
208
Conclusion
208
References
208
Chapter 12
The fish eye
211
Introduction
211
Anatomy and physiology of the fish eye
212
What do fish see?
214
Diseases of the aquarium fish eye
216
References
227
Conclusions
228
Index
231
Acknowledgements
To all who provided my education in exotic ophthalmology, cases to see and images to
borrow: most particularly John Cooper, Elliott Jacobson, Steve Barten, Kathy Barrie,
Willy Wildgoose, Peter Lee, Sheila Crispin and Graham Martin.
Dedication
To Jennie, who puts up with me spending far too much time in the chaos of my study.
and to Sam, Jack and Ross, who live with my gruesome eye images on screen and exotic
eyeballs in pots, here there and every where!
Chapter 1
Introduction
The quite remarkable feature of eyes across vertebrate species from the axolotl to the
zebra is their similarity. The basic design of the eye, the comea, the iris, the lens, the
retina all enclosed in a tough collagenous sclera, is duplicated throughout vertebrate
species, as are the similar functions across the animal kingdom with light refracted to
form an image on the retina where the photoreceptors transform the incident photon's
energy into an electrical signal.
And yet these eyes have many differences in both their anatomy and their pathology:
their appearance when nonmal and abnormal. Let's face it, if this were not the case there
would honestly be no need for this book! From the differences in conjunctival responses
to infectious organisms to the variation in vascular anatomy of the orbit in the rabbit as
compared to that of the dog and cat we are more used to enucleating, it is vital to under-
stand the variation in anatomy and physiology, in pharmacology and pathology between
the eyes of fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals.
Indeed this could be replicated across body systems but not perhaps quite so dramati-
cally as in the eye. There is a dichotomy in exotic animal veterinary medicine. On the
one hand quite a substantial proportion of what we understand about the diseases of cats
and dogs, their aetiopathology and their management can be extrapolated to help us deal
with disease in less familiar species, be they raptors or rabbits. But on the other hand
there are differences between hounds, hamsters and hormed toads that make extrapolation
without due care and attention potentially ineffective or even dangerous.
Hopefully this volume will aid in identifying where extrapolation from canine and
feline ophthalmology can be made and where new information is necessary. We start
with areas where extrapolation is possible, the first of these being the straightforward
techniques of ocular examination, which may, in many cases, be transferred from con-
ventional companion animal species. Even here though, differences exist.
Before we continue, however, it may be that this is an appropriate point to make two
confessions. First some might complain that there are several areas of duplication in the
text. The book is designed with the assumption that many will not read it through from
cover to cover, but rather use it as a reference dipping in to specific ocular diseases in
particular species. Thus several areas are necessarily somewhat duplicated to ensure that
Ophthatmotogy of Exotic Pets, First Edition. David L. Williams.
@ 2012 David Williams. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
2Ophthatmology ofExoticPets
the infonmation needed is presented in a readily accessible fonm. Second it might be
necessary to give an apology to some for the wording of the title of this book
“Ophthalmology of Exotic Pets'. For some, it must be noted, rabbits and guinea pigs are
 hardly exotic species; recent evidence suggests that rabbits are the third most common
species seen in small animal veterinary practice, certainly here in the United Kingdom
and quite possibly elsewhere also. Nevertheless in many ways, from their teeth to their
retinas, rabbits and guinea pigs are very different from cats and dogs and so they deserve
inclusion in a volume detailing ophthalmic disease in what we might term non-dog-and-
cat species. But that would hardly make an appropriate title for a book like this would
it?! My first reason for producing a volume on this subject came when seeing how useful
Sue Paterson's volume ‘Skin Diseases of Exotic Pets' was [1]. Sue cleverly gathered a
group of other dermatologists with special interests in different exotic species to write
her book with her, but somehow I failed to galvanise others in the field of veterinary
experience in the fields of reptile, avian and laboratory animal ophthalmology will
forgive any resulting failings in this book. Perhaps a second edition can include their
contributions to the subject.
Reference
1. Paterson S. Skin Diseases of Exotic Pets. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2006.
Chapter 2
A brief history of comparative
ophthalmology
While we may think that a text on exotic animal ophthalmology is a new venture, and
certainly within veterinary ophthalmology this is the first volume dedicated to the subject,
ophthalmologists and visual scientists have for many years considered the delights of
comparative ophthalmology worth pursuing. The great Sir Stewart Duke Elder started
his momentous 16 volume System of Ophthalmology with a glorious first volume entitled
"The Eye in Evolution', covering ocular anatomy and physiology together with visual
ecology and behaviour from invertebrates through to higher mammals. But 50 years
earlier the Canadian ophthalmologist Casey Albert Wood (Figure 2.1) was already pub-
lishing his remarkable overview of avian ophthalmology The Fundus Oculi of Birds as
Viewed with the Ophthalmoscope linking his lifelong interest in ormithology with his
acknowledged expertise in ophthalmology.
Wood, borm in Ontario, Canada in 1856, frst studied medicine in Montreal with further
studies at Berlin, Vienna, Paris and London where he worked at Moorfields. He studied
in Montreal under William (later Sir William) Osler and it was at this early stage that
his passion for ophthalmology began. Before then however, even from childhood, his
thalmology and omithology would guide Wood through his life. Having no children, he,
his wife Emma and their pet parrot John Paul toured the globe after his retirement in
1906, collecting material for his magnum opus on the appearance of the avian retina,
published in 1917 (Figure 2.2). This was not just a work arising from a general interest
in birds. Wood considered that the superior optics and visual capability of many birds
when compared with the human eye may well lead to discoveries which would improve
human vision.
But while The Fundus Oculi of Birds is the book for which Wood is remembered today,
he was a key general ophthalmologist in North America at the end of the nineteenth
century, 0ne might even argue the key ophthalmologist. His 1896 publication implicating
methyl alcohol in the etiology of toxic amblyopia was considered a classic work, and
Wood was editor at various times of the Ophthalmic Record, the Annals of Ophthalmology,
and the American Jourmal of Ophthalmology (of which he was a founder in 1884). He
wrote ofASystemof OphthalmicTherapeutics(1909),ASystemofOphthalmicOperations
Ophthatmotogy of Exotic Pets, First Edition. David L. Williams.
@ 2012 David Williams. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
4OphthatmologyofExoticPets
Fgure 2.1 Casey Albert Wood.
Fgure 2.2 The tawny owl retina from The Fundus Oculi of Birds, 1917.
(1911), and the seventeen-volume American Encyclopedia of Ophthalmology (1914-
1920). But more than that, Wood was fascinated by the history of ophthalmology and.
of course, by comparative ophthalmology. Wood translated numerous historical ophthal-
mic texts from all over the world into English. A masterpiece is his translation of the
earliest printed book on ophthalmology, De Oculis Eorumque Egritudinibus et Curis,
written by the twelfth-century physician, Benvenuto Grassi, and first published in Ferrara
in 1474.
For most of his working life Casey Wood was an ophthalmologist in Chicago, joining
the faculty in 1899 and becoming Head of Ophthalmology in 1913, when the College of
Physicians and Surgeons of Chicago became the University of Illinois College of
A briefhistoryofcomparativeophthatmology5
Medicine and holding that position until 1917. He was described as ^one of the most
colorful and outstanding figures in ophthalmology at the tum of the century, not only in
Chicago but nationally and intermationally as well.' In 1929 Wood organized the ormi-
thological titles at the British Museum and prepared its first catalogue describing that
collection. Travelling widely in pursuit of this interest, he collected specimens in British
Guiana, the Caribbean, the South Pacific, India, Ceylon, Australia and New Zealand.
Wood retired from the College in 1925, spending much of his last decade at the Vatican
Library in the translation of medieval European and Arabic ophthalmic manuscripts.
It has to be said that from a political perspective Wood held some views with which
we might not agree - he was an ardent fascist, supporting Mussolini in the 1930s while
he worked in Europe towards the end of his life, but had progressive views on the impor-
tance of animal experimentation held in balance with animal welfare. These opinions
stemmed from his interest both in human medicine and also in environmental conserva-
tion, developed in his early childhood in the fields around his home in Ontario.
Another important ophthalmologist of the tum of the twentieth century with an abiding
passion for comparative ophthalmology was George Lindsay Johnson (Figure 2.3). Bom
in 1853 and dying in 1943, Johnson was almost exactly Wood's contemporary.
Interestingly, while Wood spent a formative period of his professional life in Germany.
Johnson's early education occurred there although he had been borm in Manchester. He
was in Strasbourg in 1870 when the Prussians seized the city in a devastating episode in
the Franco-Prussian war. Escaping from the beleaguered city, he spent a year on a rela-
tive's ranch in Australia before returming to his roots and studying at Owen's College in
Manchester. He then undertook his undergraduate degree at Caius College in Cambridge
and St Bartholomew's Hospital in London, becoming a Fellow of the Royal College of
Surgeons in 1884 and taking his MD from Cambridge in 1890. His ophthalmic career
Figure 2.3  George Lindsay Johnson. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier
6Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Fgure 2.4 The fundus of the elephant from Johnson's 1902 monograph
Fgure 2.5 Arthur Head examining the fundus of a lion.
began as a registrar at the Royal Westminster Hospital in London followed by a period
at the Royal Eye Hospital in Southwark, London.
During this period in London, he spent much of his spare time at the Zoological
Society of London performing ophthalmic observations on a wide variety of species; this
on the comparative ophthalmoscopy of the mammalian eye and secondly a sequel on the
eyes of reptiles and amphibians (Figure 2.4).
 In this he was ably assisted by Arthur Head, ophthalmic artist of no mean distinction,
as may be observed looking at his illustrations of the fundus of species from tigers to
rattlesnakes (Figure 2.5). Head was also responsible for the illustrations in Wood's The
Fundus Oculi of Birds, most of which were also undertaken in painstaking hours in the
Zoological Collection at Regent's Park.
Between these two ophthalmologists of a century ago and Duke Elder stand two further
key figures in the subject of comparative ocular biology. These are the French ophthal-
mologist, Andre Jean Francois Rochon-Duvigneaud, and the American, Gordon Walls.
Rochon-Duvigneaud (Figure 2.6) will be remembered for his comment that a raptor was
‘a wing guided by an eye' but had considerably wider comparative interests, documented
in his book Les Yeux et la Vision des Vertebres of 1943 [1]. But his studies ranged far
wider than merely the avian eye. Borm in 1863 he studied medicine in the Faculte de
Bordeaux and later in Paris writing a seminal doctoral thesis on the anatomy of the human
A briefhistoryof comparativeophthatmology7
Figure 2.7 Gordon Walls.
iridocomeal angle in 1892. His studies took him from the human eye to a more compara-
tive approach and, in 1926, rather in the same way Wood had done ten years earlier, he
retired from clinical practice to devote his time to comparative ophthalmology. He was
the first to recognise recessively inherited glaucoma with buphthalmos in the New
Zealand White rabbit as far back as 1921 [2] although in human ophthalmology he is
more commonly associated with the syndrome resulting from traumatic collapse of the
superior orbital fissure with damage to the nerves passing through it, which bears his
name [3] .
Gordon Walls (Figure 2.7) was the only one of our comparative ophthalmic investiga-
tors who was not first a human ophthalmologist. He published a number of papers and
8Ophthatmology of Exotic Pets
monographs in comparative ophthalmology but is primarily remembered for his master-
piece The Vertebrate Eye and its Adaptive Radiation[4]which was published a year
earlier than Rochon-Duvigneaud's text. Walls was originally an engineer, moving into
zoology in Harvard where he undertook work on the ultrastructure of the retina across
the vertebrates. Study of the reptile eye in particular allowed him to formulate many of
his ideas on the evolution of the vertebrate photoreceptor but as his magnum opus shows,
his interest in development of the eye through evolution ranged across its whole anatomy
and physiology, his life's work finishing with study of the intricacies of comparative
colour vision on the one hand and of the evolution of ocular movement and extraocular
muscle action on the other.
In the last half century and more since the deaths of Wood, Johnson, Rochon-
 Duvigneaud and Walls, the subject of visual ecology has become a recognised discipline,
with researchers correlating visual function with behaviour of species in the wild from
the visual capabilities of deep sea fish to the hunting behaviour of birds of prey. Several
books on the subject are worthy of perusal. Here we add a paragraph or two on visual
function in the species discussed before detailing the diseases seen in these animals.
Clearly in such a limited compass detailed evaluation is not possible and thus the reader
is directed to the works of Ron Douglas [5], Michael Land and Dan-Eric Nilson [6], Ivan
Schwab [7] and Chris Murphy [8].
References
1. The avian portion of the work is available online at http://www.theavianeye.com/translated.
2. Rochon-Duvigneaud A. Un cas de buphthalmie chez le lapin: etude anatomique et physi
ologique. Ann Oculist (Panis) 1921;158:401-414
Archives D'ophthalmologie (Paris) 1896;16:746-760.
4. Walls GL. The Vertebrate Eye and its Adaptive Radiation. Bloomfield Hills, MI: The Cranbrook
Institute of Science, 1942.
5. Douglas RH, Djamgoz MBA. The Visual Systerm of Fish. London: Chapman and Clarke, 1990.
6. Land MF, Nilsson D-E. Animal Eyes. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.
7. Schwab IR. From eye spots to eye shine. Br J Ophthalmol 2000;84:1214. (The first in a won-
 o    s  s     
Schwab's masterpiece Evofution's Witness: How Eyes Evofved (Oxford Umiversity Press, 20l1)
(pei-sn, e s
8. Murphy CJ, Kern TJ, Howland HC. Refractive state, corneal curvature, accommodative range
and ocular anatomy of the Asian elephant (Elephas maximus). Vision Research 1992;32:2013-
2021. (One of a number of papers on the refractive status of a wide range of non-domestric
species.)
Chapter 3
Common features of exotic animal
ophthalmology
We will discuss the ocular anatomy and physiology of different species groups at the
beginning of each chapter together with an assessment of how and what the different
species actually see. Here we consider some areas which unite the different types of
animal eye, before moving on to examine fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammal
species individually in detail.
Ocular examination
The similarity between eyes of different species means that the basic techniques of ocular
examination can be extrapolated from those of dogs and cats. The differences generally
occur because of the small size of many eyes of exotic animal species, be they rodents,
caged birds or reptiles
globe. And yet the ease of examination and the quality of retinal image is indeed reduced
with a pupil of 2 or 3mm compared with the dilated dog or cat pupil at nearly 10mm in
diameter.
Whether used on a small rodent or a large dog, the direct ophthalmoscope can be used
at 0 dioptres (D) as the comea and lens refract the incoming light on to the retina what-
ever the size of the globe. Similarly using the direct ophthalmoscope at +10D focuses
light on the lens and iris and at +20 D the cormea can be seen at high magnification (Figure
3.1). It has to be said that most veterinary ophthalmologists who regularly examine
rodents use the indirect technique and a +30D lens to examine the eye [1]. But the
technique one learms while training tends to stick and Dr Keith Barmett who inspired me
and taught me all I know about veterinary ophthalmology always used the direct oph-
thalmoscope, so that is what I feel most familiar with. Professor Peter Bedford, with
whom I worked later in my ophthalmic training, never seemed to pick up a direct, always
using the binocular indirect for examination of the retina using the loupe lens at a distance
(Figure 3.2) and the lens and comea at a shorter distance from the eye (Figure 3.3).
Using a +30D or even a higher dioptre lens can give a signficantly wider view of the
Ophthatmotogy of Exotic Pets, First Edition. David L. Williams.
@ 2012 David Williams. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
10Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Fgure 3.1Using the direct ophthalmoscope to examine a rabbit eye
Fgure 3.2 Using an indirect ophthalmoscope to examine the fundus of an owl eye
as dilated a pupil as possible, which brings us on to another problem with a number of
exotic species, that of mydriasis. A novel and useful technique recent published for rodent
fundus imaging and photography, a notoriously taxing exercise, is the use of a video
endoscope[2].
The small size of the eye means that the slit lamp with its high magnification is very
useful in many of these species (Figure 3.4) [3]. Although, as its name suggests, this
instrument is optimally used with a slit beam of light creating an optic cross-section of
the ocular tissues observed, most of the time veterinary ophthalmologists use it with a
full beam of light as a binocular magnifying system, especially where the small eyes of
most exotic pet species are concemed.
Commonfeaturesofexoticanimalophthatmotogy11
Figure 3.5The Schirmer tear test used on a rabbit.
Ancillary tests
Two key tests which should be undertaken as routine supplementation to straightforward
ocular examination are the measurement of tear production and the detenmination of
intraocular pressure. The small size of most eyes examined herein renders their tear
volume similarly minute. The standard method of measuring lacrimation, the Schirmer
tear test, while it can be of use in sizeable animals such as the rabbit (Figure 3.5) and
larger bird species, is just too big to fit in the palpebral aperture of many smaller species,
and the tear volume available to be taken up by the test strip is just too small. Here the
phenol red thread test is ideal [4-7]. Held in the eye for 15 seconds (Figure 3.6) it gives
a measurable reading of reddened thread by taking up a very small volume of tears. The
only problems are the limited availability of the threads, their price and the paucity of
normal values for many species. For some species groups we do have data, these pro-
duced in each of the following chapters. However, for all too many animals we have no
values for normal animals. In such cases the normal fellow eye can be used in animals
unilaterally affected, or readings can be taken on an unaffected cage-mate. A simpler test
12Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Figure 3.6The phenol red thread test used on a guinea pig
Fgure 3.8  The Tonovet rebound tonometer used on a rabbit eye.
may be to cut the Schirmer tear test strip in half, as has been reported by Rudolph Korbel
in owls; we await studies of normal tear wetting values in other species for this inexpen-
sive and readily available test.
Measuring intraocular pressure (IOP) should be a standard test for any animal with a
red eye, with glaucoma (and a raised IOP) or uveitis (with a correspondingly lower value)
two important diagnoses differentiated by tonometry. Again in these small eyes the
problem is that our standard test, applanation tonometry using the Tonopen (Figure 3.7),
has just too big a footplate for any eye with a cormeal diameter less than 5 mm. The
Tonovet rebound tonometer (Figure 3.8), designed first for use in laboratory rodents [8,9],
is invaluable in many small species [10]. Again we do not have much in the way of
normal data, but our studies so far indicate that there is enough similarity between the
Common features of exotic animal ophthatmology13
Tonovet and Tonopen values in larger eyes, to allow us to diagnose cases where IOP a
measured with the Tonovet rebound tonometer is over 20mmHg (glaucoma) or under
10mmHg (uveitis).
Ocular pharmacology
As will be discussed in more detail in each species group where it is relevant, mydriasis
can be a significant problem in different exotic animals. The mammals have autonomi-
cally innervated iris musculature which means that parasympatholytic agents such as
atropine and tropicamide are generally effective in providing pupil dilation. Having said
that, rabbits and rodents with pigmented irides often show poor or slowly acting phar-
macologically mediated mydriasis. Some contain atropinase [11], an enzyme that breaks
down atropine, while in others the drug is bound to pigment, changing its efficacy [12].
The lack of mydriasis mediated by these muscarinic parasympatholytic agents in
reptiles and birds occurs because here the muscles of the iris are not smooth muscles.
autonomically innervated as in the mammals, but rather striated muscles similar to those
of the limbs. Here mydriasis requires a non-depolarising muscle relaxant, such as vecuro-
nium [13,14] or pancuronium, or indeed a depolarizing agent such as succinyl choline
[15], The latter is used far less commonly as it has to be injected intracamerally, into the
eye; not ideal in a bird or reptile needing mydriasis.
Another important pharmacological factor in many exotic animal species concerms the
fact that with such a small globe size, and indeed a small blood volume, using the same
size of eye drop that one would employ in a dog a thousand times as big as a laboratory
rodent or a bird, must give a high risk of substantial systemic toxicity. Unless we use an
25-30μl size that comes out of a standard dropper bottle, we risk such toxicity. Indeed
reducing the drop volume, and thus the total drug instilled into the eye, actually increases
the bioavailable drug in the eye after topical administration as was shown in a beautiful
series of papers by Patton more than 30 years ago [16].
References
1. Williams DL. Rabbit and rodent ophthalmology. Eur J Comp Anim Pract 2008;17:242-252.
2. Guyomard JL, Rosolen SG, Paques M, Delyfer MN, Simonutti M, Tessier Y, Sahel JA,
Legargasson JF, Picaud S. A low-cost and simple imaging technique of the anterior and pos-
terior segments: eye fundus, ciliary bodies, iridocorneal angle. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2008;49:5168-5174
3. Hess HH, Newsome DA, Knapka JJ, Westney GE. Slitlamp assessment of age of onset
 and incidence of cataracts in pink-eyed, tan-hooded retinal dystrophic rats. Curr Eye Res
1982-1983;2:265-269.
4. Storey ES, Carboni DA, Kearney MT, Tully TN. Use of phenol red thread tests to evaluate
findings. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009:235:1181-1187.
 5. Trost K, Skalicky M, Nell B. Schirmer tear test, phenol red thread tear test, eye blink frequency
and corneal sensitivity in the guinea pig. Vet Ophthalmol 2007;10: 143-146
14Ophthatmologyof Exotic Pets
6. Holt E, Rosenthal K, Shofer FS. The phenol red thread tear test in large Psittaciformes. Vet
Ophthalmol 2006;9:109-113.
7. Biricik HS, Oguz H, Sindak N, Girkan T, Hayat A. Evaluation of the Schirmer and phenol
red thread tests for measuring tear secretion in rabbits. Vet Rec 2005;156:485-487.
8. Kontiola AI, Goldblum D, Mittag T, Danias J. The induction/impact tonometer: a new instru-
ment to measure intraocular pressure in the rat. Exp Eye Res 2001;73:781-785.
of intraocular pressure in mice. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:1138-1141.
10. Jeong MB, Kim YJ, Yi NY, Park SA, Kim WT, Kim SE, Chae JM, Kim JT, Lee H, Seo KM.
Comparison of the rebound tonometer (TonoVet) with the applanation tonometer (TonoPen
XL) in normal Eurasian Eagle owls (Bubo bubo). Vet Ophthalmol 2007;10:376-379.
11. Salazar M, Patil PN. An explanation for the long duration of mydriatic effect of atropine in
eye. Invest Ophthalmol 1976;15:671-673.
12. Salazar M, Shimada K, Patil PN. Iris pigmentation and atropine mydriasis. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther 1976;197:79-88.
13. Mikaelian I, Paillet I, Williams D. Comparative use of various mydriatic drugs in kestrels
(Fatco tinnuncufus). Am J Vet Res 1994;55:270-272.
African gray parrots, and blue-fronted Amazon parrots. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996;208:
227-230.
15. Verschueren CP, Lumeij JT. Mydriasis in pigeons (Cotumbia fivia domestica) with
d-tubocurarine: topical instillation versus intracameral injection. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
1991;14:206-208.
16. Patton TF. Pharmacokinetic evidence for improved ophthalmic drug delivery by reduction of
instilled volume. J Pharm Sci 1977;66:1058-1059.
Chapter 4
The rabbit eye
Introduction
Ocular diseases have commonly been diagnosed in the rabbit for many years [1], particu-
larly in laboratory strains where infectious conditions were common and important [2],
but recently ophthalmic disease has been seen more and more in pet animals also. Thus
while what we might call the basic sciences of the rabbit eye have been known for
decades, it is only in the past few years that rabbit ophthalmology as a discipline with a
proper diagnostic and therapeutic foundation has taken off. And thus there are still many
areas, from dacryocystitis to cataract extraction, where we still have a long way to go
before eye disease in rabbits is managed as adequately as it is in dogs and cats
While there are several reports of ocular disease in the rabbit, we do not currently
have a study of the prevalence of ocular disease in this species. In an attempt to mirror
the study we have conducted in 1000 guinea pigs (see Chapter 5) we have just finished
a study documentating eye disease in 1000 pet rabbits and hope to analyse our findings
and publish in the peer-reviewed literature in the near future. Preliminary findings note
that 26% of rabbits were found to have ocular lesions with 17% having some degree of
lens opacification, 3.5% with dacryocystitis and 2.5% with cormeal lesions from chronic
scarring to frank ulceration. Such figures vary from those seen in laboratory animals [3]
and from those in the referral hospital population [4], but we hope that they are more
representative of the disease prevalence in the normal pet population, at least in the
United Kingdom.
Anatomy and physiology of the rabbit eye
Given the widespread use of the rabbit as an experimental animal model for ocular
disease it might be thought surprising that we only have one detailed text describing its
the rabbit eye is similar to ours and that of domestic animals in its general layout, but
in others, particularly with regard to its retinal organisation, it is quite different
Ophthatmotogy of Exotic Pets, First Edition. David L. Williams.
@ 2012 David Williams. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
16Ophthatmology ofExoticPets
Figure 4.1  The lateral placement of the rabbit eye with substantial exposure even in the
normal animal.
The eyes are placed very prominently and laterally (Figure 4.1) to allow the wide
visual fields experienced by the wild rabbit which can see almost the entirety of its
environment from far anteriorly to right behind its head; below we will discuss further
where this might not be true in pet rabbits. Interestingly this very lateral placement has
implications for the inflammatory mechanisms within the eye quite as much as the neu-
robiology of vision. As noted in a wonderful paper by Laslo Bitto, this prominence
means that the eye can quite readily be damaged [6]. The intraocular inflammatory
cascade following injury is thus quite profound and rapid with production of fibrinous
secondary aqueous after loss of fuid from the eye in a much more substantial manner
than is the case for the human eye, where our brow and totally enclosed bony orbit
protects the globe from injury. Such differences are important to note either when con-
sidering the rabbit as an experimental model for intraocular inflammatory disease or
The lagormorph nasolacrimal system is unique with one nasolacrimal punctum and a
nasolacrimal duct which takes a tortuous route to the nasal ostium with two sharp diver-
sions and narrowings and an anatomy which takes the duct close to the molar and incisor
tooth roots; this is discussed further under dacryocystitis.
The rabbit has a circular pupil, and a heavily pigmented iris in pigmented species
(Figure 4.2), with complex vascular anatomy as recently investigated through corrosion
casts [7]. The vasculature of the merangiotic lagomorph fundus is unlike that of any other
mammal to this author's knowledge, in that the vessels extend from the optic disc with
myelinated nerve fibres horizontally (Figures 4.3 and 4.4), allowing the visual streak.
lying parallel and inferior to the retinal vessels, to be supplied solely through the choroi
dal vessel network [8].
Therabbit eye17
Figure 4.2The rabbit pupil.
Figure 4.3 Optic nerve head in a pigmented rabbit.
Figure 4.4 Optic nerve head in an albino rabbit.
Another important vascular peculiarity in the lagomorph eye is the sizeable retrobul-
bar venous plexus (Figure 4.5) [9]. As we will see this has important implications in
exophthalmos and enucleation, but the reason for this vascular arrangement, also seen
to a lesser degree in smaller rodent species, remains unclear. The other orbital contents
of note are the orbital glands which can make an unwelcome entrance during gland
18Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Superficial
temporal vein
Angular vein
Orbital venous sinus/plexus
Pterygoid anastomosing vein
Facial vein
External jugular vein
 Pterygoid
External
venous plexus
maxillary vein
Fgure 4.5 Line diagram of retrobulbar venous plexus.
displacement (see below) but otherwise take up a significant portion of the retrobulbar
space (Figure 4.6).
What do rabbits see?
As a prey species the rabbit has vision concentrating on the horizon with the ability to
concentrate on this narrow band of visual information for almost 360 degrees of circum-
ference (Figure 4.7). We cannot, of course, have much of an idea of what this sort of
vision ^looks' like to the rabbit in the same way we cannot understand what the psychol-
ogy of a prey species ^feels' like. We will encounter this problem again and again as we
ask what other species' vision ‘looks' like to them. The neurophysiological and elec
troretinographic reports we will allude to tell us something as do the visual field studies
of researchers such as Martin in the avian sphere, but in essence the fact that we can
know little of the sensory lives of other species is a philosophical, quite as much as a
physiological or psychological one.
As we noted above, the classic view is that rabbits can see both in front and behind
them. While this is certainly true of a slim wild animal or pet breed such as a Netherland
The rabbit eye 19
Deep gland of third eyelid -
Superficial gland of
Retro-orbital lobe of accessory
Jacrimal gland
third eyelid
Lacrimal gland 
Orbital lobe of accessory
lacrimal gland
Infraorbital lobe of
accessory lacrimal gland
Figure 4.6Line diagram of orbital glands
dwarf, simple observation of a rather overweight lop shows that this is not always the
case! Preliminary investigations similar to those of avian visual fields reported by Martin,
show the variation in rabbit visual fields between different individuals (Figure 4.7) and
will indeed be able to see 360 degrees with binocular fields anetriorly, posteriorly and
dorsally. But a rotund lop-eared animal in a sedentary position has very much reduced
visual felds.
 Concerming the eye itself, the horizontal arrangement of myelinated nerve fibres allows
a long horizontal visual streak, potentially allowing the rabbit to pay high-grade attention
to the horizon, and overhead presumably to detect approac hing predators. The refraction
of the rabbit eye has been determined as almost emmetropic at 0.5 D by electrophysio-
logical means [10], although there is some debate over measurement by retinoscopy. De
Graauw and Van Hof reported frontal myopia, whereby the rabbit is short-sighted when
using its binocular vision anteriorly but emmetropic (normally sighted) or slightly hyper-
meytropic (long-sighted) when looking laterally [11,12]. Other workers [13] could not
repeat these findings and concluded that De Graauw and Van Hof's off-axis retinopscopy
was inaccurate.
Determination of contrast sensitivity in Pak's report [10] achieved through meas-
urement of patterm-evoked cortical potentials, suggested that the rabbit has a highest
degree, giving a visual acuity of 10 minutes of arc, corresponding to a Snellen acuity of
20/200. Behavioural measurement of grating acuity with rabbits choosing a horizontal
or vertical grating to obtain a food reward, demonstrated an acuity of between 1.6 and
20Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
(a)
(c)
(b)
192°
Binocular reflex
Blind area
Optic nerve head&fibres
placement with panoramic visual fields. (b) Diagrammatic representation of visual fields in 
rabbit (reproduced from Hughes A. A schematic eye for the rabbit. Vision Research
lack of panoramic visual fields.
The rabbit eye  21
2.5 cycles/degree with different rabbits having varying acuities [14]. They all lie within
the range noted by Van Hof in his 1967 paper which estimated acuity at between 1.5 and
2.7 cycles/degree. But there is more to seeing than that measured by assessment of visual
acuity by Snellen charts or sinusoidal gratings. The rabbit's visual system has evolved
to detect motion, and thus local edge detector ganglion cells in the retina probably allow
a significantly better detection of edge and motion than this low reported visual acuity
suggests [15].
As one might expect from an herbivore, detailed trichromatic color vision is not
required. Indeed only 5% of the rabbit's photoreceptors are cones [16]. The two popula-
tions have maximal absorption at wavelengths of 425 mm and 520nm corresponding to
greatest sensitivity to blue and green respectively [17,18]. In the visual streak the cone
density is around 13000/mm^ while in the rest of the retina it is as low as 7500/mm^.
Interestingly below the visual streak is a second streak containing a high proportion of
blue-sensitive cones at a density of around 11 000/mm'. Given that the majority of preda-
tors of the rabbit are birds, the ability to see a shape against blue in the superior visual
field might seem only reasonable, while the ventral visual field is more green-sensitive.
Adnexal disease
Nasolacrimal disease
We start our discussion of ocular disorders with epiphora and dacryocystitis, not neces-
sarily following the anatomical scheme we will with other species, but because of the
frequency with which it is seen in the pet rabbit population, the severity of its presenta-
tion in many cases and the difficultie in its treatment [4,19,20]. Our preliminary results
show a prevalence of 3.5% for dacryocystitis in the normal rabbit population. This is
higher than that reported in the laboratory rabbit population [4] although those were
young animals and the mean age for rabbits with the condition in our study was 5.4 years
of age. Our figure is lower than that in a referral hospital population studied by Burling
and colleagues [4] but hopefully presents a more nonmal range of cases than those
referred for specialist treatment.
As noted above the rabbit nasolacrimal duct has a tortuous passage from the single
ventral nasolacrimal punctum, narrowing as it passes through from the lacrimal to the
frontal bones and then passing perilously close to the molar tooth roots and across the
incisor tooth root before exiting in the nasal mucosa near the extermal nares (Figures 4.8
causing epiphora, while molar tooth root abscesses will extend to involve the nasolac-
rimal duct with long-standing purulent dacryocystitis as a common sequel.
Epiphora
Clinical signs
A sizeable number of pet rabbits have epiphora as an almost normal finding with a
somewhat moist periorbital region and sometimes mild conjunctivitis [23]. In a number
22Ophthatmotogy of ExoticPets
Narrowing of duct
between lacrimal
and maxillary bone
Nasolacrimal duct
Incisor tooth roots
Molar tooth roots
Figure 4.8 Line diagram of nasolacrimal duct.
this progresses to a severe overfow of tears yielding an excoriating facial dermatitis
(Figure 4.10). The tears may be clear and watery or sometimes a whiter fuid. This is
probably coloured by calcium salts rather than being exudative as with dacryocystitis
(see below), where cytology will show a neutrophil population and bacteriological cul-
Aetiopathogenesis
The close apposition of the nasolacrimal duct to the molar and incisor tooth roots
(Figure 4.8) means that while the molar tooth root abscesses are the main cause of
dacryocystitis, epiphora alone usually results from overgrowth of the incisor tooth root
which, as it curls round ventrally, blocks the nasolacrimal duct, as shown by dacryo-
cystorhinography of the area (Figure 4.11). There is no infection here, just a physical
occlusion of the duct.
Clinicalmanagement
Diagnostic steps in epiphora include radiography of the maxilla, important to document
the involvement of dental abnormalities, and possibly also cytology and bacteriology of
Therabbit eye23
Figure 4.9 Normal rabbit dacryocystorhinogram (top) with anatomical diagram showing
association with dental roots (middle) and distal onifice (bottom). (From Burling et al. 1991
[4] with permission.)
tear fuid, although where this is clear in nature, an infammatory cell picture cytologi-
cally and a meaningful bacteriological culture result are unlikely.
Flushing through the duct can be beneficial if a mucus plug is obstructing the duct.
As noted above the nasolacrimal punctum of the rabbit is single and can best be can-
nulated by an upward pressure on the lower lid (Figure 4.12) which forces the punctum
24Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Fgure 4.10 Excoriated facial dermatitis in severe epiphora. (Reproduced with permission
from Sheila Crispin.)
Fgure 4.11  Dacryocytorhinography of occluded nasolacrimal duct.
Fgure 4.12 Opening the nasolacrimal punctum.
(sh-ez) anns-moneu e jo uoasui aun noy Apean sunnod, sd omg shn wm uado m
cannula. With epiphora alone this is not difficult, since the proliferative conjunctivitis
(Figure 4.13) often seen in dacryocystitis (see below), which can make nasolacrimal
intubation difficult, is not present. Cannulation is difficult in such circumstances and
often requires the production of a new punctum through the proliferative tissue (Figure
4.14). If cannulation of the proximal punctum is impossible the distal punctum may be
approached through the extemal nares (Figure 4.15). Mobilisation of pus by fushing in
this mamner will facilitate canulation of the upper punctum to allow complete fushing
of the nasolacrimal duct.
Questions arise between veterinarians regarding what fuid to use for irrigation of
the duct. In dacryocystitis antibiotics and anti-inflammatory agents may be worthwhile,
Therabbiteye25
Figure 4.13  Proliferative conjunctivitis.
Figure 4.14 Cannulating the punctum in the face of severe proliferative conjunctivitis.
Figure 4.15 Cannulation of the distal punctum through the nares.
26Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
but in straightforward epiphora sterile saline is likely to be efficacious at least for a
period.
Dacryocystitis
Clinical signs
Purulent discharge from the nasolacrimal cannaliculus is the cardinal sign of dacryocys
titis but this may vary from a watery white fuid, not dissimilar to that sometimes seen
 im epiphora but merely more profuse (Figure 4.16), to a thick creamy white discharge,
this being the more commonly seen appearance (Figure 4.17). Upward pressure with a
finger on the lower eyelid will expel a bead of pus from the nasolacrimal punctum even
in early cases and is a sure sign that there is inflammation and infection down the nasol-
acrimal duct rather than merely in the conjunctival sac. When the discharge is particularly
dense it can result in an area of cormeal oedema or a frank comeal ulcer in the tissue
adjacent to the duct opening (Figure 4.18). Periocular swelling can be marked in some
cases and in these cure is unlikely (Figure 4.19).
Aetiopathogenesis
As noted above with epiphora, the tortuous route of the nasolacrimal duct and its prox-
imity to the molar and incisor tooth roots means that the nasolacrimal duct is highly
Figure 4.17 white discharge from nasolacrimal punctum.
The rabbit eye27
Figure 4.19 Swelling around nasolacrimal sac.
prone to occlusion and to dilation with inflammation. The formation of dilated sacs or
frank rupture of the duct next to a tooth root abscess leads to the profuse continuous
purulent discharge seen. The underlying pathology of the bone of the maxilla leading to
this change is associated with dietary calcium deficiency as documented in detail by
Frances Harcourt-Brown whose seminal work has demonstrated the nutritional and
endocrine aetiopathogenesis of this condition [2426].
Clinical management
Primary diagnosis of dacryocystitis is generally simple given the pathognomonic signs
 Of purulent discharge, but determining the underlying pathology can be much more
taxing. Dacryocystorhinography can be very helpful in revealing the exact location of
the duct occlusion and inflammation. Injection of around 0.2ml of a non-ionic contrast
agent followed by lateral and dorsoventral radiographs shows the nasolacrimal duct, its
pathology and its association with dental structures, when compared with plain radio-
graphs taken before the contrast is used.
As noted above, long-term cure of this condition is difficult and management may be
efficacious given that the duct is already blocked with purulent material. Single fushing
of the duct after cannulation followed by frequent administration of topical antibiotics
28Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
can have a short-term benefit but is rarely a method to control the problem in the long
term. In the UK fusidic acid as Fucithalmic Vet is as licensed preparation and might be
effective against staphylococcal disease but not at all against Pasteurella, a Gram
negative organism. In addition its viscous vehicle base, while having excellent effects in
increasing drug residence time in the conjunctival sac, reduces the likelihood of it reach-
ing deep into the nasolacrimal duct. This problem with any case of dacryocystitis what-
ever the species means that irrigation is a much better option than merely topical
antibiosis.
Regular flushing of the duct, either with sterile saline or with antibiotics such as gen-
tamicin or enrofloxacin, is advised by some although in some stressed animals this fre-
quent treatment (as regular as daily for 2 weeks then every other day for a further month
in some hands) may be more comprising to the rabbit's welfare than is the condition
itself.
A short course of systemic antibiotic can produce a remarkably good result. Here
very careful about enterotoxaemia from oral antibiosis, although azithromycin does not
appear to have this side effect. In this author's experience 2 weeks' course of this in a
paediatric elixir can have beneficial results lasting 2 or more months before another
water can control the condition and surprisingly does not seem to have enterotoxaemic
effects nor generate resistant strains as long as drinking water is kept with a drug dose
of 5mg/kg.
Conjunctivitis
Clinical signs
Conjunctivitis in the rabbit may be very similar to inflammation of that tissue in other
species. Hyperaemia is regularly associated with a proliferation of lymphoid nodules
There can be some discharge although a profuse exudate should always ring alarm bells
with regard to dacryocystitis.
Aetiopathogenesis
dacryocystitis, but conjunctivitis can occur on its own from infection or from an irritative
focus. This could be a single agent, such as a hay awn in the inferior conjunctival sac.
 Or a more diffuse cause, such as a generally dusty hutch environment or a carpet shampoo
used where a house rabbit resides. The difficulty in interpreting the results of a bacterio-
logical sample can revolve around the fact that many bacteria can be normal, we might
species, such as Pasteurella and staphylococci, can be found in the nonmal rabbit nasal
turbinates, and thus also conjunctiva, without causing any pathology [27]. But this is not
        n      
The rabbit eye29
d is as n ss asn  si ss a a 
Conjunctivitis can be a manifestation of systemic infection [28], and although this is less
likely than localised disease, it goes without saying that the approach to ocular infection
should always involve clinical assessment of the whole animal
Clinical management
the environment in which the rabbit lives.
A Schinmer tear test should be performed early in the ocular examination; while kera-
toconjunctivitis sicca is rare in rabbits it must be ruled out [29]. Interestingly, different
breeds of rabbit have very different normal ranges of STT, emphaising the importance
of comparing the patient with an unaffected cage or hutch-mate. A rabbit with an irrita-
tive conjunctivitis would be expected to have an increased tear production, so a low
result compared with that of a cage-mate of the same breed for instance, should make
one suspicious. Note that use of oral trimethoprim antibiotics has been shown in one
statistically significant reduction in STT after 14 days and the experiment was not
extended to assess if clinical KCS occured after more prolonged drug use or whether
tear production normalised on cessation of treatment [30].
Treatment of conjunctivitis where a profuse growth of a specific organism has been
found should clearly be directed against that pathogen after culture and sensitivity [31].
In cases where financial constraints preclude such a full investigation, a broad-spectrum
agent such as tetracycline or chloramphenicol is to be recommended. Treatment of sta-
phylococcal conjunctivitis by production of an autologous vaccine has been reported [32]
but this approach is unlikely to be widely applicable.
Conjuncfival overgrowth
Clinical signs
This unusual condition, unique to rabbits, is readily recognised as a ring of conjunctiva
growing over the cormea inwardly from the limbus (Figures 4.20, 4.21) [33-35]. The
conjunctiva appears normal and not inflamed in most cases and the rest of the eye appears
unremarkable [36]. The animal can see through the aperture in the central comea where
the conjunctival annulus is relatively narrow, although in some cases only a small
window of cormea not covered by conjunctiva remains in the centre of the ocular surface.
The key feature differentiating this from keratitis is that the conjunctiva is not adherent
to the comea.
Aetiopathogenesis
The cause of this condition is unknown. While it has been called pseudopterygium, this
is misleading since a pterygium is a fibrovascular lesion arising from the limbus in man
30OphthatmologyofExoticPets
Fgure 4.20 Mild conjunctival overgrowth in a rabbit.
Fgure 4.21 Marked conjunctival overgrowth in a rabbit.
conjunctival centripetalisation or epicomeal membrane [37], as noted above, is not asso
ciated with the cormea other than to lie over it.
Clinical management
Initially veterinary ophthalmologists removed this ring of tissue by sharp dissection at
the limbus, but it was found that the tissue regrew relatively rapidly. Some reported
to divide the annulus of tissue radially and then suture the conjunctiva back to the epis
clera so that further tissue growth does not cover the cormea (Figure 4.22) [38].
Blepharitis
Clinicalsigns
Sometimes as a part of dacryocystitis but often on its own, eyelid infammation can
be a significant problem in rabbits. The lids become swollen and hyperaemic, losing
(a)
Lid
(c)
Pupil-
-Episclera
Section of conjunctival overgrowth
Iris
Conjunctival
 anchored to episclera
overgrowth
(b)
(d)
The
rabbit
eye
E
 All sections anchored allowing full
visualisation ofeye
Figure 4.22 Line diagram of surgical division and suturing of conjunctival overgrowth. (After Allgoer et al. 2008 [28].)
32OphthatmologyofExoticPets
Figure 4.23Blepharitis in a rabbit.
their natural apposition with the comea (Figure 4.23), with resulting pathological
changes in the ocular surface. Sometimes there is discharge associated with the condition
but this may be linked with the resulting conjunctivitis and not the blepharitis itself,
given that cases can be seen without the sort of discharge seen in conjunctivitis with
dacryocystitis.
Aetiopathogenesis
Blepharitis is not directly associated with specific infection, but many consider that it is
for this may not be particularly strong in individual cases, but here one might see a simi
              
tious disease but resolves not with antibiotics but with oral steroids
Clinical management
In this author's experience hot water compresses are probably the most efficacious treat-
ment to reduce the swelling and improve the degree of apposition of the lids with the
comeal surface to reduce both exposure keratitis and excoriation. Topical and systemic
antibiosis may be valuable as may systemic non-steroidal anti-inflammatory treatment
Myxomatosis
Clinical signs
This tragic viral disease results in blepharitis and conjunctivitis with a profuse purulent
discharge (Figure 4.24) as a prelude to death in infected unvaccinated rabbits. The case
in vaccinated animals is quite different without the purulent discharge but with the
development of myxomatous masses on the lid (Figure 4.25).
Aetiopathogenesis
Therabbiteye33
Figure 4.24 Myxomatosis in a wild rabbit with profuse discharge.
Figure 4.25 Myxoma development on lids of vaccinated rabbit with myxomatosis
those for the major histocompatability complex (MHC) and cytokine homologues, allow
the virus to counteract the host's immune system, preventing presentation of its antigens
to host T cells and reducing the antiviral effects of T cells by competing with their own
cytokines [40]. This explains the prevalence of secondary infections in affected animals,
the rapid undefeated spread of the virus in the individual and their rapid demise. Quite
why the pathology is particularly focused on the mucocutaneous junctions of the lid and
the genitalia is, to this author at least, unclear.
Clinical management
The preferred option in unvaccinated cases, at least in this author's opinion, is euthanasia.
Although some have suggested that courses of alpha-interferon may be effective this has
cinated animals there is rarely need for treatment, given that the only ocular signs are
periocular myxomas. If tumours at the lid margin cause comeal irritation, these could be
(perhaps 1-2mm given the good demarcation of these neoplasms, their relatively non-
aggressive local behaviour and the small aperture of the rabbit eyelid).
34Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Figure 4.26Entropion in a rabbit
Entropion
Clinical signs
As with entropion in dogs, lid in-turming is generally seen in young rabbits, but this is
relatively rare and infrequently reported. Lid in-turming is evident from close inspection,
but by the time it is presented there is often cormeal damage present (Figure 4.26). It can
be difficult to evaluate whether the entropion is secondary to ocular irritation or whether
the irritation from comeal pathology was caused by the entropion and subsequent trichi-
asis with eyelid hairs abrading the comea.
Aetiopathogenesis
Why some rabbits should be affected by entropion is unclear. There does not appear to
be a particularly inherited tendency in specific rabbit strains but several animals within
a litter can be affected. In certain cases the history clearly shows that an ocular surface
irritative focus, such as a cormeal ulcer, has provoked the entropion.
Clinical management
A standard Hotz-Celsus procedure can be undertaken on affected rabbits, but rather in
the same way that young puppies often need tacking procedures before a definitive surgi-
cal rectification, rabbit kits can require urgent action early in life to protect the cormeal
surface from irritation and this may be before a penmanent surgical correction is possible.
Temporary tacking sutures with 4/0 to 6/0 vicryl in a vertical mattress arrangement can
be effective.
Nictitans gland prolapse
Clinical signs
In the same way as is seen in the dog. the orbital glands of the rabbit can prolapse to
give the appearance of ^cherry eye'(Figure 4.27) [41,42]. The difference with the rabbit
The rabbit eye35
Figure 4.27 Prolapsed Harderian gland in a rabbit.
Figure 4.28  Prolapsed Harderian and nictitans glands in a rabbit.
is that, as noted above, there are several orbital glands, one or all of which can prolapse
(Figure 4.28). Thus the condition can look merely like a small well demarcated, round,
pink to red mass in the medial canthus, or a rather more alarming protrusion of several
 different types of tissue, manifesting appearance of the deep and superficial glands of 
the third eyelid, the Harderian gland and the deep orbital gland, though to see all four is
umusual.
Aetiopathogenesis
Quite why gland prolapse occurs in dogs is unclear and the same is true in rabbits.
It may be that a conjunctival trauma initiates the protrusion of these orbital glands or
there may possibly be an anomaly in the connective tissue which normally holds them
inplace.
36Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Figure 4.29Repairing prolapsed gland with pocket technique.
Clinical management
Some would suggest that the gland, if only one is involved, can be left prolapsed, yet
experience shows, as with the case in dogs, that a protruding gland gradually becomes
inflamed and enlarged - it is better replaced earlier rather than later. One might ask if
the gland could be removed. In dogs we know that the nictitans gland produces around
a third of the tear film. We have no such evidence for tear production in the rabbit, but
One might say that as God put them there, they must have a purpose! Another reason for
replacing them rather than performing gland removal is that the latter risks damaging
the retrobulbar venous plexus, with potentially catastrophic haemorrhagic consequences.
In the author's experience use of Dr Rhea Morgan's pocket technique [43] for such glands
 in the rabbit is relatively easy and successful (Figure 4.29); attempting to fix the glands
to the orbital rim using the technique described by Dr Renee Kaswan [44] would be
difficult since, while the superficial gland of the nictitating membrane might be suitable
for such a technique, the other glands are either too friable or to multilobulated to allow
a single suture to hold them in place.
Microphthaimos
Clinical signs
a a in aas nng saads n un no u azis ao ui sae [
While no treatment is possible, attempts to define the aetiology are important to prevent
future cases of the condition[45].
Diseases of the orbit
Exophthaimos
Protrusion of the globe from the orbit is relatively common in rabbits for a number of
reasons (Figures 4.30 and 4.31). The eye is relatively prominent so a space-occupying
The rabbit eye 37
Figure 4.30 Exophthalmos in rabbit
Figure 4.31 Exophthalmos in rabbit
lesion in the orbit, be it infectious, neoplastic, parasitic or vascular, will readily manifest
as an exophthalmic globe. Determination of the reason for globe protrusion is often best
achieved by cranial radiography and orbital ultrasonography, although other imaging
techniques can be valuable if more expensive, and sometimes clinical judgement on its
own can be sufficient to yield a diagnostic result.
Orbital abscessation
Clinical signs
The most common cause of exophthalmos, and thus the first diagnosis to rule out, is that
of an orbital abscess from a molar tooth root. These can occur rapidly and give severe
exophthalmos often with exposure keratitis and strabismus. Radiography demonstrating
a tooth root abscess impinging on the orbital contents is diagnostic, although imaging
techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT)
can delineate the lesion more precisely (Figure 4.32). Examination of the dentition is
mandatory and a haemogram will confinm an inflammatory focus, though clearly not
define its position.
38Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Fgure 4.32 MRl scan of rabbit in Figure 4.31 showing large tooth root abscess.
Aetiopathogenesis
The vast majority of orbital abscesses in rabbits are associated with molar tooth root
problems and as such cure is very difficult to achieve. Other reports of lesions giving
rise to exophthalmos include those of parasitic cysts [46] and neoplasms [47] in the orbit.
Clinical management
Enucleation together with exenteration of infected orbital contents can ameliorate signs,
though on its own this is only a temporary solution. In all too many cases even the most
aggressive enucleation eventually fails as remaining bacteria proliferate and the orbital
abscess recurs, eventually breaking through the enucleation incision. The use of antibiotic
impregnated beads in the orbit can improve the prognosis which is grave in the majority
of cases. Manuka honey in the enucleated or exenterated orbit has been suggested as a
worthwhile therapeutic option and in an admittedly small number of cases to date we
have found this very useful in sterilising open orbits after exenteration and in promoting
a granulation tissue response [48].
Retrobulbar venous plexus engorgement
Clinicalsigns
The unusual appearance of a rabbit which becomes bilaterally exophthalmic when
stressed is a pathognomonic sign of retrobulbar venous plexus engorgement (Figure 4.33)
[49,50]. The stressor sufficient to cause a rise in blood pressure sufficient to overfill the
The rabbit eye 39
venous plexus when vascular drainage is compromised can be as mild as gentle stroking.
Perhaps this is enough to alert us to the parless state of this prey species in our care even
when we think we are calming it down!
Aetiopathogenesis
Most of the cases reported with this condition have been affected by a cranial thoracic
space-occupying lesion such as a thymoma. The neoplasm enwraps the jugular veins
restricting venous returm from the head. With mildly increased arterial blood pressure
during a stressful period it is assumed (although to the author's knowledge nobody has
measured this parameter in these animals during such stressing) that the increased arterial
flling is not matched by a corresponding increased venous drainage. The retrobulbar
plexus increases in size, accounting for the forward movement of the globe.
Clinical management
Treatment of these cases relies not on any regime directed at the eyes but rather therapy
 of the mass involved. Because these cases are generally associated with an anterior
thoracic or cervical mass extensive enough to have enwrapped both jugulars, prognosis
can, in this author's opinion at least, be nothing but grave although progression to more
severe clinical signs takes a long time.
Diseases of the cornea
Corneal uiceration
Clinical signs
As noted above the rabbit eye is more protuberant than that of many other animals,
this giving good vision for almost 360 degrees, essential as a prey species. The problem
with this is that the eye is thus more at risk from trauma. Cormeal ulceration as a
40Ophthatmotogy of ExoticPets
   o  t   t g
 -   a -  st ng
(Figure 4.34). In our preliminary study frank cormeal ulceration has been seen in 1% of
cases examined while chronic superficial stromal scarring, most probably a sequela of
previous ulceration, was seen in 1.4% of otherwise normal rabbits. The acute traumatic
leisons are nonmally linear superficial cormeal erosions which can best be demarcated
with the use of fuorescein as in any species with a cormeal abrasive injury. It is important,
however, to note the appearance of the ulcer prior to using fuorescein and once fuores-
cein has been applied to fush it away with sterile water to avoid pooling of dye in an
epithelialised cormeal facet, in effect a healed ulcer.
Any ulcer requires the three questions: (i) what caused the ulcer? (ii) how deep is it?
and (ii) is it healing? As noted previously most post-traumatic rabbit ulcers are superfi-
cial, although one caused by an attack from a cage-mate might be deeper and require
more aggressive therapy than a superficial ulcer. Even some superficial ulcers may not
 heal in the few days we should normally expect for a superficial ulcer. Clinical observa-
tion in such a case should particularly focus on whether the ulcer margin is clean and
crisp, or ragged with superficial stromal oedema undermeath the epithelial margin (Figure
4.35). This might suggest the existence of a lip of epithelium, non-adherent to the under-
lying basement membrane and stroma, impeding healing rather in the same way that the
epithelial basement membrane dystrophy prevents healing in so-called boxer ulcers in
dogs.
The rabbit eye 41
Aetiopathogenesis
Most superficial ulcers heal within 3-5 days. We probably know more about the rabbit
cormea and its healing processes than we do about the dog comea, since it has been used
as an experimental model for many ocular surface conditions. Epithelial cells arise from
a stem cell population at the limbus and migrate centrally as basal cells. They then dif-
ferentiate into wing cells and finally into the squamous cells of the superficial epithelium
which are desquamated at a regular rate, probably brushed off the very cormeal surface
by lid blinks. If the advancing epithelial lip fails to adhere to the underlying basement
membrane ulcer healing will be arrested.
Having said that, there is no research on the pathogenesis of these boxer-type non-
healing ulcers in the pet rabbit save the clinical anecdote of veterinary ophthalmologists
who have treated them, and there is little of that. Is the same pathogenesis underway in
the persistent erosion in the rabbit cormea as occurs in the dog [51]? Again here we can
point the way to future research. In the meantime, one paper of great value is Stacey
Andrew's review in the Veterinary Clinics of America on cormeal disease in rabbits [52].
Clinical management
Debridement of the non-adherent epithelium with a dry cotton bud followed by the use
of a tear replacement such as the carbomer-based gel Viscotears may allow epithelial
healing to resume. If the underlying basement membrane and stroma are defective, as
is the case in Figure 4.36, puncturing this defective tissue by a grid keratotomy can
stimulate epithelial healing (Figure 4.37). This technique must be used with caution.
however, since the cormea is so much thinner than in the dog, where grid keratotomy is
widely practised. Protection of the healing ocular surface is important, either using a
bandage contact lens or third eyelid fap for 10 days to 2 weeks after debridment and
grid keratotomy.
Keratitis
Inflammation of the comea other than that associated with ulceration is not common, but
has been noted with an eosinophilic component (Figure 4.38). I hesitate here to divide
42Ophthatmotogy of ExoticPets
Fgure 4.37  Grid keratotomy in a non-healing corneal ulcer.
Fgure 4.38 Eosinophilic keratitis in a rabbit.
the condition into clinical signs, aetiopathogenesis and clinical management; while the
 proliferative nature of the lesion and the eosinophils seen on taking a surface cytology
sample can be illustrated we have no information to give on the aetiology or particularly
successful treatment but for an attempt at topical anti-infammatory treatment with
steroid. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca is vanishingly rare in rabbits but diagnosis with a low
Schirmer tear test and treatment with tear replacements would be as for other species.
Corneal lipidosis
Clinicalsigns
A white opacity in the cormea could be lipid deposition, calcification, inflammatory cell
infiltration or scarring. Lipid deposition associated with a systemic increase in circulating
through endocrine, genetic [53] or dietary abnormality [54,55] appears as an arc of white
at the limbus (Figure 4.39). Crystalline paracentral lipid dystrophy as seen in the dog
The rabbit eye 43
Figure 4.39 Arcus lipoides corneae in a rabbit fed milk
does not appear to have been reported in the rabbit. Other causes of white lesions in the
cormea can be comeal oedema seen in glaucoma, of which see more below, or cormeal
epithelial dystrophy or degeneration [56].
Aetiopathogenesis
As in any species, the deposition of lipid in the cormea can occur through the death of
lipid-laden keratocytes in the central comea, this giving the signs of an inherited cormeal
lipid dystrophy. It may, however, occur through the deposition of lipid from the blood.
either in the nonmal comea, in which case the lipid arcus is seen around the comeal
limbus termed arcus lipoides cormeae (Figure 4.39), or in association with pathological
vasculature, in which case the condition is known as a lipid keratopathy.
Dermoid
Clinical signs
 si s sn ns sa s ra nn go na es n sas  i ss
diagnosed as a dermoid. The condition appears to have been reported but once in the
veterinary literature [57] but this paucity of evidence may not refect such a rarity but
merely under-reporting.
Aetiopathogenesis
This sporadic spontaneous congenital defect has no clear aetiological factor in the same
way that dermoids in Binman cats appear to be an inherited trait or those in Goldenhaar's
syndrome in man are linked to a wider syndrome of defective development.
Clinicalmanagement
The standard treatment for comea dermoids is removal by superficial keratectomy, but
in the case of the rabbit, as with any small exotic species, the thin nature of the cormea
renders this an operation best performed by a specialist with access to an operating
microscope.
44Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Diseases of the lens
Cataract
Clinicalsigns
Cataract is less common in the rabbit than in the guinea pig [58] but can occur in several
forms: congenital opacities, most often nuclear in nature with a circular lesion in the
centre of the lens, or as a posterior capsular plaque (Figure 4.40). This can be difficult
to differentiate from the nuclear opacity but careful observation will allow one to see
that it moves in relation to the centre of the lens as the eye rotates or as the observer
scans a light beam across the eye. In older animals age-related cataract can be noted but
is generally seen in the posterior cortex as small focal dots or lines. On occasion the lens
is rapidly opacifed to a mature total cataract (Figure 4.41) and while this can be related
to diabetes or trauma, there is sometimes no concurrent disease nor a history or other
signs of ocular trauma [59].
In our study 17% of rabbits were noted to have some degree of lens opacity ranging
from posterior cortical lines through posterior subcapsular plaques through to total
Fgure 4.40 Posterior capsular plaque cataract in a rabbit.
Fgure 4.41 Mature cataract, rapidly foming. in a rabbit.
The rabbit eye45
mature cataract. Prevalence of cataract increased with age, with 50% of the population
having cataract not until 8 years of age.
The more important cataract in rabbits is that associated with Encephalitozoon cuniculi
a microsporidial protozoal parasite. In those cases often there is concurrent lens-induced
uveitis, often seen as a white mass in the iris but sometimes observed as a vascularised
iris lesion, as discussed further under uveitis. This form of cataract and uveitis was seen
only in four cases in the thousand animals examined in our study so while the prevalence
of E. cuniculi seropositivity is relatively high, the involvement of the eye would seem
relatively low in the general population.
Aetiopathogenesis
Any cataract arises as a consequence of disruption of the highly regular arrangement of
crystallin proteins in the lens cortex and nucleus or cellular proliferation at the posterior
capsule of the lens with underlying subcapsular cortex. This loss of regularity often arises
from proteins cross-linking, aggregating and coming out of solution, the very solution
that keeps them in regular arranagement preserving transparency. This can happen in
age-related cataract because of photo-oxidation of thiol groups of these crystallins to
of the crystallin protein and its preciptation from solution.
The mechanism by which the protozoan Encephalitozoon cunilculi causes cataract is
unclear in detail, but its lifecycle gives clues as to the aetiopathogenesis of cataract. The
parasite is transmitted between adult rabbits most commonly by ingestion of urine. But
passage of parasite between adult and young happens in utero with the parasite circulat-
ing in the fetus and sometimes ending up residing in the developing lens [60]. At some
point in the development of the parasite it migrates through the lens causing opacifica
tion. On occasion the parasite migrates through the anterior lens capsule causing libera
uveitis, covered further below.
Clinical management
It has to be said that many rabbits with cataracts, even ones blinded by bilateral lens
opacification, lead an apparently normal life, able to negotiate around their environment,
feed and interact with fellow cage-mates without difficulty. In cases where clinical or
financial constraints prevent cataract removal, owners can be reassured that they are
unlikely to be compromising their pet's welfare unduly by retaining them blind. Having
said that removal of the opacified lens by phacoemulsification is certainly possible.
species (Figure 4.42).
46Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Fgure 4.42 A rabbit eye with an Encephalitozoon cuniculi uveitis and cataract (a) before
and (b) after phacoemulsification. Courtesy Dr E. Adkins.
the situation is somewhat different in that the cells of the lens capsule de-differentiate
into new lens fibre cells which can then duplicate to can fill the lens capsule with lens
material de novo. Indeed it was the rabbit in which this phenomenon of lens regeneration
was first discovered in mammals, back in 1825. The lens can completely regenerate
from the dorsal root of the iris in newts and the lartval cormea in amphibians such
as Xenopus laevis but the meticulous research of Cocteau and Leroy d'Etoile in the
 Academy of Surgery in Paris first showed complete lens regeneration from lens capsule
in the rabbit [61].
Having said that, lens removal by phacoemulsification is possible and has been sug-
gested as the best treatment for E. cuniculi-related opacities [62]. Some would argue that
implanting an intraocular lens can prevent posterior capsular opacification while others
caution that lens regrowth may force an intraocular lens out of the lens capsular bag with
disastrous effects on the otherwise quiet and comfortable eye.
Lens luxation
The majority of lens luxations in the rabbit are secondary to zonular tension in a mature
cataract. Primary lens luxation with a zonular degeneration does not appear to have been
reported in the rabbit as in the dog [63].
Diseases of the iris
os
Clinical signs
E. cuniculi uveitis normally presents as a white mass in or near the pupil, sometimes
with neovascularisation rendering it red or pink (Figures 4.43 and 4.44). Normally
there is evidence of cataract also, as might be expected given the aetiopathogenesis of
the uveitis as an inflammatory reaction to lens release into the anterior chamber (see
below). These eyes are generally hypotonous with a lower than normal intraocular
pressure, this manifested as being below the intraocular pressure in the contralateral
Therabbit eye47
Figure 4.43 E. cunicufi phacoclastic uveitis with a hyperaemic inflammatory mass and
focal anterior capsular cataract.
Figure 4.44  E. cuniculi phacoclastic uveitis with characteristic white inflammatory mass
eye. In other respects there may be few other signs of uveitis, without miosis, episcleral
hyperaemia or other inflammatory changes in the eye such as keratic precipitates or
frankhypopyon.
Aetiopathogenesis
As noted above this protozoal parasite can be transmitted to fetal rabbits in utero [64]
and be found in the lens, where its migration may cause cataract and later rupture of the
anterior lens capsule with liberation of lens material into the anterior chamber. I like to
think teleologically of the iris recognising lens material for the first time, given that it
has previously been constrained within the lens capsule. It then reacts against this mate
rial as a novel antigen and thus produces a uveitis. This may not be strictly true, given
that antibodies towards lens antigens can be found in normal individuals as well as those
with cataracts [65]. The other unusual feature of this E. cuniculi-associated uveitis is
that, while it does involve mild hypotony of the eye, other sigs of uveitis such as a miotic
seen. The lesion classically associated with this specific uveitis in the rabbit, as we noted
above, is instead a white circular or ovoid lesion on the surface of the iris.
48Ophthatmology of Exotic Pets
Clinical management
It might be argued that, with the pathognomonic appearance of E. cuniculi-associated
lens-induced uveitis, diagnosis can be by inspection alone. Yet many will want to confirm
their suspicions and obtaining a serological titre of circulating antibodies against E.
cuniculi is sensible before embarking on treatment [66]. A serological titre of 1/32 or
greater can be taken as good evidence that E. cuniculi infection has occurred but does
not prove for certain that the ocular lesions are related to parasitic infection [67]. This
is rather an academic splitting of hairs however - the appearance of the lesion in the face
ofa positive E. cuniculititre should be sufficient forafirm diagnosis.Immunohistochemistry
 of the affected lens material gives an absolute diagnosis but obviously requires surgery
before the sample can be obtained [68].
With regard to clinical management, the original parasiticide used was oral albenda-
zole and this is still a very effective treatment to prevent further progression, athough it
does not resolve the lesion. It should be ensured that the albendazole used (normally
employed as a sheep wormer) does not have added selenium but only the parasiticide.
Fenbendazole, an altemative benzimidazole anthelmintic, is licensed in the UK for use
in rabbits with the condition [69]. Topical steroid should be used; a suggested dose is
one drop of prednisolone acetate three times daily to control active inflammation while
the parasiticide has its effect. Another, more permanent solution, is phacoemulsification
to remove the lens and the associated parasites.
Bacterial iritis
Clinical signs
The other main cause of intraocular inflammation in rabbits is that caused by a staphy-
lococcal or Pasteurella abscessation in the anterior chamber. Intraocular abscessation is
 generally to be differentiated from E. cuniculi uveitis, as described above, by its colour,
physical extent and behaviour over time. The E. cuniculi uveitic lesion is generally white
or pink if vascularisation is pronounced (Figure 4.44). The bacterial iritis is more usually
manifest as a yellow mass in the case of Staphylococcus (Figure 4.45) or a yellow-white
lesion in the case of Pasteurella, larger in extent than the E. cuniculi lesion, and one
Fgure 4.45 Staphylococcal panophthalmitis with yellow abscessation.
The rabbit eye49
Figure 4.46 Pasteurella uveitis with miosis, synechiae and hypopyon.
which progresses with time, while the E. cuniculi lesion is generally stationary with
regards to its extent and progression. Pasteurella may give more diffuse iritis with miosis,
synechiae, hypopyon and iris swelling and hyperaemia (Figure 4.46) but staphylococcal
species more usually give a solitary abscess within the anterior chamber.
Aetiopathogenesis
Staphylococcal abscesses in rabbits are generally recognised as being haematogenous in
 origin although local spread can occur. The former method of aetiopathogenesis is prob-
ably the case in uveitic staphylococcal involvement. Pasteurella may spread haematoge-
neously or possibly more locally from the nasal mucosa, where it is often considered to
be a commensal rather than a pathogen as such, given the number of animals in which
it lives in the nasal passages without causing clinical signs.
Glaucoma
Clinicalsigns
As in any other animal species, the diagnosis of glaucoma in the rabbit is primarily based
on the finding of increased intraocular pressure by means of tonometry. The use of an
but the rebound Tonovet tonometer can also be useful, both because of the much smaller
area of contact with the comea in tonometry and also because local anaesthesia is not
needed. Having said that, we do not appear to have a properly calibrated data series for
intraocular pressure in the rabbit using either the Tonopen or Tonovet.
Other signs of glaucoma include pupil dilation and episcleral hyperaemia, although in
50Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Fgure 4.47  bu/bu inherited buphthalmos in a New Zealand White rabbit.
Fgure 4.48 Glaucoma similar to that in the NZW rabbit but in a pigmented animal.
Aetiopathogenesis
The most frequently recognised glaucoma in the rabbit population is that associated with
the bu gene in which early onset gradual enlargement of the globe occurs, often with
few other clinical signs (Figure 4.47) [70-72].This gene is noted specifically in the New
Zealand White laboratory strain of rabbit but other pet species, presumably with the bu
gene on board, can manifest the condition in a way identical to that in the white labora-
tory strain (Figure 4.48). Intraocular pressure rises with blindness ensuing but with little
to show that the rabbit is in discomfort or pain [73]. This may, of course, be associated
with its behaviour as a prey species where evolution has prevented it from making it
obvious that its health is compromised in any way. Yet these animals do not in this
author's experience show a reduction in their eating behaviour, nor even the most subtle
of signs of depression or lethargy which would in any way signal ocular discomfort such
as seen in other species with glaucoma.
The reason for this may be the insidious onset of the disease. As in human patients
late in the progression of the condition, unless measurement of visual fields by perimetry
is umdertaken.
Other causes of increased intraocular pressure include uveitis, in which infammatory
debris can block the iridocomeal angle. While in most cases of uveitis a lower pressure
The rabbit eye51
Figure 4.49  Histopathology of the normal iridocorneal angle.
tissue blocking aqueous drainage.
is noted, this increased intraocular pressure occurs later in life than the bu-associated
disease and is seen in the context of inflammatory anterior segment disease.
The bu gene produces a congenital abnormality of tissue occluding the iridocormeal
angle, where aqueous humour normally drains from the eye (Figure 4.49). The normal
iridocomeal angle is open with obvious pathways for fuid drainage from the anterior
chamber between the cormea and the iris, through the ciliary cleft and out to the episcleral
which would normally have degenerated in utero to open the drainage pathway, remains
to block outfow (Figure 4.50). Because this is a congenital defect, intraocular pressure
rises early in the young rabbit's life, and with the thin nature of the sclera the eye rapidly
increases in size, hence the term buphthalmos and the gene designation bu.
As with all glaucoma, while the pressure-raising pathology may be at the iridocormeal
angle, the blinding pathology is at the level of the optic nerve head. Intraocular pressure
forces the lamina cribrosa, the weakest part of the sclera, outwards, causing disc cupping
cup are damaged by the high intraocular pressure slowing axonal transport and causing
ganglion cell death through apoptosis.
The bu gene is recessive and also has other effects quite apart form its ocular pathol
ogy. Homozygous rabbits also show reduced litter size, though the pathological processes
that cause intrauterine fetal death are unclear.
52Ophthatmologyof Exotic Pets
Fgure 4.51 Optic nerve cupping in rabbit glaucoma
Clinical management
intraocular pressure by tonometry, although even without this increased globe size can
lead to the tentative diagnosis. With regard to bu/bu-associated glaucoma no treatment
to reduce the intraocular pressure at a stage when blindness can be avoided is rarely
possible. By time the increased intraocular pressure is noted the animal will have begun
the path to increased globe size and resulting blindness [74]. There are ophthalmologists
who would suggest long-term medical management of the increased intraocular pressure
or placement of a drainage device to provide an antificial pathway for fuid flow out of
the eye. In reality, given that there seems little change in behaviour of rabbits with
increased intraocular pressure, one might suggest that such heroic therapeutic measures
are directed at treating the owner rather than the rabbit - but perhaps that is a little unfair!
Retinal disease
Clinical signs
It might be considered unusual that retinal degenerations equivalent to progressive retinal
atrophy in the dog and cat or retinitis pigmentosa in man have only apparently been
reported once in the rabbit [75]. Perhaps the lack of a tapetum means that retinal atrophy.
so readily detected through tapetal hyper-reflectivity and retinal vessel attenuation in the
dog, has not readily been recognised in the rabbit. One inherited retinal degeneration has
teristics or genotypic origins.
References
1. Bagley LH, Lavach D. Ophthalmic diseases in rabbits. California Vet 1985;49:7-9.
 e sy  s o     r  r ss 7
Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger, 1989.
The rabbit eye 53
3. Jeong MB, Kim NR, Yi NY, Park SA, Kim MS, Park JH, Jeong SM, Seo KD, Nam TC, Oh
YS, Won MH, Seo KM. Spontaneous ophthalmic diseases in 586 New Zealand white rabbits.
Exp Anim 2005;54:395-403.
4. Burling K, Murphy CJ, Curiel JS, Koblick P and Bellhorn RW. Anatomy of the rabbit nasol-
acrimal duct and its clinical implications. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1991;1: 33-40.
5. Prince JH. (ed.) The Rabbit in Eye Research. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1954.
6. Bito LZ. Species differences in the responses of the eye to irritation and trauma: a hypothesis
of divergence in ocular defense mechanisms, and the choice of experimental animals for eye
research. Exp Eye Res 1984;39:807-829.
7. Ninomiya H, Inomata T, Kanemaki N. Microvascular architecture of the rabbit eye: a scanning
electron microscopic study of vascular corrosion casts. J Vet Med Sci 2008;70:887-892.
animals. Res Vet Sci 1989;47:34-42.
9. Ruskell GL. Blood vessels of the orbit and globe. In: Prince JH. (ed.) The Rabbit in Eye
Research. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1954, pp. 514-553.
10. Pak MA. Ocular refraction and visual contrast sensitivity of the rabbit, determined by the
VECP. Vision Res 1984;24:341-345.
11. de Graauw JG, van Hof MW. Frontal myopia in the rabbit. Behav Brain Res 1980;1:
339-341.
12. de Graauw JG, van Hof MW. Relation between behavior and eye-refraction in the rabbit.
Physiol Behav 1978;21(2):257-259.
13. Van Hof MW. Visual acuity in the rabbit. Vision Res 1967;7:749-751.
14. Vaney D1. The grating acuity of the wild European rabbit. Vision Res 1980;20:87-89.
15. van Wyk M, Taylor WR, Vaney DI. Local edge detectors: a substrate for fine spatial vision at
low temporal frequencies in rabbit retina. J Neurosci 2006;26:13250-13263.
16. Davis FA. The anatomy and histology of the eye and orbit of the rabbit. Trans Am Ophthal
Soc 1929;27:401-441.
17. Nuboer JFW. Spectral discrimination in a rabbit. Doc Ophthalmol 1971;30:279-298
18. Juliusson B, Bergstrom A, Rohlich P, Ehinger B, van Veen T, Szel A. Complementary cone
fields of the rabbit retina. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1994;35:811-818.
19. Jones SM, Carrington SD. Pasteurella dacryocystitis in rabbits. Vet Rec 1988;122:514-515.
outcome of dacryocystitis in rabbits: a retrospective study of 28 cases (2003-2007). Vet
Ophthalmol 2009;12:350-356.
21. Anon. Nasolacrimal duct lavage in rabbits. Lab Anim (NY) 2006;35:22-24.
22. Marini RP, Foltz CJ, Kersten D, Batchelder M, Kaser W, Li X. Microbiologic, radiographic,
and anatomic study of the nasolacrimal duct apparatus in the rabbit (Oryctotagus cuniculus).
Lab Anim Sci 1996;46:656-662.
studies of the lacrimal canal in the dwarf rabbit. Tierarztl Prax 1980;10:403-410.
24. Harcourt-Brown F. Calcium deficiency, diet and dental disease in pet rabbits. Vet Rec
1996;139:567-571.
25. Harcourt-Brown FH. Dental disease in pet rabbits 1. Normal dentition, pathogenesis and
aetiology. In Practice 2009;31:370-379.
26. Harcourt-Brown FH. Dental disease in pet rabbits 2. Diagnosis and treatment. In Practice
2009;31:432-445
27. Cooper SC, McLellan GJ, Rycroft AN. Conjunctival fora observed in 70 healthy domestic
rabbits (Oryctolagus cunicufus). Vet Rec 2001;149:232-235.
28. Snyder SB, Fox JG, Campell LH, Soave OA. Disseminated staphylococcal disease in labora-
54Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
29. Abrams KL, Brooks DE, Funk RS, Theran P. Evaluation of the Schirmer tear test in clinically
normal rabbits. Am J Vet Res 1990;51:1912-1913
30. Shirani D, Selk Ghaffari M, Akbarein H, Haji Ali Asgari A. Effects of short-term oral admin-
istration of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole on Schirmer II tear test results in clinically normal
rabbits.Vet Rec 2010;166:623-624
31. Srivastava KK, Pick JR, Johnson PT. Characterisation of a Hemophiius sp. isolated from a
rabbit with conjunctivitis. Lab Anim 1986;36:291-293.
vaccine. Lab Anim 1977;11:163-164.
33. Matros LE, Ansari MM, Van Pelt CS. Eye anomaly in a dwarf rabbit. Avian Exotic Pract
1986;3:13-14.
34. Bauck L. Ophthalmic conditions in pet rabbits and rodents. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet
1989;11:258-268.
35. Dupont, C, Carrier M, Gauvin J. Bilateral precorneal membranous occlusion in a dwarf rabbit.
J Smal1 Exotic Anim Med 1995;3:41-44
branes in rabbits and human pterygium. Vet Ophthalmol 2001;4: 171-174.
37. Donnelly TM, Fisher PG, Lackner PA. Epicorneal membrane on the eye of a Rex rabbit. Lab
Anim 2002;31:23-25.
38. Allgoewer I, Malho P, Schulze H, Schaffer E. Aberrant conjunctival stricture and overgrowth
in the rabbit. Vet Ophthalmol 2008;11:18-22.
a rabbit. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986; 189:1153-1154.
implications for viral-host co-adaptation. Virus Res 2002;88:17-33.
41. Janssens G, Simoens P, Muylle S, Lauwers H. Bilateral prolapse of the deep gland of the third
42. Roxburgh G, Boydell P, Genovese L. Prolapse and hyperplasia of a third eyelid gland in 4
rabbits. J Br Assoc Vet Ophthalmol 1998;12:4.
43. Morgan RV, Duddy JM, McClurg K. Prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid in dogs: a ret-
rospective study of 89 cases (1980 to 1990). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1993;29:56-60.
44. Stanley RG, Kaswan RL. Modification of the orbital rim anchorage method for surgical replace-
ment of the gland of the third eyelid in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994;205:1412-1414.
45. Nielsen JN, Carlton WW. Colobomatous microphthalmos in a New Zealand white rabbit,
arising from a colony with suspected vitamin E deficiency. Lab Anim Sci 1995;45:320-322.
46. O'Reilly A, McCowan C, Hardman C, Stanley R. Taenia serialis causing exophthalmos in a
pet rabbit. Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:227-230
47. Volopich S, Gruber A, Hassan J, Hittmair KM, Schwendenwein I, Nell B. Malignant B-cell
lymphoma of the Harder's gland in a rabbit. Vet Ophthalmol 2005;8:259-263.
48. Oryan A, Zaker SR. Effects of topical application of honey on cutaneous wound healing in
Tabbits. Zentralb1 Veterinarmed A 1998;45:181-188
49. Wagner F, Beinecke A, Fehr M, Brunkhorst N, Mischke R, Gruber AD. Recurrent bilateral
exophthalmos associated with metastatic thymic carcinoma in a pet rabbit. J Small Anim Pract
2005;46:393-397.
50. Vernau KM, Grahn BH, Clarke-Scott HA, Sullivan N. Thymoma in a geriatric rabbit with
hypercalcemia and periodic exophthalmos. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;206:820-822.
51. Gelatt KN, Samuelson DA. Recurrent corneal erosions in the boxer dog. J Am Anim Hosp
Ass0c 1982;18:453460.
52. Andrew SE. Corneal diseases of rabbits. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2002;5:341-356.
The rabbit eye 55
53. Garibaldi BA, Goad ME. Lipid keratopathy in the Watanabe (WHHL) rabbit. Vet Pathol 1988;
25: 173-174.
54. Sebesteny A, Sheraidah GA, Trevan DJ, Alexander RA, Ahmed A1. Lipid keratopathy and
atheromatosis in an SPF laboratory rabbit colony attributable to diet. Lab Anim 1985;19:
180-188.
55. Gwin RM, Gelatt KN. Bilateral ocular lipidosis in a cottontail rabbit fed an all-milk diet
J Am Vet Med Ass0c 1977;171:887-889
56. Port CD, Dodd DC. Two cases of corneal epithelial dystrophy in rabbits. Lab Anim Sci
1983;33:587-588.
cuniculi). Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci 2000;39:39-40.
58. Williams DL, Sullivan A. Ocular disease in the guinea pig (Cavia porcellus): a survey of 1000
animals. Vet Ophthalmol 2010;13:54-62.
2002;5:177-181.
60. Ashton N, Cook C, Clegg F. Encephalitozoonosis (nosematosis) causing bilateral cataract in
a rabbit. Br J Ophthalmol 1976;60:618-631.
61. Gwon A. Lens regeneration in mammals: a review. Survey Ophthalmol 2006;51:51-62
62. Felchle LM, Sigler RL. Phacoemulsification for the management of Encephalitozoon cunicufi
induced phacoclastic uveitis in a rabbit. Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:211-215.
63. Curtis R, Barnett KC, Lewis SJ. Clinical and pathological observations concerning the aetiol-
ogy of primary lens luxation in the dog. Vet Rec 1983;112:238-246.
64. Baneux PJ, Pognan F. In utero transmission of Encephalitozoon cunicufi strain type I in rabbits.
Lab Anim 2003;37:132-138.
65. van der Woerdt A, Nasisse MP, Davidson MG. Lens-induced uveitis in dogs: 151 cases
(1985-1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;201:921-926.
66. Thalhammer JG, Joachim A. Clinical symptoms and diagnosis of encephalitozoonosis in pet
rabbits. Vet Parasitol 2008;151:115-124.
67. Harcourt-Brown FM, Holloway HK. Encephalitozoon cuniculi in pet rabbits. Vet Rec
2003;152:42743 1.
68. Giordano C, Weigt A, Vercelli A, Rondena M, Grilli G, Giudice C. Immunohistochemi-
cal identification of Encephalitozoon cunicufi in phacoclastic uveitis in four rabbits. Vet
Ophthalmol 2005;8:271-275.
69. Suter C, Miller-Doblies UU, Hatt JM, Deplazes P. Prevention and treatment of Encephalitozoon
cuniculi infection in rabbits with fenbendazole. Vet Rec 2001;148:478-480.
70. Hanna BL, Sawin PB, Sheppars LB. Buphthalmia in the rabbit. J Heredity 1962; 62:294-299
71. Tesluk G, Peiffer RL, Brown D. A clinical and pathological study of inherited glaucoma in
New Zealand white rabbits. Lab Anim 1982;16:234-239.
72. Kinzel F, Gruber A, Tichy A, Edelhofer R, Nell B, Hassan J, Leschnik M, Lee PF. Gonioscopic
study of hereditary buphthalmia in rabbits. Arch Ophthalmol 1968;79:775-778.
73. Kolker AE, Moses RA, Constant MA, Becker B. The development of glaucoma in rabbits.
Invest Ophthalmol 1963;2:316-321.
74. Vareilles P, Coquet P, Lotti VJ. Intraocular pressure responses to antiglaucoma agents in
spontaneous buphthalmic rabbits. Ophthalmol Res 1980;12:2296-2302
75. Reichenbach A, Baar U. Retinitis-pigmentosa-like tapetoretinal degeneration in a rabbit breed.
Doc Ophthalmol 1985;60:71-78.
Chapter 5
The guinea pig eye
Anatomy and physiology of the guinea pig eye
The guinea pig eye is not dissimilar to that of other rodents of similar size but with one
major difference, that of the retinal vasculature which is paurangiotic but to a degree
where, by fundoscopy, the retina appears devoid of blood vessels. This has implications
for oxygenation of the retina but not for the acuity of guinea pig vision, as we see below.
The retina may thus, with its lack of blood vessels, appear to the uninitiated as if it were
suffering from an atrophic degeneration. But other than that the eye appears unremark-
able. What is, however, quite remarkable and with potential effects on the lens and retina,
is that the guinea pig is incapable of synthesising its own vitamin C. The vast majority
of cavy owners are well aware of this fact and supplement their pet's diet. Having said
that, our recent study of 1000 guinea pigs shows that 45% had some ocular anomaly,
many of them lens-related [1]. Our study of eyes of 1000 rabbits (see Chapter 5) shows
a very much lower prevalence of eye and lens abnormalities, so it is possible that, even
when supplemented, these guinea pigs are subject to levels of dietary ascorbate suffi-
ciently low to lead to lens opacities. Such a wild assertion clearly needs further investiga-
tion, but the high levels of ocular abnormalities in otherwise nonmal healthy guinea pigs
is surprising.
What do guinea pigs see?
Guinea pigs are a highly visual species, using sight from the moment of their precocious
birth and reaching a visual acuity of 2.7 cycles per degree (cpd), the equivalent of a
Snellen acuity of around 6/70, although it has to be said that this figure was obtained by
histological determination of photoreceptor density and not from retinoscopy or behav-
ioural testing of acuity [2,3]. There are of course other factors involved in visual acuity
other than the retinal photoreceptor and ganglion cell density. A key one is the refractive
state of the eye and here interesting recent research has shown that a normal group of
220 guinea pigs demonstrated an average hypermetropic (long-sighted) refraction at 3
weeks of age of +2.3D but with a wide variation and a standard deviation of 4.1D; a
Ophthalmology of Exotic Pets, First Edition. David L. Williams.
@ 2012 David Williams. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
The guinea pig eye57
number of animals were significantly myopic (short-sighted) [4]. This was wider than
the variation in a previous study but with a similar mean of 4.8 D. Twenty-eight of the
220 animals in Jiang's study [3] were selected as being bilaterally myopic or anisome-
tropic where one eye is short-sighted and the other either emetropic - normally sighted
 or myopic. These animals were found to be spontaneously myopic at between -15.7 D
and -1.5 D even though the animals were visual as determined by optomotor studies.
Albino guinea pigs have been shown to develop a high degree of myopia [6]. Howlett
and McFadden's [5] guinea pigs, however, did not develop this high myopia so it remains
prevalence of ocular defects, as we will see below.
Diseases of the guinea pig eye
Microphthalmos and anophthaimos
Clinical signs
As with any species, sporadic congenital abnormalities in globe size are seen in the
guinea pig on occasion. Given that neonatal guinea pigs are precocious and bom with
their eyes open, abnormally small eyes are obvious from birth, especially as they may
be associated with mucopurulent discharge which builds up as the orbit is, relatively
as the ocular surface is recessed given the small size of the eye. Guinea pigs can be bom
with no apparent globe whatsoever (Figure 5.1). These may be termed anophthalmic,
although many will have a small ocular remnant and so should properly be termed
extreme microphthalmic
Aetiopathogenesis
The association between the lens and the development of the globe means that animals
Figure 5.1 Guinea pig with congenital anophthalmos.
58Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
larly true in Roan x Roan crosses. Experimental studies have shown anophthalmos in
offspring of rodents treated with the fungicide benomyl and, while this is unlikely to be
the cause of globe abnormalities in pet animals, this is just one example of a chemical
causing this deformity. Nutritional causes include hypovitamosis A, as seen in piglets
although not reported in guinea pigs. Similarly we know of inherited defects in globe
size in other species and so microphthalmos or anophthalmos may have a genetic pre-
disposition [7].
Clinical management
Clearly microphthalmos and anophthalmos cannot be cured, but clinical management
should include an evaluation of possible causes, as noted above. Management of the
condition may include topical antibiotic to control possible infection in the unoccupied
orbit in these animals. In a severely microphthalmic animal entropion and subsequent
irritation caused by trichiasis with hair abrading the ocular surface may need to be
managed by Hotz-Celsus surgery, although dealing with in-turming caused by lack of a
suitably sized globe can be taxing.
Entropion
Clinical signs
Entropion (Figure 5.2) is seen when the hairless lid margin is not appreciated since the
lid in-turming leads haired skin to be apposed against the cormeal surface. Blepharospasm
and excess lacrimation are seen and ocular surface pain may be sufficient on occasion
to cause inappetance and lethargy.
Aetiopathogenesis
Lid in-turming may be associated with an abnonmally small globe, as noted above, or
with a defect in the tarsal plate of the lid as seen in several dog breeds. It may occur
secondary to the irritation caused by conjunctivitis, keratoconjunctivitis sicca or trichi-
Hgure 5.2 Guinea pig with entropion.
The guinea pig eye59
asis; these are covered further below. The condition becomes a problem when in-turming
is sufficient to cause the lid hair to abrade on the cormeal surface, often with resultant
cormeal ulceration.
Clinicalmanagement
It is important to determine the cause of the lid in-tuming and to address this before
attempting to correct the lid in-turming. This can be achieved through a standard Hotz-
Celsus surgery where a strip of eyelid skin is removed and the resulting defect sutured
closed. The guinea pig has a thin delicate lid and only 1 mm or so need be removed to
correct the lid in-tuming, thus this surgery requires magnification with a head loupe at
least and fine ophthalmic surgical equipment.
Trichiasis
Clinical signs
Rex and Texel breeds with their bristly coats are predisposed to ocular surface abrasion
in the first few hours of life (Figure 5.3). Irritation caused by this abrasion and often the
resulting cormeal ulceration, goes on to cause further blepharospasm and lid in-tuming
with further ocular surface abrasion. In other more smooth-haired breeds trichiasis can
occur with entropion, with the ocular surface abrasion again leading to a worsening of
the irritation.
Aetiopathogenesis
The Texel breed has been created specifically with this bristly coated appearance and, in
this breed, as with pedigree dogs, specific breeding for unusual conformation may com-
promise welfare.
Figure 5.3  (a, b) Texel guinea pig with trichiasis
60Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Clinical management
Texel and to some extent Rex breeders know the importance of ensuring that the peri-
ocular hair in neonates does not abrade the ocular surface. They use petrolatum jelly to
ensure that the short hairs at the eyelid margin do not cause lesions on the comeal surface.
In cases where this care at birth has not been taken, it can be very difficult to manage
the resulting cormeal pathology. Lubricating the eye with a tear replacement gel may
relieve discomfort as may a topical non-steroidal agent such as ketorolac (Acular;
Allergan). Long-term cormeal ulceration and oedema may be unavoidable in severe cases.
Dermoid
Clinical signs
One of the joys of comparative ophthalmology is that many conditions are essentially
similar across species. A dermoid, the aberrant development of a denmal area, often
haired, on the otherwise transparent cormea, is exactly such a condition. Whether in the
dog, the cow or the guinea pig. a denmoid is essentially identical. Most are haired lesions
a cormeal lesion (Figure 5.4).
Aetiopathogenesis
 There is evidence of inheritance of a propensity to develop dermoids; German shepherd
dogs are more likely to develop the condition and denmoids are seen in the recessive
Goldenhaar's syndrome in man. Whether this is true in guinea pigs is unclear.
Clinical management
Simple removal of these lesions by superficial keratectomy is curative. The difficulty
Fgure 5.4Guinea pig with dermoid
The guinea pig eye  61
Figure 5.5 Conjunctivitis in a guinea pig.
keratectomy is not difficult because of the thickness of the cormea, in the guinea pig the
cormea no thicker than 500μm so there is little tissue to remove. Thankfully the dermal
tissue of the dermoid can normally be removed from the underlying cormea, although
cormeal scissors are essential.
Conjunctivitis
Clinical signs
Conjunctival irritation and infammation may vary from a mild hyperaemia, through
conujnctival hyperplasia (Figure 5.5) or chemosis (although this seems to be relatively
rare in guinea pigs), to frank purulent discharge. It is important to differentiate this from
the white cell-free fuid which is naturally produced by the guinea pig eye and aids with
grooming (see below). Blepharospasm may occur concurrently. Conjunctivitis may occur
with keratitis or alone, depending on the causative agent.
Aetiopathogenesis
Chlamydial conjunctivitis is widely reported in the literature but this is probably because
it is a model for human chlamydial keratoconjunctivitis rather than it necessarily being
teria such as Salmonella have been reported as causative agents in guinea pig con-
junctivitis. Sterile conjunctivitis may also be seen where poor quality hay is used with
an unacceptably high dust level. Indeed the most common cause of conjunctivitis is
probably a foreign body such as a hay awn (Figure 5.5). Conjunctival infammation is
one of the earliest signs of vitamin C deficiency, a potentially severe condition in this
species.
62Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Figure 5.6 White fluid secretion is a normal finding in some guinea pig eyes.
Clinical management
Evaluation of a cases of conjunctivitis in the guinea pig should aim to determine the
cause, assessing the possibility that envirommental agents such as a hay awn foreign body.
dust from poor quality hay, or dietary factors such as a low level of vitamin C are instru-
mental in causing the condition. Where no obvious physical cause can be elucidated, an
infectious agent maybe implicated. While bacteriological investigation may be consid-
ered worthwhile, financial constraints will preclude such evaluation in many cases, and
use of a broad-spectrum topical antibiotic will, if successful, provide a diagnostic and
therapeutic step in one. In cases where such an immediate course of action does not
succeed, it may be well worth taking samples for bacteriology but in such cases culture
Where Chlamydia is isolated or suspected, topical tetracycline ointment should be
be considered to ensure that the infectious agent does not continue to reside in the
nasopharynx.
Dacryocystitis does not seem to occur in the guinea pig with anything like the fre
quency it does in the rabbit, but unresponsive purulent discharge should always alert one
to the fact that this may be the underlying lesion. As noted above guinea pigs can nor-
mally produce a milky white ocular secretion (Figure 5.6) which is said to lubricate the
eye and aid in cleaning the face. To date we have little or no information on the composi-
tion of this fuid nor on its origin or function.
Keratoconjuctivitis sicca
Clinical signs
Signs of ocular irritation and, in particular partial closure of the palpebral aperture,
together with a lack of clear sharp refection of light form the ocular surface are highly
suggestive of clinical dry eye (Figure 5.7). A Schirmer tear test is the standard method
of evaluating tear production (Figure 5.8). The normal Schinmer tear test has been
reported as a median of 3mm/min with a range of 0-12mm/min in one study of 31
healthy guinea pigs of various ages and breeds [8]. An earlier study on 28 2.5-year-old
The guinea pig eye63
Figure 5.7 (a, b) Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a guinea pig. Note the lustreless ocular
surface.
Figure 5.8 Schirmer tear test in a guinea pig with unilateral dry eye.
Dunkin-Hartley guinea pigs reported a mean Schirmer tear test before topical anaes-
thesia of 0.36 ± 1.1 mm/min and 0.43 ± 1.29 mm/min after topical anaesthesia but these
exceptionally low measurements of tear production may be a function of choosing one
breed of cavy at one age [9]. Cormeal touch threshold as measured with a Cochon et
Bonnet anaesthesiometer in that study was between 3.7 and 6.4 g/mm? in different areas
of the cormea, again significantly different from that measured by the study of a wider
range of guinea pig breeds where the mean was 6.6 g/mm? with a range of touch thresh-
old between 3.2 and 17.7 g/mm'. Given the small size of the eye the phenol red thread
test may be appropriate, with results of 16 ±4.7mm wetting in 15 seconds for the
Dunkin-Hartley guinea pigs and 21 ± 4.2mm wetting in 15 seconds for the wider range
of cavies.
Aetiopathogenesis
It is unclear whether the same immune-mediated lacrimal destruction occurs in guinea
pigs as is the case in the dog but given that topical cyclosporine has a beneficial effect
(see below) we might anticipate that the same pathological processes are reducing tear
production in these animals as in canine patients.
64Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Figure 5.9Traumatic corneal lesion from hay awn.
Clinical management
We have shown topical cyclosporine (Optimmune, Schering-Plough) to have a beneficial
effect in increasing tear production in guinea pigs with dry eye but, given the high price
of this medication, it may well be that tear replacement therapy with a carbomer-based
gel such as Viscotears (Allergan) or a more liquid medication such as hydroxymethyl-
cellulose is a more practical approach.
Keratitis
Clinical signs
A common condition in guinea pigs is ocular surface trauma, nonmally from a hay shard
 or grass awn (Figure 5.9). In the acute phase a cormeal epithelial erosion and sometimes
also stromal damage occurs, but with little blepharospasm in the majority of cases. Later
changes yield a scar with inflammatory cell infiltrate and fibrosis which often impairs
Aetiopathogenesis
The fact that guinea pigs burrow in straw and leaf litter both in the wild and in captivity
renders them prone to such injuries. The lack of obvious reaction to such a nociceptive
stimulus means that often such cormeal injuries in captive guinea pigs are not noticed by
owners until a later stage when the inflammation and fibroplasia are ongoing.
Clinical management
In the acute phase, removal of the inciting foreign body and provision of topical antibi-
otic drops or gel, with a broad-spectrum drug such as chloramphenicol or gentamicin,
is appropriate. In the chronic phase a superficial keratectomy might be appropriate
to remove the reactive tissue from the cormeal surface, but this is rarely imple
surgery.
The guinea pig eye65
(b)
Figure 5.10 (a) Subconjunctival lipid deposition (fatty eye). (b) Guinea pig fattened up' for
showing
Figure 5.11“Flesh eye' in a guinea pig.
'Fatty eye' and 'flesh eye'
Clinical signs
These two conditions, with their nomenclature taken straight from guinea pig breeders
and showers, involve masses around the eye. Fatty eye is, as its name suggests, a deposi-
tion of lipid in the bulbar conjunctiva, appearing as a white or pink-white lesion (Figure
5.10a). Flesh eye, again well named, is probably the equivalent of nictitans gland pro-
lapse in the dog, although to date we have no histological evidence to confirm this. It
appears as a pink, or red-pink mass in the medial canthus, quite different from fatty eye
(Figure 5.11).
Aetiopathogenesis
We have little evidence on the aetiology or even the histological nature of these lesions,
but fatty eye is seen in guinea pigs ^fattened up' not for the pot, as they might be in their
homeland of Peru, but for shows! Figure 5.10b shows just such an animal. Understandably.
having been fed to present a rounded figure, conjunctival lipid deposition is seen rela-
tively commonly.
66Ophthatmology of Exotic Pets
Clinical management
Fatty eye can be managed by reducing the calorific dietary input of the animal but reduc-
tion in size of the lesion will take time. To date no report exists of removal of the medial
canthal mass in flesh eye but we might suppose that removal by sharp dissection might
be appropriate.
Corneal lipidosis
Clinical signs
Another manifestation of lipid deposition in the eye is cormeal lipidosis. This manifests
as a circular or oval white area in the central or paracentral comea (Figure 5.12). At
higher magnification it can be seen that the lesion consists of a number of focal white
deposits, either granular in appearance or more commonly spicular (Figure 5.13). Each
of these is a triglyceride or cholesterol crystal, the former more likely to be small and
granular while the cholesterol crystals are somewhat larger and appear as straight
spicules.
Fgure 5.12 Dense corneal lipidosis in a guinea pig eye.
Fgure 5.13An ellipse of lipid deposition in a guinea pig eye
The guinea pigeye67
Aetiopathogenesis
It is unclear to what degree dietary fat plays a role in the genesis of these lesions. Stromal
lipid dystrophy in the dog and in man is bilateral and is not associated with an increase
evidence of the gene involved, it is reasonable, therefore, to consider these lesions to be
 true stromal lipid dystrophy.
Clinical management
While we have just said that these lesions are likely to be genetic and not related to
enquiries with regard to the animal's diet and perhaps also take a fasted blood sample
for circulating lipid analysis. Having said this, such lesions, even though they are in the
central visual axis of the animal and so should compromise vision quite substantially,
seem to make little difference to the animal's quality of life and thus owners should be
advised that unless investigations show excess dietary fat intake to be at the root of the
problem, there is little that needs to be done to limit the problem, and little to be con-
cemed about.
Heterotopic bone formafion
Clinical signs
This fascinating condition has a very distinctive appearance, that of a white lesion at the
limbus, protruding slightly into the comea (Figures 5.14 and 5.15). In another species
group it might be confused with a lipid deposition but in guinea pigs this well demarcated
white deposit is one thing and one thing only - heterotopic bone formation. Some reports
have suggested that glaucoma may be seen concurrent with this condition, but this
author's experience is that, if anything. intraocular pressure is lower than normal in
most of these eyes; little clinical significance can be placed on such a finding, since the
eyes generally have no signs of other disease such as uveitis associated with the white
Figure 5.14 Small area of heterotopic bone formation.
68Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Fgure 5.15 Extensive limbal heterotopic bone formation.
Figure 5.16Heterotopic bone formation of entire globe.
calcium deposit. The point at which the intraocular pressure may rise is in animals where
the entire globe is overtaken by this mineral deposition (Figure 5.16), but even here
intraocular pressure as measured by tonometry, paradoxically does not seem to rise in
most cases.
Aetiopathogenesis
This condition used to be termed an osseous choristoma [10]. That condition, however,
is a benign slow-growing congenital tumour [11] and thus the tenm is inappropriate for
this condition in the guinea pig eye which, while slowly developing, is neither congenital
nor a neoplasm. It is, as Brooks reported, heterotopic bone formation in the ciliary body
[12]. Others have confirmed Brooks' diagnosis while retaining the term osseous choris-
toma [13]. The pathogenesis here appears quite remarkable. Ascorbic acid, vitamin C.
promotes calcium deposition when at high concentrations in tissue. The ciliary body
secretes vitamin C into the aqueous humour, potentially to ensure sufficiently high levels
The guinea pig eye69
in the lens to prevent cataract formation. High levels at this anatomical location in
the eye cause the build-up of calcium at the limbus, causing this heterotopic bone for-
mation. It is unusual, having said this, that the white calcium plaque is generally a
focal lesion rather than one which encircles the eye at the level of the limbus although
this can occur (Figure 5.15). Why calcium deposition and new bone formation should
occur in this focal manner is unclear. There are obviously further lessons to be learmed
regarding the development of this condition.
Clinical management
Most cases of heterotopic bone formation do not require treatment, since the appearance
of this white plaque, while disconcerting to owners, does not impede vision in the guinea
 pig or cause any discomfort. The report that glaucoma may supervene might suggest that
measurement of intraocular pressure should be central to the management of this condi-
tion but in this author's clinical experience glaucoma is unlikely to occur unless the
whole globe is overtaken by bone deposition. Given that applanation or rebound tonom-
of ocular discomfort, blindness or globe enlargement supervene, an increase in intraocu-
lar pressure should not be a prime concerm
Cataract
Clinical signs
cortex to an obvious complete mature cataract (Figures 5.17-5.19). The opacity may
have no effect on vision and only be picked up on a routine ophthalmic examination of
an otherwise normal eye, or may be sight threatening or frankly blinding and clear to all
who observe the animal. In our study of 1000 animals 40% had some degree of lens
Figure 5.17Mature cataract in diabetic guinea pig also with fatty eye.
70Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
   n n     si  at' 
opacification, although in the vast majority of these animals no effect on visual acuity
was noted [1].
Aetiopathogenesis
The fact that guinea pigs require a dietary input of ascorbic acid, and the importance
of this vitamin in preventing the oxidative changes at the heart of many cataracts
suggests that low levels of vitamin C may be central to the high levels of lens changes
we noted in guinea pigs [14]. Having said that no correlation between prevalence of
cataract and level of vitamin C supplementation (or lack of it) was noted in our study.
It is known that congenital cataract is seen in N13 laboratory guinea pigs as an
inherited cataract associated with a crystallin gene mutation, namely a splice-site muta-
tion in the zeta crystallin [15]. We have seen a number of other congenital lens
opacities in related animals, which are probably associated with other lens protein
The guinea pig eye 71
gene mutations. Diabetic cataract occurs frequently in guinea pigs and presents as a
mature lens opacity.
Clinical management
Any cataract in any species can be removed either by phacoemulsification surgery if the
globe is large enough or by irrigation/aspiration if the comeal diameter is too small to
accommodate the phaco probe. Thus guinea pig cataracts could be removed but one has
ua ad eue uonudu e se sid aun a oy adoe si sun ianum yse o 
reduction is there in the quality of life of a blind as opposed to a sighted guinea pig?
Anecdotal reports of the behaviour of blind guinea pigs compared with sighted ones
suggest that there is not a huge difference between the two. Perhaps the potential down-
side of ocular inflammation and the difficulty of guinea pig anaesthesia for a prolonged
ficient to justify cataract removal. This is not the sort of comment normally expected of
an ophthalmologist but we must be informed by evidence from the behaviour of sighted
 and blind cavies.
Retinal anomalies
Clinical signs
The guinea pig has an anangiotic fundus, one in which there are no retinal blood vessels
(Figure 5.20). In addition the guinea pig fundus has no tapetum. These differences from
the retina seen in the dog and cat may explain why we have no records of retinal degen-
in calibre of retinal vessels as key ophthalmic signs of retinal degeneration. But without
tapetum or retinal vessels, the key signs of retinal degeneration cannot be seen. Only one
report exists of retinal degeneration in the guinea pig but this reduction in retinal function
was determined by electroretinography and not fundoscopy or behavioural changes [16].
Figure 5.20 The anangiotic guinea pig fundus.
72Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
References
1. Williams DL, Sullivan A. Ocular disease in the guinea pig (Cavia porcellus): a survey of 1000
animals. Vet Ophthalmo1 2010;13:54-62
2. Buttery RG, Hinrichsen CF, Weller WL, Haight JR. How thick should a retina be? A compara
tive study of mammalian species with and without intraretinal vasculature. Vision Res 1991;3 1:
169-187.
3. Zhou X, Qu J, Xie R, Wang R, Jiang L, Zhao H, Wen J, Lu F. Normal development of refrac
tive state and ocular dimensions in guinea pigs. Vision Res 2006;46:2815-2823.
porceffus). Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2009;50:1013-1019.
 5. Howlett MH, McFadden SA. Emmetropization and schematic eye models in developing pig
mented guinea pigs. Vision Res 2007;47:1178-1190.
e g              r  9
guinea-pigs.Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban 2007;32:282-287
1971;32:2099-2105
8. Coster ME, Stiles J, Krohne SG, Raskin RE. Results of diagnostic ophthalmic testing in
healthy guinea pigs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008;232:1825-1833.
9. Trost K, Skalicky M, Nell B. Schirmer tear test, phenol red thread tear test, eye blink frequency
and corneal sensitivity in the guinea pig. Vet Ophthalmol 2007; 10: 143-146.
10. Griffith JW, Sassani JW, Bowman TA, Lang CM. Osseous choristoma of the ciliary body in
guinea pigs. Vet Pathol 1988;25:100-102.
11. Kim BH, Henderson BA. Intraocular choristoma. Semin Ophthalmol 2005 20:223-229.
12. Brooks DE, McCracken MD, Collins BR.Heterotopic bone formation in the ciliary body of
an aged guinea pig. Lab Anim Sci 1990;40:88-90.
choristoma of the ciliary body. Lab Anim 2002;31:23-25.
14. Wu K, Kojima M, Shui YB, Sasaki H, Sasaki K. Ultraviolet B-induced corneal and lens
damage in guinea pigs on low-ascorbic acid diet. Ophthalmic Res 2004;36:277-283.
15. Bettelheim FA, Churchill AC, Zigler JS Jr. On the nature of hereditary cataract in strain 13/N
guinea pigs. Curr Eye Res 1997;16:917-924.
              
blinding disorder in guinea pigs. Doc Ophthalmol 2003;107:59-69.
Chapter 6
The ferret eye
Anatomy and physiology of the ferret eye
s     e sa   a    s
although it may be that the eye's diminutive size as well as its behaviour in dim light
(see below) renders the ferret's vision of less importance than in related species such as
the mink, which feeds more in daylight. Ferret kits are born, as are puppies and kittens,
with their eyes closed but unusually, compared with the dog or cat, the eyelids do not
open until as late as 28-34 days postnatally. The ferret globe is small (7.0 ± 0.24mm)
[1] with a relatively large lens (3.4 ± 0.15mm) and a wide cormea for optimal light
gathering in low light conditions. The animal has widely spaced laterally set (32 degrees
from the midline) eyes giving a field of view of around 270 degrees but a relatively poor
degree of binocularity of only about 40 degrees frontally [2]. The ovoid pupil (Figure
6.1), as with that of the cat, allows the eye a greater range of variation in admission of
light from a mydriatic pupil to a tight slit, but the ferret has a horizontally orientated
the horizon for prey items on the ground. The iris is brown in pigmented individuals
(Figure 6.2) and in so-called ^black eyed white' individuals (Figure 6.2); it is not pig-
mented in albino animals in which the blood vessels within the iris radiate towards the
pupil (Figure 6.3). Ferrets have a holangiotic fundus with retinal blood vessels radiating
from the optic disc. They may appear unusually magnifed on fundoscopy but this is an
effect of their unusually large lens. Pigmented ferrets have a dog-like tapetum lucidum
with a green-blue reflective eye-shine. Albino ferrets lack this reflectivity but are reported
to have a tapetum histologically similar to that of the the pigmented wild-type ferret [3].
What do ferrets see?
The ferret eye is optimised for function in dim and dark environments, given that in the
wild the species is crepuscular, hunting its rodent prey mostly at dusk and dawn. We
have litle information on the visual acuity of ferrets apart from research comparing
visual perception in albino and wild-type pigmented animals. On the other hand the ferret
or polecat retina has been studied in detail. As we might expect from their predominantly
scotopic (dim-light) vision, the ferret retina is predominantly rod-based. Research on
Ophthatmology of Exotic Pets, First Edition. David L. Williams.
@ 2012 David Williams. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
74Ophthatmotogy of ExoticPets
Figure 6.1 The normal polecat (pigmented) ferret eye with ovoid pupil.
Figure 6.2 The 'black eyed white' ferret eye with red tapetal reflex
Figure 6.3 The albino ferret eye with red tapetal reflex.
ganglion cell density suggests that acuity is considerably lower than that of another
obligate crepuscular camivore, the cat. As with the cat, the ferret has an area of increased
photoreceptor density superiotemporal to the optic disc, the area centralis. This correlates
to some degree with the human macula but the ganglion cell density of the ferret is only
about half that of cats, with ganglion cell receptive fields two to three times larger in the
ferret than in the cat. It appears that, in terms of Snellen acuity, the ferret's visual resolu-
tion is 20/170 in bright light and 20/350 in dim light. Although the ferret's vision is
markedly inferior to that of man or the cat (which is probably around 20/100), its visual
sensitivity, the lower limit of light needed for vision is much better: the threshold of light
needed for vision in the ferret is estimated to be five to seven times lower than in man.
The ferreteye75
As with all non-primate mammals, ferrets are dichromats, seeing with two sets of
cones rather than the human three.Their peak cone density is around 26000/mm? with a
peak rod density of 350000/mm'. The ferret seems adapted to visualisation of moving
objects rather than stationary ones: one study suggested that objects moving at 25-45 cm/
sec were optimally visualised, perhaps correlating with the speed of rodent prey items,
though this has to be said to be little more than conjecture. Other sensory agencies such
as smell and hearing are important to the ferret, as may be expected in a predominantly
noctural/crepuscular predator. One study suggested that olfactory cues were more impor-
tant in stimulating hunting behaviour than visual ones.
We noted above that research in the ferret had for the most part been focused on the
difference between pigmented and albino strains, this acting as a model for ocular abnor-
malities in albino animals and humans more generally. As first noted in Siamese cats.
the visual fields of albino animals are substantially different from those of pigmented
animals. This is certainly the case in ferrets where the far lateral retinal ganglion cells
project not contralaterally, as in pigmented individuals, but ipsilaterally [4]. Defects in
the optokinetic refex in albino ferrets are also associated with defective neurogenesis
and thus abnormal neurogenesis in the visual cortex [5]. This is gives rise to problems
in motion detection in albino ferrets as can be shown behaviourally [6]. The same
researchers measured visual acuity and contrast sensitivity in albino and normal pig-
mented ferrets. Interestingly they found that albino animals did not appear to have a
much poorer ability in visual discrimination than their pigmented cage-mates; although
there was a somewhat lower visual acuity in these albino animals it did not reach statisti
cal significance. Females did perform less well than males in visual discrimination tests
but this seemed to be a motivational rather than perceptional difference. Quite what
relevance this has to pet ferrets is unclear but it may be that albino animals have poorer
Diseases of the ferret eye
Ophthaimia neonatorum
Clinical signs
The late opening of the ferret kit eyelids means that infections in the conjunctival sac of
kits can be severe and give rise to substantial ocular disease before being noticed.
Swelling of the lids in these first weeks of the kit's life or any discharge from between
the opening lids should be dealt with promptly since extension of infection can lead to
panophthalmitis, subsequent septicaemia and even death. Affected kits are often ano.
rexic, presumably because of the pain involved in the condition, but also possibly because
of systemic infection spreading from the ocular region.
Aetiopathogenesis
Ocular infection early in life can occur at birth, as seen in the cat with genital herpesvirus
being passed to kittens, but in the ferret it is more commonly seen when kits suckle a
76Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
jill with mastitis. Subsequent panophthalmitis and septicaemia may even result in death
in severe cases [2].
Clinical management
With regard to local treatment, the eyelids should be coaxed apart with cotton buds if
near opening, or surgically if younger. Bacteriological swabs should be taken to identify
the organisms involved. Topical broad-spectrum antibiotic ointment should be applied
frequently. If the kits are listless or pyrexic, or the jill is shown to have an infectious
mastitis, systemic antibiotics should be given to the jill and kits, although the prognosis
is poor.
Congenital ocular defects
Clinical signs
Other congenital defects which have been reported in ferrets include microphthalmos.
cormeal dermoids, primary hyperplastic primary vitreous and cataracts; the latter two
conditions are dealt with further below.
Aetiopathogenesis
Microphthalmos was determined to have a simple dominant inheritance although it has
to be noted that this was in one closed laboratory colony of ferrets and extrapolating this
 aa soa [ao [] aode aq nou  s jo sdno rao 
reported in ferrets and these aberrant islands of dermal tissue within the conjunctiva or
cormea have in some species been determined to be inherited but in others they are spo-
radic defects.
Clinical management
ent infection which may occur because of the over-large conjunctival sac relative to the
small size of the eye may need regular management with topical antimicrobial agents.
Comeal dermoids can be removed by superficial keratectomy, although the small size of
Orbital disease
Clinical signs
Space-occupying lesions in the retrobulbar space will give rise to exophthalmos with
of the dog but deeper anterior-posteriorly. This means that retrobulbar lesions are quite
extensive before they are readily noted through globe protrusion anteriorly in the orbit
The ferret eye77
Aetiopathogenesis
Several different causes can give rise to exophthalmos from a space-occupying orbital
mass. First a relatively sizeable zygomatic salivary gland fills the posterior-inferior
portion of the orbit and an intraorbital salivary mucocele can develop, particularly
following head trauma, given that the gland is relatively poorly encapsulated in this
species [8].
Orbital neoplasia may be encountered in this species although reports are rare. Two
ferrets have been reported with orbital involvement in generalised lymphoma [9].
Clinical management
The ferret orbit has a sizeable retrobulbar venous plexus which can complicate surgical
intervention in orbital disease. Nevertheless exenteration to treat orbital neoplasia has
been reported in the ferret, after diagnostic imaging to determine the extent of the neo-
plasm [2].
Conjunctivitis
Clinical signs
Conjunctivitis, with the classic signs of conjunctival hyperaemia and oedema (chemosis)
and an obvious mucoid to mucopurulent ocular discharge, is a relatively common finding
in ferrets. These classical clinical signs of conjunctival inflammation do not allow a dif-
ferentiation of the varying causes of the disease; since they are often associated with
systemic disease (see below) a full clinical examination of an affected animal is
man datory.
Aetiopathogenesis
Local irritative factors such as dusty bedding or a conjunctival foreign body can cause
conjunctivitis in ferrets but in most cases the condition is a sign of systemic disease and
indeed often the first sign of severe and even life-threatening conditions.
The first and most important of these is canine distemper [10]. For up to a week after
exposure the ferret appears unaffected, after which a moderate to severe chemosis with
mucopurulent ocular and nasal discharge is noted. The drying discharge produces brown
crusting around the eyes, in severe cases leading to partial or complete fusion of the
eyelids in ankyloblepharon. Blepharitis and keratoconjunctivitis sicca can also occur.
Mortality rates in this condition are exceptionally high with animals dying within the
first 2 weeks after infection with the ferret strain of the virus or between 3 and 5 weeks
after infection with the dog strain.
 s     n s   s o n 
similar to those of canine distemper virus infection. The difference is that progression
to severe disease with signs such as periocular crusting and ankyloblepharon do not
generally occur and mortality rates are much lower [11].
78Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Mycobacterial infection with M. genovense has been reported in two ferrets with
proliferative conjunctivitis in one case and a more chemotic condition in the other [12].
Salmonella has been reported to be associated with conjunctivitis in ferrets but as a minor
clinical sign in disease with other more severe characteristics such as haemorrhagic diar
rhoea and pyrexia. Nutritional deficiencies, such as those associated with low dietary
biotin or vitamin A, have been reported but these are likely to be rare in pet ferrets.
Clinical management
In cases of local irritation or infection topical antibiotic preparations may be useful in
disease, a full clinical examination together with an attempt at definitive diagnosis
through conjunctival swabs for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for distemper and
influenza viruses is important if the correct diagnosis and prognosis are to be given. In
S u a d p sansna ans si pe nn  an sao io
where distemper is diagnosed, many chose euthanasia as the kindest option given the
high mortality rates.
In the cases of mycobacterial infection, diagnosis was by PCR investigation of material
obtained by conjunctival biopsy and treatment with rifampicin together with other anti-
bioticmedication was curative inboth cases.
Entropion
Clinical signs
As in any species lid in-turming can give ocular discomfort and in severe cases comeal
ulceration, especially if the defect is serious enough to give trichiasis with skin hair
abrading onto the ocular surface (Figure 6.4).
Aetiopathogenesis
Entropion is rare in the ferret. Anatomical abnormalities in the lid may be the cause of
the condition, but in other cases an ocular surface foreign body may be responsible for
initial blepharospasm which later turms into a more long-lasting defect.
Fgure 6.4 Lower lid entropion with trichiasis in a 6-month-old ferret
The ferret eye 79
Figure 6.5 Lymphoma presenting as third eyelid swelling and protrusion.
Clinicalmanagement
Where ocular surface pain results from lid in-turming a foreign body should be sought
by careful examination. If an anatomical defect appears to be the cause, a standard
Hotz-Celsus excision of a small strip of lid skin can resolve the problem, although in a
lid as small and delicate as a ferret lid, surgery under an operating microscope is to be
advised.
Adnexal lymphoma
Clinical signs
seen occasionally is lymphomatous enlargement of the tissue on the bulbar surface of
the third eyelid (Figure 6.5).
Aetiopathogenesis
Quite why lymphoma appears so common in the older ferret is unclear but one large
survey suggested that in reality the incidence of neoplasia is not higher than in the dog
or cat [13], while another study showed that a high proportion were T cell neoplasms
with related poor prognosis [14].
Clinical management
While various chemotherapeutic regimes have been reported for lymphoma in the ferret,
in this author's experience these neoplasms when involving the eyes are refractory to
treatment. Topical steroid can reduce the infammatory reaction for a time and topical
tear replacement similarly eases ocular surface discomfort.
80Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Keratitis
Clinical signs
Cormeal disease in the ferret may be usefully categorised into ulcerative and non-
ulcerative keratitis. Cormeal ulcers can be evaluated as in any other species by use of
Huorescein dye to determine when epithelial integrity has been lost. Non-ulcerative
keratitis may be characterised by vascularisation and a cellular infiltrate.
Aetiopathogenesis
Cormeal ulceration may be associated with trauma, tear deficiency or exposure kera-
titis. Epithelial basement membrane dystrophy, as seen in dogs and rabbits, has not
been reported in ferrets, but in older animals delayed epithelial healing can give rise
to similar signs. Tear production in ferrets has been documented at 5.3 ± 1.3mm/min
using a standard Schirmer tear test strip, giving a useful guide suggesting when tear
deficiency may be involved in cormeal disease. Assessment should also be made of
the degree of exposure of the central cormea since comeal ulceration may be associated
with exposure keratitis, as reported in a ferret with exophthalmos from a salivary
mucocele [2].
The non-ulcerative keratitis may be immune-mediated in origin as in canine chronic
superficial keratitis, but it has also been reported as an early sign of multicentric lym-
phoma in one ferret [15].
Clinical management
Comeal ulceration should be managed as in other species with topical antibiosis alone
if traumatic in origin or with topical cyclosporine ointment (Optimmune, Schering-
Plough) and tear replacement (a carbomer gel such as Viscotears, Allergan) if associated
with keratoconjunctivitis sicca. If exposure keratitis is a causative factor, clearly amel-
joration of the cause of the globe protrusion is essential but if this is not possible in the
short term, a lateral canthoplasty will reduce the degree of exposure until resolution of
the comeal exposure is achieved.
Uveitis
Clinical signs
The classic signs of miosis, episcleral hyperaemia and frank signs of intraocular inflam-
mation such as keratic precipitates and hypopyon may be missed initially because of the
small size of the ferret eye, but pain and photophobia should encourage further examina
tion of an inflamed eye in a ferret as with any other species. The predominant sign seen
by this author is cormeal oedema (Figure 6.6), with uveitis differentiated from glaucoma
by the fact that the inflamed eyes have a lower intraocular pressure than those with
glaucoma.
The ferret eye  81
Figure 6.6 Uvetitis with corneal oedema and an intraocular pressure of 8mmHg
Aetiopathogenesis
Uveitis is not a commonly reported condition in the ferret and most cases involve break-
down of the blood-aqueous barrier secondary to trauma or cormeal ulceration. The one
condition in which uveitis is an important primary sign is Aleutian disease, a generalised
parvoviral immune complex disease. Mink experimentally infected with the virus devel-
oped a significant anterior and intermediate uveitis involving the iris and ciliary body
predominantly; this has also been reported in a naturally infected otter. While ferrets with
the disease have not been specifically reported with uveitis this may well be through
inattention to ocular signs given that vasculitis is a classical feature of the disease and
inflammation of uveal vasculature classically causes a breakdown in the blood-aqueous
barrier with subsequent uveitis. Other causes of uveitis in ferrets may include systemic
fungal diseases, such as blastomycosis and cryptococcosis, and protozoal diseases, such
as toxoplasmosis.
Clinical management
Use of atropine as a mydriatic and cycloplegic is important in anterior uveitis but the
small size of the ferret eye and the small blood volume means that over-exuberant medi-
cation with this parasympatholytic could result in systemic toxicity. As uveitis may be
an early sign of systemic disease in the ferret, any animal with intraocular inflammation
should be subject to a full clinical examination and blood work-up.
Cataract
Clinical signs
Lens opacification starting as small cortical vacuoles or spokes and progressing to full
milky white cataract is surprisingly common in some reports of ferrets from laboratory
environments although, in this author's experience, it is less common in outbred ferrets
kept as pets. Most are seen in older ferrets over 5 years of age in which lens opacification
is more common. Nuclear sclerosis occurs in middle-aged ferrets prior to frank opacifica-
tion. Close examination of the ferret eye with either direct or indirect ophthalmoscopy
will show opacities in the lens capsule, cortex or nucleus. Early focal opacities appear
82Ophthatmologyof Exotic Pets
Fgure 6.7Diffuse maturing cataract in an 8-year-old ferret
predominantly as pinpoint refections of light, while mature cataract is seen as a diffuse
haze or more profound opacity similar to those in other species (Figure 6.7).
Aetiopathogenesis
In one report 47% of year-old ferrets had some degree of lens opacity ranging from
punctate opacities to hypermature cataracts, while by 18 months of age almost all ferrets
in the colony had some degree of cataract [16]. Another report, already noted above,
documented microphthalmia with congentital cataract in a group of inbred laboratory
ferrets [7,17]. A study ongoing by our group has found age-related nuclear sclerosis in
ferrets over 4 years of age while 50% of the population have frank focal opacities as the
beginning of age-related cataract by the age of 5 years. By the age of 7 years all ferrets
have some degree of age-related cataract formation.
Clinical management
Removal of a cataractous ferret lens is difficult given the small size of the ferret globe.
Irrigation-aspiration is more likely to be successful than phacoemulsification given the
size of the probes involved, although most animals are not overly affected by the mild lens
 opacification occurring in middle to old age, and so probably do not require any surgery.
Lens luxation
Clinical signs
Lens luxations are readily noted in the ferret eye by assessment of the aphakic crescent
which occurs as the lens first subluxates out of the visual axis of the globe. Many are
associated with mature cataract and thus movement of the lens is particularly easily
appreciated, either forward into the anterior chamber or backwards, falling in to the vitre-
ous cavity. Intraocular pressure should be determined with a hand-held applanation or
rebound tonometer; often intraocular pressure is raised because of impairment of aqueous
outflow by the large lens sitting in the anterior chamber or by vitreous strands blocking
the iridocomeal angle. At other times intraocular pressure may be reduced, presumably
as a result of mild intraocular inflammation, although concurrent signs of uveitis are not
generally present.
The ferret eye 83
Aetiopathogenesis
Most lens luxations in ferrets occur because of cataract formation within the lens which
puts tension on the lens zonule but primary luxations have also been noted.
Clinicalmanagement
Removal of the lens by irrigation-aspiration or by intracapsular lendectomy may be
attempted but the small size of the ferret eye renders the surgery more difficult and in
this author's experience, where the animal is not inconvenienced by the luxation, cases
may be better managed by conservative medical therapy to reduce intraocular pressure
(see below) or control mild infammation
Glaucoma
Clinical signs
Glaucoma is an uncommon condition in the ferret. Episcleral injection, mydriasis and
blindness are signs of raised intraocular pressure in the ferret as with other species. The
normal intraocular pressure in the ferret has been reported as 22.8 ± 5.5 mmHg in one
study using rhe Tonopen applanation tonometer [18] and 21.0 ± 4.0mmHg in another
study using anaesthetised ferrets; a third study determined the intraocular pressure to be
considerably lower at 14.5 ± 3.2 mmHg. Recent measurements on 80 normal ferrets from
this author's clinic using the Tonovet rebound tonometer determined the normal intraocu-
lar pressure to be 13.1 ± 1.1 mmHg
Aetiopathogenesis
No cases of primary glaucoma have been reported in the veterinary literature and all
cases seen in the author's clinic have been secondary to uveitis after trauma or luxation
of cataractous lenses.
Clinical management
Medical management of glaucoma in ferrets with topical dorzolamide, pilocarpine or the
prostaglandin analogue latanoprost has been reported [19], although no data were given
with regard to efficacy of these drugs; this quite understandable given the rarity of the
conditon in this species. The same review reported the successful use of trans-scleral
diode laser cytophotocoagulation to control raised intraocular pressure in one ferret.
Retinal disease
Clinical signs
hyper-reflectivity and vascular attenuation as one might find in a dog or cat with inherited
degeneration seen in progressive retinal atrophy.
84Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Aetiopathogenesis
While some suggest a familial trait in such degeneration, the fact that the ferret, like the
cat, is an obligate carmivore, suggests that, as in what used to be called feline central
retinal degeneration, dietary taurine deficiency may play a part in the retinal atrophy.
occurs in the cat, but to date none has been reported in the literature.
Intrauterine infection with feline panleucopenia virus has been shown to cause a
widespread devastating retinopathy with subsequent blindness, but this infection has not
beenreported occurringnaturally[21].
Clinical management
Without a clear aetiology for these blinding retinopathies in the ferret little can be offered
in advice regarding treatment or prevention except to say that, given their often nocturmal
habits in the wild, many ferrets appear to cope well with blindness and that owners should
not be unduly perturbed if their pet is found to be visually impaired.
References
1. Hernandez-Guerra AM, Rodilla V, Lopez-Murcia MM. Ocular biometry in the adult anesthe-
tized ferret (Mustela putorius furo). Vet Ophthalmol 2007;10:50-52
2. Miller PE. Ferret ophthalmology. Sem Avian Exotic Pet Med 1997;6:146-151.
3. Tjalve H, Frank A. Tapetum lucidum in the pigmented and albino ferret. Exp Eye Res
1984;38:341-351.
4. Garipis N, Hoffmann KP. Visual field defects in albino ferrets (Mustela putorius furo). Vsion
Res 2003;3:793-800.
5.Hoffmann KP, Garipis N,Distler C.Optokinetic deficits in albino ferrets (Mustela putorius
furo): a behavioral and electrophysiological study. J Neurosci 2004;24:4061-4069.
6. Hupfeld D, Distler C, Hoffmann KP. Motion perception deficits in albino ferrets (Mustela
putoriusfuro).Vision Res 2006;46:2941-2948
7. Miler PE, Dubielzig RR. Autosomal dominant microphthalmia, cataract and retinal dysplasia
in a laboratory colony of ferrets. Invest Ohthalmol Vis Sci 1995;36:S64.
8. Miller PE, Pickett JP. Zygomatic salivary mucocele in a ferret. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1989;184:1437-1438
9. McCalla TL, Erdman SE, Kawasaki T. Lymphoma with orbital involvement in two ferrets.
Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1997;7:36-38.
10. Davidson MG. Canine distemper virus infection in the domestic ferret. Comp Cont Educ
1986;8 :448-453.
11. Ryland LM, Gorham JR. The ferret and its diseases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1978;173:
1154-1158.
12. Lucas J, Lucas A, Furber H, James G, Hughes MS, Martin P, Chen SC, Mitchell DH, Love
DN, Malik R. Mycobacterium genavense infection in two aged ferrets with conjunctival
lesions.Aust Vet J2000;78:685-689.
13. Li X, Fox JG, Padrid PA. Neoplastic diseases in ferrets: 574 cases (1968-1997). J Am Vet
Med Ass0c 1998;212:1402-1406
The ferret eye 85
14. Onuma M, Kondo H, Ono S, Shibuya H, Sato T. Cytomorphological and immunohistochemi-
cal features of lymphoma in ferrets. J Vet Med Sci 2008;70:893-898
15. Ringle MJ, Lindley DM, Krohne SG. Lymphoplasmacytic keratitis in a ferret with lymphoma.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;203:670-672
16. Miller PE, Marler AJ, Dubielzig RR. Cataracts in a laboratory colony of ferrets. Lab Anim
Sci 1993;43:562-568.
17. Miller PE, Dubielzig RR. The morphology of autosomal dominant microphthalmia in ferrets.
26"h ACvO Congress 1995:62.
18. Sapienza JS, Procher D, Collins BR. Tonometry in clinically normal ferrets. Prog Vet Comp
Ophthalmol 1991;1:291-294.
19. Good KL. Ocular disorders in pet ferrets. Vet Clin N Am 2002;5:325-339.
20. Kawasaki T. Retinal atrophy in the ferret. J Sm Exotic Anim Med 1992;1:137.
21. Margolis G, Kilham L. Retinopathy in experimental prenatal and early postnatal infections
with reovirus 3, mumps virus and feline panleucopaenia virus. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
1974;3:178.
Chapter 7
The rat and mouse eye
We will cover the rat and mouse eye together; although they have some differences in
basic biology and disease, for the most part the same sort of conditions are seen in both
and their overall anatomy and physiology are similar. I have previously reviewed oculan
conditions in the rat [1], and Richard Smith's masterful monograph gives all the informa-
tion one could need for, as its title suggests, the mouse eye [2].
Anatomy of the eye
The small size of the laboratory rodent eye renders close ophthalmic examination some-
what difficult without practice. Having said that, noctumal species often have compara-
tively bigger eyes than diurmal animals, but with most rodents being adapted for night
vision the eyes are relatively small and, though it pains me as a comparative ophthal-
mologist to say this, vision is relatively less important to these rodents than to many
other species.
Rats and mice have three lacrimal structures, the intraorbital gland, situated deep in
the orbit, the extraorbital gland, located near the base of the masseter muscle, and the
Harderian gland positioned as a U shape around the optic nerve behind the globe [3].
The cormea is very thin in these species and the lens is spherical, taking up a large
amount of the intraocular volume, in order to focus light on the retina in such a small
eye. Almost all rodents have a round pupil, but chinchillas have a slit pupil somewhat
like that of a cat. Albino rodents have a non-pigmented iris with a red refex and little
opportunity to reduce illumination falling on the retina. This is important when consider-
ing reasons for phototoxicity in animals kept in too light an environment, whether at
home or in the laboratory.
While the iris of albino animals rarely needs dilating, and does so rapidly if tropica-
mide is applied, the irides of pigmented rats and mice can be taxing to widen. They resist
the pharmacological dilation provided normally by topical atropine, probably because
melanin binds atropine, reducing the drug availability at the motor end plate of the para-
sympathetic nerve. 1% atropine followed by 10% phenylephrine every five minutes
rapidly provides adequate pupil dilation, although toxic effects of systermically absorbed
drugs should be watched for. Retinal phototoxicity has been noted in bright light after
mydriasis so ambient light should be reduced in animals after pupil dilation [4]
Ophthalmology of Exotic Pets, First Edition. David L. Williams.
@ 2012 David Williams. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Theratand mouseeye87
Figure 7.1 The holangiotic retina of a pigmented rat eye
Figure 7.2  The holangiotic retina of an albino mouse eye.
Rats have an orbital venous plexus which is important to note when performing an
enucleation [5]. While mice may be at a lower risk of haemorrhage during this operation,
their small size means that even limited blood loss during enucleation should be avoided
at all costs [6].
The fundus of the rat and mouse is holangiotic with retinal venules and arterioles
radiating from the optic nerve head. The choroid underlying these vessels is pigmented
in pigmented strains (Figure 7.1) but devoid of pigment in albinos (Figure 7.2).
A note on ophthalmoscopy
As noted in the introductory chapter on examination techniques, the small size of rat and
particularly mouse eyes, renders fundoscopy somewhat taxing. Indirect ophthalmoscopy
with +30-40D can be useful since the large lens tends to distort the view of the fundus
by direct ophthalmoscopy. A particularly useful method of observing and recording the
fundus in small rodents is to use an operating microscope with the rodent under a general
anaesthetic which dilates the pupil, and the highly convex comea covered with one drop
of viscous solution (2% methylcellulose for instance) held in place with a fat cover slip
Over the eye. The animal's eye can then be observed with an operating microscrope
88OphthatmologyofExoticPets
Another useful technique is to use a drop of similar viscous fuid between the cormea and
a rigid endoscope which allows ready viewing of the entire fundus; recording is also
possible if a photographic attachment is added [7].
of the large size of the filter paper strip. The phenol red thread test is to be preferred,
although we do not have detailed normal ranges for tear production in most laboratory
species [8]. Tonometry is difficult in rats and next to impossible in the mouse with the
Tonopen applanation tonometer because of its sizeable footplate compared to the ocular
surface diameter in these species. The Tonovet or Tonolab, a rebound tonometer, is much
more appropriate for these species since its rebounding probe takes up less than 1 mm
of comea[9]
What do rats and mice see?
Being by nature nocturmal animals, the rat (Rattus novergicus) and the mouse (Mus
musculus) have rod-dominated retinas but with cones containing visual pigments that
absorb with a peak sensitivity at 359 mm with ^blue-UV' cones and at 510mm with middle
'green' cones [10,11]. About 88% of a rat's cones are the middle green type, and 12%
are the blue-UV cones, these mostly located in a zone in the ventral retina [12]. The
ultraviolet sensitivity is important in two ways - at dawn and dusk the ratio of ultraviolet
wavelengths compared with those of visible light is higher and thus a UV sensitivity may
Rat visual acuity is relatively poor, as might be expected from their relative deficiency
that of a normal pigmented rat is reported as 1 cpd, and 0.5 cpd for albino rats in one study
[13]; another report gives values of 1.2cpd for pigmented rats and 0.34-0.43 cpd for
albino rats [14]. Such measurements suggest that a normally pigmented rat has about
20/600 vision, while albino rats have about 20/1200 vision. If rat acuity is measured by
determining ganglion cell density of ganglion cells in the retina, the area of maximum
ganglion cell density is 52.8 degrees wide, this being above and temporal to the optic disc
with a maximum density at 6774 cells/mm? compared with the human fovea with a
density of 38 000 cells/mm? [15]. This ganglion cell density suggests a maximum visual
acuity of 1.5 cpd, which is consistent with the values from photoreceptor density and also
from behavioral acuity experiments [16]. Having said that, acuity can be influenced by
many factors, especially during development, as Hubert and Weissel showed in their
seminal Nobel prize-winning studies on cats [17]. Rodent visual acuity is significantly
improved by environmental enrichment [18], but visual deprivation, on the other hand.
causes substantial decreases in visual acuity in both juvenile rats [19] and mice [20],
paralleling the changes seen in high mammals such as primates and man. Interestingly
The very lateral placement of the rat eyes (Figure 7.3) renders their depth perception
by binocular vision defective. This ocular positioning gives this prey species a wide field
of view, with their field of binocular vision being only about 76 degrees, while that of
humans is around 105 degrees [10]. Rats rely on motion parallax rather than binoculal
The rat and mouse eye89
Figure 7.3 The protuberant eyes of an albino rat.
vision to estimate depth, with vertical head bobs allowing them to judge distance. An
experiment requiring rats to jump between two platforms showed a greater number and
more pronounced head bobs before jumping as the gap between platfonms increased [23].
Albino rats and mice have lower visual acuity than pigmented individuals, as noted
above, this being due to a number of factors. Photoreceptor development requires dopa,
a molecule derived through the action of tyrosinase, the enzyme deficient in albinc
animals. Thus the albino rat or mouse retina has around 30% fewer photoreceptors than
its pigmented compatriot [24] and the rods it does have are relatively depleted of rho-
dopsin [25]. The lack of melanin also makes dark adaptation slower in albino animals;
pigmented rats adapt to the dark in around 30 minutes, but albino rats are reported to
take six times as long [26]. Such a deficit may be important in laboratories where lights
are switched on and off with regularity. Perhaps a more worrying effect on albino rodents
of living in a relatively well lit environment such as a research laboratory, is that light
toxicity is all too common where miosis has no effect on the amount of light reaching
the retina, as is the case in animals with albinoid irides. The light levels required by UK
Home Office regulations of research establishments in the UK are limited to 350-400
lux. Given the lack of detection of wavelengths at the red end of the visible light spec-
trum, the use of red plastic hide boxes in such housing prevents this retinal degeneration
and allows animals to behave as if they were in the dark, while allowing animal techni-
cians to evaluate the animals with acceptable illumination.
Ophthalmic disease in rats and mice
Chromodacryorrhoea
Clinicalsigns
Rodents with chromodacryorrhoea exhibit red staining or crusting around their eyes
(Figure 7.4), and sometimes near the nostrils and also on the dorsal surface of their front
feet, as they have rubbed their periocular regions [27].
90Ophthatmologyof Exotic Pets
Fgure 7.4 Chromodacryorrhoea in a stressed rat. (Reproduced courtesy of Dr L. Bauck.)
Aetiopathology
The lacrimal glands of rodents such as the rat and mouse differ quite substantially from
those of companion animal species, and one of the main ways in which this is manifest
is their production of porphyrin pigments in the tears at times of stress. This so-called
chromodacryorrhoea occurs during parasympathetic stimulation of the Harderian gland,
one of the orbital glands involved in tear production. This periocular red staining or
crusting can be seen as a feature of diseases such as mycoplasmosis or sialodacryoad
enitis but also during periods of stress such as restraint, rehousing with unfamiliar
animals or transport. Harderian gland swelling and necrosis have been reported after
aberrant exposure of rats to excessive levels of light and it may well be that these patho-
Harderian gland and its porphyrin products [28].
Clinical management
The key feature in the management of chromodacryorrhoea is finding and resolving
the stressors which have led to the condition. Until these are ameliorated one cannot
hope to control the condition and the impeded welfare which it signals. In an individ-
ual animal topical tear replacement can be helpful in ameliorating associated ocular
discomfort.
Ocular surface trauma
Clinical signs
The relatively large size of the ocular surface in these species compared to the globe
volume, and the prominence of the eye renders these animals prone to ocular surface
trauma (Figure 7.5). This is particularly true given the environments in which they are
often kept with sawdust or hay shards all too frequently agents of tramautic injury.
Cormeal ulceration can be visualised in these species as in others, with the use of a small
drop of fuorescein rapidly flushed away with a stream of sterile water or normal saline
solution. Ocular discharge may be seen with surface trauma or with intraorbital disease
as noted further below. It is important to differentiate these two mechanisms of ocular
Theratand mouse eye91
Figure 7.5 Vascularised corneal ulcer in a rat after ocular surface exposure following a
ketamine/xylazineanaesthetic
injury. Intraorbital infection gives exophthalmos, blepharitis and epiphora with or without
in the rat and mouse than in the chinchilla or hamster.
Aetiopathology
As noted above traumatic injury may be seen relatively regularly in small rodents, if
Owners or carers are careful enough to observe it. The same can be said of intraorbital
disease secondary to tooth root abscessation which can be seen in any rodent species.
While surface trauma occurs after direct interaction with an envirommental insult, intraor
bital space-occupying lesions such as abscesses cause exophthalmos which can readily
result in surface trauma, thus potentially making the differentiation of these two some-
what difficult at times.
Clinical management
Topical antibiotic is worthwhile applying to surface post-traumatic lesions to avoid sec-
ondary bacterial infection. Ocular lubrication with a carbomer-based gel or a hypromel-
lose drop can similarly reduce irritation and inflammation, as well as speeding cormeal
epithelial healing.
Conjuncfivifis and sysfemic disease
Clinical signs
Conjunctivitis in laboratory rodents may be manifest in a number of different forms from
excess clear tearing through to a frank purulent discharge with profound conjunctival
hyperaemia.
92Ophthatmologyof Exotic Pets
Aetiopathogenesis
Conjunctivitis in rats and mice may be caused by local irritative agents such as dusty
bedding. It should be noted that it can often be a sign of upper respiratory disease caused
compounded by poor ventilation [29]. The presence of one aetiological factor does not
rule out the involvement of others - the possible involvement of Mycoplasma together
with dusty bedding borme on air currents caused by deficient ventilation underlines the
potential multifactorial nature of this disease. An outbreak of conjunctivitis in laboratory
rodents is therefore to be investigated thoroughly with attention paid to affected animal.
The genetic background of the animals has also to be taken into account: athymic nu/
nu mice lack eyelashes and forelimb hair preventing them from removing particulate
matter from their ocular surface. In these animals their deficiency immune status also
renders them susceptible to colonisation by microorganisms.
Clinical management
Clearly management of these cases depends on a thorough investigation of the factors
which may be important in their genesis. Correction of deficiences in the environment
may be a long-term project, but is central to optimising the welfare of the animals,
whether they be a child's pet or a colony of research animals; it will also ensure that the
results obtained from research on the animals in this second example are acceptable from
a scientific perspective. Investigating the animals themselves should include close oph-
thalmoscopic or slit lamp examination to determine if there is purely conjunctivitis, or
conjunctivitis with a concurrent keratitis. Samples should be taken for bacteriology and
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Mycoplasma, unless it is already known that a
chronic subclinical infectious problem exists. In such a case it is important to look for
additional factors exacerbating the underlying problem. These could range from the stress
caused by a new member of staff handling the animals to a novel research procedure or
 change in the environment precipitating additional conjunctival pathology.
It must be appreciated that once an outbreak of conjunctivitis occurs, especially if it
is associated with upper respiratory infection, it can be very difficult to eradicate.
on animal welfare or research validity. A vicious circle can be promoted in which con-
junctivitis and upper respiratory infection exacerbate stress which further worsens the
animals'ocular condition.
Sialodacryoadenitisvirus
Clinical signs
This condition, previously described as the most devastating adnexal disease of rats.
as continual eye rubbing [30]. After initiation excess lacrimation, tear gland hyperpla-
sia and subsequent necrosis lead to a severe reduction in tear production. Keratitis,
conjunctivitis and periocular swelling occur partly through tear deficiency but more
The rat and mouse eye 93
probably directly related to self-mutilation [31]. Chromodacryorrhoea (see above) is a
common sequel, through this trauma and associated stress. Sometimes intraocular inflam
mation and secondary glaucoma can occur. The disease itself is self-limiting with
improvement within 1 week, but the secondary signs may take more than a month to
Aetiopathogenesis
Sialodacryoadenitis is caused by a coronavirus, first described in 1961, but given that
the disease signs occur as a result of the interaction between the virus and the host
immune system, the exact nature, severity and duration of the disease varies between
strains and is influenced by extermal factors and intermal infuences such as degree of
stress and the immune status of the animals [32]. Studies on immunosuppressed rats
showed that experimentally impeding the immune response to the virus with cyclophos-
phamide delayed the onset of signs, reduced the severity of gland damage but led to a
lengthening of the disease and also persistent viral shedding [33]. Repair processes which
naturally occur in infected glands involve squamous metaplasia of duct epithelium with
potential reduction in tearing.
Clinical management
The disease is often diagnosed by its pathognomonic signs, but detection of anticorona-
viral antibodies is possible. Such serological testing has shown that up to 45% of colonies
within the United Kingdom have been exposed to the virus, although incidence of overt
a set of naive animals into a subclinically affected colony which may provoke onset of
overt clinical disease. Individual animals should be managed with tear replacement gel
to counteract the deleterious effects of lacrimal insufficiency.
Microphfhaimos and anophfhaimos
Clinical signs
The occurrence of pathologically small eyes in laboratory rodents, or in severe cases the
absence of an eye altogether, is a not uncommon condition in certain strains of laboratory
which find their way into pet shops. Microphthalmic eyes often have abnormal iridal
vasculature (Figure 7.6), but the most obvious sign is a sunken small globe in a relatively
large orbit, sometimes with associated ocular discharge.
Aetiopathogenesis
Absence of ocular tissue, or small size of the eye, can be seen as an inherited trait in
laboratory rodents [35]. This is particularly the case in C57 black mice where micro-
phthalmos is a regular occurrence [36]. It has been suggested by some workers that this
abnormality in globe development is associated with a defective lens morphology [37].
94Ophthatmotogy of Exotic Pets
Figure 7.6 Iris vascular congestion in a microphthalmic mouse eye. (Reproduced courtesy
of Mr Peter Lee.)
Fgure 7.7 Persistent hyaloid vasculature with haemorrhage in a 6-week-old rat.
(Reproduced courtesy of Mr Peter Lee.)
Clinicalmanagement
infection in the relatively large orbit. Topical antibiotic medication is valuable to resolve
such problems and may be useful prophylactically to prevent chronic orbital infection.
Persistent embryological vasculature
Clinical signs
Persistence of the hyaloid artery is a common finding in rats and mice (Figure 7.7).
In one study of ICR and BALB/c mice, 28% of the former and 32% of the latter strains
The rat and mouse eye 95
had persistent hyaloid vasculature appearing as a white strand in the vitreous, with
100% of animals aged up to 2 weeks having the condition, reducing to 43% by 11 weeks.
The more concerming finding is vitreal haemorrhage associated with this persistent
vasculature.
Aetiopathogenesis
Congenital persistence of the hyaloid vasculature may be an inherited trait but a specific
gene mutation has not been identified.
Clinical management
No treatment is successful in such cases nor required since, although the posterior
segment haemorrhage may obscure vision and on occasion led to uveitis or increased
intraocular pressure,such sequelae are rare.
Non-ulcerative corneal lesions
Clinical signs
Cormeal opacification may be related to keratitis, to lipid stromal dystrophy or to subepi-
thelial calcification or indeed to a mixture of these different pathologies. Some cases,
such as dystrophic change in CDl mice, are characterised by a central white oval lesion
(Figure 7.8); other cases, such as cormeal calcification, show a more general white het-
erogeneous scarring. Where infammation supervenes the lesion can become predomi
nantly vascularised. In their study of ICR and BALB/c mice, Park and colleagues noted
around 4% of animals from both strains with cormeal scars, most probably traumatic in
origin [38]. Heywood noted that many similar lesions in rats have associated concurrent
secondary uveitis [39], (see further below).
Figure 7.8 Corneal dystrophy in a CD-1 mouse.
96Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Aetiopathogenesis
Cormeal lesions can have a number of aetiologies in rodents and elucidating which is
important in a specific case can be difficult. Nasal cormeal opacities are relatively
common in laboratory rodents and can be a sequel to orbital gland inflammation or
intraocular inflammation, or can exist as an ocular surface disorder alone. There may
well be an association with reduced tear secretion or with environmental changes such
as increased ammonia in the microenvironment of the cage foor area.
Mineral deposits in the superficial subepithelial stroma have been noted on histopatho-
logical examination of these eyes; in some cases infammation supervenes, while in
others mineralization is the only change. Dietary deficiencies in nutrients such as vitamin
A have, in the past, been reported as causes of such pathology, but the nutritional ade-
quacy of diets for laboratory or pet rodents these days makes such factors less likely to
play a part in cormeal disease.
Clinical management
In animals where keratitis is noted, a thorough investigation of the environment and
microenvironment should be undertaken to ensure that increased levels of ammonia or
other noxious agents are not instrumental in the genesis of comeal pathology.
Corneal uicers
Clinical signs
Ulcerative keratitis in rats and mice can be delineated with the use of a small drop of
fuorescein dye followed by fushing of the ocular surface. Most ulcers are superficial
although some can progress deeper into the stroma. Depth can be assessed by visualising
the refection of incident light from the comeal surface adjacent to the ulcer and the
reflection from the centre of the ulcer. In superficial ulceration there is little gap between
the two, while in a deep ulcer the two refections are separated from each other by the
depth of the ulcer.
Animals with epithelial defects alone will present with an irritated eye with an area
of epithelial erosion, positive with fuorescein dye but with no other signs of cormeal
disease. Deeper stromal ulcers generally also manifest with a variable degree of comeal
oedema but a relatively crisp ulcer boundary. Any ulcer in which this defined margin
appears blurred or irregular may be developing into a melting ulcer or stromal abscess
and should be observed carefully. Many of these more serious ulcers will also give rise
to an anterior uveitis with a miotic pupil, aqueous flare (which can be difficult at times
to differentiate from the comeal haze also present) and sometimes frank inflammatory
debris in the manner of hypopyon.
Stromal abscessation describes the situation where infectious organisms and associated
purulent material, often resulting from a comeal injury, are trapped in the stroma by re-
epithelialisation. Thus the comea does not stain with fluorescein dye but may be infil
trated by new blood vessels or further stromal infammatory cell populations. Uveitis
with flare and miosis often accompanies such signs.
The rat and mouse eye 97
Aetiopathogenesis
Comeal ulcers in these rodents are often post-traumatic in origin with or without an
stromal ulcers may be refractory to healing, especially where there is also an infectious
organism involved. Indeed this rapid epithelialisation can be a problem where it covers
and traps infectious material giving a stromal abscess
Clinical management
Most cormeal ulcers in these animals will heal spontaneously, but the likelihood of com-
plication by infectious organisms means that topical antibiosis with a broad-spectrum
antibiotic ointment should be standard practice. Given the prevalence of Gram-negative
organisms the choice of topical antibiotic should be chloramphenicol, a fuoroquinolone
such as ofloxacin or ciprofloxacin, or gentamicin; fusidic acid is not recommended as it
only has antibiotic activity against Gram-positive cocci.
Where uveitis is evident, as manifest by miosis or fare, one atropine drop or atropine
ointment should be applied. The small size of these animals means that the transconjunc-
tival uptake of such medications can give the problem of systemic toxicity. The use of
one drop alone, or indeed of ointments which limit systemic uptake and prolong drug
availability in the precomeal tear film should be emphasised to owners to avoid the
overuse of topical medication in these small animals.
In some cases of severe stromal abscessation, surgical removal of infectious material
may be attempted, but the very thin nature of the cormea in these rodents, and particularly
ing microscope. As such, surgery for an individual rat or mouse pet is generally not
financially viable, nor particularly beneficial for the welfare of the animal. Similarly
in individual animals but a Gram stain and modified Giemsa stain of a comeal sample
will allow one to tell whether Gram-positive cocci or Gram-negative rods are involved,
Or maybe that the condition is fungal in origin.
Exposure kerafopafhy
Clinical signs
Cormeal surface pathology, which may be ulcerative or non-ulcerative, may be seen
either after anaesthetic or when the globe is abnormally protruding, either through
enlargement in glaucoma or proptosis through a retrobulbar space-occupying mass. The
lesion is more often than not vascularised if chronic and may or may not be ulcerated
(see Figure 7.5).
Aetiopathogenesis
Exposure keratopathy can occur especially during and after anaesthesia if eyelids are not
taped closed during a prolonged procedure. This is particularly the case in animals
98Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
anaesthetised with a xylazine/ketamine regime; it is particularly noted in Wistar, Long
Evans and Fischer 344 strains more than in Sprague-Dawley and Lewis rats, suggesting
that there is a genetic component to the predisposition for such changes as well as a
drug-related agency. Other reasons include ocular surface exposure through globe
mass, either a neoplasm or abscess.
Clinical management
As noted above, anaesthetised animals should have their eyes taped shut during an pro-
cedure or have a lubricant such as the carbomer-based Viscotears or lanolin-based
Lacrilube applied to prevent exposure keratitis. In animals with proptosis ocular surface
lubrication can reduce the likelihood of severe ocular surface damage, although manage-
ment of the underlying problem, if possible, is obviously to be recommended.
Congenitalabnormalitiesofthe uvea
Clinical signs
Colobomas or absence of tissue, may be observed at the 6 o'clock position in some
mouse strains (Figure 7.9). Such a sign must be differentiated from a synechia, where
an inflamed iris has adhered to the anterior lens capsule (Figure 7.10). This can be dif-
ficult but in the absence of other signs of intraocular inflammation such as miosis or
flare, and especially if several related animals are affected with otherwise quiet eyes, a
ventral coloboma can be diagnosed.
Aetiopathogenesis
Colobomas can be inherited or occur during intrauterine development because of mater-
nal disease, often with pyrexia, during gestation. In the case of a 6 o'clock coloboma the
  o )   g   ( )    
PeterLee.)
The rat and mouse eye99
Figure 7.10 Ventral synechia in a Wistar rat with uveitis
lesion has occurred because of defective fusion of the optic cup in which the ventral
optic fissure does not close adequately.
Clinical management
There is generally no need for treatment in such cases but the presence of an incidental
coloboma in a toxicity study, for instance, should not be taken as a drug effect, but more
likely a spontaneous incidental finding.
Uveitis
Clinical signs
Intraocular infammation is not commonly seen in rats and mice but, on the other
hand, is not vanishingly rare. The classic triad of miosis, blepharospasm and photo-
phobia together with evidence of anterior chamber inflammatory debris should be
sufficient to give a finm diagnosis where present. Note however that haemorrhage in
the anterior or posterior chambers is not suffcient evidence to lead to a diagnosis
since persistence of the tunica vasculosa lentis, which supplies the lens with nutrition
haemorrhage without infammation (Figure 7.11). On the other hand intraocular inflam-
mation in these rodents can be manifest by iridal hyperaemia alone, as seen in Figure
7.10, and does not always manifest as overt inflammatory deposits as with the
hypopyon seen in cat and dogs.
Aetiopathogenesis
A number of experimental manipulations can give rise to uveitis in rodents held in
research but we have little understanding of what causes uveitis in pet rats or mice. Thus
systemic infection or injection with lipopolysaccharide can give rise to uveitis.
100Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Fgure 7.11 Hyphaema from hyaloid haemorrhage in a BALB/c mouse.
Fgure 7.12 Buphthalmic globe in a glaucomatous mouse.
Clinicalmanagement
The use of a mydriatic such as atropine and topical anti-inflammatory such as pred-
nisolone acetate or a non-steroidal such as ketorolac will aid in resolving the pathology
in uveitis, but identifying and treating the underlying cause is important. Note, however
that the topical use of such agents is likely to give a systemic overdose as nasolacrimal
absorption of the majority of the drug will occur in such small eyes.
Glaucoma
Clinicalsigns
In the small globes of the rat and mouse with their thin sclera, any increase in intraocular
pressure rapidly leads to an increase in globe size (Figure 7.12). This is the most common
The rat and mouse eye 101
expect to see in early glaucoma in the dog or cat.
Aetiopathogenesis
Glaucoma may be seen in some rats and mice, as inbred strains have been created with
a propensity to glaucoma [40 42]. In these animals the mechanism of drainage obstruc-
tion is not dysplastic development of the iridocormeal angle, as in the bu/bu rabbit or
several breeds of dog. but rather the development of peripheral anterior synechiae which
occlude the drainage angle in some mice or the deposition of pigment cells in the drain-
age angle in the DBA mouse model of pigment dispersion. Other rodent models for
glaucoma include those in which episcleral vessel occlusion is created by laser photoco
agulation [43] or where injection of microspheres into the anterior chamber leads to angle
blockade [44]. The optic nerve degeneration seen in glaucoma can be replicated by the
optic nerve crush model, but clearly these models in which glaucoma is artificially
induced will not be seen in rodents kept as pets.
Clinical management
Given that many spontaneous cases of glaucoma are related to the development of
peripheral anterior synechiae between the iris and cormea, one might hope that anti-
inflammatory medication could reduce this. The problem is that once globe enlargement
has been noted, the synechial development has occurred and cannot be reversed. Use of
drugs to reduce ocular hypertension could be considered, but one problem in these small
animals is that the delivery of a substantial dose of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors or
adrenergic agonists, as might be used in a dog or cat, can deliver substantial drug doses
systemically because of trans-conjunctival and trans-nasolacrimal absorption. Given the
substantial interest in the degree of systemic absorption in rodent models of topical oculal
medications [45].
Cataract
Clinical signs
Opacification of the lens is similar across species but the small size of the rodent eye
means that most cataracts are not detected, unless by one looking specifically for them
At this stage the entire lens, or the majority of it, is an opalescent white (Figures 7.13
and 7.14). Use of a slit lamp biomicroscope, 0r even a direct ophthalmoscope at +10D
can give a magnified view which improves cataract detection quite substantially. If
animals are being used in an experimental setting, especially in a drug-screening proto-
col, the onset of a lens opacity not caused by the agent in question would be a significant
confounding factor in the study. It is therefore important to know whether the animals
102Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Fgure 7.13 Nuclear cataract in a rat.
Fgure 7.14  Immature but progressing cataract in an outbred mouse.
being used have a predisposition to cataract formation through genetic or environmental
agencies.
Aetiopathogenesis
A number of rat and mouse strains have inherited cataract, created or specifically bred
from a spontaneous mutation, as a model for human cataract [46,47]. Thus mutations of
a number of genes in the lens can be critical in the development of congenital cataracts.
Examples include the crystallin protein molecules which make up the bulk of the lens,
the ion channels critical in stablising the amount of water in the lens and the enzymes.
such as superoxide dismutase, which ensure a correct redox status for the lens and ensure
that photo-oxidation of crystallins is minimised.
Indeed even age-related cataracts, which one might expect to be predominantly envi
ronmentally mediated, have a genetic component, as shown by Wolf's work on catarac-
togenesis in older individuals of a number of different strains [48]. Evaluating both
cataracts and posterior synechiae in a heterogeneous mouse population obtained by four
way back crossing, three alleles on chromosomes 4, 11 and 12 were determined to be
particularly important in the development of these lens opacities [49].
Cataracts can occur secondary to effects from other ocular disease such as retinal
degenerations (see below) where lipid peroxidation biproducts are the most likely agency
The rat and mouse eye103
in RCS rats with a retinal pigment epithelial degeneration [51] but not in mice with
the rd mutation of the phosphodiesterase enzyme within the phototransduction cas-
cade [52]. Interestingly cataract in the RCS rat can be delayed by the inclusion of sun-
fower kermels in the diet [53] and by rearing the animals in the dark [54]. Diabetic mice
and rats develop cataracts rapidly and the anti-oxidant pyruvate can delay their onset
and reduce their severity [55], as it can in experimentally induced ultraviolet-mediated
cataracts [56].
Clinicalmanagement
In most cases rats and mice live an apparently normal life when blinded by lens opaci-
fication. The small size of the eye renders cataract extraction difficult and thus the cost-
benefit analysis of surgery normally lies on the side of what we might call benign neglect.
from the veterinary literature. Experimental studies of capsular opacification after cata
ract surgery in the rat have used extracapsular techniques for lens removal but the use
of such techniques in the rat or mouse are not generally considered justifiable [57].
Lens fuxation
Clinical signs
Lens luxation has been reported in rodents but occurs rarely [58]. Generally the lens can
be observed in the anterior chamber with an aphakic crescent evident where the lens has
slipped ventrally.
Aetiopathology
Lens luxation in rodents is most commonly secondary to globe enlargement following
glaucoma. It has also been noted as an effect of soft X-ray irradiation in utero [59].
Clinicalmanagement
The small size of the rat and mouse eye make surgery to remove the lens taxing and
ensuing glaucoma is problematic. In most cases, as noted above, the lux ation is secondary
to globe enlargement and thus lendectomy is not curative anyway.
Vitrealhaemorrhage
Clinical signs
A substantial number of laboratory rodents have vitreal haemorrhage associated with
retained hyaloid vasculature as noted above (Figure 7.11). Some individuals have aneu-
(' ai ar  a a  a sn
104Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Figure 7.15 Saccular aneurysm of retinal vessels in an adult F344 rat. (Reproduced
courtesy of Mr Peter Lee.)
Aetiopathogenesis
It might be asked why so many rodents have retained vasculature with resulting vitreal
bleeds. In some studies these changes are seen in older rodents so the lesions may develop
over time. The haemorrhages can also be associated with preretinal vascular loops which,
with minor trauma, bleed uncontrollably.
Clinical management
It has to be said that, given the mostly nocturmal habits of these animals and their rela-
tively poor visual acuity, treatment of vitreal haemorrhages is generally not required. If
intraocular pressure increases through blood clotting in the iridocormeal angle or aqueous
draining vessels, treatment might be necessaryto reduce intraocular pressure using topical
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors or prostaglandin analogues. The major problem posed
 by these vitreal haemorrhages is that they preclude visualisation of the retina in many
cases, thus hampering experimental studies when the rodents are held in a research
environment.
Retinal degeneration
Clinical signs
As noted above most rodents are noctural or crepuscular animals, active from dusk
until dawn. That means that vision is not anything like as important to them as to
pletely blind mouse may appear completely normal in its behaviour and interactions with
other animals, at least to an untrained observer, unless specifc tests such as the Morris
water maze are used. Clinically, pupil dilation may be evident, although not invariably
so. In a laboratory setting specific behavioural tests such as the water maze can give an
Therat and mouseeye105
indication of vision, although even an apparently clear test in other species such as the
vertical drop test needs to be interpreted with caution as a simple measure of visual
capability in these species.
Aetiopathogenesis
A significant number of mice used in laboratory research, and indeed available as pet
animals, come from stock, such as the C3H strain, affected with the rd gene mutation.
This prevents the action of retinal phosphodiesterase, a key player in the phototransduc-
tion pathway leading from a photon of light activating rhodopsin. Other strains of mouse
and rat especially prone to blindness, are albino animals where retinal damage normally
occurs through light damage to the retina, since even if the lids are closed shut, light can
still impinge on the retina.
Clinical management
Most of these animals appear unaffected by their blindness, at least to a human observer.
Behavioural assessment has shown that blind animals have increased duration and inten-
sity of aggressive territorial behaviour, perhaps because they cannot visualise the body
postures of their adversaries [60]. Having said that, olfactory and auditory cues are so
much more important to most of these rodent strains, that defective vision may not be
all that important from a welfare perspective. Thus management of these animals once
blind is not perhaps that taxing an issue although it should not be overlooked when
assessing the welfare of an individual animal or a group.
What might be more important are steps to prevent blindness in the first place. Use
of animals not affected by the rd mutation in transgenic and other research would be a
valuable first step. Ensuring that animals, and especially albino strains, are not exposed
to high levels of illumination, especially on the top row of cages on a stacking system
is also very important. Photic damage leading to blindness can occur very quickly and
thus all possible steps should be taken to ensure that animals are not over-illuminated.
This will include the use of red plastic containers as areas where the animals can rest.
These are dark to the rodents, whose retinas have spectral sensitivities highest in the blue
wavelengths, as noted above, and also serve to filter out the higher-energy light from the
blue end of the spectrum, which causes photic damage to the retina. In the home environ-
ment encountered by pet animals this is likely to be less of a problem, but still it is worth
waming owners of the hazards of keeping albino animals in a continuously high-light
enviromment.
Ocular neoplasms
Clinical signs
Many different rat and mouse strains have been bred with a propensity to develop
tumours in various sites from the mammary carcinomas to intracranial neuromas, and
the eye is potentially affected by many tumours in these rodent species.
106Ophthaimology of ExoticPets
References
1. Williams DL. Ocular disease in rats: a review. Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:183-191
2. Smith RS, John SWM, Nishina PM, Sundberg JP (eds). Systematic Evatuation of the Mouse
Eye;Anatomy,Pathology and Biomethods.Boca Raton: CRC Press,2002
3. Djeridane Y. Comparative histological and ultrastructural studies of the Harderian gland of
rodents. Microsc Res Tech 1996;34:28-38.
4. Williams RA, Howard AG, Williams TP. Retinal damage in pigmented and albino rats exposed
97-102
5. Timm K1. Orbital venous anatomy of the rat. Lab Anim Sci 1979;29:636-638
6. Timm Kl. Orbital venous anatomy of the Mongolian gerbil with comparison to the mouse,
hamster and rat. Lab Anim Sci 1989;39:262-264
7. Guyomard JL, Rosolen SG, Paques M, Delyfer MN, Simonutti M, Tessier Y, Sahel JA,
terior segments: eye fundus, ciliary bodies, iridocorneal angle. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2008;49:5168-5174.
improving the study of Sjogren's syndrome. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2009;247:
59-66.
9. Morrison JC, Jia L, Cepurna W, Guo Y, Johnson E. Reliability and sensitivity of the TonoLab
2802-2808
10. Szel A, Rohlich P, Caffe AR, Juliusson B, Aguirre G, Van Veen T. Unique topographic separa
tion of two spectral classes of cones in the mouse retina. J Comp Neurol 1992;325:327-342.
11. Jacobs GH, Fenwick JA, Williams GA. Cone-based vision of rats for ultraviolet and visible
lights. J Exp Biol 2001;204:2439-2446
12. Szél A, Rohlich P, Caffe AR, van Veen T Distribution of cone photoreceptors in the mammalian
retina. Microsc Res Tech 1996;35:445-462.
13. Prusky GT, Harker KT, Douglas RM, Whishaw IQ. Variation in visual acuity within pig-
mented, and between pigmented and albino rat strains. Behav Brain Res 2002;136:339-348
14. Birch D, Jacobs GH. Spatial contrast sensitivity in albino and pigmented rats. Vision Res
1979;19:933-937.
15. Curcio CA, Allen KA. Topography of ganglion cells in human retina. J Comp Neurol
1990;300:5-25
16. Heffner RS, Heffner HE. Visual factors in sound localization in mammals. J Comp Neurol
1992:317:219-232
17. Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional architecture in
the cat's visual centres. J Physiol 1960;160:106-154.
acuity but not place learning in mice. Behav Brain Res 2000;114:11-15.
Eur J Neurosci 2000;12:3781-3786.
20. Prusky GT, Douglas RM. Developmental plasticity of mouse visual acuity. Eur J Neurosci
2003;17:167-173
21. Iny K, Heynen AJ, Sklar E, Bear MF Bidirectional modifications of visual acuity induced by
monocular deprivation in juvenile and adult rats. J Neurosci 2006;26:7368-374.
22. Prusky GT, Alam NM, Douglas RM. Enhancement of vision by monocular deprivation in adult
mice. J Neurosci 2006;26:11554-11561.
The rat and mouse eye 107
23. Legg CR, Lambert S. Distance estimation in the hooded rat: experimental evidence for the
role of motion cues. Behav Brain Res 1990;41:11-20.
24. Ilia M, Jeffery G. Retinal cell addition and rod production depend on early stages of ocular
melanin synthesis. J Comp Neurol 2000;420:437-444.
25. Grant S, Patel NN, Philp AR, Grey CN, Lucas RD, Foster RG, Bowmaker JK, Jeffery G. Rod
photopigment deficits in albinos are specific to mammals and arise during retinal development.
Vis Neur0sci 2001;18:245-251.
26. Muntz WR. A behavioural study on photopic and scotopic vision in the hooded rat. Vision
Res 1967;7:371-376.
27. Harkness JE, Ridgway MD. Chromodacryorrhoea in laboratory rats (Rattus norvegicus): etio-
logic considerations. Lab Anim Sci 1980;30:841-844.
28. Kurisu K, Sawamoto O, Watanabe H, Ito A. Sequential changes in the Harderian gland of rats
exposed to high intensity light. Lab Anim Sci 1996;46:71-76.
29. Young C, Hill A. Conjunctivitis in a colony of rats. Lab Anim 1974;8:301-304.
30. Innes JRM, Stanton MF. Acute disease of the submaxillary and Harderian glands (sialodacry-
oadenitis) of rats with cytomegaly and no inclusion bodies. Am J Pathol 1961;38:455-468.
31. Carthew P, Slinger RP. Diagnosis of sialodacryoadenitis virus infection of rats in a virulent
enzootic outbreak. Lab Anim 1981;15:339-342.
32. Bhatt PN, Jacoby RO. Epizootological observations of natural and experimental infection with
sialodacryoadenitis virus in rats. Lab Anim Sci 1985;35:129-134.
33. Hanna PE, Percy DH, Paturzo F, Bhatt PN. Sialodacryoadenitis in the rat: effects of immuno-
suppression on the course of the disease.Am J Vet Res 1984;45:2077-2083.
34. Gannon J, Carthew P. Prevalence of indigenous viruses in laboratory animal colonies in the
United Kingdom 1978-79. Lab Anim 1980;14:309-311.
35. Kinney HC, Klintworth GK, Lesiewicz J, Goldsmith LA, Wilkening B. Congenital cystic
microphthalmia and consequent anophthalmia in the rat: a study in abnormal ocular morpho-
genesis. Teratology 1982;26(2):203-212
36. Smith RS, Roderick TH, Sundberg JP. Microphthalmia and associated abnormalities in inbred
black mice. Lab Anim Sci 1994;44(6):551-560.
37. Robinson ML, Holmgren A, Dewey MJ. Genetic control of ocular morphogenesis: defective
lens development associated with ocular anomalies in C57BL/6 mice. Exp Eye Res 1993;
56:7-16
38. Park SA, Jeong SM, Yi NY, Kim MS, Jeong MB, Suh JG, Oh YS, Won MH, Nam TC, Park
JH, Seo KM. Study on the ophthalmic diseases in ICR mice and BALB/c mice. Exp Anim
2006;55:83-90.
39. Heywood R. Some clinical observations on the eyes of Sprague-Dawley rats. Lab Anim 1973;
7:19-27.
40. Sheldon WG, Warbritton AR, Bucci TJ, Turturro A Glaucoma in food-restricted and ad libitum-
fed DBA/2NNia mice. Lab Anim Sci 1995;45:508-518.
41. John SW, Smith RS, Savinova OV, Hawes NL, Chang B, Turnbull D, Davisson M, Roderick
TH, Heckenlively JR. Essential iris atrophy, pigment dispersion, and glaucoma in DBA/2J
mice. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1998;39:951-962.
42. McKinnon SJ, Schlamp CL, Nickells RW. Mouse models of retinal ganglion cell death and
glaucoma. Exp Eye Res 2009;88:816-824.
43. Aihara M, Lindsey JD, Weinreb RN. Experimental mouse ocular hypertension: establishment
of the model. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:4314-4320.
44. Urcola JH, Hernandez M, Vecino E. Three experimental glaucoma models in rats: comparison
Res 2006;83:429-437.
108Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
45. Tan AY, LeVatte TL, Archibald ML, Tremblay F, Kelly ME, Chauhan BC. Timolol concentra-
tions in rat ocular tissues and plasma after topical and intraperitoneal dosing. J Glaucoma
2002;11:134-142.
46. Graw J. Mouse models of congenital cataract. Eye (Lond) 1999;13:438-444.
47. Tripathi BJ, Tripathi RC, Borisuth NS, Dhaliwal R, Dhaliwal D. Rodent models of congenital
and hereditary cataract in man. Lens Eye Toxic Res 1991;8:373-413.
48.Wolf N, Penn P, Pendergrass W, Van Remmen H, Bartke A, Rabinovitch P, Martin GM. Age-
related cataract progression in five mouse models for anti-oxidant protection or hormonal
infuence. Exp Eye Res 2005;81:276-285.
49. Wolf N, Galecki A, Lipman R, Chen S, Smith-Wheelock M, Burke D, Miller R. Quantitative
trait locus mapping for age-related cataract severity and synechia prevalence using four-way
cross mice. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004;45:1922-1929.
50. Zigler JS Jr, Hess HH. Cataracts in the Royal College of Surgeons rat: evidence for initiation
by lipid peroxidation products. Exp Eye Res 1985;41:67-76.
51. Al-ghoul KJ, Novak LA, Kuszak JR. The structure of posterior subcapsular cataracts in the
Royal College of Surgeons (RCS) rats. Exp Eye Res 1998;67:163-177.
rds mutant mice utilizing specific monoclonal antibodies. Exp Eye Res 1985;40:757-761.
in the pink-eyed RCS rat. Lab Anim Sci 1985;35:47-53.
54. O'Keefe TL, Hess HH, Zigler JS Jr, Kuwabara T, Knapka JJ. Prevention of cataracts in pink-
eyed RCS rats by dark rearing. Exp Eye Res 1990;51:509-517.
55. Varma SD, Hegde KR, Kovtun S. Attenuation and delay of diabetic cataracts by antioxidants:
effectiveness of pyruvate after onset of cataract. Ophthalmologica 2005;219:309-315.
56. Hegde KR, Kovtun S, Varma SD. Induction of ultraviolet cataracts in vitro: prevention by
pyruvate. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2007;23:492-502.
57. Lois N, Dawson R, McKinnon A, Forrester JV. A new model of posterior capsule opacification
in rodents. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:3450-3457.
58. Takizawa Y, Sakasai K, Harada T, Ebino KY. Lens luxation in a CD-1 mouse. Exp Anim
1996;45:271-273.
59. Kuno H, Kemi M, Akimoto M, Fujii T, Usui T. Effects of soft X-ray irradiation on ocular
development in Sprague-Dawley rats. Jikken Dobutsu 1993;42:443-449.
albino mouse (M. muscufus L.). Physiol Behav 1986;36:773-778.
Chapter 8
The eye of other mammalian
exotic pet species
Introduction
Apart from the rat and mouse, the rabbit and guinea pig. a number of other mammalian
species are regularly kept as pets. The smaller rodents, such as hamsters and gerbils, and
larger species, including chinchillas and degus, have specific ocular problems but there
is insufficient data on these to warrant whole chapters for each species. Primates might
be considered rather a different case in point. They are infrequently kept as companion
animals but clearly do have ophthalmic problems worthy of inclusion. Thus in this
chapter we will consider specific problems for each species group but in less detail than
in previous chapters
Hamsters
While many hamsters are kept in laboratory colonies, the only literature on eye diseases
in the species are individual case reports from anophthalmos in a colour dilute strain [1],
through multifocal retinal dysplasia [2] to metastatic eyelid melanomas [3] and suspected
keratoconjunctivitis sicca [4], although anecdotal evidence would suggest a higher preva-
lence of the latter condition than the single case in the literature suggests. The problem
with this last condition is that the hamster palpebral aperture is too small for a Schirmer
tear test. The phenol red thread test (PRTT) can be a useful altermative in these small
eyes but no nonmal values are available for PRTT readings in this or any other small
rodent species. In such cases measurement of tear production in a normal cage-mate or
in the normal fellow eye in unilateral cases is valuable. Conjunctivitis can be seen in
hamsters, as with all small rodents, where dusty bedding is provided, and the finding of
ocular irritation warrants evaluation of the animals' environment quite as much as clinical
examination of their eyes.
A common problem with hamsters is globe prolapse either through trauma or from
over-enthusiastic handling and ‘scruffing' the animal. Normally globes can be readily
repositioned but prolonged globe prolapse will lead to exposure keratitis and ocular
surface damage. In such cases a tarsoraphy may be appropriate until orbital inflammation
Ophthatmotogy of Exotic Pets, First Edition. David L. Williams.
@ 2012 David Williams. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
110Ophthatmotogyof ExoticPets
Fgure 8.1  Buphthalmic globe in a hamster with uveitis and glaucoma
Figure 8.2 Mature cataract in an aged hamster.
is reduced. Proptosis can also be seen with globe enlargement - the thin sclera of many
small rodent globes predisposes them to globe enlargement with even small increases in
intraocular pressure (Figure 8.1).
The Harderian gland of Syrian hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus) is unusual in that it
exhibits marked sexual dismorphism with the gland of the female having only one cell
type secreting small lipid droplets while the males have two types, the second producing
jou op (snioauns sndopoud) suasuey (ueuesunfa) uejaqis [s] sdop pid ragiel yonu
exhibit this sexual dimorphism. Male glands of Mesocricetus produce significantly less
porphyrin than does the female gland although phenotype is also dependent on photope-
riod [6] and daylength. The exact function of the gland and its secretions is unclear
compared to research on that of the gerbil (see below) where Harderian gland secretions
can also be a clinical problem, not generally seen in the hamster.
Cataracts are relatively common in hamsters (Figure 8.2) either solely in older animals
or as part of a systemic syndrome such as that seen in cardiomyopathic strains [7]
Gerbils
The Harderian glands of gerbils produce a copious secretion which can cause facial
dermatitis in extreme cases [8]. Removal of the gland alleviates the dermatitis [9] but
The eye of other mammalian exotic pet species111
Figure 8.3Lens luxation in a chinchilla.
this should be a last resort given the importance of glandular secretions in several physi-
ological and behavioural functions. The Harderian exudates are central in communication
between sexually active gerbils [10]; since they are spread through the hair coat during
grooming, they also play a part in thermoregulation [11] and osmotic balance [12].
While the gerbil is an important model for ocular toxacariasis [13] with findings of
exudative and haemorrhagic chorioretinitis and vitritis; the parasite does not seem to
affect animals in the wild or those kept as pets.
Chinchillas
thalmic problems, with posterior cortical cataracts and asteroid hyalosis in two animals
[14]. Lens luxation has also been noted in chinchillas (Figure 8.3) and this may be
managed surgically, although the eye is too small to allow extraction by phacoemulsifica-
tion. Any ensuing rise in intraocular pressure can be managed with topical ocular anti-
hypertensives such as doszolamide (Trusopt). Dental disease is quite widely seen in these
animals in captivity [15], possibly related to calcium deficiency as has been shown in
the rabbit with similarly hypsodont (continually growing) teeth. These dental changes
often result in epiphora, and dental investigation in such animals, even including diag-
nostic imaging techniques such as computerised tomography [16], is valuable if the
ocular problems are to be controlled. While one might expect cases of exophthalmos in
this species to be similarly related to dental disease, one case report shows that other
factors, such as a parasitic cyst, have to be taken into consideration [17].
Degus
The degu, a rodent native to Chile [18], is a species the excellence of whose eyesight
has been demonstrated by tool use and manipulation of tiny seeds [19]. Its main interest
112OphthatmologyofExoticPets
Fgure 8.4Diabetic cataract in a degu
with which it develops diabetic cataract (Figure 8.4); this is probably related to the high
level of aldose reductase in its lens. This enzyme system, which catalyses the metabolism
of glucose into insoluble sugars such as sorbitol, is important in the generation of cataract
in diabetic lenses, as shown by the ability of aldose reductase inhibition to prevent cata-
ract formation in the degu lens [20].
Hedgehogs
The small size of the eye of the European hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus) or the African
many ocular problems probably go unnoticed. Conditions that cause obvious changes to
the appearance of the eye or that manifest as ocular pain are more likely to be recognised
reported in these animals is that of exophthalmos 0r globe proptosis [21-23]. The shallow
orbit of these species also contributes to the high incidence of globe protrusion - 15%
of the hedgehogs examined in one veterinary college had exophthalmos as their present-
ing complaint either with orbital infammation or neoplasia [21].
 Our specific study of ocular disease in hedgehogs is still in its infancy but preliminary
results show that many apparently normal-sighted hedgehogs have considerable propto-
sis and strabismus (Figure 8.5). The close proximity of the spines to the ocular surface
and the tendency of hedgehogs to roll into a ball renders trichiasis a common occurrence
(Figure 8.6). This normally results in excess tear production and overflow with mucoid
conjunctivitis (Figure 8.7) but may give rise to traumatic injury to the eye. Thus the
finding of apparent anophthalmos or clinical microphthalmos in some hedgehogs (Figure
8.8) may be cases of phthysis bulbi after chronic injury rather than a congenital defect
 we have considerably more work to do in this area to determine the exact aetiopatho-
genesis of the condition. Other damage to the hedgehog eye can result from fy strike
where eggs have been laid around the eyes, with the maggots hatching from these liter-
ally eating the eyes away.
Figure 8.5 Apparent exophthalmos in a normal hedgehog.
Figure 8.6  Entropion with trichiasis in a 3-month-old hedgehog.
Figure 8.7Anophthalmos in a neonatal hedgehog.
Figure 8.8 Epiphora and conjunctivitis in a 3-month-old hedgehog.
114OphthatmologyofExoticPets
Fgure 8.9 Keratoconjunctivitis with comeal ulceration in a slender loris.
Primates
Non-human primates sit in an unusual position, given that on the one hand in many ways
ophthalmic diagnostics and therapeutics can be extrapolated from more conventional
companion animal species but that on the other their eyes more closely resemble those
of humans. Examination should be undertaken under sedation and restraint in the vast
majority of cases. The assistance of a medical ophthalmologist may be beneficial given
the similarity between non-human primate and human eyes [24]. The literature about
but hopefully a review of these will aid those needing to treat similar cases and, indeed,
novel ocular lesions in these animals.
Young monkeys are often somewhat esotropic or cross-eyed and in the majority of
cases this resolves over the first few weeks of life [25], although some remain with
strabismus for much longer and may form a useful model for human strabismus [26]
Congenital anomalies have been reported in primates [27] but are rarely amenable to
correction.
Conjunctivitis in primate colonies can be infectious with viral agents as a cause [28];
Conjunctivitis may be a presenting sign of systemic disease such as coccidiomycosis and
clearly a full clinical examination is required in such cases [32].
Other causes of conjunctival hyperaemia include keratoconjunctivitis sicca which, as
with dogs and humans, can be treated with topical cyclosporine [33]. Reference values
for measurements such as Schirmer tear tests have been published for the capuchin
monkey (Cebus apella) [34] but will be different for each primate species - comparison
with readings from the normal fellow eye or in cases of bilateral disease of a cage-mate
of the same species is suggested where values are unknown. This was the case with two
slender lorises (Loris tardigradus) diagnosed with dry eye when presented with central
cormeal ulcers and mild changes in their behaviour (Figure 8.9). While twice daily topical
cyclosporine medication was effective in increasing tear production, the regular handling
required was detrimental to their wellbeing and it was decided that keeping them without
treatment was better than giving regular lacrimomimetic medication.
The eye ofother mammalian exoticpetspecies115
Figure 8.10 Cataract in an aged cynomolgus macaque
Entropion with resultant keratitis has been noted in a macaque and successfully treated
with just the same surgery as would be used in a dog [35]. Here extrapolation from the
known to the unknown is quite justifed. On the other hand some diseases are unique to
primates; adnexal changes of molluscum contagiosum have been reported in chimpan-
zees with these warty swellings otherwise only noted in humans [36]. While such cases
are rare, a survey of ocular disease in marmosets and tamarins found almost 10% to have
meibomian gland obstructions present with yellow-white waxy material at the meibo-
mian gland orifice and eyelid swelling in some animals [37].
Glaucoma is seen in laboratory primates as an experimentally induced condition but 
also as a spontaneous disease in a number of cases. The similarity of the aqueous drain-
age system in primates to that in humans renders such spontaneous disease highly inter-
esting but also of relevance to individual monkeys kept as companion animals. Glaucoma
in vervet monkeys has been reported [38] as has raised intraocular pressure in a number
of macaques in a large colony derived from an island off the coast of Puerto Rico and
maintained in a colony in Gainesville, Florida, since 1930 [39,40]. Glaucoma has also
Cataracts are relatively common in captive non-human primates (Figure 8.10) and
phacofragmentation has been reported in a number of individual animals [42]. Two young
116OphthatmologyofExoticPets
Fgure 8.12 Retinitis, vasculitis and cotton wool spots in a macaque.
lens implantation [43]. Posterior capsular opacification led to secondary cataract which
required Neodynium Yag laser treatment to restore vision. Interestingly lens opacification
has been reported in wild-caught African green monkeys with inheritance determined in
two reports of cataract in this species [44].
Fundus lesions are also relatively common. A survey of more than 2000 cynomolgus
macaques showed a 6.6% prevalence of pathological change, mostly involving chori-
oretinal scarring which was chronic in nature (Figure 8.11). Some of the fundus lesions
were active with vasculitis, retinal haemorrhage and so-called cotton-wool spots indica-
tive of retinal infammation and oedema (Figure 8.12) [45,46].
The Floridean primate colony noted above has also yielded an important study or
ageing change in the primate fundus, specifically regarding drusen and macular degenera
tion [47,48]. Such changes may also be encountered in older primates kept as companion
animals but as they have little influence on vision and there is no treatment their relevance
might be said to be primarily academic [49].
References
1. Asher JH Jr, James SC. The primary ultrastructural defect caused by anophthalmic white (Wh)
in the Syrian hamster. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1982;79:4371-4375.
Pathol Toxicol 1980;3:569-576
3. Mangkoewidjojo S, Kim JC. Malignant melanoma metastatic to the lung in a pet hamster. Lab
Anim 1977;11:125-127.
4. Atkinson M. Suspected keratitis sicca in a Syrian hamster. Vet Rec 2000;146:680.
5. Buzzell GR, Blank JL, Vaughan MK, Reiter RJ. Control of secretory lipid droplets in the
harderian gland by testosterone and the photoperiod: comparison of two species of hamsters.
Gen Comp Endocrinol 1995;99:230-238
6. Coto-Montes AM, Rodriguez-Colunga MJ, Uria H, Antolin I, Tolivia D, Buzzell GR.
Menendez-Pelaez A. Photoperiod and the pineal gland regulate the male phenotype of the
Harderian glands of male Syrian hamsters after androgen withdrawal. J Pineal Res 1994;17:
48-54.
The eyeofother mammalian exoticpet species117
7. Thakar JH, Percy DH, Strickland KP. Ocular abnormalities in the myopathic hamster (UM-
X7.1 strain). Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1977;16:1047-1052.
8. Thiessen DD, Pendergrass M. Harderian gland involvement in facial lesions in the Mongolian
gerbil. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1982;181:1375-1377.
9. Farrar PL, Opsomer MJ, Kocen JA, Wagner JE. Experimental nasal dermatitis in the Mongolian
gerbil: effect of bilateral harderian gland adenectomy on development of facial lesions. Lab
Anim Sci 1988;38:72-76.
10. Payne AP. The harderian gland: a tercentennial review. J Anat 1994;185:1-49.
regulate female proceptive behavior, aggression, and investigation. J Comp Psychol 1986;
100:85-87.
12. Harriman AE, Thiessen D. Removal of Harderian exudates by sandbathing contributes to
osmotic balance in Mongolian gerbils. Physiol Behav 1983;31:317-323.
13. Takayanagi TH, Akao N, Suzuki R, Tomoda M, Tsukidate S, Fujita K. New animal model
967-972.
14. Peiffer RL, Johnson PT. Clinical ocular findings in a colony of chinchillas (Chinchilla taniger).
Lab Anim 1980;14:331-335.
15. Crossley DA. Dental disease in chinchillas in the UK. J Small Anim Pract 2001;42:12-19.
16. Crossley DA, Jackson A, Yates J, Boydell IP. Use of computed tomography to investigate
cheek tooth abnormalities in chinchillas (Chinchilla taniger). J Small Anim Pract 1998;39:
385-389.
17. Holmberg BJ, Hollingsworth SR, Osofsky A, Tell LA. Taenia coenurus in the orbit of a chin-
chilla. Vet Ophthalmol 2007;10:53-59.
18. Lee TM. Octodon degus: a diurnal, social, and 1ong-lived rodent. ILAR J 2004; 45:14-24
19. Okanoya K, Tokimoto N, Kumazawa N, Hihara S, Iriki A. Tool-use training in a species of
rodent: the emergence of an optimal motor strategy and functional understanding. PLoS One
2008;3:e1860
20. Datiles MB 3rd, Fukui H. Cataract prevention in diabetic Octodon degus with Pfizer's sorbinil
Curr Eye Res 1989;8:233-237.
21. Wheler CL, Grahn BH, Pocknell AM. Unilateral proptosis and orbital cellulitis in eight Affricar
hedgehogs (Atelerix aibiventris). J Zoo Wildl Med 2001;32:236-241.
22. Fukuzawa R, Fukuzawa K, Abe H, Nagai T, Kameyama K. Acinic cell carcinoma in an African
pygmy hedgehog (Atelerix albiventris). Vet Clin Pathol 2004;33:39-42.
23. Kuonen VJ, Wilkie DA, Morreale RJ, Oglesbee B, Barrett-Rephun K. Unilateral exophthalmia
in a European hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus) caused by a lacrimal ductal carcinoma. Vet
Ophthalmol 2002;5:161-165.
24. Liang D, Alvarado TP, Oral D, Vargas JM, Denena MM, McCulley JP. Ophthalmic examina
tion of the captive western lowland gorilla (Gorilla gorilla gorilla). J Zoo Wildl Med 2005;36:
430-433
25. Kiorpes L, Boothe RG. Naturally occurring strabismus in monkeys (Macaca nemestrina).
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1981;20:257-263.
26. Narasimhan A, Tychsen L, Poukens V, Demer JL. Horizontal rectus muscle anatomy in natu-
rally and artificially strabismic monkeys. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48:2576-2588.
27. Ribka EP, Dubielzig RR. Multiple ophthalmic abnormalities in an infant rhesus macaque
(Macaca mulatta). J Med Primatol 2008;37:16-19.
28. Tyrell DA, Buckland FE, Lancaster MC, Valentine RC. Some properties of a strain of SV-17
virus isolated from an epidemic of conjunctivitis and rhinorrhoea in monkeys (Erythrocebus
pates). Br J Exp Pathol 1960;41:610-616.
118Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
29. Ivanova E, Spiridonov S, Bain O. Ocular oxyspirurosis of primates in zoos: intermediate host,
worm morphology, and probable origin of the infection in the Moscow zoo. Parasite 2007;14:
287-298
31. Hoopes J, Montali RJ, Ensley PK, Bush M, Koch SA. Allergic conjunctivitis in a juvenile
black spider monkey. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1977;171:870-871.
32. Hoffman K, Videan EN, Fritz J, Murphy J. Diagnosis and treatment of ocular coccidioidomy-
cosis in a female captive chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes): a case study. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2007;
1111:404410
33.Schuler AM, Tustin GT, Abee CR, Scammell JG. Restasis for the treatment of “dry eye’ in
Aotus nancymaae. J Med Primatol 2009;38:318-320.
34. Montiani-Ferreira F, Shaw G, Mattos BC, Russ HH, Vilani RG. Reference values for selected
ophthalmic diagnostic tests of the capuchin monkey (Cebus apella). Vet Ophthalmol 2008;11:
197-201.
35. Peiffer RL, Johnson PT, Wilkerson BJ. Peripalpebral folds and entropion in a male crab-eating
macaque (Macaca fasicutaris). Lab Anim Sci 1980;30:113-115)
36. Douglas JD, Tanner KN, Prine JR, Van Riper DC, Derwelis SK. Molluscum contagiosum in
chimpanzees. J Am Vet Med Asoc 1967;151:901-904
37. Buyukimichi N,Richter CB.Prevalence of ocular disease in a colony of tamarins and mar-
mosets. Lab Anim Sci 1979;29:800-804.
1963;69:630.
39. Dawson WW, Brooks DE, Hope GM, Samuelson DA, Sherwood MB, Engel HM, Kessler MJ.
Primary open angle glaucomas in the rhesus monkey. Br J Ophthalmol 1993;77:302-310.
40. Dawson WW, Brooks DE, Dawson JC, Sherwood MB, Kessler MJ, Garcia A. Signs of glau
coma in rhesus monkeys from a restricted gene pool. J Glaucoma 1998;7:343-348.
41.Shields MB,Ritch R. Spontaneous buphthalmos in Lermur futvus rufus.Prog Vet Comp
Ophthalmol 1991;1:87-91.
42. Whiteley RD, Jacobson ER, Lavach JD, Gelatt KN, Barrie KP. Bilateral ultrasonic phacofrag-
mentation and aspiration cataract extraction in a Spider monkey. J Zool Anim Med 1980;11:
58-60.
43. de Faber JT, Pameijer JH, Schaftenaar W . Cataract surgery with foldable intraocular lens
implants in captive lowland gorillas (Gorilla gorilla gorilla). J Zoo Wildl Med 2004;35:
520-524
44. Suzaki MT, Hiyaoka A, Cho F, Fukui M. Some cases of cataract in African green monkeys.
Anim Eye Res 1988;7:27-29.
45. Suzuki MT, Cho F: Normal and abnormal findings in ocular fundi of cynomolgus monkeys.
J Toxicol Sci 1986;11:452-457.
46. Kuhlman SM, Rubin LF, Ridgeway RL. Prevalence of ophthalmic lesions in wild-caught
cynomolgus monkeys. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1992;2:20-28.
rhesus monkeys. Doc Ophthalmol. 1989;71:253-263.
48. Suzuki MT, Cho F. Normal and abnormal findings in ocular fundi of cynomolgus monkeys.
J Toxicol Sci 1986;11:452-457.
49. Suzuki MT, Ogawa H, Cho F, Honjo S. Visual function in cynomolgus monkeys with macular
degeneration.Anim Eye Res 1989;8:33-38
Chapter 9
The avian eye
Introduction
Vision is centrally important to the vast majority of birds. A fish or lizard can cope with
relatively poor resolution to see its prey, a cow does not need to differentiate food items
of different colour and a mouse, active for the most part by night, hardly needs sight at
all! But a bird in fight landing on a branch, catching insects on the wing, seeking out a
prey rodent species on the ground as it hovers above or swooping in a dense flock in the
early evening air needs exceptional sight. It was this very realisation that made the
Canadian ophthalmologist Casey Albert Wood, whom we met in Chapter 2, study birds
and their vision so intensely in the later part of the nineteenth and the early years of the
twentieth century. His aim was to find ways of improving human visual capabilities by
investigating quite what made avian vision so good. For veterinarians this feature of the
avian sensory world means that maintaining optimal vision in the birds under our care
shouldbeapriority.
Anatomy and physiology of the avian eye
If we say that vision is vitally important to birds then understanding the anatomy and
physiology of the avian eye and how it differs from that of other species is crucial in
arriving at a correct diagnosis of avian ocular disease and critical in differentiating the
abnormal from the considerable range of normal variations. The key monograph in avian
ophthalmic basic sciences is that of Professor Graham Martin [1], of whom more later.
A more concise coverage can be found from Willis and Wilkie who have reviewed the
subject area in two relatively recent papers [2].
We should consider first the avian eyelids. Both are mobile but the lower considerably
more so than the upper. The Meibomian glands are absent but the lacrimal gland is
present inferior and lateral to the globe with an additional Harderian gland acting as a
second lacrimal gland at the base of the nictitating membrane. The nictitating membrane
moves over the cormea during blinking and the menace response, drawn across by an
unusual muscle arrangement. The pyramidalis muscle, which accomplishes this action,
Ophthatmotogy of Exotic Pets, First Edition. David L. Williams.
@ 2012 David Williams. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
120OphthatmologyofExoticPets
originates on the posterior sclera and loops around the optic nerve through a sling formed
by the bursalis muscle, also known as the quadratus muscle (Figure 9.1). Inferior and
superior nasolacrimal puncta drain the lacrimal secretions into the nasal cavity.
The orbit is open and is occupied predominantly by the globe in most birds (Figure
9.2). For this reason the extraocular muscles are not particularly well developed in those
Dorsal rectus rmuscle
Gland of nictitating
membrane
Quadratus muscle
Medialrectus
muscle
Optic nerve
Ventral oblique
muscle
Pyramidalis muscle
(a)
Ventral rectus muscle
Nictitating membrane
Lateral rectus
muscle
Lacrimal gland
Gland of
(b)
nictitating membrane
Fgure 9.1  (a) The arrangement of muscles behind the eye moving the third eyelid. (b) The
nictitating membrane extended over the ocular surface.
The avian eye 121
species. Torsional movements of the globe are generally limited to between 2 and 5
degrees. As will be seen later though, such movements are very important to retinal
nutrition. The most important feature of the orbit is the close proximity of the globe to
the infraorbital diverticulum of the infraorbital sinus (Figure 9.3). Enlargement of this
diverticulum in sinusitis leads to a number of conditions from periorbital swelling, orbital
compression, conjunctivitis and sometimes exophthalmos or intraocular inflammation. It
Figure 9.2 The orbit almost completely filled by the globe which takes up a substantial
proportion of the cranial volume, here shown in a drawing from Casey Wood's 1917 Fundus
Oculi of Birds.
Preorbitaldiverticulum
Nares
Rostral
Postorbital
diverticulum
diverticulum
Infraorbital sinus
Man dibular diverticulum
Cervico cephalic airsac
Figure 9.3 The sinuses around the eye.
122Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
is important to be aware of the extensive network of sinuses in the cranial area in order
to appreciate the extent that inflammatory involvement of the sinus system may take.
Different bird species have quite variable globe shape. The majority of birds, including
passerines and psittaciformes, have a somewhat anterior-posteriorly fattened globe
forming an oblate spheroid with a hemispherical posterior segment (Figure 9.4). In
several species of owl, however, the posterior segment is tubular allowing a considerably
magnified image to be projected on the retina (Figure 9.5).
Birds.
Fig.3
Vertical Seetion of the EyeoftheAmerican Sereech
Cwl-Shpix re Megascope asio.l, lens, bp, bony
plates; S, sclera, C, Crampton's muscle; F. peeten;
ON, optie nerve; f, macula and fovea.
a s    s       
Fundus Oculi of Birds.
Theavian eye123
Figure 9.6 The ring of scleral ossicles in the owl eye.
Figure 9.7 The iridocorneal angle of an eagle owl.
The avian cormea is similar to that of mammals but for its considerably reduced thick-
ness, an important factor to note when performing cormeal surgery, and the fact that its
anterior stroma is quite obviously acellular with a marked Bowman's layer, unlike that
of subprimate mammals. A more important difference from the mammalian eye is the
presence of a ring of scleral ossicles immediately behind the limbus (Figure 9.6). These
bony structures are probably important from an anatomical and physiological perspective
in providing a firm origin for the muscles which allow accommodation. From a thera-
peutic perspective they change the approach to enucleation in many birds where they
render the surgical removal of the globe more challenging.
The anterior chamber of most avian eyes is considerably shallower than that of
mammals, that is with the exception of owls which have a deep anterior chamber. Such
differences have clinical implications with regard to examination of the iridocomeal
angle which, while taxing in many species, is relatively easy in owls where a goniolens
is not required (Figure 9.7).
The avian iris is thin and, importantly, contains striated muscle rather than the auto-
nomically innervated dilator and constrictor muscles of the mammalian eye. This has
considerable implications for pharmacological dilation of the pupil, requiring depolaris-
ing or, more commonly these days, non-depolarising muscle relaxants rather than the
simple and effective parasympatholytic drugs tropicamide or atropine commonly used
to produce mydriasis in mammals. This difference in iridal innervation allows birds to
124Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
consciously control pupil dilation and constriction which can make the iris an important
device in communication. For that reason the avian iris can be brightly coloured to allow
fashes of iridal constriction to become danger signals or signs of sexual attractiveness.
Chromatophores within the avian iris render the iris a sign of sexual dimorphism in some
species with the male cockatoo iris being dark brown while the female has a pinkish-red
iris. Changes in iris colour can also occur with age; young blue and gold macaws have
dark irides which turm yellow as they reach sexual maturity while young African grey
parrots have muddy-grey irides which turm a more yellow hue as the bird ages.
The conscious control of pupillary musculature complicates evaluation of the pupillary
light refex. Miosis does occur with retinal stimulation but clearly can also occur in its
absence. Another important difference between the avian and mammalian visual system
is the absence in the former of decussation at the optic chiasm. Integration of the sensory
information from each visual field occurs in the midbrain and this renders the concept
of the direct and consensual pupillary light reflex redundant.
The lens of birds differs quite considerably from that of their mammalian counterparts.
The lens is generally soft with a conspicuous annular pad lying under the lens capsule
in the equatorial region allowing considerable attachment between the lens and the
muscles of accommodation.
Accommodation, that is to say change in the focal length of the lens, in the bird is
produced by the ciliary muscles which are divided in two portions [3]. The anterior of
these is termed Crampton's muscle (Figure 9.8). It originates on the sclera beneath the
scleral ossicles and its contraction has the effect of fattening the cormea at its peripheral
 margin and giving a central bulging effect to the cormea, increasing its refractive power.
This gives about 40% of total accommodative power in birds such as the chicken but
B
Scleral
ossicle
Crampton's
Circumferential
muscle
muscle fibres
88888888888885
Pectinate
Scleral
888888888888
Dilator
cartilage
ligament
muscle
1888888
fibres
38888888888
Iris
Ciliary 
Bricke's
Ora
process
muscle
Ciliary
Lens
serrata
body
Tenacular
Muiller's
Anmular pad
ligament
muscle
of lens
Fgure 9.8 Musculature of accommodation in the bird. Reprinted from The Quarterly
Review of Biology. Vol. 71, no. 4, Adrian Glasser and Howard C Howland, 'A History of
Studies of Visual Accommodation in the Bird' @ 1996 University of Chicago Press.
Theavian eye125
tion of 25 D. The posterior component of the ciliary body is the so-called Brucke's muscle
which pulls the ciliary body forward, lessening tension applied to the annular pad by the
tenacular ligament from the ciliary body. The defonmation of the lens is also caused by
pressure from the circumferential muscle of the iris which bulges the central portion of
the lens into the pupil increasing its refractive power. The density of this circumferential
muscle differs between species and is particularly marked in diving birds where the
substantial increase in refractive power of the lens makes up for the lack of refractive
power of the cormea under water [4].
The retina of the bird differs markedly from that of the mammal. Without retinal blood
vessels or a choriocapillaris to provide a direct vascular supply of oxygen and nutrition
for the retinal photoreceptors, a portion of the choroid, the pecten, protrudes into the
Huid posterior vitreous (Figures 9.9 and 9.10). Continual small torsional movements of
the globe cause the pecten to move backwards and forwards in this fuid vitreous with
Figure 9.9 The pecten, protruding into the postenior vitreous as seen on ultrasonography
(a)
(b)
ophthalmoscopy. (b) The pecten and choroidal vasculature of the avian fundus by indirect
ophthalmoscopy.
126Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Fgure 9.11The distinct fovea of the tawny owl, from Wood's 1917 Fundus Oculi of Birds.
Fgure 9.12 The two foveolae of the kestrel, from Wood's 1917 Fundus Oculi of Birds.
diffusion of both oxygen and nutrients from the vascular elements of the pecten across
the posterior vitreal face to supply the entire retina. This intricate mechanism was first
described by Pettigrew and colleagues using fluorescein angiography to demonstrate the
movement of molecules from the pecten to the very peripheral extremities of the retina
with these small torsional movements of the globe [5].
There is no tapetum in the avian fundus, and hence the appearance is one dominated
by the choroidal vasculature and pigmentation (Figure 9.10). Most species have a distinct
fovea (Figure 9.11) where an increased density of photoreceptors gives increased visual
resolution. Diurmal raptors and hummingbirds, among other species, have two foveolae
(Figure 9.12) and it is suggest that in these bi-foveolate species one area is for high reso-
lution distance vision while the other is for close work, such as manipulating prey
when caught or positioning the beak very precisely as with the hummingbird. Some
raptors such as the golden eagle have a concave, or more precisely convexiclivate fovea
Theavian eye127
Figure 9.13  The convexiclivate fovea of the golden eagle
possible if the fovea was fat and giving a much higher resolution than possible even
Another area in which birds supercede man's visual ability is in colour vision.
While subprimate mammals have two-colour vision and might tempt us as trichromatic
primates to consider ourselves as the pinnacle of ocular evolution, birds see not only
in the three colours with which we are familiar but often in ultraviolet also. Birds
have four types of cone peaks of light absoption of around 400nm, 470nm, 540nm
and 600mm in the pigeon and 370mm, 450nm, 540nm and 610nm in the starling. t0
give just two examples (Figure 9.14). As well as having differently spectrally tuned
also change their colour sensitivity with oil droplets of different colours. The three
human cone photoreceptors have peak absorbances of 430mm, 530mm and 560mm
showing how avian colour vision includes wavelenths in the ultraviolet to which we
are simply blind. Birds not only use their superior colour vision for food selection (prob-
ably the reason for trichromacy in primates seeking out ripe fruit in a leafy environment)
but also for mate selection [8]. Casey Wood would have been delighted with such
findings!
What such information should tell us is the importance of vision to birds and the great
relevance of our attempts to correct visual disturbance in these individuals when pre-
sented to us with ocular abnonmalities.
What do birds see?
We are very fortunate in avian ophthalmology to have in Professor Graham Martin,
a top class researcher who has devoted his professional career to the study of what
birds see. From his doctoral studies on the visual acuity of tawny owls [9] to his most
recent lucid review of avian binocular vision (or the lack of it) [10], he has provided an
unparalleled appreciation of avian vision. But if one thing was to be taken from this
128Ophthatmology of Exotic Pets
Hunan
0.8
10打
0.6
Amax= 437
Amax = 533
0.4
Amax = 564
0.2
4O
European Starling
ob
0.8
A
Amax = 362
0.6
Relati
max=449
0.
Amax = 504 
0.2
Amax = 563
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
Wavelength (nm)
Fgure 9.14
1 The four cone photoreceptors of the starling compared to the three of the
human.
lifetime's work it should be that avian vision varies quite as much as the diversity of
birds themselves. To try and group avocets, buzzards and crows together behaviourally
not to mention owls, penguins and quail, would be quite ridiculous. And thus to try and
pigeon-hole (if one will forgive the pun!) their vision into one description would be
pointless. For birds' vision is intricately linked to their behaviour. The heron, which needs
to visualise fish immediately under its beak, is bound to have very different vision from
the kestrel which must focus on prey items moving hundreds of feet below it. To describe
bird vision would take a whole book in itself - one which to my mind Professor Martin
alone in the world of visual science is placed to write! And we might just add at this
point that what appears obvious at a first glance - say for instance that the tawny owl
has forward facing eyes with a wide feld of binocular vision (Figure 9.15) - may
tum out to be incorrect when subjected to critical analysis (Figure 9.16). Indeed Casey
Wood realised that a century ago as shown by the diagrams in his Fundus Oculi of Birds
(Figure 9.2). Thus we need to be very careful in what sweeping generalisations we make
about avian vision. But having said that, barring a very few exceptions (the kiwi, for
instance), birds have exceptional vision.
 In those species for which refraction and visual acuity has been estimated, the American
kestrel is emmetropic with an estimated acuity of 29 cycles/degree (cpd) when tested
electrophysiologically, a method which those authors considered to underestimate acuity
by some 37% in such species, giving them a final estimate of 46cpd [11]. A study 0n
the wedge-tailed eagle gave a maximum resolution acuity of between 132 and 146 cpd
   a u o  []
The avian eye129
Figure 9.15
to severe ulceration and scarring in the let eye and loss of the right following a road traffic
accident.
Median sagital plane of the skull
A
sector
Blind
Divergenceptic axes
C
B
Right eye
Leff eye
Visualtieldota
ctor
Optic axis
sector
Binocularsector
Mecian sagittallplane of the skull
Visual field of a
Cyclapean field
201°
Optic axis
Optic axis
Blnocularsector
Blind sector
Manooular sectors
Dircctionof bill
Figure 9.16
 The true visual fields of the tawny owl, from Binocularity G Martin.
Reproduced with permission from Professor Graham Martin.
130Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Evaluating the avian eye
As we noted in Chapter 3, the main problem with avian ophthalmology, as with eye
examination of reptiles, amphibians and rodents - indeed most of the species covered in
this volume - is the small size of the eye. Use of the direct ophthalmoscope is compli
cated by a tiny pupil in many species, but, with care, time and a close examination, full
ing small lesions of the adnexa and anterior segment on its own and then the posterior
segment can be viewed with a +30 D lens.
Because of the greater difficulty in performing a full ophthalmic examination, ancil-
liary tests become even more valuable than in ophthalmoscopy of the dog or cat. Some
do, however, have to be modified again because of the size of the eye. The Schinmer tear
test strip, for instance, is just too wide to be placed in many avian eyes and, even if it
were the right size, the amount of tears produced in a minute would not be sufficient to
yield a measureable length of wetting. Two altermatives present themselves. One is to
cut the strip of filter paper lengthways to halve its width [13]. The only problem with
this is that we have little data for specific species of bird on what the normal wetting of
a half-width test strip is. If only one eye is involved it may be possible to use the normal
fellow eye as a control, although the concerm there is that pathology in one eye alone
may give a reactive increase in tearing in both eyes. The other altermative is to use a
different measure of wetting such as the phenol red thread test. Here a yellow dye
impregnated into a standardised cotton thread turms red when in contact with tears. Here
we do have some normal values, reported for psittacines [14]. If values are not known
for a specific species of bird, normal cage-mates can provide a useful set of normal
values.
The same can be said for measurements of the intraocular pressure. Here the Tonopen
applanation tonometer has been used most commonly and there are some reference
values for different bird species, but if one is evaluating a species for which normal range
of intraocular pressure is not available, normal cage-mates can be used to provide a refer-
ence range. The newer rebound Tonovet tonometer has the disadvantage that it has been
used less frequently and so normal reference ranges are generally not available, but the
great advantage that its tiny replaceable rebound tip can be used on comeas as small as
3mm while the Tonopen tip requires a cormea around twice that wide. In the birds on
which we have used the Tonovet we have not seen significantly different readings of
intraocular pressure form those obtained with the Tonopen but those were birds with
larger eyes and those results have as yet not been subjected to peer review in the veteri-
nary literature.
Other ancilliary tests include cytology and bacteriology, again very useful additions
in nature. Cytology samples should be obtained with a cytobrush for immediate transfer
to a clean glass microscope slide. Ideally bacteriology samples should be transferred
straight from eye to suitable culture medium plate to avoid loss of organisms during
transport. Polymerase chain reaction tests for other organisms can be very useful, espe-
cially considering the limited sample harvest which might be obtained from a small eye.
The avian eye 131
Orbital disease
Infraorbital and periocular sinusitis
Clinical signs
As noted above the proximity of the globe to the infraorbital sinus and particularly its
diverticulum renders the eye prone to sinusitis. This can give exophthalmos or strabismus
of the globe in acute phases, when infection and inflammation of the infraorbital sinus
in chronic conditions where the sinus collapses because of fibrotic change after an acute
infection (see Figure 9.24). Inflammation can lead to entrapment of air in the sinus giving
to the globe distorting the palpebral aperture.
Aetiopathogenesis
Sometimes the infection gives rise to a solid caseous infected focus. The avian abscess,
as is also the case in the reptile, is not the liquid purulent focus seen in mammals (which
contains mostly neutrophils with their destructive enzymes). Instead, the avian abscess
is a semi-solid lesion since the predominant cells are heterophils [15] which pave the
way for fibrosis, to give what Professor John Cooper has suggested we call not an abscess
but a fbriscess [16] (Figures 9.17 and 9.19).
Figure 9.17  Infraorbital sinusitis with firm caseous swelling distorting the lower lid.
132Ophthatmology ofExoticPets
Fgure 9.18 Entrapment of air in the infraorbital sinus in an Amazon parrot.
Fgure 9.19  Distortion of the lid aperture from sinus pathology in a corvid (reproduced with
permission from Dr Rudolf Korbel).
It may be that the problem is multifactorial with an infected blepharitis also present
or hypovitaminosis A playing a part in the disease process and such possibilities should
be taken into account in managing the case (see Figure 9.24).
Clinicalmanagement
The potentially solid nature of such an infected focus means that one must be prepared
to shell these lesions out of the infraorbital sinus through a skin incision below the lower
eyelid. In such cases the problem may not be removing the inflammatory mass but
reconstructing the stretched skin to ensure that the eyelid aperture still corresponds to
the globe undermeath. It may be, especially in the early stages, that the lesion is more
Huid and in these cases irrigation of the entire cranial sinus system can be beneficial. In
raptors with a profound sinusitis this can require holding the bird upsidedown and fush-
The avian eye133
Figure 9.20 Microphthalmos in a litle owl
ing saline through its nostrils to irrigate the far reaches of its sinus system. Systemic as
well as local antibiotic after such a treatment regime is important and should be based
on culture and sensitivity of samples taken during irrigation.
Chronic cases where enophthalmos occurs following collapse of the sinus can be very
difficult to manage and topical antibiotic as well as systemic pain relief may be valuable
in the management of the case, although cure is not possible.
Microphthalmos and anophthaimos
Clinicalsigns
The presence of a small eye or indeed no apparent eye at all in the orbit signals micro-
phthalmos or anophthalmos (Figure 9.20). Since the size of the globe defines the growth
of the orbit, a bird with unilateral or bilateral microphthalmos may have an abnormally
developed skull. Even so the orbit is often relatively over-large for the size of globe. In
such cases a concurrent problem can be persistent conjunctivitis in the overly deep con-
junctival sac. The eye itself may be normal but often microphthalmos is associated with
other intraocular defects such as cataract or retinal dysplasia or detachment. It is impor-
tant not to miss such findings in a small globe. Another possibility is related developmen-
tal defects in other body systems where a multisystem set of congenital defects may occur.
Aetiopathogenesis
Microphthalmos is a relatively common occurrence in birds of any species. There may
well be a hereditary component to the condition but environmental influences in how the
egg is managed before hatc hing can also be important. Birds thus affected normally have
relatively poor vision but not often to the extent that their welfare in captivity is sub-
stantially compromised.
Clinical management
There is clearly nothing that can be done to resolve a congenital defect such as micro-
134Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
topical antibiotic medication; cataract may conceivably be removed with phacoemulsi-
fication or irrigation/aspiration, although the concurrent presence of other ocular defects
such as retinal dysplasia or detachment should be ruled out before surgery is attempted.
Anophthalmos, or what we might tenm extreme microphthalmos since a small oculan
remnant is often found in the orbit, is clearly blinding when bilateral and chicks hatched
without detectable eyes should be euthanased. Investigation of the status of eggs before
hatching and the presence of the condition in related birds should be undertaken.
Cryptophthaimos
Cryptophthalmos, where the globe is of normal size but hidden from view by constriction
of the eyelid aperture can occur after injury or infammation but is also seen in lutino
colour-dilute cockateils (Figure 9.2l) [17]. The birds are rendered sightless by the
extreme constriction of their eyelids. If surgery is performed to open the lid aperture,
refibrosis occurs rapidly with considerable reduction in vision once more. These birds
should not be bred from. A similar condition can occur in any bird after lid trauma (Figure
9.22), and again the eyelid appears to recicatrise after attempts to repair it.
Other congenital defects reported have included agenesis of part of the eyelid [18] and
while surgical correction can be attempted, again the possibility of long-tenm damage to
Figure 9.21 Cryptophthalmos in a cockatiel. (Reproduced courtesy of Dr N. Buyukmihci.)
Fgure 9.22Cryptophthalmos after lid trauma in a mallard duck.
The avian eye135
the ocular surface through inadequate protection during blinking may well suggest that
euthanasia might be the kindest option in such cases.
Lid and adnexal disease
Poxviral blepharitis
Clinicalsigns
 In different avian species poxvirus has quite different manifestations. In pigeons localised
lid swelling with proliferative cutaneous growths is nonmally the predominant sign
(Figure 9.23), although more severe lid swelling can cause ocular surface exposure in
some birds (Figure 9.24). In psittacines a mild blepharitis with eyelid oedema and epi-
phora (Figure 9.25) develops into a more concerming condition with self-trauma causing
lid ulceration (Figure 9.26) [19]. These lesions scab over and may develop to yield
a mucopurulent discharge. The damaged lids may become sealed with a plug of
    s   a n    ss   
2 weeks leaving mild scars. If further traumatic injury occurs, fibrosis of the scarred
areas of lid can lead to an irregular eyelid margin with chronic comeal damage and
blindness (Figure 9.27).
Figure 9.23 Proliferative poxviral lesions in a pigeon.
Figure 9.24 Exposure keratitis in poxvirus and hypovitaminosis A in an Amazon parrot.
136Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Fgure 9.26 Traumatised lid in poxvirus-infected parrot.
Fgure 9.27  Chronic ocular surface damage with lid pathology in poxvirus infection.
Aetiopathogenesis
There are three strains of avian poxvirus, the pigeon, canary and fowl (poultry) variants,
of which the canary strain is seen most commonly in captive pscittacines. The different
strains in different bird species give substantially different results as noted above. Avian
pox can be a very damaging infection of the adnexa either because of the proliferative
 lesions or more commonly from self-trauma which leaves ulcerated areas prone to further
scab fonmation and a vicious circle of self-trauma and irritation. This was particularly
The avian eye 137
the case when large consigmments of parrots were transported in crates from the Amazon
to be kept as captive individuals in North America and Europe [20]. The stocking density
 of birds increased the likelihood of poxviral transmission between birds and the stress
of capture and transport crippled their immune system rendering them much more sus-
ceptible to infection. In mild infections, however, where good-quality care is available
at the time of infection the initial lesions can resolve well.
Clinicalmanagement
The key factor in successful treatment of periocular poxviral disease is prevention of
self-trauma. Use of a thin plastic collar to prevent the bird's claws reaching the periocular
region can lead to considerable suffering and stress for the bird. A better option is the
use of a dilute baby shampoo around the lids, taking care not to apply any to the ocular
surface. This softens the scabs, renders them less irritating and also less likely to be torm
off by self-trauma. Antiviral medication is not generally considered effective against
 poxviral infection in birds.
Hypovifaminosis A
Clinical signs
Vitamin A deficiency can give rise to periocular and conjunctival swelling with ocular
discharge (Figure 9.24). The problem with these as signs of deficiency is that they may
also occur in diseases such as poxvirus blepharitis or sinusitis. Thus hypovitaminosis
must always be considered as a contributory factor when these periocular signs are seen
in and around the mouth, laboured and open-mouth breathing, sometimes profuse nasal
discharge together with sneezing or, in other cases, dry crusted extemal nares. Dermal
dyskeratosis and feather abnormalities may also be seen.
Aetiopathogenesis
Vitamin A is a key molecule regulating normal epithelial growth. Thus deficiency leads
and potentially damaging around the eye. As noted above deficiency, even at a subclinical
level, can be an important contributory factor to other periocular diseases.
Clinical management
The clinical presentation of a bird with signs as noted above should always lead first to
a thorough history taking focusing on the nutritional status of the animal. Use of a seed-
based diet, especially one with sunflower seeds, is highly suggestive of a dietary def-
ciency of a fat-soluble vitamin like vitamin A. A suggestive history and appropriate
clinical signs are generally sufficient for a tentative diagnosis of a deficiency without the
need for measuring serum levels of the vitamin. While changing the dietary regime is
138Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
clearly the long-term aim, this can be difficult in the short term as these birds are as good
 ana   a u n ss arr a n  s
one must ensure that hypervitaminosis A is not provoked. Oral beta carotene can be a
safer option from this perspective. The key factor in immediate ocular management is
care of the periorbital area with a lubricative antibiotic gel.
Knemidokoptes infection
Clinicalsigns
The mite Knemidokoptes pilae, commonly associated with the conditions podoknemi-
dokoptes (scaly leg or tassel-foot) [21] and similar proliferative lesions around the beak
(scaly-face or tassel-beak), can cause substantial tissue outgrowths around the eye (Figure
9.28 and Figure 9.29). The fndings are pathognomonic for the mite infestation.
Fgure 9.28 Knemidicoptes pilae infection giving proliferative periocular lesions.
Figure 9.29 Knemidicoptes pilae infection giving periocular tassels'
The avian eye 139
Aetiopathogenesis
The mite burrows into the comified epithelium around the eyelids and provokes a vari-
able, but sometimes marked, proliferative reaction. This often looks disfiguring and
alarming to the owner but rarely causes much discomfort to the affected bird, although
trauma can cause tissue damage with bleeding on occasion.
Clinical management
Treatment with ivermectin at a dose of 200 μg/kg by intramuscular injection once weekly
for three treatments has been effective in one previous report [22], and by a single dose
in another [23], although neither of these cases were periocular. Softening the prolifera-
tive lesions with paraffn oil is said by some to prevent irritation but in this author's
experience these lesions are not markedly pruritic.
Lid neoplasia
Clinical signs
Neoplasms in the avian eyelid are rare while non-neoplastic swellings, either cystic or
infammatory from sinusitis are much more common. Thus any periocular swelling.
while it may be cancerous, is more likely to be non-neoplastic [24]. Cystic swellings or
those resulting from sinusitis are generally, in this author's experience at least, more
likely to be smooth rather than verrucose in their surface appearance as shown in the
virally induced papilloma in Figure 9.30.
Aetiopathogenesis
Clearly any neoplasm can arise de novo without a specific aetiological agency. Thus
lymphosarcoma [25] and chondrosarcoma [26] appear in the literature but many other
Professor Elliott Jacobson.
140Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Clinical management
Eyelid surgery to remove neoplastic masses can be performed but the small size of the
eye and thin nature of the periocular skin mean that such surgery should be perfomed
umder an operating microscope by someone well versed in microsurgical techniques.
Conjunctivitis
Clinical signs
The classic features of any inflammation are hyperaemia, swelling, discharge and pain
and conjunctivitis is no different. Thus we will see conjunctival hyperaemia, chemosis
(conjunctival oedema), ocular discharge, either serous or mucopurulent depending on the
involvement or otherwise of bacteria, and also blepharospasm indicating discomfort, a
part of ocular inflammation which is often forgotten [27].
Aetiopathogenesis
We can differentiate avian conjunctivitis into three distinct groups. First are those condi-
tions which are specifically localised - foreign bodies or conjunctival infections. Secondly
are those where the conjunctivitis is a manifestation of periocular disease, these predomi-
nantly involving sinusitis as covered above. The third group is those cases in which the
conjunctivitis occurs concurrent with a systemic disease, with the link between the two
normally involving septicaemia
A surprising number of birds can be affected by foreign bodies - in one report of free
ranging red-shouldered hawks 7% of them had grass forets lodged behind their third
eyelid. In pet birds foreign bodies such a millet seeds, seed husks and feathers may alsc
be seen associated with foreign body conjunctivitis. The infectious organisms involved
and Mycoplasma, fungi such as Cryptosporidium and even mycobacteria such as M.
avium [28]. In pigeons the ^one-eyed cold' is a general term for conjunctivitis which can
often be related to Chlamydophila or Mycoplasma infection.
But we must note that merely finding an organism in a conjunctival sac does not make
it the cause of the lesion. What of the bacteria isolated from normal eyes? Work on the
normal microbiological fora of the avian conjunctiva showed that 71% of the captive
exotic birds sampled had at least one bacterial isolate from their conjunctival sac [29].
Eighty-six percent of these were staphylococcal species or Corynebacterium while
Gram-negative bacteria were isolated from 14% of birds and fungi from 9%. In another
study 59% of sampled birds showed a bacterial isolate and 50% of these were Gram
positive cocci[30].
Finding a profuse growth of a single organism is good evidence that it may well be a
     o         s
infection we come across, but the finding of a profuse growth of a single bacterium is
much better evidence than a scanty growth of two or more isolates.
Having said that Crispin and Barmett recovered Escherichia coli from the majority of
clinically normal ducklings and considered that the neonatal flora in these birds were
derived from the intestinal fora [31]. Chlamydophila psittaci is frequently isolated from
The avian eye 141
Australian parakeets with keratoconjunctivitis and from conjunctivitis in pigeons and
finches [32]. Mycoplasma is more often isolated from pigeons with conjunctivitis, the
so-called one-eyed cold, although as we noted above Chlamydophila can cause this as
canSalmonella.
Parasitic conjunctivitis has been reported with the nematode Oxyspirura mansoni in
cockatoos with epiphora. The worm lives in the lower conjunctival sac and sometimes the
roach as its intermediate host, so birds kept inside are unlikely to be affected [33]. Thelazia
nematodes have also been noted causing conjunctivitis in birds although they are more
normally parasites of mammalian hosts [34]. Tremadode fukes of the genus Philophthal-
mus have been reported as causing conjunctivitis in a number of avian species [35].
Clinical management
The first step in investigating avian conjunctivitis then, must be to evaluate which of
these three groups the conjunctivitis falls. Is it associated with localised infection or a
foreign body? Is it part of a condition such as sinusitis, or is there a more systemic
component with the bird more dull and lethargic and showing other clinical signs of
generalised infection?
First a history must be taken. Are any other in-contact birds affected or maybe a new
unquarantined cage-mate? Is the bird exposed to a noxious stimulus such as cigarette
smoke or perhaps the carpets have just been cleaned with a proprietary product? A close
ophthalmic examination is of course required but ensure that careful assessment is made
of areas which might not be covered on a cursory examination such as the conjunctival
sac behind the third eyelid - all too often this is where a foreign body can lie unrecog
nised. Third a full clinical examination is mandatory, focusing particularly on the upper
respiratory tract but taking care to note any other possible infectious foci.
After this clinical assessment come ancilliary tests - first a Schirmer tear test to deter
tion for possible infectious agents. Bacterial infection is the most commonly reported
cause of conjunctivitis, so topical antibiotic is suggested even before bacteriological
results are obtained. Recrudescence occurs often because concurrent sinus infection is
also seen so systemic antibiosis is important in addition to topical treatment, with a
broad-spectrum agent advisable. Use of tetracycline or fuoroquinolone is recommended
given the likelihood that Mycoplasma or Chlamydophila may be involved in many cases
Or Aspergillus isolated, topical treatment with amphotericin B at 4% has been advised
as oral dosingis not tolerated well. Where systemic medication is required 5-fuorocytosine
has been suggested orally at 400mg/kg per day in divided doses [18]
Cockafiel conjuncfivifis
Clinical signs
Specific note should be made of conjunctivitis which causes quite profound chemo
sis and hyperaemia predominantly in cockatiels but also in budgerigars [36]. There is
142Ophthaimology of Exotic Pets
Figure 9.31 Chemotic and hyperaemic conjunctivitis in a cockatiel.
hyperaemia, chemosis and a clear watery discharge (Figure 9.31). Some of the birds thus
affected also have neurological signs such as partial lid paresis and reduced jaw tone.
Many of these birds also have intestinal Giardia infection and respond to treatment with
metronidazole and vitamin E.
Aetiopathogenesis
To date no organism has been isolated from the eyes of birds with this condition although
given the response of the condition to topical chlortetracycline one assumes that either
Chlamydophila or Mycoplasmamayberesponsible.
Clinical managemernt
Use of topical chlortetracycline resolves the vast majority of these cases. Once the ocular
signs are resolving. showing that this is indeed the correct course of therapy, the bird
should be dosed with systemic tetracycline, since if ocular tissues are affected, it is highly
likely that organisms will also be found in the nasopharynx. Currently the standard
topical chlortetracycline in the UK, Aureomycin, is not available, and in its place topical
fluoroquinolones such as ofoxacin (Exocin, Allergan) may be effective.
Lovebird eye disease
Clinical signs
This condition again manifests as conjunctivitis and periorbital swelling with blepharitis
and serous ocular discharge leading to hyperaemia and ulceration of the region and the
serous disc harge becoming mucopurulent with concurrent bacterial infection. The disease
here is more severe than those previously mentioned in that generalised depression is
seen with lethargy, anorexia and commonly death within a few days.
Aetiopathogenesis
No specific infectious agent has been isolated from affected birds although histological
evaluation has shown inclusions in conjunctival cells and sometimes also proliferative
The avian eye 143
inflammatory lesions with lymphoid infiltrates and subepithelial oedema. Stress is prob-
ably an important factor in the initiation of the disease, as transport and the introduction
of new cage-mates into the environment have been reported as being associated with
outbreaks of the disease.
Clinical management
Isolation of affected birds is important both to reduce the stress on the bird itself, whose
cage-mates have been reported to be aggressive towards affected individuals, and also
for in-contact birds in case an infectious cause is at the root of the problem.
Corneal disease
Corneal ulceration
Clinical signs
Blepharospasm, epiphora and signs of self-trauma are often the first signs of cormeal
ulceration in a bird (Figure 9.32). Ophthalmic examination reveals an area of the ocular
surface giving an irregular refection of a light shone onto it. The ulcer margin, either
r-u  n u       n e u s  ds
one, is often evident on examination with some magnification from a direct ophthalmo-
scope at +20D or a slit lamp biomicroscope.
Fluorescein can be very valuable in demarcating the extent of an ulcer and also for
determining whether the edge of the surrounding epithelium is adherent to the underlying
basement membrane and stroma or is devitalised and non-adherent, as in cormeal epithe-
lial basement membrane dystrophy or so-called boxer ulcers in dogs.
Figure 9.32 Chronic comeal ulceration in an aged snowy owl. Note that chronic lid
pathology here probably contributes to the non-healing nature of the ulcer in addition to the
age of the bird.
144Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Aetiopathogenesis
As with any species, the majority of avian cormeal ulceration occurs secondary to
trauma, either from an extermal source such as a foreign body or from what we might
call an intermal agency, such as a swollen irregular eyelid abrading the ocular surface.
More chronic non-healing ulcers can often be seen in older birds, where epithelial
healing is not as rapid and complete as in a younger animal. Some birds also seem
to have a basement membrane dystrophy-like lesion where the epithelial edge is non
adherent.
Clinicalmanagement
A superficial erosion subsequent to localised trauma in a nonmal healthy cormea should
heal within 1 week. The nonmal flow of epithelial cells from the stem cell population at
the limbus, across the cormea as a basal epithelial cell and then up through the layers of
the stratified squamous epithelium, becoming wing cells and then squames and finally
desquamating at the comeal surface ensures that epithelial erosions should heal within
this short time. The question is should a prophylactic antibiotic be used topically to
ensure that bacterial infection does not supervene? It would seem only reasonable to
attempt to stop invading organisms from crossing this denuded and thus at-risk area of
ocular surface. Yet it is likely that by giving antibiotic we are actually killing the normal
commensal fora and thus may be leaving a path open for pathogenic bacteria to take
over the binding sites normally occupied by these comensals. And yet perhaps the one
cormeal ulcer you decide to leave without antibiotic will be the one that develops a
Pseudomonas infection and begins to melt, with collagenases from the bacteria destroy-
ing the otherwise healthy stroma beneath the ulcer surface.
It may be that the antibiotic or, more likely, the preservatives and stabilisers in such
topical medications, may themselves slow ulcer healing, but given the horrendous results
of true pathogenic bacterial colonisation of a cormeal ulcer, it is probably correct to use
an antibiotic prophylactically in cormeal ulcers in birds. What we should say is that the
antibiotic to chose should be one that is more likely to kill the Gram-negative pathogens
on a cormeal surface than the Gram-positive commensals.
In deep ulcers or ones that show signs of beginning to melt, that is to say those with
an irregular oedematous surface, topical autologous serum should be used frequently.
The serum contains TIMPs, tissue inhibitors of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs)
which are causing the collagen breakdown manifest as cormeal melting. Serum, or indeed
plasma, with EDTA added also has the advantage that the EDTA chelates calcium which
A long-standing non-healing but sterile ulcer may benefit from ocular surface protec
tion using a tarsorraphy simply fashioned by placing two 4/0 vicryl sutures to close the
lids. This is to be preferred to a third eyelid fap, for the powerful muscles that draw the
third eyelid across the ocular surface may well pull the sutures through the margin of
the third eyelid, with a failure of cormeal protection and further damage to the ocular
adnexa.
The avian eye 145
Amazon keratitis
Clinical signs
A transient comeal inflammation with a subtle punctate appearance has been reported in
extend across the ocular surface and then resolve, normally within 1 week. The surface
lesions are transiently fuorescein positive and are seldom more than an epithelial erosion.
On occasion the lesion extends more deeply in the stroma with associated uveitic change
giving either a dull-appearing iris or occasionally a more severe inflammation with fibrin
clots and synechiae. Some birds develop a concurrent sinusitis
Aetiopathogenesis
These lesions have been noted associated with capture in the wild and transportation.
Their development may merely be one associated with damage to the cormea during
capture complicated by capture and transport-related stress.
Clinical management
Neither topical antibiotics nor antivirals have been found to improve the course of the
disease significantly. Most lesions self-heal within one week but animals should be
examined regularly to ensure that no complicating factors lead to worsening of lesions
rather than their healing. If lesions are worsening, supportive care with topical antibiotics
would be indicated.
Mynah bird keratifis
Clinical signs
The vast majority of these heal within 48 hours through the natural migration of
comeal epithelial cells from the stem cell population at the limbus. Mynah birds seem
prone to more severe and long-lasting handling-related traumatic cormeal lesions.
In one study 96% of birds examined immediately after shipping were noted to have
cormeal epithelial erosions with associated blepharospasm and some conjunctival
hyperaemia [38].
Aetiopathogenesis
As with the Amazon punctate keratitis discussed above, most of these lesions resolve
with 1 week, but some leave cormeal scarring and permanent opacity. Other birds develop
chronic keratoconjunctivitis with conjunctival masses, widespread cormeal ulceration
and neovascularisation. In several of these severely affected birds systemic aspergillosis
146OphthatmologyofExoticPets
  sn un nssns snn u n  t aq 
responsive to acyclovir, has been suggested as a complicating factor.
Clinical management
many cases of mynah keratitis, but tear replacement, topical antibiosis and antiviral
therapy where required should be considered.
Uveal disease
Clinical signs
The classical signs of uveitis are a miotic pupil, inflammatory changes in the anterior
segment from aqueous flare through to keratitic precipitates of cells from the aqueous
onto the posterior cormeal face, and in severe cases frank hypopyon (Figure 9.33).
Veterinarians will have noted such changes in cats and dogs with uveitis and the same
reducing the clarity of iris detail and the pupil margin, while other more severe cases
may have purulent material or haemorrhage in the anterior chamber. Chronic mild uveitis
may result merely in a darkened hyperpigmented iris (Figure 9.34). In more severe cases,
often after trauma, posterior synechiae are seen (Figure 9.35). When these adhesions
 nd a rn ssd snoae aad ansd sa   sn aa
coma can supervene.
Aetiopathogenesis
Cormeal disease can lead to uveitis when severe, probably through an antidromal trigemi-
nal stimulation causing breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier with subsequent libera-
tion of fibrin and leucocytes into the aqueous humour. Another cause of uveitis in birds
is association with systemic infectious disease. Here again blood-aqueous barrier disrup-
o Aumel onaan g u suawbas jouaue aun buy uoidody anaaas ce'e anby
The avian eye147
Figure 9.34 Lens-induced uveitis with a dull dark iris with mature cataract in a Harris
hawk.
Figure 9.35 Post-traumatic cataract and uveitis with synechia
tion is important. Bilateral uveitis has been reported in a lovebird with staphylococcal
septicaemia [39], while psittacines with reovirus infection showed disseminated intra-
vascular coagulation and associated uveitis [40]. Some had hypopyon, some intraocular
haemorrhage and most recovered but with synechiae.
Ocular trauma in any bird species, but seen most particularly in raptors, can result in
uveitis. A final cause of uveitis is the dissemination of lens protein into the anterior
chamber either acutely through lens capsule rupture after trauma or more chronically
associated with mature cataract formation. Ingress of water into the capsular bag of the
lens results in enlargement of the lens. This causes microfractures of the lens capsule
with concomitant release of soluble lens proteins into the aqueous. The story here runs
that the iris has not encountered these proteins previously, as they have been trapped in
the lens until now. Release of this antigen, novel to the intraocular immune system,
results in an immune activation and resulting uveitis. This neat story is probably rather
too simple - lens proteins are not necessarily hidden from the neighbouring uveal lym-
phocytes prior to such release but it is probably the level of their presence after cataract
maturity which leads to uveitic change.
148 Ophthatmology of Exotic Pets
Clinical management
The classic treatment of uveitis in mammals involves mydriasis and anti-inflammatory
medication. Topical steroids such as prednisolone acetate and/or non-steroidals like
ketorolac or furbiprofen work in birds just as well as in mammals, but the striated muscle
of the iris means that atropine will not work to dilate the avian pupil. While it takes rela-
tively little non-depolarising muscle relaxant such as vecuronium to dilate a normal pupil,
 in an inflamed iris frequent dosing is needed to produce adequate mydriasis, and intrac-
emeral suxamethonium (i.e. drug injected into the anterior chamber) may be required.
The trouble here is that overdosing with potential systemic paralytic effects can be all
too easily a potentially fatal side effect.
Lens disease
Cataracts
Clinical signs
One of the most common conditions seen in the avian eye is cataract (Figure 9.34). By
the time many birds are presented to the veterinarian they will have a total mature white
cataract. Evaluation of the lens with more subtle changes can be readily achieved with
the direct ophthalmoscope set at +10D, although often a slit lamp biomicroscope can
give a better view of lens pathology in these very small eyes. Other ocular signs of
importance when evaluating a cataract include assessing the iris for lens-induced uveitis.
when there will be a dull dark homogeneous hue to the iris face (Figure 9.34), and retinal
determined by ocular ultrasonography when the cataract is mature or nearly so.
Aetiopathogenesis
A common cause of cataracts in birds is trauma, whether in wild or captive individuals
(Figure 9.35). Others are age-related, seen in older birds (Figure 9.36) Some cataracts
Fgure 9.36 Age-related cataract in a 48-year-old macaw.
Theavian eye149
Figure 9.37  Inherited cataract in a Norwich canary.
Figure 9.38 Phacoemulsification of a cataract in an owl.
are inherited - that seen in the Norwich canary (Figure 9.37) is one such and thus related
birds should always be examined if possible. Given that psittacine species can have long
life expectancies, age-related cataract is not uncommon [41]. A deficiency in dietary
antioxidants and daylight, which accounts for much of the age-related cataract seen in
humans, may be important in older birds. Drugs and diabetes are factors noted in man
but as yet their importance is unclear in birds. Indeed the majority of lens opacities seen
in birds are post-traumatic, although, as a greater number of older birds are examined.
we might expect idiopathic age-related cataract to be recognised more frequently.
Clinicai management
The only curative treatment for cataract is surgery. Phacoemulsification can be used in
     i ss n si sn m  s 
aspiration handpiece or even with a needle can be employed given the soft nature of the
majority of birds' lenses (Figure 9.38) [42]. Cases with lens-induced or post-tramatic
uveitis should be rigorously managed with topical steroid drops up to five times daily to
ensure that the intraocular inflammation is controlled as well as possible. Indeed this
150OphthatmologyofExoticPets
Fgure 9.39 Lens luxation in a hybrid hawk.
after the surgery.
Lens luxation
Clinical signs
Displacement of the lens is seen with surprising frequency in birds and is evident
monmally because of the aphakic crescent evident when the lens has deviated ventrally.
its zonule having been disrupted (Figure 9.39). In many cases, given the pathogenesis
noted below, there will be concurrent ocular abnormalities, either resulting from the
trauma that luxated the lens in the frst place, or the mature or hypermature cata-
ract, often with resulting lens-induced uveitis. In such cases it can be difficult to dif-
ferentiate these two aetiopathological paths and the taking of a history, if available, is
crucial.
Aetiopathogenesis
The majority of lux ated lenses are seen after trauma, although the changes in a maturing
cataract rendering it more spherical can lead to tension on the zonule with its rupture
and subsequent lens luxation. This is more seen in birds with large eyes such as owls
rather than in small birds where the lens is already spherical to maximise its focusing
power in such small eyes.
Clinical managment
In many cases the bird is not unduly concermed about the lens luxation. If there is little
inflammation it may be best to leave the lens in place in this author's opinion, although
Theavian eye151
its removal by phacoemulsification is certainly possible; altematively it may be removed
by means of an intracapsular lendectomy, if the size of the eye does not permit use of a
phacoemulsification handpiece[43,44]
Retinal disease
Clinicalsigns
Much avian retinal disease is trauma-related and thus clinical signs include in the short
tenm detachment and haemorrhage, often with damage to the pecten (Figure 9.40 and
Figure 9.41) [45]. Focal pigmented areas are seen in some owls and have been associated
with sunlight exposure in some reports and toxoplasmosis in others. This author consid-
Figure 9.40 Inflammatory change around a damaged pecten in an aged eagle owl.
          a 
152OphthatmologyofExoticPets
ers that they may well be a normal variant, as they are seen in numerous raptors and not
associated with concurrent posterior segment inflammation [46]
Aetiopathogenesis
of inherited retinal degenerations so common in dogs are vanishingly rare in birds,
presumably because they have not been looked for and techniques such as electroretin-
ography are only available for birds in a small number of specialist centres. The size of
the bird eye again is a limiting factor with wire electrodes needing to be used and the
tively speaking, a noisy electrical background. Thus photoreceptor dysplasia has been
reported in pigeons [47] and raptors [48] and a retinal defect leading to globe enlarge-
ment has been evaluated in detail in one line of chickens, clinically [49], histopathologi-
cally [50], and by electroretinography [51]. While these can hardly been considered pet
and thus reference is made to them here. Retinal degeneration has been reported in a
psittacine [52], but the majority of retinal disease reported in the veterinary literature is
traumatic or infectious in origin. Toxoplasma has been reported to have caused his
topathological chorioretinal lesions in one group of canaries in the same way that it can
in people [53] and blindness in a different group of the same species in an earlier report
[54]; we have shown, however, that there was no serological evidence for Toxoplasma
infection in similar lesions in a small sample of owls [45]. Here trauma was the underly.
ing cause of retinal detachment
Horner's syndrome
Clinical signs
The classic triad of miosis, ptosis and enophthalmos is not seen in birds with sympathetic
denervation the eye. To start with the iris sphincter and dilator muscles are not autonomi-
cally innervated and thus we are not dealing with miosis with this condition in birds
The globe is much less mobile in the avian orbit and thus one does not see enophthalmos
and third eyelid protrusion. The only sign left is ptosis, and this is an eyelid paresis tha
can be reversed with topical dilute phenylephrine (Figure 9.42 and Figure 9.43) [55,56]
Aetiopathogenesis
In the two reported cases of avian Homer's syndrome an aetiology was not given; as so
often with unexplained lesions in raptors, trauma is invoked as the most likely cause.
Clinical management
Unless further evaluation with radiography and ultrasonography is used in an attempt to
locate the cause of the sympathetic dysfunction these cases, no further diagnostic or
The avian eye 153
Figure 9.42  Homer's syndrome in an
Figure 9.43The bird in Figure 9.42 after
African eagle owl.
administration of topical phenylephrine
therapeutic measures are required. The birds are not unduly compromised by this condi-
tion and treatment is not possible.
Enucleation
A number of reports exist for various ocular surgeries in birds from operations for entro-
pion, for cataract and for lens luxation already discussed above [33-35,57], to cormeal
reconstructive surgery after trauma [58], or even cormeal grafting [59]. Given the high
incidence of trauma, enucleation is the most common ocular surgery in birds, yet it can
be difficult to undertake because of the scleral ossicles which can preclude removing the
eye without collapsing it. Two altermatives have been reported. First a very useful tech-
nique of enlarging the palpebral aperture by joining it to the aural meatus has been
published (Figure 9.44) which allows the entire globe to be removed even in owls with
tubular eyes [60]. Secondly evisceration, where the intraocular contents are removed and
the resulting space filled with a conforming sterile padding, is possible (Figure 9.45)
[61,62]. The problem with enucleation is that, as we saw at the beginning of this chapter
in Figures 9.2 and 9.4, the globe takes up a significant proportion of the avian skull in
terms of volume and weight. Enucleation is not only difficult, it may leave the bird
unbalanced after surgery. Evisceration opens the cormea, removes the intraocular contents
and then, following removal of the palpebral margins, closes the lid skin over the result-
ing blind and pain-free globe.
This leaves us with one final question: if vision is so central to a bird's telos - its
very reason for being - is removing an eye an appropriate surgery to be doing? Should
a unilaterally anophthalmic bird, or even one bilaterally blind after trauma or disease.
ssans pe ut ma e ui ae snd [a] aded su nossaoid zae day a
that maybe after all birds do not necessarily need two eyes to fulfil their life's require.
ments. While reports of successful reintroduction into the wild of uniocular birds are
not common, they do occur, showing that release after adequate training might be appro-
priate [63].
154Ophthaimology of ExoticPets
T
E
F
Fgure 9.44  Enucleation via enlargement of the palpebral aperture through the aural
meatus, redrawn after Murphy et al. 1983. An incision joins the lateral canthus to the aural
meatus, enlarging the aperture through which the tubular globe can be removed after careful
resection, with the resulting cavity closed with permanent sutures.
The avian eye 155
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 9.45  Evisceration of the globe as a potentially preferable technique compared to full
enucleation. The cornea is incised and intraocular contents removed by traction. The cornea
is removed and the globe packed with haemostatic gauze. The lid margins are resected and
sutured to close the skin over the open globe.
References
1. Martin GR. Eye. In: AS King, J McLelland, eds. Form and Function in Birds, vol. 3. London:
Academic Press, 1985.
2. Willis AM, Wilkie DA. Avian ophthalmology: part 1: anatomy, examination and diagnostic
techniques. J Avian Med Surg 1999;13:160-166 and part 2: review of ophthalmic diseases.
J Avian Med Surg 1999;13:245-251.
 3. Ott M. Visual accommodation in vertebrates: mechanisms, physiological response and stimuli.
J Comp Physiol A 2006;192: 97-111.
156Ophthaimology of ExoticPets
4. Sivak J G. Avian mechanisms for vision in air and water. Trends Neurosci 1980;12:
314-317.
5. Pettigrew JD, Wallman J, Wildsoet CF. Saccadic oscillations facilitate ocular perfusion from
the avian pecten. Nature 1990;343:362-363.
6. Fite KV, Rosenfield-Wessels S. A comparative study of deep avian foveas. Brain Behav Evol
1975;12:97-115.
7. Locket NA. Problems of deep foveas. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol 1992;20:281-295.
8. Bennett AT, Cuthill IC, Partridge JC, Lunau K. Ultraviolet plumage colors predict mate prefer
ences in starlings. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:8618-8621.
9. Martin GR, Gordon IE. Visual acuity in the tawny owl (Strix aluco). Vision Res 1974;14:
1393-1397.
10. Martin GR. What is binocular vision for? A birds’ eye view. J Vis 2009;9:14.1-19.
11. Gaffney MF, Hodos W. The visual acuity and refractive state of the American kestrel (Fafco
sparverius).Vision Res 2003;43:2053-2059.
12. Reymond L. Spatial visual acuity of the eagle Aquila audax: a behavioural, optical and ana
tomical investigation. Vision Res 1985;25:1477-1491.
13. Korbel R, Leitenstorfer P. [The modified Schirmer tear test in birds - a method for checking
lacrimal gland function]. Tierarztl Prax Ausg K Klientiere Heimtiere 1998;26:284-294.
14. Holt E, Rosenthal K, Shofer FS. The phenol red thread tear test in large psittaciformes. Vet
Ophthalmo1 2006;9:109-113.
15. Montali RJ. Comparative pathology of infammation in the higher vertebrates (reptiles, birds
and mammals) J Comp Pathol 1988;99: 1-26.
16. Huchzermeyer FW, Cooper JE. Fibriscess, not abscess, resulting from a localised inflammatory
response to infection in reptiles and birds. Vet Rec 2000; 147:515-517.
             
malformation in four cockatiels. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990;196:1490- 1492.
18. Kern TJ, Murphy CJ, Heck WR. Partial upper eyelid agenesis in a peregrine falcon. J Am Vet
Med Ass0c 1985; 187:1207.
19. McDonald SE, Lowenstine LJ, Ardans AA. Avian pox in blue-fronted Amazon parrots. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 1981;179: 1218-1222.
20. Karpinski LG, SL Clubb. Clinical aspects of ophthalmology in caged birds. In: RW Kirk, ed.
Current Veterinary Therapy /X. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1986; pp. 616-621.
robins. J Wildl Dis 1999;35:1-7.
22. Miller DS, Taton-Allen GF, Campbell TW. Knemidokoptes in a Swainson's hawk, Buteo
swainsoni. J Zoo Wildl Med 2004;35:400-402.
23. Schulz TA, Stewart JS, Fowler ME. Knemidokoptes mutans (Acari: Knemidocopidae) in a
great-horned ow1 (Bubo virginianus). J Wild1 Dis 1989;25:430432
24. Jacobson ER, Mladinich CR, Clubb S, Sundberg JP, Lancaster WD. Papilloma-like virus
infection in an African gray parrot. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983;183: 1307-1308.
25. Ramos-Vara JA, Smith EJ, Watson GL. Lymphosarcoma with plasmacytoid differentiation in
a scarlet macaw (Ara macao). Avian Dis 1997;41:499-504.
26. Spalding MG, Woodard JC. Chondrosarcoma in a wild great white heron from southern
Florida. J Wild1 Dis 1992;28:151-153.
27. Abrahams GA, Paul-Murphy J, Murphy CJ. Conjunctivitis in birds. Vet Clin N Am Exotic
Anim Pract 2002;5:287-399
28. Pocknell AM, Miller BJ, Neufeld JL, Grahn BH. Conjunctival mycobacteriosis in two emus
(Dromaius novaehollandiae).Vet Pathol 1996;33:346-348.
The avian eye 157
29. Wolf ED, Amass K, Olsen J. Survey of conjunctival fora in the eye of clinically normal,
captive exotic birds. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983;183:1232-1233.
30. Zenoble RD, Griffth RW, Clubb SL. Survey of bacteriologic fora of conjunctiva and cornea
in healthy psittacine birds. Am J Vet Res 1983;44:1966-1967.
31. Crispin SM, Barnett KC. Ocular candidiasis in ornamental ducks. Avian Patho1 1978;7:49-59.
32. Surman PG, Schultz DJ, Tham VL. Keratoconjunctivitis and chlamydiosis in cage birds. Aust
Vet J 1974;50:356-362.
33. Schwabe CW. Studies on Oxyspirura mansoni, the tropical eyeworm of poultry. II1. Preliminary
observations on eyeworm pathogenicity. Am J Vet Res 1950;11:286-290.
34. Brooks DE, Greiner EC, Walsh MT. Conjunctivitis caused by Thelazia sp in a Senegal parrot
J Am Vet Med Ass0c 183:1305-1306.
35. Greve JH, Harrison GJ. Conjunctivitis caused by eye fukes in captive-reared ostriches. J Am
Vet Med Ass0c 1980;77:909-910.
36. Korbel R, Schaffer EH. The occurrence of conjunctivitis of unknown etiology in budgerigars
(Melopsittacus undulatus, Shaw 1805). Tierarztl Prax 1991;19:659-663.
37. Karpinski LG, SL Clubb. Post pox ocular problems in Blue-fronted Amazons and Blue-headed
Pionus Parrots. Proceedings of AAV Annual Conference, 1985.
38. Karpinski LG, SL Clubb. An outbreak of avian pox in imported mynahs. Proceedings of AAV
Annual Conference, 1986.
39. Bonous DI, Schaeffer DO, Roy A. Coagulase-negtaive Staphylococcus sp. septicaemia in a
lovebird. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989;195:1120-1121.
40. van den Brand JM, Manvell R, Paul G, Kik MJ, Dorrestein GM. Reovirus infections associated
with high mortality in psittaciformes in The Netherlands. Avian Pathol 2007;36:293-299
41. Clubb SL, Karpinski LG. Aging in macaws. J Ass Avian Vet 1993;7:31-33.
lens implantation in a great horned owl. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007;230:559561.
43. Van Niekerk WH, Petrick SW. Unilateral lentectomy in a black-shouldered kite. J S Afr Vet
Assoc 1990;61: 124-125.
44. Brooks DE, Murphy CJ, Quesenberry KE, Walsh MT. Surgical correction of a luxated cata-
ractous lens in a barred ow1. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983;183:1298-1299.
45. Williams DL, Gonzalez Villavincencio CM, Wilson S. Chronic ocular lesions in tawny owls
(Strix aluco) injured by road traffic. Vet Rec 2006;159:148-153.
46. Bayon A, Almela RM, Talavera J. Avian ophthalmology. Eur J Comp Anim Pract
2007;17:253-265.
47. Moore PA, Munnell JF, Martin CL, Prasse KW, Carmichael KP. Photoreceptor cell dysplasia
in two Tippler pigeons. Vet Ophthalmo1 2004;7:197-203.
48. Dukes TW, Fox GA. Blindness associated with retinal dysplasia in a prairie falcon, Fafco
mexicanus. J Wildl Dis 1983;19:66-69.
49. Montiani-Ferreira F, Li T, Kiupel M, Howland H, Hocking P, Curtis R, Petersen-Jones S.
Clinical features of the retinopathy, globe enlarged (rge) chick phenotype. Vision Res 2003;43:
2009-2018.
50. Montiani-Ferreira F, Fischer A, Cernuda-Cernuda R, Kiupel M, DeGrip WJ, Sherry D,
Cho SS, Shaw GC, Evans MG, Hocking PM, Petersen-Jones SM. Detailed histopathologic
characterization of the retinopathy, globe enlarged (rge) chick phenotype. Mol Vis 2005;11:
11-27.
51. Montiani-Ferreira F, Shaw GC, Geller AM, Petersen-Jones SM. Electroretinographic features
of the retinopathy, globe enlarged (rge) chick phenotype. Mol Vis 2007;13:553-565
52. Tudor DC, Yard C. Retinal atrophy in a parakeet. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 1978;73:1456.
158Ophthaimology of Exotic Pets
53. Williams SM, Fulton RM, Render JA, Mansfield L, Bouldin M. Ocular and encephalic toxo
plasmosis in canaries. Avian Dis 2001;45:262-267
54. Vickers MC, Hartley WJ, Mason RW, Dubey JP, Schollam L. (1992) Blindness associated
with toxoplasmosis in canaries. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;200:1723-1725.
55. Williams DL, Cooper JE. Horner's syndrome in an African spotted eagle owl (Bubo africanus).
Vet Rec 1994; 134:64-66.
56. Gancz AY, Lee S, Higginson G, Danylyk I, Smith DA, Taylor M. Horner's syndrome in an
eastern screech ow1 (Megascops asio). Vet Rec 2006;159:320-322.
57. Canton DD, Murphy CJ, Buyukmihci NC, Schulz T. Pupilloplasty in a great horned owl with
pupillary 0cclusion and cataracts. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;201:1087-1090.
58. Gionfriddo JR, Powell CC. Primary closure of the corneas of two great horned owls after
resection of nonhealing ulcers. Vet Ophthalmol 2006;9:251-254.
59. Andrew SE, Clippinger TL, Brooks DE, Helmick KE. Penetrating keratoplasty for treatment
of corneal protrusion in a great horned owl (Bubo virginianus). Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:
201-205.
60. Murphy CJ, Brooks DE, Kern TJ, Quesenberry KE, Ris RC. Enucleation in birds of prey.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 183:1234-1237.
 61. Christen C, Richter M, Fischer I, Eule C, Spiess B, Hatt JM. Unilateral evisceration of an eye
following cornea and lens perforation in a sulfur-crested cockatoo (Cacatua galerita). Schweiz
Arch Tierhei1kd 2006;148:615-619.
62. Implantation of an intraocular silicone prosthesis in a great horned owl (Bubo virginianus)
J Avian Med Surg 1999;13:98-103.
63. Hegemann A, Hegemann ED, Krone O. Successful rehabilitation and release with a subse-
quent brood of a one-eyed eagle owl (Bubo bubo). Berl Munch Tierarztl Wochenschr 2007;
120:183-188.
Chapter 10
The reptile eye
Introduction
Any review of reptile ophthalmology, must refer back to a key work on the subject, that
of Millichamp, Jacobson and Wolf [1], which even though it is now over 25 years old.
still provides much useful information. Other overviews include that of Lawton, whose
chapter in the second edition of Mader's Reptile Medicine and Surgery [2], added to my
contribution to the smaller first edition [3]. Here I will aim to bring new data to the field
as well as covering that already known. We will concentrate on diseases of reptiles kept
as pets or in zoological collections but will include some conditions seen in wild reptiles
in order to compare and contrast with what may be encountered in captive reptiles. These
animals, perhaps in contradistinction to the mammals and birds already covered, are still
very much wild animals in captivity, and thus diseases seen in their counterparts free in
the wild, are perhaps of more relevance than in captive wild mammals or birds.
Anatomy and physiology of the reptilian eye
The key monograph on reptile ocular anatomy is Underwood's masterful chapter in the
second volume of Gans and Parsons' Biology of the Reptilia [4]. Gordon Lynn Walls in
his classic text [5] and Sir Stewart Duke Elder in his The Eye in Evolution [6] both also
contribute valuably to the literature on the reptile eye, although the age of these publica-
tions means they do not include more modem research.
The eyes of lizards, snakes, crocodilians and chelonia are surprisingly different, these
variations giving considerable insight into both the diversity of their evolutionary origins
and their current residence in different ecological niches. As Underwood notes in his
introduction ^The eye shows how species have modified their basic equipment to current
conditions and evolutionary opportunities. Study of the eye may contribute to reconstruc-
tion of a group's phylogeny' [4]. Following Underwood we will start by describing the
eye and adnexa of a typical diumal lizard.
The large orbits contain the extraocular muscles, the large Harderian gland which curls
around the globe at its posterior aspect, the lacrimal gland and an orbital sinus which
Ophthatmotogy of Exotic Pets, First Edition. David L. Williams.
@ 2012 David Williams. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
160Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Iris
Cornea
Lens
Scleral ossicle
Conus papillaris
Optic nerve
Figure 10.1Line diagram of lizard eye
connects to the intermal jugular vein via the vena cerebralis, clearly an important fact to
be borme in mind when considering enucleation. The orbits meet medially with only a
cartilaginous septum between them, meaning that an abscess in one orbit could readily
cross to the fellow orbit, although in practice this is rarely if ever seen. The eyelids are
unequal with the upper eyelid, although containing smooth muscle, being relatively
immobile. The eye opens predominantly through downward movement of the lower
eyelid which contains a large cartilaginous plate. In several families of lizard and in all
snakes the eyelids are fused to form a transparent spectacle, the biology and diseases of
which will be discussed further below. In those lizards with eyelids, the nictitating mem-
brane, a fold of conjunctiva, contains vertical crescents of cartilage attached to a tendon
which links them to the retrobulbar bursalis muscle. Thus while conjunctival faps can
be fashioned in a similar manner to those in cats and dogs, the tension on them from the
action of this bursalis muscle often renders them of use for only a short time before the
suture tears through. A tarsorraphy may be of more benefit.
The globe of the lizard eye (Figure 10.1) can be divided into an anterior cormeal and
a posterior orbital segment. The cormea has a thin stroma but a relatively thick Bowman's
layer covered by a thin cormeal epithelium. The iridocormeal angle is poorly developed
compared with that of higher vertebrates. Overlapping scleral ossicles, around 10-14 in
lizards, are found in the sclera immediately behind the limbus overlying the ciliary body
which, as Underwood puts it, embraces the equator of the lens. Crampton's muscle and
Brucke's muscle lie between the ciliary body and the sclera with actions in accommoda-
The reptile eye16l
tion, since contraction of Crampton's muscle draws the ciliary body anteriorly pressing
it against the lens and shortening its focal length. This allows not only changes in the
lens sphericity but also enhancement of the curvature of the cormea. The lens is fairly
soft with an epithelium which thickens markedly at the lens equator forming the Ringwulst
which brings the lens into contact with the ciliary body. Noctumal lizards such as the
which is hexagonal when dilated, allowing a much larger pupil diameter than that of a
circular pupil, and closes to a slit on miosis. Diurmal lizards are more likely to have a
simple round pupil. Not only does iris anatomy differ between lizards with such different
lifestyles. The depth of the globe along its optical axis is significantly less in noctural
lizards, allowing much greater irradiance of the viewed image on the retina in the noc-
tumal reptile species [7]. The differences in visually orientated behaviour between
noctumal and diurmal lizards is also manifest in their photoreceptor populations. All
diurmal lizards have retinas populated solely by cones, both single and double, with oil
droplets giving them specific responses to particular light wavelengths. Nocturmal species
within this group, such as the nocturmal geckos, have cones which have developed mor
phological features of rods but still contain and use cone photopigments in their visual
transduction pathway.
As noted above and discussed further below, the eyes of all snakes are covered by a
spectacle fonmed from fused transparent eyelids. The ophidian eye (Figure 10.2) is suf-
ficiently different from that of other reptile groups for Walls to conclude that it developed
Iris
Spectacle
Cornea
Periocular
skin scale
Lens
Lens wulst
Optic nerve
Figure 10.2Line diagram of snake eye.
162Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
a second time from an almost vestigial eye which had degenerated during an evolutionary
period spent underground. Regarding the difference between the snake eye and that of
other reptiles, Underwood goes so far as to suggest that ‘there is nothing about [the snake
eye] to suggest that its owner is a reptile, let alone one related to lizards' [8]. The ophid-
ian orbit has only the Harderian gland, which secretes a seromucous fuid between the
spectacle and the cormea [9] rather than also having a lacrimal gland producing a less
viscous fuid as do all other reptiles. Snakes do not have scleral ossicles but have an
entirely fibrous sclera with a cartilaginous cup posteriorly. The cormea, not needing to
thelium only of a very few cell layers. Snakes accommodate with changes in lens defor-
mation but more importantly also by forward movement of the lens. The relative
importance of these two mechanisms is unclear, and in his significant cross-species
review Ott argues that further research is needed and that at present any definitive state-
ments on ophidian accommodation should be treated with caution [10].
The chelonian eye varies markedly between species, predominantly because of the
different ecological niches they inhabit. The amphibious terrapin Emys, for instance, has
a relatively convex cormea and a thick lens with a thin annular pad [11]. To have appro-
priate refraction above and below the water such aquatic chelonia use their iris to squeeze
the anterior face of the lens, dramatically increasing its curvature. In terrestrial Testudo
species the lens is less spherical, since in its terrestrial environment the cormea plays an
active part in light refraction but the small ocular size of many of these species still
means that the lens cannot be as ovoid as that of larger mammals.
The eyelids are positioned so that the lateral canthus is higher than the medial. While
this means that an aquatic terrapin or turtle rising to the surface has its palpebral aperture
parallel to the water surface, it is not clear why terrestrial species maintain this anatomi
cal peculiarity. The nictitating membrane is pronounced, being withdrawn by the pyrami-
dalis muscle. The lacrimal and Harderian glands are large in most chelonia compared
            
prise a predominant cone population with single and double cones with oil droplets:
while some suggest the chelonian retina is devoid of rods, Walls describes rods in several
species[5].
Biology of the reptilian spectacle
As we noted in the introduction to this volume, a key feature of exotic animal ophthal-
mology as with any area of exotic animal medicine, is knowing when extrapolation from
what one already knows of more conventional pet anatomy, physiology and disease is
appropriate and where one needs new information concerming differences between the
species being investigated and those with which one is more familiar.
This is nowhere more true than in the case of the snake spectacle. Here, assuming that
we can extrapolate from what is already known in the cat or dog will result in incorrect
diagnoses and potentially damaging treatments. All snakes, and a reasonable proportion
of lizards, have a transparent covering over the cormea, presumably for protection. This
The reptile eye163
is the spectacle or, as it used to be termed by the biologists who first investigated it, the
"brille”.
The spectacle is formed from fusion of the eyelids and thus forms a closed space in
which the tears form, circulate and are drained through the nasolacrimal duct. This
marked difference from the anatomy of the open ocular surface in all other animals has
a substantial infuence on both the normal anatomy and physiology of the area and the
disease states experienced in the eye where the spectacle is present. As the spectacle is
formed from skin structures it has characteristics of the skin scales including blood
vessels, as beautifully shown by Dr A Mead in his study (Figure 10.3) [13]. The spectacle
is shed with the rest of the skin and during this period of shedding it becomes oedematous
and opaque as quite a normal phase in growth of the animal (Figure 10.4). Obstruction
of the nasolacrimal duct in any other animal would result in epiphora, that is to say tear
overflow. In reptiles with a spectacle such a pathology leads to swelling of the spectacle
in what is known as bullous spectaculopathy. We will see further below other diseases
specific to reptiles with spectacles and discuss their management as well as essential
husbandry principles if diseases of the spectacle are to be avoided.
The evolution of the spectacle is a somewhat controversial area of debate. Most pale
ontologists accept that snakes evolved from terrestrial squamates although the fossil
Figure 10.3 A vascular cast of the vessels in the normal snake spectacle. (Courtesy of Dr
AMead.)
Figure 10.4 Opacity of the snake spectacle during ecdysis. (Reproduced with permission
from Professor Elliott Jacobson.)
164Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Fgure 10.5 A normal Sarasin's giant gecko (Rhacodactylus sarasinorum) showing the
extent of the subspectacular space although total internal reflection may exaggerate the
Barten.)
record of early snakes is not as complete as we might wish it to be. Snake skeletons are
generally small and fragile and as such good fossilised examples are rare. Having said
that specimens from 150 million years ago have been identified as early snakes but with
skeletal structures eminently lizard-like, these mostly found in South America. Such
burrowing lizards could quite feasibly have developed fused eyelids to protect the cormea
during burrowing at the same time as experiencing the loss of extermal ears and overt
limbs. The pythons and boas of today, generally held to be more primitive groups of
snakes, still have vestigial hind limbs demonstrating how feasible such an evolutionary
development could be.
Another group suggest that prototypic snakes developed form monosaurs, extinct
to combat environmental threats quite different from the adbrasions of the subterrestrial
world, namely the loss of water though the cormea by osmosis when the animal was
living in an salty aquatic environment. On this theory the snakes recolonised the land in
the late Cretaceous period. Cladistic studies comparing snakes with monosaurs are sug-
gested to support such a hypothesis as does the finding of snake fossil remains in marine
sediments from the late Cretaceous period.
The presence of a spectacle in the geckos (Figure 10.5) is difficult to explain using
either of these theories of origins. It may be that convergent evolution has resulted in
eyelid fusion in these lizards with their large protuberant eyes where ocular surface
 protection is all important.
What do reptiles see?
Nobody would attempt to ask or answer such a broad question as ‘what do mammals
see?', realizing that this group of animals covers everything from rats to cats, not forget-
or two. But reptiles range from crocodilians, with dorsally placed eyes, to boa constric-
Thereptileeye165
Figure 10.6  The polchorate (many pupilled) iris of the Tockay gecko.
such as the leopard gecko to diumal animals like inland bearded dragons with obvious
differences in vision and its importance in behaviour. The noctumal geckos such as the
leopard gecko, somewhat surprisingly, have a rodless retina with nocturmal colour vision,
since they have evolved from cone-dominated diurmal lizards [14]. Diumal snakes such
as the garter snake, understandably have a cone-rich retina [15], while those that hunt
nocturmally are more rod-dominated [16]. Such differences in activity in different light
levels are refected throughout the eye and not just in the retina; snakes whose habits are
diurmal have round pupils while nocturmal snakes have slit pupils allowing a wider range
of light entry [17].
What then of their field of vision? Again many snakes have laterally placed eyes
giving an almost panoramic field of vision while the diurmal geckos have forward facing
eyes with a substantial feld of binocular vision. It has to be said, however, that no
researcher has studied the extent of visual fields in reptiles in the same way that Graham
Martin has for their avian counterparts (see page xx). We know from studies of unilat-
erally anophthalmic snakes that vision with both eyes, even if this may not involve a
truly stereo binocular field, is important in prey location [18]. An interesting feature of
certain reptiles with regard to prey location is the multiple pupils of reptiles such as
the Tockay gecko (Figure 10.6). This anatomy yields a refractive arrangement whereby
Only objects at the focal distance of the lens appear as one in-focus image on the retina.
In this manner these animals are able to determine the distance of a prey item prior to
capture[19].
 Many reptiles have two other sensory modalities for detecting electromagnetic radia-
tion. The first detects light, and with an organ analogous to the lateral eyes; the parietal
eye homolous with the pineal gland of higher vertebrates. In lower vertebrates such as
the lizards, the parietal eye is histologically similar to the conventional eyes (Figure
10.7). These mid-brain structures are overlain by a dorsal foramen in the skull, the pineal
foramen, and a translucent skin scale which in the tuatara Sphenodon punctatus has
cormeal-like focusing power. The parietal eye plays a central role in diurmal and seasonal
166Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Figure 10.7Parietal eye of Lacerta sicula, the wallizard.
Figure 10.8Pit organs.
physiological and behavioural cycles through light detection and a more hardwired
manner than the effects of the pineal gland in higher vertebrates.
Secondly a number of reptiles, most specifically snakes such as the crotaline pit
vipers but also boids, use infrared detection in predation. In boids, such as the Burmese
python, nerves from the infrared end-organs located deep within invaginations between
labial scales (Figure 10.8) project from the trigeminal ganglion to the lateral descending
nucleus of the trigeminal tract (LTTD), a brainstem nucleus found only in snakes with
infrared detection and apparently devoted to processing such information. In the crota-
line pit vipers a single pit organ contains an infrared-sensitive membrane from whence
the nerves proceed to the LTTD and thus on to the nucleus reticularis caloris and lateral
tegmental nucleus. These nerve flows are clearly very different from that of cranial
nerve II, the optic nerve, where the majority of impulses flow to the contralateral tectum.
However both imaging systems eventually project to the tectum where they converge
to form overlying spatial maps in rather the same way that bam owls coordinate their
visual and auditory tectal spatial maps. Research evaluating prey capture has shown
that deprivation of either sight or infrared detection did not alter rattlesnakes' strike
behaviour or ability to catch prey [20], while obliteration of both systems led to greater
strike latency, fewer strikes and less accurate contact with prey [21,22]. A congenitally
blind rattlesnake, however, showed no difference in behaviour than a normally sighted
sibling[23].
The reptile eye167
Diseases of the reptile eye
Hypovitaminosis A in chelonians
Clinicalsigns
Signs of hypovitaminosis A can range from mild eyelid oedema through to much more
severe eyelid swelling with hyperaemic chemotic conjunctiva enlarged to the extent
that the lids are closed with no globe visible and the animal rendered blind (Figure
10.9). It is important to note that vitamin A deficiency in chelonia may also be involved
in combination with infectious or traumatic factors in ocular disease (Figure 10.10).
Even at the early stages of the disease respiratory pathology may also be evident. While
the clinical picture may be considered pathognomonic and further diagnostic tests ren-
dered superfuous, biopsy of the conjunctiva can show disintegrating epithelial cells,
Figure 10.9 Dr Edward Elkan's first photograph of a terrapin with hypovitaminosis A
(Reproduced with permission from the Edward Elkan Collection of Lower Vertebrate
Pathology and the Journal of Zoo and wildlife Medicine.)
Figure 10.10 A Greek spur-thighed tortoise Testudo graeca with infectious blepharitis after
hibernation. Note that vitamin A deficiency may also be a contributory factor here
168Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Fgure 10.11  Histopathology of hypovitaminosis A. (Reproduced with permission from the
Edward Elkan Collection of Lower Vertebrate Pathology and the Journal of Zoo and Wildlife
Medicine.)
hyperkeratinised epithelium and keratin pearls with granulocyte infiltration as a feature
occurring secondary to infection. Since the freshwater aquatic chelonia thus affected
are sight-feeders, these blinding ocular changes further exacerbate the nutritional defi-
ciency at their heart.
Denmal signs of the vitamin A deficiency on the eyelids may also be seen later in
the disease and dermal hyperkeratosis of the eyelids has been reported in juvenile sea
turtles [24].
Aetiopathogenesis
It was nearly 50 years ago that Dr Edward Elkan and Dr Peer Zwart independently
histopathological studies demonstrated epithelial changes in conjunctiva and orbital
glands which were characteristic of low vitamin A levels (Figure 10.11). Hypovitaminosis
Ais particularly obvious in terrapins because of the large proportion of the orbit occupied
by the lacrimal and Harderian glands. Lizards generally have a ventromedial Harderian
gland and a dorsotemporal lacrimal gland but these are considerably smaller than in the
freshwater aquatic chelonia. Geckos, chameleons and snakes have only a well developed
Harderian gland, but even this does not rival the size of the chelonian orbital glands. The
desquamated hyperkeratinised epithelium swells the conjunctiva and fills the orbit
Clinical management
As noted above the clinical signs of vitamin A deficiency in freshwater aquatic chelonia
are essentially pathognomonic rendering biopsy unnecessary, but cytology can be useful
not only to confinm the diagnosis but to allow evaluation of inflammation and infection.
common secondary features of the disease. Should impression cytology reveal numerous
heterophils or bacteria, topical and perhaps even systemic antibiosis with a fuoroqui-
nolone such as enrofloxacin or ciprofloxacin may be necessary.
The key feature of management of the condition is, however, restoration of a correct
level of vitamin A. This can be by weekly intramuscular injection of water-soluble
vitamin A. Some argue that this can all too commonly result in hypervitaminosis A, but
The reptile eye 169
oral dosing can be fruitless, since the intestinal epithelium can be similarly dystrophic
rendering absorption of dietary vitamin A difficult if not impossible. Having said that it
is important to be aware of the signs of hypervitaminosis A, those of skin sloughing and
blister formation.
Periocular lesions - infection and infflammation
Clinical signs
Periocular adnexal lesions in reptiles may involve lid swelling (Figure 10.12), ocular
discharge and conjunctival hyperaemia. It is important to note the variations present in
normal eyes between species. Some varanid monitor lizards, for example, have a vivid
a sign of ocular inflammation.
Aetiopathogenesis
The most common cause of eyelid pathology in reptiles is hypovitaminosis A as discussed
above. Nevertheless blepharitis and conjunctivitis have been noted with other causes;
occur as a sequel to septicaemia. We will however start with localized causes of adnexal
lesions. Trauma can lead to significant adnexal pathology either directly (Figure 10.13)
Viral disease may manifest as adnexal pathology; caiman pox has been reported with
focal raised white or cream-coloured papules (Figure 10.14) [26]. These lesions may
occur any where on the skin but are perhaps most commonly seen on the delicate skin of
the eyelid.
Herpesvirus infection has been reported associated with proliferative and often ulcera-
tive skin lesions in sea turtles [27] as well as with tracheitis and conjunctivitis in the
same species and periocular neoplasms (Figure 10.15) [28]. Research has demonstrated
association of two very similar herpesviruses in green sea turtles (Chelonia mydas) and
loggerhead turtle (Caretta caretta) in Florida. Secondary bacterial infection often occurs
in association with these lesions.
Figure 10.12 Rhinoceros iguana with periocular swelling
170Ophthatmology of Exotic Pets
Fgure 10.13  Ectropion following deflation of a periorbital cyst in a water dragon.
Fgure 10.14 Caiman pox lesion in eyelid of caiman. (Reproduced with permission from
ProfessorElliottJacobson.)
Fgure 10.15 Herpes-virus-associated fibropapilloma in Chelonia mydas. (Reproduced with
permission from Professor Elliott Jacobson.)
The reptile eye 171
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.16 Adhesion of substrate material to ocular surface in geckos (a) and (b)
requiring careful removal with microsurgical forceps (c).
Conjunctivitis
Clinical signs
Conjunctivitis in reptiles is most often associated with blepharitis, with eyelid swelling
and sometimes chemosis, sometimes with a mucoid discharge but often with the eyelids
being sealed shut with a dry caseous discharge (Figure 10.16).
Aetiopathogenesis
Adnexal lesions with infectious origins more likely to be seen in captive pet reptiles are
occurring, although they may be localized to the eye alone. Periocular Aeromonas infec-
lacertid lizards [29], while Pseudomonas was isolated from a group of anoles with con-
junctivitis and blepharitis. The lacertid lizards first developed a clear fuid discharge,
difficult to detect initially, which eventually led to the lids sealing closed with associated
visual impairment and anorexia. Death occurred within a week of the lids sealing closed.
Histopathology revealed a mucoprulent ocular discharge and a prevalent growth of
172OphthatmologyofExoticPets
Aeromonas liguifaciens. Treatment in the first group with oral ox ytetracycline and topical
ocular bathing was successful while the anoles responded well to topical gentamicin
Vivarium hygiene was improved and ventilation increased with some effect. The meal-
worms comprising the majority of the diet were thought to be a potential source of
infection, but changing their source had no effect on the infection.
reptiles, but exudative conjunctivitis has been reported associated with Chlamydia in
hatchling and juvenile crocodiles in a farm in New Guinea [30]. While this may be
thought to have little relevance to pet reptiles, the problem in this situation was one
introduced by the unquarantined introduction of wild-caught animals into the farm. Such
a report confirms the importance of ensuring strict biosecurity when introducing new
individuals into any group of captive animals.
Other causes of conjunctivitis can include irritation from physical causes, such as small
pieces of vermiculite used as a substrate, through to chemical agents, such as organo-
chlorine pesticides reported to be associated with conjunctivitis, belpharitis and ocular
discharge in easterm box turtles [31]; such agencies are less likely to be the cause than
systemic infection, in this author's experience.
Clinical management
mosis as was a thorough ophthalmogical examination. Note however that the health of
the whole animal must also be evaluated since many of these ocular signs are harbingers
of systemic infection. Topical and systemic antibiotics should be prescribed but a key
first step is opening the sealed palpebral aperture, seen in many cases, with warm water
compresses.
Periocular masses
Clinical signs
Periocular masses in reptiles present as a finm swelling gradually increasing in size
(Figure 10.17 and Figure 10.18), with signs of secondary trauma caused by their size
and the blindness they cause.
Aetiopathogenesis
The vast majority of these are inflammatory lesions secondary to Gram-negative bacterial
or fungal infection. In reptiles these inflammatory lesions are for the most part granulo
matous in nature and not the fuid-filled mass of, say, a cat-bite abscess. They can thus
be very difficult to differentiate from neoplasms which can also be seen in this area.
with abscessation with Pseudomonas aernuginosa [32]. Others are purely infectious, as
in the periorbital abscess in a chameleon reported by Schumacher and colleagues [33].
Other causes of adnexal pathology include parasitic infestations with surgical explora
tion of one in a chameleon revealing microfilaria of the fillaroid genus (in that case
The reptile eye173
Figure 10.17  Periocular abscess in an iguana
Figure 10.18  Periocular abscess in an iguana.
Foleyella, a relatively common parasite in chameleons). Cystic structures associated with
report demonstrated a vascular anomaly, an orbital varies, as a cause of exophthalmos
and periocular swelling [35].
As noted earlier, the heterophilic inflammatory cell infiltrate in reptiles followed by
macrophages, leads to a granulomatous reponse with formation of giant cells somewhat
similar to those in the caseous lesions seen in mycobacterial disease in man. The
abscesses seen in reptiles are thus mostly solid at their core rather than fuid pus-filled
as with neutrophil-dominated abscesses in mammals [36].
Clinical management
Management of a periocular mass must clearly be dictated by the specific diagnosis
reached, but in most cases surgical exploration and resection will be important in both
reaching a diagnosis and dealing with the lesion itself. Whether purely infectious, neo-
plastic, or fibrous reactive lesion, surgical removal is the key to resolution of the lesion.
Note however that the relatively thin skin of the ocular adnexa in reptiles means that a
mass in this area readily distorts the eyelid margins as seen in Figure 10.15, rendering
vision problematic in many cases. Reconstructive surgery may well be required to bring
the palpebral aperture in apposition with the globe.
174Ophthaimology of ExoticPets
Dacryocystitis
Clinical signs
Inflammation of the nasolacrimal duct can be seen in several reptiles, even those in
which, according to the anatomy books, no nasolacrimal duct exists! Thus, while some
text books report that chelonia do not have a nasolacrimal duct, dacryocystitis has been
reported in these species, with discharge and bubble formation at the medial canthus.
Animals with epiphora - tear overflow - or a purulent ocular discharge particularly from
the medial canthus should be investigated for dacryocystitis with slit lamp biomicrscopy
and placement of a drop of fuorescein dye in the eye to assess appearance of the dye at
the extermal nares.
Management
Topical and systemic antibiotics together with regular fushing, if possible, might be
suggested.
Opacity of the spectacle
The normally clear spectacle may become opaque for one of several reasons. The most
common is that before ecdysis, as noted above, the spectacle becomes opaque, as fuid
increases to separate the old spectacle from the newly formed tissue undermeath (Figure
10.19). The whole skin becomes dull for the same reason and this is a normal appearance
at the time of ecdysis. Most commonly just before shedding occurs the spectacle clears.
comfirming that this is part of the snake's nonmal growth. Should retention of the spec-
tacle occur some opacity may occur, but this is not the dense white of the shedding
oe
Outer epidermal generation layer
je
Inner epidermal generation layer
CZ
Cleavage zone
sg  Stratum germinativum
Fgure 10.19 Histological changes in snake skin as ecdysis occurs
The reptile eye175
Figure 10.20  Indentation of the spectacle after trauma.
Figure 10.21   Pigmentation of the superficial layers of an old spectacle
spectacle, rather a dull lustreless appearance. This condition is covered further below.
Another cause of opacity in the spectacle can be trauma. Given that the whole point of
the spectacle is to protect the underlying cormea, continued mild trauma can lead to
scratches on the spectacle, indentation of the surface (Figure 10.20) or more severe pig-
mentation (Figure 10.21). Such opacification is not of concerm, however, since the new
spectacle revealed after shedding will be clear and transparent. Bullous spectaculopathy
(see below), where a fuid accumulation distends the spectacle, can also lead to opacifica-
tion possibly from trauma, although in many cases the distended spectacle is clear.
Retainedspectacle
Clinicalsigns
Retention of previously unshed spectacles is manifest as a raised plaque of retained
tissue, often opaque, in the ocular area and often too with a ^frill' of scale remains around
176Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
Fgure 10.22 Retained spectacle in a Python regius. (Reproduced with permission from
Dr Stephen Barten.)
the edge of the spectacle (Figure 10.22). It is often the case that these retained ^eyecaps
are multiple. Differential diagnoses include opacity of the spectacle through infection or
trauma, bullous spectaculopathy (see below) or a subspectacular abscess. Another, but
much less common differential diagnosis would be one of a neoplastic process such as
a keratoacanthoma [37]. The multiple nature of these retained layers of skin is normally
obvious on close examination.
Aetiopathogenesis
Spectacle retention is often seen as part of a more generalissed dysecdysis where skin
shedding is not complete (Figure 10.22). This may be associated with generalised poor
health but more often than not the underlying problem is a husbandry deficit and particu-
larly too low a humidity. This is understandable given that the separation of newly
regenerated and old epithelium in the skin scales - and also the spectacle - relies on the
generation of a fuid-flled delineation between the two layers. Thus a snake kept in too
low a humidity is likely to suffer dysecdysis with attendant spectacle retention. Another
aetiopathogenic factor of a number of cases is infestation with the snake mite Ophionyssus
natricis. This parasite itself undergoes several moults as it reaches adulthood. Between
each of these it takes a blood meal to increase its body size and the easiest place to take
such a meal is the space between the spectacle and the first periocular skin scale. Multiple
punctures here cause inflammation and lead to spectacle retention. The dark deposits
around the spectacles in Figure 10.23 are the mites (Figure 10.24) and the haemorrhagic
remains of their multiple blood meals.
Clinical management
The key point to note in managing a case of retained spectacle is that no attempt should
be made to remove the retained tissue by force, using a pair of forceps. This will all to0
often result in removal of the entire spectacle with a resultant severe keratitis as shown
in Figure 10.25. We have noted that low humidity is critical in many cases of retained
spectacles. Increasing the humidity at the time of next ecdysis may be sufficient to
promote a full shed with removal of the retained spectacles. If this is not the case use of
The reptile eye177
Figure 10.23 Retained spectacles seen after a successful shed. Note the black debris
around the spectacle, indicative of Ophionyssus infestation, an important causative factor in
spectacle retention. (Reproduced with permission from Dr Stephen Barten.)
Figure 10.24 The snake mite Ophionyssus natricis. (Reproduced with permission from
Dr Stephen Barten.)
damp cotton paper in the vivarium against which the snake can rub itself, or soaked
cotton wool abraded against the retained spectacles can affect removal of the abnormal
   n s     ss  s r  s
severe technique has a beneficial effect, but such a technique is best achieved with the
 n asa m ados o  s p sa   rn ass
true spectacle and underlying eye are not damaged
Prophylaxis
Keeping the snake in an appropriate humidity, especially around the time of shedding.
is vitally important if dysecdysis and spectacle retention are to be avoided. The correct
178Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Figure 10.25 Severe keratitis after the removal of the entire spectacle in a corn snake with
Management of this catastrophe required enucleation
Fgure 10.26  Shed skin or exuvium with both spectacles correctly shed.
level will clearly differ depending on the species involved - a desert dwelling snake will
require a lower humidity than one residing in a rain forest, although even here it should
be noted that the microclimate inhabited by the animal may be considerably more humid
than one would expect in a desert habitat. Providing a damp area within the vivarium is
worthwhile and wetted paper added to the vivarium at the time of moulting is valuable,
especially in an animal which has previously been affected by spectacle retention.
Owners with snakes thus affected should be encouraged to check at each shed that the
exuvium (the shed skin) includes both shed spectacles (Figure 10.26) to ensure that a set
of retained spectacles does not build up and that preventative measures can be taken if
dysecdysis occurs
Bullousspectaculopathy
Clinicalsigns
Obstruction of the nasolacrimal ducts in snakes leads to a build up of tear fuid under
the spectacle with resultant marked enlargement of the spectacle. The resulting appear-
Thereptile eye179
permission from Dr Fredric Frye. Originally printed in Biological and Surgical Aspects of
Figure 10.28 Mildly enlarged but still transparent spectacle in bullous spectaculopathy.
ance of the eye can be one of a protuberant opaque mass (Figure 10.27) or one where,
while the spectacle is clearly distended, it remains transparent (Figure 10.28). The dif-
ficulty here is differentiating this from glaucoma, which would present in a similar
Indeed in what is apparently the first mention of the condition in the literature, Drs
Boniuk and Lusquette, used the term pseudobuphthalmos to indicate that it was not the
globe that was enlarged but the spectacle alone [38]. They noted ‘this apparent buph-
thalmos has often been misinterpreted as the result of an underlying glaucoma.' Martin
Lawton has argued [39] that the term bullous spectaculopathy is inappropriate since the
medical definition for bulla is an epithelial accumulation of fuid. The original Latin
meaning, however, is a hollow thin-walled rounded prominence (consider for instance
the tympanic bulla) and thus to my mind it would seem quite acceptable to use it for this
distention of the spectacle, as Frye first did [40].
180Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
from Professor John E. Cooper.)
Aetiopathogenesis
As we noted above the enclosure of the preocular tear film by the spectacle in snakes
and some squamates, notably several geckos, means that nasolacrimal obstruction leads
to swelling of the space between the cormea and the spectacle rather than epiphora. Later
we will encounter instances where upwelling infection along the nasolacrimal duct
results in abscessation between the cormea and spectacle, but here no infectious agent is
involved and the problem is merely a mechanical swelling of the spectacle.
The nasolacrimal obstruction may be congenital with a developmental atresia of the
duct, as has been reported in a blood python by Millichamp and colleagues [41]. More
commonly it is caused by an acquired physical obstruction to the duct. In some cases
[42], there is an infectious aetiology at its origin, in which case the condition should
probably be termed a subspectacular abscess, as discussed further below.
Interestingly there are snakes which develop this condition just before ecdysis or
shedding, when presumably the shed epithelium, which includes that of the nasolac-
rimal duct as well as the dermal epidermis, impedes tear drainage for a few days
(Figure 10.29).
Clinicalmanagement
Simple aspiration of the lacrimal fuid with a needle is possible but will only give tem-
porary amelioration of the signs although this might be sufficient. The sample obtained
is submitted for bacteriological culture and cytology. The fuid produced by the lacrimal
and Harderian glands can be viscous precluding aspiration with a narrow-gauge needle
as one might want to employ in such a situation. The standard treatment under general
anaesthetic is to excise a ventral triangle of spectacle, allowing continual drainage of
gery and should be performed by a specialist, ideally using an operating microscope,
It is important to address the initial problem causing the nasolacrimal obstruction.
normally an inflammatory aetiology associated with necrotic stomatitis. As noted above,
Millichamp has reported a congenital nasolacrimal obstruction which required the forma-
tion of an artificial draining tract [43] but such cases are thankfully rare, since success
The reptile eye181
Figure 10.30 Snake with bullous spectaculopathy anaesthetized for surgery. (Reproduced
with permission from Dr Daniel Priehs.)
from Dr Daniel Priehs.)
Subspectacular abscessation
If obstruction of the nasolacrimal duct manifests in snakes as bullous spectaculopathy
rather than the epiphora which would be seen in species without a spectacle, it is not
surprising that infection of the nasolacrimal duct in snakes is seen as an abscess mani-
festing in the space between the comea and spectacle, a subspectacular abscess.
Clinicalsigns
Subspectacular abscesses can be easy to diagnose with a yellow mass in the ventral
subspectacular space or in severe cases occupying the entire ocular surface (Figure
10.32), in which case differentiating it from a bullous spectaculopathy with opacity of
182OphthatmologyofExoticPets
Figure 10.32 Snake with subspectacular abscessation
the spectacle might be difficult. Conversely, some cases which initially appear as bullous
spectaculopathy, are in fact infected, with infammation and abscessation causing the
nasolacrimal obstruction.
Clinical management
As with bullous spectaculopathy, the optimal treatment is fonmation of a 30 degree
ventral window in the spectacle though which the infected and inflammatory debris can
be removed by irrigation. The purulent material can be caseous in nature and not fuid,
as one might expect from say a cat bite abscess, rendering it significantly more difficult
to remove from this narrow space than one might expect. As discussed earlier when
considering periocular abscessation in reptiles, the involvement of heterophils in inflam-
matory processes in the lower vertebrates rather than neutrophils in mammals precludes
the release of coagulative enzymes and thus results in what has been termed a fibriscess
rather than an abscess [44].
Samples obtained from fushing the subspectacular space in such cases should be
submitted for bacteriological culture and cytology, together with oral samples to assess
the likelihood that necrotic stomatitis is the underlying cause of an ascending infection
resulting in the ocular signs.
Corneal uiceration
Cormeal disease in reptiles may be a keratitis with or without attendant infection, trau-
matic ulceration or lipid deposition, and each of these diagnoses has different clinical
signs.
Clinical signs
Post-traumatic comeal ulcers in reptiles (other than snakes where the spectacle protects
the cormea from such trauma) are an area where we can extrapolate from what is known
in mammals more frequently seen in veterinary practice. Use of fuorecsein dye in exactly
the same way as might be employed in an ulcerated canine or feline cormea, willl demar
cate the extrent of the ulcer and its depth (Figure 10.33).
The reptile eye183
Figure 10.33  Post-traumatic comeal ulcer in a 38-year-old spur-thighed tortoise (Testudo
graeca).
Aetiopathogenesis
Most ulceration in reptiles is post-traumatic, although infection may be important in
preventing healing or resulting in a more severe melting ulcer. In some older animals,
and here it must be remembered that chelonia can have a very extended lifespan, geriatric
lengthening of healing time may be an important factor precluding rapid healing.
Clinical management
Staining a suspect comeal ulcer with a single drop of sodium fluorescein will allow
appreciation of its extent. Other tests to complete the diagnostic work-up should include
bacteriology and cytology, the latter obtained with a cytobrush smeared onto a clean
slide, air-dried and stained with Diff-Quik as a modified Wright-Giemsa stain.
The three questions to ask of any ulcer are: (i) what is the cause of the ulcer? (ii) how
deep is the ulcer? and (iii) is the ulcer healing? Most ulcers in reptiles have a history of
these erosions are superficial but care must be taken given the thickness of the comea in
many reptiles kept in captivity. Comeal thickness in three leatherback turtles, for instance,
ranged between 300 and 650 μm [45], the higher limit equating with the thickness of the
canine cormea, but these are the largest eyes likely to be encountered among reptiles.
Even a superficial ulcer in an iguana or a box turtle can involve a considerable proportion
of the cormeal thickness and so should be treated as an emergency.
Comeal ulcers usually heal rapidly, within 1 week, except where healing is delayed
either because of an abnormality of the epithelial basement membrane as in recidivistic
epithelial erosions in Boxer dogs [46] or in older animals as in Figure 10.33 where
a traumatic ulcer has failed to heal in a 38-year-old tortoise. In such cases debride-
ment of the redundant devitalized epithelium at the ulcer edge is important, probably
followed by topical antibiotic to prevent secondary infection, although preservatives
and stabilizers such as benzalkonium chloride have been shown to retard ulcer healing
in vitro [47].
184 Ophthatmology of Exotic Pets
Third eyelid faps can be used to protect eyes with ulcers but conjunctival pedicle flaps
are difficult to fashion in small eyes such as those of the reptiles normally encountered
in practice. Tear replacement drops, with a carbomer gel or sodium hyaluronate base,
can be useful to ensure rapid healing.
Corneal opacificafion
Clinical signs
While a long-standing comeal ulcer could cause comeal opacification, predominantly
through pigmentation, lack of transparency is more normally related to a white discolora
tion of the cormea caused by either lipid, calcium or a proteinaceous deposit.
Aetiopathogenesis
Chelonia with a systemic circulating lipidaermia, either through an inherited dyslipopro
teinaemia or a dietary hyperlipidaemia, have comeal lipidosis which is not dissimilal
from that seen in the dog. The lesion appears a diffuse milky white colour (Figure 10.34)
but at higher magnification individual lipid crystals may be evident.
A denser much more homogeneous white cormeal lesion may be seen in reptiles, and
particularly chelonia, after hibermation (Figure 10.35). Frye has reported that these can
be dissolved using Kymar ointment, a preparation of alpha chymotrypsin, suggesting that
this lesion is proteinaceous in nature [48].
Clinical management
In the same way that amelioration of lipid-related cormeal pathology is difficult in com-
panion mammals, these opacities, once formed, can be very taxing to resolve. The key
feature in dealing with the lesions in reptiles as in other species is evaluating the underly-
ing cause and removing it, with the hope that in time the cormeal lipid deposition will
gradually resolve. Assessing the individual's diet is essential.
Fgure 10.34  Red-footed tortoise with corneal lipidosis. (Reproduced with permission from
Dr Stephen Barten.)
The reptile eye185
permission from Dr Fredric Frye. Originally printed in Biological and Surgical Aspects of
Figure 10.36 Trionyx turtle with uveitis manifesting as aqueous flare with irregular
appearance of intraocular structures.
Uveitis
Clinicalsigns
Inflammation of the uveal tract, the iris anteriorly and the choroid posteriorly, together
with the ciliary body, is rarely seen in reptiles. It can be a sign of systemic infection, as
we saw to be the case with conjunctivitis. The main clinical signs of anterior uveitis are
those of inflammatory cells in the anterior chamber of the eye with either flare in mild
dap guannd paao ao no (ae'o annt) si aui on auadde zu e suai sass
giving rise to hypopyon (Figure 10.37) [49,50]. It appears that pupil construction or
miosis is less of a problem in reptiles than in mammals such as dogs and cats.
186Ophthatmologyof Exotic Pets
Figure 10.37Testudo graeca tortoise with uveitis showing hypopyon.
Aetiopathogenesis
The majority of cases in reptiles are associated with systemic Gram-negative infections,
such as dissemination of Pseudomas sp. which led to uveitis with hypopyon in an
Indonesian blue-tongued skink [51] or Aeromonas septicaemia as reported by Millichamp
and Jacobson in the same review. Klebsiella pneumoniae infection was the cause of
anterior uveitis, again manifest as hypopyon in a group of Tockay geckos [52]. Whether
this association between septicaemia and intraocular infammation shows the presence
of infectious organisms in the eye is unclear. Circulating lipopolysaccharide, as would
be seen in such a septicaemia, can lead to a breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier
with resultant flare without a frank intraocular infection, as least in rats when used as a
laboratory model of uveitis, but the evidence base for this as the cause of reptile uveitic
signs is shaky to say the least.
Clinical management
Close examination with a slit lamp biomicroscope will show early signs of inflammatory
cell circulation and fibrin deposition in uveitis. Because of the likelihood of association
with systemic infection, blood culture should be undertaken as well as routine haemato-
logical and biochemical assessment. Parenteral antibiosis should ideally be based on
bacteriological culture and sensitivity from a blood sample, but a broad-spectrum agent
such as enrofloxacin or trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole, considered ^old hat' by some
but nevertheless effective, should be used before results of bacteriological investigations
areavailable.
As far as the eye is concermed topical steroids or non-steroidal agents are worthwhile
essential. Attempts at surgical removal of the purulent debris in a case of hyopyon has
been reported in a case of fungal hypopyon but without long-term success; enucleation
was eventually necessary [53]
The reptile eye187
In a mammal with anterior uveitis anti-inflammatory medication such as topical pred-
to dilate the pupil. This is not effective in reptiles where, as we noted earlier, the iris
muscle is striated. While topical non-depolarising muscle relaxant is sufficient to produce
mydriasis in some lizards but not chelonia, it does not seem to be effective in situations
where active infammatory miosis is occurring. As noted earlier, aggressive miosis with
synechia formation does not seem a pronounced sign in reptile uveitis, so this lack of
effect is perhaps less concerming than we might otherwise consider it to be.
Cataracts
Clinicalsigns
Mature blinding cataracts are readily visible as a white opacity through the pupil of the
eye (Figure 10.38 and Figure 10.39). Immature cataracts may be more difficult to visu-
alise without the use of ophthalmic equipment such as the direct ophthalmoscope and
slit lamp biomicroscope, although if white they can be observed even at a distance
(Figure 10.40). Incipient opacities in the lens are more difficult still to evaluate and the
Figure 10.38 Blinding mature cataract in a tree monitor.
Figure 10.39 Mature cataract in tortoise eye.
188Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Fgure 10.40  Immature developing cataract in a varanid monitor lizard.
Fgure 10.41 Nuclear sclerosis in a 40-year-old Aldabaran toroise.
most useful technique is retroillumination viewing against the red refex using a direct
where the central nucleus is compressed by the developing surrounding cortex, clearly
visible as a ring in an otherwise clear lens (Figure 10.41).
Aetiopathogenesis
As with any species there are several factors involved in the generation of lens opacity.
As Taylor [54] suggested several years ago the 5 Ds of age-related cataract - daylight,
diet, diabetes, drug and don't know - cover most of the bases! Now, with our understand-
nd pun mou auop, au aa ggoid uno am poo uo sauangui nau jo su
 DNA in its place since genetics seems to play a significant part in the aetiopathogenesis
of age-related cataract as well as directly inherited cataract, which usually occurs at a
younger age in a human or canine patient. This highlights two problems faced with many
older captive reptiles developing cataract. Is this the result of an environmental or dietary
factor or a genetic tendency to lens opacification? If the former, then we need to identify
what changes should be made to the captive environment, and if the latter, then the animal
should not be bred from, perpetuating a cataratogenic mutation.
The majority of published literature on cataracts in captive reptiles involves reports
of surgery on individual animals [55,56]. Lawton has reported cataract as a possible
sequel to freezing during hibermation [57]. Our research investigating cataracts in older
Testudo species has shown that by the age of 35 most, if not all, tortoises of this genus
have some degree of nuclear cataract without any reported hibermational catastrophes.
The reptile eye189
Figure 10.42 Immature posterior cortical cataract in Physignathus leseuri
This is not surprising, since all animals appear to develop age-related lens opacities at
around the same proportion of their life expectancy, as we have shown in companion
mammals [58,59]. Lawton's cases, though, developed mature blinding cataracts which
tended to clear over time, thus separating them from age-related lens opacities occurring
later in life.
While we have no direct evidence for ultraviolet (UV) light causing cataracts in rep-
tiles, the varanid monitor lizard in Figure 10.40 was housed very close to an ultraviolet
light source. It is widely recognized in laboratory rodents, and by extrapolation to people,
proteins. It is thus not surprising that UV may cause opacification in reptiles housed
under quite powerful UV illumination in order to ensure that sufficient vitamin D3 is
produced. The question might justifiably be asked, how much UV does each different
species require? A useful website regarding this whole area is http://www.uv guide.co.uk.
We have examined the eyes of a number of bearded dragons (Pogona viticeps) and
Chinese water dragons (Physignathus lesuerurii) kept under the same UV irradiation at
350-450μW/cm². The former is used, in its natural environment, to being exposed to
considerable levels of UV irradiance while the latter, under a leaf canopy, is adapted for
a substantially lower UV light level. Two different species from similar environments
have been shown to have significantly different degrees of skin absorption of UV light
[60] and we might expect the same from the different lenses of these two species. The
forest dwelling lizard did have a significantly higher prevalence of nuclear and posterior
cortical cataract (Figure 10.42) compared with the bearded dragon, a basking lizard. We
presume the lens of the bearded dragon is adapted to high levels of UV.
Such a study is at best described as preliminary but still shows the importance of
assessing the natural levels of UV experienced by each species and mirroring this as
closely as possible in captivity.
Clinical management
larger reptiles (Figure 10.43) [61,62].
190Ophthatmology of Exotic Pets
(a)
Figure 10.43 Savannah monitor eye (a) before and (b) after phacoemulsification surgery.
(Reproduced with permission from Dr Carmen Colitz.)
Giaucoma
While increased intraocular pressure has not been reported in reptiles, several papers
have reported the normal intraocular pressure in breeds of tortoise and in alligators
[63-66]. Significant differences in intraocular pressure occurred with sea turtles held in
different positions [65] and in alligators of differing lengths [66]. All these reports deter-
mined intraocular pressure using the Tonopen applanation tonometer, too large for use
in the smaller chelonia such as Testudo graeca or smaller lizards. Our initial studies with
the Tonovet rebound tonometer suggest that it is a valuable tool in measuring intraocular
 pressure in these smaller reptiles.
Ramesh Tripathi's comprehensive account of aqueous outfow across the species
allows us a valuable insight into the drainage pathways of each reptile group [67]. The
differences between species of reptile occur because of variation in anterior chamber
depth and the anatomy of the iridociliary cleft and ciliary musculature, this varying with
the different mechanisms of accommodation, as discussed earlier.
Clearly the spectacle precludes the measurement of intraocular pressure in snakes by
tonometry. It also means that assessment of globe size in these species can only be done
using ultrasonography. Enlargement of the spectacle has to be the key differential diag-
nosis in snakes from an enlarged eye because of glaucoma, but since glaucoma in these
species has yet to be reported it is difficult to give an assessment of techniques to dif-
ferentiate buphthalmos and what has been called pseudobuphthalmos (see above).
Another differential is megaglobus (see below) where the eye is abnormally large but
visual and with a normal intraocular pressure.
Microphthaimos and anophthalmos
Clinical signs
As with any species, ocular congenital abnormalities may be encountered in reptiles and
the most frequent are microphthalmos (Figure 10.44) and less commonly anophthalmos
The reptile eye 191
Figure 10.44 Microphthalmos with opaque ocular surface in an albino kingsnake
(Figure 10.45). We term the latter clinical anophthalmos, as often a small remnant of pig-
mented tissue is visible at the orbital apex with magnification, and complete anophthalmos
mic animals to mild visual impainment in microphthalmic animals. The key problem with
blind animals is the difficulty in getting them to eat, since they are highly visually moti-
vated feeders. A common problem also in moderate to severe cases is orbital infection,
since the conjunctival sac is increased in size given the reduced globe diameter
Aetiopathogenesis
These congenital defects may be associated with egg incubation at too high a tempera-
ture; metabolism is inevitably increased and a relative hypoxia appears to occur resulting
in abnormalities in globe development.
Megaglobus
Clinical signs
We have already noted that bullous spectaculopathy may appear as if the globe itself
is enlarged, giving rise to the term pseudobuphthalmos. Globe enlargement can be seen
in glaucoma when it would be accompanied by vision loss but has also been reported in
eyes retaining vision in the Texas black rat snake in its leucistic form and then only in
male individuals (Figure 10.46) [68].
192Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
Fgure 10.46 Megaglobos in a male leucistic Texas black rat snake (below) compared with
the female (above)
a    s          
Posterior segment lesions
While the reptile retina has been the subject of a number of studies (the input of ^reptile'
and ‘retina' into the NCBI search engine pubmed yields 1089 hits!), reports of retinal
disease are vanishingly rare in the literature. Casey Wood has a drawing of the fundus
of an Indian cobra (Figure 10.47) drawn by the indefatigable and courageous Arthur
Head while Johnson's monograph on the reptile eye, illustrated by the same gentleman,
covers the reptile fundus in great detail [69]. The fascinating anatomical variation is in
the retinal vasculature which varies markedly between species, demonstrating the widely
varying evolutionary roots of different reptile classes.
Two exceptions to this paucity of data on retinal disease exist. The first is Lawton's
report of post-hibermatinal freeze damage in Testudo retinas leading to blindness, although
the relative contribution of retinal and central lesions to visual loss is difficult to assess
with certainty [70]. The second is the retinal toxicity of mercury in alligators in the
Florida everglades [71]. Changes in the electroretinogram were seen in mercury-
intoxicated animals reflecting the high concentrations of the metal toxin in the retinas,
optic nerves and optic tracts of affected individuals.
The reptile eye 193
References
1. Millichamp NJ, Jacobson ER, Wolf ED. Diseases of the eye and ocular adnexae in reptiles.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983;183:1205-1212
2. Lawton M. Reptilian ophthalmology. In: D Mader, ed. Reptile Medicine and Surgery 2nd edn.
St Louis, Mo: Saunders, 2006.
3. Williams DL. Reptilian ophthalmology. In: D Mader, ed. Reptile Medicine and Surgery Ist
edn. St Louis, Mo: Saunders, 1996.
4. Underwood G. The eye. In: C Gans, TS Parsons, eds. Biology of the Reptilia Vol 2B. London
and New York: Academic Press, 1970; pp. 1-97.
5. Walls GL. The Vertebrate Eye and its Adaptive Radiation. Michigan: Cranbrook Institute of
Science, 1942; pp. 607-641.
6.Duke Elder S. The eye in evolution. System of Ophthatmotogy Vol 1. London: Kimpton, 1958;
pp. 353-395.
7. Citron MC, Pinto LH. Retinal image: larger and more luminous for a nocturnal than a diurnal
lizards. Vision Res 1973;13:873-876.
8. Underwood op cit p. 89.
9. Minucci S, Chieff Baccari G, di Matteo L. Histology, histochemistry, and ultrastructure of
the harderian gland of the snake Cotuber viridifavus. J Morphol 1992;211:207-212.
10. Ott M. Visual accommodation in vertebrates: mechanisms, physiological response and stimuli
J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol Sens Neural Behav Physiol 2006;192:97-111.
11. Northmore DP, Granda AM. Ocular dimensions and schematic eyes of freshwater and sea
turtles. Vis Neurosci 1991;7:627-635.
12. Abel JH, Ellis RA. Histochemical and electron microscopic observations on the salt secreting
lachrymal glands of marine turtles. Am J Anat 1966;118:337-358.
13. Mead AW. Vascularity in the reptilian spectacle. Invest Ophthalmol 1976;15:587-591.
14. Roth LS, Kelber A. Nocturnal colour vision in geckos. Proc Biol Sci 2004;271(Suppl 6):
S485-487.
             
       
ning electron microscopic and immunocytochemical study. J Comp Physiol [A] 1997;181:
89-101.
16. Sillman AJ, Johnson JL, Loew ER. Retinal photoreceptors and visual pigments in Boa con-
strictor imperator. J Exp Zool 2001;290:359-365.
   s  e s         
J Exp Biol 2006:209:18-25
18. Grace MS, Woodward OM. Altered visual experience and acute visual deprivation affect
predatory targeting by infrared-imaging Boid snakes. Brain Res 2001;919:250-258.
19. Murphy CJ, Howland HC. On the gekko pupil and Scheiner's disc. Vision Res 1986;26:
815-817.
20. Grace MS, Woodward OM. Altered visual experience and acute visual deprivation affect
predatory targeting by infra-red-imaging Boid snakes. Brain Res 200l;1919: 250-258.
21. Grace MS, Woodward OM, Church DR, Catlisch G. Prey targeting by the infrared-imaging
snake Python: effects of experimental and congenital visual deprivation. Behav Brain Res
2001;119:23-31.
22. Haverly JE, Kardong KV. Sensory deprivation effects on the predatory behaviour of the rat-
tlesnake Crotalus viridis oreganus. Copeia 1996:419-428.
23. Kardong KV, Mackessey SP. The strike behaviour of a congenitally blind rattlesnake.
J Herpetol 1991;25:208-211.
194Ophthaimology of Exotic Pets
24.Frye FL.Biomedicat and surgical aspects of captive reptile husbandry. Melbourne, FL:
Kreiger Publishing, 1991; pp. 329-341.
 25. Elkan E, Zwart P. The ocular disease of young terrapins caused by vitamin A deficiency. Pathol
Vet 1967;4:201-222.
26. Jacobson ER, Popp JA, Shields RP, Gaskin JM. Poxlike skin lesions in captive caimans. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 1979;175:937-940.
27. Lackovich JK, Brown DR, Homer BL, Garber RL, Mader DR, Moretti RH, Patterson AD,
Herbst LH, Oros J, Jacobson ER, Curry SS, Klein PA. Association of herpes virus with fibro-
papillomatosis of the green turtle Chelonia mydas and the loggerhead turtle Caretta caretta
in Florida. Dis Aquat Organ 1999;37:89-97.
28. Jacobson ER, Gaskin JM, Roelke M, Greiner EC, Allen J. Conjunctivitis, tracheitis, and
pneumonia associated with herpesvirus infection in green sea turtles. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1986;189:1020-1023.
29. Cooper JE, McClelland MH, Needham JR. An eye infection in laboratory lizards associated
with an Aeromonas species. Lab Anim 1980;14:149.
30. Huchzermeyer FW, Langlet E, Putterill JP. An outbreak of chlamydiosis in farmed Indopacvific
crocodiles (Crocodyfus porosus). J S Afr Vet Assoc 2008;79:99-100.
31. Tangredi BP, Evans RH. Organochlorine pesticides associated with ocular, nasal, or otic infec
tion in the eastern box turtle (Terrapene carolina carolina). J Zoo Wild1 Med 1997;28:97-100.
chameleon (Chamaeleo calyptratus). Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:217-220.
33.Schumacher J, Pellicane CP, Heard DJ, Voges A. Periorbital abscess in achameleon (Chameleon
jacksonii). Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1996;6:30-33.
34. Allgoewer I, Gobel T, Stockhaus C, Schaeffer EH. Dacryops in a red-eared slider (Chrysermys
scripta elegans): case report. Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:231-234.
35. Whittaker CJG, Schumacher J, Bennett AR et af. Orbital varix in a green iguana (/guana
36. Montali RJ. Comparative pathology of inflammation in the higher vertebrates (reptiles, birds
and mammals). J Comp Pathol 1988;99:1-26.
37. Hardon T, Fledelius B, Heegaard S. Keratoacanthoma of the spectacle in a Boa constrictor
Vet Ophthalmol 2007;10:320-322.
38. Boniuk M, Lusquette GF. Leucocoria and pseudobuphthalmos in snakes. Invest Ophthalmol
1963;2:283.
39. Lawton M. Reptilian ophthalmology. In: D Mader, ed. Reptile Medicine and Surgery 2nd edn.
St Louis, Mo: Saunders, 2006; p. 340.
40.Frye FL.Biomedicat and surgical aspects of captive reptile husbandry. Melbourne, FL:
Kreiger Publishing, 1991; pp. 329-341.
41. Millichamp NJ, Jacobson ER, Dziezyc J. Conjuncti voralostomy for treatment of an occluded
lacrimal duct in a blood python. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986;189:1136-1138.
42. Cullen CL, Wheler C, Grahn BH. Diagnostic ophthalmology. Bullous spectaculopathy in a
king snake. Can Vet J 2000;41:327-328.
43. Millichamp NJ, Jacobson ER, Wolf ED. Diseases of the eye and ocular adnexae in reptiles.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983;183:1205-1212.
44. Huchzermeyer FW, Cooper JE. Fibriscess, not abscess, resulting from a localised inflammatory
Tesponse to infection in reptiles and birds. Vet Rec 2000; 147:515-517.
(Dermochelys coriacea). Vet Ophthalmol 2008;11:99-110.
46. Murphy CJ, Marfurt CF, McDermott A, Bentley E, Abrams GA, Reid TW, Campbell S.
Spontaneous chromic corneal epithelial defects (SCCED) in dogs: clinical features, innerva-
The reptile eye 195
tion, and effect of topical SP, with or without IGF-1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 200l;42:
2252-2261.
47. Ayaki M, Yaguchi S, Iwasawa A, Koide R. Cytotoxicity of ophthalmic solutions with and
without preservatives to human corneal endothelial cells, epithelial cells and conjunctival
epithelial cells. Clin Experiment Ophthalmol 2008;36:553-559.
48.Frye FL.Biomedicat and surgical aspects of captive reptile husbandry. Melbourne, FL:
Kreiger Publishing, 1991; pp. 329-341.
49. Bonney CH, Hartfiel DA, Schmidt RE. Klebsiella pseumoniae infection with secondary
hypopyon in Tokay gecko lizards. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1978;173:1115-1116.
50. Tomson FN, McDonnell SE, Wolf ED. Hypopyon in a tortoise. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1976;169:942.
51. Millichamp NJ, Jacobson ER, Wolf ED. Diseases of the eye and ocular adnexae in reptiles.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983;183:1205-1212.
52. Bonney CH, Hartfiel DA, Schmidt RE. Klebsiella pneumoniae infection with secondary
hypopyon in tokay gecko lizards. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1978; 173:1115-1116.
chendra maurus: enucleation under halothane narcosis. J Small An Pract 1973;14:773.
54. Robman L,Taylor H. External factors in the development of cataract. Eye 2005;19:
1074-1082.
55. Colitz CM, Lewbart G, Davidson MG.Phacoemulsification in an adult Savannah monitor
lizard. Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:207-209.
56. Kelly TR, Walton W, Nadelstein B, Lewbart GA. Phacoemulsification of bilateral cataracts in
a loggerhead sea turtle (Caretta caretta). Vet Rec 2005;156:774-777.
57. Lawton MPC, Stokes LC. Post-hibernational blindness in tortoises (Testudo spp.) In: ER
Jacobson, ed. Third International Colloquium on Pathology of Reptiles and Amphibians.
Orlando FL 1989.
58. Williams DL, Heath MF. Prevalence of feline cataract: results of a cross-sectional study of
2000 normal animals, 50 cats with diabetes and one hundred cats following dehydrational
crises. Vet Ophthalmol 2006;9:341-349.
59. Williams DL,Heath MF, Wallis C. Prevalence of canine cataract: preliminary results of a
Cross-sectional study. Vet Ophthalmol 2004;7:29-35.
60. Carman EN, Ferguson GW, Gehrmann WH, Chen TC, Holick MF. Photobiosynthetic oppor-
tunity and ability for UVB generated vitamin D synthesis in free-living house geckos
(Hemidactyfus turcicus) and Texas spiny lizards (Scefoporus ofivaceous). Copeia 2000:
245-250. Available online at http://www.reptileuvinfo.com/docs/vitamin-d-house-geckos-
texas-spiny.pdf
61. Colitz CM, Lewbart G, Davidson MG. Phacoemulsification in an adult Savannah monitor
lizard. Vet Ophthalmol 2002;5:207-209.
62. Kelly TR, Walton W, Nadelstein B, Lewbart GA. Phacoemulsification of bilateral cataracts in
a loggerhead sea turtle (Caretta caretta). Vet Rec 2005;156:774-777.
63. Selmi AL, Mendes GM, MacManus C. Tonometry in adult yellow-footed tortoises (Geochelone
denticutata).Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:305-307.
64. Selmi AL, Mendes GM, McManus C, Arrais P. Intraocular pressure determination in clinically
normal red-footed tortoise (Geochefone carbonaria). J Zoo Wildl Med 2002; 33:58-61.
65. Chittick B, Harms C. Intraocular pressure of juvenile loggerhead sea turtles (Caretta caretta)
held in different positions. Vet Rec 2001;149:587-589.
66. Whittaker CJ, Heaton-Jones TG, Kubilis PS, Smith PJ, Brooks DE, Kosarek C, Mackay EO,
alligators (Alligator mississippiensis). Am J Vet Res 1995;56:1380-1383.
196Ophthatmology of ExoticPets
67. Tripathi RG. Comparative physiology and anatomy of the aqueous outflow pathway. In:
Davson H, Graham LT Jr, eds. The Eye, Vol 5. New York and London: Academic Press, 1974.
68. Bechtel HB, Bechtel E. Genetics of color mutations in the snake Elaphe obselata. J Hered
1985:76:7.
69. Johnston GL. Contributions to the comparative anatomy of the reptilian and the amphibian
eye, chiefy based on ophthalmological examination. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
1927;215:3 15-353 available online at http://www.jstor.org/stable/92111.
70. Lawton MPC, Stoakes LC. Post-hibernation blindness in tortoises (Testudo sp.) In: Jacobson
ER, ed. Third International Colloquium on Pathology of Reptiles and Amphibians. Orlando
F11989.
71. Heaton-Jones TG, Homer BL, Heaton-Jones DL, Sundlof SF. Mercury distribution in American
alligators (Affigator mississippiensis) in Florida. J Zoo Wildl Med 1997;28:62-70.
Chapter 11
The amphibian eye
Perhaps more than any other group of animals covered in this volume, amphibians have
been the subject of research in vision. From a basic science question such as the organi
sation of ocular reflexes and their neurological sequelae [1] to behavioural issues, such
as the role of amphibian vision in mate choice [2], researchers have investigated the
amphibian visual system in great depth. Yet when it comes to assessing the amphibian
eye in disease, relatively little research has been undertaken on captive animals and
virtually none on wild populations. Given the parlous state of amphibian conservation
worldwide [3,4], this is certainly a worrying lacuna. Ocular pathology in wild-caught
seen [5]. While the number of cases is small, one would not expect to see any blind
animals in the wild, since their survival would be severely compromised. Eye disease
in captive amphibians is important for their welfare and also for the health status of
animals reintroduced into the wild, the prime aim, it would be hoped, of any and all
captive breeding programmes [6].
Anatomy and physiology of the amphibian eye
The very fact of being amphibian, living in both aquatic and terrestrial environments
(hence the term amphi bios - double life), means that the amphibian eye has to be adapted
to both visual niches. How does the eye of the developing tadpole cope with a sudden
move from an aquatic niche to a terrestrial one where its eye, emetropic underwater,
becomes exceptionally myopic in air [7]? In that way the amphibian visual system seems
very far from our own. And yet the amphibian eye has been widely used as an experi-
mental model of vision in higher animals.
In the same way that amphibians have evolved from fish and adapted to a more ter-
restrial existence in most species, the eye has adapted also. Eyelids protect the ocular
surface to some extent and the Harderian gland provides tears to moisten the cormeal
surface. The globe is almost spherical with the cormea and sclera having the same radius
of curvature. Tadpoles of the anura and urodela orders have a purely fibrous sclera; after
Ophthatmotogy of Exotic Pets, First Edition. David L. Williams.
@ 2012 David Williams. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
198OphthalmologyofExoticPets
enlarging eye and an insertion for the rectus muscles. The most important of these is the
retractor oculi, essential in pulling the eye in and down to form an integral part of the
roof of the buccal cavity during swallowing. The cormea of many larval amphibian stages
is duplex, as seen in the fish, with a dermal ^spectacle' and a deeper dural comea, while
in the adult it has the form seen in higher vertebrates. The anterior chamber of the adult
is deep with the spherical lens situated almost centrally in the globe but moving forward
by the action of the protractor lentis muscle, which is central in accommodation in these
eyes (Figure 11.1). The iris is thin and well vascularised as shown in the beautiful work
of Dame Ida Mann with the constricted pupil taking a multitude of differing shapes across
the various species: a horizontal slit in Hyla species, a vertical one in Hylates and a
heart-shaped one in Bominator (Figure 11.2). While there is striated iridal muscle as in
lris
Cornea
-Zonule
Lens
Opticnerv
Fgure 11.1  The amphibian eye.
Fgure 11.2 Different amphibian iris patterns and pupil shapes. (a) Triturus torosus
(Californian newt). (b) Bufo marinus (Marine toad). (c) Hyperius horstockii (Horstock's tree
frog). (d) Caloptochephalus quoyi (Gay's frog). (e) Hyla coerula (white's tree frog). From Ida
Mann's beautiful monograph, lris patterns in the vertebrates. Transactions of the Zoological
Society of London 1931;XXl(IV):355-412.
Theamphibianeye199
all lower vertebrates, considerable autonomous activity allows the pupil to constrict
directly upon light stimulation, with contraction even said to occur in the enucleated eye
[8]! Given such information, the diagnostic power of the amphibian pupillary light reflex
with regard to visual function must be regarded with some considerable caution
What do amphibians see?
The importance of vision to amphibian genera is as varied as the animals themselves.
The primitive caecilians and the retrograde subterranean and blind cave salamanders such
as Proteus anguilis have degenerate eyes which can still sense light and dark but have
no perception of form or movement. Intriguingly P. anguilis has light-sensitive skin with
the photopigment melanopsin present in dermal melanophores [9].
Most anurans and salamanders, however, employ vision as their primary sense in
prey location, primarily using a sit-and-wait strategy. The tree frog Hyla cinerea, for
instance, has been shown to obtain 88% of its prey after visual detection and a short
but only moving objects. Put a frog in a room with dead insects on pins, so it is said.
and the animal will die of starvation [1l]. While movement of prey is an important
stimulus to prey-catching behaviour, numerous amphibians use other cues as well
as movement in prey detection and identification. A complex interaction of velocity.
size and orientation is important in determining amphibian reaction to passing prey
items. Even more intriguing, research has shown that Bufo toads reject bumblebees
as noxious rather than prey items, by sight alone [12]. Tadpole schooling is to some
degree vision-dependent although the lateral line system also plays an important part in
orientation: individuals of some species such as Xenopus laevis orientate themselves in
a parallel manner in the school more exactly in light, but in the dark, tight schooling still
Occurs. Others, such as Phrynomerus annectens, school during the day but disperse in
the dark [13].
When we come to examine depth perception, so important in prey capture for many
species, different amphibians vary considerably. Those with small eyes placed laterally
have little in the way of binocular vision, while those with large protruberant eyes, such
as many anurans and several salamanders, have almost 360-degree visual fields with
significant overlap of the right and left eye vision. Indeed binocular vision or stereopsis
un yns [ti] og pue nuny ui ad ad noy nui aq on umous uaq su
tion is important if considering unilateral enucleation after trauma or neoplasia - anurans
with one eye ablated are significantly compromised at making accurate movements
towards prey and avoiding barriers [15].
The other mechanism for depth perception is accommodation. In amphibians this
occurs through change in position of the lens, with a forward movement effected by two
protractor muscles in anurans while salamanders have only one and here the effect of
accommodation is less than 5 dioptres. Indeed experiments where lens accommodation
is minimised show little change in behaviour and prey capture success, suggesting that
accommodation plays little part in depth perception in these species.
The bright colours employed as breeding signals by amphibians such as male newts
200Ophthatmology ofExoticPets
Fgure 11.3 Striking colour differences between genders in amphibians such as the golden
toad (Bufo periglenes) show the importance of colour vision in some of these species
in the ultraviolet range is present and may be important in many amphibians [16]. Colour
vision is difficult to assess in amphibians, but behavioural work on Xenopus and Rana
tadpoles shows two different responses. One is phototactic with a bimodal spectral sen-
sitivity with maxima at 560 μm and at 460 μm (green and blue wavelengths respectively)
while an optomotor response to the stimulus of a rotating set of grid lines has one stimu-
lus maximum at 650μm, well into the red hues of the visible light spectrum. Adult
amphibians may have significantly different visual responses to light of different wave-
lengths from those of their larval progenitors and different species, with varying visual
ecologies (some existing in deeper water where spectral maxima of ambient light are
different from those of terrestrial species for instance), have quite different visual
capabilities.
 Indeed some amphibians manifest no sexual dimorphism with regard to their colour
and in these generally nocturmally breeding animals there is no evidence for overt colour
vision. In diurmally breeding species such as Bufo canorus (the Yosemite toad) and Bufo
periglenes (the golden toad), striking sexual colour differences are evident, this being
indirect evidence for colour vision in these animals (Figure 11.3).
Diseases of the amphibian eye
Corneal uiceration
Clinicalsigns
The protuberant nature of many anuran eyes and the limited protection provided by the
amphibian eyelids renders the amphibian eye more liable to cormeal ulceration than that
of many other animal groups. The limited thickness of the amphibian cormea also means
that any comeal erosion or ulceration can potentially be dangerous for the integrity of
the eye. The use of fuorescein dye can, as with any species, determine the extent of
ulceration with regard to its lateral spread and its depth (Figure 11.4).
The amphibian eye 201
Figure 11.4Comeal ulceration demonstrated by fluorescein dye uptake
Aetiopathogenesis
Cormeal ulcers in amphibians, as in any species, are commonly traumatic in origin as
noted above, but infection may also be a predisposing or a complicating factor, which it
is important to take into account. Cormeal oedema can occur as a result of loss of epi
thelial integrity but can in some instances be a contributory cause of ulceration with a
bleb of water causing a bulla of epithelium which can then rupture, giving an ulcer which
fails to heal precisely because of the oedematous underlying stroma.
Clinical management
The use of topical antibiotics must be treated with caution in amphibians since systemic
absorption across their highly permeable skin can result in systemic toxicity. Thus eye
drops such as fuoroquinolones or chloramphenicol are to be preferred, for instance, over
aminoglycosides which could result in renal toxicity. Third eyelid faps can be used in
certain species, but in many the third eyelid refex is strong enough to tear out sutures
in the delicate epithelial margin of the nictitating membrane. Where underlying stromal
oedema is precluding rapid comeal healing it can be very difficult to resolve matters. In
the thicker canine cormea a thermal keratoplasty may be in order, but in the thin comea
of most amphibians such a treatment is likely to lead to cormeal perforation, and is thus
to be avoided.
UV-mediated ocular pathology
Clinical signs
Utraviolet irradiation-mediated ocular surface damage may be seen either as an inflam-
matory keratitis or more frequently a degenerative white opacity which can be distin-
guished from lipid keratopathy in that is is a sparser more crystalline opacity (Figure
11.5 - compare with Figure 11.7). Intraocular changes on UV irradiation are most com-
monly characterised by opacification of the lens. Tadpoles maintained in high levels of
UV-B showed skin ulceration and a significantly higher level of cataract formation than
202Ophthatmology ofExoticPets
Figure 11.5UV keratopathy.
Fgure 11.6 Cataract formation in tadpole kept in high UV-B radiation.
those kept at ambient UV levels (Figure 11.6) [17]. Whether cataracts occurring in
amphibians in the wild can be attributed to increased levels of UV irradiation, especially
in these times of atmospheric ozone depletion is difficult to say, but given that many
occur in amphibians experimentally exposed to UV-B radiation, it might be reasonable
to ascribe such changes to UV irradiation. The same could be said for idiopathic cataract
in amphibians kept in captivity under UV light to optimise their vitamin D production.
Amphibians in the wild have been shown to be affected by UV [18] but research has
generally been focused on developmental abnormalities in tadpole larvae and not on
defects in adults exposed to high levels of ultraviolet irradiation.
Lipidkeratopathy
Clinicalsigns
Perhaps the most common ocular condition seen in captive amphibians is that of lipid
keratopathy (Figures 11.7-11.9). Presenting as a white opacity in the cormea, more often
than not protruding from the cormeal surface, lipid deposition in the cormea is not difficult
to diagnose. Most reports in the literature concerm Cuban tree frogs (Osteopilus septen-
trionalis) or White's free frog (Litoria versicolor) which have been kept in captivity for
Differential diagnoses might include cormeal scarring or inflammatory cell infltration
but the raised surface and intense white colouration of the lesion is pathognomic
Theamphibian eye203
Figure 11.7Lipid keratopathy in an American bulfrog.
Figure 11.8Lipid keratopathy in a White's tree frog.
Figure 11.9 Histological section of cornea with lipid keratopathy. (Reproduced courtesy of
ProfessorPeerZwart.)
Aetiopathogenesis
Initially this was considered to occur only in female frogs with the conjecture being that
animals ready to spawn but unable to find an appropriate place in a captive environment,
had an elevated blood lipid level for an unusually long time. In such cases lipid is depos-
ited in the cormea secondary to this circulating lipid abnormality.
In fact lipid deposits occur in many body tissues and the condition is seen in male
as well as female amphibians, so the hypothesis that the lipid deposition relates to
204Ophthaimology of Exotic Pets
unusuccessful spawning cannot be true in all cases, although it may be an important
factor in some, or indeed many, cases.
Lipid levels in affected amphibians and normal control animals have been reported
with affected individuals having serum cholesterol of 17.4 ± 16.1 mmol/l while unaf-
the same review fed Cuban tree frogs fed crickets containing 0.1% cholesterol on a dry
matter basis. Comeal lipid arcus developed in eight animals fed the high cholesterol diet,
four females and four males, while three females on a regular diet also developed lipid
lesions in their comeas. The animals with cormeal arcus had significantly higher circulat-
ing cholesterol levels than umaffected animals (27.3 ± 19.8 mmol/l vs. 16.5 ± 20.4mmol/]
respectively but the ratio of VLDL and LDL to HDL and levels of VLDL, HDL and
triclyceride did not differ between affected and unaffected animals.
The relevance of this dietary study is that large captive anurans may be fed newbom
mice which, if they have already suckled, as most have, will have a high lipid content
through ingested milk. Having said that frogs fed on more natural diets have been noted
with the condition also.
Clinical management
Attempts to reduce circulating lipid levels are generally somewhat fruitless although
allowing females to find an acceptable place to spawn may be very important in relevant
cases. Superficial keratectomy can be performed to remove the lipid but the thin nature
microscope by a specialised ophthalmic surgeon.
Periocular dermal ulceration
Clinical signs
 Fungal dermal conditions are well recognised in amphibians and these can cause particu-
mycosis lead to skin ulceration with or without skin reddening through infammation.
while Saprolegnia gives a white fuffy deposit on the skin. These are skin conditions
rather than strictly ocular ones, thus denmatological texts should be consulted in dealing
with them.
Fgure 11.10 Chromomycosis involving the upper eyelid in a bullfrog.
The amphibian eye 205
Aetiopathogenesis
A number of fungal organisms can be involved including the ascomycetes Fonsecaea.
Philalophora and Cladosporium, while phycomycosis is caused by the phycomycetes
Absidia, Mucor or Rhizopus. Defining the exact agent is not important since the treatment
dendrobatidis which is causing dramatic declines in amphibian populations in the wild
globally.
Clinicalmanagement
Treatment for these dermal fungi is normally immersion in solutions of malchite green
for periods of up to 5 minutes, although where the lesion is periocular treatment by laying
gauze swabs soaked in medication over the area but not touching the ocular surface is
to be preferred.
Cataracts
Opacities in the lens may be noted as incidental findings, particularly in older animals
(Figure 11.1l) or, as noted above, possibly secondary to ultraviolet irradiation (Figure
11.6). Cataracts have been reported as occurring after 5% dextrose administration as
supportive therapy in dendrobatid frogs but these opacities were reversible. Cataracts are
currently reported to be a serious disease in farmed tiger frogs, Rana tigerina rugulosa,
in China [2l], although their aetiology is as yet unclear.
Uveitis
Clinical signs
The classic signs of intraocular inflammation are miosis, breakdown of the blood-
aqueous barrier with fibrin, inflammatory cells or frank haemorrhage in the anterior
chamber, hyperaemia of both intraocular and episcleral vasculature, and pain. We cannot
Figure 11.11Incidental finding of lens opacity
206OphthatmologyofExoticPets
Fgure 11.12 Uveitis associated with Gram-negative septicaemia
tell in amphibians the degree to which this last feature is experienced, but the cases in
which uveitis has been reported in amphibians demonstrate the other classic signs of
uveitis [22-24].
Aetiopathogenesis
Any traumatic episode can give rise to uveitis through damage to intraocular tissues
and the amphibian is no exception here. In many other species from cats to horses,
systemic infections can give rise to uveitis. In the mammals we deal with regularly
most of these uveitiogens are viruses, such as feline infectious peritonitis or canine
adenovirus, or parasites such as Ehrlichia or Leishmania. The amphibian seems par-
ticularly prone to its iris acting as a target tissue for the effects of Gram-negative
septicaemia. Thus any amphibian with the classic signs of uveitis should be evaluated
for bacterial septicaemia. Uveitis associated with Gram-negative septicaemia has been
reported by Brooks and co-workers in fire-bellied toads (Figure 11.12) [22] and Olson
and colleagues in leopard frogs [23], but the underlying mechanism has yet to be fully
elucidated. Is it the same one that causes uveitis in mice injected with endotoxin? There
the lipopolysaccharide breaks down the blood-aqueous barrier and precipitates an
intraocular inflammatory response [25]. Or is it related to direct bacterial attack on iris
tissues? We know that in septicaemic anurans the skin is a sentinel organ, with hyper-
aemia giving ‘red leg'. It appears that the iris, with its substantial vascular network, is
a second sentinel tissue, reacting to systemic Gram-negative infection. In the third case
of uveitis reported, this time in Asian homed frogs with a rhabditid nematode infection.
the keratitis, uveitis and encephalitis noted were associated with intralesional parasites
[24]. Again it is difficult to know if the infammation is an immune reaction specifically
against the parasite or a more innate immune response to irritation experienced as the
larvae migrate through the tissues. Whatever the situation, these cases show the impor-
tance of a full clinical examination when presented with an amphibian with ocular
inflammation.
The amphibian eye 207
Clinicalmanagement
Given the systemic disease in most of these uveitic animals, the key task is isolation of
these animals from any in-contact animals and careful examination of those apparently
healthy individuals. Blood culture from affected animals and post-mortem of any
deceased cases is essential. Treatment of affected animals, and probably also in-contact
stock with parenteral antibiotic, such as enrofloxacin (5-10mg/kg) subcutaneously or
intramuscularly once daily, or oxytetracycline injected by the same route at 25 mg/kg, is
probably the best option. Small stock may best be medicated with a bath of an antibiotic,
such as rifampicin at 25 mg/l, or treatments conventional to amphibian keepers but less
so to veterinarians such as baths of methylene blue at 3mg/l or malachite green at
150μg/l.
Glaucoma
Clinical signs
sh nsa  ua u u anssad rnnn ui as n saads n ym s
with blindness, comeal oedema and, in severe cases, globe enlargement. Episcleral
vessel congestion appears not to be a consistent finding in amphibians with glaucoma,
maybe because the vasculature is too narrow in calibre to be readily visible. The small
size of the amphibian eye and the consequent thinness of the sclera, render globe
enlargement or buphthalmos a sign occurring rapidly in glaucoma in these individuals
(Figure 11.13).
Aetiopathogenesis
Amphibian glaucoma has not been investigated in detail, as it occurs rarely in these
species. It would appear that most cases occur secondary to intraocular inflammation,
where inflammatory debris occludes the drainage angle.
Figure 11.13Glaucoma with buphthalmos in a toad.
208 Ophthatmology of Exotic Pets
Clinical management
We have no evidence for the medical management of raised intraocular pressure in
amphibians. Given the importance of carbonic anhydrase in acid-base balance and
amphibian skin, the use of topical or systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitors is not to be
recommended.
Enucleation
While one might think that the optimal surgical treatment for a painful blind amphibian
and as such the ventral surface of the globe forms part of the dorsal buccal cavity. This
means that a frog or toad retropulses its eye very slightly into its buccal cavity to provide
sufficient intraoral pressure to facilitate swallowing. An amphibian which has been enu-
cleated, therefore, has great difficulty in swallowing, and as such enucleation is not to
be recommended in these species. Evisceration and the implantation of an intraocular
prosthesis might be preferable, although to this author's knowledge this technique has
not been reported in the literature.
Conclusion
The differences between the diagnosis, aetiology and treatment of conditions such as
uveitis and glaucoma in amphibians show just how different these exotic species can be
ted that in these species where we need more species-specific information, so little exists
currently in the veterinary literature. And yet there are substantial similarities too, so
with care the knowledge we have of the mammalian eye can be extrapolated to the frog.
it is not!
References
1. Straka H, Dieringer N. Basic organization principles of the VOR: lessons from frogs. Prog
Neurobiol 2004;73:259-309.
2. Cummings ME, Bernal XE, Reynaga R, Rand AS, Ryan MJ. Visual sensitivity to a conspicu-
ous male cue varies by reproductive state in Physalaemus pustulosus females. J Exp Biol 2008;
211:1203-1210
3. Rohr JR, Raffel TR, Romansic JM, McCallum H, Hudson PJ. Evaluating the links between
climate, disease spread, and amphibian declines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:
1743617441.
4. Pennisi E. Amphibian decline. Life and death play out on the skins of frogs. Science 2009;326:
507-508
The amphibian eye209
5. Schoff PK, Johnson CM, Schotthoefer AM, Murphy JE, Lieske C, Cole RA, Johnson LB.
Beasley VR. Prevalence of skeletal and eye malformations in frogs from north-central United
States: estimations based on collections from randomly selected sites. J Wildl Dis 2003;39:
510-521
6. Griffiths RA, Pavajeau L. Captive breeding, reintroduction, and the conservation of amphib
ians. Conserv Biol 2008;22:852-861.
7. Hoskins SG. Metamorphosis of the amphibian eye. J Neurobiol 1990;21:970-989.
8. Brown-Sequard CE. Recherches de experimentales sur l'infuence excitatrice de la lumiere,
du froid et du la chaleur sur 1’iris, dans les cinq classes d'animaux vertebres. J Physiol Homme
Anim 1859;2:281-294.451460
9. Kos M, Bulog B, Szel A, Rohlich P. Immunocytochemical demonstration of visualpigments
in the degenerate retinal and pineal photoreceptors of the blind cavesalamander (Proteus
anguinus). Cel1 Tissue Res 2001;303:15-25.
10. Freed AN. Prey selection and feeding behavior of the green treefrog (Hyla Cinerea). Ecology
1980;61:461-465.
11. Ingle DJ. Prey-catching behavior of anurans toward moving and stationary objects. Vision Res
1971;S3:447-456.
12. Brower LP, Brower JVZ, Westcott PW. Experimental studies of mimicry. 5. The reactions
of toads (Bufo terrestris) to bumblebees (Bombus americanorum) and their robberfy mimics
(Mallophora bomboides), with a discussion of aggressive mimicry. Am Nat 1960;878:
343-355.
13. Channing A.Life histories of frogs in the Namib desert. Zoologica Africana 1976;1l:
299-312.
14. Ingle D. Spatial vision in anurans. In: KV Fite, ed. The Amphibian Visual System. New York:
Academic Press, 1976; pp. 119-140.
15. Collett T. Steropsis in toads. Nature 1977;267:349-351.
in vertebrates. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003;100:8308-8313.
17. Novales Flamarique I, Ovaska K, Davis TM. UV-B induced damage to the skin and ocular
system of amphibians. Biol Bull 2000;199:187-188.
18. Bancroft BA, Baker NJ, Blaustein AR. A meta-analysis of the effects of ultraviolet B radiation
and its synergistic interactions with pH, contaminants, and disease on amphibian survival.
Conserv Bio1 2008;22:987-996
19. Carpenter JL, Bachrach A Jr, Albert DM, Vainisi SJ, Goldstein MA. Xanthomatous keratitis,
disseminated xanthomatosis, and atherosclerosis in Cuban tree frogs. Vet Pathol 1986;23:
337-339.
20. Keller CB, Shilton CM. The amphibian eye. Vet Clin N Am Exotic Anim Pract 2002;5:
261-274.
21. Xie ZY, Zhou YC, Wang SF, Mei B, Xu XD, Wen WY, Feng YQ. First isolation and identifica
tion of Elizabethkingia meningoseptica from cultured tiger frog, Rana tigerina rugulosa. Vet
Microbiol 2009;138:140-144.
22. Brooks DE, Jacobson ER, Wolf ED, Clubb S, Gaskin JM. Panophthalmitis and otitis interna
in fire-be1lied toads. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 183:1198-1201.
23. Olson ME, Gard S, Brown M, Hampton R, Morck DW. Flavobacterium indologenes infection
in leopard frogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;201:1766-1770.
24. Imai DM, Nadler SA, Brenner D, Donovan TA, Pessier AP. Rhabditid nematode-associated
montana). J Vet Diagn Invest 2009;21:568-573.
210OphthatmologyofExoticPets
inflammatory response to endotoxin-induced uveitis in the mouse. Arch Ophthalmol 2000;118:
521-527.
 26. Scheid P, Siffert W. Effects of inhibiting carbonic anhydrase on isometric contraction of frog
skeletal muscle. J Physio1 1985;361:91-101.
Chapter 12
The fish eye
Introduction
We said at the beginning of this volume that, in so many words, an eye... is an eye... is
an eye. Even though they belong to animals inhabiting very different ecological niches.
the basic anatomy, physiology and function of the eye is very similar across vertebrate
species. If we had to pick one group, however, where this adaptation to their environment
had given a substantially different set of features, this would have to be the fish. The
underwater environment rules out the cormea having any refractive power and thus the
fish lens is spherical. The light underwater is considerably different from that above water
both in its spectral characteristics and its intensity. And the behavioural visual require-
ments are substantially different from those of animals on land. We will see how this
infuences piscine ocular anatomy and physiology in one moment but we also need to
discuss briefly the way in which fish are kept in captivity, as this has a significant infu-
ence on their ocular health and disease.
The intimate contact between the ocular surface and the aqueous environment inhab-
ited by fish renders deficiencies in that environment very important. Too high a build-up
of bacteria or parasites in the water through inadequate filtering and water changes,
incorrect pH or abnormally high levels of chemicals such as ammonia and nitrates,
inadequate (or even excessive) oxygen concentrations, abnormal temperature and a host
of other more minor factors can all adversely affect aquarium or pond fish health and
this includes the eye as much as any other part of the body. A history taken before exam-
ining a fish with eye problems should thus make careful note of the state of the facility
and its management as well as conditions of other in-contact fish. Perhaps more than in
any other species group, interactions of the eye with the rest of the body and with the
outside environment are particularly crucial.
Protection of the ocular surface does not need to be as profound as in animals where
the comeal surface has to cope with air currents and the hazards they bring; this yields
differences in lacrimation, in cormeal epithelial structure and function, and in the need,
Or rather lack of need, for eyelids. On the other hand fish have to be prepared for the
osmotic challenge of salt or fresh water, or even in some cases such as the daring salmon
or the common eel, rapid transition between the two media. The lens must provide the
Ophthatmotogy of Exotic Pets, First Edition. David L. Williams.
@ 2012 David Williams. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
212Ophthalmologyof ExoticPets
entire refractive capability of the eye as the cormea underwater provides none. In the
dwelling cousins: they are often in more than one row, are continually generated from a
stem cell population, and need to respond to light at very different wavelengths from
those detected by terrestrial animals.
 A full outline of piscine ophthalmology would include information on farmed fish such
as trout and salmon, wild-caught fish such as tuna and fish with importance from a con-
servation perspective from the green sturgeon to the great white shark. Wider assessments
of the fish eye in health and disease are available [1,2], but here we focus on species
most likely to be kept in aquaria, both freshwater and marine, and the ocular problems
which derive from their being kept in captivity.
Anatomy and physiology of the fish eye
One of the problems of dealing with ocular disease in such a wide and diverse group as
fish is that from an anatomical and physiological perspective as well from one focusing
on disease and ocular pathology, it is very difficult to make generalisations that, by the
very fact of spreading the net too wide, if one with forgive the pun, the important details
of particular species are lost. One advantage of constraining ourselves to aquarium fish
is that generally, with certain exceptions such as the megaophthalmic black moor gold-
fish, of which more below, the fish being dealt with have a simple, relatively primitive
the other end of the spectrum, those such as Anableps, the four-eyed fish, which live half
above and half below the water surface.
We can then say that the fish dealt with here most often have an anterio-posteriorly
flattened globe without eyelids (Figure 12.1 and Figure 12.2), though these are also seen
in cartilaginous fish such as sharks and rays. The eye has a thick cormea which, because
humour, plays no part in refraction of light as it would do in an animal living with its
freshwater counterparts. Yellow pigmentation in the comeas of some surface-living fish,
together with iridescence, may serve as a sunscreen to limit glare. The cormeal epithelium
has a much more important role in preventing ingress of water into the piscine cormea
than does its mammalian equivalent, rendering cormeal ulceration more serious than it
can be in more conventionally treated species.
The fish lens is spherical and placed much more anteriorly in the eye than in mammals,
this serving to optimise refraction now that the lens is the only refracting element in the
eye and also to maximise light collection in an environment where illumination is at a
premium. The fish lens has the highest refractive index of any vertebrate, around 1.69.
A gradient of refractive index through the lens minimises spherical aberration which
would otherwise severely compromise image formation in a spherical lens. The lens has
a nucleus, cortex and capsule, as in any mammal lens, but its sphericity renders it impos
sible to deform as occurs in accommodation with many other species groups. Lens
movement in an anterior-posterior direction thus changes the plane of focus of the entire
Thefisheye213
lris
Lens
Cornea-
Cartilaginous
plate
Extra ocular
muscle
Falciform
ligament
Zonule
-Retina
Optic nerve
Choroidal gland
Figure 12.1Line diagram of fish eye.
Figure 12.2 A normal goldfish eye. (Reproduced with permission from William Wildgoose.)
Ocular imaging system. A dorsal suspensory ligament allows the lens to hang pendulum-
like and be moved back wards and forwards by contraction and relaxation of the retractor
lentis muscle. The retractor lentis muscle arises from the falciform ligament ventrally in
the teleost (bony) fish eye. As its name suggests, the muscle pulls the lens, which nor-
mally sits within the pupil aperture, backwards to provide a shorter focal length. The
cartilaginous sharks and rays, have an anterior protractor lentis muscle which does the
exact opposite to vary the focusing power of the eye.
214Ophthatmologyof ExoticPets
The uvea consists of iris, ciliary body and choroid, although the ciliary body
guanophores in many species, giving the appearance of a metallic sheen to many fish
irides. The pupil is often asymmetric and the anterior lens often protrudes through it.
optimising light-gathering power. T'he iris has little in the way of musculature, either of
the smooth or skeletal varieties and thus the pupil is for the most part stationary; the eye
in fish are next to non-existent, an important factor to note in determining whether fish
can see. The choroid, apart from acting as an immunological powerhouse of the posterior
segment, plays a unique role in many fish species by which its choroidal rete, a tight-knit
is connected to the pseudobranch or false gill in most teleost fish, an arrangement allow.
ing high oxygen tensions to be delivered to the choroidal rete.
The piscine retina is highly unusual in that photoreceptors are continually added to its
number. This relates to the continued growth in size of the eye through life, requiring
the addition of rods in particular, but also means that if the retina becomes degenerate
through cytotoxic effects, injury or surgical lesioning it can regenerate. Whether this is
important in clinical retinal damage is unclear.
It was noted above that fish species do not generally rely on pupillary constriction to
limit irradiation of the posterior segment of the eye. Instead the retina has two unique
mechanisms through which it can vary the impact of light on its photoreceptors. The
retinomotor response allows the photoreceptors to move in and out of recesses in the
retinal pigment epithelium; cones move out of the protection of the retinal pigment
    s    i   
rods move back into these protective retinal pigment epithelium sheaths. At night the
opposite occurs so that photoreceptors with greater light sensitivity are more exposed in
dim light conditions [1]. These changes take a matter of 1-2 hours to occur, an important
factor to bear in mind if one is suddenly examining a fish eye with a bright light or
effects on the retina may give rise to a blind fish even if the rest of the surgery was
successful.
What do fish see?
Much has been written about the peculiarities of vision in the deep sea where the proper-
ties of down-welling light are very different from those on the surface. Yet as most of
the pet fish we will deal with here are near-surface dwellers these considerations should
not take much of our time here. The optics and visual capabilities of fish are covered in
detail in the chapter on behavioural studies of fish vision in Douglas and Djamgozi
excellent volume The Visual System of Fish and readers are directed there for further
information [2].
One might wonder why researchers would want to make the study of fish vision a
priority. Yet in vision research for many years the goldfish retina has been an important
Thefish eye215
model [3] and more recently the zebra danio (Danio danio) has provided an excellent
primitive vertebrate model for transgenic investigation of the link between genotype and
optokinetic response [5] and through behavioural responses which manifest early in
larval development [6].
Visual sensitivity, the lowest light levels at which vision is still possible, vary consider-
ably between different species living in different photic environments. It appears that the
sensivity of goldfish vision equates to one photon absorbed per 15000 rods per second
per second. Clearly the goldfish eye, seeing in the lower light environment under water,
is orders of magnitudemore sensitive.
Visual acuity for goldfish has been determined as between 1.2 and 1.5 cycles per
degree (cpd). Note that using Snellen acuity measures 20/20 is 30 cpd and 20/200 is 3 cpd
so goldfish vision is around 20/400. But there are substantial cross-species differences
in acuity, primarily for two reasons. First, the density of photoreceptors in the retina
light intensity have more densely packed photoreceptors and thus higher acuity. Secondly
fish with larger eyes have a great acuity, predominantly because larger lenses have less
in the way of spherical and chromatic aberration but also because if the lens is further
from the retina, the image size will be larger and resolution improved.
For a fish, in a continually moving visual environment, the detection of static images
is of litle importance compared with motion detection. Thus measuring critical flicker
frequency (CFF), the temporal rather than spatial resolution of the eye, is important in
fish. This can be achieved behaviourally or, more readily, by electroretinography. These
again show a wide variation between species of between 4.4 and 95.8 Hz; again an active
predatory fish has to have a higher CFF than a sedentary bottom feeder, and that is exactly
what we find.
Colour vision again varies between species but the fact that water screens out shorter
constricted at the blue end of the spectrum. Fish have four photoreceptor cones rather
than the meagre three we humans possess; quite how this relates to behavioural responses
is beyond the scope of this short discussion. Interestingly as well as differentiating light
of different spectra, the fish eye responds to light differently polarised. Grasping what
this means is almost impossible to us humans, blind to polarisation, but behavioural
studies suggest that polarisation of downwelling solar illumination through water has a
significant effect on fish motion in the short range and also quite possibly in migration.
as indeed it may do for other taxa as varied as butterflies and birds.
Finally fish also have their lateral line system which gives then a totally novel sensory
system allowing detection of objects in their close enviromment without the need for
eyes. So we might ask, does vision matter in an aquarium environment where food is
conversion ratio and smaller size. They may have more aggressive interactions with
conspecifics as is certainly seen in some aquaculture environments. Vision in these
animals certainly does matter, though conceivably in a different manner from that in
216OphthatmologyofExoticPets
terrestrial species. And so we come to discuss diseases of the fish eye, their diagnosis
and treatment.
Diseases of the aquarium fish eye
Anophthaimos
Clinical signs
On occasion fish will be noted with congenital anophthalmos or lack of any ocular
structures. In other fish trauma or infection can lead to loss of the globe in which case
the dermal layers regenerate over the empty orbit yielding the appearance of anophthal-
mos. It is surprising how well such fish cope in an aquarium environment although their
small size relative to sighted fellow tank dwellers shows their reduced food conversion
ratio (Figure 12.3). Blinded individuals in commercial fish farms show a similarly limited
growth rate.
Aetiopathogenesis
fish Astyanax mexicanus ocular development starts but the embryonic ocular primordia
ates, retinal cells undergo apoptosis and retinal growth is arrested. In the sighted surface.
dwelling form of the fish the eye develops normally [8]. Another example of anophthalmos
in fish is the el (eyeless) mutation in medaka (Oryzias latipes), a recessive mutation
which affects eye formation; in the most severe cases it results in the absence of eyes
with small optic cup-like structures differentiating in situ in the walls of the prosen-
hatch normally but do not respond to visual stimuli and in the small fraction which grow
to adulthood the brain exhibits a number of abnormalities [9].
The mechanism by which trauma can lead to apparent anophthalmos, unilaterally or
bilaterally is unclear.
Figure 12.3 Bilaterally anophthalmic fish after trauma.
Thefish eye217
Macrophthaimos
Clinicalsigns
A number of goldfish strains (Carassius auratus) are characterised by enlarged eyes, the
most common of these being the black moor (Figure 12.4), the subject of some consider-
able research on the mechanisms of abnormal globe enlargement [10]. These animals
have visual eyes, though highly myopic ones and an ocular surface which, because of
its protruding nature, is often the site of traumatic injury. Indeed the lifespan of these
animals in a normal aquarium is generally considerably shorter than that of a conven-
tional goldfish cohort. Other goldfish strains such as the bubble eye, have enlarged
lymph-filled sacs in the infraorbital region (Figure 12.5) and while these might be mis-
taken for globe enlargement at first sight, a closer inspection will show that the ^bubble'
is adnexal and not ocular in origin. While trauma can lead to puncture of these sacs they
usually reinflate with time.
Figure 12.4 Black moor goldfish with protuberant eyes.
Figure 12.5 Bubble eye goldfish with infraorbital lymph-filled sacs.
218Ophthatmotogy ofExoticPets
Aetiopathogenesis
The exact gene or genes leading to the development of these enlarged globes is unclear
The myopia is caused through vitreal chamber enlargement and not through abnormal
lens development [11].
Exophthaimos ('pop eye')
Clinical signs
Exophthalmos is considered by many to be the most prevalent ocular disorder in aquar-
ium fish [12]. Orbital anatomy in teleost fish means that a relatively small space-
occupying lesion in the retrobulbar area, or indeed expansion of the posterior segment
of the globe, produces a pronounced forward movement of the globe.
The signs seen concurrent with exophthalmos in land-dwelling mammalian species.
such as lagophthalmos, failure of complete eyelid closure with subsequent exposure
keratitis are not seen in fish with exophthalmos, but predisposition to trauma is increased
and vision may be compromised.
Aetiopathogenesis
A large number of factors may be involved in the development of exophthalmos in fish
(Figure 12.6).
Gas bubble disease is most commonly caused by increased levels of dissolved gases
(nitrogen or oxygen normally increased in partial pressure through gas being intrained
into water in a faulty pumping system). This occurs predominantly in aquaculture systems
but can be seen in aquaria for pet fish also. The dissolved gases form gas bubbles in the
vasculature of the fish including the gills and skin but most obviously appreciated in the
Fgure 12.6  A goldfish with exophthalmos or 'pop eye' fom systemic tuberculosis.
(Reproduced with permission from William Wildgoose.)
The fish eye 219
countercurrent mechanisms of the choroidal gland, thus resulting in exophthalmos
(Figure 12.7).
Swim bladder inflammation is seen with a number of infectious organisms giving a
systemic vasculitis, again most commonly appreciated with engorgement of the vessels
of the choroidal gland with subsequent exophthalmos.
Clinical management
Treatment of these cases clearly relies on an understanding of what factors underlie the
retrobulbar lesion.
If gas bubbles are seen under the skin, in the gills or within the eye, and the fish is
kept in a supersaturated environment, remedying the dissolved oxygen levels using a
Use of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors may resolve choroidal gas bubbles with a peribulbar
injection of 6mg/kg acetazolamide being reported as successful. However, systemic
absorption of the drug can give problems with gas transport in another rete, that of the
but success with their use has not been reported in the literature.
If choroidal gland enlargement is associated with an infection then ameliorative treat-
ment with systemic antibiosis may be effective but again once the globe has been dis-
placed anteriorly there is little that can be done to resolve the problem and the attention
must switch to in-contact animals to ensure that the same pathology does not occur in
these fish.
Corneal uiceration: ulcerative keratitis
Clinical signs
Cormeal ulceration is a common condition in aquarium fish and most commonly occurs
cormeal ulcer, the definitive proof of the lesion and this test can be performed with the
fish out of water for a few moments. Some suggest that the animal is held in a damp
220Ophthatmology of Exotic Pets
Fgure 12.8 Corneal ulceration with oedema in a goldfish. (Reproduced with pemission
from William Wildgoose.)
Fgure 12.9 Keratitis and panophthalmitis with globe collapse. (Reproduced with
permission from William Wildgoose.)
or benzocaine. The difference between cormeal ulceration in the fish from that in land-
based vertebrates is the propensity to develop profound cormeal oedema. The earliest
signs of an epithelial abrasion are an oval edge of damaged epithelium but very rapidly
the ulcer bed becomes grey and oedematous. Development and worsening of the ulcer
can occur rapidly and thus it may be at the point of cormeal perforation and globe rupture
that the fish is presented.
Aetiopathogenesis
The lack of eyelids in all teleost fish render the ocular surface highly prone to traumatic
insult, be this from aquarium ^furmiture' or attacks by other fish. Commercial fish farms
recognise this ^eye snapping' by aggressive individuals at feeding time. This is less of a
problem in most aquarium fish, except for those bred specifically for an aggressive tem-
perament, such as Japanese fighting fish Betta splendens. Thus the vast majority of
piscine cormeal ulcers start as a superficial abrasion; the rapid onset of cormeal oedema
and the presence of infectious organisms in the water of a less than perfectly maintained
aquarium, lead to deepening of the cormeal ulcer with potential globe perforation and
subsequent endophthalmitis (Figure 12.9)
The fish eye 221
can extend to cause ocular surface disease and the rest of the animal should always be
examined where comeal ulceration is present.
Clinical management
Because of the potential for rapid worsening of cormeal ulcers in aquarium fish, treatment
should be instituted as rapidly as possible. The likelihood that normal commensal organ-
isms on the surface of the fish may become pathogens in the exposed oedematous comeal
stroma means that prophylactic antibiosis is essential. While it might be thought that
obtaining diagnostic samples for bacteriology would be useful, a skin swab probably
yields no more information than a water sample. Bacteriology probably should be
retained for circumstances where antibiosis has not been successful. A cytology specimen
may be useful; this is harvested with a cytobrush applied to the cormeal surface and used
to produce an air-dried smear on a slide for a modified Giemsa stain.
A 10-day bath in furazone green at 0.017 g/l has been suggested as appropriate in
methylene blue giving antibacterial and antifungal action, but is only available currently
in the USA. Sodium chloride, added to the water at 1-2g/l can be beneficial for fresh-
water fish and has a mild antiseptic action while also reducing the osmotic gradient
across the skin. Deeper ulcers likely to perforate may be treated with cyanoacrylate
glue allowed to dry for 1-2 minutes while the fish is maintained in a hydrated state
out of the tank, anaesthetised and ventilated with oxygenated water through the gills.
Such a glue will only adhere to a dry cormeal surface and thus dessication of the ulcer
bed is vital before applying the adhesive - use of cotton-tipped applicators or better
still an air-jet similar to those used to clear dust from photographic negatives is useful
in this regard. Postoperative treatment should include an antibiotic bath as detailed
above while the underlying comea heals and eventually the adhesive layer lifts off the
cormeal surface.
As noted above all too many ulcers progress rapidly to descemetocoeles where only
Descemet's membrane remains between an intact cormea and a perforated globe. In these
cases use of cyanoacrylate adhesive is probably not to be recommended as the exothermic
reaction can cause further damage and globe rupture.
In all cases it is vital to maintain water quality especially with regard to sterility - use
of ozone in a separate bubble chamber or ultraviolet irradiation to remove pathogens
from the water during filtration should be considered where bacterial keratitis appears
as a frequent problem in in-contact fish.
Non-ulcerafive kerafitis
Clinicalsigns
Interstitial keratitis may manifest as cormeal opacification with oedema, cellular infil-
trates appearing as a grey haze together with fibroplasia as a more pronounced opaci-
fication of the comea. In such cases there will be no immediate uptake of fuorescein
222OphthatmologyofExoticPets
Figure 12.10 Keratitis following exposure and trauma in a goldfish. (Reproduced with
permission from William Wildgoose.)
as seen in ulcerative keratitis but after a few minutes a diffuse granular uptake may be
noted. While this does not denote frank loss of epithelium, it suggests that the cormeal
epithelium, while still in place, has lost the integrity of its intercellular tight junctions
(Figure 12.10).
Aetiopathogenesis
A number of causes from infectious agents to environmental factors such as excess
ultraviolet light or even nutritional deficiencies in vitamin A, thiamine or ribofavin can
lead to cormeal opacification. Parasites nonmally found on the skin may also involve the
comeal surface with the most common ones being Glugea or Icththyophthirius while
trematodes, anchorworms and lice have been reported as causing ocular surface pathol-
Ogy, although generally in commercial fisheries not aquarium stock.
Clinical management
Often cormeal opacification through such infuences can be very difficult to resolve,
since the damage is already done once the aetiological factors have been identifed.
Preventing further exposure to these will halt the progress of the condition and prevent
other in-contact fish being affected, but often cannot reverse the signs in the first fish
affected.
Cataract
Clinical signs
Lens opacities in fish, whether farmed commercially or in aquarium settings, are all to0
common (Figure 12.11). Cataracts can progress rapidly to a fully mature white lens and
it may be only at this stage that the pathology is noted, while closer examination with
The fish eye 223
Figure 12.11Cataract in a Hypostomus suckerfish
equipment such as a slit lamp biomicroscope can show earlier changes in the lens which
do not fully obscure vision.
Aetiopathogenesis
A number of different factors can cause cataract formation in fish. Excess ultraviolet light
may be an infuence in a surface-dwelling species while nutritional deficiency can be a
cause in any species. This is surprisingly common and very important in commercial fish
farms but perhaps less so in aquarium fish. Poor water quality may give rise to cataracts
through osmotic changes in the lens. Cataract was noted in a number of wolf fish after
an increase in water temperature [14]; cataracts have also been noted in fish subjected
to freezing temperatures, this more likely to take place in animals kept in an outside
aquarium or a garden pond than ones living in an indoor tank.
species Diplostomum which embed themselves in the lens. This may seem an unusual
place for such a parasite to reside but studies have shown that fish thus blinded swim
near the surface and thus are more likely to be predated by birds which are the definitive
host for the parasite.
Clinical management
Cataracts can be removed from the fish eye in the same way that surgery is performed
in more conventional species by phacoemulsification. It has been suggested that the fish
lens is considerably more dense than that of a mammal rendering removal by phacoe-
mulsification more difficult [11]. Only one report appears to exist in the literature con-
cerming phacoemulsification in a fish and in that no mention was made of surgery being
more difficult than in a dog or cat [15]. Indeed that report documented removal of a lens
in which the cataract was caused by migrating Diplostomum larvae.
Other measures taken against this cataractogenic trematode include a 1-3-hour bath
in praziquantel (Droncit, Bayer) at 2mg/l repeated after 7 and 14 days. The problem here
is that the anthelmintic kills the larvae with the potential for a substantial immune
response against dead and dying larvae with ensuing panophthalmitis.
224Ophthaimology of ExoticPets
Wildgoose.)
Uveitis
Clinical signs
Anterior uveitis presents in fish with signs similar to those in mammals - episcleral
hyperaemia, comeal oedema, aqueous fare manifest as a haziness of iris detail, synechiae
or adhesions of the pupil margin to the anterior lens capsule and, most obviously,
hyphaema or hypopyon, blood or purulent exudate respectively, in the anterior chamber
n  ss  g us an  sa  s ais s a a  go
with systemic infectious disease (see further below) means that the most common pre-
senting signs of uveitis involve inflammation of all structures within the eye, so-called
panophthalmitis (Figure 12.12). In some cases the inflammatory damage can be so severe
that the globe becomes phthytic, reducing in size until only the skin-covered orbit
Aetiopathogenesis
A number of different causes may result in intraocular infammation from trauma,
through helminth migration and Myxobolus infection or bacterial infection. This is the
case not only with localised infection but also, and probably more commonly, as a result
of septicaemia either with Gram-negative bacteria, such as Aeromonas and Pseudomonas,
or less frequently Gram-positive organisms, such as Staphylococcus or Streptococcus.
Even uveal neoplasms can give rise to intraocular inflammation (Figure 12.13).
Clinical management
As with exophthalmos, uveitis often signals a systemic disease which requires a wider
assessment of the animal as a whole. Other signs of infection may be seen, such as dermal
petechiae, raised scales, dropsy (accumulation of fuid in the body cavity), lethargy or
anorexia. All these are signs that the ocular inflammation is merely part of a more gen-
eralised condition. Uveitis is so often associated with septicaemia that a blood culture
Thefish eye 225
permission from William Wildgoose.)
can be useful, although where keratitis is also involved a bacteriological and cytological
sample of the ocular surface will be valuable to detect bacterial and viral conditions.
Treatment of the eye is difficult but improving the water quality and potentially treating
any systemic bacterial disease with baths of sodium chloride or malachite green can be
appropriate.
Retinal disease
Clinical signs
It is unusual to note changes such as chorioretinitis or retinal detachment without looking
for them specifically with an ophthalmoscope. Even then, as we noted above, ophthal-
moscopy to view the retina is difficult because of the degree of comeal curvature and
the spherical nature of the lens. Rendering the cormeal surface fat with a microscope
cover-slip can be helpful.
Aetiopathogenesis
Retinal infammation or detachment is often part of panophthalmitis, although a diabetic
retinopathy has been reported in carp. Adenocarcinoma of the retinal pigment epithe-
lium and retinoblastoma have been reported but these neoplasms are likely only to
be found at a post-mortem examination unless ultrasonography is employed to define
them.
Clinical management
Given that retinal disease in fish is generally associated with intraocular inflammation,
 treatment of the ensuing panophthalmitis generally requires systemic antibiotic and anti-
inflammatory medication given for such disease. Globe removal can be performed in
hypophysectomy [18].
226Ophthatmology of Exotic Pets
Fgure 12.14  Fibroma in a goldfish. (Reproduced with permission from William Wildgoose.)
Fgure 12.15 Retinal pigment epithelial carcinoma in a black moor goldfish. (Reproduced
with permission from william Wildgoose.)
Neoplasia
Clinical signs
Space-occupying tumours can arise in any part of the eye, with varying clinical signs.
so a retrobulbar mass gives exophthalmos and eventually extrusion of the neoplasm from
the orbit (Figure 12.14). Uveal neoplasms are often manifest through a glaucomatous
globe enlargement but before that may be visualised as a mass in the iris. Posterior
12.15) and medulloepitheliosarcoma are very interesting from a comparative pathology
perspective but are rarely seen in aquarium fish medicine; they all give rise to globe
enlargement and blindness.
Aetiopathogenesis
As with neoplasms in any species, ocular tumours in fish may be caused by genetic
mutations or by environmental infuences. In the majority of cases of ocular neoplasia
in aquarium fish an aetiopathology cannot be detenmined.
The fish eye 227
Clinical management
While enucleation might be considered worthwhile in a valuable koi carp or similar fish,
in most cases the welfare of the fish is best served by euthanasia, normally with an
overdose of intracoelomic barbiturate.
References
1.Fernald RD. Vision. In: Evans DH, ed. The Physiology of Fishes. Boca Raton, LA: CRC Press,
1993; pp. 161-189.
2. Douglas R, Djamgoz M. The Visual System of Fish. London: Chapman and Hall, 1990.
3. Kaneko A. Physiological studies of single retinal cells and their morphological identification.
Vision Res 1971;Suppl 3:17-26.
4. Bilotta J, Saszik S. The zebrafish as a model visual system. Int J Dev Neurosci 200l;19:
621-629
 5. Huang YY, Neuhauss SC. The optokinetic response in zebrafish and its applications. Front
Biosci 2008;13:1899-1916.
6. Neuhauss SC. Behavioral genetic approaches to visual system development and function in
zebrafish. J Neurobiol 2003;54:148-160
7. Powers MK, Easter SS. Absolute visual sensitivity of the goldfish. Vision Res 1978;18:
1149-1154
8. Tian NM, Price DJ. Why cavefish are blind. Bioessays 2005;27:235-238
9. Ishikawa Y, Yoshimoto M, Yamamoto N, Ito H, Yasuda T, Tokunaga F, ligo M, Wakamatsu
Y, Ozato K. Brain structures of a medaka mutant, el (eyeless), in which eye vesicles do not
evaginate.Brain Behav Evol 2001;58:173-184.
10. Easter SS Jr, Hitchcock PF. The myopic eye of the Black Moor goldfish. Vision Res 1986;26:
1831-1833
11. Seltner RL, Weerheim JA, Sivak JG. Role of the lens and vitreous humor in the refractive
properties of the eyes of three strains of goldfish. Vision Res 1989;29:681-685.
12. Jurj 1. Ophthalmic disease of fish. Vet Clin N Am 2002;5:243-260.
13. Williams CR, Whitaker BR. The evaluation and treatment of common ocular disorders in
Teleosts. Sem Av Ex Pet Med 1997;6: 160-169.
14. Bjerkas E, Bjerkas I, Moksness E. An outbreak of cataract with lens rupture and nuclear extru-
sion in wolf-fish (Anarhicas spp.). Vet Ophthalmol 1998;1:9-15.
15. Bakal RS, Hickson BH, Gilger BC, Levy MG, Flowers JR, Khoo L. Surgical removal of cata-
racts due to Diplostomum species in Gulf sturgeon (Acipenser oxyrinchus desotoi). J Zoo Wildl
Med 2005;36:504-508.
16. Wildgoose W. Exenteration in fish. Exotic DVM 2007;9:25-29.
17. Nadelstein B, Bakal R, Lewbart GA. Orbital exenteration and placement of a prosthesis in
fish. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997;211: 603-606.
18. Nishioka RS, Richman NH, Young G, Prunet P, Bern HA. Hypophysectomy of coho salmon
(Oncorhynchus kisutch) and survival in fresh water and seawater. Aquaculture 1987;65:
343-352.
Conclusions
We said at the beginning of this volume that the eye varied surprisingly little between
species, yet had sufficient diversity to render specific attention to the differences impor
tant. I hope that the layout of the text has allowed sufficient discussion of these differ-
ences at an academic level while focusing on the clinical diagnosis and management of
ocular disease across the species range. Some diseases, such as comeal ulceration, span
the species divide, yet others, such as diseases of the snake spectacle, are very specific
to that group of animals. These latter conditions are more difficult for veterinarians to
identify as they present relatively infrequently. Indeed one of the problems with dealing
with exotic species as a generalist, is that their particular peculiarities are not commonly
encountered in routine veterinary practice. I wonder if, following on from that thought,
I might be permitted a moment to ponder what this book has shown me philosophically
about keeping some of these exotic pets in captivity. The fact that we may encounter
species such as reptiles or primates relatively infrequently means that we do not have an
innate sense of what they are feeling. as we might have with a dog or cat.
Take the rabbit we saw in Chapter 4 with a lymphoma obstructing its cranial venous
drainage which develops exophthalmos when handled. We happily noted with fascination
that raised arterial blood pressure and impaired venous drainage leads to an engorgement
of the retrobulbar venous plexus with subsequent globe protrusion. But what does that
say about what the rabbit feels about being handled? As a prey species is has evolved to
exhibit what we might call “learmed helplessness' but maybe its eyes and the momentary
hypertension they reveal show us in this one instance what it really is feeling deep inside.
Take the slender lorises in Chapter & where treatment was more problematic than the dry
eye affecting them - a dog with KCS accepts regular medication from its owner because
of the bond that exists between them, but by the very nature of being exotic many of
these animals are not amenable to regular treatment. What does that tell us about the
ethics of keeping them in the first place?
Having said that, there would be no reason for writing this book if treatment of ocular
disease in these species was impossible or if keeping them in captivity was entirely
unethical. Our aim should be to optimise their welfare and that must mean providing the
best ophthalmic diagnostic and therapy we can. I do hope that this volume will provide
readily available information which will aid in diagnosis and treatment of eye disease
Ophthalmology of Exotic Pets, First Edition. David L. Williams.
@ 2012 David Williams. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Conctusions229
from amphibians to zebrafish and as well will provoke more interest in the fascinating
subject of comparative visual physiology and behaviour.
I have to thank so many people, both ophthalmologists and exotic animal clinicians,
for help over the years in understanding these animals and their eyes more and more.
Writing this book has shown me how much I still have to leam and I hope that those
with greater experience and knowledge than I will forgive errors and omissions
along the way. I am always happy to be contacted by e-mail through my website www.
davidlwilliams.org.uk so please do send comments and corrections to me there!
anophthalmos
chinchilla 111
avian 133
Chlamydia 61,172
fish 216
Chlamydophila 140, 172
guinea pig 57
chromodacryorrhoea 89-90
hamster 109
chromomycosis 204
reptile 190-1
cockatiel conjunctivitis 141-2
azithromycin 6
colour vision
fish 215
Bamett, Dr Keith 9
amphibia 299
Bedford, Professor Peter 9
avian 128
binocular vision 128, 199
ferret 75
black moor goldfish 217, 226
rabbit 29-31
blepharitis
 conjunctival centripetalisation, rabbit
avian 135-6
29-31
ferret 77
conjunctival overgrowth, rabbit
rabbit 30, 32
29-31
reptile 167, 171
conjunctivitis
bu gene 50
avian 140-3
bullous spectaculopathy 175, 178-81
ferret 77-8
buphthalmos 50-2
guinea pig 61-2
rabbit 28-9
C57 black mouse 93
rat/mouse 91-2
cataract
reptile 171
amphibian 205
comea
avian 147
avian 143
ferret 81-2
ferret 80
fish 222
guinea pig 64
guinea pig 69-70
mouse/rat 86, 95-8
rabbit 44-6
rabbit 40-2
rat/mouse 101-3
reptile 184-5
reptile 187
comeal dystrophy, mouse 95
Ophthatmology of Exotic Pets, First Edition. David L. Williams.
@ 2012 David Williams. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
232 Index
cormeal lipidosis
fatty eye, guinea pig 65
guinea pig 66
fibropapilloma, reptile 169-70
rabbit 42-3
fesh eye, guinea pig 65
cormeal oedema, ferret 80-1
fovea, avian 126-7
comeal ulceration
amphibia 200-1
gas bubble disease 214
avian 144
glaucoma
ferret 80
amphibian 207
fish 219
ferret 83
guinea pig 64
guinea pig 68-9
rabbit 39-41
hamster 110
rat/mouse 90,96
rabbit 49-51
reptile 1
rat/mouse 100-1
cryptophthalmos, avian 134
Gram negative infection 171, 186, 206,
224
dacryocystitis, rabbit 26-8
dacryocystorhinography, rabbit 27
Head, Arthur 6, 192
degu 111-12
herpesvirus, reptile 169
 depolarising muscle relaxant 13
 heterotopic bone fonmation, guinea pig
dermoid
67-9
guinea pig 60
hibemation 188
rabbit 43
Hormer's syndrome, avian 152-3
Diplostomum fuke 223
hypopyon
distemper 77
avian 146
dysecdysis 176
reptile 186
dysenterobiosis 28
hypovitaminosis A
avian 137-9
ecdysis 174
reptile 167
electroretinogram 192
Encephalitozoon cuniculi 46-8
infuenza 77
entropion
infraorbital sinus
ferret 78
avian 121, 131
guinea pig 58
iris
rabbit 34
amphibian 198
enucleation
avian 123, 152
fish 225
rabbit 16,46-9
amphibian 208
reptile 165
avian 153
iris coloboma, mouse 98
epiphora, rabbit 21-5
evisceration, avian 154
Johnson, George Lindsay 5-6, 192
examination, 0cular 9-11, 87-8, 130
exophthalmos
keratitis
fish 218
avian 145-6
ferret 76-7
08 .0
rabbit 36-8
guinea pig 64
exposure keratopathy rat/mouse 97-8
mouse and rat 96
eyelid disease, reptile 169-70, 173
rabbit 41-2
eyelid neoplasia, avian 139-40
reptile 178, 182
Index 233
keratoconjunctivitis sicca 42,
parietal eye 166
62-3
Pasteurella 28,48,49
Knemidokoptes pilae 138
pecten 125-6, 151
persistent hyaloid vasculature 94
lens luxation
phacoemulsifcation 46-7, 189, 190
avian 151
phenol red thread test 11, 63, 88, 109
chinchilla 111
pineal gland 166
ferret 82-3
pit viper 166
rabbit 46
pox virus
rat/mouse 103
avian 135
lipid keratopathy
reptile 169
amphibian 202
Prince, JH 15-16
reptile 184
pseudobuphthalmos 179
Listeria 61
Pseudomonas 186
lovebird eye disease 142-3
pseudopterygium, rabbit 30
lymphoma, ferret 79
refraction
macrophthalmos,fish 217
guinea pig 51-2
Martin, Professor Graham 127-9
rabbit 19
megaglobus, reptile 191-2
 retained spectacle 175
merangiotic fundus 17
retinal degeneration
microphthalmos
ferret 83-4
avian 133
rat/mouse 104-5
ferret 76
retinal disease, avian 151
guinea pig 57
retrobulbar venous plexus 18, 38-9
mouse 93-4
Rochon-Duvigneaud, Andre 7
rabbit 36
reptile 190-1
Salmonella 61
Mycoplasma 92,140
Schimmer tear test 11, 42, 62, 80
mydriasis 13
scleral ossicles
mynah bird keratitis 145
avian 123
myxomatosis 32-3
reptile 162
septicaemia 206
nasolacrimal disease, rabbit 346
sialodacryoadenitis 92-3
nictitans gland prolapse
sinusitis, avian 131-2
guinea pig 65
spectacle, snake 161,162-4,174-82
rabbit 34-6
Staphylococcus 28
nuclear sclerosis, ferret 81-2
subconjunctival lipid deposition 65
subspectacular abscess 181-2
one eyed cold, avian 141
ophthalmia neonatorum, ferret 75
taurine deficiency retinopathy, ferret
optic nerve 52
84
 orbital glands 
Texel guinea pig 59-60
rabbit 19, 34
tonometry 12,49,69,83,88
reptile 160, 162, 168
Toxoplasma 152
orbital sinus
trichiasis
rabbit 17,39
ferret 78
reptile 160
guinea pig 59-60
234Index
ulceration, cormea, avian 144
mouse 89
ulcerative keratitis, see cormeal
rabbit 18-21
ulceration
rat 88
ultraviolet inradiation 127, 189, 200, 204,
reptile 164-6
222
visual acuity
uveitis
avian 129-30
amphibian 205-6
ferret 74
avian 146
fish 215
ferret 80-1
guinea pig 56-7
fish 224
rabbit 61-2
rabbit 46-9
visual feld
rat/mouse 96-7,99-100
avian 129
reptile 185
rabbit 61
visual streak, rabbit 19
vecuronium 13,148,187
vitamin A 137, 167
vision
vitamin C deficiency 56, 61, 70
amphibia 199-200
vitreal haemorrhage 95, 103
ferret 73
fish 214-16
Walls, Gordon 7-8
guinea pig 56-7
Wood, Casey A 3-5, 119, 192