SMALLANIMAL
DENTALPROCEDURES
FORVETERINARYTECHNICIANS
ANDNURSES
lRUS
EDITEDBYJEANNER.PERRONE
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
TECHNICIANS
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Small Animal Dental Procedures
for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Website
 This book is accompanied by a companion website:
site
www.wiley.com/go/perrone
 The website includes:
• Key terms
- Training materials
· Supplemental figures
。PowerPoints
Small Animal DentaI Procedures
for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Edited by
Jeanne R. Perrone CVT, vTS (Dentistry)
Tampa Bay Veterinary Dentistry
Largo, Florida
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
This edition first published 2013 @ 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific,
 Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Editoriat offces: 2121 State Avenue, Armes, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atriurm, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for inforrmation about how to apply
for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/
wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific
clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been
granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of payments has been arranged. The fee codes
 Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned
in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to
the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Catatoging-in-Publication Data
Small anirmal dental procedures for veterinary technicians and nurses / editor,
Jeanne R. Perrone.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-2075-0 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Veterinary dentistry. 1. Perrone, Jeanne R.
[DNLM: 1. Dental Care-veterinary. 2. Animal Technicians. 3. Pets. SF 867]
SF867.S632013
636.089'76-dc23
2012019513
A catalogue record for this book is available frorm the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not
be available in electronic books.
Cover design by Jen Miller Designs
12013
To my dad, Frank, who taught me
To the members of the AVDT for over
responsibility and the value of providing
30 years of love and laughter
quality medicine
To all the veterinary technicians,
To my mom, Priscilla, who taught me
veterinary assistants,veterinarians,and
compassion and giving
veterinary dentists Ihave been blessed to
work with for making me into the
To my stepmom, Lynn, who taught me
technician Iam today
bow to be resourceful
To my Tony, who constantly teaches
To my sister, Zan, who taught me how to
this Italian girl how to bea little more
be independent
Puerto Rican
To my brother, Andy, who taught me
To my pets and patients, past
never to give up
and present, my source of love
and acceptance
To my sister-in-law, Lucy, who taught
me that all challenges can be overcome
Lastly,to Luna,our model for the
with grace
medical diagrams in Chapter 1 and a
former patient of mine. I received word
To my niece,Jasmine, who taught me
from her mom and our artist,Brenda
maturity
Gregory, that she passed away from an
inoperable tumor on December 29,2011.
To my nephew, Jordan, who taught me
Her mother, Brenda, is grateful that she
spirit and bravery
will be immortalized in this book.
To my best friend and confidant, Lisa,
for over 30 years of love and laughter
Contents
Contributors
!!IX
Foreword by Judy Ozier
XV
Foreword from Academy of Veterinary Dental Technicians
xvii
Preface
XIX
Acknowledgments
Xxi
1: The Basics
3
Cerianne Holzman
Anatomy of the Skull
4
Odontogenesis
12
Anatomy of the Tooth
15
Directional Terminology
18
Training and Key Terms: Online only
2: The Examination Room and the Dental Patient
23
Mary Berg
Introduction
24
The Client Interview
24
The Oral Examination: Conscious Patient
25
The Dental Estimate (Treatment Plan)
27
?
Training and Key Terms: Online only
3: Components of the Dental Operatory
29
Benita Cherry
Dental Delivery Units
30
Dental Handpieces
32
Power Scalers
34
Dental Tables
38
Ergonomics and Personal Protection
41
Training, Key Terms, and Supplemental Figures: Online only
4: Anesthesia and the Dental Patient
45
Annie Mills
Introduction
46
Anesthesia for the Dental Patient
46
Anesthetic Equipment
47
vii
vili  Contents
Monitoring Anesthesia and Common Complications
50
Pain Management in the Dental Patient
53
5: The Dental Cleaning
59
Julie McMahon
Introduction
60
 Common Instrumentation for the Dental Cleaning
61
The Dental Record
64
The Dental Cleaning Procedure
67
 Purpose of the Oral Exam and Charting
67
Cleaning the Teeth Using the Power Scaler
74
Dental Cleaning with Hand Instrumentation
75
Polishing
78
Recovery
79
Home Care
80
Equipment and Instrument Care
82
"Developing a Home Dental Health Care Plan": Online only
6: Dental Radiology
87
Laurel Bird
Radiography in Veterinary Dentistry
88
The Dental X-Ray Unit
88
Dental Film and Processing
90
Positioning for Taking Dental Radiographs
94
Care and Storage of Images
100
Anatomy of the Dental Radiograph
101
Training, Key Terms, and Supplemental Figures: Online only
7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments
105
Jeanne R. Perrone, Sara Sharp, and Patricia A. March
Introduction
106
Periodontal Disease
106
jeanne R. Perrone
What is Periodontal Disease?
106
Pathogenesis of Periodontal Disease
106
Clinical Signs
108
Radiographic Signs
108
Treatment and Therapies
111
Summary
114
Training, Key Terms, Supplemental Figures, "Dental Extractions," "Extraction
Instrumentation," "Flap Procedures," "Oronasal Fistula," "Periodontal
Instrumentation," and "Stages of Periodontal Disease": Online only
Endodontic Disease
115
Sara Sharp
Anatomy of the Pulp
115
Indications for Endodontic Therapy Due to Trauma
115
The Endodontic Exam
116
Contents ix
The Endodontic Treatment
117
In Conclusion
123
回
Training, Key Terms, and Supplemental Figures: Online only
Malocclusion
123
Patricia A. March
Normal Occlusion
123
Types and Treatments of Malocclusions
124
Position Statements
126
Treatment of Malocclusions
127
Training, Key Terms, and Supplemental Figures: Online only
Jaw Fracture Management
130
Patricia A. March
Types and Treatments for Jaw Fractures
130
Training, Key Terms, Supplemental Figures, and "Tape Muzzle": Online only
Oral Tumors
134
Patricia A. March
Benign Oral Tumors and Treatments
135
Malignant Oral Tumors and Treatments
137
Charting and Preparation of Samples
139
Training, Key Terms, and Supplemental Figures: Online only
8: Feline Dentistry
143
Jennifer Crawford and BillieJean (leannie)Losey
Introduction
144
Gingivostomatitis
144
jennifer Crawford
Introduction
144
Symptoms of Gingivostomatitis
145
Diagnostics
147
Oral Evaluation
147
Treatments
148
Summary
151
Key Terms and Supplemental Figures: Online only
Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex
151
Billie Jean (leannie) Losey
Eosinophilic Ulcers
151
 Eosinophilic Plaque
151
Collagenolytic Granuloma
152
Causes
152
Symptoms
152
Diagnostics
153
Treatments
153
Key Terms: Online only
Feline Tooth Resorption
154
Billie Jean (Jeannie) Losey
Definition and Symptoms
154
Stages of Tooth Resorption
156
Diagnostics
158
Charting
158
Contents
Treatment
159
 Key Terms and Supplemental Figures: Online only
Training: Online only
9: Dentistry and the Exotic Patient
161
Kathy Istace
Challenges of Exotic Dentistry
162
Rodent Dentistry
162
Caviomorph Rodents (Guinea Pigs, Chinchillas, Degus)
162
Murine Rodents (Rats, Mice, Hamsters, Gerbils)
162
Oral Examination of Rodents
165
Anesthesia and Pain Management
165
Common Dental Problems of Rodents
167
Dental Instruments
168
Husbandry and Home Care
169
 Miscellaneous Small Pets
169
Supplemental Figures: Online only
Rabbit Dentistry
170
Oral Anatomy and Dentition of Rabbits 
170
Oral Examination of Rabbits
171
Anesthesia and Pain Management
172
Common Dental Problems of Rabbits
174
Dental Instruments
176
Husbandry and Home Care
176
Supplemental Figures: Online only
Ferret Dentistry
177
 Oral Anatomy and Dentition of Ferrets
177
Oral Examination of Ferrets
177
Anesthesia and Pain Management
177
Common Dental Problems of Ferrets
180
Dental Instruments
181
Husbandry and Home Care
181
Supplemental Figures: Online only
Dental Radiography for the Exotic Patient
181
 Materials and Equipment
181
Rodents and Rabbits
182
Ferrets
184
 Supplemental Figures: Online only
Training: Key Terms; Dental Assessment Charts for Rabbit, Guinea Pig.
Chinchilla, Rat, Mouse, Hamster, and Ferret: Online only
10: Discharging the Dental Patient
187
Patricia Dominguez
Discharge Instructions: What You Need
188
The Importance of Photographs and Radiographs
192
Managing Recheck Visits
194
Reminders: How Often Should Dental Patients Return?
195
Training and Key Terms: Online only
Contents
xi
Appendices
197
1. Home Oral Health Care Interview Form
197
2. Canine Dental Chart
198
3. Feline Dental Chart
200
4. Dental Procedure Estimate
202
5. Dental Procedure Release Form
203
 6. Dental Radiograph Template
204
7. Discharge Take Home Instructions Example
206
 8. Discharge Take Home Pictures: Simple Example
208
 9. Discharge Take Home Pictures: Detailed Example
209
Index
217
 For materials available online only.
go to www.wiley.com/go/perrone.
Contributors
Mary Berg, BS, RLATG, RVT, VTS
Billie Jean (Jeannie) Losey, RVT, VTS
(Dentistry)
(Dentistry)
Gentle Care Animal Hospital
Veterinary Teaching Hospital
Lawrence, KS
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC
Laurel Bird, CVT, VTs (Dentistry)
Brakken Veterinary Clinic
Patricia A. March, CVT, VTs (Dentistry)
Menomonie, WI
 Department of Dental and Oral Surgery
Matthew J. Ryan Veterinary Hospital
Benita Cherry, LVT, VTS (Dentistry)
University of Pennsylvania
VCA Animal Medical Center
Philadelphia, PA
Richland, WA
Julie McMahon, LVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Jennifer Crawford, LVT, VTS
Community Animal Hospital
(Dentistry)
Reno, NV
Indian Springs Animal Clinic
Pelham, AL
Annie Mills, LVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Florida Veterinary Dentistry and
 Patricia Dominguez, LVT, VTS
Oral Surgery
(Dentistry)
Punta Gorda, FL
Gotham Veterinary Center
New York, NY
Judy Ozier, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Northgate Pet Clinic
Gerianne Holzman, CVT, VTS
Decatur, IL
(Dentistry)
Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital
Jeanne R. Perrone, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
University of Wisconsin
Tampa Bay Veterinary Dentistry
Madison, WI
Largo, FL
Kathy Istace, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Sara Sharp, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Mayfield Veterinary Hospital
Alameda East Veterinary Hospital
Edmonton, AB, Canada
Aurora, CO
xili
Foreword
Ten years ago, a group of veterinary technicians with a passion for veterinary dentistry
began an arduous journey. Their vision was to form a dental specialty organization for
technicians who wish to excel in the field. The Academy of Veterinary Dental Technicians
(AVDT) was formed. Over the next several years, the organizing committee succeeded in
writing a constitution and an exam, which is given annually to qualifed candidates.
AVDT also had to meet specific guidelines for technicians seeking to become Veterinary
Technician Specialists. Today AVDT is recognized by both the National Association of
Veterinary Technicians in America (NAVTA) and the American Veterinary Dental College
(AVDC]
Since the beginning, ADVT has provided an avenue for technicians and assistants
involved with dentistry to grow and learn together. The idea for this book has evolved
over time. All of the existing written material for veterinary dentistry has been provided
by the veterinarians in the field. AVDT has chosen to use our pool of very knowledgeable
 and qualified veterinary technician specialists to write a dental book by technicians spe-
cifically for the use of other technicians, assistants, and students.
This book is designed to be a learning tool to increase skill levels and understanding
of various dental procedures. Basic dental skills, such as doing a complete prophylaxis,
charting teeth, and taking diagnostic radiographs, are just a few examples of essential
tasks that we should to able to perform competently. Additionally, it is necessary to have
the knowledge of more complex dental procedures.
Increasing our levels of competence yields many tangible benefits to us all. In addition
to achieving pride in our accomplishments, we become more valuable members of the
veterinary dental health care team. Our increased knowledge allows us to pursue job
opportunities with potential monetary increase. We will also establish a necessary founda-
tion to pursue our professional challenges in a knowledgeable manner.
It is our hope that you will find this book to be a good reference guide, a resource to
find specific dental information that will help make your dental experiences less intimidat-
ing, and a resource for you to hone your skills and tweak areas that need improvement.
Remember that we all have our patients’ best interests in mind and our ultimate goal is
to provide them with good oral health through our best efforts.
Judy Ozier, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
XV
Foreword from Academy of
Veterinary Dental Technicians
The Academy of Veterinary Dental Technicians (AVDT) has partnered with Wiley to bring
this text to you to encourage the education and training of veterinary technicians and
nurses. The accumulation and integration of knowledge found within the covers of this
book will teach, inspire, challenge, and fuel your interest in all aspects of veterinary
dentistry. Please read it through, to get the maximum benefit.
I would like to extend my gratitude to the authors and to our wonderful editor. This
book couldn't have been completed without the encouragement and support from the
AVDT members, the American Veterinary Dental College (AVDC), the American Veteri-
nary Dental Society (AVDS), and their families, at home and at work. Thank you for
making this project possible.
Please note that the world of veterinary medicine is constantly evolving and the infor-
mation shared within this text is time-sensitive and subject to change.
Patricia A. March, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
President, AVDT
xvii
Preface
With the upsurge in dental education available for veterinary technicians at the regional,
state, and national levels, I am excited to provide a text written for technicians by
technicians.
The text is divided into 10 chapters, covering all branches of dentistry that the veteri-
nary technician could encounter in practice. The contributors also touch upon the role
of the veterinary technician, stressing the importance of connecting to the owner profes-
 sionally using their dentistry knowledge. Professionalism is gained through education and
experience
This book is geared for technician students, working technicians, and technicians who
are pursuing their specialty certification in dentistry. In keeping with changes in technol-
ogy, the book has two components: the book and the Web. The Web component was
added for two reasons: (1) there is sufficient space to store the large number of photo-
graphs and drawings that could not fit in the book and (2) it provides the reader with
an extra educational experience using a project or a quiz based on the chapter.
xix
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the following individuals and institutions:
University of Wisconsin Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital
Patricia Dominguez, LVT, VTS (Dentistry)
IM3
 Midmark
Summit Hills Laboratories
Surgitel
Kristen Cooley, CVT, VTS (Anesthesia)
John Koehm, DVM, FAVD
Air Techniques Inc.
American Veterinary Dental College
Theresa Gabel, CVT
Alexander Reiter, Dipl. Tzt., Dr. Vet. Med.
North Carolina State University
Duke Lemur Center
Skulls Unlimited International
Loic Legendre, DVM
Michael Fallon, DVM, PhD
Shipps Dental and Specialty Products
David Crossley, BVetMed
Gotham Veterinary Center
Without their contributions, this book would not have come to be.
J.R.P.
xxi
Small Animal Dental Procedures
for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
CHAPTER 1
The Basics
Gerianne Holzman,CVT,VTS (Dentistry)
Learning Objectives
Learn the anatomy of the skull and teeth
Discover the relationship between structures surrounding the oral cavity
Obtain knowledge of tooth development 
Understand the dental formula
 Realize the unique oral directional terminology
Small Anirat Dentat Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, 1st edition. Edited by Jeanne R. Perrone.
2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
4Smafl Animal Dental ProceduresforVeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses
This comprehensive text on small animal dentistry meets the need for both novice and
CHAPTER
B a a   e   sa a 
paths. To learn advanced techniques, one needs to begin with the basics. This chapter
discusses the anatomy of both the skull and teeth. With this knowledge, the veterinary
technician learns the complex relationship between all structures surrounding the oral
cavity. Dental disease, while normally thought of as a condition of the mouth, can also
affect the nares, sinuses, and eyes.
Most mammals—including humans, dogs, and cats—have two sets of teeth in their
lifetime: primary (or deciduous) and permanent (or secondary). Normally, the primary
teeth exfoliate prior to the eruption of the permanent teeth. Malocclusions and dental
disease can occur if this natural progression does not happen. (Two teeth should not
occupy the same place at the same time.) Knowing the normal age of tooth eruption and
the development of the tooth aids the veterinary technician in performing an oral exam.
In the mouth, the usual directional terminology of dorsal, ventral, medial, and lateral
do not apply. The oral structures create a unique set of terms to determine location.
Learning this special language simplifies charting, surgical assisting, and explaining oral
pathology.
Anatomy of the Skull'
Oral Cavity
The primary structures of the oral cavity consist of teeth, gingiva, tongue, soft palate,
and hard palate. These important organs of mastication and breathing can be involved
with oral disease. Knowing what is normal helps to recognize abnormalities.
Teeth?
Each species has a distinct dental formula. A dental formula is the number and types
of teeth expected in a normal mouth. Most mammals have two sets of teeth in their
lifetime: primary (or deciduous) and permanent. Dogs and cats have four types of teeth,
each with separate purposes for eating and chewing. Domesticated animals, fed com-
mercial diets, do not always use the teeth in the same manner as their wild ancestors.
Incisors cut, pick up, and groom. Canines rip, tear, and hold. Premolars and molars grind
food into a more digestible size (Figs. 1.1 and 1.2). Carnassials are the largest chewing
teeth in the mouth. In both the dog and cat, they are the upper fourth premolar and the
lower first molar.
Primary dental formula: Canine (Total 28)
Maxilla: incisors (6), canines (2), premolars (6), molars (0)
■
Mandible: incisors (6), canines (2), premolars (6), molars (0)
Permanent dental formula: Canine (Total 42)
Maxilla: incisors (6), canines (2), premolars (8), molars (4)
Mandible: incisors (6), canines (2), premolars (8), molars (6)
Chapter 1: The Basics
5
Premolars
CHAPTER
Molars
Incisors
Canine
Incisors
Canine
Premolars
Molars
Figure 1.1 Canine skull showing permanent dentition (llustration by Brenda Gregory).
Molar
Premolars
Incisors
Canine
Incisors
HCanine
Premolars
YMolar
Figure 1.2 Feline skull showing permanent dentition (llustration by Brenda Gregory).
Primary dental formula: Feline (Total 26)
Maxilla: incisors (6), canines (2), premolars (6), molars (0)
Mandible: incisors (6), canines (2), premolars (4) molars (0)
Permanent dental formula: Feline (Total 30)
Maxilla: incisors (6), canines (2), premolars (6), molars (2)
Mandible: incisors (6), canines (2), premolars (4), molars (2)
Dental formulae are often written as: canine (permanent): 2 x (I3/3, C1/1, P4/4, M2/3);
and feline (permanent): 2 x (I3/3, C1/1, P3/2, M1/1). Anatomically, cats normally are
missing their first upper premolars, first lower premolars, and second lower premolar
teeth.
Gingiva?
The gingiva is the soft tissue surrounding and supporting the teeth. It also covers the
alveolar bone supporting the teeth. Most often pink, the gingiva may be fully or partially
pigmented. It should be glossy and smooth. Gingiva is modified epithelial and connective
tissue. It divides into attached and unattached (or free) gingiva. The juncture of the gingiva
6Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
CHAPTER
Figure 1.3  Incisive papilla in a canine (Courtesy of Jjill Jecevicus)
to the rest of the oral mucosa of the lips is the mucogingival junction. Attached gingival
tissue protects bone and tooth supporting structures from infection, trauma, and peri-
odontal disease. The junction between the free gingiva and the tooth is the gingival sulcus
Pockets, greater than these depths, indicate the presence of connective tissue loss. Pockets
are often associated with gingivitis, an early form of periodontal disease.
Tongue
 The tongue has four primary functions: to taste food; to lap up liquids; to form food into
a bolus; and to aid in swallowing. Canines have a relatively smooth and overlong tongue.
Panting provides an efficient method for dogs to cool their body temperature. Feline
tongues are rough from firm, upright papillae. These structures aid in grooming and
cleaning. The tongue can be pink or pigmented. In certain breeds (i.e., Chow Chows),
the tongue is near to black. A median groove is present on the dorsal surface. Hairs may
grow in this groove. While aesthetically displeasing, they rarely cause injury.
The dorsal surface of the tongue contains papillae, some of which are specialized into
taste buds. Different tastes and combinations—sweet, sour, bitter, and salty—are sensed
 Over all surfaces of the tongue, not just in specific sections as previously understood.
Specialized muscles and nerves of the tongue provide animals with the ability to drink
U raem dn dooss oi sheo moe oi uoneon s[moq, e saean ansuoi sieo y sp
 dogs, the tongue curls and twists water into the mouth. The tongue rolls food around
the mouth forming a bolus or smooth round ball. With the aid of the tongue muscles,
this bolus of food is then pushed to the back of the mouth and swallowed.
Hard and soft palate
The hard and soft palates comprise the "roof" of the oral cavity. The hard palate, created
by the incisive, maxillary, and palatine bones, is covered by the soft tissue of the palatine
rugae. The rugae, on each side of the palatine raphe (or midline), are symmetrical. Clefts
or openings in the hard palate create direct access to the nasal cavity and sinuses. Surgical
correction is appropriate for this genetic condition. The incisive papilla located at the
most rostral area of the hard palate is a raised round structure (Fig. 1.3). It aids in the
senses of smell and taste and should not be confused with an oral mass. The soft palate
Chapter 1: The Basics
CHAPTER 1
Figure 1.4 Mesaticephalic head shape: Labrador retriever.
Figure 1.5 Brachycephalic head shape: pug.
is a continuation of the soft tissue overlying the hard palate. This movable fold of tissue
connects the oral cavity to the pharynx. It is smooth and does not contain rugae.
Bones
The skull is composed of two sections: cranium and face. The cranium protects the brain
and associated structures. The face comprises the bones of the oral, nasal, and ocular
cavities. Bones provide the basic structure and support for blood vessels, muscles, tendons,
all soft tissue structures, and teeth. Dogs and cats have three primary head shapes: mesati-
cephalic or average (i.e., Labrador retriever [Fig. 1.4], German shepherd dog, domestic
cat); brachycephalic or short faced resulting in crowded and rotated teeth (i.e., pug [Fig.
1.5], Persian cat, English bulldog); and dolichocephalic with a long narrow nose and face
(i.e., Irish wolfhound, greyhound, Siamese cat [Fig. 1.6]).
8Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
CHAPTER
Figure 1.6  Dolichocephalic head shape: Siamese (Courtesy of Rebecca Johnson).
SkulfI4
The primary bones of the cranium are
1.
 Frontal
2.
Parietal
3.
 Interparietal
4.
 Temporal
5.
Ethmoid
6.
 Occipital
7.
 Sphenoid
The facial bones consist of
1.
 Lacrimal
2.
Temporal process (includes zygomatic arch)
3.
Nasal
4.
Maxilla
5.
Incisive
6.
Pterygoid
7.
Ventral nasal conchal
8. Mandible
The primary bones of the oral cavity are the mandibles and maxilla and the incisive.
 They support the teth, attach to muscles and provide protection to vessels and nerves.
Within the mandible, maxilla and incisive bones, the alveolus surrounds the tooth root
and connects to the periodontal ligament (Figs. 1.7-1.9).
Mandible
 The mandible supports the teeth of the lower jaw. Two separate bones meeting at the
rostral midline (symphysis) create the mandible. The mandibular symphysis is a fibrous
joint. Unlike in humans, it is rare for this juncture to fuse completely in canines and
Lacrimal
Sphenoid
Parietal
Frontal
CHAPTER 1
Ethmoid
nterparietal
Maxilla
emporal
Occipital
Mandible
Zygomatic Arch
Pterygoid
Figure 1.7
Lateral view of skull bones (lllustration by Brenda Gregory).
Frontal
Parietal
Nasal
\Ethmoid
Interparietal
Incisive
Maxilla
Temporal
Zygomatic Arch
Figure 1.8 Dorsal view of skull bones (lllustration by Brenda Gregory)
Pterygoid
Palatine
AEthmoid
Interparietal ↑
Incisive
Occipital
Ventral Nasal
MaxillaConchal
Temporal
ZygomaticArch
Sphenoid
Lacrimal
Figure 1.9
Palatine view of skull bones (llustration by Brenda Gregory).
10Small AnimalDentalProceduresforVeterinary Techniciansand Nurses
felines. Cats tend to have a very "loose" mandibular symphysis. The ends of the mandibles
CHAPTER
meet the temporal bone to form the temporomandibular joint or TMJ. It is a hinge joint.
Muscles of mastication, originating along the cranium, insert into the body of the man-
dible near the TMJ. They provide the ability to open and close the mouth, eat, chew, and
bite. In rare cases, the TMJ can luxate preventing the animal from closing its mouth.
Incisive
The incisive bone is the rostral section of the maxilla. It supports the upper incisor teeth.
 Defects in formation of this bone can cause a cleft palate.
Maxilla
Supporting the remainder the upper canines, premolars, and molars, the maxilla also
includes the palatine bones creating the hard palate. The maxilla separates the oral cavity
from the nasal cavity.
Muscies
Muscles of the skull allow movement, facial expression, chewing, eating, and biting.
While these are not the sleek muscles of the limbs, the strong muscles of the face are
designed to rip and tear food. They also create an extreme ability to bite. In humans, the
biting force is 250-300 pounds per square inch (psi) with the ability to create a sudden
snapping force of 25,000-30,000 psi. Contrast this to the canine with the normal range
of 300-800 psi and a potential for 30,000-80,000 psi when provoked.
Nerves
The trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V) begins at the brain stem and divides into three
branches: ophthalmic, maxillary, and mandibular. The trigeminal nerve and its subsidiary
branches provide sensory and motor function. To keep within the confines of this text,
the author will only discuss the dentistry related branches.
The maxillary nerve provides sensation to the lower eyelid, nasal mucosa, maxillary
teeth, upper lip, and the nose. Branching from the maxillary nerve, the minor and major
palatine nerves provide sensation to the soft and hard palates as well as giving rise to
taste fibers. The infraorbital nerve branches into the three alveolar branches. These nerves
enter the alveolar canal and each tooth root. The caudal superior, middle superior, and
rostral superior alveolar nerves supply the maxillary molars, premolars, and canines/
incisors, respectively.
The mandibular nerve provides motor function to the mouth by innervating muscles
of biting and eating. The mandibular nerve and its many branches provide sensation to
the cheeks, tongue, mandibular teeth, lower lip, and the skin of the head. The mandibular
nerve branches into the masticator nerve, which aids in opening the mouth. The related
masseteric and deep temporal nerves allow closing of the mouth. The lateral and medial
pterygoid nerves aid in raising the mandible while eating. The buccal nerve provides
sensation to the skin and mucosa of the cheek. The inferior alveolar nerve supplies sensa-
tion to all the mandibular teeth. It exits the mandible through its mental nerve branches
Chapter 1: The Basics 11
and foramens. The mental nerves provide sensation to the lower lip and rostral interman-
CHAPTER
dibular region. The lingual nerve creates tongue sensations of touch, pain, temperature,
and taste.
Vascufar System
Arteries
The external carotid artery and its branches supply blood flow to the oral cavity. The
palatine branch runs ventrally in the lateral wall of the pharynx and provides blood supply
to the palatine glands, mucosa, and muscles. Pharyngeal arteries serve the mucosa and
muscle of the pharynx. The largest branch of the external carotid artery is the lingual.
Running from the tip to the base of the tongue, it further bifurcates into the hyoid and
tonsillar branches. The facial artery supplies blood flow to the mandibular and sublingual
salivary glands and facial muscles and gives rise to the sublingual artery. Running parallel
to the mandible, it supplies the rostral mandible and lower incisor teeth. The superficial
temporal artery and its many branches bring blood to the parotid salivary gland, zygo.
matic arch, and temporal muscle. The maxillary artery divides into the mandibular and
pterygopalatine branches. The mandibular portion of the maxillary artery supplies the
TMJ and the roots of the mandibular teeth. It terminates as the mental arteries in the
rostral mandible. The pterygopalatine portion of the maxillary artery gives rise to many
branches. They provide blood flow to the eye, nose, sinuses, and facial muscles. The
 alveolar arteries, terminal branches of the maxillary artery, serve all the maxillary teeth.
Veins
Terminating in the external jugular vein, the arteries’ corresponding veins drain blood
from the head. These include the lingual-facial, facial, mandibular, temporal, and maxil-
lary veins.
Lymphatic System
Of importance in dentistry are the following lymph nodes (LNs) of the head:
Parotid LNs lying at the level of the TMJ and rostral to the parotid salivary gland
Mandibular LNs are rostroventral to the mandibular salivary glands
 Retropharyngeal LNs are deep and caudal to the mandibular salivary gland and dor-
solateral and caudal to the pharynx
Dental conditions, gingivitis, and periodontal disease can manifest themselves with
enlargement of the adjoining lymph nodes.
Eye
e as a  io  p r  nou si a a a
between the two systems is considered. Infected and abscessed maxillary premolars or
molars may present as suborbital swelling. Minimal distance is present between the orbit
12Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
CHAPTER
Figure 1.10 Cat skull showing minimal distance between the infraorbital foramen and the eye socket.
and the infraorbital foramen. Careful administration of a regional nerve block in this
area prevents puncture of the eye. This is especially important in the cat (Fig. 1.10).
Larynx and Pharynx
The oral cavity and oral portion of the respiratory system coincide in formation. The
larynx is the oral opening to the trachea and lungs. The epiglottis closes to prevent food
 sd aond oi sosa a oi so xd a an an a o
food. Tonsils are located within the pharyngeal opening. Tonsils are modified lymph tissue
that can be indicative of or a focal point of disease.
Odontogenesiss
Odontogenesis is the development of teeth: odont = tooth and genesis = origin. The
development of the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract, including the oral cavity and teeth, is a
complex series of events. In the embryo, the GI tract begins as an endodermic tube. In a
short period, this structure folds in on itself to form three distinct sections—foregut,
midgut, and hindgut. The foregut gives rise to the pharynx, esophagus, stomach, duode-
num, respiratory tract, liver, gallbladder, and pancreas. The midgut becomes the jejunum,
ileum, cecum, appendix, ascending colon, and part of the transverse colon. The hindgut
forms the rest of the transverse colon, rectum, and anal canal. The oral cavity develops
from the pharyngeal end of the foregut as the oral plate. From this, the maxilla, mandible,
and their associated structures form.
Tooth Formation'
Teeth form from the gathering of mesenchymal cells from the ectoderm along the epithe-
lium of the mandible and maxilla at specific sites.7 A variety of growth factors interacts
Chapter 1: The Basics 13
Crown/
Ectoderm|
Eruption
CHAPTER
Dental Lamina
[Bud
[Cap
[Bell
[Late Bell
Mesenchyma
Figure 1.11Tooth development (llustration by Brenda Gregory).
with this follicle to form the tooth bud. Additional growth factors create the enamel knot
and the cap stage of development when the tooth cells begin to align. During the cap
stage, nerves and blood vessels begin to develop and enter the developing dentin, eventu-
ally becoming the pulp of the tooth. The bell stage then follows and begins the differen-
tiation into the tooth components of dentin and enamel. In the final, crown stage, enamel
forms with the mineralization of odontoblasts. Ameloblasts aid in the creation of enamel
toward the outer surface of the developing tooth. Odontoblasts move toward the center
of the tooth creating dentin. (Secondary dentin continues to form in permanent teeth
throughout life causing a gradual narrowing of the pulp chamber.) Cementoblasts form
the cementum in the very late stages of tooth development (Fig. 1.11).
Eruption
 Many theories exist on the mechanism of tooth eruption. The three current theories are
as follows.
Root formation
As the tooth root develops, it elongates the tooth pushing it through the gingival tissues;
however, rootless teeth develop.
Alveolar bone remodeling
Bone formation at the apex of the tooth and resorption of bone at the coronal end of the
tooth follicle interact to create penetration of the mucosa.
Periodontal ligament
Periodontal ligament formation and renewal are involved in the continuous growth of
teeth in some species (i.e., rodents and rabbits); however, this has not been proven in
species of animals with only two sets of teeth.
 If a path does not create for the eruption of a tooth, it may become impacted or
embedded. An impacted tooth is one prevented by bone from erupting. Soft tissue inhibits
 an embedded tooth's eruption. If there is a disruption of a tooth bud during development,
(1'1 ) is  e an no n qe ue u mo A 1
14
Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
CHAPTER
an Addnd e se aoej ayi u! uang sop e jo yiooi aujues al jaddn juauewad aui jo ydeisoipey zl't auniy
the development of the tooth within the nasal sinus.
Table 1.1 Primary tooth eruption schedule
Tooth Type
Canine (Week of Eruption)
Feline (Week of Eruption)
Incisors
3-4
2-3
Canines
E
3-4
Premolars
4-12
3-6
Molars
None
None
Primary Teeth
Dogs and cats are diphyodont with two sets of teeth during their lifetime. As permanent 
teeth erupt, roots of primary (deciduous) teeth are absorbed, become loose, and eventu-
ally fall out. Other species, such as most rodents and lagomorphs, have open-rooted teeth
that continue to grow throughout their life. Many types of snakes and sharks are poly-
phyodont and continuously replace teeth as they exfoliate. Table 1.1 shows the tooth
eruption schedule for primary teeth of dogs and cats.
Permanent Teeth
Primary and permanent teeth do not fall out and erupt at the same rate. A mixed denti-
tion is often present. Normally, as the permanent tooth emerges, the primary tooth is
Chapter 1: The Basics15
Table 1.2
Permanent tooth eruption schedule
CHAPTER
Tooth Type
Canine (Month of Eruption)
Feline (Month of Eruption)
Incisors
3-5
3-4
Canines
4-6
4-5
Premolars
4-6
4-6
Molars
5-7
4-5
lost. If this does not occur, the primary tooth is retained. Two teeth should not occupy
the same space at the same time. Retained primary teeth can lead to rotation and maloc-
clusion of permanent teeth. The close interdigitation of the primary and permanent tooth
prevents normal teeth cleaning causing food and debris to accumulate leading to peri-
odontal disease. This can cause long-term damage to the developing permanent tooth and
potential tooth loss.
Tooth eruption varies with sex, breed, overall health and well-being, body size, and
 season of birth. Teeth of females, larger breeds, summer-born, and healthy animals erupt
s a  nd n s ii  s   
for dogs and cats.
Anatomy of the Tooth
Every tooth, no matter its form or function, contains the same elements. Multirooted
tooth structures are crown, enamel, cementum, dentin, pulp, root, and periodontal liga-
ment (Fig. 1.13).
Crown
The crown is the most visible portion of the tooth and is primarily made of enamel. The
tip of a crown is the cusp. It meets the tooth root at the cementoenamel junction (CEJ).
The neck and cervical line are common terms for the CEJ. Crowns are subject to wear,
fractures, and discolorations. Wear occurs from excessive chewing on rocks, cages, tennis
balls, sticks, and so on. Fractures are the result of trauma. Discoloration can be the result
of tetracycline or doxycycline administration during tooth formation causing the teeth to
yellow. Trauma may also cause discoloration resulting from injury to the internal tooth
structures. In a vital tooth, the injured tooth is pink to red from hemorrhage within the
pulp. If left untreated, the tooth may “die” or become nonvital. The crown will then
become purple, gray, or black.
16Smafl AnimalDentalProcedures forVeterinary Techniciansand Nurses
CHAPTER
Enamel
Crown
Dentin
Pulp
Gingiva
Cementum
Periodontal
Ligament
Root
Alveolar
JNerves
Veins
Arteries
Figure 1.13 Anatomy of a tooth (lllustration by Brenda Gregory)
Ename!
Enamel covers the crown of the tooth. The strongest surface in the body, enamel is com-
posed primarily of mineral with a small quantity of water and organic matter. It is shiny
and varies in color from white to ivory. Canine teeth are often more bright white than
human teeth. The mineral content creates the strength of the enamel, but also makes it
brittle. Enamel chip fractures are a common finding when animals chew on hard surfaces
such as rocks and bones. Due to an absence of a blood supply, enamel cannot heal itself
when injured. In the adult dog, enamel is approximately 1 mm in depth. In young animals,
enamel fractures easily because it is very thin with a large underlying pulp chamber. See
Dentin.
Cementum
Cementum is mineralized connective tissue covering the root of the tooth. It begins at the
     e  ,     s  
the enamel and cementum meet. Unlike shiny enamel, cementum is dull and often pitted.
The lower mineral content of cementum makes it softer than enamel, dentin, and bone.
 Collagen fibers of the periodontal ligament penetrate cementum to aid in retention of the
root in the alveolar bone. Cementum's connective tissue provides nourishment allowing
it to remodel and repair throughout life.
Dentin
The majority of a tooth is made of dentin. It is 70% inorganic material with the remainder
being collagen fibers and water. It is porous and yellowish in color. Made up of
Chapter 1: The Basics 17
odontoblasts (odonto = tooth, blast = germ or embryo), the dentin continues to fill in the
CHAPTER
pulp cavity of a vital tooth. This continual laying down of odontoblasts causes the pulp
cavity/root canal to narrow with age. There are three primary types of dentin. Primary
through life. Trauma to the tooth causes the formation of tertiary dentin. This reparative
material may be brown or darker yellow than the surrounding tooth structure.
Pulp
The pulp is the most vital portion of a tooth. Veins, arteries, lymphatic vessels, nerves,
odontoblasts, and other cellular structures make up the pulp or endodontic (endo = within,
dontic = tooth) system. The pulp chamber joins the periodontal ligament at the apex of
the tooth. The coronal or crown section and the root section (root canal) divide the tooth
into two areas. The structures of the pulp provide nourishment, sensation, and defense.
The veins and arteries keep the tooth alive. The nerves react to trauma by transmiting
 pain sensation. Odontoblasts from the pulp form dentin. As noted earlier the pulp
chamber continues to narrow, through life, from the continuous deposition of odonto-
blasts. Damage to a tooth early in life may cause pulp inflammation or death stopping
 odontoblast production and resulting in a continued large pulp chamber.
A variety of insults cause tooth death and loss by injuring the pulp. Crowns with no
 gross sign of trauma may be discolored indicating internal trauma to the pulp. In an intact
tooth, the pulp chamber is a closed space. Swelling within the pulp chamber often leads
to pulpal necrosis from internal pressure applied to the arteries cutting off blood supply
to the tooth. Impact trauma creating a fracture with an open pulp chamber, left untreated,
most often leads to tooth death. Aggressive and improper use of dental power tools
scalers, polishers, and drills—can cause excessive heat buildup within the pulp chamber
resulting in inflammation. Bacteria from untreated periodontal disease or bacteremia can
ascend into the pulp chamber causing pulpitis and necrosis. Without treatment, bacterial
pulpitis may spread apically (toward the apex or root) creating an abscess and alveolar
bone loss.
Roots
Tooth roots contain the living tissues of the tooth. Composed mostly of dentin and
covered with cementum, roots anchor the tooth with the attached periodontal ligament.
The tip of the root is the apex. Dog and cat teeth have an apical delta composed of several
openings leading into the pulp chamber or root canal. Human teeth have a single opening.
The importance of the apical delta becomes evident during endodontic (root canal)
therapy.
 In dogs, incisors, canines, first premolars, and the third mandibular molar are all single
rooted. The only three-rooted teeth in dogs are the maxillary fourth premolar and first
and second molars. All other teeth have two roots. In cats, the incisors, canines, maxillary
second premolar, and molar have one root. The rest of the teeth are double rooted except
the fourth maxillary premolar-the only three-rooted tooth in the cat mouth (Table 1.3).
The space between roots in a multirooted tooth is the furcation. It is the area where the
roots bifurcate or divide.
18
Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 1.3Tooth root numbers
CHAPTER
Canine
Feline
Tooth
Maxilla
Mandible
Maxilla
Mandible
Incisors—all
1
1
Canines—all
1
First premolar
1
1
Absent
Absent
Second premolar
2
2
1
Absent
Third premolar
2
2
2
Fourth premolar
E
2
L
2
 First molar
E
2
2
Second molar
E
2
Absent
Absent
Third molar
Absent
Absent
Absent
Periodontaf Ligament
The periodontal ligament attaches the cementum of the tooth to the alveolar bone and
 the cementum of adjoining teeth. Collagen fibers are its primary component, but it also
contains blood vessels, nerves, and elastic fibers. The strong fibers of the periodontal liga-
ment counteract forces put onto teeth from chewing, trauma, and extraction. The elastic-
ity of the ligament allows the tooth to move slightly during normal activity. Strong forces
 from either trauma or extraction are required to dislodge a tooth. Unlike the nerves within
the pulp cavity, the nerves of the periodontal ligament contribute to the sensations of
pressure, heat, and cold
 Inflammation of the gingiva (gingivitis) is an ascending condition leading to periodon-
tal disease—the number one most common condition in dogs and cats. Periodontitis
(inflammation of the periodontium) causes destruction of the periodontal ligament,
 gingiva, bone, and eventually tooth loss. It is a treatable condition if managed in its early
stages.
Directional Terminology?
The mouth has its own terminology related to location of tooth, direction in mouth, and
position related to the tongue and cheeks. Learning this terminology will aid the veteri-
nary technician in performing an oral exam and assisting the veterinarian. The following
terms relate to the tooth surface (see Fig. 1.14):
 Medial: Toward the midline of the face
Distal: Away from the midline of the face
Vestibular: Toward the vestibule or lips (interchangeable with labial or buccal)
Chapter 1: The Basics 19
CHAPTER 1
Facial
Palatal
Buccal
Lingual
Labial
Vestibular
B
Medial
Distal
Cervical
Cusp
Interproximal
Occlusal
Figure 1.14  Directional terminology (llustration by Brenda Gregory).
 Labial: Toward the lips, used for the incisors and canines
Buccal: Toward the cheeks, used for premolars and molars
Facial: Surfaces of rostral teeth visible from the front
Lingual: Toward the tongue, used in the mandible
Palatal: Toward the palate, used in the maxilla
Coronal: Toward the crown of the tooth
Apical: Toward the root of the tooth
 Contact, proximal, or occlusal: Toward adjoining teeth in same jaw
Interproximal: Between two teeth
Cusp: Point of the tooth
 Cervical or neck: Area of tooth where crown and root meet
Abbreviations
Abbreviations aid dental charting and record keeping. The two primary forms of abbre-
viation for tooth identification in veterinary dentistry are the proper identification sequence
20Small AnimalDentalProcedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
and the Triadan system. Chapter 5 discusses abbreviations for oral pathology. The Ameri-
CHAPTER
can Veterinary Dental College continuously updates abbreviations.
Proper Identification Sequence
This version of tooth identification involves using dentition (permanent or primary—
 indicated with small case “d" for deciduous), arch (maxilla/mandible, often upper/lower),
quadrant (left or right), and tooth (using tooth formula abbreviations: I, C, PM, and M).
The proper identification is, for example, the permanent mandibular left first molar using
subscripts and superscripts, the shorthand is M. The primary (deciduous) maxillary right
third incisor is indicated as dI?.
TriadanSystem
Adopted by the American Veterinary Dental College, the Triadan system identifies each
tooth with a three-digit number. The first number indicates the quadrant of the tooth's
location and its dentition (primary or permanent): maxillary right = 1 (5 for primary),
maxillary left = 2 (6), mandibular left = 3 (7), and mandibular right = 4 (8). Based on
the full dentition of a pig, second and third numbers follow sequentially with incisors
being numbers 01, 02, and 03, canines = 04, premolars = 05, 06, 07, and 08, and
molars = 09, 10, 11. Adult cats normally are missing the maxillary first premolar and
 mandibular first and second premolars. The numbering system remains intact and skips
 a si ss  a  r a sna  a s a
teeth are always number 4 and the fourth premolars are always number 8. Using the
above examples, the permanent mandibular left first molar is tooth 309. The primary
(deciduous) maxillary right third incisor is tooth number 503. A cat's permanent right
mandibular fourth premolar, even though it is the second premolar found in the mouth,
is tooth number 408. Remember, cats normally are missing teeth 405 and 406 (Figs. 1.15
and 1.16).
101.201
102
202
CHAPTER
103
203
104
204
105
205
106
206
107
207
108
208
109
209
Right
110
210
Left
411
410
310
409
309
408
308
407
307
406
306
4050
305
404
304
403
303
402
302
401301
Figure 1.15
5Canine Triadan tooth numbering system (llustration by Brenda Gregory).
101201
102
103号
104
204
Right
Left
106
206
107
207
208
209
409
309
408
308
407
307
404
402302
303
401301
Figure 1.16 Feline Triadan tooth numbering system (lllustration by Brenda Gregory).
21
22
2Small Animal DentalProcedures forVeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses
References
CHAPTER
1. Evans, HE. 1993. Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd ed., Philadelphia: Saunders.
2. Wiggs, RB, Lobprise, HB. 1997. Veterinary Dentistry Principles and Practice.
Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven.
3. Gioso, MA, Carvalho, VGG, Holmstrom, SE (editors). 2005. Oral Anatomy of the
Dog and Cat, Veterinary Clinics of North America, Small Animal Practice-Dentistry.
Philadelphia: Saunders.
4. Budras, KD, McCarthy, PH, Horowitz, A, Berg, R. 2006. Anatomy of the Dog, Fifth
Edition. Hanover: Schlitersche.
5. Gilbert, SF. 2006. Tooth Development—Developmental Biology Eight Edition Online
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates.
6. Harvey, CE, Emily, PP. 1993. Small Animal Dentistry. St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
 7. Theslaff, I. 2003. Epithelial-mesenchymal signaling regulating tooth morphogenesis.
Journal of Cell Science 116:1647-1648.
8. Johnson, C. 2001. Mechanisms of tooth eruption, University of Illinois at Chicago
Courses online: Oral Sciences.
9. Holmstrom, SE. 2000. Veterinary Dentistry for the Technician and Offce Staff
Philadelphia: Saunders.
The Examination Room and
the Dental Patient
CHAPTER 2
Mary Berg, BS, RLATG, RVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Learning Objectives
This chapter is going to give you the tools to
 Conduct an effective client interview
Gather an accurate history
Perform an oral examination on the conscious patient
Prepare and present a treatment estimate to the client
Convey the importance of the recommended dental procedure to the client
Small Anirat Dentat Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, 1st edition. Edited by Jeanne R. Perrone.
2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
23
24Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Introduction
The veterinarian is the only one who can make a diagnosis of disease, but the technician
and staff can assist the veterinarian by gathering an accurate history and recognizing
pathology and bring it to the attention of the veterinarian. The technician plays a vital
role in a successful dental practice. Each practice should have a technician whose main
emphasis is in dentistry.' This technician's responsibilities include client education, com-
munication, and therapeutic skills, as well as educating the remainder of the staff. The
 dental technician is responsible for gathering an accurate history and performing an oral
CHAPTER
examination on the pet prior to the doctor's examination. By doing so, they are able to
give the veterinarian an accurate evaluation of the pet. Veterinary technicians should
develop a good understanding of all aspects of veterinary dentistry in order to field ques-
tions that clients may ask. In order to have a successful dental practice, all members of
the veterinary staff play an important role in caring for the patient.
The Client Interview
Veterinarians need to use a combination of knowledge and observation in dentistry com-
paring abnormal findings with known normals to determine the best course of treatment.
Part of gathering the information needed to develop that treatment plan is gathering an
accurate history on the patient by interviewing the client. This history should be gathered
by the technician. This allows the doctor to be able to enter the exam room with an
understanding of the oral condition of the pet.
Some clients are astute owners and are able to recognize that there is a problem with
their pet's oral cavity; however, many seem to be unaware that their pet even has teeth.1.2
When a client presents a pet they suspect has a problem with the oral cavity, it is neces-
sary to interview the client to gather the needed information as well as perform an oral
exam of the pet. As veterinary professionals we have to rely on the information regarding
the symptoms of the pet as it is given to us by the pet owner.?2 These symptoms may
include malodor, excessive salivation, inappetance, swelling, diffculty swallowing, or
 indications of oral pain or discomfort.? This information along with the complete history
including past oral examinations and treatments, diet, chewing habits, and home care are
all pieces of the puzzle that must be put together.?
At times the owner may not even be aware that there is a problem with their pet's
mouth. Oftentimes, the dental problems are discovered during the oral portion of the
annual examination. They may have noticed a change but did not think it was relative
or important. This is the perfect time to educate the client on oral disease and its impor-
tance to the animal's overall health.
The past history of the patient is valuable information that can aid the veterinary staff
in determining the treatment plan for the patient. Having a complete history of past oral
examinations and treatments helps the veterinarian understand the present oral condition
and predict the outcome of a procedure. A 10-year-old toy breed dog that has not had
any previous oral examinations and/or treatments is likely to have severe oral disease,
while a similar patient that has had annual dental cleanings may only have mild disease.
Just as a veterinary technician interviews the client regarding lifestyle to determine the
appropriate vaccine protocol, the veterinary technician should ask many questions when
Chapter 2: The Examination Room and the Dental Patient 25
interviewing the client about the pet's oral health. Encourage the client to volunteer
information if possible, but some questions need to be asked. A nonleading question is
the best way to gather information.
 If a client is not aware of any problems with their pet's oral cavity, questions that
should be asked are as follows:
Has Ricky had any previous dental work? Let the owner volunteer information for
you. Yes, Ricky did have two teeth extracted at my previous veterinarian. At this
point you can ask more pointed questions regarding the cause for the extractions,
when the procedure was preformed, and so on.
CHAPTER
 Is Jaxx a heavy chewer? He used to be but you know lately he has had no interest in
his toys or bones.
S am     sd  i   sa  s 
may not be chewers. Some toys such as tennis balls, ice, cow hooves, pig ears, and
hard nylon bones can cause serious trauma in the mouth. Clients may not realize the
harm that could come from what they thought was a great toy. Use this opportunity
 to educate your clients about possible harm.
If the client is aware of a problem, ask them when they first noticed a problem. Oral
disease can develop slowly and the owner may not be aware of the problem. Many owners
think that bad breath is natural in their pet and are not aware that periodontal disease
may be the culprit.? However, malodor does not always mean periodontal disease.? Other
forms of dental disease and/or gastrointestinal disease may also be the culprit.?
 The following questions should be asked in situations where the owner is concerned
about a problem:
 Has the pet had any problems eating? Do they tend to drop food or chew on one side
of the mouth? Have they stopped eating altogether or will only eat soft food?
Does the pet seem to salivate excessively?
 Does the pet appear to have problems drinking or swallowing?
Has there been a change in the pet's habits or behavior?
Does the pet rub its face on the carpet or paw at their face? Face rubbing can be a
sign of oral pain or inflammation. In traumatic cases, such as a fractured, avulsed, or
luxated tooth, it is vital to know when the injury happened if there is a chance of
saving the tooth.
The Oral Examination: Conscious Patient
The general health exam is preformed by the veterinarian. During the examination the
 entire animal should be examined nose to tail. A thorough exam should include the eyes,
ears, skin, heart, lung, abdomen, and check for internal parasites. If anesthesia is planned,
it is highly recommended to perform blood and urine analysis. Preanesthetic testing will
be discussed in more detail in Chapter 4 (Fig. 2.1).
The oral examination is done both on the conscious and anesthetized patient. The
conscious exam is limited to olfactory, visual, and tactile examination. A primary indica
tion of oral disease is malodor. ',3 A normal, healthy breath will have a sweaty, salty odor
but not unpleasant.? Periodontal disease is usually accompanied by a strong unpleasant
odor comparable to necrosis and infection.*
26
SmaflAnimalDentalProcedures forVeterinary TechniciansandNurses
CHAPTER
Figure 2.1  The veterinary technician evaluates the occlusion and oral condition of the pet in the exam room.
This is a perfect time to educate your clients about the oral health status of their pets.
Figure 2.2 The veterinary technician uses diagrams to illustrate the link between oral health and systemic
health.
Evaluate the symmetry of the head. Do both sides appear to be uniform or does one
side look different? Is there swelling in any area of the head? If swelling appears below
the eye, look for a fractured maxillary fourth premolar. Do the jaws appear symmetrical?
 If one side of the jaw is swollen or not symmetrical, rule out mandibular or tooth frac-
tures, or oral masses.
Feel the head. Palpate the bones of the head including the zygomatic arch and man-
dibles. Feel for the presence of abnormalities. Evaluate the lymph nodes including the
sublingual and submandibular nodes. Inflammation in the oral cavity can contribute to
swelling of these nodes. The temporomandibular joint should also be palpated for indica-
tions of pain or discomfort.
A cursory oral exam should be preformed prior to anesthesia if possible. During this
exam, check for occlusion, tooth fractures, gingival recession and inflammation, and
missing, supernumerary, or loose teeth. If your patient is cooperative, show the client the
areas of concern (Fig. 2.2).
Malocclusion is the improper alignment of the teth. Malocclusion will be discussed
in another chapter but it is important to evaluate this prior to anesthesia and intubation.
It is important to look at all of the teeth to evaluate occlusion, not just the incisors. Begin
Chapter 2: The Examination Room and the Dental Patient27
by ensuring that the incisors meet in a healthy and comfortable bite. The maxillary inci-
sors are rostral to the mandibular incisors. The mandibular canine teeth should fit into
the diastema between the maxillary third premolar and the maxillary canine. The pre-
S sd   ss an  e ss d e aa rs s
ing the interdental spaces of the opposing arcade. The maxillary first premolar should be
the most rostral. The maxillary fourth premolar should occlude along the buccal surface
of the mandibular frst molar. There are certain breeds in which malocclusion would be
considered a normal bite for the breed. For example, a Boxer has an underbite or man-
dibular mesioclusion. Use the American Kennel Club breed standards as a reference for
the type of bites that are acceptable in each breed. This will be reviewed in the “ Maloc-
CHAPTER
clusion" section in Chapter 7.
Count the teeth to determine if there are supernumerary teeth present or if teeth are
missing. This task can be difficult as not every patient is willing to allow a good look,
especially if they are head shy or a young puppy. Dental formulas are listed in Chapter 1.
 Each tooth should be evaluated for fractures, mobility, and the amount of plaque and
calculus present.
While it is most important to evaluate the gingiva under general anesthesia when the
gingival index and pocket depth can be evaluated, it is important to observe the gingiva
to determine a preliminary degree of periodontal inflammation. Healthy gingiva is pink
with defined margins, while inflammation is indicated by red, swollen gums. Gingival
recession or hyperplasia are key elements of periodontal disease and should be noted.
A complete examination can only be completed under general anesthesia and will
be covered in Chapter 5; however, the exam on the conscious patient can yield vital
information that can help create the treatment plan for the patient and estimate for
the client.
The Dental Estimate (Treatment Plan)
The best veterinarians will not be able to practice their dental skills if the owner does not
give permission. The technician's role in obtaining this permission includes creating an
accurate treatment plan for the procedure and presenting the plan to the client. The client
needs to understand the pathology and the need for therapy. The technician plays a vital
role in providing this education to the client.
The treatment plan should be itemized and be as accurate as possible. The technician
should go through this plan with the client, explaining the need and value of each item.
For example:
Preanesthetic blood work can sometimes find systemic problems that can have a
bearing on the anesthesia protocol and assess the patient's anesthetic risk. (See
Chapter 4)
 Dental radiographs are necessary to determine if there is pathology that is not
visible on the crown.
Explaining the treatment plan line by line helps the client understand the need for and
importance of the treatment. Use photographs, models, videos, and charts to let the clients
see the pathology. Clients see and understand the pathology more easily in pictures than
in the oral cavity of their pet (Fig. 2.3).
28
SmaflAnimalDental Procedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
CHAPTER
Figure 2.3 The veterinary technician uses a skull as an aid to explain the pet's oral health to the client.
procedure. This practice prevents
 distress over unexpected expenses and helps the clients
understand that the procedure is important to their pet's health. Providing an estimate in
advance can also help the client
e arrangements for payments.
An exact treatment
plan
cannot
 determined in the exam room on a conscious
patient, but a close “
estimate
1 be created from the oral exam. Explain that the treat-
animal is under anesthesia and the final oral exam and dental radiographs have been
performed. Creating an estimate higher than anticipated can have a twofold benefit. First,
it allows for an allowance if the periodontal disease is more advanced than thought on
the initial exam. Second, the client can be pleasantly surprised to have a lower cost for
the procedure. If the client would like a more precise estimate prior to the procedure,
prepare a “worst-case scenario” and explain this to the client.
Having an understanding of the owner's commitment and ability to perform home care
will help develop your treatment plan. If you have an understanding of your client's
degree of commitment, your veterinarian may plan to perform periodontal surgery to
save teeth or decide to extract the teeth in the best interest of the pet.
References
1. Bellows, J. 1999. The Practice of Veterinary Dentistry: A Team Effort. Ames, IA: Iowa
State Press.
2. Lobprise, HB, Wiggs, RB. 2000. The Veterinarian's Companion for Common Dental
Procedures. Lakewood, CO: AAHA Press.
3. Livgren, R, Logan, E, Jensen, L, et al. 1995. Method for assessment of canine oral
malodour. In Proceedings of the American Veterinary Dental Forum.
Components of the
Dental Operatory
Benita Cherry, IVT, VTS (Dentistry)
CHAPTER 3
Learning Objectives
Become familiar with the differences in dental delivery units and their specific uses
Understand the use of air compression versus motor-driven systems and the benefits and
limitations of each type
 Become familiar with the different types of handpieces that are utilized in veterinary
dentistry procedures today
 Understand the proper use and applications for each type of handpiece
Learn techniques to maintain the instruments' usefulness by proper daily care of the
equipment
The dental technician should be familiar with the different types and mechanisms by
which dental scalers function
 Proper use and maintenance of the specific scalers is very important to prevent damage
to the tooth's surface or intemal structures
Thorough understanding of the usefulness of the dental scaler and its vital function in
performing a complete dental prophylaxis
Become familiar with the different types of dental tables and working surfaces that are
available
 Be aware of the optimum height, length, and width of a dental table
Learn how to clean, disinfect, and maintain a working dental table
Recognize possible hazards that may be present in the dental operatory
Recognition and knowledge of the use of personal protective equipment during dental
procedures
 Understanding ergonomics as it pertains to the dental technician or veterinarian, and
how to minimize risks associated with daily tasks and avoid personal injury
Small Animat Dentat Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, 1st edition.Edited by Jeanne R.Perrone.
2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
29
30Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Dental Delivery Units
The dental delivery unit is a major equipment item for the dental operatory. Without this
vital piece of equipment, the veterinary professional would not be able to effciently
 provide dental care to their patients.
Air- or Gas-Driven Units
 The air-driven unit is composed of a compressor to deliver pressurized air to handpieces
-an oo'ot-ooo'o7 ie lp ramod aun oi uoeoi paads-qaty aiord o pasn ane 1eu
lutions per minute (rpm) as well as low-speed rotation 5,000-20,000 rpm to a handpiece
that is used for tooth polishing as well as other applications that require fewer rpm's.'
Air-driven handpieces have the ability to run at higher speeds compared with motor-
driven scalers and polishers.
An important component of the dental unit is its ability for water to be delivered into
the handpieces, which functions to flush away debris as well as cool burs or tips that due
CHAPTER
to friction could cause tissue or tooth damage or death. Contemporary dental units also
offer a mechanism of flushing a chemical solution into the system to facilitate reduction
of bacterial contamination in the dental units' tubing and handpieces.
The source of water may be from bottles attached to the machine that need to be
refilled when empty, or water lines that are attached to the machine and supply a constant
water source. Often this water source must be filtered and should always be demineral-
ized water.
These units can stand alone in the dental operatory or may be integrated into dental
tables or mounted on a wall. Many newer compressor models are also oil-free, which has
many advantages to the patient and operator (Fig. 3.1).
Compressors
Compressor motors must be cooled during their operation; this is accomplished either by
the use of oil, which must be maintained at a level required and changed on a periodic
basis, or by air-cooling, which has the advantage of not requiring oil maintenance and
which prevents that oil from getting into the handpieces and air lines which could be
contraindicated in some veterinary dental procedures in which oil could contaminate
the working environment and cause failure of some advanced dental restoration
procedures.
The compressor will generate some level of noise output depending on the size and
capabilities of the compressor. Compressors that are larger and capable of running more
than one dental delivery unit may be housed in an area away from the dental operatory
to prevent excessive noise levels.
Compressors also require that the air storage tank be drained of any condensation on
a regular basis, otherwise the air tank will fill up with water over time and reduce the
availability of air space causing the motor to turn on excessively, and eventually the motor
will fail due to overheating.
Nitrogen or carbon dioxide tanks are alternatives to using air compressors to drive
high- and low-speed handpieces and the ultrasonic scalers. These tanks must be ordered,
Chapter 3: Components of the Dental Operatory31
TM3
VTLIIDDICANC
CHAPTER 3
Figure 3.1  iM3 Elite with silent hurricane compressor (Courtesy of iM3 Inc.—"The Veterinary Dental
Company").
delivered, and replaced as necessary. Nitrogen or carbon dioxide tanks are not compli-
cated to maintain; and they do not generate noise, which over time could harm the
operator's hearing, will not require the same maintenance that a compressor would, and
do not generate noise that may harm the operator (Fig. 3.2).
Motor-Driven Units
 Electric motor-driven units are also available for use as a high- or low-speed alternative
for handpieces. In general, the capabilities of these are limited to a speed range of
3,000-30,000rpm, much slower than the air-driven units. The advantage of these units
is that they are small, very portable, less expensive, and offer more torque, or the turning
force at any given speed, versus the air-driven units.
Some disadvantages are the inability to run water through the handpieces to allow for
cooling of the dental tissues to prevent hyperthermic damage; more torque equals more
heat generated. Constant heavy workloads may cause the unit to break down, and slower
cutting speeds may make sectioning of larger teeth and other cutting procedures more
difficult to accomplish
32
Smafl AnimalDentalProcedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
CHAPTER
中
Figure 3.2 VetProim 5000 dental unit (Courtesy of the Midmark Corp.)
Some other features to consider are the availability of a foot pedal to control the on/
off and speed of the handpieces to allow hands free control. Also, the ability to use acces
sories such as a contra-angle to reduce or increase the speed capability of the handpiece
or to reverse the direction of the rotation of the working end may be very important
features for the overall usefulness of the unit' (Fig. 3.3).
Dental Handpieces
Definition
When we refer to "handpieces" we are referring to the operational part of the dental unit
that rests in the operator's hand and facilitates the use of rotational forces driven by
compressed air or other gasses to maximize the effectiveness of certain dental burs, disks,
polishing angles, and other instruments to section, change the shape or contour of tooth
or bone, and to polish or finish the final tooth structure during a procedure.
Types of Handpieces
Handpieces attach to a cord that runs from the main dental unit to the area where the
work needs to be done in the mouth.
Chapter 3: Components of the Dental Operatory33
M25
Figure 3.3 Vetroson electric motor-driven dental unit (Courtesy of Charles Rahner, Summit Hill).
As explained before there are handpieces for high-speed work over 200,000rpm and
handpieces for low-speed work at 5,000-20,000rpm. High-speed handpieces have a bur
attached at the working end for use in sectioning teeth as in a crosscut fissure bur, or a
CHAPTER 3
round bur that is useful in alveoloplasty, endodontic access, cavity preparation, and other
procedures.
Care and Use
Remember to never run a high-speed handpiece without a bur or "blank" inserted in the
chuck; this may cause the chuck to be damaged.'
Low-speed handpieces have disadvantages. They should not be used for cutting bone.
Also, their higher torque makes it less likely that they will "stall out" during the procedure
but they are going to take more time to do the job, thus creating more heat due to fric-
tion and can cause tooth, tissue or bone to heat up due to the lack of water to rinse and
cool the area.
High-speed burs do occasionally “stall" due to their lower torque forces but this pre-
vents the possibility of shattering the tooth or other bone being cut or altered. Also, the
water cooling and higher speeds prevents thermal damage to the structures.
As with all handpieces they do require some daily maintenance to ensure their longe vity
and optimum usefulness. Oil or lubricant spray especially formulated for the handpieces
must be placed in the smaller of the two holes on the bottom of the handpiece daily after
use, and then the handpieces should be ran with a "blank" or bur for several seconds to
disperse the lubricant through the handpiece. For prevention of spread of disease these
handpieces should be cleaned, lubricated, and autoclaved between every patient.' Consult
the manufacturer's directions for specific maintenance on the handpiece that you need to
maintain.
Aftachments
Contra-angles
Low-speed handpieces can facilitate the use of a contra-angle attachment to reduce or
increase the speed at which the tip rotates. This is useful when procedures such as
SmaflAnimalDentalProcedures forVeterinary Techniciansand Nurses
1M3'GS Deluxe
Figure 3.4 iM3GS Deluxe demonstrating fiber-optic handpiece (Courtesy of iM3 Inc.—"The Veterinary
Dental Company").
CHAPTER
1
endodontic preparations are to be performed or when the angulations need to be changed
to allow the practitioner to perform certain operations that may require this. Also, a
reverse in direction of rotation can be used in certain procedures to "back" out of end-
odontic access sites.
da n as m m i  i a ds, u is a
from 20,000 to 80,000, and a “step-down" angle would be the 10:1 reduction gear. You
must purchase right-angle (RA) burs, which are larger than the high-speed handpiece burs
of contra-angle is the Doriot-type and it takes another type of bur called an HP or hand-
piece bur. These are even longer and bigger in diameter than the RA burs.
Prophy angles
If you are using the low-speed handpiece to “polish" teeth at the end of a dental cleaning
procedure, you will need to attach a disposable oscillating prophy angle to the Doriot-type
handpiece by pushing it on the handpiece. Metal prophy angles are also available but do
require maintenance and in general do not oscillate; they have a circular motion, which
when in use can also grab long hairs and wrap them around the prophy angle causing
trauma to the patient as well as causing the operator to have to stop and un-wrap the hair
Fiber optics
Many high-speed handpieces are equipped with fiber-optic light sources that are very
useful in visualization of the working area while the handpiece is in use (Fig. 3.4).
Power Scalers
Introduction
Power scaling units are designed to help the practitioner perform a professional dental
cleaning by using sonic or ultrasonic forces to aid in the removal of plaque and calculus
Chapter 3: Components of the Dental Operatory35
from the dental surfaces either supra- or subgingivally. These units require electricity or
air to drive the mechanism, which shortens the working time dramatically to prevent
the patient from undergoing such a lengthy anesthetic episode that may be required
without the power scaler. Power scalers must utilize a water source to help irrigate and
cool the working tip of the instrument. Some scalers are integrated into the dental unit 
cart itself, and some are independently operating units that require their own water supply
that is pressurized by a small water tank that must be pumped by hand before use to
pressurize it.
Ultrasonic Scalers
The most commonly used scalers are ultrasonic; these are either magnetostrictive
or piezoelectric. The magnetostrictive dental insert can either use a ferromagnetic stack-
type insert or a special solid rod called a ferrite rod. These inserts when activated cause
the working tip to vibrate in a certain predictable pattern.1 When these vibrations occur,
it is caused by the magnetic field that is created around the stack in the handpiece and
this energizes the water as it flows along the tip of the handpiece, which causes the
CHAPTER
removal of plaque and calculus by the operator when moved in a pattern gently over the
 is aia are aq au se yns sn os ao sa aq o a
cleaning on the crown or supragingival surfaces.' If you wish to use the cavitation effect
of the ultrasonic to clean and destroy bacteria below the gum line onto the root surfaces,
you will need to change the tip to an approved subgingival tip and reduce the power to
prevent damage to any of the surrounding soft tissues due to heat that is generated by
the unit's tip.
It is important to note that the power control is used to adjust the distance that the
tip travels in its own specific pattern and that certain types of tips are more or less active
inq sapis uonoq pue doi aun uo aanoe iso ane sdn aleos adi-yoeis ssapis ueiian uo
not on the edges, the magnetostrictive tips are only active at the last 4mm of the tip,
whereas the ferrite rod tips are active along the whole 12mm of the tip.2
Water Flow Adjustments
 It is important to understand how your dental power scaler allows for adjustments in the
flow of water along the working tip of the scaler. “Tuning" the unit in for use involves
adjusting the water flow as well as the frequency and power intensity of the unit.
Unit Frequency
Frequency is a term that is used to indicate the number of times the tip of the scaler
completes a single pattern per second.l This movement will seem like vibrations at the
tip of the scaler. The higher range frequencies of 40,0o0 Hz may provide the most effec-
tive scaling due to faster vibrations and smaller area they are covering, but there are
variations in available frequencies based on the particular unit that you are working with.
Some units allow you to adjust the frequency so that you may use the tips safely below
the gum line without causing thermal damage to the tissues. Some units are “self-tuning"
and will adjust to the power needed for the particular area that needs to be scaled
36Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Otherwise, it is a good idea to adjust the power and only use the amount that is neces-
PowerSettings
The distance with which the working tip of a scaler insert travels is controlled by the
 power setting on the unit itself. Tuning the unit to adjust the frequency, power, and water
flow will aid in directing the water flow to the portion of the tip that requires the most
water such as the very tip if you are going below the gum line to scale and destroy bac-
teria or more to the center of the working tip if you are doing a job that required heavy
calculus removal on the crowns of the teeth or supragingivally. Also, avoid leaving the
tip on one tooth for more than 20 seconds to prevent thermal damage to the tooth itself.
Power Scaler Tip Use and Maintenance
中
Magnetostrictive units
CHAPTER
These units use either a ferromagnetic stack or a ferrite rod.
The ferromagnetic stack is a type of insert that is composed of a working end attached
to a base of strips of laminated nickel that are attached at the bottom with solder. These
inserts need to be monitored very closely for any sign of separation or fracture of the
strips of nickel, and when the attachment of solder breaks down at the end the strips
become ineffective.' The insert should be only placed in the handpiece once the handpiece
has been filled with water from the dental unit. It is placed by pushing it into the handle
and then twisting slightly to remove the insert from the handle when finished. There are
several different types of inserts to accommodate scaling of the crown as well as subgin-
gival applications.
Ferrite rod inserts are inserted in much the same way, and care should be taken to
make sure that the rod insert is not dropped because they are very fragile (Fig. 3.5).
Figure 3.5  iM3? 42-12 ultrasonic scaler unit with ferrite rod insert and universal tip (Courtesy of iM3 Inc.-
"The Veterinary Dental Company").
Chapter 3: Components of the Dental Operatory37
Piezoelectric units
Piezoelectric units have only a smaller metal tip that attaches to the handle that is to
be held by the operator. Crystals are inside the handpiece and when electricity causes
the crystals to become active, the working metal tip starts to move in a linear fashion.l
These vibrations working at a specific frequency and cooled by the continuous water
 s a s  ad g p ss a  d an  m
this unit are applied and removed by using a small wrench specific to the unit's design
(Fig. 3.6).
Tip function
The tip of the magnetostrictive unit has a figure-of-8 pattern and the ferrite rod tip causes
more of an elliptical pattern, whereas the piezoelectric tip works in a linear fashion and
is only active on the last 3 mm of the tip.2
CHAPTER 3
Figure 3.6 VetProim 1000 dental unit with integrated piezoelectric scaler (Courtesy of the Midmark Corp.)
38Smafl Animal Dental Procedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Tip care and maintenance All of the tips must have attention paid to the length of the
working end. Over time usage of these tips shortens the tip end, or if they are dropped
the tip end may be fractured off. Even a 1 mm loss of length will dramatically (by 25%)
reduce the effectiveness of the tip.l Usually a guide will be supplied with newly purchased
tips so that you may compare the tip length with the proper length that it should be for
use. When tips have lost 2mm of their length, they should be replaced due to loss of 50%
of their effectiveness.
Magnetostrictive and piezoelectric tips should be cleaned per the manufacturer's
instructions and autoclaved after every use. One disadvantage of having scalers that
require only certain inserts of a specific frequency is that they are not necessarily inter-
changeable with all types of magnetostrictive scaler models. You must purchase the fre-
quency of scaler insert that is compatible with the scaler that you are using. Examples of
the differences between a 25-kHz scaler insert and a 30-kHz insert are the length of the
stack and the number of vibrations per second that they are capable of.
Concfusion
CHAPTER
As a dental technician you must become familiar with the equipment that you have to
work with and use and maintain that equipment as it was designed to be used, keeping
the safe application of the scaler to the patients' tooth structures in mind at all times to
prevent damage from ultrasonic scalers.
Dental Tables
Introduction
A table for the patient to rest on for dental care is a required item in veterinary dentistry.
Without this surface we would not be able to perform the procedures properly. Unfortu-
nately, we cannot have our animal patients in a comfortable chair that reclines as in the
human dental working area, so veterinarians have used many different types of surfaces
over the years to accommodate our patients. We will discuss how the dental table has
evolved over the years, how ergonomics for the dental operator have taken a forefront
 in achieving a more comfortable posture for the dental technician or veterinarian, and
'ed aui rog aqet sAip, e pue aqen ciam, e susn uaamiaq sauana a
Types of Tables
The different types of tables available are either permanently fixed or mobile, with fea-
tures such as follows:
1. Dry-flat surface countertop-like table with or without a basin at working end
2.Wet, tublike table with a flat stationary surface
3. Dry sloping table with or without a basin system at the working end to catch water
and fluids
Chapter 3: Components of the Dental Operatory39
4. Wet table-freestanding with ability to lift patient from near floor level to a comfort-
able working level for operator
6.
Wet or dry freestanding lift table with integrated dental unit and compressor with
ability to add accessories
Dry tables
Dry tables can either be fixed or mobile
Fixed tables A fixed type of table may be a treatment table that has been utilized for the
purpose of dentistry. It usually will be attached to a wall, other countertop, or cabinetry.
It may have an area at the working end where the operator may place their legs under
the edge of the table while working in a sitting position.l Some fixed dry tables do not
allow a person to sit comfortably at the working end due to the lack of leg room under
the table, so the operator may have to be in a standing position to work.
Mobile or nonfixed table A nonfixed table may be a metal(stainless steel) surgical type
table on wheels or a "lift" table that may have the ability for height adjustment, so that
the veterinary professional can sit comfortably. Lift tables usually have a foot pedal or
CHAPTER
other switch to elevate or lower the table as necessary, thus not requiring the dental
 operator to lift heavy patients to tabletop height.
Wet tables
Wet dental tables have a water supply plumbed in and a tub or basin area to accommodate
the excess water and debris that accumulates when dental procedures are being per-
formed. Excess water and debris can fall with gravity into the tub or basin below the
patients' head or body and then be cleaned away easily after the procedure with the water
supply hose and spray nozzle that is integrated into the plumbing of the dental table.
 Keeping the patient clean, free of debris, and dry is important to help prevent hypothermia
due to the water cooling effects of water from the spray of the ultrasonic scaler or air/
water attachment on the dental delivery unit. Having the tub or basin under the patient
allows the operator to rinse away debris, polish paste, and blood from the patient's mouth
without soaking the patient's head and hair with water.
 If the table has a slope declining toward the working end where the patient's head will
 be positioned, this helps to drain any water and debris from the patient's oral cavity into
the basin or tub.
 Contemporary dental tables that have a basin or tub and water availability can also
have the ability to lift the patient and adjust the working height of the table to suit the
operators' needs to ensure that the operator is sitting comfortably and using a more ergo-
nomic posture to help prevent work-related injury to the back, neck, and arms (Fig. 3.7).
Recommendations
The table should be from 5 to 7ft in length, 1.5-2.5ft in width, and with a stationary
height of 36in. at the working end with a 2-in. height increase to 38in. at the tail end
Otherwise, if the height is adjustable, the operator can adjust this as necessary (Fig. 3.8)
4心
SmaflAnimalDentalProcedures forVeterinary Techniciansand Nurses
CHAPTER
Figure 3.7 Canis Majorm wet dental/treatment lift table (Courtesy of the Midmark Corp.).
Figure 3.8 Common stationary wet tub/dental table (Courtesy of Kevin Hallum, Midmark Corp.).
Care and Use
Working tables should be maintained in a clean and disinfected state. All areas should
be thoroughly removed of organic debris and disinfected with an approved disinfectant
for the surface to be cleaned. Working parts, as in the case of a mobile, lift, or wet table
should be maintained per the manufacturer's instructions to ensure a functioning table
for as long as possible.
Chapter 3: Components of the Dental Operatory41
Ergonomics and Personal Protection
Types of Hazards
 In general, in the veterinary profession, there are three types of hazards that one must be
aware of during employment.
1. Physical Hazards. These include things such as injury resulting from patient handling.
lifting, radiation exposure, noise exposure, slip or trip and fall types of accidents,
repetitive motion injuries or cumulative trauma disorders, and injury due to handling
of sharp dental instruments, needles, or other equipment.
2.
 Chemical Hazards. Exposure to harmful chemicals either through inhalation of the
chemical, skin or mucous membrane contact, or other exposures either chronic or
acute.'
Some commonly found chemical hazards in the dental operatory are the
following:
■
Anesthetic gases
■
 Chemicals to develop and fix dental X-ray film
CHAPTER
■
 Free mercury found in dental amalgams
■
 Concentrated chemical disinfectants 
■
 Acids, resins, and catalysts from dental restorative kits
■Sodium hypochlorite
3. Biological Hazards. Aerosolization of harmful bacteria when performing dental pro-
cedures and any contact of the operator to the patients’ biological matter such as
blood or saliva, or to another operator's bodily fluids in the case of injury to another
person working in the area.l
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), along with the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and the Centers for
Disease Control (CDC), provide employers and employees with guidelines to regulate
safety in the workplace through enforcement of the Hazard Communication
Standard.,2
Employer Responsibifties
Employer responsibilities include the following:
 Providing access to a comprehensive Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) fle so that
ingly if there is a chemical accident
 Providing initial and ongoing training on safety in the workplace
 Providing personal protective equipment (PPE) so that employees can wear these items
to protect themselves from potential acute or cumulative injury
 Providing a safe and maintained work area for the employee free of known physical
hazards
 Providing training, equipment manuals, and a maintenance protocol for each piece
of equipment that the employee will be required to use
42Small AnimalDental Procedures forVeterinaryTechnicians and Nurses
Employee Responsibilities
 Employees are responsible for the following:
Reading and understanding MSD sheets that are made available in the hospital
Wearing the required PPE during procedures
Knowing how to use the eyewash station
■
 Becoming familiar with any equipment that will be used and knowing the safety
 procedures with that equipment
■ Attending routine safety meetings and training
The above items are just some of the responsibilities that employers and employees both
must assume in order to collectively work toward safety in the veterinary hospital.
PPE
CHAPTER
Gloves
Gloves must be worn at all times to protect the operator from skin exposure to biological
contamination through open wounds, microabrasions, or chemical contact injury. Gloves
should be right and left specific to avoid incorrect fit causing fatigue and injury to the
small joints in the hands over time. They should be neither too tightly fitting nor too
loose. Surgical gloves that are sized by number may be the perfect choice if right- and
left-handed exam gloves are unavailable. Avoid latex gloves and powdered gloves if you
have allergies to these items.
Web Content: See 3.9W
Eye protection
Safety glasses must be worn by everyone in the dental operatory area. Particles do become
airborne and can cause eye injury or infection. Possible options include common safety
protection provided by eye loupes that provide magnification as well, or special prescrip-
tion safety glasses made for specific users.1.2,4,.$
Face masks
A mask covering the nose and mouth should be worn during all dental procedures to
 prevent inhalation of bacteria and other biological contaminants. The mask should fit well
 and not be too loose; an ill-fitting mask can allow contaminants in and also cause fogging
 of safety eyewear. Surgical masks are often used but masks that are made specifically for
respiratory protection are more effective at blocking potentially hazardous material.
Protective clothing and caps
Having a dental operatory gown or jacket and a surgical hat will protect the user from
bacterial contamination of work clothing and hair that could be carried out of the dental
area and contaminate other areas or patients.
Chapter 3: Components of the Dental Operatory43
Hearing protection
The use of high-speed handpieces, ultrasonic scalers, low-speed handpieces, model trim-
mers, vibrators, and suction units cause sufficient levels of noise that over time can cause
hearing protection during the procedures to minimize this risk.? Common earplugs will
prevent damage due to these high-decibel noises.
Dosimetry badges
These are important for ongoing monitoring of employee exposure to radiation. The
dental operator should always wear their dosimetry badge when taking dental X-rays
and should never stand near the primary beam unprotected by a lead apron and also
never hold the film or sensor in the mouth of a patient with or without lead gloves on
the operator's hands
Ergonomics
CHAPTER
The word ergonomics originates from the Greek word ergon meaning work and nomos
meaning natural laws, and was first described as the word “ergonomics" by the polish
researcher Professor Wojciech Jastrzebowski in 1857. Since then, many organizations
have been developed throughout the world to study and focus on the development of
equipment, methods, and systems with the goal of optimal performance of work through
awareness of human anatomy, physiology, and psychology to allow for safe, effective,
comfortable, and productive work to take place.124
Ergonomics as it pertains to veterinary dentistry is in the beginning stages of develop-
ment and has not really become a consistent practice. Due to this fact, the technician
should become very aware of ergonomic principles and practices and what ergonomic
considerations are in regard to choosing equipment for the dental operatory.6
Cumulative trauma or repetitive strain disorders
Repetitive motions, such as those required by veterinary dentistry, utilize the small muscles
 and joints in the hand and wrist along with the larger muscles and joints of the upper
body; shoulder, neck, or back. Over time this motion can lead to strains due to tasks
being repeated to the point of fatigue and then to muscular exhaustion,' eventually result-
ing in a chronic disorder, that if not allowed to heal, can lead to permanent changes to
those joints, nerves, vasculature, and muscles. Chronic stress disorders such as carpal
tunnel syndrome (which affects the median nerve in the wrist and hand), ulnar nerve
 entrapment at the wrist (Guyon's canal syndrome), ulnar nerve compression at the elbow
(cubital tunnel syndrome), and thoracic outlet syndrome (which is a neurovascular com-
pression affecting the shoulder, arm, and hand), along with many other chronic stress
disorders to mention a few, can be prevented.24
Often symptoms of such injuries will be similar in nature and a physician should always
be consulted if injury is suspected.? Prevention of such injury is of utmost importance due
to the nature of dentistry. Ergonomics should be considered when purchasing hand instru
mentation as well as power equipment; larger lighter handled instruments should be used
whenever possible to prevent tight gripping of small items, and using a correct neutral
44Small Animal Dental Procedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
arm, wrist, and sitting posture should be practiced and performed.2 Changing motions
or actions frequently to prevent continued stress to certain muscle groups can also help
to prevent injury.
Web Content: See 3.10W
Careful attention to the use of the correct instrument for the task and making sure the
instrument is sharp, not damaged, and held with a neutral wrist posture will reduce risk
of a disorder?
 Utilizing power instrumentation whenever possible will decrease the strain of excessive
use of hand instruments alone.?
 Placement of equipment and items most often used in the dental operatory will reduce
 the need for twisting and reaching movements further reducing strain on the body during
procedures and the use of "line of sight" lighting, where the light line is parallel to the
line of sight, such as a fber-optic or direct halogen light mounted on a headband or
magnification loupes/glasses to decrease the tilting of the head forward. Increasing our
ability to visualize the working area can greatly decrease the injuries sustained due to
improper posture, leaning over the patient and table, and raising the elbows above the
working area to accomplish tasks.78
R
Web Content: See 3.11W
CHAPTER
References
1. Holmstrom, SE, Frost Fitch, P, Eisner, ER. 2004. Veterinary Dental Techniques for the
Small Animal Practitioner, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier.
2. Bellows, J. 2004. Small Animal Dental Equipment, Materials and Techniques: A
Primer. Ames, IA: Blackwell.
3. Stepaniuk, K, Brock, N. 2008. Hypothermia and thermoregulation during anesthesia
for the dental and oral surgery patient. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 25(4):
279-283.
 4. Aller MS. 2005. Personal safety and ergonomics in the dental operatory. Journal of
Veterinary Dentistry 22(2):124-130.
5. Murphy, DC. 1998. Ergonomics and the Dental Care Worker. Washington, DC:
American Public Health Association.
 6. DeForge, DH. 2002. Physical ergonomics in veterinary dentistry. Journal of Veterinary
Dentistry 19(4):196-200.
7. Pollack-Simon, R. 2002. All the Right Moves. Tulsa, OK: Penn Well.
8. Chang, BJ. 2002. Guidelines for Selecting Ergonomically Correct Surgical Telescope
Systems. Chesterland, OH: Academy of Dental Therapeutics and Stomatology.
Anesthesia and the Dental Patient
Annie Millis, IVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Learning Objectives
This chapter will provide the reader with the knowledge required to
Facilitate a successful anesthetic event from induction to recovery
 Understand pain and its effects on the dental patient, and to implement an effective pain
management protocol
Choose a safe and effective anesthetic protocol
CHAPTER 4
Understand pain and its effects on the dental patient
Formulate and implement an effective pain management protocol
The following will be an in-depth discussion of anesthetic equipment, monitoring devices,
and pain management techniques. The reader should become familiar with this information
in order to implement the techniques into everyday practice.
Small Anirat Dentat Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, 1st edition. Edited by Jeanne R. Perrone.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
S+
46Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Introduction
Numerous marketing surveys of have shown that the number one reason pet owners
decline professional dental care is not a financial one, but because of their fear of anes-
thesia. Many patients may suffer needlessly with periodontal disease because of this fear
and the reluctance of the owner to consent to a professional dental cleaning procedure.
It is important that pet owners are educated by the veterinary team and explain that the
benefits of professional dental care and treatment far outweigh the risks of anesthesia. It
is also the role of the veterinary team to alleviate the pet owners’ fears by minimizing
anesthetic risks and becoming proficient in providing effective and safe anesthesia for the
dental patient. This is accomplished by becoming well versed in anesthetic protocols and
techniques, and through comprehensive monitoring techniques. The pain management
protocol is also an essential component in the anesthetic plan to aid in the overall success
of the dental patient's treatment and recovery. By encompassing all pain pathways, using
 preemptive pain management, and addressing postoperative pain, the veterinary team can 
"cover all the bases" of the dental patient's pain relief.
Anesthesia for the Dental Patient
The keys to success of any anesthetic event lie in the knowledge and preparedness of the
veterinary team, the reliability of the anesthetic equipment, and diligent monitoring
 throughout the entire event. The following sections will discuss anesthetic protocols avail.
able to veterinary professionals, and the anesthetic equipment required to maintain and
CHAPTER
monitor a safe and effective anesthetic plane.
PresurgicaI Assessment
Before beginning any anesthetic procedure, the veterinary team must evaluate and antici-
 pate the needs of the patient based on a variety of criteria that includes, but is not limited
to, age, breed, weight, procedure being performed, and any physiological conditions
 e    e a d  d   s
 preanesthetic diagnostic workup should be performed prior to any anesthetic procedure.
The most common tests in a preanesthetic workup include a complete blood count to
rule out any anemias and bacterial or viral infections. A full chemistry panel, electrolyte
panel, and urinalysis should also be performed. These tests can indicate normal or abnor-
mal function of the major organs. An electrocardiogram (ECG) prior to anesthesia is
important to rule out any abnormal arrhythmias. Chest radiographs may be recom-
mended as an additional preanesthetic screening test for senior patients and those oral
masses suspect of neoplasia. For any patient where there is a suspicion of cardiac disease
(coughing, prolonged capillary refill time, murmur, pulse deficits), a cardiac workup is
indicated before initiating dental procedures.
Some anesthetic protocols can be detrimental to a patient with early kidney or liver
disease or a patient with cardiac abnormalities. The anesthetic protocol should be tailored
to the patient based on the previous criteria and all preanesthetic diagnostic data. A
thorough preanesthetic evaluation is a vital first step in reducing the risk of anesthesia
Chapter 4: Anesthesia and the DentalPatient47
for the dental patient. In this regard, fractious pets who present to veterinary hospitals
require special consideration.
Premedicants
The premedication is important to the anesthetic regimen for several reasons. The major-
ity of veterinary patients are in a heightened state of fear after being admitted into the
hospital for a dental procedure. A sedative, because of its calming effect, reduces their
 stress level and facilitates the preoperative preparation of the patient. During the proce-
dure, an opioid premedication allows the anesthetist to use a lower rate of inhalant
anesthesia due to its analgesic properties. This will be discussed more thoroughly later in
this chapter. There are many premedication drug combinations available to the veterinary
anesthetist. The key is deciding which regimen to choose for a particular patient. As
previously stated, protocols should be chosen based on the patient's information (age,
breed, etc.), the data gathered during the preoperative workup, the physical exam, and
when choosing the drug protocol. It is important to note that anesthesia in the dental
patient, in many instances, will involve anesthesia for the geriatric patient as well, since
it can bring about physiological changes in the patient that must be considered before
the anesthetic procedure (Table 4.1).
Induction Agents and Inhalants
As with premedications, there are also numerous choices in induction agents, and should
CHAPTER
d an a oi si aru r u sau sd a u pas aa su a
to a point of sedation in which an endotracheal tube may be placed. This will then facili-
tate the use of an inhalant anesthetic in order to continue and maintain a safe anesthetic
plane. A ketamine and diazepam combination is a reliable and fairly safe protocol;
however, propofol is becoming more widely used for its minimal absorption by the major
organs and its short recovery time. These induction agents should be administered care-
fully and only “to effect" in order to insert an endotracheal tube. Modern inhalants
(including isoflurane and sevoflurane) are preferred because of their low solubility. They
permit a rapid induction and recovery, as well as allowing the anesthetic plane to be
adjusted as needed. They do not depend on metabolism to any significant degree for
removal from the body.
Anesthetic Equipment
Modern anesthetic machines and breathing systems control the delivery of inhalant anes-
thetics and oxygen and eliminate waste gases from the environment of the operating
room. The anesthetic machine is equipped with a vaporizer to deliver a mixture of inhal-
ant anesthetic and oxygen to the patient at a controlld rate (Fig. 4.1). The anesthetic
machine should be assessed at the beginning of the day before any anesthetic procedures
All parts of the machine should be closely examined for any defects; the oxygen and
Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 4.1Table of premedication protocols
Dose If Used in 
Sna
Class of Drug
Combination
Advantages
Disadvantages
Acepromazine
 Phenothiazine
Dog: 0.005-
Excellent sedation 
No analgesic effects
0.060 mg/kg
when used in 
Cat: 0.04-
combination with 
0.10mg/kg
 an opioid 
 Butorphanol
Opioid
Dog: 0.1-0.4 mg/kg
 Analgesic
Very short duration
Cat: 0.1-0.4mg/kg
properties
of analgesic effects 
Morphine
Reversible
Dog: 0.5-1 mg/kg 
 Potent analgesic
Hypersensitivity in
opioid 
Cat: 0.5-1 mg/kg
properties
cats; can cause
bradycardia and
respiratory depression
Hydromophone 
Reversible
Dog: 0.10-
 Potent analgesic
Can cause
opioid 
0.20mg/kg
properties
bradycardia and
Cat: 0.10-
respiratory depression
0.20mg/kg
Oxymorphone
Reversible
Dog: 0.05-
 Potent analgesic
Can cause
opioid
0.10mg/kg
properties
bradycardia and
Cat: 0.05-
respiratory
0.10mg/kg
depression, noise
sensitivity
Fentanyl
Reversible
Dog: 0.005-
Potent analgesic
Can cause
opioid
0.010mg/kg
properties
bradycardia and
Cat: 0.005-
respiratory depression
APTER
0.10mg/kg
Medetomidine
Alpha-2
Dog: 0.002-
Potent analgesic
Can cause
T
agonist
0.40mg/kg
properties,
bradycardia
产
Cat: 0.002-
reversible
0.40mg/kg
Buprenorphine
Synthetic
Dog: 0.101
Undesirable
Limited reversibility
opiate
0.40mg/kg
effects are rare
Cat: 0.10-
0.40mg/kg
anesthetic inhalant levels should be checked; and the absorbent should be changed if
needed. The circle and anesthetic machine should be tested for leaks. This is accomplished
with the pop-off valve closed and the Y-piece occluded. The system is then filled with O2
and the O, flow is set at 5L/min. When the system pressure reaches 20cm of HzO, the
 O flow is gradually decreased until the pressure no longer rises. Any leak should be
negligible.2
There are two primary breathing systems used in veterinary medicine, rebreathing or
"closed" and nonrebreathing or “semiclosed." The rebreathing system or circle system is
referred to as a closed system because all or part of the expired gases is recirculated to
the patient. This system is preferred for patients of average size and weight. The inspira-
tory and expiratory rebreathing tubes are connected by a Y-piece that is then connected
Chapter 4: Anesthesia and the Dental Patient49
Figure 4.1 Anesthetic machine with vaporizer.
CHAPTER 4
Figure 4.2 Rebreathing tubes and rebreathing bags.
to the endotracheal tube. The Universal F rebreathing circuit is a tube within a tube and
can be used in place of the traditional Y-piece and breathing tubes? (Fig. 4.2). Pediatric
rebreathing tubes should be used for animals weighing 10-15 lb. A rebreathing bag is
used to allow for the patient's tidal volume and minimum volume during ventilation. The
rebreathing bag should be three to five times the tidal volume (tidal volume is calculated
at 10-15 mL/kg). The pop-off or adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) valve is an essential
safety feature of a circle system. It vents excess gas and prevents the development of
excessive pressure.? This valve should remain open at all times, except when manually
ventilating the patient. A scavenger system is attached to the exit portal of the pop-off
valve and eliminates waste gases from the environment. The non-rebreathing system is
50Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 4.3 Bain nonrebreathing system.
preferred for pediatric patients and those animals under 10lb. They induce less resistance
to breathing and contain slightly less mechanical dead space than circle systems. Less
inspiratory effort is required than with circle systems ² (Fig. 4.3).
Before beginning the induction phase, all necessary equipment should be prepared.
Endotracheal tubes of various sizes should be available at the time of induction {Online
®
Figure 4.1). Generally, tubes are chosen as follows: the size expected to be used, one size
larger and one size smaller. The cuffs are inflated and checked for leaks before induction.
The rebreathing tubes and rebreathing bag of correct sizes should be attached to the
anesthetic machine. After intubation, the cuff is inflated only to the point where a seal
will allow bagging at no more than 20 cm of water. An overinflated cuff can cause trauma
to the delicate tissues of the trachea or even tracheal rupture. Once the patient is attached
CHAPTER
to the anesthetic machine, the oxygen flow rate and the anesthetic vaporizer settings
are adjusted to maintenance levels. In order to achieve the correct amount of inflation of
the endotracheal cuff, close the pop-off valve; pressurize the system by squeezing the
rebreathing bag. Add or remove air until you hear the gas leak at 15-20 cm of water. At
this point, a patient can be maintained for a varied length of time. All monitoring equip-
ment should be attached to the patient and baseline readings should be taken to begin
the monitoring process.
Monitoring Anesthesia and Common Complications
Monitoring means continued measurement of physiological variables over time.? Patients
should be monitored during the entire anesthetic procedure up to and including part of
the recovery phase. There are many multiparameter machines available (Fig. 4.4). Keep
in mind that these machines should never be used as a substitute for hands-on human
involvement in the monitoring process. An anesthetic record should be used for each
patient, with values being recorded at least every 5-10 minutes until the patient is recov-
ered from anesthesia. Once the procedure is completed, the anesthetic record should be
placed in the patient's file and reviewed before the next anesthetic procedure. In addition
to recording parameter data, the anesthetic record should also include the anesthetic
protocol used for that particular patient. The anesthetic record essentially provides an
accurate “picture" of how the patient is responding to the anesthesia. Any subtle changes
Chapter 4:Anesthesia and the Dental Patient51
60
9820
20
（95）
14 1 1721
98.6100.4
2009-00-1821:13
Figure 4.4 Multiparameter monitor (Courtesy of Jamie Renner, Midmark Animal Health).
from one reading to the next could indicate that the patient is either “too light" or “too
deep" with regard to the anesthetic plane. This monitoring process also alerts the anes-
thetist of any abnormal vital signs, which can then be addressed early to avoid potential
complications while the patient is under anesthesia. Preventing, as well as addressing
complications, decreases the anesthetic risk and increases the chance for a favorable
outcome.
 Parameters that are most commonly monitored are oxygen saturation (pulse oximetry),
respiration, EKG and heart rate, blood pressure, CO, levels (capnograph), and body
CHAPTER 4
temperature. In addition, more invasive monitoring parameters may include blood gas
analysis and central venous pressure.
Puise Oximetry
Pulse oximetry measures the arterial oxyhemoglobin saturation of the patient. This allows
the anesthetist to determine if the patient is receiving enough oxygen for healthy perfusion
on an uo eid si aqod an 'sd ps is un 'sss  sn go
However, for dental patients, this can be cumbersome when working in the oral cavity.
Alternative locations include the pinna, prepuce, vulva, toe, tail, or metacarpus. Oxygen
saturation should be maintained between 98% and 100%, particularly if the animal is
breathing 100% oxygen. Saturation readings of 90% or less indicate marked desatura-
tion, hypovolemia, shock, or anemia.d It is important to determine the cause of desatura-
tion in order to correct the problem. In many instances, the probe may have simply
become dislodged after repositioning of the patient. Other causes can include low pressure
in the oxygen supply or tank, low respirations, or poor ventilation of the patient.
Respiratory Monitor
Respiratory failure can lead directly to cardiovascular failure. For this reason, respiratory
rate is one of the most important parameters in the monitoring protocol. Apnea monitors
52Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
SAFE
Figure 4.5  Apnea monitor.
are a crucial piece of equipment in alerting the anesthetist of increased, or more impor
tantly, decreased respirations (Fig. 4.5). The monitor is placed between the rebreathing
tubes and the endotracheal tube and emits an audible beep each time the animal takes a
breath. An alarm of continuous beeping sounds when there is an excessive amount of
time in between breaths. Changes in respiratory rate should be addressed to determine
the cause. Increased respiratory rate could be due to a “light" anesthetic plane in which
  a san asp  d  ap a adxa s e a
a plane of anesthesia that is too “deep" and should be corrected. Apnea can occur imme-
diately following induction. The patient should be given several breaths of oxygen imme-
diately following induction. Breathing rates in normal dogs and cats vary between 10 and
ECG
CHAPTER
Continuous monitoring of the ECG pattern allows early recognition of electrical changes
associated with disorders of rate, rhythm, and conduction. A decreased heart rate initially
can be due to the premedications and induction, but should stabilize once the procedure
is started. Bradycardia is considered to require definitive therapy when it causes an exces-
sive decrease in cardiac output; that is, when heart rate decreases below 50-60bpm in
an animal that has an adequate circulating volume.? Sinus tachycardia (increased heart
rate) is herein defined as a heart rate above 160 bpm in the dog and 180 bpm in the cat.
Causes of increased heart rate are underlying complications such as hypoxia, hypercapnia,
or hyperthermia.
Blood Pressure
Hypotension is one of the most common complications of anesthesia. Unfortunately,
blood pressure monitoring is often lacking in many veterinary practices. Blood pressure
is influenced by the depth of anesthesia, blood volume, strength of cardiac contraction,
systemic vascular resistance, and shock. The minimum mean arterial pressure (MAP)
should not drop below 60 mmHg (systolic pressure below 80-90 mmHg) in order for vital
organs to receive adequate perfusion.? Administering intravenous (IV) fluids to every
patient throughout anesthesia may stabilize and maintain the blood pressure. Increasing
the rate of administration of IV fluids and/or decreasing the depth of anesthesia
may alleviate hypotension. Adding a colloid such as hetastarch and/or dopamine or
Chapter 4: Anesthesia and the Dental Patient 53
dobutamine to the drip may be warranted in more severe or refractory hypotension. The
correct cuff size should be used to obtain accurate measurements. The cuff width should
be 40% of the limb circumference in a dog and 30%-40% in a cat.
Capnograph
Capnography measures the end tidal CO, level in the anesthetic patient. End tidal CO2
is a graphic display of carbon dioxide pressure over time that allows assessment of ven-
tilation, breathing circuit function, and ventilation-perfusion function in the lungs. Respi-
 ratory responses to even subtle changes in CO levels in blood are extremely rapid because
the chemoreceptors are much more sensitive to changes in CO than to changes in O2.
 For this reason, capnography alerts the anesthetist much sooner to respiratory complica-
tions than pulse oximetry. Some common problems with ventilation can include improper
placement of the endotracheal tube, partial or full obstruction, or apnea. The end tidal
CO, should be between 35 and 45 mmHg.
BodyTemperature
A dental procedure can last several minutes to several hours. Hypothermia can be a
common occurrence with longer dental procedures, especially in cats and smaller breeds
of dogs. Prolonged hypothermia can cause low respirations, bradycardia, decreased blood
pressure, and a slow recovery. Consequently, these patients can become compromised
without supportive care during the procedure or during the recovery period. Unfortu-
nately, maintaining body temperature is often overlooked and can be the cause of many
unnecessary anesthetic deaths. The patient's body temperature should be monitored with
CHAPTER 4
a temperature probe or a simple thermometer, and controlled using a thermoregulatory
system. There are many options to choose from to maintain body temperature including
hot water blankets to heated air blankets (Fig. 4.6). The most effective method is one
that is in contact or surrounds a good portion of the patient's body surface. A heated
cage or incubator for smaller patients can be used as a recovery chamber to facilitate a
 smoother and shorter recovery period. Nonveterinary electric heating pads should be
avoided as these may cause burn injuries to the patient. IV fluid line warmers are also
available and are extremely helpful in maintaining the patient's body temperature.
Although there exists the possibility of unexplained or "fluke" reactions to anesthesia
in a small percentage of cases, the majority of anesthetic emergencies arise from one or
more of the following: inappropriate administration of anesthetic agents; poor monitoring
or absence thereof; poor anesthetic equipment; lack of supportive therapy; or lack of
timely intervention when complications do occur. Detecting complications early on and
reacting quickly can increase the probability for a successful anesthetic event.
Pain Management in the Dental Patient
In veterinary dentistry, even noninvasive procedures can cause some degree of pain, with
more invasive procedures being extremely painful. Although detrimental to any patient,
  pdo a m sd r  rd ed e si 
tion. In patients with marginal cardiac, renal, or hepatic function, the stress of pain often
54Smafl Animal Dental Procedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 4.6 Heated air blanket heat source.
results in decompensation during the procedure, during recovery, or in the days immedi-
ately after the procedure. For this reason, effectively managing pain is vital to the
CHAPTER
 patient's successful recovery. It is the role of the veterinary team to anticipate the needs
of the patient and what type of pain relief the animal may need based on the procedure
being performed. In order to be proficient in pain management, it is important to frst
understand how pain is received and transmitted.
Understanding the Pain Pathways
 Pain is defined as a perception of noxious stimuli. Nociception is the processing of this
Ad a ue sian ud uq aui aq ud jo udad e ys snu
pathways before being perceived by the brain. In the dental patient, pain is introduced
at the peripheral site, the oral cavity. This is known as transduction. After transduction,
the painful stimulus is picked up by the peripheral nerves, which then carries it to the
spinal cord. This is known as transmission. Finally, the spinal cord then transfers the pain
(a process known as modulation) to the brain resulting in the perception of pain by the
 patient.° It is by interrupting the pain response along multiple pathways that the most
effective pain management is achieved.
The Multimodal Approach to Pain
The use of two or more analgesics in combination to control pain is known as a multi-
modal approach to managing pain. This protocol is becoming widely recognized and
Chapter 4: Anesthesia and the Dental Patient55
utilized more frequently than in the past. There are a wide variety of parenteral analgesics
that can be used to control pain along a specific pathway before, during, and after the
dental procedure. Local anesthetics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
opioids, and corticosteroids are used to control pain at the point of transduction.
Local anesthetics and alpha-2 agonists are used at the point of transmission. Local
anesthetics, opioids, and alpha-2 agonists are used with regard to modulation, and inhal-
ant anesthetics at the point of perception. The timing of the use of these drugs is also
a critical component to the pain management protocol. Preemptive, as well as, intra-
operative and postoperative, pain management has been found to be the most effica-
cious. The goal of preemptive analgesia is to provide therapeutic intervention prior to a
   n dd o   d  ada 
(CNS) sensitization to the noxious stimulus.6 Drugs that are given before the painful
i  d re pn si as isn  an a  a s
duced. By providing preemptive analgesia, postoperative pain is greatly reduced and much
easier to control. This preemptive pain management begins with the premedicant seda-
 tion, usually an opioid or alpha-2 antagonist that interrupts pain at the site of modulation
(spinal cord). For extremely painful dental procedures such as full-mouth extractions,
mandibulectomy, or maxillctomy, a constant rate infusion started preoperatively and
continued throughout and after the procedure can facilitate a smooth and pain-free
recovery for the patient. A widely used combination for constant rate infusion includes
an opioid (morphine at a rate of 0.12-0.36 mg/kg/h), lidocaine at a rate of 0.6-1.5 mg/
kg/h, and ketamine at a rate of 0.12-1.2 mg/kg/h. Postoperatively, additional opioids and
injectable NSAIDs can be administered to provide continued pain control following a
procedure.
Regionaf Nerve Blocks
CHAPTER
The regional nerve block is an extremely useful tool and should be part of the dental pain
   d o  s a n d   n
block stops the transmission of pain at the site of injury, preventing the painful stimulus
from ever reaching the brain stem and, ultimately, the cerebral cortex. Local and regional
 anesthetics can enhance the effectiveness of the premedication and allows for a lower
concentration of inhalant anesthetic needed to maintain a comfortable anesthetic plane.
The block should be administered a few minutes before the painful procedure is begun
for optimum effectiveness. Local or regional blocks are relatively simple to master with
training and practice in a hands-on laboratory setting. Many technicians are able to
perform this task after completing a training program. Regional blocks should be con-
sidered for many different oral procedures including extraction, root canal therapy, oral
mass removal, maxillectomy, or mandibulectomy, and even for those advanced periodon-
tal cases when aggressive open or closed root planing is performed. The drug of choice
is usually lidocaine and bupivicaine, or bupivicaine alone. Each of these drugs has advan-
tages and disadvantages. Lidocaine has a short onset of action, but a very short duration
lasting only 1-2 hours. Bupivicaine can last up to 6-10 hours, but has a delayed onset
of action. These limitations can be minimized or eliminated by using them in combina-
tion.8 The total dose of bupivicaine should not exceed 2mg/kg, with lidocaine not to
exceed 5mg/kg. The infused volume for each site is 0.25-1.0mL depending on the size
of the patient.* Lidocaine with epinephrine can be used as well to constrict blood vessels
to aid in homeostasis, but should be avoided in patients with underlying heart issues. A
56Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
25-gauge or 27-gauge needle on a 1-cc syringe is used to inject and deliver the drug into
or near the foramen.
Infraorbital block
 This foramen can be palpated through the buccal mucosa dorsal to the maxillary third
 premolar. This block provides analgesia from the maxillary third premolar to the incisors
and the associated soft tissues. Holding the syringe parallel to the palate, the needle is
inserted into the canal with bevel up. The syringe is aspirated to avoid injecting into a
blood vessel. The syringe is rotated until the bevel is facing down and aspiration is per-
formed again before injecting slowly into the canal. Digital pressure is held over the site
for 30-60 seconds to "hold" the drug in place to achieve the maximum effectiveness of
the block.8
Maxillary nerve block
This block is also referred to as the caudal infraorbital nerve block. It affects the entire
ipsilateral maxillary teeth and the associated soft tissues. The foramen is located dorsal
to the last maxillary molar. The needle is inserted vertically just caudal to the last molar
with the bevel facing rostral or toward the nose of the patient. Aspiration is performed
before injecting slowly near the foramen. Note that this nerve block has the potential to
cause ocular trauma.8
Mandibular alveolar nerve block
The foramen is located on the lingual surface of the mandible, dorsal to the caudal ventral
CHAPTER
mandibular notch. This block provides analgesia to all the ipsilateral teeth and associated
soft tissues and can be performed either intraorally or extraorally. Intraorally in the dog.
the foramen is palpated on the lingual surface about halfway between the third molar
and the angular process. In the cat, it is located halfway between the first molar and the
angular process. Extraorally, the injection site is located on the lingual side of the man-
dible. The needle is inserted vertically at the mandibular notch on the lingual side of the
mandible.8
Middle mental nerve block
There are three foramina located on the rostral portion of the mandible. The middle
foramen is used as it is the largest of the foramina. It is located ventral to the mesial root
of the second premolar and affects all teeth and soft tissue rostral to the injection site.
The needle is inserted parallel to the mandible at the base of the mandibular frenulum.
The drug is delivered adjacent to the foramen. Digital pressure is applied for 30-60
seconds.
LocalNerveBlock
A local nerve block provides analgesia only for a limited area. The drug is infused
into the periodontal space or gingiva surrounding a tooth. This technique is used primar
ily for extraction of incisors or for small oral mass removal. It is important to mention
Chapter 4:Anesthesia and the Dental Patient57
that these agents become ineffective when used in inflamed tissue due to changes in
pH levels.8
Strategies for Home Pain Management
Once the patient is discharged, continued pain management is not only the best care for
the patient; it also increases the possibility of owners consenting to future procedures if
their pet is kept pain free at home. There are a myriad of home care strategies and drug
 protocols for dental patients. Choosing the correct protocol should be based on whether
mild, moderate, or severe pain is anticipated based on the procedure performed. The
physiological condition of the patient should also be taken into consideration. For moder-
ate or severe pain, a multimodal approach should be employed. For example, an opioid
given in conjunction with an NSAID can be a very effective combination. In dogs, the
most common drugs used are meloxicam (0.2mg/kg initially, then 0.1 mg/kg once daily)
or carprofen (0.5 mg/kg twice daily), and tramadol (1-4mg/kg two to three times daily)
In cats, buprenorphine sublingually (0.1 mg/kg two to three times daily) is commonly
used. In more severe cases, other drugs used may include gabapentin(3-5 mg/kg twice
daily) used primarily in patients suffering from chronic or neuropathic pain, but it has
been shown to provide effective analgesia in more severe dental cases. Liquid medications
tend to be easier for an owner to administer as opposed to pills or capsules, especially if
extensive dental work was performed. A reputable compounding pharmacy can be useful
in formulating liquid medications when needed. The duration of administration of these
o a p- o - e apu sond  d is q a u s
pain relief.
CHAPTER
References
1. Peak, M. 2008. Marketing veterinary dentistry: creating value. In FVMA
Convention.
2. Hartsfield, S, Paddleford, R. 1999. Manual of Small Animal Anesthesia, 2nd ed., edited
by Paddleford, R. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
 3. Stepaniuk, K, Brock, N. 2008. Anesthesia monitoring in the dental and oral surgery
patient. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 25(2):143-149.
4. Bellows, J. 2004. Small Animal Dental Equipment, Materials and Techniques, 1st ed.,
edited by Albright, N. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
5. Holmstrom, S. 2000. Veterinary Dentistry for the Technician and Office Staff, 1st ed.,
edited by Holmstrom, S. Philadelphia: Elsevier Health Sciences.
6. Ko, J. 2008. New pain management techniques. The NAVTA Journal Spring:35-39.
dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 23(1):58.
 8. Beckman, B. 2007. Regional nerve blocks key to delivering quality dental care. DVM
Newsmagazine, September.
The Dental (
Cleaning
Julie McMahon, LVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Learning Objectives
In this chapter, you will be given the information needed to perform a complete
 prophylaxis. This will include the following:
The instruments needed and their uses
Dental records, their types and styles, and the pro and cons of each
The preparations for a procedure to assure you have everything necessary to complete it
in a timely and safe manner
 The oral exam and charting
Cleaning the teeth with mechanical instruments, hand instruments, and polishing
Patient recovery and preparation for release to the owners, which will include the home
care and need for follow-up treatment
 Equipment and instrument care
CHAPTER :
Small Anirat Dentat Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, 1st edition. Edited by Jeanne R. Perrone.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
59
60Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Introduction
Dental cleaning or prophylaxis is often only one step in a larger dental procedure. A
dental prophylaxis is defined as a procedure that includes oral hygiene care, as well as
techniques to prevent disease and remove plaque and calculus from the teeth above and
beneath the gum line before periodontitis has occurred.l The goal is to aid in the preven-
tion and control of gingival and periodontal infections and to create an environment
where tissues can return to health. A prophylaxis may also be done in preparation for
another dental procedure such as restorations, prosthodontics, orthodontics, and oral
surgery.2 A patient coming in for a prophylaxis often ends up needing periodontal therapy
 and/or oral surgery. Performing and assisting with dental procedures can be a rewarding
aspect of a technician's career. We are able to be an active part of the procedure and make
a difference in the animal's long-term health. The veterinary technician is often relied on
to perform the prophylaxis and related tasks such as client education and going over
home care instruction. The technician also aids in the documentation of oral pathology
 and takes dental radiographs. This allows the veterinarian to form a treatment plan that
is best for the patient.
Dental procedures should be done in a separate room. This is to reduce contamination
of the rest of the hospital from bacterial aerosolization. You also need good lighting
and ventilation. There are other ergonomic considerations. All equipment and instruments
should be within reach. You should have good posture and be seated while working
(Fig. 5.1).
Consider patient protection as well. Cuffed endotracheal tubes are a necessity to
 protect the patient from aerosolization and asphyxiation. A pharyngeal gauze pack may
be used to minimize fluid pooling and minimize the risk of debris accumulating around
the endotracheal tube. If a pack is used, make sure that there is a tie attached to the pack
to assure that you remember to remove it. The pack also needs to be changed frequently.
CHAPTER
Figure 5.1  Dental procedures should be done in a separate room (Courtesy of John Koehm, DVM, FAVD)
Chapter 5:The Dental Cleaning61
Patients should be positioned for adequate drainage, with the head positioned lower in
relation to the body. Although the oral cavity is not sterile, each patient requires clean,
sterile instruments.
Common Instrumentation for the Dental Cleaning
There are various instruments used in dental cleaning. In this section, we will cover the
use of calculus removal forceps, power scalers, hand instruments, explorers, periodontal
probes, and polishing instruments. Power instruments, such as sonic and ultrasonic
scalers, use rapid energy vibrations to fracture calculus from a tooth surface as well as
clean periodontal pockets as needed.? Hand instruments are used for fine-tuning after
power scaling
Calculus RemovafForceps
Calculus removal forceps are used for removal of large deposits of calculus from the
tooth surface at the beginning of a procedure. This is a very powerful instrument and
should be used with great care as you can inadvertently damage a tooth or surrounding
soft tissues. The forceps are similar in design to extraction forceps except that one side
of the working end has a straight tip and the other has a curved tip to help engage the
margin of the calculus near the gingival margin. To use the forceps, grasp the handle and
place the straight end behind the tooth and the curved end at the margin of the calculus
just below the gingiva. Gently squeeze the handle and pull down at the crown of tooth.
This will remove the very large thick pieces of calculus. It should not be used to remove
smaller pieces.
Power instruments
Sonic scalers are driven by compressed air and the tip oscillates at a sonic frequency.
Ultrasonic scalers are more commonly used and are driven by a micromotor with a tip
that oscillates at an ultrasonic frequency. Each scaler operates differently and has various
tips and inserts to perform scaling (Fig. 5.2). (See Chapter 3 for further details.)
Rotary scalers are best to avoid because they are known to cause pain and significant
CHAPTER
enamel damage. Rotoburs fit in a high-speed handpiece (HSHP) to remove the calculus.
This is considered an obsolete method of calculus removal and is not recommended.
Instruments for the oral exam
When performing an oral exam, there are a few instruments needed. This includes a
periodontal probe, explorer, and a dental mirror.
Periodontal probe. The periodontal probe is used to measure the gingival sulcus, as well
as periodontal pocket depth; determine gingival inflammation, furcation exposure, and
tooth mobility; and measure the size of oral lesions. They are a round or flat instrument
with a graduated blunt end used for measurement. They come in various lengths with
millimeters marked in on them. Examples are round (#14 Williams B) and flat
(Goldman-Fox)
Web Content: See 7.2W Supplemental "Stages of Periodontal Disease"
62Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 5.2 Ultrasonic dental scaler (Courtesy of John Koehm, DVM, FAVD).
Dental explorer. The explorer is a sharp-ended instrument that is straight or curved. It
is used to check for caries, enamel or dentin defects, fractures, tooth resorption, and
subgingival calculus. Examples are a straight #6 and the more common shepherd's hook.
 They commonly come double ended with an explorer on one end and a periodontal probe
on the other.
Web Content: See 7.2W Supplemental *Stages of Periodontal Disease*
Dental mirror. Dental mirrors are used to better visualize palatal, lingual, and distal
molar surfaces. They also reflect light onto surfaces and retract soft tissue. There are small
and large circular mirrors.
Dental polishing. Dental polishing removes plaque and smooths enamel surfaces after
scaling. It is done with a slow-speed handpiece (SSHP), a prophy angle, prophy cup, and
polish. There is air polishing that is similar to sandblasting. It uses bicarbonate of soda
and you must protect oral tissues because it can cause significant damage.?
CHAPTER
Instruments for the dental cleaning
There are two main types of hand instruments needed for the dental cleaning. First is the
scaler, which is used for supragingival scaling. Second is the curette, which is used for both
supra- and subgingival scaling. Both scalers and curettes require frequent sharpening.
Hand scalers. Hand scalers are for supragingival scaling only.7 Generally, scalers are
sturdier and should be used more for general calculus removal than a curette. The cross
section of a scaler is triangular and has two cutting edges. The sharp working tip can
cause trauma to the gingiva. Common types of dental scalers are the sickle scaler (curved)
and the Jacquette scaler (straight).
Hand curettes. Hand curettes are primarily for the removal of subgingival calculus, but
they can also be used supragingivally. They are more slender than a scaler and have a
rounded back and tip.
Chapter 5: The Dental Cleaning63
Figure 5.3 Hand scalers (left) are for supragingival scaling only. Curettes (right) are for the removal of
subgingival calculus as well as supragingival calculus (Courtesy of John Koehm, DvM, FAVD).
CHAPTER
Curettes can be used supragingivally and subgingivally; however, they are considered
to be more delicate than a scaler and should not be used as one. This usage will age your
instrument quickly. The curette has a rounded tip or toe, and the cross section of it is a
half-moon shape. This design is more forgiving on the gingival tissues. There are two
main types. First is the universal curette, which can be used almost anywhere in the
mouth. Second is the Gracey curette, which has only one cutting edge and is area specific
(Fig. 5.3).
Powerequipment
A micromotor is used for polishing and can be used for tooth sectioning for extraction.
The main problem is the absence of water, which requires an external source, to prevent
thermal damage. Some micromotors do not have high enough revolutions per minute
(rpm) for sectioning. Compressed air units have an HSHP with water coolant, an SSPH
64Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
without water, and an air/water syringe. These can have satellite compressors or be all
in one. This is ideal for everyday use. (See Chapter 3 for further details.)
The Dental Record
As part of the patient's complete record, the dental record is a legal document and is an
essential part of a dental procedure. It is utilized to document information about the
patient, pathology, and procedure. These records can be in many different forms but
all should include the following information with the anatomical chart: the client infor-
mation, patient information, complaint, medical history, dental history, exam findings,
radiographic interpretation, treatment plan, consent for treatment, documentation of
treatment, prognosis, and follow-up care recommendations. There should also be a docu-
mentation of client discussions and consultations from other professionals. There are
several different types and styles of dental charts available for you to choose. There
are sticker, paper, and computerized charts. The record may be a single page or several
pages depending on the use of other documents such as patient release forms, separate
anesthesia monitoring sheets, or other documents that might complement the dental
record.
Dental stickers are good when complemented with the patient's records; however, they
are self-limiting because of their size. This makes it difficult to fit the pathology, plan,
treatment, or other documentation in the available space. Depending on the style of the
label, the teeth will be laid out either with a buccal, occlusal, and lingual view or just an
open-mouth occlusal view.
Paper charts are typically full 8.5 × 11-in. sheet of paper with room on the front and
back for complete documentation of the procedure. The front of the document allows
for the overall exam of head and oral cavity including facial symmetry, swellings, occlusal
evaluation, skull type, and soft tissue exam. You can also document overall plaque, cal-
culus, gingivitis, and other tooth abnormalities. The back includes an anatomical chart
d    o          
treatments performed, and additional notes.
Computerized charts are newer and in many systems a work in progress. There are
journal tablet systems that allow a copy of a paper chart to be presented on the computer.
It can be edited with a pen on the computer, just as on paper. It then can be saved as a
ER
 document attached to the patient's record. This allows for the diversity of a paper chart
CHAPTI
with computerized storage in a paperless setting. This also allows for the patient's infor-
mation to be imported to the chart from your management software. It allows for draw-
ings and shapes to be inserted in different colors to more clearly document pathology.
There are additional pages at the end of the document for additional notes. Other systems
have charts that are attached to practice management software. These also allow for
drawing and shape placement for charting but do not allow the freedom and ease of
charting as a paper chart or tablet does. (See Appendices 2 and 3 for sample canine and
feline dental charts.)
When charting the mouth, you use a combination of abbreviations, marks, drawings,
and written explanations to thoroughly document the pathology. There are a myriad of
abbreviations and terminology that are available to aid in charting. Much of the anatomi-
cal and directional terminology that is necessary for charting is covered in Chapter 1.
A current and complete list of abbreviations can be found at the American College of
Chapter 5:The Dental Cleaning65
Table 5.1
Common abbreviations used by veterinary technicians
Diagnostic
Diagnostic
AB
Abrasion
RTR
Retained root
SN
 Supernumerary tooth
AT
 Attrition 
Canine
TR 1-5
Tooth resorption
C
CA
Caries
CI
Calculus index
Treatment
 Enamel
E/D
Enamel defect
B/1
 Biopsy incisional
F 1-3
 Furcation exposure 
B/E
Biopsy excisional
GTR
Guided tissue regeneration
Fx
Fracture
HD
Gingival hyperplasia 
GV
Gingivectomy
PRO
Prophylaxis
1D
Gingivitis index
GR
Gingival recession 
R
Restoration
RC
 Root canal therapy
Incisor
MAL
Malocclusion
RPC
Root plane closed
M 1-3
Mobility
RPO
Root plane open
OM
Oral mass
S
Surgery
PE
 Pulp exposure
X
Simple extraction
PM
Premolar
XS
Extraction with sectioning of tooth
Rad
Radiograph
XSS
Surgical extraction
RD
Retained deciduous tooth
CHAPTER :
Veterinary Dentistry website (www.avdc.org/abbreviations.pdf). Table 5.1 presents a list
 of common abbreviations used by the technician.8
Tooth identification on the dental chart can be done in two ways. One is the anatomi-
cal system and the other is the modified Triadan system.?
Anatomical System
The anatomical system uses a combination of letters and numbers to identify each tooth
(I = incisor; C = canine; PM = premolar; M = molar). A number is placed around the
letter to indicate which tooth it is, as well as the location. (e.g., I′ = right upper first
 incisor; PM = left upper third premolar). Deciduous teeth are notated by lowercase
letters. This system is easy to learn; however, it is more time-consuming and difficult to
use with most computerized systems.
66Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Triadan System
 The Triadan system is a numbering system that uses three numbers to identify each tooth.
The first number indicates the quadrant the tooth is in (100 = right maxilla; 200 = left
maxilla; 300 = left mandible; 400 = right mandible). The next two numbers indicate the
tooth, beginning from the midline out. The central incisor is 01, the middle incisor is 02.
the lateral incisor is 03, and the canine is 04; premolar 1 is 05 and molar 1 is 09. The
three numbers then tell exactly which tooth you are talking about (e.g., 204 = left maxil-
lary canine; 409 = right mandibular first molar). There is a rule of 4 and 9 that states
that a canine is always 04 and a first molar is always 09. This is helpful when working
with animals that are missing teeth or have supernumerary teeth. Deciduous teeth are
indicated by adding 400 to the quadrant the tooth is in. If the deciduous tooth is in the
100 quadrant, it would be a 500; if the tooth is in the 400 quadrant, it would be an 800
(e.g., 604 = left maxillary deciduous canine; 706 = left mandibular deciduous second
 premolar.? The Triadan system is being used more in practice because of the ease of use
with a computerized system (Fig. 5.4).
100
200
500
600
CHAPTER
10
60
90
800
700
400
300
Chapter 5: The Dental Cleaning 67
Setting Up a Charting Protoco!
When charting, it is important to use a specific repetitive pattern to make sure you do
not miss a quadrant. During a procedure, the patient is in lateral recumbency and the
work is done on one side, then the patient is rolled over and the procedure is repeated.
Therefore, when charting, you will do the buccal sides of the top (up) teeth and the
palatal/lingual sides of the bottom (down) teeth. The exact pattern that you use does not
matter as long as you cover all surfaces of the teeth and you keep using the same pattern.
An example would be to start at the maxillary midline and work your way distally on
the buccal side, and then do the same with the mandible. Next, look at the palatal surface
of the opposing side starting at the midline and move distally; repeat this process on the
lingual portion of the mandibular teeth.
The Dental Cleaning Procedure
Preparation
Part of being prepared for a cleaning is making sure the client is aware of all aspects of
the procedure and has signed the appropriate paperwork. This includes, but is not limited
to, cost, anesthesia and associated risks, steps of the procedure, recovery, home care, and
follow-up. (See Chapter 2 for further details.)
All patients should have an intra venous catheter placed and have a balanced electrolyte
solution run during anesthesia. Consider the patient's preanesthetic medications based on
their history and health. This often includes antibiotics, preanesthetic sedation, and pain
management, as well as induction and maintenance anesthetic agents, and intraoperative
and postoperative medications. The use of a cuffed endotracheal tube is necessary for the
Chapter 4 for further details.)
The preparation of your work area is the key to the ease of your procedure. This will
assure the shortest anesthetic event for the patient. Prepare your dental chart and anes-
thetic monitoring sheet. Pressure-check your anesthetic machine and be sure to have the
correct size of tubing and bag. Your monitoring equipment, fluids, and infusion pump
should also be ready. Prepare your dental unit, which will include the HSHP, low-speed
handpiece (LSHP), air/water syringe, and power scaler. Other instruments will include
CHAPTER
your power scaler inserts/tips, various hand scalers and curettes, a periodontal probe,
dental explorer, SSHP, prophy angle, prophy cup, and paste. Other materials needed
include a dental mirror, calculus removal forceps, a mouth speculum, and gauze for a
pharyngeal pack. A chlorhexidine solution for flushing the oral cavity prior to the pro-
 cedure will reduce bacterial aerosolization.0 Have your personal protection equipment
ready, which should include a minimum of a mask, eye protection, and gloves. Good
lighting and magnification are invaluable and should also be available. (See Chapter 3.)
Purpose of the Oral Exam and Charting
The oral exam and charting is one of the most important steps in a dental procedure.
The technician often performs this along with the prophylaxis. The oral exam should be
68Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
done in a systematic, organized manner much like when performing the cleaning.? In
order to successfully identify oral pathology, you must know what the normal anatomy
is. The documentation of the oral exam on a dental record then becomes part of the
patient's complete record. As stated before, the dental record is a legal document and is
an essential part of a dental procedure.
The Oral Exam
 The patient's oral exam is intended to determine if there is any presence of disease and
if so, the type, extent, and severity. Always consider the whole patient: signs and symp-
toms, medical history, medications, and behavior during the process.ll The oral exam
begins in the exam room with the awake patient and the client. This part of the exam is
covered in detail in Chapter 2. Some of the awake and anesthetized exams can overlap,
although it is better to duplicate than miss any pathology. Some of the exams can also
be done while the patient is sedated prior to anesthesia. This will include documentation
of the skull type and any abnormalities with facial symmetry, swellings of the face, lymph
nodes, and salivary glands. You may also be able to document the occlusion and count
the teeth.
Once the patient is anesthetized and before the endotracheal tube is placed, the oro-
pharynx region should be examined.12 This will include the tonsils and their crypts, soft
palate, fauces, uvula, and the palatoglossal arch. When examining these areas, look for
redness, swelling, ulcers, oral masses, trauma, tonsillitis, and foreign bodies.
After placing the endotracheal tube, continue your soft tissue exam with the hard
palate. Examine the rugae fold symmetry and look for other defects. Check all of these
areas for redness, swelling, ulcers, masses, trauma, and foreign bodies. Next, examine the
cheeks, lips, and commissures for fold pyoderma, masses, and possible signs of autoim-
mune disease. Continue with the tongue and floor of the mouth, looking for mobility,
ulcers, foreign bodies, masses, swellings, or the presence of a ranula. Examine the mucosa
and gingiva for color, redness, texture, swelling, moisture, discharge, fistula, ulcers, kissing
lesions, masses, and wounds. The gingiva should also be examined for hyperplasia,
recession, and other signs related to periodontal disease. Find the salivary papilla and
look for inflammation. The papilla is located above the maxillary fourth premolar, sub-
lingually. In the cat, there is one located just lingual to the mandibular frst molarl3
'ER
(Fig. 5.5).
CHA
PeriodontalExam
The periodontal exam helps determine if there is a presence of periodontal disease.' Make
sure you are being systematic with your exam and starting at the same point each time
while documenting all abnormalities. Materials needed for a periodontal exam are a
 dental mirror, a periodontal probe, and a dental explorer. When performing a periodontal
exam, there are a number of different indicators to identify periodontal disease. This
includes the following: plaque index, calculus index, gingivitis index, periodontal pocket
depth, gingival hyperplasia, root exposure, tooth mobility, furcation exposure, total
attachment loss, and any other oral lesions noted.
Chapter 5: The Dental Cleaning 69
Figure 5.5 Once the patient is anesthetized and before the endotracheal tube is placed, the oropharynx region
should be examined (Courtesy of John Koehm, DVM, FAVD).
Charting Your Findings
Plaque and calculus are evaluated by a visual exam. The plaque and calculus index is a
quantitative measurement that allows you to document the presence of it. It is advised
that you document the amount of plaque or calculus per tooth versus as a whole because
it can help you determine patterns of disease. For example, if a dog is in pain and favor-
ing the left side, you are likely to see more plaque and calculus on that side. When an
area is not being used, it will build more plaque and calculus, likely causing more gingivitis
and opportunities for periodontal disease. This means that you need to pay extra atten-
tion to areas with more buildup.
CHAPTER
Plaque index (PI 0-3)
The plaque index is a measurement of plaque detected on the surface of each tooth. A
plaque index of 0 (PI0) means that there is no visible plaque on the surface. A plaque
index of 1 (Pl1) means that there is plaque that covers less then one-third of the surface.
A plaque index of 2 (PI2) means that there is plaque that covers between one-third and
two-thirds of the tooth surface. A plaque index of 3 (PI3) means that there is plaque that
covers more then two-thirds of the tooth surface.14
Calculus index (Cl 0-3)
The calculus index is a measurement of calculus detected on the surface of each tooth
A calculus index of O (Clo) means that there is no visible calculus on the surface. A
70Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
calculus index of 1 (CI1) means that there is calculus that covers less then one-third of
the surface. A calculus index of 2 (CI2) means that there is calculus that covers between
one-third and two-thirds of the tooth surface with minimal subgingival involvement. A
calculus index of 3 (CI3) means that there is calculus that covers more than two-thirds
 of the tooth surface, with significant subgingival involvement.l4
Gingivitis index (Gl 0-3)
Gingivitis is evaluated by a combination of visual inspections and the use of a periodontal
probe. When visually examining the gingival, you are looking for the presence of redness
 and inflammation. You use the probe gently touching the gingiva at the gingival margin
of each tooth to determine if any bleeding is present. The gingivitis index is a measure-
ment of the gingivitis detected. It is advised that you document gingivitis on each tooth
versus as a whole because it can also indicate patterns of disease.
A gingivitis index of 0 (GI0) means that there is no gingival inflammation. A gingivitis
index of 1 (GI1) means that there is inflammation but no bleeding upon probing. A gin-
givitis index of 2 (GI2) means that there is moderate inflammation and bleeding upon
probing. A gingivitis index of 3 (GI3) means that there is severe inflammation and spon-
taneous bleeding will be present.14
Counting the teeth
Counting the teeth should be one of the first steps in your exam. When you are counting
teeth you are looking for extra (supernumerary) teeth and missing teeth. Supernumerary
teeth are commonly incisors and first premolars; however, they can be any tooth. When
evaluating these teeth, consider whether or not they are causing any problems. Many
supernumerary teeth do not cause a problem and can simply be documented and left
alone. If a supernumerary tooth is causing crowding that will allow periodontal disease
to occur, then extraction of the tooth should be considered. Supernumerary teeth should
be drawn onto the chart. Missing teeth occur quite frequently. Common teeth to be
missing are the maxillary and mandibular first premolars (105, 205, 305, and 405) and
mandibular third molars (311, 411), although any tooth can be missing. When encounter-
ing a missing tooth, it should be radiographed. This is to help determine if the tooth is
truly missing, impacted, or if there is the presence of retained roots. If a tooth is truly
missing, then there is no need for any further treatment. A missing tooth is circled on the
ER
dental chart and abbreviated with an "O." Impacted teeth are teeth that are still under
CHAPTI
the gingiva and bone. These teeth, if not detected early, can result in dentigerous cyst
formation and can lead to significant bone loss and tooth destruction. In some cases,
these can lead to neoplasia formation. Impacted teeth are abbreviated as T/l. Retained
roots are the result of the loss of crown. This can occur from fractures, tooth resorption,
or from a previous unsuccessful attempt to extract a tooth. Retained roots can also cause
long-term infections and should be evaluated and removed when appropriate. Retained
 roots are abbreviated as RTR.
Periodontal probing
When evaluating periodontal pocketing around a tooth, you should check each tooth in
stroke is a series of bobbing strokes along the junctional epithelium with forward
Chapter 5:The Dental Cleaning71
movements in 1-mm increments while moving the probe 1-2mm up and down. When
performing the probing, the tip of the probe (1-2mm) should maintain contact with the
tooth while keeping it parallel to the long axis of the tooth.? After cleaning one side of
the mouth, probe the buccal surfaces of the maxillary teeth and the lingual surfaces of
the mandibular teeth. Repeat the probing procedure on the other side. The normal gin-
gival sulcus depth is 0-3 mm for dogs and 0-1 mm for cats. Measurements greater than
this are considered to be a sign of periodontal disease and need to be documented on the
dental chart. A periodontal pocket is an indicator of periodontal ligament attachment
loss and bone loss.1 It is important to take into consideration the size of the patient when
probing. A Yorkie with a 3-mm pocket is likely to have periodontal disease, whereas a
Great Dane may have a 5-mm pocket on a canine and it may be normal for that dog.
Some patients may have inflammation or gingival hyperplasia, which will create artificial
probing depths. These are known as pseudopockets and do not truly reflect the loss of
attachment of the periodontal ligament or bone.1s Gingival hyperplasia is the growth of
excess gingival tissues and is measured in millimeters from the top of the gingival margin
to the sulcus. You may also see hyperplasia and a periodontal pocket at the same time,
so there may be a measurement of the hyperplasia as well as the pocket.
Gingival recession, root exposure, and attachment loss
Root exposure occurs when gingival recession and bone loss occurs around a tooth. It is
measured in millimeters from the cementoenamel junction of the tooth to the gingival
margin. Total attachment loss is the combined total of periodontal pocketing and root
exposure (Fig. 5.6).
Tooth mobility (M 1-3)
Tooth mobility is measured by how much a tooth moves from its axis in millimeters.
Using a periodontal probe, engage the tooth rocking it back and forth horizontally. Some
teeth have mobility that is considered normal for them. An example would be the man-
dibular incisors. Mobility of stage O (Mo) is normal physiological movement up to
CHAPTER :
Figure 5.6 Total attachment loss is the combined total of periodontal pocketing and root exposure (Courtesy
of John Koehm, DVM, FAVD).
72Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
0.2 mm. Mobility of stage 1 (M1) is increased movement in any direction other than axial
of 0.2mm and up to 0.5 mm. Mobility of stage 2 (M2) indicates increased movement in
 s jo  y oi on d p  'o jo xe un o  u
(M3), movement is increased in any direction of more than 1.0mm.16
Furcation exposure (F 1-3)
The furcation is the area where the roots of multirooted teeth come together. In a healthy
mouth, the furcations are not visible or significantly palpable on exam. Furcation expo-
sure is a result of periodontal disease causing gingival recession and bone loss around the
I ape po ansodxa uoeong v 't-i sape q panseau are sansodxa uoeong 'uaal
(F1) exists when a periodontal probe extends less than halfway under the crown in any
direction of a multirooted tooth with attachment loss. On exam, the periodontal probe
will fall into the depression but bounce back out with little or no resistance. A furcation
exposure of grade 2 (F2) exists when a periodontal probe extends greater than halfway
under the crown of a multirooted tooth with attachment loss but not through and
through. On exam, the periodontal probe will fall into the depression and readily stay.
A furcation exposure of grade 3 (F3) exists when a periodontal probe extends under the
crown of a multirooted tooth and pass from one side of the furcation to the other. '7 When
determining how to treat furcation exposures, the veterinarian will need to evaluate
the health of the surrounding teeth. Furcation exposures of 1 and 2 may not need to be
extracted if they can be maintained with good home care and regular professional visits.
However, because periodontal disease is considered to be progressive, they often need
eventual extraction if follow-up treatment is not provided. Grade 3 furcation exposures
need to be extracted to prevent the advancement of periodontal disease to the tooth and
surrounding teeth.
Retained/persistent deciduous teeth
Retained/persistent deciduous teeth frequently occur on small-breed dogs but can occur
with any dog or cat. Deciduous canines (504, 604, 704, 804) are the most common tooth
to be retained. Retained deciduous teeth can cause occlusion problems as well as an
increase in the incidence of periodontal disease. Retained deciduous teeth should be
radiographed to make sure there is a succedaneous tooth and to evaluate the root struc-
ER
ture before extracting. If there is a deciduous tooth that has no successor, some believe
CHAPTI
that it may be left in and evaluated at a later date, as a deciduous tooth is better than no
tooth. Deciduous teeth are drawn in on the chart and abbreviated as RD.
Wear: abrasion versus attrition
Wear is a more common occurrence in a dog's mouth than in a cat's and is characterized
 as the loss of enamel and dentin from repeated friction on the teeth.18 There are two types
of wear: abrasion and attrition. Abrasion is wear that results from an external source.
Examples are tennis balls, Frisbees, cage chewing, and dermatitis wear. The patterns are
very distinct on examination. Wear patterns from tennis balls have a concave pattern on
the occlusal surfaces of the maxillary and mandibular teeth starting at the canines and
running distally to the upper fourth premolars. Heavy play with Frisbees can cause a flat
wear pattern on the incisors and canines. Cage chewers have wear on the distal surfaces
of the canines, incisors, and occasionally on the premolars. If this behavior continues, the
Chapter5:The Dental Cleaning73
teeth can fracture causing pulp exposure. Dogs with pruritic skin conditions can have
wear due to chewing on their fur and skin for long periods of time. This abrasion is on
the canines and incisors and can be flat or angled rostrally. Abrasion is drawn on the
teeth that are affected and abbreviated as AB. Attrition is the result of tooth-to-tooth
contact. It is also referred to as occlusal wear. '9 Attrition is often a result of a malocclu-
sion causing teeth to have abnormal contact with each other. Examples are with animals
with a Class 3 malocclusion where the mandibular canines come in contact with the
maxillary third incisors. Over time, the canines and the incisors wear down causing loss
of tooth structure. Atrition is drawn on the chart and abbreviated as AT. If wear occurs
slowly over a long period of time, the body can keep pace and continue to lay down
reparative dentin allowing the pulp to recede and remain protected. This appears on the
dicular over the worn area.13 If the wear occurs faster than the tooth can keep up, then
pulp exposure can occur. All teeth with wear should be radiographed to evaluate the
vitality of the tooth.
Malformed teeth
When examining the teth, look for malformations. This again goes back to knowing
what normal is. Malformations are seen in the crowns, developmental groove, and on
the roots of the teeth. These malformations are often the result of trauma during develop-
ment. When detected, these findings should be drawn in and a written description should
accompany it.
Malpositioned teeth
Malpositioned teeth are commonly either crowded and/or rotated. Crowded and rotated
teeth frequently occur with brachycephalic breeds. They are also seen when there are
supernumerary teeth present. When evaluating these teeth, look for areas where periodon-
tal disease can potentially occur. Crowded teeth are abbreviated as CWD, and rotated
teeth are abbreviated as ROT with an arrow drawn over the tooth indicating the direc-
tion of the rotation.
Enamel hypoplasia/hypocalcification
Enamel hypoplasia is loss of enamel on the tooth surface. This can be the result of trauma
CHAPTER
to the developing tooth bud or when a fever occurs during tooth development. Enamel
hypoplasia can be located on just one tooth or can be generalized throughout the mouth.
Enamel hypoplasia is abbreviated as E/H and should be drawn in on the chart
Trauma
Tooth trauma can result in several problems. Anterior teeth are often damaged by blunt
force. Catching Frisbees, fetching rocks, running into stationary objects, tug of war, and
cage chewing are examples of events that can cause injuries. Posterior teeth are usually
injured by chewing aggressively on objects such as bones, hooves, hard nylon bones,
wood, and rocks. When the injury occurs, it can result in fracture, pulpal hemorrhage,
disruption of the apical blood supply, and in some cases luxation (partial displacement
of the tooth from the socket) or avulsion (complete displacement of the tooth from the
socket).
74Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Tooth fractures are classified based on the degree of the fracture. Fractures are abbrevi-
ated as T/FX/(type of fracture).
Pulpal hemorrhage is when bleeding has occurred within the pulp canal causing
increased pressure on the nerves and blood supply. This often results in the death of the
tooth. The exception to this is if the trauma occurs to a young animal. Because there is
a large pulp chamber, there is room for expansion of the inflamed tissue giving the tooth
 a chance to survive. Pulpal hemorrhage causes a discoloration of the injured tooth. An
early injury will have a pinkish-purple color, and as the hemoglobin decomposes the color
changes to a tan-brown. The abbreviation for this is T/NV.
Complete disruption of the apical blood supply will result in death of the tooth. This
can be a luxation or an avulsion. This is usually due to a traumatic injury. A luxation
will present with the patient having a tooth that is loose in the socket and may have
obvious areas of torn gingiva and fractured alveolar bone. A luxated tooth is abbreviated
as T/LUX. With avulsions, the patient is presented with the tooth out of the socket and
they also may have obvious torn gingiva and alveolar bone fractures. An avulsed tooth
is abbreviated as T/A
Tooth resorption
Tooth resorption can occur in both dogs and cats. It is a process by which all or part of
a tooth structure is lost due to the destruction of mineralized tissue, mediated by odon-
toclasts.19 This includes cementum, dentin, and enamel. Tooth resorption is detected by
visual inspection of the gingiva for "band-aid lesion." These are patches of granulation
tissue that are found on the crown of a diseased tooth covering the lesion caused by the
resorption. Tooth resorption can also be detected with an explorer by running it perpen-
dicular to the tooth at the gingival margin. If a lesion is present, the explorer will catch
at the margin of the defect. Dental radiographs are also necessary in the detection and
classification of tooth resorption. Tooth resorption is classified into five stages, with se veral
substages within. Tooth resorption is abbreviated as TR followed by the stage number
the tooth is in. (See Chapter 8 for details on tooth resorption and its classifications.)
Caries
True dental caries are uncommon in dogs and almost unheard of in cats. Caries are
characterized as demineralization of the hard dental tissues from acids created in plaque.
CHAPTER
The acids are formed from the oral bacteria fermenting carbohydrates, converting them
into acids.20 Caries usually present as a small black lesion on the enamel in early stages.
If caries have started to develop, you will be able to force the tip of the explorer into the
decaying surface. As you withdraw the instrument, the tip will stick and let go, resulting
 in a metallic ping from the explorer tip.2 Advanced caries often result in substantial tooth
loss and pulp exposure. Caries are abbreviated as CA and drawn on the chart.
Cleaning the Teeth Using the Power Scaler
When working with power scalers, it is very important to know the machine you are using.
This is because each one has its own specifications on how to use it properly. This is espe.
cially true when it comes to water and power settings in relation to the type of tips that are
being used. With that said, find your user's manual and read it before using your machine.
Chapter 5:The Dental Cleaning 75
An indication for the use of the power scaler is the buildup of calculus on the tooth
 an o ai o sa po s m oe as a  'a
deposits of calculus and clean the surface of the tooth. When indicated, power scaling is
also used to remove subgingival calculus, plaque, and associated diseased tissues. This
can include necrotic soft tissues and cementum.
When working with the power scaler, it is important to use proper technique. A light
grasp should be used when holding the instrument. Someone should be able to come up
behind you and pull the handpiece out of your hand without resistance when you are
scaling. In order for the instrument to work correctly, it should be balanced in your hand
with little pull from the cord.6 The modified pen grasp is not necessary; however, the use
of a fulcrum is very helpful. You can also loop the cord around a finger to reduce the
pull on your hand.
Water serves a dual purpose in power scaling. First, the proper amount of water is
vital during the use of the scaler because it decreases the heat generated by the scaler.
Generally, the larger the tip, the more water needed; the smaller the tip, the less water
 needed. The second purpose is cavitation. Cavitation occurs when the water exits the tip
Of the instrument as a mist. Within the mist are tiny bubbles that collapse, releasing energy
that serves to flush away calculus, plaque, and debris as well as destroy bacteria through
tearing of the cell walls.3.11
The proper power setting is also very important. Most supragingival tips can be run
at a medium to high power setting. Subgingival tips are run at low to medium power
settings. A new tip is going to require less power, but as it ages the metal tip wears down
and a gradual increase of power may be needed. Never use a subgingival tip higher than
a medium power setting as it can damage the instrument as well as the tooth. If after
increasing the power the tip is unable to effectively clean the tooth surface, it should be
replaced right away.
 Light pressure should be used when engaging the tip to the tooth. Too much pressure
creates more heat and hinders the vibrations of the scaler, which pre vents it from working
efficiently. This also causes more etching on the tooth surface than necessary. On the
reverse, your pressure should not be too light because you will not engage the calculus
and your instrument will be ineffective. It is ideal to use the back and lateral surfaces of
the tip keeping it paralll to the tooth's long axis moving with a combination of short,
 overlapping, vertical, oblique, and horizontal strokes. 3 When working on a tooth surface,
keep moving and do not spend more then 10-15 seconds on each tooth. If too much heat
is a concern, you can cool the tooth with water between scaling. Depending on the type
CHAPTER
of tip and machine, there will be anywhere from 3-12mm of active surface to work with.
Generally, the most terminal 4 mm of the tip are the most useful for calculus removal.
Do not use the tip or face of the instrument because they are the most active surfaces
 and can cause damage to the tooth surface.3
The use of power scalers is contraindicated when restorations are present. Sonic and
ultrasonic instruments can cause restorations to become dislodged. Gently clean areas
with restorations with hand instruments as an alternative (Fig. 5.7).
Dental Cleaning with Hand Instrumentation
Hand instrumentation was used exclusively in veterinary dentistry before power scalers
Today, hand instrumentation is done in conjunction with power scaling. Hand
76Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 5.7 Power scaling is also used to remove subgingival calculus, plaque, and associated diseased tissues
(Courtesy of John Koehm, DVM, FAVD).
Figure 5.8Hand instrumentation is the use of scalers and curettes to fine-tune the cleaning after power scaling
(Courtesy of John Koehm, DVM, FAVD).
instrumentation is the use of scalers and curettes to fine-tune the cleaning after power
CHAPTER
scaling. Power scaling cannot remove all calculus or plaque; therefore, no dental cleaning
is complete with just power scaling. The leftover calculus will allow for new plaque and
calculus to build up quickly.
Common areas that residual calculus is found are on the upper fourth premolars and
 both upper molars as well as the lingual surfaces of the mandibular premolars. To detect
any remaining calculus, you can use a few different techniques such as disclosing solu-
tions, drying the teeth, and using the explorer probe.
The use of the modified pen grasp is vital to the effectiveness of the hand instrument
 and protects the operator by reducing hand fatigue. The idea is to grip the instrument
rather than pinch it. The handle of the instrument should be placed between the thumb
and the index finger, with the middle finger on the shank of the instrument. The pinkie
and the ring finger are then placed on or near the tooth being worked on to act as a
fulcrum. A fulcrum is a place near the tooth that you are working on to support your
hand. This creates stability and increases control of the instrument? (Fig. 5.8).
Chapter 5: The Dental Cleaning 77
Figure 5.9 Modified pen grasp (Courtesy of John Koehm, DVM, FAVD).
Use of the Hand Scafer
Hand scalers are for supragingival scaling only.22 The sharp working tip can cause trauma
to the gingiva. When using a scaler, you should always start at the gingival margin and
move toward the crown. The sharp tip is for cleaning developmental grooves and fissures
 q  s ss   o o o ar   a 
incisors.
Use of the Dental Curette
 Curettes are for use supra- and subgingivally, with its primary purpose being to remove
subgingival calculus, plaque, and debris. Proper use of this instrument is imperative.
Next, consider the way the instrument adapts to the tooth. The working end of the
CHAPTER :
instrument is the last 1-2mm of the tip or toe.ll The working end is kept in contact with
the tooth and is then adjusted to the changes of the contour of the tooth while cleaning.2
This will assure that the surrounding tissues are not being damaged by the tip or toe of
the instrument.
 Subgingival scaling requires a different approach to angulation because curettes are
inserted under the gum line. Gently insert the curette into the base of the pocket in a
"closed" position. A closed position means that the face of the instrument is as close to
0 degrees as possible in relation to the tooth surface. Next, move the instrument to an
open position so the angle of the face, in relation to the tooth, is at about 70 degrees.
Again, while maintaining this angle and placing lateral pressure on the tooth during the
stroke, you will achieve subgingival calculus removal.
When pulling the instrument, it is important to remember to rock your arm and wrist
in the same motion and not to move just your fingers as this will cause great fatigue and
result in long-term damage to your hands (Fig. 5.9).
78Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Disclosing Solution
Disclosing solution is a red dye that attaches to calculus and plaque. This is great when
you are beginning because it identifies areas that you missed. This product is messy and
will stain the patient so use with great caution.
Dry the Teeth
Another way to see leftover debris is to dry the teeth with the air/water syringe on your
machine. The calculus on the crown of the tooth will appear chalky white. Subgingival
 se u so ir no dq ose u arxa o e ee im s
may not be easy to visualize.
Polishing
 It is necessary to polish the teeth after scaling to remove any plaque left on the enamel
surface. It also smooths etched enamel caused by scaling, without causing significant loss
of enamel. The defects leave a rough surface on the enamel and create a hospitable envi
ronment for new plaque formation and retention.
Polishing is accomplished with an LSHP, a prophy angle with a prophy cup attached,
and the correct paste. The LSHP can be either air driven or powered electrically with a
motor pack. They should be run between 2000 and 4000 rpm to prevent too much heat
from occurring while polishing. A good way to judge this is by running the handpiece at
a comparable range, and then trying to cause it to stop with your finger using gentle
pressure. If it stalls then you are fine. If you cannot stop it, your rpm's are too high. Use
caution when doing this as you can easily burn your finger if there is too much friction.
There are two common types of prophy angles: standard circulating ones and oscillating
ones. Circulating angles rotate a full 360 degrees, whereas oscillating angles move back
and forth 90 degrees. Oscillating prophy angles are often preferred because they do not
generate as much heat as circulating ones.6 They are also appealing because the patient's
hair does not get caught in them. Prophy angles are available in reusable metal and dis-
posable plastic types. There are benefits with both types and each practice will have a
ER
 personal preference as to which type is used. Prophy cups are made of rubber and vary
CHAPTI
in their firmness. It is ideal to use a soft-style prophy cup over one that is firm.23 The
softer cup requires less pressure for it to conform over the contours of the tooth surface
and polish along the gingival margin.3
 Prophy paste is needed to aid in polishing as well as to reduce friction on the tooth.
They vary in consistency, ranging from coarse to fine grit. Polishes that are coarse are
typically used for stain removal, while fine-grit pastes are used for smoothing tooth sur-
faces. There are pastes prepackaged individually and some in bulk containers. Some pastes
contain fluoride or glycerin and should not be used if restorative dentistry is being per-
formed.6 Pastes can also cause artifacts on dental radiographs by showing up as little
white flecks. Fine flour pumice mixed with water is often preferred and will not cause
either of the above problems.6
When polishing teeth, be sure to use caution not to overheat the tooth. Hold the
handpiece in a modified pen grasp and allow the prophy cup to pass over the tooth surface
Chapter 5: The Dental Cleaning 79
 aq n  o d jo ad    p q  
reduces friction and smooths roughed surfaces. Move quickly over the tooth surface,
spending only 3-5 seconds on each tooth. Use only enough pressure to cause the cup to
flare open and be allowed to move just below the gum line.0 Subgingival polishing is
 important to remove rough areas as well as plaque that can lead to attachment loss. When
polishing subgingivally, remember to be very gentle so as to not injure the soft tissue.
After polishing is complete, irrigate the gingival sulcus and rinse the teeth and oral cavity.
This is especially important when dealing with periodontal pockets as debris can be
 trapped in these areas preventing healing.23 This can be accomplished by using your air/
water syringe on your dental unit as well as irrigation needles or curved tipped syringes
with saline or a dilute chlorhexidine solution.
Air polishing is another technique available for polishing the teeth. It is done by spray-
ing a combination of water and sodium bicarbonate on the tooth with a special handpiece
that can attach either to a dental unit or a stand-alone machine. This is very technique
  an  o ao  n rd sn  nss
the gingival tissues, lips, cheeks, and tongue.3 It is also important to protect yourself and
the patient's eyes from the spray. Air polishing is beneficial for extrinsic stain removal as
well as polishing areas that conventional polishing cannot reach such as developmental
grooves and interdental spaces.6
Recovery
Once the dental procedure is complete, you can begin the patient recovery. Before ending
the anesthesia, be sure to inspect the oral cavity for blood, debris, and excess water. Check
for any loose debris between the lips, under the tongue, and in the back of the mouth.
 Rinse the oral cavity using your air/water syringe. Once you are sure that it is clean,
remove your pharyngeal gauze pack and check again for debris in the area. You should
also clean the head and face of any fluids and dry them. Keep in mind to protect the
patient's eyes and relubricate them as needed.
Some patients may have a low body temperature after a dental procedure; therefore,
some cleaning of the head and face may need to be done after their temperature has
returned to normal. This is also a good time to check the intravenous catheter site for
 blood as it is easier to clean when they are still anesthetized.
CHAPTER
Depending on the extent of the procedure, you may need to consider medications
needed for recovery. If an extended painful procedure was performed, there may be a
need for additional pain medications. (See Chapter 4 for further details.)
When ending general anesthesia, it is important to continue on oxygen for several
minutes as well as continue monitoring all vitals until the patient starts to show signs of
recovery. These include the return of palpebral reflexes, eye position, jaw tone, changes
in respiratory and heart rates, and swallowing reflexes. After several minutes, remove the
patient from oxygen and challenge them on room air. Once the patient shows signs of
recovery, you can start to remove some of the monitoring equipment, ideally, leaving at
least one monitor on (i.e., Doppler or pulse oximeter). You should leave the endotracheal
tube in place until the patient is swallowing. In brachycephalic breeds or animals with
an elongated soft palate, you may need to leave the tube in place until the patient is
almost completely recovered. Be sure to deflate the cuff before the patient begins to move
to avoid any tracheal injury. Once the endotracheal tube is removed, the patient can be
80Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
moved to a recovery cage. The cage should be heated to help the patient maintain tem-
perature during recovery. Continued patient monitoring for temperature and other vitals
should be done every 30-60 minutes until the patient is fully recovered. Some patients
will require continued pain management and fluid therapy for several hours or days.
When appropriate, you may begin to ofer the patient food and water and take them for
a walk, allowing them to urinate.
Home Care
The goal of dental home care is to maintain a healthy oral environment or to prevent
deterioration of previously existing periodontal disease.?4 This is attained by evaluating
certain factors. First, learn how much the owner is committed or capable to do at home.
Second, evaluate the patient's level of disease and willingness to cooperate.2s
The key to successful home care is owner education. The veterinary technician needs
to help them understand the causes, effects, and means of prevention.
Plaque is a bioflm composed of bacteria, saliva, and food that forms on teeth shortly
after a professional cleaning or brushing. The effects of plaque are halitosis, discomfort,
and pain that can lead to chronic infection resulting in tooth loss. Other effects can be
 on the systemic level causing renal and cardiac problems.23 Prevention is now easier then
ever before with the myriad of methods and products available. Helping the owner
understand their responsibility in plaque control and prevention of periodontal disease
will often help them perform good home care. This education should begin at a very
 young age so that the animal and the owner can learn together and continue over the life
of the pet. The technician needs to help by monitoring progress and reinforcing the
importance of consistent home care with the owner. It is also important to help them
 understand that even with good home care, professional exams and cleaning are
necessary.
The technician, along with the entire staff, should be comfortable with the products
made available to owners. They should be able to discuss the use and benefits along with
 being able to demonstrate how to use them with confidence. When educating owners, it
is good to have demonstration materials such as models, a demonstration dog or cat,
handouts, and videos explaining the different methods of home care that are available.
This will help them decide the best method for themselves and their pet.
ER
 Home care is broken into two different types: active and passive. Active home care is
CHAPTI
brushing, oral rinsing, or applying of barrier sealants. Passive home care is using diets,
treats, chews, water additives, and dental sealants.24.26
Brushing is considered the gold standard of home care. There are times when this
cannot be accomplished regularly due to the animal's behavior or the owner's inability
 or unwillingness to perform it. It is important to evaluate these factors early on so as not
 'paunsip pue pansard oon jaay oi aun asneo ro iq ia on raumo au asneo on
will also help the veterinarian decide the best course of treatment when performing a
procedure.
 If brushing is not an option, then oral rinses with a chlorhexidine or zinc base will
help to a lesser degree. Another option is a barrier sealant application once a week. This
may be more appealing to the client that will not commit to brushing but wants to do
something. All of these active methods of home care keep the owner handling the mouth
more aware of dental changes.
Chapter 5: The Dental Cleaning 81
Passive forms of home care are often more attractive to owners. Dental diets are a
common method of passive care. There are two diet formulations: chemical and mechani-
cal. They are also categorized based on whether they work against plaque, calculus, or
both. Chemical-based diets are often coated with sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP).
SMHP is a chelating agent that binds with calcium in the saliva, aiding in the prevention
of calculus formation.?7 Diets that contain SMHP only work to prevent calculus and not
plaque. However, by preventing calculus formation they are preventing larger surface
areas for plaque to form on.
 Mechanical diets are fiber-based diets that are designed to maximize the foods contact
time on the tooth surface while the patient chews.24 This shredding activity over the tooth
surface actively disrupts plaque formation. Some diets have combined the two for
maximum benefits. Biscuit-type treats work in a similar manner as diets do. They are
often coated with SHMP and help control calculus but not plaque.24 Chews such as
Greenies? (The Nutro Company, Franklin, TN) are designed to mechanically control
plaque and calculus by abrasion as the pet bites down on it. Rawhide chews are shown
to help reduce plaque and calculus as well as promote gingival health. It is important to
differentiate between rawhide strips and pressed rawhide bones. These larger rawhides
are much harder and place the pet at risk for dental fractures and possible foreign body.
Some rawhide strips are also coated with SMHP to have additional calculus reduction
For current information on approved products, see VOHC.org (the website of the Veteri-
nary Oral Health Council).28
Educating clients about proper chew toys is also important. Although chew toys are
not proven to have significant effect on plaque and calculus, they are widely used by
owners. Chew toys such as Kong Balls? (Kong Company, Golden, CO) are designed to
be safe for chewing without causing fractures. When choosing chew toys, it is important
to consider the safety. Some criteria to use when selecting chews and toys are to see if it
indents with your nail, soften with saliva, and is bendable. If the pet is not chewing the
toy as it was meant to be, then it is also not considered to be safe.28
Brushing
 Daily brushing is the best method for plaque control. Brushing every other day is also
considered beneficial but anything greater than that is not effective in plaque, calculus,
or gingivitis control.t Remember to start slowly and early in life.
Materials needed to be successful with brushing are a soft-bristled toothbrush,
CHAPTER
pet toothpaste, and a will to succeed. There are many different types of toothbrushes
available. These include plastic finger brushes, smaller feline brushes, and dual-ended
brushes. Finger brushes are a great tool for beginners; however, they are not ideal for
Sq on raumo aun asodxa pue ysa pasiq e se aaisrqe se nou ae Aaui 'asn ai-uo
bitten. Pet toothpastes have enzymatic properties that inhibit plaque formation, but
more importantly, they are flavored so the pet will accept it. Because pets swallow tooth-
paste, human toothpaste cannot be used due to gastrointestinal upset caused by the
detergents. It is important to emphasize that the mechanical action of brushing helps
control plaque.29
Be patient; it can take weeks to months to be able to completely brush. Start slowly
and be gentle. It is helpful to place the pet up on a couch, chair, or counter for smaller
animals. This puts them at your level and gives you more control of the situation. Create
a daily pattern for you and the pet. Start giving the toothpaste at the same time and place
82
SmaflAnimalDentalProcedures forVeterinary Techniciansand Nurses
Figure 5.10 Using a demonstration dog to help educate owners on how to brush teeth (Courtesy of John
Koehm, DVM, FAVD).
and by the same person every day. This causes the pet to anticipate the toothpaste as a
treat. Before long, they will be looking forward to their treat. While giving them the
 aui suan pue sdl aun sul uaa aznu pue aoey au ynon ‘asedoon
and teeth. This will begin to desensitize them. It is not necessary to force the mouth
 open. You can then start to place the toothpaste on the brush and allow them to lick at
is while continuing to manipulate to face as described. Introduce the brush, starting in
the front of the mouth at the incisors and canines. With gradual acceptance, increase
the number of the teeth advancing farther back in the mouth to the premolars then the
molars.9 It is important to remember that the maxillary molars angle in toward the
midline and you will need to change your brushing angle to accommodate this. On
the mandible, the overlap of the upper fourth premolar and the lower first molar causes
a need for you to open the mouth slightly when brushing. Sometimes placing a toy in the
mouth helps to accomplish this. Move the brush in a circular or side-to-side motion at a
45-degree angle to the tooth surface. The bristles at the tooth and gum margin should be
angled to engage the gingival sulcus with the emphasis on the stroke away from the gum
line.30 A complete brushing will last about 2 minutes or about 30 seconds per quadrant?9
CHAPTER
(Fig. 5.10).
Equipment and Instrument Care
Power scalers need to have the stacks and tips checked regularly. Bent or fractured stacks
cannot tune and spray water correctly. This results in increased heat and decreased effec-
tiveness of the instrument. Piezoelectric and sonic tips have guides that help you determine
when it has been worn enough to be ineffective.
Compressors need to have the oil checked and changed (follow manufacturer recom-
mendations). They also have air and water filters that need to be cleaned or changed.
The fan should also be cleaned regularly. If there is an air tank, it should be drained of
condensation.
Chapter 5: The Dental Cleaning83
Instrument Sharpening
Sharpening scalers and curettes is a necessity. To check for instrument sharpness, use an
acrylic rod and engage the cutting edge of the instrument on the rod. If it is sharp, it will
shave a thin slice off of the stick.$ If it is dull, it will not engage the stick well and will
skip over the surface. You can also visually inspect the instrument by holding it in the
light. If the edges reflect the light they are dull. Make sure that the instruments are cleaned
before sharpening to avoid contaminating the stones, and then cleaned and sterilized after
sharpening to remove any sharpening remnants. This is to ensure that you do not con-
taminate your stones and to protect the patient from sharpening remnants.
Sharpening Equipment
To begin sharpening you need a sharpening stone. There are several types but there are
a few standard ones that are needed. First is a fine Arkansas stone for regular sharpening.
Next is an India stone which is coarser and used on dull instruments or to recontour
instruments. The last one is a conical stone and is used to sharpen the face of the instru-
ment. All three of them require oil during sharpening. Ceramic stones are also available
that do not require oil for sharpening. The Rx Honing machine (The Rx Honing Machine
Corp., Mishawaka, IN; www.rxhoning.com) is also available. It has guides that provide
the correct angles for sharpening curettes and scalers while a mounted stone rotates on
a mandrel.7 It is technique sensitive and must be used with caution.
Sharpening Technique
One common sharpening technique is the stationary instrument/moving stone. Place oil
on the stone and disperse it evenly. Next, hold the instrument on a counter edge with the
instrument face parallel to the floor and the tip facing you. Then hold the stone in the
opposite hand between your thumb and forefinger on the top and the bottom of the stone.
Place the stone parallel to the instrument the angle it away about 15 degrees. This will
put the stone at either an 11 o'clock or 1 o'clock position. While maintaining the correct
angle, move the stone up and down two to three short strokes, ending on a downward
stroke. If the instrument is a universal instrument, then repeat on the other side. For a
CHAPTER
curette, the stone is rotated around the front of the instrument to keep the blunt toe
shape. As a final step, take the conical stone and roll it along the face of the instrument
 to remove any spurs that night be formed on the edges.s
回
Web Content: See 5.11 W and 5.12W.
References
1. Holmstrom, S, Bellows, J, Colmery, B, Conway, L, Knutson, K, Vitoux, J. 2005.
AAHA dental care guidelines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 41:
277-283.
2. Wilkins, EM. 2009. Clinical Practice of the Dental Hygienist, 10th ed., Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
84Smafl AnimalDental Procedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
3. Nield-Gehrig, J. 2008. Fundamentals of Periodontal Instrumentation and Advanced
Root Instrumentation, 6th ed., Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
4. Mitchell, PQ. 2002. Periodontics. In The Practical Veterinarian: Small Animal Den-
tistry. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann, Pp. 59-103.
5. Wiggs, RB, Lobprise, HB. 1997. Dental equipment. In Veterinary Dentistry: Princi-
ples and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, Pp. 1-28.
6. Holmstrom, S. 2000. The complete prophy. In Veterinary Dentistry for the Technician
and Ofce Staff. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, Pp. 159-181.
7. Holmstrom, SE, Frost Fitch, P, Eisner, ER. 2004. Dental equipment and care.
In Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Small Animal Practitioner, 3rd ed.,
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, Pp. 30-129.
8. American Veterinary Dental College. Abbreviations for use in AVDC case logs,
www.avdc.org/abbreviations.pdf. Date accessed August 29, 2010.
9. Holmstrom, S. 2o00. Introduction. In Veterinary Dentistry for the Technician and
Offce Staff. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, Pp. 1-22.
10. Kessel, LM. 2000. Performing the dental prophy. In Veterinary Dentistry for the
Small Animal Technician. Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press, Pp. 81-99.
11. Newman, MG, Takel, HH, Carranza, FA. 2002. Carranza's Clinical Pathology, 9th
ed., Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
12. Gorrel, C. 2004. Oral examination and recording. In Veterinary Dentistry for the
General Practitioner. Philadelphia: Elsevier, pp. 47-55.
13. Wiggs, RB, Lobprise, HB. 1997. Oral anatomy and physiology. In Veterinary Den-
tistry: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, Pp. 55-86.
14. Lobprise, HB. 2007. Oral exam and charting. In Blackwell's Five-Minute Consult
Clinical Companion Small Animal Dentistry. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing,
Pp.3-13.
15. Hale, F. 2008. Focus on: gingival hyperplasia, www.toothvet.ca/PDFfles/gingival.
hyperplasia.pdf. Date accessed April 21, 2011.
16. American Veterinary Dental College. Tooth
mobility, www.avdc.org/?q=node/
29#mobility. Date accessed August 29, 2010.
17. American Veterinary Dental College. Furcation involvement/exposure, www.avdc.
org/?q=node/29#furcation. Date accessed August 29, 2010.
18. Holmstrom, S. 2000. The oral exam and disease recognition. In Veterinary Dentistry
for the Technician and Offce Staff. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, Pp. 23-64.
19. Lobprise, HB. 2007. Tooth resorption: feline. In Blackwell's Five-Minute Consult
CHAPTER
Clinical Companion Small Animal Dentistry. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing,
Pp. 309-313.
20. Gorrel, C. 2004. Common oral conditions. In Veterinary Dentistry for the General
Practitioner. Philadelphia: Elsevier, Pp. 69-85.
21. Hale, F 2004. Dental caries, www.toothvet.ca/PDFfles/DentalCaries.pdf. Date
accessed April 21, 2011.
 22. Holmstrom, S. 2000. Dental instruments and equipment. In Veterinary Dentistry for
the Technician and Office Staff. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, Pp. 65-98.
23. Gorrel, C. 2004. Periodontal disease. In Veterinary Dentistry for the General Prac-
titioner. Philadelphia: Elsevier, Pp. 87-110.
24. Roudebush, P, Logan, E, Hale, FA. 2005. Evidence-based veterinary dentistry: a
systemic review of homecare for prevention of periodontal disease in dogs and cats.
} Vet Dent 22:6-15.
Chapter 5: The Dental Cleaning 85
25. Hale, F. 2003. The owner-animal-environment triad in the treatment of canine peri-
odontal disease. J Vet Dent 20(2):118-122.
26. Holmstrom, S. 2000. Home care instructions. In Veterinary Dentistry for the Techni-
cian and Offce Staff. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, Pp. 65-98.
27. Bellows, J. 2010. Clinical effectiveness of sodium hexametaphosphate in the impor-
tant role of canine calculus reduction, vetlearn.com/Portals/0/SHMPwhitepapercover.
jpg. Date accessed April 21, 2011.
28. Veterinary Oral Health Council. Products currently awarded the VOHC seal,
www.vohc.org/accepted_products.htm. Date accessed August 29, 2010.
29. Berg, M. 2005. Educating clients about preventative dentistry. Vet Tech 26:
103-111.
30. Wiggs, RB, Lobprise, HB. 1997. Periodontology. In Veterinary Dentistry: Principles
and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, Pp. 186-231.
CHAPTER :
Dental Radiology
LaureI Bird, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Learning Objectives
 Learn how to position film or sensor in the feline mouth to take the following
radiographs:
口
 Maxillary incisors
 Maxillary canine teeth
口
 Maxillary premolars/molar
口
 Mandibular incisors/mandibular canine teeth
Mandibular premolars/molar
 Learn how to position film or sensor in the canine mouth to take the following
radiographs:
0  Maxillary incisors
口
 Maxillary canine teeth 
口
 Maxillary premolars/molars
 Mandibular incisors/mandibular canine teeth
口
 Mand ibular premolars/molars
 Properly arrange film (nondigital) radiographs to be read; affix films in film mounts
Label and store radiographs 
Identify normal and common abnormal radiographic structure
CHAPTER 6
Small Anirat Dentat Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, 1st edition. Edited by Jeanne R. Perrone.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
87
88Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Radiography in Veterinary Dentistry
Radiography in veterinary dentistry is invaluable in identifying pathology that cannot be
observed with the naked eye within the oral cavity. Without its use, much pathology may
go undetected by the veterinary team.' Teeth that appear normal on the surface may be
  pp aq uo i si pod po r An  a
graphs. Some of the problems that it is used to identify include endodontic disease,
periodontal bone loss, damage from tooth resorption, missing teeth, and jaw fractures.l,2
The value of dental radiography is generally underestimated and must be part of every
dental procedure.
The veterinary technician is the perfect person to perform the task of taking dental
radiographs for the veterinarian. The techniques necessary are not extremely difficult to
master and most people can learn how with some practice. In this chapter, you will learn
how to use the dental X-ray unit, how to use and read dental film or a digital sensor, and
how to develop and store film.
The Dental X-Ray Unit
Veterinary technicians are familiar with how to operate a standard X-ray machine and
the dental X-ray unit is not much different, mechanically speaking. The standard medical
X-ray unit has adjustable milliampere (mA), peak kilovoltage (kVp), and time settings.?
However, the fixed or limited range-of-motion tube head reduces its usefulness in den-
tistry. While dental radiographs can be taken with a standard medical X-ray unit, the
difficulty in moving the patient, positioning them for intraoral films, and adjusting the
machine make it unlikely that a practice could rely on this as a method for taking dental
films.
Dental X-ray units ofer many benefits to the practice of dentistry. The dental X-ray
unit is relatively inexpensive, compact, flexible, and easy to use. New or used units can
be obtained through a variety of suppliers. They can be wall-mounted next to the
station(s) where it will be used, then folded up to be relatively flat against a wall when
 not in use, or mounted on a wheeled cart, which allows the unit to be moved to different
locations, then wheeled to an out of the way corner for storage.
There are three main parts to these units: the X-ray tube head, the adjustable arm, and
the control panel (Fig. 6.1).
The X-Ray Tube Head
This part contains the anode/cathode that generates the X-rays. It includes a scale located
where the tube head attaches to the arm that can be used to determine various angles
(Fig. 6.2). The focal film distance is measured using the lead-lined tube or position-
CHA
indicating device (PID) and provides collimation that will result in less scattered radiation.
The PID comes in a variety of lengths and moving the PID closer or further from the
patient will also change the focal film distance. The best practice is to keep the end of
the PID as close to the patient and film as possible.
Chapter 6: Dental Radiology89
Figure 6.1 Wall-mounted X-ray unit.
Figure 6.2 Scale used to cetermine X-ray tube head positioning for radiographs, set at 45 degrees.
TheAdjustableArm
This part is just that, an arm that can be adjusted in a wide array of angles and at many
different levels to position the X-ray tube head. It contains adjustable screws to allow
The Control Pane!
This portion contains the settings for the unit. In many units, the kVp is fixed, as is the
mA, alleviating some adjustments to the settings. Time is usually the main setting that
CHAPTER
needs to be adjusted and many units make even that measurement simple by providing
small, medium, and large canine settings or a feline setting and then an pictogram of the
animal oral cavity allowing you to select the tooth being radiographed (Fig. 6.3). This is
essentially two buttons to push to set the unit for taking a radiograph. Should you have
a unit with adjustable kVp and/or mA, then a technique chart can be created as you
90Smafl AnimalDental Procedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 6.3 The control panel of a typical veterinary dental X-ray unit.
would for any other X-ray machine. Most units can operate on 110V, 60 Hz AC electric-
ity; although a separate electrical circuit is usually recommended.?
Just a couple of comments about safety when using dental X-ray units: Personnel
throughout the clinic should be aware of and follow all standard radiation safety proto-
cols. Everyone should always be 6ft or more from the tube head, at a 90- to 135-degree
angle to the beam or wear lead-lined equipment to minimize radiation exposure. Wearing
a dosimeter badge will also help check for inadvertent exposure. Film should never be
held in the animal's mouth by anyone (lead gloves or not). Finally, the unit should be
checked regularly for leakage by a radiation expert; many states have regulations to help
 you set up a schedule of inspection.
Dental Film and Processing
Dental Film and Processing
The dental X-ray films are inexpensive, nonscreened, direct exposure films that provide
PTER
 great detail and come in several different speeds (this refers to the amount of radiation
required to produce an image). Fast film equals less radiation, although it gives a grainier
LHA
image, with A flm being the slowest and F being the fastest. Film speeds A-C are not
used these days due to the higher radiation needed to produce an image. D-speed film
is the most commonly used veterinary dental X-ray film today. E-speed film is available
but should not be processed in a chairside developing unit unless a red light filter is used.
Chapter 6:Dental Radiology91
Figure 6.4 Assorted film sizes. Shown here are, from left to right, size 0, 2, and 4.
OPPOSITE SIDE
TOWARDTUBE
Kodak
Ultra-speedD
SAFETY1FILM
OCCLUSAL
OPEN
Figure 6.5 Colored film back with concave dot, raised dot in corner of film on front of film.
Dental film comes in a variety of sizes from O-4, although most clinics find that size
0, 2, and 4 flms work best for most dog and cat radiographs. Some manufacturers or
suppliers may use other terminology when referring to dental film. For instance, size 0
flm may also be either DF-54 or pediatric, size 2 flm may be DF-58 or periapical film,
 and size 4 may be DF-50 or occlusal film if using D-speed flm. Film should be kept in a
dark, cool, dry location protected from radiation exposure until needed'-3 (Fig. 6.4).
There are four parts to the dental X-ray film packet. The outside is a paper or plastic
 coating to protect the flm from moisture and has a white front side with a raised dot
in one corner to assist in orienting the film once it is developed and a colored back side
(Fig. 6.5). The colored side will let you know if the packet contains one (green back,
Kodak, Carestream Dental, a division of Carestream Health, Rochester, NY) or two
films (gray back, Kodak). Different manufacturers may use different color schemes so be
sure to check. The white side is always placed toward the teeth being radiographed. Once
exposed, the packet is opened only in a darkroom or chairside developing box. The packet
is opened from the colored side; there is a lead foil sheet to prevent radiation scatter that
could affect the flm image, black paper surrounds the flm protecting it and then the film
itself is in the center (Fig. 6.6). Some manufacturers combine the lead and inner paper
layers, especially for the large size 4 films.
CHAPTER
Note: The thin lead sheets should not be thrown in the garbage in most communities, but
should be sent to a lead recycler.
92Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 6.6 Dental film packet with protective outer barrier, black paper, film (green), and lead sheet
Figure 6.7 Chairside developing unit with cups for chemicals (from left to right): developer, rinse water, fixer,
and final rinse water.
 Dental film is processed in either a manual chairside developer or an automatic proces-
sor. Care must be taken when developing and handling flms as they are easily scratched,
especially when wet. While some people have tried to use standard flm processors for
their dental flms, it is not recommended as the smaller dental films may become "lost"
or stuck to the rollers. There are automatic processors available specifically for dental
film and are used the same as standard processors.? These can be purchased through most
equipment suppliers.
 If you are using a manual chairside developer, it is still relatively quick and easy to
produce a quality diagnostic image. Chairside developers are compact, light-tight boxes
that allow you to develop film close to where you take the radiographs. Films can gener-
ally be ready to read in as little as 1 minute, although they will not be dry. The chairside
developer box has two hand holes on the front side with fitted cuffs to keep light out.
 The top side of the box has a translucent orange or red flter lid. This allows you to see
PTER
what you are doing inside the box without risking light exposure to the flm. The orange
filter is used for D-speed film and the red filter is used for E- and F-speed film. Inside
CHA
the box are four cups; from left to right they contain developer, water for a rinse, fixer,
and water for the final rinse (Fig. 6.7). Film is passed from one cup to the other, from
left to right, at specific time intervals (see chemical and flm manufacturer directions,
although generally less than 30 seconds in the developer).
Chapter 6: Dental Radiology93
To develop films manually, gently mix each cup of developer and fixer and change the
rinse water for fresh, cool water at the beginning of the developing session. Ensure that
the filter cover is firmly seated so no light leaks in. Insert hands, flm, and a film clip
through the cuffed openings working with one film at a time. Open the flm packet and
attach the film clip in the corner; many people place the clip in the corner with the indent.
Gently agitate or swish the film in the developer for the given time frame (generally 15-30
seconds), then move the film to the first rinse cup and gently agitate for 5-10 seconds to
rinse excess developer from the film. Film can then be placed in the fixer cup and agitated
occasionally. Film should remain in the fixer for at least 10 minutes for a long-lasting
image, although you can briefly remove the film from the fixer and view the image after
1 or 2 minutes.? Just be sure to immediately return the film to the fixer for the full time.
They must then be thoroughly rinsed, 10-20 minutes in the final rinse cup or, preferably,
 on  a qu   n s  n ao o am  
remove chemical traces; they will feel nongreasy when completely rinsed. Be careful not
to scratch the films when rubbing them.' Allow films to dry completely, without touching
other films or they will stick together. Chemical developer and fixer can be purchased
through most veterinary distributors and generally come premixed.
Tip: Check your chairside developer box in the location you plan to use it. While the filter
tops are designed to keep light out, the bright overhead lights in clinics may require you to
 e ed aa pae a  si uoi a is e on rn a ao
film in the box, and opening and exposing one-fourth of the film at 30-second intervals; then
 ud  assxa o n ae l yn jo a u ensn se doaa
is a general haziness to the film.
Other issues some veterinarians have with taking dental X-rays are added anesthesia
time and radiation exposure due to X-ray retakes because films or images were not of
diagnostic quality (elongation, foreshortening, poor alignment with area in question,
over-/underprocessing, improper machine settings). Care should be taken when producing
films and images to minimize these errors that require retakes, for the safety of the pet
and personnel.
The Digitaf Sensor and Digitaf Images
 Digital radiography is rapidly gaining favor and popularity among veterinarians despite
the initial higher cost of the sensor and software. Luckily, digital X-rays can still be pro-
duced with the standard dental X-ray unit, so a separate unit is not needed. Perks of a
digital system include 50%-90% less radiation needed to produce an image, immediately
available images with quick retake ability should the image not be sufficient for diagnosis,
and images that can be manipulated using a computer for better viewing.* The sensors
come in limited sizes, with the most common being equivalent to a size 2 dental flm. The
sensor has an attached cord that is plugged into a desktop or laptop computer. The sensor
replaces the dental film (Fig. 6.8). It is recommended that the thin plastic hygienic sleeve
CHAPTER
be used on the sensors to prevent cross-contamination between patients and keep the
sensor dry. When radiographing larger teeth, two or more views/images will need to be
taken to see the whole tooth, and for this reason many clinics still use a size 4 dental film
for large teeth. The smooth, flat side of the sensor is placed in the mouth facing the teeth
to be radiographed, and the image is sent to a computer for immediate viewing.
94Smafl Animal Dental Procedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 6.8  Digital sensor with laptop showing digital image or phosphor plates.
 Note: Animals being radiographed should be fully anesthetized, not just sedated, so they
do not accidentally bite down on the sensor as sensors are easily damaged and costly to
replace.
Once loaded into the computer, the image contrast and brightness can be adjusted and
enlarged to assist in reading the image. Do not flip images, and rotate them with care.
Since there is not a dot on some systems to help orient directions, flipping an image can
cause reading errors and the wrong tooth may be treated.
Phosphor Plate Radiographs
Phosphor plates are another option for taking dental radiographs. It is a unique form
that combines the versatility of flm with the convenience of digital images. The phosphor
plate is a thin film placed in a protective plastic sleeve and then placed in the mouth the
same way as dental film. Once the exposure is taken, a special scanner digitizes the image,
and transfers it to a computer where it can be used in the same way as other digital
images. Advantages of phosphor plates include the ease of use, versatility, reusable films
 in sizes from O to 6, no chemicals, and a digital image with superior image quality. Dis-
advantages include the higher initial cost of a processing unit and the costs for viewing
and storage of the digital images (Fig. 6.9).
Positioning for Taking Dental Radiographs
 Intraoral flms are the most common form of radiographs used in veterinary dentistry.
Animals being radiographed should be fully anesthetized, not just sedated, so they do not
accidentally bite down on the film or sensor.
The film is placed in the mouth with the white side of the film packet facing the teeth
to be radiographed, and the digital sensor's flat side is placed toward the teeth. For all
intents and purposes, flm and digital sensor are placed in the mouth similarly. While
CHA
descriptions use the term film, if you have a digital unit, substitute the word “sensor" for
“film.”
The majority of the film should always be inside the pet's mouth. A rule of thumb is
to have the crown near the edge of the film to get as much root as possible on the film.
Chapter 6: Dental Radiology95
30
Figure 6.9 Phosphor plates (Courtesy of Jennifer Healey, Air Techniques, Allpro Imaging).
Figure 6.10 Wooden tongue depressor used to prevent film from bending in mouth.
It can be held in place using gauze, paper towel, foam wedges, or any number of avail-
able materials to keep the film tight to the teeth or hard palate. Film should never be held
in the mouth by hand, even with lead gloves on, for taking a radiograph. The film packet
should never be bent (sensors cannot be bent) when taking the radiograph as this will
create distortion of the image. To prevent bending you may use a wooden tongue depres-
sor behind the film to provide a flat surface (Fig. 6.10).
Full-mouth radiographs are a set of X-rays that include all the teeth in the mouth.
Full-mouth radiographs in both the dog and the cat are important to establish a baseline
CHAPTER
and diagnose pathology below the gum line. This is generally accomplished with a
 minimum of eight films for felines and 12 films for canines and should include lateral
views of the canine teeth.1
Positioning of the patient is sometimes a question. Many people learning to take dental
radiographs find it easiest to move the patient into sternal recumbency for maxillary
96Smafl Animal Dental Procedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 6.11  Parallel technique in a dog.
radiographs and dorsal recumbency for mandibular radiographs. Most positions described
here will be for sternal or dorsal recumbency.
'su auiop uaua 'sasodind sdenopen lot rsnf suoisod hauo on nualed au auiaow uu
 you will need to use different angles for some films.
There are only two positioning techniques typically used for intraoral films in veteri-
nary dentistry: the parallel technique and the bisecting angle technique.
The parallel technique is the easiest to master. In the canine mouth, this technique can
be used for the mandibular fourth premolars and molars. In felines, the mandibular fourth
premolars and molars can be taken with this technique.' The film packet is placed in the
mouth, parallel to the teeth to be radiographed. The PID is placed as close to the patient/
film as possible with the end parallel to the teeth and film packet. The exposure is taken
and the flm packet removed and developed as discussed earlier. Be careful to get your
film all the way back to the last molar as this tooth can be a challenge to radiograph due
to its location. No other teeth in the arcade allow the film to be placed parallel to the
teeth (Figs. 6.11 and 6.12).
The second technique is the bisecting angle. The hard palate prevents film from being
placed parallel to the roots of all maxillary teeth, and the mandibular symphysis prevents
film from being placed directly parallel to the mandibular incisors, canine teeth, and first,
second, and third premolars. The bisecting angle technique seems to cause much concern
for those trying to learn it, when in fact it is a rather simple concept to grasp. First,
 determine the line the roots of the tooth in question, now set your flm in the mouth and
determine the rostral edge of the flm. The imaginary line halfway between these two
PTER
lines is your bisecting angle. Now line up the end of the PID parallel to this bisecting
angle. A pair of swab sticks, two pens, or your fingers can be used to help you envision
CHA
the planes of the tooth roots and the flm packet. Do not be afraid to practice, as this is
a technique where practice really does make perfect.
 A technique chart can be created to assist in taking these films. I recommend having
a chart for each type of radiograph (canine or feline and then maxillary incisor,
Chapter 6:DentalRadiology97
Figure 6.12  Parallel technique in a cat.
Figure 6.13  Film placement for mandibular canine tooth and first premolar.
mandibular incisor, etc.). Record the position of the patient, then the degree of angle used,
and the result of your shot. The degree of the angle can be obtained from the scale on
the X-ray tube head. After a few takes, you should be able to identify common angula-
tions for each type of shot. This can be used as your starting point for future takes on
d e m  s a s a r    I 'd 
in sternal or dorsal recumbency use approximately 45-60 degrees on the scale, with digital
closer to the 60-degree and film closer to the 45-degree marks. There will be slight varia-
tion based on skull type, individual dentition, and you and your equipment.
CHAPTER
The first couple mandibular premolars can be hard to view on a parallel technique
radiograph as the symphysis will not allow the film (and especially a sensor) to be
advanced that far rostrally. This is also the case if you need a lateral oblique view of the
mandibular canine tooth. For this area, lay the film in the mouth supported on the man-
dibular canine teeth and set the tube at about 45-50 degrees (Fig. 6.13). For premolars
98Smafl AnimalDental Procedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 6.14  Film placement for mandibular incisors on a cat.
Figure 6.15 Film placement for mandibular incisors on a dog.
CHAPTER
the PID is positioned from the lateral side, and for the canine tooth it will be slid a bit
rostral to a lateral oblique position.
The mandibular incisors are taken by placing the flm in the mouth supported on the
mandibular canine teeth. Leave the tongue in its normal position. The tube head is set at
 45 degrees. This view also gives an additional view of the mandibular canine teeth (Figs.
6.14 and 6.15).
Chapter 6: Dental Radiology99
Figure 6.16 Film placement for maxillary incisors.
Figure 6.17 Film placement for maxillary canine tooth lateral view.
The maxillary teeth require the use of the bisecting angle for all views. For the maxil-
lary incisors, place the flm in the mouth between the maxillary canine teeth (or on the
canine teeth in smaller mouths). Angle the X-ray tube head at 45 degrees. Another tip
for this view is to line the end of the PID up parallel to the lateral line of the nares. This
 almost always gives you the proper angle for the incisors (Fig. 6.16).
The lateral oblique maxillary canine tooth can be taken by lining the tube head up as
if for an incisor view, then slide the tube head just over halfway to the lateral side. The
film can be set with the edge of the film on the palatal side of the opposite canine tooth
and premolars. Some adjustment may be needed depending on skull type (Fig. 6.17).
Maxillary premolars are radiographed by placing the flm in the mouth tight to the
 palate. The edge of the film in the mouth should be on the palatal side of the opposite
CHAPTER
teeth, not on the crowns of the teeth, with the crown of the teeth of interest on the edge
of the film. The tube head is set at 45 degrees, generally (Fig. 6.18). The maxillary fourth
premolar is taken similarly with the tube head angled just slightly rostral or distal
(oblique) to help separate the two mesial roots. This view usually includes the maxillary
molars as well.
100SmaflAnimal DentalProceduresforVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 6.18  Film placement for maxillary premolars.
The SLOB rule applies to the maxillary fourth premolar and will help you determine
which of the two mesial roots is palatal and which the buccal root is. SLOB stands for
the area where your tube head was located is the lingual root. Opposite buccal means
that, of the two mesial roots, the root that is farthest from the tube head is the buccal
root. When radiographing this tooth, record where the tube head was placed in reference
to the tooth (rostral or distal), so you can determine which root is affected when looking
at the processed radiograph.
Care and Storage of Images
Identification of films is important and can be a challenge due to their small size. Keep
in mind that these are a legal part of the patient's medical records and must be maintained
as such. Also, be sure films are completely dry before storing them to prevent films from
sticking to each other or the envelopes. To identify films, small radiographic numbers can
be placed on the films prior to exposure, with the numbers and patient information
recorded in a radiology log.3 Films can also be labeled with a permanent marker in a
way that does not affect the area of interest. Another method of identification is to place
the films in film mounts (label with owner name, patient name, date, and number of films)
(Fig. 6.19).
Once numbered or placed in mounts, films should then be placed in envelopes and can
be stored either with each patient's record or in a separate radiograph file. Radiographs
should be stored in a cool, dry location as moisture can soften the emulsion and cause
films to stick together.
    day y  e aq o s i go s e a
are part of the medical record for each patient and must be handled as such. File sizes
CHA
can be large, requiring additional computer hard drive space. Each individual series of
radiographic images should be identified with client, patient, and date taken. Depending
on the computer software used, some allow images to actually be downloaded into the
individual pet's computer record.
Chapter 6: Dental Radiology 101
Figure 6.19 Film mounts.
Note: Backups and/or hard copies are important with digital systems to help preserve the
images should a computer malfunction. In addition, it is still recommended that clinics
Anatomy of the Dental Radiograph
 Interpretation of the radiographic image is as important as creating a high-quality image.
It is recommended that you take full-mouth radiographs for comparison from one dental
procedure to the next. Solid knowledge of anatomical structures and their location is
beneficial in determining normal from abnormal. While not all anatomical features can
be seen on every radiograph, being familiar with them allows accurate identification
and interpretation when seen. Keep in mind that there is a wide variation that can still
be considered normal, and it sometimes depends on the angle when taking the film or
 age, breed, and species of the animal.
Radiolucent objects will appear black and radiodense objects are white. Starting with
the crown of the tooth, the enamel is difficult to differentiate on the crown of the tooth
Dentin is seen as medium density and encompasses most of the tooth, both crown and
 yo ads n  a si ao dd a on e pi a jo o
tooth. It occurs in both the crown and the root. If the animal is younger, the pulp cavity
will be quite wide, with the dentin being a narrower line between the enamel and the
 pulp cavity. As the animal ages, the pulp cavity goes from very wide with a narrow line
of dentin, to a narrow pulp cavity and a wide area of dentin. The cementum on the root
of the tooth is ill-defined in radiographs and will be outlined by a radiolucent (black)
line, the periodontal ligament. The lamina dura is the thin, very radiodense line in the
alveolar bone that forms the tooth socket.'-s Beyond that is the cortical bone that forms
the jaw and alveolar crest (Fig. 6.20). Be aware that the various foramina in the jaw can
appear as lesions. Knowing where these are located is very beneficial to interpretation.
Web Content: See 6.21W
There are several techniques that can be used to help orient the flms for viewing. Keep
in mind that they are viewed the same as other X-rays. It is a mirror image. The right
side of the patient is on your left and the left side is on the right. Maxillary teeth should
always be viewed as they naturally occur with the roots pointing upward and mandibular
CHAPTER
teeth with the roots pointing downward. It is easy to tell the maxillary from mandibular
teeth as maxillary teeth will have the sinuses visible and a thin radiodense line that runs
along the apices of the roots of the premolars. Refer to Figure 6.20 to see the maxillary
sinus/nasal passages with the thin white line of the palatine process. The mandibular teeth
will have the darker mandibular canal visible below the root.
102Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 6.20 Radiographs of normal tooth structures. The X-ray on left shows white line apical to tooth roots
Mous yog lapiog jeingipuew smous nuhs uo Aei-x aui pue 'maia Aiellixew e jo (alessed leseusnuis Aiellxe)
pulp canal, the black line of the periodontal ligament around each root, and the white line in the alveolar bone
that is the lamina dura. This X-ray is also properly positioned with maxillary roots pointed up and mandibular
roots pointed down.
The raised dot on film is the root of much contention, namely, "Where to place the
dot?" Some people always place the raised film dot on the right and some to the front
of the mouth. Others prefer to always place the dot on the labial/buccal side of the teeth,
regardless of whether this places the dot rostral or caudal in the mouth. Pick one and be
consistent in using it.
I prefer that the dot be placed coronal to the teeth to be radiographed for this reason:
The dot will never be in the roots of the teeth, potentially obscuring an important portion
of the film as the dot can distort the picture. See Figure 6.11 for a view of the dot coronal
to the teeth when taking a film. Figure 6.20 shows where the film clip was in the lower
right corner of the film on the left.
 I recommend using this succession to view radiographs: First place the film so the
raised dot is toward you, and then identify the teeth as maxillary or mandibular. The
mirror image comes into effect. The molars of the right arcade will be on your left and
the molars of the left arcade will be on the right.
Digital images are a bit simpler to view. There usually is no dot; the image simply
comes up just as you took it. After that, it is the same as with film. Remember, do not
flip the image or you will make it difficult to determine left or right. Rotating the image
is alright, flipping is not.
Learning what is normal is a large part of identifying what is abnormal. Once your
picture is correctly oriented, assess the entire flm for quality of exposure and developing.
Does the tooth in question, both crown and root, appear in your film? The film should
have a clear image without blurring, splotching, or fogging. All roots should be visible,
with a minimum of 2mm visible beyond the apices of the teeth. This allows you to view
the full periodontal ligament, lamina dura, and some of the alveolar bone.
Next look at all the structures in the view. It is easy to get sidetracked or make quick
assessments if there is an obvious defect; however, you do not want to miss the less
obvious issues either. Check out the bony tissue present—does it appear normal and
consistent? Do you have an adequate amount of structure to assess it? Your radiograph
should extend well beyond the roots of the teeth in question. Remember the minimum
CHA
2 mm rule.
Then start on the left and move to the right; look at each tooth—does the dentin and
pulp cavity match its neighbors, is the periodontal ligament visible all the way around
the root, is the alveolar bone at the proper height (any signs of vertical or horizontal bone
Chapter 6: Dental Radiology103
loss), any resorption or periapical lucency? Perform these steps with each tooth as you
move to the right.
Common radiographic pathology to learn to identify includes missing or unerupted
teeth, horizontal and vertical bone loss, endodontic lesions, abnormal root structure,
 retained tooth roots, tooth resorption, and fractures to the roots or bone below the gum
line. This is by no means a complete list of the pathology that may be seen but it is a
good start at identifying problems seen with radiographs.
Missing and unerupted teeth are fairly obvious. A missing tooth is one that is not
visible in the mouth and on radiograph is also not present within the bone. An unerupted
tooth is not visible in the mouth but can be seen on the radiograph below the gingiva
 and possibly impacted. Be sure you have a radiograph that goes to the ventral border of
the mandible or to the maxillary sinuses and at least one tooth beyond the normal area
for the missing tooth. Remember that the tooth may be in an abnormal position.
Web Content: See 6.22W
 There are several problems to look for when analyzing radiographs for periodontal
disease. Bone recession and alveolar bone loss can be seen as either horizontal or vertical
 Normal bone should reach 1-2mm apical to the cementoenamel junction (CEJ) and fill
the furcation of a tooth.? Horizontal bone loss is seen as bone receding from the CE]
and/or furcation of the tooth apically in a horizontal line. Vertical bone loss is seen as
bone loss that follows one or more roots apically.
Web Content: See 6.23W
Root abnormalities vary, from root tips that curve in unusual directions to extra roots.
This is very important information when planning extractions as the procedure may need
to be adjusted to accommodate an extra root or a tip that is curved in an unusual fashion.
 Fractures of the roots will appear as a solid dark gray line across the root. If the fracture
involves bone, the gray line will appear in the bone too. Retained roots will appear as
white densities in the bone subgingival to where a tooth crown is missing.
Web Content: See 6.24W
 Tooth resorption can vary. Teeth with tooth resorption will have an abnormal gray
area of the tooth crown and/or root. The crown may appear to have a large piece missing
from it or have a moth-eaten appearance. The roots can have a normal periodontal liga-
ment with only the crown affected or the periodontal ligament can be almost nonexistent
with the root and surrounding bone hard to differentiate. These teeth are in the process
of becoming ankylosed and can be difficult to extract.
Web Content: See 6.25W
Endodontic disease may not be obvious until you take a radiograph. It is exhibited in
several ways on radiographs. It may be seen as a pulp canal that is wider in the affected
tooth than other similar teeth in the same mouth. Compare the tooth in question with
the neighboring teeth and the contralateral tooth. Is the canal similar in size? If not, the
 tooth will warrant further evaluation. You may see periapical lucency as a darker gray,
radiolucent bubble or line around the apex of one or more roots. This bubble can vary
in size or shape and a foramen can mimic periapical lucency, so be cautious and know
your anatomy. Sometimes these changes can be very subtle, showing a slight widening of
the periodontal ligament space or a disruption of the lamina dura.
CHAPTER
Web Content: See 6.26W
Web Content: See 6.27W
Learning radiographic anatomy and recognizing pathology can be a challenging part
Of taking dental radiographs. With a bit of practice this skill will expedite the diagnosis
of several treatable diseases of the oral cavity.
104Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
References
1. Gorrel, C, Derbyshire, S. 2005. Veterinary Dentistry for the Nurse and Technician,
edited by Seager, M. Philadelphia: Elsevier.
 2. Bellows, J. 1999. The Practice of Veterinary Dentistry. Ames, IA: Iowa State University
Press.
3. Mulligan, T, Aller, MS, Williams, C. 1998. Atlas of Canine and Feline Dental
Radiograp by, edited by Aller, MS. Trenton, NJ: Veterinary Learning Systems.
4. Basset, J, McCurnin, D. 2010. McCurnin's Clinical Textbook for Veterinary Techni-
cians, edited by Merchant, T. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier.
5. Holmstrom, S. 2000. Veterinary Dentistry for the Technician and Ofce Staff.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
Common Dental Conditions
and Treatments
Jeanne R. Perrone, CVT, VTS (Dentistry), Sara Sharp, CVT, VTS
(Dentistry), and Patricia A. March, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Learning Objectives
 Understand what is meant by periodontal disease
What is the pathogenesis or development of periodontal disease?
What are the clinical signs of periodontal disease found during the oral exam?
 How are dental radiographs used to diagnose and assess the severity of periodontal
disease?
What are some of the commonly used treatments and therapies?
Describe the anatomy of the pulp.
Discuss the indications for endodontic therapy.
Discuss what to look for during an endodontic examination.
Discuss the different types of endodontic treatments, the steps involved, and which
treatments to recommend.
Identify common malocclusions.
 Understand the significance of malocclusions and the complications they may cause.
 Have knowledge of current therapies for the various malocclusions and assist the
veterinarian in surgery.
Identify oral anatomy, and recognize the different types of fractures.
Understand various treatment options.
 Assist the client/pet owner with patient care.
Recognize normal oral structures and be able to point out any abnormality and
recognize common oral tumors, both benign and malignant.
 Understand the current modalities of treatments for various tumors.
 Ensure patient comfort and safety, and handle and process biopsy samples correctly.
Small Animat Dentat Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses,1st edition.Edited by Jeanne R. Perrone.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
105
106Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Introduction
CHAPTER
This chapter deals with dental conditions that will come through the general practice-
periodontal disease, endodontic disease, malocclusion, jaw fractures, and oral tumors.
Some of these cases, once diagnosed in the general practice, may require the help of a
board-certified veterinary dentist or another specialist.
So if some of these cases may end up with a veterinary dentist, or another specialist,
why does the technician working in the general practice need to be familiar with these
conditions? The general practice is the front line that begins the diagnostic and treatment
process. In the case of a jaw fracture, it stabilizes the patient prior to the dental treatment.
The technician is in some cases responsible for keeping the owner informed of the patient's
status and/or treatment options. If the technician understands the disease process and the
treatment options, they are better able to serve both the veterinarian and the client.
The learning objectives for each section are stated at the beginning of this chapter
Periodontal Disease
Jeanne R. Perrone, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
What is Periodontal Disease?
Periodontal disease is a bacterial inflammation of the periodontium or periodontal tissues.
The periodontal tissues are those structures that hold the tooth in the mouth. It is the
most common oral condition found in dogs and a common finding in cats.1.2
What is important to remember about periodontal disease is that it is divided into two
separate conditions—gingivitis and periodontitis.
Pathogenesis of Periodontal Disease
Pellicle
The oral cavity is a constantly moist environment. The pellicle is a thin film consisting
of salivary proteins and glycoproteins. The pellicle protects and lubricates. Pellicle deposi-
tion occurs immediately after a dental cleaning. As the pellicle ages, it gives the oral
bacteria a surface to adhere.
Dental Plaque
As bacteria colonize on the pellicle, it forms a bioflm on the inert surfaces of the tooth
namely the crown, and becomes mature plaque. It is difficult to see but can be visualized
using a plaque disclosing solution. The bioflm thickens as the aerobic bacteria consume
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments107
 Oxygen and multiply, making the environment more suitable for anaerobic bacteria. An
CHAPTER
important thing to remember here is that dental plaque is not a disease, but is the cause
of periodontal disease. Plaque that is allowed to accumulate will result in gingivitis.!
Dentaf Cafcufus
Dog and cat mouths, unlike human's, are slightly alkaline, an environment in which
calcium salts are more likely to be deposited. Calcium carbonate and calcium phosphate
salts are found in the salivary fluid. These calcium products crystallize on the surface of
the teeth and mineralize the soft plaque. The formation of dental calculus takes 2-3 days.
The deep crevices along the surface of the calculus promote further growth of anaerobic
bacteria because oxygen is low to unavailable. Calculus cannot be removed except by
mechanical action (hand or power scaling).
Gingivitis
 Plaque extends subgingivally and the mixture of bacteria and cell degradation products
become destructive on the periodontal soft tissues and inflammation occurs and gingivitis
develops. Sulcus depths are usually normal. Gingivitis is considered reversible, meaning
that once the bacterial laden dental plaque is removed, the inflammation disappears. Not
all sites with gingivitis proceed to periodontitis. Gingivitis can become more severe in
patients with local or systemic conditions' (Fig. 7.1).
Periodontitis
Periodontitis is the inflammatory destruction of the epithelial barrier that protects the
tooth's support structure. The tooth support structures are the gingiva, cementum, peri-
odontal ligament, and the alveolar bone. Bacteria is able to break through the epithelial
barrier due to an inability of the patient to launch an effective immune response.'3 As
the bacteria moves deeper into the periodontal tissues, the bacteria run out of oxygen
and become more destructive. The epithelial barrier breaks down and the gingiva sepa-
rates or shrinks away from the alveolar bone, causing a periodontal pocket or gingival
Gingivitis
AVDC
Figure 7.1 Photograph of a maxillary fourth premolar (108) with gingivitis. Note the red line at the gingival
margin (Copyright AVDC, used with permission).
108Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
CHAPTER
Periodontitis
AVLC
recession, the marked inflammation, and the furcation exposure (Copyright AVDC, used with permission).
recession. As the bacteria moves toward the root, the periodontal ligament and the alveo-
lar bone are destroyed. As more of these support structures are affected, tooth mobility
will be seen (Fig. 7.2).
Pathogenic bacteria cause the body to activate immune and nonimmune reactions that
are responsible for the tissue damage. It is the host response to plaque bacteria and not
the virulence of the bacteria that causes the tissue damage. So, all dogs and cats will
 develop plaque, but not all that plaque will develop into periodontitis.
Clinical Signs
Halitosis or bad breath is the owner complaint when the patient is brought in for an oral
exam. When assessing the patient for periodontal disease, part of the examination occurs
with the owner present, and the rest of the exam is done under anesthesia.
 In the exam room, the whole mouth is given a subjective generalized assessment. At
this point, you can classify the severity of the periodontal disease using either the standard
(AVDC) or a classification system used by the veterinary hospital (Table 7.1).
Web Content: See 7.2W Supplemental "Stages of Periodontal Disease*"
Common clinical signs of periodontal disease are gingival inflammation, gingival reces-
sion, periodontal pockets, furcation and/or root exposure, presence of purulent discharge,
 draining tracts, and calculus. The patient may show discomfort when touched around
the mouth or when chewing food (Table 7.2).
Radiographic Signs
With periodontal disease, the alveolar bone level decreases as the inflammation moves
apically and bone is resorbed.
Bone Loss
Bone loss can be localized in one particular area or generalized where major sections of
the crestal bone are involved. Bone loss can be horizontal where the alveolar marginal
Table 7.1
 Stages of periodontal disease and their treatment options
 Radiographic
CHAPTER
Classification 
Stage
 Abbreviation 
Gum Health
Changes
 Treatment
Normal
 Stage 0
PD0
No gingival
No change to
Prophylactic
inflammation 
 alveolar height
dental cleaning
 o architecture
Gingivitis
Stage I
PD1
Mild gingival 
No change to
 Dental cleaning;: 
inflammation 
 alveolar height
 subgingival
 o architecture
 cleaning: home
care
Early
Stage II
PD2
Gingival Inflammation
Loss of
All of the
periodontitis
and swelling; bleeding
periodontal
above; with or
 on probing;: 25%
 attachment
without closed
attachment loss or stage
<25%
curettage;
 1 furcation involvement
 perioceutics
Moderate
Stage III
PD3
Gingival inflammation
10%-30% 1055
 All of the
 periodontitis
 and swelling:; bleeding
of bone
above; flap
 on probing; gum
joddns
surgery and/or
recession or
extractions
hyperplasia; 25%-50%
attachment loss; stage 2
furcation involvement;
M1 mobility possible 
Advanced
 Stage IV
PD4
Gingival inflammation
Over 30%
All of the above;
periodontitis
 and swelling, bleeding
 bone loss
placement of 
on probing: recession
bone grafting
or hyperplasia; >50%
materials if
attachment loss; pocket
needed;
depth >5 mm; stage 3
extractions if
furcation exposure;
support loss is 
M2-3 mobility
>50%
Table 7.2
 Assessment parameters using the age of the patient
Oral Exams Using the Life Stage Assessment
Using a life stage approach to evaluating oral hygiene is highly recommended.
● From birth to 9 months of age, evaluate the patient for problems related to deciduous teeth, missing
 Or extra teeth, and oral swellings.
● From the age of 5 months to 2 years, evaluate for developmental anomalies, permanent dentition,
and the accumulation of plaque and calculus.
Toy and small-breed dogs can start showing signs of periodontal disease as early as 9 months.
After 2 years of age, all dogs and cats should be checked for signs of periodontal disease and 
evaluated for the adequacy of home care.
Source: Holrmstrom, SE, Bellows,I, Colmmery, B. 2005. AAHA dental care guidelines for dogs and cats. / Arm Anim Hosp 
Assoc 41:227-283.
109
110Small AnimalDentalProcedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
CHAPTER
Figure 7.3 Radiograph of maxillary premolars. Note the horizontal bone loss (indicated by the arrows) that
involves all the teeth shown.
Figure 7.4  Radiograph of a maxillary fourth premolar (208). Note the vertical bone loss along the mesial buccal
root (indicated by the arrows).
bone around adjacent teeth is decreased (Fig. 7.3). Vertical bone loss appears as V-shaped
alveolar bone defects on one or all roots (Fig. 7.4).
Furcation Exposure
 Furcation exposure radiographically appears as an area of lucency due to loss of intra-
radicular bone (see “A" in Fig. 7.3).
Alveolar Dehiscence
Alveolar dehiscence occurs when there is a loss of the alveolar buccal bone. Radiographi
cally, there is a break in the continuity of the lamina dura and loss of the periodontal
space. Alveolar bone loss can extend from the alveolar margin apically involving the
whole root (Fig. 7.5).
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments111
CHAPTER
Figure 7.5 Radiograph of a mandibular fist molar (409). Note the alveolar dehiscence that runs along the
entire distal root (indicated by the arrow),
Treatment and Therapies
Prevention versus Treatment
In veterinary dental literature, the use of more precise terminology is recommended with
regard to the prevention and treatment of periodontal disease. It is important for the
dentistry staff to become familiar with these differences and implement them into their
vocabulary, treatment protocols, and fees.
Remove the phrase "doing a dental" from the list. It does not specify the treatment or
procedure being performed. In order to provide the best service to the client, the clinic
must detail the procedures to be implemented. So what is the difference between a dental
 prophylaxis and a periodontal treatment?
As we have seen, one typical mouth can have areas where plaque only is seen all the
  aq o pn aq on si    pn ussn  oi m
prophylaxis is a preventative treatment. A tooth with plaque and/or calculus and no
gingival inflammation qualifies as a dental prop bylaxis.
 If any gingival inflammation, recession, periodontal pockets, furcation exposure, or
mobility exists, a periodontal treatment is being performed.
Goal of Periodontal Therapy
The goal of periodontal therapy is threefold. The first goal is the reduction of periodontal
pockets or the elimination of soft tissue or bony lesions. The second goal is to slow or
u aro e on sanss an ua oi si s uosan iioad e po ssnond aun dois
environment by removing all tooth deposits through professional cleanings and diligent
home care.'
Periodontal pockets form due to the apical migration of plaque bacteria causing
destruction of soft and bony tissue. Greater than 50% attachment loss carries a poor
 prognosis. It is with professional treatments and rigorous home care that success can
be seen.
回
Web Content: See 7.2W Supplemental "Periodontal Instrumentation*"
112Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Flap surgery
CHAPTER
A flap is a section of tissue that has been cut and raised with one side still attached.
 Flaps are useful because they allow exposure of the root surface while maintaining the
attached gingiva and allows the gingiva to be sutured in such a way that the pocket can
be reduced.6
The objective of flap surgery is to allow adequate access and visibility to the diseased
area. When making the flap, the base should be 1.5 times as wide as the coronal aspect
to allow adequate blood flow. The flap needs to be sutured closed in order to prevent
displacement, bleeding, hematoma formation, and infection.6
are used to gain visibility for bony areas to perform procedures such as root planing and
pocket elimination. Using a periosteal elevator, the instrument is placed under the peri-
osteum and rocked until it is peeled away from the bone. Partial-thickness leaves the
 periosteum. This is used in areas where there are thin, bony plates, or in areas where
there is dehiscence where bone must be protected or in areas where the bone loss is
 permanent.6
Q
Web Content: See 7.2W Supplemental "Flap Procedures*
Regenerative therapy
 The goal of regenerative therapy is to keep the faster growing alveolar mucosa and gingi-
val connective tissue out of the lesion to allow the growth of the periodontal ligament and
bone. Osseopromotive products such as Consil (Nutramax, Baltimore, MD), which is a
biosynthetic particulate glass material, acts as a barrier and stimulates new bone growth.2
In order for regenerative therapy to be successful, all debris and granulation must be
removed to clean, healthy bone or tooth surface. Pre- and postoperative radiographs
should be taken. Removal of any diseased marginal gingiva would also be beneficial. A
full-thickness flap that includes attached gingiva may be necessary to close the lesion
without any tension. Schedule a recheck appointment at 10-14 days with a follow-up
cleaning, exam, and radiographs 3-4 months later.
Periodontal splinting
When teeth are mobile, it decreases the chances of retention. If the plan is to try regenera-
tive therapy, splinting the teeth may provide stability. This technique can also be used
after a traumatic luxation or subluxation of a tooth. The teeth are cleaned and polished
and any debris or granulation tissue is removed. The osseopromotive product is placed
in the defect and suture closed. A band of dental acrylic is placed around the teeth in the
area of the defect with stabile tooth on either side. The acrylic attaches one tooth to
another for stabilization.6
The splinted area must be cleaned daily using rinses. Regular recheck must follow with
a full oral exam with radiographs in 3-4 months.
Extraction or exodontics
Role of dental radiology. Preoperative dental radiographs are necessary. Knowledge of
abnormal anatomy and pathology will allow the steps of the extraction to be planned.
Postoperative radiographs to assess the extraction should also be taken.
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments 113
Types of extractions. There are two basic extraction techniques: (1) closed or nonsurgical,
which involves simple luxation or elevation without the removal of alveolar bone; and
CHAPTER
(2) open or surgical, which involves raising a mucoperiosteal flap to reveal alveolar bone.
 pq o u pa an o ssi sn h q pasi si d a
mucogingival line. Two-thirds of the root length of the alveolar bone is removed using a
bur on a high-speed handpiece to expose the roots.7 The exposed roots allows the doctor
to have a purchase point to place a dental elevator and start elevating the tooth. The
 open technique can be used on all teeth and is recommended if the tooth is not mobile.
When working with multirooted teeth, it is best to section the tooth into single rooted
sections using a taper fissure bur on a high-speed handpiece. In order to section a tooth,
the gingival attachment to the tooth is cut exposing the furcation. The bur is inserted
into the furcation and moved coronally cutting into the crown.
When using a closed or open extraction technique, suturing the gingiva over the defect
is recommended. Suturing reduces postoperative pain. The suture material should be
absorbable on a reverse cutting needle; 3-0 to 5-0 chromic gut is fine for most extractions
and 3-0 to 5-0 poliglecaprone 25 where an extended healing time is needed such as an
oronasal fistula repair.
Web Content: See 7.2W Supplemental "Dental Extractions*"
Web Content: See 7.2W Supplemental "Extraction Instrumentation'"
Oronasal fistula. An oronasal fistula is a communication between the oral cavity and the
nasal cavity. An oronasal fistula can occur in different ways. With periodontal disease, it
Occurs due to the continuous bone and attachment loss as the pathogenic bacteria moves
down the root. Eventually, the bacteria erode the plate that separates the oral cavity from
the nasal cavity.
Oronasal fistulas can occur with any tooth in the maxilla, but most commonly the
canine tooth.
Symptoms of the presence of an oronasal fistula are chronic sneezing, sometimes with
a purulent and/or bloody discharge. Dogs with a dolichocephalic head shape are most
commonly affected, especially dachshunds.8
Oronasal fistulas can only be diagnosed when the patient is under general anesthesia.
A periodontal probe is the instrument of choice. The probe is inserted along the palatal
aspect of the maxillary tooth. The periodontal probe will usually drop into the pocket
deeply and bleeding can occur from the corresponding nostril. Another test is to gently
flush the pocket with saline—if the saline comes out of the corresponding nostril, there
is communication.
Web Content: See 7.2W Supplemental "Oronasal Fistula*"
Treatment of oronasal fistulas is extraction of the tooth or teeth in the area of the
fistula. The extraction site must be thoroughly cleaned of debris and granulation tissue.
  ou s an s d ps s e  s s  a
long-lasting absorbable suture such as polyglactin 910 or poliglecarpone is used to close
the tissue. Blood-tinged saliva and nasal discharge is common during the first 24-48 hours
after surgery. Home care includes the use of antibiotics and pain medications.
Antibiotic use in periodontal disease treatment
Systemic antibiotics are not recommended for periodontal disease prevention. In a clean
and healthy mouth, antibiotics could decrease beneficial, along with pathogenic,
organisms.
114Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Systemic antibiotics should be used if periodontal disease is present or if an invasive
CHAPTER
periodontal therapy is being performed.? The most commonly used systemic antibiotics
for the treatment of periodontal disease is clindamycin, amoxicillin/clavulanate, and
doxycycline. Clindamycin and amoxicillin/clavulanate are the most effective against a
large percentage of oral pathogens.
Systemic antibiotics can be given preoperatively or perioperatively. The goal is to bring
the level of the drug in the blood up to therapeutic levels prior to the treatment. If you
have a patient that has a chronic systemic disease such as diabetes, kidney, liver, or heart
abnormalities, these patients would benefit from a preoperative course of antibiotics.
Perioperative antibiotics are usually recommended in cases where oral ulcerations.
moderate to severe periodontitis, or systemic disease exist. It should be given prior to the
ganradoisod rou I isea ie ii pue apaod an go fuuiaq
Locally applied antimicrobials do not subject the body to unnecessary antimicrobial
exposure. Doxycycline is placed in a biodegradable delivery system that is applied to the
affected periodontal pocket. It remains in the periodontal pocket for se veral weeks, slowly
releasing therapeutic levels of doxycycline.10
Importance of Foffow-Up Visits and Periodontaf Maintenance
Provide oral and written home care instructions individualized to the patient. Alert the
client to possible side effects such as bleeding coughing, nasal discharge, neurological
signs, vomiting diarrhea, anorexia, or signs of pain. Soft food should be fed either in the
form of moistened hard food or canned food. Set up a recheck appointment for after the
antibiotics have been taken.
Telephone the client the day after surgery to inquire about the patient's condition,
ability to give the medication, the patient's tolerance of the medication, and to answer
 any questions or concerns.
At the recheck appointment, check the sutured areas for signs of dehiscence or further
infection. If the suture sites look healthy and healing is taking place, resume the patient's
regular diet. Go over home care instructions again and revise if necessary. Schedule more
recheck appointments until the disease or wound is controlled—monthly to every 3
months.
Assess Your Patient and Your Cfienf
The role of the veterinarian and the technician is education, treatment, and support.
Management of periodontal disease requires the building and nurturing of the relationship
between the owner, animal, and the environment. The owner is the one who will be
investing a high level of time and commitment. It is important that the owner feels that
they are part of the treatment decisions that will best suit their pet based on their ability
to carry out the treatment.ll
Summary
Prevention and treatment of periodontal disease is a commonly dealt with issue in the
veterinary practice. In order to maintain good long-term oral hygiene or treat existing
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments 115
periodontal disease takes input from the veterinary staff, the client, and the pet. The
combination of practicing high-quality dentistry, updating your knowledge and treatment
CHAPTER
protocols, knowing when to refer, and solid client support brings about a successful
outcome for the patient.
With the presence of a veterinary technician specialty group in dentistry, the opportuni-
ties for technicians to gain further knowledge in this field are more available both at a
local and at a national level. With periodontal disease being the most frequently clinically
Occurring condition in dogs and cats, it is imperative that the veterinary technician be
current with the most up-to-date information regarding pathogenesis, treatment options,
and home care.
 Part of what makes a veterinary technician an indispensable part of the medical staff
is the ability to bridge the gap between the client and the veterinarian. Your level of
professionalism is gauged by your knowledge and, more importantly, how well you can
communicate your knowledge. The medical knowledge of the procedures used in the
prevention and treatment of periodontal disease involved is crucial.
Endodontic Disease
Sara Sharp, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Anatomy of the Pulp
The general definition of endodontics is the treatment of the pulp of the tooth. The pulp
is made up of blood vessels, nerves, and connective tissue that help support the odonto-
blastic cells lining the pulp chamber of the tooth. The apex of each tooth has an opening
called the apical delta. When a tooth becomes infected or traumatized, the animal is able
to feel pain because of the nerves that run through the root apex. Infection is also able
 to spread from the inside of the tooth and from the outside of the tooth into the pulp.
Web Content: See Section 1, 1.13 W
Indications for Endodontic Therapy Due to Trauma
1.
 Discolored teeth—indicating possible necrosis of the pulp.
2.
 Fractured teeth with an exposed nonvital pulp.
3. Fractured teeth with an exposed vital pulp. These fractures are to be treated within
an o dnnd aun moe on roue sisou lednd pre oi a po poad ous e
to develop.
 4. Fractured teeth with a “near" exposure causing sensitivity and increased chance of
infection and further fracture.
5. Preventative endodontics—this treatment is provided for teeth that are at high risk
of fracture. Patients that fall into this category are:
 Dogs that chew at cage doors causing continual wear to the distal aspects of their
canine teeth.
116Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Police dogs that practice bite work on a hard sleeve causing wear or possible
CHAPTER
fracture of the canine teeth. The canine teeth are the police dog's weapon and
need to be protected.
Dogs that do agility or fly ball competition, where toys are constantly being
carried causing wear to the canine teeth.
The Endodontic Exam
Animals with endodontic disease are painful. The dead and dying pulp of the tooth causes
inflammation, infection and thus pain receptors are stimulated causing oral sensitivity
 and severe discomfort. Many pet owners do not perceive their animals pain, however.
Pets are able to hide their pain until they are no longer able to compensate, then the pain
will manifest itself in symptoms.
Symptoms of oral pain include the following:
 Salivation
 Inappetance
Lethargy
Inability to eat or drink properly
口
10PO
口
Swelling/redness
Draining lesions on the gingiva
Reluctance to chew
Inability to close the mouth properly
Reluctance to play or be petted
Changes in socialization
 Dropping of food while eating
Vocalization with oral activity
Ear and ocular pain
Ocular discharge
A complete history needs to be taken focusing on when the injury occurred or abnormal-
ity was found. Treatment does involve the patient going under anesthesia. A full physical,
oral exam and presurgical blood work needs to be performed.
Once under anesthesia, each tooth must be assessed on an individual basis for disease
both visually and using dental radiographs. A full survey of dental radiographs should
be performed on the patient during the assessment. This will help tell the veterinarian the
health and stability of the affected tooth by looking at the pulp chamber of the tooth,
the surrounding tissue, bone, and ligament. The pulp chamber size should be evaluated
to see if the maturation process of the tooth has progressed at the same rate as the other
teeth. As a tooth matures, the pulp chamber gets narrower. This is a good way to monitor
if the maturation of the tooth was interrupted or stopped due to infection or damage.
Radiographs will also show the presence of periapical lysis, degradation of the periodontal
ligament, and integrity of the surrounding bone structure. All of these factors will help
determine the severity of the endodontic disease and the percentages of a successful end-
odontic treatment.
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments117
Advantages to Endodontic Therapy
CHAPTER
Less invasive than extraction
Recovery time is faster
Integrity of jaw is stronger with tooth in place
Highly successful
Very efficient procedure
Cost is comparable with a surgical extraction
The Endodontic Treatment
Types of Endodontic Therapy
Vital pulp therapy
1.
 Standard root canal therapy
2.
3.
 Surgical root canal therapy
Please note that before any of these procedures are performed, a local/regional nerve
block is administered to the patient to help with pain control during the operation. A
local block helps lessen the amount of gas anesthesia needed, and helps with postopera-
tive pain control. See Chapter 4.
Patient and Treatment Considerations for Endodontic Therapy
If the animal does “mouth work" found in agility, field trials, and obedience, the tooth
that has been damaged needs to be considered. Further damage to these teeth is possible.
In this case, the crown may need to be amputated further to take it out of occlusion, thus
preventing further damage, or a metal crown needs to be placed after endodontic therapy.
If the owner wants to keep the remaining crown intact, a crown or on-lay for this tooth
could be placed to provide additional strength. A crown is not as strong as the original
tooth; however, it will be stronger than not having protection to the crown. The consid-
erations for crown therapy on fractured teeth include cost, further anesthetics to place
the crown, and consideration of the oral activity of the pet. If the animal is unsupervised
with oral activity, the crown can be lost, or the tooth could break further due to sheer
force on the crown by inappropriate oral activity.
The environment, both external and internal, needs to be a consideration in vital pulp
therapy. If the animal has severe periodontal disease, or if he comes from an external
environment that is not clean, or has oral habits that are not sanitary, the owner may be
dnd pea e on pasoddo se Adera peueo ioor prepus e ym paaood oi pooua
therapy due to the increase in bacterial exposure.
After determining all the above factors, the veterinarian can help the client make an
educated choice as to which procedure would be best for their animal.
118Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
VitalPulpTherapy
CHAPTER
Vital pulp therapy is a procedure where the tooth has been freshly fractured and the pulp
is still vital or living. The procedure is short. There are many factors that need to be taken
into consideration when performing a vital pulp therapy. These include the following:
■The age of the animal
■
 The length of time the tooth has been fractured
■
Which tooth has been fractured
 The age of the animal must be considered because of the canal development. Apexogenesis
may not be complete. Apexogenesis describes the completion of normal developmental
root lengthening in young permanent vital teeth. The process of these procedures can be
up to 24 months.2 If the animal is very young, less than 24 months of age, the pulp canal
is still very wide and the apex of the root may not have closed. In young permanent teeth,
the tooth walls are thin so the tooth is not very strong. An open apex will have to have
an apexification performed first so that the apex will close and the tooth will continue
to mature. Apexification is the process of stimulating the apex to close with hard tissue.
This procedure is performed when a necrotic pulp is present in an incompletely developed
young permanent tooth where normal tooth development is delayed by an infectious or
 This does not preclude a young animal from having more endodontic therapy in the
future.
Apexification can be done by packing a thin layer of a lining material such as calcium
hydroxide in the fracture site and placing a restoration filling on top. The calcium hydro-
xide will irritate and stimulate the pulp to close the apex of the tooth. If necessary,
the tooth can be reopened after this has occurred and standard root canal therapy
performed.'3
The length of time that the tooth has been fractured is also important. As long as the
pulp is exposed to the outside environment, it is being exposed to bacteria that can infect
the pulp. Vital pulp therapy should not be performed if the tooth has been fractured with
pulp exposure for more than 48 hours. The owner must be warned that the vital pulp
therapy can fail and that a standard or even surgical root canal may have to be performed
at a later date. The tooth must be monitored for the lifetime of the animal.
 The vital pulp therapy procedure is faster than standard root canal therapy because
the pulp remains mostly intact. Sterility of the procedure is very important. Although the
mouth is not sterile to begin with, we do not want to introduce further contamination
so an aseptic environment should try to be maintained throughout the procedure
The first step is to radiograph the tooth to determine the extent of damage to the tooth.
If the crown is fractured, and the root is intact, this tooth is a good candidate for vital
pulp therapy. The integrity of the bone surrounding the tooth and the presence of any
apical lesions should be checked. If there is a vertical crack or fracture in the tooth, further
therapy may be required including standard root canal therapy and a crown placement
(Fig. 7.6).
Steps of the vital pulpotomy
1. After the radiograph has been taken, the mouth should be rinsed thoroughly to help
cut the bacteria count and the affected tooth should be soaked for about 5 minutes
with a chlorhexidine solution to help decrease the bacteria count.
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments119
CHAPTER
Fractured tooth tip removed and vital pulpotomy performed.
Figure 7.7 MTA placement into canal after amputating 5mm of tooth root.
2. A sterile bur and handpiece should be used to amputate the first 5 mm of the exposed
pulp. The pulp should bleed profusely at his step. The area is then gently lavaged
with cold sterile saline to help control hemorrhage.
 3. A thin layer of a lining cement such as mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) or calcium
hydroxide is then placed. This irritates the pulp to form a bridge over the exposed
pulp, thus giving it a protective layer between it and the external environment
(Fig. 7.7).
4.  A intermediate restorative layer such as a glass ionomer should then be placed over
the layer of lining cement providing a foundation between the cement liner, that is
protecting the pulp, and the final restoration.
5. A final restoration is then placed over the cured glass ionomer and shaped and
smoothed. After this is cured, a radiograph is then taken of the final restorations to
be sure there are no air pockets present (Fig. 7.8).
The tooth should be radiographed after 6 months to check for further maturation of the
pulp and also for signs of periapical disease. After that, the patient should be monitored
yearly at each dental cleaning for continued signs of infection or death of the pulp.
Home care for the patient should include a few days' course of nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) to help cut down on inflammation and pain. The client
120Small AnimalDentalProcedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
CHAPTER
Figure 7.8  Final radiograph of completed vital pulpotomy.
should also monitor the tooth weekly for signs of discoloration, further damage, fistula
formation on the gingiva above the affected tooth, and signs of pain. If any of these signs
Occur, the patient should be anesthetized and radiographed to see if the vital pulp therapy
may be failing.
Standard Root Canal Therapy
Standard root canal therapy involves removal of all of the pulp and nerve, disinfecting
the canal, and filling the canal and filling and capping it. This procedure will make the
tooth nonvital but in doing so, will remove pain and allow the animal to keep the tooth
maintaining normal dental occlusion.
A standard root canal should be performed if a tooth has been fractured for more than
48 hours or if it has been determined that the pulp may already be contaminated and is
nonvital.
Steps of the standard root canal therapy
1. The patient should be anesthetized and radiographs taken to determine the amount
of damage sustained and the apex evaluated for signs of periapical disease and/or
root fracture or disease (Fig. 7.9).
2. If the radiograph shows that the animal is a good candidate for a standard root canal
therapy, the affected tooth should be disinfected and asepsis should be maintained.
3. A direct access site into the pulp through the tooth surface needs to be established.
This will help with accessibility to the natural curve of the tooth root and prevent
strain and stress on the files that will be used, thus preventing separation of the file
or breakage of the file within the tooth (Fig. 7.10).
4. There are many types of fles that can be used to help remove the nerve and pulp
from the tooth. The files each have a different function. The files also come in many
lengths to fit many canal sizes. The Hedstrom file is used in a push/pull motion. The
K-file is used in a twisting motion; the barbed broach can be used to “snag" the pulp.
 5. An ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) preparation is a chelating compound that
can be used to help lubricate the files and softens the dentin.
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments 121
CHAPTER
Figure 7.9 Radiograph of tooth prior to root canal treatment to check for integrity of bone and apex. Note the
apical abscess present on the distal root of 208.
6. A radiograph should be taken when the file reaches the apex of the root to be sure
that it is all the way down to the apex and to check that it has not gone past the
apex of the tooth.
Web Content: See 7.11W
 7. A 6% solution of sodium hypochlorite (household bleach) should be infused into the
canal and left to stand for approximately 5 minutes. This will help with canal disin-
fection. It will infuse into all lateral canals and help to soften any additional debris
left behind.
 8. The sodium hypochlorite solution is then flushed out with sterile saline and the
 debrided canal is dried with paper points. Paper points are rolled pieces of paper that
are conical shaped and sized to fit canal sizes. The canal should be thoroughly dried
and no sign of blood or pulp should be noted. If there is debris still noted, the filing
process should be resumed until the canal is clean and flushed.
9. A sealant material is placed into the clean canal. This mixture will help with sealing
the lateral canals and provides an improved apical seal. Gutta percha is a rubber-
based material that is used to help fill the canal after cleaning and sealing.
10. Gutta percha comes in many forms—solid points or liquid. A three-dimensional fill
 is desired. The goal of the placement of the gutta percha is to provide a nonirritating.
inert fluid tight seal in the pulp chamber. Radiographs are taken during the filling
122Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
procedure to determine that the material is reaching the apex of the canal and the
CHAPTER
gutta percha is providing a tight seal. If there are voids in the gutta percha, or if it
extends past the end of the apex, the process will need to be started over until a good
obturation or flling of the canal is complete.
Web Content: See 7.12W
11. A glass ionomer is then placed over the gutta percha forming an intermediate layer
between the filling material and the final restoration.
12. A final restoration is then placed on top of the glass ionomer and a radiograph should
be taken of the final work. Again, voids or air bubbles should be noted and restora-
 tions may need to be replaced if any are present.
®
Web Content: See 7.13W
®
Web Content: See 7.14W
Aftercare for the root canal patient may consist of NSAIDs for a few days to help relieve
any inflammation and also for any temporomandibular joint (TMJ) pain that they may
incur. Antibiotics should not be needed unless they are indicated for an apical abscess.
The final filling should be checked after a month and the owners should be instructed to
also monitor the filling and the gingiva above the tooth for any fistula formation, swell-
ing, or pain. A radiograph should be taken after 6 months to check for apical abscess.
Yearly radiographs should be taken to monitor the tooth throughout the life of the
patient.
Surgical Root Canal Therapy
A surgical root canal can be performed along with a standard root canal therapy when
there is disease of the apex of the root. If, upon radiographing the tooth, the apex of the
tooth is open, or if there is an apical disease or destruction is present, then a standard
root canal therapy and a surgical root canal therapy could be performed.
Web Content: See 7.15W
1.
 Following the conclusion of the standard root canal therapy, a “window" is opened
 in the gingiva and bone overlying the apex of the tooth where the abscess is located.
 A gingival flap is made and reflected back exposing the bone. The bone is then drilled
away until the apex of the tooth is exposed.
3.
 The area is then curetted and all the granulation and diseased tissue is debrided. The
area is then flushed thoroughly and dried. The apex of the tooth root is amputated
(about 2-3 mm) and a cement material is placed in the apex of the root, thus sealing
it off from top and bottom. Once the cement is in place, the gingiva is then sutured
back over the “window" and a radiograph is taken of the finished procedure.
The animal will need to be monitored closely for signs of failure of the procedure. Owners
should watch for pain, swelling, and fistula formation over the apex of the tooth root on
the gingiva. If this occurs, the tooth will probably need to be extracted. Failure rate of a
surgical extraction is slightly higher than that of a standard root canal due to the presence
of infection at the root tip. We are unable to tell if all infection has been removed during
the procedure. Aftercare of the patient should involve not only NSAIDs for swelling and
pain but also a course of an appropriate antibiotic. A radiograph should be taken at 6
months and then yearly after to monitor the stability of the tooth.
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments 123
In Conclusion
CHAPTER
Have information available and give owners all options when making a decision. There
is information available on the website of the AVDC (www.avdc.org), the American
Veterinary Dental Society (www.avds-online.org), and the Academy of Veterinary Dental
Technicians (www.avdt.us). Be sure to supply owners with appropriate handouts and
websites for them to research on their own also.
When recommending endodontic procedures, it is important to educate the owner
of all options that are available. Remember, it is best to try and save teeth whenever
possible. Extraction should be the last option.
Malocclusion
Patricia A. March, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Normal Occlusion
A normal or “ideal" occlusion is described as the perfect alignment or interdigitation
between the upper and the lower teeth, when the mouth is closedl4 (Figs. 7.16 and 7.17).
This occurs because the maxilla is longer and wider than the mandible. The maxillary
incisors will be in a rostral position to the mandibular incisor teeth. The mandibular
canines will be positioned between the maxillary third incisors and the maxillary canines,
AVDO
Figure 7.16 Normal occlusion (Copyright AVDC, used with permission).
Figure 7.17 Normal occlusion (Copyright AVDC, used with permission).
124Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
called the “dental interlock."1s The premolar teeth will occlude in a specific pattern, not
CHAPTER
overlapping, but interdigitating. This effect has been termed a "scissor or pinking shear
effect."i6 There will also be a very close alignment of the developmental grooves of the
 maxillary fourth premolars and the mandibular first molars. Several things may contribute
to jaw occlusion, such as nutrition, environment, trauma, and genetics. Genetics factor
in when taking into account the normal size and shape of the head of certain breeds of
dogs and cats.
 Brachycephalic breeds, such as bulldogs, boxers, pugs, and Burmese and Persian
cats, have a shortened maxilla with crowded and rotated teeth. This abnormality results
from chondrodystrophy of the chondrocranium rather than an overgrowth of the
mandible.17
Mesocephalic or mesatocephalic breeds, such as German shepherds and Labrador
retrievers, have a well-proportioned head where the maxilla is longer and wider than the
mandible. The teeth are evenly spaced and in a normal occlusion, called a *scissor bite.*18
Dolichocephalic breeds, such as greyhounds and Shetland sheepdogs, have an elon-
 gated muzzle with increased interdental spaces or diastema between the premolars.
A malocclusion is defined as any deviation of the normal occlusion.l4 This condition
may occur due to congenital or hereditary factors causing irregularity of the jaw bones,
or teeth erupting in an abnormal position. These abnormalities will typically appear after
eruption of the deciduous teeth, and should be noticed during the eruption of the perma-
nent dentition. As a technician, you should become familiar with the eruption times and
 eruption proces may also be compromised, delaying or impeding deciduous and/or per-
manent teeth eruption. Due to the crowding or misalignment of the teeth causing accu-
mulation of plaque and debris, these animals are predisposed to periodontal disease.
a po roo an 'aed ai oi siop anss os a  yan paosod asa
 mouth, and oronasal fistula formation or gingival trauma. Fracture or excessive wearing
or attrition due to improper tooth contact may also occur.
Types and Treatments of Malocclusions
Malocclusions are divided into symmetrical and asymmetrical skeletal malocclusions.
Symmetrical Skeleta! Malocclusions
Class I malocclusion (MAL/1) or neutrocclusion is defined as a normal relationship
between the maxilla and the mandible, with one or more teeth out of alignment.14
Class I malocclusion: base-narrow canine, base-wide mandibular canine, lance teeth,
rostral crossbite, and caudal crossbite.
Base-narrow canine
Base-narrow canine or "lingually displaced mandibular canine" is a condition where the
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments 125
in a lingual position. This type of malocclusion may be due to persistent deciduous man-
CHAPTER
dibular canine teeth.
Base-wide mandibular canine
Base-wide mandibular canine occurs when the mandibular canine tooth or teeth flare out
in a lateral position. This is often associated with lancing maxillary canines and may lead
to the inability to lift certain portions of the lips and protruding tips of the canine teeth.
 Prolonged exposure of the teeth can cause drying or desiccation of the crown tips, which
may result in tooth discoloration.
Lance teeth
Lance tooth, which is a mesioversion or retroversion of the maxillary canine tooth, is
often due to a lack of or a decreased diastema between the third incisors and the maxil-
lary canines. This condition is very common in Shetland sheepdogs.
Rostral crossbite
Rostral crossbite occurs when the maxillary incisors are displaced palatally and/or the
mandibular incisor teeth are displaced labially.
Web Content: See 7.18W
Caudal crossbite
Caudal crossbite is diagnosed when there is an improper, reversed relationship between
the maxillary fourth premolar and the mandibular first molar. This condition is common
in sight hounds and collies.
Class ff Mafoccfusion (MAL/2) or Mandibufar Distoccfusion
Class II malocclusion is defined as a mandible that is shorter than average.14 This common
malocclusion has often been referred to by the terms "overjet," "overbite," or "mandibu-
 lar brachygnathism." Teth may be improperly aligned or malpositioned.
Web Content: See 7.19W
Web Content: See 7.20W
Class IHl Malocclusion (MAL/3) or Mandibular Mesiocclusion
Class II malocclusion is defined as a mandible that is longer than normal.14 This type
of malocclusion has often been referred to as “reverse scissor bite," "prognathism,
or “underbite." Brachycephalic dogs and cats are frequently placed in this category,
although there is normally an abnormal relationship between the maxilla and mandible.
When the mouth is in a closed position, the maxillary and mandibular incisors meet
in a level or even bite. When the maxillary incisors align on the lingual aspects of
126Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 7.3 Dental malocclusions
PTER
CHAI
 Distoversion (Dv) is the correct term for a tooth that is abnormally angled in a caudal direction.
Mesioversion (Mv) is used to describe a tooth that is abnormally angled toward the midline.
Linguoversion (LV) should be used to identify a mandibular tooth that is abnormally angled toward the
tongue.
Labioversion (LABv) is the proper term for an incisor or canine tooth that is abnormally angled toward
the lips.
 Buccoversion (Bv) is a more precise term used to describe a premolar or molar tooth that is
abnormally angled toward the cheek.
 Crossbite (XB) is a term used when there is an abnormal positioning between the maxillary tooth or
teeth and the mandibular tooth or teeth. This abnormal position may be in a buccal or a labial
direction.
Rostral crossbite (RxB) is when one or more mandibular incisors are labial to the maxillary incisors
when the mouth is in the closed position. This was previously called "anterior crossbite."
Caudal crossbite (CxB) is when one or more mandibular cheek teeth are buccal to the maxillary cheek
teeth when the mouth is in a closed position. This used to be called "posterior crossbite."
the mandibular incisors when the mouth is closed, this is often referred to as a “reverse
scissor bite.*15
Web Content: See 7.21W
Q
Web Content: See 7.22W
Asymmetrical Skeletal Malocclusions
Asymmetrical skeletal malocclusions occur when there is a malocclusion or malposition-
ing of individual teeth'4 (Table 7.3).
Asymmetrical skeletal malocclusions are further subdivided into the direction of move-
ment, such as rostrocaudal, side-to-side, or dorsoventral.
Maxillary-mandibular asymmetry in a rostrocaudal direction is seen when there is a
 mandibular mesiocclusion or distocclusion present only on one side of the face.14
Maxillary-mandibular asymmetry in a side-to-side direction is seen where there is a
loss of normal midline alignment between the maxilla and the mandible. The term “wry
 r u si  Ai  e se   d  
mended due to its nonspecificity.
14
Maxillary-mandibular asymmetry in a dorsoventral direction is seen when there is an
abnormal vertical spacing between the left and right sides of the mouth when it is in a
closed position. It is also called and “open bite" (OB).
Position Statements
The American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) states that the correction of a
conformational defect in a dog or cat is unethical, except when that abnormality affects
the health and or welfare of the animal.
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments 127
The AVDC states that the goal of an orthodontic procedure is to provide pets with a
CHAPTER
healthy and functional occlusion. The AVDC supports the AVMA policy regarding cos-
metic procedures that enhance the appearance of show or breeding animals.
 The American Kennel Club (AKC) declares it is illegal to show a dog whose conforma-
tion has been altered in any way. The AKC has standards relating to dental corrections,
stating that "a dog is considered changed in appearance by artificial means if it has been
subjected to any type of procedure that has the effect of obscuring, disguising, or elimi-
nating any congenital or hereditary abnormality or any undesirable characteristic or that
does anything to improve a dog's natural appearance, temperament, bite, or gait. ... These
procedures include: restorative dental procedures, the use of bands or braces on teeth, or
any alteration of the dental arcade"19 (www.akc.org).
Treatment of Malocclusions
The principle of orthodontic movement involves the use of force. Force is applied to the
crowns of the teeth, which exerts on the roots, which press against the alveolar bone.
The goal of treatment of malocclusions is to restore a functional bite.
The bone is reabsorbed at the side where there is pressure and new bone is laid down
on the tension side. This will lead to the tooth gradually moving." Light, continuous
forces result in more rapid (physiological) tooth movement and less patient discomfort,
whereas heavy, continuous forces will result in pathological movement or damage to both
the tooth and the periodontal tissues.21
The goal of treatment is to restore a functional bite. This is accomplished by diagnos-
ing the malocclusion early and preventing the various problems that may occur due to
the abnormal bite.
Diagnosis is accomplished via a thorough oral examination and intraoral radio-
graphs. If an animal's bite is considered functional and nontraumatic, treatment may
not be necessary. The decision to provide orthodontic treatment is usually based on
 gss s o  o  r m    g ud
s     dd p a i  on s
dard root canal therapy, or extraction of the affected tooth or teeth. Orthodontic
d o    s ss s   
tooth buds, root resorption, root ankylosis, and overcorrection and malpositioning of
affected teeth.
 Common equipment used in orthodontics includes orthodontic wire, buttons, bands,
wire twisters, acrylic composite material, acid-etch, enamel bonding material, brushes,
light-cure gun, and nonfluoridated polish.
There are two main types of orthodontic treatment—interceptive and corrective.
Interceptive Orthodontics
Interceptive orthodontics is the process of removing improperly aligned teeth in the hopes
of preventing further problems as the patient ages and the jaws continue to grow. If
an animal has deciduous teeth in malocclusion, the affected teeth are extracted between
4 and 6 weeks prior to the expected permanent tooth eruption.
128Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Corrective Orthodontics
PTER
CHAI
When deciding to administer corrective orthodontics in a pure-breed animal, there are
certain ethical considerations. The AVDC has issued a position statement:
 In cases of rostral crossbite, odontoplasty performed on permanent teeth in an
attempt to alleviate crowding or a labial maxillary arch bar, with button brackets
and elastic ligatures or chains may be used to move the maxillary incisors forward.
Other options would be the use of a lingual maxillary arch bar with finger spring,
a mandibular and maxillary incline plane, a maxillary expansion screw appliance
or mandibular brackets and elastic chains. Extraction of the affected teeth is also
an option.
If there is mild caudal crossbite, gingivoplasty or partial gingivectomy in the diastema
may prevent contact trauma, pain, discomfort, and possible oronasal fistula formation.
If the malocclusion is significant, then an orthodontic appliance, such as an inclined plane,
with expansion springs and screws, is recommended. This procedure will help guide a
Base-wide canine teeth
Base-wide canine teeth may not require any intervention. If treatment is warranted,
lingual position.
Lance teeth
Lance teeth may be treated by extraction or orthodontic treatment. The orthodontic
 procedure begins with the scaling and polishing of the teth with flour pumice. The
crowns are then dried and prepped with acid-etch. Next, the buttons/brackets are applied
with cement toward the tip of the canine that needs to be moved, called the target tooth
and on the anchor teeth, typically the maxillary premolar and molars. A power chain or
elastic ligature is placed between the target and the anchor teeth. These cases have to be
monitored carefully to avoid the potential movement of the anchor teeth, usually weekly
checkups until movement is complete. This process may take several months, especially
 in animals older than 1 year.
Web Content: See 7.23W
Web Content: See 7.24W
Base-narrow canine teeth
Base-narrow canine teeth or lingually displaced mandibular canine teeth may be treated
by extraction of the affected tooth or teeth, vital pulpotomy and crown reduction, gin-
givoplasty, or orthodontic treatment, such as an a bite plate or a custom cast appliance.
Passive ball therapy, allowing a young dog to chew on a properly-sized rubber ball for
several minutes daily, has been used in mild cases with mixed results.22
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments 129
Web Content: See 7.25W
CHAPTER
Web Content: See 7.26W
Web Content: See 7.27W
Web Content: See 7.28W
Web Content: See 7.29W
Web Content: See 7.30W
Types of Appliances
There are se veral different versions of orthodontic appliances: intraoral appliances; direct
bonding, and fixed appliances, such as acrylic splints, expansion splints and bands, hooks,
or buttons
Direct acrylic appliance
A direct acrylic appliance, or inclined plane, is constructed in the oral cavity. This type
of device may cause soft tissue irritation. The first part of the procedure is to ensure the
crowns are clean, scaled, and polished with nonfluoridated polish or pumice. Acid-etch
is applied to anchor teeth.
Dental acrylic is applied to both sides of the teeth, allowing it to flow in the diastema.
While the acrylic material is still soft, it should be shaped accordingly to allow for proper
alignment. When it is hardened, the composite should be trimmed and shaped so that
no rough edges exist. The inclined plane may also be made by wrapping a figure-of-8
wire around the canine teeth, then covering the wire with acrylic and/or composite
material. This procedure will move the canine teeth into a more normal alignment. The
inclined plane may be left in place for several months and requires diligent home care by
the owner.
Web Content: See 7.31W
Web Content: See 7.32W
Dental impressions
Dental impressions will be taken if an appliance needs to be fabricated by a laboratory.
The procedure involves using plastic or metal impression trays, lined with alginate impres-
 sion material. The flled trays are pressed over the dental arcade, held in place for up to
5 minutes, removed, rinsed, and allowed to harden. After the impressions are set, dental
 stone material is poured into the impression and let harden. After a minimum of 45
minutes, the stone model is removed from the mold.
A bite registry is needed to determine the relationship of the maxilla and mandible. The
 registry is taken with a slab of softened bite wax, pressed between the maxilla and man-
dibular teeth. This should be performed prior to intubation or just after extubation.
Unfortunately, orthodontic movement may be a long, drawn out process whose
outcome cannot be guaranteed. The client needs to be informed that there may be a need
for frequent recheck examinations and sometimes intensive home care, such as cleansing
an appliance daily, or adjusting the appliance weekly. Treatments may sometimes displace
or damage normal teeth. The pet owner needs to be aware of which teeth are affected,
the expected outcome, and how to care for the appliances. This is where the technician
is an essential part of the dental team. There are several types of malocclusions and just
130Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
as many treatment options. It is the responsibility of the veterinary technician to be
CHAPTER
familiar with both
Jaw Fracture Management
Patricia A. March, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
A fracture is defined as a break, split, or discontinuity in a bony structure. Fractures are
further classified as closed, comminuted, complicated, greenstick, impacted, or open.
A closed fracture is one in which the bone is broken, but the tissue is intact. With a
comminuted fracture, there will be several pieces of bone broken. A complicated fracture
will involve significant injury to organs, blood vessels, or nerves. A greenstick fracture
will involve only one side of the bone; it is not a thorough break. When two fragments
of a bone are jammed together, it is considered an impacted fracture. With an open frac-
ture, there will be one or more pieces of bone breaking through the skin.
Types and Treatments for Jaw Fractures
The dog or cat skull consists of 35 bones and over 40 major foramina. The mandibles
are subjected to opposing forces by the action of the jaw muscles, opening and closing
the mouth.23 This makes the mandibles the most common site of jaw fractures. Fractures
occur at the mandibular symphysis, the coronoid or condylar processes, at the junction
of the ramus and the body, and along the body of the mandibie.24
A symphyseal separation is commonly seen in cats with a history of trauma. This is
not a true fracture, but a type of joint instability.?4 In most cats, the mandibular symphysis
never completely fuses, which may allow for manipulation or a laxity of the joint.
Fractures of the mandible may be further classified by involvement with a tooth: if
they encompass the bone and the tooth root, the bone and the apex of the tooth, or
fracture of the bone with tooth root exposure.25
 Jaw fractures may be traumatic or pathological in origin. The most common cause of
jaw fracture is trauma. Pathological jaw fractures involve weakening of the jaws preclud-
ing a particular animal to fracture due to severe periodontal disease or malignant oral
tumors24.26 (Fig. 7.33). Other causes of weakening of the jaw bones include metabolic
 disorders such as renal secondary hyperparathyroidism, nutritional secondary hyperpara-
thyroidism, fungal infections, and osteogenesis imperfecta.27
Diagnosis of Jaw Fractures
Diagnosis of jaw fractures is made through a careful oral examination and history.
 Common symptoms are pain, swelling, bruising, epistaxis, bloody saliva, inability to eat
or drink water, tilting of the head, and holding the mouth open or in an abnormal posi-
tion2325 (Fig. 7.34). Intraoral radiographs are more desirable than head radiographs. If
multiple maxillary and/or palatal fractures are suspected, a computed tomography (CT)
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments 131
CHAPTER 7
Figure 7.33 A 12-year-old miniature poodle presented for mandibular fracture. This is an example of a
pathological fracture due to severe periodontal disease (@ 2010 Alexander M. Reiter, University of Pennsylvania).
Copyright
Figure 7.34 A 3-year-old domestic shorthair (DSH), presented after trauma. Note multiple fractures (@ 2010
Alexander M. Reiter, University of Pennsylvania).
Jaw Fracture Management
 i a Ps s as s a  aad n rro 
ment of the jaws to allow for the teeth to return to normal occlusion is necessary.
Any diseased or damaged teeth in the fracture site should be removed prior to jaw
132Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
fracture repair. If the tooth root is involved, consider root canal therapy to prevent a
CHAPTER
nonunion due to infection. Debride, lavage, and close soft tissue defects over the fracture
site prior to stabilization. Extensive home care, such as feeding tube care, might be
needed.24,27,28
Jaw Fracture Repair
Common methods of jaw fracture fixation include maxillomandibular fixation, circum-
ferential wiring, interdental wiring, intraoral splinting, transosseous wiring, external
skeletal fixation, bone plating, and partial mandibulectomy or maxillctomy.28
A tape muzzle may be utilized to treat minor unilateral mandibular fractures in young
animals. This technique will help keep the jaws stabilized and the teeth in normal occlu-
sion, or may be used as a temporary support until surgical repair can be performed. White
cotton tape is fashioned in a band encircling the muzzle, leaving a 5- to 10-mm space to
allow the tongue to protrude, with connecting bands on the sides of the face and extend-
ing behind the head. A piece of tape may also be applied between the eyes over the
forehead. A regular fabric muzzle could also be used. The key is to allow the animal room
to move the tongue, but not to open the jaws. With the muzzle on, they can lap up water
and a liquefied diet. The muzzle will need to be changed often, as moist dermatitis may
develop under the tape.23-25
®
Web Content: See 7.35W
Interarcade acrylic bonding, or maxillomandibular fixation, is performed by applying
acrylic between the maxillary and the mandibular canine teeth to stabilize jaw fractures.
When the canines are bonded together, there should be enough to space to allow the
lapping of food and water but not allowing for opening the jaws. In dogs, the distance
between the maxillary and mandibular incisors should be between 1.0 and 2.0cm, with
the distance being 0.5-1.0 cm in cats. An esophagostomy feeding tube is often placed until
the animal learns how to eat and drink on its own.24
Web Content: See 7.36W
Web Content: See 7.37W
Web Content: See 7.38W
In cases of severe trauma, infection, necrosis, or pathological fractures due to peri-
odontal disease, surgical removal such as partial mandibulectomy or maxillctomy be
bony defect.
Transosseous or interfragmentary wiring is performed only if the tooth roots will not
be compromised by the wire placement or in areas of the mandible that do not have
teeth.24,27
Interdental wiring is a technique used to stabilize adjacent teeth or several teeth in
one quadrant. The basic technique involves looping the wire between and around
the teeth, and may be extended to include all the teeth in one quadrant to improve
stability.23,24
Fractures of the maxilla can range in severity and treatment options. Because of the
thin maxillary bone and the close proximity of the nasal cavity, bone plates and intra
medullary pins are contraindicated. For some fractures, interdental wiring and an acrylic
®
Web Content: See 7.39W
Web Content: See 7.40W
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments 133
Circumferential mandibular wiring is commonly used to repair symphyseal separation
 in cats and fractures located near the mandibular symphysis. The technique involves
CHAPTER
placement of wire around both mandibles, caudal to the canine teeth and tightened under
the chin. The wire will be left in place for up to 4 weeks and then removed. If the jaw is
e u yaai ae aui s pid aq u ad a ay, e aisn s
splint may be placed over the wire to ensure stabilization and to cover the sharp ends of
the wire. The splint is typically left in place up to 8 weeks.24-28
Web Content: See 7.41W
Web Content: See 7.42W
回
Web Content: See 7.43 W
Intraoral splinting is accomplished when acrylic is applied to teeth along either side of
the fracture to provide a rigid, interfragmentary fixation. The acrylic material is applied
to the buccal surface of the maxilla for stabilization and to prevent palatal trauma from
the splint material, as well as achieve normal occlusion. If the fracture is located on the
mandible, the acrylic should be applied to the lingual aspect of the mandibular teeth.
The teeth are scaled and polished prior to placement of the acrylic. Next, the crowns
are acid-etched and dried, and the acrylic is applied in layers, checking occlusion fre-
quently. Wire can be placed in a circumferential pattern, incorporating the wire within
the acrylic to provide more stabilization near the fracture site. The acrylic will need to
 ai si s a a aa s e aa o s  is 
within 4-8 weeks, depending on how severe the fracture was and the age and health
status of the patient. Removal of the splint is typically accomplished with the use of a
high-speed bur and wire-cutting forceps. Extraction forceps may also be used to remove
large chunks of the acrylic splint. The crowns of the teeth might require touch-up scaling
and polishing.23-29
 Bone plates, screws, and intermedullary pins are not commonly used due to the loca-
tion of the mandibular tooth roots. The incorrect use of these types of fixtures could lead
to damage of the inferior alveolar blood vessels, nerves, as well as the vitality of the
teeth.23-23 If a plate is deemed necessary, a maxillofacial miniplate is recommended, using
screws of 1.5- or 2.0-mm diameter. A tape muzzle will often be recommended for several
weeks.
External skeletal fixation may be used in cases of comminuted fractures or where there
are large bony defects. This may be accomplished with the use of Kirschner wires, small
Steinmann pins, and/or an acrylic splint. In these cases, the intermedullary pins should
 Patients with extensive facial trauma should be checked for fractures in the TMJ area,
ideally with a CT scan. Fractures of the condylar or coronoid process may be treated
conservatively, carefully watching for the possibility of the development of joint ankylosis.
This may require future surgery.2
Home Care
 Home care instructions are essential in jaw fracture management. There are several
options for pain control, such as oral buprenorphine for cats and fentanyl patches. Anti-
biotics are usually dispensed if they can be given with a minimum of oral manipulation,
such as through a feeding tube. The oral cavity will need to be rinsed daily with an anti
bacterial solution to prevent gingivitis or oral ulcers. Canned food or softened dry food
needs to be given; no toys or hard treats.24
134Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Rechecks are usually done weekly, then every 2 weeks, and again at 4-8 weeks, requir-
CHAPTER
Possible complications include malocclusions from the jaws healing in an abnormal
position, osteomyelitis, damage to teeth, and possible feeding tube complications such as
infection or expelling the feeding tube.2425
Oral Tumors
Patricia A. March, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
A tumor is defined as an abnormal mass of tissue that is not inflammatory, arises without
obvious cause from cells of preexistent tissue, and possesses no physiological function. It
may also be called a mass or neoplasm.?
30
In dogs and cats, the fourth most common site for neoplasia is the oral cavity.31-33 Oral
tumors can originate from numerous sites within the oral cavity such as the mucosa, the
tongue, the periodontium, the maxilla, the mandible, and the lips.33 Oral tumors typically
spread by direct extension or invasion of the adjacent bone and cartilaginous tissues.
 Metastasis occurs within the regional lymph nodes and lungs.32
Common symptoms of oral masses are visible swellings, oral bleeding, dysphasia,
halitosis, weight loss, hypersalivation, nasal discharge, and enlargement of the regional
lymph nodes. Upon examination, the oral mass may be visualized, along with loose teeth
and facial deformities (Figs. 7.44 and 7.45).31.33
When attempting to identify an oral mass, be sure to take into account the normal
anatomical structures; specifically, the lingual molar glands in cats, located medially to
the first mandibular molars, the incisive papilla found on the rostral midline of the hard
 palate, and the normal papillae of the tongue.
Web Content: See 7.46W
Suyissoeig auaouopo jenudad isisouseia ssew jeno ym pauasaid sop plo-ieal-xis tt' anni
type (@ 2010 Alexander M. Reiter, University of Pennsylvania)
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments 135
CHAPTER
COPyrI
Figure 7.45 Eight-year-old small mixed breed dog presented with oral mass. Diagnosis: acanthomatous
ameloblastoma (@ 2010 Alexander M. Reiter, University of Pennsylvania).
Benign Oral Tumors and Treatments
The diagnostic approach begins with a complete physical examination and a limited
intraoral examination. Other tests that should be included are complete blood count
(CBC), chemistry panel, chest radiographs, electrocardiogram/echocardiogram, and
ultrasound-guided aspirates of the retropharyngeal lymph nodes, CT or magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI), and incisional biopsy.
Benign oral tumors are unlikely to metastasize and tend to be less locally invasive
There are several types of benign oral tumors: peripheral odontogenic fbromas, odonto-
Peripheral Odontogenic Fibromas
 Peripheral odontogenic fbromas, previously referred to as epulides, are of a fibromatous
or ossifying type."s
 These benign tumors are typically slow growing, may be smooth or
pedunculated in appearance, and are usually found arising from the gingival tissues in
middle-aged to older dogs.31 The ossifying type will have an osteoid matrix. Intraoral
aoq tupunns aun pue yan aue jo yeq aun ansua on Aressaau are sydeoipin
Treatment is typically excision, but recurrence is common.
3
回
Web Content: See 7.47W
Acanthomatous Ameloblastoma
Acanthomatous ameloblastomas are tumors that originate from the odontogenic tissues
tumor, seen as a smooth, frm, nonulcerated mass, is commonly found on the rostral
mandible and occasionally on the maxilla, in middle-aged to older dogs.* Oral
136Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
radiographs will show bone lysis, seen as a radiolucent area.3l A rare, malignant form
CHAPTER
may occur, whose symptomology is similar to the benign form. Histopathology is neces-
excisional biopsy, with 1- to 2-cm margins and removal of any teeth in direct contact
with the tumor. Radiation therapy may also be an option.31
Web Content: See 7.48W
®
Web Content: See 7.49W
Odontomas
Odontomas are benign tumors that arise from the dental follicle, early in the stages of
development of the teeth.3l They may be compound, with multicellular differentiation
and having toothlike structures, commonly known as "denticles" present within the mass
or complex, in which the dental tissues do not resemble teeth at all. This tumor commonly
develops in younger dogs, less than one year of age and rarely in cats. On an intraoral
radiograph, you will observe a defined mass of calcified material, which may be sur-
rounded by a radiolucent band or a number of toothlike structures.3l The recommended
course of action is a wide excision to remove all affected tissue and teeth structures.
Odontomas may be associated with a dentigerous cyst. A dentigerous or follicular cyst
is a fluid-filled cyst surrounding the crown of an unerupted tooth, which can expand
rapidly and cause destruction of bone. The recommended treatment is removal of the
entire cyst lining along with any unerupted or partially erupted teeth to prevent the cyst
from reoccurring.
3 1,33
Gingival Hyperplasia
Gingival hyperplasia is more properly defined as a gingival overgrowth or enlargement.
This type of oral tumor is presented in various degrees in dogs of any age, but more
commonly seen in boxers and bulldogs. These masses may mimic a neoplastic process
and all should be charted, measured, and biopsied. An instrument that can be used to
aid in removal of excessive tissue is the Goldman-Fox periodontal pocket marker. This
probe is calibrated in increments of 2cm and used to establish exterior puncture marks
on the gingiva at the base of the pocket to help indicate the initial line of the incision.
Gingival enlargement is commonly seen in dogs that are on a chronic regimen of cyclo-
 sporine, phenobarbital, or calcium channel blockers. Gingival enlargement is rare in cats
but has been noted in kidney recipients that are on a long-standing dose of cyclosporine.
 Treatment is typically excision with a surgical blade. Bleeding needs to be controlled by
means of digital pressure, gauze, or swabs coated with hemostatic solution. Cautery or
laser therapy is another option to remove large amounts of abnormal gingiva. A crown
 prep bur or 12-fluted bur may be used to contour the gingiva. Finally, a gingival dressing,
consisting of a tincture of benzoin and myrrh is applied to the affected sites.34
Web Content: See 7.50W
®
Web Content: See 7.51W
Web Content: See 7.52W
Web Content: See 7.53W
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments 137
Papillomas
CHAPTER
Papillomas are benign oral tumors, viral in origin, and are commonly located on the
by direct contact and typically affect younger animals.31 They range from all sizes, may
be a single or clustered pattern, pink or white in color, and are located on stalks. The
majority of the papillomas will resolve within several weeks, so removal is often unneces-
sary, unless there is trauma causing bleeding or difficulty eating.31,3 If the papillomas are
removed, they should be biopsied. It is common for these tumors to reoccur.
Web Content: See 7.54W
Eosinophilic Granulomas
Severe ulcers or plaques may be located on the upper lip area, the tongue, palate,
and glossopalatine arches. If the ulcers are significant, it could lead to anorexia and
weight loss. Diagnosis is achieved with a biopsy, as lab work may or may not show
eosinophilia.31 Treatment consists of high-dose corticosteroid therapy, such as prednisone,
to control the lesions. Another option may be the use of methylprednisolone acetate
 injection to control the lesions. Other therapies include flea control and feeding a hypoal.
lergenic diet.31
Web Content: See 7.55W
Malignant Oral Tumors and Treatments
Malignant oral tumors may be both locally invasive and metastasize. The diagnostic plan
is often the same for benign or malignant tumors.
Common malignant oral tumors found in dogs are malignant melanoma, squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC), and fbrosarcoma. Common malignant tumors found in cats
include SCC and fibrosarcoma.31,32
MalignantMelanomas
Malignant melanomas are frequently found in cocker spaniels, miniature poodles, and
Chow Chows, commonly affecting older male dogs.3 These rapidly growing, discrete
masses may be seen as raised, ulcerated, pigmented mass located on the gingiva or buccal
They are occasionally located on the palatal tissues. Malignant melanomas are highly
invasive to the jaw bones. Metastasis is common, involving the regional lymph nodes and
lungs.31,32
Web Content: See 7.56W
Web Content: See 7.57W
138Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
SCC
CHAPTER
o pe o si il eee'so u r jno su u iso aui si 
the palate, rostral mandible, sublingual mucosa, and on the caudal maxilla and has a red,
cauliflower-like, ulcerated appearance. This is a progressive, rapidly growing tumor that
is locally invasive, especially to the jaw bones.?l Lingual SCC is common in older dogs,
sp u inq 'seo u aru si sisis zespaos pe sqe 'saood aadsa
involves spread to regional lymph nodes and then the lungs. Tumors found in the caudal
oral cavity are more likely to metastasize than tumors located elsewhere.31,32 Cats that
have feline leukemia virus (FeLV), feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), and that wear flea
collars may be predisposed to the development of SCCs.33,34 In young dogs, papillary SCC
is seen frequently. It is less aggressive than ordinary SCC, but still requires surgical inter-
vention.31 The prognosis of SCC in cats is considered poor due to the fact that it is locally
 invasive and often is not diagnosed until the tumor has spread 31,33
Web Content: See 7.58W
Fibrosarcomas
Fibrosarcomas are slow-growing tumors routinely found on the caudal maxilla and/or
large-breed, middle-aged, male dogs.31 They may be less commonly located on the man-
dible, but have been shown to deeply infiltrate the adjacent soft tissues and bone. Metas-
 e s  a si r e  si si
benign but biologically aggressive fibrosarcoma exists, which may be misdiagnosed as a
fibroma or other benign oral mass.31-33
Osteosarcoma
Osteosarcoma may involve the maxilla or mandible, but the primary tumor may be dif-
ficult to locate. It may not be seen without intraoral radiographs.
 The most recommended treatment for malignant tumors is surgical removal, with the
goal being to remove the primary tumor with a margin of unaffected tissue to prevent
 tonsillectomy, and partial glossectomy. Surgery consists of surgical excision of the primary
 mass, the surrounding tissues, and lymph nodes.31
Clients often request a debulking of a tumor perhaps in hopes of delaying the growth
of the tumor or removing the visible portion that the pet may be traumatizing. "Debulk-
ing" or partial removal of the tumor is largely considered unrewarding because oral
tumors tend to recur rapidly and may become more ulcerated once debunked. Surgical
removal will prevent local recurrence, but is not adequate as monotherapy for tumors
such as malignant melanoma, due to the high incidence of metastasis to the regional
lymph nodes and the need to achieve 2-cm margins.32 Surgery is often combined with
Any surgical procedure is not without complications. Intraoperative complications
to expect include blood loss and hypotension, which can be prevented and/or treated.
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments 139
Patients, especially cats, may require the placement of a temporary feeding tube after
CHAPTER
 In some instances, chemotherapy will prolong a good quality of life by controlling
 metastasis in patients where surgery or radiation therapy have removed or controlled the
local tumor.3 Chemotherapy may be used in combination with surgery and radiation
therapy in the treatment of highly metastatic tumors, such as malignant melanoma and
tonsillar SCC.31,32
 Radiation therapy is used to treat the primary tumor site if the tumor is expected to
margin" is when there is evidence of malignant cells in the tissues of the surgical site. A
combination of radiation therapy and surgery may provide tumor control while maintain-
ing good function and appearance.31 Radiation therapy may provide relief from clinical
symptoms, such as pain and bleeding. Side effects may include inflammation, hair loss,
anorexia, and scar formation.31,33 Full-course radiation involves low doses of radiation,
for a total of 12-16 doses, given three times a week for 4 weeks.31,32 There are minimal
side effects locally, but may lead to tumors in the area due to radiation exposure. Malig-
nant melanomas have been shown to be sensitive to large doses of radiation.32 This is
also a good alternative for nonrespectable tonsillar SCCs and acanthomatous ameloblas-
In cases where more aggressive or definitive treatment is not an option, palliative
radiation may be recommended. Palliative radiation calls for lower-dose radiation, given 
once a week for 4 weeks
Alternative therapies for carcinomas include the use of piroxicam.3233 This
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitor may interfere with tumor proliferation.31 The treat-
ment is palliative, in hopes of slowing tumor growth and helping with pain relief. The
dose is 0.3 mg/kg q48h in cats and q24h in dogs. This dose may induce partial remission
in some canine patients. Side effects include renal failure in cats and gastrointestinal
ulceration in dogs.
A commercial vaccine is available for use in dogs with malignant melanoma. The
canine melanoma vaccine is manufactured by Merial under the name OnceptTM. While
the vaccine will not prevent the growth of the primary tumor, it may help prevent metas-
tasis, thus increasing survival times.31,32 The vaccine is administered with a transdermal
device, with the doses given intramuscularly at 2-week intervals, for a total of four doses.
Boosters are recommended at 6-month intervals. The vaccine is only available through a
veterinary oncologist.32
Charting and Preparation of Samples
The World Health Organization (WHO) has recommendations for the staging of oral
tumors in dogs and cats. This involves a tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system as
wel1. 31-33,35
Stage O: No visible tumor
Stage I: Tumor <2 cm in diameter, no lymph node involvement
Stage II: Tumor 2-4cm in diameter, no lymph node involvement
Stage IHl: Tumor >4 cm in diameter, and/or lymph node involvement
Stage IV: Tumor of any size, distant metastatic disease
140Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
T: Primary tumor
CHAPTER
Tis: Preinvasive carcinoma
TO: No evidence of a tumor
T1: Tumor <2cm
T2: Tumor 2-4cm
T3: Tumor >4cm
T3a: Without bone invasion
T3b: With bone invasion
N: Regional lymph node
 NO: No evidence of regional lymph node involvement
N1: Movable ipsilateral nodes
N2: Movable contralateral or bilateral nodes
N3: Fixed nodes
N3a: Nodes do not contain tumor
N3b: Nodes contain tumor
M: Distant metastasis
MO: No evidence of distant metastasis
M1: Distant metastasis, including distant nodes
Tissue biopsy is the only way to get a definitive diagnosis of an oral tumor Knowing
the type of tumor will help the veterinarian make recommendations as to treatment and
submitted as well. Impression smears may also prove helpful to send along with the
preserved specimens. If a mass is biopsied and given a histopathological diagnosis of
"undifferentiated tumor," it should be reevaluated by another pathologist, preferably one
who is familiar with oral tumors.32 It may be helpful to include digital radiographs and
pictures.
The prevalence of oral tumors in the dog and cat makes this an important topic for
veterinary technicians to be aware of. With the ever-changing modalities of treatment, it
is important to keep abreast of all the current literature.
References
1. Harvey, CE. 2005. Management of periodontal disease: understanding the options.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 35(4):819-836.
2. Lobprise, H, Wiggs, R. 2000. Periodontal disease. In The Veterinarian's Companion
for Common Dental Procedures. Lakewood, CO: AAHA Press, Pp. 47-62.
3. Bellows, J. 2007. Periodontal disease: periodontitis. In Blackwells Five Minute Vet-
erinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, edited by Lobprise,
HB. Ames, IA: Blackwell, pp. 172-180.
4. Bellows, J. 2004. Dental radiography. In Small Animal Dental Equipment, Materials
and Techniques: A Primer. Ames, IA: Blackwell, pp. 63-103.
5. Holmstrom, S, Frost-Fitch, P, Eisner, E. 2004. Periodontal therapy and surgery.
In Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Small Animal Practitioner, 3rd ed.,
Philadelphia: Saunders, Pp. 233-290.
Chapter 7: Common Dental Conditions and Treatments 141
6. Bellows, J. 2004. Periodontal equipment and techniques. In Small Animal Dental
CHAPTER
Equipment, Materiais andTechniques: APrimer.Ames,IA:Blackwell,
Pp.115-173.
7. Gorrel, C, Derbyshire, S. 2005. Tooth extraction. In Veterinary Dentistry for the
Nurse and Technician. Edinburgh: Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, pp. 119-129.
8. Bellows, J. 2007. Oronasal fistula. In Blackwell's Five Minute Veterinary Consult
Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, edited by Lobprise, HB. Ames, IA:
Blackwell, pp. 188-193.
9. Dupont, GA. 1998. Prevention of periodontal disease. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 28(5):1129-1145.
10. Cleland, WP. 2000. Nonsurgical periodontal therapy. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
15(4):221-225.
11. Hale, FA. 2003. The owner-animal-environment triad in the treatment of canine
periodontal disease. J Vet Dent 20(2):118-122.
12. Holmstrom, SE, Frost Finch, P, Eisner, ER. 2004. Dental records. In Veterinary
Dental Techniques for the Small Animal Practitioner, 3rd ed., Philadelphia: Saunders,
Pp. 31, 33.
13. Holmstrom, SE, Frost Finch, P, Eisner, ER. 2004. Endodontics. In Veterinary Dental
Techniques for the Small Animal Practitioner, 3rd ed., Philadelphia: Saunders,
p.353.
14. American Veterinary Dental College (AVDC). www.avdc.org.
15. Eisner, ER. 2005. Bites, Breath and Benevolent Breeding: A Dog Breeder's Guide to
Healthy Bites and Oral Health, Sth ed.
16. Holmstrom, S, Frost-Fitch, P, Eisner, E. 2004. Orthodontics. In Veterinary Dental
Techniques for the Small Animal Practitioner, 3rd ed., Philadelphia: Elsevier,
Pp.499-558.
17. Hennet, PR, Harvey, CE. 1996. Craniofacial development and growth in the dog-
} Vet Dent 9(2):11-18.
18. Tutt, C. 2006. Malocclusions and normal occlusions. In Small Animal Dentistry:
A Manual of Techniques. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 239-268.
19. Bellows, J. 1999. Atlas of Canine Dentistry: Malocclusions and Breed Standards.
Waltham: Vernon.
 20. Reiter, AM. 2008. Orthodontics: diagnosis and treatment of malocclusions. Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine, Philadelphia.
21. Surgeon, TW. 2004. Case studies: orthodontics and other dental surprises. In Pro-
ceedings: Western Veterinary Conference.
22. Verhaert, L. 1999. A removable orthodontic device for the treatment of lingually
displaced mandibular canine teeth in young dogs. J Vet Dent 15(2):69-75.
23. Harasan, G. 2008. Maxillary and mandibular fractures. Can Vet J 48(8):819-820.
24. Verstraete, FJM. 2004. Maxillofacial fractures. In: (2004) Orthodontics. In Veteri-
nary Dental Techniques for the Small Animal Practitioner, 3rd ed.,edited by
Holmstrom, S, Frost-Fitch, P, Eisner, E. Philadelphia: Elsevier, pp. 559-600.
25. Marretta, SM. 2001. Jaw fracture management. In Proceedings: Atlantic Coast
Veterinary Conference.
26. American Veterinary Dental Society. 2005. AVDS—jaw fractures and their fixes,
www.avds-online.org/info/fracture/html.
27. Reiter, AM. Oral and maxillofacial trauma management, 2003. Invasive jaw fracture
repair and nonivasive jaw fracture repair, 2009. In Proceedings of the Annual Sym-
posium of the American College ofVeterinary Surgeons.
142Small AnimalDentalProcedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
28. Newton, CD, Nunamaker, DM. 1985. Textbook of Small Animal Orthopaedics.
CHAPTER
Philadelphia: Lippincott.
29.S
Slatter, DH. 2002. Chapter 153. In Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, Vol. 1.
Philadelphia: Saunders.
30. Merriam Webster's Medical Desk Dictionary. 1996.
31. Liptak, JM, Withrow, SJ. 2006. Oral tumors. In Withrow and MacEwen's Small
Animal Clinical Oncology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders.
32. Coyle, VJ, Garrett, LD. 2009. Finding and treating oral melanoma, squamous
cell  carcinoma, and fibrosarcoma in dogs, veterinarymedicine.dvm360.com/
vetmed/Medicine/When-oral-tumors-invade/ArticleStandard/Article/detail/601624.
Date accessed August 30, 2010.
33. Dhaliwal, RS, Kitchell, BE, Manfra Marretta, S. 1998. Part 1: oral tumors in dogs
and cats: diagnosis and clinical signs. Part 2: prognosis and treatment. Compendium
20(9):1109-1119.
34. Lobprise, HB (editor). 2007. Blackwell's Five Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical
Companion: Small Animal Dentistry, 4th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell.
35. Hahn, KA, DeNicola, DB, Richardson, RC, et al. 1994. Oral malignant melanoma:
prognostic utility of an alternative staging system. J Small Anim Pract 35(5):
251-256.
Feline Dentistry
CHAPTER
Jennifer Crawford, IVT, VTS (Dentistry) and
Billie Jean (Jeannie) Losey, RVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Learning Objectives
 To be able to identify signs and symptoms of cats presenting with gingivostomatitis 
 Have an understanding of treatments that are available and recommendations for patient
care
 Have an understanding of the possible causes of gingivostomatitis
 To be knowledgeable in the diagnostics that is recommended in diagnosing 
gingivostomatitis
To be able to understand the medications used in treatment and for comfort of patients
with gingi vostomatitis
 Become familiar with the three major forms of eosinophilic granuloma complex
Become familiar with the possible causes of eosinophilic granuloma complex 
 Become familiar with the prevalence of eosinophilic granuloma complex
Become familiar with the symptoms of eosinophilic granuloma complex
Become familiar with the commonly performed diagnostics
 Become familiar with the diferent treatment options and drug dosages
Become familiar with the pathogenesis of tooth resorption in cats
Become familiar with the stages, both clinically and radiographically, of tooth resorption
Become familiar with the diagnostics that are performed 
Become familiar with how to chart tooth resorption
Become familiar with the treatment options for tooth resorption
Smalt Animat Dentat Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses,1st edition. Edited by Jeanne R. Perrone.
2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
143
144Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Introduction
The objective for feline dentistry is to understand the unique dental conditions that our
feline patients have. With some oral diseases, felines are similar to the canine patient, but
most of the diseases that felines contract are slightly different and unique to cats. As
discussed in the basic section of this book, the differences between our cats and dogs
starts at the number of teeth, and the cats are missing the maxillary first premolar and
mandibular first and second premolars, to the difference in the skull shape that most cats
have.
ER
One disease that is similar to the canine patient would be periodontal disease; the main
PT
difference being that it takes less of the periodontium to be destroyed in a feline to show
the early stages of periodontal disease. In a canine patient their normal sulcus depth is
at 1-3mm, whereas in a feline patient the normal is 0.5-1mm. Another shared oral
disease between the canine and the feline would be oral neoplasia, with squamous cell
carcinoma being the most common in felines.
 In this chapter, we are going to discuss the oral diseases that are seen predominantly
in our feline populations. There are three unique oral conditions that are seen predomi-
nantly in our feline populations:
2.
Gingivostomatitis
3. Eosinophilic granuloma complex
The two most unique and common oral conditions that are seen in our feline patients
are tooth resorption and gingivostomatitis.' The third oral condition is eosinophilic
granuloma complex, which may not be seen as commonly as tooth resorption and gin-
givostomatitis. But eosinophilic granuloma complex is a condition unique to the feline
population and rare in the canine population.
Being able to identify these oral conditions will aid in a treatment plan for your doctor.
Having an understanding of these diseases will assist you in discussing the condition with
your clients and help in giving comfort to the feline patient.
Gingivostomatitis
Jennifer Crawford, IVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Introduction
This section aims to educate the technician in the oral condition gingivostomatitis. We
will cover the recognition of the disease and the symptoms that may be noticed by the
client, as well as the treatment options available.
Gingivostomatitis is a common and oftentimes a very debilitating oral disease in the
feline population. Gingivostomatitis can easily be described as inflammation of the gingiva
and the oral mucosa, and is often a very painful condition (Fig. 8.1). There is not one
Chapter 8: Feline Dentistry145
CHAPTER
Figure 8.1   Presentation of stomatitis.
Table 8.1
Other names for gingivostomatitis
Lymphoplasmacytic stomatitis (LPS)
Lymphocytic plasmacytic gingivitis stomatitis (LPGS)
Plasmacytic stomatitis (PS)
Plasma cell gingivitis-stomatitis-pharyngitis
Chroniculcerative paradental stomatitis(CUPS)
 Necrotizing stomatitis 
 Feline chronic gingivostomatitis
Chronic gingivitis-stomatitis-faucitis
exact cause for this condition, but there are many theories as to why it occurs, and with
that many ideas on how to treat. There are also many different terms associated with this
disease, and most of the terms are in relation to the cells that may be part of the cause
(Table 8.1).
 The most common theory to this disease is that cats are having an immune response
or hypersensitivity to the plaque and bacteria that accumulates in the oral cavity. The
 immune system can be suppressed in many different ways to cause this reaction. Viruses
 are commonly associated with a suppressed immune system, and in cats, feline leukemia,
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), and calicivirus are most frequently seen. Another
theory as to the cause of this disease can be a bacterial component, such as bartonella,
 or idiopathic reasons.
Symptoms of Gingivostomatitis
Gingivostomatitis can affect any feline breed, of either gender, and at any age. Until
recently, 2007, it was believed that certain breeds were more at risk to develop the disease,
such as Persian, Abyssinians, Siamese, Himalayans, and Burmese.? Recent research has
shown that the breed of cat does not play an important factor as to the development of
the disease.? There is a wide variety of symptoms that can be seen in relation to gingivo-
stomatitis. The attached gingiva in a normal healthy cat is described as pink with a
146Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
knifelike edge. In the early stages of gingivostomatitis, the edges appear to have a darker
 sas aa a go aae u ms as are pe ae pr o 
stomatitis can oftentimes mimic gingivitis, which makes follow-up care crucial for the
patient. Halitosis is often associated with all stages of stomatitis, and as the disease pro-
 gresses the odor usually intensifies. The halitosis is associated with the bacterium that is
occurring on the teeth and at the gingival margins. Many times, owners will notice an
 odor before noticing the inflammation in the oral cavity.
As the stomatitis progresses, it will be more apparent in the buccal gingival area. The
gingiva will be bright red, as well as have an ulcerated or swollen appearance. The caudal
PTER
teeth (those behind the canine teeth) typically have more of the swollen, inflamed appear-
 ance as compared with the rostral teeth (the canine and incisor teeth) (Fig. 8.2). But that
is not true in every case associated with gingivostomatitis (Fig. 8.3). The oral mucosa
T
becomes very fragile and can spontaneously bleed upon palpation. Drooling is another
  s           
Anorexia can often be linked with the advanced stages of gingivostomatitis, but can be
seen with any stage of the disease due to the pain and discomfort in the oral cavity. The
ability to eat, drink, and even swallow can be challenging for cats with any stage of
stomatitis. It is common to see these cats wanting to eat or drink, but the pain and inflam-
mation limit the cats’ ability to do so. The inability to swallow is severe when the cat's
Figure 8.2 Presentation of stomatitis in the caudal mouth area.
Figure 8.3 Presentation of stomatitis.
Chapter 8: Feline Dentistry147
palatoglossal folds (formerly known as the fauces), the area between the pharynx and the
oral cavity, are affected. Cats affected with this disease can have any one or a combina-
tion of the above symptoms.
Diagnostics
There is a multitude of diagnostics that can be performed to rule out other systemic
disease that may need to be treated in addition to gingivostomatitis. The first and most
CHAPTER
important diagnostic tool is clinical observation by the client and by the practitioner,
especially in the early stages of the disease when there are more treatment options avail-
able. A thorough physical exam should be performed, as well as a chemistry profle and
a complete blood count. Oftentimes the serum total protein and serum globulins are
elevated. The viral status of feline leukemia and FIV should also be obtained, as oral
stomatitis can be associated with these two diseases. Other viral and bacterial tests that
can be performed are that for feline calicivirus and bartonella, as either of these condi-
tions can be linked to the onset or prevalence of stomatitis.
Oral Evaluation
A thorough oral evaluation under anesthesia needs to be performed on these cats, with
the plaque, calculus, and gingival indexes being scored. The evaluation should grade each
seas al jo sahis sunap u eade Aeu eare yea se iieo pero aul jo suaenb
Also note the area of the palatoglossal folds that are affected. Photographs are recom-
mended to document the pretreatment and posttreatment as it aids in the documentation
of treatment progression. Photographs are also good to give to the client so they are
aware of the severity of the disease. Intraoral radiographs are necessary in the evaluation
process of cats affected with stomatitis in order to evaluate the root and bone structures
(Figs. 8.4 and 8.5). As the disease progresses, the inflammation and destruction that
occurs with gingivostomatitis affects not only the gingival tissue but also the dental
support structures such as the gingiva, periodontal ligament, and alveolar bone.
Figure 8.4   Presentation of stomatitis at the rostral area (canine tooth).
148SmallAnimal DentalProcedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
BIRUS
CHAPTER
Figure 8.5 Left caudal mouth with stomatitis presenting tooth resorption (206, 207, 307) and bone loss (308)
occurring along with stomatitis.
Frequently, tooth resorption on the roots can be found in addition to the ongoing
stomatitis. The health of the tooth and periodontium is important to assess to determine
which treatment options will be best suited for the patient, either medical, surgical, or a
combination of both. The amount of support structure that may have been destroyed by
the disease will aid the practitioner in understanding how advanced the disease process
is, and help in deciding which treatment will be best suited for the patient.
A biopsy in the oral cavity may be recommended to confirm a diagnosis of gingivo-
stomatitis and to rule out neoplasia. Many cancers, especially squamous cell carcinoma,
uuo ueo 1odan Asdoq e Aquo inq 'saeis Aa s1l ui aouiadde res e aey ueo
the correct diagnosis.
Treatments
Gingivostomatitis can be a complicated oral disease to treat and usually will require a
combination of medical and surgical treatments with the goal to make the patient more
comfortable. With all the treatments, a full dental cleaning consisting of supra and sub
 gingival cleaning and polishing need to be performed prior to start of either medical or
surgical tre atments.
Medical Management
Commonly, medical management does not give a long-term cure, but it can keep the
 patient comfortable. Medical management includes one or a combination of classes of
medications. The medications included are analgesics, antibacterials, anti-inflammatories,
antivirals, immunosuppressants, and steroids (Table 8.2).
Pain management is an essential part to any of the combinations of therapy that are
being used in treatment. Often these cats are in pain and discomfort from the severe
inflammation and irritation the stomatitis causes in the oral cavity. Common medications
that are used in pain management are butorphanol, fentanyl, tramadol, and buprenor
 phine. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can help in controlling pain and
Chapter 8: Feline Dentistry149
Table 8.2
Common medications used to treat gingivostomatitis
Medication
Common Dosage
Route of Administration
Buprenorphine
0.01-0.03 mg/kg, every 6-8 hours
T'ransmucosally
Fentanyl
12.5 or 25 mcg/h, applied every
Transdermal patch
72-118 hours
Meloxicam
0.025 mg/kg
Injectable liquid or oral suspension
CHAPTER
Methylprednisolone
 20 mg. every 3-4 weeks
Injection 
Clindamycin
11-33 mg/kg, every 24 hours
Oral tablet, capsule, or liquid
Amoxicillin/clavulanate
62.5mg, every 12 hours
Oral tablet or suspension
inflammation. But because cats seem to have a high sensitivity to NSAIDs, long-term
dosing must be used with caution. Buprenorphine and fentanyl are the easiest to give due
to the method of delivery, either transmucosally or by delivery patch.
Antibacterials can help in controlling oral bacteria with either the use of systemic
medications and/or oral rinses. Common systemic medications are amoxicillin/cla vulanate,
clindamycin, doxycycline, and metronidazole. The most commonly used oral rinse is a
chlorhexidine solution.
Herpes virus is known to cause oral inflammation. Antivirals such as lysine can be of
aid, in some measure, in stomatitis, but only if the herpes virus is to be known to be the
cause.
 Cats presenting with stomatitis show an active immune response to the inflammation
occurring on the gingiva as well as to the bacteria in the plaque and saliva. That is why
 immunosuppressants can play a helpful role in treating cats medically or in conjunction
with surgical extractions. There are many different immunosuppressants that can be used,
but the most commonly used is cyclosporine. It has been shown to put 50% of cats into
remission, while a higher percentage showed biased improvement in most cats.? As with
 many medications, close monitoring needs to be observed, and with cyclosporine the cat's
renal and hepatic values should be closely monitored.
Steroids can be beneficial in treating stomatitis, with prednisone tablets and methyl-
prednisolone injections being the most commonly used. These medications are commonly
dosed for the anti-inflammatory properties to help calm the gingiva. These medications
help with the inflammation and often give patients some relief for a limited period
of time.
Surgical Treatment
Another option is extraction in the areas where there is inflammation. Some cat owners
may be hesitant to extract teeth and want to continue use of medications. This is due to
the perception that their pet would not be able to eat without teeth. Unfortunately, many
patients will become resistant to the drugs and symptoms will return at a quicker pace.
An additional concern with long-term use of medications is the inflammation may con-
tinue after extraction of the affected teeth.
150SmallAnimal DentalProceduresforVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
CHAPTER
Figure 8.6  Radiograph to show tooth resorption and bone loss occurring along with stomatitis
 Extractions are the surgical treatment of choice, and the amount of extractions per-
formed is dependent on the severity of the case and the practitioner. With surgical treat-
ment, which usually involves extractions, the patient can have up to a 60% cure rate.
 Surgical treatments need to be discussed when medical treatments have stopped providing
benefits or if the client chooses not to do any medical management.
Laser surgery is also an option but may not be available in every area and is still a
new treatment option. The goal of laser therapy is to remove the inflamed gingival tissue
and to allow scar tissue to form. When the scar tisue forms in place of the gingival tissue,
there is a decreased blood supply in the treated area. There can be a reduction in the
immune response. Laser therapy does not always remove the need to treat in combination
with medications and/or surgical extractions.
When discussing extractions, the number of extractions that would be performed at
one anesthetic period will be up to the practitioner. Each veterinarian has their own
comfort level and ideas on how to perform these types of extraction cases. Most will
choose to do caudal mouth extractions, which involve all the teeth behind the canines.
They may also choose to do one side at a time or do only the most severely affected areas.
Whichever way the veterinarian prefers to do so is their decision. The most important
factor with these extractions is the removal of the entire tooth and root. If any part of
the root is left in the socket, continued inflammation can occur. This is why intraoral
 radiographs are vital in gingivostomatitis surgery (Fig. 8.6, Online Figs. 8.7 and 8.8).
A multimodal pain management protocol should be utilized when proceeding with
pain that the extractions will cause. Local and regional nerve blocks should also be uti-
lized and applied to the areas that will be addressed.
Aftercare
Postoperative care should consist of pain medication, which will be easy for the client to
give and the patient to consume. Postoperative feeding instructions should consist of a
soft canned diet that will be easy for the cat to eat. If the cat is unable to eat due to pain,
other alternatives must be discussed. Alternatives could be force-feeding, which would be
difficult, especially if the cat is in pain and does not want the mouth to be handled. The
other alternative would be the placement of an esophagostomy tube, which would allow
Chapter 8: Feline Dentistry 151
food and medications to be given directly into the esophagus. This would have to be
discussed with the client prior to the procedure because placing the tube requires the
patient to be under anesthesia. This procedure is best performed while the patient is
having extractions. The care and teaching of the use of the esophagostomy tube would
need to be provided upon release. This tube would stay in for the recovery period of the
patient, which is anywhere from 1 to 2 weeks, or be removed sooner if the cat is able to
eat on his or her own without help.
In some cases, extractions are usually enough of a treatment to make the patient com-
fortable and functional. Many of these exceptions show a relation to the use of medica-
tions and the amount of time the patient had been managed with medications prior to
CHAPTER
surgical treatment.
Summary
The goal with our feline patients that have gingivostomatitis is to give them a quality life
with as little pain that is achievable. Achieving this goal may require further medical
management not only from the veterinary staff but also the client. As we have seen there
may not be a clear cause to this disease or treatment, but there are many ways to make
the patient have a good quality of life.
Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex
Billie Jean (Jeannie) Losey, RVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Sdos a po id ro uisa paosi  s as aq  ro doo
granuloma complex. This complex includes three major forms:
 A deep ulceration or rodent (eosinophilic) ulcer
Eosinophilic plaque (not as common)
 Collagenolytic/eosinophilic granuloma
Eosinophilic Ulcers
Eosinophilic ulcers are typically seen as a well-circumscribed area on the upper lip, bilat-
eral or unilateral with edges that are raised with superficial necrotic layers. These occur
at the philtrum of the upper lip or adjacent to the upper canine tooth.
Eosinophilic Plaque
Eosinophilic plaque can be seen as a raised lesion or lesions that are yellowish to pink,
moist, and commonly occur with miliary dermatitis and eosinophilic granuloma of
the chin.
152Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Collagenolytic Granuloma
Collagenolytic granuloma is seen as a single nodule or in groups that are linear and ulcer-
ated. They can be found anywhere in the body, but most commonly on the abdominal
region. These lesions can involve the oral mucosa, hard palate, soft palate, and the base
 ated with halitosis, anorexia, and hypersalivation, and can be difficult to manage in
the mouth.
CHAPTER
Causes
The true cause of eosinophilic granuloma is unknown, but it could be caused by trauma
 and is also considered to be idiopathic in nature since the etiology is rarely determined.
Most lesions are thought to be associated with chronic immune stimulation due to some
underlying hypersensitivity such as a food allergy, atopy, or insect allergy with conjunc-
tion of a bacterial or viral infection. Eosinophilic ulcers have been associated with allergic
responses to fleas and other allergens and trauma following a maxillary canine tooth
extraction allowing the mandibular canine to contact the upper lip.
Cats in the age range of 2-6 years old have a predisposition to eosinophilic granuloma
complex, with females having twice the prevalence as males.7 Eosinophilic plaque and
Collagenolytic granuloma could also have a genetic component.7
Symptoms
These lesions are mainly nonpainful but can be exacerbated on the tongue and lips due
to licking. Patients will present for anorexia and hypersalivation. On oral exam, lesions
can be seen, which in more extensive cases may be ulcerated.8
Cats with larger lesions can have facial distortions. Eosinophilic ulcers typically present,
unilaterally or bilaterally, on the upper lips with a circumscribed area with edges that are
raised and consists of superficial necrotic layers (Fig. 8.9).
Figure 8.9 Example of an eosinophilic ulcer (Courtesy of Dr. K.M. Murphy, North Carolina State University)
Chapter 8: Feline Dentistry 153
CHAPTER
Figure 8.1 0 Histology sample of an eosinophilic ulcer (Courtesy of Luke Borst, North Carolina State University).
Diagnostics
Diagnosis is primarily done with a physical exam, history, cytology, and/or histology. A
biopsy is primarily used to exclude neoplasia and bacterial and fungal infections.
F ss a n s e d q  aq  a  
some irregular granulomas can grossly resemble squamous cell carcinoma and a biopsy
would be needed to differentiate the two (Fig. 8.10).
Treatments
Medical Options
Due to the possible association with insect bite reaction and flea allergy, keeping the
patient on a flea preventative and out of an insect environment is essential.
Antibiotics will sometimes have a therapeutic effect on the lesions, especially if there
is a secondary bacterial infection. For eosinophilic/rodent ulcers, the choice of antibiotics
are clindamycin 5.5 mg/kg bid per os (PO), cephalexin 22mg/kg PO q12h, or amoxicillin
trihydrate/clavulanate 12.5 mg/kg PO q12h.
Glucocorticoids can be used such as dexamethasone 0.1-0.2mg/kg PO q24h.7
Since cats have fewer steroid receptors in their cells, they will need a higher dose
n inq asop uonun ue se pasn aq pinous aesop raq aui e'saioads iso uui
tapered down as quickly as medically possible with a dose of 0.4mg/kg PO q24h. Inject-
able methylprednisolone acetate can be given at 4mg/kg every 2 weeks as needed.10
The dose for prednisone or prednisolone would range from 3 to 5 mg/kg every 24-48
hours orally.
 Immunomodulation can be used for alternative therapy if the lesions are not responsive
 to steroid therapy. These drugs can include chlorambucil and levamisole.10
154Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Surgery and Other Treatments
Surgery is an option for larger or single lesions that may need to be debulked in order
for the patient to chew food more comfortably.
 Other options that have been recommended are cryosurgery, laser therapy, and radia-
tion therapies, with moderate success.10
 Feline Tooth Resorption
PTER
Billie Jean (Jeannie) Losey, RVT, VTS (Dentistry)
T
Through the years, tooth resorption in cats has been given a variety of names. Some of
the common names known are feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions (FORLs), cervical
 line or neck lesion, and feline resorption or feline oral resorption. Neck lesion is a topo-
graphical distinction only. Inappropriate terms that are sometimes used are erosion or
caries. In 2009, the term was officially changed by the American Veterinary Dental
College (AVDC) to tooth resorption because the condition is recognized not only in felines
but also in other species such as canines and primates (Figs. 8.11-8.13).
Definition and Symptoms
Tooth resorption is defined as the resorption of dental hard tissue by odontoclasts.1l
Odontoclasts are multinuclear cells that when triggered will begin the resorption of
primary teeth. Tooth resorption is the active resorption of the surface of the cementum
by these cells.
It was once believed these lesions were a result of periodontal disease, but the true
cause is still an unknown. This is a progressive disease and in stages 2, 3, and 4 can be
painful due to dentin and pulp exposure; however, most patients will not stop eating. The
areas found to be most commonly affected are the mandibular third premolars, first
Figure 8.11 Radiograph of tooth resorption at 307 in a dog (Courtesy of William Krug, DVM, North Carolina 
State University).
Chapter 8: Feline Dentistry155
CHAPTER 8
Figure 8.12 Photograph of tooth resorption in a premolar of a dog. Note the lesion at the gum line (Courtesy
of William Krug, DVM, North Carolina State University).
Figure 8.13 Radiograph of tooth resorption of the canine root in "Poe," an aye-aye (Courtesy of Lari Hatley,
DukeLemar Center).
molars, and the maxillary third and fourth premolars. Many times the lesion is confused
with gingival hyperplasia. Once the lesion has started destroying enamel in the crown,
 granulation tissue will fill in the defect. The granulation tissue is often confused with
gingival hyperplasia. Some signs one may see can include the following:
Chattering of the jaw
Dropping his or her food
■
 Hypersalivation
Head shaking
■
Sneezing
Oral bleeding
Anorexia (less common)
As the disease progresses, it moves coronally and the crown of the tooth may be lost.
Clients, in turn, may complain of missing teeth. Once the resorption process advances
156Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
through the crown and dentin, it then exposes the tooth's pulp chamber to the oral cavity
 and oral bacteria. There is no gender, breed, or age predisposition, but it may develop
n umous aey saps iu'sieaa g-t si ae aiaa sieo parqand u aae rasunoa e ie
the percentage of mature cats that are clinically affected can be anywhere between 20%
and 75%.12
Stages of Tooth Resorption
ER
Tooth resorption is classified into five stages based on the severity and into three types
PT
based on the location of the resorption.
 Stages are defined by the AVDC as follows
(Fig. 8.14):
Jo iso (Aiaeo dind aui oui suaixa) ssoi anss prey peuap daa (e YL) e ans
the tooth retains its integrity12,13 (Fig. 8.16).
Stage 4 (TR 4): Extensive dental hard tissue loss. Most of the tooth has lost its
Tooth
Tooth
Resorptio
Resorp
Resorptic
Stage 1
Stage 3
VX
Tooth Resorption-AVDC Classification of Clinical Stages
Tooth
Tooth
Tooth
Tooth
Resorption
Resorptior
Resorptio
Resorption
Stage 4a
Stage 4b
Stage 4c
Stage5
MY
Figure 8.14  Diagram of tooth resorption stages (Copyright AVDC, used with permission),
Chapter 8: Feline Dentistry157
CHAPTER 8
Figure 8.15 Stage 2 tooth resorption on *207 and #208. Notice that the enamel and part of the dentin are
missing (Courtesy of William Krug, DvM, North Carolina State University).
Figure 8.16
Radiograph of stage 3 tooth resorption (Courtesy of William Krug, DVM, North Carolina State
University).
Stage 5 (TR 5): The crown is no longer visible; only ghost appearance of the hard
Based on radiographic appearance, tooth resorption is then classified into three types:
Type 1 (T1) tooth appearance: There will be a focal or multifocal radiolucency, which
Type 2 (T2) tooth appearance: There is narrowing or disappearance of the periodontal
 Type 3 (T3) tooth appearance: This will include types 1 and 2 appearance in the same
tooth. The tooth will have areas of normal and narrow or lost periodontal space.
There will be focal to multifocal areas of decreased radiolucency, and generalized
decreased radiopacity in other areas of the tooth.12,13
158Small Animal DentalProcedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
PTER
T
Figure 8.17  Stage 4a tooth resorption of #207 and stage 4b tooth resorption of #208; the crown is more affected
(Courtesy of William Krug, DVM, North Carolina State University).
Diagnostics
Diagnosis of tooth resorption should be done with combination of a thorough oral exam
and intraoral radiographs. It is important to perform a thorough exam on all feline
 patients, especially since tooth resorption is so prevalent.14 On oral exam on the awake
patient, it may look like part of the tooth's surface may be missing or hyperplastic tissue
is covering a portion of the tooth's crown. In some patients, the overlying gingiva or
 gingival margin will be severely inflamed, and in other areas, no inflammation is evident
For the patient under anesthesia, each tooth should be evaluated with a periodontal
probe and dental explorer. The explorer is used to help detect pitted areas in the tooth's
enamel and cementum by dropping down into the lesions. When the explorer is used
correctly, it will make a pinging sound as it catches the edge of the lesion on its way out.
Caution is to be used at the mandibular molar due to its anatomy. The molar's furca-
tion space can be misdiagnosed as a resorptive lesion. Intraoral radiographs should be
taken; this will help you visualize if there is root resorption. No matter how insignificant
a lesion may appear externally, there is always the potential for root resorption internally
and externally.
Charting
The abbreviation that is commonly used to note tooth resorption is TR. Once a stage has
been determined, that stage number is recorded next to the abbreviation on the dental
chart. On a tooth diagram, a dot is placed on the surface of the tooth with a circle around
it to represent the location of the lesion.
Example: TR 3 (Online Fig. 8.20)
Chapter 8: Feline Dentistry159
Treatment
Treatment choices are determined by the intraoral radiographs.
Complete extraction of the tooth should always be attempted if no root resorption
is noted and a normal periodontal ligament space is present on  the dental
radiograph.7,12,14
Crown amputation is a great treatment choice due to it being less invasive, making for
an easier recovery for the patient; however, it can only be performed if no periodontal
CHAPTER
performed by making a small envelope flap and using a round bur or diamond round
bur to cut the crown of the tooth off at the gingival margin. Once the crown of the
affected tooth is removed, the roots and bone are smoothed down and closure of the
gingival flap is achieved with a 5-0 absorbable suture.16 This treatment is only performed
opoad ou pue uoisil 7 adi e un uaas se aeis aouape an ui si uodosn noon uaum
disease is present. Advance stages are seen radiographically when the periodontal ligament
 is becoming difficult to distinguish from the surrounding alveolar bone, the roots, cemen-
tum, and dentin.
Dental radiographs are a very important tool when dealing with tooth resorption.
Without this capability, it is not possible to properly stage and treat the lesion appropri-
 ately. Without properly staging these lesions, treating them could be done improperly and
lead to more patient discomfort. If intraoral radiographs are not possible, refer these
 patients to a specialty practice that has dental radiographic capability (Online Fig. 8.21}
Medical Options
Restorative procedures were once recommended in shallow lesions of stage 1 and some
stage 2s to interrupt the progression of the lesion, provided that the roots look normal
on radiographs.' But due to the progressive nature of the disease, it is no longer a rec-
ommended treatment. It was found (restorative treatment) to have a poor success rate-
only 10%-20% after a 2- to 3-year follow-up.ll The oral application of fluoride treatments
References
1. Girard, N, Servet, E, Biourge, V, Hennet, P. 2008. Feline tooth resorption in a colony
of 109 cats. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 25{3):166-174.
2. Wiggs, R, Lobprise, H. 1997. Veterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice.
Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven.
3. Ray, JD, Jordan, DG, Eubanks, DL, Crosswhite, ME. 2009. A review of stomatitis
and treatment in cats. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Compounding
13(5):372-381.
4. Holmstrom, SE. 2000. Feline dentistry. In Veterinary Dentistry for the Technician
and Offce Staff. Philadelphia: Saunders, p. 284.
5. Lyon, KF. 2005. Gingivostomatitis. Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Animal
Practice 35(4):893.
160Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
6. Lewis, JR, Tsugawa, AJ, Reiter, AM. 2007. Use of CO, laser as an adjunctive treat-
ment for caudal stomatitis in a cat. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 24(4):240-249.
7. Bonello, D. 2007. Feline inflammatory, infectious and other oral conditions. In
BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Dentistry, 3rd ed., edited by Tutt, C, Deeprose,
J, Crossley, D. Gloucester: BSAVA, Pp. 126-147.
8. Bellows, J. 2010. Feline Dentistry Oral Assessment, Treatment and Preventative Care.
Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell.
9. Werner A. 2007. Eosinophilic granulomas. In Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary
Consult Clinical Companion, Small Animal Dentistry, edited by Lobprise, HB. Ames,
HAPTER
IA: Blackwell, pp. 352-357.
10. White, S. 2010. Eosinophilic granuloma complex. In The Merck Veterinary Manual,
edited by Kahn, S. Whitehouse, NJ: Merck Sharp & Dohme, Pp. 884-885.
11. Reiter AM. 2007. Tooth resorption: feline. In Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary
Consult Clinical Companion, Small Animal Dentistry, edited by Lobprise, HB. Ames,
IA: Blackwell, pp. 305-313.
12. Bellows, J. 2010. Feline Dentistry Oral Assessment, Treatment and Preventive Care.
Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 120-126, 222-241.
13. AVDC. 2009. Tooth resorption, www.avdc.org/nomenclature.html#resorption.
14. Niemic, BA. 2010. Small Animal Dental, Oral and Maxillofacial Disease. London:
Manson Publishing, Pp. 136-139.
15. Lobprise, H, Wiggs, R. 2000. The Veterinarian's Companion for Common Dental
Procedures. Lakewood, CO: AAHA Press, Pp. 143-146.
16. Niemiec, BA. 2008. Oral pathology. Topics in Companion Animal Medicine (1938-
9736) 23(2):59.
Dentistry and the Exotic Patient
Kathy Istace, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
CHAPTER 9
Learning Objectives
The species addressed in this section are rodents, rabbits, ferrets, and other popular small
exotic pets. Anesthesia and pain management for exotic species could (and do!) have entire
textbooks devoted to them, so the scope of this section will be limited to that for dental
procedures. In this section you will learn
 Dental and oral anatomy
Important differences between the dentition of the species mentioned above
Commonly seen dental problems
Specialized dental instruments for exotic species
Husbandry and home care for healthy mouths
 Dental radiography in exotics
Small Anirat Dentat Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, 1st edition. Edited by Jeanne R. Perrone.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
161
162Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Challenges of Exotic Dentistry
 Exotic caged pets are seen by many small animal veterinary practices, although in most
practices, they are not dealt with as commonly as dogs and cats. Owners may also handle
their smaller caged pets infrequently. This leads to two main difficulties when they are
presented for dental treatment: that veterinary staff may not be as familiar with their
dental diseases and appropriate treatment, anesthesia, and pain management; and that
by the time the client notices a problem and the exotic patient is presented, it may be
quite debilitated.
Rodent Dentistry
All rodents possess two pairs of continuously growing incisors and no canine teeth.
Rodents also lack a set of exfoliating primary teeth, growing only permanent teeth.
However, not all rodents are created equal when it comes to the rest of their dentition.
PTER
murine rodents.
HC
Caviomorph Rodents (Guinea Pigs, Chinchillas, Degus)
All teeth of caviomorph rodents have open root apices, allowing the teeth to grow con-
tinuously, a type of dentition called elodont.2 These teeth, worn down by a diet of
abrasive grasses and vegetation, are constantly replaced by new growth.
Oral Anatomy and Dentition of Caviomorph Rodents
2(I1/1: C0/0 : P1/1 : M3/3) = 20
The oral cavity is small and narrow, with a large space, the diastema, separating the inci-
sors from the cheek teeth.3 The enamel on the incisor teeth is thickest on the facial surface
and is a yellow-orange color. This pigmentation is not present in guinea pigs. The cheek
teeth have large chewing surfaces, and rather than being set parallel in the mouth, diverge
caudally (Figs. 9.1-9.4).
Murine Rodents (Rats, Mice, Hamsters, Gerbils)
Murine rodents possess continuously growing incisors that allow them to nest and to
tunnel through hard obstacles to gain access to food, but they do not have continuously
growing cheek teeth. Murines consume diets of seeds, roots, and tubers, which are not
particularly abrasive.4 Their molars possess true anatomical roots and short crowns,
called brachyodont.
Chapter 9: Dentistry and the Exotic Patient163
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.1 Guinea pig skull: occlusal surfaces (Photograph courtesy of Skulls Unlimited International Inc.).
Figure 9.2 Guinea pig skull: side view (Photograph courtesy of Skulls Unlimited International Inc.).
Oral Anatomy and Dentition of Murine Rodents
2(I1/1 : C0/0 : P0/0 : M3/3) = 16
Murine rodents possess the same sort of long, narrow oral cavity as caviomorph
rodents; however, cheek tissue fills the diastema between the incisors and the molars.
Hamsters have large cheek pouches that are used to store and carry food, bedding, and
164Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
CHAPTER
Figure 9.3 Chinchilla skull: occlusal surfaces (Photograph courtesy of Skulls Unlimited International Inc.).
Figure 9.4 Chinchilla skull: side view (Photograph courtesy of Skulls Unlimited International Inc.)
their young. As with all rodents, murines have two pairs of elodont incisors. The man-
dibular incisors are normally three times longer than the maxillary incisors.7 The enamel
is thicker on the facial surface of the incisors and is orange in color. There are no canine
teeth or premolars. The molars are brachyodont and situated caudally in the mouth
 (Fig. 9.5,Online Fig. 9.6).
Chapter 9: Dentistry and the Exotic Patient165
CHAPTER
Figure 9.5 Hamster skull: occlusal surfaces (Photograph courtesy of Skulls Unlimited International Inc.).
Oral Examination of Rodents
The face and head should be frst assessed for any asymmetry, swellings, ocular or nasal
discharge, drooling, saliva staining, inability to close the mouth, obvious incisor over
growth, and/or abnormal incisor wear pattern. A complete intraoral examination of the
awake rodent is difficult. An otoscope can sometimes be used in larger awake rodents to
visualize the oral cavity and cheek teeth, but more often, the pet will need to be sedated
or anesthetised.? Mouth gags, cheek dilators, magnifiers, and dental mirrors can be used
in the sedated/anesthetized patient to improve visualization of the caudal oral cavity.
Check for an unlevel occlusal plane, sharp points or hooks on the cheek teeth, food
impaction between teeth, tongue entrapment, soft tissue lacerations or ulcerations, cheek
 pouch impaction, stomatitis, or fractured teeth (Online Figs. 9.7-9.9). Skull radiographs
should also be obtained as part of the complete oral examination, which allow occlusal
evaluation and can reveal tooth root elongation and periapical lucencies.4
Anesthesia and Pain Management
Preanesthetic fasting should be limited to 1-2 hours, as these small patients do not vomit
and are at risk of developing hypoglycemia. Preanesthetic blood panels should be run
on those patients large enough to perform venipuncture. The lateral saphenous or cephalic
veins are the most accessible to collect small amounts of blood and for intravenous
catheter placement (use 24-gauge or smaller) for emergency access with or without fluid
administration.
Some procedures such as oral examinations or incisor trimming can be done using
only chemical restraint. Drugs such as ketamine, oxymorphone, butorphanol, midazolam,
medetomidine, glycopyrrolate, and atropine are commonly used to provide sedation,
166Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Table 9.1S
 Some common drugs and dosages for premedication of rodents and other small exotic pets
Agent
Guinea Pig
Chinchilla 
Hamster
Rat/Mouse
Hedgehog
 Sugar
Glider
Ketamine
 22-44mg/kg
20-40
20-40mg/kg
 22-44 mg/kg
5-20
20mg/kg
IM
mg/kg IM
IM
IM
mg/kg IM
IM
Oxymorphone
0.2-0.5 mg/kg
0.2-0.5
0.2-0.5
SC, IM 
mg/kg SC, IM
mg/kg SC, IM 
Butorphanol
0.4-2.0mg/kg
0.2-2.0
1 -5 mg/kg SC
1 -2 mg/kg SC 
0.05-0.4
0.5mg/
SC
mg/kg IM
mg/kg SC
kg IM 
Midazolam
1-2 mg/kg IM
1-2 mg/kg
 1 -2 mg/kg IM 
1 -2 mg/kg IM
IM
Medetomidine
0.3 mg/kg SC,
0.1 mg/kg SC,
0.1 mg/kg SC
0.1 mg/kg
IM
IM
IM
Glycopyrrolate 
0.01-0.02
0.01-0.02
0.01-0.02
0.01-0.02
mg/kg SC
mg/kg SC
mg/kg SC
mg/kg SC
PTER
Atropine
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
0.1-0.2
0.1-0.4
0.1-0.4 mg/kg
0.01-0.04
0.01-
SC, IM
mg/kg SC,
mg/kg SC, IM 
SC, IM 
mg/kg SC,
0.02
T
IM
IM
mg/kg
SC, IM
IM, intranuscular; SC, subcutaneous.
Source: Adapted from Morrisey and Carpenter.9
reduce the stress associated with induction, decrease salivary secretions, and provide pain
relief. There are many excellent texts and resources that can be consulted with regard to
rodent drug protocols and dosages? (Table 9.1).
Intubation of very small rodents is generally not an option. Alternately, a kitten-sized
anesthetic mask on a nonrebreathing system can be used to induce anesthesia with iso-
flurane and Oz administration. Anesthetic maintenance can be accomplished by placing
a small anesthetic mask over only the nose, or by using a rubber catheter thin enough to
fit into a nostril cut to accept an endotracheal tube adapter and trimmed to extend
approximately 1 in. into one of the nostrils while the other nostril is occluded by a finger.'
For murines, chamber induction can be used. A large anesthetic mask placed over the
 patient with the mask's diaphragm pressed firmly against a table can serve as a makeshift
induction chamber. For anesthetic maintenance, a rubber dental dam or the palm of an
examination glove is stretched over the end of a Bain system anesthetic hose using an
elastic band to keep it in place. The patient's nose is placed through an "X" cut in the
rubber, leaving the mouth free. A staff member must hold the nasal tube or mask to keep
 it in place. This person can also be dedicated to anesthetic monitoring [Online Fig. 9.10]
Heart rate can be monitored via pediatric stethoscope, Doppler blood pressure monitor
(Doppler crystal can be held or taped directly over the fur of the chest in most patients),
or a lingual SpO2 sensor placed on a foot, ear, or scrotum. Visualization of the mucous
 membrane color (tongue is especially useful) and the chest movements of respirations is
 essential. Circulating warm water blankets, microwavable oat bags (Online Fig. 9.11},
and exam gloves filled with warm water can all be useful in maintaining body
temperature.
Chapter 9: Dentistry and the Exotic Patient167
Small mammals do not often show obvious signs of pain, but this does not mean they
should be denied pain relief.10 Pain management can include narcotics used in premedica-
tion, injectable analgesics such as buprenorphine, and oral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) such as meloxicam. The placement of dental local blocks in rodents is
 usually impossible. Some signs that pain relief is not adequate are teeth grinding, hiding,
depression, and anorexia. Pain must be recognized and treated quickly as rodents can
become debilitated very quickly if not eating.
Common Dental Problems of Rodents
Malocclusion
The most common dental problem seen in rodents is malocclusion, causing overgrowth
 of the incisors (with or without cheek teeth in caviomorphs) [Online Fig. 9.12). Second-
ary tongue entrapment, in which the lower cheek teeth overgrow and due to their angula-
tion arch over the tongue, preventing the animal from prehending food or swallowing:
soft tissue lacerations of the tongue and buccal mucosa; tooth root elongation; and excess
CHAPTER
salivation ("slobbers") can occur. Malocclusions can result from traumatic injury to a
tooth causing a loss of a portion of the crown and subsequently the loss of normal wear
on the opposing tooth, or can result from hereditary conditions such as a mandible that
is too narrow or too short, nutritional deficiencies such as not consuming enough rough-
age resulting in insufcient tooth wear, weakness of the jaw muscles, or behavioral prob-
 lems such as cage chewing (Online Fig. 9.13)
Treatment
Traumatic malocclusions are treated by smoothing the edges of the fractured tooth with
a bur or fle to reduce soft tissue injuries, treating the pulp if exposed by removing any
 e u e ym padn asid aixo   ii de p ass p
glass ionomer, and performing routine odontoplasty (also referred to as crown height
reduction or occlusal levelling) on the opposing tooth until the fractured tooth regrows.
Atraumatic malocclusions can be treated, although not usually cured, with routine odon-
toplasty (usually every 6-8 weeks for the remainder of the animal's life), extraction of
the affected teeth, dietary changes, or reducing the animal's stressors in cases of behavioral
problems such as cage chewing or barbering. For details of odontoplasty and extraction,
 see the "Rabbit Dentistry" section (Online Figs. 9.14 and 9.15]
Tooth Root Abscess
This can be secondary to infection due to food or debris impaction between teeth, which
spreads periapically, tooth fracture leading to endodontic disease, or plaque-associated
 periodontal disease.6 Facial swelling is the most common presentation. Radiographs are
necessary to determine not only whether the abscess is from the teeth but if so, from
which tooth. The location of facial swelling can be misleading, as the root apex of the
incisors can extend to the premolars in caviomorphs and beyond the third molar in murine
rodents. Tooth root abscesses of elodont teeth are usually very difficult to resolve, possibly
168Small Animal Dental Procedures forVeterinary Technicians and Nurses
due to the difficulty of completely removing all abscess material, often requiring multiple
procedures for extraction of the affected teeth, surgical debridement of the abscess, long-
 term antibiotic administration, and possible force-feeding.6 Abscessed brachyodont teeth
may be extracted using a small luxator or an 18-gauge needle. Suturing the gingiva closed
over the extraction sites is very difficult in these tiny patients, so they are usually left open
to heal.
Scurvy
Like humans, Guinea pigs cannot synthesize vitamin C from glucose, and so require
vitamin C supplementation from their diet. If vitamin C is not provided or ingested, they
will develop scurvy. Oral signs of scurvy include gingival bleeding and loose teeth some-
times resulting in malocclusion.
Cheek Pouch Impaction and Eversion
PTER
The cheek pouches of hamsters can become impacted if sticky, dry, or sharp materials
are ingested and the hamster is unable to remove these materials from the pouch. The
impacted pouch needs to be emptied and rinsed clean with saline. Long-term impaction
can lead to stomatitis, and oral antibiotics may be necessary.
Cheek pouches may also become everted, which appears as a pink, moist mass pro-
truding from the mouth. The pouch should be replaced and a suture placed through the
 cheek to prevent re-eversion (Online Fig. 9.16]
Caries and Tooth Resorption
Feeding a diet high in sugars or refined carbohydrates can cause dental caries in rodents.
Tooth resorption can also occur, possibly secondary to periodontal inflammation. Extrac-
tion is the treatment of choice for brachyodont teeth, or for elodont teeth that have
extensive damage.° If a carious lesion is present on an elodont tooth that otherwise
appears healthy and is still erupting, odontoplasty (and pulp capping if necessary) can be
attempted.
Periodontal Disease
Plaque-induced periodontal disease can affect brachyodont teeth, particularly in pet rats.
These patients should have dental prophylaxis and extraction of teeth that have advanced
attachment loss or infection. Periodontal disease involving elodont teeth is much more
likely to be due to impaction of food or debris.
Dental Instruments
A complete set of rodent dental instruments comprises a mouth gag and cheek dilators
to ensure adequate visualization of the oral cavity, and a rodent tongue depressor to
Chapter 9: Dentistry and the Exotic Patient169
protect the tongue and soft tissues of the mouth from trauma. High-speed burs (i.e.,
FG330, FG701) are used for incisor trimming, and low-speed burs (i.e., HP5, HP8,
HP5s8) and/or molar/premolar rasps are used for crown height reduction of overgrown
premolars and molars. A pair of rodent molar/premolar cutters can be used if no drill is
available. For extraction of elodont teeth, a set of incisor and molar/premolar luxators
are required, which are inserted into the periodontal space lateral to the tooth being
extracted, then held while applying pressure longitudinally for 20 seconds. This is then
done on the mesial aspect of the tooth being extracted, and the process repeated until the
 periodontal ligament is torn and the tooth is mobile. Extraction forceps are then used to
intrude the tooth into the alveolar socket in a rocking motion to tear any remaining
Lastly, the extraction forceps are used to extract the tooth completely.6 Other useful tools
include magnifying loupes, 18G needles to use to luxate very small teeth, a saliva ejector
suction tip fitted with a urinary catheter to suction fluid and debris from the mouth, and
cotton-tipped applicators to staunch blood flow, absorb fluid, and remove debris from
the mouth.
CHAPTER
Husbandry and Home Care
Debilitated patients or patients who have had oral surgery may need nutritional support.
A variety of soft foods can be offered or force-fed, such as Oxbow Critical Care (Oxbow
Animal Health, Murdoch, NE; www.oxbowanimalhealth.com), which is a recovery food
in powder form that is mixed with water and fed from a syringe; yogurt; or hay, vegetables
and water pureed in a blender. Abscess-flushing syringes with the tips trimmed off halfway
work to force-feed chinchillas and guinea pigs; and 1- to 3-mL syringes work well for
 tinier patients (Online Fig. 9.17). Distasteful medications such as enrofloxacin may be
mixed with apple or other juices in the dosing syringe to improve palatability.
 To aid in preventing dietary-related malocclusions, owners should feed caviomorph
rodents the majority of their diets as roughage, such as timothy hay, fresh greens, and
vegetables; and at most, one-third of their diets should consist of commercial pellets.
Guinea pigs must also be given vitamin C supplementation to prevent scurvy. Stress can
often be reduced by enlarging the animal's cage, removing or adding companions, or
adding stimulation such as toys and mazes. Chew aids, such as wooden blocks, can help
wear down rodent incisors.
Miscellaneous Small Pets
Hedgehogs
2(I2-3/2:C1/1: P3-4/2-3 :M3/3)=34-40
As a member of the order Insectivora, the oral anatomy of hedgehogs is quite different
from other exotic pets. Anatomical characteristics of insectivores include small, long,
narrow snouts, and a primitive tooth structure. All teeth of hedgehogs have true anatomi-
cal roots and do not grow continuously."l They do possess deciduous teeth, replaced by
170Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
permanent dentition beginning at 7-9 weeks of age. The incisors are used as forceps for
picking up small prey, and the canines often resemble incisors or first premolars [Online
Figs. 9.18 and 9.19). A complete oral examination of hedgehogs requires anesthesia or
chemical restraint because of their self-protective behavior of rolling into a tight ball when
stressed.
Periodontal disease has been described in both captive and wild hedgehogs, although
hedgehogs because they have noticed a bad smell associated with the pet and/or inap-
petance. Treatment involves antibiotics, supportive care by force-feeding anorectic
 patients, and extraction of the diseased teeth [Online Fig. 9.21]
Sugar Gliders
2(I3/2:C1/0 : P3/3 : M4/4)= 40
Sugar gliders are small nocturnal marsupials native to Australia and New Guinea that
feed on insects and tree sap, although in captivity are generally fed commercial pellets,
CHAPTER
 proteins such as pinkie mice, mealworms, eggs, or cooked chicken, along with fruits and
vegetables. Anesthesia is usually necessary for a complete oral examination, although
restraint and examination while awake can be attempted in the morning, when they are
more inactive. Their teeth are designed for stripping the bark from trees, with long man-
 dibular incisors and shorter maxillary incisors'3 [Online Figs. 9.22 and 9.23]. All of their
teeth have true anatomical roots and do not grow continuously. Periodontal disease can
occur in gliders fed large amounts of soft carbohydrates. Teeth can also fracture from
chewing sticks or cage wires. Dental prophylaxis and antibiotic therapy are recom
mended, although extraction of diseased teeth, especially of the long mandibular incisors,
may risk jaw fracture.
Rabbit Dentistry
Rabbits belong to the order Lagomorpha. All teeth in lagomorphs have no true anatomi-
cal roots and grow continually, a type of dentition called elodont. Deciduous teeth are
replaced by permanent teeth by 5 weeks of age.6
Oral Anatomy and Dentition of Rabbits
2(12/1: C0/0 : PM3/2 : M3/3)= 28
The oral cavities of rabbits are long and narrow, with a large space, the diastema, sepa-
rating the incisors from the cheek teeth. The oral cavity is further divided by buccal skin
folds halfway along the diastema.l4 Prehension of food is performed by the lips, tongue,
and incisors in the rostral cavity. The actual chewing of food is done by the ridged cheek
teeth in the caudal oral cavity. The mandible is narrower than the maxilla. Lagomorphs
have four maxillary incisors-two anterior and two posterior.' The posterior incisors are
Chapter 9: Dentistry and the Exotic Patient171
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.24 Rabbit skull: occlusal surfaces (Photograph courtesy of Skulls Unlimited International Inc.).
Figure 9.25 Rabbit skull: side view (Photograph courtesy of Skulls Unlimited International Inc.).
smaller than the anterior ones and are commonly referred to as "peg" teeth (Figs. 9.24
and 9.25).
Oral Examination of Rabbits
The face and head should be first assessed for asymmetry, swellings, ocular or nasal dis-
charge, drooling or wet fur, saliva staining, hair loss, obvious incisor overgrowth, and/or
172Small Animal DentalProcedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 9.26  Rabbit with mouth gag and cheek dilators in place.
abnormal incisor wear pattern. A thorough oral examination is difficult in the awake
rabbit because the long and narrow oral cavity allows only the anterior portion of the
HAPTER
mouth to be readily visualized, and often there is food within the mouth that may obscure
the teeth. An otoscope may be used to look into the oral cavity of the awake patient, but
will allow mouth gags, cheek dilators, magnifiers, and dental mirrors to be used to
improve visualization of the caudal oral cavity (Fig. 9.26). Look and feel for an unlevel
occlusal plane, sharp points on the teeth, food impaction between teeth, soft tissue lacera-
tions, tooth mobility, or fractured teeth. Skull radiographs are necessary to reveal tooth
root elongation and periapical lucencies
Anesthesia and Pain Management
 Preanesthetic fasting may cause hypoglycaemia and intestinal ileus in rabbits, and rabbits
cannot vomit, eliminating the risk of aspiration pneumonia. Fasting should be limited to
1-4 hours prior to sedation to allow the pet to clear any food content from its mouth.16
As a minimum, packed cell volume and total protein (PCV/TP) and blood glucose should
be measured. The cephalic veins, lateral saphenous, or the marginal ear vein are the most
accessible to collect small amounts of blood and for intravenous catheter placement for
emergency access with or without fluid administration.
Sedation or anesthesia in the debilitated rabbit is risky, so patients should be given
 antibiotics, pain relief, force-feeding, and so on as necessary to correct any preexisting
conditions before attempting anesthesia.
Some procedures such as oral examinations or incisor trimming can be done using
only chemical restraint. Drugs such as ketamine, midazolam, medetomidine, buprenor-
phine, butorphanol, and glycopyrrolate are commonly used to provide sedation, reduce
the stress associated with anesthetic induction, decrease salivary secretions, and provide
pain relief. There are many excellent texts and resources that can be consulted with regard
to rodent drug protocols and dosages?,17 (Table 9.2).
Due to the small oral cavity, large tongue, and caudal location of the glottis, intubation
of rabbits can be difficult. It is easy to traumatize the trachea during repeated intubation
Chapter 9: Dentistry and the Exotic Patient173
Table 9.2
Common drug dosages for rabbit dentistry
Use
Agent
Dosage
Premedication
Ketamine
20-50 mg/kg IM
Midazolam
1 -2 mg/kg IM
Medetomidine
0.25 mg/kg IM
Glycopyrrolate
0.01-0.02 mg/kg IM, SC
Anesthesia
Propofol
3-6 mg/kg IV
Ketamine/diazepam
20-40 mg/kg (K)/1-5 mg/kg (D) IV
Analgesia
Buprenorphine
0.01-0.05 mg/kg IM, SC, IV
Butorphanol
0.1-0.5 mg/kg IM, SC
Meloxicam
0.2 mg/kg IM, SC or 0.3 mg/kg PO
Carprofen
4 mg/kg IM, SC or 1.5mg/kg PO
IM, intramuscular; SC, subcutaneous; IV, intravenous; PO, per 05.
Sources: Adapted from Heard,17 and Morrisey and Carpenter.9
CHAPTER 9
attempts. The rabbit is first masked down with isoflurane or sevoflurane, or alternatively
general anesthesia can be induced with intravenous drugs such as propofol, or ketamine
blind intubation.18 In either case, the rabbit is anesthetized by intravenous or inhalant
agents, and is placed in sternal recumbency with the head and neck hyperextended. A
2.0- to 3.5-mm endotracheal tube is used with local anesthetic gel applied to the end to
ease intubation. In direct intubation, the tongue is grasped and pulled to the side. Gauze
ties placed around the upper and lower incisors will open the mouth as wide as possible
A laryngoscope is inserted into the mouth so that the glottis is visualized, and the endo-
tracheal tube is slid down the blade of the laryngoscope and into the trachea. For blind
intubation, the rabbit must be breathing on its own as this technique requires respiratory
noise to allow the operator to guide the tube into the correct position. The endotracheal
tube is passed over the base of the tongue and the tube is advanced while listening for
 respiratory noise at the adapter end of the tube. If respiratory noise is not heard and the
rabbit is breathing, the tube has entered the esophagus. If respiratory noise becomes
louder, the tube is still on its way to entering the trachea. Once the tube is fully advanced
and respiratory noise is still heard, the rabbit has been successfully intubated.
If intubation has been tried unsuccessfully, or if the rabbit is very small, anesthetic
maintenance can be accomplished by placing a small anesthetic mask over only the nose,
or by using a 4-8 French red rubber catheter inserted into one nostril and advanced to
the depth of the pharynx.6 The catheter is attached to the anesthetic hose using an endo-
tracheal tube adapter (Fig. 9.27).
Heart rate can be monitored via pediatric stethoscope, Doppler blood pressure monitor
(crystal can be held or taped directly over the fur of the chest in most patients), or a
lingual SpO2 sensor placed on a foot, ear, or scrotum. Visualization of the mucous mem-
brane color (tongue is especially useful) and the chest movements of respirations is essen-
tial. The palpebral reflex is lost by rabbits early in light planes of anesthesia, followed by
the pedal withdrawal reflex. At a surgical plane, the auricular reflex is lost. If the corneal
reflex has been lost, this indicates that the patient is too deep. Rabbits are prone to
 developing hypothermia, so be sure to monitor and maintain body temperature (Online
Fig. 9.28)
174Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 9.27  Rabbit with nasal tube in place for anesthetic maintenance.
Rabbits are very sensitive to pain, becoming anorectic and lethargic. Gastrointestinal
CHAPTER
(GI) stasis, delayed wound healing, shock, and death can result. Tooth grinding is a
 common sign of pain in rabbits, as are hunching, vocalization, and inactivity. Any rabbit
with a painful condition or who is undergoing a painful procedure should be provided
with pain relief. Analgesics useful in rabbits include buprenorphine, butorphanol, meloxi-
cam, and carprofen.
Common Dental Problems of Rabbits
Malocclusion
The most common dental problem in lagomorphs is incisor overgrowth, either causing
 cheek tooth overgrowth or being caused by it² [Online Figs. 9.29 and 9.30). Malocclu-
sions are classified as traumatic, resulting from a traumatic injury to a tooth causing a
loss of a portion of the crown and subsequently the loss of normal wear on the opposing
tooth; or atraumatic, normally resulting from hereditary conditions such as jaw length
disparity or nutritional deficiencies such as not consuming enough roughage to wear down
the continually growing teeth. In either case, tooth overgrowth can result in an altered
curvature of the teeth so that the occlusal surfaces are no longer able to meet and wear
down adequately. Altered curvature of the teeth can also widen the spaces in between
teeth, leading to food and debris impaction, periodontal pockets, and periodontal
abscesses. Inadequately worn teeth can lead to sharp spikes causing soft tissue lacerations
of the tongue and buccal mucosa. Excess salivation ("slobbers") can occur Tooth root
elongation can occur secondary to crown elongation when the elongated crowns come
 into contact with the opposing teeth and eventually are prevented from further eruption:
Eruption stops but tooth growth does not, so the root apices begin to intrude into the
bone of the mandible and maxilla. Elongation of the mandibular roots can cause bone
remodeling and a palpable "lumpy jaw," while long maxillary cheek tooth roots can
break in to the orbit, causing eye prolapse in severe cases. Root elongation of the maxil-
 lary incisors can obstruct the lacrimal ducts, causing lacrimal discharge (Online Fig. 9.31)
Chapter 9: Dentistry and the Exotic Patient175
Traumatic malocclusions are treated by smoothing the edges of the fractured tooth
with a bur or file, treating the pulp if exposed by removing any infected tissue with a
sterile, small round bur and capping it with calcium hydroxide paste topped with a thin
layer of glass ionomer, and performing routine odontoplasty (also referred to as crown
height reduction or occlusal levelling) on the opposing tooth until the fractured tooth
regrows. Atraumatic malocclusions due to jaw length disparity can be treated, although
not usually cured because the underlying jaw malocclusion remains, with routine odon-
toplasty, usually every 6-8 weeks for the remainder of the animal's life. This is often also
the case when malocclusion has occurred secondary to some other cause such as inade-
quate dietary roughage: If a tooth's curvature has been altered, causing it not to be able
to meet its opposing tooth and wear down, it is uncommon for the curvature to return
 to normal, even after numerous occlusal leveling procedures. Extraction of the affected
teeth along with the opposing teeth is another option to resolve the problem, and dietary
changes such as substituting hay for less abrasive pellets can be successful in cases of
nutritional deficiencies where tooth curvature has not been altered, although getting
rabbits to accept a new food regimen is often difficult.
Odontoplasty
CHAPTER
Whether trimming the incisor or cheek teeth, the use of nail clippers or tooth trimmers
is no longer acceptable as these can cause longitudinal tooth fractures. A much better
instrument for performing odontoplasty is a dental bur.4 To trim the incisors, a #330,
#701, or coarse diamond cone bur on a high-speed handpiece with the water turned off
can be used, sometimes even in the awake patient. Half of a tongue depressor or a couple
of cotton-tipped applicators are inserted into the mouth behind the incisors to protect
the tongue and soft tissues from injury. One incisor is cut and shaped at a time, with care
not to cut so much as to enter the pulp chamber (if the pulp does become exposed, treat
 with calcium hydroxide and glass ionomer as described above) 
(Online Fig. 9.32]. For
odontoplasty of the cheek teeth, the patient must be anesthetized. The rabbit is placed in
dorsal recumbency with cheek dilators and mouth gag in place to allow access to the
caudal oral cavity. Be sure to protect the tongue and oral tissues from laceration as rabbits
can rapidly exsanguinate from such injuries. A slow-speed handpiece and bur such as an
HP5, HP5s8, or lab bur is used to shorten any overgrown teeth or tooth aspects (Online
Fig. 9.33). Cotton-tipped applicators or a saliva ejector suction tip with the end cut off 
and a urinary catheter inserted into it can be used to remove debris from the mouth,
?
9 which is particularly important if the rabbit is not intubated (Online Fig. 9.34). If no burs
are available, the cheek teeth may be "floated" using small mammal premolar and molar
rasps.
Extraction
 Extraction can be considered for patients whose teth are causing ongoing problems. The
 area should frst be rinsed with chlorhexidine solution. Because of the long, curved nature
of the tooth roots, a rabbit incisor or premolar/molar luxator should be alternately
inserted into the mesial and distal aspects of the periodontal ligament space of each tooth
and held in place for 10-20 seconds until it becomes loose.14 Before extracting the tooth,
it should be pressed back up into the alveolus while rotating the tooth slightly to remove
the germinal tissue at the open root apex. If no plug of tissue is seen at the apex once
the tooth is extracted, there is likely still germinal tissue remaining within the alveolus,
176Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
and it should be curetted to prevent regrowth. If even a tiny amount of germinal tissue
is left behind, the tooth may regrow, so owners must be made aware of this possibility.
The extraction sites should be sutured closed with a fine, absorbable suture. If a tooth
fractures during extraction, it can be capped with calcium hydroxide and allowed to
regrow: Another attempt at extraction can be done at a later time. Remember that the
 opposing tooth will continue to grow: Odontoplasty or extraction of the opposing tooth
 may be necessary [Online Fig. 9.35]
Periodontal Disease and Tooth Root Abscess
Plaque-related periodontal disease is rare in rabbits.19 More commonly, debris such as
food or bedding becomes impacted between teeth, which introduces bacteria into the
 periodontium, resulting in attachment loss [Online Fig. 9.36). The infection can travel
down the tooth, causing it to loosen and/or develop a periapical abscess. This infection
can affect multiple teeth, and even cause osteomyelitis. Other causes of periapical abscess
include pulp exposure and subsequent endodontic infection or penetrating wounds. Treat-
ment involves extraction of the affected teeth, curettage of any infected material and
CHAPTER
flushing the area with saline or povidone-iodine solution, and systemic antibiotics. Place-
or defects may be considered. Extraoral abscess lancing may be necessary when complete
curettage of the abscess is unable to be achieved from within the mouth [Online Figs.
9.37-9.39). Even with treatment, recurrence of rabbit abscesses are very common, pos-
sibly due to the difficulty in complete removal of abscess material, and multiple proce-
dures may be required.
Dental Instruments
A complete set of rabbit dental instruments comprises an incisor luxator, molar/premolar
luxator, molar/premolar extraction forceps, root elevators, mouth gag, cheek dilators,
molar/premolar rasp, tongue depressor, low-speed burs to use for odontoplasty (HP5,
HP8, HP558), and high-speed burs for use in incisor trimming (FG330, FG701) [Online
Fig. 9.40). Other useful tools include magnifying loupes, a saliva ejector suction tip fitted
with a urinary catheter to suction fluid and debris from the mouth, and cotton-tipped
applicators to staunch blood flow, absorb fluid, and remove debris from the mouth.
Husbandry and Home Care
Patients who have had oral surgery may need nutritional support until healed. Lago-
morphs may be offered or force-fed a variety of soft foods, such as Oxbow Critical Care;
yogurt; or hay, vegetables, and water pureed in a blender; and 35-mL syringes with cath-
eter tips work well to force-feed larger rabbits while abscess-flushing syringes with the
tips trimmed off halfway work well to force-feed small rabbits.
Distasteful medications may be mixed with apple or other juices in the dosing syringe
to improve palatability. Owners can also be taught how to administer subcuticular
Chapter 9: Dentistry and the Exotic Patient177
injections of antibiotics such as benzathine penicillin/procaine penicillin G (rabbits <2.5 kg
SC).20 If the patient has had extraoral surgery, such as abscess lancing, bedding and debris
may stick to the site. Owners should be advised to keep the area clean using a cloth and
warm water several times daily. A “weak-tea" solution of povidone-iodine and water, or
sterile saline can be used to flush abscesses, making sure not to flush with too much liquid,
as these abscesses often still communicate into the oral cavity, and the rabbit must be
allowed time to swallow the saline.
To aid in preventing dietary-related malocclusions, owners should be encouraged to
feed rabbits the majority of their diets as roughage, such as timothy hay, fresh greens,
and vegetables; and at most, one-third of their diets should consist of commercial pellets.
Ferret Dentistry
Ferrets are obligate carnivores belonging to the Musteldae family, which includes weasels,
mink, and skunks. They are diphyodont, having a set of deciduous teeth that are replaced
CHAPTER
by permanent teeth by 9 months of age. Their dentition resembles that of the cat, and
 like cats, their teeth have true anatomical roots and do not continuously grow.
Oral Anatomy and Dentition of Ferrets
2(I3/3 :C1/1 : PM3/3 : M1/2)
Ferrets have long, narrow, flat skulls, with the region containing the teeth and hard palate
being only one-third of the skull length.?1 Ferrets, like cats, are missing all first premo-
 lars.22 They are also missing the upper second molars and the lower third molars. The
upper fourth premolars have three roots (Figs. 9.41 and 9.42).
Oral Examination of Ferrets
 Oral examination can usually be done on pet ferrets while awake. The face should first
be examined for asymmetry, swellings, and ocular or nasal discharge, and the subman-
dibular lymph nodes palpated. Check for proper occlusion of the jaws and individual
teeth, as well as any tooth fractures, wear, and tartar accumulation. The gums and oral
mucosa should be checked for redness, swelling, and oral masses.
Anesthesia and Pain Management
Preanesthetic fasting should be limited to 4 hours as ferrets are prone to hypoglycemia.23
A full physical examination and a blood profle consisting of, at minimum, a PCV and
total protein should be performed prior to anesthesia, either on the same day as the
178Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
CHAPTER
Figure 9.41 Ferret skull: occlusal surfaces (Photograph courtesy of Skulls Unlimited International Inc.).
procedure or on the days leading up to it."4 Blood collection is facilitated by using a 25-
gauge needle on a 1- to 3-cc syringe from the jugular, cephalic, or lateral saphenous veins.
Premedication drugs such as acepromazine, oxymorphone or hydromorphone, and gly.
copyrrolate are commonly used to provide sedation, supply pain relief, and decrease sali-
vary secretions. An intravenous catheter can be placed in the cephalic or saphenous vein,
and intravenous induction can be accomplished with ketamine and diazepam, or propo-
foll7 (Table 9.3). The ferret's jaw is often tight even once anesthetic induction is complete,
Chapter 9: Dentistry and theExotic Patient179
Table 9.3
Common drug dosages for ferret dentistry.
Use
Agent
Dosage
Premedication
Acepromazine
0.1-0.3 mg/kg IM
Oxymorphone
0.05-0.2 mg/kg IM
Glycopyrrolate
0.01 mg/kg IM
Anesthesia 
 Propofol
3-6 mg/kg IV 
Ketamine/diazepam
10-30mg/kg (K)/1-2 mg/kg (D) IV
Analgesia
Meloxicam
0.2 mg/kg IM, SC or 0.3 mg/kg PO
Buprenorphine
0.01-0.03 mg/kg IM, SC, IV
IM, intranuscular; SC, subcutaneous; IV, intravenous; PO, per 05.
 Source: Adapted fron Heard.17
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.43 Ferret under general anesthesia for routine dental prophylaxis.
but even so, intubation is generally not much more difficult than intubation of the cat.
A laryngoscope with a pediatric blade is used to visualize the entrance to the trachea,
 and a few drops of 2% lidocaine are applied to the arytenoid cartilages before intubation
with a 2.0- to 3.5-mm endotracheal tube.24 Lidocaine gel can also be applied to the end
of the endotracheal tube in place of nonmedicated gel lubricant. Isoflurane or sevoflurane
provide excellent general anesthesia once the patient is intubated.
Anesthetic monitoring can be performed as for the cat: SpO2, COz, ECG, Doppler or
noninvasive blood pressure, temperature, respiration rate, MM color, and so on can all
 be easily assessed. Maintenance of body temperature is of particular concerns as ferrets
are susceptible to hypothermia (Fig. 9.43).
 Pain management includes any opioids used in premedication, intraoperative inject-
ables such as meloxicam, buprenorphine, or constant rate infusions (CRIs) of drugs such
as ketamine and fentanyl, as well as dental regional nerve blocks using lidocaine or
bupivicaine.10 The infraorbital, mental, mandibular, and maxillary blocks can be per-
formed on the ferret in much the same manner as in the cat, with the maximum dose of
local anesthetic being 2mg/kg. Postoperatively, oral liquid pain medications such as
meloxicam can be administered at home by the owner.
180Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Common Dental Problems of Ferrets
PeriodontalDisease
Ferret periodontal disease is staged and treated in the same manner as is periodontal
 disease in dogs and cats.2 Mild tartar accumulation and gingivitis warrants a complete
professional dental prophylaxis under general anesthesia (Fig. 9.44). Moderate to severe
 periodontal disease will require not only a complete prophylaxis but also intraoral dental
 radiographs to assess the degree of attachment loss [Online Figs. 9.45 and 9.46]. Peri-
odontal therapy such as subgingival curettage and root planing, or tooth extraction can
then be performed. Periodontal therapy and extraction are accomplished in the same
 manner as in the dog and cat, with extraction sites being sutured closed, and using appro-
priate antibiotic therapy and pain management.
Tooth Fracture
PTER
Tooth fracture, especially of the canine teeth, is very common in the ferret due to their
tendency to chew on many household surfaces, including cage bars, chair legs, and
 children's toys?2 (Online Fig. 9.47). If a fracture has exposed the tooth pulp, treatment
is necessary to prevent or eliminate infection. If the pulp is not exposed, radiographs
should still be obtained to ensure that the trauma that caused the fracture did not
also cause pulp death. The root of the canine tooth in the ferret is longer than its
d     n       o
healthy canine tooth difficult. Root canal therapy can be performed in these teeth just as
it is done in a canine tooth of a cat, and has the advantage of allowing the ferret to
maintain a functional dentition while minimizing recovery time and postsurgical pain
[Online Fig. 9.48]
Figure 9.4 Ferret with tartar accumulation and mild gingivitis.
Chapter 9: Dentistry and the Exotic Patient181
Dental Instruments
The periodontal probes, explorers, dental mirrors, scalers, and curettes used for feline
prophylaxis function well in the ferret's mouth. The same applies to dental surgical instru-
ments: Feline periosteal elevators, luxators, extraction forceps, root tip picks, needle
drivers, forceps, and small scalpel blades such as #15 are sufficient to make up a ferret
 oral surgery tray. Dental suction units or gauze packing can be used to keep fluids and
debris from entering the trachea during procedures.
Husbandry and Home Care
Ferrets are carnivorous, requiring high-protein diets. At least 30% of their diet should be
 protein from animal sources, as they do not digest plant proteins well23; 20%-30% of
their diet should come from fat. There are many commercial diets for ferrets: Ensure that
the ones your clients are feeding meet the above guidelines. Small amounts of fruits,
CHAPTER
vegetables, and grains can be offered, although refined carbohydrates should be avoided.
Tartar accumulation and periodontal disease seem to develop in ferrets regardless if they
are fed a dry versus a moist diet.26
 If a ferret has developed anorexia due to dental disease or postoperatively, syringe-
feeding a canned high-protein diet such as Hills a/d (Hill's Pet Nutrition Inc., Topeka,
KS) should be performed until the ferret will eat on its own. Most ferrets will tolerate
feedings of 5-10mL four times daily.27 Medications should be dispensed in liquid form
if possible, as it can be very difficult for ferret owners to successfully administer pills or
capsules.
To prevent the development of periodontal disease, ferrets can be taught to accept daily
toothbrushing. Use a cat-sized toothbrush and pet toothpaste.
Dental Radiography for the Exotic Patient
Materials and Equipment
Dental radiography for the exotic patient is best performed with a conventional dental
X-ray unit. Good-quality radiographs can be obtained using either manual or digital
systems. If a dental X-ray unit is unavailable, a standard X-ray unit capable of low peak
kilovoltage (kVp) settings can be used to obtain extraoral radiographs of larger rodents
and rabbits; however, the correct positioning for each view is more difficult to achieve,
and the fine resolution of nonscreen dental X-ray films provide much better detail than
standard films in cassettes.' Sedation or general anesthesia is required to ensure that the
patient does not move during exposure, as most of these patients are small enough that
attempting to restrain their heads "by hand" while wearing bulky leaded gloves usually
does not prevent them from squirming, and can also obscure areas of interest on the
resulting radiograph.
182Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Rodents and Rabbits
rodents as they allow assessment of crown and root length, the occlusal plane, any peri-
apical lucencies, or other bony changes. Extraoral skull radiographs are preferred for
these species as the small size of their oral cavities makes it difficult even to insert film,
much less obtain a diagnostic image. Manual dental flm size #4 will capture the entire
skull of most species, or several exposures taken with a size #2 digital dental sensor can
be compiled together to get a complete picture of the maxilla and mandible. There are
four skull views that should be obtained in order to properly diagnose pathology: lateral,
two lateral obliques, and dorsoventral.4 The lateral view is the most useful, allowing
assessment of the patient's occlusion, crown or root overgrowth, and any bony changes
to the ventral mandible.6 The drawback to this view is that the left and right quadrants
 of the mouth are superimposed (Figs. 9.49 and 9.50). The two lateral obliques, which
are taken at approximately 45 degrees right-to-left and left-to-right, show details of
PTER
HA
Figure 9.49  Lateral dental radiograph positioning on a rabbit.
Figure 9.50 Lateral dental radiograph of a rabbit with normal occlusion.
Chapter 9: Dentistry and the Exotic Patient183
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.51
'lggel e uo suuosod ydeilopel anb!go jeajel
Figure 9.52 Lateral oblique radiograph of a rabbit.
individual root apices and their surrounding bone without superimposition of structures
on the opposite side of the mouth (Figs. 9.51 and 9.52). The dorsoventral view shows
the symmetry (or asymmetry) of the skull, and any irregularity to the contours of the
bone including that of the orbits (Fig. 9.53). An additional view that is of particular use
 in guinea pigs is the rostrocaudal view, where the patient is placed in dorsal recumbency,
nose pointing up at the X-ray tube head, and the film placed beneath the skull. Due to
the occlusal angulation of the cheek teeth in guinea pigs, this view is the best to visualize
whether occlusal abnormalities are present: Normal guinea pig occlusion will result in an
oblique radiolucent line between the upper and lower cheek teeth on either side of the
mouth28 (Online Fig. 9.54). All radiographs should be assessed for the following: elonga-
incisors are chisel-shaped and cheek teeth have an even “zigzag" pattern, whereas waves
184Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 9.53 Dorsoventral radiograph of a rabbit.
CHAPTER
9 or steps are signs of malocclusion [Online Fig. 9.57); and a fine radiolucent line should
exist between the alveolar bone and the subgingival crown, while absence of this can
 indicate ankylosis, and areas of increased bone lucency may indicate abscessation.29
Ferrets
Ferret dental radiographs are obtained for the same reasons as dental radiographs are
obtained in dogs and cats: to determine the degree of attachment loss in cases of peri-
odontal disease, pulp exposure and periapical changes in cases of tooth fracture, assess-
ment of oral masses, and evaluation of many other oral problems including missing or
impacted teeth, retained roots, nonvital teeth, jaw fractures, and so on.
Positioning for dental radiography is much the same as that for the cat. Extraoral skull
radiographs are not recommended, as small-sized manual dental flms (size #0, #1, #2)
can be used intraorally to obtain much better-quality images without superimposition of
 oral structures. Bisecting angle technique is used to obtain intraoral images of the maxil-
lary teeth, while parallel technique can be used in most cases to obtain intraoral images
of the mandibular premolars and molars. Some digital dental X-ray sensors are too wide
to fit within the mouth for standard intraoral views: In this case extraoral oblique views
can be taken of the maxillary teeth, while bisecting angle technique can be used to obtain
 an intraoral view of the mandibular teeth with the X-ray sensor placed perpendicular to
the teeth and as far back in the mouth as possible. Intraoral radiographs of the canine
teeth can easily be obtained with either manual dental flms or digital sensors [Online
Figs. 9.58-9.60)
References
1. Legendre, L. 2003. Oral disorders of exotic rodents. Veterinary Clinics of North
America Exotic Animal Practice 6(3):601-628.
Chapter 9: Dentistry and the Exotic Patient 185
2. Lobprise, H. 2008. Dentistry quarterly: challenges in pocket pet dentistry, www.
veterinarypracticenews.com/vet-de pt/avian-exotic-dept/dentistry-quarterly-challenges-
in-pocket-pet-dentistry.aspx. Date accessed June 13, 2012.
3. Quesenberry, KE, Donnelly, TM, Hillyer, EV. 2004. Biology, husbandry, and clinical
techniques of guinea pigs and chinchillas. In Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical
Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed., edited by Quesenberry, KE, Carpenter, JW. St. Louis,
MO: Saunders, Pp. 232-244.
4. Hoefer, HL. 2000. Small mammal dentistry. In Proceedings: Colorado State Veteri-
nary Medical Association Convention 2000.
 5. Crossley, DA. 1995. Clinical aspects of rodent dental anatomy. Journal of Veterinary
Dentistry 12(4):131-136.
6. Crossley, DA. 2004. Small mammal dentistry part 1. In Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents:
 Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed., edited by Quesenberry, KE, Carpenter, JW.
St. Louis, MO: Saunders, Pp. 370-379.
 7. Bihun, C, Bauck, L. 2004. Basic anatomy, physiology, husbandry, and clinical tech-
niques. In Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed.,
edited by Quesenberry, KE, Carpenter, JW. St. Louis, MO: Saunders, Pp. 286-298.
8. Bennett, RA, Mullen, HS. 2004. Soft tissue surgery. In Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents:
Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed., edited by Quesenberry, KE, Carpenter, JW.
St. Louis, MO: Saunders, Pp. 316-328.
9. Morrisey, JK, Carpenter, JW. 2004. Formulary. In Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents:
CHA
Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed., edited by Quesenberry, KE, Carpenter, JW.
St. Louis, MO: Saunders, Pp. 436-444.
10. Lichtenberger, M. 2006. Anesthesia protocols and pain management for exotic
animal patients (V2224). In Proceedings: Western Veterinary Conference 2006.
11. Ivey, E, Carpenter, JW. 2004. African hedgehogs. In Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents:
Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed., edited by Quesenberry, KE, Carpenter, JW.
St. Louis, MO: Saunders, Pp. 339-353.
12. Clarke, DE. 2003. Oral biology and disorders of chiroptera, insectivores, mono-
tremes, and marsupials. Veterinary Clinics of North America Exotic Animal Practice
6(3):523-564.
13. Ness, RD, Booth, R. 2004. Sugar gliders. In Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical
 Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed., edited by Quesenberry, KE, Carpenter, JW. St. Louis,
MO: Saunders, Pp. 330-338.
14. Crossley, DA. 2003. Oral biology and disorders of lagomorphs. Veterinary Clinics
of North America Exotic Animal Practice 6(3):629-659.
15. Crossley, DA. 1995. Clinical aspects of lagomorph dental anatomy: the rabbit.
Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 12(4):137-140.
16. Murray, MJ. 2002. Anesthesia and analgesia for rabbits. In Proceedings: Western
Veterinary Conference 2002.
17. Heard, DJ. 2004. Anesthesia, analgesia, and sedation of small mammals. In
Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed., edited by
Quesenberry, KE, Carpenter, JW. St. Louis, MO: Saunders, Pp. 356-369.
18. Johnson, D. 2006. Intubation of rabbits and rodents. In Proceedings: Atlantic Coast
Veterinary Conference 2006.
19. Lobprise, H. 1991. Dental and oral disease in lagomorphs. Journal of Veterinary
Dentistry 8(2):11-17.
20. Aiken, S. 2004. Surgical treatment of dental abscesses in rabbits. In Ferrets, Rabbits,
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed., edited by Quesenberry, KE,
Carpenter, JW. St. Louis, MO: Saunders, Pp. 379-382.
186Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
21. He, T, Friede, H, Kiliaridis, S. 2002. Macroscopic and roentgenographic anatomy of
the skull of the ferret. Laboratory Animals 36:86-96.
22. Brown, SA. 2004. Basic anatomy, physiology, and husbandry. In Ferrets, Rabbits,
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed., edited by Quesenberry, KE,
Carpenter, JW. St. Louis, MO: Saunders, Pp. 2-12.
23. Brown, SA. 1993. Ferrets. In A Practitioner's Guide to Rabbits and Ferrets.
Lakewood, CO: American Animal Hospital Association, Pp. 43-100.
24. Brock, N. 2000. Anesthesia for the healthy ferret. In Veterinary Anesthesia Update
Volume 2:Guidelines and Protocols for Safe Small Animal Anesthesia.British
Columbia: Veterinary Anesthesia Northwest, Pp. 80-81.
25. Johnson-Delaney, CA. 2007. Ferret dental disorders: pictorial of common clinical
presentations. Exotic DVM: A Practical Resource for Clinicians 9(2):40-43.
26. Hoefer, HL. 2004. Gastrointestinal diseases part 1. In Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents:
Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed., edited by Quesenberry, KE, Carpenter, JW.
St. Louis, MO: Saunders, Pp. 25-40.
27. Quesenberry, KE, Orcutt, C. 2004. Basic approach to veterinary care. In
Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed., edited by
Quesenberry, KE, Carpenter, JW. St. Louis, MO: Saunders, Pp. 13-24.
CHAPTER
28. Capello, V. 2003. Dental diseases and surgical treatment in pet rodents. Exotic DVM
5(3):21-27.
29. Meredith, A. 2007. Rabbit dentistry. European Journal of Companion Animal
Practice 17(1):55-62.
Discharging
 the
e Dental Patient
Patricia Dominguez, IVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Learning Objectives
This chapter will give you the tools to
 Effectively communicate with owners about their pet's dental procedures
 Properly demonstrate the importance and value of a high-quality dental program
Teach owners how to successfully treat and maintain their pet's oral health
CHAPTER 10
Small Anirat Dentat Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, 1st edition. Edited by Jeanne R. Perrone.
2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
187
188Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
A complete dental procedure is not finished once the patient is awake from anesthesia.
A vital part of veterinary dentistry is to teach the owners how to maintain their pet's oral
care at home. They need to understand how important a healthy mouth is to having a
healthy body. We have already seen in human medicine how periodontal disease is linked
to heart disease, diabetes, low birth weights, and even pneumonia. In veterinary medi-
cine, we are only beginning to uncover the links between dental disease and overall
convey this message at each and every visit, starting with the first puppy and kitten exam.
Good communication is essential when explaining to owners about their pet's dental
procedure, both at regular exams and as part of a discharge after a dental procedure.
Digital pictures, radiographs, models, and charts should be used as tools to convey the
importance of what was done to their pet. Clients will need to learn the value of every
step performed during a dental prophylaxis. This will demonstrate the similarities between
the owner's dental checkups and their pet's trip to the dentist.
In this chapter, you will learn how to present the value of a high-quality dental pro-
cedure. When owners understand the complexity of what is involved, they can then
appreciate the value of the services that have been provided. Visual aids are key to ensur-
ing that the client appreciates each step of a thorough dental procedure. This establishes
the hospital as a trustworthy facility that provides a higher standard of care. Also, cost
tends to be less of an issue if they understand the need for any of the treatments provided.
Clients will not only continue to return for these services, but also refer people to you
once they are aware of the dangers of periodontal disease.
tistry. Owners need to feel like the complete care of their pet is a team effort and works
best when they are involved. Recheck visits and follow-up calls are great opportunities
二
to touch base with clients and review how they are managing oral care at home. If they
CHAPTER
have started a prescription dental diet, these phone calls can be utilized to remind them
of food refills. Not only will this increase revenue for the practice, but also help keep pets
on the road to better oral health
Client compliance is crucial to fghting the battle against plaque accumulation. Once
we have cleaned the oral cavity, it is our duty to give owners the tools necessary to be
able to provide good oral care at home. If the client understands that the dental procedure
is just a part of a complete dental health program, they will be more likely to comply
with your recommendations.
Discharge Instructions: What You Need
The Dental Prophylaxis
A dental prophylaxis is described as the cleaning of an oral cavity without periodontal
disease or mild gingivitis. The idea is to prevent periodontitis.? The discharge instructions
for a dental prophylaxis are going to be less involved than the discharge instructions of
a pet that had a dental procedure to clean and treat advanced stages of periodontal
disease. We will discuss the dental prophylaxis discharge first.
Once the dental cleaning is complete, it is time to organize all of the information
necessary for the owners to take home with them. This should include the following: a
complete write-up of everything that was done during their pet's procedure; special
Chapter 10: Discharging the Dental Patient189
instructions regarding home care; and an oral care plan formulated for that particular
 pet and family to be followed at home. Using these three guidelines will give clients a
dental procedure and for routine maintenance.
The discharge write-up should contain an explanation of what is entailed in a complete
dental prophylaxis. This will educate clients on the numerous steps involved in the
cleaning procedure and assure them that their pet received the highest quality in oral care
    n  n  e    r   
pain medications, intravenous fluids, and anesthetic monitoring. Although the use of
injectable antibiotics and pain medications is not required for a dental prophylaxis, the
practitioner may chose to prescribe them on a case-by-case basis. All of this information
 can be formulated into a generalized template on any word processing system. Once
the document has been saved as a template, it is very easy to personalize them for each
 patient by inserting their name. The report should also include an area where you
can insert what was found on oral exam and a description of any treatments performed.
This will allow you to tailor each discharge packet based on the pet's procedure (see
Appendix 7).
A vital part of the packet will be the visual aspect. Digital pictures and radiographs
make it easy for the client to see the need for treatment, as well as the end results of the
treatments performed. The packet gives them something tangible to show family members,
coworkers, and friends who may not be able to understand everything that was done
without seeing it for themselves (see Appendix 8).
The Dentaf Procedure
10
A dental procedure involves not only the cleaning of the oral cavity but also the treatment
CHAPTER
 of other dental diseases. Specific instructions will need to be given in cases of extractions,
oral surgery, periodontal, endodontic, or orthodontic therapies. You will also need to
outline what the owners should expect after their pet goes home from anesthesia and
how to determine if the pet is not doing well after their procedure. This section should
 also instruct the owner of any medications, special feeding or chewing instructions, and
when to return for a recheck. Be sure to include contact information for the dental team
involved with their pet's procedure in case they have any questions or concerns.
Examining the pet after extractions or when advanced dental therapies are performed
 gives you the opportunity to evaluate the oral cavity and gingival healing. The owner will
be able to describe any differences in the pet's chewing behavior and personality. Use this
time to reiterate the importance of home care and make a timeline to check their progress
before their oral condition worsens again.
The most significant component of the dental discharge process is formulating an oral
put on the value of home care in minimizing the accumulation of bacteria and plaque in
the mouth. You will need to assess the pet's personality and the commitment level of the
family to preventing dental disease. Use this opportunity to explain how to introduce
their pet to having their teeth brushed. The owners will also need ways of remembering
to brush their pet's teeth on a daily basis. This can be as simple as putting the toothbrush
and toothpaste next to their own in the bathroom so when they brush their teeth they
know it is time to brush their pet's teeth as well. To get more tips, review the lessons
learned on home care in Chapter 5.
190Small Animal DentalProcedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
Figure 10.1  Technician explaining the dental procedure using a skull and a periodontal probe (Courtesy of
Gotham Veterinary Center).
The Dental Discharge Experience
二
CHAPTER
Most clients have experienced being discharged in a noisy waiting room where they are
given their pet and a sheet of instructions. This will need to change if you want to ensure
your clients have a good comprehension of what was done to their pet and have all of
their questions answered. This can only be done if you take the time to go over all of the
details of their pet's dental procedure and home instructions.
When discharging a patient after a dental procedure, you want to make sure you have
 a quiet area where there are no distractions. It is preferred to have a room set aside where
you can utilize educational tools such as models, skulls, diagrams, books, and albums
(Fig. 10.1). It is beneficial to have a photo album prepared that has pictures of common
 dental issues, treatment options, and advanced dental procedures to show clients. It is
easier for owners to understand the importance of dental radiographs when they can see
examples of tooth resorption, tooth root infections, oral masses, impacted teeth, and
persistent primary teeth. This album can be used to educate clients both before and after
a dental procedure. It would also be helpful to have a view box or a monitor where dental
radiographs and digital pictures can be viewed (Figs. 10.2 and 10.3). Even something as
simple as a DVD player can be used to demonstrate the proper way to brush a pet's teeth
and apply oral gels and rinses.
This is also a great place to have samples of toothbrushes, toothpaste, oral gels, rinses,
water additives, dental diets, and dental chews. Instruct the family on the benefits and
use of each product before deciding on a daily care regimen that will work for them.
Since all of this can be overwhelming to an owner be sure to have handouts available
that they can review later. To minimize paper use, you can opt to e-mail the instructional
aides to clients or have links reviewing oral care on the hospital's webpage. But still,
the explanation of the dental procedure (Courtesy of Gotham Veterinary Center).
CHAPTER 10
component that contributes to the explanation of the procedure (Courtesy of Gotham Veterinary Center).
191
192Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
 nothing is as effective as showing an owner how to brush their pet's teeth so they can see
how easily it can be accomplished.
Once you have gone over the entire dental procedure, pictures, special instructions,
medications, home care, answered all questions, and addressed all concerns, then you can
reunite them with their pet. If done in the beginning, their attention will usually be more
focused on the pet than on what you are saying. Remember to present the pet as close
as possible to what it looked like when the owners left them in your care. Dental proce-
dures will involve large amounts of moisture around the pet's face so take a few minutes
while the pet is recovering to clean, dry, and brush the hair around it.
 A follow-up call should be given to the owners to check on the status of the pet after
the dental procedure. This will allow you to address any problems before they return for
their recheck visit.
AdvancedDentalProcedure Release
A dental procedure involves not only the cleaning of the oral cavity but also the treatment
of advanced periodontitis. Specific instructions will need to be given in cases of extrac-
tions, oral surgery, periodontal, endodontic, or orthodontic therapies. You will also need
to outline what the owners should expect after their pet goes home from anesthesia and
how to determine if the pet is not doing well after their procedure. This section should
also instruct the owner of any medications, special feeding or chewing instructions, and
when to return for a recheck. Be sure to include contact information for the dental team
involved with their pet's procedure in case they have any questions or concerns.
CHAPTER
The Importance of Photographs and Radiographs
Sometimes we have to put ourselves in the shoes of our clients to understand what they
are seeing and feeling. Imagine for a moment you take your car to an auto care center.
You might get a phone call during the day explaining the work needed and you give your
consent for them to proceed. When you go to pick up your car, you are handed a bill for
almost $1000.00 and your keys. Would you appreciate the real value of what you spent?
Value is often measured by the way it is perceived. The field of veterinary medicine is
based on client relationships and patient care. Pet parents want to know that they can
trust you with members of their family and that you will do what is in the pet's best
interest. One way to build this bond is by taking the time and effort to create informa-
tional discharge packets.
Dentistry is a topic that is better understood when it is seen instead of heard. The
perception of value will increase when the client is presented with before and after pic-
tures. This can be accomplished by using a digital camera with the capability of taking
exported into a template that will demonstrate the difference of each side before and after
the dental procedure. Be sure to include close-ups of any problem areas and copies of
any radiographs taken. These visual aids will show the owner exactly what was done and
the reasons why (Fig. 10.4).
Pictures really are worth a thousand words. They are clear indications of abnormal
findings and show drastic changes after the treatment plan has been implemented. A copy
Chapter 10: Discharging the Dental Patient 193
Figure 10.4 Technician going over the discharge packet with the owner (Courtesy of Gotham Veterinary
Center).
of the pictures and dental radiographs should be saved in the patient's medical record to
refer back to during future dental procedures. Sending home a copy with the owners will
serve as a reminder of signs to look for in their pet's mouth. It can also serve as a moti-
vational tool to adhere to a daily oral care regimen.
CHAPTER
 Dental radiography has become a necessary standard when providing a high level of
 oral care. It is impossible to perform a complete dental assessment without incorporating
a dental radiography unit. Research has shown that the majority of pathology will be
found underneath the gum line. The American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA) has
 mandated that all pets receive a full set of dental radiographs to establish a baseline
 evaluation of a pet's oral health, in addition to taking specific radiographs when abnormal
findings are discovered on oral exam.
Dental radiology plays a vital role in assessing any abnormalities found during the oral
exam. Dental radiographs are also needed when performing procedures that will alter the
pet's oral cavity. You will need radiographs before any treatment to justify its recom-
mendation. After extractions are done, radiographs can confirm if all tooth root material
was removed and that no damage was done to the surrounding teeth or bone.
Whether you are developing dental radiographs or have a digital unit, clients will love
seeing the details of their pet's dental treatment. If you are developing radiographs, you
aoo on raus qdeopnn e as ro xoq ma e uo au jo said pnip an uo
them to digital pictures. If you are using a digital dental radiography unit, it is easy to
export the images into a document template. Any photo editing software will allow
you to attach text notes to the pictures. Utilize this feature to illustrate what pathology
was discovered in the oral cavity and on the dental radiographs. Clients will often put
these pictures in a place at their home or workplace where others will see it. This is a
great tool to promote your practice's dental program. You can personalize the discharge
packet and pictures by adding your hospitals name, contact information, and logo. This
194Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
will lead people to associate your clinic with providing a higher level of dental care (see
Appendix 9).
Managing Recheck Visits
d e      on    a s s
 oral cavity. Clients should be instructed to return for a follow-up after any extractions
or oral surgery. At this visit, you should make sure the gum tissue is healing properly and
that the pet is doing well at home. This is also the best time to reiterate the importance
of home care. Owners of pets receiving true dental prophylaxis (just cleanings) will also
benefit from follow-up visits. After paying a large bill, most people want to know how
to avoid another extensive dental procedure. The answer is to brush, brush, brush! (Fig.
10.5). When you sit down with the family to discuss the discharge instructions, a home
care regimen will need to be formulated and then implemented. Your goal should be to
teach them that brushing is the most beneficial to their pet's oral health care. If daily
brushing is not possible, then introduce them to the alternatives such as oral gels, rinses,
 dental diets, and dental chews. These can be incorporated into a multimodal approach
to keep their pet's oral cavity free from bacteria. Show the families how the program you
design for them will help prevent the accumulation of plaque and thus the formation of
tartar. All of these daily treatments are to reduce the effects of periodontal disease and
extend the time needed between professional cleanings. Well-trained staff members are
crucial to educating clients on the use of all the oral care products available. Having a
point person responsible for oral health education will give clients a person to contact
二
when they need help or have questions.
CHAPTER
Figure 10.5 Technician demonstrating toothbrushing (Courtesy of Gotham Veterinary Center)
Chapter 10: Discharging the Dental Patient 195
Most veterinary scheduling software used today will allow you to pull reports on
recent dental procedures or clients that have purchased oral care products, dental diets,
or dental chews. You should also be able to incorporate a callback system in the soft-
ware where it will remind you to call clients a few days, a few months, and a year after
a dental procedure. This will allow you to monitor the success of the oral care regimen
discussed at the discharge appointment. If the owner is having a difficult time with
compliance, try to reevaluate the home care program and adjust it to fit their needs.
Offer to have the owner come in to discuss tips and tricks to make the process go
smoother. Many times the hardest part of the process is getting the owner to remember
to take on this initiative every day. Advise them to put the oral care products in a place
they will see every day, like next to their own toothbrush, next to the pet's food, or
next to the pet's leash. These daily reminders should help encourage them to take a few
minutes out of each day to help their pet on the road to better oral health. If the owner
 is doing a good job with complying, then continue giving them support and guidance to
continue. Positive reinforcement will make the goal of good oral care at home more
attainable.
Reminders: How Often Should Dental Patients Return?
Pets should have their teeth evaluated every 6-12 months. The need for a cleaning may
depend on how often the owners are able to provide oral care at home. Greater compli-
ance of an owner with daily brushing can delay the need for another anesthetic procedure
to professionally clean the teeth. Prevention is a big part of fighting dental disease. The
recheck visit should not only emphasize monitoring home care but also be the opportunity
to identify problems before they become serious.
CHAPTER
Offering free or low-cost dental evaluations will encourage clients to bring their pets
more frequently instead of waiting until it is too late. Use this time to show the owner
 how prevention is more cost-effective than performing major dental treatment plans.
Not only is a routine maintenance prophylaxis less expensive, but they are also less trau-
matic and require less anesthesia than extensive dental procedures. This should make
your clients feel more comfortable and understanding of the benefits of preventative
dentistry.
 Since bacteria start to reattach to the enamel within 8-10 hours of a dental cleaning.
 it is imperative to begin an oral care routine as soon as possible. Just like with us, the
more you brush and floss the cleaner your teeth will be. The same theory applies to our
pets in that a healthy mouth is a healthy body. By keeping their mouths clean, we can
help them live healthier longer lives.
a m s d-g  d e n Ps n  a   s
patient undergoing any dental treatments. The patients that are prone to periodontal
disease should be seen more frequently. By seeing them every few months, you have the
opportunity to intervene when you see the tartar beginning to reaccumulate. Patients that
are less prone to periodontal disease can be seen every 6 months to ensure proper home
care cleaning techniques are being followed.
Each recheck visit should include a review of how the pet is doing at home, including
eating and chewing behaviors. You should discuss any problems that may have come up
trying to provide oral care at home. It is also a good opportunity to share information
about new dental procedures and products with clients.
196Small Animal Dental Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses
References
1. DeBowes, LJ. 1998. The effects of dental disease on systemic disease. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 28:1057-1062.
2. DeBowes, LJ, Mosier, D, Logan, E, et al. 1996. Association of periodontal disease and
histologic lesions in multiple organs from 45 dogs. J Vet Dent 13:57-60.
3.Holmstrom, SE. 2000. Veterinary Dentistry for the Technician and Offce Staff.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
4. Holmstrom, SE, Bellows, J, Colmery, B, et al. 2005. AAHA dental care guidelines for
dogs and cats, www.aahanet.org/PublicDocuments/Dental_Care_Guidelines.pdf. Date
accessed August 29, 2010.
10
CHAPTER
Appendices
Appendix 1 Home Oral Health Care Interview Form
(To help formulate a plan for successful home care)
Owner or family
Relationship with pet
(a)  Family member
(b)Outdoor pet
(c)  Guard dog
(d)Working dog
What is the dental problem?
(a) Halitosis
(b)Mobile teeth
(c)  Missing teeth
(d)  Heavy tartar accumulation
(e) Trouble eating
(f) Pain
Are there financial concerns?
What are the owner's physical capabilities
(a)  Able to train to enjoy brushing
(b]  Any medical or anatomical considerations
Patient information
APPENDICES
 Is the pet likely to cooperate with home care?
 Any medical or anatomical considerations that make one form or treatment pre ferable
to another?
Environment
Current diet or treats used
 Other pets in household?
Courtesy of Judy Ozier, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Small Animat Dentat Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, 1st edition. Edited by Jeanne R. Perrone.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
197
Appendix 2
Canine Dental Chart
Clinic Name:
Doctor Name:
Phone:
Date:
Fax:
Client Name:
Client #: 
Patient Name:
Age:
Sex:
Breed:
Color:
Weight:
Allergies:
Medical Alert
ChiefComplaint
Past Dental Mistory
Pertinent Mistory
Diet
Home Care
Brush
Rinse
Medications
Other
Initial Exam
SKULL TYPE
DENTAL ABNORMALITIES
MISC
Brachycephalic
Ret.Deciduous
Oral Enlargements
Mesocephalic
Missing
 Dolichocephalic
Supernumerary
Pharynx
Other
Caries_
Broken_
TMJ
OCCLUSION
Discolored
Normal Scissors
[Gingival Recession_
Other
Class l:
PM Shift
INDEXES
Anterior Crossbite
Overall Calculus Index (CI)
Posterior Crossbite
(0) None
Rostrally deviated Max K9
(l) Supragingival/W sl.
Base narrow lower canines
Subging.
Class Il:
(ll) Moderate subginival
 Brachygnathic/over
[(l) Abundant supra and/or
Class Ill (Prognathic/Under):
Subging.
Level/ reverse scissor/
Gingivitis Index (GI)
underbite
(0) None
Other:
()Mild/no bleeding
APPENDIC
Wry
[(ll) Moderate/bleeding on probing
Occlusal Wear
(ll Severe/spontaneous bleeding
IC P M
Physical Exam
Temperature:
F
Pulse:
BPM
Resp.Rate:
BPM
CRT:
[LN:
Abdomen:
Overall:
Meart Sounds:
Lung Sounds:
Documentation
Radiographs:
Digital
Film
Digital Photos:
Referred by:
Recommended Follow-Up:
198
CANINEORALDIAGNOSIS,TREATMENTPLAN,ANDTREATMENTCHART
M2M1P4P3P2P1
DX
DX
PLN
PLN
TX
RT
1000
1000000o
APPENDICES
M3M2M1P4F
P3
P2
P1
P2
P3P4M1M2M3
411410409408407406405404403402
401
302
303304305306307308309310311
199
Appendix 3
 Feline Dental Chart
Clinic Name:
Doctor Name:
Phone:
Date:
Fax:
Client Name:
Client#：
Patient Name:
Age:
Sex:
Breed:
Cofor:
Weight:
Allergies:
Medical Alert
Chief Complaint
PastDentalMistory
Pertinent Mistory
Diet
Home Care
Brush
Rinse
Medications
Other
InitialExam
SKULL TYPE
[DENTAL ABNORMALITIES
MISC
Brachycephalic
Ret. Deciduous
OralEnlargements
Mesocephalic
Missing
Dolichocephalic
Supernumerary
Pharynx
Other
Caries.
Broken
TMJ
OCCLUSION
Discolored
Normal Scissors
Gingival Recession
Other
Class l:
PM Shift
INDEXES
 Anterior Crossbite
[Overall Calculus Index (CI)
Posterior Crossbite
(O)None
 Rostrally deviated Max K9
[(1l) Supragingival/W sl.
Base narrowlower canines
Subging.
Classll:
(l) Moderate subginival
Brachygnathic/over
[ll) Abundant supra and/or
Class 1ll (Prognathic/Under):
Subging.
Level/ reverse scissor/underbite
Gingivitis Index (GI)
(0) None
Other:
(1)Mild/nobleeding
Wry
(1l) Moderate/bleeding on probing
Occlusal Wear
(lll)Severe/spontaneousbleeding
APPENDIC
ICPM
Phrysical Exam
Temperature:
F
Pulse:
BPM
Resp.Rate:
BPM
CRT:
LN:
Abdomen:
Overall:
Heart Sounds:
Lung Sounds:
Documentation
Radiographs:
[Digital
Film
Digital Photos:
Referred by:
Recommended Follow-Up:
200
FELINEOF
EATMENTCHART
M1
P4
M1
09
08
07
202
06
207
208
209
DX
PLAN
C
S
000
000
PLAI
P3
13
12
11
11
12
C1
P3
P4
M1
308
309
APPENDICES
Remarks:
201
Appendix 4
 Dental Procedure Estimate
This document lists procedures to be performed on Kodi. This estimate only approxi-
mates tbe cost of this visit. It does not include any treatments tbat may be deemed
necessary upon examination and commencement of the included treatments.You are
responsible for all fees incurred during this visit included or not in this estimate.
The following is a list of the treatments and/or supplies expected to be required during
this visit and their approximate cost.
If you have any questions concerning this estimate, please do not hesitate to ask.
Procedure or Dispensed Item
Qty
Charge
Preoperative Exam
18.89
Packed Cell Volume (PCV) with Preoperative Laboratory Tests
11.01
VetTest Preanesthetic Panel (IDEXX Laboratories, Westbrook,
15.40
ME; www.idexx.com)
Blood Collection Procedure
11.35
 IV catheter placement and supplies
25.00
Preanesthesia Acepromazine, Buprenorphine, and Atropine
12.78
 Ketamine and Diazepam Induction
35.60
Isoflurane Intubation Maintenance 1st 15 minutes
29.81
Isoflurane Intubation Maintenance
3
40.24
Grade 3 Periodontal Therapy
84.41
Dental Survey X-rays 20-601b
43.90
Tooth Extraction—Level 3
35.00
Tooth Extraction—Level 4
65.00
Dental Nerve Block
50.00
Metacam 5 mg/mL injectable
0.50
10.13
Metacam 1.5 mg/mL 100mL
5
11.48
Clavamox Tabs 375 mg
14
32.40
Tramadol 50mg
6
10.90
Total estimate charges
$543.30
APPENDIC
 Be assured that the health of Kodi is our highest concern and we will do everything pos-
sible to maintain that health. Understand, too, that your signature below indicates that
you have reviewed and agree to the terms of this estimate.
Your signature below does not make you responsible for the charges listed above unless
performed upon Kodi.
I accept and agree to the terms of this estimate:
John Smith
202
Appendix 5  Dental Procedure Release Form
555-555-555
Dr. Smith
August 10, 2010
Owner:
Beau Smith
Patient:
Barney
Case No:
1234
Breed:
Beagle
Street:
1234 Any St.
Sex:
NM
City:
Anytown
Age:
5 yr
Phone:
555-123-1234
Color:
Tri-colored
I, the undersigned, do hereby certify that I am the owner (duly authorized agent for the
 owner) of the animal described above, that I do hereby give <serv-doctor>, his agents,
 and/or representatives full and complete authority to perform the surgical procedure
described as:
 Scaling and polishing (remove plaque and tartar) and full series radiographs (a com-
 plete set of X-rays are included in the cost of this procedure)
 Necessary Extractions (after calling for consent)   Necessary  Extractions (with-
out calling)
and to perform any other procedure that, at his discretion, may be useful to promote the
health of the above described pet, and I do hereby and by the presents forever release the
said doctor, his agents, or representatives from any and all liability arising from said
surgery on said animal. If we are unable to reach you by pbone, the doctor will make
the necessary decision for the bealth of the animal.
APPENDICES
LABORATORY TESTING
In an effort to provide the best possible care for your pet, we are requiring preanesthetic
blood screening for all pets undergoing anesthesia. Because we will be using injectable
medications, it is important to know if there are any hidden health concerns your pet
may have that are not detectable with a physical exam. Our in-house blood work screens
for anemia and vital organ health. This information can serve as a baseline for future
reference.
Signed
Alt. Phone #
Beau Smith
PAYMENT IS DUE AT THE TIME OF SERVICE.
203
Appendix 6
Dental Radiograph Template
109,108, 107, 106
206,207,208,209
104
101, 102, 103,
204
201, 202, 203
APPENDICES
409,408,407
401, 402, 403 (fractured),
307, 308,309
404,301,302, 303, 304
Feline Radiographs
204
(UmO) 608
012607
(1001) 60E
310,311
80z
204
80
305, 306, 307
205, 206, 207
20z
304*
01,402403 
7067 40 
107, 106,105
407,406, 405
*D
801
408
APPENDICES
110, 109 
 Canine Radiographs
409 (crown)
(1001) 60t
205
Appendix7
Discharge Take Home Instructions Example
GOTHAM
Dr. Bonnie Brown
700 Columbus Avenue
VETERINARY
New York, NY 10025
CENTER
office (212) 222-1900, mobile (917) 796-2871
www.gothamvetcenter.com
Patient: "Titus Maximus" Mandl
Date: 7/8/10
Dental Procedure Discharge Instructions
Titus had a complete dental prophylaxis today. This includes a full cleaning above and
below the gumline using a Piezo ultrasonic scaler. The teeth are then polished to restore
the enamel to a smooth surface. The final steps of the procedure are to apply a fluoride
treatment and an enamel sealant. This will create a barrier to slow down the accumula-
tion of bacteria and plaque. A mild sedative/pain reliever is given in the morning to help
alleviate any anxiety or discomfort associated with the procedure. An antibiotic is given
by injection while under anesthesia if severe infection is found in the oral cavity. Intra
venous fluid therapy is administered to maintain circulation, hydration and blood pres-
sures within normal range. The site where the IV catheter is placed must have the hair
shaved and cleaned to ensure sterility. Any bruising should dissipate within a few days
and the hair will grow back within a few weeks. Any additional shaved areas are for
 proper placement of our anesthetic monitoring equipment.
Titus had a heavy amount of tartar removed from his teeth. A full oral exam showed
both upper third incisors to be rotated and occluding on the lower third incisors. This
had caused areas of periodontal pockets to form around the lower canine and incisor
  n q  o     sn  s
due to their having lost greater than 50% attachment. The dental radiographs also
revealed both roots of the left lower first molar to be infected. The removal of these three
teeth will help prevent further infection and discomfort to Titus. The lower molar extrac-
APPENDI
tion site was filled with Consil* and the periodontal pockets were treated with Doxirobe*.
surrounding bone or teeth. The oral cavity was flushed with an antimicrobial solution.
Titus has had a pain reliever to make him feel more comfortable and may be groggy for
the next 12 hours.
Extractions are sometimes necessary when a tooth or its roots are too infected to save.
Frequently the pet seems more active and comfortable once the diseased teeth are removed.
Do not become alarmed if you notice some bloody saliva around your pet's mouth, this
is normal and will resolve within a few days. You can use a small towel or gauze with
warm water to wipe any discharge away from the mouth. Please call right away if tbere
is any active or profuse bleeding. The underlying bone will take up to a few weeks to
heal, so we recommend restricting any chewing on toys or bones during this healing
 period.
206
Appendices207
Regular brushing and cleanings will help maintain Titus's good oral health. Remember,
dental disease can be prevented with consistent at-home care. Brushing the teeth, oral
gels, oral rinses, dental diets and dental chews will help maintain your pet's good oral
health. This is the best way to help prevent periodontal problems in the future.
*Consil is a synthetic bone graft material that is used to fill infrabony pockets caused by
periodontal disease or removal of teeth. This material acts as a matrix onto which the
patients new bone will grow, allowing repair of the defect. This provides additional
support to the jaw and better healing.
*Doxirobe Gel was used to fil in any periodontal pockets measuring greater than 4 mm.
These pockets are found when there is a buildup of bacteria below the gumline and
around the root structure. The bacteria can cause a destruction of the bone surrounding
the root, leading to decay and mobility of the tooth. By applying this antibiotic gel below
the gumline, after proper root planing, we are helping the subgingival structures to heal
and reduce pocket depth. This along with good oral care at home and regular dental
checkups will help maintain the health of these teeth.
Medications:
Clindamycin 25 mg—Give one tablet by mouth twice a day for 7 days. (Antibiotic)
MetacamLiquid—Give 10 pounddose once daily onfoodfor 3 days. (Anti
Inflammatory)
Start medications tonight with a small soft meal.
Titus's nails were trimmed while under anesthesia today.
Titus's special instructions are below:
Titus can have small amounts of food and water following today's discharge from the
hospital. Offering smaller amounts will be easier on your pet's stomach in case they
are nauseous from the anesthesia or pain relievers.
 Since Titus had extractions, please feed canned or softened food for 7 days.
■
 Any sutures in the oral cavity are absorbable and will dissolve on their own within
the next 2 weeks.
Please schedule a recheck in 7-10 days to have the extraction sites evaluated by Patri-
cia Dominguez.
APPENDIC
 Please call us with any questions or concerns.
Thank you for trusting us with your pet's oral health needs. If you are bappy with
today's services, please feel free to give us a review on www.yelp.com
 Dr. Bonnie Brown and Patricia Dominguez, LVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Gotham Veterinary Center is open Monday through Saturday.
Our hours are 8:30AM to 6:00PM on weekdays,
and 9:00AM to 4:00PM on Saturdays.
Appendix 8
Discharge Take Home Pictures: Simple Example
GOTHAM
VETERINARY
Captain's Dental Procedure
CENTER
Before cleaning
After cleaning
Dental Radiographs
APPENDICES
Red arrows show root infections of right lower first molar.
208
Appendix 9 Discharge Take Home Pictures: Detailed Example
GOTHAM
VETERINARY
CENTER
Titus's
Day at the
Dentist
APPENDICES
7-8-10
209
TITUS 7/8/2010
Right Side: Before
Right Side: After
APPENDICES
210
Left Side:Before
Left Side: After
APPENDICES
211
Right Side with Rotated Upper Third Incisor
Rotated Left Upper Third Incisor
Left Lower First Molar
APPENDICES
212
Dental Radiographs
Upper Incisors-Both laterals with >50% attachment loss
LowerIncisors
APPENDICES
213
Right Upper Quadrant
Right Upper Canine Tooth
Right Lower Quadrant
APPENDICES
Right Lower Canine Tooth
214
Left Upper Quadrant
Left Upper Canine Tooth
Left Lower Quadrant—Abscessed roots on first molar
APPENDICES
Left Lower Canine Tooth
215
He was so sweet !!!
APPENDICES
Thank you for trusting us with your baby @
216
Note: Page numbers followed by "f" indicate figures. Page numbers followed by "t" indicate tables.
Abbreviations
nerves, 10-11
anatomy,19-20
 oral cavity, 4-7
dental record, 64-65, 65t
teeth,4-5, Sf
Abrasion, charting, 72-73
tongue,6
Abscess, tooth root
vascular system, 11
in rabbits, 176
veins, 11
in rodents, 167-168
terminology, 18-21
Acanthomatous ameloblastoma, 135-136
abbreviations, 19-20
Acepromazine, 48t, 179t
directional terminology, 18-19, 19f
Acrylic appliance, 129
tooth identifcation sequence, 20
Aerosolization, 60, 67
Triadan system of tooth numbering, 20,
Air polishing, 79
21f
Alpha-2 agonists, 55
tooth,15-18, 16f
Alveolar arteries, 11
cementum,16
Alveolar bone remodeling, 13
crown, 15
Alveolar dehiscence, 110, 111f
dentin,16-17
Alveolar nerves, 10
emamel,16
Ameloblasts, 13
periodontal ligament, 18
Amoxicillin/clavulanate
pulp, 17
for eosinophilic granuloma complex, 153
roots, 17, 18t
for gingivostomatitis, 149, 149t
Anesthesia,45-57
for periodontal disease, 114
complications, 50-53
Analgesia. See Pain management
equipment,47-50,49f-50f
Anatomy
fear of, 46
of dental radiograph, 101-103, 102f
in ferrets, 177-179,179f, 179t
pulp, 115
induction agents, 47
skull, 4-12
inhalants, 47
arteries, 11
monitoring, 50-53
bones, 7-10, 9f
blood pressure, 52-53
eye, 11-12,12f
body temperature, 53, 54f
gingiva,5-6
capnography, 53
hard and soft palate, 6-7, 6f
depth of anesthesia, 51
larynx and pharynx, 12
ECG, 52
lymphatic system,11
multiparameter machines, 50, 51f
IND]
muscles, 10
pulse oximetry, 51
Small Anirat Dentat Procedures for Veterinary Technicians and Nurses, 1st edition. Edited by Jeanne R. Perrone.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
217
218lndex
Anesthesia (continued)
Buccal nerve, 10
plane/depth of anesthesia, 51-52
Bupivicaine, for nerve blocks, 55
presurgical assessment, 46-47
Buprenorphine
in rabbits, 172-173, 173t
in exotics, 167
recovery, 79-80
in ferrets, 179, 179t
in rodents, 165-166,166t
for gingivostomaitis, 149, 149t
Anesthetic record, 50
as premedicant, 48t
Anorexia, in gingivostomatitis, 146
in rabbits, 173, 173t
Antibiotics
sublingual in cats, 57
for eosinophilic granuloma complex, 153
Burs, 34, 169
for gingivostomatitis, 149, 149t
Butorphanol,48t, 166t, 173t
locally applied, 114
for periodontal disease, 113-114
Calculus, 107
Apexifcation, 118
Calculus removal forceps, 61
Apical (directional term), 19
Canine dentistry
Apnea monitor, 51-52, 52f
dental formula
Appliance
permanent, 4
 dental impressions, 129
primary, 4
direct acrylic, 129
mmple charts, 198-199
Arteries, skull, 11
tooth resorption, 154, 154f-155f
Atropine, 166t
Triadan system of tooth numbering, 20, 21f
Attachment loss, 71, 71f
Capnography, 53
Attrition, charting, 73
Caries
Avulsion, tooth, 74
charting, 74
in rodents, 168
Bacterial aerosolization, 60, 67
Carprofen,57,173t
Bioflm, 106-107
Caviomorph rodents, 162, 163f-164f. See also
Biopsy, of oral tumors, 140
Rodent dentistry
Bite registry, 129
Cavitation, 75
Blanket, heated air, 53, 54f
Cementoblasts, 13
 Blood pressure, monitoring during anesthesia,
Cementoenamel junction (CEJ), 15
52-53
Cementum
 Body temperature, monitoring during anesthesia,
anatomy, 16
53,54f
radiographic appearance, 101
Bone(s)
Centers for Disease Control (CDC), 41
brachycephalic head shape, 7, 7f
Cephalexin, for eosinophilic granuloma complex,
cranial bones, 8
153
dolichocephalic head shape, 7, 8f
Cervical (directional term), 18
facial bones, 8
Cervical line. See Cementoenamel junction (CEJ)
incisive bone, 10
Charting, 64-67
loss in periodontal disease, 108, 110, 110f
abbreviations, 64-65, 65t
mandibles, 8, 10
anatomical system, 65
maxilla, 10
computerized charts, 64
mesaticephalic head shape, 7, 7f
fndings, 69-74
radiographic appearance, 103
calculus index, 69-70
skull, 7-10, 9f
caries, 74
views of, 9f
counting teeth, 70
Brachycephalic head shape, 7, 7f, 124
enamel hypoplasia/hypocalcification, 73
Brachyodont, 162,168
furcation exposure, 72
Bradycardia, 52
gingival recession, root exposure, and
Breathing systems, 48-50
attachment loss, 71, 71f
non-rebreathing (semiclosed) system, 49-50,
gingivitis index, 70
50f
malformed teeth, 73
rebreathing (circle, closed) system, 48-49, 49f
malpositioned teeth, 73
Brushing, 80-82, 82f
oral tumors, 139-140
Buccal (directional term), 19
periodontal pocketing, 70-71
index 219
plaque index, 69
Client interview, 24-25
retained/persistent deciduous teeth, 72
Clindamycin
tooth mobility, 71-72
for eosinophilic granuloma complex, 153
tooth resorption, 74, 158
for gingivostomatitis, 149, 149t
trauma,73-74
for periodontal disease, 114
wear, 72-73
Clothing and caps, protective, 42
paper charts, 64
Collagenolytic granuloma, 151. See also
protocol, 67
Eosinophilic granuloma complex
sample charts
Compliance, client, 188
canine,198-199
Compressors, 30-31, 31f, 82
feline, 200-201
Consil, 112
Triadan numbering system, 20, 21f,
Contact, 18
66, 66f
Contra-angles, 33-34
Cheek pouch impaction and eversion, in rodents,
Coronal (directional term), 19
168
Cranial bones, 8
Chemotherapy, 139
Crossbite
 Chest radiographs, in presurgical assessment, 46
caudal, 125,126t, 128
Chew toys, 81
rostral, 125,126t, 128
Chinchillas, 162, 163f, 166t. See also Rodent
Crowded teeth, charting, 73
dentistry
Crown
Chlorambucil, for eosinophilic granuloma
amputation for tooth resorption, 159
complex, 153
anatomy,15
Chlorhexidine, 67, 149, 175
Curettes
Cleaning, 59-83. See also Cleaning procedure
hand,62-63,77
discharge instructions, 188-189
sharpening, 83
goal of, 60
Cusp, 19
instrumentation,61-64
Cyclosporine, for gingivostomatitis, 149
calculus removal forceps, 61
care of equipment and instruments, 82-83
 Deciduous teeth charting retained/persistent, 72
dental explorer, 62
Deep temporal nerve, 10
dental mirror, 62
Degus, 162. See also Rodent dentistry
dental polishing,62
Dental cleaning. See Cleaning
hand curettes, 62-63
Dental delivery units, 30-32
hand scaler, 62, 63f
air- or gas-driven units, 30-31, 31f-32f
periodontal probe, 61-62
compressors,30-31,31f
power instruments, 61,62f, 63-64
motor driven units, 31-32, 33f
rotary scaler, 61
Dental estimate, 27-28
sharpening, 83
Dental explorer, 62
sonic scaler, 61
Dental formula, 4-5
ultrasonic scaler, 61, 62f
canine
location for, 60, 60f
permanent,4
patient protection and positioning, 60-61
primary, 4
Cleaning procedure
caviomorph rodents, 162
charting findings, 69-74
feline
hand instrumentation, 75-78,76f
permanent,5
dental curette use, 77
primary, 5
disclosing solution, 78
ferrets, 177
drying teeth, 78
hedgehogs, 169
hand scaling, 77
murine rodents, 163
modified pen grasp, 76, 77f
rabbits, 170
EX
oral examination, 68, 69f
sugar gliders, 170
periodontal examination, 68
Dental impressions, 129
polishing, 78-79
Dental mirror, 62
power scaling, 74-75, 76f
Dental operatory, 29-44. See also Equipment
 preparation, 67
Dental polishing, 62
recovery, 79-80
Dental prophylaxis. See Cleaning
220lndex
Dental record, 64-67
Endodontics, 115-123
abbreviations, 64-65, 65t
advantages of, 117
anatomical system, 65
exam,116
charting findings, 69-74
indications for treatment due to trauma,
charting protocol, 67
115-116
computerized charts, 64
preventative, 115-116
paper charts, 64
pulp anatomy, 115
Triadan numbering system, 66, 66f
radiographic appearance, 103
Dental tables. See Tables
therapy
Dentigerous cyst, 136
patient and treatment considerations for, 117
Dentin
standard root canal therapy, 120-122, 121f
anatomy, 16-17
surgical root canal therapy, 122
radiographic appearance, 101
types, 117
Developers, 92-93, 92f
vital pulp therapy, 118-120, 119f-120f
Dexamethasone, for eosinophilic granuloma
Endotracheal tubes
complex, 153
in exotics, 166
Diazepam, 173,173t, 179t
in ferrets, 179
Diet, 81
inflation of, 50
Digital radiography, 93-94, 94f
in rabbits, 172-173
 Direct acrylic appliance, 129
removal of,79-80
Directional terminology, anatomy, 18-19, 19f
End tidal COz, 53
Discharge, 187-195
Eosinophilic granuloma complex, 137, 151-154
in advanced dental procedure release, 192
causes,152
client experience, 190-192, 190f-191f,
diagnostics, 153, 153f
193f-194f
histology, 153f
importance of photographs and radiographs,
major forms of
192-194
collagenolytic granuloma, 152
instructions
eosinophilic plaque, 151
 dental procedure, 189
eosinophilic ulcers, 151
dental prophylaxis, 188-189
symptoms,152,152f
take home instructions example,
reatment,153-154
206-207
Eosinophilic plaque, 151. See also Eosinophilic
recheck visits, 194-195
granuloma complex
reminders, 195
Eosinophilic ulcers, 151. See also Eosinophilic
take home pictures examples, 208-216
granuloma complex
Disclosing solution, 78
Epinephrine, 55
Discoloration, 15, 74,115
Equipment. See also specifc instruments
Distal (directional term), 18
anesthesia, 47-50, 49f-50f
Dobutamine, 53
dental cleaning instrumentation, 61-64, 62f-63f
Dolichocephalic head shape, 7, 8f, 124
dental delivery units, 30-32
Dopamine, 52
air- or gas-driven units, 30-31, 31f-32f
Dosimetry badges, 43
compressors, 30-31, 31f, 82
Doxycycline, 15, 114
motor driven units, 31-32, 33f
Drooling, 146
ergonomics, 43-44
Drying teeth, 78
 in ferret dentistry, 181
handpieces, 32-34, 34f
Earplugs, 43
attachments, 33-34
ECG
care and use, 33
monitoring during anesthesia, 52
contra-angles, 33-34
preanesthesia, 46
definition,32
Elodont teeth, 167, 169-170
fiber optics, 34
Enamel
prophy angles, 34
anatomy,16
types of,32-33
radiographic appearance, 101
personal protection equipment (PPE), 42-43
Enamel hypoplasia/hypocalcification, charting,
clothing and caps, 42
73
dosimetry badges, 43
index 221
eye protection,42
in periodontal disease, 113
face masks, 42
postoperative care,150-151
gloves, 42
for rabbit malocclusion, 175-176
hearing protection, 43
sectioning the tooth, 113
power scalers, 34-38
for tooth resorption, 159
overview, 34-35
Eye anatomy, 11-12, 12f
power settings, 36
Eye protection, 42
tip use and maintenance, 36-38, 36f
ultrasonic scalers, 35
Face masks, 42
unit frequency, 35-36
Facial artery, 11
water flow adjustments, 35
Facial bones, 8
in rabbit dentistry, 176
Facial (directional term), 19
in rodent dentistry, 168-169
Feline dentistry, 143-159
sharpening, 83
dental formula
tables, 38-40
permanent,5
care and use, 40
primary, 5
dry, 39
eosinophilic granuloma complex, 151-154
features, 38-39
causes,152
recommendations, 39
collagenolytic granuloma, 152
wet,39,40f
diagnostics, 153, 153f
Ergonomics, 43-44
eosinophilic plaque, 151
Eruption, 13-15,14t-15t
eosinophilic ulcers, 151
permanent teeth, 14-15, 15t
histology, 153f
primary teeth,14,14t
symptoms,152,152f
Esophagostomy tube, 150-151
treatment, 153-154
Estimate,27-28,202
feline tooth resorption, 154-159
Examination
charting,158
of conscious patient, 25-27
definition, 154
oral,25-27,61-62,68
diagnostics, 158
in ferrets, 177
tages of resorption, 156-157, 156f-158f
instruments for, 61-62
symptoms, 154-156,155f
procedure,68
treatment, 159
in rabbits, 171-172,172f
gingivostomatitis,144-151
in rodents, 165
diagnostics, 147
periodontal, 68
goal for patients, 151
using life stage assessment, 109t
medical management, 148-149, 149t
Examination room
oralevaluation,147-148,147f-148f
client interview, 24-25
other names for, 145, 145t
oral examination of conscious patient,
presentation of, 144-145,145f
25-27
surgical treatment, 149-151
treatment plan, 27-28, 28f
symptoms of, 145-147, 146f-147f
Exotic dentistry, 161-195
theories on causes, 145
challenges of, 162
overview, 144
ferret dentistry, 177-181
sample chart, 200-201
hedgehogs, 169-170
Triadan system of tooth numbering, 20, 21f
rabbit dentistry, 170-177
Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions (FORLs).
radiography, 181-184, 182f-184f
See Tooth resorption
rodent dentistry, 162-169
Fentanyl
sugar gliders, 170
for gingivostomatitis, 149, 149t
Explorer, dental, 62
as premedicant, 48t
EX
External carotid artery, 11
Ferret dentistry, 177-181
anesthesia, 177-179, 179f, 179t
External jugular vein, 11
Extractions
dental formula, 177
closed (nonsurgical), 113
dental instruments, 181
for gingivostomatitis, 149-151
husbandry and home care, 181
open (surgical), 113
oral anatomy, 177
222lndex
Ferret dentistry (continued)
Glucocorticoids, for eosinophilic granuloma
oral examination, 177
complex, 153
pain management, 179, 179t
Glycopyrrolate, 166t, 172, 173t, 179t
periodontal disease, 180, 180f
Goldman-Fox periodontal pocket marker, 136
radiology, 184
Gracey curette, 63
tooth fracture, 180
Guinea pig, 162, 163f, 166t, 168-169. See also
Ferrite rod, 35, 36
Rodent dentistry
Ferromagnetic stack, 36
Gutta percha, 121-122
Fiber optics, 34
Fibrosarcomas, 138
Halitosis, 108, 146
Film mounts, 100, 101f
Hamsters, 162-164,165f, 166t, 168.See also
Fistula, oronasal, 113
Rodent dentistry
Flap surgery, for periodontal disease, 112
Hand curettes, 62-63, 77
 Floating rabbit cheek teeth, 175
Hand instrumentation, 75-78, 76f
Fluoride treatment, 159
deaning with, 75-78
 Foramina, radiographic appearance of, 101
curettes, 62-63, 77
Forceps, calculus removal, 61
disclosing solution, 78
Fracture
drying teeth,78
charting, 74
modified pen grasp, 76, 77f
crown,15
for oral examination, 61-62
enamel chip, 16
scaler, 62, 63f, 77
in ferrets,180
subgingival tips, 75
as indication for endodontic therapy, 115
supragingival tips, 75
jaw, 130-134,131f
Handpiece bur, 34
with open pulp cavity, 17
Handpieces, 32-34, 34f
pathological, 130, 131f
attachments,33-34
root, 103
contra-angles, 33-34
Frequency, scaler, 35, 38
fiber optics, 34
Fulcrum, 76
prophy angles, 34
Furcation exposure
care and use, 33
charting,72
definition, 32
radiographic signs in periodontal disease, 110,
speed,33
110f
types of,32-33
Hand scaler, 62, 63f, 77
Gabapentin, 57
Hard palate, 6, 6f
Gerbils,162-164. See aiso Rodent dentistry
Hazards, 41
Gingiva
Head shape
anatomy, 5-6
brachycephalic, 7, 7f
hyperplasia, 71
dolichocephalic, 7, 8f
suturing,113
mesaticephalic, 7, 7f
Gingival flap, 122
Hearing protection, 43
Gingival hyperplasia, 136
Hedgehogs, 166t, 169-170
Gingival recession, charting, 71
Hemorrhage, pulpal, 74
Gingivitis, in periodontal disease, 107, 107f
Home care, 80-82
Gingivostomatitis,144-151
brushing, 80, 81-82, 82f
diagnostics, 147
chew toys, 81
goal for patients, 151
dental diet, 81
medical management, 148-149, 149t
ferret dentistry, 181
oral evaluation, 147-148, 147f-148f
goal, 80
other names for, 145, 145t
home oral health care interview form, 197
presentation of, 144-145, 145f
rabbit dentistry, 176-177
surgical treatment, 149-151
rodent dentistry, 169
symptoms of, 145-147, 146f-147f
Home oral health care interview form, 197
theories on causes, 145
Hydromorphone, 48t
Glasses, safety, 42
Hypotension, 52
Gloves, 42
Hypothermia, 53
Index2
223
Immunosuppressants, for gingivostomatitis, 149
Magnetostrictive units, 35-36,38
Impacted tooth, 13, 70
Malformed teeth, charting, 73
Impressions, dental, 129
Malignant melanoma, 137
Incisive bone, 10
Malocclusion, 26, 123-130
Incisive papilla, 6, 6f
asymmetrical skeletal,126
 Inducion agents, 47
attrition, 73
Inferior alveolar nerves, 10-11
normal occlusion, 123-124, 123f
Infraorbital nerve
position statements on, 126-127
anatomy, 10
in rodents, 167
block, 56
symmetrical skeletal,124-125
Inhalants, 47
base-narrow canine, 124-125,128
Instructions, discharge, 206-207
base-wide mandibular canine, 125, 128
Instrumentation.See Equipment
cudal crossbite, 125
Interarcade acrylic bonding, 132
Class III malocclusion (MAL/3) (mandibular
Interproximal (directional term), 19
mesiocclusion), 125-126
Interview form, home oral health care, 197
Class II malocclusion (MAL/2) (mandibular
Intravenous {IV) fluids
distocclusion),125
for hypotension, 52
Class I malocclusion (MAL/1), 124-125
line warmers, 52
lance teeth, 125, 128
Intubation,of rabbits,173,174f
rostral crossbite, 125
terminology 126t
Jacquette scaler, 62
treatment, 127-130
Jaw fracture,130-134,131f
appliances, 129-130
diagnosis of, 130
corrective orthodontics,127
home care, 133-134
dental impressions, 129
management, 131-132
direct acrylic appliance, 129
repair, 132-133
interceptive orthodontics, 127
types of fractures, 130
in rodents, 167
Malpositioned teeth, charting, 73
Ketamine,17t,55,166t,172-173,179,179t
Mandibles
anatomy,8,10
Labial (directional term), 19
jaw fractures, 130-134
Lagomorphs. See Rabbit dentistry
Mandibular alveolar nerve block, 56
Lamina dura, radiographic appearance of, 101
Mandibular brachygnathism, 125
Lance teeth, 125
Mandibular distocclusion, 125
Laryngoscope, 173, 179
Mandibular mesiocclusion, 125-126
Larynx, 12
Mandibular nerve, 10
Laser surgery, for gingivostomatitis, 150
Mandibular symphysis, 8, 10
Levamisole, for eosinophilic granuloma complex,
MAP {mean arterial pressure), 52
153
Masseteric nerve, 10
Lidocaine
Massticator nerve, 10
constant rate infusion, 55
Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS), 41-42
with epinephrine, 55
Maxilla
for ferret intubation, 179
anatomy, 10
gel, 179
fracture, 132
for nerve blocks, 55
Maxillary artery, 11
Life stage assessment, oral examination using,
Maxillary nerve
109t
anatomy,10
Lingual artery, 11
block, 56
Lingual (directonal term), 19
Maxillomandibular fixation, 132
EX
Lingual nerve, 11
Mean arterial pressure (MAP), 52
Local nerve block, 56-57
Medetomidate,48t, 166t, 172, 173t
Lumpy jaw, 174
Medial (directional term), 18
Luxation, tooth, 74
Melanoma vaccine, 139
Lymphatic system, 11
Meloxicam, 57,149t, 167,173t, 179,179t
Lymph nodes of the head, 11
Mental arteries, 11
224lndex
Mental nerves, 11
Oral cavity
Mesaticephalic head shape, 7, 7f, 124
anatomy, 4-7
Methylprednisolone
gingiva,5-6
for eosinophilic granuloma complex,
hard and soft palate, 6-7, 6f
153
teeth,4-5,Sf
for gingivostomatitis, 149, 149t
tongue, 6
Mice, 162-164, 166t. See also Rodent
ceaning after procedure, 79
dentistry
examination,25-27,61-62,68
Midazolam, 166t, 172, 173t
Oral examination,25-27,61-62,68
Middle mental nerve block, 56
of conscious patient, 25-27
Mirror, dental, 62
in ferrets, 177
Modified pen grasp, 75-76, 77f
instruments for, 61-62
Monitoring anesthesia, 50-53
procedure, 68
Morphine, 48t, 55
in rabbits, 171-172, 172f
MSDS (Material Safety Data Sheet), 41-42
in rodents, 165
Murine rodents, 162-164, 165f. See aiso Rodent
Oral pain, symptoms of, 116
dentistry
Oral tumors, 134-140, 134f-135f
Muscles, skull, 10
benign, 134-137
acanthomatous ameloblastoma,135-136
National Institute for Occupational Safety and
eosinophilic granulomas, 137
Health (NIOSH), 41
gingival hyperplasia, 136
Neck, tooth, 19. See also Cementoenamel
odontomas, 136
junction (CEJ)
papillomas, 137
Neoplasia. See Oral tumors
peripheral odontogenic fibromas, 134f, 135
Nerve blocks
biopsy, 140
drugs for, 55
charting, 139-140
in ferrets, 179
chemotherapy, 139
local, 56-57
malignant, 137-139
needle size for, 56
fibrosarcomas, 138
regional,55-56
malignant melanoma, 137
Nerves, skull, 10-11
osteosarcoma,138-139
Nociception, 54
squamous cell carcinoma, 138
 Non-rebreathing (semiclosed) system, 49-50,
radiation therapy, 139
50f
ample preparation, 140
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
saging,139-140
55, 57
symptoms,134
in exotics, 167
Oronasal fistula, 113
for gingivostomatitis, 148-149, 149t
Osseopromotive products, 112
for root canal, 122
Osteosarcoma, 138-139
for vital pulpotomy, 119
Overbite, 125
Oxygen saturation, 51
Occlusal (directional term), 18
Oxymorphone, 48t, 166t, 179t
Occlusion
malocclusion, 26,123-130
Pain management, 53-57
normal, 123-124,123f
in ferrets, 179, 179t
 Occupational Safety and Health Administration
in gingivostomatitis, 148-149, 149t
(OSHA), 41
at home, 57
Odontoblasts, 13, 17
local nerve block, 56-57
Odontogenesis, 12-15
multimodal approach, 54-55
eruption, 13-15, 14t, 15t
preemptive analgesia, 55
permanent teeth,14-15,15t
in rabbits, 173t, 174
primary teeth,14,14t
regional nerve blocks, S5-56
tooth formation, 12-13, 13f
in rodents,167
Odontomas, 136
Pain pathways, 54
Odontoplasty, in rabbits, 175
Palatal (directional term), 19
Opioids, 47, 48t, 55
Palate, anatomy of, 6-7, 6f
index 225
Palatine nerves, 10
eye protection,42
Papillomas, 137
face masks, 42
Paste, prophy, 78-79
gloves, 42
Pellicle, 106
hearing protection, 43
Periodontal disease, 106-115
 Pharymgeal arteries, 11
assessment parameters, 109t
Pharynx, 12
clinical signs, 108, 109f
 Phosphor plate radiographs, 94, 94f-95f
defined,106
 Photographs
in ferrets, 180, 180f
importance of, 192-193
oronasal fistula, 113
take home pictures examples, 208-216
pathogenesis of, 106-108
Piezoelectric units, 35,37-38, 37f
dental calculus, 107
Piroxicam, 139
dental plaque, 106-107
Plaque, 80, 106-107
gingivitis,107,107f
Polishing
pellicle, 106
air, 79
periodontitis, 107-108,108f
equipment for, 62
in rabbits, 176
procedure,78-79
radiographic signs, 108, 110, 110f-111f
Pop-off valve, 48-50
alveolar dehiscence, 110, 111f
Power instruments, 61, 62f, 63-64
bone loss, 108, 110, 110f
Power scalers, 34-38
furcation exposure, 110, 110f
care of, 82
in rodents, 168
overview, 34-35
therapy, 111-114
power settings, 36
antibiotics, 113-114
p use and maintenance, 36-38, 36f
assessment of patient and client, 114
magnetostrictive units,36
extractions, 113
piezoelectric units,37
flap surgery, 112
tip function, 37-38
follow-up visits, 114
ultrasonic scalers, 35
goal,111
unit frequency, 35-36
maintenance, importance of, 114
use of, 74-75, 76f
periodontal splinting, 112
water flow adjustments, 35
prevention versus treatment, 111
Prednisone, for eosinophilic granuloma complex,
regenerative therapy, 112
153
Periodontal exam, 68
Premedication, 47,48t, 173t, 179t
Periodontal ligament
Presurgical assessment for anesthesia, 4647
anatomy, 18
 Primary teeth
formation and renewal,13
dental formula
radiographic appearance, 101
canine, 4
Periodontal pocketing, 70-71, 111
feline, S
Periodontal probe, 61-62
eruption,14,14t
 Periodontal splinting, for periodontal disease, 112
retained,15
Periodontitis, 18,107-108, 108f
Probing, periodontal, 70-71
 Peripheral odontogenic fbromas, 134f, 135
Prognathism, 125-126
Permanent teeth
Prophy angles, 34, 78
appearance in skull, 5f
Prophy cups, 78-79
dental formula
 Prophylaxis. See Cleaning
canine,4
Prophy paste, 78-79
feline,5
Propofol, 173,173t, 179t
eruption, 14-15, 15t
Proximal (directional term), 18
Personal protection, 41-43
 Pterygoid nerves, 10
employee responsibilities, 42
Pulp
EX
employer responsibilities, 41
anatomy, 17, 115
types of hazards, 41
pulp cavity, radiographic appearance of,
Personal protection equipment, 42-43
101
clothing and caps, 42
vital pulp therapy, 118-120, 119f-120f
dosimetry badges, 43
Pulpal hemorrhage, 74
226 lndex
Pulpotomy, vital, 118-120, 119f-120f
in tooth resorption, 154f-155f, 157-159,
Pulse oximetry, 51
157f-158f
value of, 88
Rabbit dentistry, 170-177
X-ray unit, 88-90, 89f-90f
anesthesia, 172-173,173t
adjustable arm, 89
dental formula, 170
control panel, 89-90, 90f
husbandry and home care, 176-177
tube head, 88, 89f
instruments, 176
Rats, 162-164, 166t. See also Rodent dentistry
malocclusion, 174-176
Rawhide chews, 81
extraction,175-176
Rebreathing (circle, closed) system, 48-49, 49f
odontoplasty, 175
Recheck visits, 194-195
traumatic and atraumatic, 175-176
Record. See Dental record
nasal tubes, 173, 174f
Recovery, 79-80
oral anatomy, 170-171
Reflexes, 79, 173
oral examination, 171-172, 172f
 Regenerative therapy, for periodontal disease,
pain management, 173t, 174
112
periodontal disease, 176
Regional nerve blocks, 55-56
radiology, 182-184, 182f-184f
infraorbital block, 56
tooth root abscess, 176
mandibular alveolar nerve block, 56
Radiation therapy, 139
maxillary nerve block, 56
Radiology, 87-103, 203. See also specifc dental
middle mental nerve block, 56
conditions
Release form,203
anatomy of dental radiograph, 101-103,
Reminders, 195
102f
Repetitive strain disorders, 43-44
care and storage of images, 100-101, 101f
Resorption. See Tooth resorption
common pathologies, 103
Restorative procedures, 159
dental flm and processing, 90-93, 91f-92f
Retained/persistent deciduous teeth, charting, 72
dental radiograph template, 204-205
Reverse scissor bite, 125-126
digital, 93-94,94f
Right-angle burs, 34
in endodontic disease, 116
Rodent dentistry, 162-169
exotic dentistry, 181-184,182f-184f
anesthesia, 165-166,166t
for ferrets, 184
caviomorph rodents, 162,163f-164f
materials and equipment, 181
common problems, 167-168
for rodents and rabbits, 182-184,
caries and tooth resorption, 168
182f-184f
cheek pouch impaction and eversion, 168
flm mounts, 100, 101f
malocclusion, 167
film placement, 97-100, 97f-100f
periodontal disease, 168
for mandibular canine tooth and first
scurvy, 168
premolar, 97-98,97f
tooth root abscess, 167-168
for mandibular incisors, 98, 98f
dental instruments, 168-169
for maxillary canine tooth, 99, 99f
home care, 169
for maxillary incisors, 99, 99f
husbandry, 169
for maxillary premolars, 99, 100f
murine rodents, 162-164, 165f
importance of discharge radiographs,
oral examination, 165
192-194
pain management, 167
interpretation of images, 101-103, 102f
radiology, 182-184
in periodontal disease, 108, 110, 110f-111f
Rodent ulcer, 151. See also Eosinophilic
phosphor plate radiographs, 94, 94f-95f
granuloma complex
positioning, 94-100, 95f-100f
Root canal
bisecting angle technique, 96
sandard therapy, 120-122, 121f
full-mouth radiographs, 95
surgical therapy, 122
parallel technique, 96, 96f-97f
Root exposure, charting, 71
SLOB rule (same lingual, opposite buccal),
Roots, tooth
100
abscess
technique chart, 96-97
in rabbits, 176
take home pictures examples, 208, 213-215
in rodents, 167-168
index 227
anatomy,17,18t
 oral cavity, 4-7
charting root exposure, 71
gingiva,5-6
formation,13
hard and soft palate, 6-7, 6f
fractures, 103
teeth, 4-5, 5f
number of, 17, 18t
tongue,6
radiographic appearance, 101, 103
vascular system, 11
resorption of, 159
veins, 11
retained, 70,103
Slobbers, 167, 174
 Rotary scaler, 61
SLOB rule (same lingual, opposite buccal), 100
Rotated teeth, charting, 73
Sodium hypochlorite, 121
Rx Honing machine, 83
Soft palate, 6-7
Sonic scaler, 61
Safety
Splinting, intraoral, 133
employee responsibilities, 42
Squamous cell carcinoma, 138
employer responsibilities, 41
Staging, oral tumors, 139-140
hazards, 41
Steroids, for gingivostomatitis, 149, 149t
personal protection equipment (PPE), 42-43
Stickers, dental, 64
radiation, 43, 90
 Stomatitis. See Gingivostomatitis
Safety glasses, 42
Sublingual artery, 11
Scaler
Sugar gliders, 166t, 170
hand, 62,63f,77
Superfcial temporal artery, 11
power, 34-38,36f
Superior alveolar nerves, 10
care of, 82
Supernumerary teeth, charting, 70
use of, 74-75, 76f
Swallowing difficulty, 146-147
rotary, 61
sharpening, 83
Tables, 38-40
sonic,61
care and use, 40
ultrasonic,35,61,62f
dry, 39
Scaling
features,38-39
subgingival, 77
fixed, 39
supragingival, 77
lift, 39,40f
Scurvy in rodents, 168
recommendations, 39
Sedative, 47
wet, 39,40f
Sharpening
Take home instructions. See Discharge
equipment for, 83
Tape muzzle,132-133
instruments,83
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ), 10
technique,83
Tetracycline, 15
Sharpening stone, 83
Tongue, 6
Sickle scaler, 62
Tooth
Sinus tachycardia, 52
anatomy, 4-5, 5f, 15-18,16f
Skull anatomy, 4-12
cementum,16
arteries, 11
crown, 15
bones, 7-10, 9f
dental formula, 4-5
brachycephalic head shape, 7, 7f
dentin, 16-17
cranial bones, 8
emamel, 16
dolichocephalic head shape, 7, 8f
 periodontal ligament, 18
facial bones, 8
pulp, 17
incisive bone, 10
roots,17,18t
mandibles, 8,10
odontogenesis, 12-15
maxilla, 10
eruption,13-15,14t-15t
 mesaticephalic head shape, 7, 7f
permanent teeth, 14-15, 15t
EX
eye, 11-12,12f
primary teeth,14,14t
IN
larynx and pharynx, 12
tooth formation, 12-13, 13f
lymphatic system, 11
Toothbrush, 81-82
muscles, 10
Tooth grinding, in rabbits, 174
nerves,10-11
Tooth identification sequence, 20, 21f
228Index
Tooth mobility, charting, 71-72
Ultrasonic scaler, 35, 61, 62f
Toothpaste, 81-82
Underbite, 125-126
Tooth resorption
in canines, 154, 154f-155f
Vaccine, melanoma, 139
charting,74,158
Vaporizer, 47,49f, 50
definition, 154
Vascular system, skull, 11
diagnostics, 158
Veins, skull, 11
in felines, 154-159
Vestibular (directional term),18
with gingivostomatitis, 148, 148f, 150f
Vital pulp therapy, 118-120, 119f-120f
radiographic appearance, 103
Vitamin C, 168-169
in rodents, 168
stages of resorption, 156-157, 156f-158f
Wear, charting, 72-73
symptoms, 154-156, 155f
Wiring jaw fractures, 132-133
treatment, 159
Tooth root abscess
X-rays. See also Radiology
in rabbits, 176
digital, 93-94, 94f
in rodents, 167-168
film
Toys, chew, 81
packet anatomy, 91, 91f-92f
Tramadol, 57
processing, 92-93, 92f
Trauma
sizes,91,91f
charting findings, 73-74
speed,90
cumulative, 4344
flm mounts, 100, 101f
 indications for endodontic therapy due to
flm placement, 97-100, 97f-100f
trauma,115-116
positioning for, 94100, 95f-100f
rabbit malocclusion, 175, 176
X-ray unit, 88-90, 89f-90f
Treatment plan, 27-28, 28f
adjustable arm, 89
Triadan system of tooth numbering, 20, 21f, 66,
control panel, 89-90, 90f
66f
position-indicating device, 88
canine, 21f
safety, 90
feline, 21f
mube head, 88, 89f
 Trigeminal nerve, 10
Tumors. See Oral tumors
Y-piece,4849
Keep
up with
critical fields
Would you like to receive up-to-date information
on our books, journals and databases in the areas
that interest you, direct to your mailbox?
Join the Wiley e-mail service - a convenient way
to receive updates and exclusive discount offers
on products from us.
Simply visit www.wiley.com/email
and register online
We won't bombard you with emails
and we'll only email you with
information that's relevant to you.
We will ALWAYS respect your e-mail
WILEY
privacy and NEVER sell, rent, or
exchange your e-mail address to any
outside company. Full details on our
privacy policy can be found online.
WILEY-
/BLACKWELL
www.wiley.com/email