Pet Photography 101
Tips for Taking Better
Photos of Your Dog or Cat
Focal
ANDREWDARLOW
Press
Pet Photography 101
Tips for Taking Better Photos
of Your Dog or Cat
Andrew Darlow
AMSTERDAM + BOSTON → HEIDELBERG + LONDON
NEW YORK + OXFORD •PARIS+SAN DIEGO
SAN FRANCISCO  SINGAPORE ▪ SYDNEY • TOKYO
Focal
Press
ELSEVIER
Focal Press is an im print of Elsevier
Focal Press is an imprint of Elsevier
30 Corporate Drive, Suite 400, Burlington, MA 01803, USA
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP, UK
@ 2010 Andrew Darlow. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek
permission, further information about the Publisher's permissions policies and our arrange-
ments with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licens-
ing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright
by the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and
experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional prac-
tices, or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in
evaluating and using any infommation, methods, compounds, or experiments described 
herein. In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety
and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or
editors, assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter
products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
books on acid-free paper whenever possible.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Darlow, Andrew.
 Pet photography 101: tips for taking better photos of your dog or cat / Andrew Darlow.
"uo *d
Includes index.
TR727.D393 2009
778.9'32-dc22
2009024691
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISB N: 978-0-240-81215-1
For information on all Focal Press publications
visit our website at www.elsevierdirect.com
09101112135 43 2 1
Printed in China
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
www.lsevier.com| www.bookaid.otrg | www.sabtr.otg
ELSEVIER
BOOK AID
Sabre Foundation
[nternational
This book is dedicated to the memory of Chachi, Cupid, Jiro, Lady.
Madel, Muffet, Penny, Regal, Shaney, and the many other dogs
and cats who have made an impact on my life, as well as the lives
of so many others. We miss you.
This page intentionally left blank
Contents
Foreword
vii
Preface
ix
About the Author
XV
Chapter 1 Train Your Camera, but Don't Make It Roll Over!
Chapter 2
It's All About Perspective: Tips for Composition
and Camera Placement
27
Chapter 3
Bask in the Sunshine (or Rain!): Outdoor
Lighting Tips
39
Chapter 4 I Do Windows!—Window Lighting Tips
55
Chapter 5 
 Let Sleeping Dogs (and Cats) ... Sleep!
69
Chapter 6
Where'd My Sock Go?--Tips for Setting Up and
Capturing Fun Photos
87
Chapter 7
Holidazed and Confused: Photo Tips for Holidays
and Events
113
Chapter 8
Barkness on the Edge of Town: Low-Light and
Creative Lighting Tips
131
Chapter 9
The Digital Canine and Feline: Technical Tips
and Printing Advice
151
Index
187
This page intentionally left blank
ForewordM
Photography is an art. The ability to set the scene, capture the
moment, and have others connect with the emotion and beauty
of the picture is what makes a photographer great. As an amateur
photographer, I love taking pictures of my favorite subjects ... my
four-legged family. The walls in my home are covered with pictures
of my pets, and nothing gives me more joy than seeing their faces
throughout my house as I move from room to room. Anyone who
has shared a special love with an animal knows what I mean. They
gone, our hearts ache. But they can live on forever in their photos,
and their pictures are often a source of great comfort when they
leaveus.
Andrew Darlow is one of those rare photographers who have a
ioqe aieuoissed si ah ara sapuat e yhnosyi shuiyi aas dt tualet
his work. He has sensitivity toward animals and people that is
Elwood, won the 2007 World's Ugliest Dog Contest, and lucky for
me, Andrew was quite interested in photographing Elwood and
the rest of my family. Andrew spent hours at my home painstak-
'piy., Aun, lauo Au se llm se 'poomle buydebooud Aou
When Andrew sent me the proofs I was overwhelmed; the photos
he took were the most beautiful pictures of Elwood I had ever
seen. He captured Elwood's true "beauty." Andrew saw the gen-
tleness of the little dog I fell in love with when I first rescued him,
and through his lens, he brought out Elwood's tenderness and
splendor, as well as the special bond that Elwood shares with
everyone in our home. The photos were artistic, beautifully com-
posed, and just lovely.
Foreword
Pet Photography 101 will allow photographers of any level to hone
their skills with easy-to-understand information and techniques.
Many of the "models" featured in the book are rescued animals
that were once homeless. Now they are special, loving compan-
ions for many families. Thank you, Andrew, for sharing your talent
with others and for bringing beauty to the world through your
magnificent photography.
vili
Karen and Elwood Quigley,
Sewell, New Jersey
www.EveryoneLovesEiwood.com
Karen  Quigley withElwood and
some of the other adopted mem-
bers of her family (all of whom are
rescues). Photo @ Andrew Darlow
Preface
I love photography. And as long as I can remember, I've loved
noybnoiul 'sieo pue shop buiydeboioud pue yim awi buueus
my childhood, I spent hours playing with many dogs and cats at
the homes of family and friends. Later in life, at the age of 18, 1
lived with a family in Japan, where I shared the house with a very
special Akita named Jiro (see the following page for more about
Jiro). Since then, I've spent time with and have had the honor of
from New York City to Tokyo, Japan.
Whether I'm photographing a dog or cat while on vacation, on the
front lawn of a neighbor's house, or during a commissioned assign-
ment at a client's home, I find that my most memorable photos
are not posed pictures with a paper or fabric background. They
are the pictures that happen spontaneously, like a photo of a dog's
face with his tail wagging happily when he reacts to the voice of
a family member, or a photograph of a cat while she's in a zenlike
state of relaxation perched on a window sill. I always strive to
capture the spirit of pets and the people with whom they share
theirlives.
tographs of your loved ones that you and your family will cherish
for many years. If you take even one photo that is influenced by
what you read here, and if that image brings a tear to your eye or
a smile to your face, then I've done my job. Hopefully, you'll be
or actual photo albums and frames using the advice contained in
thebook.
I have so many people (and furry friends) to thank for helping make
this book possible. To help express my gratitude, I've included an
acknowledgement section on the companion Web site. It also con-
course, the pets) who have made a positive difference in my life
Preface
How theBook Is Organized
This book is organized in nine chapters and 101 tips, beginning
with information about different cameras, lenses, and the nuts and
bolts of photography, including color balance, removable card
storage options, and various shooting modes. Most of the book's
chapters center on a theme, such as lighting and creative photog-
raphy, with tips related to that theme. To help illustrate the tips,
description of the overall setting, as well as camera shooting data
(for example, shutter speed and ISO). Also included with most of
the tips is a description of the lighting used, including from where
the sun and/or other lighting is coming.
Important note: In most cases, I've also included the month and
time of day that the photos were taken to help you better deter-
mine when you might find a certain quality of light. Unless other-
natural light will generally be different in other regions of the world
at different times of the year.
Jiro (my "host family dog"), photographed in Nara, Japan. Jiro means "second
son" in Japanese, and he quickly became like a second host brother to me when 1
lived with a wonderful host mother, father, sister, and brother in Japan as an
to him earlier that day. There are a few tips from the book at work here, including:
 Tip 60: Capture some interesting profile or partial-profile views. Your subject
doesn't always have to be looking right at the lens, as you can see from this
photo.
Tip 89: Get your old negatives, slides, and prints scanned (or scan them
yourself). I scanned this photo from a 4 x 6-inch (approximately 10 x 15-cm)
print on an inexpensive flatbed scanner.
For this photo, the entire image was sharpened moderately, but I selectively
Preface
Who This Book Is For
This book was designed primarily for those who want to make
better photos of pets and people, regardless of your photographic
or computer skill level. The book was designed to give you the
information needed to get started or to continue on your journey
from simple but dramatic photos of a pet just waking up in the
xii
early morning sunlight, to a family photo on the beach in the late
afternoon, lit with the help of a portable flash unit. I wrote the book
with as little jargon as possible, and in many cases, when I wanted
to elaborate or include more information about a topic, I created
a reference link, which you can find on the book's companion Web
site.
Companion Web Site
The Internet offers an incredible amount of free and fee-based
information about photography, digital imaging, dogs, cats, and
just about every related topic. The book's companion Web site
(www.PhotoPetTips.com) contains hundreds of links to more infor-
-pe se llam se 'yoog siyi u! pasuasand sd aui ot paielau uoieu
tional information about photography, retouching, and much
more. Just look for notations like [w1.1] throughout the book. 1
that would otherwise have to be printed throughout the book. The
aui oi ieo oi Aessaoau buidst jo zunowe aui aonpau osle syul
information. To navigate to a link, just click on the chapter number
on the main page of the companion Web site, and then click on
the specific link reference number.
What You'll Need
will do. In Chapter 1 I explain why I prefer digital single-lens reflex
cameras (DSLRs) for most of my image making, but you'll also see
why a good-quality point-and-shoot camera or video camera with
a still picture mode may be perfect for all your needs. It's all about
inoqe tou pue 'Kofua ueo Awef anor pue nor teui saunioid buiyeu
how many megapixels you can capture, or how many pounds of
PREFACE
gear you can carry. A late-model computer running Mac OsX or
Microsoft Windows is highly recommended, though not necessary
pue sael oioud pe Aepoi algejieae saonosau Auew aui ol syueui
retailstores.
With regard to software, I mention Adobe Photoshop a lot through-
nu aoy em awos ui wboid aui azn I asnoag yoog aui ino
of my retouching and image preparation, but Adobe Photoshop
xili
demonstrate in the book. Also, unless otherwise noted, when 1
mention Adobe Photoshop, I am speaking of Adobe Photoshop
CS2/CS3/CS4, etc. In Chapter 9, Tips 85 and 86, I discuss a few
free and inexpensive retouching software options, as well as some
Photoshop Lightroom) that work differently from Adobe Pho-
toshop, and that should be considered by anyone who is serious
about photography and who would like to work more eficiently.
About the Cover Image
On the following page is the unretouched version of the book's
cover photo. I took this photograph of a beautiful 11-year-old
owner placed her in the back of his pickup truck, which raised her
position and allowed me to photograph her without having to crawl
As is the case with most of the photos in the book, there are mul-
some minor retouching was done to produce the final image.
Apart from cro pping the photo for the cover, selective sharpening
was done on the dog's eyes and fur, and some contrast enhance-
using the curves tool in Adobe Photoshop. Also, a catch light was
added to the dog's right eye by cloning it (brushing in the detail
by copying it from another location) in Adobe Photoshop using
the catch light in her left eye. I've included the before image here
because I believe that these small adjustments to her eyes alone
have a dramatic effect on the overall image. You can use a similar
process to improve the photos in your collection that might benefit
from the same techniques.
Preface
xiv
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50 mm macro;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/4.5;
 Shutter Speed: %s0 sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight from the sun low in the sky provided all of the
lighting. The primary catch light in the dog's left eye is the reflection of a boat
covered with an off-white tarp, parked in the driveway. The catch light was then
cloned to enhance the overall look of the image using Adobe Photoshop.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
About
the Author
Andrew Darlow is an award-
winning author and photogra-
pher whose love of cats and
dogs began at a very young
age. His pet photography has
been  featured  in numerous
publications and on-air broad-
casts, including Animal Fair
magazine, the News 12 New
Jersey
 television
program,
Rangefinder Magazine, and
the AKC Gazette (the official
magazine  of  the American
Kennel Club).
Andrew Darlow
 Photo by Jorge Julian
Over more than a decade,
Darlow
has been   commis-
sioned to photograph people and their pets in both formal and
informal situations. He has photographed numerous dog shows,
including the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in New York
City, and he has donated his photo and custom-printing services
to a number of causes, including the Susan G. Komen Foundation,
Women's Venture Fund, The Seeing Eye (the world's oldest exist-
ing dog guide school), and the garden tour for Animal Rescue
Fund of the Hamptons (a no-kill shelter for dogs and cats). He has
lectured and conducted seminars and workshops around the world
at conferences and for photography organizations and schools,
including the Arles Photo Festival; School of Visual Arts, Columbia
University: and the International Center of Photography (ICP) in
New York.
About the Author
Andrew Darlow relaxing with one
of his four legged models at a
client's home after a photo
xvi
session. Photo by David Levy.
Darlow is editor of The Imaging Buffet (www.imagingbuffet.com),
an online resource with news, reviews, and interviews covering the
subjects of photography, printing, and new media. His book 301
Inkjet Tips and Techniques: An Essential Printing Resource for
Photographers (Course Technology, PTR) was chosen as the winner
in the "Photography: Instructional/How-To" category of The
National Best Books 2008 Awards, sponsored by USA Book News.
visit(www.andrewdarlow.com)
Andrew Darlow photographing a client's cat in New York City. Photo by
Paul Kessel.
This page intentionally left blank
1
Train Your Camera,
but Don't Make It
Roll Over!
including magazines, billboards, and greeting cards. But getting
aeus noa siad aue oy suoissaidxa pue enb abewi seli
your life with can be a challenge. I'm here to help. In this chapter
I cover some of the basics of photographing dogs, cats, and the
people who love them, including camera selection, accessories,
and ways to get started quickly, regardless of your camera or
current experience level. I also reference some of the images and
content in other chapters of the book, as well as Web sites that
e yhm pue 'ope sayeny noyim os 'paiuasaid sdii aut oi aieia.
friendly bark and a meow, on with the tips!
Please note: When you see notations like [w1.1], it means that a related Web link (and
usually additional information] can be found by visiting the book's companion Wweb site
 at www. PhotoPetTips.com.
Important note: Also included with most of the tips is a description of the lighting used
and the month and time of day that the photos were taken to help you better determine
when you might find a certain guality of light. Unless otherwise stated, all photos were
taken in the northeast United States (New York/New Jersey area).
 Photo on facing page @ Andrew Darlow [see Tip 1 for image infommation] 
Pet Photography
Tip #1
Choose the right camera for
your needs (and the needs of
your pets)!
You'll definitely need a camera of some type to take photographs,
so that's why this is the first official tip of the book. Overviews of
below. Because there is so much I'd like to cover within each cat-
egory, I go into more detail with all the camera types listed below
in an article available on the book's companion Web site [w1.1].
but most people consider these to be the major categories:
Film Cameras: Most people (including me) learned photogra-
phy using film cameras. Film cameras have been produced for
These
include:
Single-use
plastic film cameras; Point-
and-shoot 35mm film cameras; 35mm SLR (Single Lens Reflex)
film cameras; and specialty film cameras, including swing-lens
panoramic cameras that can produce some amazing images.
Other options include pinhole cameras, as well as the Holga
and Diana+, which help to produce very artistic images that
must be seen to be believed [w1.2].
35mm DSLRs: 35mm DSLR's have become the most popular
[w1.3].
Digital Point-and-Shoot Cameras: Excluding camera phones,
digital point-and-shoot cameras are the most popular cate-
gory of digital camera. One of the main features most digital
point-and-shoot cameras have that most DSLRs lack is video,
but that gap is closing fast.
Video Cameras with Still Photo Modes: There are many video
cameras on the market today that have very good-quality still
picture modes, and the lines are blurring between video
cameras and point-and-shoot still cameras [w1.4]. Please also
note that when I refer to point-and-shoot cameras in this book,
TRAIN YOuR CAMERA
I am also referring to most video cameras with  still
photo modes.
Camera Phones: The popularity ofthe camera phone is nothing
short of incredible. Whereas just a few years ago only a small
percentage of the population carried a camera, today over a
billion people worldwide have a camera at their side, inte-
grated into their phone/smartphone. The quality of camera
phones varies dramatically. Some are even capable of produc-
ing images that rival the image quality of good quality point-
and-shoot digital cameras [w1.5]. Some tips for using camera
phones can be found later in this tip.
Before making a camera purchase, it often helps to read the
advantages and disadvantages of one type of camera compared
with another. I've put together a few detailed articles on the book's
companionWebsitethatcomparethecameras discussedthrough
out this section [w1.6]. For example, most DSLRs have a traditional
optical viewfinder instead of just a video representation of what
you are about to capture, as found on most point-and-shoot
cameras. That can be helpful because the built-in diopter that
accompanies most optical viewfinders can be easily adjusted for
your shooting eye. Also, putting the camera against your face
when shooting can help stabilize it. Having a true optical view-
finder can also make manual focus and burst-mode photos in quick
succession of a moving subject (like a jumping cat) much easier.
The diopter adjustment dial on the
Canon EOS-5D Mark II DSLR (circled
in red) is similar to the diopter
adjustment on most cameras that
have an optical viewfinder. Above the
viewfinder is the camera's hot shoe
for mounting flash units and/or
wireless trigger devices.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
For this photo of Elwood, photographed on a sunny May afternoon
at about 3 P.M., I asked him to sit on a bench near a window, and
he soon discovered what a nice spot it was to soak up some rays.
I show this image to demonstrate some of the advantages DSLR
cameras have over most point-and-shoot cameras. First, I'm using
a super-sharp 50mm macro lens, which I discuss more in Tip 3. It
is of higher quality and has wider maximum aperture compared
with most point-and-shoot camera lenses. Next, I shot the image
at ISO 640, which results in considerably more grain on most point-
and-shoot cameras. Finally, the DSLR I used shoots at a faster
frame rate, and I'm able to capture more images without having
about any other point-and-shoot camera. That's not to say that
you can't get great images and good frame rates with a point-and-
shoot camera. It just helps sometimes to see why people go out
of their way to carry and use DSLRs (and in some cases, multiple
lenses).
Camera: Canon EOs-5D;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm;
ISO: 640; Aperture: f/3.5;
Shutter Speed: %oo sec;
Lighting Notes: The lighting for this
photo comes almost entirely from the
windows just above Elwood's head.
though I used a white board clamped
to a light stand (camera left) as a fill
 card to direct the light coming into
the room back toward Elwood.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
"|'ll be right with
you.
TRAINYOURCAMERA
apixel Canon point-and-shoot digital camera at about 2 P.M. on a
May afternoon. A photo of the same dog photographed in similar
lighting (but not shaded under trees) can also be found in this
chapter.
Camera: Canon PowerShot SD790 IS;
Lens/Focal Length: Built-in 6.2-18.6mm
IS/14mm;
ISO: 320; Aperture: f/4.5;
Shutter Speed:Yson sec;
Lighting Notes: Lighting was natural
daylight filtered by trees.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
“A little to the left....
Perfect!
PetPhotography
This photo of the same Beagle was shot in the parking lot of a
restaurant with an Apple iPhone 3G. The overall quality is surpris-
in Adobe Photoshop on the dark portion of the dog's fur to reduce
some of the color noise in the photo.
"Hang on a moment, I'm
setting our GPS."
Camera: Apple iPhone 3G;
Lens/Focal Length: built-in;
Aperture: f/2.8;
Shutter Speed and ISo:unrecorded;
Lighting Notes: Lighting came entirely from natural daylight.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
TrAIN YOuR CAMErA
A Few Camera Phone Tips
In the camera settings menu (if your camera phone has one),
set it to the highest native picture resolution and quality if you
want the best possible results. The highest resolution shown
is usually the native resolution, and the manual should note if
it is not.
If your camera has a slot for external memory, such as a micro
SD card, buy a card and set the camera to record to the exter-
nal card. Then purchase a card reader, or use the one built
into your computer if you have one (an SD card adapter is
usually included with every micro SD card). It will allow for
charges from your cell carrier.
Turn off the camera phone's internal flash (most of them do a
poor job) and go outside during the day to shoot, turn the
lights on in your home, or use continuous lighting such as a
lamp or diffused LED light for better overall results [w1.7]. See
Chapter 8 for much more about lighting.
Use your opposite hand (the hand not holding your phone) to
cradle and help stabilize your phone while taking pictures. This
can dramatically improve sharpness, especially in low light
situations.
white cat in low light with an LG enV cell phone. The camera
provided little metadata for the image, resulting in none of the
shot information (aperture, shutter speed, etc.) being recorded.
However, I was able to choose the white balance setting, and I
opted for "Daylight" because the LED light I used was similar to
daylight (about 5500 degrees Kelvin-see Tip 4 for more about
color temperature). The largest file size (1600 x 1200 pixels) was
selected in the camera's menu.
Pet Photography
"Did I just hear the dinner bell ring?"
(a)
[b}
(a) The LED headlamp that I used for this picture can be seen above in Figure (b).
I taped a piece of warm-colored diffusion material over it to soften the light and to
 create a warmer overall tone. Most of the light came from the LED headlamp,
which was held about 3 feet (91cm) from the cat. Both photos were taken with the
LGenVcell phone.
photos @ Andrew Darlow
TRAIN YOUR CAMERA
Tip #2
Decide Whether You Want
to Shoot in RAW, JPEG.
or Another Mode
The decision to capture your images in RAW, JPEG, a combination
of the two, or another mode is an important one. Shooting in your
camera's RAw format gives you the ability to edit your images
more effectively. I generally shoot RAw files only and process my
files through a RAW processing application so that I don't have to
store and archive multiple originals. However, there are reasons
The main reasons for shooting both RAW and JPEG at the same
time are the following:
You can quickly make an online gallery from the JPEGs and
email the files without having to process them (though they
may be quite large if not resized).
You can bring the JPEGs on a media card or CD (or in some
cases, a DvD) to a photo lab (or use your own inkjet printer)
 e un a s o bu o sd  o
processing application. If the photos are important, I'd highly
recommend backing up the files in two places, such as your
computer and an extermal hard drive, before inserting your
card into any photo lab machine.
You can achieve a secondary backup of your images, and this
separate memory card slots. The camera can be set so that
one card can be used for RAW files and the other for JPEGs.
More on this topic can be found in Chapter 8, Tip 71. Also included
there are some of the reasons why a JPEG-only workflow may be
right for you.
Pet Photography
Tip #3
Consider your lens options
carefully (Warning:
: Ihis can
get expensive!)
10
The number of lens options currently available (especially for
DSLRs) is staggering. This is a topic that is discussed widely in
many books and online, and I've put together some links to sites
that specialize in lens ratings [w1.8], as well as a comprehensive
article to help you determine what things to consider before buying
a lens [w1.9]. For virtually every photo in this book, you will see
information about the focal range and focal length of the lens I
info. If you use a 50mm lens on a full-frame 35mm DSLR like a
Canon 5D, the same lens will approximate the focal length of a
75mm lens in 35mm terms on a smaller, APS-C-sized sensor camera
such as the Canon 20D or Canon 50D.
Some point-and-shoot cameras have accessory lenses available
the lens' zoom capability.
While we are on the topic, whether you have a full-frame or a DSLR
with a smaller sensor, I recommend considering a fixed-focal
length 50mm lens. These lenses are light, compact, and afforda-
ble; good-quality models with wide maximum apertures (f/1.8 to
f/2.8) are available for about U.s. $100-200. if you check the
camera info, you'll notice that quite a few of the photos in this
book were shot with a 50mm lens [w1.10].
Macro lenses (or cameras with a macro mode) allow you to create
close-up images that are in focus. On point-and-shoot cameras
and video cameras, a flower icon is generally used as the symbol
to engage the macro shooting mode. Another option that I've
are compatible with DSLR lenses, as well as some point-and-shoot
lenses. These attach to existing lenses, are very affordable, and
TRAIN YOUR CAMERA
That makes them great for images of sleeping dogs or cats, and
a tripod is recommended to help you get sharper photos. Some
times a step-down adapter ring is needed to make them fit your
particular lens or camera [w1.11].
Other options worth a look are the lenses from LensBaby [w1.12].
allow for creative focus similar to what you can produce with view
cameras. The lenses take a bit of practice to get used to, but once
you play with them for a little while, you will quickly see how they
can help you produce images with a very interesting look and feel.
shown on the next two pages from the same spot with a Tamron
18-200mm lens on a Canon EOS 20D at about 8 P.M. in June. The
camera's sensor is not a full-frame 35mm size, and its multiplication
factor makes it approximately equivalent to a 30-320mm lens in
35mm terms. I should note that the wide-angle image is not
cropped, and about 10 percent of the top and 10 percent of the
bottom of the close-up view have been cropped.
From left to right: (a) Canon EF 28-135mm f/3.5-5.6 IS zoom lens with a Sima
front of your lens cap to help keep the lens cap from being misplaced. Attached to
the front of the lens barrel is a screw-on collapsible rubber lens shade (available from
a number of different companies). (b) Canon EF 50mm f/2.5 Compact Macro Autofocus
Lens with the barrel fully extended to the 1:1 Macro level. (c) The Lensbaby 3G and
accessories. The Lensbaby Control Freak is an updated version of the Lensbaby 3G
photo @ Andrew Darlow
COLDPLAY XGY
06.07.05
COLDLAY XGY
4400
4400
06.07.05
RUDIOSLRVE
Jiasinoog.
LX8Y
COLDPLAY
06.07.05
6-14-05
[a}
"Next stop, Hollywood!"
TRAIN YOuR CAMERA
"Now someone just needs
to pack my bags for me!
13
(q)
(a) Camera: Canon EOS 20D;
Lens/Focal Length: Tamron 18-200mm Di I/18mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/10;
Shutter Speed: Y2o sec;
(b) Camera: Canon Eos 20D;
Lens/Focal Length: Tamron 18-200mm Di 1l/200mm;
ISo: 400; Aperture: f/10;
Shutter Speed: %oo sec;
Lighting Notes: The lighting for both images is coming from the early evening
photos @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #4
Take control of your color
temperature and learn how
to set gray balance
Color temperature is an important consideration in photography.
14
By learning what types of light have what approximate color tem-
perature, you can more easily choose a color temperature and
balance your lighting. For example, daylight at about noon in New
about 3500*K. If you were to photograph a scene under those two
lighting conditions, you would generally choose the daylight colon
temperature setting for the 5500*K light and the tungsten color
temperature setting for the 3500*K light. When you do that (in a
perfect world), all the neutral colors (grays) in your photo will be
reproduced as neutral.
Alternatively, you can use a gray or white card of some type to
make a custom white balance, as long as your camera has the
 e 'i a uo s a u e aaui 
small ones that are integrated into lens caps, to large black, white,
and medium gray cards that are also collapsible reflectors [w1.13].
Here's a quick tip: If you don't use a custom white balance, set
your camera to the "cloudy" white balance setting (look for the
cloud icon) when shooting outdoors. It is an excellent starting
point that will give most of your outdoor photos (or window light
photos) a slightly warm tone, which is great for photographing pets
and people.
More info on white balance can be found in an article on the book's
companion Web site [w1.14], and additional links to articles on
color temperature and filters can also be found there [w1.15]
TRAIN YOUR CAMERA
Tip #5
Learn Your Camera's
Various Shooting Modes
Most point-and-shoot cameras (and some DSLRs) have a number
15
of special camera shooting modes (for example, Canon calls them
'special scene modes") to help you take pictures in certain situa-
tions without having to set the camera manually. Examples includer
Landscape, Portrait, Beach, and Night Portrait, and each generally
has a descriptive icon, such as a face, runner, or mountain. These
can be helpful to know, and are worth learning about, especially
if you are not concerned about the science behind the modes. The
best way to learn about what each mode does is to refer to your
camera's manual or books/Web sites that go over each mode step
by step [w1.16]. Also check whether specific modes will force your
camera into JPEG shooting mode. You may not want that.
Many point-and-shoot and DSLR cameras have color modes that
you can set that allow you to shoot in black-and-white (B&W),
sepia, negative, etc., but I would discourage the use of them
because you usually will be discarding the color information in your
make adjustments to your images in the computer or even at the
lab where you bring your card or CD for output [w1.17].
cameras allow adjustments to overall contrast, sharpness, and
saturation in your images. These adjustments generally won't
change your RAW files (they can later be reset to defaults in a RAW
will affect your JPEG files, so consider that before you make adjust-
ments to your camera's settings [w1.18].
Some common shooting modes that can be found on most DSLRs
and many point-and-shoot cameras are Program, Auto, Manual,
Aperture Priority and Shutter Priority. I cover the last three in more
detail in the following two tips.
Pet Photography
Tip #6
Use Aperture Priority Mode or
Manual Mode to Control Depth
of Field
16
to control the look of your photographs. When I shoot using avail
able light, I almost always have my camera set to aperture priority
mode (the symbol for it is usually A or Av, depending on the
control the depth of field in my photos. Aperture priority adjusts
your shutter speed for you based on your camera's meter readings
as you change the f-stop on your camera.
Keep in mind that if you set the aperture to a level that causes the
'paunig eq reu sabeui anor 'paads mols Aaa e oiisnpe oi laiinus
and that can lead to out-of-focus puppies and kittens. To remedy
this, you can add more light, set your IsO to a higher level, or
open the aperture to a wider f-stop (for example, from f/8 to f/4).
Manual mode puts a lot of control in your hands, and many pho-
tographers use this mode almost exclusively. For cameras that
have no built-in internal meter, like the Hasselblad medium format
film camera I used for the photo in this tip, you can either guess
the exposure, use a hand held meter, or you can use a camera
with a built-in meter to get a pretty accurate reading which you
then set on the camera that has no meter. Manual mode on many
point and shoot cameras is not entirely manual (many cameras will
still use their built-in meters and will do their best to make proper
exposures). Check your specific camera to see what options are
opened up to you when you switch to "M."
An example of how I used a wide aperture to control depth of field
can be seen in the photo on the facing page. I focused on the
back of the head of a Chihuahua on a street in New York City and
shot with an f/2.8 aperture. In the photo, the background is very
much out of focus, and parts of the foreground are also out of
focus because I chose such a wide aperture. If I had changed the
aperture to f/8, the look of the out-of-focus areas would have been
different—more of the scene would have been sharp.
"Finally, my lunch order has arrived."
Camera: Hasselblad 500ELX;
Film: llford XP2 B&W film;
Lens/Focal Length: 80mm f/2.8PlanarT*CFE;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/2.8;
Shutter Speed: unrecorded;
Lighting Notes: The lighting for this image is entirely from natural light on a sunny
afternoon in thespring orsummer.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
L# d!L
Use Shutter Priority
Mode to Control Your
Shutter Speed
Shutter priority mode is another powerful shooting mode. It allows
18
you to keep the shutter speed at one specific value, and as you
based on what the meter reads in the scene. The symbol for it is
usually S or Tv, depending on the camera model. The advantage
of this mode is that it can help you keep your images sharp, which
Oi oas oos pue oas szy uaamieq oi peads lainys aut buines A1
begin. If you choose too fast a shutter speed, and if your camera
can't set the aperture wide enough to expose the scene properly.
everything will be too dark. In that case, add light, increase the ISO
"tracking" or following the action of a person and/or pet. This is
a great effect that makes the subject look as though he or she is
running at supersonic speed. To use the tracking technique, set
your camera to shutter priority and about % sec to begin. Then
pan and follow the motion of a walking or running pet (maybe
during a brisk walk) as you depress the shutter button [w1.19]. Tip
8 covers some of the exposure focus options that can be helpful
when using this technique.
The dial on this Canon DSLR is set to Shutter
Priority mode (Tv).
Other popular modes, such as Manual (M)
W
A-DEP
and Aperture Priority (Av) can also be seen
on the dial. A few "Basic Zone Modes," as
Canon calls them, are also available,
including Portrait, Landscape, and Sports
mode. Other cameras have very similar
options, but they are often selected and
displayed on an LcD screen instead of a dial.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
TRAIN YOUR CAMERA
Tip #8
Take Control of Your
Exposure and Focus Options
Setting and controlling your exposure and focus options are impor-
19
tant if you want to get the most from your camera. If you plan to
use manual focus or autofocus on your DsLR or point-and-shoot
continuous shooting. Single shot will allow you take one photo at
a time, and you'll need to take your finger off the shutter release
and depress it again to take another picture. Continuous shooting
xe on nos molle lm (seao aos uo ,apou sna, palie)
multiple photos without taking your finger off the shutter release
until you fill your camera's buffer [w1.20].
Another autofocus option found primarily on DSLRs (when in auto-
focus mode) is Al Servo AF. This mode allows you to track a moving
subject, like a running dog about to leap to catch a Frisbee or
Servo AF mode will keep changing the focus point for you until
you take your finger off the shutter release [w1.21].
Exposure compensation and Auto-exposure bracketing are two
very useful controls found on most DSLRs and many point-and-
shoot cameras. Like some of the more complex topics presented
throughout the book, I've written a detailed article about both
features on the companion Web site [w1.22]. Exposure compensa-
tion is also covered in Chapter 3, Tip 28.
The photo on the next page of a client's Maltese relaxing on a
white bedspread is a "high key" or predominantly white picture
make the adjustment, and I could have used auto-exposure
bracketing
"Take your time, I'm not going
anywhere."
Camera: Nikon D1X;
Lens/Focal Length: Nikkor 50mm;
ISO: 200; Aperture: unrecorded;
 Shutter Speed: %o sec;
Lighting Notes: The lighting for this image is coming almost entirely from
natural light through the windows (camera left). A few lightbulbs in the
bedroom add some warm light to the dog and bed.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
TRAIN YOUR CAMERA
6# d!1
Know Your Flash Options
There are many flash lighting options available for cameras, from
using the built-in flash on a point-and-shoot, to multiple off-camera
flashes with a DSLR. With a little research and experimentation,
you can start making incredible photos of your pets and other
21
family members using flash photography, and it can be done on
virtually any budget. Creative lighting is covered in more detail in
Chapter 8.
This photo of a woman with her Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier
demonstrates how you can blend outdoor lighting with flash. The
lighting is coming from the early evening setting sun, as well as
an off-camera diffused flash (placed slightly camera right).
Camera: Canon E0s 20D;
Lens/FocalLength:Tamron 18-
200mm Di 1/149mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/10;
Shutter Speed: Yoo sec.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
"I think I can dig up
an extra Hollywood
ticket for you as
Well."
Pet Photography
Tip #10
Determine a removable storage
option, as well as the resolution
settings for your needs
22
Removable digital media cards, such as CompactFlash cards and
SD/SDHC cards, are a modern miracle. Unlike most commodities,
 l a o l   ie d o 
years. The read/write speeds of most cards have also been
increased both with regard to image capture as well as download
speeds. You can find some extensive speed tests online, as well
as many user reports [w1.23].
The question of how many megapixels one needs is primarily up to
the user. Some people will be perfectly content with a 2-megapixel
what they want to do with their pictures. The best advice I can give
is not to base your decision solely on megapixels. Some 5- or
6-megapixel cameras will produce far better images with less noise
than 12-megapixel cameras at the same or similar camera settings.
In general, to make a good-quality print up to 11 x 14 inches without
much post processing, you should have at least a 6-megapixel
point-and-shoot or DSLR camera with a good-quality lens.
It is also important to realize that you don't have to always shoot
at the full resolution that your camera offers. If you know that the
pictures you are taking never need to be larger than about 1000
x 1500 pixels (4.5 megapixels), you can choose a resolution close
to that number, even if you have an 8-,10-,12-, or 14+-
adjustment. If you are shooting in JPEG, also note that there is
usually a high-, medium-, and low-quality option available at dif-
ferent resolutions. Experiment to see the differences on a large
screen, and be sure to check your resolution settings before start-
ing a shooting session.
Some DSLRs even have RAw file capture options that are smaller
than the full resolution of the sensor.
.For example, the 21-
megapixel Canon EOS-5D Mark Il offers not only a 21.1-megapixel
RAW, but also a 10- and 5.2-megapixel RAW. This is a big advan-
tage over just having smaller-sized JPEG options.
TRAIN YOUR CAMERA
Tip #11
Learn Techniques for Capturing
Action and Sports Photos
Getting great action shots of pets, whether they are running
23
through the yard or at a competitive event, can be a challenge.
Here are a few tips to get you started:
The important thing to realize is that action shots don't have
to be tack sharp. Blurs of all types can look great, so experi-
as well as the tracking technique described in Tip 7.
Shoot at a relatively high ISO level, but not so high that you
will introduce unwanted noise.
Use a long lens (from about 100-300mm in 35mm terms) if
you want to take detail photos from a good distance, but don't
forget to pack a wide-angle lens for the environment shots (for
example, a dog or cat standing in the middle of a football
field).
Use a tripod or monopod to help increase stability with longer
lenses.
Try aperture priority mode to control depth of field. Generally
f/2.8 or f/4) to allow the maximum amount of light in for your
lens.
Throwing a ball or other object that your dog likes to fetch (or
having someone swing a toy from a stick to entice your cat) are
great ways to practice this technique. Links to action photography
articles can be found on the companion Web site [w1.25].
For the action-packed photo on the next page, I photographed a
client's dog playing with her neighbor's dog in her yard in Decem-
ber at about 5 P.M. Both dogs had a favorite item in their mouths
u aam raut ing 'papeay aam aui aaum ans tou u,l pue
there fast! Pictures like this are a lot of fun to make and share with
friends and family.
TRAIN YOUR CAMERA
Tip #12
Find other appropriate learning
resources, including photo groups,
conferences, and books
O soog woy Aydeboioud snoqe ueal oi sem Aueu ae alau
25
group workshops to individual training by a professional in the
field. There are also many groups and organizations around the
world that you can join. Some have monthly meetings with an
average group of less than 20 people, and others conduct confer-
ences in which thousands attend. To delve deeper into the art and
science of photography, from capture techniques to asset man-
agement to retouching and printing, I've compiled a list of sug-
gested groups, books and other resources on the companion Web
site [w1.26].
"First one to get
over there wins!
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/FocalLength:
Canon 16-35mm/35mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/2.8;
Shutter Speed: Y2s sec;
Lighting Notes: Outdoor natural light
provided all the lighting.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
2
It's All about
Perspective:
Tips for Composition and
Camera Placement
So often we see photos of pets (and kids) from an adult's per-
spective, which can be charming and beautiful, but at the same
time, a bit predictable (dare I say, even a bit boring). In this
chapter, I suggest some tips for mixing things up and making
your photos look like you've been floating around a movie set
with a million-dollar camera rig.
Please note: Wwhen you see notations like [w2.1], it means that a related wweb link (and
usually additional information] can be found by visiting the book's companion Web site
at www. PhotoPetTips. com.
 Photo on facing page @ Andrew Darlow [see Tip 16 for image infommation]
Pet Photography
Tip #13
Photograph Your Pet Straight
On, Eye to Eye
You can get great photos of your dog or cat (or a group of pets)
by sitting on a low chair or staircase step, and looking directly into
28
up to a level that allows you to take their photo straight on without
having to crawl around on the floor. It also helps to have someone
else entice your pets from behind the camera with toys or noise-
makers, or by calling their name.
I photographed this kitten at a client's home playing on her scratch-
ing post. The height of the post made it easy to capture this image
eye-to-eye without crawling on the ground.
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm
macro;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/2.5;
Shutter Speed: %a sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight plus
room light from some halogen
lightbulbs provided the lighting.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
"First one who blinks
buys the catnip!"
IT'SALL
ABOUTPERSPECTIVE
Tip #14
Lower Your Perspective and
Make Your Subject a Hero
si op oi paau nos e 'osafeu aou yool soalans aui sayeu uano
lower your perspective so that you are a bit lower than the pet's
29
eye level (how low will depend on the pet, and experimentation
is key). Like in the previous tip, toys and noisemakers work well to
help create different poses.
In this photo of a Weimaraner, photographed in a park on a partly
cloudy day at about 1 P.M. in late December, his owner was right
next to him when I took the shot. I cropped it to a square because
I liked that look much more in this case. That's a bonus tip that
will be covered again in Tip 20 and other places throughout the
book—use cropping to your advantage!
"It's good to be
the king!"
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
16-35mm/16mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/19;
Shutter Speed: Y2s sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural
daylight plus fill light from
the built-in pop-up flash
produced the lighting.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #15
Photograph Your Dog or Cat
from the Back
Many of my favorite photos are those captured from behind the
30
the viewer what the subject is seeing. You can work with this
approach at many levels, from super wide to a macro view.
I captured this image of a cat and a few birds at a client's home
on a sunny February afternoon at about 3 P.M. My goal was to have
the viewer think about what the cat was thinking at the time. These
types of photos can often tell a story, and they can be completely
random or set up like in a movie. The f/2.8 aperture helped to
keep the focus on the main characters in the image.
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
16-35mm/16mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture:f/2.8;
Shutter Speed: %s0 sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight from
the windows provided the lighting,
and some additional *fillight" was
added on the cat in Adobe Photoshop.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
"Birdies are
friends, not food!"
T'SALL
ABOUTPERSPECTIVE
Tip #16
Go for the Overhead View
than normal (or totally overhead), you can create some really dra-
31
matic looks. Like in the previous tip, this approach can work at
many levels, from super wide to a macro view.
I photographed this Boston Terrier named Cupid at about 1 P.M.
in December for a magazine's February issue (you can probably
guess which holiday it was for). I photographed her from a number
magazine. The rose petals and soft material (it's a tablecloth) com-
plemented Cupid and her big brown eyes perfectly!
"Don't hate me because
I'm huggable."
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 28-135mm
IS/28mm;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/8;
 Shutter Speed: %2a sec;
Lighting Notes: Multiple incandescent
lightbulbs were placed camera left
with a large sheet of diffusion material
[w2.1] in front of them to create the
 soft lighting and the big catch lights in
the dog's eyes. Large sheets of heavy
white paper (fill cards) surrounded
the subject to soften the shadows.
Some daylight from windows (camera
left) added to the overallighting.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #17
Shoot from the Hip!
A walk through a city or town with a friend or family member is a
great time to take photos of your dog. Fast shutter speeds and
32
higher ISOs are key here unless you are after creative blur or
picture. As long as the four-legged subjects get proper coverage,
everyone will be happy!
This shot was taken on the way to a park along the Hudson River
in New York City at about 7 P.M. in June. I love how animated pets
can be. It may take a lot of shutter clicks to get pictures you are
really happy with, so keep on shooting!
Camera: Canon EOS-20D;
Lens/Focal Length:Tamron 18-
200mm Di 1/18mm;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/5.6;
Shutter speed: Yeoo sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight
provided most of the lighting, and the
light-gray pavement offered some
nice fill light.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
"I love New
York!
T'SALLABOUTPERSPECTIVE
Tip #18
Use Technology to Get the
Shot from Unusual Angles
There are only a few digital cameras that allow you to see what
you're about to shoot without having to look through a viewfinder
33
what your photos will look like before you take a shot. One way
to expand your options is by using a flip-out viewfinder, which can
be found on some DSLR and point-and-shoot digital cameras from
Sony and Olympus. Another option is from Zigview [w2.2]. The
product is a digital angle finder that attaches to many SLR cameras
that have live view and video out. Also available is an inexpensive
and ingenious mirror attachment called the Flipbac [w2.3]. It pro-
vides a way to hold your camera at a low angle while viewing a
reflection of the live image on the mirror. It also doubles as a
screen protector. And don't forget video cameras. Many have flip-
out screens and good-quality still-image capture modes
options by allowing you to hold the camera at different angles,
such as directly over your pet. Or be adventurous by just setting
the camera to autofocus (or use the distance scale on your camera
 'enueu uong sanus aui buisaid Aq iooys uaue '(sual o
self-timer, or from a remote shutter release, and check the results
on the LCD screen. Isn't technology wonderful?
The Flipbac Angle Viewfinder in the closed and open position.
photo courtesy Fllpback Innovatons
Pet Photography
Tip #19
Go for the "Snail's Eye View'
By getting low on the ground and shooting up toward your sub-
34
jects, you can create some really dramatic imagery. If you are
outside, it's a good idea to bring along some plastic bags to kneel
or lie on while taking these types of pictures (one-gallon resealable
bags work well). Just roll up a few and pack them away for when
improvement stores (look in the carpet or painting section)—they
are good if you will be standing, then kneeling, because they
usually attach via a recloseable fastener. For real die-hards, heavy-
duty skateboard kneepads are another option.
I took this photo of a friend's bulldog at a park from a very low
viewpoint just after noon in early September. I really like how the
foreground becomes an important part of the overall picture. It's
a good idea to experiment by including different amounts of fore-
ground in your photos when shooting close to ground level.
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
28-135mm/28mm;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/3.5;
Shutter Speed: V4oo0 sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight on a
clear day at about noon was the only
light used. A fill flash can also be
used effectively in this situation.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
"I proclaim this land:
Bulldogsville!"
IT'SALL
ABOUTPERSPECTIVE
Tip #20
Photograph Your Pet in Your
Home Using a Wide-Angle
View
O1 ieo jo bop anof iab ueo no j! inq 'lis pueis iou saop aw!
35
stand still for a moment, you can photograph them in time, and
have memories of the places that are important to you. Follow
them around the house to capture multiple locations. Wide-angle
views using cameras with wide-angle lenses help to fit more in a
o1 teaib s,ll ,Asng, ool soioud 1noA ayew ol iou An 1ng 'auaos
see how your pet, other family members, and even furnishings
a photo so that it looks like a panoramic image (either horizontal
or vertical).
This photo opportunity presented itselfto me when a client's kitten
decided to stroll across her couch at about 5:30 p.M. on a sunny
March afternoon. I particularly like the additional cat in the photo,
your photos for an added twist!
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
16-35mm/16mm;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/2.8;
Shutter Speed: Y5 sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight from
a large window (camera right) and
inside lighting from household 
lightbulbs combined to produce the
lighting.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #21
Use a tripod or similar device to
stay sharp and extend your
creative options
36
A tripod or other device that holds your camera can do wonders
in many situations. One approach is to set up a scene, set a self-
friends (instant modern photo booth!). Other devices are available
that allow you to attach a camera and extend it to allow for inter-
esting camera angles, or to take a photo of you and your loved
[w2.3] and QuikPod [w2.4].
In this photo of a woman and her Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier
photographed at about 10 P.M. in June on a rooftop in New York
se 'ssaudieus aunsua diay ol podut e uo eaueo Au paoeid I '
well as a level horizon line.
"Next time, I get to
wear the green
dress!
Camera: Canon EOs-20D;
Lens/Focal Length: Tamron 18-
200mm Di 1/18mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/6.3;
Shutter Speed: Y40 sec;
Lighting Notes: An off-camera flash
placed on a stand (camera left)
provided dramatic light on the model
and her dog, and the slow exposure
(%4 sec) allowed for some of the city
lights and sky to be recorded.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
3
Bask in the
Sunshine (or Rain!):
Outdoor Lighting
Tips
Ahh, the great outdoors. Rain or shine, winter, spring, summer,
 or fall, opportunities are everywhere for taking great photos of
 your pets and their people friends. Since most house cats stay in
the house, these tips for getting better outside photos in any
type of weather will feature dogs, but the same concepts can
apply to cats, other pets, and of course, people.
Please note: When you see notations like [w3.1], it means that a related Web link (and
usually additional information) can be found by visiting the book's companion Web site
 at www. PhotoPetTips.com.
 Photo on facing page @ Andrew Darlow [see Tip 25 for image infommation]
Pet Photography
Tip #22
Shoot Early or Late in the Day
for More Dramatic Light
Someone named the time period just before sunrise and just after
pue '(,noy yibew, aut se umouy osje) ,anoy uapjoh, aut asuns
40
it was for good reason. The light that one finds in most areas is
lovely at those times, and the nice light usually continues for a few
hours after sunrise and before sunset. The color temperature at
a warm tone when your camera is set to daylight white balance
mode. Also, at those times, the sun's rays tend to produce a softer
light, and the sun casts longer shadows since it is not as high in
the sky. There is also much less of a chance of getting "raccoon
eyes," which can occur when the sun is high in the sky because of
the way the shadows fall just under the eyes.
This photo of Elwood and his "mom" Karen was taken on a "mostly
clear" day just after 4 P.M. in May. Notice how the setting sun
(camera right) produces very nice light on Karen's jeans. And
because of where Elwood is standing, just enough light is coming
through to Elwood's face and body to create a very dramatic
effect.
Camera: Canon EOS-5D;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm
macro;
ISO: 640; Aperture: f/11;
Shutter Speed: 4 sec.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
"I seem to recall the
promise of a treat."
BASK IN THE SuNSHINE (OR RAIn!)
Tip #23
For Better Portraits, Use Flash
When Shooting Outdoors
Electronic flash has many uses when outside. On the topic of
of ways to avoid the problem. One way is by using fill flash when
41
outdoors. Fill flash can be enabled in several ways: by using the
e buisn Ag isauo poous-pue-uiod Aueu uo punoy yse leus
DSLR's pop-up flash; with a detachable, on-camera flash unit; or
with an off-camera flash unit [w3.1]. The icon on most point-and-
shoot cameras to turn on fill flash is usually a lightning bolt—press
the flash button until you see the lightning bolt stay on.
A removable flash unit that sits in your camera's hot shoe, or an
off-camera flash are best for fill flash (or for flash in general when
outside). That's because you can separate your camera lens from
the flash, which reduces the chance of red-eye (or green-eye, as
is the case with many pets), plus you can create larger catch lights
se yons 'ysel aui saao sesnp e buisn g sasa ,sioafqns anoe u
the LumiQuest BigBounce diffuser [w3.2]. An off-camera flash has
the added benefit of allowing you to light from any angle. When
using a DSLR with an external flash unit, fill flash can usually be
controlled in a way that won't overpower the natural daylight
(unless that's the look you're after). Check your manual to find out
how to set fill flash properly.
I photographed this little girl and her Pug shown on the following
page on a sunny day at about 1 p.M. in late August. An off-camera
compact flash unit (Vivitar 285HV) was placed slightly camera right
with a large diffuser about two feet (.6 meters) from the subjects.
I asked the girl and her dog to stand under a tree to avoid most
of the very bright areas you see in the background (some sun came
through, but I think it adds to the overall look). I used manual mode
on the flash and camera to find the right balance between the
natural light and flash.
Pet Photography
"That's right.... Do the Pug hug!"
42
尚可
Camera: Canon Eos-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 16-35mm/16mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/9.5; 
Shutter Speed: %o sec.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
BASK IN THE SuNSHINE (OR RAInN!)
Tip #24
Use reflectors when shooting
outside, and use the sun
like a lightbulb
Using one or more fill cards (often referred to as reflectors) can do
43
wonders for your photographs. A fill card helps to direct light onto
the subject. Reflectors can be white foam boards, white walls
posters, aluminum foil (for more dramatic effects) or anything else
that helps to fill in or add drama to the main light. The sun shades
often used to keep cars cool can be excellent fill cards, and some
even fold up nicely into a small circle, like more expensive options
from photo-related companies [w3.3].
If you think of the sun as a lightbulb, you can create many effects
with natural light. Start by locating the sun in the sky. Then have
eid e pug so 'uns au woy Aeme Auans uni sioafans ano
without direct sun so that the sun does not make them squint their
eyes. Then use reflectors to direct light toward them. It helps to
have an assistant hold the reflectors, and always be careful outside
when using any type of stands, tripods, etc. (especially when they
have a reflector attached), because they can easily get blown over
by the wind. Sand bags or backpacks can be used on the legs of
tripods or light stands to keep things more stable.
The light stand model shown on the following page is a Bogen
3361. It is lightweight and very strong. Attached to the top of the
stand and circled in red is an Impact Telescopic Collapsible Reflec-
tor Holder. It has two strong clamps, and it is holding a collapsed
car windshield sun protector called the Axius Basix Magic Shade.
Notice how one side is shiny silver and the other side is matte.
The shiny side will produce a more focused, intense light (similar
to aluminum foil), and the matte side will reflect light more softly.
It should be noted that the Impact Collapsible Reflector also comes
with a swiveling stand adapter (not shown). Circled in blue is a
small Bosh 12-inch (30-cm) diameter translucent circular reflector.
It folds up into a small circle and comes with a black protective
zipper case (also shown in the photo). A number of companies
make similar reflectors.
PetPhotography
Circled in green is a Manfrotto Camera/Umbrella Bracket 143BKT,
which is supporting the reflector holder. One way to use the
camera/umbrella bracket is to attach a small flash unit to the 1/4-20
standard thread shown in the photo using a hot shoe mount like
the Stroboframe Shoe - General Purpose. At the bottom of the
frame is a gold sunshield, which can be found at auto-supply stores
Or online.
44
In addition to being used to reflect light, the translucent reflectors
like the one circled in blue can be used to shoot light through
(either sunlight or flash) to produce catch lights and beautiful soft
light. More reflectors, as well as links to all companies mentioned,
can be found on the companion Web site [w3.4].
BASK IN THE SuNSHINE (OR RAInN!)
Tip #25
Let It Rain in Your Photos,
but Not on Your Camera!
Rain can put a damper on one's day, but it can also offer many
great photo opportunities. As long as your camera and lens stay
dry, you will probably soon discover why images of your pets and
45
rewarding. A resealable plastic bag can help keep your camera dry
(just cut a hole forthe lens), and if you are so lucky, a large umbrella
held over you and your gear by a friend or family member can
make a huge difference.
. Some go as far as using an underwater
housing device to keep their gear dry [w3.5]. A soft, clean cloth
for your lens, or even better, a package of photo wipes such as
Pec-Pads [w3.6], stored in a small plastic bag can be invaluable for
keeping your lenses clean and dry.
I took this photo of a little Chihuahua named Rosco one evening
at about 11 P.M. in June for the AKC Gazette's "Dog Day America
Special Issue." It had been a long, rainy day, and the pavement 
was an ideal background for him to strike a pose in his uber-chic
yellow raincoat.
"I'm too sexy for my coat!'
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
16-35mm/16mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/8;
Shutter Speed: % sec;
Lighting Notes: An off-camera flash
(camera left) about 10 feet from the
dog provided most of the lighting, but
the relatively slow shutter speed
allowed some of the ambient street
lights and house lights to play a part
in the overall look of the image.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #26
Might as well ... JUMP!
Capture Airborne Action
Outdoors
Photos of jumping dogs and cats offer a great opportunity to prac-
46
tice your reflexes, and capturing those moments in time can result in
some truly amazing images. Some ideas for getting pets to jump
high, or by just saying "Jump!" On a more technical note, the best 
wayto freeze action is by using fast shutter speeds ( Yooo sec orfaster)
and a steady hand (or tripod). That being said, some blur can be
interesting, so experiment a bit until you get something you like. It
worth the effort. Also consider using your camera's continuous
exposure (burst) mode. Many cameras can shoot between three and
eight frames per second.
I photographed this jumping Chinese Crested outside on a Febru-
ary afternoon at about 4 P.M. Lower vantage points like this help to
including the ground in your photos, either when shooting or when
cropping.
"Three ... two
one ... blastoff!"
Camera: Canon Eos-5D Mark Il;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
28-135mm/85mm;
ISO: 640; Aperture: f/5.6;
Shutter Speed: Xsoo sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight
(camera right) was the only light
used.
photo@Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #27
Use the Power of Scale When
Outdoors
The great outdoors offer us an incredible array of trees, mountains,
and man-made objects in which to frame our pets and other family
48
members. Like Tip 20 in Chapter 2 about including parts of your
home when photographing a pet, when you're outside you can also
include parts of your house, backyard, or other surroundings.
This photo was taken during an assignment at a client's home at
about 3 P.M. on a September afternoon. I let the pets roam around
and captured this image of her Rhodesian Ridgeback enjoying a
glorious day in her backyard near some majestic trees. Today's
high-quality zoom lenses make it easier to shoot at a number of
different zoom levels, whether the lens is built into your camera or
removable.
"I'm so relaxed, I
might just have to
recite a haiku!"
Camera: Canon Eos-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
16-35mm/16mm;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/3.5; 
Shutter Speed: Ya sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight
provided most of the lighting, and the
trees helped provide the dappled
li ghting effect.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
BASK IN THE SuNSHINE (OR RAInN!)
Tip #28
Let It Snow, Then Capture
Your Pets In and Around It!
Snow can be incredibly beautiful, but all too oten we keep our
cameras inside when we're outside in the snow with our pets and
other family and friends. Some snowy photo ideas include: close-
49
ups of a dog's whiskers covered with tiny icicles; photos of a family
wearing the same style of sweater as their lap dog; and a dog and
a child on a sled with snow-covered mountains in the background.
Most camera meters treat everything as if it is medium gray, so if
your camera has the capability, set the exposure compensation to
   os   o   t  t 
exposures [w3.8]. If your camera has a highlight alert feature that
makes the blown-out areas blink on your LCD screen, enabling it
can help to let you know when the snow or sky is overexposed
[w3.9]. Also, shooting in RAW mode (instead of JPEG) can help to
retain detail in these cases.
following page at about 2 P.M. one afternoon a few days after a
big February snowfall. I kept shooting as I zoomed in and out with
ng 'Kexo sem aunsodxa Au ieut ans apeu I 'laay Au pue sual Au
I didn't worry too much about what the images looked like until
time is limited, it's better to get the shots and review them later.
It also usually makes for some great surprises (much like when
shooting with film cameras).
照口：
③地
The Exposure Compensation
adjustment area on a Canon point-
S
+/-(Exp.)
and-shoot camera is circled in red.
DISP
photo @ Andrew Darlow
1..2+
Pet Photography
"What was that again about the yellow
snow?"
50
Camera: Canon Eos-5D Mark Il;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 28-135mm IS/28mm;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/11;
 Shutter Speed: %a40 sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight on a clear day was the only light used. A fill flash
or reflector can also be used effectively in this situation.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
BASK IN THE SuNSHINE (OR RAIN!)
Tip #29
Use the Wind to Your
Advantage
Whether Mother Nature provides it, or whether you create it in
some way, our furry friends (and anyone with some hair or loose
clothing) can appear as though they are flying, or just enjoying a
51
day at the beach with help from wind. Wind effects can be created
vehicle. Of course, always use caution when in any vehicle with
pets, or when using any electrical devices. Pets can easily trip over
just about any cord, and some fans can pose a risk if pets try to
get their paws on them.
This "windy" photo of a Chinese Crested was taken in mid-winter
on a very windy day. I shot the photo handheld, and held my
camera as steady as I could. Autofocus mode, a fast shutter speed,
and relatively high ISO helped ensure good sharpness in this
image and most of the photos from the session.
"Hey, who turned out
the lights?"
Camera: Canon Eos-5D Mark Il;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
28-135mm IS/28mm;
ISO: 640; Aperture: f/5.6;
Shutter Speed: %soo sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight
(camera right) provided all of the
lighting.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #30
No Sun, No Problem! Use
Cloudy Days to Their Full
Extent
52
You may think that a bright, sunny day with a clear, blue sky offers
the best lighting for outdoor photos. It's true that clear, blue skies
can look great (especially early and late in the day), but cloudy
days offer softer, more diffused lighting that can be very flattering
to your subjects. Even on cloudy days the sun will usually produce
directional light that creates soft shadows, so use the same basic
technigues described in earlier tips in this chapter. And of course,
there are all kinds of "mostly cloudy" or " partly sunny" days, which
provide for an ever-changing palette of light and shadows.
This photo was taken in a wooded area near a client's home in
(camera left) was just about ready to set, and it created a slightly
warm, soft, and directional feel.
"This is exactly
how my 'Dog of
the Year' statue
Camera: Canon Eos-D60;
should look."
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
16-35mm/35mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/2.8;
Shutter Speed: Yao sec.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
4
 Do Windows!-
Window Lighting
Tips
Windows can be found just about everywhere, and with some
help from the sun they can produce a beautiful quality of light
that can be used in many different ways. Another bonus to
window lighting is that pets often love to sit on window sills or
 ops." Following are some tips to help you use window lighting
effectively to make better photos. Many of the tips can be
applied to other situations as well, such as when you are shoot-
ing with electronic flash, or even when you are outside.
Please note: When you see notations like [w4.1], it means that a related Web link (and
usually additional information] can be found by visiting the book's companion Web site
at www. PhotoPetTips.com.
 Photo on facing page @ Andrew Darlow [see Tip 34 for image infommation]
Pet Photography
Tip #31
Use Modifiers to Control Window
Light Effectively
Windows with no shades or drapes can transmit light very nicely.
aut puedxa oi shuibuey mopuim asn ot srem Aueu ale alau ing
56
creative possibilities. For example, if you have Venetian blinds or
vertical blinds, beautiful dappled light can be produced very easily.
light changes as you make adjustments to the blinds [w4.1].
Depending on the weather, time of day, and time of year, the
intensity, color, and overall look of the light will also change.
Translucent fabrics are often used to filter window light, which can
help make the light very soft, elegant, and flattering to both
people and pets. If you don't have any window coverings, there
are other diffusion materials that can be used, including tracing
paper, sheets of white paper, shower curtains, bed sheets, or milk
acrylic (often called "milk Plexi") [w4.2]. Venetian blinds can be
purchased inexpensively and are especially versatile; just attach
them to a light stand, place them in front of your windows, and
you're ready to go.
I photographed this image of a client's cat in New York City in late
January on a sunny day at about 5 P.M. The lighting came entirely
from a bedroom window, and was modified by some fabric window
shadow on the foreground, and they held back some of the light
falling on the pillow in the background.
Camera: Canon Eos-D60;
"It's funny 'cause
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
it's true!
28-135mm/47mm;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/5.6;
Shutter Speed: %50 sec.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Dogs Come when
They Are Called
Cats TakeA
Message& Get
Back To You
Pet Photography
Tip #32
Shoot with a Window Directly
Behind Your Subject to
Create Silhouettes
Silhouettes in photos can be very captivating and dramatic. If your
58
main light is coming from a window, and if that light is much
can easily create a silhouetted image. Determining proper expo-
will result in a silhouetted image. Just be sure that your camera's
flash doesn't go off.
For those who want more control, if you expose for the highlights
and bracket plus and minus one stop, that should give you a good
range of photos with which to work. Also, try not to blow out the
highlights. You can always increase contrast later in an imaging
program like Adobe Photoshop. Be aware that flare on your lens,
which is usually caused by light falling on the front of your lens,
can reduce contrast and produce unwanted light streaks (though
it can also make for a nice effect). A lens hood (a.k.a. lens shade)
can do wonders to reduce flare [w4.3]
I took this photo of a friend's Cockapoo on a mid-January day at
about 1 p.M. The room was dark except for bright sunlight coming
through a few windows. I used aperture priority mode and set the
and using the recovery slider in Adobe Camera Raw, the highlights
overall look of the lighting, as well as the glowing highlights on
the dog's fur.
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
"Is this the talent
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
portion of the
16-35mm/16mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/10;
show?"
Shutter Speed: Y4s sec.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #33
Fill Window-lit Silhouettes with
Flash, Continuous Lighting
or Reflectors
To follow up with Tip 32, a silhouetted image can be modified by
60
adding fill flash, fill cards/reflectors, or continuous lighting (such as
a handheld flashlight). For example, LED flashlights are bright,
inexpensive, and very efficient [w4.4]. Just be careful not to use a
light that is too bright for your subjects' eyes. To avoid that problem
and to soften the light, a small piece of diffusion material (or even
a napkin or piece of paper) over the light can help a lot. Products
normally designed for flash units like the LumiQuest Big Bounce
can also be used with LED flashlights [w4.5].
In this photo, taken a few minutes after the photo from Tip 32, my
friend used a small LED flashlight with some diffusion over the light
to add the catch lights and bring out detail in the dog's face and
fur as I photographed her dog from different angles, positions,
and focal lengths (from 16-35mm).
"Do I have
anything
in my teeth?"
Camera: Canon Eos-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
16-35mm/35mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/2.8;
Shutter Speed: Y50 sec.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
IDO WINDOWS!-WINDOW LIGHTING TIPS
Tip #34
Include a Large Window
or French Doors for Some
Dramatic Looks
Continuing the theme of including a window in your images, if you
61
have a distinctive-looking picture window or French doors, try
outside compared with inside, you can get a very nice overall look
without losing detail on your subject.
For this photo of a client's Dalmatian, which I captured handheld
at a beautiful home on a snowy day with a wide-angle lens, I just
followed the dog around until she stopped to take a peek outside.
I took at least 10 photos as she adjusted her tail here and there.
Within just a few moments, she was on to her next adventure,
which is common with pets, so it's important to be prepared and
shoot a lot when the moment is right.
"Hurry, please! I see a
squirrel who wants to play.
Camera: Minolta X-700;
Film: Kodak T400CN;
Lens/Focal Length: Minolta 50mm; 
Aperture, Shutter Speed, and ISO:
unrecorded.
Lighting Notes: Diffused, natural light
from the sun provided much of the
light, but the inside lighting from
standard household bulbs and other
windows helped to balance the
exposure.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #35
Zoom In and Use Windows
Like Big Softboxes
One of the most visually interesting things about close-up portraits
are the range of catch lights that you can capture in your subjects
62
eyes. Studio photographers often use umbrellas or softboxes with
electronic flashes (usually made of a material with a diffused white
only produce a certain quality of light, they also produce catch
lights in the eyes in a variety of sizes and shapes. Window lighting
also offers this opportunity, and depending on how close you are
to the window, and at what angle you photograph your subjects,
you can produce some great effects. Interestingly, a related tip is
O xoqnos e oi adei (alqeaowau pue) zueisisa-ieay yoela ppe oi
simulate the look of a window. Just two pieces (about one inch
wide) attached in a cross-like pattern over the face of the softbox
can produce great effects.
mid-March at about 6 P.M. I moved in very close to her, and
cropped even closer, which made one of the room's windows
more clearly visible in her eyes.
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: 50mm;
"This modeling
ISO:200; Aperture:f/2.8;
Shutter Speed: Yan sec;
thing is hard
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight
work!"
provided most of the lighting, and a
few lightbulbs in the room added to
the overall look.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #36
Photograph Your Loved Ones
Relaxing in Bed or on a Sofa Lit
by Window Light
One of the best times to photograph furry friends and other family
64
members is while they are relaxing on a sofa, the floor, or a bed.
e oi buioe yim paledwoo aaey noA abeiueape Aewud e s,leyl
photo studio to pose for a photo. The window light found in many
bedrooms and living rooms is beautiful, and the standard sugges-
tions for getting sharp photos in relatively low light pertain here
(see Chapter 8 for more on low light). Also, it helps to let your
uool ae shop aui hauaym Auom oi tou moua sioalgns aldoad
toward the camera. It's important that people look at the camera
so that they look great, but the photographer or an assistant
e si siul 'aieladooo oi siad aut iah buidlay sauo ayi ag pinous
tip you can use in many situations (especially with babies and
young children)
For this photo of a client and her four dogs (three Maltese and a
mixed breed), the sun was streaming through a nearly wall-sized
window (camera left), and provided most of the light. Some warm
lightbulbs in the bedroom provided the rest of the light, and
podui e uo elaweo Au paoeid I laaf pue yool wuem aui oi pappe
so that I could focus manually and get the framing I liked. It wasn't
easy to get good expressions on all the dogs in just one photo,
so I ended up borrowing from a few images and assembled them
in Adobe Photoshop to get the results you see. That's a little secret
covered in more detail in Chapter 9.
Camera: Nikon D1X;
"We are fam-i-ly!"
Lens/Focal Length: Nikkor 50mm;
ISO: 200; Aperture: unrecorded;
Shutter Speed: Yo sec.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #37
Shoot Through a Window
or Glass Door from Inside
or Outside
66
Windows and glass doors can be great for shooting through. For
example, if you are outside your home looking in, you can photo-
graph your cat or dog on a window sill or ledge near a window.
Another option is to shoot from the inside with your pets outside.
You can even spray some water on the window or door using an
atomizer to create some interesting effects.
For this photo of a Basset Hound/Beagle mix photographed on a
May afternoon around 3 P.M., I was inside and noticed the dog
peering in. The hazy look that was being created by the sliding
glass door and the light streaming through it combined for a great
photo opportunity. Ater just a few exposures, the dog walked
away.
Open, please! I've
had enough
exercise for this
Camera: Canon EOs-5D;
week."
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm;
ISO:640; Aperture: f/3.5;
Shutter Speed: %ooo sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight
provided most of the lighting, but light
from inside the kitchen helped
illuminate the dog's front side.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
5
Let Sleeping Dogs
(and Cats)
 ... Sleep
There are few sights more adorable than a resting or sleeping
dog, cat, puppy, kitten, baby, or child (or a mix of them sharing
ydeboioyd oi sAem isabons I haideuo siyt ul iayiaboi a
people and pets relaxing or sleeping, and I also offer ideas for
lighting them effectively. And I promise not to be offended if you
doze off while reading these particular tips!
Please note: Wwhen you see notations like [w5.1], it means that a related wweb link (and
usually additional information] can be found by visiting the book's companion Web site
at www. PhotoPetTips.com.
 Photo on facing page @ Andrew Darlow [see Tip 40 for image infommation]
Pet Photography
Tip #38
Get Low, Get Close,
and Use Shallow Depth
of Field
A low vantage point, shallow depth of field, and close-up framing
70
like you see in this image are some of the techniques that can
much more interesting. I photographed  this  sleeping kitten
at about 6 P.M. in mid-March at a client's apartment in New York
City. The low vantage point and shallow depth of field (f/3.5
aperture) caused the couch cushions in the foreground and
background to be out of focus. The front cushion is particularly
significant because it leads the viewer's eyes to the kitten's face
without being distracting.
A tripod can help keep things sharper in these cases, and manual
focus can also be helpful if you are trying to pinpoint a specific
area, such as the kitten's nose. The 50mm macro lens I chose
is ideal for these types of pictures, and it creates an effect equiva-
lent to about a 75mm lens on a full-frame 35mm camera. See
Chapter 1, Tip 3 for more on lenses and the multiplication factor.
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm
macro;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/3.5;
"Beauty sleep in
Shutter Speed: Y%a sec;
progress."
Lighting Notes: Diffused, natural light
from the sun through the room's
windows (camera right) provided
most of the light, and some household
lightbulbs in the room added to the
overallighting.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #39
Share Your Chairs with Your
Four-Legged Friends
A pet relaxing on a chair (with or without a few companions) can
72
1 ing 'ieuo e uo buis ieo 1o bop 1noA ydeiboioud noA ajbue
especially like a straight on perspective, or from above. And if you
have a few chairs, a few dogs, and a deck of cards, you can recre-
ate a classic velvet painting!
For this photo of a client's Dalmatian, I photographed the dog
relaxing after a long run with her owner. I like a focal length of
images, and a zoom lens helps allow for more experimentation.
Another quick tip in a situation like this is to walk completely
around the chair, shooting from about the same angle of view that
you see in this picture. Then move the camera more overhead
when you get to the back of the chair since it will otherwise block
the shot.
Camera: Nikon N90;
Film: Fuji Sensia 200 Color Slide;
Lens/Focal Length: Sigma 28-105mm/
approximately 28mm;
Aperture, Shutter Speed, and ISO:
unrecorded.
"Was that a dream
Lighting Notes: I used the available
sunlight that was streaming in from
or did I hear the
large windows (primarily from the
word Lunch??"
left), plus a few lightbulbs that were
on in the home. The light on the chair
is a bit blown out, but I like that look,
because it makes the image feel as
though it is full of warmth and light on
a sunny day. The key is not to let it
blow out too much (see Chapter 3,
Tip 28, for more on that).
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #40
Look for Interesting Framing
Opportunities Around the Home
In Chapter 4, window-related tips were discussed, including a tip
about including windows as architectural details in your photos.
74
There are many other features found in homes, such as attractive
doorways, fireplaces, and staircases. Pets seem to often place them-
need to lookforopportunities and be there to capture the moments.
I photographed these two cats at a client's home in February at
ois aui all yonu shahenb buill aut ,buipene, 'w'd e inoge
lions outside the New York Public Library on 5th Avenue. The
wide-angle lens made all the difference here because of the way
it helps to bring in so much of the surroundings. Because I used
a zoom lens (16-35mm), I was able to get many different looks
cropped final version shown on the facing page, left side, is quite
different from the uncropped version on the right.
Cropping is extremely important, and every photo can be altered
notice that a little retouching was done to remove the bottoms of
the frames that were at the top of the photo. I also removed the
hinge from the door on the right. I don't normally do much retouch-
ing on my pet photos, but sometimes a little bit of work like this
can improve an image dramatically.
Camera: Canon EOS-20D;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
16-35mm/16mm;
"I think we slept
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/2.8;
through the
Shutter Speed: %o sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight
changing of the
provided much of the lighting, but
guard!"
additional light from lightbulbs around
the home and in spotlights just behind 
the cats helped add to the overall
lighting.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #41
Photograph Your
Subjects Stretching in
Outrageous Ways
Dogs and cats often seem to defy the laws of physics with the ways
76
in which they can stretch out and twist themselves up-—often while
sleeping. This black-and-white cat was very, very relaxed when I
carpet for stability and to get the low vantage point. These kinds
camera ready! The shallow depth of field (f/2.8) definitely helped
to enhance the overall effect.
There are many things you can use when in a situation like this to
help steady the camera when you are low on the ground. A folded
towel or t-shirt can work well, and a thick mouse pad is another
option because of the way it gives support [w5.1]. Beanbags of all
types have been used for years, and you can make your own from
a few resealable bags [w5.2]. There are also some interesting
including the POD [w5.3], Monsterpod [w5.4], Omnipod [w5.5],
and Cam-Pod [w5.6].
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
16-35mm/35mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/2.8;
Shutter Speed: Yo sec;
"Welcome to this
Lighting Notes: Lighting came
week's episode of
primarily from a single off-camera
diffused flash (camera left). Some
Cat Nap Yoga."
natural light from a large window
(also camera left) provided additional
light, and some household lightbulbs
added some of the warm light on the
cat's paws, as well as the warm
shadows.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #42
Get Some Bed Shots,
and Vary Your Aperture
One of the best places to capture pets napping and in deep sleep
is, of course, in bed. That could include a traditional pet's bed, a
78
combined cat scratching post/bed, or like in so many homes, any
bed that has humans sleeping in it! In Chapter 4, Tip 36, I included
a photo of a woman sitting with her four dogs in bed, and two
were sleeping, which I believe adds a lot of warmth and reality to
the image.
For this image of a Chinese Crested/Chihuahua mix (left) and
Chinese Crested (right), I was able to get a range of expressions
and angles as they both drifted in and out of their doggy dreams
(see Tip 43 next for another shot from the series). I shot this on a
beautiful spring day in May at about 2 P.M. The 50mm focal length
on a full-frame 35mm DSLR helped create the feeling that the front
dog is very close. She was about 12 inches (30cm) from my lens
The f/3.5 aperture contributed to the out-of-focus background
ing your f-stop, you can alter the depth of field dramatically in just
a few seconds. Chapter 1 has more information on using aperture
and shutter priority modes with many types of cameras.
Camera: Canon EOS-5D;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm;
"Please do not
ISO: 640; Aperture: f/3.5;
Shutter Speed: %szoo sec;
disturb ... unless of
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight
course you have
(camera left) from a large glass door
provided most of the lighting, and 
treats."
some overhead light from inside the
room helped provide some fill light.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #43
Capture One Pet Awake
and One Asleep
When you have a few dogs or cats around, there are bound to be
times when one is snoozing and the other is awake. This makes
80
for a nice contrast between them, as in this photo of the same two
dogs photographed in Tip 42. A related tip is to vary your aperture
so that you can get more or less of the scene in focus. I prefocused
on the left dog by half-pressing my shutter release, and then
look you see. Manual focus could also have been used, which
would avoid the need to recompose as I did.
Many point-and-shoot cameras have face detection that detects
in these types of situations. That being said, I like to be in control
of the focus points whenever possible. You really can't set up these
these, you'll start seeing (and capturing) them more. Chapter 1
covers some more related tips and links about exposure.
Camera: Canon Eos-5D;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm;
ISO: 640; Aperture: f/4.5;
"'May I go back to
Shutter Speed: %aoo sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight
sleep now?"
(camera left) from a large glass door
provided most of the lighting, and
some overhead light from inside the
room helped provide some fill light.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #44
Photograph a Person Petting
a Relaxed Dog or Cat
The act of petting a dog or cat has been shown in laboratory tests
to reduce blood pressure, and I think we've all experienced the
82
relaxing benefits that come with petting our furry friends. Although
maybe not quite as potent, pictures of people petting dogs and
cats can be quite relaxing as well, so consider taking some photos
when your human loved ones share their affection with pets. Pic-
tures taken from above when a dog or cat is in one's lap is one
option, and another option is to shoot from a very low angle as
someone pets the dog or cat on the head. You can also get a
range of great expressions, such as tail wagging, purring or
yawning, as you pet different areas. This can be hilarious at times-
like when a dog shakes one of his legs in a funny way when being
pet! For this photo of a Weimeraner, I captured him leaning in for
some love from his owner. I took this photo shortly after the Hero
shot of the same distinguished dog shown in Chapter 2, Tip 14. It
is amazing how many different looks and emotions you can capture
if you keep shooting!
LET SLEEPING DOGS （ANd CATS)
SLEEF
Tip #45
Gather the Troops on the
Couch and Utilize the TV
As they say (orat least, as I say), the more couch potatoes, the merrier,
and that certainly rings true for sleepy dogs and cats. Whether your
pets find themselves on a big couch, love seat, or a chair that
83
Feel free to invite your people friends as well to join in the fun.
Keeping the TV while shooting can help in a few ways. It can provide
a good amount of light (especially in the evening in a darkened
room), and depending on the size of the screen and the angle, it can
a common focal point to encourage the pets to look in the same
direction—as long as everyone is interested in what's on!
In the photo on the following page, shot on the same day as the
images in Tips 42 and 43, we politely asked some ofthe home's resi-
dents to join their "brother" Elwood (center) on the couch in front of
the TV. It was just after 5 p.M. and it had been a long day for every-
one, as you can tell from everyone's expressions. They all held in
there nicely throughout the session. Some retouching was done,
including reducing the redness in the front two dogs' eyes, adding
some catch lights to the black dog's righteye, darkening the cormers
aui pue poom uo isenuoo buiseaou! pue 'abewi at jo dot pue
dog on the left. Many of these retouching tips will be discussed in
Chapter 9.
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
"They don't call us
16-35mm/16mm;
Man's Best Friend
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/9.5;
Shutter Speed: %s sec;
for nothing."
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight on a
partly cloudy winter day was the only
lighting.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
"l'll flip ya to see who fetches the
remote."
84
Camera: Canon Eos-5D;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm;
ISO: 800; Aperture: f/7.1;
 Shutter Speed: Yoo sec;
Lighting Notes: Lighting came primarily from a single off-camera diffused flash,
placed slightly camera right. Natural daylight from a few windows located on the
right and left provided some fill light.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
LET SLEEPING DOGS （AND CATS)
SLEEF
Tip #46
Don't Worry About Looking
Perfect. Take Pictures of
"Real Life"
I saved this tip for last in this chapter because it fits in well with
85
the idea of photographing our pets and people friends when relax-
ing or sleeping. We're often conditioned to get "set up" and
"made up" when we know people are going to take our pictures.
In fact, many people don't even think of taking pictures unless they
go on vacation or have a party or family gathering. Instead, con-
sider taking photos of your loved ones on a Sunday morning in
their pajamas just after they've brushed their teeth and grabbed
(or fetched) the weekend paper, or late at night while watching a
movie, or in the yard covered with dirt. Most pets seem to always
be ready for their close-up, but they rely on us to grab the camera!
o s au ae asoui uaue 'no ot peads ae siuao aui 
should be taking pictures.
6
Where'd My Sock
Go?—Tips for
Setting Up and
Capturing Fun
Photos
I always enjoy looking at collections of photos based on themes.
A theme could be a series of images related to a topic like cats
who scuba dive, or a picture collection of firehouse dogs from
around the worid (l'm trying to stay on topic here). In this
chapter, I present a series of tips that read like themes or photo
had in school, I promise that these will be fun ... should you
accept the challenges!
Please note: vwhen you see notations like [w6.1], it means that a related vweb link (and
usually additional information) can be found by visiting the book's companion Web site
 at www. PhotoPetTips. com.
 Photo on facing page @ Andrew Darlow [see Tip 48 for image infommation]
Pet Photography
Tip #47
Photograph Your Cool Cat (or
Dog) in Some Shades
Sunglasses or goggles can turn any feline or pooch into an instant
star (at least in your photos), and the look can be absolutely hilari-
88
here are a few quick tips for working with sunglasses:
Use children's sunglasses or special sunglasses made for pets.
Aates aie Ajensn Aaut teut s! sassebuns td oi abeiueape au1
tested and they oten have adjustable straps with a Velcro (or
similar) hook and loop fastener.
Use a glasses neck strap to hold the sunglasses because they
usually have soft caps to hide the sharp edges of the frames.
Tie a rubber band or mini elastic hair band to the back of the
your pet's head. Just be sure not to make ittoo tight. In all cases,
checkthe glasses to ensure that they don't have sharp edges or
contain any glass—both can be potentially dangerous.
For this photo of Elwood sporting some very cool shades, we were
outside on a beautiful day in May just after 4 P.M. I had him stand on
a small table so that I could get a straight-on shot without having to
lie on the ground. I shot it handheld (without a tripod), and was able
to get a variety of different looks, including a number of profile
views. The sunglasses were made especially for pets [w6.1] and
Elwood didn't seem to mind wearing them. I cropped the photo
'ahew! eiuozuoy e se ious Aleuibuo sem l! ing 'anenbs e oi alay
"Be super cool by
being super kind
Camera: Canon Eos-5D;
to animals!"
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm macro;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/6.3;
Shutter Speed: Y%oo sec;
Lighting Notes: The sun is slightly overhead and camera
right, which created the lighting you see. No reflectors were
used, but the Fill Light slider was moved to the right about
one-third of the way in Adobe Lightroom when processing
the file to help open the shadows on Elwood's face [w6.2].
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #48
Capture Interesting
Juxtapositions Between
Pets and Artwork
06
As demonstrated earlier in the book (Tips 20 and 31), artwork and
other furnishings can be used in your pictures to complement the
actions and expressions of your pets. Some examples of art include
quilts, distinctive pillows, statues, framed photographic prints and
paintings. In this photo, taken at about 5 P.M. on a sunny day in
May, the cat was just hanging out on top of the couch, appearing
to be very wary of what the wolves' next move might be. I only
vertical  orientation  helped   make  the photo  more  interesting
because of the way the cat is tightly framed with the picture. The
os pauaddey lle t asneoaq auenbs Aoexa jou sem abew! leuibuo
fast, so I straightened the photo when I cropped it, which leads to
another tip: Don't throw out or overlook potentially strong photos
just because the horizon is not perfectly straight.
Camera: Canon EOs-5D;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm macro;
ISO: 640; Aperture: f/2.5; 
 Shutter Speed: Yoo sec;
Lighting Notes: Lighting came primarily from
afew windows located camera left. Some
household lightbulbs provided additional fill 
light. Keep in mind that if you take a photo
like this and use an on-camera flash, the
fash will probably reflect back in the glass
(like when shooting a flash into a mirror).
photo @ Andrew Darlow
"Ummm ... need a mascot
for your team, perhaps?"
WHERE'D mY SOCK GO?
Tip #49
Offer Some Treats and
Photograph the Ensuing Action
It goes without saying that dogs and cats, like their people friends,
91
love food, and some dogs will do almost anything for a treat. Dog
trainers know this, and often use food as a reward for good behav-
ior. Here are just a few ideas for using treats:
Have someone stand just behind you with a treat to capture
the dog's anticipation as you photograph the moment.
Throw the treat toward the person who has the camera so that
they can capture some action moving toward them.
aunideo pue 't! iab oi sdwn! iad anoA jeui os dn teaui aui mouu
the moment when he or she is in the air.
Make a line of treats over a specific area and photograph your
pet as he or she travels from location to location to retrieve
them.
Hide a treat in an appropriate toy and capture the fun that
ensues.
For the photo on the following page, shot on a cloudy day in mid-
treats, and then decided to capture the moment. I really like the
angle of view in this photo, and how the dogs' emotions come
out. The look was achieved with a wide-angle lens, and I got pretty
close to the dogs (about 20 inches (50cm) away).
Every lens has a minimum focus distance, which is the distance
from the film plane (or digital sensor) to the closest point at which
you can achieve a sharp image. For the Canon 16-35mm f/2.8 lens
I used, the minimum focus distance is about 11 inches (28cm).
Pet Photography
"These are the low-carb, gluten-free
treats, right?"
92
Camera: Canon Eos-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 16-35mm/16mm;
ISo:400;Aperture:f/2.8;
Shutter Speed: Ya sec;
Lighting Notes: Lighting came almost entirely from the available lighting in the
kitchen, which was an assortment of about six lights in different sizes. You can
see a number of the circular catch lights in the dogs' eyes created from the
kitchen's lights.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
WHERE'D mY SOCK GO?
Tip #50
Photograph Some "Pet Parts
On a number of occasions throughout the book I've suggested
shooting at different zoom levels (focal lengths) to expand your
creative options when photographing your pets and other family
members. This tip builds on that idea and covers the wonderful
93
ot yool pinous no sueau ieul shed ad buydesboioud jo puom
interesting parts of your subjects to frame, such as close-ups of
the nose, eyes, mouth, paws, teeth, or a curly tail.
Another related idea would be to just photograph a part of
someone, but at the same time, include all of a dog or cat in the
shot. For example, someone could be holding a dog or cat in his
from his neck to his waist. A good example of that can be seen in
Chapter 7, Tip 63.
For the photo of Elwood on the following page, shot on a beautiful
day at about 4 p.M in May, I placed a silky black piece of cloth on
the ground, and I quickly noticed his distinctive curled tail. This
shot was my favorite from the group. Having a few background
[w6.3]. I also cropped the photo slightly to keep the focus on
Elwood.
Pet Photography
"From head to tail, I'm sharing the love!"
94
Camera: Canon EOs-5D;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm macro;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/7.1;
 Shutter Speed: %oo sec;
Lighting Notes: The sun is slightly overhead and camera right, which created the
highlight and shadows you see. No reflectors were used.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
WHERE'D mY SOCK GO?
Tip #51
Get Your Feet in the Game
This idea is related to the previous tip, and it involves a little foot-
work. The range of shoes, sneakers, sandals, and, of course, unique
in this world makes the inclusion of one's feet in the frame with a
dog or cat both fun and interesting. It's easiest to do this when
95
sitting, but it's also possible to include your feet in the shot when
standing. In that case, a wide-angle lens generally works best. A
related option would be to shoot someone else's feet with a dog
or cat looking up at them.
For this photo of a yellow Labrador Retriever photographed in
direction and was rewarded with a smile. My lens was set to nearly
its widest focal length (17mm), which is equivalent to about a
25mm lens (in 35mm terms) with the camera I used. The f/2.8
aperture contributed to the relatively shallow depth of field.
Camera: Canon Eos-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
16-35mm/17mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/2.8;
Shutter Speed: %o sec;
Lighting Notes:
Lighting came entirely
from outdoor natural
light filtered
through the clouds.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
"Need a shine?"
Pet Photography
Tip #52
Stack 'em Up! Photograph
a Pet Sitting or Standing on
Another Pet
96
If you have multiple dogs or cats you may occasionally find them
sitting or standing on one another. As long as it is safe for everyone
involved, the situation can make for very entertaining and heart-
warming pictures. Little cats standing, sitting, or sleeping peace-
fully on the backs of big dogs are especially amusing to me. For
'Ke u! 'W'd t inoqe ie Aep Auuns e uo paydeiboioud 'oioud s!yt
the Pit Bull was just trying to get some sun next to the sliding glass
door when her Chinese Crested/Chihuahua-mix "sister" dropped
in for a little surfing practice on her back. Everyone (well, at least
the surfer) appeared to enjoy the experience.
I hung a curtain just behind them that I purchased from Ikea [w6.4].
It had some wrinkles in a few spots, so I did a little retouching on
it using the clone tool in Adobe Photoshop. I also selected the
fabric and applied a slight Gaussian blur in Adobe Photoshop.
which is a tip covered in Chapter 9, Tip 93 that can be used to
draw focus more toward the subjects and away from the areas you
blur. Many software programs have the ability to make selections
and blur selected areas. In addition, I lightened the top dog's face
by selecting it in Adobe Photoshop because it was considerably
darker than her body. I then lightened the Pit Bull's head a bit
because it looked a bit too dark, and I added a catch light in his
left eye. Last, I darkened the upper- and lower-left two cormers of
the frame very slightly to help bring the viewer's eye more toward
the center of the frame [w6.5].
Camera: Canon EOs-5D;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm;
"Hang ten, dude
ISO: 320; Aperture: f/10;
... then please
 Shutter Speed: Y2s sec;
get off me!"
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight (camera left)
from the large glass door provided most of
the lighting, and some overhead light from
inside the room helped provide some fill light.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #53
Look for Distinctive Tongues
(and Cheeks)!
It is, of course, bad manners for people to stick their tongues out
98
and can be very funny. I photographed this Rhodesian Ridgeback-
mix with his large, distinctive tongue and his Terrier-mix friend at
though his tongue was handcrafted in a men's tie factory! And
there is no shortage of tongue flapping in this book with Elwood
and some of his friends gracing many of the pages!
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
16-35mm/35mm;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/5.6;
Shutter Speed: Y2s sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight
provided all of the lighting, and the
trees helped provide the dappled
lighting effect.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
"Guinness Book people,
I'm waiting for your call!
WHERE'D MYSOCK GO?
Tip #54
Coordinate Your Dog
or Cat to the Background
A background can make all the difference in a photo, so I recom-
mend taking a quick walk around your home (including the bath-
rooms and outside) and see what areas might work well for this
66
approach. For example, bright orange 1960's décor can really
make a statement when your pet complements the look! Bed
sheets and bedspreads can also make for great backgrounds. For
this photo of a client's Dalmatian, the carpet and the dog had
similar patterns, but were very different in color, which made for
an interesting overall look. The overhead view and shallow depth
of field also added to the effect.
Camera: Nikon N90;
Film: Fuji Sensia 200 Color Slide;
Lens/Focal Length: Sigma 28-105mm/
approximately 28mm;
Aperture, Shutter Speed, and ISO:
Spots are the new
unrecorded.
Lighting Notes: Light was streaming in
stripes."
from a large window (camera right),
which created the strong highlights and
slightly cool tones. A few lightbulbs
were on in the home, and they added to
the warmth of the picture, especially on
the dog's head. No retouching was done
apart from some minor dusting. The
darkened corner effect was created by
the shadows made by furniture in the
room. lf only a few corners were dark,
I probably would have darkened the
other corners in Adobe Photoshop to
create the balanced look you see in
this photo. Vignettes are covered in
Chapter 9.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #55
Photograph Your Dog Chewing
on Something
This tip, and the title of this chapter, arose because a client's dog
(which you see here) decided that a nearby sock would make for
100
a great chew toy. I think that the expression is priceless, and it was
no easy feat for the dog's owner to get the sock back! Other items
that fall into this category include t-shirts, scarves, men's or wo men's
underwear (including bras), and perennial favorites—designer
shoes and expensive sneakers. There are always safety considera-
tions with pets chewing on items that are not considered safe toys,
so this tip is more a recommendation to capture the moment
quickly if it happens, instead of setting it up on purpose. Safer
options that you can explore include stuffed animals made for
dogs and colorful chew toys [w6.6].
gone, and because the lighting was low, the photo was not very
sharp. I did some sharpening in Adobe Photoshop, which resulted
in a bit of extra grain in the photo. Sometimes that's just fine
grain is not bad as long as you like the final look. Other retouching
done to this photo included cloning out a piece of a chair's leg on
the bottom left, and reducing saturation in the blue carpet and
wood table in the back left of the frame. To finish things off, the
edges were darkened slightly to draw attention toward the center
of the frame.
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
"They come in
16-35mm/16mm;
ISO: 800; Aperture: f/2.8; 
pairs, so can't we
Shutter Speed: Ys sec;
share?"
Lighting Notes: Indoor lighting from
household lightbulbs provided all the
light because everything happened so
fast and there was no time to set up
any special lighting!
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #56
Photograph Someone Happily
Holding Multiple Pets
Multiple pets, whether of the same breed or various mixes, can be
102
are held up for the world to see. Of course, use care when holding
multiple pets-it's not a contest. You can also have a few people
stand or sit next to each other, each holding a few puppies or
kittens for a more continuous look and feel.
For this photo of a client and her three adorable Maltese, she wore
a beautiful dress, and while sitting in her home in front of a fire
place, she held her dogs all together (and very carefully). I took
about 25 exposures of the group, and even then, I had to borrow
au lle dot suoissaidxa pooh iah ot sbeu! uanap may e woy
included some color correction to make the dogs more neutral in
color. Also, selective sharpening was done in Adobe Photoshop
to make the dogs stand out from the background, and to avoid
sharpening the woman's skin, which is another tip to consider.
Camera: Nikon D1X;
Lens/Focal Length: Nikkor 50mm;
ISO: 200; Aperture: unrecorded; 
Shutter Speed: %o sec;
Lighting Notes: The lighting that created the subtle
edge light on the left of the frame came from a
"I'm the cutest!
large picture window camera left. A bare-bulb
... No, I am! ...
lightbulb placed in a lamp (camera right) and two
No, I am!
fashlights added interesting catch lights and
dappled lighting effects to my client's face as well 
as her dogs. The mixed lighting (different color
temperatures) created a warmish glow on her face
and on the dogs when setting the camera to
daylight color balance. The daylight was about
5000°K and the lightbulb and flashlights were about
3500°K. (See Chapter 1, Tip 4, for more about color
temperature.)
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #57
Capture Dramatic Side-by-Side
Size Contrasts
When I think of size contrasts and pets in photos, Elliott Erwitt's
104
comes immediately to mind. In the photo, shot from a very low
perspective, a Chihuahua stands next to a woman with black boots,
and she is standing next to a very large dog. If you have a few
pets of varying sizes, get them together and shoot from various
angles to emphasize their size differences.
For this photo of Elwood and his "brother," a large German Shep-
hard, we encouraged Elwood to take a seat next to him. I experi-
mented with a few angles, and both of them handled the
assignment well.
Camera: Canon EOS-5D;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm macro;
ISO: 640; Aperture: f/8;
 Shutter Speed: Yioo sec;
"Hey Elwood ... say
Lighting Notes: Lighting came primarily
cheeeeese!"
from a single off-camera diffused flash
(Vivitar 285HV), placed slightly camera
right. Natural daylight from a few
windows located behind the camera
provided some additional light.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
WHERE'DMYSOCKGO?
Tip#58
Capture Pets In and
Around Water
There are countless opportunities for photographing dogs near
the water, including lakes, rivers, pools, the beach, outside in the
105
sprinklers on a summer day, or even in the bathtub. Watch your
to perform after they get wet. A clear screw-on skylight filter can
be invaluable in those situations to help protect your lenses [w6.7],
and some companies make special bags and housings for cameras
[w6.8].
Pet Photography
Tip #59
Use Simple Props to Make a
Picture Much More Interesting
Simple props—scarves, bandanas, hats, angel/butterfly wings,
pool/bath toys, and just about anything else that complements
106
your pets and their people friends—can transform an otherwise
 average photo into something far more interesting. Furniture can
also be a prop, and it works especially well if you keep the back-
ground simple and use a distinctive chair or bench. Many compa-
nies make chairs and benches especially for kids and pets, and
[w6.9].
I photographed this Pug puppy outside under a tree at about 1
baby pacifier in the dog's mouth. That's not something I would
recommend anyone do unless they have a very close relationship
with the dog or cat! The pacifier was new and clean, and I brought
it with me in a plastic bag. It's always best to clean any toys in
advance that you plan to offer to a dog or cat.
"Where did I sign up
for this?"
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm
macro;
ISO: 400; Aperture:f/8;
 Shutter Speed: %a sec;
Lighting Notes: Shaded natural
daylight provided all the lighting, and
the tree provided the nice dappled
light effects.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #60
Capture Some Interesting Profile
or Partial-Profile Views
This tip is one that is very easy to do, but it is often overlooked.
Look for opportunities to photograph the profiles of your pets as
108
they turn to look in different directions. There are full profile views,
partial profiles, and everything in between. It's especially interest-
ing if the dog or cat is looking at something or someone that you
also include in the photo, such as a cat looking at a dog.
For this photo of Eric Udler, founder and President of the Super
Pet Expo, and his Weimaraner named Chandler, the dog lookec
away for a moment and I was able to get this shot with Eric slightly
out of focus in the background [w6.10]. It was photographed in a
park on a partly cloudy day at about 1 p.M. in late December.
Here's another tip: Have your people subjects sit or stand just
'eaweo aui ie syool uosiad aui pue Aeme syool lad aut hl 'abews
it can produce a great effect. In Chapter 2, Tip 14, I also included
a photo of Chandler when describing a "hero shot." In that case,
a profile view was combined with a low viewpoint for a very dif-
ferent look and feel.
"My sidekick is a
nice guy, but I call
the shots around
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
here."
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm
Macro;
ISO: 400; Aperture:f/8;
Shutter Speed: Yao sec;
Lighting Notes: Daylight diffused
through the clouds in the sky
provided all the lighting.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #61
Photograph Dogs and Cats When
You Travel, Live, or Work in
Other Countries.
110
I've been fortunate to have lived, studied, worked, and traveled in
Europe, Asia, and North America. Just about everywhere I've been,
I've seen dogs and cats in homes, walking with their owners on the
their own. There are rules of etiquette (and possibly laws) governing
photography in different countries, so I recommend doing some
research about the places you are visiting, and if the pet's owner is
there, always ask permission. It's a good idea to write down the
translation for a statement like: "Excuse me, may I photograph you
dn awoo teui suoiisanb Aueu ae alaul ,e(eo jo) bop inoA pue
-ad si asn uoeoqnd jo adk reum pue sasealau lapou bupresa
mitted for such photos, so I recommend reading some of the
resources on the book's companion Web site [w6.11].
I took this photo of a neighbor's cat who often came to visit my
apartment near Osaka, Japan, when I was an exchange student
during college. I love these types of photos because they include
details that are very different from my home country, such as the
Japanese-style sliding windows and the hot water heater over the
sink. I also really like photos that are not posed, and that just
capture moments in time. Of course, you can use these tips wher-
ever you find yourself. Just look for scenes like this as you go about
your day—while cooking, cleaning, relaxing, traveling to work, and
while you're just living life.
Camera: Minolta Freedom Zoom 90 (35mm);
"Hmmm, how do I
Film: Fuji Color Negative;
say 'miruku onegai
Lens/Focal Length: Fixed-zoom 38-90mm;
Aperture, Shutter Speed, and ISO:
shimasu' in
unrecorded.
English?"
Lighting Notes: The natural daylight that came
through the sliding window provided much of
[Translation at
the light, and an overhead light in the kitchen
w6.12]
provided the rest.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Budweiser
7
Holidazed and
Confused:
Photo Tips for
Holidays and Events
Holidays and events are an important part of so many of our
 memories. Weddings, holidays, birthday parties, school trips,
and other events and celebrations all make for great photo
opportunities. In this chapter, I make specific suggestions
for capturing memories of holidays and events. And even if
you don't celebrate some of the holidays mentioned, there will
be generic tips throughout the chapter that will hopefully help
make your photos even more memorable.
 Please note: When you see notations like [w7.1], it means that a related Web link
(and usually additional infomation) can be found by visiting the book's companion
Web site at www. PhotoPetTips.com.
 Photo on facing page @ Andrew Darlow [see Tip 70 for image infommation]
Pet Photography
Tip #62
Capture Memories of Christmas.
Chanukah, and the New Year
The winter holidays of Christmas, Chanukah, and the New Year
(summer holidays in the southern hemisphere) are filled with
114
opportunities to take pictures of our pets and otherfamily members.
Photo ideas include:
the fireplace or in front of a Christmas tree or Chanukah
candles/lights.
A photo of the whole family in the front of a home decorated
for the holidays (day or night).
Photos taken around your local town or even in front of shop-
snowef aui se yons) sepoy aue bunnp seisp aois buid
displays at Macy's in New York City), can capture the spirit of
the holidays in so many ways.
I photographed this Boston Terrier, Cupid, just before Christmas
outside her family's home under some trees at about 1 P.M. See
Chapter 2, Tip 16, and Tip 70 later in this chapter for two indoor
photos of Cupid. The sleigh was the perfect size for Cupid, and it
looked as though she and her assistant were ready to give Santa
a helping paw or two (or four)! I also selectively sharpened Cupid's
face to help her stand out a bit more.
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
28-135mm IS/28mm;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/11;
"Mr. Snuggles, fire
Shutter Speed: Y25 sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight
up this bad boy!
shaded by trees provided much of the
lighting, and a single diffused
off-camera flash provided some fill
light. The off-camera flash also
provided the catch lights in
everyone's eyes.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #63
Photograph Your Family When
Watching or Participating in
Sporting Events
116
outfitting your dog or cat with shirts, jackets, or other gear specifi-
uwny hae so asn oi alge ag Aeu noa ioi waui sof apeu ai
esting is to have pets match the rest of the family on game day.
However, don't just limit the fun to professional team wear. Con-
sider making outfits with the same colors as the Little League
baseball or football teams in which your family participates, or buy
shirts or sweaters with matching colors. Then hit the field (or back-
yard) and capture the color-coordinated fun! Consider the low
light and action tips in Chapter 1, Tip 11, as well as in Chapter 8
for when you are photographing moving people and pets.
''d z inoge ie paisa asauuo sty pue ueu slut paydenboioud 1
ed sem bop aui yoyym u! juaaa Abe bop loopino ue te jldy u!
ticipating. I asked for his permission and then photographed both
of them from a number of different angles, and in both horizontal
tures the special bond between a man and his sports-loving pooch.
aie diay oi sara s,bop aut u! aas nos siye!l yoieo ayt pappe 1
more sparkle and life to the photo. I also selectively sharpened the
ay apeu 1 pue 'sasa sau oi uouane ao mep dl aoef s,bop
face a bit lighter and more contrasty so that she would stand out
more from the background.
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon
"J-E-T-S, Go JETS!"
28-135mm IS/28mm;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/5.6;
Shutter Speed: %ooo sec;
Lighting Notes: Natural daylight on a
clear day provided all of the lighting.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
166
Pet Photography
Tip #64
Photograph Your Pet with Bunny
Ears for Easter or Halloween
Easter is observed by more than a billion people worldwide, and
like Christmas, it is a religious holiday that in some countries has
118
a component to it that is celebrated even by those who are not of
the Christian faith. Easter egg hunts, coloring Easter eggs, and
exchanging candy are some examples of how Easter is celebrated.
The Easter Bunny is a part of that tradition, and because of that,
adjustable bunny ears are sometimes worn by people and pets
around Easter [w7.1]. Halloween is another time that bunny ears
are commonly worn, though you should not expect them to stay
That being said, the photos you can get of dogs or cats wearing
bunny ears is nothing short of hilarious!
For this photo of a Doberman Pincher photographed indoors
during a Kennel Club dog show, I asked the dog's owner to put
the bunny ears on him (always the best option if you don't know
the dog or pet very well). I really like the expression on his face
and how the ears sit on his head. I selectively sharpened his eyes
a bit to draw a bit more focus there, however, the focal point is
clearly on his nose, which I think is interesting.
This takes patience of course, so be persistent if you want to get
usable images. And if the dog or cat is very uncomfortable with
the whole process, I recommend trying something that doesn't
require placing anything on the pet's head.
Camera: Canon Eos-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 16-35mm/35mm;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/8;
Shutter Speed: %o sec;
Lighting Notes: Lighting came from a studio strobe light (flash unit) placed behind
a large translucent disk reflector. That produces both a soft light, and nice catch
lights in the eyes. A second strobe light was used for the background. See
Chapter 8 for more on tips for lighting with studio strobes.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
HOLIdAZEd ANd ＣONFUSEd
"Get my agent on the horn, Now!
119
Pet Photography
Tip #65
Photograph Your Pet in
Halloween Garb
Halloween is also a holiday celebrated by millions of people world-
wide. Many celebrate Halloween by dressing up in costumes, s0
120
consider making or purchasing a costume for your pets. Some
quick costume ideas include:
A ghost—a white costume can be made from a sheet, fabric,
or t-shirt.
A witch—a small hat can be purchased, and optionally, a black
costume can be made from a sheet, other fabric, or t-shirt.
Jack-o'-lantern—an orange costume can be made from an
orange sheet or other fabric, with cut-out black shapes glued
or sewed onto the fabric.
There are a multitude of pet Halloween costumes available in
stores and online [w7.2].
For this photo of a friend's black-and-white cat photographed in
May at about 4 p.M., I asked his owner to place a soft black top
hat on his head, which I adjusted slightly to make it look more like
a witch's hat. The top hat was part of a "cap and tails" outfit for
dogs. I cropped the photo fairly tight to focus on his expression
ou! auenbs Aara apnou! oi aey semle i,uop nok 'tey aut pue
of a costume or a pet. It's the overall look and impact that a photo
makes that is most important.
"You've got 12
seconds before my
next scheduled nap.
Camera: Canon Eos-5D Mark Il;:
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 16-35mm/35mm;
ISO:2000; Aperture:f/3.5;
Shutter Speed: %a sec;
Lighting Notes: Allighting came from daylight streaming through a large window
with vertical blinds that were opened slightly. The window was about 8 feet
(2.4 meters) from the cat, and it produced one catch light seen in the cat's right
Buuoio Ag dousoioud agopy u! pappe sem aha hal s.teo aut u suh!l yoteo aui aa
the catch light from his right eye to his left eye). Some additional fill light came
from the white carpet, which acted like a reflector.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
PetPhotography
Tip #66
Take Photos At a Dog or Cat
Show (or Related Event)
aui punoe play suoinadwo peo pue bop Aueu Aueu ae aau
world. Some are very organized, like the events sanctioned by the
122
AKC (American Kennel Club). Others, like The Great American
Mutt Show, are much more casual [w7.3]. I've photographed many
dog shows over the years, and forthose who have pets competing.
they can be a great place to meet other dog owners and to pho-
tograph your pets. Even if your dog or cat does not win a ribbon
or trophy, there are always a few good spots around the facility
where you can take pictures. The benching area (where pets and
their handlers get ready) is a great place because you can take
some dogs and cats undergo is nothing short of amazing!
expertise. These events include lure coursing and agility (weaving
in and out of poles, and jumping through rings). The best general
advice I can give for photographing agility events is to follow the
action and sports photography tips in Chapter 1, Tip 11.
I photographed this woman and her adorable Chihuahua-mix at
an event called The Great American Mutt Show [w7.4]. Despite the
show's name, purebred dogs are also welcome to participate. A
porting animal rescue and awareness, and this particular show was
held during one of the Super Pet Expos.
Camera: Canon Eos-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 16-35mm/35mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/6.7;
Shutter Speed: %o sec;
Lighting Notes: A single diffused on-camera flash provided much of the lighting,
but additional lighting came from the natural daylight coming from the windows,
as well as some fixtures above. The shutter speed allowed for a nice balance
between flash and ambient light.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
HOLIdAZEd ANd ＣONFUSEd
123
TILE
EAT
RICAN
NEED
Pet Photography
Tip #67
Take Pictures at a Pet Expo!
Trade Show
Pet expos that allow leashed dogs and cats are a great place to
get some unique images. One such event that I've been attending
124
and photographing at for years is the Super Pet Expo, held in
various locations throughout the year in the eastern part of the
United States [w7.5]. At many of their shows, pets on leashes are
welcome to bring along their owners (if pets could drive, I'm sure
they'd do just that!). Here are a few suggestions for taking pictures
at a pet-related expo:
 Look at your pet to see what he or she may be interested in
doing. If he or she seems to want to play in a specific area,
such as an enclosed dog run, take some photos of your pet
there.
If your pet finds a furry friend or two (very common at these
sion of their owners of course).
The lighting at expos is generally not very bright so the low-
light tips in Chapter 8 should come in handy when dealing
with this issue.
Capture photos of booths that represent causes that you
support and about which you want to spread the word. Many
pet expos (including the Super Pet Expo) have booths with
specific breed rescue organizations, such as Greyhound Rescue
groups [w7.6], general rescue groups like Rogers' Rescue
[w7.7], or animal protection organizations like the Humane
Society [w.7.8].
I took this photo of the Pets with Disabilities booth [w7.9] and one
of its mascots named Duke at the Super Pet Expo in New Jersey.
The organization does outstanding work, and like so many other
support to operate. By taking photos like these and sending them
to friends and family, more people can learn about organizations
that are working hard to help others.
HOLIdAZED AND ＣONFuSEd
I chose a low viewpoint for this photo, and I would not be con-
cerned if a dog or cat has something or someone in front of
is similar to what you might find in a newspaper. It isn't posed,
and the subjects look like they are hard at work, spreading the
word about their organization—and I'm pretty sure that they were!
I chose the cropping you see because of the way it helps focus
the eye on the main subjects.
125
Suppont
FTS WITH DISHBIUNTZS
www.petswithdisahiltis.ong
SPONSOREDBY
www.wheelchairsfordog.om
F.J.R.Inc.Website Dugn
"Yes, I'm that hunky dog on the
cover of our calendar.
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 16-35mm/35mm;
ISO: 400; Aperture: f/4;
Shutter Speed: %o sec;
Lighting Notes: Lighting from overhead fixtures inside the exhibition hall provided
most of the lighting, and some daylight from windows surrounding the exhibition
hall added to the overall lighting.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #68
Photograph the Action at a
Parade, Fair or other Event
Parades, fairs and other events are great places to bring pets as
long as they are permitted, and as long as they can handle crowded
126
situations. One big concern at street fairs and parades is that
pieces of food are often dropped on the ground as people walk
and eat, and some dogs become walking vacuum cleaners in those
udeiboioud aut pue saem bop aut st uosiad auo fl suoenis
or another family member acts as the food cop, you will have a
better chance of avoiding unpleasant "issues" later on.
Here are a few specific ideas for taking photos at these types of
events:
Dress up your pets to match the theme of the parade. For
example, for a St. Patrick's Day parade, dress them in green,
and for a Thanksgiving day parade, outfit them in pilgrim cos-
punob aui uo lay do wy ydebotoud isnf lo bop unoA dn ploh
in front of interesting color schemes such as a wall of t-shirts,
or in front of various food stands such as a big siqn that reads
"HOT DOGS."
event's banners and/or signs showing. New York City's San
Gennaro Feast, held each September in Little Italy, comes to
mind immediately with regard to this suggestion [w7.10]. By
having the signs in the photo, you will more easily be able to
recall where and when the photos were taken.
Camera: Nikon N90;
Film: Kodak E100s (color slide);
"Good thing I
Lens/Focal Length: Sigma 28-105mm/
approximately 50mm;
had my hair
Aperture, Shutter Speed, and IsO: unrecorded.
done yesterday."
Lighting notes: Lighting was entirely from direct
natural sunlight almost directly overhead.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
HOLIDAZED AND CONFUSED
Tip #69
Consider Including Your Pets
in Your Wedding
Carol Brady's wedding, dogs have had a difficult time getting on
127
the wedding reception is usually not the best place for a pet, but
both are options to consider when planning a wedding. Another
idea is to consider bringing the family dog or cat to the rehearsal
dinner for a few quick group photos. Some quiet photos with a
groom or bride alone with his or her dogs or cats can also be
priceless—and perfect for the wedding album.
If you look for shooting opportunities before, after and during a
how many satisfying images you will come home with. At about
noon on a perfect October day while in San Diego for a friend's
wedding, we came across the "Blessing of the Animals" ceremony
outside a church. After asking permission, I took a few photos of
this beautiful dog. I was shooting film and didn't note the aperture,
but it was probably about f/4 due to the shallow depth of field.
Pet Photography
Tip #70
Take a Few Valentine's Day
Photographs and Create Your
Own Cards
Valentine's Day is celebrated by hundreds of millions of people
128
worldwide, and the history of St. Valentine and Valentine's Day is
very interesting [w7.11]. The color red is a symbol of love and the
predominant color of Valentine's Day, so consider dressing up
your dog or cat in something red (even a red scarf or boa will do).
Like the photo in Tip 16 in Chapter 2, I photographed this Boston
Terrier named Cupid inside her home for a full-page feature in a
magazine's February issue. I photographed her from a few dis-
tances with a fixed-focal length 50mm lens, and this was the one
that was chosen. This photo was also used for a number of cards
that I printed for the dog's "mom" using an inkjet printer and
inkjet-compatible prescored papers. She then distributed the cards
to friends and family around Valentine's Day and at other times.
There are many fantastic inkjet- and laser-compatible prescored
papers for making cards, or you can make your own by printing.
cutting, scoring, and folding them [w7.12].
"Won't you be
mine?"
Camera:Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm;
ISO: 800; Aperture: f/3.5;
Shutter Speed: %s sec;
Lighting Notes: Most of the lighting
came from two small off-camera flash
units, which created the two catch
lights seen in the dog's eyes. Some
additional fill light came from a large
picture window.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
8
Barkness on the
Edge of Town:
Low-Light and Creative
Lighting Tips
Photography is all about capturing light, and throughout the
book I've covered various lighting tips for photographing pets by
describing the lighting used. In this chapter, I present tips for
getting better photos in dark and low-light situations with differ-
ent types of cameras, and for lighting with flash units, whether
the flash is built into the camera or separate. To delve deeper,
there are many books and Web sites that cover creative lighting.
including camera-specific books that go over the nitty-gritty of
exactly which buttons to press on your specific camera and/or
flash unit, and where they are located [w1.26]. And of course,
there's the user's manual, which always makes for exciting reading!
Please note: Wwhen you see notations like [w8.1], it means that a related Wweb link (and
usually additional information] can be found by visiting the book's companion vweb site
at www. PhotoPetTips.com.
 Photo on facing page @ Andrew Darlow [see Tip 80 for image infommation]
Pet Photography
Tip #71
Shoot in RAW Mode for
Best Results
that I added it as the first tip in this chapter. When you use your
132
camera's RAw capture mode, you can edit your images much
more effectively because the RAW files retain more information
and generally exhibit less noise at the same ISOs compared with
shooting in other modes, such as JPEG or TIFF. In fact, you may
be surprised how a very dark or contrasty photo can be adjusted
and look great because you shot it in RAW mode. That being said,
people understandably like the convenience of being able to just
take pictures and upload them quickly to a blog or site like Face-
book.com or Flickr.com. Others just want to bring their media
having to process RAw files through a special application.
Whatever options you choose, it's really about selecting and using
a system that allows you to make photos that you can share with
friends, family, and future generations.
For this photo of a client's cat, photographed in front of a window,
u Aem awes aul ious uaag si pey pasaia aq oi alqeun pue
JPEG mode. By shooting in RAW, I was able to retain detail in
both the highlights and shadows by making some adjustments
in a RAw file-processing application (in this case, I used Adobe
Photoshop Lightroom). For situations when there is a very wide
the highlights and once for the shadows), then combine the photos
in Photoshop or another application, as described in Chapter 9.
Tip 95.
BARKNESSON THEEDGEOF TOWN
"I hope you know we just went into
overtime."
133
Camera: Nikon D300;
Lens/FocalLength:Nikkor24-70mm/70mm;
ISO: 640; Aperture: f/5;
Shutter speed: %2s sec;
Lighting Notes: Lighting came from a combination of daylight from a large window,
as well as a small flash unit (Nikon SB-900) shot into a 40-inch-diameter (102-cm)
Lastolite All In One Umbrella (camera right, and fitted with its white insert). That
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #72
Choose Higher ISOs with or
without Flash, but Consider
the Noise
134
When you shoot in relatively low-light situations and turn off your
flash, many creative options are possible. However, unless you
have a tripod and your subjects don't move, you need to find a
cially when photographing active subjects like dogs and cats.
The key is not to adjust your ISO so high that your photos contain
excessive noise. You canj
at your photos at a few different zoom levels, as well as in prints.
There are also some software programs that can effectively help
to reduce noise [w8.1]. The tips related to action and sports pho-
uh-mol oi padde ag osie ueo 'll dl 'l saideu u! Aydeibot
el apeu aq ue stuaisnpe Aueu yonou pua deboioud
to RAw files, such as color temperature settings, it is important to
choose your ISO wisely in the camera before you shoot. Also, even
when using a flash unit, it's a good idea to choose an ISO that is
not too low so that your flash doesn't have to work as hard (this is
less power, your flash should refresh faster. Waiting for a flash to
from your subjects.
Displayed here are a few of the flash
options for the Canon PowerShot SD790
国专活
dligital camera. In this camera's Manual
(M) or ScN (scene) modes you have the
following three options (displayed from
left to right): Auto flash (the camera
Off
engages the flash if it thinks it needs it);
MENU Settings...
DISP.
Flash on (very useful for fill flash as
described in Tip 33); and Flash off (as
described in Tip 73).
photo @ Andrew Darlow
BARKNESS ON THE EDGE OF TOWN
Tip #73
Turn the Flash Off in
Certain Situations for More
Natural-Looking Photos
Most people set their camera to automatic mode and trust it to
135
expose scenes acceptably. But in many situations, it's far better to
turn your flash off and use a few techniques for getting more
natural-looking pictures of your pets and other family members.
  e   r m ia s ) s 
dieus e aonpoid oi laiaw s,eaweo aut oi yuep oot steadde bunyel
photo, the camera will either cause the flash to fire, or it will
engage the pop-up flash to let you know that it is about to fire
when you press the shutter release. This is especially important
with camera phones, as discussed in Chapter 1, Tip 1.
As I mentioned in Tip 72, the first place to start when you want to
take pictures in a low-light situation without the flash is by setting
your camera's ISO to the lowest value that allows you to get the
types of pictures you want, with a level of noise that you find com-
pue podui e aaey noA j! ool osl se mol se aq Aew teul 'alqeio
are shooting static objects, or as high as ISO 3000 if you want to
freeze action in certain low-light situations. Then turn off your flash
(on most point-and-shoot cameras, look for a lightning bolt icon
-pue-uiod awos (! ybnouui oh au!l e aas nos jun h! ssaud pue
shoot cameras won't let you turn off the flash when the camera is
in auto mode, so you may need to go into the menu to turn off
auto mode, and then the flash. For DSLRs with a pop-up flash,
check your camera's manual to see how to best disable it. Manual
mode is also an option in these cases.
Below are suggestions for situations when you'll probably want to
turn off your camera's flash:
When you have a large window, mirror, or glass in front of your
subjects, because the flash will create a starburst effect.
When you want to capture the ambient light in the background
(especially if the background is far away), like at a concert or
from the stands at a dog or cat show.
PetPhotography
Any time you want to capture the look of the light you see in
front of you. Examples of lights you can use include overhead
lights, flashlights, or even car headlamps. Most modern digital
cameras have a live-view LCD or live-view option, so seeing a
good approximation of what you are going to get on a 2- or
3-inch screen is a big plus.
136
or other light on your subject and moving it as you expose the
image. I used this technique in Chapter 6, Tip 56, to create a
dappled light look, as well as Chapter 4, Tip 33. You will almost
always want to place your camera on a tripod so that you can set
usually the best option when using this technique. Just keep in
mind that anyone who moves will be blurred if the shutter speed
is not fast enough [w8.2].
I took this photograph of a client's Maltese resting in a very nicely
decorated home in New York City at about 4 P.M. in May. The sun-
light streaming in from the windows of the home was magnificent,
and I really like how the light falls on the chair and furniture. The
dog is relaxing in the shade under the table, and definitely looks
like he's at home.
BARKNESS ON THE EDGE OF TOWN
Tip #74
Choose Backgrounds and
Place Them a Proper Distance
from Your Subjects
Using backgrounds such as muslin, set paper (a.k.a. seamless),
137
artificial silk, and canvas can help make your photos look as though
they were photographed in a professional studio. There are hun-
dreds of options for backgrounds, from inexpensive curtains from
a store like Ikea (see Chapter 6, Tip 52, for an example) to hand-
painted canvas with intricate designs [w8.3].
The distance you choose from your subjects to the background is
important. Generally, more distance is better, which may require
the use of a separate light or two just for the background. Advan-
tages of more distance from subject to background are that you
aeu ag ueo h! pue 'sialans aue woy Aiuapuadapu! h tubi ue
to go out of focus so that any defects or unwanted creases are
held steamer [w8.4]
I photographed this lovely Papillion (p. 138) at about 4 P.M. on a
clear day in March. The background was a light-brown, hand-
painted muslin, and it was hanging about six feet behind the table.
I really like the way it contrasts with the soft red fabric that's on
the table. The dog's face and body were selectively sharpened
and some cloning was done on the background in Adobe Pho-
toshop to reduce some of the lines and wrinkles.
"I proclaim this my
Camera: Nikon D1X;
Lens/Focal Length: Nikkor 50mm;
spot from now on!
ISO: 200; Aperture: unrecorded;
Shutter Speed: Ys sec;
Lighting Notes: The lighting for this
image is coming almost entirely from
the windows. A few lightbulbs inside
the home add to the warm tone of the
image.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
"Too happy-go-lucky? I'l!
work on that."
138
Camera: Canon Eos-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 16-35mm/33mm;
ISo: 200; Aperture:f/6.7;
Shutter Speed: % sec;
Lighting Notes: A single flash unit (studio monolight strobe) with a 40-inch
translucent white circular reflector in front of it, placed about 4 feet from the
subject, provided most of the lighting on the dog. A second studio monolight
provided lighting for the background, which was about six feet behind the dog.
            
white reflector card was placed camera left, just out of the frame.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
BARKNESS ON THE EDGE OFTOWN
Tip #75
Use a Tripod or Monopod
in Low-Light Situations
A tripod (and in some cases, a monopod) can be an invaluable
tool for any photographer. I covered tripod-related tips in Chapter
2, Tip 21. In addition to stabilizing cameras, tripods can also serve
139
as light stands, reflector holders, or background stands, and many
tripods have quick-release plates that you can attach to your
camera. When you are ready to use the tripod, the plate quickly
attaches to the tripod and you're good to go.
A related tip is to bring a bubble level with you when you use a
tripod to make sure that the horizon is straight. Some levels have
a hot shoe adapter that can be inserted in the camera's hot shoe.
Hot shoes are the small brackets located on top of many DSLRs,
video cameras and some point-and-shoot cameras. They are nor-
mally reserved for on-camera flash or continuous lighting units
[w8.5]. By keeping things level, portraits and landscape images will
be easier to process later on.
One of the best uses for a tripod is to set up a scene much like
the director of a film would. First prefocus using manual focus (or
use autofocus if your camera has no manual focus option), and
then stand next to the camera as you watch the action through
your eyes instead of having to constantly look through the view-
keep things tack-sharp.
Shown here (left) is a Bogen/Manfrotto 3265 Grip Action Ball Head. On the right is
a Canon DsLR with a matching quick release plate in the camera's tripod socket.
Circled in red is a built-in bubble level, and circled in green is an adjustable
"locating pin" that allows you to keep the quick release plate in more securely on
cameras that accommodate it. It can be unscrewed until it does not show for
cameras that have no locating pin socket. In the center of the quick release plate
camera without having to use a coin (like many other quick release plates).
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #76
Use a large softbox, umbrella,
or a reflector with a flash or
continuous light for effective
ighting
140
A large softbox, umbrella, or reflector (about 2 × 3 feet—61 x
91cm—or larger) with either a flash head or continuous-lighting
fixture inside can produce a beautiful soft light, similar to diffused
window light. Alternatively, a large disc reflector (about 24-50
inches—61-127cm—in diameter) can be placed in front of a small
flash unit such as those made by Canon, Nikon, Sigma, or Vivitar
to produce a similar light [w8.6]. Alternatively, a photo umbrella
can be placed in front of the subject and light can be reflected
into it to produce a very attractive light, usually with very distinc-
tive-looking catch lights due to the metal weblike construction of
most umbrellas.
There are hundreds of lighting units available. I've put together a
list of some popular brands and accessories on the book's com-
panion Web site [w8.7]. Another quick tip to remember is that
assist light that can help you focus faster in just about any lighting
condition.
The distance you place the softbox, umbrella, or translucent reflec-
tor from your subjects will affect the following:
How hard or soft the shadows are. The closer you move the
softbox to your subject, the softer the shadows will be. Depend-
ing on what height and angle you choose (side lighting, or
light placed directly in front of your subjects), the look of the
light and shadows will be very different.
How wide the coverage of the light will be.
The size and shape of the catch lights. You can use tape to
create the look of a window by putting a few pieces in a tic-
tac-toe pattern over a softbox. You can also place a black
circular mask over a square light box (or make one with gaffer
tape) if you want the catch lights to be round [w8.8].
BARKNESS ON THE EDGE OF TOWN
I photographed this distinguished-looking feline at a client's home
at about in 3 P.M. in April. The cat was resting on a rug, so I decided
to use a very simple but effective lighting technique. I placed a
40-inch-diameter (102-cm) Lasolite All In One Umbrella (camera
right, and fitted with its white insert) on the ground about 4 feet
(120cm) from the cat and used a Nikon SB-900 Speedlite unit off-
camera, aimed toward the umbrella to create the not-too-hard, yet
not-too-soft, lighting. The low perspective offers a very interesting
141
view of the cat, rug, and background. Had I moved the light closer.
the shadows would have been a bit softer.
'Did you catch last night's Animal Planet
special?"
Camera: Nikon D300;
Lens/Focal Length: Nikkor 24-70mm/24mm;
ISO: 640; Aperture: f/13;
Shutter Speed: Yi2s sec.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
PetPhotography
142
That's me on the floor directing the supermodel. The lens shade helped to
increase contrast in the image and reduced the chance of flare from the light
hitting the lens. A "gobo" or some light-blocking material could have been placed
between my lens and the flash unit, and it would have done the same thing.
However,thatwould havemadeit difficultformetoadjust theflashunit from shot
to shot as I reviewed the images on the camera's LcD.
photo by Paul Kessel
BARKNESS ON THE EDGE OF TOWN
LL# d!1
Determine What Flash Mode to
Choose on Your Camera
As discussed in Chapter 1, Tip 5, many point-and-shoot and DSLR
low-light situations. One that is particularly helpful is called slow
143
sync flash mode. On some cameras, it is called night scene or night
them, but they vary from camera to camera, so check your manual.
When you use night scene or night portrait mode, the camera will
fire the flash, but will keep the shutter open for longer than it would
if you set it to auto mode. This longer exposure time will allow for
some ambient light from the background of a city or room to be
captured, which usually results in more natural-looking flash expo-
sures. However, it is important to hold the camera steady or place
it on a tripod so that your backgrounds are not blurred. The photo
in Tip 80 is an example of this technique, but I photographed it
anus 'ysel eaweo-ho ue pue apow lenuew s,eaweo Au buisn
because it allows you to choose how long the shutter will stay
open. Mixing that with flash can be tricky, but today's Through The
Lens (TTL) flash systems make it much easier. In Chapter 3, Tip 23,
I discussed fill flash, which is another way to improve your photos,
as well as your overall creative options.
Some cameras also have a long-exposure noise-reduction mode.
The disadvantage is that the noise-reduction process sometimes
can take the same amount of time as the actual exposure because
it employs what's known as "dark frame subtraction." For this
technique (and for most long-exposure photography), you should
also have the camera on a tripod for best results [w8.10].
I took this picture (p. 145) of a distinguished-looking white cat in
Kyoto, Japan, one evening in 1990 when I was out with friends. 1
used a 35mm point-and-shoot film camera with no special settings,
and because of that, the background is quite dark, because when
the flash fired, the camera chose a very short shutter speed (prob-
ably about Xioo sec). Even so, I like the way the cat stands out in
PetPhotography
the scene, and I show this image because sometimes a dark back-
make some adjustments to your camera using a night, shutter
priority, or manual mode, you can control the way your lighting
will look, instead of just leaving it up to your camera.
144
"Know any good
sushi places
around here?""
Camera: Minolta Freedom Zoom 90
(35mm);
Film: Fuji Color Negative;
Lens/Focal Length: Fixed-zoom
38-90mm;
Aperture, Shutter Speed, and ISO:
unrecorded.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #78
Use a Cable Release, Self-Timer.
or Mirror Lockup Mode
A wired or wireless cable release allows you to keep your hands
off the camera during an exposure, which can help to reduce
146
movement during a shot when your camera is on a tripod or a
stable surface. A self-timer is often more convenient to use, but
awi u! suawou yioads e ie pous e iah oi Asea se Aueau iou s
of 8-12 seconds), which is very helpful if you are right next to your
camera. Just depress the shutter gently, and in a few seconds, the
shutterwill fire.
Mirror lockup is a feature available on many DSLRs. By engaging
mirror lockup (often through a custom menu), you can reduce
vibrations inside the camera because the mirror does not have to
flip out of the way to expose the film or sensor. This can result in
sharper images when you have the camera on a tripod. I have seen
a subtle but discermable difference when using mirror lockup on
or other detailed work [w8.11].
release (or cable release) will engage the mirror lockup and the
second press will make the actual exposure. It's also a good idea
to wait 2-5 seconds after engaging the mirror lockup before
making your exposure to allow for vibrations to be reduced.
(a)
(b)
Custom Tiner
口
1506
Delay
1380.
Shots
3shots
Custom Timer
SETOK
MENU Cancel
MENU Settings...
BARKNESS ON THE EDGE OF TOWN
Tip #79
Reduce or Eliminate Red Eye
with a Few Technigues
Red eye (or green/purple/blue eye, as is the case with many pets)
can be very distracting in photographs. This problem is usually
147
caused when photos are taken with a flash in a dark environment,
and the issue can be avoided or greatly reduced with some of the
following techniques:
Turn off the flash and use some of the shooting and lighting
techniques described in Tip 73.
Separate the flash from the camera lens by at least 6 inches.
This is usually only possible with more advanced cameras, such
as DSLRs. Moving the flash unit off-camera is the best option.
Use a red-eye reduction feature. This approach is often not
very effective, and it can scare your pets if it uses an approach
that uses multiple flashes of light. The preflash red eye-reduc
tion mode is also famous for tricking people into thinking the
photo has already been taken, so you may end up with closed
eyes or expressions that you don't want.
Have your subjects look into a relatively bright light for a few
seconds before taking the photo. This may be difficult for dogs
or cats to do, so if you quickly illuminate the whole room for
a few seconds, then turn off the lights, this technique can help.
Fix the red eye in a software application (many can do this
effectively). This is definitely a solution, but it should be your
last option [w8.12]
(a) Shown here is the Custom Timer menu for the Canon PowerShot SD790 digital camera.
Many other cameras have similar features. It also controls single shot mode (shown as a single
rectangle), or high speed continuous shooting, which will allow you to take multiple photos
with a single press of the shutter button (shown as three stacked rectangles). Next is a 10
second self timer, then a 2 second self timer (great for when you have the camera on a tripod,
bean bag, etc. without a cable release). Last is a custom timer option, which, when selected,
brings up the menu to the right (b). In that menu, the number of seconds (0-10 seconds, 15, 20
or 30 seconds in the case of this camera) and the number of continuous shots to be fired, can
be set. If the flash is used in this mode, the camera will wait to shoot until the flash recycles.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #80
Use a wireless flash trigger both
for safety and to expand your
lighting options.
148
Wireless flash triggers enable you to fire a flash from your camera
without any wires between them. That's a much safer option com-
pared with having wires between your camera and an external
flash. Wireless triggers are available in numerous types, shapes,
sizes, and price points [w8.13]. They can be used with just about
any camera that has either a hot shoe or a PC terminal, but an
inexpensive adapter is needed if your camera has a hot shoe but
no PC terminal [w8.14]. The PC terminal has traditionally been
used to connect a studio flash directly with a wired sync cord, but
it can be used to plug in a wireless flash trigger.
Some  cameras  include built-in wireless  functionality  for  their
own company's flash units. For example, the Nikon SB-600
and SB-800 Speedlites can be triggered wirelessly by the Nikon
D70, D200, D300, and other Nikon DSLRs with no additional
equipment [w8.15]. Some camera manufacturers sell transmitters
that attach to the camera's hot shoe that can fire flash units wire-
lessly. An example is the Canon ST-E2 Speedlite Transmitter for
Canon 580EX Ii, 430EX, and 430EX Il Speedlites [w8.16]. Like
many accessory flash units, the ST-E2 can also improve autofocus
in almost any light
Other options for firing flash units wirelessly include built-in or
accessory optical photo cells on flash units. These photo cells
(a.k.a. optical slaves) can sense other flashes, and when they detect
them, they fire as well [w8.17]. The main problem with these is that
if anyone else has a camera in the area that flashes, it very well
palgeua llao oioyd aui sey ieui ysel au dui Aeu
photographed at about 10 P.M. in June on a building in New York
City. I used a Quantum Radio Slave 4 wireless transmitter and
flash unit (Vivitar 285HV) was diffused using a LumiQuest Big-
Bounce accessory placed on a stand about 10 feet from the sub-
BARKNESS ON THE EDGE OF TOWN
jects (camera left) [w8.18]. The shadows falling on the woman's
face were lightened a bit, and selective sharpening was done to
draw more attention to their faces, as well as the woman's hair
and scarf.
149
" hope Craft
Service has the
Milk Bones
again tonight."
Camera: Canon EOs-20D;
Lens/Focal Length: Tamron
18-200mm Di 1/38mm;
ISO: 800; Aperture: f/7.1;
 Shutter Speed: Ya sec;
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Y
The Digital Canine
and Feline:
Technical Tips and
Printing Advice
sieo ay!l leyiaboi ob je4t spiom omi a.e ,Ayde.boioyd, pue ,let:b!a,
:buipnpou! 'soidoi Auew sassedwooue Ayde.boioud letib!a 'deels pue 
using a digital camera to capture and display images; shooting with a
film camera and then scanning the originals; retouching images on a
computer regardless of where they originated; printing final works of
e uo yaded so wjl mau bundino pue :adai awos jo saiud e uo be
device and using it to make prints with traditional methods (for
example, outputting new negatives to make photo prints in a dark-
room). In this chapter I will cover tips related to the wide world ot
digital photography, presented in the following order:
1. Organization and imaging software options;
2.5
 Scanning and retouching:
3.  Black-and-white photography;
 4. Printing.
Please note: When you see notations like [w9. 1], it means that a related Web link (and
usually additional information] can be found by visiting the book's companion Wweb site
at www. PhotoPetTips.com.
Photo on facing page @ Andrew Darow [see Tip 98 for image infommation]
Pet Photography
Tip #81
Back Up Your Digital Files
in Multiples!
This is the first tip in this chapter because it is so important. Digital
images can easily be lost if a laptop is dropped, if a hard drive
152
stops working, or if a CD or DVD on which you have your photos
stored just goes bad. And the possibility always exists of fire, flood,
computer for a while, back up your photos to at least two external
devices (for example, a hard drive and DvD) and keep one of them
separate from the other (preferably in a different town or city). You
will have both piece of mind, and a better chance of not losing
any of your life's memories and/or assignments (if you are a profes-
sional photographer). Another option for a third backup would be
to use an online backup service (many are very afordable and
some are free) or a shared or dedicated server that you manage
yourself. Some backup services, as well as a number of books
digital asset management can be found on the companion Web
site [w9.1].
AzOwR
MoryPr
Sign Up
Log In
Hard drives crash.Viruses attack.Important documents get lost
Frightening newsforanycomputer owner.
LogIn
News
Mozy torBusiness（MozyPro)
Oo
SignUp
mole location.
Support
AboutUs
mozyhome
UnlimitedBackup
Only$4.95
permonth!
Get Started
tobackupyouroffice
MakeYo
ldaSaferPlace
Caption: The screen shot above from mozy.com highlights the company's Mac- or
Windows- compatible online backup services, including a non-business backup
plan for under $5 per month.
THE DIGITAL CANINE AND FELINE
Tip #82
Store Your Cards Properly and
Reformat Them in the Camera
This tip covers two important things: making sure your cards are
stored properly in a card case or bag so that you know their current
153
lof Aadod per anos aedad nor peui ans bueu pue 'sniens
shooting after downloading. In the days of film, it was easy to know
which rolls were new and which were exposed. That's not the case
with removable media cards like SD/SDHC and CompactFlash
cards. One good way to let you know that you've already filled a
card is to turn it over and put it in a separate place from the cards
that you haven't used yet (l learned that from Vincent Versace
when I viewed the online Epson Print Academy). All cards I've seen
have one side that has a company name, and another side that
has a black-and-white label (or it is blank).
There are many media card cases available, and I use a few types.
In the photo on the following page, you can see two of the card
cases I use with "new" cards (ready to be shot with) on the left, and
cards that have been shot but not yet downloaded on the right.
After downloading and backing up your files to a computer, and
after reinserting a card back into your camera, you should always
reformat your card in the camera (not the computer). Virtually every
digital camera has a card format option accessible through its
menu, though you may not find the option on some cell phones.
In those cases, consult the manual, or ask the manufacturer how
to properly erase or reformat a card's data.
tion that can be enabled after you've filled a card, or any time you
want to keep data from being written to or from the card. This
approach can be used in conjunction with the tip above (turning
over the card) for a second level of protection. For SD/SDHC cards,
to enable the lock function, just slide the small plastic switch down.
to a computer or other device, and of course, you'll need to move
the switch up before you reformat the card in the camera and start
shooting again.
PetPhotography
154
trade shows. You can find many inexpensive card carrying cases at photo retailers
[w9.2].
photoAndrewDarlow
THEDIGITAL
CANINEANDFELINE
Tip #83
Manage your cards and files
properly from the beginning
with a date-based system
155
cards to their desktop and leave it there until their hard drive is
filled, but that's not a very good choice. There are some very basic
llm peut sabew! pue spie epau anos buiziuebio oi sauoeoidde
help you to take control of where things are stored, and how they
are archived. Also consider that at some point, you will need to
make room for new photos on your computer. Having a good
system in place will help make that possible with little risk of losing
precious images later on.
The main suggestion I have to help reduce the problem of losing
images is to create folders for your image files organized by date.
Though not complex, describing the process takes a considerable
amount of space, so I've written an extensive, step-by-step article
on this process that you can find on the companion Web site
[w9.3]. This is the system I use, and the system that I've set up for
many of my consulting clients. I've also created a zip file with a set
of named and organized folders (for Mac or Windows), ready for
you to begin using to help you organize your new images as well
as your archives [w9.4].
1三口
GUILDela
[DCIMe3eagleMa
PrintFirais
[WetGalleries
This screenshot illustrates from left to right how the folder structure might look for
the date-based system described in the article on the companion site. You may
want to add, remove, or rename the folders depending on the type of work you do.
Pet Photography
Tip #84
Rename your image files to
avoid overwriting files
Most digital cameras produce file names with four-digit numbers,
156
and you generally have two choices: the camera's counter will keep
(known as Continuous or Sequential File Numbering), or it will
reset when you insert a newly formatted media card (known as
"Auto Reset"). For example, IMG_1234.CR2 might be a RAW file
name that the camera would produce. The problem is that if files
it can lead to problems, including possible deletion of files, because
you want to avoid this problem!
Some cameras add a random string of text to the beginning of
every file on every new card that you format, which should solve
the problem, but this is rare. Instead, after downloading your
dde Aue jo auo ui sat no bueuau puaoa i 'sabe
tions that have the capability. I often use Adobe Bridge, which
comes with Adobe Photoshop. Adobe Photoshop Elements also
has this capability. Links to file renaming tutorials can be found on
the companion Web site [w9.5].
When renaming, I recommend choosing the capture date followed
by a "_" (Key command: Shift plus the minus key) and the original
file, see when it was shot, and put that date in the beginning of
the file name. You will then know, while browsing through your
tured on 11/25/2009. Some applications even allow you to search
for text and remove it during the file renaming. For example, you
could have the "IMG_" removed so that your file becomes
"20101224_1234.CR2." Regardless how you rename your files,
don't use any spaces or special characters. Keep it to letters,
numbers and underscores like the one used in our example.
THE DIGITAL CANINE AND FELINE
Tip #85
Find the right software
options and learning tools for
working on digital files
157
digital files, starting from free options that come with computers
such as Apple's iPhoto (comes with all Apple Macs), to inexpensive
but powerful options like Adobe Photoshop Elements and Corel
Paint Shop Pro. Another free option to consider if you use a
Windows computer and shoot in JPEG is Picasa. Though Picasa
will view and process RAw files from some cameras, I recommend
other applications in Tip 86 for processing RAw files. Some online
printing services, like Shutterfly.com and Snapfish.com, offer a fair
number of image editing options to help you edit your photos for
online galleries, books, cards, prints, etc. without the need for any
additional software.
Of course, Adobe Photoshop is the "big dog" when it comes to
software used for retouching image files. And for good reason-
it's an extremely powerful tool and there are a tremendous amount
of learning tools available for it for free and for a fee through online
video- and DvD-based learning programs like those offered at
Lynda.com, PhotoshopUser.com, K
Kelbytraining.com, Software-
Cinema.com, and TotalTraining.com. Many of these companies
offer excerpts of some or all of their tutorials for free so that you
can sample the quality and content. A list of links to these and
other Adobe Photoshop resources can be found on the companion
Web site [w9.6]
If you are not ready to invest in Adobe Photoshop but would like
to start learning the program so that you are better prepared
fo Aueui saeus stuawala dousotoud 'apebdn oi suem no pinous
the key commands, layer controls, and other features of the full
version of Adobe Photoshop. In addition, Photoshop Elements
offers an incredible array of features including slide shows with
fantastic efects (including the ability to make a DVD with images
and music), downloadable scrapbook pages, calendars, and book
templates. You can even order cards with your images embedded,
design photo books, and send away for photo prints all from inside
the application.
Pet Photography
+
G
Kelbytraining
siga
e：81333-5000
HOMEBOOKSDWDs
ewhere?
158
THIS MONTHSFEATURED ONU
UNLIMITEDACCESS
DesignEfect
1999
Cerey Barle
199
PERYEAR
wthptosanever
WatchIl
CS4TRAINING
Porbronoswitn
S4
soreinfo
(a)
+
Gx
h://
rw.lynda.com/
Q-Google
Subscribe to a world of knowledge.
sofyourse
subscribe
lynda.com
about us
Learn by:Sje
Courses
Print Design
eTra
Learn
53275 Prmum
599onll
Pro Tools
25Monthk
subscrbel
trynow
Online Training
(247
Multi-user
Your Thoughts
?
Blogww
Videos about
Library
solutions
lynda.com
and
Wewould keto hear
winScr
fromyouincrdcrto
ucss who's Comingto
Dinner?
developmer
Subacrbe Now
enmore
Corporatesolutions
Podcast
日
e a viden.
Academic solutions
Jake the quick
survey,
Watch the lynda.com
subscribenow
It maly is gyico
podast lTns or RS
Certificates
Gift Subscriptions
Case Studies
Latest releases
of Completion
Get yourjustewas:fo
Bridge CS4:10 Things Designers.
leedtoKnow
Librarycourse
succeeded using
duratlon:1.17 hours
givetoday
lynda.com tutoriaisin
Tellusyourory
[b]
THE
DIGITAL
CANINEANDFELINE
htg://
softwareCINEMA
Unleash Creativitynizing
Watch>Learn>Achieve
HOME
Selet area to serch
159
AdobePbo
Prove
cinAdobe
MEMBERLOGIN
AndViowFREE Tutorial
Artices,event
RondProducg Reye
Din
HotOn
ndy Hufford
Mask IT&FinishIT in
ALLPERFECTPRINTTITLES!
PhotoshopCs
-Cnliaralion
20%OFFNEWRELEASE!-Inthis2
Print-Digital
ostdifioult in
ygagprejects
andaritig.The
WOW JadkDav
Offer voo Mayde
PSCS4,ACR5&LR2!
(c)
Screenshots of three popular fee-based training options that offer training both
 online and through DvDs (Lynda.com, Kelbytraining.com, and Software-Cinema.
com).Eachone covers AdobePhotoshop extensively,andIrecommend checking
out their offerings formany other applications.
PetPhotography
Tip #86
Consider a RAW Processing and
Workflow Application
This tip is related to Tip 85 but deserves its own space because
applications that can be used for RAw file processing and general
160
Am buol e awo ay (uawabeuew sasse e'y'e) uoeziuebio al
in a short time. These applications include Adobe Photoshop
Lightroom, Apple Aperture, and Adobe Camera Raw (comes
bundled with Adobe Photoshop). Lightroom and Aperture both
have trial versions available for download, and both have many
free and fee-based tutorials available. Adobe Camera Raw is an
excellent RAW processing application, but it does not allow for
extensive photo organization of files that are located both on and
off your computer as Lightroom or Aperture do. One important
item to realize is that Lightroom is available for both Mac and
Windows, and Aperture is available only for Macs.
As I did in Chapter 1 when describing different cameras, I've
written a lengthy article on the companion Web site covering many
of the advantages of using either Lightroom or Aperture. Each
program also has unique features that are discussed in the article
and on other Web sites [9.7].
The Lightroom Library interface is shown here, with the metadata search filter
feature enabled. As you can see, you can select from many different criteria,
including lens, labels, or capture date. The photos in this specific folder are offline
so they show a question mark next to each icon. That allows me to still search the
thumbnails, and when I want to access the high-resolution files, I can just attach
the hard drive where the images are stored. In some cases, re-linking files is
necessary, which is described in this article on the companion Web site [w9.8].
Photos In Library @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #87
Size down the files you send
via email and consider the zip
file format
162
As megapixel counts get higher on point-and-shoot cameras (and
even some camera phones), it is more difficult for people to open
large files. Even if you shoot JPEG and think that the files are not
your photo tries to open the file, they could be 20-30 MB in size
in their uncompressed form! There are a few ways to deal with
this. First, don't send RAw files (most people can't open them-
especially through an e-mail application); instead, batch process
them in a RAW processing application. A good size to choose fon
processing is 800 pixels on the long side with medium- to high-
quality JPEG compression. That will result in files of about 80-
200 k (kilobytes). Also be sure to embed the sRGB profile, which
will be an option inside the RAW processing application. If you use
AdobeRGB, your colors will probably not look good on the recipi-
ent's monitor.
Another option for Apple Mail users (comes free with all Macs) is
to just drop your camera's JPEG files into a body of a new Apple
Mail message, then choose small, medium, or large from the
bottom right of the message window where it reads "lmage Size."
The Mail application will then resize your images for you and on
resize a PDF file in this way—it will get corrupted, and you won't
be able to be open it.
This Apple Mail message shows an image about to be emailed with the window
that allows you to size down the compatible files (such as JPEGs) selected. Note
the file size readout on the left side.
Photos In emall message @ Andrew Darlow
DIGITAL
CANINEANDFELINE
The zip file format allows you to compress one or more files of just
about any file type and send them via email or through an FTP
server with little chance of them getting corrupted. The best way
to make a zip archive is to make a new folder with a name like
"PhotoArchive01," then create the zip archive using your compu-
ter. Macs have a built-in way to do this by right-clicking or Ctrl-
clicking on the folder and choosing "Create Archive of ..". Most
Windows Vista computers also allow you to make a zip archive by
right-clicking on a file or folder then choosing "Send to: Com-
163
pressed (ZiP) Folder." Otherwise, some Windows applications are
available including WinZip that will create zip files. To uncompress
a zip file, just double-click on it. Of course, make sure that you
know the sender before clicking on any file that you receive. A
that I've used successfully is sendthisfile.com
ReplyTo
Pet Photography
Tip #88
Use online galleries and
animated slideshows to present
your images
Sending files via e-mail works well, but for security reasons, many
164
companies restrict e-mail with attachments. Also, e-mail attach-
ments take time to download, and too large an attachment can
cause someone's e-mail inbox to fill up (a sure-fire way to get
someone upset!). Instead, it's generally better to create a Web
gallery or animated slide show and just send a Web link to the
gallery or slide show to your friend or loved one. Below are a few
options for creating a Web gallery or Slide Show:
Use an online photo lab/printing company. This option is often
free, and the companies who offer this service include Shut-
terfly, Snapfish and Kodak Gallery. Check each one to see
which one works best for you before uploading hundreds of
pictures. Also make sure that you don't make your images
available for viewing to the general public (unless you want
to). Each company handles the sharing/security of galleries,
books, etc. differently, and in some cases, the number of
images (or total file size) is limited. Once you are ready to share
you to send an invitation directly from the Website to your
contacts. Because of the high incidence of e-mail phishing
mou spuat pue Aiwef anor ial oi suem Aeu no 'sawauos 
ahead of time that they will be receiving a link from the online
lab.
Use an application that has built-in tools for creating an online
gallery and/or animated slide show. There are many, many
software options on the market that can be used for these
purposes. A list of many of them, including links to tutorials,
can be found on the companion Web site [w9.9].
THE DIGITALCANINE AND FELINE
Tip #89
Get your old negatives,
slides, and prints scanned
(or scan them yourself)
Most people have decades of negatives, slides, and/or prints in
165
shoeboxes, albums, slide carousels, and frames. Wouldn't it be
great to have your favorite photos from the past available in digital
family and friends via email, online galleries, and through digital
prints? Understandably, it can be a daunting task to choose which
cially if they are in negative form).
This is another topic that is very broad in scope, with many options.
To best describe some of the many ways in which you can bring
your archives into the 21st century, I've written an extensive article
options for do-it-yourselfers, as well as companies who scan prints,
negatives, and/or slides [w9.10].
I photographed the poodle on the following page Hasedera
Temple in Nara, Japan, with a point-and-shoot camera on a beauti-
ful spring day in the early afternoon when the flowers were in full
bloom. The digital file was produced by a drum scanner from a
small 4 x 6-inch (10 × 15-cm) color glossy print. A scan from the
original negative would have resulted in a file with more detail,
but this image looked fine even when printed up to about 16 x 20
inches (41 x 51 cm).
ScanCafe
How scanning works
 Screen shot from a popular
scanning service company-
ScanCafe Inc.
(www.scancafe.com).
Pet Photography
"If this background's too busy, I know a
great spot nearby.
166
Camera:MinoltaFreedomZoom90(35mm);
Film: Color Negative;
Lens/Focal Length: Fixed-zoom 38-90mm;
Aperture, Shutter Speed, and IsO: unrecorded.
and the bench that the dog is standing on is providing some fill light.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
THE DIGITAL CANINE AND FELINE
Tip #90
Adjust color temperature
settings quickly with the
help of gray cards
I covered the camera portion of this tip in Chapter 1, Tip 4. Assum-
167
ing you have a captured digital photo or scanned photo with a
gray card or other product designed for gray balancing in the
scene, you can use the gray-balance tool in almost any imaging
application to click on the gray area so that the software knows
what should be neutral. In a perfect world, once you do that, all
the other colors will fall into line and you won't need to make any
additional color adjustments. Of course, the world is not perfect,
so you may need to make some adjustments to either the white
balance, "tint" slider (if available), orother color adjustment options
once you set the white balance.
One good option is to use a photo editor that is nondestructive.
like Apple Aperture or Adobe Photoshop Lightroom, even if you
shoot entirely in JPEG mode, because you can make changes to
the white balance settings regardless of the file type. However,
RAW files will retain better overall quality compared with JPEGs
when making white balance adjustments. Once you make adjust-
ments to one image, you can quickly apply the same adjustments
to many other images if your imaging application has the feature,
such as Aperture, Lightroom, and Adobe Camera Raw.
In some applications, including Photoshop Elements, you can use
pling the neutral gray card with the midpoint eyedropper. Once
you've made those color adjustments, you can then drag and drop
the adjustment layer to other images photographed under the
same lighting to achieve a similar result in other pictures [w9.11].
PetPhotography
Tip #91
Use proper color management
and select sRGB or AdobeRGB
from your camera menu
The whole topic of color management can seem overwhelming.
168
The key to understanding and using color management is to first
understand that all devices, including your camera, monitor, and
printer/paper combinations, have a certain number of colors,
known as the color gamut, that they can capture, display, or print
part of color matching and proper printmaking. By making custom
profiles for our monitors and specific printer/paper combinations,
we can help to come closer in color between the different devices.
Also, it's important to note that every device must operate consist
properly. If one day you are working outside on a laptop in the
lou ae nos 'ssauyep jeau ui ae nof Aep ixau aui pue 'uns tybug
viewing your screen in a consistent environment, and you probably
won't get the results you want.
A common question that comes up oten is whether people should
set their camera to the sRGB or AdobeRGB working space (an
option on all DSLR and some point-and-shoot cameras). Ado-
combination has a very wide gamut, and your picture has very
bright colors, you should be able to print more possible colors
from images if you have the AdobeRGB working space profile
embedded and use proper color management. For those who
shoot RAw files, it really doesn't matter what you set your camera
to because you will determine your file's working space when you
export the files. If you shoot only in JPEG or TIFF, then it is impor-
tant, and for most people, I'd recommend sRGB if you don't want
photo lab or when posting them online. However, there is a good
argument for using AdobeRGB even if you only shoot JPEGs
because of the additional colors that you can retain in your file
you shoot only JPEG or TIFF with sRGB embedded and then
THE DIGITAL CANINE AND FELINE
convert to AdobeRGB, you won't get back the bright saturated
colors you've already lost.
As I mentioned, most photo labs expect incoming files to be con-
verted to sRGB. You can convert all lab-bound files to sRGB in
Convert to Profile > sRGB." Other applications also have this capa-
bility. In Lightroom, Aperture, or another color management-aware
application, choose sRGB when exporting.
169
There are countless articles and many books available on the topic
of color management, including reviews of and information regard-
ing different monitor and printer calibration and profiling hardware
and software options, the importance of lighting, as well as related
topics like whether to retouch and print in 16-bit versus 8-bit color
mode [w9.12].
On the topic of lighting, few things are as important as understand-
ing and controlling lighting at all times. Pictured below are a few
excellent products from SoLux. I often use SoLux Clip-On Fixtures
during my workshops to explain color temperature and lighting
options for display or proofing. Proofing essentially means check-
ing your work, and if you don't use a consistent lighting system
(including having consistent lighting in the room where you are
working), you will have a difficult time achieving proper color
management.
(a) The original SoLux Task Lamp
shown in three configurations. All
ship with a SoLux MR-16 bulb.
(b) Two SoLux MR-16 halogen
bulbs are shown here. The top
bulb is called the Solux "Black
Back." Its design eliminates light
leakage from the back.
photos courtesy Tallored Lightng, Inc.
Pet Photography
Tip #92
Check your image quickly
and effectively for dust,
dirt, etc.
170
If you've ever scanned your own prints, negatives, or slides (or had 
had some experience with the clone tool. That's because almost
any scanned image will have dust, hair, and other unwanted stuff
on your images. There are a number of ways to handle this issue,
including using a dust and scratch removal tool, such as the Dust
and Scratches filter found in Adobe Photoshop and Photoshop
Elements. A few tutorials that cover dust removal can be found on
the book's companion Web site [9.13].
Regardless of what tools you use, you'll need to check your image
effectively. The way that I've been doing that for years is to first
fll the screen with your image, then zoom to 50, 66.7, 100, or 200
percent in your imaging application depending on the resolution,
how detailed the image is, and how large you plan to display or
print the file. (Note that 50, 100, and 200 percent are also known
as 1:2, 1:1, and 2:1, respectively, in Lightroom and some other
applications.) Then, starting at the top left work from top to bottom,
Using the space bar in Adobe Photoshop and Photoshop Ele
ments, you can turn the mouse into a hand and quickly move down
to the bottom as you clean up the file. When you reach the bottom,
move the image to the left using the space bar so that a new
auop au,nos un ssaod syi readau uaul 'doi aue yoeau noa un
I then recommend taking one quick look again using the same
technigue at either the same zoom level or one zoom level closer.
THE DIGITAL CANINE AND FELINE
Tip #93
Sharpen with care
(sometimes selectively)
depending on the subject
Sharpening is a critical step whether you are preparing files for
171
display on a large computer screen, DVD presentation, Web page,
printed brochure, or fine art print. Properly sharpened images will
look much better than over- or undersharpened photos. Though
it may seem simple, this is a huge topic with many options, and
the article links provided should help you to better determine
which options to consider, and which options to try. For example,
in one article that I've written on the topic (demonstrated in the
photo of Elwood seen here), I describe how blurring parts of the
photo can create the appearance of increased sharpness in an
image [w9.14].
In this photo of Elwood in a "hero pose," I selectively blurred the
than the other areas of his face to draw more attention toward his
eyes.
"I wonder who Mommy
will bring home next for
us to play with?
Camera: Canon EOS-5D;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm;
ISO: 320; Aperture: f/11;
Shutter Speed: Y2s sec;
Lighting Notes: Lighting came primarily
from a single off-camera diffused flash,
placed slightly camera left. Natural
daylight from a few windows located on
the left provided some fill light, and much
of the light for the background.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #94
Choose an appropriate
resolution depending
on your output
172
The question of what resolution, or how many pixels per inch (ppi),
your files should be at their final print size is a common question.
I always recommend testing to see what works for your images.
print most of my work around 200-300 ppi at final size to inkjet
printers and continuous tone photo machines (like those found at
professional labs). However, 150-200 ppi or even lower has also
worked well for me in many cases, especially when making larger
prints. Your file's image quality, plus the paper, printer, amount of
sharpening, and final 
l output size, will all contribute to the final
quality of your prints
You can check just about any file size quickly in a variety of imaging
programs. For example, you can choose "File > New" in Adobe
ppi, and color mode (for example, grayscale, RGB, 8-bit or 16-bit,
doi aul ie leadde saiqebau ui azis all inos aas lm nor pue (oia
of the box.
FileDimensions
RES30
RES40
RES50
RES80
100PPI
150PPI
200PP1
23CPPI
269PP1
32CPP1
400PPI
650PPI
762PP1
(below)
5mm(24mmx35mm)
40k
157k
203k
284k
402k
6Z8x
1.815
2.49
4.4325
6.922
17.7
123张
5.0625
6.9525
12.375
19.35
49.425
6cm(2.25"sq.
653k
847.5
6.7425
9.3
16.5
25.725
65.925
191k
429
762k
982.5
1.3575
1.905
2.9775
7.875
10.8
19.2
30.07
76.875
24Sk
551k
096
1.2675
1.7475
4525
3.8325
10.125
13.875
24.75
38.625
98.85
1"x5'
586k
2.29
2.2875
3.085
4.17
5.8575
9.15
24.15
3325
92.325
236.25
5x7
.005
4.005
7.2975
10.275
16.05
103.35
161.55
413.475
x10
2.2875
5.1525
9.15
12.075
16.725
23.475
36.6
96.675
132.9
236.25
369.15
945.075
2.6775
6.0225
0.725
14.175
19.5
27.375
42.829
113.025
155.32
276.1
431.475
1104.525
11"x14"
4.41
9.9
17.625
23.325
32.1
45.15
70.5
186.15
255.825
454.8
710.625
NA
11"x17
5.3475
12.075
21.375
5
226.05
310.65
552.3
862.95
4x18
16.2
28.875
38.175
52.575
73.8
115.35
41B.65
744.225
7.2075
NA
6'x20
9.15
20.625
36.6
48.45
66.75
93.75
146.475
386.85
72.675
100.125
531.6
13.725
30.9
54.9
219.75
580.2
797.4
NA
NA
82425
108.975
150.15
210.975
870.3
NA
40
34.35
77.25
137.32
261.525360.375506.25
181.65
250.275
351.6
549.3
NA
49.425
111.225
197.775
NA
NA
NA
500.55
NA
NA
154.5
74.65
863.225
703.125
NA
NA
527.325
697.425961.125
NA
NA
NA
A downloadable PDF of this resolution chart is available on the book's companion
Web site [w9.15].
Resoluton chart @ Andrew Darlow
THE DIGITAL CANINE AND FELINE
Tip#95
Borrow from multiple images
to expand highlight/shadow
detail or for other creative uses,
including HDR photography
173
One of the most powerful ways to improve your images is by
tiple photos. To do that, you can process the same file twice (once
for the highlights and once for the shadows). RAw files are much
better for doing this because they can usually be adjusted more
than JPEGs (less visible artifacts, noise, etc). Then combine the
photos in Adobe Photoshop or another application by using masks
and "painting" in the area that you want to replace. Even better
than processing the same file twice, especially if the file does not
have enough highlight or shadow detail, is to use the bracketing
techniques described in Chapter 1, Tip 8, to capture multiple
eut os podi e buisn Aqeajaid) sansodxa puaasp pe sabei
images will be in perfect registration, which means that they will
line up perfectly when placed on top of one another).
On a related note, high-dynamic range (HDR) photography is very
popular these days, and you can create very realistic or really wild-
best when you take pictures of the same image at different expo-
sures in perfect registration. Special software can then be used to
expand the dynamic range. And because expanding dynamic
noqe seoini oi syul aie alaue 'oidoi seindod e yons si abue
combining multiple files as well as HDR photography on the com-
panion Web site [w9.16].
For the image of a client's two dogs on the following page, I used
a tripod, and processed the file twice in Adobe Camera Raw. The
first file was processed to capture detail in the overall room and
for the dogs, and the second was processed for the window. I then
combined them in Adobe Photoshop using layers and a layer
mask, and painted in the window detail to achieve the look
yousee.
Pet Photography
"They call us the dynamic doggy duo!
174
Camera: Canon EOs-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm macro;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/2.8;
Shutter Speed: %45 sec;
windows located behind the dogs, as well as a Vivitar 285Hv flash unit with a
LumiQuest Big Bounce light modifier on it to soften the light and create some of
the catch lights you see in the dogs' eyes.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
THE DIGITAL CANINE AND FELINE
Tip #96
Experiment with different
cropping and vignette
options
e buiddouo ing 'Aydeboioud jo puom aut u! mau buiyiou s! s!y
175
photo can have a dramatic effect on its overall impact. And virtually
to determine what cropping might look like is to just zoom into
different areas of your image, regardless of what image editor you
are using. Once you see something you like, grab the crop tool
Oi dn apeu aa,noA ieui shpa Aue aaes isuy oi auns aa 't! douo pue
that point and consider naming the file something that differenti-
ates it from your cropped version.
Vignetting control is another powerful tool found on some image
editors. Vignetting (also called "falloff") means a reduction of an
image's brightness in or near the corners of an image. It occurs in
corners or to create the vignetted look.
One versatile third-party application that has a number of vignette
options is PhotoKit, an Automate plug-in toolkit for Adobe Pho-
toshop. The software has a total of 141 effects, and is well worth
trying out. PhotoKit-EL is a similar toolkit that is available for some
early versions of Photoshop Elements [w9.17].
See Tip 97 next for an example of an image before and after crop-
ping and vignetting. The example is subtle to show how just a few
of a photograph. Other before and ater cropping examples can
be found in Chapter 5, Tip 40, as well as in the book's Preface-see
the section in which I describe the cover photo. And more crop-
ping and vignetting tips and tutorial links can be found on the
companion Web site [w9.18].
Pet Photography
Tip #97
Create outstanding black-
and-white and retro-looking
images from your digital files
176
The look and feel that's possible to achieve with images that are
black and white is truly amazing. Dogs and cats can look especially
good when transformed into black and white, and it's important
to note that black and white is not just about neutral gray images;
it encompasses a wide range of toned images, from brown-toned
prints with a sepia tone that look like vintage darkroom prints, to
cool-toned bluish images that look like hand-coated 19th-century
cyanotypes.
Whether you work from a scanned print or slide, or whether you
capture an image with a digital camera in its standard color mode,
you can produce great-quality black-and-white images using a
number of different applications. Adobe Photoshop and Light-
room share a similar and powerful black-and-white adjustment tool
that allows you to pinpoint a specific color range and make it
lighter or darker throughout the image.
O paieaio uaag aaey suoieoidde auolepueis pue sui-bnid awo
help photographers create better black-and-white images from
color or existing black-and-white files. These include Alien Skin's
Exposure 2 and Nik Software's Silver Efex Pro. They both make it
easy to approximate the look of different classic (in some cases,
discontinued) film types. Trial versions are available for just about
every plug-in and standalone application you can imagine, and
links to a number of black-and-white tutorials and software options
can be found on the companion Web site [w9.19].
For this photo of a client's cat (originally in color, as shown on the
facing page), I used Lightroom's powerful black-and-white conver-
sion tool to convert the image. To do that, I first hovered over the
center of the cat's right cheek with the target adjustment tool in
grayscale mode and moved the tool up as I pressed the mouse
image. I then made some adjustments to the white balance to
THEDIGITALCANINEANDFELINE
lessen some of the noise I noticed. I also used the crop tool in
Lightroom and used the Vignette settings shown in the screenshot
to illustrate those two features. The vignette settings are provided
so that you can see the adjustments before and after processing.
(a)
(b)
THE DIGITAL CANINE ANd FELINE
Vignettes
LensCorrection
Amount
0
Midpoint
50
Post-Crop
Amount
-31
179
Midpoint
43
Roundness
35
Feather
75
(c)
vignette in Lightroom. (c) The vignette adjustments made in Lightroom for the
black and white image to the left.
Camera: Nikon D300; 
Lens/Focal Length: Nikkor 24-70mm/70mm;
ISo: 640; Aperture:f/5;
Shutter Speed: Y25 sec;
as well as a small flash unit (Nikon SB-900) shot into a 40-inch-diameter (102-cm)
Lasolite All In One Umbrella (camera right, and fitted with its white insert). That
photo @AndrewDarlow
Pet Photography
Tip #98
Create a Hand-Colored Look in
Your Images
Hand-colored black-and-white prints have been popular for over
100 years. The look can be very striking and nostalgic, but you
180
don't need special paints or a paintbrush to do it. Almost any
images. The key is to use layers or other nondestructive workflow
options so that you can revisit the image to increase or decrease
you've "painted outside the lines."
sntaldwis pue isef Aaa s! yool paoloo-puey aui iah oi em auo
Aue Aenpis buisn paonpau aq ueo uoiieinies juoienies aonpa
photo editing program, and depending on how much you reduce
the saturation of your image, you can make your photo look like
it's from a 1970's color magazine ad, or a faded color print from
the same time period. Also, as I touched on in Tip 85, any tutorial
for Photoshop Elements can be done in Adobe Photoshop with
the same or similar tools, and many Adobe Photoshop techniques
can be duplicated in Photoshop Elements.
Another approach is to keep a dog or cat his or her natural color
ground completely neutral or a warm-toned black and white. Some
links to free hand-coloring tutorials for a few different applications
can be found on the companion Web site [w9.20]
For this photo of a friend's cat, I liked the look of the cat but didn't
like some of the strong colors in the background. I decided to
enbe auow e waui apew pue sara s,ieo aut paioalas isnf uaui1
color tone using Adobe Photoshop's Replace Color tool (go to
"Image > Adjustments > Replace Color").
DIGITAL CANINE AND FELINE
"Hurry up, Oprah's on in
two minutes!
181
Camera: Canon Eos-D60;
Lens/Focal Length: Canon 50mm macro;
ISO: 200; Aperture: f/2.8;
Shutter Speed: Vs sec;
Lighting Notes: Lighting came primarily from natural daylight from a few windows
located camera left,and in front of the cat.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Pet Photography
Tip #99
Consider Ordering
Continuous-Tone Prints from a
Photo Lab or Retail Store
182
Continuous-tone digital prints from photo labs or from many of
for a few reasons:
1.
You can have sharp, vibrant, long-lasting prints made afford-
ably from wallet size to over 40 x 60 inches.
The prints are very water- and smudge-resistant and have an
expected longevity of about 20-60 years if displayed under
typical gallery lighting (much longer in dark storage) before
noticeable fading or color shift based on longevity testing
from Wilhelm Imaging Research. Prints made on some types
of photo papers fared better than others, as you can see on
their Web site [w9.21].
3
There are many online companies that offer continuous-tone
digital printing, including Shutterfly, Snapfish, Kodak Gallery.
andothersw9.22]
There are some steps you can take to help ensure that you get
consistent, high-quality results from your lab, and I've written an
article that covers the topic in depth [w9.23]. One important part
of the article includes using a standard image to test all of your
devices from monitor to print. An example of a good standard
image is shown below, and the link to download it can be found
in the article.
元
THE DIGITALCANINE AND FELINE
Tip #100
Make Your Own Prints
at Home or in Your Studio
The subject of making prints from digital images is a topic very
183
your dog or cat, framing it, and giving it to a friend or another
member of your family. The options for printing at home are exten-
sive, and there are many options, from small printers that you can
prints 64 inches (163cm) in width or larger.
Many books have been written on the topic of printing digital
images, and I can recommend at least one from someone I know
pretty well! Seriously, I've linked to a number of books and articles
on the companion Web site that can help with choosing and using
inkjet and other printers [w9.24]. One of the articles is entitled "5
Things to Consider before Buying Your Next Inkjet Printer." Other
process. The issue of print longevity is one of great importance to
Auew u! liep u! paao s! eu pue (au bupnoun aldoad Aueu
of the articles, as well as on the Web site of Wilhelm Imaging
Resource [w9.25].
The standard image file shown on the opposite page contains color and black and
white images sized to 280 PPl on a 4 x6 inch (approx. 10 x 15cm) canvas and
saved with the sRGB working space. The file is in the sRGB working space and
Photoshop Pso format so that you can experiment without degrading the image
quality (saving a JPG on top of a JPG is not advisable because you will be creating
more and more artifacts each time). The image also includes some text, which
helps to judge the sharpness of the lab's output.
Please Note: For this system to work properly, it is important to instruct your lab
to turn off any color correction (most labs keep correction on by default), or you
won't be able to properly control the color and density of your prints. It is also
important to view your prints under controlled lighting (about 4000-50o0 degrees
Kelvin is recommended). See Tip 91 earlier in this chapter, and Chapter 1, Tip 4,
for more on the importance of lighting and color temperature.
photo @ Andrew Darlow
Wilhelm
Google
Search
Imaging
wwww
.wilhelm-research.com
Research
Just Posted!
lefromIS&TNIP
Photogr
Tepheroriontionor
render1moglimg
Tech
iesFarDigital
corbis/5y
asve
ography
2004-2007
ByHenry wiem
tZ3200
March25,2009
DC
Ratingsfor
(40)FulicoloriGrystal Archi
F1000
Download 2-Pagc PDF
THE DIGITAL
.CANINE ANDFELINE
Tip #101
Find More Online Resources,
Experiment, and Have Fun!
Learning the ins and outs of a digital camera, imaging software,
and working with a photo lab or your own printer can get frustrat-
185
experiencing the same problems, so I've put together a list of
online photo-related  forums  and  groups  to  consider  visiting
[w9.26]. Also use search engines—they can be invaluable. If a
certain search term doesn't get your question answered, try a dif-
ferent one with quotes; for example, "Adobe Photoshop sharpen-
ing" and "sharpening with Adobe Photoshop" will give you some
of the same links, but many will be different.
spuauy pue Awey ino pue 'sieo 'sboa juny aaey 'lle jo isou puy
have a way of bringing out the most wonderful emotions in us,
leads aoue aeus pue ysuauo ot sn sday udeboioud pue
moments in so many ways.
Wilhem Imaging Research (wilhelm-research.com) has a wealth of good
information, not just about longevity testing, but also about the technology and
inks used in the printers that are discussed. The right column contains most of the
information regarding late-model inkjet printers. You can view the information
on-screen or download PDFs.
This page intentionally left blank
Index
B
Action shots
Baby pacifier, 106
187
paradles/street fairs, 126
Background
sporting events, 116
ambient light, 135-136,143
techniques, 23
blurring, 171
Adobe Bridge, 156
Adobe Camera Raw
depth of field, 70
color temperature adjustment, 167
hand-colored look,180
multiple image processing, 173
lighting, 118f-119f, 138f
RAW processing,160
materials, 93
silhouette shots,58
out-of-focus, 16, 78, 108
Adobe Photoshop
pavement as, 45
ba.ckgrounds, 137
perspective, 141
black-and-white images, 176
pet coordination to, 99
color management,169
simple props, 106
dust checks, 170
standing cut from, 102, 116
file renaming, 156
subject distance, 137
fle size, 172
Bandana,106
Backups, 152
fillight acddition,30f
hand-colored look, 180
Bath toys, 106
highlights/shadows, 173
Bathtub shots, 105
multiple image combination, 64-66
Beach shots, 105 
noise reduction, 6
Beagle, 5
 online resources, 185
Beanbag camera stabilizer, 76
retouching, 96
Bed sheets, 56
sharpening, 100, 102
Bed shots, sleeping pets, 78
sillhouettes, 58
Behind-the-subject shots, 30
as software option, 157
Benches, as props, 106
training options, 158f-159f
Black-and-white images, 176-177, 179f, 180
vignetting,175
Bogen 3361 light stand, 43
Adobe Photoshop Elemments
Boston Terrier, 114, 128
color management169
The Brady Bunch, 127
color temperature adjustment, 167
Bubble level, 139
dust checks, 170
Bulldlog, 34
file renaming,
 156
software choices, 157
file size, 172
Butterfly wings, 106
Adobe Photoshop Lightroom
bla.ck-and-white images, 176
C
color temperature adjustment, 167
Cable release mcde, 146 
RAW processing, 132, 160, 160f-161f
Cammera phones, 6-7, 6f, 8f
AdobeRGB, 168-169
Cam-Pod, 76
Agility events, 122
Canvas, 137
Al Servo AF, 19
CDs (compact discs), 9, 152
AKC, see American Kennel Club (AKC)
Chair props.72,106
Alien Skin Exposure 2, 176
"Chandler,” 108
Ambient light
Chanukah shots, 114
fom background,135-136
Chew toy shots,100
city, 139
Chihuahua, 16, 17f, 45, 78, 96, 104, 122
and exposure time, 143
Chinese Crested, 46, 51, 78, 96, 116
rain shots, 49f
Christmas shots, 114
and sheeed2
Close-up framing, 70, 93
American Kennel Club (AKC), 122
Cloudy day shots, 29, 52, 108
Angel wings.106
Cockapoo,58
Aniated slideshows, 164
Color laser prints, 183
Aperture Priority Mode, 16, 78
Color management,168-169
Apple Aperture, 160, 167
Color matching, 168
Apple iPhone 3G, 6, 6f
Color modes, 15
Apple iPhoto,157
Color schemes, 126
Apple Mail, 162-163, 162f-163f
Color temperature, 14, 167
Airtificial silk, 137
CompactFlash cards, 22, 153
Artwork-pet juxtaposition, 90
Competitions,122
Auto-exposure bracketing, 19
Continuous light, 140-141
Autofocus mode, 51
Continuous-tone prints, 182
Axius Basix Magic Shadle, 43
 Corel Paint Shop Pro, 157
Index
Couch shots, 83
outdoor portraits, 41-43
Creative lighting, 137, 140-141
red eye reduction, 147
Cropping
silhouette shots, 58, 60
black-and-white images, 179f
and softbox, 62
seeping pet shots, 74-76
with softbox, umbrella, reflector, 140141
softwareapplicatins175
on umbrella bra.cket, 44
"Cupid,”114,128
Flickr.com, 132
Flipbac, 33
Dalmatian, 61, 72, 99
Flip-out viewfinder, 33
Dappledl lighting effect, 48f, 56, 62f-63f, 98f, 102f-103f,
Focus options, 19
106f-107f, 136
Food stands, 126
"Dark frame subtra.ction," 143 
Foreground
Date-based management system, 155
out-of-focus, 16,70
 Depth of field
shacows, 56
881
shallow, 70
"snail's eye view, 34
and shooting modes, 16
French doorlight,61
seeping pet shots, 78
Fuji Color Negative film, 72f73f, 99f, 110f111f
stretching pets, 76
Furniture-pet juxtaposition, 90 
Digital single-lens reflex [DSLR), see also Camera.5,
23
G
Diopter acljustment dlial, 3f
German Shephard, 104
Dirt, 170 
Ghost costume, 120
Doberman Pincher, 118
Glass, no flash, 135-136
Dog Legs (Enwitt, 104
Glass door shots, 66
Doorway framing, 74
Gobo, 142f
Dramatic light, 40,61
Goggle props, 88
DSLR, see Digital single-lens reflex (DSLR)
"Golden hour," 40
"Duke,” 124
Gray balance, 14
Dust, 170
Gray cards, 14, 167
Dust and Scratches Filter (Photoshop) 170
The Great American Mutt Show, 122
DVDs, 9, 152
Greeting cards, 1, 128, 157
 Dye-sublimation prints, 183
H
E
Halloween shots, 120
Easter shots, 118
Halogen lights, 14, 28f
"Elwood," 4f, 40, 83, 88f-89f, 93, 104, 171
Hand-colored look,
180
E-mail, 162-164
Hasselblad 500ELX, 17f
Erwitt, EIliott, 104
Hats, 106
Exposure compensation, 19, 49
HDR, see High-dynamic range (HDR) photography
Exposure options, 19
Headlamps, 7, 8f 135-136
Eye-to-eye shots, 28
"Hero shots," 29, 108
High-dynamic range (HDR) photography, 173
F
Highlights
Fabric, window lighting, 56
camera alert feature, 49
Facebook.com, 132
dletails, 173
Feet,photographer's,95
silhouette shots, 58
Fill carcls
from sun, 94f
outside shots, 43
from windows, 99f, 132
white board as, 4f
Holiday shots, see also Event shots
white paper as, 31f
Christmans, Chanukah, New Year, 114
Fill flash
Easter, 118
outdloor shots, 41
Halloween, 120
silhouette shots, 60
Hot shoes, 139, 148
"snail's eye view," 34f
snow shots, 50f
Fill light
from bench,166f
43
from lightbulbs, 90f
Inkjet printers, 128, 183
via Lightroo,88f-89f
International travel photos, 110
from off-canera flash, 114f-115f
ISO, general
from overhead light,78f-81f,96f-97f
and aperture,16
frompavement,32f
low-light shots,
.135
and noise, 134
fom picture window, 128f-129f
on-the-fly shots,32
from pop-up flash, 29f
RAW mode, 132
from white carpet, 120f-121f
and sharpness, 51
from winclows, 84f, 171f
and shutter speed，18
Fill window-lit sillhouettes, 60
Film cameras, 2-3
Fixed-zoom lens, 110f-111f
Jack-o'-lantern costume, 120
Flashlight
JPEG format
dlappling effects, 102f103f
color management, 168-169
no-flash photos, 135-136 
file sizes, 162
"paint with light," 136
highlights/shadows, 173
silhouette images,60
and Picasa, 157
Flashmode options,143-144
Vs. RAW, 9, 132
Flash units, see also Lighting examples
resolution choices, 22
high 1SOs, 134
Juxtapositions, 90
low-light situations, 139
mounting, 3f 
K
natural-looking photos,135136
Kelbytraining.com, 157, 158f-159f
options, 21
Kennel Club dog show, 118 
INDEX
Kodak Gallery, 164, 182
 Mouse padl, 76
Kodak T400CN film, 61f
Multiple pet posing, 96, 102
Muslin, 137
Labrador Retriever, 95
N
Lake shots, 105
Natural-looking photos, 135-136
Lastolite All In One Umbrella, 133f, 141, 179f
Negative scanning, 165
LCD screen, perspective shots, 33
New Year shots, 114
Learning resources, 25
Night portrait mode, 143
LED flashlights, 60
Night scene mode, 143
LED headlamp. 7, 8f
Nik Software Silver Efex Pro, 176
LensBaby, 11'
Noise, 134
Lens options, 10-11
 Noise-reduction mode, 143
Lens shade, 142f
LG enV cell phone, 7, 8f
Lighting examples
Omnipod, 76
bare-bulb lightbulb, flashlights, 102f-103f
Online backup service, 152
189
clouddiffuseddaylight,108f-109f
Online galleries, 164
Online resources, 185
exhibition hall,125f
Outdloor shots
flash,reflector,118f119f
cloudly days, 52
glass door light, overhead light,78f81f, 96f97f
dramatic light, 40
incandescent lightbulbs, fill cards, 31f
flash, 4143
kitchen lights, 92f
jumping pets, 46
lightbulbs,100f-101f
power of scale, 48
natural daylight, 6f, 32f, 34f, 46f-48f, 98f, 116f-117f
rain, 45
natural light, 166f
reflectors, 43-44
off-camera flash, city lights, 36f-37f
snow, 49
off-camera flash, street lights, 49f 
wind effects, 51
 outdloor natural light, 95f
 Overhead shots, 31
overhead sun, 94f
overhead sun, Lightroomn processing, 88f-89f
P
setting sunoffcamera flashff
 Painting-pet juxtaposition, 90
shaded natural daylight, 106f-107f
"Paint with light," 136
snow shots, 50f
Papillion, 137
sunny afternoon, 17f
Paracles,126
through glass door shot, 66f-67f
 Partial-profile shots, 108
tree-filtered daylight, 5f
 PC terminal, 148
tree shacle light, off-camera flash, 114f115f
Perspective, 29-36
wind effects, 51f
Pet expos, 124-125
window light, 62f65f, 181f
Pet parts, 93
Lighting units, creative lighting, 140-141
 Pets with Disabilities, 124
Light stand, 43, 43f-44f
Photo cells, 148 
Live-view option, 33
 Photographer's feet, 95
Low-light shots
 Photographic print-pet juxtaposition, 90
cable release mode, 146
PhotoKit, 175“
flash mocles, 143144
Photo lab prints, 182
high 1SO, 134 
PhotoshopUser.com, 157
mirror lockup mode, 146
Picasa, 157
Pillow-pet juxtaposition, 90
and RAW mode, 132
Pit Bull, 96
redl eye, 147
Pixels per inch (ppi), 172
self-timer mode,146
Planar lenses, 17f
tripodls, 139
Plug-ins, 175-176
wireless flash trigger, 148-149
POD, 76
LumiQuest Big Bounce light modifier, 60, 148-149,
 Point-and-shoot cameras, 2-4
174f
Pocdle, 165, 166f
Lynda.com, 157, 158f159f
Pool shots, 105
Pool toys,106
M
Portraits, 41-43, 62
Macro lenses, 10-11
“Power shake,105
"Magic hour," 40
Maltese, 19, 64-66, 102, 136
Manfrotto Camera/Umbrella Bracket 143BKT, 44
 Profile shots, 108
Manual focus, 80, 139
Props, 106
Manual Mode, 16 
Pug, 41-43, 42f, 106
Masking, 180
Medlia cards
Q
backing yp. 9
Quantum Radio Slave 4 wireless transmitter, 148-149
cases, 154f
Quilt-pet juxtaposition, 90
date-based management, 155
file naming, 156
R
options, 22
"Raccoon eyes," 40-41
Megapixels, 22,162
storage and reformatting. 153
Rain shots, 45
RAW format
Micro SD card, 7
color management, 168-169
Milk acrylic, 56
file renaming, 156
Milk plexi, 56 
file sizes, 162
Mirror, no flash, 135-136
high ISO, 134
Mirror lockup node, 146
highlights/shadows, 173
Modifiers, 56, 60, 148-149, 174f
vs. JPEG, 9
Monopods, 139
lihting tips, 132
Monsterpod, 76
processing applications, 160
Index
resolution choices, 22
Still Photo mode, 2-3
snow shots, 49 
Storage, see Media cards
software options, 157
Straight-on shots, 28
"Real life" shots, 85
Street fairs,126
Red eye reduction, 147
Stroboframe Shoe—General Purpose, 44
Reflectors, 43f-44f
Sun
Reformatting, media cardls 153
as lightbulb, 43-44
Relaxing poses, 64-66
overhead, 88f-89f
Removable storage, see Media cards
shaclows from, 40, 94f
Replace Color tool (Photoshop), 180
Sunglasses props, 88
Resolution settings, 22, 172
Super Pet Expo, i08, 122, 124
Retouching,74-76
Retro-looking images176-177
Rhodesian Ridgeback,48,98
Terrier mix, 98
River shots, 105
Through The Lens TTL) flash systems, 143
"Rosco," 45
TIFF format,132,168-169
190
"Tiger," 127
S
TotalTraining.com,157
 San Gennero Feast, 126
Towel camera stabilizer, 76
Saturation, 180
Tracing paper, 56
Scale,outdoor shots,48
Trade shows, 124-125
Scanning images, 165
Training software, 157, 158f-159f
Scarf props, 100, 106
Treats, pet reactions, 91
SD/SDHC cards, 7, 22, 153
Tripods
Self-timer mode, 146
low-light shots, 139
Set paper, 137
O 'piay yo ydap maus
perspective shots, 36
Shadlows
dlark corners, 99f
1145-1
details, 173
 camera stabilization, 76
hardl/soft, 140
TTL, see Through The Lens (TTL) flash systems
as chew toy, 100
lightening,148-149
Lightroom processing, 88f-89f, 132
TV, sleeping pet shots, 83
soft, 31f, 52, 140
from sun, 40, 94f
warm, 76f77f
Udler, Eric, 108
fro window hangings, 56
Umbrella
wireless flash triggers, 148-149
bracket, 44
Sharpening step,17
creative lighting, 140-141
Shoe chew toy, 100
with flash, 62, 133f, 140-141, 179f
Shooting modes, 9, 15-16
rain shots, 45
Shower curtains, 56
Underwear chew toy, 100
Shows, 122, 124-125
Shutterfly, 164, 182
Shutter speeds
Valentine's Day, 128
flash modes, 143-144
Vantage point, 70
jumping shots, 46
Venetian blinds, 56
wind effects, 51
Versace, Vincent, 153
Side-by-side size contrasts, 104
Vertical blinds,56
Sillhouettes, 58, 60
Video cameras, 2-3
Silk, 137
Vignetting,175-177
Sitting pet-on-pet, 96
Vivitar 285HV flash, 41-43, 148-149, 174f
Skylight filter, 105
Slide scanning, 165
W
Slidleshows, 164
Water shots, 105
"Snail's Eye View," 34
Weding photos,127
 Snapfish, 164, 182
Weimaraner, 29, 108
Sneaker chew toy, 100
White balance setting, 14
Snow shots, 49
White card, 14 
Sock chew toy.100
White paper, 31f, 56
Softboxes, 62, 140-141
Wide-angle lens, 61
Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier, 11, 20f, 21, 49, 148-149
Wide-angle view,35
Software-Cinema.com, 157, 158f159f
Wilhelm Imaging Research, 184f185f
Speedllites, 141, 148
Wind effects, 51
Sporting events, 116
WinZip, 163
Sports shots,23
Wirelessflash trigger 148-149
Spotlights, 14, 74f-75f
Witch costume, 120
Sprinkler shots,
105
sRGB.168-169
St. Patrick's Day parade, 126
Staircase framing. 74
Zigview, 33
Zip files, 162-163
Standing pet-on-pet, 96
Zoom-in shots, 62
Statue-pet juxtaposition, 90
Zoom lenses, 110f111f