1000
BEST
Sop
training
secrets
FROM THE FOUNDERS OF TALL TAILS TRAINING
* Housebreaking made easy
ROBYN
* Tips for dogs of all ages -- from puppies
ACHEY
to geriatrics
&
* Effective obedience training techniques
BILL
* Teach good manners
GORTON
* Fun tricks you can teach your dog at home
尾巴宠物健康中.http://utahc.taobao.com
1000
 Best
Dog
Training
Secrets
ROBYN ACHEY
AND
BILL
GORTON
SOURCEBOOKS, InC.
NAPERVILLE, ILLINOIS
Copyright @ 2006 by Robyn Achey and Bill Gorton
Cover and internal design @ 2006 by Sourcebooks, Inc.
Cover images @ Brand X Pictures, Digital Vision
Internal images ⊙ Brand X Pictures, Digital Vision, Art
Explosion
Sourcebooks and the colophon are registered trademarks of
Sourcebooks, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced
in any form or by any electronic or mechanical means
including information storage and retrieval systems-
except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical
articles or reviews—without permission in writing from its
publisher, Sourcebooks,Inc.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and
authoritative information in regard to the subject matter
covered. It is sold with the understanding that the pub-
lisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or
other professional service. If legal advice or other expert
assistance is required, the services of a competent profes-
sional person should be sought.—From α Declaration of Prin-
ciples Jointly Adopted by a Committee of the American Bar
Association and a Commitfee of Publishers and Associations
All brand names and product names used in this book are
trademarks, registered trademarks, or trade names of their
respective holders. Sourcebooks, Inc., is not associated with
any product or vendor in this book.
Published by Sourcebooks, Inc.
P.O. Box 4410, Naperville, Illinois 60567-4410
[630} 961-3900
Fax: (630) 961-2168
www.sourcebooks.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Achey, Robyn.
 1000 best dog training secrets / Robyn Achey and Bill Gorton.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-4022-2016-6
ISBN-10: 1-4022-2016-2
1. Dogs--Training. I. Gorton, Bill II. Title. Il. Title: One thou-
sand best dog training secrets.
SF431.A24 2006
636.7--dc22
2006012422
Printed and bound in Canada.
WC10987654321
Dedication
We dedicate this book to:
Our clients and their dogs. We fall in love with
every dog we teach, for they each come to us with
a valuable lesson. This lesson may come in the
form of learning about dogs, it may come in the
form of learning about people, and it may come in
the form of learning about ourselves. Our clients
and their dogs teach us to use our hearts and our
heads in good combination and balance.
Our own personal animals with whom we've
journeyed over the years. Their lessons are
imprinted on our hearts and we are forever con-
nected to them.
The beloved anirmals now in our lives who
have devoted themselves to our companionship
They've waited and watched patiently as we cre-
ated this manuscript. At times they offered a
needed break from writing. at other times a sim-
ple “lean" or gentle kiss to offer adoration and
support.
Finally, each other for our patience and devo-
tion to our partnership, which is Tall Tails Train-
ing. Our friendship has proven that you can, in
fact, teach "old" dogs new tricks!
Contents
Acknowledgments
X1
Introduction
Part One: Ages and Stages,
Needs at Each Stage
Chapter One: Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising. . . 5
Goals for Puppyhood
Expectations for Puppyhood
Exploration
The Role of Leadership for Your Puppy
Your Puppy's Needs
Basic Puppy Manners
The Name Game! Socialize Your Puppy
to Her New Name
Bringing Home Puppy
Raising Tips
Tethering or "Posting"
Crate Training
Why Use the Crate?
Housebreaking
The Housebreaking Cycle
In Equals Out!
Preventing Food Aggression
Puppy-Proofing
Motor Mouthing Monsters
Why Do Nipping and Mouthing Happen?
Chapter Two: Adolescent Dogs
.57
Goals for Adolescent Dogs
Expectations for Adolescent Dogs
The Role of Leadership for Adolescent Dogs
Your Adolescent Dog's Needs
Raising Tips
There Is No "I" In "T-E-A-M"
Your Dog's Perspective
Chapter Three: Adult Dogs
Goals for Adult Dogs
Expectations for Adult Dogs
Your Adult Dog's Needs
Raising Tips
Chapter Four: Geriatric Dogs.
93
Goals for Geriatric Dogs
Expectations for Geriatric Dogs
The Role of Leadership for Geriatric Dogs
Your Geriatric Dog's Needs
Raising Tips
Special Needs
Part Two: Basic Skills
111
Chapter Five: Establishing Leadership
113
Establishing a Leadership Protocol
Body Language
Leaders Are Consistent in Their Rules of the Role
Little Things Mean a Lot!
The Secret Leadership Role of the Walk
Chapter Six: Socializing: Learning
from Human Leaders.
129
How Do Our Dogs Learn from Us?
Socialization
Keeping the Crate a Happy Place
Noise Desensitization
Touch Desensitization
Acclimation to Movement
Thunderstorms
Don't Overdo Noises
Teaching Dogs to Share
Removing Objects and Toys from Your Dog
Chapter Seven: Obedience Training.
.155
Styles—Gizmos, Treats, and Clicks
Avoiding Common Training Pitfalls
Positive Reinforcement
Creating Good Training Habits
Teaching the Obedience Command Language
Creating Good Boundaries—the Corrective NO
HEEL
Test the HEEL Command
SIT
Test the SIT Command
The Release Command BREAK
DOWN
Test the DOWN Command
Position Holding (STAY)
Test Position Holding
COME
PLACE
Distraction Training
Ten-Week Training Recipe
Training Diversity
Off-Leash Training
Part Three: Developing Life Skills.
.233
Chapter Eight: Creating Manners.
235
 Practicing and Reinforcing
Obedience Commands
Applications of DoWN
Applications of HEEL
Applications of SIT
Creative Daily Applications
WAIT (or STAY), OFF, and LEAVE IT
More Good Application Exercises
Chapter Nine: Dog Etiquette
261
Dinnertime Manners—No Begging!
Greeting Manners—No Jumping!
Walking MannersNo Pulling!
Four Types of Walking
Riding in Cars with Dogs
Respect for Humans—No Biting!
No Bossy Barking!
Vet Visits-Be Polite!
Groomer Visits
Meeting Dogs—No Fighting!
Chapter Ten: Living Harmoniously
with Your Dog.
281
Fence Usage
Yard Manners
Human/Dog Play
Lifestyle
Advanced Tethering or “Posting'"
Daily Rituals
Multiple Pets
Chapter Elever: Balancing Essential Needs . . 301
Your Dog's Daily Balance
Mental Needs
Physical Needs
Social Needs
Rest Needs
Your Life's Balance
Daycare for the Working Family Dog
Your Common Balance
Chapter Twelve: Behavior Problem Solving . . 321
What Are Behavior Problems?
Root Causes of Behavior Problems
Behavior Modification Skills and Tools
Drug Therapy
The Role of Socialization in Behavior Modification
Behavior Modification Plans
Avoiding and Changing Nuisance Behaviors
Stealing, Counter Surfing, and Garbage Stealing
Coprophagia (Stool Eating)
Chewing and Digging
Separation Anxiety
Aggression/Territorial Behavior
Aggression Towards People
Part Four: Having a Good Time
with Your Good Dog
361
Chapter Thirteer: Toys, Games,
and Leisure Activities
.363
Toys
Unhealthy or Non-Therapeutic Toys
Stage-Appropriate Toys
Games
Activities
Being a Doggie Lifeguard
Appendix: Advanced Activities and Tricks . . . 399
Therapy Dogs
Agility
Tricks
Index
409
About the Authors
419
Acknowledgments
We are proud and grateful to acknowledge the fol-
lowing beings for their contributions to our lives,
to our business, and to this book:
Our spouses, Sue and Steve, for their under-
standing of all of our time apart during the writing
of this book and for their love and encouragement
always.
Our families for their constant
t pride and
encouragement to "live our dream.
The veterinarians of the Lehigh Valley for giving
us our start, their confidence, and their referrals;
and especially to Drs. Paul Donovan, Kelly Craig.
and Ken Banzhof for their personal support, vet-
erinary care, and friendship.
Kathy Poole for not only her friendship, but
also for the kind and generous opportunity to call
Cloud Nine Country Kennel our “home training
base" and to be a part of her "kennel family.
And of course to our agent, Jessica Faust of
Bookends, Inc., for her patience, talent, and per-
sistence.
d
ntroduction
Raising an "obedient dog" requires more than just
obedience training. As we tell all of our clients,
there is a difference between having obedience
"skills" and “being" obedient. Being obedient is
about being dedicated to the "obedience lifestyle"
in daily living. This journey begins with teaching
good obedience skills.
In our book, 1000 Best Dog Training Secrets, we
will reveal to you the secrets of raising an obedient
dog and nurturing a positive relationship. Begin-
ning with housebreaking and obedience training.
through to behavior problem solving and even
trick-training. we will give you the knowledge and
skills to raise the best dog you will ever own!
Some of the secrets are "how to" secrets, some
o m, a an jo ao pu 'on uam, a
secrets. Other secrets are “practice secrets,""game
plan secrets," and "real life secrets."
We include philosophy secrets in each section
to give you the necessary knowledge for the rest
of the process. Raising your dog is a process and a
journey. The entire book echoes the process you
will have in raising your dog.
The secrets in Section One outline the needs.
requirements, and raising guides for your dog as
he grows through the various stages of his life.
The secrets in Section Two establish your Lead-
ership, teach you to use your Leadership role to
Socialize your dog, and teach your formal Obedi-
ence Command Language.
The secrets in Section Three detail the Missing
Piece, which is using your skills to create manners
and lifestyle. This section is dedicated to the
many, many ways the obedience command lan-
guage is used to teach your dog how to live har-
moniously in your household.
The secrets in Section Four are provided so
both you and your dog will never be bored. Having
a good time with your good dog is all about fun
activities and making the most of them due to
your foundation in the obedience lifestyle.
As professional dog trainers, we have learned that
 many different aspects of daily life influence behav-
ior. We don't believe you should just view the train-
ing of your dog as a way to "fix" him or her, rather as
 a journey in building a friendship and a lifelong rela-
tionship. Good training is not just for problem dogs.
Therefore the secrets that we will divulge to you are
everything from training concepts to training skills,
care secrets. All secrets are designed to give you a
new perspective, new tools, and a complete and well-
rounded guide to a happy life with your dog.
2
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Part One:
Ages and Stages, Needs at
Each Stage
Each stage of a dog's life has specific characteris-
tics and learning needs for him. If you approach
"puppy raising" with the same attention you do
"child rearing," you can be a much more effective
leader and have a better-behaved dog. This section
will detail the various stages of a dog's "growing-
up" and how we can teach all of the important
skills and concepts to ensure that our dogs will
not only be great companions, but safe and man-
nerly members of society as well!
1.
Puppy
Raising.
Puppy
Praising
uppyhood—the season of adoration. While
this is a stage that requires meeting our pup-
pies' immediate needs, we must be careful not to
spoil them. Puppyhood is very similar to the
infancy and toddler stages of parenting a child
The important part about this stage isn't so much
what the puppy learns skill-wise, rather what he
experiences about his environment and his lead-
ers! This is the most impressionable stage in a
dog's life and attitudes about his environment
and leaders are imprinted on the brain as it grows.
Ready to be a good leader and teacher?
Age: This stage ranges from two months to
roughly five months of age.
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
GoAls for Puppyhood
Confidence in Environment. Your puppy must
learn to be confident with the things in her envi-
Aep Aiaaa Aem aalisod e ui lay azileioos 'tuawuo
to different places, textures, objects, people,
noises, etc. A good rule of thumb is to take her to
at least three different places per week.
Confidence in Seif. Your puppy must learn confi-
dence in herself. The more good direction you give,
the more she can succeed. The more she succeeds,
the more you can praise her. The more you praise
her for accomplished tasks, the more confidence
she will gain. Give no less than ten simple tasks per
day to have her earn praise and confidence.
Confidence in Leadership. At this early stage,
your puppy is gathering impressions of how you act
as her leader and primary caregiver, but she is also
developing a perspective of humans from the
examples you set while raising her. How you behave
and interact with your dog sets the stage and tone
for the rest of the relationship. Keep your behavior
positive and trustworthy to gain her confidence.
New Object Acceptance. Help her to investi-
gate things and to accept new objects with good
direction and praise. Praise her for following your
lead. Expose her to many different objects with a
positive outcome each time. Touch the object
you wish for her to investigate and praise heartily
when she shows interest.
Accepting New Challenges. Have her do many
small tasks so she can earn praise for each. Doing
tasks and earning praise will help her gain confi-
dence in doing new things under your direction. She
will also learn to accept new challenges without fear.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
Acceptance of the Crate and Boundaries.
Using the crate and other methods to limit your
puppy's freedom will help her develop an accept-
ance of boundaries. If this is not achieved during
her first several months, she'll have a difficult time
developing acceptance of confinement and
boundaries later in life
Learning to Fly Solo. Your puppy must also
learn to be comfortable being alone. Small periods
of crating in a quiet room away from the family will
help her develop this confidence. Frequent breaks
in between crate sessions will help her see that it's
only temporary and it's not abandonment.
Learning to Chew on the Proper Toys. Keeping
the proper chew toys available, using proper redi-
rection techniques, and having the appropriate
chew toys will teach chewing etiquette. Proper
chew toys are described in Section Four.
Learning the Concept of Housebreaking.
proper housebreaking schedule will help her learn
the concept of where and when to "potty." A good
schedule will teach your puppy where and when.
1000 BEST DOGTRAINING SECRETS
EXPECTATIONS FOR PUPPYHOOD
Life is all about ME! Me, me, me! Expect
●nothing less than that from your puppy!
Basically we are their servants in this stage. Their
needs mimic the immediate needs of an infant or
young toddler. Keep in mind that it has nothing to
do with your puppy being bratty—it's just his
immediate needs that need tending. Do tend to
them right away.
Love, love, love. Yes, since this is the stage of
● adoration, you will easily fall in love with
your puppy. Take lots of pictures, but be careful
not to overindulge and spoil your puppy. This will
be the most difficult part of raising your puppy.
but is essential in creating a cooperative, good
dog!
While there are fundamental skills you can
●begin to generate in puppyhood, you are
really in a "holding pattern" of sorts. Your puppy is
just too young for formal obedience training in
this life stage. Your job now is to prevent errors,
teach concepts, and keep puppy safe until she can
learn her obedience skills at five months of age.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
EXPLORATION
Your puppy is in a natural stage of exploration
and this is usually done with her mouth. Explo.
ration is actually a positive thing since that means
your puppy is eager to learn about her environ-
ment. Be careful to remain positive in how you
redirect this drive so you don't squelch a natural
instinct that is a learning process.
Puppies act on instincts. Puppies come
●equipped with only their canine instincts
and are acting strictly on what they know geneti-
cally. They are not in control of their emotions,
nor do they preplan actions. They just act on their
instincts until we teach them to resist urges. Do
not punish, but redirect them and remain patient!
Limitations: Puppies literally have no self-
 control at this stage. They tend to do whatever
pops into their little minds. This is part instinct and
part lack of self-control. Don't expect your puppy to
make good choices or to always be well behaved.
10
1000BEST DOGTRAININGSECRETS
Trying to "break" your puppy of instinctual
●behaviors (like mouthing) will not work. You
can teach your puppy to stop using her mouth to
communicate when you teach her an alternate
method of communicating. Until then, attempting
to use "quick fixes" to curb these behaviors will
only serve to diminish your puppy's confidence in
you as a leader. Techniques for dealing with
teething, nipping, and mouthing are described
later in this chapter.
Puppies have a limited attention span and
●can only "behave,” or rather, be kept out of
trouble, for a limited amount oftime.As they grow
and as we teach them, they do develop an atten-
tion span. It's important to know now that they
can only concentrate for short periods of time.
Once your puppy's mental battery has worn
● down and repetitive, improper behaviors
begin, any attempt to redirect will be futile. Take
your puppy to the crate for rest.
Your puppy can learn the housebreaking
· routine, but his body cannot "hold" all of his
bodily functions no matter how much he may
want to do this. At roughly four and a half to five
months of age, your puppy's body will catch up in
development and be able to control his flow of
urine from the body. Very frequent potty breaks
will help this routine.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
11
10
Get Real! Keep your expectations realis-
●tic. Puppyhood is the stage where we
must be completely responsible for our puppies.
Do not expect your puppy to behave like an adult
dog. Know her limitations and work with them
into the next stage of learning.
12
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
The role OF leadershIP FOr
Your PuppY
Your role as a leader right now has many facets.
Safety Patrol, Tour Guide, Teacher, Mom/Dad,
Leader, and Role Model are all roles that you will
fulfill. The Friend role will happen later in life, so
be a parent now. Parents teach, lead, set rules,
and reinforce them.
Safety Patrol. As Safety Patrol, you will be
responsible for all of your puppy's safety needs.
You will need to puppy-proof all areas of your
home and supervise your puppy continuously to
ensure safety.
Tour Guide. As Tour Guide, you will be respon-
sible for teaching your puppy about the world.
Take this role very seriously and actively show
your puppy new experiences. You will need to
"explain" everything to her!
Teacher. It is up to you to teach your puppy
the expectations of the household and society.
Don't think for a minute that your puppy can fol-
low a command as if you had a remote control!
You must teach her everything you want her to
know.
Mom/Dad and Leader. As the Parent and
Leader, you will need to lead your dog just like
you parent children. You need to make decisions
for them, direct their activities, and praise them
when they succeed. Good parents direct their
children well. If good parents "parent" well, then
good leaders "lead" well! Don't be afraid to take
the lead in all situations. Your puppy will appreci-
ate this. Leading him tells him he is not out there
on his own. Leading will boost his security.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
13
Role Model. Since a puppy learns critical les-
sons about humans in this stage, we must be very
aware of how we respond to the inevitable acci-
dents of puppyhood. The occasional chewed
object or "puppy puddle" should not be met with
maniacal screaming. (If so, your puppy may sur-
mise that humans are imbalanced!) Remain calm
when finding errors, firmly say "no," and calmly
redirect your puppy to learn the appropriate
behavior.
The Patient Leader. When you find yourself
out of patience, crate your puppy. If your mental
batteries have worn out, chances are that your
puppy's batteries have also worn out. By crating
your puppy, you are getting an essential break
from your job, and your puppy is getting "recess"
and naptime. This dramatically cuts the chances
of losing your patience.
14
1000BEST DOGTRAININGSECRETS
Your Puppy's needs
Mental Needs
11
While your puppy's mental needs are
●small right now, her learning capability is
great. The mental needs are small because her rest
needs are much higher in comparison. But the les-
sons she is learning through observation and envi-
ronmental response to her exploration are great.
She needs to get positive feedback from learning-
both from you and from the environment.
12
View every time you are with your puppy
 ●as a learming session. These sessions
need to be positive and well guided to ensure suc-
cess. If she's not supervised well or is only "half
supervised,” her chances of getting into trouble
are greater. Making continuous mistakes and con-
tinually getting scolded is not fun or positive for
anyone!
13
Keep your puppy's "learning sessions"
·short. Learning is exhausting for a
puppy! They are trying to learn how to live in a
human world and this generally means that none
of their "doggie skills" are applicable (rough play,
food guarding, mouthing, etc.) His learning and
"unlearning" must be in small doses.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
15
14
Crating your puppy for periodic breaks
●will keep her learning sessions small
and will not mentally exhaust or frustrate her. A
tired or frustrated puppy will not learn well or
eagerly. Crate time will help her recharge for the
next session.
15
Exploration at this stage is usually
●curiosity driven and not genetically
driven (e.g., hunting instincts) and therefore prob-
ably won't cause repetitive nuisance behaviors at
this stage (see chapter 12). However, an "ounce of
prevention" is truly worth more than trying to
"pound the cure into her." Prevention, by super-
vising your puppy as she explores, is critical in
maintaining curiosity and safety at the same
time.
Physical Needs
16.
Your puppy's physical needs come in
mop pue dn yem ews y 'sisnq jous o
the block is fine for a youngster. If you do a walk
that is too long. your puppy will sit down and
refuse to walk. You may even need to pick her up
 us sm o daa jau  ao p
build time and pace slowly.
16
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
17
Don't take your puppy jogging and
●expect her to keep up with you for a
great distance. Keep the runs short in duration.
Running on a long leash is fine if done in a soft,
grassy area, but high-impact jumping or running
should be avoided until your dog is one year of
age. Their bones are still developing and you don't
want to risk injury or impairrment of proper devel-
opment.
18
One or two small walks per day along
●with one or two short runs in puppy-
hood is a rather general, but appropriate "recipe"
to meet your dog's physical needs. Keep in mind
that the balance will be different with different
breeds so make adjustments accordingly!
Social Needs
19
Your puppy's social needs are extremely
 important right now. This is probably the
most important need to fulfill at this stage
because she is forming all of her impressions
about the world right now. Preplan many social
exposure to as many different people, animals,
environments, and objects as possible.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
17
20
In the case of social exposures for your
●puppy. "the more the merrier" doesn't
always apply. Never sacrifice quality for quantity.
Control the exposures to other animals so they
don't scare your puppy. Visit new places during
off-peak times so they will not be overwhelming.
Use food to introduce new objects. The more pos-
itive learning experiences your puppy gets, the
faster she will learn good social skills.
21
All too often it is tempting to treat pup-
● pies to a magic carpet ride, picking them
up to either carry them from one point to another
or to immediately try to reassure them if some-
thing (a loud noise or quick movement) startles
them. While we must be aware that there may be
certain times when picking them up may prevent
harm and a negative learning experience, we
must also be willing to allow puppies to experi-
ence new situations to their fullest potential. If we
act as if there is something wrong with every new
or different situation, our puppies will take our
cue and assume something is wrong as well.
18
1000 BEST DOG TRAININGSECRETS
22
Give them a "safety net." When it comes
● to navigating steps or getting in and out of
cars or up and down stairs, assist your puppy. Since
we don't want their little furry joints to become
injured, we must develop a sense of how much
assistance to provide while still allowing them to
acclimate to their environment. We can assist our
puppies in these learning situations by offering the
same type of "safety net" that we offer when we
place our hands under a toddler's armpits to "un-
weight" them as they learn to walk.
Rest Needs
23
Rip Van Puppy: At this stage, puppies
·need more naps than most people
expect. Napping in a quiet crate, in a quiet room,
will help them recharge their little puppy batter-
ies. When a puppy is well rested, he will take
direction from you better, mouth you less, learn
things more cooperatively, and have more fun
playing with you. Rest recharges the battery, but
nothing recharges the battery like sleep. Sleep
occurs during nighttime when the dark reduces
i daa e oui d  dnd no ue 
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
19
24
Rest needs are high during physical
●growth spurts. Puppyhood is the stage
where the most physical growth takes place. When
your dog experiences a physical growth spurt, her
energy may decline and she may sleep nearly con
stantly. Don't worry—after the growth spurt stops,
she will be back to full activity in no time!
BASIC PuPPY MAnnerS
25
Probably the most frequent complaint of
● all clients is "my dog jumps on people.
One of the problems is that we accidentally nur-
ture the jumping from the start by picking them
Aem ,adoid, aui 'sn je budunt are Aau alum dn
to pick up a puppy (so as not to nurture the jump-
ing problem!) is to turn the puppy away from you
first, then pick her up with one arm under her
chest and armpits and one arm supporting her
rump. Do not pick her up when she is facing you
or climbing on you. Recognize the early request
for a cuddle but turn it into a positive pattern
starting on the first day!
20
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
The NaMe GaMe! socIalize
Your puppy to her new name
For this exercise you will need two people. Both
people need to sit on the floor facing each other
six or eight feet apart. Have a long leash on your
puppy. One person has the loop end of the leash
and the other person has the puppy. Hold the
puppy so he faces the person with the loop. Have
the person with the loop call the puppy's name.
Person Two may need to push the puppy towards
Person One. Person One reels the puppy in with
the leash. When your puppy gets to Person One,
praise and give a treat.
Make sure to only use your puppy's name and
praise. Give a treat every time. Repeat this exer-
cise at least ten times per session. The lesson we
can teach the puppy is "when I hear my name and
come running, I get a cookie." You will need to
repeat the practice session at least four times a
week. Children can also assist in this exercise with
the parent's immediate supervision.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
21
26
After your puppy appears to recognize
●her name, you can try a different exer-
cise. Take your puppy outside on the long leash.
Wait until your puppy becomes interested in a
scent or is wandering around. Call her name (only
ue sn rno gd q aao pe (au nau
repeating her name. Reel her in if necessary.
Praise and give a treat for returning to you. Repeat
this exercise ten times each session.
27
While you are raising your puppy. you
●can use her name to divert her from
improper behaviors and redirect her to you. If you
find your puppy starting to chew on a plant or leg
of a chair, call her name in a cheery, positive tone
and she will leave the object behind and eagerly
trot over to you. Praise and give her a treat.
28
Don't worry—your puppy won't learn to
●chew things for a treat. Her attention
span is so short she will only remember her name
and the treat. This diversion/redirection will only
work if you keep your puppy's name positive!
(Remember, reprimand will not teach her a lesson
at this age. The desire for discovery will override
any "social lesson.")
22
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Earn It and Learn It
29
Begin simple daily manners by having
· your puppy sit to have her leash put on,
sit before she is served her meal, sit for treats, and
sit at doorways before exiting. This will not only
promote etiquette but will also get her in the
habit of cooperating with you on a daily basis
30
There are basic skills of sitting, downing.
o and walking on a leash that your puppy
can learn during this stage. Working with you,
taking direction, earning rewards, and "learning to
enjoy learning" are all accomplished by doing
these exercises at this time.
Teaching the "Puppy Sit"
31
With your puppy at your left side, place
·your right hand on the collar and your
left hand on your puppy's rump just above her
tail. "Roll" your puppy's haunches under with a
tuck of your left hand. As you're rolling your
puppy's rump under, gently apply upward and
backward pressure with the collar. As you're plac-
ing the puppy into the position, say "SIT:" When
the puppy is there, cheerfully say "Good SIT!"
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
23
32
Do not push down on your puppy's
● pelvis and never use force when teach-
ing SIT! Your puppy's rump should roll right under
her as you slide your hand down and over her tail.
If you curl your hand gently under her buttocks
while you do this, she will automatically roll her
haunches under for you.
Teaching the "Puppy Down"
33
Begin with your puppy in a SIT by your
●left side. Place your left hand on your
puppy's upper shoulders and back, with your right
hand underneath your puppy's front legs, palms up.
With a sweeping motion, move your right hand
forward as you gently push your puppy's front
feet forward and out from underneath him. While
doing this, apply gentle, steady pressure downward
on your puppy's shoulders as your puppy slides
softly into the DOwN position. As you place the
puppy into the position, say "DOwN." When the
puppy is there, cheerfully say "Good DowN!"
Teaching
 Your Puppy "Follow-the-Leader"
Skills and Leash Etiquette
34
At this point it isn't important for your
● puppy to walk directly at the HEEL posi-
tion. It is more important for her to learn to hap-
pily accept walking on a leash somewhere near
you. This means no excessive pulling or dragging
behind.
24
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
35
Begin by calling your puppy's name and
·saying,"Let's go!" Pat your leg, encourage
your puppy with your voice, and praise her for fol-
lowing.
36
When your puppy becomes distracted,
·gently tug on the leash, saying "No"
then say "Here!" When she responds, looks at you,
and follows you, praise her heartily!
37
 If your puppy is a puller, turn away from
● her to get her attention. You may have to
make several turns in each session to teach her to
stay by your side. Do not expect her to hold a true
HEEL at this time in her life. Just concentrate on
having her learn to look for you.
If your puppy bites at the leash when you walk,
give her a toy to carry on the walk. This will avoid
a "tug-of-war" situation. You can also spray a bit-
ters spray on the leash before each walk to dis-
courage her from putting the leash in her mouth.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
25
BrINGInG HOMe PuPPY
38
Make sure you understand the pros and
● the cons of the breed you are getting (or
have gotten). To make sure you get useful feed-
back, talk to a local trainer or veterinarian. These
professionals have seen the good and bad of each
breed and can provide balanced input.
39
When is the best time to get a dog? Ide
·ally, bring your puppy home approxi
mately three years before you plan to introduce
children into the household. This will give the dog
plenty of time to be trained and to mature. He will
then be better able to handle the introduction of
the children. The dog will also be less work for
mom and dad by the time the children arrive.
If you have young children and the household is
determined to get a pet, try a cat or a fish. Cats
require much less raising, care, and maintenance
than dogs do. You will still need to kitten-proof
and supervise your children with the cat, but this
might be a better alternative.
26
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
40.
Conversely, if small children are already
●in the household, waiting until the chil-
dren are between eight and ten years of age is rec-
ommended. Children of this age have more
self-control and maturity, and Mom and Dad have
more available time for raising the puppy now that
the children don't require constant monitoring.
41
Never assume the children will care for
●your puppy or dog. Raising a puppy is
not a learning experience for your children. Only
bring a puppy into the household if the adult
owners both agree that this is the right idea at the
right time.
42
Introduce the leash and collar when the
●puppy comes home for the first time.
Keep your puppy on a leash while she is out of the
crate. Allow her to drag her leash around so that it
will become a normal part of her day-to-day life.
RAISING TIPS
43
Stay in constant watch of your puppy.
● The more you watch and direct his every
action, the fewer mistakes he will make. Less mis-
takes means less stress for the owner. Less stress
for the owner means no temper tantrums or dis-
out" behavior from leaders leads to more trust
from puppy to human. Easy, yes?
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
27
44
Unknown Boundaries: You can't make a
●correction for something that your
puppy doesn't understand yet. So if you're puppy
is going into unchartered waters (rooms off lim-
its), do not yell or vocally reprirmand. Play the
 ny aid pe eq na  p a a
following your lead.
45
Keep your puppy on a leash in order to
redirect him more neutrally. If you see
him get into something inappropriate, gently tug
the leash and call his name (without anger) to call
him away from his mistake.
46
Keep in mind that puppies are truly
●making mistakes in this stage. If we
respond to mistakes with anger, our puppies may
accidentally learn that exploring is negative (and
that we are negative!). Mistakes are mistakes at
this stage. The only thing they need to learn is
that their leaders will help them learn fairly and
calmly. Whether it's a housebreaking accident, a
chewing mistake, or a mouthing mistake, keep
your cool and redirect your puppy.
28
1000 BEST DOGTRAININGSECRETS
47
Be a good baby-sitter. Since we need to
·tend to their needs completely, don't
leave your puppy alone in the yard by himself or
unattended to
“play" by himself in the living
room. When you're with your puppy, plan activi-
ties to occupy his time. Balls, chew toys, puppy
manners exercises, walks, etc., are all creative
ways to keep your puppy involved with something
positive.
48
When you can't supervise your puppy.
● place her in her crate for a nap. This is
the easiest way to prevent errors. You may need to
crate her simply to pay bills or cook dinner, and
then take her out again. Feel good about using
your crate as a way to supervise (safeguard) your
puppy when you can't supervise her. Think of the
tools we use for children when we can't actually
hold them: walker, playpen, swing, crib. Tools or
"training wheels" are always used for safety until
the little one is safe by herself.
49
Keep chew toys in every room in which
● you wish to take your puppy. If toys are
readily available, you can always give your puppy
something positive to do with her time while
you're brushing your teeth or putting on your
shoes. This prevents table legs, your legs, and
leather shoes from being "chew toy du jour!"
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
29
TeTherinG Or "POsTinG"
50
The "canine umbilical cord": If you need
· to fold laundry or do the dishes and you
wish to have your puppy with you rather than
crated, tether her to a table leg or tie the leash
around your waist or belt. Keeping your puppy
tethered in the room with you will keep a "bound-
ary" in place and keep her in your visual field. Be
sure the object you tether your puppy to is some.
thing heavy, like a bedpost, sofa, or heavy dresser,
so your dog can't move the object or pull it over
and injure herself.
51
Only tether your puppy while she's
 wearing a flat, material collar. Never
tether a dog while she's wearing any sort of train-
ing collar. It helps if your puppy's material collar
has a quick-release latch in case she gets tangled.
Never use a choker chain or prong collar for teth-
ering, and never tether your puppy unattended or
for long periods without supervision.
52
You may want to have several tethers
●already set up around your house. Pick
the most used rooms like your bedroom, office
and living room. Have a tether already set up in
each room so that you can easily hook your puppy
up to it as you move around the house with her.
30
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
CRATE TRAINING
Why use the crate?
The crate is the safest and most effective form of
confinement. Socialize your puppy to it immedi-
ately and continue to use it through maturity (2-3
years). It provides safety and respect in many
areas.
Crating provides  a  housebreaking  tool,
structure, acceptance of boundaries, puppy safety.
property safety, and relationship preservation.
Housebreaking.
 The crate
eis an excellent
housebreaking tool. The goal of its use is to stim
ulate cleanliness. Puppies instinctively don't want
to soil their sleeping or living area.
Structure. When the crate is used for structure,
it is the single easiest way to establish a "follow-
the-rules" appreciation in your dog. Simply using
the crate on a regular basis allows the puppy to
accept the concept of rules of the house.
Acceptance of Boundaries. While the crate is a
physical boundary, its use generates the accept-
ance of boundaries in your dog's life. This helps
achieve one of your main puppy goals.
Puppy's Safety. Certainly there are times when
you cannot be "tied" to your dog or supervise
her every action. These are the times when crate
usage is also positive and helpful. Any dog, une-
ducated in household rules, can get into danger
when you're not looking.
. Household dangers
range from puppies falling down the steps to
puppies  chewing
g wires, ingesting the wrong
items, etc. Using your crate for those moments
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
31
when you need to take your attention away from
[!un Aiajes aajueienb l!m Addnd anox bujypiem 
you can watch her again.
Property Safety. Nothing is more devastating
than seeing your one-hundred-dollar pair of
shoes ripped into pieces by your puppy's side.
Seeing your DVD remote control being used as a
teething toy while you're sidetracked on the
phone is also quite upsetting. Contrary to popu-
lar belief, these things are accidents in puppy-
hood, but can be prevented by using the crate for
the times when your puppy is unsupervised.
Relationship Saver. Using your crate to give
you and your puppy some time away from each
other is important in maintaining a good relation-
ship. When we, or our puppies, become tired and
stressed, both run the risk of acting inappropri-
ately. Our voices and body language become
stressed while our puppies can end up making
destructive mistakes. Whether it's losing our
patience or a valuable item, our relationship can
become compromised. The crate as a relation-
ship saver answers the timeless question: "How
can I miss you if you don't go away?"
32
100O BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Crate Training—How to Use the Crate
53
One size fits all. To save money, purchase
·the crate that will be adequate for your
dog's lifetime needs. During the housebreaking
period, block off the rear of the crate with wood
slats or crate dividers available at larger pet stores.
As your puppy gets better at keeping the crate
clean, gradually increase the available living space.
54.
The crate should be big enough for the
●puppy to stand up in, turn around in,
and lie down in comfortably. It shouldn't be big
enough for the puppy to eliminate and then move
away to the other side of the crate.
Setting Up the Crate
55
We have assembled many metal crates,
● and each assembly is just as "easy" as the
first. Assemble the crate away from the puppy. Have
someone take him on a walk that will last at least a
half hour. The clanging of metal and gnashing of
teeth (your teeth) during set-up will surely preju-
dice your puppy's first impression of his new home.
56
Introduce your puppy to the surface on
●which he will be resting. Take the pan
out of the crate and allow the puppy to investigate
it. Place some treats on the pan to help out. The
same idea is important for the plastic crates. Sep-
arate the halves and allow the puppy to play in
the bottom half.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
33
57
Cushion the bottom of the metal crate.
· Sometimes the noise your puppy makes
walking on the pan can scare him. To dull the
sound, place the crate on a carpet or cut up the
cardboard box and place the cardboard under-
neath the pan.
Location of the Crate
58
Place the crate in a quiet location. The
● goal of being in the crate is to rest and
relax. If the crate is located in the kitchen or other
high-traffic area, your puppy will not rest ade-
quately and may develop problems from being
overtired. The ideal place is in a separate room
behind a closed door. Bedrooms are the ideal
place for the crate. This is the room where you
(the owner) leave the most scent. Your puppy will
feel closest to you here and will get the best rest
here.
59
Use the crate, not the gate. Puppies need
● their own space. Gating off an area like a
laundry room or kitchen doesn't allow the puppy
their own dedicated space. These areas are
shared-space areas. How relaxing would it be if
your bedroom doubled as the kitchen?
34
1000BESTDOGTRAININGSECRETS
Socializing to the Crate
60
Maybe your puppy has been socialized
●to the crate at the breeder, maybe not.
Since the crate is one of the most important tools
in raising and training your puppy, it is time to be
brave! Your attitude toward the crate will greatly
influence how your puppy accepts this aspect of
his life. Remember, adult dogs spend significant
amounts of time alone; it is essential they learn to
self-soothe now.
61
Place your puppy in the crate. Give your
● puppy their favorite treat. Always have a
pleasant voice even if your puppy was doing
something dastardly or dirty. It is often how the
puppy is placed in the crate and not what they
were doing that makes being in the crate punish-
ment. So if you never yell and you keep your emo-
tions under control, the crate will always be a
happy place.
62
Always get your puppy and lead him to
● the crate (using a leash). Never call your
puppy to the crate. This will avoid the “keep-
away" game as your puppy might not always want
to go into the crate and may dash around the
tables and under furniture trying to avoid you. If
your puppy makes a fool out of you, your temper
will undoubtedly rise, and now the crate will seem
like punishment.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
35
63
Provide some “white noise" for your
● puppy. Turn a radio on low volume or a
fan on low. This will provide enough background
noise for your puppy. He will be less likely to stay
awake and “listen" for house noises like people
moving around or that pesky squirrel dashing
through the leaves.
64
Even if your puppy is acting inappropri-
 ● ately and you need to use the crate for a
time-out, do not use anger when crating your
puppy. Remain calm when using the crate so your
puppy does not associate your anger or emotion-
ality with the crate itself.
65
Cover all bases! When your puppy is
●overly stimulated, you can cover the
crate with a blanket to remove excess stimulation.
Most often, puppies calm right down when cov-
ered. Leave the side facing the wall open for ven-
tilation.
How to Use the Crate
66
Give your puppy frequent elimination
·breaks in and out of the crate to ensure
that your house and the crate remain clean. A
clean crate will stimulate the puppy's natural
instincts to remain clean.
36
1000BEST DOGTRAININGSECRETS
67
In puppyhood, your puppy will not
●understand being crated as a negative
reinforcement for bad behavior. It will, however
settle her down if rest is truly what she needs, or
if she is becoming too stimulated during play. (In
the adolescent stage, a dog does understand "con-
sequences" and will be able to see crating as part
of a "liberty removal" system.)
68
The crate is a valuable tool for providing
● time management for your puppy. The
best way to use the crate is to set a schedule for
your puppy. The key to good management is many
repetitions in and out of the crate.
69
Have at least five planned activities
·ready when your puppy is out of the
crate. These activities should last between thirty
and forty-five minutes total for a young puppy.
Make these activities "quality time" with 100 per-
cent attention being paid to the puppy. After this
time is over, allow your puppy some downtime,
and then he will probably be ready for a crate nap.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
37
HOUSEBREAKING
70
Establish a schedule: The very first step
● to housebreaking your puppy is to estab-
lish a schedule. It is critical to stay as close to the
same times every day until your puppy has fully
understood the concept you are teaching him. The
tighter you remain on schedule, the faster the
puppy will develop a rhythm and internal time
clock for his own schedule.
71
Create a working schedule around the
●rhythms of the household. Puppies
should be fed three times a day unless work
schedules prohibit. Start your schedule when the
household wakes, and begin with an immediate
elimination break. Once a puppy is awake he
won't wait long to eliminate.
72
Write this schedule down and post it in
 a prominent place. If more than one per-
son is caring for the puppy, make sure schedule
responsibilities are understood and followed by
all participating. A unified family can ensure the
success of your housebreaking venture!
38
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Cue Words
73
Direction Cue. When going to the door,
+ choose a word like OUTSIDE to direct the
first part of her task. OUTSIDE will let her know
where you are going. and by using the next cue
word (the elimination cue word), she will link the
two words with the process.
74
OUTSIDE will become a question you
· will later ask her if you suspect she may
need to go outside. If you've successfully linked
OUTSIDE with HURRY UP (or the elimination cue
word), she will quickly run to the door in answer
to your question if she needs an elimination
break.
75
Elimination Cue. Use another specific cue
 like HURRY UP or POTTY to indicate that
you wish her to eliminate. This word can be linked
easily with the first potty break of the morning
since most puppies need to eliminate first thing
in the morning.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
39
76
Cue words can become gentle coaxes
● when you know your puppy needs to
eliminate but is perhaps becoming distracted in
the yard. Repeating the cue HURRY UP in a coax-
ing voice can refocus her on the job at hand.
77
Some people choose to pick one cue
● word for urination and one for defeca-
tion. You have to time the cue word with the
action quite a few times successfully so your
puppy can make the link between the action and
the words. Sometimes it's easier to use one word
or phrase for both actions.
40
1000 BESTDOG TRAINING SECRETS
The HOuSebReAKInG CYCle
Start the housebreaking cycle by bringing your
puppy out of the crate. Carry or walk your puppy
immediately outside. Using a leash, walk your
puppy over to the desired elimination area. Gen-
tly, but encouragingly, repeat your cue word.
Once your puppy has eliminated, praise in a gen-
tle tone "Good potty," and return inside the
house.
Wait only three to four minutes for your puppy
to eliminate. If it takes longer than this, she prob.
ably does not need to eliminate or is distracted.
Return inside and wait five minutes and repeat
the process. (lf your puppy tends to eliminate
few minutes or keep her on a short leash with you
to avoid these accidents.)
Once inside, offer breakfast and some water.
When your puppy finishes, take her outside for
another elimination break. In this morning rou-
tine, your puppy should both urinate and defe-
cate.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
41
Feeding Time
78
When feeding your puppy. allow only
● ten to fifteen minutes for eating. If your
puppy doesn't eat the full meal, remove it and do
not feed again until the next scheduled feeding.
This will encourage a timely and efficient feeding
schedule. This, in turn, helps with a timely, rhyth-
mic elimination schedule.
79
 If your puppy is wandering around during
 mealtime, you may need to put her on-
leash and restrict her motion around the kitchen
until she is finished. After the bowl is empty or time
is up, remove the bowl and do not feed your dog
again until the next scheduled feeding.
80
During feeding. pick a quiet area or time
 to feed. Sometimes the daily activities in
one's kitchen or living area will cause the puppy
to be unable to focus on eating. If your puppy
seems distracted and unable to concentrate on
a oi ain iau un rau ind 'uaag jo ao, a
Eliminating distractions will allow your puppy to
focus on the task at hand.
42
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Setbacks and Accidents in Housebreaking
81
Be prepared for setbacks! Puppies at the
· age of eight to ten weeks will void them-
selves completely when they eliminate. As they
age to between eleven and thirteen weeks, muscle
control of the bladder begins to develop. At this
stage, it is not uncommon for the puppy to elimi-
nate only a portion of their contents and then
become distracted by a leaf, noise, or their own
tail. The puppy will return inside and promptly
eliminate again. This is not a deliberate action,
just a lack of concentration. Practice puppy con-
centration exercises and keep a keen eye to see if
your puppy is voiding completely.
82
What do you do if your puppy has an
● accident? Be calm. (Yelling or otherwise
startling or scaring the puppy may teach him not
to eliminate in front of you.) Walk quickly over to
your puppy and say "NO" firmly. Pick up the puppy
and immediately take him to the desired elimina-
tion area.
83
Do not rub your puppy's nose in her acci-
●dent. This will cause her to lose trust in
you for doing such a distasteful act to her. She may
also think that you are displeased with the act
rather than the location of it. That may cause her to
not want to eliminate in front of you. This could
lead to her sneaking off and hiding to eliminate,
eliminating in her crate, or eating her own stool.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
43
84.
Thoroughly clean the accident area with
● an odor neutralizer. Common cleaners
may take the smell from our noses but not your
puppy's. If the scent remains, the puppy will
assume this area is appropriate for elimination.
Special Considerations of Housebreaking
85
Should people with jobs own dogs? Sure,
·but
t remember that housebreaking a
young puppy without a midday elimination break
is more difficult on the both the puppy and owner
alike. The owner must allow (and provide space
for) more frequent accidents and an overall longer
process.
86
Hiring a dog-walking service to aid in
● this developmental period is also a good
idea to help avoid long crating periods while your
puppy is young. This period in a dog's life goes by
quickly and some allowances made early on can
yield an opportunity for better learning and a
wonderful relationship with your dog later.
87
At first, absorbent bedding will keep
●accidents away from your puppy when
they are simply too young to "hold it" for extended
periods of time. Keeping them clean now will
stimulate their own ability to be clean later. Keep
a good schedule to aid in this cleanliness process.
44
1000 BEST DOG TRAININGSECRETS
88
In later stages of housebreaking (three
●months on), avoid absorbent bedding. If
your puppy can eliminate and have the offending
material absorbed, he can push it off to one side.
Removal of bedding at this point will require your
puppy to really try to remain clean in between
scheduled potty breaks.
89
Avoid tethering your puppy outside. Nat-
● ural instincts will tell the puppy not to
soil an area they spend extended amounts of time
in. This may cause the puppy not to eliminate out-
side or start eliminating inside the crate.
90
Not all puppies give obvious signals
· when they need to eliminate, but they do
give signs. Watch your puppy carefully and note
some of the more common signals: waking up,
sudden sniffing, circling, moving to a remote area,
or just a puzzled look. Act quickly to get your puppy
to the elimination area as quickly as possible.
91
When activity level changes, your puppy
● could have an accident. This applies to
sleeping and waking, playing then stopping, after
a car ride, after a meal, etc.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
45
92
Your puppy's accidents will catch him as
●much by surprise as they do you! Your
puppy can be playing, drinking, walking, or chew-
ing a bone and may just spontaneously urinate
This is completely without intent and is certainly
not "out of spite." Her bladder simply became full
and her body released it. Until her body develop-
ment catches up, this is quite common.
IN EQuAlS Out!
What goes in must come out, and this applies to
both treats and water. Limit treat volume. Fre-
quent treats are okay, but offer small bits instead
of big bones. Watch the water intake as well. The
rule of thumb is to make sure your puppy has
plenty of water to clean his system. But offer the
water in small parcels, relevant to your dog's size.
This will keep a good flow of water moving
through his system, but in predictable time peri-
ods so you can structure his "output" and keep
accidents to a minimum.
46
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
93.
Quality food is highly digestible. What
●this
 means to the housebreaking
process is the more readily digestible the food, the
less the puppy must eliminate. A bargain food-
store brand has plenty of fillers. For every one
hundred pounds of food your puppy eats, he may
eliminate fifty to sixty pounds in the yard! One
hundred pounds of a higher-quality pet-store
brand may only yield thirty-five to forty pounds in
the yard. The more frequently the puppy must
eliminate, the harder the housebreaking process.
94
The firmer the stool, the easier it is for
● the puppy to "hold it." If your puppy's
stool is consistently soft, consider switching
foods. Check the protein source on the bag you are
currently feeding your puppy (e.g., chicken, beef,
lamb, or some other meat). Switch the protein
source and see if the stool changes. Always switch
foods slowly over at least a week interval to avoid
diarrhea.
95
Unless you are teaching your puppy to
· eliminate inside the house (if you live in
a big city and have a small dog), it is best to use
pne, u se Ao ped aam-aam pue raded
catcher" It is not wise to encourage the puppy to
eliminate on the paper as a habit. Encouraging
paper elimination leads the puppy to understand
that, under the correct circumstances, it is okay to
eliminate in the house.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
47
96
If your puppy is having trouble under-
●standing where to eliminate, place a
soiled paper or pad outside in the area reserved
for elimination. During the next scheduled bath-
room break, take the puppy out to the desired
area and show him the pad. Repeat your cue word
encouragingly and praise for success.
PreVenTinG fOOd AGGreSSION
97
Feeding your puppy in a quiet, peaceful
·area will remove the chances of her
becoming stressed out and defensive about meal-
times. Too much activity and commotion near her
feeding area may cause her to startle quickly.
ingest her food too quickly, or become protective.
98
If her litter was large, she may have had
·a great deal of competition either for a
teat on the mother dog or for food in a bowl as she
was weaned onto dog food. This competition is
stressful and may have caused her to have to fight
to claim her food.
Sit quietly by your dog in a chair, holding
·her leash. This gives not only direction
to your puppy. but also enhances her ability to
adapt to someone being near to her food bowl.
Remain motionless and do not disturb her while
she's feeding. Don't stare at her. Sometimes your
puppy may perceive that as a challenge.
48
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
100
After a week or two of sitting by her,
●you can begin casually reaching
down and petting her gently while she's eating.
Don't distract her too much. Just touch her as the
next step in desensitizing her. Praise her gently
for allowing you to interact with her. At later feed-
ing sessions, reach into her food bowl and touch
her food. Again, praise her for not responding.
101
You may want to divide her meal
ing" is finished, you can add the rest to her bowl
and let her finish the second "serving" which is
really just the second half of the total meal. This
may help her to see that food isn't scarce, her
needs will be met, and there will always be plenty
for her to eat.
Puppy-prOofinG
102
 It is essential to "puppy-proof" your
● home for your newest family mem-
ber. Keeping her safe is your first goal. Since pup-
pies have no self-control or concept of right and
wrong yet, you do not want to risk her safety by
having ingestible items readily available.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
49
103
Plug up outlets with childproof out-
·let covers. Whiskers and tongues
may find investigation a shocking experience! All
jokes aside, this could be very dangerous, if not
life-threatening to your puppy.
104
Hide television, phone, and com-
·puter wires
 under furniture or
objects. All too often, these tempting "toys" satisfy
not only unsafe investigation instincts, but unsafe
chewing needs as well. Not only is this dangerous
to your puppy, but it can also cost you money in
electronic repairs.
105
Bitters extract sprays can be pur-
●chased to spray on items that you
wish your dog to remain away from. These tastes
are so pungent that your dog will immediately
spit the object out of his mouth and create a neg-
ative association with the object. Later, the smell
of the spray alone will be enough of an associa-
tion with the taste to keep your puppy away from
the object. The sprays need to be reapplied every
other day or so to completely break the habit of
chewing the object.
106
Houseplants can be poisonous, so do
● some research on the plants in your
home. Bitters extract spray products exist specifi-
cally for plants, but supervise your puppy around
plants.
50
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
107
Puppy-proofing is not a license to let
●your puppy have free roam of the
house or even of a given area. She can find the
smallest of items to investigate and it could prove
harmful to her. You remain her best safeguard in
her daily life experiences.
Motor MouthinG monsters
108
Nipping and mouthing are very nat-
●ural instincts. Everything puppies
know instinctually tells them that using the
mouth is one of the most natural things they will
do (just like crying is to a newborn baby). This
does not mean that your puppy is aggressive or
temperamental, just using the only tools he
understands.
109
You will not do any one thing to get
●them to believe that this deeply
imprinted mouthing instinct is wrong. So don't
try the “quick fixes" like spray bottles, shaker
cans, or holding their mouth! Attempting these
reprimands will not work and will only serve to
break your puppy's trust in you. There are ways to
manage your puppy's mouthing and nipping as
opposed to using"quick fixes."
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
51
110
Each "mouthing moment" has a dif-
·ferent origin, so each “solution" or
management option is, of course, going to be dif-
ferent. You can keep a running list of"origins" and
a list of "managements" to help you troubleshoot.
Managing Mouthing and Nipping
111
The first step in managing nipping
●and mouthing is to identify the core
reason for the mouthing/nipping at any given
time. Your puppy will use her mouth for many dif-
ferent reasons and at many different times. Keep
a log of the times and circumstances of the behav-
ior. You will quickly see patterns in the behaviors.
112
Once you've identified the source of
● the mouthing, you can apply a man-
agement technique to quell it (for the time being).
Remember that puppies are constant manage-
ment, and managing this behavior today means
managing it tomorrow until your puppy can learn
right and wrong concepts and self-control. We will
outline a checklist of actions to take when your
dog is “bite happy."
52
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Why do nippinG And
Mouthing Happen?
Communication. Puppies will nip and mouth to
communicate. Try to figure out what it is they are
trying to communicate and meet that need. They
may need interaction, a walk, or a nap. Mouthing
to communicate only stops when a new commu-
nication channel is introduced. This channel is the
obedience training
 language.  Until  obedience
training, try to figure out what they are trying to
communicate and resolve it—don't punish it.
Investigation. Puppies will nip and mouth to
investigate. They will also use their mouths to
explore textures—carpets, clothing, shoes, pil-
ows, furniture,
. etc.
.To
0redirect investigation,
encourage
other play with safe,
approved
objects. Use a specific "approved chew toy" to
help your puppy quickly identify which material is
approved for chewing.
Teething. Puppies will nip and mouth to teeth.
Your puppy will begin teething as early as four
months 
 and
continue
ethrough
five months
(smaller breeds may be delayed as much as one
month). If your dog is teething, divert with a chew
toy. If your puppy spits the chew toy out and
returns to your hand, you either do not have the
material she needs to soothe her teething, or she
has another need.
Frustrated.  Puppies will nip and mouth if
they're frustrated. If your puppy feels you don't
understand her needs, 
, she can become quite
frustrated. This is where mouthing usually jumps
into high gear. At this point, it is best to crate
your puppy so she can get out of her "tizzy" and
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
53
calm down. Find out where the communication
breakdown is coming from. It could be a forgot-
ten potty break, hunger (mealtime), thirst (empty
water bowl), or other unfulfilled need that needs
tending. If your puppy ends up snoozing soundly
while you're playing detective, then there's your
answer—the need was rest all along!
Recipes for Quelling a Mouthing Situation
113
Give your puppy a bathroom break.
●This is the quickest and easiest
potential solution.
114
Stop! Cease all action by placing
●your puppy into a SIT position facing
away from you. Once she is sitting. praise her
calmly. Keep her in this position for one to two
minutes and introduce calming words like "settle
down" or "enough" spoken in mild vocal tones. Do
not stroke or pet your dog at this point. You will
need both hands to do this correctly, and stroking
InoA on Bueins Aiaa aq ueo 1ny sgop 1noA
puppy. Do not release your puppy if she is resist-
ing or fighting you. Release your puppy when you
feel her body relax.
54
1000BEST DOGTRAININGSECRETS
115
Try to divert with chew toys. Place a
 toy
y in your puppy's mouth and
praise for her taking it. Try to keep it there and
help her concentrate on this new action rather
than the previous nipping action. This is usually a
great troubleshooting action as you will quickly
know if the need has been met with this one!
116
Maybe a little interaction is the
●thing. If your puppy diverts for a
short time with the SIT redirection or the toy redi-
rection, but is still insistent in mouthing you, try a
game of fetch or other game that will not over-
stimulate your puppy. (We recommend not using
the “chasing the kids around the house" game as
an outlet!)
117
Lastly, it is time for a nap. If your
● puppy has lost the ability to control
  r a,  r a '
control will be met with failure. Now it's time for
a time-out. Pick your puppy up and talk quietly to
her as you place her in her crate, and give her a
treat for going in. Shut the door and let your
puppy relax for at least fifteen minutes after her
initial fidgeting in the crate has stopped. She
might even need a good, long one- or two-hour
nap.
Puppy Raising, Puppy Praising
55
2.
Adolescent
Dogs
dolescence—the season of teaching and
mentoring. All of the adolescent stages are
the core stages for a dog's learning of our expec-
tations, making good choices, and becoming a
good team member. It's much like a child's devel-
opment from ages five through thirteen.
Age: Adolescence covers the period between
the puppy stage (five months) and adult stage
 id g d e i s ( )
and social growth. The physical growth stage will
climax between nine months and one year in age.
The mental and social growth stage continues
from puberty through three years of age when the
dog fully matures into an adult dog.
GOALS fOR AdOLeSCenT dOGS
Obedience Command Language. The first goal to
be accomplished in the adolescent stage is to
teach the obedience command language. The
obedience commands will serve as the communi-
cation substitute for the nipping and mouthing
you endured during the puppy stage. It is also the
stage to formally introduce the boundary that
dogs must not use their mouth on humans.
Cooperation. To teach cooperation, do a short
fifteen- to twenty-minute training session and fol-
low it up with your puppy's favorite activity: Fris-
bee, ball game, retrieving game, walk, run, or
favorite chew toy. Your dog will quickly see that
obedience is a vehicle to his favorite activities.
Social Skills. Learning the concept of "social
skills" is equally important for dogs in this age
58
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
range. Use obedience skills, such as HEEL and
SIT-STAY, in social situations to help your dog
learn to have self-control around other dogs and
people. Good social skills begin with self-control
through obedience training.
Realistic goais. Set realistic goals for these
stages. As early as puberty, your dog can be
exhibiting good self-control. He will continue to
exhibit better self-control as you help him
develop it through training and as he matures.
Set small goals for each life stage and continue to
build on them so that your guidance and his
maturing go hand-in-hand.
The "Loop of Learning." During these stages,
behavior patterns, manners, and daily skills are
being taught and set. This loop or circle holds all
of the valuable information your dog will need for
his entire life. Use this time wisely to educate your
dog fully so that the proper lessons will be carried
into his adulthood. This "loop" remains open only
until adulthood.
EXPeCTaTIOns fOr
AdOLeSCeNT dOGS
118
Obedience training at this stage is
-qod ino jo le ,xy, oi papuaiun nou 
lems. Obedience will be used to create patterns
that will be adopted (self-applied) in various situ-
ations to create manners over time. So don't
lems to occur.
Adolescent Dogs
59
119
Patience-building exercises are espe-
●cially helpful at these stages. Do
position-holding (SIT STAY and DOWN STAY)
exercises daily to increase patience over time.
120
During puberty, secondary sexual
●characteristics begin to blossom.
Genetic imprinting such as territorial responses
can also begin to surface. This is the time when
mental discipline must be instilled as a basis for
developing a sense of canine "morality." Mentally
challenging exercises, like distraction training.
practiced often will help decrease response to
genetics.
121
"I've never seen my dog do that
●before." If owners could assign a slo-
gan to this developmental stage of puberty, that
would be it! Mental growth driven by genetic
imprinting and hormonal influences will find fer-
tile ground in a dog who is becoming more confi-
dent with sorting out these impulses. Many
interesting behavior problems can surface in an
otherwise "good dog" during this period.
60
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Limitations
122
The adolescent stage is defined by
·questioning authority and bound-
aries. Your dog may have a solid grasp of the com-
mands, and he might even be starting to self
apply some of the patterns you have been teach-
ing him. But remember, he is only beginning to
understand right and wrong, and questioning
these boundaries is normal. Answer his "ques-
tions" and breaches of boundaries with calm, on-
leash direction
through
commands.
Your
command system is your 
"yes and no," "ques-
tion/answer" communication system.
123
Maintaining the protocol until actual
maturity (adulthood) is essential.
The temptation at this stage is to remove the
leadership protocol activities that have chauf-
feured your dog up to this point. Because your dog
is not mature yet and is still questioning leader-
ship and boundaries, he could slowly begin to
backslide if you remove your leadership. Contin-
your dog from seeing holes in your consistency.
Adolescent Dogs
61
124
It is common to want to remove the
●training wheels of leadership when
you see glimpses of good behavior. It is also com-
mon, however, to be deceived into thinking your
dog is "grown up" mentally just because he is
"grown up" physically. Fully developed bodies do
not mean fully developed minds. Be aware of this
tendency at this time and keep teaching.
62
1000 BESTDOG TRAINING SECRETS
125
Despite the fact that this stage
· seems like a long period of time (two
and a half years) the imaginary "software" that
deterrmines how your dog behaves in society is
being programmed and the "learning loop" is clos-
ing. The opportunity to fundamentally change
your dog's behavior will close sometime near the
adult timeline. During the adolescent stage, true
behaviors (positive ones) can be imprinted and
behavior problems can be extinguished. After the
"loop of learning" is closed, behavior problems
can only be managed.
The Role Of LeaderShIP fOR
AdOleSCENT dOGS
You direct them, or genetics will direct them! Very
simply, dogs need leaders. If you do not tell them
how to behave, their instincts will. Your leader-
ship will help them listen to a more appropriate
leader than their genetics—you!
Parent or Friend? We all want to be friends
with our dogs. We want that "man's best friend"
image of a boy and his dog. That will come after
you've raised your dog well and he's an adult. In
these adolescent stages, however, it is most
important to be his parent, leader, director, and
guide. Leadership now ensures that your dog will
correctly learn how to be a positive family mem-
ber for the rest of his life.
Adolescent Dogs
63
126
Respect. Respect comes from how
●you work with your dog, how you
 guide him in real life, and how consistent you are
in your teaching. Don't fall into the “dominance
trap” of leadership. You do not need to play
"prison guard" to gain your dog's respect. Gain his
respect by being fair and consistent, not loud and
demanding.
Direction now, freedom later. This is the stage of
direction and leadership! The freedom your dog
will gain in adulthood comes from your direction
and leadership in the adolescent stages. More
direction means better teaching, better learning.
and better manners. Do your job well in these
stages, and you will have to do less directing later
and more enjoying!
YouR AdOLescent doG's NeedS
Mental Needs
127
Mental needs in your adolescent dog
·are high. Fulfilling these needs will
reduce boredom, stimulate his mind, teach con-
cepts, and reduce his need to follow his instincts.
You can fulfill his mental needs mostly by work-
ing obedience training, whether in your home or
in other locations. Keep the training interesting
and thought-provoking to pique their interests.
64
1000 BEST DOG TRAININGSECRETS
Language and Learning Perspectives
128
"It's all Greek to me!" In puberty, a
● puppy must learn a communication
system that will replace the old system of dog lan-
guage. If he does not learn this system that we call
obedience training, he will continue to rely on his
instinctual canine communication skills. Instinc-
tual skills for a dog involve barking, mouthing.
and body language to communicate concepts. The
new language, obedience training, helps the dog
learn words, their meanings, and ultimately our
expectations by how we use them.
129
n
the
beginning
{around
five
●months of age), approach training
like a game for your puppy. Begin slowly and pos-
itively, like a first-grade teacher would with chil-
dren. Making it fun means that your dog will
embrace the idea of training and learning for the
rest of his life.
130
At six to nine months, increase the
● workouts. Make some lessons longer
and some more difficult.
Adolescent Dogs
65
131
As you try to develop a work ethic,
·add some "plain ol' fun" training ses-
sions to your routine. This will keep your dog feel-
ing like he's “winning" and succeeding. If it isn't
always tough, he will remain eager to learn from
you.
Physical Needs
132
Physical needs escalate in these
·stages of life. One to three walks
and/or runs each day is a fair number to expect
for your adolescent dog. The amount and duration
of these activities will vary according to breed,
size, climate, and personality.
133
Keep your dog well exercised to
·relieve stress and to balance the
mental work he needs to be doing. In this stage of
teaching and directing, exercise serves as a bal-
ance to all of the learning you are asking him to
do. While mental work is something he needs.
there is nothing like a good dose of physical exer-
cise to release energy and pent up stress!
66
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
134
Brave it and bundle up! Exercise will
●still be most desired by your dog
even in the dead of winter. Do your best to bundle
up and exercise your dog even in the snow (if your
dog's breed and size can handle it).The good news
is that it will take less time to exercise them in the
snow since it will tire them more quickly! Daily
exercise will help to compensate for the lack of
social interaction that sometimes occurs at this
time of year.
135
Take precautions to avoid frostbite
 on your dog. Less time outdoors in
the cold, avoiding direct contact with ice, and
using coats for small dogs or breeds with shorter
coats are all good precautions. Avoid any outdoor
activity if the weather is especially threatening.
136
Hot Fun in the Summertime! While
 summer is a great time to exercise
your dog outdoors, be cautious of the extra hot or
humid times of the year. Do either shorter walks,
alternate swimming activities, or walks early in
the morning or late in the evening to avoid the
hottest times of day.
Adolescent Dogs
67
137
Your dog may especially enjoy one
·physical activity over another, or a
variety of activities. Some of those include walk-
ing, running, fetch, hiking, swimming, retrieving.
and Frisbee. Vary your activities to keep your dog
enjoying outdoor fun, or simply key in to his
favorite one and supply plenty of this for balance
in his life!
Social Needs
138
Your dog's social needs in these stages
● are as high as their mental and phys-
ical needs. Your dog is taking in everything about
 d pos,    u  pom 5
is curious to learn about his world, so input and
integration with many people, places, and things is
necessary to create a well-rounded dog.
139
The deep
0 winter and the hottest
·summer season can cripple a dog's
critical learning period. If you're raising a young-
ster during these times, you risk your dog losing
her most critical imprinting time for learning
about the world. Be creative and diligent about
getting your impressionable puppy the proper
social exposures during these tricky times.
68
1000 BEST DOG TRAININGSECRETS
140
Avoid social "cabin fever" by taking
● him to indoor social venues like pet
stores or dog shows. Go to covered strip malls and
walk, to at least have your dog continue to see
people and be in a social scene.
141
Summer swelter can also put a snag
● in your dog's social life if it's too hot to
go outside. Try indoor social activities the same way
you would during winter, or simply go to a park
with a bowl of water for her and a bottle of water for
you, and sit in the shade and enjoy being in a social
environment without exerting any energy!
Adolescent Dogs
69
Rest Needs
142
Your dog's rest needs vary during this
● stage. Generally speaking, the amount
of rest your dog needs will decrease as she gets
older. Early in the adolescent stage your dog will still
need to have rest periods scheduled for her. Later in
the adolescent stage she will learn to rest on her
own. Rest is used to avoid physical injury and to pre-
vent behavior accidents in curious teenagers. Be
 aware of the different needs in each stage.
143
As maturity sets in and the leaders
● are leading their pets, the amount of
rest a dog needs as prevention wanes a bit. Self-
control and manners are being built, so physical
and mental "accidents" are less likely to occur.
Expect this balance to shift as your dog grows.
144
If her mental and physical needs are
● met to a high degree, your dog might
need more rest in a proportional fashion. If the
mental and physical needs are not met, then your
dog might need less rest and more stimulation.
RAISING TIPS
145
The language of obedience training
●must be positive, fun, well taught, and
well received. The tools for these concepts are food.
happy voice, happy facial expressions, precise and
patient teaching. and an eager teacher. (See the fol-
lowing tips for more details about the concepts.)
70
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Positive Learning
146
Food for teaching obedience. Do not
●worry that by using food your dog
will come to depend on food in training. There are
many ways to ensure that food simply puts a pos-
itive twist on training, as opposed to becoming a
"crutch." The main ideas are that your dog finds
this a positive experience, and he is learning to
work, cooperate, and be patient for rewards.
147
If you do it, the treat will come. Start
● out using a tiny snack for each com-
pleted command. After a while, decrease the
amount of treats. Reinforce after perhaps three
completed
l commands. Then only treat for
patience commands. Then reinforce randomly so
that your dog is kept guessing (and working!) for
the next treat.
148
Use a treat in conjunction with
●upbeat, genuine verbal praise and
your smiling face. After a while, your praise and
the treat should end up meaning the same thing.
Therefore, eliminating food during training
shouldn't matter.
Adolescent Dogs
71
There Is No "I" In "t-e-A-M"
After learning the obedience language in the
puberty stage, teamwork is the next piece of the
"growing-up puzzle" that your dog needs to
learn. Teamwork is the concept that will help your
dog overcome the "me" stage. It means that your
dog understands working with you brings good
things. He learns this by getting praise, petting.
food, and affection for working with you. Rein-
force training, walking, and games in this manner
to emphasize teamwork.
The HEEL command, with its turns, pace
changes, and side-by-side position, is a perfect
way to practice teamwork. Fluid
d movement
together illustrates  a beautifully  synchronized
team working together and paying attention to
each other.
Stages and Learning
149
Though your dog knows obedience
●commands, there is no "magic man-
ners" button to push for results. When you want
your dog to do something, pick up the leash and
give him a formal direction like you would in a
training session. This is a very successful way to
communicate a need and direction to your dog. It
is also faster than waiting for the magic remote
control to appear.
72
1000 BESTDOG TRAINING SECRETS
150
Don't expect that once you've picked
● up the leash a few times in real life
that your dog will automatically know what to do
by himself. It takes many months of using your
dog's skills in public to fully create good manners
in your dog. Once you've taught the skills, keep
using them in real life until your dog does it by
himself. It can take a few months to develop some
behaviors.
151
All of the skills that are taught at the
●onset of each stage may take the
completion of that stage or moving on to the next
stage to fully set as behaviors. Keeping a working
knowledge of just how long it takes to build
behaviors will make you a more patient teacher and
owner. Create a roadmap of "stage-appropriate
skills" for your dog's jourmey through the stages.
Cooperation
152
In early stages of training, you may
●want to let your dog release some
energy by running and chasing a ball before you
do obedience training. Younger dogs have less
patience and usually cooperate better if they can
release first.
Adolescent Dogs
73
153
In later stages (puberty on up), make
●sure that training comes before play
If your dog earns his play, you will be setting a
wonderful precedent for good behavior and coop-
eration. If, as your dog grows up, you only train
after play, your dog may see training as an inva-
sion into his playtime.
154
Always make your dog earn things. By
·asking him to do things for you (and
for rewards!) at these early stages, you will develop
cooperation as a concept very early in his life. If you
begin having your dog do small tasks for everything.
he will not ever know what it is to be spoiled.
155
Play charades! Have your dog SIT as a
●way to gain things that he desires. If
he wants a treat, make him SIT. If he wants to be
petted, ask him to SrT first. If he wants to go out-
side, have him SIT at the door to put his leash on.
Your dog will understand to SIT next to that which
he desires. Soon you will have a dog politely com-
municating his desires to you through charades.
156
When leaving in the morning, don't
●"apologize" with vocal tones or body
language for crating or leaving your dog. Very
casually walk him into his crate, give him a treat,
and thank him for his cooperation in your daily
schedule. Say goodbye in a casual manner and
leave for your business.
74
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Patience Building
157
Start obedience training shortly after
● five months or after the completion
of teething, whichever is later. At seven months
old your dog should be able hold a thirty-second
SIT and a ten-minute DOWN.At nine months your
dog should hold a one-minute SIT and a twenty-
minute DOWN. This "ramping-up" effect plateaus
when your dog is around one year old. At this
point your dog can hold a two-minute SIT and
thirty-minute DOWN. This is a set of small goals
with realistic timeframes.
158
Distraction training {described in
●chapter 8) begins after completing
the initial obedience-training plan. Younger ado-
lescents will have some difficulty with distrac-
tions. As your dog's ability to concentrate for
longer periods develops, distractions will become
easier to resist.
159
 Puberty is the time to begin teaching
●Applications. You may expect your
dog to learn DOWN while the family eats at the
dinner table. Similarly, your dog can learn, with
your guidance, how to greet people by holding a
SIT (although he may not be able to do this totally
on his own for some time). Begin teaching appli-
cations in this stage and continue to reinforce
until he has mastered them himself.
Adolescent Dogs
75
160
In later adolescence, just as he's
·approaching adulthood, he can
begin learning his long-distance and off-leash
skills. You may have begun teaching these con-
cepts earlier in his life, but the maturity required
for true off-leash training begins in this stage.
Begin this process now and expect to mold the
skills and concepts into adulthood.
Your dog's perspective
161
In the adolescent stage, be certain
●that you don't give your dog the
impression that he's the center of the universe. If
the whole world and daily function of the house-
hold revolves around the dog, you will be forever
caught in the gravitational pull of the “canis
domesticus star" (spoiled domestic dog)! Instead,
help your dog integrate into the family function
by learning his place along with the others.
162
Don't rush right into the home and
●"rescue" your dog from her crate.
Calmly walk in the door and get situated in your
home, then without too much fuss, get her out of
the crate and on-leash, and then greet her with
affection. Rushing home and tearing through the
house like you're about to greet a long-lost love
will certainly skew your dog's perspective about
her importance in the family!
76
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
163
Do not place your dog's crate in the
● center of the living space. Deliberate
placement in the middle of or most important
area of the house will cause your dog to believe he
is the most important part of the house. He may
never learn to be alone, and he may never want to
be out of the spotlight. He should learn integra-
tion, not self-centeredness.
164
Structure and daily routine teaches a
dog to follow rules. The morning
routine alone of waking up, taking him for potty
break, feeding him breakfast, walking him, etc.,
establishes the concept of following the rules and
rhythm of the family. Do many "mini routines"
daily to keep this concept developing and solid.
165
The continued use of regular, peri-
●odic crating at these stages helps
your dog to continue to accept boundaries in life.
The boundary of the crate is a literal boundary.
but teaches the idea of accepting limits as well.
This is especially important in this “questioning
stage." Keep using the crate to get past the "test-
ing" stage.
Adolescent Dogs
77
166
Structure teaches security. Positive
·daily structure removes chaos and
for "mini routines," daily practice sessions, and
continuous leadership to give your dog a secure
feeling about his life. Without the stress of unpre-
dictability, our dogs can relax and be stress-free
and problem-free!
78
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
3.
al
Adult
 Dogs
Su
he adult dog—the friend, the companion, the
buddy! This is the much-awaited stage of your
dog's life. The season of "me" transforms into the
season of "we." It is the season of friendship and
teamwork. It's the one where he sits in your front
yard while you wash the car, jogs with you off-
leash, sits quietly by your side in the yard while
you lounge in your lawn chair sipping iced tea and
reading. He is happy to simply be with you
because you're pals! This stage makes all of the
other "raising" stages worthwhile.
Age: Adulthood begins at roughly the age of
three. Earlier than three years of age, your dog
may have some good skills, but will not be fully
mature. Adulthood ranges from three years of age
to roughly seven or eight years of age.
Goals for Adult doGs
In your dog's adult years, you have many path
ways open to you both. You can pursue any of a
number of advanced activities from Therapy Dog
Work  to  Shutzhund
d Competitions. See the
Appendix for details on some of these activities.
Once the active part of your raising, teaching,
and modeling is done, you can now enjoy the fun
of your dog's company! This is the stage of life
where she truly enjoys doing things with you as
opposed to having things done just for her. Take
her places, do more walks, more swims, and more
playing, and enjoy life with her. Reward her for all
of her hard work and learning in her earlier years.
In this stage, while you're not actively teaching
80
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
or creating manners (if you've already done your
job!), you should pay special attention to main-
taining your dog's daily balance. Don't set your
dog aside simply because the raising is done.
Keep the balance in check!
Maintain your dog's safety even in adulthood.
Keeping your dog safe means keeping her listen-
ing skills, obedience skills, and respect skills
tuned. When your dog is tuned in to you and your
leadership, you should always have the ability to
command her away from danger, as well as pre-
vent her from getting into it.
When the skills and responses of your dog
remain sharp, not only will you maintain her phys-
ical safety, but her mental safety as well. A dog
that remains well trained will not develop behav-
ioral problems. Therefore your dog remains a safe
being to have in society.
EXPeCTATIONS FOR AduLt dOGS
167
"Look, mom, no leash!" If formative
· stages have been crafted or modeled
well, off-leash training will be developed rela-
tively easily. Any other advanced work that you
wish to do in this stage should be accomplished
easily and with high levels of success if your foun-
dation is polished and strong. Polish any details
and proceed forward with your advanced training.
Adult Dogs
81
Limitations
168
If you've not done your "parenting"
●job well, you will not have a very
close companion. Your friendship will be weak
and you run the risk of your dog having little
respect for you. You can develop close compan-
ionship by continuing to invest time in the rela-
tionship with your dog. Go back in and retune or
polish any "weak links" in your relationship
before going forward.
169
When the "learning loop" closes, and
●the circle is complete, your dog may
not have drawn her circle around her family;
rather, she will probably have drawn her circle
around herself or other dogs. She may remain
independent and/or self-serving. If you need to
"open her up" and rebuild concepts, do so gently
and patiently.
170
Tolerance breakdown of the situa-
●tion can occur. If your dog has been
without leadership mentally or socially for too
long, her tolerance for social isolation can break
and major behavioral problems can occur due to
her inability to cope with the situation. You can
change this pattern if you see it before tolerance
breakdown happens or correct it when it does
happen.
82
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
171
If there are any unresolved behavior
● problems that exist from the previ-
ous stages, chances are they will not be able to be
resolved completely. At this point, behavior prob-
lems may be about management instead of solu-
tion. Problems may dissipate to a large degree, but
their core may remain. Use your best manage-
ment "skills" to ease your stress and your dog's if
this is the case.
172
Any unpolished skills left from the
● previous stages may remain weak or
"rusty" in adulthood. Some skills like off-leash
training may be compromised if the proper atten-
tion to detail was not given in the formative
stages.
173
Any misconceptions about her role
●in the family or her perspective of
herself that has not been clarified in adolescence
may remain an issue in adulthood. If many incon-
sistencies and mixed messages have existed in
her upbringing, then they will set in adulthood.
Un-mix any mixed messages to remedy this.
Adult Dogs
83
174
"We don't talk anymore." A common
●pitfall in marriages is forgetting to
talk to your spouse and spend quality time
together. Likewise, your adult dog became your
friend through the time you spent raising her.
Continue to give her quality time each day. Having
a positive training session together can be like
having a very special conversation together. Stop
everything for just ten to fifteen minutes and
train your dog. A little one-on-one focused atten-
tion goes a long way in reminding your dog that
she's important to you.
175
Not only will continued training
·practice keep your relationship
healthy, but it will also keep both you and your
dog's skills polished and in good working order for
all of the fun adventures upon which you will be
embarking!
Your Adult doG's needs
Mental Needs
Three training sessions per week is a good main-
tenance " recipe" in adulthood. Training your dog
on a regular basis continues to polish his skills as
a cooperative companion. It will maintain rules,
reinforce your positive relationship, practice your
teamwork, and prevent boredom. If his skills
remain sharp, you will continue to share pleasant
time and good teamwork together.
84
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
176
Knowledge is freedom. The more
· your adult dog knows, the more he
can do. Great training skills, great listening skills
and reliable response to your commands will gain
more freedom for your dog. You will be able to
take your dog more places and potentially do
more activities.
177
Try to teach your dog something new
·each week. This will keep his mind
alert and clear. Clear thinking in adulthood will
help keep your dog's mind working well in his
geriatric stage.
178
If you have an especially smart dog.
· or a high-drive working breed, you
will want to do more training even in adulthood.
"Brainiac dogs" will need to be entertained and
worked their entire life so they not only remain
problem-free, but boredom-free as well.
179
Working breeds will need many
● more mental activities to keep them
problem-free. Some of those breeds are German
Shepherds, Dobermans, Great Danes, Rottweilers,
Border Collies, Old English Sheepdogs, Australian
Shepherds, and Australian Cattle Dogs. These are
only a few of the "brainiac workers," but if you do
have one of these breeds, prepare many mental
activities for these rocket scientists!
Adult Dogs
85
180
"Use it or lose it!" You can very easily
●lose those snazzy, polished skills
that you worked so hard to create if you just stop.
Keep them working fluidly by training regularly in
adulthood. Be aware and alert to keeping your
communication channels open. You will sidestep
many relationship and behavioral errors this way.
181
Training daily or weekly will keep
·your dog from being bored. Boredom
will cause your dog to revert to instinctual behav-
iors with which to entertain herself. No matter
how diligent you were in puppyhood and adoles-
cence, you can have negative behaviors develop
even in adulthood if you don't satisfy your dog's
need to use her brain.
Physical Needs
182
Your dog's physical needs were high
·est during her developmental ado-
lescent stage. Your dog's physical needs will
plateau during this adult stage. Her final exercise
needs will vary in proportion to your dog's breed,
size, and personality. A good balance of physical
happy.
86
1000 BEST DOG TRAININGSECRETS
183
Keep walks, runs, and ballgames
●high on your list of activities. If your
dog is large and energetic, you may need more of
the above. If your dog is small and less hearty, you
will still need to supply physical activities, but
temper them for his or her endurance level.
Social Needs
184
Dogs that feel sad because their own-
● ers no longer spend quality time with
them will act out behaviorally. Some will chew, run
away, or begin house-soiling behaviors. While
humans can communicate sadness or disappoint-
ment with words, dogs communicate with actions.
185
Don't be a fair-weather friend. Don't
● love your dog only if she's behaving.
Love her unconditionally and search for the reasons
why she may be misbehaving (if she is). Negative
behavior from a dog is always a signal that some-
thing is lacking, out of balance, or stressing her.
Adult Dogs
87
186
Continue outside social exposure to
● prevent social isolation. This is espe-
cially important in the territorially protective
breeds like Rottweilers and German Shepherds
During your travels to the park and pet shop.
make sure your dog "meets and greets" several
people (provided they want to meet your dog).
Find a new environment once a month to prevent
becoming bored with the same old places.
187
"You don't bring me flowers any-
●more." Be sure you continue to
reward your “"good dog" for being good! Often
times we forget to acknowledge good behavior
because we accidentally take it for granted. Take
the time to tell her "good girl" for the simplest
things that she continues to do right! Even if she's
just lying on the floor chewing the correct chew
toy, praise her for this good choice!
188
Adulthood is the season of true
● friendship and companionship. Your
dog will want to spend quality time with you now
more than ever. She will enjoy simply being by
your side. Take the time each day to do something
together as good friends would. A walk, a run, a
leisurely stroll around the block, time in the yard
with your favorite book and her favorite toy are all
ways to share time together.
88
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
189
If you want to "take ten" and relax on
●a lawn chair, give your dog a run
with her favorite toy first. Spend at least ten min-
utes (maybe twenty) with her first. She will feel
her needs fulfilled, and you can fulfill your needs
more easily then.
190
Friends listen to each other. Your dog
 will hang on your every word. You
will see her intently staring at you to gain either
your attention or her understanding. Be equally
 o   ,  o 
 guage, listen to her noises, watch her movements,
and be sensitive to what they might be telling you.
Rest Needs
191
It is said that dogs run on five-hour
● time clocks. They are active for five
hours then at rest for five hours. Watch your adult
dog for a few days and try to track her activity lev-
els to see if this applies to him. Even if this five-
hour track does not apply to your dog. find out
what his track is.
Adult Dogs
89
192
Your adult dog will spend more time
●alert, awake, and ready for action at
this stage in her life. Rest will be what happens
when everyone goes to bed at night! Giving her
too much rest during the day at this stage will
cause behavioral problems. Each morning, create
a mental daily plan to monitor her activities and
be certain she is stimulated properly rather than
"mentally idling" all day.
RAISING TIPS
193
Leave your
r "baggage" outside the
●door! Taking stress home rubs off on
the people and animals in your environment. If
your dog repeatedly feels waves of stress from you
as you return from a long day at work, she will
begin to feel nervous about your homecoming.
This might lead to negative behaviors from her.
Do your best to take a deep breath before you
enter your house and try to decrease your stress
level.
194
Continue to use her crate periodi-
●cally. This will send a continual sig-
nal to your dog about house rules. It will also
      s  
dog's daily routine.
90
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
195
Continue to use obedience skills
every day. This reminds your dog
that you are a team, and that life is predictable
and easy. Find a "recipe" or "formula" that works
each day for you and your dog.
196
Continue to praise your dog for each
●command she follows. Do this as
heartily as you did while you were raising her.
Think of this as any other relationship. We always
start out on our best behavior and then become
relaxed. Relaxed behavior is fine as long as we
don't drop the (tennis) ball on our relationship.
Adult Dogs
91
al
Geriatric
Dogs
he Canine Golden Years: this is the season of
 assistance. The balance of our dogs' needs
changes drastically here. Some move more slowly:
others lose one or more of their senses; still oth-
ers have changing medical needs. This is a time
where, like puppyhood, we must have ultimate
patience and sensitivity. Let's explore this phase.
Age: This period of time sets in around seven
or eight years of age and continues throughout
the remainder of your dog's life.
GOALS fOR GeRIATRIC DOGS
Keeping your dog mentally aware and physically
comfortable are the main goals of this age stage.
Maintain  comfortable bedding,  a  comfortable
temperature climate, and a peaceful environment
at all times.
Now is the time to enjoy the "long rays of the
sun." Kinetic activities give way to reflective
encounters. Sit with your geriatric dog and watch
the sunrise or sunset. Take lots of pictures
because time passes quickly the slower your dog
gets.
EXPeCTatiOnS fOr GerIaTRIC
DOGS
197
Your elderly dog may require more
·physical help doing simple things
like getting up from her bed, climbing stairs, get-
ting into the car, or navigating slippery surfaces.
94
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
198
Since your dog will have many spe-
●cial needs again and your time will
be more in demand, you will need to remain
patient. It may be a bit unnerving at first to know
that you will need to supply so much more care
and attention than in adulthood, so be prepared
and patient.
199
At this stage, your dog will need
●more quiet time with you. While
your dog will still enjoy doing things with you,
those things may involve just sitting in the yard
with you, sitting at your feet while you read or
watch television, or going for a slow, casual walk.
Activities will be much more mellow.
200
Your elderly dog may have less
·patience
between 
bathroom
breaks and meals. You may have to tend to your
dog's immediate needs in much the same way you
did in puppyhood.
201
It is a good idea to have your older
●dog visit the vet two times a year
instead of just once. Medical issues that can
develop into large problems can be caught early
and treated, cured, or managed more comfortably
Blood work should be run more frequently since
monitoring blood panels can help detect medical
problems while they're still in the early stages.
Geriatric Dogs
95
202
Your own stress level may rise due to
· the increase in care for your aging
dog. Give yourself many breaks and be patient.
Caring for an elderly dog, especially if she has
many health problems, can take its toll on you. Be
certain you get ample rest for yourself.
Limitations
203
An older dog will not have a high
·degree of tolerance for younger,
more active dogs. The activity level of puppies is
especially hard for a geriatric dog to cope with. If
there are other dogs in the house, make sure your
aging dog gets enough rest away from them. Bet-
ter yet, be certain the younger dogs aren't stealing
the older dog's space, toys, time with you, or
peaceful time alone.
204
Your older dog may not have a high
  degree of tolerance for noise either.
Sirens, music, or car noises may disturb your dog
at this stage of life. If this is the case, either divert
your dog with a game or small training session or
block these noises with gentle "white noise" from
a fan or quiet radio station.
96
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
205
Your dog's body may not be up to par
● for a walk, but you can still get social
  a   a 'd a   e a
sit on a bench or patch of grass with her by your
side. She will be able to see people, perhaps get pet-
ted and admired, and breathe fresh air. This kind of
social time is incredibly important in keeping an
older dog from slipping into depression.
206
Older dogs usually have a difficult
● time handling the activity level of
younger children. Babies, toddlers, and children
under ten years of age can be stressful for an older
dog. Be certain to give your older dog a reprieve
lads, ru u ry d Aq ua an o
place" when the children are most active.
Geriatric Dogs
97
The ROLE OF LeAdERSHIP FOR
GerIATRIC dOGS
Be aware of your dog's changing needs. A good
leader will notice the need to shift the balance in
all elements of her dog's life: mental, physical,
emotional, and rest needs.
You, as their leader, need to give him peace
and stability as he ages. Your presence and con-
tinual direction make him feel secure. Don't stop
leading your dog at this critical stage!
While the season of friendship (adulthood)
was one of doing (usually) action-oriented things
together, this season means that things will slow
down. You will do less action-oriented things and
more quiet things. This sometimes means chang-
ing how you would like to do things and spend-
ing more quiet time with your dog.
Your GerIatric dog's needs
Mental Needs
207
Mental needs at this stage of life are
●lower than in the other stages of life,
but they are still there. Using obedience training
at this stage of life keeps your dog's mind clear
and alert. If a dog spends too much time alone,
her mind can become “mushy" just like when
older people spend too much time alone. Small
 e e  daa l ssa 
tally alert.
98
1000BEST DOG TRAININGSECRETS
208
Small training sessions will also
●help your dog remain feeling valu-
able to you. If she can't jog or hike with you like
she used to, she can at least do her teamwork
exercises with you to receive your praise and
admiration. This is critical in keeping her spirits
up and preventing her from becoming depressed.
Physical Needs
209
A geriatric dog's physical needs are
● much lower than younger dogs. But
some movement that's low-impact will keep his
body moving and toned.
210
Mild swimming is a good exercise
● for an older dog, as long as it's done
on flat, calm water. In this type of exercise, there
is no high-impact pressure on his joints. His mus-
cles can get some toning while he enjoys a low-
impact activity, and it can be relaxing to him as
well.
211
Keep a close eye on your dog's
· potentially changing health. Watch
for any changes from stiff joints or limping to
appetite and water-consumption changes. All
these little changes could signify internal aging
that needs attention.
Geriatric Dogs
99
212
Keep soft bedding available in as
·many rooms as possible for your
aging dog. Her joints may be suffering from arthri-
tis, and her muscles may not be as limber and
agile as before. Available bedding will ensure her
comfort level.
213
Older dogs also become colder much
● faster than younger dogs. Make sure
that her bedding isn't in drafty areas in the fall.
winter, and spring. You may even want to cover
her body with a blanket in the winter as she
sleeps.
214
When practicing obedience for your
·dog's mental health, keep in mind
that you may want to replace the SIT command
with STAND. Whether it's the AUTO-STAND
replacing the AUTO-SIT, or removing repetitive
SIT commands, your dog will appreciate less
stress on her hip joints.
Social Needs
215
Your geriatric dog has special social
needs at this time in her life. She
doesn't want to be alone. She would be happy sit-
ting by your side in the front yard, or having her
belly scratched while you watch TV. Time with
you, even if it's quiet time, will be appreciated by
your older dog.
100
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
216
Social time is very important to your
●dog right now. If a dog spends too
much idle time alone, he can become depressed
Try to get your geriatric dog out of the house and
on small trips with you as much as possible. You
might just walk down the driveway to the mail-
box, or drive to the local drive-through bank.
217
Geriatric dogs often do not like to be
● alone. Your presence makes their life
secure. Some dogs begin to feel frightened or
extrermely lonely when you leave them as they
age. If you need to leave them, put a quiet pro-
gram on the TV or tune the radio to a pleasant sta-
tion. Sometimes the gentle noise of music or
conversation will keep your dog from feeling com-
pletely alone.
218
There are plug-in devices with calm-
●ing hormonal aromatherapy scents
that can ease your dog's stress of being alone. The
scent emitted is based on pheromones of a
mother dog. The scent relaxes the dog by calming
his senses.
Geriatric Dogs
101
219
Toys that weren't appropriate in
·puppyhood may apply as proper
stimulation for an aged dog. They are past the
stage where inappropriate play can be learned as
a habit, and now they're seeing things as special
treats. Some exceptions may apply at this age, but
use your judgment according to your dog's age,
physical abilities, and personality.
220
Squeaky toys may help perk up your
· dog. A dog that cannot be stimulated
to play may be enticed to have a little good-
natured fun when they hear the squeak noise.
Play with your dog for a short while so as not to
overstimulate her and remove the squeaky toy
when you're through playing. A squeaky toy can
be chewed up and ingested, causing physical
problems. Use your discretion and caution.
221
A mild game of tug with a rope toy
● (only at this stage) may also encour-
age an otherwise withdrawn dog to interact with
you. Be certain that the game isn't promoting
rough behavior or overly aggressive play.
222
A stuffed toy for your dog to hold,
 carry, and sleep with may be soothing
for her as well. Having something to cuddle may
help her feel more secure while you're gone for the
day. Something with your scent on it, like an old T-
shirt, may add comfort in your absence as well.
102
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Rest Needs
223
The rest needs are much higher for
 an aging dog. It is hard to picture
your energetic Golden Retriever eager to sleep
eight or more hours during the day, but this tends
to happen in their "golden years." Make provisions
for their much-needed rest and help yourself
adapt to this change by being aware that this is
normal.
224
Make your geriatric dog feel secure
●in your home while you're gone by
reducing his space down to a small area with a
water bowl, some toys, and a large, comfortable
dog bed. This can be done with baby gates, exer-
cise pens, or closing off certain rooms. Less space
and a more predictable "special space" each day
will help your older dog relax.
225
Make the routine of going to a "spe-
· cial place" a privilege for your dog.
Offer a favorite bone or toy or a treat, praise her,
and make a big fuss about sending her into her
special place. Be sure your "fuss" is positive and
not apologetic! Keep it happy, but not overly ener-
gized and stressful. This will help her make a good
association with the "special place" without over-
stimulating her before you leave.
Geriatric Dogs
103
226
Be certain to teach children that
ads, rau u si bop ino uaumo
place” she should be left alone. Teach them to
respect the peace and quiet needs of their oldest
best friend.
227
While rest is higher on the "need
●list" for an older dog, so is peace and
quiet. Set up times in the day that are quiet times
for her so she does not become stressed out.
228
Balance quiet time with a good mix
 of social time. You don't want to iso-
late your dog too often, yet you don't want her to
feel overwhelmed with noise and activity. Find
the happy medium for her.
RAISING TIPS
229
If you would like to add a puppy as
● your dog ages, it is our advice to hold.
off until your dog has passed on. A new puppy will
demand your time and attention and dilute your
time with the older dog. Your new puppy and his
activity level will also cause stress for your aging
dog.
230
If you do choose to add a puppy to
●your house with your older dog.
keep the puppy on-leash at all times to ensure
he's on his best behavior around your old-timer.
104
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
231
Do not expect your older dog to
●teach the younger puppy. Not only
does your younger puppy need to learn how to
take direction from humans, but your older dog
may lose patience with the puppy.
232
Your older dog can, however, be a
 ●good role model for your younger
puppy. Your well-raised, mannerly dog will be an
example of behavior for your little one. Let your
little one observe good behaviors, but remember
to be your little one's leader and mold her in the
same manner as you raised your old dog.
SPECIAL NEEDS
233
If you've trained your dog using
●hand signals as well as verbal sig-
nals, you may find that you'll be able to use your
hand signals in an interesting way. Some older
dogs lose their hearing as they age. It is then par-
ticularly helpful to draw on and use your dog's
ability to see a "silent" hand signal and under-
stand you even if he can't hear you.
234
You can use more exaggerated body
●language, facial expressions, and
hand gestures to communicate concepts to your
dog if he's experienced any hearing loss.
Geriatric Dogs
105
235
If
f your dog's vision has become
·impaired, approach him by talking
softly and gently to him to announce your
approach. When you reach for him, do so slowly
and gently so that your dog won't flinch or be
frightened.
236
Before
touching
  your
 vision-
· impaired dog, let her "see" and smell
aa iau ynn 'asou lau jo ju u pu ino
 nno aao ms p u n nun 
around to her body. This will remove the startle of
being touched unexpectedly.
237
If your dog is hearing impaired, tap
·on the floor with your foot as you
approach him, especially if he's sleeping. The
vibration from the floor will give him an alert that
you are coming and you will reduce any chances
of startling him.
238
You may want to practice giving
· your dog a gentle body massage on a
daily basis. Older dogs experience the same kinds
of aging pains that humans do. The effect of gen-
tle hands massaging his body will greatly
decrease discomfort.
106
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
239
Everything is more sensitive as your
●dog ages. You may want to down-
grade your grooming tools to soft, gentle brushes
and hand-mitt brushes so that your dog is getting
the ultimate in gentleness.
240
Use baby gates at stairwells. If your
· older dog is experiencing difficulty
with the steps due to arthritis or poor vision, you
may wish to prevent his use of the steps while
you're gone. That way there is no risk of his falling
down the steps and injuring himself in your
absence.
Canine Cognitive Dysfunction (Senility)
241
As your dog approaches the geriatric
●stage of life, it is important to keep
his mind functioning and sharp. We know this to
be true of our elderly humans, and it works
exactly the same way with our canine friends. Its
kind of a “use it or lose it" situation. As long as we
require our dog to think, he is less likely to
become senile, mentally "soft," or "lost." Symp
toms of senility are loss of housetraining, changes
in sleep/wake cycles, loss of play, and lack of
social interaction.
Geriatric Dogs
107
242
Canine Cognitive Dysfunction 
is
·something your vet can diagnose
with your help.There is a series of questions that
will aid in the diagnosis. There is an effective
medication (Selegilene) available that will help to
curtail the symptoms of this condition. You and
your dog may enjoy better quality of life and
peace of mind through this avenue of treatment.
243
If your dog suddenly begins to dis-
 miss commands, don't assume they
are just being difficult. Dismissing commands can
mean anything from discomfort in their bodies to
becoming forgetful. Low-impact obedience train-
ing (without the corrective part of the NO) will
provide interaction, attention, and mental stimu-
lation. If your dog appears to be losing her mem-
ory, your best tool is patience. You may need to
coach her on some things like you did in puppy-
hood.
Geriatric House Soiling
244.
Geriatric dogs can have inconti-
●nence problems at times. You may
need to get them out more often for "potty
breaks" and forgive the occasional accident in the
house. They are as upset about these accidents as
you are, so be patient with them.
108
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
245
If your dog begins to have extreme
· difficulty with incontinence and you
need to be gone for long periods of time, you may
choose to confine your dog to a tile area, or one
that is easily cleaned. When you notice an acci
dent in this area, do not reprimand your dog for
something she cannot control. Simply clean it up
and make her comfortable. She isn't happy with
what her body is doing, either.
246
m se ,siadeip aiaop, asn ueo nos
 for incontinent senior dogs.This will
eliminate accidents on the carpet, but you must
remember to keep your dog's skin dry and free
from irritation if she's wearing a diaper. Remove
the diaper when you're home and allow her skin
to breathe. You may want to wipe the area with a
"doggie wipe" to soothe it. Your veterinarian can
recommend the best approach.
Geriatric Dogs
109
Part Two:
Basic Skills
5.
Establishing
Leadership
m1llw
o be a truly effective leader for your dog. you
 will need to learn and balance the various
tools of leadership. This will cultivate a mutual
respect between you and your dog, insuring a long
and enjoyable relationship together.
ESTAblISHING A LEADERSHIP
PROTOCOL
247
So what is a leadership protocol?
●The leadership protocol is a list of
attitudes, standards, and actions you will adopt
towards the raising of your dog. The following sec-
tion outlines how to develop a dynamic leader-
ship protocol.
248
Make a framework of attitudes, stan-
·dards, and actions. It is a proactive
way of making sure your dog will be the best dog
he can be. Without a proper leadership protocol,
you are leaving your dog's mental development to
chance and hoping all will turn out for the best.
The needs of your dog change from stage to stage.
Using this information, we propose that the
framework for the leadership protocol will never
be dismantled, only adjusted based on your dog's
changing needs.
114
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Effective Leaders Understand Their Role
249
All dogs need leadership. When you
●brought your dog into your home,
you may not have even known you had to be a
leader. However, without clear leadership your
dog will gradually become insecure and attempt
to assume the role. Not all dogs will completely
melt down, but these insecurities because of a
lack of leadership may manifest themselves in a
variety of different ways (see chapter 12).
250
A key issue is that our roles may be
●in direct opposition. They need a
strong leader, we want a companion. The activi-
ties associated with these roles are incongruous
and may cause confusion in our dogs if we don't
take the leadership role. To be an effective leader
we must be more respectful of what our dogs
need from us and put the role we want them to
play in the back seat.
251
To be an effective leader you must
●learn to view things from your dog's
eyes. The crate is not a jail but a source of security.
Giving your dog toys or food that he really likes
but we know are not good for him (mentally or
physically) is letting our dog down from a leader-
ship standpoint. By practicing the philosophies as
well as the exercises described in this book, we
will learn to be our dog's emotional custodians as
well as their physical companions.
Establishing Leadership
115
Effective Leaders Manage Time
252
The first concept is that leaders man-
● age time. Create a schedule. The crate
is a valuable tool for providing time management
for your dog. What this translates to in the daily
raising of your dog is to use the crate frequently
according to a predetermined schedule. There is no
substitute for the crate. The crate is the safest and
most effective form of confinerment. Socialize your
puppy/dog to it immediately (described in chapters
1 and 6) and continue to use it throughout your
dog's life as his stage needs dictate.
253
The leader giveth, the leader taketh
●away. A fair leader provides consis-
tency in rules and structure, sets and maintains
boundaries, and allows room for expansion of lib-
erties and boundaries as responsibility is proven.
A fair leader is also not shy about removing liber-
ties or tightening boundaries if disrespectful
behaviors return.
Effective Leaders Direct Activities
254
Another effective leadership trait is to
· direct activities. Always have some-
thing for your dog to do when he is out of the crate.
(In chapter 8 we will outline several obedience-
related activities to help your dog socialize to your
household.) Mentally plan obedience workouts,
play, social activities, and rest. The leadership-
related idea here is to have an activity plan that
includes more than "lie down and be quiet."
116
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
255
Supervise your dog's "out of crate
● time." When your dog is out of the
crate, keep the leash and collar on your dog and
keep the leash in your hand. Use your obedience
commands to actively teach your dog how to
behave inside your house and in all environ-
ments.
256
Develop a proactive leadership style.
● By having an activity plan for how
you will manage your dog's out-of-crate time, you
are planning opportunities for your dog to receive
praise. Praise is what the dog-training world
revolves around and should be the brightest part
of your dog's universe. For every behavior you
curb, praise the behavior that replaces it.
Effective Leaders Are Consistent in Every
Aspect of Their Dog's Life
257
Consistency leads to a clear under-
·standing of what is expected in
behavior. Without consistency you have confu-
sion. Speech patterns and words, daily habits,
leadership style, emotional responses to behav-
iors both good and bad, and consistency in teach-
ing are some of the areas to which you must pay
attention.
Establishing Leadership
117
258
Use the same words and the same
·sequence of words each time you
ask for a certain action or behavior. Likewise, each
person in the house must follow the same pat-
terms. If these patterns are all mixed up, your dog
will experience confusion and frustration when
you speak to her.
259
Check each day to see if your emo-
· tions are in check when you are inter-
acting with your dog. Sometimes we come home
from a long, stressful workday and end up losing
our cool with or around our dogs. They will respond
with stressful behaviors to our stressful outbursts.
260
Yelling is a combination of inappro-
· priate vocal tones and inappropriate
emotional responses. Leaders need to remain in
control of their emotions and their voice so that
negative reinforcements like removal of free-
doms, crating, or NO retain their corrective mean-
ings and do not become punishment
118
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
261
Try to ask for the same habits from
● your dog each day. For example: if you
ask your dog to hold a DOWN at the dinner table
one night, but allow her to sit by your side and beg
the next day, she will be extremely confused by the
change in house rules. She will either begin taking
advantage of your inconsistency, or become frus-
trated when you scold her unfairly one day for a
behavior that was allowed the previous day.
BODY LANGUAGE
262
Humans rely
 on speech for the
 ●majority of non-written communi-
cation. Not so for the dog. The dog's main form of
communication is body language. Be aware of
both the positive and negative ways our body can
influence our dog.
263
Your face, posture, speed of move-
 ment, direction of approach to your
dogs, how you carry yourself, and the way in
which you "reach" for your dog are all ways in
which you communicate your intent to your dogs.
264
Each dog you approach requires a dif-
● ferent message. With some dogs, you
must look like a leader. So you may need to carry
yourself so you appear taller. Some dogs might
need to see you looking more friendly and
approachable, which would require a relaxed body
posture and with a neutral approach (not head-on).
Establishing Leadership
119
Body
265
Positive messages include things
· like “I'm approachable, "I'm pleased
with your behavior!, "I'm proud of you!, "Come
play!," and "I'm your leader and you can trust me."
signal to convey it properly.
120
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
266
Bent-over posture, open arms, and a
· seated position are all usually invit-
ing forms of body language. Speed of movement
will convey enthusiasm or gentleness.
267
Approach timid or nervous dogs
● from the side, not the front. The side
position is "neutral" and non-offensive. Just don't
make it a "sneak attack" from behind! Be soft,
slow, and gentle.
268
While a "softer" body posture (bent
●and rounded shoulders) will com-
municate approachability and a bit of submission,
this won't work for communicating messages of
leadership. When commanding, stand up tall and
straight with confidence. This posture will look
leader-like, yet not offensive.
269
Negative messages include those
● that wish to communicate intimida-
tion, threat, or aggressive leadership. These are
the ones that say, "You're really in trouble now,
buster! These types of body language really do
not need to exist in our "civilized" human-to-dog
communication. These are things that would exist
in the wild for dogs to use as survival-instinct
skills.
Establishing Leadership
121
Pointing or wagging a finger in your dog's face is
an invitation to have your dog bark back at you-
or worse—especially if you are bent over at the
waist with one hand on the hip. Even the most
well-meaning vocal tones will get lost among the
negativity of the body language.
270
Avoid “blitzing approaches" where
·your dog feels like he's being cor-
nered. Negative, threatening, or intimidating body
language can cause anything from angry barking
to defensive aggression from your dog. By facing
in a neutral direction, you focus the correction on
the behavior, not on the dog.
271
Practice in a mirror and try to sirmu
· late a message using your body. See
if you can use your own body to tell your reflec-
tion what thought or message you are conveying
Try this with both positive and negative body lan-
guage.
Face
272
Our
facial
 expressions (smiles,
● laughs, frowns, eye contact) can con-
vey much about our intent and attitude as well.
Soft eye contact can mean affection or approval,
whereas intense, angry eyes in direct contact may
communicate anything from displeasure to a con-
frontation.
122
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
273
Using a "helper," try to communicate
● an emotion to that person without
saying a word. See if they can get your message
nonverbally. Try this for both positive and nega-
tive facial expressions.
Eye Contact
274
Make positive eye contact while
● praising if you can. Praise is a posi-
tive, personal form of interaction and should be
given with as many positive forms of body lan-
guage as possible.
275
Avoid grabbing your dog's face and
· forcing him to look you in the eyes.
This a gesture a bully would use to force his point.
You do not need to stare your dog down to
become his leader. Doing this will only make him
lose his trust in you. Be especially careful to not
use negative eye contact with defensive dogs as
that can provoke them to react.
276
Do not use harsh eye contact or
"visual intimidation" when making
corrections. You don't need to make corrections
"personal."
Establishing Leadership
123
Voice
277
Your vocal tones tell your dog as
·much as your body language does.
The words you choose to communicate a concept
are not important—the voice you use with the
chosen words says it all.
278
When you are praising your dog, it is
important to use a positive tone
with the praise word ("good!"). For a command,
use a tone that sounds businesslike and direct.
This does not mean harsh, just firm. Commands
are not questions.
279
A firm, yet unemotional tone for the
·correction cue ("NO") is essential in
keeping confrontation out of correction. If your
voice is serious but non-threatening, you can cor-
rect and not have the dog take it as a personal
issue.
280
 It is extremely important to put pos-
· itive emotion into your voice when
you communicate with your dog. Motivate him
with an encouraging voice. Your positive results in
training will happen faster as your dog will want
to earn your approval!
124
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
281
iscriticalto refrain
1from
●extremely negative emotions while
communicating with your dog. Yelling, screaming.
and angry "growling" sounds all have no place in
civilized communication. Your dog will interpret
that you are imbalanced and not worthy of trust,
and he will quickly become fearful of you. Raging
emotions are extremely stressful for a dog to han-
dle. Avoid this at all costs.
LeAdeRS Are CONSISTenT IN
ThEIR RULES OF THE ROLE
282
Sometimes consistency is easier to
·define by citing examples of incon-
sistency. When we consider inconsistency with
respect to our leadership protocol, we call these
mixed messages. Mixed messages are inconsis-
tencies that either make the owner look like a dog
in the dog's eyes or elevate the dog to level of a
human in the dog's eyes.
283
Elirminate activities that reduce the
 owner to the level of a dog: playing
rough with your dog, wrestling, playing hand
games, allowing your dog's mouth (teeth) on your
skin (even just a little), and playing tug of war.
Remember, the dog is not the toy and even with a
toy, no rough play!
Establishing Leadership
125
284
Eliminate activities that elevate your
● dog to the level of a human: allowing
your dog to sit on the chair or couch with you,
allowing your dog to sleep on your bed, allowing
your dog to eat at the table (yes, I'm serious), and
allowing your dog to lick your face to the point
where it becomes compulsive.
LITTlE THINGS MEAN A LOT!
285
When it comes to being an effective
·leader, little things mean a lot.
Understanding the importance of the little things
determines your quality of leadership. Your
respect for the fact that some things have very
important meanings for your dog will nurture
mutual respect. You may not mind if your dog
sleeps on the furniture, but I assure you, to your
dog it has more meaning than you can imagine!
286
Leaders do go through the door first.
● Since no doors exist naturally in the
wild, this is a purely socially influenced rule.
There is no magic about the door and leadership.
but this is one additional opportunity to direct
your dog's activities and develop some door man-
ners in the process. The formal process for devel-
oping door manners is described in chapters 8
and 9.
126
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
287
Manage
instinctual
behaviors.
· Sometimes we all feel the need to let
a dog be a dog. However, some of the activities in
which a dog engages reinforce natural instincts
that should be discouraged. Activities like rolling
on the back to either pick up or lay down scent
should be discouraged. If you catch your dog in
this behavior, give a light leash correction with NO
and praise for redirecting.
288
Urinary "marking activities" should
● be discouraged as well. If your male
(or female) dog is obsessive about marking over
other scent markers, redirect their activities to a
neutral site. Require male dogs to urinate in the
open without marking on an object like a tree or
shrub.
289
As some dogs mature they develop a
●habit of “scratching" with their feet
after elimination. The action involves an action
similar to a bull preparing to charge. You will
know it when you see it. This action, while really
no big deal, is just another attempt by your dog to
overinflate his ego. As soon as your dog begins to
scratch with his feet, give the leash a quick snap.
tell him NO, and praise him for stopping. Again, it
seems like a small thing to us, but it is a big issue
for your dog.
Establishing Leadership
127
290
Create an efficient eater. Leaders
·present and restrict food. Some-
times it is easier to live with a dog that eats at his
leisure. But being an effective leader means seiz-
ing all opportunities to influence your dog's view
of you as a leader, including food consumption.
The seCreT LeAdershiP Role
OF THE WALK
291
Before actually teaching the formal
·HEEL command, it is important to
understand how a dog views leadership. Most
dogs prefer to walk ahead of their owner. The dog
feels that being out in front is important. From the
dog's perspective, he is in the lead. The leader is
dictating where the walk is going, and even
though the owner may guide the dog from time to
time, the dog still thinks he is in the lead.
292
This is why the HEEL position is so
important. The HEEL position is
deliberately chosen so your dog's head is behind
the imaginary line he understands as the “leader-
ship threshold." If your dog's head is behind this
line, he will easily walk by your side and you will
truly be the leader. If your dog's head is beyond
this line, your walk is going to become a bit of a
drag...literally.
128
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Socializing:
Learning
from
Human Leaders
ocialization is one of the biggest buzzwords in
Odog training. It is used liberally to describe
almost any type of interaction between dogs and
situations, humans, or other dogs. The leadership
duty of the owner is to provide quality socializa-
tion so your dog learns positive interactions. Posi-
tive interactions provide a happy basis against
which your dog will judge future experiences.
HoW do our doGs learn
From us?
Conditioning. Training by conditioning relies on
consistently
patterned
performances
and
responses without causing emotional responses
like fear or pain. Conditioning requires repetition.
Quality   dog
g  training
 involves conditioning.
behaviors.
Compuision. Compulsion is a scary word with
many misconceptions. (
Compulsion does not
mean force. We use compulsion in dog training
all the time. When we place our dog in a SlT posi
tion, we are using compulsion. Physically requir-
lauuew Aue u! aaow jou jo aow oi bop 4no bu!
is compulsion. The key to keeping compulsion a
useful training method is through making it a pos-
itive experience. You must never motivate your
dog physically in a manner that is threatening, is
intimidating, or causes the dog pain.
Aversion. Aversion training relies on one or
two exposures of a sufficiently negative stimulus
to create an avoidance response from your dog.
130
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
How many times did you need to touch the glow-
ing element on the stove before you knew that it
would be unpleasant? Boundary training uses
aversion training so our dogs really won't want to
cross the boundary.
SOCIALIZATION
293
Socialization is exposure to a per-
·son, object, or environment that
generates an emotion coupled with an experience
that is stored in the brain. Resocialization is repet-
itive exposure to a person, object, or environment
targeted at changing the emotion that has been
coupled with a specific prior experience. Discrim-
ination is the process of comparing a new person,
object, or environment with past experiences to
predict the outcome of the new experience. Edu-
cation (as applied to dog training) is learning
without experience.
294
What is the role of obedience com-
mands in socialization? Once the
obedience commands are taught properly, they will
become the vehicle to attach the new positive emo-
tions to a specific experience. This is the primary
reason that obedience commands must be taught
in a positive manner. For example, if your dog has
become scared of the veterinarian's office, repeat-
edly practicing the obedience commands at the
office will transfer the "positive" of performing obe-
dience commands to the veterinarian's office.
Socializing: Learning from Human Leaders
131
295
Socialization and resocialization
·exercises require many repetitions
of positive exposures. Both the dog and the expe-
rience must be controlled so a positive exposure is
assured. When beginning socialization exposures,
always start at a distance away from the object.
Perform some obedience commands. Use tons of
praise. The further away the dog is from the
object, the less distracting (or threatening) the
object is. As your dog acclimates to the new
object, move closer and repeat obedience com-
mands.
296
Break down a large socialization
● problem into small goals. Socializing
to something like a vacuum cleaner will be broken
down into several exercises (listed below). When
you progress in difficulty level, you must go back-
ward and repeat fundamental exercises. The fun-
damental
l exercises
of
manners
are
the
self-control SIT position and DOWN position-
holding cues. This is so you can sift out the confu-
sion of the new 
 situation with something
"known" and predictable for your dog.
132
1000 BESTDOG TRAININGSECRETS
Socialization to New Environments
297
In each new environrment, use the
● fundamental exercises for self-control
(SIT and DOWN position holding) to create a pat-
tern. Use of these cues will tell the dog that the
situation requires self-control and manners. She
can then begin to self-apply manners.
298
Self-application begins only after
●several situations where you are
directing her behavior. This can be as few as ten
applications or as many as three months to six
months of direction. Don't assume that one or
two times will do it!
299
The amount of applications required
●on your part will be deterrmined by
your dog's age, maturity, self-control, level of dis-
traction, and your consistency in how it's been
applied.
300
When resocializing to problematic
● situations (something your dog may
be afraid of or sensitive to), you will need to
change your dog's perception along with his
behavior. Sometimes perception changes first and
then the behavior can change, and sometimes
behavior must change first for the perception to
change.
Socializing: Learning from Human Leaders
133
301
Sometimes the dog is moving too
●fast (fight or flight response) to
really understand the situation. Using the com-
mand system and having her SrT to calm down
will allow her to fully "see" or "experience" the sit-
uation and understand there is nothing wrong
with it. This is called the "discrimination phase" of
learning-discriminating good and bad, right and
wrong.
134
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
302
No one wants to be the first person
●through the "Fun House." When it
comes to socialization and resocialization, you
must take the lead. If you are not willing to touch
the scary object, then why should your dog? Get
down on your knees and pet the scary object if
necessary. Once your dog sees that it doesn't hurt
you he will be more willing to experience it too.
303
Confidence is key. No one enjoys
 seeing fear in their dog. Your dog will
pick up his emotional cue from you. Don't be to0
quick to come to your dog's emotional rescue. If
you react to your dog's fear with deep sympa-
thetic vocals like "it's okay, you're okay." you may
send the completely wrong signal to your dog.
Food is especially useful when trying to build a
nervous dog's confidence or build their security in
a situation. Don't use the food to reinforce the
fear; rather, use it for positive behavior. Eventu-
ally your dog's "trigger" for fear can take on a
new association for your dog—a food dispenser!
If a once-scary object or situation now becomes
associated with food, your dog may be better
able to change his perception.
Socializing: Learning from Human Leaders
135
KeePING THe CRATe A HAPPY
PLACE
304
Use the crate frequently. Using the
·crate only when away or at night
will cause your dog not to expect to be crated
when you are home. Keeping a schedule is key to
knowing when to crate your dog.
305
Never scold or yell at your dog while
● in the crate or while being taken to
the crate. While socializing your dog to the crate,
never call your dog to you to go into the crate.
Always go get your dog (by the leash) and lead
him into the crate with a happy cue word.
Remember, punishment has more to do with your
emotions than your actions.
306
Always give a small treat for going
● into the crate. Take your dog's collar
off and close the door. Give another small treat
after the door is closed.
307
Whenever possible, place the crate in
 a non-central location. Central loca-
tions keep your dog from getting adequate rest and
downtime. Spare bedrooms are ideal, or reserve a
place in the master bedroom (your dog will feel at
home there). Finished basements are also a good
location. Place a radio (on low volume) somewhere
near the crate to help block out nuisance noises so
your dog can rest. Avoid heavy metal or rap music.
136
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
308
Don't overuse the crate. Putting your
● dog in the crate for extended lengths
of time may cause your dog to dislike the crate
experience. An adolescent or adult dog can spend
eight or so hours crated during a workday. Avoid
repeated longer stays. Make sure the time your
dog spends out of the crate is high quality.
NOISE DESENSITIZATION
309
To desensitize your dog to noise, you
●will need an assistant. Always start
desensitizing at a distance. You may need to start
one hundred feet away or more. Heel your dog in
a circle. Have your assistant make a noise by using
a wood stick on the bottom of a metal food dish.
Your dog may show interest in the noise. Praise
your dog and re-command HEEL. Feel free to use
food to make the desensitization exercise posi-
tive.
310
If your dog startles or shows excess
• interest, divert (without leash cor-
rection) with NO and redirect with HEEL. Praise,
and use food. Don't be surprised if your dog
refuses the food. He has more important things
on his mind. This fact can be a barometer. Con-
tinue to verbally redirect and praise. When your
dog accepts food again, you know he is relaxing
with the noise.
Socializing: Learning from Human Leaders
137
311
As your dog learns to relax with the
●noise, try position holding with SIT
(first) and DOWN (with SIT success). Return to the
increased distance and change the noise. Try
banging pots together, an air horn, a car horn, or
breaking balloons (your assistant will have a ball
with this).
312
If you plan on doing any hunting
● with your dog, noise socialization is
a must. Spend a lot of time socializing to medium-
range noises before using the starter's pistol. You
may also take your dog to a firing range but stay a
distance away. Practice obedience commands in
the parking lot or a block away. Again, as your dog
improves, decrease the distance to the noise.
313
 If you want to use the clicker during
· obedience training, you will want to
introduce it slowly. Some dogs are noise sensitive
to the click and may be startled. Since this signal
is meant to be praise, take the time to introduce
the click and gage your dog's reaction. If the click
is too intense, try to muffle the sound by putting
your clicker hand in a pair or two of socks. Watch
that you don't click in close proximity to your
dog's ear.
138
1000 BESTDOG TRAINING SECRETS
TOUCH DESENSITIZATION
314
All places of your dog's body need to
●be permissible to touch! Remember
that this idea, while it sounds reasonable to you,
may feel like a real breech of personal boundaries to
your dog. The key is to go slowly and be sensitive to
what you're asking your dog to accept from you.
315
Touch Desensitization has a proac-
tive part and a preventative part.
Proactive means teaching this concept of accept-
ance, and prevention means avoiding things that
could cause touch sensitivity.
Prevention of Touch Sensitivity
316
Never touch your dog's face any
● rougher than you want your own face
touched. If you have gentle manners with your
puppy, generally your puppy will have gentle man-
ners with you, and he won't mind being touched on
the face. Rough handling around the face will
cause your puppy to mouth at your hands, avoid
hand contact, and dislike being petted.
Socializing: Learning from Human Leaders
139
317
Do not grab at your dog's collar if
·he's into "trouble." Repeated grab
bing at his neck (his instinctual center of control!)
will cause him to be "on guard" around that area.
Mouthing, flinching
  at
 touch.
and
 startle
responses can occur, as this will be construed as a
dominant, bully gesture.
318
Do not smack your dog's fanny for
● any reason! If he's “"into something'
call him to you proactively or lead him away by his
leash. Any surprise tactile gestures that are nega-
tive will cause your dog to view touch as negative.
319
Do not perform "dominant DowN"
exercises. These are exercises that
ask you to roll your dog over on his back, hold him
firmly, and stare at him in the face. This exercise
will most certainly stimulate defensive aggres-
sion, fight drive, or submissive urination in your
dog, depending upon his personality. The amount
of "touch trust" this exercise breaks is very large.
320
Do not perform "muzzle hold" exer-
ocises. Do not pinch his gums or
squeeze his muzzle in response to mouthing (see
the Mouthing section for proactive tips) as this
will cause extreme sensitivity around his mouth
and an increase in mouthing. This negative form
of handling will cause your dog to distrust the
hands coming near his face.
140
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Proactive Teaching
321
Touch-desensitization exercise: the
● goal of this exercise is to desensitize
your dog to being touched in various places of his
body. These exercises will desensitize your dog's
response to being touched, yet obedience and
manners training will keep your dog respectful of
all who touch him, not just his owners!
Socializing: Learning from Human Leaders
141
322
Practice multiple "touching" exer-
·cises each week (roughly three to
four times per week) to not only teach your dog
touch acceptance, but also to maintain his accept-
ance of handling throughout his life. It is best to
begin this exercise in puppyhood and practice
touch-desensitization exercises throughout your
dog's adolescence and into the first year of adult-
hood.
CAUTION
If you have a dog with not only a touch sensitivity
but also an aggression issue, consult a private
 professional trainer one-on-one before beginning
these exercises, as they are breaking boundaries
your dog may fight you on. Remember to always
have a high degree of leadership through training
with your dog to do this exercise.
323
Before you begin, you must be aware
●of certain areas that are "touchy" or
sensitive to your dog. These areas are paws, ears,
fanny, and tail. Other areas may be sensitive to
your particular dog. but these are the primary
areas about which to be sensitive. They may not
only be "ticklish," but areas of contest as well. Your
dog may mouth you upon your touch here, so pro-
ceed cautiously
142
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
324.
When beginning this exercise with
●your dog, break down your touch
exercise into small goals. One night work on
touching the head, the next night work the paws,
and save the belly and backside for a separate
evening
325
When touching body parts, do so
·slowly and gently, yet with confi-
dence. After a part is touched, say "Good dog!" and
offer a piece of kibble to thank your pet for his
acceptance. Praise and treats makes this exercise
of cooperation flow more smoothly, and it also
helps your dog to associate it with good things.
326
Begin by slowly touching your dog's
●head from the side. Do not reach for
him from the front. Work your way down his
cheeks, to his jaws and muzzle. You may want to
maintain control of him by holding his leash. The
head inspection includes gently looking in the
ears, carefully opening the eyes a bit, and opening
the mouth for a tooth, tongue, and gums inspec-
tion. Keep in mind that someday you may need to
administer pills or ear or eye drops, brush his
teeth, or remove something from his mouth.
Socializing: Learning from Human Leaders
143
327
When you begin working the legs
·and paws, you will want to start at
the shoulders or hips, work down to the elbows
and knees, and end at the paws. Paws are sensi-
tive, so take your time here! You will want to be
able to not only handle the paws, but the individ-
ual toes and pads as well.
"Belly up!" Next, move to the back, abdomen,
and belly. Be gentle here as well, yet confident
about your touch. Scan as much of these areas
with your hands as you can, praising along the
way.
328
Your dog's rear end is the most sensi-
 tive area on his body. He will want to
guard this area since it is a zone that is most per-
sonal and triggers vulnerability. When touching
this area, be in control of his leash, don't linger
there long, and build the amount of time spent
there in repeated exercises. Do not avoid touching
this area, as there will certainly be a time where
the veterinarian will need to take your dog's tem-
perature. Allowing this area to be touched also
indicates full acceptance of leadership.
329
Once you've spent one to three
● nights on each body segment, begin
combining segments until you are able to perform
the touch exercises on the entire body in one
evening. This will take anywhere from one to
three weeks, depending upon your dog's accept-
ance and your approach.
144
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
ACclimation to moVement
330
Dogs may be sensitive to moving
●objects. Objects like bicycles, vac-
uum cleaners, lawn mowers, baby strollers,
wheelchairs, rollerblades, scooters, motorcycles,
cars, and trucks may solicit reactive behaviors
from your dog. Your dog may want to chase, bark,
or lunge aggressively towards the object. To suc-
cessfully socialize your dog to these objects it is
important to understand that fear of these objects
plays a large part in these behaviors.
331
Preparatory work: make sure your
·obedience commands are spotless.
Distraction train your dog with moving distrac-
tions (see chapter 8). Start distraction training
with objects that are non-threatening like a ball or
a toy. When your dog resists the moving objects
you are ready to begin.
332
Walk your dog around objects like
 ●the bicycle and baby stroller while
they are not moving (use treats to introduce the
scary items). Once your dog is comfortable with
the stationary object, if the object makes a noise,
turn it on. Continue to walk your dog around the
object.
Socializing: Learning from Human Leaders
145
333
Next step: with small items like
·bicycles, baby strollers, scooters, and
lawn mowers, have your trusty assistant move the
objects around while your dog holds SIT and
eventually DoWN commands. Use positive social-
izing techniques and treats with praise for posi-
tive behaviors.
334
Continue: take your dog to a bicy
· cling path where people will be jog-
ging, bicycling, or rollerblading. Start several feet
away from the path (twenty to thirty feet at first).
Give your dog a SIT command. As a moving object
approaches you, coach your dog with "good SIT." If
your dog ignores the moving object and lets it
pass, praise your dog. If your dog reacts, divert
with a corrective NO and redirect with SIT. Gradu-
ally decrease the distance from you to the path
until you are standing next to the path. Change
your position along the path frequently.
335
Finish it: once you have success on
●the bike path, graduate to the street.
Again, to go forward you must go back. Start many
feet away from the street. Repeat the exercise as
described above, decreasing the distance to the
street as your dog irmproves. Pay special attention
tocoaching
your
dog
as
the distraction
approaches. Don't wait for your dog to fail to start
directing him. Change your spot along the street
frequently.
146
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
336
Make a game out of the exercise.
● Every time your dog does not react,
it is a success. For each success your dog achieves,
give a treat with praise. Use this technique in the
beginning, and as you see your dog's fearful atti-
tude toward the object change to confidence and
the reactive behaviors disappear, wean off the
treats.
337
For objects like a wheelchair or baby
·stroller, shorten the leash and hold
it in your left hand. Use your right hand to steer
the object and HEEL your dog while pushing the
object. Maintain a tight HEEL position and praise
liberally. Make sure you begin this exercise with-
out any passenger in the stroller or wheelchair.
Add a passenger when your dog becomes com-
fortable with the exercise.
Socialization to Cars
338
Drooling in Dodges or “Queasy
●Rider": sometimes dogs find the
movement of the car and the unstable surfaces
unsettling to the stomach. The first thing to try is
ginger. Ginger has a calming effect on the stom-
ach. Two or three ginger cookies (available at any
market) a few hours before traveling may be
enough.
Socializing: Learning from Human Leaders
147
339
The car may make your dog nervous.
●It is big and loud and may emit
sounds inaudible to human ears that may really
repel your dog. Begin desensitizing your dog to the
car with the engine off. Open all the doors and
explore the interior with your dog. Use food treats
to turn your car into a fun place to play.
THUNDERSTORMS
340
Storrms have natural signals which
· alert to the imminent danger. Wild
animals receive these signals and seek shelter
before the storm actually begins. Our family dogs
also receive these signals and, depending on their
prior experiences (and probably your reactions),
act accordingly.
341
Thunderstorms are tricky in terms
●of desensitizing. You must first
determine which part of the storm is causing your
dog stress. Stress can come from the noise of the
thunder, the flashes of lightning, or simply the
barometric pressure changes in the atmosphere.
Each must be desensitized differently.
342
If your dog can be diverted with sim-
·ple obedience exercises, you will
begin a light-hearted workout, using food and
praise and perhaps even nice music.This will keep
their minds off the storm, but also create the illu-
sion of something positive in light of the storm.
148
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
343
Your ability to use obedience to dis
● tract your dog will depend upon how
much it is used in daily life. If it's a way of life and
a “known" reliable piece of her life with you, it will
be most effective.
Thunder
344
First desensitize your dog to general
●noise as described above. You can
use pots, books dropping, doorbells, etc. You can
then begin to add higher-level noises like trucks
and traffic. In noise desensitization, work your
way up to a CD that contains thunderstorm
noises. Start with it being played quietly, then
ramp up the noise.
Don't Overdo noIses!
Desensitization means that you're getting them
used to varying levels of noise, but if you apply
too much noise too constantly, you will end up
stressing your dog. Likewise, if your environment
is too continually quiet, you will need to get your
dog into different environments to experience
noise.
Socializing: Learning from Human Leaders
149
345
Active practice is positive, but what
●happens when the storm hits? Now
is the time to jump into leadership mode. That
means that you pick up your dog's leash and use
the SIT and DOWN cues for relaxation to put your
dog's "thought path" onto a positive thought. (See
"thought path" discussion in chapter 12.)
346
Remember to do SIT and DOWN
 position holding exercises for other
things as well. You don't want your dog sensitiz-
ing to the actual exercise! This means that if you
only use the exercise for noise, your dog will begin
to generalize and expect noises every time you
use the skill set.
Lightning
347
Flashes of light can be disconcerting
·for your dog. The only time they
seem to really bother dogs is when the flashes are
preceded or followed by loud thunder. The associ-
ation between lightning and thunder is then neg-
ative for your dog, and both seem to hold the
same association. Use of a calming workout can
be effective here as well, just as in the thunder
desensitization exercise.
150
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
348
Draw your blinds, close curtains, and
●cover the crate with a blanket to
keep the flashes to a minimum. This will allow
your dog less stressors at once. It kind of "man-
ages" the storm for you so you have less to work
the dog through.
Barometric Pressure
349
Most dogs can sense the change in
· the atmosphere upon an approach-
ing storm. This sense is what enables animals in
the wild to "head for high ground." They sense
storms and try to find safety.
350
Some dogs like to go to closets, bath-
● rooms, or crates for safety and secu-
rity during a storm. This is fine, and you can
permit this as long as it isn't due to your dog being
a fearful dog in general. You will then want to
handle this as a self-confidence issue in a training
program.
351
If you have trained your dog well,
●built confidence, and have not pam-
pered your dog, you should be able to redirect
your dog during storms, even if they can sense the
barometric pressure changes. Dogs that run on
fight, flight, or freeze responses need more direc-
tion and obedience in their lives so they do not
have to default to their instincts for survival.
Socializing: Learning from Human Leaders
151
TeACHING dOGS TO SHArE
352
In multiple-dog households, it is
● often the perception of the dogs to
have to “claim" critical resources (toys, food,
space, affection). While this is a natural instinct to
- e sl on jum lm no 'u no e qe1g,
ent behavioral pattern over this instinct.
353
The first step in helping your dogs to
· share is to be certain that the lead-
ers are leading. This is through obedience train-
ing, structure, and positive direction of both dogs.
Having leashes on both dogs (and one handler per
dog) makes this job easier.
354
Sit with each dog on a leash, on
 ● opposite sides of the room. Hold the
leash and keep one to three toys in front of each
dog. If your dog tries to get up and go to the other
dog for a toy, detain your dog with the leash and
resupply her original group of toys to her.
355
If you have a good leadership rela-
·tionship with your dog and you
practice obedience daily, you will be able to give a
mild leash correction for stealing, but then substi-
tute her own toy for the stolen toy. You will have
to redirect this behavior often to keep it in check
and develop a new pattern of behavior.
152
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
356
Work up to allowing one dog to play
● actively instead of lying in a DOWN
while the other remains on-leash and in a DOWN.
Give each dog a turn with this so they can learn
patience.
357
Toy stealing happens often if there is
· competition, so be certain to have
plenty of toys for each dog and a good rhythm of
structure about the household. If no leaders are
leading and supplying the necessary items for a
happy life, the dogs will view things as a "free for
all!" and feel the need to steal
ReMoVInG obJeCTs And TOys
FroM Your doG
358
Your ability to remove toys and
● objects from your dog will be deter-
mined by your leadership role (of course!) with
your dog. The following tips will be much more
useful, effective, and safe if you have a positive
role and relationship with your dog. Obedience
practiced every day and used in daily life will
ensure these points. For severe cases in toy and
food possession, only attempt to resolve it with a
professional trainer directing you one-on-one and
in person.
Socializing: Learning from Human Leaders
153
359
When trying to take toys from your
· dog, always do it in a calm but direct
fashion. Do not use suspicion or anger in your
voice as that will often cause a dog to become
defensive and hold the toy harder.
360
Approach your dog slowly (but not
●suspiciously) and without threaten-
ing body language or direct eye contact. Pick up
uen agengue1 Apoq 1nok os yseal sgop 1noA
remain neutral and non-threatening, yet busi-
nesslike. Say your dog's name out loud so you
won't startle her.
361
With one hand on the leash and the
· other hand holding a treat, use a cue
word such as "give" as you offer the treat. Your dog
should drop the toy or allow you to remove the toy
from her mouth as you give her the reward and
praise her. This method will allow you to teach
her to release a toy with a positive result at a
given cue word. Practice this often and randomly.
154
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
7.
d
Obedience
Training
eader's Note: the best way to approach this
chapter is to read both chapters 7 and 8
through to the end, then go back and begin the
teaching process. In this manner, you will see the
end destination and understand how things build
upon each other before you begin.
Obedience commands serve two functions:
1.) Each command has a specific activity asso-
ciated with it that you will use to direct your dog's
activities.
2.) Each command has a specific meaning and
concept connected to it for the dog and how he
perceives his role in your relationship. Regular
practice and proper use of the obedience com-
mands in daily life will cement your relationship
as a team, nurturing trust and mutual respect.
STYLES
-GIzmos, treats, And
ClIcKs
362
There are many varied methods and
● styles of obedience training for dogs.
It is important to research your local trainers as
thoroughly as possible before making a commit-
ment to any one program or option. Some of the
options available are group classes, private
instruction, and pre-training programs. Some
well-crafted programs include combinations of
these programs designed to capture the best of
each type.
156
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
363
Teaching your dog in a group class
· environment can be very distracting.
Your dog will have to ignore the action going on
around him and focus on learning. If your dog
falls behind, you may be pushed toward moving
your dog ahead to exercises for which he is not
prepared. This may sour the training experience
for both you and your dog.
364.
Before signing up for an obedience
●class, visit a current class and
observe the dogs and owners. Take special note of
how the instructor handles owner-and-dog teams
that have fallen behind. A good instructor can bal-
ance the special needs of the stragglers without
penalizing the teams who are on pace.
365
Don't underestimate the value of
● obedience commands being profes-
sionally taught. Whether or not your dog "listens
to you" depends more on your relationship with
your dog than who teaches the obedience com-
can do just as much damage as good. Investigate
dog training schools that provide pre-training for
your dog as well as "after" training for you.
Obedience Training
157
366
The click-and-treat method has sig-
●nificant merit. The click-and-treat
dog-training method was developed around the
marine-mammal training experience. By offering
an effective positive approach, the click-and-treat
dog-training method has been instrumental in edu-
cating people about the problems of a dominance-
based training system.
The Trouble with Tools
367
When selecting a training tool, keep
· the goal of obedience in mind. It is
important to remember when selecting the train-
ing tool that the ultimate goal of the training pro-
gram is to develop mental self-control within your
dog. Tools or devices designed for physical control
may be effective when taking a walk or preventing
jumping but may be ineffective when developing
mental discipline.
368
Choosing a collar. Every domesti
●cated being has a natural control
point. For the human, it is our arms (and hands).
This is the reason why human control tools like
the straightjacket and handcuffs are effective. The
natural control point for the dog is the neck. For
the activity of dog training we recommend a flat
collar, leather slip collar, or prong collar.
158
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
369
Larger dogs (greater than seventy-five
● pounds) may graduate early to a prong
collar during the teaching phase, especially with
HEEL. Alternately, a head halter might be the tool for
the teaching phase or taking a walk in the park.
370
Medium-sized dogs (ten to seventy-
● five pounds) will probably start out
training on a flat collar. During the reinforcement
phase you will probably want to switch to a cor-
rective device like the prong collar. With maturity
and experience with the obedience lifestyle, you
will probably be able to return to the flat collar.
371
Small dogs (under ten pounds) may
● use a flat collar or harness.There are
many harness types on the market. We have
trained dogs so small they required the smallest
cat harness we could find. Not small enough? Try
the ferret harness.
372
Our least-recommended device is
●the chain (choker) collar. The con-
stricting action may cause long-term wear on the
interior of the neck and may flatten or constrict
the trachea if not properly used. The main prob-
lem is that the chain collar is a difficult tool to use
properly. If the collar is put on the dog backwards
it will not release, therefore rendering it useless.
The construction geometry and link size for some
models also makes it difficult for the collar to
release properly.
Obedience Training
159
373
A popular tool for positive reinforce-
 ment is the clicker. The theory holds
that with proper association of a food reward with
the accompanying click, the dog can be condi-
tioned to various responses. The click is adminis-
tered in the same manner as vocal praise. When
your dog performs the action you desire, click and
treat.
374
Whatever tool you select for your
· dog, be consistent with how you use
it. Your dog will learn to listen to you when he is
wearing the leash and collar but not listen if they
are off. The tools will become the source of the
respect. If your dog is always on the leash and col-
lar (leash and collar are always off when in the
crate), the respect will eventually flow to you. At
this point, when the leash and collar come off, the
respect is still yours, and you and your dog will be
a team.
160
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
AVOIdInG COMMOn traInInG
PITFALLS
Control is an illusion. Do not teach your dog obe.
dience commands so you will have control over
them. Obedience commands form a language
through which you can communicate your expec-
tations and teach him how to socialize in the two-
legged world. These commands will also keep
him safe and allow him to remain safe for society.
Forget everything you ever heard about
"alpha dog" and pack theory. Proper training and
communication have nothing to do with placing
your dog in a subservient role to you or anyone
else. Being a leader and being dominant are two
completely different roles.
Another common pitfall is about praise. Very
often, owners confuse
eaffection with praise.
Overly emotive vocals and touching and/or pet-
ting are affection but are not praise. While your
dog has a need to understand that you like or
love him, affection is not the proper reward for
obedience training.
Avoid becoming attached to the outcome of
the training process and learn to enjoy it. Effec-
tive training means having high standards and
lofty goals. However, if the goals are not immedi-
ately achieved, then you must avoid frustration
with the process. Consistency, patience, and per-
sistence are essential traits of a quality dog
trainer.
Obedience Training
161
POSItIVe rEInFORCeMenT
375
The obedience command language
·must be a positive expression of
communication for your dog. Obedience training
is not punishment. To ensure this, the language of
obedience commands should be positive, fun, well
taught, and well received. The tools for achieving
these concepts are food, a joyful voice, happy
facial expressions, precise and patient teaching.
and an eager teacher.
376
Most dogs are food motivated. The
● secret to food training is getting the
most result for each treat. Start out by using a tiny
treat for every success. Always use a cue phrase
poo8, 'u18 poo8, .Koq poo8, 8op poo8, ay!l
(insert dog's name here)," or "good (insert com-
e a o o a  
to the training process (approximately one
month), decrease the frequency of treats. The next
step is to treat only for patience building or dis-
traction training. Finally, reward randomly so your
dog is kept guessing (and working) for the next
reward.
162
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
IMPORTAnT NOte
During the following obedience command train-
ing instructions, where we have written praise
peaipue-ypo e pasu Aew noA ,."pooh, yim
reward if this is your preferred style of training.
377
You must use the right "bait" to
"catch" a command. Sometimes you
will need to use food to bait your dog into the
appropriate positions. This is completely normal.
Using food to assist your manual manipulations
will assure a positive attitude towards the com-
mands.
378
When it comes to giving treats, the
● goal is taste not tons. Use a soft treat
like a stick or a square where small bits can be
pulled off (about the size of a pencil eraser) and
given individually. The more fragrant the treat, the
more flavor your dog will receive. Avoid giving
large prepackaged treat snacks whole. A medium-
i  o on  q  a pa p
quick bites.
379
You can wean off the food reward,
● but the verbal praise must continue
for life. If you begin to "expect" behaviors from
your dog and stop praising for the effort, the good
behavior will eventually go away.
Obedience Training
163
380
Not only will the good behavior van-
·ish, but a negative behavior may
take its place. A dog will pick up an annoying
behavior if you are not paying enough positive
attention, just to divert your attention to him
381
Dogs respond to your voice more
●than any other stimulus. If you
approach obedience training with a negative atti-
tude, so will your dog. Act like a coach and praise
your dog in a manner that will build trust, eager-
ness, and confidence.
382
Praise your dog so that your dog
●looks up to you. Sometimes when
training your dog, praise becomes distracting.
Work through the praise distraction because
hearty praise is necessary for a positive training
experience.
CrEATING GOOD TrAInInG HAbItS
383
Behind every success story is a plan.
· The key to successfully training your
dog is no different. Before you begin teaching your
dog anything, develop a plan for what you will
teach first, second, and so on.
164
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
384.
Having a prepared plan will help you
 develop excellent timing. Distracted
dogs have short attention spans. Giving a com-
mand and praising three or four seconds after
your dog has succeeded may not link the praise
with the action. Being very timely with both
praise and correction will help your dog learn
faster and understand exactly which action is
desired and which action is inappropriate.
385
Poor
r or sloppy
 leash handling
●reflects  a
very
casual attitude
towards training. Your dog will have a tough time
taking you seriously with sloppy leash handling.
The effect of getting a proper leash grip is like a
lecturer clearing his throat to get your attention.
386
Get a grip! Place the thumb of your
●right hand in the loop of the leash.
Make another loop in the leash to take up the
slack and loop it over your right thumb. Your left
hand should find a spot on the leash toward the
stitching near the buckle. Hold the leash so that
the buckle lays flat but minimum slack is in the
leash. Your left hand will be rather close to the
buckle depending on the height of you and your
dog. Relax both arms so you are standing natu-
rally.
Obedience Training
165
387
Practice your hand signals for the
●various commands without your
dog present. Watch yourself in the mirror and use
the verbal cues with the hand signals. Practice
makes for crisp, clean, and readily recognizable
hand signals for your dog.
388
Some owners cheat for their dogs,
·giving a slight tug on the leash
before giving a command, calling his name, or
making another sound to get the dog's attention
or placing themselves in the dog's view. All these
tactics do more harm than good. They do not
allow the dog to make the appropriate decision on
his own.
389
Obedience commands have a begin-
·ning (spoken command), a middle
(the action associated with the command), and a
finish (where the command ends). Always praise
for performance of the command and praise for
waiting until you release the dog at the finish.
390
Never give the leash signal for a
 command. Most main commands
have both a verbal and hand signal. The NO diver-
sion has a leash signal, which should be consid-
ered the same as a hand signal. Just as it would be
wrong to give the DOWN hand signal for HEEL, it
is wrong to give the NO leash signal for any other
command.
166
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
391
Commands are just that: com-
● mands. Avoid vocal inflections that
would indicate intimidation or uncertainty in
your voice. Never yell at your dog during obedi-
ence training. Avoid all reprimands. Reprimand-
ing your dog only serves to break down the trust
bond between you and him. Physical punishment
of any form is abusive and dangerous and may
lead to your dog becoming aggressive towards
you.
392
Do not train your dog when you are
●in a bad mood. Negative emotions
will cause a negative training experience for your
dog. Never train your dog when you are angry or
in a hurry. Obedience training is not a punish-
ment for poor household behavior.
393
Train your dog when you can be
●"mentally present" in the workout.
Turn off the TV, turn the phone's ringer off, and
give the kids some activities and let them know
that this is the dog's special time. Your dog will
only be able to remain focused and undistracted if
you can remain focused and undistracted.
Obedience Training
167
394
Dogs learn by repetition. In the
● teaching phase of your process, cre-
ating a consistent and repetitive goal is essential.
However, once your dog has learned and under-
stood the concepts, patterns will work against one
of the fundamental reasons for obedience train-
ing: teaching our dogs to think. Deliberately struc-
turing your obedience workouts to avoid patterns
or repeating the same thing over and over again is
called diversity and will be referenced as such
within the book.
395
Avoid the temptation to release your
●dog at the end of the workout and
overly praise your dog like they have "survived"
the nasty workout. Your dog should get more
praise during the practice session than immedi-
ately afterwards
396
Always end an obedience training
● session on a positive note. If things
are going very badly, give your dog a quick and
happy SIT command, praise heartily, and quit. Try
again later after each of you has had a break.
TeACHING THE ObEdIeNCe
COMMANd LANGUAGE
397
Teaching each command will have
● four phases: Teaching, Reinforcing.
Testing, and Applying.
168
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
398
The teaching phase is designed to
●teach your dog the meaning of each
command. During the teaching phase you will be
helping your dog by manually placing him in posi-
tions and repeating a cue word such as SIT so he
associates the work with the action. You may
need to repeat these exercises with as many as
one hundred repetitions before you begin rein-
forcement.
399
Teaching is a one-time experience,
·and
 reinforcing
will
continue
throughout your dog's life. You only have one
chance to teach your dog well. Take your time and
get it right. Do not begin to exact performance
(reinforce) any command before your dog has
demonstrated a complete understanding of the
command. Be patient.
400
The reinforcement phase of each
 command will be characterized by a
removal of the physical assistance used to teach
each command. Food reward will be reduced to
provide a "random" reward scenario. Quality ver-
bal praise and motivation are essential during this
phase to maintain a positive experience for your
dog.
Obedience Training
169
401
The reinforcement phase will trans-
● fer the responsibility for completing
the commands from you to your dog. Your dog will
begin to learn boundaries by placing performance
requirements on the exercises.
402
The testing phase will have specific
exercises designed to determine if
your dog truly understands the meaning of the
specific commands.
403
The application phase requires you
 to use the obedience command in
daily life to socialize your dog to living in your
environment.
404.
Keep a training log. List the com-
● mands vertically down on the page,
and list the milestones on the top of the page. The
commands should be HEEL, SIT, BREAK, DOWN,
POSITION HOLDING, COME, and PLACE. Include
MOTION SIT and MOTION DOWN as well as
FRONT DOWN and FRONT SIT. The milestones
will be Teach, Reinforce, Test, and Apply. As you
reach each milestone, make an “x" in the space
below the milestone. This log will help you
remember where you are in your training plan
and not to forget the work you have yet to do!
170
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
CreatinG Good boundArIes-
The CorrectiVe NO
405
Define the “"Yes" and the “"No" to
●teach what is good praise. To teach
what is not good, say "No" Only giving praise,
without the NO, will not develop the sense of
"right and wrong" needed for your dog.
406
If effectively taught and consistently
·reinforced, NO is a valuable tool in
the obedience language. Functionally, NO will
mean: you (the dog) are doing something wrong;
stop what you are doing and pay attention to me
(the owner), and I will tell you what to do to get
praise!
407
How does this complex meaning get
●taught? Teaching NO is part of the
reinforcement phase in obedience training. To
teach your dog NO, you will give a quick snap and
release of the leash (leash signal) while simulta-
neously saying NO
408
Give a command you wish your dog
●to do. If performed, praise. If not
performed, give the corrective NO (diversion) and
re-command with the initial command (redirec-
tion). An example of the verbal pattern for a dog
who needed to be corrected twice for failing to SIT
is: "SIT,"NO...SIT, "NO...SIT," (the dog sits)... "Good
SIT."
Obedience Training
171
409
The corrective NO technique will
●need to be understood, practiced,
and mastered to assure that NO is fair and under-
stood. The leash signal required to perform an
effective correction is a quick snap and release,
the release being just as important as the snap. It
is not a pull, yank, or jerk.At no time should your
dog's feet leave the ground, and if the corrective
snap is done properly, your dog's head shouldn't
even move. The technique key is quick.
QuicK Is not HarD
One fair quick correction is better than twenty
light, slow nagging corrections. Keep the mental
other ideas like yank, tug, pull, hard, jerk, or haul.
410
To get a feel for the corrective snap,
attach the buckle of the leash to
your shoelaces. Place your foot flat on the floor
with the buckle resting on your foot. Give your
foot a quick snap. If you feel a pulse on your foot
and the buckle is back resting on your foot, you
have given a good correction. If your foot hops off
the floor, too hard. If you end up with the
shoelaces being tightly held aloft by the leash, you
are not releasing the correction.
172
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
411
The direction of the correction is
+ also important. The direction of the
correction will provide an indication of which
motion may be required to complete the action
correctly. For each obedience command, the
proper correction direction will be described.
412
During the teaching of NO, you will
●use whatever collar you are using to
teach the command at that time. Most commands
will start with a flat collar and graduate in the
reinforcement phase to a more corrective device
once the command is understood. Head har-
nesses such as the Halti or Gentle Leader can be
used effectively but without the leash signal.
413
Keep your voice constant. No nega-
 tive emotions, frustration, or anger.
NO is not a punishment or a reprimand, just a
diversion. Adding negative emotions to the cor-
rection may cause your dog to become defensive
(or defensively aggressive) towards you and the
obedience experience.
414.
While teaching your dog NO, only
●use NO in the context of the obedi-
ence training workout. Wait until your dog under-
stands what NO means before you use it in real
life to craft patterns and behaviors.
Obedience Training
173
HEEL
415
The HEEL zone is a two-foot square
● positioned at your left hip. To imag-
ine this, take a piece of sidewalk chalk and draw a
two-foot square and stand next to it. Masking tape
on the carpet also makes a nice HEEL visual! If this
zone moves forward, your dog will maintain his
head within the prescribed HEEL zone. When the
zone stops moving, your dog will stop and SIT
automatically and will hold the SrT position until
given another command. Read and understand all
the teaching steps prior to teaching your dog HEEL
416
The goal of the HEEL command is to
● get your dog to keep his or her head
within the boundaries of this square. This com-
mand begins the process of developing the dog's
self-control by keeping himself in the required
zone. The goal is to wean off physical control and
develop mental self-control.
Teach the HEEL Command
417
The HEEL command is the first and
● most important command to teach
your dog regarding "following the leader." Heeling
not only means that he is walking nicely on a
leash for you, but more important, it means that
he's following you as a leader, paying attention to
you, and walking with you, not against you. Only
when your dog is following you well and paying
clear attention at HEEL will he be able to listen to
you through other commands and distractions.
174
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
418
To teach the HEEL command, hold
+the dog on your left-hand side and
walk in a left circle. By walking in a left circle, your
body motion keeps “"herding" your dog left. This
consistent left and slightly backwards motion will
encourage your dog to remain at your left side in
the proper HEEL zone.
419
Begin this exercise by walking very
·slowly. Baby steps or half strides
may be necessary to achieve the slow pace neces-
sary for your dog to maintain the proper position.
Most dogs will learn HEEL at a reasonable pace;
however, exuberant dogs will require a very slow
pace until they learn the concept.
420
How big should this circle be? Most
● dogs will learn HEEL in a circle about
fifteen to twenty feet across. More exuberant dogs
will need a smaller circle only five to ten feet
across. The tighter the circle, the more "herding'
influence your body will exert. As your dog under-
stands the concept of HEEL, you may widen the
circle.
421
Be careful with this exercise! Walk-
●ing in a circle that is too tight and
watching your dog may make you dizzy! If you
feel dizzy, slow down or stop all together. Pick
your head up and look at the horizon. Begin again
but with a wider circle and slower pace.
Obedience Training
175
422
Give the verbal command HEEL and
● start walking very slowly in your left
circle. Hold the leash with your left hand with
minimum slack. Gradually tighten your circle and
slow your pace until you feel the leash slacken.
When your dog's head is within the HEEL zone,
verbally praise with "good HEEL" to teach your dog
that HEEL means being in this position.
423
During the early teaching stages of
●HEEL, complete between three and
five circles before you stop (this will be known as
a series). Repeat one series of three to five circles
seven times.
424.
Your dog may want to walk ahead or
 behind you. Using the leash, quickly
guide him back into the proper zone and praise
with "good HEEL" when he returns to the zone.
425
What training tool should you use to
● teach your dog HEEL? Start with a
flat collar. If the exercise is difficult because your
dog is a hearty puller, switch to a prong (or finger)
collar, Halti, or Gentle Leader. Remember, the goal
is to wean away from physical control so any of
these tools will be temporary.
176
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
426
During HEEL your dog should walk
●with his head aloft. Most dogs like to
sniff the ground while taking a walk. While this is
natural, it is hard for your dog to sniff and watch
your movements at the same time.
427
Teach your dog to keep his head at
●least even with a line drawn from
his tail through the shoulder blades. How? Baiting
with a nugget of food is helpful. Baiting with a
favorite toy is also useful. Pat your side and moti-
vate your dog to watch you with your voice. Once
Aqian 'guuiem pue dn st peay sbop inos
praise "good HEEL."
428
Once you have taught your dog the
·middle of the HEEL command, you
need to introduce the beginning and the finish.
The HEEL command begins with your dog any-
where in your proximity. Give the verbal com-
mand HEEL and hand signal. As you begin
walking, your dog should walk over to your left
side with his head within the HEEL zone. Praise!
429
The hand signal for HEEL is rela-
●tively simple. Begin with your left
thumb on your left hip, palm flat and facing back-
wards (the back of your hand faces forward). Make
a scooping "U" motion with your left hand so your
left hand returns to your left palm facing forward.
All of this motion is behind your hip.
Obedience Training
177
430
The next step is to introduce the fin-
●ish of the HEEL command. As you
come to a stop, reach across your body and grasp
the leash near the buckle with your right hand.
Shift your left hand to your dog's rear and place
into a SIT position at your left side. Don't use the
SIT command yet. Your dog is still learning the
HEEL command and giving your dog too much
responsibility with reinforcing the SIT command
may distract him from learning his HEEL lessons.
431
Put it all together. Give the com-
●mand HEEL, take four steps, and
place your dog into a SIT command. Praise with
"good HEEL!" Why four steps? It is important for
your dog to link the beginning with the middle
and the finish. Four steps help teach your dog that
the verbal command is linked to the action of
HEEL and to SIT when the motion stops.
432
Make sure you give the HEEL hand
●signal and verbal command before
you begin moving. Otherwise your dog will move
every time you move your feet. You want your dog
to move ONLY when properly signaled.
Reinforce the HEEL Command
433
There are two potential reinforce-
 ments with the HEEL command: rein-
forcing the HEEL zone and reinforcing the automatic
SIT. We will begin with reinforcing the HEEL zone.
178
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
434
Give the command HEEL and begin
●walking (slow pace first). As long as
your dog's head is in the HEEL zone, praise with
"good HEEL" Once your dog's head reaches the
outer boundary of the zone, give a quick correc-
tive snap (toward the HEEL zone) with NO and
re-command HEEL. Once your dog's head returns
to the zone, praise.
Do not use the leash to restrict your dog's move-
ments. This is called TOwING because you are
literally towing your dog around. Towing your
dog is cheating! If he doesn't maintain the zone on
his own, give a NO correction and re-command
HEEL. Praise when he returns to the zone.
435
Review the leadership meaning of
●HEEL described in chapter 5. If you
let your dog too far out of the HEEL zone prior to
correcting, you may end up giving more correc-
tions instead of one properly timed correction.
436
Another redirection tip is to remem-
●ber that there is no part of the HEEL
zone in front of your left leg. If your dog begins to
curve his head in front of your left leg, correct out-
ward to your left and re-command.
Obedience Training
179
437
The second reinforcement of HEEL is
●the automatic SIT. When you are
ready to finish moving the HEEL zone by walking.
slow down so your dog focuses his attention to
you. Slowly come to a full stop and if your dog
does not SIT, correct upwards with NO and com-
mand SIT. Praise when your dog sits.
438
Avoid commanding your dog to SIT
● when you stop moving. If you get in
the habit of commanding SIT, your dog will adopt
the idea of waiting to SrT until being asked. To
build the respect inherent with the HEEL com-
mand, the SlT must be automatic.
180
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
TeST The Heel CoMMANd
Test #1: Changing Pace
Changing your pace is one of the easiest ways to
test to see if your dog understands the HEEL
zone. Walk at a normal pace, and without signal-
ing to your dog, change pace. He should imme-
diately match your new pace and probably look
up at you.
As long as you have good health, there are
five paces for you to use for pace changing: jog.
quick, normal, slow, and baby steps. To effec-
tively change your pace, you will need to change
your stride. If you like to walk for exercise you will
H 'sabueyo aoed oi uojjuane leloads Aed oi paau
your knees have trouble with jog and quick, don't
bother with them. Compensate by being really
clever with your slower pace changes.
Test #2: Changing Directions
If your dog moves ahead of you while you are
both moving forward, step forward on your left
foot and pivot completely around so you face the
opposite direction. If your dog turns with you,
praise. If not, correct with NO and re-command
HEEL. Do not turn your dog with the leash; make
sure he turns on his own. Praise when your dog
returns to the HEEL position
Right circles and right squares. Right-hand cir-
cles and squares will require your dog to keep a
close eye on you, as your body will not be there
to steer him. You may be required to give several
small corrections at first, but enthusiastic motivat-
ing (patting your left leg) will encourage your dog
to follow you.
Obedience Training
181
Left circles and left squares. If you find your
dog drifting forward, many small left-hand circles
will motivate your dog to keep at your left hip.
Avoid the temptation to hold your dog back by
the leash. Correct backwards with NO (and re-
command HEEL) as long as your dog's head is in
front of your left thigh. Also, don't try to get in
front of your dog's head; make your dog slow
down to match your pace and turns. Left squares
will help keep your dog's head in the correct posi-
tion.
Figure eights are an excellent test of focus and
following. Start slowly and maintain a slack leash.
Only use the leash to correct (with NO) when
buisn pue ap!s inoA bujhed Aq aiea!io pauinbau 
your voice. Walk slowly at first and increase speed
to a normal pace.
Test #3: Stationary HEEL
With your dog in a SlT at your side, step forward
a few paces and stop. Your dog should have
remained in the SlT position. Pause for a few
moments. Without taking any forward steps, give
your dog the HEEL command. Your dog should
move to the HEEL zone and SIT. Praise heartily.
Perform  this  test exercise  from  all positions
around your dog.
If your dog can successfully maintain a HEEL
position with a slack leash for the prior three
tests, you can begin working on segment walks
described in chapter 8.
182
1000BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
SIT
439
When your dog is in the SIT position,
+his head is in the air and his poste
rior is on the ground. Alert, he waits in the SIT for
the next command. Read and understand all the
steps prior to teaching your dog SIT.
Teach the SIT Command
440
Begin with your dog in front of you,
·head pointing towards your right
side and rump towards your left side. Stand up
straight and give the verbal command SIT. Move
your right hand to the leash buckle and left hand
above the tail. Using light pressure, place your dog
in a sitting position by making a motion like you
are turning a ship's wheel counterclockwise
(please practice this motion before trying it with
your dog)
CAUTION
Some dogs do not appreciate having your hand
near their hindquarters. To avoid getting bitten,
desensitize your dog to being touched and han-
dled as described in chapter 6.
Obedience Training
183
441
Do not push your dog's hindquarters
·down.
Thesomewhat
circular
motion with your left hand should lightly scoop
the hindquarters. Also avoid pushing and releas-
ing (we call bumping). Maintain consistent light
pressure for as long as it takes to finish the com-
mand.
442
Your right hand should be directly
●on top of the leash buckle or on the
stitching just above the buckle. Any higher on the
leash and your dog may spin around. The less
excess movement your dog makes, the faster he
will learn the movement associated with the SIT
command.
443
As soon as your dog's rump hits the
suu .Lis poos, um asieid 'punoigo
will associate the word SIT with this action. If you
wish to add a food reward, offer it with your right
hand while switching control of the leash to your
left hand. Have your dog maintain the SIT com-
mand for three to five seconds (you may guide
him with light leash pressure backwards towards
the rump) repeating the praise "good SIT" every
two seconds. Then release your dog with BREAK.
184
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Reinforce the SlT Command
444
At some point during the teaching
·phase, your dog will begin to SIT
before you are required to place him in the SIT
position. Praise heartily with "good SIT" If you
find your dog sitting with little physical assis-
tance or you have been placing your dog in a SIT
Training Recipe later in the chapter), begin the
reinforcement phase of training.
445
You can begin to reinforce the SIT
●command by removing the physical
assistance and introducing a corrective NO. Stand
up straight and give the verbal command SIT. If
your dog completes the SIT command, praise
heartily with "good SIT." If your dog does not com-
plete the SIT command, give a corrective NO and
repeat the SIT command. If your dog fails to SIT,
repeat the corrective NO pattern a maximum of
twice and then place your dog in the SIT position
446
The leash correction required for the
·corrective NO is a vertical (up and
slightly backward) snap and release.
Obedience Training
185
TeST THe SIt COMMANd
Combine the SIT command with position-holding
skills by teaching your dog SIT in motion. Main-
tain a close HEEL position and give your dog the
SIT command. You may need to march in place
for a few moments until your dog completes the
SIT. When your dog sits, praise and continue
walking forward until you reach the end of your
leash and your dog remains in his position.
As your dog gets better at the SlT in motion,
increase your speed until you can HEEL at a nor-
mal pace and your dog SITS immediately when
commanded. Your goal is to have your dog stop
his forward motion and SIT within a two-second
count.
Your dog should understand that SlT is more
than the action of moving his rump to the floor.
To proof this idea we will teach your dog to SIT
from DOwN at the side. While your dog is hold-
ing the DOwN position give the command SIT
You may need to motivate your dog by happily
patting your leg. Be cautious not to lean over
your dog because your body language will be
telling him to stay down. Also divert your eye
stare to the ground or better yet the horizon.
The release Command breaK
447
The release command BREAK is the
● indication that the individual com-
mand is finished. Read and understand all the
steps prior to teaching your dog BREAK.
186
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Teach the BREAK Command
448
Since every obedience command
●has a beginning, middle, and finish,
you need a clear signal for the finish. Your dog
needs a clear understanding of when he is work-
ing and when he is not. The release cue BREAK
lets him know that he is no longer under com-
mand. Break is not a license to return to poor
behavior but simply to release from a command.
The BREAK command should be used frequently
during the workout, not just at the end of the ses-
sion.
449
While you are teaching your dog to
·SIT, begin teaching BREAK at the
same time. Begin by standing with your shoulders
facing your dog. You do not need to be at the front
of your dog-you may stand at the side or rear as
long as your shoulders are facing your dog. Using
a natural motion bring your hands together,
palms facing each other, waist high. Pause.
450
The following actions are to be per-
·formed simultaneously. With an
enthusiastic voice, give the release cue BREAK,
spread your hands approximately shoulder-width
apart, and take one step backwards. These
motions will serve to draw your dog off the SIT. As
soon as your dog releases from the SIT command,
praise verbally with "good BREAK" to associate
this action with the word BREAK.
Obedience Training
187
451
If your dog fails to move off the SIT
●command, repeat the BREAK com-
mand with the motion assistance but add tension
with the leash to gently motivate your dog off the
SIT command. Make sure you stand up straight
while performing the BREAK command. If you
bend over towards your dog, your body language
is telling him to remain in a SIT. As soon as your
dog releases from the SIT command, praise with
"good BREAK."
Reinforce the BREAK Command
452
As your dog gets better at position
●holding, wean off your body motion
so that only the hand signal and verbal cue
remain.The goal of this command is that your dog
releases without you moving your feet. If your dog
has difficulty moving off his SIT or DOWN, try a
more energetic voice command. If he still resists,
give a light corrective NO and repeat BREAK.
DOWN
453
When your dog is in the DowN posi-
●tion, he is lying on the ground. He
may be relaxed and on one hip or on his side but
not on his back. He may not crawl around. Read
and understand all the steps prior to teaching
your dog DowN.
188
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Teach the DOwN Command
454
Begin with your dog at your left-
●hand side in a SIT command. Give
the DowN hand signal and simultaneously give
the DOWN command verbally. The hand signal for
the DOWN is to align your elbow directly over the
top of your dog's head (approximately two feet
above his head). Extend your arm horizontally
with your palm facing down. The hand signal is
stationary—do not move your arm downward or
lower your hand in front of your dog's head. After
you have spoken the command DOwN, remove
your hand signal and place your left hand back on
the leash. Only give the hand signal once.
455
Bend at the waist or get down on
· your right knee. Place your left hand
very close to the leash buckle and bend your
elbow so vour left forearrn is horizontal. Gently
place the center of your forearm on top of the
shoulder blades on your dog's back. With a treat in
pue puoAaq isnf Sop inoA neq 'puey nugu inoA
noA sy N/moa, teadan pue smed siy uaamiaq
dog begins to lie down, follow the motion with
your forearm but do not push. Once your dog is in
the DOWN, praise “good DOWN" and give the
treat. While you are still on your knee, release
your dog with BREAK and stand up.
Obedience Training
189
456
It may seem overly directive to spec-
●ify the right knee, but if you get
down on your left knee, your body will open
towards your dog and invite him to come snuggle
in the nook your body creates. Bending on your
right knee keeps a neutral body posture towards
the dog. Body language is very important when
teaching DOWN.
457
If your dog is really small or you are
● really tall, or bending down makes
you fall, do something which you are able: teach
the DOwN command using a table. Set up a card
table or suitable folding table (but not your
kitchen table) and go through the motions of
teaching DoWN exactly the same as you would
with your dog on the ground.
458
The biggest key to teaching your dog
●DOWN is that you must wait for
your dog to DowN on his own. Do not push your
dog down with your forearm or elbow. Do not pull
your dog down with your left hand. These hand
positions are presented as a guide only to remove
other options to performing the DOwN. Never
physically force your dog into the DOWN. Watch
that your forearm or elbow is on the shoulders of
your dog and not the neck. Any of these errors will
immediately add dominance and make the
DOwN command unenjoyable for your dog.
190
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
459
This idea is so important we are
·going to present it another way.
Body assistance on the shoulder blades is not to
provide any downward pressure or movement.
Body assistance is provided solely to guide your
dog. Once your dog begins to move down, your
body should follow. If he attempts to stand back
up, your arm should provide resistance toward
the upward movement. Don't push him down,
just resist the upward motion. As soon as he
begins to move downward again, all pressure
must release and your dog will move under his
own power.
460
If your dog tries to move forward to
●get the treat, brace him backwards
with your left arm on your dog's shoulders. If your
dog does get all the way up, do not say anything.
but quickly place your dog back into the SIT and
repeat the command DowN.
461
Hand signals can be distracting
●while you are teaching. Give the
DOWN hand signal only once. Place your left hand
back on the leash and keep it there.
Obedience Training
191
462
Once your dog gets more comfort-
●able with the DOwN command,
increase the duration your dog remains in the
DOWN position. Prepare yourself with three
pieces of treats in your right hand. Give one piece
every three seconds while repeating
poo8,，
DOWN." While your dog is in the DOWN position,
gradually remove your left forearm from his
shoulders and have your dog hold the DowN
position on his own. You may give your dog light
praise and affection while repeating
“good
DOWN."
463
Providing some light affection while
·your dog is in a DOwWN can help
assign a positive experience with the DowN com-
mand. While your dog is in a DOwN, pet him
lightly down the length of the neck or shoulders
while praising "good DOWN."
464.
The next milestone is to see if you
● can stand up. Once your dog seems
settled in the DowN command, slowly stand up.
If your dog gets up, say No, bend at the waist, and
repeat the DOWN baiting. Bait without food this
time and simply touch the ground with your fin-
gers. Once your dog is DOwN, praise and stand
back up.
192
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
465
If you need some additional physical
·assistance, use the back of your left
hand on your dog's shoulders instead of your left
forearm. This may be particularly useful when
attempting to stand up from your teaching posi-
tion while assisting your dog to remain in the
DOWN position.
Reinforce the DOwN Command
466
At some point during the teaching
● phase, your dog will begin to DoWN
as you bend over to provide the physical assis-
tance. Praise heartily with "good DOwN." If you
find your dog downing with little physical assis-
tance or you have been baiting your dog in a
DOWN for two weeks (as prescribed in the Ten-
Week Training Recipe later in the chapter), begin
the reinforcement phase of training.
467
To reinforce the DOWN command,
●remove the physical assistance and
introduce a corrective NO. Stand up straight and
give the verbal command and hand signal DowN.
If your dog completes the DowN command,
praise heartily with "good DOWN" and reward
with a treat. If your dog does not complete the
DOWN command, give a corrective NO and repeat
the DOWN command. If your dog fails to DOWN,
bait him using food in the right hand into the
DOWN position. You only want to correct once at
this time.
Obedience Training
193
468
The direction of the leash correction
● for the corrective NO is especially
important for the DoWN command. The leash
correction should be delivered by a sideways
snap. Since your left hand is already on the leash,
place your left hand adjacent to your left knee.
When you snap, move your left arrm like a pendu-
lum towards your right knee and returning
to
your left knee. This correction should be made in
a neutral direction, not downwards. This would
introduce dominance into the experience.
469
After two weeks of teaching and one
● week of reinforcing with some assis-
tance, your dog should be ready to perform the
DOWN command completely on his own. Give the
verbal command and hand signal DoWN, praise
verbally, and reward with random food but do not
bait. Wait to deliver the food reward until your dog
has completed the command. If your dog does not
complete the command, correct with NO and
repeat DOWN.
470
If your dog begins to curl in front of
 you, adjustments may be required
on the direction of the correction. First, make sure
you are not pulling your dog across your body
with a slow or forceful correction. If your dog still
curls in front of your body, try correcting back-
wards towards your dog's tail instead of in front of
your body. Correct with the same low horizontal
motion, just towards the tail.
194
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Make sure you don't make the DowwN a personal
issue between you and your dog. Maintain
absolutely neutral vocal tones while commanding
and correcting. Do not look your dog in the eyes.
Instead, divert your gaze to the ground where
you want your dog to DOwN. Looking at the
ground instead of in your dog's eyes is another
way of keeping the focus on the command and
not making correction personal.
471
Proof the DOWN by teaching DOWN
● from a stand. Start with your dog in
a BREAK (so your dog will probably be standing),
sidle up to your dog so he is on your left-hand
side, and give the DOwN command and hand sig-
nal. Praise if your dog DOwNS and correct if he
doesn't. Your dog may be slightly confused at first.
He is has been conditioned to DOWN from the SIT
position. Having him DowN from a standing posi-
tion will reinforce the idea that commands are
positions and not actions. This concept is impor-
tant in developing mental discipline in your dog.
Obedience Training
195
TeST The doWn CoMMAnd
DOwN in motion is the first test of the DOwWN
position. It is more difficult because it combines
the DOwN skill with position holding and HEEL
(Practice this test after some position-holding
skills have been developed.) Start in HEEL and
slow down so your dog is guessing if you are
going to stop or not. Give the DOwN command
and momentarily march in place as your dog
downs. Once he is down, praise and resume for.
ward movement. If your dog breaks the DOwN
command with forward movement, correct him
puewuoo-au pue On yim 
Extend the motion command for SIT and
DOwN. As your dog gets better at SIT in motion
and DOWN in motion, increase your HEEL speed
and decrease how long you march in place while
your dog completes the command. The goal of
these commands would be to maintain normal
HEEL speed, give your dog the SIT or DOwN
command without slowing, and have your dog
remain in his position while you continue to walk
away.
POSItIOn HOLdInG (STay)
472
Position holding is the vehicle
●through which patience is devel-
oped. Position holding teaches concentration,
focus, and self-control. Most dogs act on impulse.
Position holding teaches your dog to think. He
then learns to ignore the inputs and the impulses
that make him misbehave.
196
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
473
What happened to STAY? When
●most classes teach STAY, the vocals
and hand gesture often become threatening. The
word stay has been removed from this part of the
language because it was taught in an intimidating
or threatening manner, either by repetition of the
word using a stern voice, by placing a flat hand in
front of the face, or by pointing a finger. Alter-
nately. positive reinforcement has been substi-
tuted with praising "good SIT, "DOWN,” or "HEEL'
as often as the owner wants (this keeps the
thought path positive).
Teach Position Holding
474
Position holding is taught in two
●parts. The first part is time, where
your dog will learn to hold a position with you at
his side for increasingly longer periods of time.
The second part is patience, where you will leave
your dog's side and require him to remain without
your immediate presence. Reinforcing will com-
bine the two. The concept of position holding will
be taught using the SIT command, and after the
concept has been tested and proofed with SIT, the
DOWN command will be added.
Position Holding for Time
475
Start by planning a time goal (exam-
●ple: ten seconds). Give your dog the
SIT command. Praise "good SIT:" After ten sec-
onds, release with BREAK and praise "good
BREAK." If your dog gets up, place him back into
the SIT command and continue praising.
Obedience Training
197
476.
Verbally praising “good SIT" takes
● about one second. While you teach
position holding, praise every other second. This
makes for a convenient timer as well. For a ten-
second SIT, you will praise five tirmes (with one-
second pause in between) before releasing your
dog. Using this verbal timer also insures adequate
praise during the teaching phase.
477
If your dog has trouble focusing dur
● ing the early position-holding exer-
cises, bait with a treat by holding it in front of his
face about two feet higher than his nose. If your
dog wants to jump for the treat, step on the leash
and wait for the dog to relax in the SIT before
praising. Release foot tension on the leash and
praise “good SIT" before giving the treat. Most
dogs will release from the SIT command after
they are done chewing their treat.
Position Holding for Patience
478
Start with your dog in a SIT com-
● mand at your left side. Praise with
'good SIT" and take one or two "side steps" to your
right side. Pause for one or two seconds and
return to his side. Praise again "good SIT:"You may
need to brace your dog by holding leash tension
with your left hand. As you repeat this type of
exercise you will want to wean off assisting with
leash tension. Release your dog with a BREAK to
signal that this position-holding session is over.
198
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
479
Advance the "step away and return"
·exercise. Repeat the step away and
return cycle several times before releasing your
dog. Begin stepping away from your dog in differ-
ent directions. Every time you change directions
you may need to brace your dog with the leash in
the opposite direction you want to move. Always
praise your dog for remaining in the SIT.
Position Holding for Distance
480
As your dog begins to understand
·position holding, increase the dis-
tance: step away from your dog up to the length of
the leash. Do not drop the leash during the teach-
ing phase of position holding. Always returm to
your dog's side and pause before you release with
BREAK.At no time should your dog begin to antic-
ipate when he is being released from the com-
mand.
481
Once your dog can SIT reliably while
● you walk to the end of the leash and
return, you may begin walking in a circle around
your dog. This will be a milestone exercise. Once
your dog will allow you to walk around his rear
end, he should trust you with the vulnerable
nature of the DOwN. We have seen a strong link
between the length of time your dog allows you to
walk completely around him and when he begins
to DowN without assistance.
Obedience Training
199
Reinforce Position Holding
482
Once you have taught the concepts
●of position holding for time, posi-
tion, and distance, you are ready to introduce the
corrective NO.
483
Slowly increase the target time goal.
· Increase by five-second intervals
until you can consistently achieve twenty- to
thirty-second sits. If your dog breaks the position,
leash, correct with NO, and reposition your dog.
Repeat this until your target time goal has been
achieved. If your dog begins to repeatedly fail the
SIT exercise, lower the target time goal by several
seconds and repeat until your dog improves.
484
If your dog feels that the treat sig-
●nals the end of the position-holding
exercise, brace him on his shoulders with the
palm of your left hand while he is eating the treat.
Make sure he does not get up and praise. After he
relaxes in the position, release him with BREAK
Alternately, when your dog gets up quickly, cor-
rect with NO and re-command with SIT. Praise
and release.
200
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
485
Increase the distance you walk away
●from your dog. Walk around your
dog in a circle. Change the circle direction and
walk in the opposite direction. If your dog gets up
and walks away, take the leash and move your dog
back to the initial position, correct with NO, and
re-command SIT. Repositioning your dog in the
initial position is important; otherwise your dog's
respect of the position-holding rules will degrade.
486
When practicing SIT and DOWN
●position holding, don't wait until
your dog fails by breaking the command. Practice
short durations and release your dog with a
BREAK command before he gets up on his own.
Let your dog know there is an end to the exercise.
Give your dog a BREAK command before he breaks
the command by himself. Start with short time
intervals (five seconds, ten seconds, fifteen sec-
onds) and increase to thirty seconds and one
minute.
487
Position holding is the pathway to
●building patience. Since you began
the teaching process with HEEL, that is the com-
mand most frequently practiced. Make sure to
take at least a third of each practice workout for
position holding. Most dogs are conditioned
through the workout process to think each com-
mand lasts between three and five seconds. Prac-
ticing position holding is an opportunity to show
your dog that sometimes commands last longer.
Obedience Training
201
TeST POSITION HOLdING
Leash tension. Command your dog to SIT. Step a
few feet away from your dog. Place some light
tension on the leash. Praise your dog with "good
SIT" as long as your dog resists the tension on the
leash. Only apply tension for a few moments. If
your dog breaks the SIT, correct with NO and re-
command SIT. Return the tension to the leash.
As your dog improves by actively resisting.
increase tension from all points around your dog.
Do not pull or tug with short or choppy move-
ments. Slowly increase the tension, and praise.
Keep the duration you place tension on the leash
only three or four seconds.
Fake heel. while you are at your dog's side.
step forward without giving any verbal command
or signal. Your dog should remain in a SIT
because you did not give either HEEL or BREAK
commands. Step away slowly and only a short dis-
tance before returning to his side. Increase the
speed and distance to test how well he can resist
body movement and remain in the SIT.
The 20/20 exercise. Have your dog SIT for
twenty complete seconds, and release with
BREAK. Command the dog directly into DOwN
and have him hold the DOwwN for twenty full sec-
onds. Release with BREAK. Repeating the SIT,
BREAK, DOwN, BREAK exercise three times is
one series of the 20/20 exercise.
202
1000 BESTDOG TRAININGSECRETS
CoMe
488
Regardless where your dog is or what
●he is doing, he should come to you
and SIT directly in front of you when called and
wait for further direction. Read and understand all
the steps prior to teaching your dog COME.
489
The COME command exemplifies
●your dog's overall understanding of
your rules, clarity, and consistency, as well as the
respect level he has for you. Your dog will COME
when called if your relationship is positive and
well balanced.
490
COME is the position of being within
●the same two-foot-to-a-side square
but positioned directly in front of you. When
called to COME, your dog should stop whatever he
and SIT. Your dog should remain in the SIT until
released or given another command. The com-
mand has the same meaning regardless of how
far (or close) your dog is to you.
Teach the COME Command
491
The hand signal for COME is a
● motion with your right hand, similar
to sweeping poker winnings off the table and into
your lap. Your right hand starts shoulder height
with arm extended fingertips. Sweep your hand
toward the center of your chest.
Obedience Training
203
492
Stand
 approximately
twofeet
●directly in front of your dog with
your dog in a SIT. Grasp the leash with your left
hand with minimum slack between your dog and
your hand. Give the hand signal and command
COME simultaneously and then move quickly
backwards, motivating your dog to COME. Stop
the backwards movement and give your dog a SIT
command. Praise, saying"good COME," and offer a
small treat.
Reinforce the COME Command
493
You can reinforce the COME com-
● mand with a stationary recall. Begin
with your dog in a SIT or DOWN and step away
from your dog (keep the leash in your left hand).
As you practice position holding by walking
around your dog, pause and face your dog. Give
the COME command (verbal and hand signal).
Praise verbally and with food for a good recall. If
your dog does not respond immediately, correct
with NO and re-command COME.
494
Do not cheat for your dog by giving a
· leash signal or by calling his name.
Make sure your dog is performing this command
completely on his own. If your dog anticipates
your recall command, reposition him, correct, and
re-command him. Desensitize by moving around,
facing your dog and pausing.
204
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
495
Recall your dog from all positions
·especially the positions with your
dog facing away from you, as this keeps your dog
on his toes.
496
Try very hard not to use the COME
●command at any other time. The
COME command has a specific action associated
with it and using the casual "come" will dilute the
effectiveness of the command.
497
Even though your dog may under-
+stand
l the obedience 
command
COME, he may still choose to ignore you from time
to time. It is important to understand the use of
this command from the dog's point of view. Fre-
quently, we call our dogs to us for negative rea-
sons, at least in the dog's eyes
-coming in from
the outside, being called to the crate, or calling
them when you want to take something away
from them. It is very important to use the COME
command for many more positive reasons than
negative.
Obedience Training
205
498
To establish a speedy yard recall, you
●will need a thirty-foot leash (not a
retractable leash). Every time you go outside with
your dog, put him on this long leash. Walk around
the yard with your dog and every few minutes or
s0, give him the COME command. As your dog
returns to your front, praise and give a treat. If he
does not return, give the corrective NO and repeat
the command COME. Reel your dog in if necessary
and always praise for completing the command.
Repeat this exercise at least ten times every night
for three months. Add the thirty-foot leash recall
to your ongoing obedience-training workout.
PLACE
499
Place is a command used to indicate
●to your dog where you would like
him to go and lie down. When on PLACE, your dog
may get up and turn around but cannot leave the
PLACE. The PLACE may be moved from room to
room or outside (like on a deck) but must be rein-
troduced after moving the PLACE.
Teach the PLACE Command
500.
HEEL your dog across the object you
●have selected as the PLACE. This
object may be a dog bed or fleece mat or a small
carpet. When you are directly over top of the
PLACE stop (your dog will SIT automatically) and
give your dog the DowN command. As your dog
DOWNS, command PLACE and point. Praise your
dog with "good PLACE."
206
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
501
Advance the PLACE command by
+doing a DowN in motion over the
place object, and just as your dog DOwNS, com-
mand PLACE and praise. Next HEEL up to the
place. Bend over and point to the place and com-
mand PLACE. Praise when your dog lies down on
the place.
Reinforce the PLACE Command
502
If your dog leaves the place, lead
·him back, give a corrective NO, and
re-command PLACE. Make sure you lead your dog
back to the place before correcting him. Do not
use the DoWN command to remind him of the
position he should be in. If your dog has difficulty,
perform more teaching exercises.
DISTRACTION TRAINING
503
 To make training practical you will
● need to add controlled distractions.
Distractions are things (food, cats, toys, etc.) or sit-
uations {traffic, thunderstorms, veterinarian
offices, etc.) that will cause our dogs to become
temporarily diverted from their normal "good"
behavior. Distraction training helps your dog
understand that obedience commands, along
with the appropriate corrections and praise, are
consistent ingredients of his life regardless of
change. Make a list of the most distracting
items/situations that are difficult for your dog.
Rank these distractions from the hardest to easi-
est.
Obedience Training
207
504
Begin distraction training with an
·item or situation other than the
most difficult. For example, if your dog goes
bonkers with people at the door, start distraction
training with a distraction you listed as "easy'
such as a toy or food. Distraction training is usu-
ally easiest with two people—one to work the dog
and one to work the distraction. As your dog
establishes self-control, increase the difficulty of
the distraction slowly, working towards the most
distracting item or situation.
208
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
505
Distance has a great equalizer.
+ Always start the distraction training
process by having the distraction at the greatest
practical distance possible. For example, when
teaching your dog to SIT for door greetings, don't
start the process with your dog directly in front of
the door. He will not succeed. Start the process by
having your dog SIT with you at your side about
ten feet away from the door. As your dog
improves, decrease the distance to the door as
long as your dog continues to succeed.
506
Some dogs really have a tough time
●with distraction training. You can
turn distraction training into a game by giving a
small treat for every success. As your dog displays
self-control, give one small treat for every three
successes. Gradually decrease the food reward
over several months. Always maintain verbal
praise! Sometimes a toy reward will work in place
of the treat. The objective is to make the process
of distraction training fun but effective.
Obedience Training
209
Stationary Distractions
507
Start with placing one distraction
● object on the ground. Give your dog
the HEEL command and walk him past the object.
Start about four feet away from the distraction.
You may want to HEEL in a circle around the
object. It will be easier on your dog if you place
your body between the dog and distraction. If your
dog shows more than a casual interest in any dis-
traction, correct with NO and redirect with HEEL
Praise heartily when your dog ignores the distrac-
tion. Once your dog exhibits some self-control
with one object, repeat the same exercise with
multiple objects on the ground.
508
Some people have learned LEAVE IT
● for the previous exercise. While this
is also acceptable, proper use of NO will be suffi-
cient. We will review exercises to teach the LEAVE
IT command in chapter 8.
Moving Distractions
509
After your dog shows the ability to
●ignore a stationary object, you will
want to increase your dog's self-control by distrac-
tion training with moving objects. Quick-moving
objects are generally highly stimulating for
almost all dogs. Even their eyesight is more
attuned to motion than human eyesight which
makes motion even more distracting. For these
reasons, we will introduce motion slowly by using
the following formula: toss, bounce, and roll.
210
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
510
Toss. Begin with your dog in a SIT
position at your left side. Hold the
object (most likely a ball) in the right hand and
toss the object into the air one time. After each
toss, if your dog remains in the SIT, praise. If your
dog breaks the SIT position, correct with NO and
redirect with SIT. Repeat tossing the object in the
air until your dog remains in the SIT for three con-
secutive tosses. Give your dog a BREAK command
to signal the end of that session.
511
Once you feel your dog is developing
●some self-control to tossing an
object with the SIT command, repeat the "toss"
distraction training process with her in a DoWN
command. If you feel inclined, HEEL with your dog
at your left side and toss the object to yourself
with the right hand.
512
Bounce. Begin again with your dog in a
●SIT position at your left side. With
your right hand, bounce the object onto the floor.
After each bounce, if your dog remains in the SIT,
praise. If your dog breaks the SrT position, correct
with NO and redirect with SIT. Repeat bouncing the
object on the ground until your dog remains in the
SIT for three consecutive bounces. Give your dog a
BREAK command to signal the end of that session.
Obedience Training
211
513
Once you feel your dog is developing
●some self-control to bouncing an
object with the SIT command, repeat the bounce
distraction training process with your dog in a
DOWN command.
514
Roll.At this point, your dog should be
● able to ignore: "stuff' on the ground,
"stuff" tossed in the air, "stuff" tossed on the
ground, or “stuff" bounced off the ground. The
motion is stimulating and the self-control is real,
but a rolling object is really exciting! Having a sec-
ond person to help with the distraction is really
helpful at this stage. Have the distractor stand
  no  Ame iag n Aodde
dog. Roll the object in a neutral direction (neither
towards nor away) in relation to you and your dog
Praise your dog for ignoring the rolling distraction.
515
Gradually decrease the distance
● between your dog and the distractor
rolling the object. Change direction so the object
rolls directly away
 from your dog or directly
towards. Change from SIT to DOWN. Praise for
every success.
212
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
516
A small, furry toy with a string
·attached is an excellent distraction
for dogs who like to chase cats. Place the object on
the floor. With the dog in a SIT or DOWN, have the
distractor pull the toy across the floor, first in one
motion and then in several jerky motions. Praise
your dog for all successes.
517
Sometimes distraction training with
·quick movements causes your dog
to become excited. Keep your voice calm and
repeat the distraction exercise until your dog
relaxes around the distraction.
518
Have your dog in a SIT or DOWN on
●a long leash. Have a distractor mid-
way between you and your dog with ten feet to
either side. Give the COME command. As your dog
recalls toward you, have the distractor toss a ball
or toy across and in front of your dog's path. If
your dog diverts his recall, leash (or remote) cor-
rect with NO and re-command COME. If your dog
completes his recall, praise heartily!
Environmental Distractions
519
New places are as exciting as new
●things and require that you change
your training environment. Too often our dogs will
become accustomed to behaving only in certain
environments. The ball your dog ignored in the liv-
ing room will be newly distracting in the kitchen.
Obedience Training
213
520
Your dog may become acclimated to
 training outdoors and not indoors or
vice versa. Practice your training sessions in every
environment. View every room in your house as a
different training environment. Train in the bed-
room, basement, hallway, living room, garage,
and/or kitchen. The more frequently you change
your training environment, the faster your dog
will respond to changes in all environments.
521
Make a list of at least five places to
● take your dog to train. All of these
places should be outside of your home. Examples
include veterinarian offices, the park, local shop-
ping centers (outside), pet stores, or simply in
town on the sidewalk. Visit at least three different
environments per week during your first six to
nine months of reinforcing the obedience com-
mands.
522
Distraction training also establishes
●leadership and builds respect by
requiring your dog to do things he doesn't neces-
sarily want to do. Distraction training also builds
your dog's self-discipline and the ability to suppress
impulses. Through regular distraction workouts you
will be able to manage your dog in any situation.
214
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Ten-WeeK TrAInInG ReCIPe
The recipe described in this section is a ten-week
plan for the successful teaching of the obedience
commands as described in chapter 7. Perform
three workouts per (
 day, approximately twenty
minutes per workout (no less than fifteen min-
utes). Allow at least one hour of rest between
workouts. There should be thirty total workouts in
a two-week period.
Sometimes learning new things can be stress-
ful, especially at first when not only are the con-
cepts new, but the methods of teaching are new
as well. Some nervous-personality dogs will be
especially stressed. Dogs sometimes refuse food
during the early stages of training. If this hap-
pens, freeze the program wherever you are and
simply repeat the skills you are working on until
the dog relaxes and begins to accept treats
again. This process may require three or four
workouts but it is worthwhile to develop your
dog's positive attitude towards obedience.
Weeks One and Two
1. Teach HEEL command. Repeat a series of
three to five circles, seven times (total of thirty to
thirty-five repetitions). Perform a series of five
four-step HEELS four times (total of twenty repe-
titions).
2. Teach SIT command. Teach BREAK com-
mand. Place your dog in a SlT, pause, and release
with BREAK. Repeat this series five times. Repeat
the series four times (twenty total repetitions).
3. work on a series of one exercise and move
to another exercise (e.g., work on one series of
Obedience Training
215
HEEL circles, then a series of SIT and BREAK, and
finally a series of four-step HEELS). Dogs need
repetition of one skill to learn but bore easily
without variety.
Weeks Three and Four
4. Begin reinforcing the HEEL command. Test
the HEEL command with tests one through three
described above.
5. Reinforce SIT and BREAK. Begin teaching
position holding for time with SIT (have your dog
hold SIT from between five and ten seconds). Begin
teaching position holding for patience with SIT.
6. Begin teaching the DOWN command. Repeat
the baiting exercise three times using food. Repeat
the series twice per workout in the first week and
three times per workout in the second week.
Weeks Five and Six
Your  workouts may
 become more stressful for
both you and your dog as you wean away from
the teaching phase and enter the more difficult
reinforcing phase. If you find any particular test or
distraction too hard for your mutual skill level,
stop the exercise, continue to practice the skills
and repeat the particular test a few days later.
While the length and frequency of workouts
have not changed since week one, the workouts
are
e becoming
 less predictable  and  require  a
good understanding of diversity to make them as
useful as they can be.
7. Continue reinforcing and testing the HEEL
SIT, and BREAK commands. Continue to prac-
tice the SIT and BREAK exercise. Begin to use
216
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
distractions with HEEL and SIT as described in the
distraction section above.
8. Extend the concept of position holding:
Begin body movement with the DOwN com-
mand. Build patience by extending the SIT to
between thirty seconds and one minute. Test SIT
position holding
  with
 tests 
 one and two
described above. Repeat each test until your dog
"passes" three consecutive times.
9. Begin reinforcing the DOwN command
Start during week five by removing both the food
and the shoulder help. During week six begin
reinforcing without any bodily assistance. You
may reintroduce food but not to bait your dog.
Only deliver the food reward after your dog has
successfully completed the DOwN command.
Weeks Seven and Eight
10. Reinforce and test the HEEL command. Con-
tinue to reinforce the SIT and BREAK exercise. Rein-
force DOwN at the side. On one of every three
workouts, add distractions to your basic commands.
Proof DOWN with the "DOwN from a stand" exer-
cise.
11. Extend the concept of position holding.
Do five repetitions of the 20/20 exercise through-
out the workout.
12. Begin combining concepts by teaching
DOWN and SIT from your front and testing motion
SIT and motion DOwN. Begin teaching PLACE.
13. Begin teaching the COME command.
Repeat the backwards walk three times. Keep a
close monitoring of the position-holding skills.
The large amount of body language employed to
Obedience Training
217
teach this command sometimes causes position
holding to suffer.
Weeks Nine, Ten, and Beyond
14. Reinforce PLACE and the COME com-
mand. Always practice a short leash recall to rein-
force the final finish position. Repeat no less than
ten times per workout. Use food for nearly 100
percent of the repetitions. Of all the commands,
COME is the least-practiced command and the
command most needed. Begin extending the
COME command as described in the teaching
and reinforcing section.
15. Reinforce and test all obedience com-
mands, including HEEL, SIT, DOwN, position
holding (as a concept), SITS, and DOwNS from
your front. Motion SIT and DOWN, PLACE, and
COME. Practice all commands equally, working
each command as little as one or as many as five
re petitions per series. Avoid creating patterns.
Make exercises targeted towards your practi-
cal obedience applications in chapters 8 and 9
part of your formal training workouts. Make sure
distraction training comprises at least one out of
every three obedience practice workouts.
218
1000BESTDOGTRAININGSECRETS
TrAINING DIVERSITY
523
The primary goal of obedience work-
· outs is to make your dog think. Diver-
sity is the active practice of watching out for
patterns and deliberately breaking them up. Make
sure you use all skills equally. Change practice
environments three times per week. When you get
bored with them, find some new environments.
Examples of Diversity
524
Turn your back to your dog and give
commands (use a mirror to deter-
mine if praise or correction is necessary); give
commands while seated in a chair; use hand sig-
nals only; give commands on the opposite side of
a glass door. This is an opportunity for you to be
creative with your workout.
525
Change body position (kneel down
●or bend over); change pace speed as
you move around your dog: briefly drop the leash
and pick it up during position-holding exercises.
526
Always include fundamental and
advanced exercises in your obedi-
ence practice workout. Keep a complete list of all
exercises, like four-step heels and pace changes
as well as the application exercises and desensiti-
zation exercises. Practice them all while paying
special attention to fundamental position-holding
and distraction-training exercises.
Obedience Training
219
OfF-LEASH TRAINING
527
The secret ingredients for off-leash
● success lie in the foundation you set
during fundamental obedience training. Those
ingredients are consistency in reinforcing patterns
and commands, distraction-training distance com-
mands, and simple respect for your relationship.
Maturity on the dog's part, coupled with these
other ingredients, is the final piece of the puzzle.
Remember that you can't rush maturity.
220
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
528
For most of your basic obedience
 command teaching and reinforcing.
you are physically close to your dog (typically from
immediately adjacent to six feet around). Begin-
ning the off-leash process involves increasing the
distance from which your dog will respond to your
commands. Practice your distance commands
(front SITS and DOWNS), and perfect them on a
six-foot leash at that distance. Your dog should be
able to do this discipline-building command set at
all angles around her, with leash in your hand, with
no corrections, and with distractions.
529
Gradually work farther away from
●the dog, reinforcing commands the
first time using the same verbal pattern NO and
re-command if necessary. Increase the distance in
two-foot increments. If your dog begins to fail
repeatedly, decrease the distance two or four feet
and work on the commands from all points
around your dog.
Obedience Training
221
530
When
1 practicing your off-leash
training
exercises,
youmust
approach your dog with the same confidence you
would in a regular session; otherwise, he will
notice a bigger difference and play on that weak-
leadership portrayal.
Indoor Off-Leash Practice
531
Using your distance-command exer-
● cise, go to a distance of only two feet
and drop your leash. Remaining close to your dog.
work through this exercise the same way &
a.s
before. If your dog fails a command and needs a
correction, do so by reaching in slowly, taking the
leash, and saying "No."Your dog will see a change
since the leash is no longer in your hand, so going
back to six feet and reinforcing the same way
helps to "connect the dots" for her
532
Add distance to this exercise only if
·your dog is doing well and not
requiring correction. If when you reach about ten
feet your dog does not complete the command,
say the word “No" without the correction at first,
then repeat the command. If you've been consis-
tent to this point, the word “No" alone should be
the “correction." If, after one try at "No" alone
your dog still does not do the command, then
slowly reach in and give a reinforcement correc-
tion. Continue this formula until you are at least
twenty feet away and your dog is reliable.
222
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
533
Off-leash training is a "back and
· forth" kind of training. You may need
to go backward to shorter distances before you
can move forward. Be prepared to do that, as your
off-leash success will only be as good as your
foundation. Your dog will see any holes in your
consistency, so be careful and patient!
534
Once your front commands with the
●leash dropped have been perfected,
move to practicing your motion commands (HEEL,
motion SIT, motion DOWN, COME) with the leash
dropped. Do this for several weeks, perhaps even
one to two months, before you remove the leash
(see Tabwork),
Outdoor Off-Leash Practice
535
Put a thirty-foot leash on your dog
·and
practice distance-command
exercises outside. Begin at six feet, and work to a
distance of twenty to thirty feet. Use your long
leash as you would the short one, giving correc-
tions as needed and remaining at the distance
where your dog needs help.
Obedience Training
223
536
Be careful that your dog doesn't
● become sensitive to your approach
when you're far away. You don't want your dog
thinking that every time you approach her, she
gets a correction. To avoid this, add approaches
that reward her with food or touch praise as you
come close and reach for her.
537
Test your dog's ability to hold posi
● tions at twenty and thirty feet. Keep
the leash in your hand to ensure safety for your
dog. Test this exercise with varying levels of dis-
traction.
538
When is it tirme for no leash? Each
·dog is different. You will know,
beyond a shadow of a doubt, when it is safe for
your dog to be off-leash. If your dog makes several
mistakes when you remove the leash, you may be
rushing things and need to go backward in order
to go forward. Actual off-leash training is a true
combination of maturity (of your dog), respect,
and the strength of your relationship with your
dog, so be patient, fair, and consistent.
224
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
539
Taking your dog through off-leash
+ training is a process. It is not as sim-
ple as removing the leash. You must have your
dog's undivided attention on-leash first. True off-
leash training means that you no longer rely on
the corrective part of the NO for your dog to
respond to you. The corrective NO pattern has
been adequately completed so the spoken NO is
sufficient for your dog to respond to the diversion.
Tabwork
540
The Tab is a short strap of leather {a
●short version of a leash, roughly six
inches long) that attaches to your dog's collar in
the same manner the leash does. This training tab
is designed to take the place of your leash. Intro-
duce the training tab by attaching the tab to the
collar with the leash, and perform several obedi-
ence workouts.
541
When you remove the leash, go to a
●training tab and perform the same
training exercises using the training tab the same
way you would a leash. Use this training tool as
you practice, and do not drop this "training wheel"
until you are certain your dog respects the same
rules without the leash.
Obedience Training
225
542
Do not let your dog play with or
●mouth the training tab. Leash cor-
rect with NO if he does. When your dog is social-
ized to the tab hanging from his collar you may
begin. Remove the leash but leave the tab on. Only
use the tab for corrections.
543
Owner confidence plays an impor
 tant role in the success of off-leash
training. Sometimes an owner will feel a bit lost
without the leash. Do not change your vocal pat-
terns. Use your obedience commands exactly as
you have been practicing with the leash on.
Remote Training
544.
The goal of training with a remote
·device is to assure proper response
to spoken commands without the use of a leash
correction. This concept is achieved through sub-
stitution. By practicing and reinforcing obedience
commands with the corrective NO, you will be
able to substitute a remote correction for the
physical leash correction. If you have not chosen
to have NO as part of the obedience pattern,
remote-device training will only be a negative
experience for your dog and should not be done.
226
1000BESTDOGTRAININGSECRETS
545
There are a variety of remote correc-
+tive devices: electronic, spray (typi-
cally citronella), vibration, and noise. Do some
research with the different devices to deterrmine
the lowest-intensity correction that still gets
results. Make sure the correction intensity on
your device is adjustable. Some remote collars
have multiple forms of stimulation (e.g., vibration
and electronic). Our suggested choice is an elec-
tronic collar with a vibration mode. We will dis-
cuss spray and noise corrections in Behavior
Problem Solving, chapter 12.
546
Bv
the time you introduce the
●remote device to your dog. you
should have some great obedience teamwork
skills. Your dog should behave very well in all dis-
tractions. Some maturity is also preferred. Your
dog should be in the late adolescent or early adult
stage. Dogs should wait until at least eighteen
months of age to begin remote training.
547
To properly train your dog with a
+remote
device, you will 
need
approximately two months to substitute the leash
correction with the remote correction before you
remove the leash altogether. Not having the leash
on or taking the leash off prermaturely may lead to
the dog becoming confused and panicking. The
training process described below will be effective
for any of the devices listed above.
Obedience Training
227
548
The key to success in remote train-
· ing depends on how consistent your
corrective patterns have been during the previous
exercises. If you have allowed several opportuni-
ties to perform an obedience command before
applying a physical correction, then remote train-
ing will become confusing or outright terrifying
for your dog. You must be consistent in correcting
your dog the first time, every time for each com-
mand.
Teaching Remote Reinforcement
549
Socialize your dog to the new device.
● Have him wear the device around
for a few days to get the feel of the weight of the
object. Verbally introduce the new device with a
happy voice and even a few treats. Use a cue
phrase like "Let's get your good-boy collar."
550
In order to go forward, you must go
 back. When you are ready to begin
training your dog, adjust the device to its lowest
setting. Connect your leash to a flat buckle collar
on your dog. Practice the basic obedience com-
mands SIT, HEEL, and BREAK (not the DOWN), and
substitute the device correction for the leash cor-
rection in the same pattern of Command, Correc-
tion, Re-command...Praise. Remember to always
use the verbal cue NO
228
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
551
Go slowly at first and read your dog's
·reaction. If he doesn't seem to be
getting a correction, check the device to make
sure it is working properly. If the device is working
properly, increase the correction level to the next
available setting. Repeat the basic exercise above
until you notice a reaction.
552
Dogs often become dependent on
●the physical movements we give a
leash correction. Without these visual cues, the
first remote corrections may be a little scary for
an .a, auaos al ioe Ae Aau aop no
from behind. Be consistent with using the verbal
NO with the device correction. This will be their
link to the obedience pattern. Once they figure out
the new experience, they will relax. You may find
you will need to increase the correction level at
this time because your dog is now acclimated to
the experience and accepts the correction.
553
Spend two weeks practicing the
●basic obedience commands (HEEL,
SIT, and BREAK) with your dog on a short leash.
Once your dog accepts the new process, you may
add the DOWN command. Practice in a relatively
distraction-free environment first, then change
environments to the yard or a quiet outdoor
venue.
Obedience Training
229
554
Don't cheat! The more you cheat
●with the leash, the tougher remote
training will be for your dog. Do not tow your dog
through turns or prevent her from moving out of
position. You will need to increase the level of ver-
bal motivation to keep your dog focused on you
and not the corrections.
555
Do not overly correct the dog. If your
●dog is not responding well to the
remote training and is requiring several correc-
tions, you may need to spend more time reinforc-
ing the obedience commands consistently with
the leash and collar (without the remote device)
556
Practice all the basic obedience com-
●mands (HEEL, SIT, DOWN, position
holding, BREAK, and COME) on a short leash for
one more month. Practice in several different
environments. Introduce your dog to the long
(twenty- or thirty-foot) leash by practicing the
basic obedience commands in the exact manner
and style you practice with the short leash.
230
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
557
Begin with position-holding exer-
+cises. Place your dog in a SIT or
DOWN and go to the full length of the leash and
walk around. If your dog gets up, immediately cor-
rect with the remote device (with the verbal NO)
and re-command. Praise if your dog returns to the
position. If your dog does not return to the posi-
tion, physically return your dog and leash correct
with NO. Do not correct with the device more than
once for each test.
558
Begin using the remote device with
●the COME command. Let your dog
roam around the yard. Give the COME command
n e r (a pu qa) aid pu
recall. If your dog does not respond, give a verbal
NO with a remote device correction. Do not use
the leash to prompt your dog before giving the
command.
559
These devices are good for develop
●ing a positive response without the
use of the leash. Being off-leash with a remote
device is not really having off-leash training, since
you are relying on the device for the corrective
part of the NO. After several months of remote
training, the device may no longer be necessary.
Obedience Training
231
560
Maintain your on-leash training.
● Keep your drop-leash, training-tab,
or remote-device obedience workouts short—five
or ten minutes—and then put the leash back on.
As your dog's drop leash work improves, increase
the duration of the workout.
561
Wean off the leash and corrective
·device completely, but be prepared
to replace the leash or device immediately if you
see a return of inappropriate target behaviors. If
your dog is backsliding. put the leash or device
back on him for a period of two weeks to one
month.
562
It is very important to not attempt
●off-leash work
　outsideof
an
enclosed area until all foundation training has
been successfully completed. In many instances,
completion of off-leash work may take longer
than on-leash foundation work.
232
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Part Three:
Developing Life Skills
Having an obedient dog takes more than obedience
commands. If you adopt the obedience-command-
based lifestyle, your dog will do the same. Here are
some keys to unlocking an obedient lifestyle.
al
Creating
Manners
eader's Note: the best way to approach this
Ichapter is to read both chapters 7 and 8
through to the end, then go back and begin the
teaching process. In this manner, you will see the
end goal and understand how things build upon
each other before you begin.
Good leaders use skills to create patterns,
which over time become behaviors. An applica-
tion a day keeps the bad behavior away.
PRACTICInG And REInfORCInG
ObedIenCe CoMmandS
563
Now that you have a working set of
●obedience skills, you will need to
practice them frequently. Regular practice ses-
sions reinforce your dog's expectations and
requirements. When you are practicing, maintain
high standards of performance. Correct errors the
first time, every time.
564
The goals of practicing obedience
●are to maintain the quality of the
obedience commands and improve and refine
handling technique. They also provide formal
mental exercise, keep your dog's mind sharp, and.
most important, provide a structured forum for
your dog to receive praise from you.
236
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
565
We not only suggest practicing the
+ formal commands HEEL, SIT, DOWN,
BREAK, COME, and PLACE, but specific exercises
that you can add to your distraction-obedience
workouts throughout the distraction training and
application sessions. When you get to these exer-
cises, write them down so you can include them
in your workout plan.
566
A walk is not a training session. Even
●though you will use commands dur-
ing your walk, the low frequency of repetition pre-
d, aa a   s
During a formal workout, the obedience skills are
repeated with a greater frequency and hence
maintain the proficiency of the skills.
567
Formal practice should occur twice a
·day for at least three months after
you have finished your Ten-Week Training Recipe.
Your practice frequency should taper to once per
day for nine months after the initial training pro-
gram is over.
568
After at least nine months of daily
●workouts, taper your session fre-
quency to between three and four sessions per
week. You will probably need to maintain this
practice frequency through your dog's life.
Creating Manners
237
As a training aid, videotape yourself practicing
the obedience commands. Review the tape to
see where your inconsistencies lie. As you watch
your video, note the volume and inflection of
your voice. How much quiet time is there in the
workout? During a really effective workout, there
should be little or no quiet time.
238
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Household Patterns
569
Applying your obedience skills to
·everyday life is what we call applica-
tion. Application is a process of giving your dog
supervised activities with the ultimate goal of
teaching her how to behave on her own in a vari-
ety of situations.
570
The more tasks you ask your dog to
· do, the better your chances of keep-
ing his “cooperation muscle" flexible. Try to have
your dog do five to ten tasks per day to keep coop-
eration high.
571
Write a recipe. Identify a behavior
●that you would like to change and
write it down. Consider the alternate behavior you
would like to see and write it under the old behav-
ior. Identify the obedience skills needed to create
the new behavior. Practice these skills and begin
to craft the new behavior.
Creating Manners
239
572
Your recipe should have the following
● components: Desired Behavior, Skills
Needed, How to Create the Pattern Using the Skills.
and ETD (Estimated Time of Development). Draw
this out on a recipe card, put it on your refrigerator
as a reminder, and begin "cooking'
573
When creating patterns with your
●dog in real life, use the obedience
commands exactly as you practice them in a work-
out. In this fashion, your dog will more easily make
the connection between practice and real life. This
means always keeping the leash and collar on your
dog while you are creating these patterns.
574.
Make sure distraction training is a
●part of the application skills you
practice. An application is also a distraction (usu-
ally a combination of an object distraction and an
environment distraction). If the application you
are trying does not seem to be working, stop the
exercise and work harder on the distraction train-
ing associated with the application.
APPlICATIOnS Of dOWN
Dinnertime DOwN
575
 Step One: Identify the behavior you
● want to change. For example, when
you eat at the table, your dog begs, barks, and
bothers you.
240
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
576
Step Two: Describe a new pattern.
·When you eat at the table, you
would like your dog to lie down quietly at your
side—no barking and no begging.
577
Step Three: Identify the skills
●needed for the new pattern-DowN,
position holding (demonstrated in practice for as
long as your meal will last), distraction training
(around toys and food), and diversity (giving com-
mands from a chair). Practice these skills.
578
Step Four: Create a new pattern.
●Have your dog on leash and collar.
Once food is on the table, command your dog into
a DOWN position (praise with "good DOWN").
Wait for your dog to become settled in his DoWN.
Sit down. If your dog gets up, divert with NO and
redirect with DOwN. Once your dog is down, pro-
across your lap. Redirect as necessary. Praise ran-
domly once your dog is maintaining the DoWN.
579
If your dog continues to stare at you
● while you are eating, reposition your
dog in the DowN so he is facing away from you.
Keep the leash across your lap. If he barks at you
(even once), correct with NO and praise for the
quiet as soon as he stops.
Creating Manners
241
580
If you have worked on all the com-
ponent skills of the dinnertime
DOWN, the application exercise should be a suc-
cess. If the exercise is difficult or frustrating and
takes more patience than you have developed as
a team, discontinue the application exercise and
crate your dog during meals, then work on
expanding the individual skills required for the
application.
More DOwN Applications
581
Quiet on the phone. Some dogs under-
●stand that the phone steals their
owner's attention. So, when the phone rings, they
bark, run off to another room, steal items, etc.
and since your attention is on the conversation,
this inappropriate behavior is allowed to con-
tinue. Maintain your dog in a DowN command
while pretending to talk on the phone. Hold the
phone to your ear and have a one-sided conversa-
tion. This way, if your dog gets up. you can rein-
force the DOWN without interrupting your
"conversation, and your dog learns that you can
reinforce the command while you talk on the
phone.
582
Add a twist to the phone exercise.
●Some dogs react excitedly when
they hear the phone ring. Use a second phone
(like a cell phone) and ring your main line. Rein-
force either SIT or DOWN prior to answering. Take
your time. This is one call you won't miss.
242
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
APPLICATIONS OF HEEL
583
Most dogs never learn to walk in the
·house (at least not until they are
arthritic). Regularly heeling your dog through the
house will teach hirm to walk (not rocket) from
room to room. You may not appreciate the seren-
ity this simple application can provide for your
household, but you will be amazed at how much
din a running dog creates.
584
The same idea applies to stairs. Most
●dogs learn to go up and down stairs
by throwing thermselves down the stairs. The
process becomes more of a controlled fall than
walking. A grown dog can really bowl over their
owners on the stairs. Take your dog by the leash
and HEEL him up and down the stairs, maintain-
ing the same HEEL zone you have practiced. Per-
form ten repetitions each time you do this
exercise.
585
Once you have some manners devel-
●oped on the stairs, make the HEEL
exercise on the stairs practical by practicing the
same exercise with an empty laundry basket in
your right arm. Keep the leash in your left hand
and maintain the HEEL zone. Go slowly at first,
and watch your step!
Creating Manners
243
Create
Good Walking Manners-Segment
Walk
586
Just because your dog can HEEL well
●in the house does not mean he'll be
a good walker. You can build a good walk by using
a segment walk. A segment walk is a series of seg-
ments of movement followed by a segment of
position holding. To build good walking manners,
HEEL a short distance, then stop and have your
dog SIT. Pause a few moments (ten to twenty sec-
onds) and continue. The frequent pauses will
allow your dog to relax and maintain composure.
587
At first you may only be able to HEEL
● for five or ten steps before your dog
becomes excited or distracted. The goal of the seg-
ment walk is to build patience and manners
slowly, one small segment at a time. Remember,
when walking in HEEL, start walking slowly. As
your dog improves, you may increase to normal
walking speed. Do not try to "outwalk" your dog.
Insist that your dog walk at your pace and main-
tain the HEEL zone!
588
In a suburban setting. HEEL from
●one driveway to the next before
pausing. In a city setting. pause every quarter
block. Always pause on corners and sometimes in
between, just to make your dog think
244
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
589
As your dog improves at ignoring
·distractions and maintaining com-
posure, you will find that you will be able to HEEL
further between pauses. Eventually, you will have
one long HEEL walk separated by only a few
pauses (and possibly one potty break).
590
If you find that taking a walk with
·your dog requires correction every
few seconds, the HEEL command may not neces-
sarily be to blame. Practice position-holding and
distraction-training exercises for a week or two,
o anuaed ao seu op nno pu Ae no pue
the distractions encountered during a walk.
ApPlICatIOns Of SIt
591
Your dog should be able to maintain
·manners at mealtime. Command
your dog to SIT (leash in hand) as you place his
food bowl on the floor. Your dog should maintain
his SIT command until you release him with the
BREAK. If he does not maintain his position,
return him to his position and correct with NO
and re-command SIT. Always vary the time you
hold him in his SIT so he won't anticipate the
BREAK.
Creating Manners
245
Sitting at Doorways
592
As soon as your puppy reaches six
 months of age and has the ability to
control her bladder, begin establishing a doorway
protocol. During housebreaking, most puppies (at
our encouragement) learn to get out of the house
as fast as possible. Once bladder control is man-
aged, begin having your dog stop and SIT before
exiting the door. She should be formally released
with BREAK and allowed to HEEL into the yard
with manners.
593
Your dog does not need to SIT before
·returning inside the house. He
should always feel free to enter the house. As you
lead your dog towards the house, command
INSIDE. Repeat the command INSIDE as you walk
toward the house. Praise "good INSIDE" as your
dog walks into the house through the door. Give
your dog a treat and repeat "good INSIDE."
594.
As your dog matures, you will use
● the cue word INSIDE to return your
dog from the yard (not the COME command).
246
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Doorbell SIT
595
You will want your dog to learn to
+patiently hold a SIT when people
enter your house. Begin by teaching your dog to
SIT (at a generous distance from the door) while
you walk away from him and toward the door.
Walk back to your dog and praise him for remain-
ing in a SIT.
Creating Manners
247
596
The next step involves desensitizing
●your dog to the door opening. Have
your dog SIT directly in front of the door and keep
the leash in your hand so you can provide imme-
diate feedback. Open the door. If your dog breaks
the SIT, correct with NO and re-command SIT.
Praise for success. Repeat the exercise until your
dog can ignore the door opening three times in a
row.
597
Return your dog to a SIT in a remote
 location, walk to the door, and open
it. If your dog gets up, give a verbal NO. If he SITS,
praise. If he continues to walk towards you, take
the leash and silently relocate him back to his
spot, leash correct with NO, and re-command SIT.
Repeat this process until your dog is desensitized
to the door opening.
598
Once your dog is desensitized to the
●door opening. add a person at the
other side of the door. Have your dog SIT. Walk
over to the door and open it. Tell your visitor,
"Wait please." Return to your dog's side and con-
trol the leash. Invite your visitor inside the house.
Only allow the person to enter if your dog main-
tains a SIT fobviously the person helping you is
prepared for the exercise and knows what to do). If
your dog gets up, correct with NO and re-command
SIT.
248
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
599
You will need to add a knock on the
+door or the doorbell as the final dis-
traction piece to the puzzle. This part will stimu-
late your dog the most. HEEL your dog through the
house. Have a helper ring the doorbell or knock on
the door. When your dog reacts to the stimulus,
divert with NO and redirect with HEEL (plus
praise). HEEL will be easier than SIT or DOWN
because HEEL requires more momentary thinking
than either of the stationary commands. When
your dog can ignore the doorbell in HEEL, try SIT.
600
Whether you are performing the
·desensitization exercises or actually
greeting someone at the door, keep the vocal cue
the same. Don't panic and introduce sentences
like "Come on now, you know how to do this," as it
will only confuse your dog and make it more dif-
ficult for him to succeed. Use crisp, clear com-
mands exactly as you learned and practiced them.
601
If you repeat this process every time
●someone comes to the door, your
dog's greeting manners will improve. Slowly
decrease the distance to the door. If your dog shows
signs of backsliding, move further away. Always
practice the desensitization exercises for door
opening and knock/bell as part of your distraction-
training workout.
Creating Manners
249
602
The previous exercises are specific
● to teaching your dog how to behave
when someone arrives at the door. The actual
process of teaching a dog to greet a person will be
outlined in chapter 9.
CrEatIVe dAIlY APPLICaTIONS
603
Make a list of some of your daily
·activities. List things like brushing
your teeth, putting on your shoes, getting dressed,
making snacks, making coffee, reading the paper,
etc. Then design a “recipe" to create a doggie
application for each situation.
604
Have your dog hold a SIT while you
 brush your teeth. (Warning: verbal
reinforcement of the command is difficult and
potentially messy for this one.)
605
While you dress, have your dog hold
· a DowN and chew a bone. No pants
will be torn, no belts will be "made off with," and
your dog will have a quick dose of manners first
thing in the morning!
250
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
606
Most dogs like to play with shoes
+and shoelaces. Have your dog hold a
SIT or DowN while you put your shoes on to com-
municate a different message.
607
Have your dog SIT for his leash and
●collar to be put on. Also make him
SIT still until you put your coat on and are ready
to leave the house. This will not only create man-
ners but will also set the tone for your walk.
608
Use the PLACE command often for
●teaching your dog his "place" in
social situations. Put your dog on his "place" when
you eat dinner, while you cook, and while you
load and unload the dishwasher. This prevents his
getting in the way, begging, and licking unwashed
dishes.
609
Create a rule where your dog must
●hold a DowN whenever food is
being prepared, eaten, or served. This is a very
important protocol to adopt especially when
there are children in the home. The message is
simple: "When there's food, there's no dog." This
creates good boundaries of leadership and will
also allow your dog to self-apply this pattern
faster due to the frequency of repetition.
Creating Manners
251
610
Read the paper and drink your cof
●fee with your dog in a DOWwN by
your side with her favorite toy. This will not only
create a good lifestyle application but will also
provide some quality time together before you
start your day.
WaIt (or Stay), off, And
LEAVE IT
611
After the formal obedience com-
●mands, you can teach your dog
some soft commands.These commands are con-
sidered soft because there is no specific action
associated with the command. Teach these com-
mands only after successfully completing the ten-
week teaching plan. Once your dog completes this
experience, learning new concepts will be easier
and less stressful for her.
The WAIT or STAY Command
612
There are some applications when
·teaching your dog not to advance
forward is necessary. The WAIT (or STAY) com-
mand will mean to not move forward while not
necessarily holding a specific position. You can
choose either WAIT or STAY, depending on which
command you like most. Just be consistent with
the command you choose. The easiest way to
teach and apply this idea is at the front door.
252
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
613
Begin with your dog on leash and
·collar. Hold the leash in your left
hand, with a minimum amount of slack between
your hand and the collar. Give the command
WAIT (or STAY) and open the door about one to
two inches. If your dog advances toward the door,
correct backwards with NO and repeat WAIT (or
STAY). If your dog remains motionless, praise with
"good WAIT" (or “good STAY") to associate the
word with a lack of movement. Repeat this exer-
cise until your dog ignores the door opening three
consecutive times. If this is successful, repeat the
teaching exercise by opening the door fully.
614
Advancing this idea will require two
●people. Trainer One will work the
door and Trainer Two will work the dog. Trainer One
will be at the door and Trainer Two will have the
dog on a long (at least ten foot) leash. Trainer Two
will command WAIT (or STAY), and Trainer One will
open the door fully. If your dog remains motionless,
praise with "good WAIT" (or "good STAY"). If your
dog advances towards the door, Trainer Two cor-
rects with NO and repeats WAIT (or STAY). Trainer
One repeats the door-opening exercise until he
eventually exits the house. You may also reverse
the exercise for people entering the house.
Creating Manners
253
615
The soft command WAIT or STAY can
● also be used for exiting vehicles or
bathtubs, or in any circumstance where using a
position command such as SIT or DOwN is difficult.
Make the teaching exercises of the WAIT or STAY
command part of your distraction-training workout.
The OFF Command
616
Another useful soft command is
·OFF. OFF is used whenever one (or
more) of your dog's paws are not on the floor. The
easiest way to teach the command is to have your
dog on-leash in the house. Bait a few choice items
at the edge of the kitchen counter. If your dog
jumps up to investigate, correct with NO and com-
 a  o,   o 
new items later in the day. Make this exercise a
part of your distraction-training workout.
617
Another place to teach OFF is the
●couch or chair. Have the leash in
your hand and throw a ball or toy onto the couch.
If your dog jumps up, while he is still standing.
correct with NO and command OFF. Once he
 sop inoe f .o pooe, yiim asieid 'o sdn!
down and hunkers into the couch, use food to bait
him off to avoid a confrontation.
254
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
618
When teaching the OFF command, it
●is important to have patience and
not pull your dog off the object or person. Correct
with NO and command OFF, and repeat until your
dog gets himself off the object or person. In this
manner, the situation becomes his choice, and he
will learn exactly what he is to stay off of.
The STAND Command
619
At some point during the later adult
·stage of your dog's life, you may
want to teach the STAND command to him. The
STAND command may be useful in your dog's
later life when arthritic joints will not want to SIT.
STAND can be easily substituted for SIT in any of
the command applications where patience is
required.
620
Teaching the STAND is relatively
easy. Start with your dog in HEEL,
slow down, and come to a stop. As you come to a
stop, place your left hand directly in the nook of
your dog's right rear leg where it joins his body.
Command STAND. You may need to apply some
light upward pressure on your dog's abdomen
with the back of your hand for the dog to remain
in a STAND. Praise "good STAND." Some forward
tension with the leash may be required to define
the STAND position.
Creating Manners
255
621
As your dog gets better at standing.
●remove the physical assistance.
After you have taught your dog to STAND, you will
want to practice position holding with the STAND
command. Use the same position-holding exer-
cises described for the SIT command.
The LEAVE IT Command
622
Teaching the LEAVE IT command is
● similar to distraction training with a
stationary object as described in chapter 7. Start
with an "easy" object on the floor approximately
ten feet away.
623
Give your dog the HEEL command
and
slowly
 but
confidently
approach the object. As you reach three or four
feet from the object, give the command LEAVE IT.
If your dog shows interest in the object (by dip-
ping his head toward the object), correct with NO
and re-command LEAVE IT. Praise heartily as your
dog ignores the object. Your dog may require more
than one corrective NO and re-command repeti-
tions as you pass the object.
256
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
624
Make sure you begin this exercise
●with the target object a few feet to
the left of your HEEL path. As you and your dog
become more proficient at the LEAVE IT com-
mand, decrease the distance away from the object
until you are heeling directly over it. Once your
dog becomes accustomed to "leaving" one item,
switch to another item, and repeat the exercise
from the beginning.
The DROP IT Command
625
Sometimes your dog enjoys the
●game of tug-of-war better than the
game you are trying to play with him. A useful
command to teach your dog is DROP IT. The com-
mand DROP IT will require your dog to release the
object out of his mouth and not pick it back up
again. We chose DROP IT instead of GIVE or any
other command which requires you to take the
object out of your dog's mouth. This is an impor-
tant difference to your dog.
Creating Manners
257
626
Begin teaching the command by giv-
●ing your dog an object like a ball.
Give the command DROP IT (using neutral, busi-
nesslike, non-threatening vocal tones), and open
your dog's mouth slightly so the object falls out.
 aa a  o , m a
food reward. Have the food reward ready so your
dog does not have time to pick up the ball again.
627
Some dogs resist prying their jaws
● apart. Bait your dog with the treat
while commanding DROP IT so your dog has a
choice: he can either hold the object in his mouth
or spit it out and get a treat. With enough repeti-
tion, your dog will spit out the object without bait-
ing with the treat.
628
After several repetitions of hearing
●DROP IT, your dog will spit the ball
out and look for the food reward. Remove all the
physical help in opening his mouth, and intro-
duce the corrective NO. Give the command DROP
IT, praise with voice and food for success, or give
a corrective NO and re-command DROP IT. When
your dog drops the object, praise with voice and
food.
258
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
629
Test the DROP IT command with
●another object like a stuffed toy or
dish towel. Practice the command regularly, keep-
ing the vocal tones neutral, and praise success so
the command does not become confrontational.
Make DROP IT a part of your regular distraction-
training workout.
630
Some dogs are chewers and some
·dogs are swallowers (ingesters). If
your dog is an ingester, teach DROP IT with an
oversize object like a ball or a bath towel. Use
extreme caution with items like socks, sponges, or
small balls. If your dog swallows the wrong object,
it may require an expensive operation to remove
it. Teach DROP IT with larger items for at least
three weeks.
More Good ApPlicatiON
EXERCISES
631
Teach your dog not to pick up things
●that get knocked on the floor. Line
up a series of distractions along the kitchen
counter (dishrags, sponges, soda cans, plastic
cups, etc.). Place your dog in a SIT and casually
knock the objects onto the floor (not on top of
your dog's head, please). If your dog breaks the
SIT, correct with NO and redirect with SIT. Praise
heartily when your dog ignores the falling distrac-
tions. Add this exercise to your formal distraction-
training workout.
Creating Manners
259
632
Once your dog learns the pattern at
●the kitchen counter, change the
training environment to the living room and
repeat by dropping items off the coffee table. Line
up the items and walk your dog past the table. If
your dog shows more than a casual interest in the
items, correct with NO and redirect with LEAVE IT
(don't forget to praise). Once your dog ignores the
items on the coffee table, drop them on the floor
as you did in the previous exercise.
260
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Dog
Etiquette
ood manners in your dog are essential. Appli-
cations provide structure and formality to
daily life, provide positive patterns for your dog to
receive praise, and teach your dog good behavior
as a lifestyle. The more avenues you have to
develop good behavior, the more your dog will
come to behave well in all situations. Here are
some secrets about avoiding bawdy behavior and
creating and reinforcing excellent etiquette.
DInnerTiMe MAnnerS-NO
BEGGING!
633
Don't encourage begging by feeding
● from
1the table. The occasional
shared morsel
lwill
l have your dog
waiting
patiently for the next one. This sends your dog a
mixed message about what is acceptable for her
to be doing during your meals. Mealtime for the
leaders should rermain off-limits to the followers
(the dogs). Remain clear about this boundary.
634
Prevent young puppies from devel-
● oping the habit of begging by crating
them during your mealtime. Through removal and
this finite boundary, your puppy will see that he is
not perrmitted near the leaders' meals.
262
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
GREETING MANNERS-NO JuMPING!
635
Whether the greeting is inside your
· house or out on a walk, the greeting
exercise remains the same. Once your dog is
excited, it takes approximately two to three min-
utes for her to completely relax when a new per-
son comes to visit. Once she is relaxed (no
jumping. barking, or pulling on the leash), you
may release her with BREAK and allow her to
greet.
636
There are two ways your dog can
●greet a person. The first is to allow
the self-controlled dog to go to the person to
greet. The second is to have the spring-loaded dog
remain in a SIT and have the person come to the
dog.
637
Self-controlled dogs. Start with your
●dog in a SIT to communicate the
need for manners and self-control. Say BREAK
and a cue like "Go say hi!" Maintain leash control
with a short leash. If your dog begins to jump on
someone, correct with NO and repeat OFF. (If your
dog becomes too excited, you may need to either
redirect with SIT or remove your dog with a HEEL.)
Praise for four paws on the ground.
Dog Etiquette
263
638
Make sure people give your dog a
● low target like an open palm for her
to greet. Do not restrain her from jumping by
holding the leash very tightly, as it will only make
her strain against the leash and jump more. Keep
the leash slack to allow her to learn.
639
After one brief greeting. call your
● dog away with HEEL, followed by a
SIT. Repeat this same pattern of greeting and
backing up three times so your dog will notice the
pattern and become better each time.
640
Spring-loaded dogs. Begin with your
·dog in a SIT. Loop the leash to the
ground and step on it. There should be just
enough slack in the leash to allow your dog to SIT
on his own without being restrained but not be
no se buoi se asieid ianaldon dn dnt on ae
dog remains in the SIT. When your dog attempts
to jump up as the person approaches, correct with
NO at the point when the leash restricts your dog
and re-command SIT.
264
1000BESTDOGTRAININGSECRETS
641
Have the greeter step backward to
·remove any positive reinforcement
for jumping. When the dog is seated, the greeter
may approach again, offering a low target to greet.
Keep this greeting short so as not to excite the dog
too much. The greeter may back up so the dog can
maintain composure, and then repeat the greet-
ing three times.
642
Watch
quick
hand
movements
 around your dog's head. Do not have
children approach your dog's head from above.
Your dog will raise his head to check out the hand.
If the small child quickly withdraws his hand, the
dog may try to catch the hand with his mouth.
643
Properly introduce your dog to other
·people by having the person hold
their hand out, palm facing up, and place your
hand underneath the new person's. If it makes
you feel better, make a "sandwich" of the new per-
son's hand with your two hands. As your dog
investigates this "scent sandwich," gradually
remove your top hand first, then your bottom
hand. Provide lots of praise to show your dog
there is nothing to fear here!
Dog Etiquette
265
644
Face your dog (roughly two feet in
● front of him) and have him SIT. Give
the BREAK signal enthusiastically and step away
from him. If he jumps on you, correct him away
from you, saying, "No, OFF." If he continues to
jump and be rowdy, give the SIT command to
reinstill some self-control. Repeat this exercise
many times in a row and with quick repetition.
Each time, you may want to add either enthusias-
tic body language or an excited voice. This dis-
traction level may cause your dog to err, in which
case give him a collar correction away from you
and repeat, "No, OFF" until he understands the
boundary of your body.
WALKInG MANNeRS-NO
PullInG!
645
In chapter 8, we learned exercises
●(called a segment walk) to build a
walk with your dog using the HEEL command.
646
A good HEEL walk is as much a men-
· tal exercise as a physical exercise.
Add pace changes, full turns, circles, and figure
eights to your walking rather than always moving
in a straight line. Use these skills during a walk to
maintain focus on you and for a more interesting
walk for your dog.
266
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
647
To teach no pulling on a walk, prac-
·tice a focusing exercise. Begin walk-
ing forward. As soon as your dog walks ahead of
you, anchor the leash with your left hand and
turn in the opposite direction. When your dog
a anuo .iop poo, e ym  asied 'dn sauie
passes you, repeat the turning exercise, and praise
for each time your dog returns to your side.
648
To take a walk along a path, walk
·slowly and zigzag down the path
using the turns to keep your dog focused on you.
You can always use the walking pace to indicate
who is leading. Slow down until your dog accepts
the pace and walks nicely at your side.
Dog Etiquette
267
Four types Of WalkInG
Taking a walk is not always heeling! There are four dif-
ferent types of walk: a HEEL walk, a "free walk" for
sniffing, a "potty walk," and a "party-time walk."
Each one is done on a leash and still requires leash
manners of no pulling. Each one, though, also fulfills
a different need for your dog and will help him under-
stand when he must maintain a complete HEEL.
1. HEEL walk. We already know that HEEL
requires paying
 attention to the leader, no
pulling, no sniffing, a certain position to be held,
and the finish of an automatic SIT when com-
plete. This one is quite formal and should always
have the same requirements on a walk.
2. Free waik. This is a walk on BREAK with no
formal position.
. Your dog may sniff, investigate,
and walk at any position as long as there is no leash
pulling. It helps his curious side and, by releasing
ay uaym Aoexa pueisiapun wiy sdlay 't! oui wiy
can sniff the ground if he can't during HEEL
3. Potty walk. It's hard for your dog to elimi-
nate at HEEL. From time to time during your
walk, stop and have your dog finish the HEEL with
SIT. Give him a BREAK to allow time to relieve
himself. While on BREAK, your dog may sniff and
walk freely but still have manners. Correct your
dog with NO for pulling against the leash.
4. Party-time waik. Sometimes all four of a
dog's feet need to leave the ground. A release
from structure will show him balance-—a time to
walk and a time to run! A physical release may
show your dog that if he has patience and HEELS
well, a fun reward awaits at the end of the path.
Remember to correct for any pulling during play
because play still requires manners.
268
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
RIdInG In CaRS WITh dOGS
649
Some dogs are enthusiastic passen-
·gers in the car. If driving with your
dog is too distracting and prevents you from tak-
ing him different places, try this exercise. First,
warm up your dog's mind and self-control with a
five- or ten-minute obedience workout.
650
Next, open the doors to your car. Sit
·in the back seat and have your dog
SIT next to you. Keep the leash in your hand and
use your obedience command language. As long
as your dog behaves, praise heartily. If he is fidg-
ety, divert with NO and redirect with SIT.
651
For the next step you will need two
·people. Sit in the back seat and let
your assistant drive your car. Give your dog a SIT
command (leash and collar on). Move the car slowly
at first. Praise your dog as long as he remains sit-
ting. As your dog begins to get upset or unsettled,
divert with NO and redirect with SIT. Initially you
may not get out of the driveway and instead, just
back out and return. If the driveway trip goes well,
drive around the block. Increase the driving time as
your dog learns to relax and ride well.
Dog Etiquette
269
652
Some dogs tend to become stimulated
 ●by the moving objects outside the
window. If this seems to be the case, formally social-
ize your dog to movement as described in chapter 6.
653
You may need to drive with two peo-
•ple for a while until your dog
becomes acclimated to riding with manners in a
SIT. With lots of experience and a little maturation
on your dog's part, you may be ready to ride solo
with your dog. Remember to start slowly with the
driveway exercise and work up to a longer ride. If
the SIT goes well, try DowN as the next step in
safe riding.
654.
Doggie seatbelts, crates in cars, and
●dividers for the front and back sec-
tions of cars are all ways to ensure the safety of
your dog. Crates help not only contain your dog.
but provide security for them during movement.
Seatbelts ensure a limited space and the simula-
tion of someone holding them in a position.
Dividers will certainly maintain the boundary
between the driving area and the passenger area.
270
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
RESPECT FOR HUMANS-NO BITING!
655
As a puppy, your dog used his mouth
·to communicate his urges to you.
This is perfectly normal and we accepted it
because he was a puppy. Now that your dog is
maturing, the mouth is getting scary. Once an
alternate communication system is in place (obe.
dience training) the remaining pieces of inappro-
priate communication need to be curtailed. This is
where proper application of the corrective NO can
be effective when your dog mouths you.
656
After obedience training is complete
· and the new communication system
is being applied, your dog may still want to use his
mouth to communicate. Continue to build respect
through training in general, but leash correct for
mouthing at the moment. Command with SIT for
a self-control reminder.
657
Crate your dog if he cannot be redi-
●rected, as removing the liberty of
being with you may communicate your require-
ments to him better than a leash correction. Once
your dog is settled, bring him out of the crate, on-
leash again, and see if his behavior changes. If all
of his needs have been met, this negative rein-
forcement consequence can certainly help tell
him what you will and will not accept from him.
Dog Etiquette
271
No bossy barkinG!
658
 If your dog is being bossy and bark-
● ing to get you to do things, examine
your relationship with him. Are you not leading
enough, and does he think he needs to lead you?
If so, take more active direction of his life and cre-
ate respect through obedience training.
659
Don't jump up and pacify your dog's
●barking by playing ball, opening the
door, feeding him a snack, or otherwise reinforc-
ing this bad behavior. Teach him to communicate
politely for the things he would like. Pick up his
leash, and run through a few commands in
response to this barking. This message is remind-
ing him that not only has he forgotten his man-
ners, but he also needs to gain some composure.
660
If you suspect your dog truly has a
● need and is trying to communicate
this with you, tell him to SIT, and reinforce the sit-
ting with the desired object or action. Be certain
that your leadership is respected, though, and
you're not jumping up to obey your dog's every
whim!
272
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
VeT VISItS-be POlIte!
661
Practice the same touch-desensiti-
·zation exercises as you learned in
chapter 6. Add opening the mouth and inspecting
the teeth as another exercise to prepare them for
the vet visit. Looking in their ears and eyes as well
will help them understand what will happen at
the vet. Keep tolerance and self-control high on
your list of traits you need to develop through
training to ensure touch permission.
Dog Etiquette
273
662
Try to simulate a vet exam where
● you're actually touching your dog to
"feel" things (palpate). Imagine touching his
abdomen and trying to imagine what might lie
beneath your touch. This will be a different touch
exercise than simple petting or stroking as this
touch will be more firm.
663
The vet visit can sometimes carry
●negative connotations since vac-
cines and blood work can be less-than-happy
experiences. Your dog will need to hear your
active leadership in these instances. Giving direc-
tions and commands will help guide their behav-
ior and reassure them.
664
Try to make the visit to the vet a pos-
· itive experience. Have the waiting
area personnel give your dog treats when she
enters, and even have the doctor give her a treat
or two to help counter any scary experiences.
665
SIT
T position holding and STAND
 position holding are valuable self
control skills for your dog to know in vet visits.
Your dog will remain under control and your vet
will have an easier time examining him.
274
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
666
Teach your dog to roll over partially
●(perhaps use the cue word SIDE) on
command. If your dog is taught as a trick, and he
enjoys doing it, you will be able to use this to not
only help the vet see underneath your dog. but
also to communicate a fun message to your dog.
Learn the command SIDE in chapter 15.
Groomer VIsIts
667
 A very important skill for your dog to
· know is the STAND command. Prac-
tice this once daily and work your dog up to being
able to hold a two-minute STAND. This will build
patience, self-control, and tolerance—all skills
your dog will need for the grooming table!
668
Remember to continue your touch-
 desensitization exercise as described
in chapter 6. Continuing to do this exercise will
keep your dog conditioned to touch.
669
Don't question the groomer! Your
·dog will need to take direction from
someone other than you. Regular obedience
training practice in combination with touch-
desensitization exercises will keep the groomer
happy.
Dog Etiquette
275
MeetinG dOGS-NO fIGHtinG!
670
Yes, dogs can meet and learn to play
● together! But remember, if the lead-
ers are not telling them how to meet and play.
their instincts will tell them how to do it, and
things could get confrontational. Establishing
good meeting habits is important and should be
given special attention as a handler. Have your
greeting etiquette override your dog's genetic
instincts!
Interaction Tips
671
 Dogs do not need to play rough with
·each other to enjoy being in each
other's company. Teach them that other dogs are
not a toy! They should learn to play with (inani-
mate) toys when with each other.
672
Don't let your dog play with or even
● meet every dog he sees. This pro-
motes an expectation that can cause your dog to
become too excitable and hyper each time he sees
another dog. This expectation from your dog can
lead to unmanageability, excessive barking, and
uncontrollable pulling on a leash.
276
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
673
If your dog acts like this around
+other dogs, he can accidentally pro-
voke defensive aggression in them. These dogs are
sensitive to body language, and your rowdy dog's
approach will appear out-of-control and chaotic.
Some dogs will try to control your dog (with
aggression or barking) if you don't appear to be
controlling hirm!
Making "Formal Introductions'
674
When trying to introduce two dogs,
●remember that they do not need to
touch noses (or other parts!) right away. Have
them SIT and be in control around each other
first.
675
Do a "pass by" exercise and have the
·handlers walk by each other with
their dogs. Start by passing each other person-to-
person with the dogs on the outside. Then work
up to passing each other dog-to-dog, maintaining
adequate personal space during this pass.
676
Walk up to each other and stop with
 a two- to three-foot buffer between
the two dogs. Have the handlers reach out to
shake hands, keeping both dogs in a SIT. Take
turns having each handler reach out and pet the
other dog while he remains seated.
Dog Etiquette
277
677
Go for a short fifteen- to twenty-
● minute walk together. Two handlers
and two dogs walking under control is a fun way
to teach the dogs to be together. If one dog has
any questions about the safety of the situation,
two leaders in control will quell his fear nicely.
678
Have the dogs meet for two to three
● seconds, then split them up with a
command and some personal space. After two to
three seconds of sniffing, say HEEL and move your
dogs away for a breather. Smaller doses of "hellos"
will prevent first meetings from becoming offen-
sive. Repeat this three to four times, but do not
increase the greeting length.
679
Don't let your leashes twist! Yes, this
● appears comical in the movies, but it
usually becomes stressful and unsafe in real life.
Puppy Personal Space-Be Courteous!
680
It is common for people to allow
●their dogs to pull into another dog's
space. This is not only discourteous, but is also
potentially dangerous. The pulling dog can set off
another dog's defenses by appearing out of con-
trol. Be aware of personal space and be respectful
of this boundary.
278
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
681
Keep your dog in control of his
●actions, using your HEEL or position-
holding commands. Even at a distance, another
dog will be wary of your dog if you allow him to
appear threatening in his approach. The other dog
may perceive a threat to his personal space.
682
Always ask the other handler if it's
+okay for the two dogs to meet. If the
wishes. He may have very good reasons for this
answer: a sick dog, an elderly dog, a fearful dog, an
aggressive dog, etc. Do not judge him or force a
meeting upon him.
683
If a meet-and-greet is agreed upon
●by both owners, keep both dogs in
control with commands, short leashes, and brief
exposures in sniffing. Don't allow your dog to bolt
directly up to the other dog, and do not allow him
to bolt to private areas, or jump on, paw at, or nib-
ble the other dog. Personal space and courtesy
should be respected from dog to dog just as you
would expect it from dog to human.
Dog Etiquette
279
684
Different dogs have different com-
●fort zones. Sometimes the "personal
space" area is a radius of five feet or more. Some
dogs are okay with closer spaces.This will depend
upon individual personalities. Take your visiting
cues from the other owner, the body language of
the other dog, and your own dog's messages.
685
Provide proper social interactions
●for your dog. We recommend one
hour of mental exercise and positive socialization
for every four hours spent in playgroups. If your
dog displays any type of aggression towards any
dog he meets outside of the daycare, discontinue
daycare or playgroups and begin resocializing
your dog.
280
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
10.
al
Living
Harmoniously
with Your [
Dog
iving harmoniously with your dog requires him
to leave genetically imprinted instincts behind
and adopt a sense of right and wrong. Survival
instincts have no bearing on how well he behaves
in the house and towards your family. Your dog
needs to check that baggage at the door.
fenCe uSAGe
686.
We all look forward to experiencing
●the joys of being outside with our
dogs. Your pet containment system is one of your
most valuable tools to ensure the safety of your
pet. There are many types of containment sys-
tems and methods to keep your dog safe out-
doors. Do your research and find the best
containment option for your family.
687
One of the great things about a fence
●is that you can play with your dog
and know that he can't get away and be injured or
killed. You can be outside with your dog while you
barbecue or garden and your dog can be with you.
688
The fence is not a baby-sitter. When
● a dog is acting up, some owners tend
to simply put the dog outside. The problem has
not been addressed, it has just been moved out-
side.
282
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
689
Fixed fences. A fixed fence is a physi-
·cally tangible fence. Whether it is
made out of chain link or wood slats, it presents a
physical barrier so your dog cannot get to the
other side and things on the other side cannot
enter your dog's side. A fixed fence is our favorite
kind of fence for that reason. The bad part of the
fixed fence is that the dog can touch it, jump on it,
chew it, and dig around it. Supervision is still
required.
690
Electric Fences. A very popular form of
●containment is the electric fence.
Aesthetically, having no physical barrier is more
attractive than something that obscures your
view. The electric fence relies on aversion training.
The main deficit of this system is that the electric
fence will only keep your dog inside the boundary.
Other people, dogs, and critters can come and go
as they please.
691
Proper tool selection is essential to
●maintaining a reliable containment
system. Quality hardware and software are criti-
cal to the success of your electric fence. Research
the options. Avoid bargain store brands. We rec-
ommend purchasing a hardware system with
appropriate professional training. Every dog has a
unique personality and, as in obedience training.
professional assistance will be of a great help.
Living Harmoniously with Your Dog
283
692
The electric collar should fit snugly
● on your dog's neck. One of the most
common ways the electric fence fails is when
owners loosen the collar. The prongs of the fence
collar must be in snug contact with your dog's
neck to be safe and effective.
693
The second way the fence fails is
● when the battery prematurely runs
out. If your dog tests the fence frequently, the
warning signal (typically a tone or vibration) uses
the battery charge. Change or recharge the battery
frequently.
694
Regular inspection of the entire elec-
● tric fence system is essential in pre-
venting surprises. Select a fence system that has
an alarm in the event the signal wire is cut. Follow
all the manufacturer's recommendations regard-
ing using and maintaining your electric fence.
695
The last method of yard contain-
●ment is the cable tie-out. The tool
consists of a fixing device such as a spike you
place in the ground or screw into a tree. The cable
attaches to the fixing device and the collar (flat
collar only) or harness. For durability and safety,
the cable should be made out of a coated steel
cable, not rope or chain. Supervision is essential!
284
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
696
Make sure your dog cannot wrap
●himself around trees, shrubs, or
lawn furniture. Be especially cautious that your
dog cannot jump over a fixed item and hang him-
self. Comply with all safety rules and standards
for the containment tool you use.
Living Harmoniously with Your Dog
285
697
Perhaps the "ultirmate" containment
● system for your dog would be a fixed
fence approximately four feet in height, which is
visually not very distracting and keeps unwanted
intruders (two and four legged) out and your dog
inside. Couple the fixed fence with an electric
fence with a four- or five-foot boundary inside the
fixed fence so your dog cannot interact with or
jump up or over the fixed fence.
YARD MANNERS
698
Always monitor your dog's activity
● while inside the contained area. You
will need to be outside with your dog at all times.
Your dog's activity in the yard must be supervised.
You don't want your dog ingesting anything you
are going to need to pay to remove later.
699
Blow the whistle on unwanted
●behaviors or patterns. Even if your
dog is behind a fence, you may need to keep your
dog on a leash (a ten- or twenty-foot leash). If your
dog begins to engage in unwanted behavior, divert
with a corrective NO and redirect with an obedi-
ence command.
700
Sometimes your dog spends so much
time playing in the yard he doesn't
understand that he must listen as well. If you feel
your dog's yard manners are getting out of hand,
practice your obedience commands in the yard.
286
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
701
Make your dog's time in the yard
●quality time, not destructive, time-
killing time. Abandonment outside will encourage
inappropriate behavior. Nuisance behaviors like
digging or barking will develop due to boredom.
702
Don't let your dog jump on the fence
● when greeting a neighbor. Place your
dog in a SIT (or DOWN) command four or five feet
away from the fence. Walk over to the fence and
converse with your neighbor, praising your dog
randomly for maintaining the SIT.
703
Picking up dog waste is no fun. Step-
· ping in dog waste is even less fun.
Create an effective plan for frequently picking up
eliminations and placing them in an appropriate
receptacle. If you fail to pick up waste over the
period of a few days, then your yard may start to
stink. Even worse, your dog may refuse to elimi-
nate in an already full yard.
HUMAN/dOG PLAY
704
An excellent rule of thumb applies
● to both adults and children who are
playing with dogs: the puppy is not a toy. Fetch is
a great game to teach your dog. There are descrip-
tions of toys and activities in Section Four.
Living Harmoniously with Your Dog
287
705
Rough
play
like  tug-of-war,
●wrestling, and general aggressive
play must be halted immediately. No negotiating
on this rule. Every dog that lives with people
needs to learn to be social and polite. Actively
teaching your dog to be antisocial (with “bad"
play) will nurture some of the most annoying
behaviors and
 potentially dangerous behavior
problems.
Children and Dogs
706
Children may share in the experi-
●ence by providing age-appropriate
tasks (i.e., food, water, supervised games, and yard
cleaning). Children should never be required to
reprimand, redirect, or crate a puppy or adult dog.
707
Most small children compensate for
● their age by being overly aggressive,
cent children are rarely in control of their emotions.
They also have little patience for dogs that do not
listen to them and may become easily frustrated.
Always supervise your children with your dog.
288
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
708
No single breed of dog is "wonderful
●around children." Each breed must
be taught how to behave in a family situation.
Most dogs view small children as "littermates"
and may play roughly or in a doggie manner with
the children. This should be anticipated and play
should be supervised and directed. Keep your dog
on-leash and actively direct your dog when he is
around children.
709
Do not distraction train your dog
● using your children. The mental dis-
cipline developed during distraction training can
make your dog tired and frustrated. During this
period, the dog appears to develop slightly nega-
tive feelings toward the object with which he is
being distraction trained. Always socialize your
dog around your children when both children and
dog are fresh and rested.
LIFESTYLE
710
Managing your dog's daily activities
 is essential to shifting away from the
pack nature of your dog and nurturing her domes-
tic nature. Properly practicing the basic obedience
commands
will
l nurture
e trust and respect,
strengthening the desire of your canine compan-
ion to take direction from you and accept your
leadership. Obedience commands are not a form
of dominance but positive tools to socialize your
dog to a human's world. Done in daily life, you will
create a lifestyle.
Living Harmoniously with Your Dog
289
711
Draw a circle on a sheet of paper.
●Draw a line from the center of the
circle to the twelve o'clock position. Draw another
line from the center to midway between the
twelve and one o'clock positions. Using a marker.
color this small wedge red. Imagine this small
wedge is the period of time in your day when you
want your dog to listen to you without question.
The remainder of the circle is the period of time
(waking time) your dog gets to do whatever he
wants to do.
712
Add some more slices to the pie.
● Every day and in every way, make
your dog work for it. Simple things like sitting for
a cookie, and waiting for you and exiting the door
first are meaningful, especially when these activ-
ities are a part of a complete leadership protocol.
Don't use these as the only things you do. Make
these pieces a part of a whole pie. Look for as
many opportunities to add new pieces (new appli-
cations) to your pie.
713
Take one last look at your dog's pie
●chart. Establishing your leadership
for only ten or fifteen minutes out of roughly six-
teen waking hours in the day it is not enough! The
complete leadership protocol provides for direc-
tion for at least four hours of supervised activities
with at least half of the remaining time being
crated.
290
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Use Your Household Tools
714
The television is an excellent timer.
●While your family is watching
a
show, have your dog lie in his PLACE or in a
DOWN. Provide a therapeutic chew toy or other
toy to occupy his time. During the commercial
break, release your dog with a BREAK and take a
quick walk around the house, have a potty break,
have a snack, or just play and let him stretch his
legs. When the next act of the TV show starts, put
your dog back into a command.
715
Dogs
 learn from repetition. If they
are
 repeatedly
performing good
behavior several times a day (using the crate
between teaching sessions to prevent inappropri-
ate behaviors), they will learn positive behaviors
faster.
716
Start with one hour of structured
 time and one hour of crate time
(remember, the crate needs to be in a remote loca-
tion for adequate rest). As your household team-
work improves
(typically over a one-month
period), increase the structured out-of-crate time
by fifteen minute intervals. Maintain the hour rest
time. The longer your dog works, the more rest he
will need.
Living Harmoniously with Your Dog
291
717
Most dogs are accidentally rewarded
·for inappropriate behavior. Free-
doms or privileges are not earned, and inexcus-
able behavior continues unbridled. By properly
and positively using the crate, you can establish
limits on inappropriate behavior. As long as the
owner is consistent in reinforcing boundaries, this
concept will be effective, and the crate will con-
tinue to be a positive experience.
Keep dog beds in multiple rooms of your house.
This will prevent your dog (who really does like
comfort!) from climbing on the nearest recliner,
sofa, or bed. He will know that he has furniture
available to him and can be comfortable without
breaking the rules.
AdVANCEd TETHeRING OR
"POSTING'
718
Review the section in chapter 1 on
 Tethering or "Posting" for the basic
rules and safety concerns. Advanced tethering
will involve using commands to actively teach a
lesson while your dog is tethered.
292
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
719
While your dog is tethered, give and
· reinforce
obedience
 command
applications like DOWN or PLACE. This will help
him understand the lesson while he is posted. As
you are walking around, give your dog random
Aioe ue sop inok aaio .Aoq poot, axll asieid
like a chew toy to occupy himself.
720
After a few months of repetition
●(and some maturity) your dog will
begin to auto-apply the lessons you are teaching
him. When you enter the room, your dog will walk
over to the designated area and lay down. At this
point the tether is not needed.
721
Dogs love attention. If you find your
● dog likes to play the game where he
tosses his toy just beyond the reach of the tether
and has you get it, remove your dog from the
tether and interact by doing an obedience work-
out, play, or crate (depending on your schedule).
Make sure the options are fair and your dog is get-
ting his needs met (see chapter 11).
Living Harmoniously with Your Dog
293
DAILY RITUALS
722
Breakfast Ritual. Time to wake up and
+ potty; possibly a short walk. Next is
breakfast and possibly another potty break. Have
your dog hold a DowN (perhaps while being
posted) and chew a toy while you read the paper
and sip coffee. Crate your dog during the morning
shower (until maturity). Some attention (mild play
or affection) and then crate (and treats). Make
your final preparations for work while your dog is
in the crate. Then, off to work.
723
Crate your dog while the kids are
●preparing for bed (bath and paja-
mas). Give each of the kids a goodnight treat to
give to your dog. When the kids are ready in their
rooms, take your dog around from kid to kid to say
"good night" and get a treat.
724
Bedtime Ritual. Bedtime also means
  time for a potty break and five or ten
minutes of attention (mild play or affection) for
your dog. Then, head to the bedroom and crate
(with treats).
725
Keep your daily habits consistent.
● For example: you ask your dog to
hold a SIT for greeting at the door but allow him
to jump all over cousin Pete. With this scenario,
your dog is confused by the change in house rules
manding him for the behavior later.
294
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
726
Just as you need to be consistent
●with expectations and habits, the
way you present them must also be consistent.
Being calm, cool, and collected one day and "los-
ing it" the next day may cause your dog to become
stressed out. Shifting your emotions about the
same experience does not present yourself as
being stable in your dog's eyes. Keep it cool as a
rule.
727
As an individual, you must approach
● your leadership the same way every
day. As a family, one person in the house cannot
be “easy” and flexible with the boundaries, crate
schedule, or obedience training reinforcement
while another person is rigidly consistent.
728
Each owner must agree on rules for
● their dog. You should convey these
rules to the children and other frequent visitors of
the household.
MULTIPLE PETS
729
There are many tricks to having
● multiple-dog households, the first of
which is to be certain the humans are in charge!
The easiest way is to try to have one human per
dog as a handling ratio. If there are two humans
and three or more dogs, the task becomes harder,
but not impossible.
Living Harmoniously with Your Dog
295
730
Obedience is not an option. With
● multiple-pet households, it is imper-
ative to have obedience training as the main com-
munication language and rule set. Since dogs that
are unattended or undirected will always make
decisions using their instincts, you will need to
practice obedience training and use it constantly
in daily life to ensure that the dogs and their
instincts do not rule.
731
Thin out the herd. When raising two
 at a time, or introducing a new dog
into the household, you may want to thin out the
herd at times. This means crating one dog while
the other dog gets your full attention. This will cut
down on competition for resources and attention,
and allows you to fully develop manners and
skills one at a time.
296
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Double Dog Dilemmas
732
If one dog is work, how much more
● work can two dogs be? Ages, person-
alities, and breeds will determine just how much
more work it will be-but rest assured that it will
require more work. Your second dog is a dynamic,
living being with emotional and mental needs
that will need to be fulfilled.
733
If one puppy is messy, are two really
messier?
Yes.  Littermates
are
extremely difficult to raise on many levels.
Besides the obvious (more food, more yard
cleanup, more hair!), the extra emotional and
mental energy required to raise two siblings is
huge. When raising one, do yourself a favor and
raise only one. You'll enjoy your experience much
more, and chances are, so will your single puppy.
734
Dogs don't have to have other canine
 mermbers in the family to feel loved
and safe. Your leadership, friendship, and guidance
can do exactly that if you raise your puppy with
devotion and love. Your puppy will love bonding to
you when there's no other puppy in sight.
Living Harmoniously with Your Dog
297
735
Integrate two dogs and their skills
● with two handlers present. If there is
one handler for two dogs, the dogs may try to take
advantage of your divided attention. However, if one
dog is older and more polished, this may not happen
and you might be safe in proceeding with two at a
time.
736
Keep both dogs on-leash during the
●day to ensure consistency and suc-
cess in directing them. Even if there is an older.
more seasoned dog, the leash helps tell both dogs
that there is security in leadership and direction
will prevent chaos.
737
Never allow the first dog to "raise"
+ the second dog! It is too much pres-
sure on the older dog to have to direct the little
one. This stress may cause problems in the new
relationship.
738
When the second dog grows up look-
● ing to the first dog for direction, you
The second dog may bond to dogs rather than
humans, she may never learn to look to humans
for direction, and she may grow up using too
many dog instincts because her leader is a dog.
Prevent this by raising the second one like you did
the first one.
298
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
739
Do not expect your second dog to be
●as experienced in the manners of
the household as your first dog. Keep the second
dog on-leash and under your direction. Show
structure, security, and a rhythm to the house-
hold. Resist the urge to give your second dog the
freedoms and privileges that your first dog has
earned until the second dog has earned them.
740
Having a dog is a fun and rewarding
 experience. Owning two dogs can be
double the fun as well as twice the work. Every
dog you add to your household doubles the
amount of leadership that needs to be applied to
maintain harmony. Three dogs feel more like six,
and four dogs seems like eight. Every being (two
and four legged) needs a certain amount of space
for adequate living.
741
At some point, you may add too
 many pets to your household. May-
hem will follow shortly. Unfortunately, sometimes
the only solution is to thin the herd, and placing
-aau aq  ag mau e m sop io o ao
sary.
Living Harmoniously with Your Dog
299
742
Try to determine which one of your
●dogs is the most stressed by the
social load of a crowded house. Take each dog out-
side for a long walk solo. Watch the interactions of
the dogs that remain. There is typically one dog
that keeps the emotions stirred up and when that
dog is out for the walk, the remaining dogs will
relax and lay down. This is probably the dog that
would be happiest in a quieter home.
300
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
11.
Balancing
Essential Needs
o assure your dog's mental serenity, you must
learn to balance four of your dog's essential
needs: mental, physical, social, and rest. When
you mix these elements properly for your dog, her
behavior becomes balanced.
YOuR dOG'S dAIlY bALAnCe
Each  dog
will
I reguire a
different balance.
Research your breed
1 so you  will  know  her
genetic tendencies as well as the breed's phys
ical reguirements, but you must also be aware
that even two dogs of the same breed will be
different in their needs. Keep in mind that dogs
are as individual as people! Knowing and under-
standing her personality, physical health, and
age will help you create a balanced mix for her.
This, along with age and stage of life, matter in
developing your dog's balance. What works for
your dog in puberty might not be what works
for her in adulthood. Be aware of the stage in
which your dog is living and adjust the balance
as she ages through stages.
As you're working on balancing your dog's
daily and overall life, be careful not to spoil her
with constant attention. Part of a good balance
system is to make sure that her mental perspec-
tives are clear regarding her fit in the household.
Your balance and behavior will change your
dog's balance. If your daily or weekly schedule
changes often, or if work schedules are long, you
may see a change in your dog's behavior. Adult
dogs can flex better with changing schedules
302
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
than younger or older dogs, but all dogs can
experience stress if their needs are not met. Rit-
uals and routines  will help your dog flex
through these times.
MENTAL NEEDS
743
Mental needs are those needs that
require your dog to use his brain.
Utilizing his intelligence is just as important to
him as using his body. Mental energy helps a dog
feel important and feel as though he has a job.
744
Channeling mental energy will help
 to
prevent behavioral problems.
When a dog is given a job to do in the form of obe-
dience training, it leaves him little time or mental
space to find the wrong things to do.
745
If mental needs are not met through
·your direction, your dog's genetic
makeup will meet them for him. Each dog has a
purpose and a desire to do work. His breed and
genetic makeup has hardwired him to do tasks. If
you do not choose the tasks for him, his genetic
instincts will choose the job.
Balancing Essential Needs
303
746
Mental needs can be met through
●daily obedience practice sessions,
thought-provoking games such as Find It, or more
advanced
 training tasks such as soft-mouth
retrieval.
747
Daily application of your commands
·is essential to keeping your dog
mentally satisfied. At least one practice session
per day can keep him feeling as though he's done
work and has had a purpose.
304
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
748
Make
your
training
sessions
·dynamic and thought provoking.
Don't just "go through the paces." Make this an
interesting exchange of direction, and praise for
team accomplishment. You should feel as though
you are having a conversation with your dog, not
just a trail of mindless commands.
PhYSICal NeedS
749
Physical needs vary from stage to
·stage. Physical needs are highest
during the adolescent stage and lowest during the
geriatric stage. The specific physical needs are
described for each stage in Section One. Be sensi-
tive to your dog's changing physical needs.
750
While physical needs are important,
● physical activity is not a substitute
for meeting mental needs. Don't confuse the two.
751
Some good physical exercises are
·walking. running, Frisbee, fetch,
swimming. water retrieval, agility, flyball, lure
coursing. weight pulling, and cart pulling. Choose
an activity that your dog will enjoy and that you
will enjoy doing with her.
Balancing Essential Needs
305
752
Physical release is important after a
● long sedentary day. Sedentary days
are days where the owner has been gone a long
time and the dog is crated, or days where the dog
has been asked to have manners, hold DowN-
STAYS, and remain quiet for long periods.
753
Exercise exchange. Different seasons
· require a different balance. Summer
may prohibit walking. in which case you may
want to substitute light swimming. Rainy days
and icy winter days may prohibit outdoor activity
altogether. In this case, you can either substitute
an indoor ball game (careful!), a mentally enter-
taining training session, or game to help your dog
find an outlet for her energy. If the weather is not
conducive to physical activity, substitute addi-
tional mental-exercise activities fobedience work-
outs or indoor mental games)
754
Choose an activity suited to your
F● dog's physical ability, age, and per-
sonal needs. You won't want your Pug doing
weight pulling, just as you wouldn't want to see
your Mastiff doing agility!
306
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
755
Regular veterinarian visits will keep
●you aware of your dog's physical
health. Your vet can also counsel you about your
dog's changing physical needs and activity
choices you can make for him.
SOCIAL NEEdS
756
Social needs are critical to dogs.
● Most dogs thrive on social interac-
tion. They crave tirme with their families and other
people. Some dogs enjoy the company of other
p e uo ut ansodxa pios daay lam se so
or weekly basis.
757
Keep social exposure positive! For
● instance, if your dog enjoys the com-
pany of other dogs, be certain the other dogs (and
yours also! have good manners and that the time
spent is enjoyable. If your dog is meek, only have
him socialize with dogs that are mild. If your dog
is nervous, keep social exposure happening in less
stressful environments. If your dog is exuberant
or boisterous, help him to have the manners to be
a positive social experience for others as opposed
to being frightening or stressful.
Balancing Essential Needs
307
758
Negative social interactions can
●cause your dog to withdraw from
certain situations or become defensively aggres-
sive in others. Negative interactions that can
cause these reactions include constantly getting
roughed-up by dogs in parks, regular exposure to
startling noises in certain areas (construction
zones), consistently negative interactions with
people, etc.
759
Your "fascinating conversations" via
· training sessions can be as much
social time as mental time. Spending quality one-
on-one time with your dog is extremely satisfying
to her socially. When you take the time to spend
an undivided twenty minutes with your dog. you
will satisfy an important need for her to have your
attention, praise, and approval.
760
Quality social time with your dog
●will also help prevent behavioral
problems due to loneliness, depression, or fear of
separation. Letting your dog know that you want
to spend time with her will also prevent her from
having to solicit it herself through bossy or
destructive ways.
308
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
761
If a dog spends too much time alone
●and not enough social time with
people, she can develop either a separation anxi-
ety or social isolation. Keep your dog actively
social by seeing people and different places on a
daily basis.
762
Social needs remain the most con-
● stant need through a dog's life. Keep
in mind that not all dogs, depending upon per-
sonality or experiences, enjoy the same level of
social interaction as others. Some need more dur-
ing their life, while others need less.
REST NEEDS
763
Contrary to what Labrador Retriev-
●ers would think, all dogs need a cer-
tain amount of rest each day. Even if your dog
doesn't wish to stop playing, walking, running.
etc., you must make good choices for him and
help him wind down during and at the end of
each day. Rest is a critical piece in the balance pie.
764.
Rest comes in two forms: mental
● rest and physical rest. Being aware
of your dog's daily balance will help you to deter-
mine which type of rest your dog needs.
Balancing Essential Needs
309
765
If your dog has had a long day of
●working, he will need to stop and
rest his mind. This means to stop doing com-
mands and allow your dog to sleep or rest on a
dog bed. Some dogs take their "jobs" so seriously
that you may even need to crate him to take him
"off duty."
766
If your dog has been hiking and
● swimming for two hours, you may
need to call it quits before your dog overexerts
himself. Physical rest allows the body to rest, heal,
and repair itself for the next day's activities. Some
dogs know when to quit, while others need you to
stop them and rest them for the next outdoor
party.
767
Mental exhaustion and stress can
●cause behavioral problems. A tired
mind does not make good choices and sometimes
has a short fuse. Think about how you act when
tired. Your dog is no different, and her stress
behaviors exhibited will be directly related to the
amount of exhaustion or stress, her breed, and
her personality.
310
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
768
Physical exhaustion and stress can
● also cause physical problems. Over-
doing physical exercise can cause muscle pulls,
stressed joints, and overturned ankles. If your dog
is an athlete and likes to do high-impact activi-
ties, problems can occur if they're done for pro-
longed periods in his life. Usually this is
joint-related, so remain aware of their activity lev-
els on a long-term basis.
769
While lack of rest can lead to prob-
 lems, too much rest can also lead to
behavioral problems and depression. Remember
that your dog is a social creature and too much
rest can lead to depression if she is resting away
from the family too often. Behavioral problems
develop when the dog tries to relieve the stress of
boredom.
770
In the younger stages of a dog's life,
 you may need to crate him to get
rest. These are the stages when you are still mak-
ing many choices for him, and like a little child
who thinks he doesn't need a nap even when he's
throwing his tinker toys and screaming, you may
need to choose naptime before this occurs.
Balancing Essential Needs
311
771
Once you've created a pattern of how
● to rest by crating your dog in younger
years, you can convert to teaching your dog to rest
 on a dog bed. Do this by tethering him to you or a
piece of furniture by you to rest. You can do this
while at your computer or watching television.
After you've taught the new nap pattern, your dog
will know how to nap himself in adulthood.
Your Life's balaNce
772
When your balance is off, so is your
● dog's. If your mental balance has
you burned out, this usually means your dog has
been lacking mental stimulation. If you're physi-
cally ill or exhausted, your dog probably isn't
going to get his physical needs met. Watch your
own trends to know which ones could go off-kilter
for your dog
773
 If you're physically down, give your
● dog some creative mental things to
do. Games like food cubes, mentally challenging
toys, or Find It games can substitute for physical
activities at these times.
312
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
774
If you're mentally exhausted, go for
● a walk or toss a toy for your dog. The
physical exercise will do you a world of good
when you're mentally tapped out, and the physi-
cal exercise can substitute for your inability to do
creative mental work with your dog at this time.
775
Evaluate your daily life. What is your
· schedule like? If your daily schedule
takes you many places and leaves you breathless,
you may want to regain control of your own life,
slow it down, and catch your breath. Your dog
won't be able to take long bouts of time alone,
especially if the end of your workday (the begin-
ning of his time with you) leaves you with nothing
left for him.
Balancing Essential Needs
313
776
What types of things do you like to
● do? Are you an active person with a
high drive to exercise, or do you enjoy couch-
potato sports? If you haven't already bought a
dog, match the breed and its needs with your
activity level, so both of your needs are more
closely matched.
777
If you live a sedentary lifestyle, then
●it is obvious that owning a high-
energy dog (like a sporting breed) is not conducive
to your lifestyle. What may not be obvious is that
owning a dog with less physical needs but high
mental needs (like a Rottweiler) may cultivate dif-
ferent problems. Dogs with high mental needs
require as much active "care and attention" as
highly physically active dogs.
DAYCare FOR The WORKInG
FaMily doG
778
What do working owners do with
● their dog while at work? Doggie Day-
care can be a useful tool with substantial benefits
to working owners. However, you must consider
the potential negative behavioral ramifications of
these "social" groups.
314
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
779
Not every dog is right for daycare.
oSome breeds are more prone to
developing aggression towards dogs than others.
High-drive dogs such as Rottweilers, Dobermans,
Pit Bull Terriers, Cattledogs, Hounds, Boxers, Bull-
uy 1o/pue Aouue on paiq soop nayo pue 'soop
other animals should refrain from group interac-
tions. Your small dog may also enter into this cat-
egory; check the genetic heritage of your dog in a
breed book.
780
We do not recommend any form of
●playgroup for puppies under nine
months of age. Puppies of this age range are in a
highly impressionable stage. Only one or two
"cheap shots" from an older dog may perma-
nently alter her perception of trust towards other
dogs. If you must leave a puppy alone at home for
an extended period, investigate in-home pet visits
until your dog is old enough to remain in the crate
during the day.
Balancing Essential Needs
315
781
If your dog is "unmanageable" with-
●out daily trips to daycare, you have
bigger problems than a bored dog. Daycare or
playgroups will not teach your dog how to behave.
Likewise, daycare is not a substitute for raising
your dog. Your dog may be tired and quiet at the
end of the day, but when she wakes up, she will
still have the same (or worse) manners. The owner
must take the time to develop a proper relation-
ship with his dog, and this involves personal
interaction and direction.
Your coMmon balance
782
Limit the weekly trips to daycare. We
● suggest no more than two per week
The key in raising a balanced dog is quality, not
necessarily quantity. Make sure you maximize the
quality of the time you do spend with your dog.
Sending your dog to daycare isn't an excuse for
you to sit on the couch and watch TV and not
interact with your dog.
783
If you have abandoned the leader-
●ship protocol exercises and stan-
dards, go backwards and provide the most
assistance as needed to achieve the same stan-
dards. Return to two to three regular practice
workouts and distraction training. Use the leash
and collar to provide the leadership necessary to
rekindle the teamwork attitudes and mutual
respect.
316
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
784
Make a list and check it twice! Do
●your needs match your dog's needs?
Make a list of your needs, then make a list of your
dog's needs. Where do they overlap? Is there any
set of needs that directly conflicts with the other's
needs? Try to really take a good look at this so you
can begin to balance your lives together.
785
If one week is particularly challeng-
● ing for you and your dog, try to put
the balance back the next week. Look for small
ways to add things to your dog's days. Short walks
will be better than no walks, especially since
those walks may do you good as well.
786
Make a doggie-do list. Keep a list of
● quick activities posted to your refrig-
erator that you can do with your dog when your
time is limited or you are stuck for a quick activ-
ity.
787
Don't swing from a wildly neglectful
· week with your dog to a super indul-
 ao  s oa, a a n
frustrate your dog more. Try to balance in the
opposite direction if one week is tough. Extremes
will stress your dog.
Balancing Essential Needs
317
788
Dogs should be walked once per day.
● This is the minimum. During adoles-
cence, more than one walk might be required.
Smaller or older dogs require shorter walks.
789
Find ways to do things for your dog
● while doing things for yourself. For
instance,jog your two miles per day with your dog
by your side—that is, if your dog is conditioned for
it. If not, begin by slowly conditioning him to be
your running companion. He may be just the one
to keep you motivated to remain on your exercise
plan.
790
If you need to sit down and do a
·great deal of paperwork (mental
exercise), give your dog a mental training session
first. Then you will both be satisfied in one area of
your needs chart. Reward yourselves afterwards
with a walk in the park (physical and social needs)
or a trip to the ice cream store.
791
 If you balance your dog's needs, you
·will probably find that you've bal-
anced your own needs as well. Your dog's needs.
physical and social, can be the keys to balancing
your own life as well. When he needs a walk, you
benefit physically by doing it. When he needs
some social time, you can benefit from that emo-
tionally.
318
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
792
The “missing
 piece" philosophy
● doesn't always work in reverse—bal-
ancing our needs doesn't always mean that we've
balanced our dogs' needs. If our lives take us in
many different directions and we are burning our-
selves out, our dogs will end up with very imbal-
anced, stressful lives. Don't keep “putting out
fires" in your dog's behavior due to stress. Take
care to have enough energy left for him.
793
www.payattentiontoyourdog.com:
 the Internet is a wonderful tool for
making life more productive and people more
informed. Perhaps you even researched or pur-
chased this book on the Internet. Now, don't be an
Internet junkie. Log off and go interface with your
dog.
Balancing Essential Needs
319
12.
Behavior
Problem Solving
o what's the problem—aren't there a lot of
"good dogs" out there that have never had the
benefit of an extensive raising program? The
answer is yes and no. Some dogs are "good dogs'
simply from the fact that they haven't done any-
thing "bad" yet. Other dogs are simply out of (self)
control. Whether your dog is good or bad, a read
through this behavior problem solving section is
essential. The "solutions" contain valuable clues
to preventing behavior problems from surfacing.
If your dog suddenly displays any behavior
that is way out of his "typical" behavior patterns,
you should contact your veterinarian immedi-
ately for a complete physical. Sometimes imbal-
ances in liver or kidneys may trigger behavior
anomalies. Likewise, reactions to bee stings, aller-
gies, or other sensitizing conditions may be to
blame.
Of course, not all sudden onsets are physically
induced. Behavior problems develop over time
and appear to present themselves spontaneously.
In reality, behavior problems present themselves
after root causes have been “"brewing" for quite
some time.
Until this point in the book, we have outlined
d  sd   
raising your dog through a proper leadership pro-
tocol and patterning desired behaviors with your
obedience language. In this section, we will dis-
cuss some universal root causes of various behav-
ior problems and will introduce exercises aimed
at abating specific behavior problems.
322
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
What Are behaVIor Problems?
A behavior problem is a repeating behavior that
is driven by one of three things: genetics, mis-
management, or lack of management. It is a
behavior that is "beyond control," negative, and
repetitive. Behavior problems can also be behav-
iors that are not yet disruptive but if left
unchecked may become "nightmares."
There are two types of behavior.
. One is
imprinted behavior, the first behavior you learn in
each life situation. The second type of behavior is
Aljeltlu! ayt laao asodwjadns oi At noA auo ayt
imprinted behavior. There is some controversy
about whether a new behavior can be retaught
after  the initial imprinting
has
 created
an
improper behavior. In our experience, it is possi-
ble to completely extinguish an imprinted behav.
ior and replace it with a new behavior. The
process is difficult and lengthy but worthwhile.
There are three ways to address a behavior
problem: ignore it (we don't recommend this),
extinguish and counter-condition it, or manage it.
There is a difference between extinguishing a
behavior and managing a behavior.
Extinguishing. This is the process of erasing an
existing behavior by either preventing it from
reoccurring, not positively reinforcing its occur-
rence, or negatively reinforcing (correcting) the
behavior as it is occurring.
Counter-conditioning. This is the process of
replacing one behavior (usually 
( inappropriate)
with another. It uses obedience commands to cre-
ate a pattern, coupled with rewards to reinforce
the new, positive behavior to imprint the new
Behavior Problem Solving
323
patterns. As far as behavior problems are con-
cerned, the earlier you address the problem the
better the chance of counter-conditioning with a
new behavior.
Managing a behavior. This involves using
behavior-modification exercises to decrease the
severity of the behavior, yet perhaps not fully
remove it. Once your dog reaches maturity (three
to four years old) behavior problems will require
a lifetime of management.
Redirecting full-blown behavior problems is
slightly different than redirecting during distrac-
tion training.  Distracted behavior disappears
almost immediately after the distraction passes.
A true behavior problem is a complete thought
path and requires proper resocialization to create
a new thought path. This is the main reason sim-
ple "quick fixes" cannot repair a true behavior
problem.
RooT Causes Of behAVIor
ProbleMs
Mixed-Message Behavior Problems
794
In chapter 5, we discussed what con-
 ● stitutes a mixed message. These sit-
uations are activities that reduce the owner to the
level of a dog and activities that elevate your dog
to the level of a human.
324
1000BESTDOGTRAININGSECRETS
795
The confusion and related stress
●that mixed messages cause is so
powerful that these mixed-message situations are
often the root cause of many behaviors. Mixed
messages will at the very least dilute your effec-
tiveness as a leader and at the most cause your
dog to actively reject your leadership (e.g., become
aggressive towards you).
796
So often smaller dogs are invited to
·sit on their owner's lap and get
adored. Now without putting too fine a point on
the meaning. you have just established who the
leader is and who is to play the servant. Basically
your dog is sitting on a human throne.
797
Un-mix the role. Teach your dog to be
●a dog. Dogs must remain on the
floor. Your dog must be off the couch, chairs, and
laps. No bed sleeping, either! When you want to
interact with your dog. get down on the floor. Pet
your dog while your dog is at your side, not on
your lap. Your dog should walk on the ground and
not ride in your arms.
798
Un-mix the rules. Stop rough play
● with your dog. No wrestling or tug-
of-war. Any interactions that overstimulate your
dog or teach her to treat you like an animal should
be avoided.
Behavior Problem Solving
325
Spontaneous Role Reversal
799
Spontaneous role reversal is an act
· (like trying to get your dog off the
sofa, taking an item out of your dog's mouth, or
trying to get your dog to crate) that your dog views
as inconsistent with how you allow him to live on
a daily basis (this happens when you role is
mixed-up). Your dog may meet this act with a
growl or snap of the teeth. A quality leadership
protocol with clear leadership messages must be
established to eliminate this root cause.
326
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Stress
800
Stop the process early. When a dog
●experiences stress, he needs to
relieve it. Genetics may kick in to help your dog
relieve it. Hunting dogs will hunt objects inside
the house. Herding dogs may begin nipping at
your heels or grab your child's shirtsleeves or sim-
ply run around the table. With prolonged repeti-
tion, the stress may begin to alter your dog's
mental chemistry, making simple redirection very
difficult. Recognize small symptoms before they
create large problems.
801
Make a negative living situation pos-
 itive. Praise must be real praise and
not just affection. Keep a quick chart with two
columns, one for No (or using your dog's name in
a negative way) and one for "good boy." Make a
mark in each column every time you say the cue.
If you find a long list in the NO column and a
short list in the praise column, change your ways.
Make formal changes to reduce the marks in the
NO column and increase the praise. Five praises
for each NO is a good living situation.
Behavior Problem Solving
327
802
Every dog can bite. Dogs are wired
●for survival, and if your dog per-
ceives something is getting in the way of his sur-
vival, he may bite. If your dog's living conditions
are stressful enough or he has a greatly overin-
flated view of his role in this world, situations in
 an everyday world can be perceived as threaten-
ing to him.
Mental Boredom
803
Many nuisance behavior problems
● (like thievery, chewing, and hyperac-
tivity) are thought to be the result of an overabun
dance of energy. Most people presume that if they
pinom anaun .'paddop Aaun un, sop au ue
be no energy left for behavior problems. Actually,
these behavior problems (and more) are the result
of an overabundance of intelligence, so running
alone won't prevent them.
804.
Your dog is bored! Often times, sim-
●ply adding two or three obedience
workouts per day, regular distraction training, and
a prevention plan of crating and being on-leash in
the house will make these behaviors vanish. No
one has been able to just "run" good behavior into
their dog. Make sure your workouts require a
great deal of thinking and not simply repeating
patterns.
328
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
805
Provide stimulating toys and games.
● This completes the mental, physical,
social, and rest balance.
BeHAVIOR MODIfICATION
SKIllS And tooLS
806
Since behavior modification is the
● process of extinguishing one behav-
ior and replacing it by building another behavior,
you will need some skills and tools with which to
do this. The following are the skills, tools, and
concepts we will need for the process.
807
Deferment. Deferment refers to a for-
 mal exercise where your dog accepts
your direction for either vocal or food reward. You
practice deferment every time you practice your
obedience commands. Deferment is also part of
your leadership protocol described in chapter 5,
which will be instrumental in prevention of
behavior problems.
Behavior Problem Solving
329
808
Negative reinforcement/confinement.
●You can't withhold your dog's pay-
check...or can you? Once the basic household
requirements have been taught to the dog
(through obedience commands) your dog may be
placed on a rewards system. The better he
adheres to the rules of the house the more free
doms he may earn. And the opposite also holds
true-you can use freedoms and rewards removal
809
Thought path/behavior pattern. Imag-
· ine your dog's thoughts like a train.
Once the train starts down the tracks it is follow-
ing a "thought path." If your dog's thoughts begin
down the wrong track (behavior problem) the
train needs to be switched and put on another
track. The longer your dog is allowed to remain on
the inappropriate thought path the harder it will
be to switch your dog's path.
810
Creating a clear mental image in
● your mind of a train switching tracks
is essential for resocialization and prevention
exercises. Timing is essential to providing a quick
switch of thought path (divert) and providing
direction on to the proper track (redirection).
330
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
811
Divert and redirect. Behavior problem
●solving depends on the following
pattern: divert-redirect. The diversion may be
made by the corrective NO or click from the
clicker. Either way, the redirection is essential.
812
The pattern of diversion and redirec-
● tion begins in distraction training. If
behavior modification of any kind is not going
well, continue to distraction train until more self-
control is established. Unfortunately this is not
the movies where one simple modification makes
complete behavior changes.
813
Divert. During obedience training
· and distraction training when your
dog is not paying attention, we divert with a NO
and a leash correction. Since this pattern has
been firmly established and positively patterned,
it should be the most useful diversion.
814.
The clicker can also be used as a
 diverting stimulus. Once the clicker
is properly associated with food reward, you can
use it to divert the improper thought path by sim-
ply clicking. You will still need to redirect the
action to complete the behavior modification
Behavior Problem Solving
331
815
The diversion should switch the
behavior but not cause additional
fear or stress. For this reason, startling, spray bot-
tles, and penny cans are not are appropriate
diversion devices. If the root cause of the behavior
problem is stress, then startling techniques will
only make your dog more stressed.
816
Redirect. NO {diversion)
is not
 enough. You will need to provide a
redirection to your dog about how he should
behave given the immediate situation. The redi-
rection will involve the obedience language and
praise.
DRUG THERAPY
817
Pharmaceuticals are rarely the sole
·solution to behavior problems and
should always be used in conjunction with a
counter-conditioning plan. Pharmaceutical agents
 are metabolized in the liver and may have long-
term effects. Regular blood tests may be required
to monitor these effects.
332
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
818
Sometimes removal of stressful liv-
●ing conditions and creating a new
behavior pattern can be made easier with the help
of one of several pharmaceutical agents designed
to restore chemical balance within the nerve
synapse. Understanding the root cause of your
dog's behavior will assist in the application of the
correct medication. Always talk to your veterinar-
ian or accredited behaviorist for assistance.
819
Behavior situations that may also
 benefit from pharmaceutical therapy
include situations where counter-conditioning
exercises have reached a plateau, situations
where it is difficult to manage the situation (e.g.
dog aggression and thunderstorms), and finally
when the reaction to the situation is so reactive
that diversion is impossible (e.g., panic reaction
and fear aggression).
Different Medications Have Slightly Different
Actions
820
Genetic Sources. All dogs exhibit nor-
●mal
l genetic/instinctual behaviors
like territoriality, herding. hunting, and family
protection. In most dogs, these instincts are in
control. In some dogs, these instincts cause inap-
propriate behaviors. Some medications are better
at targeting genetic or instinctual responses.
Behavior Problem Solving
333
821
Personality. Other behavior problems
·are more closely related to your
dog's personality. Some medications such as
Prozac (Fluoxetine) or Paxil (Paroxetine) are better
 at managing stress- or social-related behaviors.
822
Panic Responses. Some medications
·are
better
at
managing
panic
responses seen
1 in separation anxiety or fear
aggression.
823
Not all medications are created
 equal. Most behavior-modification
drugs will allow your dog to experience the social-
ization exercises and learn from the experiences.
Drugs like Valium (Diazepam) will not allow your
dog to learn from the experience. This effect is
useful if the experience is not particularly positive
(e.g., thunderstorms, vet visits, and traveling) and
you do not want your dog to experience it.
The role Of SocIalIZatIon IN
BeHAVIOR MODIfICATION
824
Socialization is the systematic
·replacement of one set of experi-
ences or expectations with another set (which we
hope is more acceptable) through planned repeti-
tive exposures. The exposures begin in small inter-
vals at greater distance and increase in duration
and decrease in distance. Use the leash and collar.
Use your commands exactly as you practice them.
334
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
825
When creating a new behavior, you
●will need to repeat a pattern every
day for thirty days before your dog will begin to
 accept the new pattern as a behavior. Likewise, if
you are trying to extinguish a pattern, you will
 need to prevent the old pattermn from happening
for at least thirty days.
Behavior Problem Solving
335
826
Some patterms require many repeti-
● tions before they can become behav-
iors. You may need to repeat a pattern at least one
hundred times until it becomes a behavior. If you
can only repeat a certain pattern (like door greet-
ings) five times a week, it may take at least five
months to truly create the new behavior. Patience
is critical! Repetition is essential.
827
Behavior resocialization
lrequires
· two to three exposures per week to
gain ground. If the owner waits too long between
exposures, the lessons learned during the session
may be lost and you will need to start over again.
828
When performing socialization activ-
● ities, use the SrT position rather than
the DOWN position. Your dog may feel threatened
or vulnerable in the DoWN command and there-
fore may make more mistakes. The SrT position
will be more relaxing for your dog and lead to fewer
corrections. Wait until your dog really wants to lay
down before giving the DOwN command.
336
1000 BESTDOG TRAINING SECRETS
BEHAVIOR MODIFICATION PLANS
The following section of chapter 12 will be dedi-
cated to describing several behavior modification
plans after the basic obedience commands have
oeen taught and the root causes of your dog's
behavior problems have been identified.
The process of behavior modification includes
practicing obedience commands (to keep the
obedience skills positive), distraction training (to
build mental discipline to override fears, genet-
ics, and instincts), and
d  socializing (replacing
improper emotions and expectations with proper
experiences and behaviors).
Behavior-modification
plan.
complete
behavior modification plan includes the following
parts:
· Establish an effective basis of communica-
tion (obedience training).
· Identify the root causes of the behavior.
· Remove/modify the root causes.
· Resocialize:
teach
a
new
thought
pattern/path through systematic exposure.
· Establish a reasonable time frame for reso-
cialization.
All  behavior-modification  plans  will  include
establishing the obedience language.
Behavior-modification plans are not designed
to be quick fixes but are lifestyle changes. Most
of the root causes of behavior problems are
seated in the daily living habits of your dog. If you
and your family are in a hurry to return to the old
living habits, you may see a return of the old
behavior problems.
Behavior Problem Solving
337
AVOIDdING AND CHANGING
NUISaNCE bEHAVIORS
829
Teach "give paw" at your own risk
·"Give paw" starts out as an easy
command to teach your puppy. After a short while
it will become an annoying way for your dog to
demand you pay attention to him. If you have
already made this mistake, you may need to
counter-condition the behavior. When your dog
paws at you, give three or four obedience com-
mands so he defers his bossy action to your
commands. If your dog defers, praise and then go
play with him.
Running Away
830
First, get your dog back. If your dog
· gets away from you and is enjoying
his freedom by playing “catch me," stop chasing
him. Get down on one knee and point to a spot on
the ground. You will need to focus all your atten-
tion on the spot. Now is the time to be theatrical!
Maintain focus on the spot and your dog will wan-
der over to you and wonder what you are doing
Dogs are focus animals. If you take your attention
away from them and put it on a spot, they simply
must see what is more interesting than them. Try
it. This trick really works!
338
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
831
Most dogs run away when their
●basic needs are not being met at
home. Make sure your dog is getting enough pos-
itive attention and social interaction. Take your
dog off the property to meet people and see dif-
ferent things at least three times per week.
832
Another reason dogs run is that
● there is way too much stress in the
house. Review the causes of stress listed above
and de-stress your dog's (and your) life. Who
really wants to stay in a stressful environment?
General Hyperactivity
833
Hyperactivity is usually a result of
● mental unrest. Not understanding
"cause and effect" around the house and having
too much freedom and not enough direction are
things that can cause mental unrest for your dog.
Since this is a state of mental versus physical
unrest, better direction (not just physical exercise)
will calm this dog.
834.
Sometimes a lot of dogs make mis-
 takes and end up being scolded con-
tinuously. The stress in the household rises and
the humans usually end up yelling more. The
cycle repeats itself and the dog becomes more
nervous and hyper. The key is to break the cycle
and develop a plan for stress reduction.
Behavior Problem Solving
339
835
Position-holding
exercises
are
essential to calming the mentally
frenetic dog. However, sometimes we don't have
the patience to complete these exercises our-
selves. You cannot expect your dog to have more
patience than you do.
Submissive Urination
836
Some dogs urinate during exciting
·situations like door greetings or
meeting new people. This behavior is seen mostly
in puppies and may stop completely with matur-
Addeu, 1oy Sop 1noA Supions ‘uao oot lv gu!
pee" will cause stress during greetings. These
repetitive experiences will cause the submissive
urination to continue.
837
Reduce the level of stress associated
● with the trigger experiences. First of
all, relax. Your overly emotional response may
make a simple dribble into a long-term behavior
problem. Begin the pattern of greeting people out-
side. You won't mind a little dribble in the grass!
838
Counter-condition your dog to the
?door-greeting exercise as described
in chapters 8 and 9. Use food for greetings to
change the greeting experience from unsettling to
positive.
340
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
839
Ask new people who want to greet
·your dog to ignore her for at least
three minutes. This will allow her to relax and not
be intimidated or stimulated by the new arrival.
840
Lastly, if this is an adult dog, consult
your veterinarian for short-term
medication to increase urinary sphincter tone.
Continue to counter-condition while the medica-
tion is in effect.
Barking
841
Barking is a natural form of canine
● communication. As  with
many
behavior
 problems, sometimes the natural
instincts can become inappropriate. To curb the
instinct, you need to determine why your dog is
barking. This section will provide some assistance
to determine the root of the behavioral barking.
842
Nuisance barking. The primary reason
● for nuisance barking is to get your
attention. This behavior interrupts meals, phone
calls, and quiet leisure time. Apparently your dog
is bored and needs some stimulation.
Behavior Problem Solving
341
843
Remove the cause and effect. If your
●dog barks to command you, do not
respond. If your dog barks at you and you pick up
the ball and play fetch, your dog has now trained
you. Change the pattern. If your dog barks at you,
perform three to five minutes of obedience com-
mands, and then (if your dog cooperates) play.
844
The harder your dog tries to make a
·certain point, the further away she
should be from achieving the goal. Repeated bark-
ing should be met with removal from the social
situation (crated).
845
One of the easiest ways to correct
· nuisance barking when your dog is
not under leash control is a bark collar. Bark col-
lars administer an automatic correction when
your dog barks. As with remote collars, bark col-
lars come in a variety of styles and should be
properly researched before purchasing. Bark col-
lars should only be used with nuisance-related
barking. Using a bark collar for stress-related
barking or threat barking may make the problem
worse.
342
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
846
Threat barking. All dogs have basic
●territorial instincts, stronger in
some breeds than others. Barking usually stops
after the threat is taken away. Boundary agitation
can strengthen the response intensity and is typ-
ically a contributor to uncontrolled threat bark-
ing. Remove boundaries for boundary agitation.
847
You probably will have an easier
● chance at changing the color of your
dog's fur before you can extinguish a truly territo-
rial dog's bark. But with proper conditioning, your
dog should stop barking after the leader says
enough! When your dog barks (and there is a rea-
son to bark), praise him for the initial response.
Next, tell him to SIT to create a new thought path.
If your dog continues to bark, correct with NO and
cue him with QUIET and SIT. Praise as soon as
your dog stops barking. Timing is critical. Catch
your dog on the first bark.
848
Remove the visual stimulus. Prevent
·your dog from “patrolling" your
house. If your dog insists on pacing from room to
room, tether or post him with obedience com-
mands. Reduce the intensity of the territorial
response by counter-conditioning the boundary-
agitation aspect of the behavior problem.
Behavior Problem Solving
343
849
Stress-related barking. Stress-related
·barking is triggered by a visual or
noise stimulus that causes an anxiety response
and barking. How can we tell stress barking from
territorial barking? Stress-related barking will not
stop once the stimulus has passed because the
resulting stress remains in the dog.
850
Most stress-related barking starts as
· simple territorial barking. Not know-
ing how to properly address the barking, the own-
ers introduce a negative stimulus like yelling.
penny cans, bark collars, or spray bottles. The neg-
ative stimulus of the "quick fix" gradually attaches
a negative emotional response with the territorial
instinct, thus creating the barking.
851
To address stress barking ade-
●quately, you will need to address
both the threat-barking response along with
counter-conditioning to the trigger. The counter
conditioning should be done when a real territo-
rial threat (e.g., visitor) is not present. Chapter 8
contains a great exercise for counter-conditioning
to the door and doorbell. A strong foundation as a
leader will be essential for your dog to defer to
your redirection.
344
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Stealing, counter surfing,
ANd GarBaGE STeaLING
852
The root causes of these three
●behavior problems are similar: men-
tal boredom and opportunity. If your dog is bored,
she searches for something to do. Odors of food or
owner drive the search. Items like food, socks,
underwear, and remote controls are prime tar-
gets. These nuisance behaviors are not stress-
related. However,
 repeating these nuisance
behaviors will become stressful for your house-
hold.
853
Solve the mental boredom. Provide
● adequate mental exercise, especially
to the hunting or herding breeds. Two to three
workouts of twenty minutes each are probably the
minimum.
854
Remove the opportunity. During the
 periods between workouts, prevent
the nuisance behaviors from repeating them-
selves by keeping your dog on-leash. Crate your
dog if necessary. Trying to correct your dog to get
him to "understand" that these behaviors are
wrong will not work.
Behavior Problem Solving
345
855
Be very careful not to chase your dog
· if he has stolen something of yours.
Chasing ends in confrontation while you take the
object from your dog's mouth. Coupling this con-
frontation with some negative emotions (like
yelling) may cause your dog to become possessive
of the item he has stolen.
856
Distraction training is essential to
● letting your dog know his behavior is
inappropriate. Create scenarios to redirect the bad
behaviors with better behaviors. For example.
walk your dog past the garbage can. If your dog
pays attention to the can, divert with NO and redi-
rect. Praise your dog for the ignoring the object.
857
Condition your dog to understand
·he is not allowed to have these
items. As part of the behavior problem solving
protocols for stealing and counter surfing, you
will teach the DROP IT command. DROP IT will be
an important tool to teach your dog that he is not
to have these items.
346
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
COPrOPHaGIA (STOOL EATInG)
In Puppies
858
When a puppy grows, her body
 craves protein. There is undigested
protein in the stool and your puppy seeks it out
and devours the stool. Prevention of this behavior
is essential. Redirect with the leash. Take your dog
for bathroom breaks on-leash and do not allow
her to return to her stool. After the main growth
spurts have passed, this instinct will pass as well.
859
Consider changing to a better-quality
● food. If your puppy is craving addi-
tional protein, you may need to supply him with a
higher-quality food.
860
There are also meal supplements
 that supposedly make the stool less
palatable. These supplements are available in cat-
alogs or quality pet stores. Add the prescribed
quantity of tablets to your puppy's food on a reg-
ular basis to achieve the desired effect.
Behavior Problem Solving
347
In Adult Dogs
861
Adult dogs will eat their stool due
●mainly to stress. In multiple-dog
households, dogs may eat the other dogs' stool in
an attempt to literally "eliminate" the traces of the
other dogs. The solution to this problem is a bit
more complicated. Review the section in chapter
10 about multiple pets. Providing leadership and
guidance will be essential to elimination of com-
petition feelings and stress.
862
Persistent Coprophagia in the adult
·dog can also be addressed with a
remote-device correction. While your dog is out-
doors, monitor her from a remote location. Cor-
rect with the device when your dog approaches
the stool. To prevent your dog from being scared
in the yard, this treatment is not to be tried with-
out formal obedience training and formal remote-
device training first.
CHEWING AND DIGGING
863
Root causes: stress and mental bore-
 dom.
864
Provide adequate mental stimula-
  tion. Two or three obedience work-
outs should be sufficient. Provide adequate chew
toys and games. Emphasize toys and games that
promote thinking and not just physical exercise.
348
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
865
Make sure your chew toys are appro-
● priate. Plush toys are similar to sofa
cushions or pillows. A rawhide chew is similar to
that fine leather shoe. If your dog is chewing on
inappropriate things, check to see if you haven't
 accidentally taught him to do that with your toy
choices.
Behavior Problem Solving
349
866
Remove the opportunity. Supervise
·your dog in the house or the yard
Keep your dog on-leash and divert with a corrective
NO and praise for the redirection. If necessary.
counter-condition by providing remote-device cor-
rection for the undesired behavior. Wait until your
dog is just about to begin the activity and correct
with the remote device.
350
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
SePaRATION ANXIETY
867
Root causes: chemical imbalance,
●improper socialization to separa-
tion, mixed.
Messages and Expectation
868
Separation anxiety has two compo-
●nents: panic response and emo-
tional response. The panic response is almost
entirely chemical. Pharmaceutical therapy in the
form of Chlomicalm or other homeopathic reme
dies is essential to controlling this response. The
pharmaceutical therapy must be coupled with
desensitization exercises for the maximum effect
to be realized.
869
The second response is the emo-
● tional response. This part has more
to do with how you live with your dog than any-
thing else. Most dogs have a tough time hanging
out on the couch or bed and then being put into a
crate or left behind. In your dog's mind, equal or
lesser members of the societal structure do not
tell other equals or superiors what to do.
Behavior Problem Solving
351
870
The plan. Sometimes separation anx-
·iety is called “rejection of confine-
may provide insight towards the modification
plan.
871
Change the expectation. Implement
●a leadership protocol that will teach
the proper roles of man and dog to successfully
treat this component of separation anxiety.
872
Change the perception. Inflate the
● confidence cushion. If your dog feels
as though he can't cope without his owner, the
bond of love has crossed into the realm of code
pendence. To him, his security depends on your
physical presence. This will require desensitizing
your dog to being alone.
873
Start slowly. If your dog is particu-
●larly attached to one owner, practice
the following exercise. When the favorite owner
leaves the room, have the second person prevent
the dog (using the obedience commands and
leash) from following the favorite. Praise heartily
and use obedience commands and food to redi-
rect your dog's attention.
352
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
874
Have your dog remain in an obedi-
 ence command while you walk out
of sight for a moment or two. Return, praise, and
release when you return completely to your dog's
side. If your dog gets up the moment you return
into view, re-command your dog back into the ini-
tial position and repeat the exercise.
Resocialize Your Dog to the Crate
875
Avoid overly emotional greetings or
● departures. If you only use the crate
while you are at work, change the expectation.
Use the crate frequently (for short intervals) while
you are at home. This will show your dog that the
visit to the crate may not be a long one.
876
If you find your dog is having trouble
●relaxing without your physical
touch, use obedience commands and position
holding to teach your dog to relax without being
directly next to you.
Behavior Problem Solving
353
877
Build confidence. Practicing your
·obedience commands in a positive
manner will build confidence. Other activities,
like agility or swimming, will help to raise confi-
u sau go saa e uasaid Aq a
accomplishments. Your dog is mentally stronger
than you think.
AGGRESSION/TERRITORIAL
BEHAVIOR
Boundary Agitation
878
Boundary agitation occurs when a
●dog is maintained, uncontrolled,
behind a fixed boundary, and is agitated by a
repeating experience. The boundary could be a
crate, exterior fence, windows in your house, or
your car. The repeating experience could be the
mailman, a neighbor, cars, dogs, children, etc.
879
Do not use remote corrections for
● boundary agitation. The correction
may only serve to promote negative feelings
toward the people or animals being guarded
against.
354
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Yard
880
If your dog is "defending" the bound-
● ary by running along the perimeter
and barking, he is becoming boundary agitated. To
counteract the effects of boundary agitation, you
will need to remove his yard privileges and hand
walk him outside for at least two months. Divert
any inappropriate behaviors with the corrective
NO and redirect.
Crate
881
The crate is a highly confined space,
● and even the most mild-mannered
dog may
become defensive as she becomes
stressed by the repeating agitations. If the crate is
located in a high traffic area like the kitchen, relo-
cate the crate to a non-central location such as
spare bedroom or basement. Cover the front of
the crate with a heavy blanket to block out visual
stimuli.
882
Never stick your fingers at your dog
● in the crate. While your dog is in the
crate, leave her alone. Do not dwell around the
crate; just say "hi,” give a treat (if you like), and
move along.
Behavior Problem Solving
355
House
883
Continuously "patrolling" your
● house from one window to the next
is an example of boundary agitation inside the
house. To counter-condition this, you will need to
remove the access to the windows. Close blinds
and block access with heavy furniture. Do not
allow your dog to watch out the window for peri
ods in excess of thirty seconds at one time. Your
dog is allowed to get a sense of what is outside but
must not be a sentry.
884
Routinely practice deferment exer-
· cises like obedience workouts in the
areas your dog patrols. If your dog approaches the
window, positively divert with his name or a non-
threatening NO and praise when he returns to
your side.
Car
885
 Dogs that are prone to boundary agi-
●tation should not be left alone in
cars for any reason.
356
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
886
Counter-condition to the boundary
●agitation by using basic obedience
deferment skills. Sit in the back seat with your
dog. Have the leash and collar on. If your dog
barks, divert with NO for unwanted behaviors and
praise for positive behaviors. Try having your dog
SIT. Coach your dog with
1 praise as people
approach. Use food if you need some assistance.
AGGreSSIOn TOWArdS PeOPle
887
There are several types of aggres-
● sion: protection of critical resources
(food, toy, or person), genetic predatory response,
fear aggression, and dominant aggression.
888
Aggression towards people, either
● members of the household or general
public, should be counseled with your local behavior
professional. The complete counter-conditioning
plan should reflect the same aspects of the behav-
ior modification plan as described above.
889
Medication (especially in cases of
 aggression in the home) is highly
recommended. Examine the behaviors closely to
determine the real root cause(s) of the problem,
and medicate accordingly.
Behavior Problem Solving
357
Dog/Dog Aggression
890
When two dogs “play" together, the
·play action reinforces instinctual
behaviors such as dominance, fight, or flight and
general aggressive manners. The long-term casu-
trust. Dogs learn to not trust each other. Once
trust breaks down, the dog becomes defensively
aggressive in an attempt to gain the dominant
posture.
891
To properly counter-condition your
●dog. your obedience skills must be
excellent. Distraction training is also especially
important. Resocialization of dog aggression
involves repeated positive exposures to dogs that
show control. Medication may be necessary to
help suppress the panic emotions or instinctual
dominance traits.
892
Complete resocialization requires
●many positive repetitions. Depend-
ing on exactly what your dog's mental state was
before you began counter-conditioning. he may
never completely trust unfamiliar dogs. A realistic
goal is to have him be in the company of dogs (all
under control of a leash and collar) without acting
aggressively or defensively.
358
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
893
If the aggression is between two
● family dogs, you will need to man-
age both dogs equally. Remove all triggers for
aggression. Implement a 1o0 percent manage-
ment protocol for out-of-crate time. Both dogs
must be on-leash and each dog must have a man-
ager. If only one person is home, then only one
dog can be out of the crate.
Behavior Problem Solving
359
894
Reintroduce the dogs slowly after a
+ minimum of one month separation.
Introduce the dogs on leash and collar. Use muz-
zles if necessary. Consult chapter 9 for the steps
for introduction of two dogs.
360
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Part Four:
Having a Good Time with
Your Good Dog
Having fun with your dog is so much more fun
when you have great teamwork skills, he has good
manners, and you both have a good relationship.
All of the hard work that goes into "building" your
dog really pays off when you get to the stage of
enjoying him! Your frolic and fun with your dog
can range anywhere from hiking (reliably) off-
leash with him, to doing pet therapy for children
or the elderly.
13.
Toys!
Games,
and Leisure
Activities
here is good and bad in all toy and game selec-
tions. There are also safe ways in which to
frolic and play with your puppy, most of which
revolve around being aware and careful. Here are
some ideas for safe and enjoyable activities for
you and your dog beyond obedience training!
TOYS
Healthy or Therapeutic Toys
895
There are physically healthy toys
·and mentally healthy toys. Some
toys appear to be entertaining your dog. but his
health could be compromised as well as his men-
tal well-being by playing with them. Picking the
right toys will ensure meeting your dog's needs
while remaining safe.
896
Different toys may appeal to certain
● instincts. The more the toy appeals
to an instinct, the more exciting the toy will be to
your dog. However, following instincts isn't always
appropriate for her. Being a responsible owner
sometimes means making tough choices for her,
even if it seems to be contrary to what she really
likes or wants!
897
Don't have one special toy that is
● your dog's constant baby-sitter. Keep
toys healthy by using them as diversions.
364
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
898
Keep chew toys in all rooms and
● available at all times. This will allow
your dog (through your direction) to make good
choices about chewing when toys are consistently
available. It will also make it easier for you to have
your dog with you more often when toys are read-
ily available to hand to him.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
365
899
Rotate your toys. Keep a large
·amount of toys on hand, but every
now and then, remove some of them (keeping an
adequate arsenal out and available) and place
them on the refrigerator or in a cabinet. Each
week, give your dog these “new" toys from their
hiding spots. Your dog may think it's a brand-new
toy and see it in a new light.
900
Keep "special" toys out of the normal
●toy rotation. "Special" toys may be
toys that are easily destroyed if your dog is left
alone with them. But when you bring them out
with the intent of interacting (playing) with your
dog, they will be safe under your supervision.
901
Clean your toys weekly, or at the
● very least, bi-weekly. Not only is this
healthy, but it will also encourage him to remain
bacteria, dirt, etc., and just don't appeal to dogs
who wish to remain clean.
366
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
902
Since most healthy toys are made of
●plastic, and plastic is not a natural
chew toy, you may need to teach your dog to chew
new items. Hold the new toy close to her mouth,
encouraging her to take it. When she does, praise
her. You may need to do this several times to help
her learn that it is, in fact, a good chew toy.
903
Don't get in the habit of holding
·your dog's toys while he chews.
Holding his toy is one small way that your dog
may get the wrong idea about who is serving
whom. Only hold it to help him learn what to do
with it.
904
Always monitor your dog when she
●has toys. Even if you are choosing
physically and mentally healthy toys, it is wise to
watch her chewing habits.
905
Appropriate chew toys are most
●effective and best enjoyed by your
dog when they are a release and not the sole
entertainment. Mental activities for the brain
replace and prevent destructive chewing and
allow the dog to chew for diversion.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
367
Physically Healthy Toys
906.
 Physically healthy toys are ones that
·do not compromise the health of
your dog. They don't have parts that can be bro-
ken off, destroyed, or eaten. Their material should
be durable enough to satisfy chewing urges, play
urges, and exercise needs, but will not be
destroyed during the play.
907
Nylabones and Kong Toys are among
● the safest toys to supply to your dog.
Their material is quite durable and both products
provide for chewing satisfaction and fun.
Mentally Healthy Toys
908.
Mentally healthy toys are toys that
● properly stimulate your dog's mind.
These can be toys that get him to use his brain on
a “puzzle" type of toy or chewing that stimulates
proper chewing concepts.
909
Chewing durable chew toys like
●Nylabones promotes chewing for
satisfaction, teething, and proper frustration
release. There is no destructive undertone
because your dog isn't tearing something apart in
this process.
368
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
910
Kong Toys can entertain your dog's
●mind for a number of reasons. The
toy bounces in an odd fashion and keeps the dog
thinking about his catch. This toy can also be
stuffed with food as a puzzle, or with another type
of bone toy. The toy then becomes a two-way toy
and the dog must figure out how to remove the
bone, or how to play with the toy in a new way.
911
Food cubes can be mentally stimu-
●lating for your dog because he must
learn how to push the cube to shake the kibble
loose. Just be careful that you aren't overfeeding
your dog by using this toy.
912
Don't allow your dog to become
·addicted to food as a toy. This can
create an unhealthy obsession with food. Use this
only as a supplement to other mental activities.
UNHEALTHY OR NON-THERAPEUTIC
TOYS
Physically Unhealthy Toys
913
Some retrieving toys can be excel-
lent for retrieval, yet physically
unhealthy for chewing.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
369
914
Watch for things that can easily be
●destroyed and ingested. Most toys
that are easily or quickly destroyed are made of
material that is indigestible to your dog.
915
Squeaky toys, rope toys, rawhides,
● and other toys can cause problems
in the digestive tracts of your dogs if swallowed.
Rawhides can splinter and lodge in your dog's
throat, stomach, or intestines. Some edible toys, if
ingested too quickly by an over-zealous chewer,
can also cause blockages if swallowed in large
pieces. Natural bones can cause damage to the
enamel on your dog's teeth.
916.
Although dog-toy manufacturers do
·have disclaimers recommending
supervision, it only takes a few seconds of looking
the wrong way for something to happen. Getting
sidetracked by a phone call, doorbell, or late-night
snack can change supervision in a heartbeat.
Remain alert!
917
Be smart when selecting toys for
● your dogs. Don't just buy something
that looks cute. Remermber that you're supplying
an anirmal with a toy that is to be played with by
mouth. If in doubt about the toy's safety, don't buy
it!
370
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Mentally Unhealthy Toys
918.
Baby-sitter toys. These are the toys
●that appear to be entertaining your
dog or keeping her busy, but may be harmful in
some way for her, either mentally or physically.
They are baby-sitters because they remove your
responsibility of supervising and interacting with
your dog. While it is okay to have a mindless game
for your dog at leisure times, remember that it
doesn't replace their need for your interaction,
your direction, and your one-on-one quality time
with them.
919
Balls that make sounds like children
●or animals may cause problems
with your dog, especially if he is in a formative
learning stage or has a high prey drive. If a dog
learns to chase and mouth toys that make
sounds, it may accidentally teach him how to
chase down similar sounds.
920
Avoid “edible" chew toys. Though
●they are approved as safe for your
dog, they can tend to promote chewing as a form
of destruction and
 ingestion. The concept of
chewing for relaxation and release is lost in this
case. These toys can also change your house-
breaking schedule and your dog's stool if too
much of this product is consumed.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
371
921
Natural chew toys like pig ears, cow
●hooves, rawhide, and natural bones
can all stimulate the wrong instincts in your dogs.
Dogs can easily become possessive of these items
since they stirmulate a survival instinct that tells a
dog to protect the "kill" or food source.
372
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
STAGE-APprOPrIATe TOyS
922
Nylabone Durables. This type of toy
·is appropriate after your dog's adult
teeth have begun to come in. These will help keep
adult teeth clean and provide jaw resistance to
relieve stress.
923
Nylabone Flexibles. These toys are
+used for puppies when puppy teeth
are still in and while cutting adult teeth through
the gums. The soft nature of these toys eases
teething discomfort and massages gums.
924
Dogs at different stages of life enjoy
●different toys. A plush squeaky toy
that would have been destroyed in thirty seconds
by a pre-adolescent or adult dog may provide
hours and hours of stimulation and joy for a dog
in his geriatric years.
Noise Makers and Squeaky Toys
925
Squeaky toys stimulate excitement
+in dogs. If you're trying to excite
your dog to play in a very energetic way, these toys
will be appropriate. However, if you're trying to
calm your dog down or teach more relaxed behav-
iors, refrain from the use of noisy toys.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
373
926
You may want to limit noisy toys to
●outdoor activities. This is the same
voice" concept for children. Teach your dog to play
quietly indoors and kick up his heels (within rea-
son!) outdoors.
GAmeS
The Find It Game
927
This is a simple yet fun "thinking'
● activity. It requires concentration on
the dog's part as he learns to hunt and search for
his toy. Depending upon breed, it may also employ
some natural hunting instincts. This game tests
the owner's skills as a teacher as well, since teach-
ing a "thinking game" means the owner has to
evaluate the dog's progress and learning curve.
928
You may want to try this game on a
·rainy day when outside weather
limits physical activity. Along with obedience
training, your "brain games" can entertain while
they stirmulate when outdoor time is limited.
374
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
929
Any ball or object of which the dog is
+ most fond can be used. Try to pick a
toy that isn't too small to find. The smaller the toy.
the harder it is to find, which may lead to frustra-
tion with the game. Pick a toy that will allow the
dog to "win" often in the beginning. This will help
him enjoy the game right from the start.
930
Begin by hiding the object in an easy
●location. Give the command to FIND
IT and guide the dog to the object. Once the dog
finds the object, give him tremendous praise for a
job well done! Perform many times, always prais-
ing for the find.
931
As your dog gets better at finding it,
●make the object harder to find and
involve objects or areas (like a box or closet) that
might make the find more difficult. Keep the
game fun.
932
Be
e selective about your hiding
+places. Do not hide toys in danger-
ous places like the oven or toilet. Likewise, do not
hide the object on counters and tables which
could accidentally encourage "counter surfing" or
damage to furniture.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
375
933
Don't use food as a hiding object.
● This might accidentally teach your
dog to go hunting through your kitchen for good-
ies that belong to you!
Soft-Mouth Retrieval (TAKE YOUR TOY)
934
Start with a toy your dog really likes.
● This special toy should be kept sep-
arate from the normal daily playing toys. Start
with your dog on-leash (in your left hand) and
hold the cool toy in your right hand. Enthusiasti-
cally command your dog to TAKE YOUR TOY. When
your dog takes the item, praise heartily. Have your
dog give it to you and repeat.
935
Use the leash to restrict your dog s0
●he doesn't run all over the house
after he gets his toy. Dogs learn by repetition, and
if there are two or three minutes between repeti-
tions, your dog will not learn quickly. Repeat this
teaching exercise for only a few repetitions. If
your dog's interest begins to decline, stop the
 A 's g e r id pu aa
later.
936
Do not correct with No for not per-
● forming the action.This idea is more
game than command. If your dog has some prob-
lem taking the item, smear a small amount of
peanut butter on the object as incentive to taking
it.
376
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
937
The next step involves placing the
+item on the ground (or floor). Com-
mand your dog to TAKE YOUR TOY. Praise for tak-
ing the item.
938
After your dog shows great aptitude
●and exuberance taking the toy.
increase the distance your dog must travel to
retrieve the toy. Keep increasing the distance until
your dog needs to travel to another room to
retrieve the toy. How far do you think you can go
with this—upstairs, down the hall, or into the
bedroom?
939
Take it to the next level. If the target
+toy has a name like bone, ball, Kong.
or squeaky, add the name in place of the com-
mand TOY. Take some time to teach your dog to
distinguish between toys by name. Test him by
placing several objects at a distance (a few feet
apart) and send your dog to retrieve a stated
object.
940
Once your dog becomes a super
·genius with the TAKE YOUR TOY
command, change the object to a personal item
like keys, cell phone, or sock. Reward with vocal
praise. Treats may also be in order since the object
will no longer be its own reward.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
377
Frisbee
941
The ultimate in “cool dog" games!
● This is a game that is a combination
of physical exercise, skill, and timing for both
owner and dog. It is fun, athletic, and thinking-
oriented. It also builds teamwork skills between
dog and owner.
942
Start with a soft, flexible Soft-Bite
● Frisbee. When a disc is moving at a
high speed, it can be dangerous and sometimes
scary to catch. So you will want him to catch
something soft first.
943
You can graduate to a rigid Frisbee
● later. This can be a regular Frisbee or
a Nylabone Frisbee, which has a raised bone
shape on top for ease of picking up if the disc
lands on the ground before your dog catches it in
the air.
944.
A thirty-foot-long leash is helpful in
● teaching your dog to return with the
Frisbee. Keeping it on him ensures you can call
him back to you, even if he's a natural retriever.
378
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
945
Is it as easy as it looks on those TV
●commercials? No. But it can be fun
to teach. Begin a few steps in front of your dog and
toss it lightly toward him. As he catches it, praise
him heartily and do it again. Each time your dog is
successful, you may want to extend the distance
at which you throw it to him.
946
Next, teach your dog the Take It
· game described later in this section.
Hold the Frisbee in the air two or three feet in
front of him. Command her to TAKE IT. As your
dog gets up and takes the Frisbee, praise. As she
gets comfortable taking the Frisbee out of your
hand, move the Frisbee forward while still holding
it. As your dog is just about to take the Frisbee,
lightly throw it one or two feet. Your dog should
snatch it out of the air.
947
Begin with your dog at your side
●(maybe you can kneel down). Get
your dog excited by commanding TAKE IT, and
toss the Frisbee a few feet. With success, increase
the toss to about ten feet. Begin to throw it away
from him and encourage him to get it with a TAKE
IT command. He may not always get it while it's in
the air at first, but continue to throw short dis-
tances until your dog gets the hang of running to
catch it in the air.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
379
948
When he catches it, call him back to
● your side, using your long leash to
guide him back to you. Be careful not to correct
him with the leash while he's learning to go out
for the Frisbee.
949
If your dog won't release the Frisbee
·when he returns to you, do a bait-
and-switch technique with food to get him to
release it. Offer a treat using the DROP IT com-
mand. When he releases the Frisbee, reward him
with the treat
950
When you graduate to a more rigid
· Frisbee, reintroduce it the same way
as you did the original Frisbee. Take your time to
go all the way back to the beginning where you
lightly toss the disc toward your dog in slow, short
tosses. That way your dog will not be surprised
when he catches a harder object.
951
Try not to throw the Frisbee very
●high in the air. While it is extremely
amusing to see a dog "fly" through the air to grab
it, too much height may cause him to land too
hard on his limbs. Prolonged activity like this may
cause some joint problems.
380
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
952
Don't do high-impact jumps with
·dogs under one year of age. Their
bones are still growing and developing. Be cau-
tious also with aging dogs since their bones and
joints will show some wear as well at this stage.
Fetch
953
Fetch is similar to Frisbee and defi-
●nitely caters to retrieving breeds. It
can properly channel genetics of sporting breeds
since they love to go and get it as well as bring it
back! This game can help to release a great
amount of pent-up energy, while still utilizing the
brain and thinking skills.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
381
954
Teaching your dog to release his
● chase drive on inanimate objects is a
very positive way to channel energy. Your dog will
be better able to avoid the temptation of chasing
children and small animals if he can channel this
urge somewhere else.
955
Different dogs like to retrieve differ-
· ent objects. Tennis balls can be fun
and safe, as long as the dog's mouth isn't big
enough to potentially swallow it. Most dog-toy
manufacturers market virtually indestructible
rubber balls whose diameters are specifically
designed to avoid accidental swallowing. There
are also many toys with ropes attached to them
for tossing on land and for water retrieval as well.
956
Fetch is a rather instinctive game for
●most dogs. Even a non-sporting
breed likes to chase things. This game usually
requires little teaching—for the chase part, any-
way! Begin by using his favorite ball or toss toy.
and throw the toy a short distance, encouraging
your dog to run after it.
382
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
957
To teach your dog to bring it back,
·simply keep him on a long leash
while playing. If he doesn't return with the toy,
gently tug on the leash and guide him back to you
for the exchange of a snack for the ball. This pat-
tern will have him coming back to you with the
ball in record time.
958
After a few short-distance tosses of
+ around five or six feet, add some dis-
tance. Continue doing this until your dog is leav-
ing your side and returning reliably with his toy.
959
If a dog isn't particularly motivated
●to chase a ball or toy, you can
develop this drive by encouraging her with a great
deal of hype and enthusiasm. For example, you
may need to run with her toward the toy, using
motivation and exciting vocals to stimulate the
game.
960
To teach this in the water, use the
·same on-leash technique of short-
distance tosses. It is extremely important to use
your long leash in the water so you can success-
fully call your dog back with his leash
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
383
961
You may need to use your long leash
●for quite a few months until a reli-
able return
pattern is established. Reliable
retrieval at distances requires the mastery of dis-
tance commands, distraction training, and off-
leash skills for maximum safety.
962
Avoid the use of sticks for retrieval
●games. The risks range from splin-
tering in your dog's mouth to deep cuts on her
legs, and, worst of all, her becoming impaled on
the stick while trying to catch it.
ACTIVITIES
Swimming
963
Swimming is a great way for dogs to
● get their exercise. It is a low-impact
form of exercise that doesn't tax any joints, but
builds muscles. Dogs that are prone to gaining
weight can swim to remain in shape and cut
pounds from their frames. Good health can be
maintained while the dog is having fun.
384
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
964
Swimming is also a great way to
 + safely exercise your dog in the sum-
mer heat. She can exercise and keep her body
temperature down at the same time
965
Equipment for swimming can be
● minimal, yet there are certain things
to have with you to provide a safe swimming
experience for you and your pet. A long leash
helps your dog learn to return to your side and
gives you some control over where she's swim-
ming. Wear water shoes of some sort. You should
be prepared to go in the water to teach your dog to
swim, and you should always be prepared to jump
in—even with a seasoned swimmer, just in case
something happens. Having a toy to retrieve is
helpful once the dog has learned to swim.
966
Not all dogs (even sporting breeds)
●know how to swim right away, so do
not throw your dog into the water in the hopes of
his learning quickly. This will only scare him and
perhaps cause panic and an accident. Do not
make this new learning experience a negative
one.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
385
967
You will want to get in the water
●with your puppy. Keep a leash on
him and guide him around the water to help him
feel relaxed and safe. You may even want to help
him "float" by holding him under his belly. This
will help him feel secure enough to stop flailing
his legs long enough to realize he can float.
968
Be cautious around his legs and feet.
·Once their arms, legs, and paws
begin thrashing through the water, they can acci-
dentally cause serious damage to your skin.
969
Swim with a "lifeline." Some folks
●like to have their dog swim on a
thirty-foot leash. This way, you can direct your
dog back to you at any time in his swim if you feel
he's getting too far away. Once your off-leash
training is in place, you will no longer need your
leash.
970
Do not take your dog swimming
● when the water is extremely cold in
late autumn, winter, and early spring. Even
though your dog may think he enjoys water at all
times, be smart and prevent him from making a
mistake that could cost him his health. Wait until
the water warms in the spring and cut out swim-
ming at a reasonable time in the autumn.
386
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
BeING A dOGGIE LIfeGuARD
Lifeguard Tip #1: Check the area for remnants
of fishing line and hooks. These can be very dan-
gerous if your dog becomes tangled up in them.
Severe cuts can happen from the line, and hooks
can impale tender skin and footpads.
Lifeguard Tip #2: Be certain that the water
isn't too deep. Deep water for a beginner swim-
mer is challenging and frightening. Make your
new swimmer's experience positive and easy.
Lifeguard Tip #3: If your dog likes to jump
from the slope at the edge of the creek into the
water, be certain that the water is deep enough
for your dog to land without injury to her legs or
bell y. If the water is too shallow, you may risk your
dog breaking a limb when she lands.
Lifeguard Tip #4: Do not allow your dog to
swim in swiftly running water. This can be
extremely difficult for your dog to navigate.
Swimming into a small current will help him exer-
cise, yet do not underestimate the power of a
strong current to overpower your dog. Take pre.
cautions.
Lifeguard Tip #5: Be careful that your long
leash doesn't get caught on rocks in the creek
bed. It could prove dangerous for your dog while
swimming, especially if there's even the tiniest
current.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
387
Hiking
971
Hiking is a great activity to enjoy
● with your dog. It combines the peace
of walking through the quiet woods with exercise.
972
Wildlife sounds and scents provide
● wonderful distraction-training oppor-
tunities for you and your dog. Even if your dog
knows to behave in their regular setting, remem-
ber that you may have to instruct and reinforce
some old concepts in this new setting. With all
these new distractions at your fingertips, you
should come away from your fun experience with
some higher-level skills as well!
973
A short leash for getting your dog
● out of and back into the parking lot
may also be needed to work through some dis-
traction situations as they occur during the walk.
A long, cotton leash (not a retractable leash),
either thirty or fifty feet long, may be handy also
so your dog may have some freedom during the
hike.
974.
I1
f you select a thirty-foot leash,
● place a brightly colored mark (tape
or something that will not wash off) at the mid-
point of the leash. For the fifty-foot leash, place
the mark twenty feet before the loop end of the
leash.
388
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
975
It is a good idea to keep your cell
·phone with you on a hike. Many
things can happen when you're away from the
suburbs. Becoming lost, you or your dog becoming
injured, and a questionable person following or
approaching you are all reasons you may want the
security of your phone and 911 on hand.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
389
976
Always take a water bottle with you
· on hikes. There are many water bot-
tle/dog cup devices, as well as combination
devices that allow you and your dog to drink from
the same container without ever sharing germs.
You can also buy collapsible water bowls that clip
to your belt or belt loops and prove very conven-
ient when traveling.
977
If you need to navigate some ques-
●tionable terrain, you may want to
have a pair of doggie booties with you. Doggie
booties can be purchased from some pet supply
stores and online. The booties are usually made
for search and rescue dogs that need to navigate
dangerous terrain. They are also made for sensi-
tive feet in the snow and ice. If you like to hike in
a variety of places, you may want to purchase
these as part of your equipment for your dog
978
Pick a terrain that both you and your
·dog can navigate easily and safely.
Not all hiking trails are conducive to a fun walk
for your dog. Humans wear heavy-duty hiking
boots on some trails, but our dogs do not. Be fair
to your dog and choose something upon which
his feet, legs, and joints will remain comfortable.
390
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
979
Periodically take the time to sit
●down and rest. Your dog may wel-
come the break if he is new to hiking.
980
It is a good idea to keep a leash on
● your dog for at least the first ten vis-
its to a new hiking area, even if there is no leash
requirement. Choose a thirty-foot-long leash so
that your dog can enjoy the "freedom" of a good
long run, yet the safety of your direction and con-
trol. Once your dog is truly reliable off-leash, you
can remove this, providing it doesn't break the
leash law.
981
When hiking in different places, be
+sure to respect the leash laws of the
area. Most country settings require a leash; some
specify a six-foot leash, while others have more
flexible requirements.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
391
982
Practice WAIT (or STAY) on your
●hike. When you are at a familiar hik-
ing spot and away from the parking lot, place the
thirty-foot (or fifty-foot) hiking leash on your dog.
Allow your dog to wander ahead of you, dragging
the leash on the ground behind him. When you
notice the colored mark on the leash pass you by.
give the command WAIT (or STAY). If your dog
does not stop moving forward, command NO and
re-command WAIT (or STAY) and step on the
leash (if your dog is running, you will need to be
quick).
983
Walk up the leash, stepping on it
● with each step so your dog cannot
advance forward. Praise with good WAIT (or
STAY). When you reach your dog, command
BREAK and step off the leash. Allow your dog to
continue down the path and repeat the exercise
every time the colored mark on the leash passes
you.
984
Teach this walking style with an
● older (eighteen months to two years)
dog. Younger dogs may respond to this exercise if
they have burned out their excess energy first. If
your dog runs around in circles, this exercise will
be difficult. Begin slowly and add freedom as your
dog improves.
392
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
985
Once your dog understands the
●WAIT (or STAY) command, a remote
device may be used in conjunction with the leash.
Command WAIT (or STAY). If your dog does not
stop walking forward, remotely correct with NO
and re-command WAIT (or STAY) while you step
on the leash to prevent any additional forward
movement.
986
As you take more walks with your
· dog using this exercise, he will learn
a boundary of how far you will allow him to get
away from you. When you begin to see your dog
stop (on his own) and look toward you, praise
heartily and remind hirm to WAIT (or STAY).
Release him with BREAK and praise again.
987
Never let your dog get out of sight on
●a hike. If you see a corner, hillcrest,
or curve, have your dog wait until you catch up.
Other hikers with or without dogs may come
upon you suddenly. Hikers generally do not like to
be surprised by a dog without the owner close by.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
393
988
Be aware of wildlife, snakes, poison-
● ous plants, etc., while you're walking.
Staying alert and aware will prevent many potential
 accidents. Most animals will run from you and your
dog when they hear you approaching. but stum-
bling upon them suddenly may frighten or provoke
them to take action to protect themselves.
989
Be alert to hunting season schedules
● and designated hunting areas. Many
hiking parks are adjacent to hunting areas, and
this may put you and your dog in jeopardy if
you're walking too close to those areas.
990
Gunshot noises may spook your dog.
● Keeping a distance from hunting
areas and having your dog on-leash will maxi-
mize your safety in these situations. Desensitize
your dog to loud noises before walking near these
areas. This can reduce the chances of your dog
panicking and darting away.
991
If you do venture near hunting areas
●regularly, it is important to wear
blaze orange on yourself as well as blaze orange
on your dog. You can purchase blaze orange coat
drapes for your dog in many pet stores, in hunting
stores, and online.
394
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Genetic Outlet Activities
992
Once all of your obedience has been
·created and self-control filters have
been developed, you can begin adding healthy
activities that are outlets for instinctual drives. Be
certain that genetic outlet activities do not break
down everyday manners or compromise your
dog's mental well-being.
993
Don't do these activities prior to
·obedience training and distraction
training. Natural instincts are so hardwired that
distraction training is needed first so the dog
learns to make choices rather than act purely on
instinct. Once good choices are established, then
we can go back and give instincts their outlets.
994.
Cart pulling is one activity for draft-
 ●ing and working dogs such as New-
foundlands, Bernese Mountain Dogs, Great
Pyrenees, and others. In this activity, dogs are fit-
ted with harnesses and are hooked to carts. The
pull is a competition utilizing natural working and
drafting instincts of these giant breeds.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
395
995
Weight pulls are great outlets for
· breeds prone to being quite tough.
American Bulldogs, American Staffordshire Terri-
ers, Malamutes, etc., all can benefit from the
release of aggression during this sport. Dogs are
fitted with harnesses and initially taught to pull
an empty cart. Weight is added to the cart and is
gradually increased as the dog learns to pull more
weight. When watching one of these events, one
can see exactly how much these dogs appear to be
enjoying this "tough guy" outlet!
996.
Herding clubs exist for dogs and
 their owners to get experience chan-
neling herding drive. This usually takes place on a
farm where the club owner has either sheep or
geese or both on the property. Dogs and handlers
alike are taught the proper way to channel a dog's
natural herding energy on livestock. This is also a
fantastic use of the dog's intelligence and working
ability. Herding exercise is especially good for
breeds like German Shepherds, Australian Shep-
herds, Border Collies, Corgis, and many more.
396
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
997
Tracking/search and rescue clubs are
+not only wonderful ways to use the
intelligence and hunting drives of certain breeds,
but also a way to employ dogs to do important
real-life jobs. Labs, Shepherds, Rottweilers, and
Bloodhounds are all breeds that have great abili-
ties in hunting and scent detection. Their abilities,
instincts, and training education through this
activity have saved many lives.
998
Lure coursing is an activity that uti-
lizes
 a sight hound's incredible
visual skills and speed. No live rabbits are used,
but a rabbit's zigzagging path is simulated using
pulleys and a set of white bags. The coursing is
judged on the dog's enthusiasm, speed, agility,
endurance, and the ability to follow the lure.
999
Hunting and retrieval: some people
● like to use their sporting breeds to
actually hunt. A sporting breed loves nothing
more than to utilize her natural instincts for her
owner. Even if you don't hunt, you can utilize
these instincts by working retrieval games with
toys on land and water. Both allow your dog's
drive to be channeled appropriately and with
enthusiasm.
Toys, Games, and Leisure Activities
397
1000
Schutzhund trials are based on
· obedience, tracking, and protec-
tion training. Since obedience is one of the areas
judged, it must be extremely precise. In this way,
the protection training is more reliable and safe,
since the owner has complete control over the
dog and his responses. Along with that, the dog
has learned to control his behaviors rather than
allow his pure guard instincts to rise unchecked
398
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
Appendix:
Advanced
Activities and
Tricks
dvanced activities give your dog more ways to
use his smarts and his natural instincts. As a
team, you will also have more to do together.
THERAPY DOGS
Therapy dog certification is a very high honor for
a dog and handler to achieve. It requires tight
direction from the owner, great obedience skills
from the dog, and wonderful teamwork between
the two. Good therapy dogs are sociable, calm,
happy, tolerant, patient, and friendly. A dog that
has been well socialized to many different types,
shapes, colors, sizes, and ages of people is desir-
able as well.
Your dog must pass two tests to qualify for cer-
tification. Though not obedience tests per se,
these tests do require your dog to be able to SIT,
DOWN, STAY, COME, and have good self-control
around dogs, people, and the temptations of food
and play. Dogs must be at least one year of age to
be tested. However, we recommend a dog two
years old or older for this activity. Two years old
and older means that you've had more time train-
ing together and that your dog is further along in
maturity.
Therapy dogs can visit nursing homes, schools
hospitals, and special functions. During these vis-
its, your dog must be wearing his identification,
tags, and usually a special harness. The most
important rule of thumb when doing pet therapy
visits with your dog is that she must enjoy her vis-
its and her "job" as much as the people whom she
is visiting. Also be certain that the duration of
400
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
each visit does not exceed what your dog can han-
dle or enjoy. The nature of therapy dog work can
be stressful, and smaller doses are preferable to
keep your dog balanced, happy, and eager for the
next visit.
AGILITY
Agility training is a fun and athletic sport for both
en jods e Aojua noA '1auialoi gop inoA pue nof
involves exercise, teamwork, and mental tests for
your dog. Through your direction, your dog can
navigate jumps, tunnels, platforms, a-frames, and
catwalks.
Agility can be a terrific way to boost your dog's
confidence level. High-excitement fun along with
your praise for all of these accomplished tasks
will make her feel like she can conquer the world.
It is extremely helpful for shy dogs if worked on
slowly, patiently, and with successes rather than
mishaps.
Some agility clubs practice strictly to have fun,
while others do the sport for competition. Either
is fine as long as you pick the path your pet will
enjoy most. Do not put the pressure of competi-
tion on a dog that simply needs a fun release in
her life.
TRICKS
Tricks are simple patterns that you may teach
your dog for fun. They have no therapeutic leader-
ship value. You may want to wait until your dog is
late in his adolescent stage before beginning trick
Appendix: Advanced Activities and Tricks
401
training. Teaching some of these tricks involves
using the basic obedience commands. Continue to
practice these commands and enforce their ther-
apeutic meanings. Mentally, the obedience com-
mands are more important than the tricks. Make
sure they remain meaningful.
Play Dead
The favorite trick of the old west: when you
"shoot" your dog with
1 your finger (command
BANG), your dog will lay down and roll onto one
side.
1. Start with the DOWN command. Command
your dog into a DoWN. Kneel by your dog's side
and command SIDE as you lightly place your dog
on his side (either side will do, just be consistent)
Repeat the DOWN and SIDE until your dog will lie
on his side at the command SIDE.
2. Next, link a theatrical beginning with the
action. Face your dog and make a "gun" with your
hand. Point your finger at your dog and say BANG.
Command DOWN and then SIDE. Praise. With
proper repetition, your dog will begin to link the
BANG with the DOWN and SIDE. Gradually wean
off the commands DOWN and SIDE until your dog
will quickly lie down and turn on his side when
you "shoot" him with the cue word BANG.
Crawl (Commando Dog)
If you really want drama, teach your dog to
CRAWL. The CRAWL command will be exactly
that: when you tap the ground and command
402
1000BEST DOGTRAININGSECRETS
CRAWL, your dog will crawl on his belly to the
point you are tapping.
1. While your dog is in a DoWN command,
hold a treat just beyond his reach. Tap the ground
and command CRAWL and motivate ("atta boy")
with your voice. You may need to place your free
hand on his shoulders to prevent him from get-
ting up all the way.
2. Move the treat very close to your dog's nose
and, as he reaches for it, command CRAWL and
move the treat further away. When he gets the
idea of moving forward to get the treat, praise
with "good CRAWL." Initially give him the treat
quickly so he links the crawling motion with the
praise. As your dog becomes more comfortable
with the motion, extend the distance your dog
crawls for the treat.
3. Providing light pressure towards the lower
part of the back may motivate your dog to keep
his legs extended behind him. Tapping your fin-
gers in front of your dog may teach him to "reach"
with his front paws.
4. The more theatrical you are when teaching
the CRAWL command, the luckier you may be that
your dog picks up on the theatrics. If both your
dog's personality and your theatrical motivation
is a match, you may find your dog eager to drag
himself across the floor as if he were moments
away from complete collapse.
Appendix: Advanced Activities and Tricks 
403
Roll Over
Roll over requires some patience. Some dogs prefer
to roll in one direction. Some dogs are completely
uncomfortable with rolling over on their back. If you
find that your dog seems uncomfortable with this
trick, you may want to avoid teaching it.
1. Begin by saying ROLL OVER and add a hand
signal like a circular motion with your hand. Then
immediately add the DOWN, then SIDE com-
mands (that he knows from PLAY DEAD). When
your dog is on is side, lift his legs gently over his
body, saying OVER.
2. You may also want to use a piece of food to
help motivate the roll. Begin with the food directly
at his nose and use a circular motion with the
food that draws an arc that the legs should follow
over his body. Say OVER as you do this. Once he's
"over," add the final"good ROLL OVER!"
3. Next, link ROLL OVER with DOWN, SIDE, and
OVER and "good ROLL OVER!" Your dog will soon
be able to link all of the movements with the sim-
ple cue ROLL OVER. So you dog does not roll over
every time you give the DOwN command, make
sure you continue practicing the DoWN formally
without the OVER as part of your obedience com-
mand workout.
Shake
1. Start with your dog in a SIT command. Kneel in
front of your dog. Hold your hand out, palm facing
up, and command SHAKE. Place one of your dog's
pue aavHs poo, asieid pue wed nok ul smed
give a treat. How easy is that!
404
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
2. Once your dog understands the pattern, hold
your hand out and command SHAKE. When your
dog's paw hits your hand, move your hand up and
down and praise "good SHAKE."
3. When your dog has a perfect SHAKE trick
you may introduce a cue phrase like "Jack, intro-
duce yourself" as a cue to shake the hand of a
stranger. To introduce the cue phrase, repeat the
cue phrase followed by the command. With
approximately thirty repetitions, you can slowly
remove the old command and simply use the new
cue phrase.
Appendix: Advanced Activities and Tricks
405
High Five
1. Once you have mastered the SHAKE trick, you
can extend the behavior to the HIGH FIVE. Start
with your dog in a SIT in front of you. Kneel down
and extend your right hand and command
SHAKE. While your dog's paw is in your hand,
slowly turn your palm around so that it faces your
dog's face and command HIGH FIVE. While you
are turning your palm, continue praising so he
keeps his paw on your hand. Repeat "good HIGH
FIVE." Give a treat for hitting your hand.
2.To keep the pattern going, hold your hand up
with your palm facing your dog. Command HIGH
FIVE and praise if your dog hits your hand with
his paw. If he seems confused, tap your right palm
with your left hand and vocally motivate. Keep
your right hand very low so it looks like SHAKE.
Praise and treat immediately after your dog taps
your hand.
3. As your dog gets better at High Five, raise
your hand higher, get up off your knees (you may
need to lower your hand when you begin stand-
ing), and finally command a nice High Five. If you
really want to wow 'em, have your dog jump up
and hit your hand for an airborne High Five.
Beg
Once your dog can High Five, it will be easy to
teach your dog to beg. The beg position will be
with your dog sitting and both front paws up.
1. With your dog in a SrT, kneel in front of him
and command SHAKE. When your dog places his
paw in your hand, praise. While your dog is holding
406
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
one paw on your palm, gently pick up his other
paw and place it in your palm so both paws are on
your palm and he is still sitting. Give the BEG com-
mand and praise. Repeat this until your dog
places both paws on your palm on the command
BEG.
2. Wean off the help. Go back to the start posi-
tion and hold your hand up and command BEG.As
both paws hit your palm, praise. With your free
hand, hold a treat above your dog's head. At this
point, your dog will need to learn to balance him-
self, so patience is key. While you keep the treat
Amois .oia poos, asteid 'peay sbop 1no aaoqe
lower your palm so your dog is sitting with hands
up without your assistance. Keep repeating the
praise to let him know is winning. When he seems
stable, give him the treat with praise.
3. Put it all together. Stand in front of your dog.
hold a treat up with your hand (or dangle it for the
full effect), and command BEG. When he sits with
his paws up, praise and make him BEG! When you
are finished impressing friends and relatives, g0
ahead and give him the treat.
Walk (On Hind Legs)
Nothing gets the crowd more pumped up than
watching a dog walk on his hind legs. The unnat-
ural is always funny! However, if your dog is large,
overweight, or has bad hips or knees, this trick
may not be for you (or him!).
1. The quick start for the WALK trick is starting
while teaching the BEG command. With your dog in
a SIT command, give your dog the BEG command,
Appendix: Advanced Activities and Tricks 
407
and while your dog has both of his paws in your
hands, hold a treat above his head. Slowly stand
up while repeating the command WALK. Give the
treat when your dog is able to stand on his hind
legs while you support his front paws with your
hand.
2. Once your dog learns to stand on his hind
legs with the WALK command, you are ready to
advance the trick. While your dog is on his hind
legs, begin moving forward very slowly. Continue
to support your dog with your hand. Repeat the
command WALK as your dog begins to move for-
ward following the treat bait. Again, start reward-
ing with the treat for just a few steps, then
advance to walking across the room. Do not
remove your hand as support yet.
3. Finally, hold the treat high in the air and
command WALK. When your dog stands up.
praise and “bounce" the treat along in the air
while commanding WALK. Praise your dog as he
walks across the floor without your help. Be really
enthusiastic with your praise because this is a
hard trick. Just as a note, most dogs do not actu-
ally walk heel to toe but hop with both feet at the
same time.
408
1000BESTDOG TRAININGSECRETS
Index
activities, 384, 385
hiking, 388-398
swimming. 384-387
adolescent dogs, 58-78
boundaries, 61
leadership, 63, 64, 78
mental needs, 64-66
obedience training, 59, 70-76
physical needs, 66-68
rest needs, 70
routines, 77,78
social needs, 68, 69
adult dogs, 80-91
mental needs, 84-86
physical needs, 86, 87
rest needs, 89,90
social needs, 87-89
agility training. 401
behavior problems, 322-360
aggression/territorial, 354-360
barking, 341-344
behavior modification, 329-332, 337
causes, 324-328
chewing/digging, 348-350
Coprophagia (stool eating). 347, 348
drug therapy, 332-334
Index
411
hyperactivity, 339, 340
running away, 338, 339
separation anxiety, 351-354
socialization, 334-336
stealing, 345, 346
submissive urination, 340, 341
BREAK, 187.188
children, 288, 289
collars, 158, 159
COME. 203-206
daycare, 314-316
DOWN, 24, 189-195
dinnertime, 240-242
phone, 242
DROP IT, 257,258, 259
E
essential needs, 302-319
mental needs, 303-305
physical needs, 305-307
rest needs, 309-312
412
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
social needs, 307-309
etiquette, 262-280
barking, 272
biting, 271
car, 269, 270
dinnertime, 262
groomer, 275
jumping, 263-266
meeting dogs, 276-280
pulling, 266, 267
vet visits, 273-275
fences, 282-286
yard manners, 286, 287
games, 374-384
fetch, 381-384
find it game, 374-376
Frisbee, 378-381
TAKE YOUR TOY, 376, 377
geriatric dogs, 94-109
Canine Cognitive Dysfunction, 107, 108
children, 97,104
hearing impaired, 106
house soiling, 108, 109
leadership, 98
Index
413
limitations, 96,97
medical issues, 95
mental needs, 98, 99
physical needs, 99, 100
rest needs, 103, 104
social needs, 100-102
toys, 102,103
vision impaired, 106
HEEL, 24, 25, 174-182, 268
stairs, 243
walks, 244, 245
leadership, 114-128
activities, 116, 117
body language, 119-123
consistency, 117-119,125,126
eye contact, 123
instinctual behaviors, 127, 128
time, 116
vocal tones, 124, 125
LEAVE IT, 256, 257
414
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
M
multiple pets, 295-300
N
NO, 171-173
obedience training. 156-232, 236-39
classes, 157
commands, 166-170
distraction training. 207-214
environmental, 213,214
moving, 210-213
stationary, 210
diversity, 219
off-leash training, 220-226
pitfalls, 161
position holding, 197-202
positive reinforcement, 162-164
remote training, 226-232
training tools, 158, 160
OFF, 254, 255
Index
415
P
PLACE, 206, 207
puppies, 6-55
attention span, 11
children, 26,27
crate training, 8,16, 29, 31, 33-37
feeding, 42,46-49
food aggression, 48, 49
housebreaking, 11, 31, 36, 38-41, 43-48
cue word, 39,40
instincts, 10
leadership, 13, 14, 27, 28
mental needs, 15, 16
nipping/mouthing, 51-55
obedience training, 9
physical needs, 16, 17
puppy-proofing, 49-51
rest needs, 19, 20
social needs, 17-19
teaching name, 21, 22
tethering, 30
toys, 29,55
R
rituals, 294, 295
416
1000 BEST DOG TRAINING SECRETS
sharing, 152-154
SIT, 23,24, 183-187
daily activities, 250, 251
doorbell, 247-250
doorways, 246
socialization, 130-154
cars, 147,148
crate, 136,137
environment, 133-135
movement, 145-147
noise, 137,138
thunderstorms, 148-151
touch, 139-144
STAND, 255,256
STAY, 196, 197
door, 252,253
Ten-Week Training Recipe, 215-218
tethering, 292, 293
therapy dogs, 400, 401
toys, 364-374
mentally healthy, 368, 369
mentally unhealthy, 371, 372
physically healthy, 368
physically unhealthy, 369, 370
squeaky, 373, 374
tricks, 401,402
Index
417
beg. 406, 407
crawl, 402,403
high five, 406
play dead, 402
roll over, 404
shake, 404, 405
walk, 407, 408
418
1000BESTDOGTRAININGSECRETS
d
About the
Authors
Robyn Achey and Bill Gorton are professional dog
trainers and founders and co-owners of Tall Tails
Training and K-9 Education. With over ten years
experience in dog training, they are experts in
canine behavior and behavioral problem solving.
puppy development and early raising, breed selec-
tion, canine personalities and temperaments,
obedience training, and animal relationship
building. Ms. Achey and Mr. Gorton live in Allen-
town, Pennsylvania.
Quick help
for your
favorite dog!
Straightforward tips to help
you raise a well-behaved dog.
* Learn how to handle
bringing home a new puppy
* Cure your dog of her frustrating bad habits-
chewing, digging, barking and biting
* Get a handle on
obedience training basics
* Housebreak your puppy and prevent unpleasant
accidents
* Use positive reinforcement
to support your
dog's training
* Get special tips for handling the aggressive dog
* Teach your old dog some
coolnewtricks
Housetraining your dog has never been so easy!
Pets
ISBN-13:978-1-4022-2016-6
ISBN-10:1-4022-2016-2
SOURCEBooKS, InC.
Nap+ry'II I.., II IInohs