WHAT'SYOURDIAGNOSIS
SMALLANIMAL
OPHTHALMOLOGY
WHAT'SYOURDIAGNOSIS?
HeidiFeatherstone
ElaineHolt
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Table of Contents
Cover
Table of Contents
Title page
Copyright page
Foreword
Preface
Acknowledgements
List of Abbreviations
CHAPTER 1 Abnormalities of Globe Size and Position
Introduction
CASE STUDY1
CASE STUDY 2
CASE STUDY 3
CASE STUDY 4
CHAPTER 2Eyelid Abnormalities
Introduction
CASE STUDY 1
CASE STUDY 2
CASE STUDY3
CHAPTER 3Abnormalities of theThird Eyelid
Introduction
CASE STUDY1
CASE STUDY 2
CASE STUDY 3
CHAPTER 4 Ocular Discharge
Introduction
CASE STUDY 1
CASE STUDY 2
CASE STUDY3
CHAPTER 5 The Painful Eye
Introduction
CASE STUDY 1
CASE STUDY 2
CASE STUDY 3
CHAPTER 6 The Red Eye
Introduction
CASE STUDY 1
CASE STUDY 2
CASE STUDY 3
CHAPTER 7 The Opaque Eye
Introduction
CASE STUDY 1
CASE STUDY 2
CASE STUDY 3
CHAPTER 8 Corneal Opacities
Introduction
CASE STUDY1
CASE STUDY 2
CASE STUDY 3
CASE STUDY 4
CHAPTER 9 Abnormalities of theIris
Introduction
CASE STUDY1
CASE STUDY 2
CASE STUDY 3
CASE STUDY 4
CHAPTER 10 The Abnormal Pupil
Introduction
CASE STUDY 1
CASE STUDY 2
CHAPTER 11 The Blind Eye
Introduction
CASE STUDY 1
CASE STUDY 2
CASE STUDY 3
CASE STUDY 4
CASE STUDY 5
CHAPTER 12 Ocular Trauma
Introduction
CASE STUDY1
CASE STUDY 2
CASE STUDY 3
APPENDIX 1 Practical Tips for An Ophthalmic Examination
Pupillary light reflex (PLR)
Examination with a focal light source
Purkinje images (or Purkinje-Sanson images)
Tapetal reflection (or tapetal reflex, fundic reflex)
Dazzlereflex
Tear film break-up time (TBUT)
Normal references ranges
APPENDIX 2 Further Reading
Glossary
Index
Small Animal Ophthalmology
What'sYourDiagnosis?
HeidiFeatherstoneBVetMedDVOphthal DipECVO MRCVS
Willows Veterinary Centre and Referral Service
Solihull, West Midlands, UK
ElaineHoltDVMDipACVODipECVOMRCVS
North Downs Specialist Referrals
Bletchingley,Surrey,UK
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication
This edition first published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd O 2011 by Heidi
Featherstone and Elaine Holt
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2o07. Blackwell's
publishing program has been merged with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical and Medical
business to form Wiley-Blackwell
Registered office: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West
Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial offices: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300.
USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about
how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our
website at www. wiley.com/wiley-black well.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in
accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act
1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as
trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service
marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed
to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It
is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional
services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Featherstone, Heidi
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index
ISBN 978-1-4051-5161-0 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Veterinary ophthalmology. 2. Pet medicine. I. Holt, Elaine. I. Title.
and Exercises. 3. Animals, Domestic-Case Reports. 4. Animals, Domestic-Problems and
Exercises. 5. Diagnosis, Differential-Case Reports. 6. Diagnosis, Differential-Problems and
Exercises. SF 891]
SF891.F43 2011
636.089'77-dc22
2010041328
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
This book is published in the following electronic formats: ePDF 9781444340013; ePub
9781444340020
Foreword
Welcome to one of the most useful and informative ophthalmology textbooks to have been
published in recent years. The authors are to be commended on creating a reference book
that is unlike any other currently on the market. They are medical educators that have
      o       
practical guide to some of the most common presentations of ophthalmic disease. This
highly utilitarian and functional approach is exemplified by their overall organizational
approach. Rather than assuming the traditional ‘front to back' approach taught in most
classroom settings, the purpose of this text can be first best reflected in its chapters' titles.
whereby they encompass the most frequently encountered small animal patient complaints
such as ocular discharge, the painful eye, the opaque eye, the abnormal pupil, blindness,
and ocular trauma (to name just a few). The strength of this textbook is evident that all
major topic areas have been presented using actual cases, which are both beautifully
photodocumented and  carefully  organized.  In addition to the numerous high quality
coloured photographs, are clear illustrations, the results of advanced imaging modalities
which in some cases utilize 3D reconstruction, and histopathology - all which dramatically
strengthen the calibre of each case presentation.
The book will appeal to veterinary clinicians at all stages of the educational process.
ranging  from  veterinary  students  and new  graduates  to  board-certified  ophthalmic
specialists. The employment of case-based examples prompts the reader to hone his/her
clinical acumen by working through relevant questions pertaining to differential diagnoses
and the selection of appropriate diagnostic tests. Diagnosis, treatment, prognosis, and
discussion are clearly provided. Importantly, the authors recognize that, depending on the
reader's level of experience, different diagnostic and therapeutic strategies may, at times, be
equally successful to those provided and thus ample opportunities for additional reading is
provided by way of several appendices, glossaries, and extensive bibliographic material. As
I have, I believe you will find this text one of the most enjoyable, informative, and user-
friendly’ practical approaches to small animal ophthalmology to have been published in
many years.
Elizabeth A. Giuliano, DVM, MS
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists
Preface
Veterinary ophthalmology is a visual discipline - not because the eye is the organ of vision
but because the evidence that is required to diagnose ocular disease in animals is often
investigation, but in veterinary ophthalmology a thorough ocular examination and a few
routine tests may well result in an accurate diagnosis. The challenge is to know what to look
for, and then to interpret the clinical signs correctly. Techniques such as electroretinography
and advanced diagnostic imaging have their place, but only in a small number of cases.
        s   
comprehensive information on all aspects of ophthalmology, from anatomy and physiology
to the treatment of clinical disease. The aim of this book is to offer the reader a practical
guide to diagnosis using a case-based, systematic approach. It is intended for anyone with
an  interest  in  veterinary ophthalmology,  including the general  practitioner and the
veterinary student.
We are veterinary ophthalmologists working in busy referral practices, with experience in
general practice and in undergraduate and postgraduate teaching. We have sought to
provide a pragmatic approach to the diagnosis and management of ocular disease in small
animals, and to share our thought processes, drawing on the broad spectrum of examples in
our daily case loads, from extreme forms of common conditions to more complex ocular
disease. Practical recommendations are supported by extensive photodocumentation, and
an appendix of tips for interpreting the information obtained from ophthalmic examination.
Heidi Featherstone & Elaine Holt
Acknowledgements
As with any book, the finished work is possible only with the help of many people. We are
indebted to numerous colleagues, not only for generously contributing case material, but
also for their time and advice. For their ophthalmology expertise, we thank Peter Renwick,
Christine Heinrich, John Mould, Mike Rhodes, Barbara Braus, Sue Manning, Elizabeth
Giuliano, Ellison Bentley, Marnie Ford and David Gould. Peter Renwick and Christine
Heinrich deserve special thanks for their generosity in sharing their library of photographs.
o   s ss sa o  or a  ao  
photographic skills, and for his readiness to share his photographs. With respect to imaging.
we are grateful to Paul Mahoney for his tireless help and advice on advanced imaging
techniques, and to Ruth Dennis and Rob White for sharing their case material. Emma
Scurrell has provided invaluable expertise, along with enthusiasm, on ophthalmic
pathology, supported by excellent gross and histological photographs. Simon Scurrell has
worked skilfully and painstakingly on the annotated diagrams. Photographing the eyes of
conscious dogs and cats is a challenge that requires excellent handling skills and patience:
special thanks to David Hindley, Stephanie Ascott, Tom Buckley, Nicola Millington, Lou
Hadley and the nursing team at Willows Veterinary Centre and Referral Service. Sue
Jenkins? non-veterinary editing expertise has been invaluable throughout.
Not least, we would like to thank the animals, their owners, and the referring veterinary
surgeons, without whom this book would not have been possible.
List of Abbreviations
ACTH
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (adrenocorticotropin)
ALT
alanine aminotransferase
AP
alkaline phosphatase
CCT
corneoconjunctival transposition
CDV
canine distemper virus
CNS
central nervous system
CT
computed tomography
CTT
corneal touch threshold
DIM
diffuse iris melanoma
EOM
extraocular polymyositis
ERG
electroretinography
FCV
feline calicivirus
FeLV
feline leukaemia virus FHV-1
feline herpesvirus-1
FIV
feline immunodeficiency virus
FNA
fine-needle aspiration H&E
haematoxylin and eosin
HF-UBM
high-frequency ultrasound biomicroscopy
ICLE
intracapsular lens extraction
IMR
immune-mediated retinitis
IOP
intraocular pressure IVIg
intravenous therapy with human immunoglobulin
KCS
keratoconjunctivitis sicca
LIU
lens-induced uveitis
MMM
masticatory muscle myositis
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging Nd : YAG
neodymium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet
NGE
nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis
NSAID
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
OD
oculus dextor, right eye
OS
oculus sinister, left eye
OU
oculi unitas, both eyes
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
PDT
 parotid duct transposition
PHPV
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
PLR
pupillary light reflex
PPM
persistent pupillary membrane
PRA
progressive retinal atrophy prcd
progressive rod-cone degeneration q
quisque, every, e.g. q4 hours means 'every four hours′ (six times daily)
RPE
retinal pigment epithelium
RPED
RPE dystrophy
SARDS
sudden acquired retinal degeneration syndrome
SFT
swinging flashlight test
STT
Schirmer tear test
TEL
third eyelid
TBUT
tear film break-up time
TPA
tissue plasminogen activator
UBM
ultrasound biomicroscopy
VOR
vestibulo-ocular reflex
CHAPTER 1
Abnormalities of GlobeSize and Position
Introduction
It can be a challenge to differentiate between a change in size and a change in position of
the eye. An abnormally small eye (microphthalmos) may be confused with a normal-sized
eye that is recessed in the orbit (enophthalmos); an enlarged eye (buphthalmos) may have a
similar appearance to a normal-sized eye that is anteriorly displaced (exophthalmos).
Assessing the size of the palpebral fissure, position of the third eyelid (TEL) and corneal
and concurrent clinical signs are helpful in differentiating between these conditions.
CASE STUDY 1
History
A 12-year-old female neutered domestic shorthaired cat is presented because of a sudden
  s s e s        n  si
comfortable. The cat has recently lost weight and is lethargic.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities in Figs. 1.1a, b, and c.
Fig. 1.1a
Fig. 1.1b
Fig. 1.1c
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 1.1a The left eye appears larger than the right eye; a wide palpebral fissure, increased
corneal diameter and clearly visible medial and lateral regions of the limbus are consistent
with buphthalmos. There is a generalised corneal opacity which is most dense axially, a
ventrally by a red/black irregular opacity which appears to be in front of the iris, and there
is a similar coloured opacity overlying the iris at the 9 o'clock position. The pupil is
moderately dilated.
Fig. 1.1b In the left eye, the Purkinje images are disrupted. There is generalised corneal
vascularisation and a stippled area of fluorescein stain uptake axially. The conjunctival
vessels overlying the sclera on the lateral aspect of the globe are congested. The iris is
difficult to see well but appears darker (medially) and possibly thickened. In the right eye,
there is hyphaema; the regions of the iris that are visible appear normal.
Fig. 1.1c Oblique view from the lateral aspect of both eyes. In the left eye there is an
irregular contour and anterior protrusion of the cornea (Os > OD). There is increased
exposure of the sclera and conjunctiva, and episcleral congestion. The anterior chamber is
obliterated by abnormal iris tissue which appears to be displaced anteriorly. In both eyes
fluorescein dye is visible on the periocular hair at the medial canthus
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the history and the appearance of the lefft eye, the following conditions should be
considered:
· Chronic glaucoma In contrast to the dog, primary glaucoma in the cat is rare, and
secondary glaucoma is more common. The most common causes of secondary
glaucoma in the cat are chronic idiopathic lymphocytic-plasmacytic uveitis and
primary intraocular neoplasia, most notably diffuse iris melanoma. Typical clinical
signs include buphthalmos, conjunctival and episcleral congestion, corneal oedema,
mydriasis, and impaired or absent vision. Buphthalmos can be difficult to discern in
the cat and assessment of the size of the palpebral fissure can be helpful because it
becomes wider as the size of the eye increases. Glaucoma in cats is typically
insidious in onset and is often difficult to recognise. This is in contrast to canine
primary glaucoma which is characterised by peracute pain, episcleral congestion,
marked corneal oedema, mydriasis and blindness (Ch. 6, case 2).
· Exophthalmos Anterior displacement of the globe within the orbit. Common causes
of exophthalmos in the cat include orbital neoplasia, orbital cellulitis/abscess and
orbital trauma (haematoma, emphysema, fracture, foreign body). Primary malignant
neoplasia and abscesses secondary to dental disease are more likely in old cats,
whereas head trauma and orbital foreign bodies are more common in young cats
(Ch.12, case 2).
Given the appearance of the right eye, the following conditions should be considered:
· Systemic hypertension Sustained systemic hypertension is commonly associated with
the anterior segment. Abnormalities in the posterior segment involve the retina.
choroid and vitreous humour and appear as retinal oedema and bullae, retinal and
intravitreal haemorrhages, retinal detachment and increased tortuosity of the retinal
arterioles. Intraocular haemorrhage can occur as a result of haemorrhage from the iris
(Fig. 1.1d), ciliary body, retina, and choroid. Extensive hyphaema can lead to the
formation of anterior and posterior synechiae and secondary glaucoma.
· Coagulopathy and platelet disorders Ocular haemorrhage can be a clinical sign of a
platelet count is <50 000 cells/μl
  o   o     ia o
inflammation, red blood cells can enter the anterior chamber (hyphaema). The blood
may form either a homogenous layer in the ventral anterior chamber or a clot, as in
this cat.
● Trauma Ocular haemorrhage may result from both blunt and penetrating ocular
trauma (Ch. 12, cases 2 and 3).
· Pre-iridal fibrovascular   membrane  (PIFM) The  formation   of  fibrovascular
membranes on the anterior iris is usually a consequence of intraocular inflammation,
haemorrhage and/or hypoxia due to the release of vasoactive substances. Hence the
retinal detachment, glaucoma, and neoplasia. The newly formed blood vessels within
          
PIFMs can extend  into the filtration angle and result  in secondary glaucoma
Fibrovascular membranes are not restricted to the surface of the iris - they can also
form on the retina and optic disc and in the vitreous.
affected with primary or secondary neoplasia, either originating from a PIFM or as a
result of the direct effect of neoplasia (e.g. adverse effect on clotting function).
hyperplastic primary vitreous, both of which are rare conditions in the cat.
Fig. 1.1d Aneurysm within the lateral region of the major arterial circle in the left eye of a
cat with systemic hypertension.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - the left pupil is not visible. Negative consensual OS
(from left to right eye); positive direct OD, albeit slow and incomplete.
Dazzle reflex - negative OS, positive OD
。
Palpebral reflex - positive OU, OS < OD
Corneal reflex - positive OU, OS < OD
· Menace response - negative OS, equivocal OD
In this cat, these results are consistent with blindness, reduced corneal sensation and
lagophthalmos in the left eye, and reduced vision in the right eye.
● Examination with a focal light source - in the left eye, slit-lamp biomicroscopy
reveals extensive superficial and deep corneal vascularisation, and  generalised
corneal oedema and fibrosis which is most marked axially.
           o o
detachment, most marked within the medial quadrant, and multiple retinal
haemorrhages of different sizes throughout the tapetal fundus and ventral to the optic
disc (Fig. 1.1e).
· Schirmer tear test - 4 mm/min OS, 10 mm/min OD
● Fluorescein dye - negative staining OD, positive staining in the superficial axial
cornea Os. This is indicative of suboptimal ocular surface health in the left eye, most
likely because of the lagophthalmos.
· Tonometry - IOP 35 mmHg OS, 20 mmHg OD
Fig. 1.1e Extensive dorsal retinal detachment and multiple retinal haemorrhages throughout
the tapetal fundus and ventral to the optic disc
There is increased resistance to retropulsion of the left eye; retropulsion of the right eye is
normal. The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities.
A general physical examination reveals an underweight body condition and mild dental
disease.
The degree of resistance to retropulsion of the eye varies amongst species and between breeds. The normal feline globe is generally
saop pue siea ypog ur iguo moys au jo asneaag spaang lauo ur ueu sal s spaaig oudaoyoeg u uosndona
Further Diagnostic Tests
· B-mode ocular ultrasound - this is indicated to evaluate the posterior segment when
the anterior segment is opaque, and to take measurements. Axial globe length is the
distance between the centre of the cornea and the posterior pole.
· The ultrasound scan reveals an axial globe length of 22 mm OS and 19 mm OD
(within normal limits), which confirms buphthalmos in the left eye. Additional
abnormalities in the left eye include hyperechoic material spanning the anterior
chamber (consistent with blood, fibrin or anterior synechiae), hyperechoic material
within the vitreous (consistent with vitreal degeneration, intravitreal haemorrhage,
neoplasm), and convex iris leaflets which contact the anterior lens capsule (consistent
with iris bombe, Ch. 9, case 4) (Fig. 1.1f).
· Laboratory tests - results of routine haematology, biochemistry (including
electrolytes), urine analysis and thyroid function are consistent with chronic renal
failure
· Systemic blood pressure measurement - indirect assessment with a Doppler
sphygmomanometer (ultrasonic detection device) reveals a systolic blood pressure of
220 mmHg (upper limit for systolic blood pressure in the cat is 160-170 mmHg).
Fig. 1.1f Horizontal B-mode ultrasound scan (left eye). There is hyperechoic material
spanning the anterior chamber (white asterix) and within the vitreous body (blue asterix);
convex iris leaflets contact the anterior surface of the lens (arrow). In this cat, these changes
are consistent with intraocular haemorrhage, anterior synechiae, and iris bombe.
大
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of systemic hypertension is made. The
ocular manifestations are hyphaema and hypertensive retinopathy in the right eye, and
glaucoma secondary to intraocular haemorrhage in the left eye.
Treatment
The preferred first-line treatment for feline systemic hypertension is amlodipine besylate (a
calcium channel blocker) at a dose of 0.625-1.25 mg per os q24 hours. The aim of
treatment is to lower the systolic blood pressure to a safe range, i.e. ≤l60-170 mmHg
Some cats need more frequent dosing (amlodipine besylate q12 hours) and others require
the addition of benazepril to become normotensive. Adverse effects of amlodipine besylate
are uncommon but include azotaemia, lethargy, hypokalaemia, reflex tachycardia and
weight loss.
indicated because of pain, irreversible blindness and to prevent complications arising from
progressive corneal disease. A transconjunctival procedure is performed. In addition to the
clinical findings, ocular histopathology reveals retinal detachment and confirms the clinical
systemic hypertension (Fig. 1.1g).
Fio. 1.1o (A) H&F section of a normal feline retina demonstratino a normal retinal arteriole
(arrow) (x200). (B) H&E section of the detached retina in this hypertensive cat
demonstrating two abnormal retinal arterioles (arrows) (x4oo). The arteriolar walls are
diffusely expanded by a bright pink homogenous matrix. This is referred to as hyalinisation
and results from the leakage of plasma products into the vessel wall secondary to
endothelial damage. Note the haemorrhage dissecting the vessel wall (asterix) and the
perivascular haemorrhage. Thickening of the vessel walls has resulted in extreme narrowing
of the blood vessel lumens which are now barely visible; this degree of narrowing could
hyalinising arteriolosclerosis with intraocular haemorrhage characteristic of hypertensive
retinopathy.
Re produc ed with permission from EJ Scurrel.
Repeated thorough physical and ophthalmic examinations as well as blood pressure
measurements are recommended, e.g. every 3-6 months.
A1l enucleated globes should be submitted for ocular histopathology. For routine diagnostic purposes, fixation of the globe in 10% formalin
s ge nerally appr opriate, a lthough confirme
jion with the chosen laboratory is recom
mmended. Prior to fixation, as much exce ss extr aocular
tissue as possible should be removed, and the optic nerve should be leftas long as possible.
Prognosis
The prognosis is good for retinal detachment secondary to systemic hypertension in that
most retinas reattach if antihypertensive therapy is successful at lowering the blood pressure
sufficiently. The prognosis for vision is variable because it depends on the extent and
duration of retinal detachment prior to treatment, as well as the severity of any associated
haemorrhage. There is evidence to suggest that the feline retina begins to degenerate within
the first week of detachment. However, most cats only present when they are severely
visually impaired or blind, by which stage both eyes are affected. The retinal pathology is
often chronic in the eye that is affected first but is only noted when the fellow eye develops
significant disease. Even if vision is not restored, continued treatment of the systemic
 s     ss    si s
heart, kidney).
Discussion
Systemic hypertension is a relatively common disease in cats older than 1o years and is
usually associated with chronic renal failure, and less frequently, with hyperthyroidism and
Conn's syndrome. As the eye is a target organ for hypertensive damage, the most common
reason for presentation is acute blindness secondary to retinal detachment. Neurological
deficits may be present and are generally the result of cerebrovascular disease. Prolonged
increased tortuosity of the retinal arterioles, and finally to compromise of the vascular
integrity. This in turn leads to intraocular haemorrhage as well as retinal oedema and an
accumulation of serous fluid which separates the neurosensory retina from the underlying
retinal pigment epithelium. The ocular changes progress over several months and early
diagnosis of ‘at risk' cats is important in preventing blindness. Ideally any geriatric cat
should have an annual blood pressure assessment together with a complete ocular
examination including fundic examination. Cats with e.g. renal disease or hyperthyroidism
should be monitored particularly closely.
FurtherReading
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY2
History
A 9-month-old male  Labrador Retriever is presented because both eyes have  looked
different for several months. There has been no evidence of ocular discomfort and the dog
catches balls well. The dog has received his primary vaccination course and routine
anthelmintic treatment and is reported to be clinically well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 1.2a and b
Fig. 1.2a
Fig. 1.2b Right eye has received a topical mydriatic agent (tropicamide)
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 1.2a Left eye - is normal and shows an iris colour variation consisting of a mid brown
outer zone and a dark brown pupillary zone. Right eye - has a small palpebral fissure; there
is protrusion of the TEL. The pupil is small which creates a subtle anisocoria (OD < OS).
The iris is slightly dark compared to the left eye. A tapetal reflection is not visible.
Fig l.2b Both eyes are shown - the right pupil has been artificially dilated with
tropicamide. Right eye - there is a structure which comprises multiple strands of iris tissue.
The strands originate from the iris collarette and join at a single focal point. A cataract is
present, resulting in leukocoria (white pupil).
2.Differential Diagnoses
Given the history and appearance of the right eye, the following conditions should be
considered:
· Microphthalmos This is a congenital anomaly in which the eye is abnormally small
and deeply set within the orbit and has a range of concurrent defects including
persistent pupillary membrane (PPM) remnants, cataract, retinal dysplasia,
staphyloma, and nystagmus.
· Nanophthalmos A congenital anomaly in which the eye is abnormally small but
otherwise normal.
· Phthisis bulbi Acquired end-stage atrophy of the eye following severe inflammation,
ocular trauma or glaucoma. Typical features include an absence of visible signs of
inflammation, an opaque cornea which prevents intraocular examination and marked
hypotony (Fig. 1.2c).
· Enophthalmos An eye that is recessed in the orbit, causes of which include:
。
Pain Stimulation of the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve results in
globe retraction by the retractor bulbi muscle which leads to enophthalmos
and passive TEL protrusion. Conditions such as entropion and corneal
ulceration often cause enophthalmos secondary to ocular surface pain
Ocular surface pain is also manifested by blepharospasm and increased
lacrimation (Ch. 5).
eyelids and orbital smooth muscle resulting in miosis, anisocoria, ptosis,
 narrow palpebral fissure, enophthalmos, and TEL protrusion (Ch. 10, case
1).
Reduced volume of orbital tissue This can arise because of dehydration,
weight loss (reduction in orbital fat) or fibrosis of orbital tissues following
orbital inflammation or surgery.
Fig. 1.2c Phthisis bulbi secondary to chronic uveitis in the right eye of a Tibetan Terrier
Note the third eyelid protrusion, increased scleral show, absence of external signs of
inflammation, and diffuse corneal fibrosis.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
o  Pupillary light reflex - positive direct and consensual OU
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
。
· Menace response - positive OS, negative OD
In this dog, these results are consistent with absent vision but some retinal and optic
nerve function in the right eye.
● Examination with a focal light source - in the right eye, slit-lamp biomicroscopy
shows that the structure originating at the iris collarette converges at a focal point on
the anterior lens capsule, consistent with a PPM.
· Tonometry - IOP 15 mmHg OU
· B-mode ocular ultrasound - this is indicated to evaluate the posterior segment when
the anterior segment is opaque, and to take measurements. Axial globe length is the
distance between the centre of the cornea and the posterior pole. Axial lens length is
the distance between the centre of the anterior and posterior lens capsules.
· The ultrasound reveals an axial globe length of 2o.8 mm Os (within normal limits)
and 18.5 mm OD, which confirms microphthalmos in the right eye (Fig. 1.2d). The
right lens is hyperechoic and slightly smaller than the left lens (axial length 7.1 mm
compared to 7.3 mm, both within normal limits); the hyperechogenicity is consistent
with a cataract.
Fig.1.2d Horizontal B-mode ultrasound scan. (A) Right eye - axial globe length 18.5 mm,
axial lens length 7.1 mm; hyperechoic lens. This is consistent with microphthalmos and
cataract. (B) Left eye - axial globe length 20.8 mm, axial lens length 7.3 mm. C, cornea; L,
lens; P, posterior limit of globe; 'x' and *+’ represent points of measurement for the axial
length of lens and globe respectively.
There is no change in the appearance or apparent comfort level of the right eye following
the application of topical anaesthetic eye drops, which rules out enophthalmos because of
ocular surface pain. The position of the TEL in the right eye does not change following the
application of topical 1% phenylephrine, which makes Horner's syndrome an unlikely
cause of the TEL protrusion (Ch. 10, case I). The remainder of the ophthalmic examination
reveals no additional abnormalities and a general physical examination is unremarkable.
A naesthesia lasts for about 45 min in the normal dog eye (25 min in the cat). The depth and duration of anaesthesia can be increased by
he repeat application of the topical anae sthetic, e.g. one drop applied twice over one minute. The application of a topical anae sthetic can
aseasip [qio io ie[nooenur Aq pasnea ued woiy ued iemoo aoeyms sunenuaiajip jo Aem adus e ag
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of microphthalmos in the right eye is made.
Treatment
No treatment is indicated for the majority of eyes affected with microphthalmos. In a small
number of dogs, recurrent conjunctivitis may develop because of poor tear drainage and/or
entropion because of poor eyelid-to-globe apposition. Conjunctivitis is usually managed
and cataract removal in a microphthalmic eye is associated with an increased risk of
complications. Cataract removal is not considered in this dog because vision in the left eye
is considered to be normal.
Prognosis
non-progressive. The prognosis for the right eye is therefore considered to be good.
Discussion
Microphthalmos is described in many species and in many different dog breeds. Although
typically unilateral it may be bilateral but not necessarily symmetrical. Abnormalities range
from mild to severe and vision may be normal, reduced or absent. In addition.
microphthalmic eyes commonly have clinically insignificant iris hypoplasia seen as miosis
(because of hypoplasia of the iris dilator muscle) and a darkened iris, as in this dog. Miosis
and darkening of the iris can also occur with anterior uveitis and should be ruled out on the
basis of other clinical signs (Ch. 7, case l, Fig. 7.le). Although the cause of
microphthalmos is often unknown, a heritable basis is described in several dog breeds
including the Dobermann Pinscher, Miniature Schnauzer, English Cocker Spaniel and the
Australian Shepherd. Animals with reduced pigment (melanin) in the body (subalbinism)
are also commonly affected, e.g. merle collies. Regardless of the severity of the defect,
affected animals should not be used for breeding.
FurtherReading
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY3
History
A 5-year-old male neutered Weimaraner is presented with a two-day history of a prominent
red eye, reduced appetite and lethargy. The dog has received routine vaccinations and
anthelmintic treatment.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 1.3a and b
Fig. 1.3a
Fig. 1.3b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 1.3a_Both eyes are shown, the left eye is normal. Right eye - there is marked
periocular swelling, erythema of the upper and lower eyelid skin and a widened palpebral
fissure (OD > OS). The Purkinje images are disrupted and displaced. There is epiphora, TEL
protrusion and hyperaemia of the bulbar conjunctiva.
Fig. 1.3b Aerial view of both eyes. Right eye - there is an obvious anterior displacement
of the eye; this appears as a larger visible surface area of cornea when compared to the left
eye. The periocular swelling ventral to the eye is more evident with this view.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the right eye, the clinical diagnosis is exophthalmos. The
following conditions should be considered:
· Orbital neoplasia This can be primary (60-70% of tumours) or secondary, arising
from adjacent structures or metastasis from distant sites. Orbital neoplasia is more
likely in older dogs (mean age 9.5 years) and is characterised by a slowly progressive
unilateral exophthalmos with variable degrees of strabismus. Affected dogs are
typically but not exclusively non-painful. Indentation of the caudal globe can be seen
 on fundic examination and with some imaging modalities (ultrasonography, MRI and
CT).
· Orbital cellulitis/abscess This is most common in young dogs (mean age 4 years) and
is characterised by acute onset unilateral exophthalmos, and pain on opening the
include an ipsilateral swelling of the oral mucosa caudal to the last upper premolar,
pyrexia, anorexia and neutrophilia. The cause of the cellulitis/abscess is not always
identified but includes an orbital foreign body, dental problem or  from
haematogenous spread.
·Myositis
Extraocular polymyositis (EOM) Inflammation of the extraocular muscles
causes bilateral but not necessarily symmetrical ocular signs including
exophthalmos, strabismus and impaired globe movement. EOM has been
described in several breeds but is most commonly seen in the Golden
Retriever (case 4, this chapter).
Masticatory/eosinophilic  myositis Acute inflammation of the masticatory
muscles (masseter, temporal, pterygoid and digastric muscles) causes
anorexia, pyrexia, and bilateral exophthalmos. Chronic disease results in
fibrosis of the masticatory muscles and can lead to enophthalmos,
entropion, TEL protrusion, and impaired vision.
Orbital haematoma This occurs most commonly following proptosis as a
result of severe trauma, e.g. road traffic accident, and is often associated
with subconjunctival haemorrhage and lagophthalmos.
especially in brachycephalic breeds, as well as from fractures involving the
frontal sinus.
Proptosis This term describes the sudden forward displacement of the eye
with subsequent entrapment behind the eyelids (Ch. 12, case 1)
Orbital fractures Fractures of the frontal, temporal and zygomatic bone can
result in exophthalmos or enophthalmos, strabismus, orbital and periocular
haemorrhage, pain, and facial asymmetry
· Abnormalities of the zygomatic salivary gland Neoplasia, inflammation of the
zygomatic salivary gland (sialoadenitis) or leakage of saliva can cause exophthalmos.
There is often a history of trauma with the non-neoplastic conditions. Oral
· Vascular anomalies Orbital varices and arteriovenous fistulas are rare congenital
anomalies that may cause pulsating or intermittent exophthalmos.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - positive direct and consensual OS, negative direct
and consensual OD
 Dazzle reflex - positive OS, negative OD
。
Palpebral reflex - positive OU but reduced OD
Vestibulo-ocular reflex - positive OU but reduced OD
· Menace response - positive Os, equivocal OD
In this dog, these results are consistent with blindness, absent retinal and optic nerve
            
s    se o      s
· Fluorescein dye
Staining - negative OS, positive diffuse stippling of the axial cornea OD
This is indicative of suboptimal ocular surface health in the right eye, most
likely because of the lagophthalmos.
Jones test (fluorescein dye passage test) - positive OS, negative OD. This is
consistent with reduced tear drainage on the right  side because  of
compression of the nasolacrimal punctum by anterior displacement of the
globe.
· Tonometry - IOP 18 mmHg OS, 27 mmHg OD. In the absence of other signs of
glaucoma (e.g. mydriasis), the elevated IOP in the right eye is consistent with
increased intraorbital pressure causing ocular hypertension rather than glaucoma.
· Luedde or Hertel exophthalmometer - an instrument specifically designed to measure
the distance between the cornea and the lateral orbital ligament. It is not routinely
used in veterinary ophthalmology. Examination from an aerial perspective confirms
that the right eye is displaced anteriorly (Fig. 1.3b)
On further examination there is pain and increased resistance to retropulsion of the right
eye; retropulsion of the left eye is normal. There is pain when the mouth is opened but no
intraoral  abnormalities are  observed.  A general physical  examination  is otherwise
Further Diagnostic Tests
· Laboratory tests - routine haematology, biochemistry and urine analysis are
unremarkable
● Imaging
B-mode ocular and orbital ultrasound - this is indicated to evaluate the
retrobulbar space and the orbit. It reveals a hypoechoic oval mass with a
hyperechoic rim within the retrobulbar space of the right eye. The mass is
causing marked indentation of the posterior aspect of the globe which is
consistent with the fundoscopic findings (Fig. 1.3c)
Abdominal ultrasonography - unremarkable
Thoracic radiography - unremarkable
MRI - this is performed to evaluate the full extent of the orbital lesion and
中
to determine if surgical management is possible. The dorsal T1 image
confirms the presence of the retrobulbar mass identified on the ultrasound
examination. The mass is isointense to brain tissue, has a hypointense core,
and indents the posterior aspect of the globe (Fig. 1.3d)
· Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) for bacteriology and cytology - under general
anaesthesia and with ultrasound guidance, an FNA of the retrobulbar mass (via an
intraoral approach) and the right mandibular lymph node is performed. Cytological
examination reveals a monomorphic population of large neoplastic lymphocytes in
both the orbit and lymph node (Fig. 1.3e). There is no growth on bacterial culture.
Fig. 1.3c Horizontal B-mode ultrasound scan (right eye). A hypoechoic oval mass (arrows)
within the retrobulbar space indents the posterior aspect of the eye.
Fig. 1.3d MRI scan (dorsal T1 image). A large retrobulbar mass (arrow) indents the
posterior aspect of the eye.
Re produc ed with permission from R De nnis, Animat Heath Trust
R
Fig. 1.3e Orbital FNA depicting neoplastic lymphocytes. Wright's Giemsa stain. Bar = 50
μm.
Reproduced with permission from EJ Scurrell
There is a close association between the soft tisue floor of the orbit, and the maxilla and the mandible. With some orbital disorders
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of orbital lymphoma on the right side is
made.
Treatment
The treatment of exophthalmos depends on the underlying cause. Clinical staging is
indicated  in cases of lymphoma and typically includes a complete blood count,
biochemistry, urinalysis, diagnostic imaging (abdominal and thoracic), and, if indicated,
bone marrow evaluation and immunophenotyping. The reader is referred to appropriate
sources for further information.
Non-specific therapy for exophthalmos includes a topical lubricant to minimise the risk
of corneal ulceration because of exposure. Many topical lubricants are commercially
available - a paraffin-based, bland ophthalmic ointment applied generously q4-6 hours is
appropriate.  Placement of a temporary tarsorrhaphy (eyelid sutures that partially or
completely close the palpebral fissure) is an alternative means of protecting the ocular
surface until the exophthalmos improves or resolves. This can be performed whilst the
animal is under general anaesthesia for imaging
Prognosis
In this dog the prognosis for the rapid resolution of the exophthalmos is good if there is a
satisfactory response to chemotherapy. The exophthalmos should improve within several
days and/or resolve during the first 1-2 weeks of treatment. However, prolonged or severe
exophthalmos can result in corneal ulceration and blindness because of optic nerve
damage.
Most preferred chemotherapy protocols will result in an 80-90% rate of clinical
remission, with median survival times of 12 months. Approximately 25% of affected dogs
survive longer than two years.
Discussion
Most orbital space-occupying lesions are neoplastic in the dog. Orbital neoplasia usually
causes a slowly progressive, non-painful exophthalmos, in contrast to the acute onset,
painful exophthalmos typical of an inflammatory process. However, orbital lymphoma can
mimic inflammation because it often has an acute onset and can be painful. Diagnostic
imaging is always indicated for a thorough evaluation of exophthalmos. Orbital ultrasound
 sos p ro    d n sx  s  
often challenging, even for an experienced ultrasonographer. Plain skull radiography is
only helpful if there is bony involvement. MRI and CT can provide further information
about the nature and extent of the orbital lesion which can then facilitate accurate planning
of orbital surgery (if indicated).
Further Reading
See Appendix 2.
CASE STUDY 4
History
A 1-year-old female Miniature Shorthaired Dachsund is presented with a five-day history of
'bulging eyes'. The dog has received routine vaccinations and regular anthelmintic
treatment, and is reported to be otherwise clinically well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Fig. 1.4a
Fig. 1.4a
Reproduced with permission from EA Giuliano
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figure Shows
Fig. 1.4a The left and right eyes are similar except for the presence of a scant mucoid
discharge in the left eye. There is a startled expression and symmetrical exotropia, i.e. a
divergent strabismus or lateral deviation. Evidence of exotropia includes an increase in the
amount of visible sclera on the medial aspect of the globe and the abnormal position of the
Purkinje images (see Fig. 1.4b for comparison). The exotropia has resulted in misalignment
between the camera flash and the visual axis and as a result a tapetal reflection is not
visible. There is a mild exophthalmos with associated widening of the palpebral fissure and
exposure of the sclera on the dorsal and ventral aspects of the eye. The TEL is in a normal
position. The pupil size is appropriate for the ambient lighting.
Fig. 1.4b Bilateral breed-related exotropia, exophthalmos and macropalpebral fissure in an
adult Pug.
Re produc ed with permission from DJ Gould.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the history and the appearance of both eyes, the following conditions should be
considered:
· EOM An acute inflammatory process confined to the extraocular muscles (excluding
the retractor bulbi). EOM is characterised by bilateral exophthalmos and strabismus
and a classic startled expression; TEL protrusion, pain and visible signs of
inflammation are absent. Although there is an idiopathic predisposition for the young
female Golden Retriever, EOM has been described in many dog breeds.
· Masticatory muscle myositis (MMM) An acute inflammatory process involving the
muscles of mastication (masseter, temporal, pterygoid and digastric muscles). MMM
is characterised by bilateral exophthalmos, TEL protrusion and congestion of the
conjunctival and episcleral vessels. Concurrent non-ocular signs are more often the
reason for presentation and include lethargy, pyrexia, and anorexia, the latter
primarily because of jaw pain. Jaw pain results from pressure applied by the ramus of
the mandible on the swollen soft tissue floor of the orbit when the mouth is opened.
The masticatory muscles are often visibly swollen and painful when palpated.
Haematological and biochemical abnormalities include a leukocytosis, eosinophilia
and elevated creatinine phosphokinase. The masticatory muscles are composed of
unique type 2M myofibre, for which specific autoantibodies can be identified. The
serum 2M antibody test and immunocytochemical staining on muscle tissue are
important diagnostic tests for MMM. Chronic or severe disease leads to fibrosis of the
muscles and subsequent enophthalmos, entropion, TEL protrusion, impaired vision
and trismus.
· Physiological exotropia  and  exophthalmos The optical axes are offset by
approximately 2o? in a rostrolateral direction in the normal dog, resulting in good
binocular vision and dorsomedial positioning of the Purkinje images. The position of
the optical axes and the depth of the orbit depends on skull shape - brachycephalic
breeds have a tendency for mild bilateral exotropia and exophthalmos that is within
normal limits for the breed type (Fig. 1.4b).
· Orbital lymphoma Lymphoma can present as acute onset, unilateral or bilateral
orbital disease - the clinical signs mimic an inflammatory rather than a neoplastic
process. With the exception of lymphoma, orbital neoplasia is more typically
unilateral, non-painful and slowly progressive in nature (case 3, this chapter).
· Abnormalities of the zygomatic salivary gland Neoplasia, inflammation of the
zygomatic salivary gland (sialoadenitis) or leakage of saliva can cause exophthalmos.
There is often a history of trauma with the non-neoplastic conditions. Oral
examination may reveal distension of the zygomatic papilla.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
 Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
。
。
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
Palpebral reflex - positive OU
。
Vestibulo-ocular reflex - positive but reduced OU
· Vision assessment
。
 Menace response - positive OU
。
Visual placing and tracking reflexes - positive OU
In this dog, these results are consistent with reduced ocular motility in both eyes.
● Tonometry - IOP 26 mmHg OU. In the absence of signs of glaucoma (e.g. mydriasis,
corneal oedema, episcleral congestion, pain), the mildly elevated IOP is consistent
There is mild resistance to retropulsion of both eyes but no obvious pain. The remainder
of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a general physical
examination is unremarkable.
Further Diagnostic Tests
● Forced duction test - this test helps to differentiate mechanical restriction from a
neurological disorder in an eye with reduced motility. It can be performed in a
conscious (active forced duction) or unconscious, anaesthetised animal (passive
forced duction).
· A passive forced duction test is performed in this dog. Each eye in turn is grasped
with fine rat-toothed forceps close to the limbus and is moved only partially in all
directions. This is a positive result which excludes a neurological problem and
suggests that the reduced vestibulo-ocular reflex is the result of a restrictive
(mechanical) problem.
· Laboratory tests - routine haematology, biochemistry and urine analysis are
recommended prior to starting treatment; the results are unremarkable.
· B-mode ocular ultrasound - this reveals thickening of the extraocular muscles in both
eyes, and associated enlargement of the retrobulbar cone (Fig. 1.4c)
● Orbital MRI - this confirms marked thickening of the extraocular muscles and
reveals contrast enhancement consistent with inflammation (Fig. 1.4d).
Fig. 1.4c Horizontal B-mode ultrasound scan. Marked thickening of the extraocular
muscles of the left eye (arrows).
Re produc ed with permission from R De nnis, Animal Health Trust.
0.OHHE
Left
Fig. 1.4d MRI image (dorsal T1 post contrast). Marked thickening and enhancement of the
extraocular muscles of both eyes (arrows).
Re produc ed with permission from R De nnis, A nimat Heatth Trust.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of bilateral extraocular polymyositis is
made.
Treatment
at
immunosuppressive doses. Prednisolone, 1.1 mg/kg q12 hours for three weeks, is
recommended (Ramsey et al., 1995). The prednisolone can then be tapered over several
weeks. Adjunctive therapy with azathioprine may need to be considered in patients that
cannot  tolerate  the  side-effects  of  corticosteroid  therapy  or  become  refractory  to
prednisolone    therapy   alone.   Alternative   immunomodulatory   therapy   with    oral
cyclophosphamide alone, and a combination of oxytetracycline and niacinamide have also
been reported for this condition.
Prognosis
good and clinical signs usually resolve. However, recurrence is common and is reported to
be as high as 8o%, with 1o% of dogs experiencing multiple recurrences (Ramsey et al.,
1995). Recurrence was found to be most likely if the initial dose of prednisolone was
reduced before the end of the recommended three-week period. A small number of dogs
require low-dose, long-term therapy to maintain remission.
Discussion
EOM is an idiopathic inflammatory condition that probably has an immune-mediated
histopathological features and response to treatment. A common history of a non-specific
stressor (e.g. a stay in boarding kennels, surgery, oestrus) prior to the onset of clinical signs
has been noted in some cases.
The startled facial expression is virtually pathognomic for EOM and the diagnosis can
usually be made from the characteristic clinical appearance alone. In addition to the clinical
signs described above, less common clinical signs include conjunctival hyperaemia,
chemosis, fundic changes and visual impairment. The lack of TEL protrusion in this
condition is especially noteworthy as this is in contrast to most orbital disease in dogs (case
3, this chapter). Advanced imaging in the form of ocular and orbital ultrasonography, CT
and MRI helps localise the abnormality and confirm the diagnosis. Ultrasonography,
although quick and relatively inexpensive to perform, does not necessarily provide precise
information about the nature of the problem and the tissues involved. Although MMM can
also cause bilateral exophthalmos, the clinical presentation is very different to that for EOM
(see earlier). The clinical differences between these two myopathies arise from the fact that
the muscle groups have different embryological origins. The type 2M myofibre is unique to
the masticatory muscles and can be identified with serology (2M autoantibodies) and
immunocytochemistry on frozen muscle sections; the masticatory muscles are easy to
biopsy as they are large and readily accessible (Melmed et al., 2oo4). Although the
extraocular muscles can be biopsied, the procedure is challenging and is generally
mononuclear infiltrate) and type 2M fibres are not present. Serology and muscle biopsy are
therefore useful diagnostic tests to confirm the diagnosis of MMM but are not indicated for
EOM.
References and Further Reading
Melmed C, Shelton GD, Bergman R, Barton C. (2004) Masticatory muscle myositis:
pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment. Compend Contin Ed., 590-605.
Ramsey DT, Hamor RE, Gerding PA, Knight B. Clinical and immunohistochemical
characteristics of bilateral extraocular polymyositis of dogs. Proc Am Coll Vet Ophthalmol,
1995; 130-132.
       so  so g (  s
38, 347-59.
See Appendix 2.
CHAPTER 2
Eyelid Abnormalities
Introduction
The eyelid is a mucocutaneous junction, and as such provides an interface between the skin
and the ocular surface. It has an important role in ocular surface health because of its
contribution to the mucin layer of the precorneal tear film from the meibomian glands.
Eyelid abnormalities are very common in the dog, less so in the cat. They generally go
unnoticed unless they cause an ocular discharge or ocular discomfort.
CASE STUDY 1
A one-year-old male Weimaraner is presented with a two-month history of painful and
watery eyes. The dog has received routine vaccinations and regular anthelmintic treatment,
and is otherwise clinically well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities in the eyes in Figs. 2.1a, b, and c.
Fig. 2.1a
Fig. 2.1b
Fig. 2.1c
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 2.1a Both eyes - there is mild epiphora, third eyelid protrusion and conjunctival
hyperaemia. The hairs on the lower eyelid are wet and the eyelid skin is erythematous.
Fig. 2.1b Both eyes - there is marked inversion of the lower eyelid margin and resulting
trichiasis. The contour of the upper eyelid is irregular or 'notched' and there are several fine
distichia. There is relative anisocoria (OD < OS) because of different ambient room light
The Purkinje images are normal.
Fig. 2.1c Left eye - there is localised superficial keratitis which appears as corneal
vascularisation within the ventrolateral quadrant.
maue loieaal au saeaiauur aaiau [eroel aul spaaig sop auos u ameay uoon e s pafa iaddn ayi u aaueieadde paou, aul
the levator palpebrae superioris muscle in the centra
region. The position of the *notch' represents the junction between the se two regions.
w at the limbus and progress at an average rate of I mm per day.
This fact is helpful when trying to determine how long corneal disease has been pre sent
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the history of ocular discomfort and the appearance of both eyes, the following
conditions should be considered:
· Entropion The inversion or inward turning of all or part of the eyelid margin. The
resulting trichiasis causes discomfort, conjunctivitis, keratitis and sometimes corneal
ulceration. Entropion can involve any part of the eyelid but lower lateral entropion is
most frequently encountered in clinical practice.
· Eyelid agenesis or coloboma Localised absence of eyelid tissue results in increased
exposure of the ocular surface, trichiasis and a reduced ability to blink; together these
cause conjunctivitis and keratitis, with associated discomfort. Eyelid agenesis is most
common in the lateral upper eyelid of cats; it is rarely seen in the dog.
· Distichiasis This is a common condition in which extra eyelashes arise from the
region of the meibomian glands and emerge out of, or just posterior to, the gland
openings along the eyelid margin (Ch. 5, case 1, Diagram 5.1). Distichiasis tends to
occur in dogs less than one year old. It is often an incidental finding, but it can cause
increased  lacrimation,  epiphora, and blepharospasm; corneal ulceration  is
uncommon. Predisposed breeds are the Cocker Spaniel (American and English),
Boxer, English Bulldog, Flat-Coated Retriever, Shih Tzu, Pekingese, Poodle,
Dachsund and Jack Russell Terrier (case 2, this chapter).
· Ectopic cilia This is a condition in which extra eyelashes arise from the region of the
meibomian glands but, in contrast to distichiasis, emerge through the palpebral
conjunctiva 4-6 mm from the eyelid margin. Ectopic cilia most commonly occur in
the centre of the upper eyelid and cause direct irritation to the ocular surface (Ch. 5,
case 1, Diagram 5.1). The typical clinical presentation is acute onset blepharospasm,
lacrimation and corneal ulceration in a young dog (usually less than one year old).
Clinical signs may be intermittent because ectopic cilia eventually fall out, only to
regrow several weeks later Predisposed breeds include the Lhasa Apso, Pekingese.
Shih Tzu, Poodle, English Bulldog, Flat-Coated Retriever and Boxer (Ch. 5, case I).
● Trichiasis This is a condition in which periocular hairs growing in a normal location
are abnormally directed towards the ocular surface. If severe, trichiasis can cause
conjunctivitis and  keratitis,  with  associated discomfort. Trichiasis results from
entropion and eyelid agenesis and can also be associated with the nasal folds, medial
canthus and caruncle.
· Corneal ulceration Pain accompanies corneal ulceration. Superficial ulcers are
usually more painful than deep ulcers, because the anterior corneal stroma has a high
proportion of pain receptors, whereas the deep corneal stroma is rich in pressure
receptors.
· Tear film disorders Both quantitative (keratoconjunctivitis sicca) and qualititative tear
film disorders can cause ocular discomfort, mucoid discharge, conjunctivitis and
keratitis (Ch. 4, case 3).
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
Palpebral reflex - positive OU
· Menace response - positive OU
· Examination with a focal light source - in both eyes, the entire length of the lower
    e       sa  s
eyelid margin. The lower eyelid margin is lighter in colour than the upper; this is
eyelid margin and the moist ocular surface. The lower eyelid is everted and
straightened by gentle traction in a lateral direction, revealing that the eyelid is
abnormally long. There are several fine hairs along the eyelid margins in both eyes,
consistent with distichiasis (Ch. 2, case 2).
● Schirmer tear test - this is not performed, because of the excessive lacrimation in
both eyes.
· Fluorescein dye - negative staining OU
· Tonometry - IOP 18 mmHg OU
The blepharospasm resolves  in  both eyes following administration  of a topical
anaesthetic drug. The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional
abnormalities and a general physical examination is unremarkable.
A single drop of a topical anaesthetic dug willanaesthetise the ocuar surface (conjunctiva and cornea) wihin approximately 10 s
Anaesthesia lasts for about 45 min in the normal dog eye (25 min in the cat). The depth and duration of anaesthesia can be inereased by
e drop applied twice
pplication ot a topicalanaesthetic can bi
a simple way of differentiating ocular surface pain from pain caused by intraocular or orbital disease; it can also temporarily relieve
spastic entropior
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of entropion and distichiasis is made in
both eyes. There is also superficial keratitis in the left eye.
The distichiasis is considered to be an incidental finding. The low number of the distichia
and their soft appearance suggest that they are unlikely to be clinically significant compared
to the discomfort caused by the entropion.
Treatment
Many surgical techniques have been described for the correction of entropion in the dog.
     o       s o  
degree of corneal involvement, whether there has been previous eyelid surgery, and
surgeon preference.
Both lower eyelids are shortened and everted by a combined technique comprising a full
Absorbable suture material (6/0 polyglactin) is used because removal of sutures close to the
eye is difficult in conscious animals. A topical broad-spectrum antibiotic is administered
q12 hours in both eyes for five days following surgery; systemic broad-spectrum antibiotic
and NSAID therapy are prescribed for 7-10 days.
Diagram 2.1 Eversion and shortening of the eyelid by a combined Hotz-Celsus procedure
and full thickness wedge resection (based on the technique described by Read & Broun.
2007). (A) Skin incisions for Hotz-Celsus procedure. (B) Skin incisions for wedge
resection. The Hotz-Celsus procedure is closed with one layer of skin sutures; the wedge
resection is closed in two layers (subdermis and skin). Absorbable 6/0 suture material is
used. HC, Hotz-Celsus; W, wedge. Illustration by S Scurrell.
HC
The topical application of ocular medication can cause mild and transient blepharospasm. This blepharospasm can lead to a recurrence of
[don aaneadosod jo fouanbany a uosean sun lo uosod pafa au paloau Anuaoan Aruo sy Aiaains yoym ur afa ue u uodonua
treatment is kept to a minimum, e.g. q 12 hour s
Immediately after surgery there is mild lower ectropion in the left eye because of
 s s   e p o e si s m p p siss
2.1d, A). Both eyes are comfortable and have good eyelid conformation two weeks after
surgery (Fig. 2.1d, B). The sutures are moderately encrusted with discharge, which is also
to be expected (Fig. 2.1d, C). Although the suture material is absorbable, the majority of the
sutures are removed to facilitate healing and because the dog's level of co-operation is
excellent (Fig. 2.1d, D). Following surgery there is no evidence of ocular irritation, which
confirms that the distichiasis is clinically insignificant in this dog (case 2, this chapter).
Fig. 2.1d (A) Immediate postoperative appearance. (B) Two weeks postoperatively. (C) Left
eye at two weeks. The eyelid conformation is good; the skin sutures are moderately
encrusted. (D) Left eye following removal of skin sutures.
Prognosis
The prognosis for resolution of the entropion is good with correct and careful case
management. It is, however, important to caution the owner that repeat surgery may be
necessary in some dogs.
Discussion
Entropion is a common condition in the dog. The pathophysiology is complex and involves
      ss      
orbicularis oculi muscle and size of the palpebral fisure. Contributing factors include age,
gender, skull conformation and, in some breeds, the degree of facial skin folds. Entropion
can be classified as either primary (congenital and developmental), or secondary (spastic
and cicatricial). Entropion causes trichiasis and, subsequently, ocular surface pain, which in
turn causes increased lacrimation and enophthalmos. Enophthalmos leads to loss of support
to the eyelid margin and exacerbates the entropion.
Each dog must be assessed carefully to identify the precise nature of the entropion so that
the appropriate surgical technique can be selected. Trends are recognised with certain breed
types: in hunting breeds (e.g. Labrador Retriever, Pointer) the lateral two thirds to three
quarters of the lower eyelid is usually involved. In large and giant breeds (e.g. Great Dane,
St Bernard) the palpebral fissure is excessively large, which results in central ectropion and
lateral entropion - often referred to as ^diamond eye' (Fig. 2.1e). Medial lower entropion is
common in toy and brachycephalic breeds (Ch. 8, case 3). Excessive facial skin has a
strong influence on eyelid conformation in some breeds, e.g. Chow Chow, Shar Pei, and in
these dogs eyelid surgery alone may not be sufficient to correct entropion. The surgical
correction of entropion complicated by excessive facial folds is challenging. One surgical
approach is the combination of a rhytidectomy (face-lift) followed by eyelid surgery (Fig.
2.1f A-G). It is beneficial to perform this as a two-stage procedure, so that the eyelid
conformation can be reassessed following the rhytidectomy, and to ensure that the
general anaesthesia.
Fig. 2.1e ‘Diamond eye' in the left eye of a young St Bernard dog.
Fig. 2.1f (A) One-year-old Chow Chow with excessive facial and periocular skin, which
makes it difficult to see both eyes. (B) There is bilateral mucoid discharge with a strand of
mucus spanning the palpebral fissure in the right eye. In both eyes the palpebral fissure is
irregular and the margin of the upper and lower eyelids is not visible; this is consistent with
inversion of the eyelid margin. The ocular surface is lustrous and the Purkinje images are
normal. (C) Area of skin to be excised for the rhytidectomy (dog under general
anaesthesia).  (D)  Immediate appearance following rhytidectomy (dog under general
anaesthesia). The skin wound is positioned just rostral to the ears. (E) 24 hours following
rhytidectomy. Elevation of the forehead skin improves the eyelid conformation but lower
entropion persists, especially in the left eye. The ends of Penrose drains are visible on each
 moi  dn ot s oo oe so t (   go is
have been everted using a Hotz-Celsus technique. In addition, both lower eyelids have been
shortened by a full thickness wedge resection. There is mild chemosis, eyelid swelling and
upper ectropion; these are acceptable findings at this stage. The Penrose drains have been
一
Although surgery is indicated in most cases of canine entropion, conservative
management in the form of a topical ophthalmic lubricant may be sufficient to alleviate
mild discomfort. This is particularly true in young dogs with mild or intermittent entropion.
This conservative approach has the advantage of allowing the skull to grow and mature,
which may lead to a resolution of the entropion in a few dogs. There is no specific age at
which entropion surgery should be performed - surgery is always indicated when there is
ocular discomfort. Repeat surgery is most likely with complex forms of entropion, and if
surgery is performed before the dog is fully mature, regardless of the breed. An important
 a  ss ,   nd s s   s o s
surgery later. If the onset of entropion occurs in a Shar Pei older than this, some form of
corrective eyelid surgery is almost always indicated.
References and Further Reading
Read RA & Broun HC (2007) Entropion correction in dogs and cats using a combination
Hotz-Celsus and lateral eyelid wedge resection: results in 311 eyes. Vet Ophthalmol, 10 (1),
6-11.
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY 2
History
A  10-month-old male neutered Jack  Russell  Terrier  is  presented  with a  history  of
intermittent squinting and tearing for several weeks. The signs improved slightly with
topical antibiotics but did not resolve. He has received routine  vaccinations and
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 2.2a and b
Fig. 2.2a
Fig. 2.2b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
I. What the Figures Show
Fig. 2.2a There is a slightly narrowed palpebral fissure in the left eye compared with the
right eye.
Fig. 2.2b Both eyes are similar, the apparent anisocoria (Os < OD) represents a normal
response to the ambient lighting conditions. There are several fine hairs along the upper and
 ) s      o o   s  m
leading edge of the third eyelid is non-pigmented. The Purkinje images are normal.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of both eyes, the following conditions should be considered:
· Distichiasis This is a common condition in which extra eyelashes arise from the
   d s o    s   o 
openings along the eyelid margin (Ch. 5, case 1, Diagram 5.1). Distichiasis tends to
occur in dogs less than one year old. It is often an incidental finding, but it can cause
increased lacrimation, epiphora, and blepharospasm; corneal ulceration is
uncommon. The degree of corneal irritation is related to the number, length and
direction of the distichia. Short, stiff distichia tend to cause irritation whereas long,
soft distichia cause little if any irritation unless they are present in high numbers
and/or are directed towards the ocular surface. Distichia may act as a wick, causing
Predisposed breeds are the Cocker Spaniel (American and English), Boxer, English
Bulldog, Flat-Coated Retriever, Shih Tzu, Pekingese, Poodle, Dachsund and Jack
Russell Terrier.
· Ectopic cilia This is a condition in which extra eyelashes arise from the region of the
meibomian glands but, in contrast to distichiasis, emerge through the palpebral
conjunctiva 4-6 mm from the eyelid margin. Ectopic cilia most commonly occur in
the centre of the upper eyelid and cause direct irritation to the ocular surface (Ch. 5,
case 1, Diagram 5.I). The typical clinical presentation is acute onset blepharospasm,
lacrimation and corneal ulceration in a young dog (usually less than one year old).
Clinical signs may be intermittent because ectopic cilia eventually fall out, only to
regrow several weeks later. Predisposed breeds include the Lhasa Apso, Pekingese,
Shih Tzu, Poodle, English Bulldog, Flat-Coated Retriever and Boxer (Ch. 5, case I).
· Trichiasis This is a condition in which periocular hairs growing in a normal location
are abnormally directed towards the ocular surface. If severe, trichiasis can cause
conjunctivitis and  keratitis,  with associated discomfort. Trichiasis results from
entropion and eyelid agenesis and can also be associated with nasal folds, medial
canthus and caruncle.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
。
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
Palpebral reflex - positive OU
· Menace response - positive OU
· Examination with a focal light source - slit-lamp biomicroscopy reveals that fine
hairs emerge from the meibomian gland orifices along the eyelid margins, and that
the upper and lower puncta are a normal size and shape in both eyes.
· Schirmer tear test - 27 mm/min OS, 22 mm/min OD. This is consistent with slightly
increased lacrimation in the left eye.
· Fluorescein dye
Staining
g － negative OS, subtle positive staining ('stippling’) OD. This is
suggestive of minor disruption to the tear film in the right eye (Fig. 2.2c, A
and B).
Jones test (fluorescein dye passage test) - negative OU. This is consistent
with reduced or absent tear drainage in both eyes (Fig. 2.2c, C).
Tear film break-up time - 20 s OU
·Tonometry - IOP 17 mmHg OU
Fig. 2.2c (A) Fluorescein-positive 'stippling', right eye. (B) Wicking of fluorescein dye
onto periocular hairs, left eye. (C) Negative Jones test on both sides.
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination is unremarkable.
Further Diagnostic Tests
Nasolacrimal cannulation and flush (performed under general anaesthesia) - flushing in a
normograde direction (eye to nose) confirms the patency of the nasolacrimal system (Fig.
2.2d). The negative Jones test in both eyes demonstrates a reduced rate of tear drainage
rather than obstruction of the nasolacrimal system.
Fig. 2.2d Nasolacrimal flush under general anaesthesia. (A) and (B) Left upper nasolacrimal
punctum (arrow) is cannulated with a plastic nasolacrimal cannula (outer diameter 0.76
mm). Saline is flushed initially to the lower punctum, which is then occluded by digital
pressure, and then to the ipislateral nostril (C).
Cannulation of the nasolacrimal punctum can be performed with a metal or plastic lacrimal cannula. The size of the cannula (22-25
gauge) depends on the size of the animal; plastic cannulas with an outer diameter of 0.9 mm in the dog and 0.76 mm in the cat are usually
a o aaeuep uaaapeu jo ysu au spioae i asneaag paayaid iiauaa s aand iaddn au o uneuue saaneuae agedaan
lower punctum which is re sponsible for the majority of tear draina ge, and because it is usually easier
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of distichiasis is made in both eyes. The
epiphora in the left eye is a result of increased lacrimation overwhelming the nasolacrimal
drainage system because of the greater number of distichia on that side.
Treatment
Most dogs with distichia do not require treatment. Treatment is only indicated if there are
signs of ocular irritation. A topical lubricant, e.g. paraffin-based ointment, carbomer
polymer gel, may be sufficient in cases of very mild irritation - the lubricant provides a
layer in which the distichia “float', minimising direct contact between the cilia and the
cornea. Management of the condition by manual epilation with forceps following topical
anaesthesia is generally unsuccessful, as the distichia re-grow. However, manual epilation
can be useful to confirm that the cilia are the cause of the clinical signs. When treatment for
distichiasis is indicated, surgical management is usually necessary. The aim of surgery is
the permanent destruction or removal of the distichia hair follicles. Options include
electroepilation, electrolysis, electrocautery, cryosurgery, radiohyperthermia and sharp
dissection (partial resection of the distal tarsal plate, transpalpebral dissection and eyelid re-
positioning techniques). There are limitations with all these techniques and, most
importantly, all require general anaesthesia and magnification.
chosen for this dog. The eyelid is stabilised within a Desmarres chalazion clamp and
everted to expose the palpebral conjunctiva near the eyelid margin. The cryotherapy
handpiece is held in contact with the conjunctiva and a double freeze-thaw cycle is
performed to freeze the tissue to -25°C (Fig. 2.2e). At this temperature the hair follicles
should be destroyed but damage to the eyelid tissue is avoided. There are several
appropriate cryogens, but nitrous oxide is generally used in veterinary medicine. Ideally, a
thermocouple needle is inserted into the tissue to be treated but this is not routinely done in
animals. Eyelid swelling can occur postoperatively and with some cryogens this can be so
severe as to impair blinking (Fig. 2.2f). The swelling appears to cause little discomfort and
usually subsides within two to three days. The eyelid margins and eyelid hairs can
depigment within several days of treatment but generally repigment within a few months
(Fig. 2.2g). Postoperative medication includes topical antibiotic-corticosteroid eye ointment
and systemic NSAIDs.
Fig. 2.2e Distichia (blue arrow); normal eyelashes (white arrow)
P a     a  o  (  
the dog from this case.
Fig. 2.2g (A) Depigmentation of the eyelid margin in a young Labrador one week after
cryotherapy for bilateral distichiasis. (B) Repigmentation three months later.
Prognosis
The prognosis for improvement of the clinical signs following removal of distichia is good.
The aim of treatment is to reduce the overall number of distichia to a level compatible with
ocular comfort. Recurrence is possible with any of the techniques and repeated treatment is
often necessary. Complications specific to cryotherapy include permanent depigmentation
of the eyelid skin and hair (a cosmetic problem that is most relevant in show dogs).
Excessive freezing of the eyelid can result in necrosis of the tissue and subsequent scarring
and eyelid distortion, or damage to the meibomian glands which can result in a qualitative
tear film abnormality.
Discussion
Distichiasis is a common condition in the dog and should only be treated if ocular
discomfort is present because the techniques available are not entirely benign - the
complications of treatment may be more significant than the initial condition. A thorough
ophthalmic examination should be performed to ensure that the distichiasis is the primary
cause of the clinical signs (case l, this chapter). It is interesting to note that breeds
predisposed to distichiasis also tend to be predisposed to ectopic cilia (Ch. 5, case 1).
FurtherReading
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY 3
History
A 3-year-old male neutered Shar Pei is presented with a six-month history of bilateral eyelid
swellings and reduced vision. The dog has received routine vaccinations and regular
anthelmintic treatment, and is otherwise clinically well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 2.3a and b
Fig.2.3a
Fig. 2.3b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 2.3a The right and left eyes are similar There is a moderate amount of mucoid
e p r oe si   pn s  n o s
of the eyelid and periocular skin. The upper eyelids and their margins are distorted by
multiple focal swellings; the lower eyelids are relatively normal. There is conjunctival
hyperaemia and hyperpigmentation of the leading edge of the TEL and generalised corneal
opacification and pigmentation. The ocular surface is lustrous but the distorted Purkinje
images suggest that it is irregular. Corneal opacification prevents visualisation of the
intraocular structures.
 sso   pa  e i  d  -  rr ae 
demonstration. The focal swellings appear to be subconjunctival; these swellings are of
different sizes and are tan coloured. The palpebral conjunctiva is pigmented in areas and is
mildly hyperaemic; the pigmentation is indicative of chronic disease.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the history and the appearance of both eyes, the following conditions should be
considered for the eyelid abnormalities:
.Inflammatory
Chalazion This term describes a firm, non-painful swelling of the
meibomian gland located adjacent to the eyelid margin. It is caused by
obstruction of the duct of the gland which leads to accumulation of
inspissated lipid secretions (meibum) and  gland rupture. The liberated
secretions causes a chronic granulomatous inflammatory reaction within the
eyelid.
Hordoleum or  stye An external hordoleum or  stye develops from
suppurative infection of the Zeiss or Moll glands located adjacent to the
 ssss  o s s sn oo   
the eyelid margin. An internal hordoleum is caused by a localised infection
within the tarsal plate and distends the palpebral conjunctiva. Both
conditions are painful.
Meibomianitis This term refers to inflammation of the meibomian glands
which causes lid swelling and discomfort. Chronic meibomianitis can result
in thickened fibrotic eyelids and associated entropion or ectropion which
may require surgical correction.
Bacterial blepharitis This can occur as part of juvenile pyoderma (or
'puppy strangles') in which multiple abscesses form on the head, including
cause diffuse superficial blepharitis, pyogranulomatous blepharitis and
meibomianitis.
skin problem in young dogs.
Parasitic blepharitis This is caused by demodectic and sarcoptic mange and
is usually part of a generalised skin problem in young dogs. Cuterebra sp
infestation (larva of the bot fly) is rare but can involve the conjunctiva and
the eyelid.
Protozoal  blepharitis Eyelid involvement  is  common  with  systemic
leishmaniasis and signs include alopecia, diffuse blepharoedema, ulceration
and discrete nodular granulomas.
Immune-mediated blepharitis Immune-mediated and auto-immune diseases
can involve the eyelids, either in isolation or as part of a generalised disease
process. Eyelid lesions are typically ulcerative in nature.
          
and exists in two forms, a slow cutaneous form and a more aggressive
malignant form with multi-organ involvement. Both forms can have eyelid
involvement, e.g. chronic nodules, papules and plaques.
Nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis (NGE) NGE (or nodular ocular
fasciitis) is an inflammatory condition manifested by the formation of a
mass which primarily involves the episclera, conjunctiva and cornea (Ch. 6,
case 3). Eyelids and third eyelids can be affected, and involvement of the
uveal tract has also been described. The lesion can be single or multiple.
Collies are predisposed.
· Neoplasia Eyelid neoplasia is common in the dog and benign neoplasms outnumber
malignant neoplasms by 3:1. Most affected dogs are over 10 years old
Fibroma/fibrosarcoma,   mastocytoma,   lipoma,   squamous   cell  carcinoma
histiocytoma, and papilloma of the eyelid have been described in the dog. The most
common eyelid neoplasms are:
Meibomian gland adenoma The most common eyelid neoplasm in the dog
which erupts through the eyelid margin or the palpebral conjunctiva. The
mass can be pink or pigmented, lobular and can ulcerate, bleed and cause
ocular surface irritation. A single mass is common but several masses may
develop in the same individual. Meibomian gland adenocarcinomas are
rare.
Eyelid melanoma The second most common eyelid neoplasm in the dog.
Similar to other cutaneous melanomas, eyelid melanoma is usually benign
but has a tendency to recur locally following excision.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
。
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
。
Palpebral reflex - positive OU
。
Corneal reflex - positive OU
● Menace response - positive OU
● Examination with a focal light source - slit-lamp biomicroscopy reveals superficial
corneal vascularisation and that the orifices of the meibomian glands are obscured by
subconjunctival swellings.
· Ophthalmoscopy - fundic examination is limited by the corneal pathology but
 reveals no abnormalities in either eye.
● Schirmer tear test - 17 mm/min OU
· Fluorescein dye
。
Staining - negative OU
Jones test (fluorescein dye passage test) - positive OU
。
 ns si s o s s  -  -nq  
reduced tear film stability in both eyes.
· Tonometry - IOP 20 mmHg OU
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination is unremarkable.
Diagnosis
A diagnosis of chalazia is made in both eyes. This is based on the lack of discomfort and
the appearance of the lesions, specifically the tan colour and the association with the eyelid
margins.
Treatment
Chalazia can be treated by curettage under general anaesthesia. To perform curettage, the
eyelid is stabilised within a Desmarres chalazion clamp, and a scalpel blade incision is
made into the conjunctiva overlying the swelling. The secretions can be gently expressed
and samples taken and submitted for bacteriology (Fig. 2.3c). In this dog, each chalazion is
gently curetted with a surgical curette and/or cannula to remove as much of the secretion as
possible and the conjunctival incisions are left to heal by secondary intention.
 n s        s (  
Incisions have been made in the palpebral conjunctiva and the meibomian gland secretion
has been partially expressed from the more lateral of the swellings. (B) Inspissated secretion
from the meibomian gland (meibum) is expressed onto a sterile bacteriology swab.
In uncomplicated disease, a topical broad-spectrum antibiotic ointment is applied for
approximately 10 days. In more severe cases, medical therapy following curettage often
requires topical and systemic broad-spectrum antibiotic and systemic NSAID therapy for
several weeks. A topical lacrimomimetic is indicated to address the qualitative tear film
agent, e.g. corticosteroid (dexamethasone), NSAID (ketorolac trometamol) or 0.2%
cyclosporine. In addition to its lacrimostimulant effect (increasing the aqueous component
of the tear film), cyclosporine increases mucin within the tear film and reduces corneal
vascularisation and pigmentation. Treatment should be continued until the signs of keratitis
show no further improvement, i.e. are stable - this may take weeks to months.
This dog receives a four-week course of carprofen, a six-week course of systemic
oxytetracycline, a paraffin-based ophthalmic ointment, q8-12 hours for several weeks and
0.2% cyclosporine ointment q12 hours for three months, at which stage the corneal
vascularisation and pigmentation are considered to be stable.
Prognosis
The prognosis for the resolution of chalazia is good with appropriate surgical and medical
management. There is complete resolution of the chalazia six weeks following treatment in
this dog (Fig. 2.3d)
Fig.2.3d
  Right upper eyelid  six  weeks  following surgical curettage and medical
management. The chalazia have resolved and the eyelid margin appears more normal,
albeit slightly thickened. The conjunctival and corneal changes remain unchanged.
Discussion
A chalazion is a common eyelid condition in the dog but this case is unusual because of the
size and number of chalazia, the bilateral symmetry and the secondary superficial keratitis.
The meibomian glands secrete meibum, an essential lipid component of the tear film, which
reduces tear evaporation. Disease of the meibomian glands can therefore result in a
qualitative tear film abnormality. The diagnosis of qualitative tear film disorders in the dog
can be challenging, not least because they are infrequent compared to a quantitative tear
film deficiency (keratoconjunctivitis sicca). A qualitative tear film disorder can involve the
lipid or the mucin layers of the tear film and should be suspected if there is ocular surface
disease in the presence of normal aqueous tear production (i.e. a normal STT value).
Measurement of the tear film break-up time is often beneficial.
Tear film break-up time (TBUT) is a measure of the stability of the tear fim. TBUT is a measure of the time taken for the tear film to
dissociate from the ocular surface. Fluorescein dye is applied to the ocular surface, the eye is allowed to blink and then the eyelids are
easured. This procedure is facilitated by slit-lamp
biomicroscopy and a cobalt-blue fiter. The average TBUT is 20 s in the dog and 16.7 s in the cat.
FurtherReading
See Appendix 2.
CHAPTER 3
Abnormalities of the Third Eyelid
Introduction
The third eyelid (TEL) has an important role in the health of the ocular surface because the
gland of the TEL contributes to the aqueous portion of the precorneal tear film. The TEL
can also be involved in the distribution of the tear film. The position of the TEL is closely
related to the size and position of the eye and a change in position and appearance of the
TEL provides information about abnormalities of the globe and the orbit. Regardless of the
underlying condition, protrusion of the TEL is a common reason for presentation.
CASESTUDY 1
History
A 1-year-old female neutered Beagle is presented because of a swelling in the corner of
                
appeared to cause discomfort; the swelling in the right eye has only been present for three
weeks. The dog has received routine vaccinations and anthelmintic treatment and is
reportedly to be clinically well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 3.1a and b
Fig. 3.1a
Fig. 3.1b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Figs. 3.1a and b Both eyes are similar. A smooth, oval pink-to-brown mass protrudes from
behind the TEL (arrows). There is a seromucoid discharge at the medial canthus in the right
eye and along the edge of the mass in the left eye.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of both eyes, the following conditions should be considered:
· Prolapse of the gland of the TEL ('cherry eye') This is the most common primary
disorder of the TEL in the dog. The condition is thought to result from a weakness in
the connective tissue attachment between the gland of the TEL and the periorbital
tissue. The gland detaches and becomes visible above the leading edge of the TEL as
a smooth pink mass. The condition can be unilateral or bilateral and usually occurs
before two years of age. It is common in the Cocker Spaniel (American and English),
Beagle and brachycephalic dog breeds such as the Lhasa Apso, English Bulldog and
Pekingese, as well as large and giant dog breeds such as the Great Dane and Mastiff.
· Scrolled cartilage of the TEL Eversion, or less commonly inversion, of the T-shaped
cartilage within the TEL leads to folding of the leading edge of the TEL and exposure
of the bulbar surface (Fig. 3.1c). The proximal portion of the upright stem of the
cartilage is usually affected. Most commonly seen in young, large-dog breeds, it is
thought to occur because of a differential rate of growth between the posterior and
anterior portions of the cartilage. The condition can be associated with poor
distribution of the tear film, chronic low-grade ocular surface irritation, and
conjunctivitis.
 Neoplasia Neoplasia of the TEL is uncommon in the dog. Several neoplasms have
been reported and include adenocarcinoma of the TEL gland, papilloma and
malignant melanoma. Adenocarcinoma of the TEL gland can appear as a localised,
firm, pink swelling on the bulbar surface of the TEL and as such must be
differentiated from prolapse of the TEL gland; more advanced tumours can present as
orbital disease. Adenocarcinomas usually occur in middle-aged to older dogs. TEL
papillomas   are benign  cauliflower-like  growths from  the  conjunctival  surface
whereas TEL melanomas are usually malignant and appear as brown to black lesions
on the conjunctiva
   o   o    s  s
Congenital/developmental epithelial inclusion cysts, parasitic cysts, cystic neoplasia.
and cysts of the gland of the TEL, lacrimal gland (dacryops), and canaliculi
conjunctival swellings.
· Subconjunctival fat prolapse Prolapse of orbital fat appears as a non-painful, slightly
moveable subconjunctival mass adjacent to the limbus.
Fig. 3.1c Eversion of the leading edge of the TEL in the left eye of a young Great Dane.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
o Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
。
 Dazzle reflex - positive OU
● Menace response - positive OU
● Schirmer tear test - 22 mm/min OU
● Fluorescein dye
。
 Staining - negative OU
。
 Jones test (fluorescein dye passage test) - positive OU
· Tonometry - IOP 15 mmHg OU
Following topical anaesthesia, manipulation of the TEL with atraumatic forceps in both
eyes confirms that the swellings are associated with the bulbar surface of the TEL and do
not involve the leading edge. The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no
additional abnormalities and a general physical examination is unremarkable.
Atraumatic forceps can be used to manipulate the TEL in the conscious animal. Graefe fixation forceps and Bennett cilia forceps are
particularly useful and avoid inadvertent damage to the TEL
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of bilateral prolapse of the gland of the TEL
is made. In this dog the conjunctiva covering the gland is pigmented - this is an unusual
finding and is considered to be the result of chronic exposure.
Treatment
Until the mid-1970s, surgical excision of the prolapsed gland was considered an acceptable
treatment but the important role of the gland of the TEL in tear production has since been
conjunctivitis, irritation and ocular discharge. There are several published techniques to
surgically reposition the gland and these techniques can be divided into those that anchor
the gland in position and those that create a conjunctival pocket for the gland. There is
 -n n   e r  o  n   
surgery.
The Morgan pocket technique is chosen and used in this dog. After induction of general
anaesthesia but prior to the start of the surgery, one drop of topical 2.5% phenylephrine is
applied to the ocular surface (Fig. 3.1d). Two parallel curvilinear incisions are made in the
bulbar conjunctiva, one either side of the gland (Fig. 3.1e). Following blunt dissection to
create a pocket beneath the most distal incision, the gland is reduced into this area of dead
space. The conjunctival wound is closed with a simple continuous pattern of 6/0 absorbable
suture material (polyglactin 91o), leaving both knots on the anterior surface of the TEL.
Postoperative medication  includes a  five-day  course of  systemic  NSAID  and  broad-
spectrum  antibiotic  therapy,  and   a  topical steroid/antibiotic preparation   which  is
administered for 14 days.
Fig. 3.1d Blanching of the conjunctival vasculature because of vasoconstriction following
the topical application of 2.5% phenylephrine in the left eye.
Fig. 3.le Intraoperative photograph of the posterior aspect of the TEL, revealing the
direct arterial and venous access, which could lead to unwanted systemic effects on the heart rate and blood pressure (Herring ta.,
2004).
Prognosis
Proper surgical technique, adequate magnification and illumination, and appropriate
instrumentation should result in successful replacement of the gland and a good cosmetic
outcome (Fig. 3.1f). One study reports that the rate of re-prolapse following the Morgan
report a low rate of re-prolapse (0-4%) following anchoring techniques (Moore and
Constantinescu, 1997). Postoperative complications include cyst formation, suture reaction,
corneal ulceration (as a result of exposed suture material contacting the ocular surface) and
reduced mobility of the TEL. Cyst formation following the pocket technique is thought to
occur if the conjunctival incision is closed without leaving a small gap at either end for the
escape of tear secretions. A cyst will typically form several weeks after surgery and presents
as a non-painful swelling of the TEL; this is often misinterpreted by the owner as re-
prolapse of the gland (Fig. 3.1g). Cysts can be surgically excised intact (Fig. 3.1h) resulting
in a good cosmetic outcome (Fig. 3.1i).
Fig. 3.1f Postoperative appearance at two hours. The TELs are slightly more prominent than
usual and there is mild chemosis and conjunctival hyperaemia - expected findings at this
Stage.
Fig. 3.1g Large cyst within the TEL of a young Rottweiler one month following the Morgan
pocket technique to replace a prolapsed gland of the TEL (left eye). (A) Frontal view. (B)
Obliqueview.
Fig. 3.1h Excision of the intact cyst.
15
20
25
30
R
Fig. 3.li Ten days following excision of the cyst from the left TEL
Discussion
Although repositioning of the TEL gland preserves its tear function, it is still possible for an
affected eye to develop keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) for other reasons. The reason for
this is that many breeds predisposed to prolapse of the TEL gland are also predisposed to
immune-mediated KCS.
It is generally accepted by veterinary ophthalmologists that the Mastiff and Mastiff-type
breeds have a greater likelihood of complications following TEL gland surgery than other
dog breeds. These breeds often have marked hypertrophy of the gland and inflammation of
the overlying conjunctiva at presentation, both of which can lead to more challenging
surgery.
References and Further Reading
Herring IP, Jacobson JD, Pickett JP (2004) Cardiovascular effects of topical ophthalmic
10% phenylephrine in dogs. Vet Ophthalmol, 7(1), 41-46.
Moore CP & Constantinescu GM (1997) Surgery of the adnexa. Vet Clin North Am Small
Animal Pract, 27(5), 1052-1058.
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY2
History
A 3-year-old male German Shepherd Dog is presented because of red eyes and a sticky
ocular discharge for several weeks. The dog has received routine vaccinations and
anthelmintic treatment and is reported to be clinically well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 3.2a and 3.2b.
Fig.3.2a
Fig.3.2b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 3.2a The left and right eyes are similar. There is a mild increased prominence of the
because of nuclear sclerosis. The Purkinje images are normal. Right eye - fluorescein dye is
visible within the tear film meniscus along the lower eyelid
Fig. 3.2b Only the right eye is shown. The upper eyelid has been manually everted and
the globe retropulsed so that the TEL can be evaluated. The leading edge of the TEL is
irregular and there are multiple lymphoid follicles on the anterior aspect of TEL which
appear as small, round, pink nodules. There is hyperaemia and depigmentation of the TEL,
bulbar and palpebral conjunctivae.  The lustrous  cornea suggests the presence of an
adequate tear film.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance ofboth TELs, the following conditions should be considered:
· Plasma cell infiltration of the TEL (atypical pannus or 'plasmoma') This appears as
thickening and depigmentation of the TEL associated with follicle formation. Plasma
cell  infiltration of the TEL is often associated with chronic superficial keratitis
(pannus) but can also occur in isolation. The condition is usually bilateral and the
consisting predominantly  of plasma  cells  and   fewer lymphocytes  is seen  on
histopathology.
· Follicular conjunctivitis Lymphoid follicles on the bulbar surface of the TEL are
normal but in follicular conjunctivitis the follicles are larger and more numerous and
can also form on the palpebral surface. Follicular conjunctivitis can cause mild
 ssa so  s o s s  e p  go is
18 months old are most commonly affected. The cause is unknown but it is thought
to be because of chronic antigenic stimulation.
· Nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis (NGE) NGE (or ocular nodular fasciitis) is
a n inflammatory condition which primarily involves the episclera, conjunctiva and
cornea. The clinical appearance ranges from an irregular thickening to a discrete
mass or nodule, most commonly at the dorsolateral region of the limbus. The eyelids
and TEL can be involved; if affected the TEL is hyperaemic, thickened and
depigmented. Involvement of the uveal tract has also been described. A mixed
inflammatory infiltrate composed predominantly of lymphocytes, plasma cells and
histiocytes with a variable spindle cell component is seen on histopathology. Collies
are predisposed.
· Idiopathic granulomatous  disease This is  an  inflammatory  condition which  is
characterised by multiple masses involving the eyelids, conjunctiva, TEL and skin
Granulomatous inflammation with large epithelioid cells, plasma cells and
lymphocytes is seen on histopathology.
· Neoplasia Neoplasia of the TEL is uncommon in the dog. Several neoplasms have
been reported and include adenocarcinoma of the TEL gland, papilloma and
malignant melanoma. Adenocarcinoma of the TEL gland can appear as a localised,
firm, pink swelling on the bulbar surface of the TEL and as such must be
differentiated from TEL gland prolapse; more advanced tumours can present as
orbital disease. Adenocarcinomas usually occur in middle-aged to older dogs. TEL
whereas TEL melanomas are usually malignant and appear as brown to black lesions
on the conjunctiva. Less common TEL neoplasms include squamous cell carcinoma
and lymphosarcoma; the latter may be bilateral and manifests as thickening and
hyperaemia of the TEL.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
 Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
o Dazzle reflex - positive OU
· Menace response - positive OU
· Schirmer tear test - 20 mm/min OU
· Fluorescein dye - negative staining OU
· Cytology and biopsy - these tests are not performed in this dog because of the
characteristic appearance but can be helpful to distinguish an inflammatory from a
neoplastic process.
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination is unremarkable.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of bilateral plasma cell infiltration of the
TEL is made. This diagnosis is usually based on the classic appearance of the TEL in the
age and breed of dog without the need for conjunctival cytology or histopathology.
Treatment
Treatment of plasma cell infiltration of the TEL is usually based on topical
immunosuppressive  therapy.  Corticosteroids  are  the mainstay  of therapy and  o.1%
prednisolone acetate or 0.1% dexamethasone sodium phosphate are the drugs of choice.
The frequency of application depends on the severity of the clinical signs and may range
from q4-12 hours. The frequency should be tapered over weeks as the inflammation
decreases. Cyclosporine A (0.2% ointment, or drops up to 2%) can also be used q12 hours;
it tends to be more expensive and may not be as effective as corticosteroid therapy in
achieving remission, but can be beneficial for long-term maintenance therapy. A
subconjunctival  injection of  a  long-acting corticosteroid  (e.g.  triamcinolone)  can be
considered in refractory cases or in dogs that do not tolerate topical treatment.
This dog receives 0.1% dexamethasone sodium phosphate q6 hours for 10 days and then
q8 hours until re-examination three months later (Fig. 3.2c). Frequency of drug application
less prominent and there is subtle repigmentation. After three months, the leading edge of
the TEL is more regular, the conjunctival hypaeremia has resolved and there is further
repigmentation. The frequency of treatment is reduced to q12 hours and the dog monitored
for signs of recurrence on a regular long-term basis.
Fig. 3.2c (A) TEL at presentation. (B) Ten days after the start of topical treatment. (C) Three
months after the start of topical treatment. There is a progressive reduction in conjunctival
hypaeremia and number of follicles, conjunctival repigmentation and a smoothing of the
leading edge of the TEL
Prognosis
The prognosis for the resolution of clinical signs is good, as most dogs with plasma cell
infiltration of the TEL respond to appropriate topical therapy. It is, however, not uncommon
for the resolution to be partial. Recurrence is common and long-term monitoring is
important as  most affected dogs require maintenance  therapy for  life, e.g.  topical
corticosteroid therapy or cyclosporine A q12-24 hours.
Discussion
Although plasma cell infiltration of the TEL can occur in isolation, it occurs more often in
conjunction with chronic superficial keratitis (pannus). Chronic superficial keratitis begins
as a vascular lesion in the conjunctiva near the lateral limbus, and can extend onto the
and the entire cornea may eventually become vascularised and pigmented (Fig. 3.2e)
Fig. 3.2d Mild chronic superficial keratitis (arrow) in the ventrolateral quadrant of the left
 o  nn d m o      e o 
TEL.
Fig. 3.2e Advanced chronic superficial keratitis in the right eye of a German Shepherd Dog
the entire cornea is vascularised, pigmented and fibrotic. There is plasma cell infiltration
Of the TEL.
The syndrome of chronic superficial keratitis and plasma cell infiltration of the TEL is
thought to be the result of an immune-mediated process. Chronic superficial keratitis is
exacerbated by environmental factors such as ultraviolet radiation and altitude. The cornea
contains tissue-specific antigens that are modified by external factors such as ultraviolet
light resulting in cell-mediated inflammation. As with plasma cell infiltration of the TEL, the
diagnosis of chronic superficial keratitis is usually based on the signalment and the clinical
appearance.
Further Reading
See Appendix 2.
CASE STUDY 3
History
A one-year-old female neutered Labrador Retriever is presented with a one-month history
of lethargy and coughing, and asymmetry between the eyes over the last two weeks. The
dog has received routine vaccinations and anthelmintic treatment.
Questions
1 . Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Fig. 3.3a (A) on
presentation and Figs. 3.3a (B) and 3.3b, 10 days later.
Fig. 3.3a (A) Initial presentation. (B) Ten days later.
一
Fig. 3.3b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 3.3a Photograph B was taken 10 days after photograph A. The tapetal reflections are
yellow in B but not discernable in A - this is because of a subtle difference in the direction
of gaze. The right eye is normal. Left eye - there is subtle protrusion of the TEL which is
more pronounced in B.
Fig. 3.3b Left eye - there is mild exotropia (lateral strabismus) evident by an increase in
the amount of visible sclera on the medial aspect of the globe and reduced scleral show
laterally. There is relative anisocoria (Os > OD) because of different ambient room light.
Examination from a distance (as indicated in Fig. 3.3a) is essential in order toobserve suble asymmetry If possible, resraint shoud be
nso pou saop amss reigaded au jo uonosp pue paqimsip nou s uys ienooad aun neu os euu
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the history and the appearance of the left eye, the following explanations should be
considered:
· Increased volume of orbital tissue This can cause exophthalmos and/or strabismus
and TEL protrusion. Causes include orbital inflammation, infection, neoplasia, cysts,
· Reduced orbital tissue volume This results in enophthalmos and TEL protrusion.
Causes include dehydration, marked weight loss (reduction of orbital fat) and fibrosis
· Pain Ocular surface pain and intraocular pain can lead to retraction of the globe and
subsequent enophthalmos and protrusion of the TEL. Causes of ocular surface pain
include disorders of the adnexa, tear film, conjunctiva, and cornea (Ch. 2 and 5).
   g  o  sa  d oo o s
· Decreased tone of extraocular muscles Horner's syndrome (Ch. 1o, case I) and
some sedatives, e.g. acepromazine, cause enophthalmos as a result of decreased tone
1n the extraocular muscles.
· Increased tone of extraocular muscles Tetanus and strychnine poisoning cause TEL
The TEL in the dog is devoid of muscle and its movement and position is determined by the position and size of the eye. In contrast, the
TEL in the cat contains several muscles and its movement can be both active and passive
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
 Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
 Dazzle reflex - positive OU
Vestibulo-ocular reflex - positive OU
。
· Menace response -- positive OU
· Schirmer tear test - 20 mm/min OU
· Fluorescein dye - negative staining OU
· Tonometry - IOP 18 mmHg OU
Retropulsion is reduced and associated with pain in the left eye but is normal in the right
eye. Examination of the bulbar aspect of the TEL in the left eye is performed following
topical  anaesthesia  and reveals  no  abnormalities.  The remainder  of the ophthalmic
examination and a general physical examination is unremarkable.
Further Diagnostic Tests
· Laboratory tests - routine haematology, biochemistry and urine analysis are
unremarkable.
· CT scan - this is indicated to evaluate the orbit and adjacent structures. The scan
reveals fluid accumulation in the left nasal cavity, patchy lysis of the frontal bone of
the medial orbit (arrow), and a soft tissue mass within the medial orbit (asterix) (Fig.
3.3c).
● Cytology - FNA of the orbital mass is performed under ultrasound guidance; results
are non-diagnostic.
· Rhinoscopy - this confirms the presence of fluid within the left nasal cavity and
reveals several white plaques on the soft palate, from which multiple tissue biopsies
are taken.
· Histopathology - small numbers of yeast organisms, surrounded by a thick capsule,
can be seen, with an associated mixed inflammatory infiltrate. The appearance of the
high titre of 1:2054.
Fig. 3.3c CT scan (transverse image). There is fluid accumulation in the left nasal cavity,
patchy lysis of the frontal bone of the medial orbit (arrow), and a soft tissue mass within the
medial orbit (asterix).
4/01/20101
Fig. 3.3d Yeast organism (arrow) surrounded by clear space (capsule/shrinkage artefact). H
& E stain (x400). Bar = 50 μm. Reproduced with permission from EJ Scurrell.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of orbital cryptococcosis with systemic
involvement is made.
Treatment
Anti-fungal therapy with fluconazole is considered the first line of treatment in dogs with
ocular and central nervous system (CNS) cryptococcosis. The dose is 5 mg/kg per os q12-
24 hours for 60-90 days. Amphotericin B has also been used alone and in combination
   o     s  n p s 
0.45% saline containing 2.5% dextrose) and is administered by subcutaneous injection two
to three times weekly. Response to treatment should be monitored at least monthly by
evaluation of antigen titres and renal and hepatic function. Treatment is continued until the
antigen titre is negative and for at least two months after resolution of clinical signs.
This dog receives combination therapy of fluconazole and amphotericin B; there is
excellent clinical improvement and the antigen titre decreases to 1:504 during the first
month of treatment.
Prognosis
The prognosis for cryptococcosis is guarded because of the likelihood of CNS involvement.
Serial evaluation of the antigen titre is not helpful for determining the prognosis but an
initial decline in the titre by 25-50% per month usually corresponds to clinical
improvement.
Discussion
gatti, is associated with eucalyptus trees. In tissues, the appearance is of a yeast-like
organism with a thick capsule, with the size varying from 3.5-7 μm. Young (less than four
 soo s o  i o  op n o  a
inhalation of spores with subsequent systemic dissemination. Clinical signs depend on the
organ system(s) involved. In the dog, CNS (50-80%), upper respiratory system (50%),
s        o 
clinical signs include anorexia, lethargy and depression. The most common ocular signs are
chorioretinitis   with   exudative    retinal   detachment  and optic  neuritis  because  of
leptomeningitis of the optic nerve. Diagnosis is made on the basis of cytology, histology,
culture and serology. Canine cryptococcosis is less frequently diagnosed than feline
cryptococcosis and is most often found in dogs from the southern US, Australia (in
association with eucalyptus trees) and Canada (in association with fir trees).
References and Further Reading
Krohne SG (2oo0) Canine systemic fungal infections. Vet Clin North Am: Small Animal
Pract, 30 (5) 1063-1090.
Duncan TBC (2006) Evaluation of risk factors for Cryptococcus gattii infection in dogs and
cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 228 (3) 377-382.
See Appendix 2.
CHAPTER4
Ocular Discharge
Introduction
Ocular discharge is a common presenting clinical sign in the dog and cat. The nature of the
discharge can provide helpful information about the underlying problem, although the
colour, consistency and amount of discharge are not specific to particular ocular conditions.
CASE STUDY 1
History
A 10-month-old female neutered Labrador Retriever is presented because of a watery
discharge and the appearance of a swelling in the corner of the right eye. There are no
apparent signs of discomfort. She has received routine vaccinations and anthelmintic
treatment and is otherwise well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Fig. 4.1a.
Fig. 4.1a
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What Does the Figure Show?
Fig. 4.1a Right eye - there is epiphora and a well-circumscribed swelling ventral to the
medial canthus. A thin strand of mucus is adherent to the cornea; the Purkinje images are
normal.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the presence of epiphora and concurrent medial canthal swelling, the following
conditions/explanations should be considered:
. Impaired tear drainage
Cyst Congenital cysts can involve the canaliculus (canaliculops), and the
    e  o    
   o o     s  
presentation for this condition.
      
the nasolacrimal system. It can be unilateral or bilateral and can affect the
upper and/or lower punctum. Atresia of the upper punctum is usually
asymptomatic because the majority of tear drainage occurs via the lower
punctum. Clinical signs include epiphora, conjunctivitis and, if severe.
secondary dermatitis involving the medial canthus and adjacent facial skin.
Micropunctum This refers to the incomplete development of the upper
and/or lower punctum which appears as a small round opening rather than
the normal elliptical opening (1 x 0.3 mm). It can be unilateral or bilateral
and, as with upper punctal atresia, incomplete development of the upper
punctum is usually asymptomatic. Clinical signs include epiphora and less
frequently conjunctivitis.
is usually asymptomatic but can cause epiphora.
Canalicular and nasolacrimal duct aplasia Aplasia of the components of
疗
the nasolacrimal system other than the puncta are rare but if present can
cause epiphora.
Breed-related medial canthal anomalies Compression of the lower punctum
and canaliculus can result from lower medial entropion.  Caruncular
trichiasis and deep medial canthal grooves caused by tight medial canthal
ligaments exacerbate the effects of the entropion. This syndrome is common
in brachycephalic and small and toy breeds such as the Miniature and Toy
Poodle and the Bichon Frise. The clinical presentation varies in severity
from mild bilateral epiphora to marked tear staining with secondary
dermatitis (Fig. 4.1b).
Dacryocystitis lnflammation of the nasolacrimal sac is common condition in
the dog and is usually caused by the presence of a foreign body lodged in
the nasolacrimal sac or duct. Clinical signs include epiphora, purulent
ocular discharge, conjunctivitis, discomfort and, occasionally, a draining
fistula ventral to the medial canthus.
Facial trauma Sharp trauma and fractures of the maxillary and lacrimal
bones can damage the nasolacrimal duct system and cause epiphora.
Neoplasia Primary neoplasia of the nasolacrimal duct has not been reported
an  s   x o so s q ss n 
the nasolacrimal duct. Clinical signs include sneezing, mucopurulent or
haemorrhagic nasal discharge and epiphora.
· Increased lacrimation This can result from either ocular surface or intraocular pain.
The ocular surface is primarily innervated by the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal
nerve, with some contribution from the maxillary branch. Increased lacrimation
 overwhelms the nasolacrimal drainage system and epiphora results.
Fig. 4.1b Marked epiphora in a young Bichon Frise secondary to compression of the lower
puncta by medial lower entropion, and exacerbated by caruncular trichiasis and deep
medial canthal grooves.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
。
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
Palpebral reflex - positive OU
· Menace response - positive OU
· Examination with a focal light source - slit-lamp biomicroscopy reveals that both
upper and lower puncta are a normal size and shape OU.
· Schirmer tear test - 17 mm/min Os, 19 mm/min OD. These normal values suggest
that there is reduced tear drainage rather than increased lacrimation in the right eye.
· Fluorescein dye
Staining - negative OU
Jones test (fluorescein dye passage test) - positive Os, negative OD. This
。
finding supports reduced tear drainage on the right side (Fig. 4.1c).
· Tonometry - IOP 17 mmHg OU
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination is unremarkable.
Fig. 4.1c (A) Both eyes following the application of fluorescein dye. Accumulation of
fluorescein within the meniscus of the tear film and overflow at the medial canthus suggest
abnormal nasolacrimal drainage in the right eye. (B) Fluorescein dye is only visible at the
left nares (positive Jones test).
Further Diagnostic Tests
● Nasolacrimal duct cannulation and flush (performed under general anaesthesia) - a
normograde flush (eye to nose) confirms the patency of the nasolacrimal system in
both eyes.
Cannulation of the nasolacrimal punctum can be performed with a metal or plastic lacrimal cannula. The size of the cannula
(22-25 gauge) depends on the size of the animal; plastic cannulas with an outer diameter of 0.9 mm in the dog and 0.76 mm in
1.Sterilesalin
used for flushing although tap water
drainage, and because it is usually easier.
● Radiography - radiographic evaluation of the nasolacrimal system requires plain
radiography  followed  by a  contrast  study (dacryocystorhinography).  Following
cannulation, radiopaque contrast material is injected into the upper punctum until it
emerges from the ipsilateral nostril (1-2 ml in the dog).
· The plain radiographs in this dog are normal. The lateral dacryocystorhinogram
demonstrates contrast material evenly filing the length of the nasolacrimal duct from
the eye to the distal nasal ostium. The duct appears normal with respect to its course
and diameter (Fig. 4.1d).
· CT scan - this is performed to evaluate the nature of the swelling at the ventromedial
canthus and to determine whether it is associated with the nasolacrimal duct.
· In this dog, the swelling is cystic and compresses the proximal part of the
nasolacrimal duct; contrast material fills the entire length of the nasolacrimal duct and
there is no physical connection with the lumen of the cyst (Fig. 4.1e).
Fig. 4.1d Dacryocystorhinogram showing contrast material filling the duct (arrows)
Spillage of contrast material is present on the eyelid skin and around the nostril (asterix).
Reproduced with permission from RN White.
Fig. 4.1e CT scans. (A) 3-D volume rendered image of the skull, with the lateral surface of
the incisive and maxillary bones removed. Contrast material fills the length of the normal
nasolacrimal duct (arrows). (B) Transverse scan at the level of the cyst. Contrast material is
visible within the right nasolacrimal duct (white arrow) but not within the cyst (dotted
circle). The left nasolacrimal duct does not contain contrast material (red arrow). There is a
small amount of skin contamination by contrast material (asterix).
DFOV:15.
IM:
65P
A
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, the diagnosis is compression of the right nasolacrimal
duct by a cyst.
Treatment
Surgical excision of the cyst is indicated because, if left untreated, it is likely to enlarge.
Under general anaesthesia, the nasolacrimal duct is cannulated with blue 2/0 nylon suture
material. The coloured suture material highlights the position of the duct and minimises the
risk of inadvertent damage. The cyst is carefully dissected from the surrounding tissue and
totally excised; the soft tissues are closed routinely. The nasolacrimal duct is flushed in a
normograde direction  to confirm patency.  Postoperative medication  includes systemic
broad-spectrum antibiotic and NSAID therapy for five days.
Prognosis
The prognosis for the resolution of epiphora in the right eye is excellent if the nasolacrimal
duct is not damaged and if the cyst lining is entirely removed.
Discussion
Cysts of the nasolacrimal system and associated structures are uncommon and are generally
presumed to be congenital. A thorough investigation is indicated to establish whether the
cyst has a physical connection with the nasolacrimal system and in order to facilitate
accurate surgical planning. If there is a connection (dacryops or canaliculops), even
system.  Excellent illumination, magnification and microinstrumentation are essential
requirements for successful surgery of the nasolacrimal system.
Further Reading
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY2
History
A four-year-old male neutered domestic shorthaired cat is presented with a three-week
history of a thick discharge from the left eye which is unresponsive to topical fusidic acid
and gentamicin. The owner has also noticed that the cat has been grooming the left side of
its face more frequently than usual. The cat has received routine
vaccinationsand
anthelmintic treatment; he is an indoor/outdoor cat and is otherwise well
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 4.2a and b.
Fig. 4.2a
Fig. 4.2b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 4.2a The right eye is normal. Left eye - the palpebral fissure is narrowed and there is a
marked mucopurulent ocular discharge.
Fig. 4.2b Lefft eye - there is a small amount of caseous material at the medial canthus in
addition to copious mucopurulent discharge on the eyelids and periocular hair. The lustrous
ocular surface and normal Purkinje image are consistent with a good tear film.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the left eye, the clinical diagnosis is mucopurulent ocular
discharge for which the following conditions should be considered:
· Dacryocystitis Inflammation of the nasolacrimal sac in the cat is most commonly
associated with feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) infection. It can lead to the formation of
a stricture within the duct and permanent epiphora. Dacryocystitis can also be caused
by a primary bacterial infection or a foreign body lodged in the nasolacrimal sac or
duct. Clinical signs include epiphora, purulent ocular discharge, conjunctivitis,
discomfort and occasionally, a draining skin fistula ventral to the medial canthus
· Infectious conjunctivitis This is very common in the cat, the two most important
causes being FHV-1 and Chlamydophila felis (C felis) (Ch. 6, case I). The ocular
discharge  is generally  serous  and represents  increased  lacrimation  caused by
conjunctivitis and ocular irritation. The discharge may become mucoid or
mucopurulent  with  secondary bacterial  involvement, most commonly by
conjunctival fornices, behind the TEL or within the nasolacrimal sac and duct can
· Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) KCS is characterised by a deficiency of the aqueous
component of the tear film and is uncommon in the cat. Feline KCs is usually
associated with blepharoconjunctivitis, as opposed to immune-mediated KCS in the
dog. A tenacious mucoid or mucopurulent ocular discharge is the hallmark of canine
KCS but clinical signs in the cat are often subtle. The diagnosis of KCS in the cat is
usually based on the combination of low tear production and compatible clinical
signs, although Schirmer test values are highly variable in the cat.
· Qualitative tear film deficiency This is characterised by an abnormality of the lipid or
mucin layers of the tear film and is uncommon in both cats and dogs. Although a
mucoid discharge is typically present in affected dogs, cats usually present with
ulcerative keratitis, acceptable aqueous tear production and a rapid tear film break-up
time.
w ial ayi joy uayel aun ayi Aq panseau se 'u iea au jo Aqs au jo ainseau e s! (lnal) aun dn-yeaq wg ieal
to dissociate from the ocular surface. Fluorescein dye is applied to the ocular surface, the eye is allowed to blink and then the
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
. Ocular reflexes
 Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
 o  Dazzle reflex -- positive OU
o  Palpebral reflex - positive OU
● Menace response - positive OU
· Examination with a focal light source - the ocular discharge is removed from the left
eye. There is marked hyperaemia of the palpebral, bulbar and TEL conjunctiva.
Magnification is helpful to evaluate the nasolacrimal puncta but even with slit-lamp
biomicroscopy the puncta are difficult to discern because of the conjunctival
swelling.
● Schirmer tear test - 16 mm/min Os, 19 mm/min OD
· Fluorescein dye
 oStaining - negative OU
o Jones test (fluorescein dye passage test) - positive OD, negative OS. This is
suggestive of reduced tear drainage in the left eye (Fig. 4.2c).
· Tonometry - IOP 17 mmHg OU
● Cytology (ocular discharge) - this reveals a large population of neutrophils, some of
which contain cocci.
● Culture (ocular discharge) - this reveals a heavy mixed growth of Staphylococcus
aureus and Escherichia coli.
A more detailed examination is performed whilst the cat is under general anaesthesia and
reveals a focal swelling ventral to the medial canthus of the left eye. The remainder of the
ophthalmic  examination  reveals  no  additional  abnormalities  and  a  general physical
examination is unremarkable.
Fig. 4.2c Jones test: right side positive, left side negative. Note the small amount of
fluorescein dye below the left nares which has spread from the right nostril.
Further Diagnostic Tests
· Nasolacrimal duct cannulation and flush (performed under general anaesthesia)
flushing in a normograde direction (eye to nose) results in the expression of a
copious amount of mucupurulent material from both puncta but no fluid from the
ipsilateral nostril. These findings are consistent with a nasolacrimal duct obstruction
(Fig. 4.2d)
e ay jo azs ay ena de osed no peau e ym pad aq uea wund reuosu ay jo uoeu
u wuu glo pue sop au u uu 6'o jo ilauep iamo ue ypim semuuea onse[d jeujue au jo azis au uo spuadap (aanea sz-zz)
distilled water and lactated Ringe
drainage, and because it is usually easiel
· Radiography - radiographic evaluation of the nasolacrimal system requires plain
radiography  followed  by  a  contrast  study  (dacryocystorhinography).  Following
cannulation, radiopaque contrast material is injected into the upper punctum until it
emerges from the ipsilateral nostril (0.5 ml in a cat).
· In this cat, the plain radiographs are normal. The dorsoventral dacryocystorhinogram
demonstrates contrast material within the proximal region of the duct (arrow) which
stops at the level of the root of the maxillary canine tooth (Fig. 4.2e)
Fig. 4.2d Copious mucopurulent discharge and caseous material are expressed from the
puncta during flushing of the nasolacrimal duct.
Fig. 4.2e Dorsoventral dacryocystorhinogram. There  is contrast material within the
proximal nasolacrimal duct (arrow) up to the level of the root of the maxillary canine tooth;
the dotted line indicates the course of the nasolacrimal duct to the distal nasal ostium.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of dacryocystitis and proximal obstruction
of the nasolacrimal duct in the left eye is made.
Treatment
Surgical exploration of the proximal nasolacrimal duct is indicated because of the poor
response to medical management. The upper and lower puncta are both cannulated with a
plastic cannula; the cannula tips are advanced until they contact each other within the
lacrimal sac (Allgoewer and NOller, 2009, Fig. 4.2f A). An incision is made in the
conjunctiva overlying the lacrimal sac and a second incision through the skin overlying the
swelling ventral to the medial canthus. The lacrimal sac is explored by blunt dissection (Fig.
4.2f, B) and a grass seed foreign body is discovered and removed (Fig. 4.2f, C). The
lacrimal sac is irrigated with saline and the soft tissues are closed routinely. A mini Penrose
drain is inserted (Fig. 4.2f, D) and removed after 48 hours. Systemic broad-spectrum
antibiotic and NSAID therapy is continued for a week.
Fig. 4.2f (A) Placement of a plastic nasolacrimal cannula (outer diameter 0.76 mm) in each
of the upper and lower punctum. (B) Exploration of the lacrimal sac. (C) Identification and
removal of a grass seed foreign body. (D) Routine closure incorporating a mini Penrose
drain.
30
Prognosis
The short-term prognosis for resolution of the ocular discharge is excellent. However,
because of the severity of the dacryocystitis and the potential for stricture formation within
the nasolacrimal duct, permanent epiphora is a likely complication in this cat.
Discussion
Severe unilateral mucopurulent ocular discharge is an uncommon clinical presentation in
the cat and each case should be approached in a systematic manner in order to reach an
magnification as well as microinstrumentation are essential requirements for successful
surgery of the nasolacrimal system.
Further Reading
Allgoewer I & NOller C (2009) A surgical technique for dacryocystotomy in dogs with
foreign body induced dacryocystitis. Proc Eur Coll Vet Ophthalmol, Copenhagen 2o09, Vet
Ophthal, 12 (6), 379-389.
See Appendix 2.
CASE STUDY 3
History
A seven-year-old female neutered cross-breed dog is presented with a four-week history of
a thick green discharge from the left eye which has been unresponsive to topical fusidic
acid. The dog has received routine vaccinations and anthelmintic treatment and is otherwise
clinically well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 4.3a, b and c.
Fig. 4.3a
Fig. 4.3b
Fig. 4.3c
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 4.3a The right eye is normal. Left eye - the palpebral fissure is slightly narrowed and
there is a marked mucopurulent ocular discharge.
Fig- 4.3b Left eye - there is a slight protrusion of the TEL. A tenacious mucopuruleni
discharge is adherent to the ocular surface. The Purkinje images are disrupted.
Fig. 4.3c The left eye after the discharge has been flushed from the ocular surface. There
is generalised corneal pigmentation which prevents assessment of intraocular structures.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the left eye, the clinical diagnosis is mucopurulent discharge for
which the following conditions should be considered:
· Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) A common ocular condition in the dog which
results from a deficiency in the aqueous component of the tear film. There is
desiccation of the ocular surface, discomfort, and reduced vision. Clinical signs of
early KCS include a mucoid or mucopurulent discharge and conjunctivitis which can
be misdiagnosed as a primary bacterial conjunctivitis. The hallmark of KCS is that
the ocular discharge is tenacious and adheres to the ocular surface. This is in contrast
to ocular discharge that is readily removed from the ocular surface during blinking in
eyes with an adequate tear film. With more advanced disease, there is a lack-lustre
appearance to the ocular surface. The most common form of KCs in the dog is a
bilateral, tissue-specific, immune-mediated disorder. Other causes of bilateral disease
include viral adenitis (canine distemper virus), drug induced (systemic
sulphonamides, etodolac, and atropine), and endocrine disease (diabetes mellitus.
hypothyroidism, and hyperadrenocorticism). Unilateral disease is less common but
can  result  from  congenital lacrimal  gland aplasia/hypoplasia,  topical atropine,
excision of the TEL gland, uncorrected prolapse of the TEL gland, neurotrophic
keratitis (loss of sensation to the ocular surface), neurologic deficits (loss of
parasympathetic innervation to the lacrimal gland), orbital disease, local radiation
therapy and chronic blepharoconjunctivitis.
· Qualitative tear film deficiency This refers to an abnormality of the lipid or mucin
components of the tear film. The deficiency is usually bilateral. The majority of cases
in the dog are associated with abnormalities of the eyelid margin (e.g. meibomianitis.
chalazia, generalised skin disease) and other clinical signs include ocular discomfort,
mucoid discharge, conjunctivitis, superficial keratitis, tear film instability (rapid
TBUT), and corneal ulceration (Ch. 2, case 3). The diagnosis of qualitative tear film
disorders can be challenging but ocular surface disease in the presence of normal
aqueous tear production (i.e. a normal STT value) and the absence of other
identifiable causes should increase the index of suspicion.
Tear film break-up time (TBUT) is a measure of the stability of the tear film. TBUT is a measure of the time taken for the
tear film to dissociate from the ocular surface. Fluorescein dye is applied to the ocular surface, the eye is allowed to blink and
apad sul pamsau s u iea a u ieadde o ods yep is a io sayei s an aui uado pray aie spaa a uau
ien au urs L'ai pue sop au ur s oz s! Inai aaeiaae aul iay ang-egon e pue Adoosoiouog due[-s Ag paeaej s!
· Bacterial conjunctivitis Secondary bacterial conjunctivitis is common in the dog. The
clinical presentation can be unilateral or bilateral and signs include a mucopurulent
ocular discharge in the presence of normal or increased tear production. The
discharge accumulates along the eyelid margins and at the medial canthus as it is
removed from the ocular surface during blinking, in contrast to the tenacious
discharge in KCs. Causes of bacterial conjunctivitis include an eyelid mass, eyelid
irregularity and a foreign body (behind the TEL, in the conjunctival fornices or in the
nasolacrimal sac/duct). Bacterial conjunctivitis can occur secondary to KCS because
of the loss of immunoprotective properties in the aqueous component of the tear film.
Primary bacterial conjunctivitis is uncommon in dogs; the most common organisms
are Staphylococcus sp and other Gram-positive organisms.
· Dacryocystitis Inflammation of the nasolacrimal sac is a common condition in the
dog and is usually caused by a foreign body lodged in the nasolacrimal sac or duct.
Clinical signs include epiphora, purulent discharge, conjunctivitis, discomfort and
occasionally a draining skin fistula ventral to the medial canthus.
· Canine distemper virus (CDV) Ocular manifestations of CDV include conjunctivitis,
KCS, chorioretinitis and optic neuritis. A mucopurulent ocular discharge is usually
      s  s   s
rhinitis and tracheobronchitis
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - the left pupil is not visible. Positive consensual OS
(from left to right eye); positive direct OD.
 Dazzle reflex - positive OU
。
Palpebral reflex -- positive OU
。
Corneal reflex - positive OL
Corneal sensation can be assessed by touching a wispof coton wool to the lateral region of the cornea (ie away from the visualaxis),if
a blink response is elicited, corneal sensation is said to be present. Corneal sensation can be semi-quantified with a cornea
threshold (CTT). CTT is determined in different regions of the cornea. Skull shape influences corneal sensitivity in dogs and cats - the
sea oeudaouoig-uou pue spaaig lop oydanouop ur un aasuas ssa si sieo pue saop oedaoyoeng u auios
· Vision assessment
Menace response - positive OU
。
Tracking reflex - equivocal OS and positive OD
     o o  - (   
both photopic and scotopic conditions.
· In this dog, these findings are consistent with reduced vision in the left eye.
· Examination with a focal light source - in the left eye, this reveals hyperaemia and
hyperpigmentation of the palpebral conjunctivae, generalised corneal pigmentation,
and an anterior chamber of normal depth. Superficial corneal vascularisation is seen
with slit-lamp biomicroscopy.
   q  n   so   s i o o
pigmentation. Fundic examination in the right eye is unremarkable.
· Schirmer tear test - 0 mm/min OS, 19 mm/min OD. This is consistent with absent tear
production in the left eye.
· Fluorescein dye
Staining - diffuse positive ‘stippling' OS, negative OD. This is consistent
。
with poor ocular surface health in the left eye.
 Jones test (fluorescein dye passage test) - negative OS, positive OD. This is
 consistent with reduced tear drainage in the left eye.
Tear film break-up time - 5 s OS, 20 s OD. This is consistent with poor tear
film stability in the left eye.
· Tonometry - IOP 17 mmHg OU
· Cytology (ocular discharge) - this reveals a large population of neutrophils, some of
which contain cocci.
● Culture (ocular discharge) - this reveals a heavy mixed growth of Staphylococcus
aureus and Bacillus sp.
Following topical anaesthesia, the posterior aspect of the TEL is examined for the
presence of a foreign body and none is found. The remainder of the ophthalmic
examination reveals no additional abnormalities. A general physical examination reveals
left-side xeromycteria (nasal dryness) (Fig. 4.3d) and a notable absence of xerostomia (dry
oral mucous membranes).
Fig. 4.3d Left-sided xeromycteria.
Further Diagnostic Tests
· Nasolacrimal duct cannulation and flush (following topical anaesthesia) - flushing in
a normograde direction (eye to nose) results in saline appearing at the ipsilateral
nostril. This confirms that the nasolacrimal duct is patent and that the negative Jones
test is because of reduced tear drainage caused by the thick mucopurulent discharge
within the nasolacrimal system.
Cannulation of the nasolacrimal punctum can be performed with a metal or plastic lacrimal cannula. The size of the cannula
(22-25 gauge) depends on the size of the animal; plastic cannulas with an outer diameter of 0.9 mm in the dog and 0.76 mm in
distilled water and lactated Ringer's solution are acceptable alternatives. Cannulation of the upper punctum is generally
preferred be cause it avoids the risk of inadvertent damage to the lower punctum which is responsible for the majority of tear
drainage, and because it is usually easier
· Radiography - plain skull radiography to evaluate the tympanic bullae and the region
of the petrous temporal bone is unremarkable.
Diagnosis
 si  i    u o siso n a  s o 
Unilateral KCS with ipsilateral xeromycteria is considered pathognomonic for neurogenic
KCS. The most likely location of the neurologic deficit is the middle and/or inner ear.
Treatment
 ps  p q    q   
options are available. Medical treatment includes topical tear replacement therapy and the
direct stimulation of tear production (lacrimostimulant drugs). The aim of tear replacement
and minimise progressive corneal pathology. Numerous tear replacement products are
available and the specific selection depends primarily on the duration of action required
Owner compliance is usually improved by minimising the frequency of topical treatments.
z si uonpod rn s se hop s ui poipu si pnpd huon-iuon e osen s r
in the affected eye, e.g. carbomer polymer gel, hyaluronic acid or paraffin-based ointment.
Lacrimostimulants  include  both  immunomodulatory  drugs  and  parasympathomimetic
indicated for immune-mediated KCs. Parasympathomimetic agents are more likely to be
useful for neurogenic KCs because lacrimal gland secretion is principally controlled by
parasympathetic fibres  (carried   by  the facial  nerve).  Pilocarpine  is  a direct-acting
parasympathomimetic drug which is generally used orally because the topical form is
irritant and is often less effective than oral administration.
The majority of cases of neurogenic KCS are idiopathic although involvement of the
middle/inner ear is implicated. Some dogs respond to prolonged systemic broad-spectrum
antibiotic and NSAID therapy, which are used on the basis of a presumptive
inflammatory/infectious process.
Unfortunately, this dog is unresponsive to an intensive medical regime comprising tear
replacement therapy, systemic pilocarpine and a six-week course of clavulanate-potentiated
(PDT) is elected because of the failure of medical treatment. The function of the parotid
gland and duct is confirmed prior to surgery by the application of lemon juice to the dog's
(lateral) approach is chosen for the PDT.
The parotid duct conducts saliva from the parotid gland to an oral papilla near the carnassial toth (parotid papilla). In a PDT, the duct
performed through a lateral facial skin incision, and a ^closed’ approach performed through an oral incision.
Lemon juice is bitter and stirmulates salivation (sialogogue). Although atropine is a parasympatholytic agent which reduces salivation, it is
also bitter and is widely use d by veterinary ophthalmologists as a sialogogue prior to PD T surgery.
Although the ocular surface of the left eye is moist and lustrous immediately following
surgery (Fig. 4.3e), saliva contains a higher concentration of minerals than the tear film and
mineral deposition can be seen on the cornea, eyelid margin and periocular skin six months
after surgery (Fig. 4.3f).
Fig. 4.3e Left eye 24 hours after PDT surgery. The ocular surface appears moist and
lustrous - there is a meniscus of saliva along the eyelid margins and the Purkinje images are
normal. Note the salivary secretion spilling over the edge of the lower eyelid.
o o so  s a  s   a t 
discharge has resolved and the ocular surface appears moist. There is mineral deposition on
the eyelids and the cornea, and the latter causes disruption of the Purkinje images.
The ocular surface flora also changes significantly following a PDT and may consist of
large numbers of a mixed population of bacteria, uncommon isolates and potential
pathogens - this can contribute to chronic blepharitis following surgery.
Following surgery, this dog is managed long-term with daily cleansing of the eye and
periocular skin with water, intermittent use of a barrier cream on the periocular skin
(paraffin-based ophthalmic ointment) and topical and systemic broad-spectrum antibiotics
to address recurrent, secondary bacterial infections.
Prognosis
The prognosis for the control of neurogenic KCs is guarded because most dogs are
unresponsive to medical treatment, and in the few that do respond, long-term treatment is
usually indicated. The prognosis for a comfortable, visual eye with stable corneal disease
    s o o   i  a 
transient subcutaneous oedema, sialolith  formation, and blepharoconjunctivitis and
discomfort because of mineral deposition on the ocular surface and eyelids. Transection or
twisting of the duct at the time of surgery can lead to stricture formation and obstruction to
the flow of saliva. Owners must be aware that some level of long-term maintenance is
required in almost all dogs that have undergone PDT.
Discussion
Neurologic disease is an uncommon cause of KCs in the dog but it is important to
recognise its characteristic clinical presentation so that the appropriate treatment and
prognosis can be given. Neurogenic KCs is most often acute in onset, unilateral and
accompanied by ipsilateral xeromycteria. This is quite different from the gradual onset,
bilateral nature of immune-mediated KCS which is typical of predisposed breeds such as
the West Highland White Terrier. The xeromycteria is because of denervation of the
parasympathetic supply to the lateral nasal gland located within the distal nasal cavity,
rather than a result of the thick ocular discharge.
FurtherReading
See Appendix 2.
CHAPTER5
The Painful Eye
Introduction
             
photophobia, and particularly blepharospasm are strong indicators, regardless of whether
the pain originates from the ocular surface or from intraocular disease. Owners are more
likely to notice a change in the appearance of the eye than to recognise that a closed eye is
an indication of pain.
CASESTUDY1
History
A one-year-old female neutered Flat-Coated Retriever is presented with a 24-hour history of
a painful, wet right eye. The dog has received routine vaccinations and anthelmintic
treatment and is otherwise well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Fig. 5.1a
Fig. 5.1a
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figure Shows
is almost closed.
2.Differential Diagnoses
Given the history and the appearance of the right eye, the clinical diagnosis is excessive
lacrimation, for which the following conditions should be considered:
· Ectopic cilia This is a condition in which extra eyelashes arise from the region of the
meibomian glands but, in contrast to distichiasis, emerge through the palpebral
   ss  oog      - o
the centre of the upper eyelid and cause direct irritation to the ocular surface
(Diagram 5.1).  The typical clinical presentation is acute onset blepharospasm,
lacrimation and corneal ulceration in a young dog (usually less than one year old).
Clinical signs may be intermittent because ectopic cilia eventually fall out, only to
regrow several weeks later. Predisposed breeds include the Lhasa Apso, Pekingese,
Shih Tzu, Poodle, English Bulldog, Flat-Coated Retriever and Boxer.
· Distichiasis This is a common condition in which extra eyelashes arise from the
region of the meibomian glands and emerge from, or just posterior to, the gland
op  o m spn sissa (rs  u a a h sho
less than one year old. It is often an incidental finding, but it can cause increased
lacrimation, epiphora, and blepharospasm; corneal ulceration is uncommon. The
degree of corneal irritation is related to the number, length and direction of the
distichia. Short, stiff distichia tend to cause irritation whereas long, soft distichia
cause little if any irritation unless they are present in high numbers and/or are
directed towards the ocular surface. Distichia may act as a wick, causing tears to
overflow onto the periocular hairs, mimicking a problem with tear drainage.
Predisposed breeds are the Cocker Spaniel (American and English), Boxer, English
Bulldog, Flat-Coated Retriever, Shih Tzu, Pekingese, Poodle, Dachsund and Jack
Russell Terrier (Ch. 2, case 2).
· Entropion This refers to the inversion or inward turning of part or all of the eyelid
margin. Hair consequently contacts the ocular surface (trichiasis) and causes pain
because of associated conjunctivitis, keratitis and/or corneal ulceration. Entropion
can involve different regions of the eyelid but lower lateral entropion is frequently
encountered in clinical practice (Ch. 2, case I ).
· Corneal ulcer With the exception of neurotrophic ulcerative keratitis (Ch. 12, case
I), corneal ulcers are invariably associated with mild to severe ocular discomfort.
Superficial ulcers are usually more painful than deep ulcers, because the anterior
stroma is rich in pressure receptors.
· Trauma/foreign body Blunt or penetrating trauma, and corneal or conjunctival
results in acute, unilateral ocular signs (Ch. 12).
· Eyelid swellings Any irregularity of the normal contour of the eyelid margin has the
potential to cause ocular discomfort, e.g. chalazion (Ch. 2, case 3), hordoleum (stye),
granuloma, neoplasia, and blepharitis.
· Trichiasis This is a condition in which periocular hairs growing in a normal location
are abnormally directed towards the ocular surface. If severe, trichiasis can cause
conjunctivitis and keratitis, with associated discomfort. Trichiasis results from
entropion and eyelid agenesis and can also be associated with the nasal folds, medial
canthus and caruncle.
· Anterior uveitis Pain as a result of spasm of the iris sphincter and ciliary body
muscles occurs with anterior uveitis, often referred to *brow ache' in humans. There
is also usually some degree of blepharospasm and increased lacrimation (Ch. 7, case
3).
· Glaucoma Pain as a result of stimulation of the pressure and stretch receptors is most
marked in acute rather than chronic glaucoma and dogs frequently show increased
lacrimation, photophobia, and head-shy behaviour (Ch. 6, case 2).
· Eyelid agenesis or coloboma Localised absence of eyelid tissue results in increased
exposure of the ocular surface, trichiasis and a reduced ability to blink; together these
cause conjunctivitis and keratitis, with associated discomfort. Eyelid agenesis is most
common in the lateral upper eyelid of cats; it is rarely seen in the dog.
Diagram 5.1 (A) Normal eyelash (B) Distichium (C) Ectopic cilium. Illustration by S
Scurrell.
A
B
C
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
The right eye is so painful that the dog is unable to open it. Examination is facilitated by the
use of topical anaesthesia which quickly alleviates the blepharospasm (Fig. 5.1b, A).
Fig. 5.1b (A) Right eye (B) Left eye
A single drop of a topical anaesthetic drug will anaesthetise the ocular surface (conjunctiva and cornea) within approximately 10 s.
repeat applic ation of the topical anae sthetic, e.g. (
min. The application of a topical anaesthetic can be a
simple way of differentiating surface ocular pain from pain caused by intraocular or orbital disease.
· Ocular reflexes
。
Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
。
Palpebral reflex - positive OU
· Menace response - positive OU
· Examination with a focal light source - this reveals several fine hairs along the eyelid
margins and protrusion of the TEL in both eyes. There is a grey gelatinous discharge
in the lower conjunctival fornix of the left eye (arrow) (Fig. 5.1b, B), and a relative
anisocoria (OD < OS). With slit-lamp biomicroscopy a single pigmented hair is
visible emerging from the palpebral conjunctival surface; the hair is posterior to the
line of the meibomian gland openings and in the centre of the upper eyelid of the
right eye (arrow, Fig. 5.1c).
● Schirmer tear test - 17 mm/min Os. This test is not performed OD because of the
excessive lacrimation.
· Fluorescein dye
Staining - negative OS, positive ‘stippling' in the dorsal and ventromedial
region of the cornea OD. This is suggestive of minor physical disruption to
the tear film in the right eye.
· Tonometry - IOP 17 mmHg OU
Fig. 5.1c The right upper eyelid is manually everted to reveal a single pigmented ectopic
cilium (arrow) emerging from the palpebral conjunctiva.
The posterior aspect of the TEL is examined for the presence of a foreign body and none
is found. The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities
and a general physical examination is unremarkable.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of an ectopic cilium in the right eye and
distichiasis in both eyes is made.
The relative miosis in the right eye is because of reflex uveitis. Corneal stimulation
incites an axonal reflex mediated by substance P and results in iridocyclospasm and
subsequent miosis (Ch. 10, case I). Enophthalmos and TEL protrusion can also be a direct
response to ocular pain. When unilateral ocular pain is marked, it is not uncommon to see
bilateral protrusion of the TEL. The distichiasis in both eyes is considered to be incidental
      s      s
discharge noted in the left eye is a common feature of dog breeds with deep orbits, narrow
skull conformation and poor tear drainage. Referred to as ‘medial canthal pocket
syndrome', it can cause mild but chronic conjunctivitis. Predisposed breeds include the
Doberman Pinscher, Great Dane, Standard Poodle, Afghan Hound, Weimaraner and Flat-
Coated Retriever.
Treatment
Ectopic cilia must be treated surgically. Treatment involves excision of the ectopic
cilium/cilia and its hair follicle; other options include destruction of the hair follicle by
electrocautery or cryosurgery. In this dog, under general anaesthesia, and with the aid of an
operating microscope, the upper eyelid is stabilised within a Desmarres chalazion clamp 
the ectopic cilium and surrounding conjunctiva are then excised en bloc using a 2-mm
biopsy punch (Fig. 5.1d). The conjunctival wound is left to heal by secondary intention.
Further examination reveals a second pigmented ectopic cilium on the posterior aspect of
the TEL which is also excised en bloc (Fig. 5.le). Postoperative medication comprises
topical broad-spectrum antibiotic and systemic NSAID therapy for three days.
Fig. 5.1d (A) Area of tissue to be excised by 2-mm biopsy punch. (B) Excised conjunctiva
containing ectopic cilium (arrow) and its follicle.
10
15
Fig. 5.le Pigmented leading edge of the TEL is retracted to reveal a pigmented ectopic
cilium emerging from the conjunctiva on the posterior surface (arrow).
Prognosis
The prognosis for the resolution of the ocular discomfort and excessive lacrimation is
excellent following excision of ectopic cilia. Recurrence is unlikely if the hair follicle is
completely excised but additional cilia may emerge from adjacent sites. In general, dogs
affected with ectopic cilia are also predisposed to distichiasis and vice versa. The risk of
developing either condition appears to diminish with increasing age.
Discussion
The typical clinical presentation for ectopic cilia is acute onset, unilateral ocular discomfort
in a young dog for which no other obvious cause can be identified. Ectopic cilia most
   s se e  p n  go  s  ss n
The colour of the ectopic cilia usually correlates to coat colour and the diagnosis is
therefore especially challenging in lightly coloured breeds because the ectopic cilia may be
non-pigmented, e.g. English Bulldog.
A corneal ulcer may develop and its location will correspond to the position of the
ectopic cilia. The hallmark of a corneal ulcer secondary to ectopic cilia is its slightly dorsal
location and a vertical elliptical shape - the latter is caused by the vertical direction of
uncommon, however this dog demonstrates that ectopic cilia can be multiple and arise in
any location. The diagnosis of ectopic cilia is challenging without good magnification (slit-
always raise a high index of suspicion.
Further Reading
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY 2
History
A five-year-old male neutered British shorthaired cat is presented with a 24-hour history of
a painful and wet left eye. The cat has a previous history of ulcerative keratitis in the right
eye. He lives in a multi-cat household; all the cats have received routine vaccinations and
anthelmintic treatment, and are indoor/outdoor cats. None of the cats has been in a cattery
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 5.2a and b.
Fig. 5.2a
Fig. 5.2b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 5.2a Left eye - there is epiphora and dark tear staining at the medial canthus. The
palpebral fissure is narrow. The right eye appears normal.
Fig. 5.2b Left eye - the periocular region is wet and the Purkinje images are disrupted.
Right eye - there is a subtle, poorly defined corneal opacity (arrow). The Purkinje images
are normal.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the history and the appearance of the left eye, the following conditions should be
considered:
· Qualitative tear film disorder This refers to an abnormality of the mucin or lipid
           
deficiency of mucin has been described in the cat (Cullen et al., 1999). The condition
is usually bilateral and often characterised by the development of an indolent ulcer or
corneal sequestrum. There is a rapid TBUT and decreased numbers of conjunctival
goblet cells but aqueous tear production is normal.
● Feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) infection FHV-1 invades the epithelia of the respiratory
tract, conjunctiva, and to a lesser extent, the cornea. Primary infection is
characterised by upper respiratory disease (coughing, sneezing, nasal discharge),
lethargy, and pyrexia; ocular signs are bilateral conjunctivitis and corneal ulcers
which can be bilateral. Herpetic ulcers tend to be dendritic or branching and are very
painful. These lesions do not always breach the basement membrane of the corneal
epithelium and as such will only stain with Rose Bengal and not with fluorescein dye
(Ch. 6, case 1, Fig. 6.lc). Small corneal ulcers can rapidly coalesce to form large
irregular areas of epithelial loss - this 'geographic' ulcer is the most common corneal
lesion seen with FHV-1 infection. Following primary infection most cats became
latent carriers and a proportion of carriers will develop conjunctivitis and/or corneal
ulceration as adults because of recrudescence of the virus. In adult cats, conjunctivitis
and/or ulcerative keratitis is mild and upper respiratory tract signs may not be
present. Recurrent ocular signs are usually unilateral but can be bilateral; it is not
uncommon for one eye to have repeat episodes whilst the other eye remains
clinically normal
· Chlamydophila felis (C felis) infection Chlamydiae are commensals of the ocular,
respiratory, gastrointestinal and genital tracts, but cats infected with C felis rarely
blepharospasm; nasal discharge and sneezing may also occur. Conjunctivitis is
initially unilateral, becoming bilateral within several days. In contrast to FHV-1
infection, corneal involvement is not a feature of ocular chlamydophilosis. C felis can
result in chronic conjunctivitis and an asymptomatic carrier state can exist.
· Corneal sequestrum (corneal necrosis) This is a common condition in the cat,
particularly in the Persian, Himalayan and other brachycephalic breeds. Although a
sequestrum is characterised by pathognomonic brown-to-black discolouration of the
cornea (Ch. 8, case 3), the initial stage can be amber discolouration with concurrent
ulceration. The amber discolouration can be overlooked, as it may only be evident
with good magnification such as that provided by slit-lamp biomicroscopy. Pain is
invariably present because of the corneal ulceration.
o  o   d o   a o
foreign bodies can cause ocular pain and discharge. Clinical signs are usually acute
            
trauma.
·Adnexaldisorders
Eyelid agenesis or coloboma This refers to a congenital absence of eyelid
tissue, which may result in exposure of the ocular surface, trichiasis and a
reduced ability to blink. Eyelid agenesis most commonly involves the lateral
upper eyelid of cats and clinical signs occur at a young age. Cats with
eyelid agenesis have conjunctivitis, keratitis and associated discomfort.
 o    o        
eyelid margin. Hair consequently contacts the ocular surface (trichiasis) and
causes pain because of associated conjunctivitis, keratitis or corneal
ulceration. Entropion is uncommon in the cat and is usually secondary to
chronic blepharospasm or enophthalmos, the latter in geriatric cats because
of orbital fat and muscle atrophy.
Eyelash disorders Ectopic cilia and distichiasis are rare in the cat (Ch. 2,
case 2; case 1, this chapter)
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
 Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
 Dazzle reflex - positive OU
 Palpebral reflex - positive OU
· Menace response - positive OU
           -   
OD) is suggestive of increased lacrimation in the left eye.
· Fluorescein dye
Staining - an irregular area of positive staining and under-running of dye in
the lateral region of the cornea OS, negative OD (Fig. 5.2c, A). The under-
running is consistent with non-adherent epithelium around the edge of the
lesion.
Jones test (fluorescein dye passage test) - positive OU
Tear film break-up time - 3 s OS, 8 s OD. This is suggestive of reduced tear
film stability in both eyes (Os > OD).
Examination of a painful eye canbe facilitatedby the topical application of a local anaesthetic drug However topical anaestheti drugs
withRoseBengalandfurescein stains. For thesereasons, picalanaesthetic dugs shoud note apliedbefore these dignostic tets
· Tonometry - IOP 18 mmHg OU
· Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay - corneal and conjunctival swabs are
The diagnosis of FHV-1 can usually be based on clinical signs. Specific tests are available, e.g. conjunctival or corneal swab for PCR, but
their clinical use is questionable in a vaccinated cat (Maggs & Clarke, 2005).
            
presence of a foreign body and none is found. The remainder of the ophthalmic
examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a general physical examination is
unremarkable.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of an indolent corneal ulcer in the left eye is
made. The ulcer appears to be secondary to a bilateral qualititative tear film deficiency. The
subtle corneal opacity in the right eye represents a superficial scar from previous corneal
disease
Treatment
Indolent corneal ulcers can be treated medically or surgically. Surgical management is
corneal ulcer is indicated to remove the non-adherent epithelium at the periphery and is
usually  performed under topical anaesthesia.  Sedation or general anaesthesia may be
required depending on the temperament of the cat and the skill of the clinician.
Topical anaesthesia is sufficient for this cat. A gentle dry debridement is performed in a
circular motion with the tip of a sterile swab until all the non-adherent epithelium is
removed. This creates a larger but still superficial ulcer (Fig. 5.2c, B). Following
debridement a bandage contact lens is placed to improve comfort and facilitate healing (Fig
5.2c, C). A single application of 0.5-1.0% topical atropine is administered to prevent the
onset of reflex uveitis as a result of the debridement. Adjunctive medical management
polymer gel, and systemic NSAID therapy.
Fig. 5.2c (A) Corneal ulcer on presentation. (B) Increase in size of the ulcer following
debridement. (C) Colourless bandage contact lens (arrows). (D) Decrease in size of the
ulcer after 48 h (contact lens removed for examination). The pupil is dilated because of the
topical application of atropine. (E) Ulcer healed after five days. Note the change in the
Purkinje images throughout this series of photographs. The Purkinje images are initially
disrupted when the ulcer is present but are more normal in (C) because of the 'masking
effect of the contact lens and in (E) when the ulcer has healed
Topical antibiotics have epitheliotoxic effects but the magniude of the effect on epithelial healing depends on the specific drug.
Gentamicin and ciprofloxacin are particularly epitheliotoxic and should be avoided in eyes with poor epithe lial healing especially when
alternative antibiotics, e.g. fusidic acid and chloramphe nicol, are just as likely to be effective.
including reflex uveitis caused by ocular sur face pa in.
. However atropine also re duces tear production, which in turn can re sult in dela yed
corneal healing. Atr opine should therefore be used with the minimal frequency required to maintain mydriasis.
Re-examination is performed after 48 hours. The corneal ulcer is significantly smaller
(Fig. 5.2c, D), and heals completely by five days (Fig. 5.2c, E). Topical long-term
 mucinomimetic therapy is recommended in both eyes to address the underlying qualitative
tear film deficiency.
Several techniques have been described to stimulate the healing of indolent ulcers in
dogs including grid keratotomy, multiple punctate keratotomy and phenol cautery. These
should not be performed in the cat because there is evidence to suggest that they predispose
to the development of a corneal sequestrum. A superficial keratectomy, performed under
general anaesthesia and with the aid of an operating microscope is, however, very
successful in cats with indolent ulcers, as it is in dogs. In the cat, a superficial keratectomy
results in a mean healing time of 14 days compared to 30 days with debridement of the
cornea alone (La Croix et al., 2001).
Prognosis
The prognosis for the resolution of an indolent corneal ulcer secondary to a qualitative tear
film disorder is only fair, because recurrence is not uncommon and surgical intervention
may be necessary.
Discussion
The hallmark of an indolent or non-healing corneal ulcer is the presence of a rim of non-
adherent epithelium surrounding a superficial ulcer. Indolent ulcers can be frustrating to
Ss    a  o      e   
underlying cause. In the cat, causes include FHV-1 infection, trauma, and qualitative tear
film disorders (mucin deficiency).
Conjunctival goblet cells are the primary source of mucin which forms the innermost
layer of the tear film. Mucin also has a vital role in maintaining ocular surface health
through corneal epithelial hydration, lubrication, and cleansing.
The diagnosis of a tear film disorder is usually made based on clinical signs but it can be
difficult to differentiate qualitative from quantitative problems on this basis alone. A
comparison, a qualitative tear film disorder refers to abnormal composition of the tear film.
A quantitative tear film disorder is objectively diagnosed from the results of a Schirmer tear
test, whereas a qualitative tear film disorder is objectively diagnosed from the TBUT, and
less commonly, from the assessment of conjunctival goblet cell density (via a conjunctival
biopsy and histopathology).
It is important to educate owners about the recurrent and possibly bilateral nature of
indolent corneal ulcers and to choose treatment options that are appropriate for the species.
Aquanaeieequsfqle
re fers to abnormal composition of the tear film
References and Further Reading
Cullen CL, Njaa BL, Grahn BH (1999) Ulcerative keratitis associated with qualitative tear
film abnormalities in cats. Vet Ophthalmol, 2, 197-204.
La Croix NC, van der Woerdt A, Olivero DK (2001) Non-healing corneal ulcers in cats: 29
cases (1991-1999). J Vet Med Assoc, 218 (5) 733-750
Maggs DJ & Clarke HE (20o5) Relative sensitivity of polymerase chain reaction assays
used for detection of feline  herpesvirus-1  DNA in clinical samples and commercial
vaccines. Am J Vet Res, 66 (9) 1550-1555.
See Appendix 2.
CASE STUDY 3
History
A three-year-old female neutered Jack Russell Terrier is presented with a 24-hour history of
a painful right eye and a subdued demeanour. The dog has received routine vaccinations
and anthelmintic treatment.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 5.3a and b.
Fig. 5.3a
Fig. 5.3b (A) Right eye (B) Left eye (C) Right eye - the edge of the lens is delineated by
arrows and the pupil is indicated by the circle.
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
 n  si ss s  -  nr  s     a
pupil is dilated creating a relative anisocoria (OD > OS).
Fig. 5.3b Right eye (A) - there is dried ocular discharge adjacent to the medial canthus
and diffuse corneal oedema. A spherical refractile structure (lens) is visible in the anterior
chamber (see annotated image, C). The Purkinje images are normal. Left eye (B) - there are
a ss sia   n p sa  nd sd so
the pupil and overlying the iris. The Purkinje images are normal. The reflection of the
photographer's finger is evident in the medial cornea.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the history and appearance of the right eye, the following conditions should be
considered:
· Anterior lens luxation This most commonly occurs as a primary heritable condition in
terriers and other predisposed breeds, e.g. Border Collie, Shar Pei, German Shepherd
Dog and some spaniel breeds. Primary lens luxation is a bilateral condition, but both
eyes are not necessarily involved simultaneously. The most common  clinical
presentation for an anterior lens luxation is acute pain in one eye in a three-to six-
year-old dog. The pain is the result of entrapment of the lens in the anterior chamber
which in turn causes an acute elevation in IOP. Other clinical signs include epiphora.
blepharospasm, corneal oedema, episcleral congestion and a change in anterior
chamber depth. The lens may or may not be visible in the anterior chamber
zonular attachments but remains behind the pupil - from this position it can push the
iris forward and create a shallow anterior chamber. Examination of the contralateral
eye often reveals signs of lens subluxation (partial detachment of lens zonules), e.g.
strands of degenerate vitreous material in the anterior chamber, phacodonesis,
iridodonesis, and an aphakic crescent. Secondary causes of lens luxation in the dog
injury), age-related degeneration of the lens zonules, hypermature cataract,
   s   n  s s so
displacement of the lens by an intraocular neoplasm. Congenital lens luxation is
reported in the dog but is rare.
· Glaucoma This term describes a group of related ocular diseases with the common
factors of reduced aqueous humor drainage from the eye and optic nerve damage. In
dogs this is usually associated with an elevation in lOP. Causes of glaucoma can be
classified as primary, secondary or congenital. Primary glaucoma is thought to arise
from an inherent abnormality with the aqueous humour outflow system, and includes
pectinate ligament dysplasia (goniodysgenesis).  Glaucoma  can be secondary  to
chronic or severe ocular disease e.g uveitis, lens luxation, intraocular neoplasia.
Congenital glaucoma 1s rare 1n the dog. ln addition to an elevation in lOP, classic
signs of acute glaucoma include discomfort, episcleral congestion, mydriasis, corneal
oedema, reduced vision, optic disc abnormalities (swelling, cupping, degeneration)
and retinal changes (Ch. 6, case 2). Signs of chronic glaucoma include buphthalmos.
episcleral congestion, corneal oedema, Haab's striae, keratitis, mydriasis, lens
subluxation, optic nerve and retinal degeneration, blindness and discomfort.
· Uveitis Inflammation of the uveal tract can involve the entire uvea (panuveitis) but is
usually confined to either the anterior (iris and ciliary body) or posterior (choroid)
regions of the uvea. Inflammation of the uveal tract reflects the fact that it is the
primary vascular source of the eye. The uvea forms a blood-aqueous barrier which
consists of the non-pigmented epithelium of the ciliary body and the endothelium of
the blood vessels of the iris. Anterior uveitis occurs when the integrity of the blood-
aqueous barrier  is compromised. The aetiopathogenesis of uveitis is complex
Examples of ocular causes of uveitis include corneal ulcer (reflex uveitis), cataract
(lens-induced uveitis), primary intraocular neoplasia and trauma. Systemic causes
include immune-mediated
disease(e.g.
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like or
uveodermatologic syndrome), metastatic neoplasia and infectious disease: viral (e.g-
dermatitidis), rickettsial (e.g. Ehrlichia canis), protozoal (Toxoplasma gondii), and
parasitic (Dirofilaria immitis). The clinical features of uveitis depend on the area of
the uvea involved, the severity of the inflammation and whether the process is acute
or chronic. Acute anterior uveitis is characterised by discomfort (blepharospasm
increased lacrimation and photophobia), conjunctival and episcleral congestion,
one) rnonu snonn su ui sho pun uod uooda 'sisou rsnn Aei
flare, hypopyon, hyphaema, fibrin) and corneal oedema (Ch. 7, cases 2 and 3).
· Ocular surface pain See cases 1 and 2, this chapter; Ch. 2, Ch. 8 (case 3), and Ch.
12.
S! ssouaoid pue uawean ay mg euoonela pue spiaan yoq ol uouuoa ae wapao [eauos pue ssaupal juoyuosp le[noo
quite different for each.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - positive direct and negative consensual Os (from left
to right eye); negative direct and positive consensual OD (right to left eye)
 Dazzle reflex - positive OU
。
 Palpebral reflex - positive OU
· Vision testing
。
Menace response - positive OS, negative OD
 o Visual placing and tracking reflexes -- positive OS, negative OD
In this dog, the findings suggest that there is a visual deficit in the right eye but that
retinal and optic nerve function is still intact. The lack of pupil constriction in the right eye
may be attributed to the presence of the lens in the anterior chamber.
phacodonesis and iridodonesis in the left eye.
● Ophthalmoscopy - normal fundus Os. Corneal oedema and the presence of the lens
in the anterior chamber prevent fundic examination OD.
● Schirmer tear test - 18 mm/min OS, 23 mm/min OD
· Fluorescein dye - negative staining OS, mild diffuse retention OD which is evident
only after several minutes.
· Tonometry - IOP 20 mmHg OS, 35 mmHg OD
  n    n s o    - os o
because the corneal oedema would prevent observation of the filtration angle.
A functional corneal endothelium is vital for mainte nance of corneal transparency Corneal oedema develops secondary to
an anterior lens luxation for two main reasons. Firstly, the physical contact between the lens and the corneal endothelium
causes focal oedema (typically subaxial). Secondly generalised corneal oedema results from the increased intraocuar
pressure and anterior uv
aused by the lens move
ema can cause subtle focal or diffuse fluorescein
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination is unremarkable.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of primary lens luxation is made - anterior
lens luxation and secondary glaucoma in the right eye and lens subluxation in the left eye.
Treatment
Prompt surgical treatment is important if the eye with an anterior lens luxation is determined
to be visual or is considered to have the potential for vision. The potential for vision is best
determined following consideration of the duration of clinical signs, the severity of
secondary glaucoma and the presence or absence of a dazzle reflex and consensual
pupillary light reflex. Standard vision assessment tests are frequently unhelpful because of
pain, corneal oedema and elevated IOP (causing neuropraxia). An intracapsular lens
             
the eye is determined to be irreversibly blind, surgical options are restricted to enucleation
or the placement of an intrascleral prosthesis. There is considerable diversity of opinion
amongst veterinary ophthalmologists about the best management strategy for a subluxated
lens. Primary lens luxation is a bilateral condition and an unstable lens in the fellow eye will
eventually luxate completely either anteriorly or posteriorly. The interval between the first
and second eye being affected is often impossible to predict. Some ophthalmologists
advocate long-term topical miotic therapy to reduce the risk of the lens moving forwards
into the anterior chamber. Lens instability is also associated with mild elevations 1n lOP and
potent miotics (such as the prostaglandin analogues latanoprost or travoprost) will also
reduce  IOP  (Fig. 5.3c).  An  alternative  approach   is  prophylactic  lentectomy  by
phacoemulsification or ICLE, with or without artificial lens implantation. A good success
rate for early surgical intervention has been documented by some authors but early surgery
carries the risk of premature blindness from complications such as retinal detachment and
intraocular haemorrhage.
Fig. 5.3c Miosis following topical therapy with travoprost, a prostaglandin analogue.
This dog is managed by an ICLE in the right eye and prophylactic phacoemulsification
(facilitated by placement of a capsule tension ring) in the left eye. This results in aphakic
vision in both eyes. Postoperative medication consists of topical steroid and antibiotic
          
recommended.
Prognosis
The prognosis for vision and for the eye itself is guarded following surgical removal of an
anterior luxated lens. The most common complications include the development of
glaucoma and retinal detachment. Irreversible blindness and pain frequently necessitate
enucleation or placement of an intrascleral prosthesis. The prognosis for vision after ICLE is
considered poor if glaucoma is already present at the time of surgery, an inevitable finding
in the majority of cases of anterior lens luxation. The decision regarding management of
subluxated lenses is challenging. A retrospective study in dogs showed that the prognosis
for vision was significantly greater if the lens was removed by phacoemulsification rather
than ICLE. In that study, 75% of eyes were visual 2.75 years following phacolentectomy.
compared to 4o% of eyes following ICLE at the same time period (Manning et al., 2008;
to make further comparisons.
Fig. 5.3d An eight-year-old Jack Russell Terrier with  bilateral aphakic vision and
normotensive eyes three years after surgery - ICLE for an anterior lens luxation in the right
eye and prophylactic phacoemulsification for lens subluxation in the left eye.
Discussion
Primary lens luxation is a complex condition related to an inherited dysplasia and
weakening of the lens zonules. Even with prompt and appropriate management, the
prognosis for vision is guarded. The diagnosis can be challenging because the clinical
presentation is not dissimilar to other painful ocular conditions such as acute glaucoma and
anterior uveitis. Accurate diagnosis is imperative and is aided by knowledge of breed
predisposition. Terriers are the most common breeds affected and lens luxation should be
considered in all terriers which present with an acutely painful eye. Terrier breeds are also
predisposed to primary glaucoma and the two conditions can co-exist. Furthermore, chronic
glaucoma often results in buphthalmos (Ch. I, case I) - globe enlargement causes
stretching of the lens zonules and secondary lens subluxation. Identification of the primary
problem can therefore be difficult in a terrier breed with concurrent lens subluxation and an
elevated IOP. Diagnosis of lens luxation is facilitated by tonometry, gonioscopy and slit-
lamp biomicroscopy. It is particularly important to perform a careful examination of the
contralateral eye to look for signs of early subluxation. The pupil should first be dilated
 s     e   o a    
lens instability such as vitreal strands and an aphakic crescent through a dilated pupil
Dilating the pupil is not without risk as mydriasis can increase IOP or facilitate movement
of the lens into the anterior chamber.
Primary lens luxation has been determined to be heritable in some breeds and a DNA test
for terriers has recently become available. Affected dogs should not be used for breeding.
References and Further Reading
Manning S, Renwick P, Heinrich C, Cripps P. (2009) Lens instability in the dog: a
retrospective study of surgical results in 102 cases (155 eyes) (1994-2004). Proc Eur Coll
Vet Ophthalmol, Versailles 2008, Vet Ophthalmol, 12 (1), 61-70.
See Appendix 2.
CHAPTER 6
The Red Eye
Introduction
An eye may appear red for a variety of reasons; inflammation or congestion of the
conjunctiva, sclera and uvea is common but the cornea and anterior chamber may also be
involved. A red appearance usually suggests an ocular abnormality, but it can be a normal
variation, e.g. a red reflection from a subalbinotic fundus. Owners often assume ocular
redness means pain, but this is not always true.
CASESTUDY1
History
A 9-month-old female neutered domestic shorthaired cat is presented with a four-day
history of redness and discharge in the right eye. The cat has been sneezing occasionally
but is reported to be otherwise well. She has received anthelmintic treatment but has never
been vaccinated. She lives with another young adult cat who has been routinely vaccinated;
both are indoor/outdoor cats.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Fig. 6.1a.
Fig. 6.1a
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figure Shows?
Fig. 6.la Right eye - there is hyperaemia and chemosis of the palpebral and TEL
conjunctiva and a marked seromucoid ocular discharge. The Purkinje images are normal.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the right eye, the clinical diagnosis is conjunctivitis. The following
causes should be considered:
· Feline herpesvirus-l infection FHV-1 invades the epithelia of the respiratory tract,
conjunctiva and, to a lesser effect, the cornea. Primary infection is characterised by
upper respiratory disease (coughing, sneezing, nasal discharge), lethargy, and
pyrexia; ocular signs are bilateral conjunctivitis and corneal ulcers which can be
bilateral. Herpetic ulcers tend to be dendritic or branching and can be painful. These
lesions do not always breach the basement membrane of the corneal epithelium and
as such will only stain with rose Bengal and not with fluorescein dye (Figs. 6.lb and
c). Small corneal ulcers can rapidly coalesce to form a large irregular area of
epithelial loss - this ^geographic' ulcer is the most common corneal lesion seen with
FHV-1 infection. Following primary infection most cats become latent carriers and a
proportion of carriers will develop conjunctivitis and/or corneal ulceration as adults
because of recrudescence of the virus. In adult cats, conjunctivitis and/or ulcerative
keratitis is mild and upper respiratory tract signs may not be present. Recurrent ocular
signs are usually unilateral in adult cats but can be bilateral; it is not uncommon for
one eye to have repeat episodes while the other eye remains clinically normal.
· Chlamydophila felis infection Chlamydiae are commensals of the ocular, respiratory,
signs other than mild upper respiratory disease. The acute phase of the disease causes
conjunctival hyperaemia, chemosis, serous ocular discharge and blepharospasm;
nasal discharge and sneezing may also occur. Conjunctivitis is initially unilateral,
becoming bilateral within several days. In contrast to FHV-1 infection, corneal
involvement is not a feature of ocular chlamydophilosis. C felis can result in chronic
       s
· Feline calicivirus infection FCV is primarily a respiratory pathogen but can cause
conjunctivitis, oral ulceration and polyarthritis. In contrast to C felis and FHV-1, FCV
has a low pathogenicity for the conjunctiva. Most cats recover spontaneously from
FCV infection, although some cats remain chronically infected and shed virus
continuously.
· Eosinophilic conjunctivitis This may occur alone or in conjunction with eosinophilic
keratitis; it can be unilateral or bilateral. The underlying cause is unknown. Diagnosis
is confirmed by the identification of eosinophils on conjunctival cytology.
· Lipogranulomatous  conjunctivitis This condition is specific to the cat and is
characterised by non-ulcerated, single or multiple white nodules in the palpebral
conjunctiva adjacent to the eyelid margin. The condition is often bilateral and can
involve both the upper and, less frequently, lower eyelids. Diagnosis is based on the
clinical appearance and histopathology to confirm the presence of lipogranulomatous
inflammation associated with intact or ruptured meibomian glands
· Mycoplasmosis The role of a Mycoplasma sp as a cause of conjunctivitis in cats is
             
conjunctivitis (Low et al., 2oo7). Experimental infection has only resulted in
conjunctivitis in kittens and not in adult cats, which suggests an altered or immature
immune system may be a factor in establishment of infection. Diagnosis is by
conjunctival cytology, culture and/or PCR, but testing is not indicated in clinical
cases of conjunctivitis.
· Bordetellosis Bordetella bronchiseptica is a respiratory pathogen in the cat which can
cause upper respiratory signs and conjunctivitis. In contrast to the dog, clinical
disease in the cat is rare but cats from multicat housing conditions such as catteries
indicated in clinical cases of conjunctivitis
· Parasitic conjunctivitis A rare cause of conjunctivitis in the cat, e.g. nematode
Thelazia californiensis and larvae of Cuterebra sp.
Fig. 6.1b Right eye following application of fluorescein dye. There is no dye retention
Fig. 6.1c Right eye of a different adult cat following the application of fluorescein and Rose
Bengal dyes. Retention of Rose Bengal dye in a branching pattern (arrow) indicates
dendritic corneal ulceration which is pathognomonic for FHV-1 infection.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
● Ocular reflexes
 Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
。
 Dazzle reflex - positive OU
● Menace response - positive OU
· Examination with a focal light source - slit-lamp biomicroscopy reveals no corneal
abnormalities before or after the application of fluorescein and rose Bengal dye (see
below).
● Schirmer tear test - 10 mm/min Os. Tear production is not measured OD because of
the excessive lacrimation.
● Fluorescein dye - negative staining OU (Fig. 6.1b)
· Rose Bengal dye - negative staining OU (Fig. 6.1c)
Rose Bengal is an ocular surface stain the uptake of which is normally blocked by mucin in the tear film. Stain retention
6.lc). Rose Bengal and fluorescein can be administered at the same time as the stain properties are not affected by mixing.
· Tonometry - IOP 18 mmHg OU
● Cytology (conjunctiva) - this reveals epithelial cells and degenerate neutrophils, and
a conspicuous absence of eosinophils and C felis inclusion bodies.
· Culture and  sensitivity  (conjunctiva) -  this reveals a moderate growth of
· PCR - a conjunctival swab is positive for C felis but negative for FHV-1 and FCV.
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination is unremarkable.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of conjunctivitis in the right eye secondary
to Chlamydophila felis infection is made.
Treatment
Systemic treatment of C felis is indicated even if the disease is clinically restricted to the eye
because chlamydiae are commensals of the ocular, respiratory, gastrointestinal and genital
        s      s
Topical 1% fusidic acid or 1% chlortetracycline have been shown to be less effective than
antibiotic therapy can, however, be beneficial for the treatment of any secondary bacterial
infections that may be present concurrently. Systemic doxycyline should bring a rapid
improvement of the clinical signs and should eradicate the organism. To minimise the risk
of doxycycline-induced oesophagitis and stricture formation, a suspension should be used
or, if unavailable, tablet administration followed by a water bolus given by syringe. All cats
in a multicat household should be treated at the same time to prevent re-infection.
Studies have evaluated systemic antibiotics for the treatment of feline chlamydiosis. Oral
clavulanic  acid-potentiated amoxicillin  and  azithromycin  are  both as effective as  oral
eliminate the organism allowing recurrence of clinical signs (Sturgess et al., 2oo1; Owen ef
al.,2003).
Prognosis
The prognosis for resolution of the conjunctivitis without recurrence as a result of C felis
infection is excellent with appropriate treatment.
Discussion
           s 
dog, is usually infectious in origin. Specific identification of the two most common
infectious causes, FHV-1 and C felis, is often challenging and co-infection is possible
though uncommon. An important difference between the two agents is the ability of FHV-1
to infect the corneal epithelium. Because of this, a cat with unilateral conjunctivitis and
concurrent corneal ulceration is more likely to have FHV-1 than C felis. PCR assays are
helpful in the diagnosis of feline chlamydophilosis but are of questionable value for FHV-1
in vaccinated cats or cats with chronic disease (Maggs & Clarke, 2oo5). Conjunctival
cytology is an unreliable method of diagnosis for C felis because the characteristic inclusion
bodies are only present from day three after infection and decrease in number over the
following two weeks. Inclusion bodies can also be confused with “blue bodies’ which
represent epithelial cell inclusion bodies caused by topical medications such as neomycin.
Routine vaccination with a live C felis vaccine is effective at reducing the severity of ocular
disease but has no effect on shedding of the organism or its ability to infect and persist in
non-ocular sites e.g. genital tract. The vaccine can also cause atypical reactions and is
usually reserved for use in control programmes in catteries with a high prevalence of
systemic chlamydophilosis.
References and Further Reading
Low HC, Powell CC, Veir JK, Hawley JR, Lappin MR (2007) Prevalence of feline
herpesvirus 1, Chlamydophila felis, and Mycoplasma spp DNA in conjunctival cells
collected from cats with and without conjunctivitis. Am J Vet Res, 68 (6), 643-648.
Maggs DJ & Clarke HE (2oo5) Relative sensitivity of polymerase chain reaction assays
  ss   a i  ss  e   
vaccines. Am J Vet Res, 66 (9), 1550-1555.
Owen WMA, Sturgess CP, Harbour DA, Egan K, Gruffydd-Jones TJ (2003) Efficacy of
azithromycin for the treatment of feline chlamydophilosis. J Feline Med Surg, 5 (6), 305-
311.
Sparkes AH, Caney SMA, Sturgess CP, Gruffydd-Jones TJ (1999) The clinical efficacy of
topical and systemic therapy for the treatment of feline ocular chlamydiosis. J Feline Med
Surg, 1 (1), 31-35.
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY2
History
A 6-year-old male neutered Basset hound is presented with a 48-hour history of acute
redness and haziness in the left eye. The dog has been sleeping more than usual and resents
the owner touching the affected eye. He has received routine vaccinations and anthelmintic
treatment and is reportedly otherwise well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Fig. 6.2a.
Fig. 6.2a
2. What differential diagnosis should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figure Shows
Fig. 6.2a Leff eye (the upper eyelid is manually elevated) - there is a serous ocular
discharge at the medial canthus, generalised corneal opacification, and marked conjunctival
and episcleral congestion. The Purkinje images are disrupted because of a strand of mucus
on the cornea. The free margin of the TEL is pigmented and continues circumferentially
around the globe posterior to the limbus (asterix) - this represents an encircling TEL which
is common in some dog breeds (e.g. American Cocker Spaniel) and is considered to be
clinically insignificant.
2.Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the left eye, the following conditions should be considered:
· Glaucoma This term describes a group of related ocular diseases with the common
factors of reduced aqueous humour drainage from the eye and optic nerve damage.
In dogs this is usually associated with an elevation in IOP. Causes of glaucoma can
be classified as primary, secondary or congenital. Primary glaucoma is thought to
arise from an inherent abnormality with the aqueous humour outflow system, and
includes pectinate ligament dysplasia (goniodysgenesis). Glaucoma can be secondary
to chronic or severe ocular disease, e.g. uveitis, lens luxation, intraocular neoplasia.
Congenital glaucoma is rare in the dog. In addition to an elevation in IOP, classic
signs of acute glaucoma include discomfort, episcleral congestion, mydriasis, corneal
oedema, reduced vision, optic disc abnormalities (swelling, cupping, degeneration)
and retinal changes. Signs of chronic glaucoma include buphthalmos, episcleral
congestion, corneal oedema, Haab's striae, keratitis, mydriasis, lens subluxation,
optic nerve and retinal degeneration, blindness and discomfort.
Anterior  uveitis Inflammation of the uveal tract can involve the entire uvea
(panuveitis) but is usually confined to either the anterior (iris and ciliary body) or
posterior (choroid) regions. Inflammation of the uveal tract reflects the fact that it is
the primary vascular source of the eye. The uvea forms a blood-aqueous barrier
which consists of the non-pigmented epithelium of the ciliary body and the
endothelium of the blood vessels of the iris. Anterior uveitis occurs when the
integrity of the blood-aqueous barrier is compromised. The aetiopathogenesis of
uveitis is complex. Systemic causes include immune-mediated disease (e.g. Vogt-
Koyanagi-Harada-like or uveodermatologic syndrome), metastatic  neoplasia and
infectious disease: viral (e.g. infectious canine hepatitis), bacterial (e.g. Leptospira
sp), fungal (e.g. Blastomyces dermatitidis), rickettsial (e.g. Ehrlichia canis), protozoal
(Toxoplasma gondii), or parasitic (Dirofilaria immitis). The clinical features of uveitis
depend on the area of the uvea involved, the severity of the inflammation and
whether the process is acute or chronic. Acute anterior uveitis is characterised by
discomfort (blepharospasm, increased lacrimation and photophobia), conjunctival
and episcleral congestion, ciliary flush, miosis, hypotony, protein and cells in the
aqueous humour (aqueous flare, hypopyon, hyphaema, fibrin) and corneal oedema
(Ch. 7, cases 2 and 3).
Ocular discomfort, redness and corneal oedema are common to both uveitis and glaucoma but the treatment and prognosis is
quite different for each
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - negative direct and consensual Os (left to right eye);
positive direct and negative consensual OD (right to left eye)
Dazzle reflex - negative OS, positive OD
· Vision assessment
Menace response - negative OS, positive OD
Visual placing and tracking reflexes negative OS, positive OD
Obstacle course - this dog can navigate around large objects in both
          s
reluctant to move when the right eye is covered.
In this dog, these results are consistent with a blind left eye, and no sign of retinal and
optic nerve function. The pupil in the left eye cannot constrict (see below).
  os         g
corneal thickness secondary to the oedema.
Pupil size provides helpful information about the presence and type of intraocular disease. The pupil is more likely to be
dilated in an eye with glaucoma but miotic with anterior uveitis. Even in the presence of corneal opacity, pupil size can be
oaaal [ade ejoaap o nduane ue u saaue anbgo wog juaaas iouaue ay aupeuun Aq passasse
· Ophthalmoscopy - fundic examination is not possible because of the generalised
corneal oedema OS; the fundus OD is unremarkable
· Schirmer tear test - 23 mm/min Os, 17 mm/min OD
· Fluorescein dye - negative staining OU
· Tonometry - IOP 53 mmHg OS, 20 mmHg OD. The elevated IOP in the right eye is
the reason for the absent PLR because of damage to the optic nerve and retina, as
well as hypoxia of the iris.
within extensive sheets of tissue is observed OD (Fig. 6.2b, A and Diagram 6.2). In
the normal dog, distinct individual pectinate ligaments are seen (Fig. 6.2b, B and
Fig. 6.2b (A) Severe pectinate ligament dysplasia (left eye). There are several flow holes
 n  pn ()  o  ds nss  m (ao)
an adult Labrador Retriever for comparison.
SP, superficial pigmented zone; DP, deep pigmented zone; PL, pectinate ligaments; CC,
ciliary cleft; I, iris; P, pupil; F, flow hole. Illustration by S Scurrell.
SP
SP
DP
DP
CC
within several seconds, leaving the congested episcleral veins visible (Fig. 6.2c). The
 remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a general
physical examination is unremarkable.
Fig. 6.2c (A) Marked conjunctival and episcleral congestion in the right eye. (B) Same eye
several seconds after the topical application of 2.5% phenylephrine - the superficial vessels
in the conjunctiva have blanched (because of vasoconstriction), making the deeper
episcleral vessels more visible.
B
When evaluating a red eye',i canbe helpful to establish whether the blood vessel congestion/hyperaemia is superficial (conjunctiva) or
both superficial and deep (episcleral and scleral). Episceral and scleral congestion/hyperaemia is usually associated with intraoculal
disease such as uveitis and glaucoma whereas conj
ctival involvement alone
vessels are bright red, branching, tortuous, and mobile but vasocons
rict within several seconds of the topical application of a
epine phr ine.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of acute primary glaucoma is made in the
left eye and goniodysgenesis in the right eye.
Treatment
The primary aim of the treatment of acute glaucoma is the rapid reduction of IOP to within
a safe target range (<20 mmHg). Lowering IOP can be achieved by medical or surgical
treatment, or a combination of both. The choice of treatment depends on the potential for
vision, owner compliance, financial considerations and the temperament of the dog. There
is no single effective medical treatment regimen for glaucoma. A treatment protocol for
acute primary glaucoma includes a topical prostaglandin, e.g. latanoprost (an analogue of
thought to lower the IOP in the dog by reducing aqueous humour production and/or
increasing unconventional uveoscleral outflow (Miller et al., 2010). Analgesia and anti-
inflammatory therapy is also essential.
            
therapy. The IOP is successfully lowered to 15 mmHg within one hour of treatment but the
menace response and dazzle reflex remain absent. Treatment is continued with travoprost
q12 hours, 2% brinzolamide q8 hours, and systemic NSAID therapy. Regular monitoring is
performed to ensure that the IOP remains <20 mmHg. The eye does not regain vision and
the IOP is 60 mmHg three weeks later. Enucleation is performed as the eye is considered to
be irreversibly blind and painful. The diagnosis of goniodysgenesis and irreversible damage
(g a) odsr o po si (adno, a odo) au ono  o
() an,  q s pu au oo  eo ao () r 
Normal canine optic nerve head. (H & E, × 40). Reproduced with permission from EJ
Scurrell.
Prophylactic treatment with a topical β-blocker is recommended for the contralateral eye.
One study has shown that prophylactic treatment can delay the onset of the disease in the
fellow eye by almost two years (Miller et al., 2000). The right eye is treated with 0.5%
timolol q12 hours and is re-examined every three months.
Many topical medications are available for the treatment of glaucoma in the dog. In
addition to the aforementioned prostaglandins (e.g. latanoprost, travoprost) and β-blockers
(e.g. timolol), there are miotics (e.g. pilocarpine), α-agonists (apraclonidine) and carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors (e.g. brinzolamide, dorzolamide). The reader is directed to more
detailed sources of information on the efficacy of these drugs. However, in general terms,
prostaglandins are appropriate for acute primary glaucoma in the dog as they can
successfully and rapidly lower a high IOP to a safe level. Prostaglandins induce a marked
miosis in the dog and are therefore contraindicated in eyes with acute uveitis and anterior
lens luxation. In comparison, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors take several days to reach their
  e    ns  - s o   m   
eye with a mildly elevated IOP. Systemic medications are now used infrequently and
include hyperosmotic agents e.g. mannitol. These drugs are now only commonly used prior
to glaucoma surgery. The role of neuroprotective drugs is currently under investigation.
The term 'neuroprotection' refers to the protection of remaining retinal ganglion cells which
have not been damaged by the elevated 1lOP
Surgical treatment is available for primary glaucoma. Some procedures involve the
creation of an alternative drainage pathway for aqueous humour, e.g. anterior chamber
shunts, while others focus on decreasing the formation of aqueous humour, e.g. destruction
of part of the ciliary body by laser or cryotherapy. Currently, the most frequently employed
surgical techniques in veterinary medicine include gonioimplants (i.e. anterior chamber
shunts), laser photocoagulation and cyclocryotherapy. The ideal surgical candidate still has
vision and is in the early stages of glaucoma, i.e. the eye has a normal-appearing optic
nerve head and no signs of uveitis or lens subluxation. Surgery to reduce IOP is not elected
in this dog because the right eye remains blind even when it becomes normotensive.
Optic nerve axons are acutely sensitive to elevations in 1OP. The normal 10P range in the dog is 15-25 mmHg. Even at 25 mmHg, 10% of
more sensitive to further l0Pelevations. The ~safe' 1OP for the dog is unknown, but general guidelines are 30 mmHg to maintain comfort,
and <20 mmHg to maintain vision
Prognosis
The long-term prognosis for a visual, comfortable eye is poor. The majority of dogs with
primary glaucoma become blind and the eye continues to be painful despite appropriate
medical therapy.
Vision  after  combined surgery  with  a  gonioimplant  and cyclophotocoagulation  or
B     io t       s 
al., 1999; Sapienza & van der Woerdt, 2005). There is currently no published reports on the
prognosis for vision with medical management alone compared with a combination of
medical and surgical management.
Discussion
 ss o o  xo     s  
primary glaucoma, the risk of permanent blindness is high because the disease is often not
recognised until there is an acute onset of elevated IOP. Blindness results from damage to
the retina and the optic nerve - the nerve may recover to a degree if prompt appropriate
treatment is given, but irreversible optic nerve atrophy is common. The diagnosis of
glaucoma is often delayed because of a low index of suspicion on the part of the owner and
Hound, Chow Chow, Shar Pei, Wire-haired Fox Terrier, Norwegian Elkhound, Siberian
Husky, Flat-Coated Retriever, Great Dane and Samoyed. In an emergency situation it can
be difficult to recall all predisposed breeds but if a pure-breed dog presents with an acutely
red, painful eye, and no other cause is clearly identified, glaucoma must always be
considered and promptly excluded
References and Further Reading
Bentley E, Miller PE, Murphy CJ, Schoster JV (1999) Combined cycloablation and
gonioimplantation for treatment of glaucoma in dogs: 18 cases (1992-1998). J Am Vet Med
Assoc, 215, 1469-1472.
Miller PE, Schmidt GM, Vainisi SJ, Swanson JF, Herrman MK (2000) The efficacy of
topical prophylactic antiglaucoma therapy in primary closed angle glaucoma in dogs: a
multicentre clinical trial. J Am Animal Hosp Assoc, 36, 431-438.
Miller PE, Struble C, Burke JA, Lee SS, Robinson MR (2010) Topical application of
    so  ss so  s o o
Ophthalmol, San Diego 2010, Vet Ophthalmol, 13 (6), 407-423.
cyclophotocoagulation and Ahmed gonioimplantation in dogs with primary glaucoma: 51
cases (1996-2004). Vet Ophthalmol, 8, 121-127.
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY3
History
A 6-year-old male neutered Cocker Spaniel is presented with a six-week history of redness
in the right eye. The dog has received routine vaccinations and anthelmintic treatment and
is reportedly otherwise well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Fig. 6.3a.
Fig. 6.3a
2. What differential diagnosis should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figure Shows
Fig. 6.3a Right eye - there is a circular, raised lesion which is approximately 1 cm in
diameter; it appears to involve the limbus and adjacent cornea, conjunctiva and sclera. The
are disrupted.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the right eye, the following conditions should be considered:
· Nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis (NGE) NGE (or ocular nodular fasciitis) is
a n inflammatory condition which primarily involves the episclera, conjunctiva and
cornea. The clinical appearance ranges from an irregular thickening to a pink, fleshy.
quadrant is commonly affected. There is usually a superficial to mid-stromal vascular
response in the adjacent cornea; the cornea may be oedematous and have lipid and
mineral deposits. The TEL can be affected and appears hyperaemic, thickened and
depigmented. Involvement of the eyelids and uveal tract has also been described
There is a predisposition for the Collie breeds, Cocker Spaniel, and the Shetland
Sheepdog, but any breed can be affected. The condition may be unilateral or bilateral
but is invariably bilateral in the Collie. A mixed inflammatory infiltrate composed
predominantly of lymphocytes, plasma cells and histiocytes with a variable spindle
cell component is seen on histopathology.
· Neoplasia Primary and secondary neoplasia can affect the region of the limbus in the
dog. These include lymphoma (unilateral or bilateral white-to-pink corneal infiltrate),
squamous cell carcinoma (raised pink mass with an irregular surface), amelanotic
limbal melanoma(a smooth raised  white-to-greymass) and
haemangioma/haemangiosarcoma (raised red mass).
· Granulomatous episcleral disease Localised episcleritis caused by trauma (foreign
body, surgery), bacterial infection (e.g. Mycobacterium sp), parasitic infection (e.g.
Ehrlichia sp), and fungal infection (e.g. Blastomyces dermatitidis). Diagnosis is made
from biopsy and histopathology. The histopathological appearance of granulomatous
episcleral disease differs from nodular episcleritis. By definition the inflammatory
infiltrate is  granulomatous  and  there  are  increased numbers  of  epithelioid
macrophages and giant cells. Special stains may reveal infectious organisms and
foreign material.
· Systemic histiocytosis Ocular signs are characterised by multiple masses involving the
eyelid and episclera, exophthalmos, uveitis, retinal detachment, and glaucoma
Ocular disease occurs in conjunction with systemic signs which include anorexia,
weight loss, depression and cutaneous nodules. Histiocytosis is considered to be an
immunoregulatory disorder of the dermal dendritic cells. It is familial in the Bernese
         
histiocytosis  is aided  by  the lack  of  cellular  atypia  and immunohistochemical
staining.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
 Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
。
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
· Menace response - positive OU
· Examination with a focal light source - slit-lamp biomicroscopy reveals a vascular
infiltrate which involves the corneal stroma in the right eye.
● Schirmer tear test - 18 mm/min OU
· Fluorescein dye - negative staining OU
· Tonometry - IOP 16 mmHg OU
 ssse on issod nou si hl amou o un u pu - Adosso o
filtration angle beneath the raised lesion in the right eye.
· Laboratory tests - routine haematology, biochemistry and urine analysis are
unremarkable.
· Histopathology - under general anaesthesia and with the aid of magnification, the
conjunctiva overlying the lesion are incised to expose the underlying episcleral tissue
(Fig. 6.3b). The abnormal tissue is excised and submitted for histopathology.
Histopathology reveals a mixed inflammatory infiltrate in the episclera including
lymphocytes, plasma cells, macrophages, and fibroblasts centred on the episclera.
There is no evidence of infection, foreign material or neoplasia.
   sd  q  oo od s  ()  s
to faciliate maximum exposure of the lesion. (B) The conjunctiva is incised to expose the
underlying episclera for biopsy.
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination is unremarkable.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of nodular episcleritis in the right eye is
made.
Treatment
Topical immunosuppression with 1% prednisolone acetate or 0.1% dexamethasone is the
preferred initial therapy for nodular episcleritis. The frequency of treatment is typically q4-
6 hours until the condition improves and the drug can then be tapered over several weeks.
Recurrence  is more common with bilateral disease.  Topical therapy alone may be
insufficient in some dogs with nodular episcleritis. Surgical excision or debulking, followed
by strontium° therapy, cryotherapy or electrocautery usually facilitates prompt remission.
An intralesional injection of a long-acting corticosteroid is also a useful adjunctive therapy.
with or without niacinamide, may also be considered in conjunction with the topical
corticosteroid therapy. Systemic treatment can be tapered and eventually discontinued in
some dogs.
 In this dog remission is achieved after three months of 1% prednisolone acetate therapy
(Fig. 6.3c) and maintenance therapy is continued once daily. Signs of recurrence develop
one year later, i.e. conjunctival hyperaemia and increased vascularisation with a light tan
discolouration of the adjacent cornea (Fig. 6.3d). Lipidosis also develops at the leading
edge of the corneal pathology which is probably the result of chronic topical corticosteroid
therapy in combination with the disease process itself. Topical treatment with 1%
prednisolone acetate is re-started q6 hours to regain control of the disease and is
subsequently tapered to q12 hours as the hyperaemia improves.
Fig.6.3c
Remission after three months of treatment, as indicated by reduced
vascularisation, hyperaemia and thickening.
Fig. 6.3d Recurrence at one year appearing as an expanding area of increased conjunctival
and episcleral hyperaemia and thickening, and vascularisation and tan discolouration of the
adjacent cornea. Corneal lipidosis at the leading edge of the lesion is a result of chronic
topical corticosteroid treatment as well as the disease process itself?
Prognosis
The prognosis for maintaining a non-inflamed and visual eye is excellent with early
diagnosis, appropriate treatment and careful monitoring. Recurrence, however, is not
uncommon. Inherently, the population of T and B lymphocytes differs between different
forms of episcleritis, as demonstrated by immunohistochemical staining. This is of clinical
relevance because lesions with a predominantly B-lymphocyte population are less likely to
completely resolve and more likely to require long-term treatment to prevent recurrence.
Discussion
Episcleritis and scleritis are complex ocular conditions, not only because of the overlap in
clinical signs but also because the nomenclature is highly variable in the human and
    o n s  o o   
episcleritis, with the syndrome in the Collie breed considered a separate condition by some
authors. Synonyms  for nodular episcleritis include nodular granulomatous episcleritis
(NGE),   pseudotumour,   fibrous histiocytoma,   nodular   fascitis,   proliferative
keratoconjunctivitis, limbal granulomas and Collie granulomas. Nodular and diffuse
episcleritis are considered to be a primary condition; secondary forms of episcleritis are
caused by trauma or infection. Scleritis is a more severe disease in the dog and can be
nodular episcleritis), and both forms of scleritis (necrotising and non-necrotising) is similar
and a specific diagnosis can only be made with histopathology. The extent and degree of
inflammation associated with scleritis is more severe to that seen in dogs with episcleritis.
Extension of inflammation into the adjacent uveal tract can occur, particularly within the
posterior segment, resulting in uveitis and retinal detachment. Scleritis is also presumed to
be  an immune-mediated disease and  is treated  with  immunosuppressive drugs.  The
prognosis for scleritis is very guarded, in contrast to diffuse episcleritis for which the
prognosis is good with appropriate management.
References and Further Reading
Grahn BH & Sandmeyer LS (2008) Canine episcleritis, nodular episclerokeratitis, scleritis
and necrotic scleritis. Vet Clin North Am: Small Animal Pract, 38 (2), 291-308
See Appendix 2.
CHAPTER 7
The Opaque Eye
Introduction
The retina relies on the optical clarity of the visual axis to receive a clear and precise image.
Opacity may be the result of multiple single ocular defects, the extent of which can be
variable. With experience and a thorough ocular examination, the exact location of an
opacity in the eye can readily be determined and a list of possible causes identified.
CASESTUDY1
History
A 5-year-old male neutered terrier-cross dog is presented with a 10-day history of
progressive cloudiness in both eyes and bumping into furniture. The dog was diagnosed
with diabetes mellitus three months previously and is considered to be clinically stable on
insulin therapy.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. Z.1a and b
Fig. 7.1a Reproduced with permission from J Mould
Fig. 7.1b Reproduced with permission from J Mould.
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 7.la Both eyes have received tropicamide to dilate the pupil - the left and right eyes
are similar. There is leukocoria (white pupil) and the tapetal reflection is absent
Fig. 7.1b Right eye - there is a crystalline, white appearance to the lens. The ocular
surface is lustrous.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the both eyes, the following conditions should be considered:
· Lens abnormalities
  s     ss    
be classified in several ways including by the age of onset, degree of
maturity, location within the lens, appearance (shape and form), and cause.
The most common types of cataract in the dog are heritable, senile, diabetic
and those secondary to retinal disease such as progressive retinal atrophy
(Ch. 1l, case 1).
Nuclear sclerosis (lenticular sclerosis) This is a normal age-related change
which involves compression of the lens nucleus by the expansion of the
outer cortex from the continuous addition of new lens fibres throughout life
This process of compression begins around six to seven years in the dog.
scattering, which imparts a whitish blue or opalescent appearance to the lens
when viewed with diffuse illumination. Affected eyes still have vision and,
with experience, it is still possible to examine the fundus. In the human lens.
this process starts in the fourth decade of life and results in presbyopia - a
reduction in the ability of the lens to focus on near objects. Nuclear sclerosis
   sn      
tapetum. A tapetal reflection is present with nuclear sclerosis, but is partially
obscured by an immature cataract and is absent with a mature cataract (Fig.
7.1c).
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV) PHPV appears as a white
or fibrovascular plaque posterior to the pupil. It is a congenital abnormality
characterised by a retrolental mass formed by remnants of the hyaloid
system and the tunica vasculosa lentis. PHPV is a heritable condition in the
Doberman Pinscher and the Staffordshire Bull Terrier but can occur as a
spontaneous disorder in any breed. It is usually unilateral.
Opacities in the vitreous humour
Asteroid hyalosis This is a degenerative change of the vitreous humour
which is manifested by whitish spherical bodies containing calcium and
phospholipids suspended within the vitreous. These bodies move slightly
with eye movement and are a feature of advanced age and ciliary body
neoplasia. Affected eyes are visual (assuming no concurrent pathology) and
fundic examination is possible.
Synchysis scintillans This term describes refractile particles of cholesterol
within a more or less liquefied vitreous humour (vitreal syneresis). These
particles usually disperse and then gravitate with eye movement. Synchysis
scintillans is also a degenerative change; it is a feature of advanced age and
usually still possible.
· Retinal detachment Separation of the neurosensory retina from the underlying retinal
pigment epithelium results in anterior displacement of the detached retina. This
appears as a grey sheet containing blood vessels behind the pupil.
· Intraocular neoplasia Neoplasia within the posterior segment may manifest as
leukocoria, e.g.  ciliary
1 body  tumour   (adenoma/adenocarcinoma),  medullo-
epithelioma or amelanotic melanoma.
Fig. 7.1c A 10-year-old Miniature Poodle with a mature cataract in the left eye and nuclear
sclerosis in the right eye. Reproduced with permission from J Mould
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
+
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
· Vision testing
Menace response - negative OU
Visual placing and tracking reflexes - negative OU
Maze test (obstacle course) - this dog is unable to navigate large objects in
photopic conditions.
These results suggest that this dog is blind but that retinal and optic nerve function is
present in both eyes.
· Examination with a focal light source - this reveals normal depth and transparency of
the anterior chamber in both eyes.
· Tonometry - IOP 12 mmHg OU
· Gonioscopy - normal filtration angle OU (Ch. 6, case 2, Diagram 6.2)
● B-mode ocular ultrasound - ultrasound is helpful in animals with cataract to assess
the posterior region of the lens and the posterior segment of the eye. Rapidly forming
this is known as intumescence. Rapid intumescence may cause rupture of the lens
capsule (most frequently the thinner posterior lens capsule) and expulsion of cortical
material. Diabetic cataracts in dogs form rapidly and an increase in lens volume can
be readily assessed with ultrasound by measuring the axial length of the lens. This is
the distance from the centre of the anterior lens capsule to the centre of posterior lens
area at the junction of the posterior lens and the adjacent anterior vitreous, or as a
break in the normal contour of the posterior lens. Partial or total retinal detachment,
vitreal degeneration and a persistent hyaloid artery are also detectable on ocular
ultrasound, all of which might affect the success of cataract surgery.
Fig. 7.1d B-mode ultrasound scans. (A) Axial regions of the anterior and posterior cortices
of the lens in this dog are hyperechoic, consistent with cataract. (B) Normal eye from a dog
without cataract - the convex anterior and posterior aspects of the hypoechoic lens are
represented by hyperechoic curvilinear lines (X). C, cornea; L, lens; P, posterior outline of
globe.
B
In both eyes the ultrasound scan reveals a hyperechoic lens consistent with cataract (Fig.
7.1d, A) and an axial lens length of 7.5 mm (within normal limits).
· Electroretinography (ERG) - ERG is a means by which retinal function can be
assessed when the fundus cannot be observed with ophthalmoscopy. Assessment of
secondary to retinal degeneration (Ch. ll, case I) and some breeds are predisposed
to both heritable cataract and heritable retinal degeneration. Cataract surgery is
contraindicated in an eye with poor or absent retinal function.
· In this dog, ERG reveals that the b-wave amplitude and latency are within the normal
range for both eyes. This is consistent with satisfactory retinal function in both eyes.
· Laboratory tests - results of routine haematology, biochemistry, and urine analysis
are consistent with clinically controlled diabetes mellitus.
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities; a
general physical examination, including blood pressure assessment, is unremarkable.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of a mature diabetic cataract is made in
both eyes.
Treatment
The two most important consequences of cataracts are impaired vision or blindness and
lens-induced uveitis (LiU). Both should be assessed when considering treatment
involves the use of high-frequency ultrasonic vibrations to break up the lens, irrigation to
maintain a formed anterior chamber and aspiration to remove the lens fragments. The
procedure  is  performed  through a  small corneal  incision   (typically <3  mm).
Phacoemulsification is a highly specialised intraocular surgical procedure which requires
microsurgical instrumentation, an operating microscope, neuromuscular blockade
anaesthesia and appropriate training. Where possible, an artificial intraocular lens is placed
into the lens capsular bag following removal of the cataract. LiU (phacolytic uveitis) occurs
to some degree with most cataracts but is most marked in rapidly developing cataracts.
especially those caused by diabetes mellitus and trauma. Clinical signs include conjunctival
hyperaemia, darkening of the iris, and hypotony (Fig. Z.le). LIU should ideally be
managed prior to surgery with topical and/or systemic anti-inflammatory therapy to reduce
the risk of long-term postoperative complications. If cataract surgery is not elected, the
patient should be monitored on a regular basis for complications secondary to LIU, e.g.
glaucoma, lens luxation and retinal detachment. Cataract surgery is an elective procedure as
many dogs will adapt well to being blind.
Fig. 7.le Lens-induced uveitis causes darkening of the iris in the right eye of a young
Labrador; the left eye is normal.
As the clinical signs of LIU are limited to mild hypotony in this dog, both eyes receive
topical 0.5% ketorolac trometamol q12 hours prior to surgery. Bilateral phacoemulsification
and artificial lens implantation is performed and results in improved postoperative vision.
(Fig. 7.1f).
Fig. 7.lf Two weeks following routine cataract extraction by phacoemulsification and
artificial intraocular lens implantation. Note the clarity of the visual axes compared to that in
Fig. Z.1a and the restored tapetal reflection in both eyes. Reproduced with permission from
J Mould.
Prognosis
The prognosis for vision following routine cataract extraction by phacoemulsifcation is very
good, with an average short-term success rate of 90-95% in dogs (Wilkie & Colitz, 2007)
Diligent long-term postoperative monitoring is essential as complications may occur months
 n  sn do s sd a s  n 
detachment.
Discussion
Diabetic cataracts are very common in dogs - 5o% of dogs develop cataract within 170
days of diagnosis and 80% within 470 days (Beam et al., 1999). Hyperglycaemia leads to
an accumulation of glucose in the lens, which alters the normal lens metabolism. The
metabolism of glucose in the lens is primarily through anaerobic glycolysis (Embden-
Meyerhof pathway). In dogs with hyperglycaemia this pathway is saturated and excess
glucose is converted to sorbitol by the enzyme aldose reductase. Sorbitol accumulates in the
lens and, because it is a large sugar molecule, cannot readily diffuse through the lens
swelling of lens fibres; as a result the lens becomes opaque. Diabetic cataracts are usually
bilateral and symmetrical; they often form very rapidly (sometimes within a few days to a
week), and are characterised by moderate to marked LIU. Intumescence of the lens and
spontaneous lens rupture can occur. Signs of anterior lens capsule rupture are usually be
detected by examination with a focal light source or with slit-lamp biomicroscopy, whereas
signs of posterior lens capsule rupture may only be detected with preoperative ocular
ultrasonography. In general, diabetic cataracts benefit from early surgery, as long as the
patient is sufficiently stable to undergo general anaesthesia safely.
References and Further Reading
Beam S, Correa MT, Davidson MG (1999) A retrospective-cohort study on the
development of cataracts in dogs with diabetes mellitus: 200 cases. Vet Ophthalmol 2, 169-
172.
Wilkie DA & Colitz CMH (2007) Surgery of the canine lens. In: Veterinary Ophthalmology,
Ed., KN Gelatt, 4" edn, Blackwell Publishing, Iowa, USA, p 905.
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY2
History
A 1-year-old female neutered domestic shorthaired cat is presented with a two-week history
of lethargy and cloudiness in the left eye. The cat lives in a multi-cat household; all the cats
have been routinely vaccinated, have received regular anthelmintic treatment and are
indoor/outdoor cats.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. Z.2a and b
Fig. 7.2a
Fig. 7.2b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. Z.2a The right eye is normal. Left eye - there is pink and grey opacification in front of
the pupil.
Fig. Z.2b Leff eye - there is a subtle diffuse corneal haze and a large clot of fibrin and
blood in the anterior chamber. The iris is darker in areas and seems distorted; dyscoria is
present. There is a relative anisocoria (Os < OD).
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the left eye, the clinical diagnosis is anterior uveitis. The following
causes for uveitis should be considered:
· Infection
Viral The following agents can cause uveitis in the cat: feline
immunodeficiency virus (FIV), feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), feline
leukemia virus (FeLV) and feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1). Although both
anterior and posterior uveitis can occur with all these viruses, there are
specific characteristics associated with each, e.g. pars planitis with FIV;
keratic precipitates, fibrin in the anterior chamber, and pyogranulomatous
chorioretinitis with FIP; and white-to-pink uveal masses (lymphoma) with
FeLV.
Protozoal Both anterior and posterior uveitis are well documented features
of cats with systemic signs of toxoplasmosis. However the role of
toxoplasmosis in healthy cats with uveitis, especially anterior uveitis alone,
is controversial (Davidson & English, 1998). A definitive diagnosis of
toxoplasmosis can only be confirmed by demonstration of Toxoplasma
gondii on histopathology. A presumptive diagnosis of ocular toxoplasmosis
is based on clinical signs, response to antitoxoplasmic therapy and
supportive diagnostic tests, i.e. high IgM titre, rising IgG titre, IgM C-value
>1, positive PCR results.
Bacterial Bacterial infection can occur with penetrating trauma, septicaemia,
and systemic infection with, e.g. Bartonella henselae, Mycobacterium sp,
and Leishmania sp. Although Bartonella henselae has been considered to
be a causal agent of feline uveitis, the presence or magnitude of serum
antibodies to Bartonella sp cannot be used alone to document ocular
bartonellosis (Fontenelle et al., 2008).
Fu n g a I Granulomatous  anterior
ruveitis,  often with concurrent
chorioretinitis, can occur with Cryptococcus neoformans, Histoplasma
capsulatum, Coccidioides immitis, Blastomyces dermatidis and Candida sp.
Parasitic (ophthalmomyiasis) Anterior and posterior uveitis occur rarely.
e.g. larva of Cuterebra sp.
· Lymphoplasmacytic uveitis This is considered to be an immune-mediated process and
is characterised by unilateral or bilateral chronic disease in middle-aged to older cats.
Lymphoplasmacytic uveitis often causes secondary glaucoma which can necessitate
enucleation. The diagnosis is made by exclusion.
intraocular neoplasia in the cat includes diffuse iris melanoma (Ch. 9, case 3), post-
 o   o   s    
 s  o  n m o    
S  s  - s o n     si   n os
or anterior uveitis. Metastatic disease and local invasion of extraocular tumours can
also result in uveitis.
· Trauma Penetrating or blunt trauma can cause acute onset uveitis with pain and
hyphaema
· Corneal ulcer Corneal stimulation incites an axonal reflex mediated by substance P
and results in iridocyclospasm and subsequent miosis (Ch. 10, case I).
● Lens-induced uveitis This form of uveitis can develop with rapidly forming traumatic
cataracts (phacoclastic uveitis) or hypermature cataracts (phacolytic uveitis). Lens
intense than its counterpart in the dog (case I, this chapter).
anterior uveitis (Ch. 1, case I). Other less common causes of vascular disease include
polycythaemia and hyperviscosity syndrome.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - positive direct and consensual OU. There is reduced
mobility of the left pupil.
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
· Menace response - negative OS and positive OD
In this cat, these results suggest that there is a visual deficit in the left eye but that retinal
and optic nerve function are still present.
● Examination with a focal light source - in the left eye, slit-lamp biomicroscopy
reveals a slight increase in the corneal thickness (because of oedema), aqueous flare.
hyperaemia of the iridal vasculature, multifocal posterior synechiae and inflammatory
cells on the anterior lens capsule manifested by a dust-like covering on the surface of
the lens. The posterior synechiae most likely account for the reduced pupil mobility
· Schirmer tear test - 10 mm/min OU
· Fluorescein dye - negative staining OU
● Tonometry - IOP 14 mmHg OS, 22 mmHg OD
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no abnormalities and a general
physical examination is unremarkable.
Further Diagnostic Tests
· B-mode ocular ultrasound - this reveals thickening of the iris and hyperechoic
material in the anterior chamber, consistent with a fibrin clot. The posterior segment
is unremarkable.
· Laboratory tests - routine haematology, biochemistry, urine analysis and serological
tests for common infectious agents for a cat in north Europe (Toxoplasma gondii,
FIV, FeLV and FIP) are performed. This is an initial screening examination with a
view to selecting more specific tests if indicated. The cat is lymphopaenic.
leukopaenic and positive for both FIV and FeLV.
· Thoracic radiography and abdominal ultrasound - the results are unremarkable.
· Anterior chamber paracentesis - aqueous humour can be sampled for cytology,
bacteriology, antibody titres (to determine the C-value) and PCR assay for infectious
agents.  Aqueous paracentesis  is usually performed under sedation or general
 d s d   n -  n o si p is
essential (Fig. Z.2c). The procedure should be reserved for selected cases as it can
exacerbate uveitis and results may be unrewarding. Aqueous paracentesis is probably
best indicated when there is a strong clinical suspicion of lymphoma, or when C-
values might be helpful. It is not indicated in this cat because of the positive FIV and
FeLV status.
Aqueous humour ire levels can be compared to those in the serum to determine whether there is local antibody production
against a specific antigen. A Goldmann-Witmer coefficient, or C-value, of >1 indicates local antibody production. The 
u aI [eo) x (unas u I oroads Apoqueymouny snoanbe u I oads Apogue) s anea- ay auunaap o eoj
aqueous humour/total Ig in se rum)
After preparation of the ocular surface with dilute povidone-iodine solution a topical
and advanced; contact with the corneal endothelium, iris and lens should be avoided. A
volume of 0.1-0.25 ml aqueous humour can be slowly aspirated.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of anterior uveitis in the left eye is made,
this is most probably the result of a combined infection with FIV and FeLV.
Treatment
Non-specific    treatment  of  feline   anterior   uveitis   consists   primarily    of  topical
mydriatic/cycloplegic and anti-inflammatory drugs. Atropine is a potent mydriatic and
       o    
maintain mydriasis - this is typically q12-24 hours in the cat but depends on the degree of
uveitis.
Atropine is a parasympatholytic agent which reduces salivation. However, atropine is biter and may cause profuse salivation after topical
especially marked in cats, although it may occur in some dogs. An ointment formulation is therefore preferable in the cat to reduce
pa ssa ge of the drug thr ough the na solacrimal duct.
The topical anti-inflammatory agents of choice are 1% prednisolone acetate or 0.1%
dexamethasone. The frequency of administration will depend on the severity of the uveitis
(q6-12 hours) and the drug should be tapered as the clinical signs improve. Although
systemic anti-inflammatory therapy is indicated if the posterior segment is involved,
NSAIDs are preferable to corticosteroids if the underlying disease process is thought to be
infectious, e.g. generalised toxoplasmosis. Persisting fibrin can lead to the formation of
posterior synechiae and secondary glaucoma. If fibrin in the anterior chamber persists
(TPA) can be administered. TPA is most effective at dissolving a fibrin clot that has been
present for <72 hours but may be effective for up to 10 days.
Topical therapy in this cat includes 1% atropine ointment once daily for three days then
twice weekly for two weeks, in conjunction with 1% prednisolone acetate q6 hours for one
week, then tapered over four weeks to a maintenance dose of q24 hours.
Prognosis
The prognosis for a visual, normotensive eye following an episode of feline uveitis is
guarded. Posterior synechiae, iris bombe (Ch. 9, case 4), the formation of pre-iridal
fibrovascular membranes (Ch. 1, case I), cataract and glaucoma can all result from severe
and/or protracted uveitis. Glaucoma is common, occurring in 46% of cats either at the time
  a o s    s  s p  o
lymphoplasmacytic uveitis (Gemensky et al., 1996). These authors also found that
idiopathic uveitis and uveitis secondary to FIV were more responsive to treatment (56%)
than uveitis associated with other systemic disease (33%)
Discussion
The clinical signs of uveitis in the cat are often more subtle than in the dog, and cats often
present with advanced disease or even secondary glaucoma. Pain may be absent or mild
and conjunctival hyperaemia is difficult to observe (conjunctiva is less visible than in the
dog). However iris discoloration  because of  vascular  hyperaemia or  infiltration by
light colour. Keratic precipitates are also more common than in the dog and are readily
observed against a light-coloured iris. In summary, a dog with anterior uveitis is more likely
to present with acute discomfort or pain, whereas a cat with anterior uveitis is more likely to
present with a change in the appearance of the eye.
References and Further Reading
Davidson MG & English RV (1998) Feline 0cular toxoplasmosis. Vet Ophthalmol 1, 71-80
Davidson MG, Nasisse MP, English RV, Wilcock BP, Jamieson VE (1991) Feline anterior
uveitis: a study of 53 cases. J Am Animal Hosp Assoc, 27 (1), 77-83.
S             
antibodies against Bartonella sp in the serum of cats with and without uveitis. J Feline Med
Surg 10, 41-46.
Gemensky A, Lorimer D, Blanchard D (1996) A retrospective study of 45 cases. Proc Am
Coll Vet Ophthalmol, 27:19.
          
antibodies and DNA in aqueous humour from cats with or without uveitis. Am J Vet Res, 60
(8), 932-936.
See Appendix 2.
CASE STUDY 3
History
A 9-year-old female neutered Miniature Schnauzer is presented because of sudden onset
cloudiness in the right eye shortly after eating buttered toast. The dog underwent bilateral
cataract surgery six weeks previously, and has received routine vaccinations and regular
anthelmintic treatment.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. Z.3a and b
Fig. 7.3a
Fig. 7.3b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. Z.3a Left eye - there is a refractile structure within the pupil and a good tapetal
reflection. Right eye - there is diffuse cloudiness which appears to be anterior to the iris; a
tapetal reflection is still visible.
Fig. Z.3b Both eyes are shown. There is anisocoria (OD < OS) and the Purkinje images
are normal. Left eye - the iris is dark and mottled and the round refractile structure within
the pupil is consistent with the edge of the optic of an artificial intraocular lens. Right eye -
the conjunctiva is pigmented on the dorsal and lateral aspects of the eye, a common and
normal finding. There is a notable lack of redness and discharge.
2. Differential Diagnoses
  s n    n o      s
considered:
·Anterior chamber opacity
Lipid aqueous  (aqueous lipaemia) A transient and poorly understood
phenomenon that results from a breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier in
the presence of hyperlipidaemia; the aqueous humour is opaque because of
the presence of lipid. Lipid aqueous can occur spontaneously, or in
association with uveitis, e.g. following intraocular surgery.
Anterior lens huxation (with cataract) Anterior luxation of a cataractous lens
results in opacification of the anterior chamber. This combination is most
often seen with hypermature and senile cataract because of degenerative
changes within the lens zonules. Alternatively a luxated lens will undergo
cataractous change which can progress to complete opacification with time
(Ch. 5, case 3).
Aqueous flare Breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier results in protein
and sometimes cells in the aqueous humour. Aqueous flare is best seen as a
suspended in the aqueous humour scatter light to produce the effect known
as the Tyndall phenomenon. lt is considered to be pathognomonic for
anterior uveitis. The degree of aqueous flare can be subjectively graded as
1+ if barely detectable through to 4+ for the most intense flare, e.g.
coagulated aqueous and fibrin which obscures iris and lens detail.
 u sal uod gi snoo siu (snoanbe piounid) snoanbn snoue
aqueous humour increase to approximate that of normal plasma. This is
most commonly seen with acute, severe anterior uveitis. Fibrin clots form in
the anterior chamber if fibrinous exudation is severe.
· Corneal opacity Corneal transparency is a result of the precise arrangement of
collagen fibrils within the stroma which minimises the scattering of light rays, the
absence of blood vessels and pigment, and a low water content.
Corneal oedema Hydration of the corneal stroma appears as a characteristic
dull blue-grey opacity because of the scattering of light rays. Causes of
corneal  oedema  include  age-related corneal  endothelial  degeneration,
corneal endothelial dystrophy, corneal endothelial damage (secondary to
glaucoma, uveitis, anterior lens luxation, intraocular surgery, toxins),
corneal ulceration and endotheliitis (Ch. 8, case I).
e.g.  lipid keratopathy  (corneal  lipidosis),  corneal dystrophy,  corneal
degeneration, and calcific band keratopathy (Ch. 8, case 2).
Corneal scarring During stromal healing, new collagen fibres are laid down
 s    s     n
corneal opacity. Corneal scars may be focal or generalised.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
。
 Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
 Dazzle reflex - positive OU
● Menace response - positive OU
· Examination with a focal light source - this reveals that an artificial intraocular lens is
present in both eyes. Light directed at an oblique angle reveals that the cloudiness in
the right eye appears to be evenly distributed throughout the anterior chamber; slit-
lamp biomicroscopy confirms that the cloudiness is restricted to the anterior chamber
and does not involve the cornea.
● Ophthalmoscopy - fundic examination is normal OU
· Schirmer tear test - 17 mm/min OU
· Fluorescein dye - negative staining OU
· Tonometry - IOP 16 mmHg OS, 7 mmHg OD
● Laboratory tests - routine haematology, biochemistry (including serum cholesterol
  r o n  sisn  si a ( s
blood sample is grossly lipaemic (Fig. Z3c) and the biochemistry results are
consistent with post-prandial hyperlipidaemia.
Fig. 7.3c Lipaemic serum.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of a lipid aqueous and anterior uveitis in the
right eye is made.
Treatment
The treatment of anterior uveitis is thought to hasten the clearing of the lipid-laden aqueous
humour, although this may also happen spontaneously. Treatment comprises topical anti-
inflammatory therapy in conjunction with a low-fat diet. A topical corticosteroid (1%
prednisolone  acetate)  or  a  NSAID (e.g. 0.5%  ketorolac trometamol)  is appropriate.
Treatment of the underlying condition, if identified, is also indicated.
Prognosis
Lipid usually clears from the aqueous humour within 48-72 hours and so the prognosis for
optical clarity is good. However, recurrence is possible if systemic hyperlipidaemia persists.
Discussion
The development of lipid aqueous results from concurrent hyperlipidaemia. Transient
hyperlipidaemia follows the ingestion of a meal (post-prandial hyperlipidaemia) and is
normal. Primary hyperlipidaemia is uncommon in dogs but has been reported most
frequently in the Miniature Schnauzer. Hyperlipidaemia as a result of diabetes mellitus.
hypothyroidism, pancreatitis, hyperadrenocorticism, nephrotic syndrome, and hepatic
disease is more common.
A causal relationship between uveitis and hyperlipidaemia has been suggested. The
blood-aqueous barrier prevents large particles, including lipoproteins, from entering the
aqueous humour. However, following the breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier in
uveitis, lipid, protein and cells can pass freely into the aqueous humour. Lipid aqueous is
most often seen following cataract surgery in dogs with diabetes mellitus or in dogs with
suggesting that lipids can incite inflammation.
The importance of taking a detailed history is highlighted by this case. The Miniature
Schnauzer is predisposed to primary hyperlipidaemia, diabetes mellitus and portosystemic
shunts, all of which can cause hyperlipidaemia and lipid aqueous. Specific tests are not
performed in this dog because of the known history of recent cataract surgery and the
ingestion of a high fat meal prior to the onset of the problem.
Further Reading
See Appendix 2.
CHAPTER 8
Corneal Opacities
Introduction
The main function of the cornea is the refraction of light. The transparency of the cornea is
maintained by the parallel arrangement of stromal collagen fibres and by the corneal
epithelium and endothelium, which play a critical role in keeping the cornea in a constant
state of relative dehydration. The hallmark of corneal disease is opacity and these opacities
vary in size and colour. White opacities (e.g. lipid, fibrosis) are easier to see than brown
opacities (e.g. melanin), which may go unnoticed if viewed against the background of a
dark iris. With experience and careful examination the location and exact colour of a
corneal opacity can be determined, and a list of possible causes identified.
CASE STUDY 1
History
A 12-year-old female neutered English Springer Spaniel is presented with a six-month
history of progressive cloudiness in both eyes. The owner has not observed any evidence of
ocular discomfort but became concerned when the dog's vision seemed impaired and the
surface of the right eye began to bulge. The dog has received routine vaccinations and
regular anthelmintic treatment and is reported to be otherwise well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. &.1a, b and c
Fig. 8.1a
Fig. 8.1b
Fig. 8.1c
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 8.1a Both eyes - the ocular surface is opaque; the TEL is non-pigmented, a normal
variation in the dog. Right eye - there is an irregular contour to the ocular surface, which
Fig. 8.1b Left eye - there is a seromucoid discharge at the medial canthus, mild
conjunctival hyperaemia and normal Purkinje images. There is a mild diffuse corneal
opacity involving approximately 70% of the cornea. The pupil is moderately dilated and the
perilimbal band of corneal vascularisation and distorted Purkinje images. The cornea is
opaque, has an irregular contour and protrudes; there are multiple areas of lucency within
the axial cornea. Intraocular structures are not visible.
Fig. 8.1c Aerial view. Left eye - the convex contour of the corneal surface is
there is pronounced corneal convexity.
Corneal transparency is aresult of the precise arrangementof collagen fibrils, the relative dehydration of the stroma, and the absence of
blood vessels
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the corneal opacification, the clinical diagnosis is bilateral corneal
oedema. The following conditions should be considered:
· Age-related corneal endothelial degeneration This is a disease of spontaneous
progressive corneal oedema in geriatric dogs, resulting from an age-related decrease
in corneal endothelial cell density. The normal corneal endothelial cell density in a
young dog is approximately 3000 cells/mm?. When this cell density decreases to
between 800 and 500 cells/mm?, the endothelial pump mechanism fails to maintain
normal corneal dehydration - this is known as corneal decompensation. The corneal
oedema that results has a bluish-white appearance and there is an initial, notable
absence of conjunctival hyperaemia  or corneal vascularisation. The oedema
progresses slowly, over months to years, and although it may eventually cause visual
impairment, most dogs retain an acceptable level of guidance vision. In more
advanced cases, epithelial bullae result from the accumulation of fluid within the
stroma. Ocular discomfort arises when focal corneal ulcers develop following rupture
of the corneal bullae. Bilateral involvement is usually asymmetrical, as in this dog.
· Corneal endothelial dystrophy This refers to spontaneous, progressive corneal
endothelial cells is within normal limits, cell function is impaired because of
abnormal development. This disease is most prevalent in the Boston Terrier,
Chihuahua and Dachshund, although it has been reported in other breeds at different
ages.
· Non-specific corneal endothelial damage This can be secondary to a variety of
mechanisms including:
Glaucoma Diffuse corneal oedema develops when raised IoP impairs the
D
of the stroma results and leads to a distortion of the precise arrangement of
the collagen fibres. Corneal oedema is typically seen when IOP is >40
mmHg
Uveitis Inflammatory    mediators   cause increased  corneal  endothelial
permeability and malfunction of the endothelial pump mechanism.
Anterior lens luxation Physical contact between the anterior surface of the
lens and the corneal endothelium frequently causes focal (subaxial) corneal
  s   s      
Intraocular surgery Mechanical trauma to the cornealendothelium from
instruments, manipulation of the lens and intraocular irrigating solutions can
cause corneal oedema.
Toxins Bilateral corneal  oedema  can occur  with systemic drugs, e.g.
chlorpromazine, tocainide and lortalamine.
· Corneal ulcer Localised oedema develops when the hydrophobic corneal epithelial
barrier is disrupted or absent at the site of an ulcer. The underlying corneal stroma
becomes over-hydrated with tears from the ocular surface.
· Endothelialitis Inflammation specifically of the corneal endothelium is uncommon
but can occur with infectious canine hepatitis caused by canine adenovirus-1.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
 Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
Palpebral reflex - positive OU. This reflex is incomplete in the right eye
because of the abnormal corneal contour.
· Menace response - positive OU
aq on Aayl anou s! [dnd aul aseasp iene nur jo ada pue aouasaid ayp moqe uoneuojur aupraoid ur rnyday s azis ldnd
· Examination with a focal light source - slit-lamp biomicroscopy reveals that the
diffuse opacity is localised to the cornea and that the anterior chamber depth is
normal in both eyes. In the right eye, the peripheral corneal vascularisation is
superficial, and the pronounced corneal convexity is the result of increased corneal
thickness; the multiple areas of lucency are epithelial bullae.
It is helpful to try to assess the level at which corneal vascularisation occurs because this information can help to differentiate
intraocular disease from ocular surface disease. Deep corneal vascularisation is generally indicative of intraocular disease
e.g. uveitis, glaucoma or deep corneal pathology. Superficial vascularisation is usually associated with ocular surface disease
by the coagen amellae within the stroma. Superficialvessels arecharacterised as bright red and branching vessel which
may be observed crossing the limbus in the dog but not in the cat
  sn ao    s o   -  n s o
potentially unstable nature of the cornea which could lead to perforation.
· Fluorescein dye - negative staining OS, multifocal small areas of fluorescein uptake
OD. Extensive ulceration would have to be present to account for generalised corneal
oedema, and so it is unlikely that the corneal ulceration in the right eye is the cause.
· Tonometry - IOP 18 mmHg Os. Tonometry can only be performed near the limbus
OD because of the irregular corneal contour - the IOP readings are variable and
considered to be unreliable.
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination is unremarkable.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of age-related corneal endothelial
degeneration is made.
Treatment
No treatment is indicated in the early stages of this disease when there is only mild corneal
oedema, as identified in the left eye of this dog. In more advanced cases, a topical
hyperosmotic agent (5% sodium chloride ointment) can be used to reduce the extent of the
oedema, although it rarely improves corneal clarity significantly and may cause ocular
irritation. Corneal ulcers should be managed with topical broad-spectrum antibiotics in
conjunction with systemic analgesic and anti-inflammatory treatment as necessary. Topical
atropine is also beneficial to treat associated reflex uveitis if present. Topical lubricants such
as a carbomer polymer gel, sodium hyaluronate or a paraffin-based ointment can also be
ocular discomfort associated with corneal ulceration should be managed surgically. The
ideal surgical technique is a penetrating keratoplasty with fresh corneal tissue. This is the
standard technique in humans but is infrequently performed in dogs because of poor
availability of donor tissue. The most commonly performed surgical procedure for this
condition in the dog is a thermokeratoplasty. Thermokeratoplasty involves the creation of
multiple superficial corneal burns using a thermocautery unit to create superficial stromal
fibrosis (Fig. &.1d). The resulting vascular response in the cornea (Fig. 8.le) ultimately
leads to the formation of subepithelial scar tissue which acts as a barrier to the accumulation
of fluid within the stroma and prevents the formation of further bullae. Alternative surgical
options  that  have  been described  include  a  superficial keratectomy  and/or  a  thin
conjunctival pedicle graft.
Fig. 8.1d Thermokeratoplasty using a fine diathermy needle
Fig. 8.1e Right eye six weeks postoperatively. Note the multiple points of thermocautery
application and  the marked  corneal vascularisation  which progresses in a centripetal
direction; the cornea is fluorescein negative.
Prognosis/Discussion
With age-related corneal endothelial degeneration, corneal oedema is always progressive,
albeit at a variable rate between individual dogs and even between the two eyes of the same
dog. Once a corneal ulcer develops, it is almost inevitable that future episodes of ulceration
will occur. The prognosis for the prevention of corneal ulcer formation following a
thermokeratoplasty is good. In a group of 13 dogs with corneal ulcers secondary to
endothelial disease (present for a mean of 16.1 weeks), the mean time to healing following
thermokeratoplasty was 2.2 ± 1.1 weeks (Michau et al., 2003).
Although a thermokeratoplasty is an effective method of stopping the cyclical corneal
is poor. Postoperative corneal scarring can equal or exceed the loss of transparency caused
by the corneal oedema (Fig. 8.1f)
Fig. 8.1f Right eye of a cross-breed dog four months following a thermokeratoplasty
performed on the dorsal two-thirds of the cornea.
References and Further Reading
Michau TM, Gilger BC, Maggio F, Davidson MG (2003) Use of thermokeratoplasty for
treatment of ulcerative keratitis and bullous keratopathy secondary to corneal endothelial
disease in dogs: 13 cases (1994-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc, 222, 607-612.
See Appendix 2.
CASE STUDY 2
History
A 5-year-old female neutered English Springer Spaniel is presented with a six-month
history of cloudiness in both eyes. The dog has gained weight but is reported to be
otherwise clinically well. She has also been routinely vaccinated and receives regular
anthelmintic treatment.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Fig. 8.2a
Fig. 8.2a
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figure Shows
Fig. 8.2a Upper images A and B. Both eyes - there is a large focal corneal opacity (Os >
OD). The Purkinje images are disrupted where they overlie the corneal opacities but are
normal in the areas of clear cornea.
Lower images C and D (magnified view). Both eyes - there is a light grey, scintillating.
semi-lunar corneal opacity associated with superficial corneal vascularisation; the opacity is
separated from the limbus by clear cornea. The conjunctiva is mildly hyperaemic.
Corneal transparency is a result of the precise arrangement of collagen fibrils, the relative dehydration of the stroma, and the absence of
blood vessels
2. Differential Diagnoses
Based on the appearance of both eyes, the following conditions/explanations for the corneal
opacities should be considered:
· Crystalline corneal opacities
Lipid keratopathy (corneal lipidosis) This is a unilateral or bilateral ocular
manifestation of systemic disease characterised by peripheral or central
grey/white crystalline opacities and a clear perilimbal zone. Bilateral lesions
are usually asymmetrical. Corneal vascularisation develops with chronicity.
The crystalline opacities are composed of cholesterol, phospholipids and
fatty   acids. Screening for underlying  systemic lipid abnormalities  is
indicated, e.g. hypothyroidism, pancreatitis, diabetes mellitus, spontaneous
hyperlipoproteinaemia and post-prandial plasma lipid elevation
Corneal dystrophy This is a primary, bilateral and inherited disorder
characterised by central or paracentral grey/white crystalline opacities in the
absence of keratitis, vascularisation or systemic disease. Corneal opacities
may differ in appearance but are typically bilaterally symmetrical, oval and
well-demarcated. They may involve the corneal epithelium, stroma or
endothelium and are composed of cholesterol, phospholipids and fatty
Husky and Beagle. Diagnostic tests are not usually indicated. Affected dogs
should not be used for breeding
Corneal   degeneration This  is  usually  preceded  by   keratitis   and
lesions are grey/white and crystalline and differ in density; they may be
unilateral or bilateral, and poorly defined or well-demarcated.  Lesions
consist  of cholesterol, phospholipids, fatty acids and calcium. The
events is not always clear. Localised inflammation or injury may cause
fibroblasts and keratocytes to produce lipid in situ. Alternatively anterior
segment inflammation and corneal vascularisation may allow lipid from the
systemic circulation  to be deposited locally in the cornea. Corneal
degeneration can improve with continued vascularisation and phagocytosis
- topical corticosteroids should therefore be avoided because of their anti-
angiogenic action.
Calcific band keratopathy This is a specific type of corneal degeneration
characterised by a horizontal grey/white crystalline corneal opacity in the
interpalpebral fissure.  Corneal opacities contain calcium as a result of
localised   inflammation  (dystrophic   calcification)   or   systemic
· Corneal oedema Increased hydration of the corneal stroma produces a characteristic
dull, blue/grey opacity because of the scattering of light rays (case 1, this chapter).
· Corneal scarring During stromal healing, new collagen fibres are laid down in a
disorganised manner. This causes scattering of light rays which is observed as a
corneal opacity. Corneal scars may be focal or generalised, thus reflecting the extent
of the initial pathology.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
 Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
Palpebral reflex - positive OU
Corneal reflex - positive OU
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
· Menace response - positive OU
· Examination with a focal light source - the anterior chamber is normal with respect to
depth and transparency OU. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy localises the opacities to the
corneal epithelium and anterior stroma and confirms that the corneal vascularisation
is superficial.
It is helpful to try to assess the level at which corneal vascularisation occurs because this information can help to differentiate
intraocular disease from ocular sur face disease. Deep corneal vascularisation is generally indicative of intraocular disease
A pue suyueng pue pau ag surag Ag pasaaeia aie sassaa eiiadns eons au um aai uaaeoo aun ag
be observed crossing the limbus in the dog but not in the cat.
· Schirmer tear test - 18 mm/min OU
· Fluorescein dye
oStaining － negative OU
o Tear film break-up time -- 18 s OU
● Tonometry - IOP 17 mmHg OU
● Laboratory tests - routine haematology, biochemistry, urine analysis, and screening
tests  for  thyroid  and  adrenal  function  reveal abnormalities consistent   with
hypothyroidism
A lipid serum profile includes cholesterol and cholesterol esters, triglycerides, total lipids, lipoprotein electrophoresis (high-
Aeauaa pou op smsa au se sumas [eoua au u pauouad Aensn pou s! agoid sul (suraoudodi Aisuap-mol pue Aisuap
affe ct case ma nagement
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities. A
general physical examination indicates an overweight body condition and a slightly dry
coat.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of lipid keratopathy (corneal lipidosis)
associated with hypothyroidism is made.
Treatment
Although not always identified, any underlying disease associated with lipid keratopathy
must be treated. Corneal lesions are generally monitored and can be managed both
medically and surgically. Although the efficacy of medical management is unknown, many
veterinary ophthalmologists recommend a low-fat diet as well as the topical chelating agent,
disodium EDTA (0.40-1.38% in artificial tears) if calcium deposition in the cornea is
suspected. Lipid in the cornea, irrespective of the cause, can lead to the development of
overlying ulcers which are slow to heal because of the underlying corneal pathology.
Surgery in the form of a superficial keratectomy is indicated if the lipid keratopathy is
 progressive, interferes with vision, causes discomfort and/or delays healing of an ulcer.
In this dog, hypothyroidism is treated with oral thyroxine supplementation and the
thyroid function is re-evaluated four to six weeks later. A bilateral keratectomy is performed
because the corneal lesion is fairly extensive in both eyes and involves the visual axis in the
left eye (Fig. &.2b). Postoperative management comprises the placement of a soft bandage
contact lens to facilitate healing, a topical broad-spectrum antibiotic q8 hours until the
surgical site has fully re-epithelialised and systemic NSAID therapy for five days.
Histopathology of the cornea reveals multiple clear clefts (Fig. &.2c, arrow) within the
stroma consistent with lipid deposition.
Fig.8.2b
Fig. 8.2c H & E sections (x200) (A) Multiple clear clefts (arrow) in the corneal stroma
consistent with lipid deposition. (B) Normal canine cornea for comparison.
Re produc ed with permission from EJ Scurrell.
B
Prognosis
The prognosis for progression of a lipid keratopathy depends on the underlying systemic
disease and the treatment elected. If the systemic disease is not identified and/or not well
controlled corneal lesions can progress and impair vision. However, if the underlying
systemic process is well controlled, the prognosis for the return of corneal transparency
following a superficial keratectomy is good.
Discussion
Corneal lipidosis is common in dogs and the clinical appearance alone is often diagnostic.
However, it can be challenging to differentiate a lipid keratopathy from a region of corneal
degeneration - screening for systemic disease and careful assessment of the presence and
usually more straightforward as it is based on a characteristic appearance which is widely
described in predisposed breeds.
Further Reading
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY3
History
A 3-year-old male neutered Persian cat is presented with a two-month history of a black
spot on the left eye. The cat has never been in a cattery, and lives indoors in a single cat
household. He has been routinely vaccinated, received regular anthelmintic treatment and is
otherwise clinically well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. &.3a and b
Fig. 8.3a
Fig. 8.3b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 8.3a Both eyes - there is a seromucoid discharge. Left eye - there is an oval black
lesion in the axial cornea.
Fig. 8.3b Both eyes - there is mild lower medial entropion. Left eye - a well demarcated.
horizontal, oval black corneal lesion is surrounded by oedema and vascularisation. A large
vessel extends to this area from the ventromedial region of the limbus. The Purkinje images
are disrupted. The anterior chamber is partially obscured by the corneal changes but the iris
and anterior chamber appear normal.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the left eye, the following conditions should be considered:
· Corneal sequestrum (corneal necrosis) This is a common condition in the cat,
particularly in the Persian, and is characterised by brown/black discolouration of the
cornea. The affected cornea is degenerate and necrotic. Sequestra can be superficial
              
associated  clinical signs, e.g. pain, discharge, corneal ulceration, and corneal
vascularisation.
    d g   s s o o  o  o o
organic matter can appear as a black corneal opacity. Penetrating and non-
penetrating foreign bodies are usually associated with acute ocular discomfort.
· Corneal pigmentation (melanosis) Although this is common in the dog, usually as a
result of chronic corneal irritation (case 4, this chapter), it is not described in the cat.
· Iris prolapse Iris tissue can prolapse through a corneal defect following penetrating
    s s         
grey/black lesion protruding from the corneal surface; there is associated dyscoria.
There is often acute pain at the time of the perforation but the eye may become more
comfortable within a short time (hours) if the perforation seals with a combination of
iris tissue, coagulated aqueous humour, blood and fibrin
· Corneal dermoid This term refers to a congenital choristoma that, in the eye,
typically manifests as a focal area of pigmented skin at the temporal limbus,
conjunctiva and cornea. Eyelid involvement can occur. A corneal dermoid affecting
the central cornea is unusual but has been reported in the dog.
· Ruptured iris cyst Uveal cysts usually appear as brown/black spherical structures in
the anterior chamber but can create a focal dark corneal opacity following rupture
and adherence to the corneal endothelium (Ch. 9, case I).
· Melanocytic neoplasm Corneal involvement by a melanocytic neoplasm has only
been described in association with the limbus, i.e. limbal melanoma. This benign
neoplasm originates from the limbus and appears as a focal black mass. Limbal
melanomas  can extend locally into  adjacent  cornea and  sclera - therefore
involvement of the axial cornea is only observed as a direct extension from the
limbus and not as an isolated black lesion.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflexes - direct and consensual positive OU
。
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
Palpebral reflex - positive OU
。
Corneal reflex - positive OU
· Menace response - positive OU
· Examination with a focal light source - slit-lamp biomicroscopy demonstrates that
the margins of the black lesion involve the deep corneal stroma and that the corneal
vessels are both superficial and deep. It is, however, impossible to reliably determine
the exact depth of the central portion of the black lesion.
It is helpful to try to assess the level at which corneal vascularisation occurs because this information can help to differentiate
intraocular disease from ocular surface disease. Deep corneal vascularisation is generally indicative of intraocular disease,
.g. uveitis or glaucoma or deep corneal pathology. Superficial vascularisation is usually associated with ocular surface
restricte d by the colla gen lamellae within the strorma. Superficial vessels are characterise d by be ing br ight red and branching,
and may be observed crossing the limbus in the dog but not in the cat.
· Schirmer tear test - 20 mm/min OD, 28 mm/min OS. This is consistent with increased
lacrimation in the left eye, most probably because of the corneal pathology.
· Fluorescein dye
Staining - positive staining OS, negative OD. In the leff eye, there is an
of the periphery of the black lesion - this is consistent with a narrow lip of
corneal epithelium overlying the edge of the lesion (Fig. &.3c). Fluorescein
dye is also evident within the tear film meniscus along the margins of the
upper and lower eyelids which is indicative of a good tear film.
Tear film break-up time - 17 s OD. This is not performed OS because the
· Tonometry - IOP 19 mmHg OU
● High-frequency ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) - this technique is similar to B-
mode ultrasonography but uses higher ultrasound frequencies of between 50 and 100
MHz. Tissue resolution is increased approximately 10-fold compared to a 10 MHz
ultrasound probe. This allows discrimination between the different corneal layers.
UBM facilitates the planning of surgical management of corneal disease but is not
widely available because of cost.
· In this cat, UBM confirms that the corneal lesion involves the deep stromal layers,
which correlates with the slit-lamp biomicroscopy findings (Fig. &.3d).
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination no additional abnormalities and a general
physical examination is unremarkable.
Fig. 8.3c A narrow lip of corneal epithelium overlying the edge of the lesion is delineated
by an irregular line of fluorescein retention 2 mm inside the black area. Fluorescein dye is
also evident within the tear film meniscus along the margins of the upper and lower eyelids
and on the periocular hair.
the deep stroma indicate the depth of the corneal lesion (arrow).
Reproduced with permission fromEBenttey
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of feline corneal sequestrum in the left eye
is made.
Treatment
The choice of treatment for a corneal sequestrum depends on several factors, including the
            
brown area of discolouration and, if left untreated, progresses to a well-defined black
plaque, as is seen in this cat. Over time the sequestrum can be extruded towards the
Extrusion may take weeks to months and is often associated with ocular discomfort and the
risk of corneal perforation. Conservative medical management of a well-tolerated corneal
sequestrum includes regular monitoring and topical lubricant and antibiotic therapy.
Surgical management in the form of a keratectomy, with or without the placement of a
corneal or conjunctival graft, can shorten the course of the disease. It is recommended if
there is ocular pain, evidence of secondary bacterial infection and/or the lesion involves the
deep layers of the corneal stroma. Grafting of the corneal defect following a keratectomy is
graft, corneoconjunctival transposition graff, graft using porcine small intestinal submucosa,
and a penetrating keratoplasty.
This cat requires a deep keratectomy to completely excise the corneal sequestrum and a
corneoconjunctival transposition (CCT) graft to repair the defect (Fig. &.3e). A CCT graft is
a sliding advancement graft which comprises three distinct components: partial thickness
peripheral cornea, limbal tissue and adjacent conjunctiva. The CCT graft provides better
corneal clarity than a conjunctival graft and is particularly suited to axial corneal lesions
(Fig. 8.3e, C). A CCT graft also provides more mechanical support than a conjunctival
 s  ss ss     d  s 
importance of trying to establish the depth of the lesion preoperatively. Protocols for
preoperative  medication  differ  but  include  topical  broad-spectrum  antibiotic   and
Note the oedema within the corneal component of the graft distal to the limbus. (B) Four
weeks postoperatively. The sutures have resorbed, leaving focal opacities, and the corneal
oedema has improved. (C) Six months postoperatively. The transposed cornea distal to the
limbus is transparent and provides excellent clarity for the axial cornea.
Prognosis
Although the prognosis for a corneal sequestrum is generally good with appropriate case
management, recurrence is a well-described feature of the condition. A sequestrum can
recur whether or not surgery is performed, although placement of a graft following surgery
             
development of a sequestrum in the contralateral eye because the disease is often bilateral
in pure-breed cats such as the Persian, Himalayan, and Burmese.
Discussion
The exact aetiopathogenesis of corneal sequestrum is unknown but several causes have
been described and include: chronic corneal ulceration, keratitis, entropion, trichiasis, and
in brachycephalic breeds and a genetic component in pure-breed cats have been identified.
The association between FHV-1 and the development of a corneal sequestrum has been
speculated but  remains unclear. FHV-1  is unlikely to be the inciting factor in
brachycephalic breeds in which conformational factors are considered to have an important
role. The origin and nature of the corneal discolouration is also unclear but suggestions
include melanin and porphyrins from the precorneal tear film.
Further Reading
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY 4
History
A 1-year-old male Pug is presented with a recent history of a change in colour of both eyes.
The owners have also noticed that the reflection from the eyes in a photograph is different
from that for their other Pug. Both dogs have been routinely vaccinated, receive regular
anthelmintic treatment and are otherwise clinically well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 8.4a and b.
Fig. 8.4a
Fig. 8.4b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 8.4a Both eyes - there is brown pigmentation predominantly of the medial region of
the ocular surface. There is no visible tapetal reflection.
Fig. 8.4b Both eyes - the palpebral fissure is oval to round; lower medial entropion is
present. The nasal folds are prominent but there is no evidence of trichiasis in either eye
There is increased scleral show (visible sclera around the entire limbus), and conjunctival
and corneal pigmentation. The corneal pigmentation is marked (Os > OD) and is mostly
restricted to the medial region of the cornea although it covers approximately 70% of the
cornea in the left eye. The pigment has a swirling pattern in the axial cornea which is also
hazy. The Purkinje images are normal in the right eye but are slightly disrupted in the leff
iris in the right eye appear normal.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of both eyes, the clinical diagnosis is bilateral corneal pigmentation
(melanosis), for which the following conditions should be considered:
· Pigmentary keratitis This term describes bilateral progressive corneal pigmentation
and vascularisation which extends from the medial region of the limbus towards the
axial cornea. The cause of this syndrome is multifactorial and is related to eyelid
conformation  in brachycephalic breeds. Predisposing anatomical features include
lagophthalmos (caused by a shallow orbit and relative exophthalmos), euryblepharon
(or macropalpebral fissure), medial lower entropion, and medial canthal trichiasis.
Additional  features   often  include  nasal   fold   trichiasis,  distichiasis  and
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS). All these factors cause chronic ocular surface
irritation which leads to the characteristic corneal changes. Not all abnormalities are
present in every predisposed breed, e.g. euryblepharon and lagophthalmos are often
important factors in the Pug, whereas nasal fold trichiasis is an important cause of
ocular surface irritation in the Pekingese. Some authors consider pigmentary keratitis
to be a form of corneal dystrophy, particularly if a cause for the corneal irritation
cannot be identified.
· Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus) An immune-mediated, inflammatory condition
of  the  cornea  manifested by bilateral progressive corneal  vascularisation  and
pigmentation which extends from the lateral region of the limbus towards the axial
cornea. It is most commonly seen in the German Shepherd Dog, Border Collie and
S  s p nn       
associated with plasma cell infiltration of the TEL (Ch. 3, case 2).
· Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) Chronic KCS can result in corneal pigmentation in
thickening, corneal vascularisation and ulceration, reduced vision and discomfort
(Ch. 4, case 4).
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
Palpebral reflex - positive but reduced OL
Corneal reflex - absent OU
· Menace response - equivocal OS, positive OD
sensation in both eyes, and reduced vision in the left eye.
Corneal sensationcanbe assesed by touching a wispof cotton wool tothe lateralregion of the cornea (ie.away from the visual axis) f
filament is touched to the cornea to elicit a blink. The length of filament required to elicit a blink determines the corneal touch threshold
is of the
ea. Skull shape influen
 sensitivity in dogs and cats - the cornea in
         
depth and transparency in both eyes. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy reveals superficial
corneal vascularisation extending from the medial and dorsal regions of the limbus in
both eyes. There is a subtle increase in the corneal thickness in the left eye caused by
the marked degree of pigment deposition - this accounts for the abnormal Purkinje
images noted in Fig. 8.4b
It is helpful to try to assess the level at which corneal vascularisation occurs because this information can help to differentiate
intraocular disease from ocular sur face disease. Deep corneal vascularisation is generally indicative of intraocular disease
restricted by the collagen lamellae within the stroma. Superficial vessels are characterised by being bright red and branching
and may be observed crossing the limbus in the dog but not in the cat.
  sq  n   sod   x o - oo o
extent of the corneal changes. It is performed in the right eye, facilitated by dilating
the pupil with tropicamide; no abnormalities are present.
within the normal range, tear production may be insufficient for eyes with
euryblepharon and lagophthalmos.
· Fluorescein dye
。
Staining - positive ‘stippling' of the axial cornea OU. This is consistent with
suboptimal ocular surface health but not corneal ulceration in both eyes.
Tear film break-up time - 10 s Os, 12 s OD. This is consistent with reduced
tear film stability in both eyes.
· Tonometry - IOP 17 mmHg OU
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination is unremarkable. It should be noted that retropulsion of the
globe is limited but non-painful in both eyes - this is a common finding in brachycephalic
breeds because of their shallow orbits.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of pigmentary keratitis is made in both
eyes, primarily because of the brachycephalic conformation.
Treatment
The treatment of pigmentary keratitis depends on the underlying cause and the severity of
the corneal changes. In dogs with mild conformational abnormalities and early corneal
changes, it may be suficient to treat with topical lubricant therapy, e.g. a paraffin-based
ophthalmic ointment, and to monitor for disease progression. More specifically, diagrams
 s s o    u  d 
management is recommended in young dogs with marked conformational abnormalities
and secondary corneal disease or if there is evidence of progressive corneal disease which
could impair vision. A medial canthoplasty addresses the medial canthal abnormalities
(entropion, trichiasis) and will reduce lagophthalmos whereas a lateral canthoplasty will
only  improve  lagophthalmos.  Simultaneous medial and lateral canthoplasties may be
considered in eyes with extreme euryblepharon. Several techniques are described and the
choice is based on the experience and preference of the surgeon. The lower nasolacrimal
punctal openings should theoretically be preserved, regardless of procedure chosen, but this
limits by how much the palpebral length can be shortened. However, some
ophthalmologists sacrifice the punctal openings to maximise retention of the tear film,
which 1s considered to be beneficial to ocular surface health
Surgery is elected in this dog because of the extent of the corneal pigmentation and the
young age. A bilateral medial canthoplasty is performed (Fig. &.4c). Note the change in size
 o s    s   ss   o s 
postoperative stage - the large round aperture (Figs. 8.4a and b) becomes smaller and more
almond-shaped with no exposed sclera (Fig. &.4c) . Absorbable skin sutures, e.g. 6/0
polyglactin, are ideal for eyelid surgery because removal of sutures can be difficult in
conscious  animals.  Postoperative  medication comprises  topical  and  systemic  broad-
spectrum antibiotic and NSAID therapy for seven to ten days. Once the skin wounds have
sufficiently healed (usually within two  to three weeks), topical anti-inflammatory
medication  can   help  to   decrease  corneal vascularisation   and   pigmentation, e.g.
corticosteroids, cyclosporine, tacrolimus. Brachycephalic breeds are predisposed to corneal
 o         
corneal healing tends to be delayed in these dogs.
Fig. 8.4c Appearance three hours after a bilateral medial canthoplasty. Purkinje images are
disrupted because of topical administration of an antibiotic ointment.
Prognosis
The aim of surgery is not only to halt the progression of the corneal pigmentation but also
to reduce the extent and density of the existing pigment to improve corneal clarity. The
prognosis is good with early and accurate diagnosis and prompt surgical management
However many dogs do not present until the corneal changes are so advanced that they are
visually impaired. Although medical and surgical treatment can help dogs with advanced
disease, the beneficial effects are more likely to be seen in the overall ocular surface health
rather than in significantly improved vision.
Discussion
Corneal pigmentation is a result of the migration of melanocytic cells from the limbal and
perilimbal tissues. Melanin pigment is deposited in the basal epithelial cells and the
superficial stroma, and is found in macrophages and fibroblasts. Corneal pigmentation is a
common feature of chronic ocular surface disease in the dog, but does not occur in the cat
(case 3, this chapter); the reason for this is unknown. This case of pigmentary keratitis
treatment, but the importance of ocular surface lubrication with artificial tear preparations
for promoting corneal healing should also be emphasised.
This case  highlights  how   brachycephalic conformation  (macropalpebral fissure,
lagophthalmos, exophthalmos) has a profound influence on ocular surface health. This
influence may only become apparent when the ocular surface is challenged. For example, a
simple corneal ulcer can become complicated within a short time in a brachycephalic dog.
From the outset the clinician has the ability to prescribe treatment that can either promote or
delay corneal healing, and an inappropriate choice of treatment can cause the ulcer to
deteriorate rapidly. Topical ocular preparations have harmful as well as beneficial effects on
healing and ocular surface health. The choice of drug is particularly pertinent when treating
brachycephalic  breeds  with  suboptimal  ocular  surface  health.  All antibiotics  have
epitheliotoxic effects, but some, e.g. gentamicin and ciprofloxacin, profoundly limit the
ability of the cornea to heal and should be avoided in eyes with poor epithelial healing.
particularly when alternative antibiotics, e.g. chloramphenicol, are just as likely to be
and mydriatic properties. However, atropine reduces tear production, which in turn can
delay corneal healing. This is especially relevant in brachycephalic breeds, where tear
production is often marginal and ocular surface health is compromised. In these breeds
atropine should be used at the minimum frequency required to maintain cycloplegia.
FurtherReading
See Appendix 2.
CHAPTER9
Abnormalities of the Iris
Introduction
The iris forms the anterior part of the uveal tract, which is the highly vascular, usually
pigmented, layer of the eye. The function of the iris is to control the amount of light
entering the posterior aspect of the eye through a central pupil. The iris is closely associated
with the lens and consequently has a curvature similar to the anterior surface of the lens; if
the lens is displaced this can result in a change in position of the iris. In general, the
pathology of the uvea reflects its purpose as the primary vascular source of the globe and
the role it plays in the inflammatory process. With the exception of inflammation and
neoplasia, abnormalities of the iris are relatively uncommon, but are readily observed
because of the anterior location of the iris.
CASESTUDY1
History
A 9-year-old female neutered Staffordshire Bull Terrier is presented with a six-month
history of progressive visual impairment. The dog has received routine vaccinations and
anthelmintic treatment and is otherwise clinically well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 9.1a and b.
Fig. 9.1a
Fig. 9.1b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 9.1a Both eyes - the tapetal reflection is absent in the left eye and is obscured by a
  n       p  s    
Purkinje images are normal.
        s s i     g
brown spherical structures in the anterior chamber.
2. What Differential Diagnoses Should Be Considered?
Based on the appearance of the right eye and given the consideration that the condition
may be bilateral, the following conditions should be considered:
· Uveal cyst(s) Cysts arise from the accumulation of fluid between the bilayered
epithelium of the posterior iris or ciliary body. Cysts are common in the dog and may
be congenital or acquired following trauma or uveitis. They can be unilateral or
bilateral, single or multiple, of different sizes, and are usually brown or black. Cysts
are often free-floating within the anterior chamber but can also remain attached to the
posterior iris or ciliary body where they can only be observed following mydriasis.
Collapsed cysts are common and result in focal areas of pigment on the corneal
endothelium or anterior lens capsule. Uveal cysts are common in the Golden
Retriever, Labrador Retriever and Boston Terrier, but can occur in any breed of dog.
It is important to differentiate a uveal cyst from a melanocytic neoplasm; cysts are
generally  easily  identified  by their clinical appearance and with the aid  of
transillumination (Diagram 9.1)
· Melanocytic neoplasm This is the most common primary intraocular neoplasm in the
dog. Intraocular melanocytic neoplasia in the dog is divided into two groups: benign
melanocytoma and malignant melanoma. Intraocular melanocytic neoplasia is most
common in middle-aged dogs with a mean age of 9 years, although an age range of
two months to 17 years has been reported. Melanocytomas are more common than
malignant melanomas; both forms arise most frequently in the anterior uvea (iris and
ciliary body), and are usually nodular rather than diffuse, in contrast to the cat (case
3, this chapter). The clinical appearance of a melanocytic neoplasm can vary from a
focal colour change within the iris to a single mass protruding through the pupil; the
mass can be large enough to cause dyscoria, uveitis and secondary glaucoma.
Owners may observe a colour change or mass effect in the eye or might only notice
ocular discomfort, redness or impaired vision caused by the secondary uveitis or
glaucoma. Choroidal melanocytomas and malignant melanomas do occur but are less
by which time the tumours have reached a large size and may be accompanied by
retinal detachment.
· Metastatic neoplasia Neoplasms can metastasise haematogenously to the eye from
local or distant sites or can invade the eye by direct local extension. Bilateral ocular
involvement is characteristic of metastatic neoplasia, in contrast to the unilateral
occurrence of primary ocular neoplasia. The uveal tract is a predilection site for
haematogenous spread and metastatic neoplasia is consequently associated with
uveitis and secondary glaucoma. Gross observation of metastatic neoplasia is often
not possible because a mass lesion does not necessarily occur. Lymphoma is the
gland adenocarcinoma, transitional cell carcinoma, haemangiosarcoma
land
osteosarcoma.
· Chronic anterior uveitis Chronic uveitis often causes darkening of the iris because of
diffuse iridal hyperpigmentation (as a result of pigment proliferation and migration)
and hyperaemia, and is most obvious in lightly pigmented irides. Other signs of
chronic uveitis are usually present and include corneal oedema, keratic precipitates,
rubeosis iridis, posterior synechiae, iris rests, secondary cataract, and hypotony.
  s  s s    o o  
lateral view). (A) Light beam passes through the cyst. (B) Light beam is deflected from the
surface of a solid iris mass. Illustration by S Scurrell.
A
B
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - the left pupil is not visible. Consensual positive OS
(left to right eye), direct positive OD.
 Dazzle reflex - positive OU
· Vision assessment
Menace response - equivocal OS, positive OD
Visual placing and tracking reflexes - positive OU
Obstacle course - the dog can navigate around large objects in both
photopic and scotopic conditions.
In this dog, these results suggest reduced vision in the left eye
· Examination with a focal light source - there are multiple dark brown spherical
structures in the anterior chamber of the left eye. Some of the spherical structures can
   s s  n  s s
in corneal thickness in the left eye because of corneal oedema, an increase in the
depth of the anterior chamber, and a dark brown iris of apparently normal thickness
in both eyes.
● Schirmer tear test - 17 mm/min OU
· Tonometry - IOP 28 mmHg OU
· Gonioscopy - observation of the filtration angle is prevented by the corneal oedema
in the left eye. The multiple brown spherical structures in the anterior chamber of
both eyes also prohibit gonioscopy.
· B-mode ultrasound - this confirms the presence of multiple, spherical fluid-filled
structures within the anterior chamber of both eyes (Fig. 9.1c).
Fig. 9.1c (A) B-mode ultrasound image of the right eye. (B). Annotated image showing
multiple fluid-filled structures (uveal cysts) with a hyperechoic wall in the anterior chamber.
AC, anterior chamber; C, cornea; AL, anterior surface of the lens; PL, posterior surface of
the lens.
OD
OD
cystsin AC
B
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination is unremarkable.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of uveal cysts is made in both eyes.
Treatment
Most uveal cysts are clinically insignificant but possible adverse effects include visual
impairment and damage to the corneal endothelium (because of direct contact). Interference
with aqueous humour drainage, either by physical obstruction of the entrance to the
filtration angle or anterior displacement of the iris resulting in angle closure, can also occur.
Treatment options for uveal cysts include aspiration with a needle, laser ablation and
surgical removal with combined aspiration and irrigation. Aspiration (by a needle inserted
into the anterior chamber from the limbus, Ch. 7, case 2, Fig. 7.2c) is appropriate for a
large, single, and accessible cyst. Laser ablation can be performed under sedation or
general anaesthesia with an Nd:YAG or diode laser. Darkly pigmented cysts are more
amenable to laser therapy as the laser energy is absorbed by melanin. Although laser
ablation is reported to be an effective and safe technique, in the authors' experience it can
cause corneal damage (oedema, scarring) in eyes with a high number of cysts.
Removal of the cysts is indicated in this dog because of the history of visual impairment,
the evidence of endothelial damage (corneal oedema) in the left eye and the slightly
elevated intraocular pressure in both eyes. Surgical removal by combined aspiration and
irrigation is chosen because of the unusually high number of cysts in both eyes. Surgery is
performed with the aid of an operating microscope - a clear corneal incision results in the
immediate escape of aqueous humour and several cysts; the remaining cysts are removed
by careful aspiration facilitated by the use of viscoelastic (Fig. 9.1d, A). Several cyst wall
remnants become adhered to the corneal endothelium in both eyes and are left in situ
because attempted removal would be likely to damage the endothelial cells (Fig. 9.1d, B).
Postoperative medication comprises topical atropine and 1% prednisolone acetate as well as
systemic NSAID therapy for two weeks. The dog is monitored regularly for further cyst
development - both eyes remain visual and normotensive one year after surgery (Fig. 9.1e)
Fig. 9.1d (A) Cysts and aqueous humour exit the anterior chamber following the corneal
incision (left eye). (B) Relatively clear anterior chamber and dilated pupil at the end of
surgery (left eye). Three cyst wall remnants are adherent to the corneal endothelium. There
are air bubbles in the aqueous humour and viscoelastic, some of which is retained following
corneal closure.
Fig. 9.1e Appearance one year after surgery (pupils have been dilated with tropicamide)
the visual axes are clear apart from several cyst wall remnants adherent to the corneal
endothelium.
Prognosis
The prognosis for a visual, comfortable, and normotensive eye following cyst removal is
excellent, regardless of the technique used. A retrospective study on the use of a
semiconductor diode laser for the removal of uveal cysts in dogs, cats and horses, described
a success rate of 100%(Gemensky-Metzler et al., 2004). The adherence of cyst wall
remnants to the corneal endothelium can lead to chronic focal corneal oedema and
subsequent corneal ulceration. The development of further cysts is a possible sequela.
especially in eyes with numerous cysts.
Discussion
This dog is unusual with respect to the high number of cysts affecting both eyes - the more
typical presentation is a single cyst or a low number of cysts in one eye (Fig. 9.1f).
Fig. 9.1f Two uveal cysts in the anterior chamber of a young adult Labrador.
Although uveal cysts are generally benign, there are two different breed-related
syndromes that demonstrate an association between cysts and glaucoma. Great Danes can
be affected with multiple cysts in the posterior chamber that cause anterior displacement of
the iris and secondary glaucoma. In Golden Retrievers, a syndrome referred to as
pigmentary uveitis is characterised by multiple iridociliary cysts and concurrent uveitis and
glaucoma. The cysts are not always visible on routine ophthalmic examination and may
only be identified on histopathology. The exact causal relationship between the cysts and
uveitis is unknown.
References and Further Reading
for deflation and coagulation of anterior uveal cysts in dogs, cats, horses: a report of 20
cases. Vet Ophthalmol, 7 (5), 360-368.
See Appendix 2.
CASE STUDY 2
History
A 4-year-old female neutered Siberian Husky is presented with a three-month history of a
dark spot in the right eye. The dog has received routine vaccinations and anthelmintic
treatment and is otherwise clinically well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 9.2a and b
Fig. 9.2a
Fig. 9.2b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Figs. 9.2a and b The left eye is normal. There is a relative anisocoria (OD < OS) caused by
ambient lighting. Right eye - there is a focal, well-demarcated, dark brown circular lesion
in the ventrolateral quadrant of the iris. The lesion does not appear to extend to the pupil
margin or the peripheral iris. The limbus is partially pigmented (visible in the dorsomedial
region of the eye) which is a common, normal variation in the dog. The Purkinje images are
normal
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the right eye, the following conditions should be considered:
· Melanocytic neoplasm This is the most common primary intraocular neoplasm in the
dog. Intraocular melanocytic neoplasia in the dog is divided into two groups 
benign melanocytoma and malignant melanoma. Intraocular melanocytic neoplasms
are most common in middle-aged dogs (a mean age of 9 years, age range of two
months to 17 years has been reported). Melanocytomas are more common than
malignant melanomas; both forms arise most frequently in the anterior uvea (iris and
ciliary body), and are usually nodular rather than diffuse, in contrast to the cat (case
focal colour change within the iris to a single mass protruding through the pupil; the
mass can be large enough to cause dyscoria, uveitis and secondary glaucoma
             
ocular discomfort, redness or impaired vision caused by the secondary uveitis or
glaucoma. Choroidal melanocytomas and malignant melanomas do occur but are less
common. Because oftheir location in the posterior segment, diagnosis is offen late,
by which time the tumours have become large and they may be accompanied by
retinal detachment. The risk of metastatic disease for melanocytic neoplasms will be
described later.
· Iridociliary epithelial tumour (adenoma, adenocarcinoma) This is the second most
common primary intraocular tumour in the dog. This tumour arises from the
pigmented or non-pigmented cells of the iris or the ciliary body and can appear as a
    s          
distinguish from melanocytic neoplasia by clinical appearance alone. Even in the
case of a locally invasive iridociliary adenocarcinoma, the risk of metastatic disease
is low.
· Miscellaneous primary neoplasia Other primary intraocular tumours are uncommon
in the dog. They include medulloepithelioma, spindle cell tumour, haemangioma,
haemangiosarcoma, leiyomyoma,  leiyomyosarcoma,  and  osteosarcoma.
.A
medulloepithelioma is a congenital tumour which arises from the neuroectoderm
layer of the optic cup. In the dog the tumour most commonly originates in the ciliary
body and appears as a grey/white mass within the pupil or as a mass extending
through the iris. Spindle cell tumours of the uveal tract are thought to originate from
peripheral nerve tissue in blue irides in breeds such as the Siberian Husky; the
tumour appears as a nodular non-pigmented mass. Although locally  infiltrative.
metastatic disease has not been reported.
Metastatic neoplasia Neoplasia can metastasise haematogenously to the eye from
local or distant sites or can invade the eye by direct local extension. Bilateral ocular
involvement is characteristic of metastatic neoplasia, in contrast to the unilateral
occurrence of primary ocular neoplasia. The uveal tract is a predilection site for
haematogenous spread and metastatic neoplasia is consequently associated with
uveitis and secondary glaucoma. Gross observation of metastatic neoplasia is often
not possible because a mass lesion does not necessarily occur. Lymphoma is the
most common secondary neoplasm in the eye; other examples include mammary
gland  adenocarcinoma,  transitional  cell  carcinoma,  haemangiosarcoma  and
osteosarcoma.
· Benign iris hyperpigmentation or iris freckle (benign melanosis, pigment cell
clusters) An iris freckle appears as a well-circumscribed, non-elevated area of iridal
hyperpigmentation as a result of increased melanin within the melanocytes without
an increase in melanocyte number; lesions may be single or multiple. Iris freckles
  s         a 
bilateral condition in geriatric dogs.
· Iris nevus A nevus appears as a well-circumscribed, slightly elevated area of
hyperpigmentation of the iris as a result of melanocyte proliferation. Nevi are usually
non-progressive but may undergo malignant transformation. Lesions tend to be
single and often occur in young dogs.
· Uveal cyst(s) Cysts arise from the accumulation of fluid between the bilayered
epithelium of the posterior iris or ciliary body. Cysts are common in the dog and may
be congenital or acquired, following trauma or uveitis. They can be unilateral or
bilateral, single or multiple, of different sizes, and are usually brown or black (case I,
remain attached to the posterior iris or ciliary body where they can only be observed
following mydriasis. Collapsed cysts are common and result in focal areas of pigment
on the corneal endothelium or anterior lens capsule. Uveal cysts are common in the
Golden Retriever, Labrador Retriever and Boston Terrier, but can occur in any breed
of dog. It is important to differentiate a uveal cyst from a melanocytic neoplasm;
cysts are generally easily identified by their clinical appearance and with the aid of
transillumination (case 1, this chapter, Diagram 9.1).
· Melanocytosis (ocular melanosis, pigmentary glaucoma, abnormal ocular pigment
deposition and glaucoma) This term refers to a syndrome characterised by the
uvea. lt has been described primarily in the Cairn Terrier and also in the Golden
Retriever, Labrador Retriever and Boxer. lt is invariably a bilateral condition in the
Cairn Terrier but can be unilateral or bilateral in other breeds. Hyperpigmentation
involves the iris, the ciliary body, choroid and filtration angle. The iris typically
appears diffusely thickened and patches of pigment develop in the episclera posterior
to the limbus. Secondary glaucoma is common as a result of pigmented cells
obstructing the  ciliary cleft and  trabecular meshwork.  In  the Cairn Terrier,
ultrastructural  evaluation  of  the pigmented cells has confirmed  that they are
predominantly melanocytes and not just melanophages (macrophages containing
phagocytosed melanin pigment) (Petersen-Jones et al., 2o08).
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex -- direct and consensual positive OU
 Dazzle reflex - positive OU
· Menace response - positive OU
● Examination with a focal light source - there is no evidence of iris thickening
associated with the area of hyperpigmentation   in the right eye. Slit-lamp
biomicroscopy reveals a subtle change in the surface texture of the pigmented area
compared with that of the adjacent iris.
● Schirmer tear test - 17 mm/min OU
· Tonometry - IOP 18 mmHg OU
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination is unremarkable
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a presumptive diagnosis ofiris melanocytoma in the
right eye is made.
Treatment
Treatment for an intraocular melanocytic neoplasm in the dog depends on several factors
including the extent of the lesion, the overall health of the eye and the dog, the presence of
metastatic disease, financial considerations, available equipment and the skills of the
surgeon. Careful monitoring for disease progression is appropriate for small lesions.
Treatment options for more advanced disease include diode laser photocoagulation, local
excision by sector iridectomy, enucleation and exenteration. For photocoagulation, the
lesion should be confined to the iris and have no concurrent complicating factors such as
uveitis or glaucoma. For local excision by sector iridectomy, the optimal lesion is one that is
well-defined, confined to the iris and located axial to the major arterial circle in the
peripheral iris. Enucleation is generally reserved for a blind and painful eye in a dog with
no evidence of metastatic disease.  Exenteration should be performed when there is
evidence of extraocular extension of the neoplasm into the orbit.
In this dog, both photocoagulation and sector iridectomy are considered - the former is
elected because of the risks of haemorrhage and the potential for incomplete excision with
sector iridectomy.
Topical 1% pilocarpine is administered preoperatively to induce miosis in order to
provide good exposure of the maximal surface area of the lesion (Fig. 9.2c). The dog is
placed under general anaesthesia - a diode laser unit in combination with a laser indirect
ophthalmoscope and a 2oD condensing lens is used to treat the lesion. Laser energy is
directed at the lesion until there is no further reduction in size. Minor dyscoria is noted at
the end of the procedure, a common and acceptable finding following laser treatment (Fig.
9.2d). Postoperative treatment comprises topical 1% prednisolone acetate and 0.5% atropine
for 10 days. Atropine is used to minimise the risk of the formation of posterior synechiae
and pain associated with miosis (the latter as a result of the preoperative topical pilocarpine
and the postoperative uveitis). An ocular examination for signs of recurrence is performed
after three months, six months and one year, and annually thereafter. There are no signs of
Fig. 9.2c Miosis in the right eye following the topical application of 1% pilocarpine to
expose the maximum surface area of the lesion.
Fig. 9.2d Appearance of the iris following diode laser photocoagulation. Note the overall
 reduction in size of the lesion, mild dyscoria, hyperaemia of the iris vessels (asterix) and the
proximity of the major arterial circle (arrow) to the lesion.
Prognosis
The prognosis for vision and a complete cure for an ocular melanocytoma in the dog
appears to be good following diode laser photocoagulation. However, this information is
based on only one study in the veterinary literature (Cook & Wilkie, 1999). In that study
repeat laser therapy was required in five of the 23 dogs but there was no clinical evidence
of disease recurrence following the last treatment in all dogs; follow-up ranged from 6
months to 4.5 years. Minor complications of photocoagulation include dyscoria (as
occurred in this dog), iris hyperpigmentation and corneal oedema. Major complications
include cataract and glaucoma. The prognosis for survival is excellent for dogs that
undergo enucleation and have a clinical diagnosis of melanocytoma confirmed with ocular
histopathology. The prognosis for recurrence of the disease and for the eye itself following
sector iridectomy is fair to guarded, as incomplete excision and complications associated
with intraocular haemorrhage can occur.
Discussion
The majority of melanocytic uveal tumours are benign in the dog. Malignant melanomas
are less common and carry a low potential for metastasis (4-1o%). This, together with the
unproven efficacy of enucleation at preventing metastasis from a malignant melanoma.
makes it difficult to recommend removal of a comfortable, visual, and non-inflamed eye
a pigmented iris lesion is challenging and generally unrewarding, and it is therefore not
routinely performed in veterinary medicine. Generally, if the clinical appearance and
behaviour of the lesion is characteristic for a benign process, as in this dog, the risks
associated with an invasive biopsy procedure outweigh the possible diagnostic value. This
is particularly true for isolated iris lesions without complicating factors such as uveitis and
glaucoma. In contrast to the situation in the dog, diffuse iris melanoma in the cat is
associated with a greater risk of metastatic disease and for this reason pigmented iris lesions
in the cat are not usually managed with laser photocoagulation (case 3, this chapter).
References and Further Reading
Cook CS & Wilkie DA(1999) Treatment of presumed iris melanoma in dogs by diode laser
photocoagulation: 23 cases. Vet Ophthalmol, 2, 217-225.
Giuliano EA, Chappell R, Fischer B, Dubielzig RR (1999) A matched observational study
of canine survival with primary intraocular melanocytic neoplasia. Vet Ophthalmol, 2, 185-
190.
Petersen-Jones SM, Mentzer AL, Dubielzig RR, Render JA, Steficek BA, Kiupel M (2o08
Ocular melanosis in the Cairn Terrier: histopathological description of the condition, and
immunohistochemical  and ultrastructural  characterisation  of the  characteristic pigment-
laden cells. Vet Ophthalmol, 11 (4), 260-268.
See Appendix 2.
CASE STUDY 3
History
      s    
     m s o s     s o e go 
have both received routine vaccinations and regular anthelmintic treatment up until the last
year; they are indoor/outdoor cats.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Fig. 9.3a
Fig. 9.3a
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figure Shows
Fig. 9.3a Both eyes - the pupils appear opalescent because of age-related nuclear sclerosis
The Purkinje images are normal. Left eye - there is multifocal hyperpigmentation of the iris.
brown mass in the dorsomedial iris which extends from 12 to 3 o'clock and results in
dyscoria.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of both eyes, the following conditions should be considered:
· Diffuse iris melanoma (DIM) This is the most common primary intraocular neoplasm
in the cat, and typically presents as a unilateral progressive hyperpigmentation of the
iris over months to years. Hyperpigmentation can occur as a single area on the
anterior surface of the iris or as multiple areas which become confluent with time.
The earliest clinical sign of DIM is iridal hyperpigmentation, followed by a subtle
velveteen change in the iris surface texture, iris thickening, dyscoria, reduced pupil
mobility, pigment within the aqueous humour, and clinical signs of anterior uveitis;
the presence of secondary glaucoma is consistent with advanced disease.
· Benign iridal melanosis This term refers to a proliferation of melanocytes which is
restricted to the anterior surface of the iris. Diffuse iridal hyperpigmentation occurs
when multiple lesions coalesce, and can be difficult to clinically differentiate from
DIM. Benign melanosis usually develops with increasing age and is therefore most
commonly seen as a bilateral condition in geriatric cats.
· Chronic anterior uveitis Chronic uveitis often causes darkening of the iris because of
diffuse iridal hyperpigmentation (as a result of pigment proliferation and migration)
and is most obvious in lightly pigmented irides. Other signs of chronic uveitis are
usually present and include corneal oedema, keratic precipitates, rubeosis iridis,
posterior synechiae, iris rests, secondary cataract, and hypotony.
· Uveal cyst(s) In contrast to the dog, this is an uncommon lesion in the cat. Cysts
result from an accumulation of fluid within the bilayered epithelium of the posterior
iris or ciliary body. In the cat, uveal cysts are usually dark brown/black, and remain
attached to the pupillary margin or the posterior surface of the iris. Multiple cysts are
             
uveal neoplasm such as a melanoma - cysts are generally easily identified by their
  i  o      
Diagram 9.1).
· Feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma This is an uncommon but highly malignant
neoplasm, usually associated with a previous history of ocular trauma and lens
injury. The clinical presentation is unilateral and can include signs of chronic uveitis.
glaucoma, intraocular haemorrhage and a white/pink mass in the posterior segment
of the eye.
· Iridociliary epithelial tumour (adenoma, adenocarcinoma) These tumours arise from
pigmented or non-pigmented cells of the iris or ciliary body and typically appear as a
non-pigmented mass within the pupil or at the iris root. They are uncommon in cats.
· Lymphoma Lymphoma is the most common metastatic intraocular tumour in the cat.
It can appear as anterior uveitis, or a pink/white mass in the anterior chamber, or
both. In contrast to the dog, the majority of cats present with a nodular iris mass
rather than with diffuse iris thickening. Although ocular lymphoma in the cat is
generally considered to be a manifestation of multi-systemic disease, primary ocular
tumour exfoliates cells readily.
· Metastatic neoplasia Neoplasia can metastasise haematogenously to the eye from
local or distant sites or can invade the eye by direct local extension. Bilateral ocular
involvement is characteristic of metastatic neoplasia, in contrast to the unilateral
occurrence of primary ocular neoplasia. The uveal tract is a predilection site for
haematogenous spread and metastatic neoplasia is consequently associated with
uveitis and secondary glaucoma. Gross observation of metastatic neoplasia is often
not possible because there may not be a mass lesion. Lymphoma is the most common
adenocarcinoma, transitional cell carcinoma, haemangiosarcoma and osteosarcoma
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU. There is reducec
mobility of the right pupil
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
· Menace response - positive OU
· Examination with a focal light source - this reveals an iridal mass which obliterates
the anterior chamber in the dorsomedial quadrant of the right eye and almost contacts
the  adjacent  corneal  endothelium.  Slit-lamp biomicroscopy  reveals  that  the
hyperpigmented areas have a velveteen appearance and are thickened. This is in
contrast to the hyperpigmented areas in the left eye which appear normal with respect
to surface texture and thickness.
· Schirmer tear test - 10 mm/min OU
· Fluorescein dye - negative staining OU
· Tonometry - IOP 17 mmHg OS, 20 mmHg OD
  o   s o    - os o
angle in the right eye is infiltrated by the iris mass in the dorsomedial quadrant.
Visualisation of the fitration angle can often be performed without the use of a goniolens in the cat because of a deep
anterior chamber in this species
The remainder  of the  ophthalmic  examination reveals bilateral age-related  nuclear
sclerosis and a general physical examination is unremarkable.
Further Diagnostic Tests
● Laboratory tests - routine haematology, biochemistry and urine analysis are
unremarkable.
· Thoracic radiography and abdominal ultrasonography - results are unremarkable.
● B-mode ocular ultrasound - this can help confirm the presence of an iris mass and
aid in assessment of the posterior segment if the view through the pupil is obscured.
extent of the involvement of the uveal tract (Ch. 8, case 3, Fig. 8.3d)
Ultrasound is not performed in this cat because a detailed intraocular examination is
possible and the additional information does not alter the management of the case.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a presumptive diagnosis of diffuse iris melanoma in the
right eye, and benign melanosis in the left eye is made.
The features in the right eye which support this diagnosis are the mass effect within the
iris, dyscoria, reduced pupil mobility, the change in iris texture and thickening of the iris, as
well as a raised IOP relative to the fellow eye. The features in the left eye which support this
diagnosis are the absence of iris thickening, normal iris texture and the advanced age of the
cat.
When characteristic features of diffuse iris melanoma are present, a biopsy is not
warranted. When benign melanosis cannot be differentiated from early DIM on the basis of
the ophthalmic examination, it would, in theory, be helpful to perform cytology or
       s        
haemorrhage. Aqueous humour cytology has also been shown to provide unreliable
information for the differentiation of the two conditions.
Treatment
             
metastatic disease and can be justified on the basis of progressive hyperpigmentation, a
   d e nd  g a  s   s ss 
S           a   
enucleation  and   submitted for  ocular histopathology.  The  histopathological diagnosis
confirms the presence of advanced DIM with involvement of the filtration angle and
invasion of the scleral venous plexus (Fig. 9.3b)
Fig. 9.3b (A) Gross pathology. Box indicates tumour invasion of the region of the scleral
venous plexus. (B) Aggregate of neoplastic melanocytes plugging a vessel within the
scleral venous plexus (H & E, x400).
Re produced with permission from EJ Scurrell.
B
Prognosis
Enucleation in the early stage of DIM offers the best chance of survival. The prognosis is
guarded in advanced disease because the metastatic rate is as high as 63% in some studies.
Metastatic disease most frequently involves the liver and lungs but multiple organs can be
affected. Disease latency is common and the clinical manifestation of metastatic disease can
occur as late as one to three years following enucleation. Studies have described clinical
and histopathological parameters to assist clinicians in the management of these cases. In
one study, poor prognostic indicators included the presence of a high mitotic index, full
thickness iris involvement and the presence of neoplastic cells in the scleral venous plexus
(Duncan & Peiffer, 1991). Another study correlated histopathological findings with survival
times (Kalishman et al., 1998). In this study, cats with tumour confined to the iris had
survival times similar to the control group; cats with advanced tumour involvement of the
iris, posterior iris epithelium, ciliary body and the scleral venous plexus had reduced
survival times.
Discussion
Many veterinary pathologists believe that benign iridal melanosis in the cat is a pre-
neoplastic lesion which may progress to malignancy in some cats. In benign melanosis,
hyperpigmentation. A change in melanocyte morphology associated with infiltration of the
iris stroma is the hallmark of early DIM - this early change is only evident on
s o sn d  isso t a eo ssd o a  ds
remain static, some slowly progress over years, and others rapidly progress over weeks to
months. These factors make decisions about clinical management difficult - the dilemma
for the clinician is deciding when to recommend enucleation.
The decisions made for this cat are straightforward because obvious clinical features of
neoplasia are present. In cases where decision-making is less straightforward at initial
presentation, regular monitoring is important, e.g. every three to six months.
For comparison, the eyes of two different cats are shown in Figs. 9.3c and 9.3d. Fig. 9.3c
shows both eyes  of a six-year-old  female neutered domestic shorthaired cat  with
progressive iridal hyperpigmentation in the right eye over nine months. Enucleation was
recommended on the basis of the rate of progression, a velveteen appearance observed with
slit-lamp biomicroscopy, and unilaterality (benign melanosis is typically bilateral and more
Fig. 9.3c Right and left eyes of a six-year-old domestic shorthaired cat. Multifocal areas of
       aa sse   
Enucleation  was  advised  and the  histopathological diagnosis  was  early  diffuse iris
melanoma.
Fig. 9.3d Right and left eyes of a three-year-old domestic shorthaired cat. (A) Right eye at
initial presentation. (B) Left eye appears normal. (C) Right eye two years later - progressive
iridal hyperpigmentation. Monitoring was advised on the basis of the absence of any other
clinical signs.
Fig. 9.3d is from  a three-year-old female neutered domestic shorthaired cat with
 progressive unilateral iris hyperpigmentation in the right eye over two years. Although the
clinical presentation of this cat is similar to the cat in Fig. 9.3c, monitoring rather than
enucleation was recommended on the basis of the slow rate of progression and the normal
iris texture with slit-lamp biomicroscopy.
References and Further Reading
Duncan DE, Peiffer RL (1991) Morphology and prognostic indicators of anterior
melanomas in cats. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol, 1, 25-32.
Kalishman JB, Chappell RJ, Flood LA, Dubielzig RR (1998) A matched observational
study of survival in cats with enucleation due to diffuse iris melanoma. Vet Ophthalmol,
1(1), 25-29.
See Appendix 2.
CASE STUDY 4
History
A 4-year-old male neutered domestic longhaired cat is presented with a six-month history
of a colour change in the right eye. He is an indoor/outdoor cat and has received routine
vaccinations and regular anthelmintic treatment up until the last year.
Questions
show the appearance at presentation and one month later (see legends).
Fig.9.4a
Fig. 9.4b Frontal view. (A) Right eye at presentation. (B) Left eye at presentation. (C) Right
eye one month later.
Fig. 9.4c Aerial view. (A) Right eye at presentation. (B) Left eye at presentation. (C) Right
eye one month later.
日
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 9.4a Left eye - there is a slight serous discharge. Right eye - there is a dried mucoid
discharge, dyscoria and leukocoria because of a cataract.
Fig. 9.4b (frontal view) and Fig. 9.4c (aerial view) of both eyes: The left eye is normal.
Right eye - there is gross distortion and generalised darkening of the iris with anterior
displacement of iris tissue; this is most marked in the lateral and medial regions of the iris.
The pupil is secluded and there is a poorly defined, scintillating corneal opacity (corneal
lipidosis). The iris abnormalities in the right eye are more pronounced one month later,
consistent with a progressive condition (Fig. 9.4b, C and 9.4c, C). The Purkinje images are
normal.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the right eye, the following differential diagnoses should be
considered:
· Iris bombe This is an anterior displacement or bowing of the iris caused by the
circumferential formation of posterior synechiae as a result of anterior uveitis. The
normal forward flow of aqueous humour from the ciliary body through the pupil
towards the filtration angle is obstructed by adhesions. This leads to an accumulatior
of aqueous humour in the posterior chamber and the development of glaucoma.
·Primary intraocular neoplasia
Diffuse iris melanoma (DlM) This is the most common primary intraocular
neoplasm in the cat and typically presents as a unilateral progressive
hyperpigmentation of the iris over months to years. Hyperpigmentation can
occur as a single area on the anterior surface of the iris or as multiple areas
which become confluent with time. The earliest clinical sign of DIM is iridal
hyperpigmentation, followed by a subtle velveteen change in the iris surface
texture, iris thickening, dyscoria, reduced pupil mobility, pigment within the
aqueous humour, and clinical signs of anterior uveitis; the presence of
secondary glaucoma is consistent with advanced disease.
Feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma This is an uncommon but highly
malignant neoplasm, usually associated with a previous history of ocular
trauma and lens injury. The clinical presentation is unilateral and can
include signs of chronic uveitis, glaucoma, intraocular haemorrhage and a
Iridociliary epithelial tumour (adenoma, adenocarcinoma) These tumours
arise from pigmented or non-pigmented cells of the iris or ciliary body and
typically appear as a non-pigmented mass within the pupil or at the iris root.
They are uncommon in the cat.
· Lymphoma Lymphoma is the most common metastatic intraocular tumour in the cat
 It can appear as anterior uveitis, or a pink/white mass in the anterior chamber or both.
In contrast to the dog, the majority of cats present with a nodular iris mass rather than
with diffuse iris thickening. Although ocular lymphoma in the cat is generally
considered to be a manifestation of multi-systemic disease, primary ocular lymphoma
is also suspected to occur. Aqueous humour cytology is frequently diagnostic as the
tumour exfoliates cells readily.
     ss  so o  o
local or distant sites or can invade the eye by direct local extension. Bilateral ocular
involvement is characteristic of metastatic neoplasia, in contrast to the unilateral
            
haematogenous spread and metastatic neoplasia is consequently associated with
uveitis and secondary glaucoma. Gross observation of metastatic neoplasia is often
not possible because a mass lesion does not necessarily occur. Lymphoma is the
most common secondary neoplasm in the eye; other examples include mammary
gland  adenocarcinoma, transitional cell carcinoma, haemangiosarcoma and
osteosarcoma
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - positive direct and negative consensual OS, negative
direct and consensual OD
Dazzle reflex - positive Os, negative OD
· Vision assessment
Menace response - positive OS, negative OD
o Visual placing and tracking reflexes - positive OS, negative OD
In this cat, these results suggest that the right eye is blind. There is also a problem with
pupil mobility in the right eye.
· Examination with a focal light source - in the right eye there is anterior displacement
of the iris resulting in the obliteration of the anterior chamber and direct contact
between the iris and the corneal endothelium. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy identifies a
blood vessel extending from the iris at six o'clock, across the edge of the pupil and
onto the anterior lens capsule (arrow, Fig. 9.4b, A).
· Schirmer test test - 10 mm/min OU
● Fluorescein dye - negative staining OU
● Tonometry - IOP 17 mmHg OS, 22 mmHg OD at initial presentation; 17 mmHg OS,
33 mmHg OD one month later. This is consistent with glaucoma in the right eye.
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination is unremarkable.
Further Diagnostic Tests
         o
serological tests for common infectious agents for a cat in north Europe (Toxoplasma
gondii, FeLV, FIV and FIP) are performed to screen for systemic signs of uveitis or
neoplasia. No abnormalities are found.
· B-mode ocular ultrasound - this reveals a hyperechoic area involving the posterior
aspect of the lens and the anterior region of the vitreous humour, as well as a
hyperechoic lens which is consistent with the cataract (Fig. 9.4d). Curvilinear
hyperechoic structures in the anterior chamber extend from the anterior surface of the
displacement of the iris leaflets observed in Figs. 9.4b and 9.4c
· Thoracic radiography and abdominal ultrasound - these tests are performed to screen
for systemic disease or neoplasia. Results are unremarkable.
Fig. 9.4d B-mode ultrasound image of the right eye. (A) The lens is hyperechoic, consistent
with a cataract; there is diffuse hyperechoic material within the anterior vitreous (white
asterix), consistent with hyalitis. (B) Anterior displacement of the iris leaflets (blue asterix)
in the anterior chamber. C, cornea; L, lens.
大
大
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a clinical diagnosis of iris bombé, cataract and
glaucoma secondary to anterior uveitis in the right eye is made. The initiating cause of the
uveitis is not identified but based on the absence of uveitis in the contralateral eye, the good
general health of the cat, and the unremarkable results of the screening tests for systemic
disease, lymphoplasmacytic uveitis or uveitis secondary to trauma are considered to be the
most likely causes.
Treatment
Treatment options include symptomatic medical management for uveitis and secondary
glaucoma, or enucleation (Ch. 7, case 2). Medical therapy could include topical steroid
therapy, e.g. 1% prednisolone acetate, and topical anti-glaucoma therapy, e.g. 2%
dorzolamide, with or without 0.5% timolol maleate (Rainbow & Dziezyc, 2003; Dietrich et
al., 2007)
However, in this case the eye is considered to be irreversibly blind and a potential source
of discomfort and so enucleation is elected. The right eye is removed by a routine
diagnosis confirms the presence of chronic low-grade lymphoplasmacytic uveitis, hyalitis,
cataract and iris bombe - most probably the result of trauma (Fig. 9.4e).
Fig. 9.4e Gross specimen of the right eye showing iris bombe (white asterix), cataract and
opaque material within the anterior vitreous humour which represents chronic inflammation
(hyalitis) (blue asterix).
Re produced with permission from EJ Scuwrrell!
All enucleated globes should be submited for ocular histopathology. For routine diagnostic purposes, fixation of the globe in 10% formalin
nme nded. Prior to fixation, as much excess
extraocular tissue as possible should be removed, and the optic nerve should be left as long as possible.
Prognosis
The prognosis for the survival of this cat is excellent because neoplasia is excluded by
histopathology. As the cause of the uveitis is presumed to be traumatic, the prognosis for
the contralateral eye is considered to be good. However, monitoring is recommended
because causes other than trauma have not been absolutely excluded.
Discussion
Iris bombe can mimic the appearance of anterior uveal neoplasia and as such require
investigation. Ocular ultrasound can be beneficial to confirm that the abnormal appearance
is the result of displacement rather than thickening of the iris.
Synechia formation is an indication of the severity or chronicity ofanterior uveitis; it
results from the presence of inflammatory cells and fibrin which facilitate the formation of
adhesions between the pupil margin and the lens (posterior synechiae) or, less commonly,
between the anterior iris and the cornea (anterior synechiae). A typical clinical example of
anterior synechiae formation is in association with penetrating corneal trauma. Posterior
synechiae are often focal and as a result only partially restrict mobility of the pupil,
resulting in dyscoria (Fig. 9.4f). Iris bombe only occurs when the posterior synechiae
formation is so extensive that the entire circumference of the pupil is involved, resulting in
obstruction to the normal flow of the aqueous humour through the pupil.
Fig. 9.4f Left eye of a dog with dyscoria caused by multiple posterior synechiae as a result
of chronic anterior uveitis.
Medical treatment for feline glaucoma has limited documented success - Blocker & van
der Woerdt (2001) reported a 58% success rate in a retrospective study of 82 cats. This is
most likely due to a combination of factors, including the fact that cats often present with
chronic disease and the limited efficacy of available anti-glaucoma drugs in the cat. Some
of the topical anti-glaucoma drugs that are widely used in the dog are ineffective in the cat.
glaucoma (Ch. 6, case 2) but are generally ineffective in the cat (Studer et al., 2000;
Regnier et al., 2006). Dorzolamide and brinzolamide are topical carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors that are frequently used in the management of canine glaucoma - although
dorzolamide is effective in the cat (Rainbow & Dziezyc, 2003), brinzolamide is not (Gray et
al.,2003).
References and Further Reading
Blocker T & van der Woerdt A (2001) The feline glaucomas: 82 cases (1995-1999). Vet
Ophthalmol, 4 (2), 81-85.
Czederpiltz JM, La Croix NC, van der Woerdt A, Bentley E, Dubielzig RR, Murphy CJ, et
al. (2oo5) Putative aqueous humor misdirection syndrome as a cause of glaucoma in cats:
32 cases (1997-2003). J Am Vet Med Assoc, 227, 1434-1441.
Dietrich UM, Chandler MJ, Cooper T, Vidyashankar A, Chen G (2007) Effects of topical
2% dorzolamide hydrochloride alone and in combination with 0.5% timolol maleate on
intraocular pressure in normal feline eyes. Vet Ophthalmol, 10, (Suppl 1), 95-100.
Rainbow ME, Dziezyc J (2003) Effects of twice daily application of 2% dorzolamide on
intraocular pressure in normal cats. Vet Ophthalmol, 6 (2), 147-150.
Regnier A, Lemagne C, Ponchet A, Cazolot G, Concordet D, Gelatt KN (2006) Ocular
9 (1),39-43.
Studer ME, Martin CL, Stiles J (2000) Effects of 0.005% latanoprost solution on intraocular
pressure in healthy dogs and cats. Am J Vet Res, 61 (10), 1220-1224.
See Appendix 2.
CHAPTER10
TheAbnormal Pupil
Introduction
The pupil is the window to the posterior segment of the eye. The iris sphincter muscle
constricts the pupil to control the amount of light entering the eye and is under
parasympathetic control in mammals. Sympathetic innervation of the iris provides constant
antagonism to the iris sphincter muscle via the dilator muscle.
Abnormalities of the pupil usually involve changes in shape and size, and these are
easiest to detect if a tapetal reflection is visible through the pupil. Pupil abnormalities are
frequently the result of neuro-ophthalmic disorders and can be difficult to diagnose.
CASESTUDY 1
History
A 2-year-old female neutered English Springer Spaniel is presented with an acute onset of
lethargy and anorexia, as well as an abnormal lefft eye. To the owner, the left eye appears to
be smaller or more closed than the right eye but there is no apparent ocular discomfort. The
dog has received routine vaccinations and regular anthelmintic treatment.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 10.1a and b
Fig. 10.1a
Fig. 10.1b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to determine the specific diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Figs. 10.1a and b The right eye appears normal. There is a relative anisocoria (Os < OD).
Left eye - there is a scant, seromucoid discharge at the medial canthus. The palpebral
fissure is smaller than in the right eye. There is ptosis of the lateral upper eyelid,
enophthalmos (or possibly microphthalmos), protrusion and hyperaemia of the TEL.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the left eye, the following conditions/causes should be considered:
· Horner's syndrome This syndrome occurs when there is interruption to the
sympathetic innervation of the eye and adnexa. The sympathetic pathway to the eye
is a two-neuron system, which is controlled by higher centres of the autonomic
nervous system in the brain. The pathway involves the brain, spinal cord, thorax, and
eye. The pre-ganglionic axons synapse with the postganglionic axons in the cranial
the smooth muscles of the peri-orbita, Muller's muscle of the upper and lower
eyelids, and the iris dilator muscle. A lesion anywhere along this sympathetic
pathway results in the clinical signs of Horner's syndrome - ptosis, enophthalmos,
miosis, and TEL protrusion.
Ptosis of the upper eyelid is a classic sign of Horner's syndrome but reverse ptosis or elevation of the lower eyelid may also be present
because t
esult of local vasodilation. A mild ocular discharge is often seen in Horner's syndrome but is not considered to be part of the syndrome -
it occurs because of reduced tear drainage as a result of the change in eye position
· Anterior uveitis Inflammatory mediators cause painful spasm of the iris and ciliary
body muscles, resulting in miosis. Ocular discomfort can also lead to blepharospasm
and globe retraction by the retractor bulbi muscles. The clinical signs of anterior
uveitis include miosis, enophthalmos, narrowed palpebral fissure and TEL protrusion.
· Ocular surface pain The cornea is innervated by the ophthalmic branch of the
trigeminal nerve. Corneal stimulation can cause a reflex mediated by substance P.
This axonal reflex can cause reflex uveitis and globe retraction by the retractor bulbi
muscle. Globe retraction causes enophthalmos and passive TEL protrusion. The
S   s      
Examples of causes of ocular surface pain include corneal ulceration, entropion and
severe keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
· Small globe A small eye is recessed in the orbit compared to a normal sized eye. This
results in passive TEL protrusion. Causes of a small globe include microphthalmos,
nanophthalmos and phthisis bulbi (Ch. 1, case 2). Microphthalmos can occur alone
or in conjunction with multiple ocular defects including iris hypoplasia - the latter
· Reduced volume of orbital tissue This may cause the eye to be recessed in the orbit,
resulting in TEL protrusion. Causes include dehydration, weight loss (reduction in
orbital fat) and fibrosis of orbital tissues following orbital inflammation and surgery.
· Space-occupying orbital lesion An increase in the volume of orbital tissue, e.g.
orbital mass, results in exophthalmos and TEL protrusion (Ch. 1, case 3). A space-
    d  o   n sn s
enophthalmos and TEL protrusion e.g. local extension of a nasal tumour
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
PLR  - direct and  consensual positive OU. The anisocoria is more
while the left pupil remains small
。
 Dazzle reflex - positive OU
。
Palpebral reflex - present OU
。
Vestibulo-ocular reflex - present OU
● Menace response - positive OU
In this dog, these results suggest a lesion in the efferent pathway of the PLR in the left
eye.
If anisocoria is present, and is suspected to be caused by a neurological problem, it is important to establish which pupil is abnormal. The
pupils should be assessed in both ambient light ( photopic conditions) and in a darkened room (scotopic conditions). A ssuming that no other
padde aq ueo sanu adurs auos (ydo ne sur aa) juasaid aie san euouge ienoa
+ a normal pupil should dilate in the dark
● a normal pupil should constrict with a bright light source
auaiajp au at) suonpuos adooos u paounouoid aiou st eoaosue au jt nuasaid ag o Aal st aopuas s iauioh 
in pupil size is more obvious in the dark).
· Examination with a bright focal light source - in both eyes, this reveals that the
anterior chamber is normal with respect to depth and transparency, and the cornea is
normal with respect to transparency and diameter. Assessment of corneal diameter is
a useful indication of the size of the eye, e.g. corneal diameter is increased with
buphthalmos (Ch. 1, case 1) and decreased with microphthalmos or phthisis bulbi
(Ch. 1, case 2).
● Fluorescein dye - negative staining OU
· Tonometry - IOP 15 mmHg OU
There is no change in the position of the TEL in the lefft eye after administration of a
topical anaesthetic. Retropulsion of both eyes is unremarkable. The remainder of the
ophthalmic   examination  reveals   no  additional   abnormalities.  A general  physical
examination reveals reduced lung sounds on both sides of the chest; the external ear canals
are normal. The remainder of the neurological assessment is unremarkable.
Appication of a topical anaesthetic agent wil rapidly anaesthetise the ocular surface and can be helpful to determine whether TEL
protrusion secondary to enophthalmos is because of ocular sur face pain
Further Diagnostic Tests
In order to help localise and identify the lesion further, the following additional diagnostic
tests are performed:
Topical phenylephrine can be used to help confirm a diagnosis of Horner's syndrome. It can also help to determine the location of the
le sion ( see Discussion)
· Pharmacological testing - following one drop of topical 1% phenylephrine OU, the
TEL protrusion in the left eye resolves within 5 min; the right eye is unaffected. After
40 min, the left pupil dilates to a greater extent than the right pupil (Fig. 10.1c). This
result suggests that the miosis in the left eye is caused by a pre-ganglionic lesion in
the sympathetic innervation of the iris dilator muscle
· Radiography - thoracic radiography to assess the cervical and thoracic spinal cord
and thorax reveals a large mediastinal mass.
· Ultrasonography - thoracic ultrasonography reveals a large mass of mixed
echogenicity occupying the cranial mediastinum (Fig. 10.1d)
· CT - this is performed to evaluate further the extent of the lesion identified with
radiography and ultrasound, as well as to determine if biopsy or surgical intervention
is possible. CT examination of the thorax confirms the presence of a large mass in the
dorsal aspect of the cranial mediastinum; the mass extends caudally to the level of the
heart base, and displaces the intrathoracic trachea to the right side. This is consistent
with the radiographic and ultrasonographic findings (Fig. 1o.1e).
Fig. 10.1c Forty minutes after the topical administration of one drop of 1% phenyephrine to
each eye - the left pupil is more dilated than the right pupil.
Fig. 10.1d Ultrasound scan of thorax. Large mixed echoic mass in the cranial mediastinum.
CRAHED
Fig. 10.1e Reformatted CT images. There is a large mass (arrow, dotted outline) in the
dorsal aspect of the cranial mediastinum, extending caudally to the level of the heartbase
and displacing the intrathoracic trachea (T) to the right side.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of pre-ganglionic Horner's syndrome in the
left eye secondary to an intrathoracic mass is made (Diagram 10.1).
Diagram 10.1 Schematic  representation  of Horner's syndrome  in this dog. The
intrathoracic lesion affects second order pre-ganglionic fibres on the left side, resulting in
Horner's syndrome in the left eye. Illustration by S Scurrell.
first order neurons
(pre-ganglionic fibres)
post-ganglionic
fibres
intrathoracic
lesion
cranial cervical
secondorderneurons
ganglion
(post-ganglionicfibres)
Treatment
The treatment of Horner's syndrome depends on the location and cause of the lesion. Most
cases of Horner's syndrome in the dog are postganglionic and idiopathic although otitis
media is often presumed to be the underlying cause. Symptomatic treatment with topical
phenylephrine is advocated by some authors to relieve clinical signs in the short-term. Pre-
ganglionic lesions, although less common, are more likely to require surgical intervention.
In this dog, biopsies of the mediastinal mass are non-diagnostic and a leff lateral
thoracotomy is performed. Further histopathology reveals a haemangiosarcoma and the dog
is subsequently euthanised.
Prognosis
The prognosis for a dog with Horner's syndrome depends on the cause and the location of
the lesion. In general, postganglionic lesions have a better prognosis than pre-ganglionic
lesions.
Discussion
The sympathetic pathway to the eye is controlled by higher centres of the autonomic
nervous system in the brain. Efferent fibres leave the brain and travel along the cervical
spinal cord to synapse on pre-ganglionic cell bodies located in the grey column of the first
three thoracic spinal cord segments. The axons of these pre-ganglionic cell bodies exit the
spinal cord as part of the spinal nerves and join the thoracic sympathetic trunk to continue
towards the cranial cervical ganglion located ventromedial to the tympanic bulla. Within the
cranial cervical ganglion, the axons synapse on postganglionic cell bodies from which
postganglionic sympathetic axons pass rostrally on the external surface of the tympanic
bulla before being distributed by the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve to supply
the smooth muscles of the peri-orbita, Muller's muscle of the eyelid (upper and lower), and
the iris dilator muscle. As well as playing a role in pupil size, sympathetic tone has a role in
eyelid opening and influences the position of the eye within the orbit. A lesion anywhere
should be interpreted with caution and in conjunction with other diagnostic tests. The
underlying theory requires a detailed understanding of neuroanatomy and neurophysiology.
Pharmacological testing is based on the law of denervation hypersensitivity'. This applies
to both the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems. Loss of autonomic innervations
causes muscle  fibres  to  become  sensitised  to   cholinergic  and   adrenergic agents.
Postganglionic lesions have a greater sensitivity to topically applied agents than pre-
ganglionic lesions.  Testing is employed to confirm  that an ocular abnormality is
neurological and can also aid in the localisation of the lesion. Several different drugs are
described as being able to confirm and locate a Horner's lesion, but phenylephrine is most
commonly used in veterinary medicine because of its availability. Phenylephrine is a direct-
acting sympathomimetic agent that causes a normal pupil to dilate slowly (within two hours,
depending on the concentration). In an eye with Horner's syndrome, the denervated
sensitised smooth muscles of the iris and adnexa respond to low concentrations of
phenylephrine more rapidly than a normal eye. The timing of a response to topical
phenylephrine depends on the concentration of the drug applied - in general, a Horner's
pupil will dilate more rapidly than a normal pupil, and a postganglionic lesion will cause a
more rapid dilation of the pupil (<20 min) than a pre-ganglionic lesion (>40 min).
Phenylephrine will also cause the TEL to return to its normal position; this generally occurs
before a change in pupil size occurs.
syndrome, e.g. anterior uveitis. Although pharmacological testing has its limitations, it can
be helpful to confirm that the ocular abnormality is neurological rather than ophthalmic in
nature. It is probably for this reason that ophthalmologists often use pharmacological testing
and neurologists do only rarely.
References and Further Reading
de Lahunta A & Glass E (2oo9) Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology , 3rd edn
Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri, USA.
Penderis J (20o4) Disorders of eyes and vision. ln: BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline
Neurology, (eds S. Platt, N. Olby), 3" edn. pp 144-145. British Small Animal Veterinary
Association, Gloucester, UK
Thomson HS (2003) The Pupil. In: Alder's Physiology of the Eye, (ed. WM Hart Jr), 9"* edn.
pp 434-437. Mosby-Year Book, USA.
See Appendix 2.
CASE STUDY 2
History
A 1o-year-old female neutered domestic shorthaired cat is presented with a four-week
history of a change in the appearance of the left eye and lethargy. The cat has received
routine vaccinations and regular anthelmintic treatment, and is an indoor/outdoor cat.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Fig. 10.2a
Fig. 10.2a
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figure Shows
Fig. 10.2a Left eye - the pupil is markedly dilated. Right eye - there is a focal area of iris
pigmentation at the 12 o'clock position, an incidental finding in this cat (see Ch. 9, case 3
for causes of iris pigmentation in the cat).
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the clinical diagnosis of anisocoria, the following conditions/explanations should be
considered for the left eye:
· Oculomotor nerve lesion Postganglionic parasympathetic fibres travel with the
oculomotor nerve to the iris sphincter muscle and are responsible for contraction of
the pupil (miosis). The oculomotor nerve also supplies somatic efferent fibres to four
of the extraocular muscles (dorsal, medial, and ventral recti and ventral oblique) and
the levator palpebrae superioris muscle (upper eyelid); these muscles are involved in
eye movement and elevation of the upper eyelid, respectively. A lesion involving the
oculomotor nucleus or nerve can cause internal ophthalmoplegia (paralysis of the iris
 s) sis ss se s s ra (s o  
Other clinical signs are ventrolateral strabismus and upper ptosis in the affected eye.
· Cavernous sinus syndrome (orbital fissure syndrome) The oculomotor nerve passes
through the cavernous sinus (paired sinuses at the base of the skull) and the orbital
fissure (in the caudal wall of the orbit) and can therefore be affected by lesions in
both areas. The trochlear nerve, abducens nerve and ophthalmic and mandibular
branches of the trigeminal nerve, also pass through these areas. The clinical
presentation of cavernous sinus syndrome reflects the involvement of multiple
dilated pupil), decreased or absent corneal sensation and an inability to retract the
globe. This syndrome is most commonly caused by neoplasia but, in the cat, can be
secondary to inflammatory disease.
· Retinal disease Generalised retinal pathology causes mydriasis in the affected eye
and anisocoria if the disease is unilateral, e.g. unilateral retinal detachment secondary
to systemic hypertension. If the disease is extensive enough to cause marked
mydriasis, the PLR and vision will also be affected.
· Optic nerve disease A lesion of the optic nerve will cause mydriasis in the affected
eye and anisocoria if the disease is unilateral. Optic nerve disorders are uncommon in
glaucoma, retinal degeneration, neoplasia (meningioma). As with extensive retinal
disease, the PLR and vision will also be affected.
Mydriasis is usually greater with a lesion involving the efferent pathway of the PLR than with a lesion involving the afferent pathway.
t inpartialrather than complete mydriasis
Thisisbecause parasympathetic tone (which decreases pupil size)results fromlight stmulation of the contralatral ye.
·Abnormalities of the iris
Iris atrophy Atrophy of the iris sphincter and dilator muscles causes
mydriasis and a reduced PLR.
Iris coloboma A congenital abnormality which involves partial or complete
absence of the iris tissue. Iris coloboma can result in mydriasis and a
reduced PLR.
Heterochromia iridis Unilateral heterochromia iridis can cause mydriasis
Anisocoria results because the pupil ipsilateral to the lighter coloured iris is
larger than the contralateral pupil (Fig. 10.2b).
S        
capsule can cause dyscoria and an immobile pupil; anisocoria will result if
the lesion is unilateral
· Glaucoma Unilateral mydriasis is an important and classic clinical sign of acute
glaucoma. Mydriasis with glaucoma is presumed to be caused by damage to the optic
nerve and retina and hypoxia of the iris musculature 1nitially, and by iris atrophy in
more advanced disease. In contrast to the dog (Ch. 6, case 2), glaucoma in cats tends
 s     o s   s   
include buphthalmos, conjunctival and episcleral congestion, corneal oedema,
mydriasis, and impaired or absent vision (Ch.1, case I). It is therefore unusual for a
humour misdirection syndrome’ is a form of feline glaucoma that can cause unilateral
(most commonly) or bilateral mydriasis. Aqueous humour misdirection syndrome (or
ciliovitreolenticular  block   glaucoma) involves  displacement  of  the  iris-lens
  os   s      
raised intraocular pressure (Czederpiltz et al., 2o05).
· Lens luxation Miosis or mydriasis can result from lens dislocation depending on the
presence of uveitis or glaucoma, as well as the position of the lens; dyscoria is also
often present.
· Drug-induced
or
in the contralateral eye, depending on the agent and the degree of systemic
absorption of the drug).
Fig. 10.2b Heterochromia iridis and associated anisocoria in a Border Collie. The left eye
has a brown iris and a yellow tapetal reflection; the right eye has a blue iris and a red tapetal
reflection (from a subalbinotic fundus) and a mild resting anisocoria (Os < OD).
Re produc ed with permission from J Moutd.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
If anisocriais present, andis susected tobe caused by aneurolgical problem, itismorant to establish which puil is abnomal. h
lao ouey suunssy (suonpuoo adoos woou pauayiep e u pue (suoipuoa adooyd) yal uaque ypoq u passasse aq pnous sidnd
ocular abnorma lities are present (e.g. iris atrophy), some simple rules can be applied:
● a normal pupil should dilate in the dark
● a normal pupil should con strict with a br ight light source
Horner's syndrome is likely to be present if the anisocoria is more pronounced in scotopic conditions (ie. the difference
in pupil size is more obvious in the dark)
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - negative direct and positive consensual Os (left to
right eye), positive direct and negative consensual OD (right to left eye)
Anisocoria (Os > OD) is present in both photopic and scotopic conditions
but is less pronounced in the dark (because the right pupil dilates normally)
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
Palpebral reflex -- positive OU
。
Corneal reflex - positive OU
Swinging flashlight test - negative OU
Vestibulo-ocular  reflex -  negative  OS,  positive OD.  With  cervical
extension, the right eye moves ventrally (normal), but the left eye remains
fixed in position (Fig. 10.2c). When the head is turned to the right side, the
right eye moves in a medial direction (normal) but the left eye remains fixed
in position (Fig. 10.2d). The finding in the left eye is consistent with
external ophthalmoplegia (paralysis of the external ocular muscles).
· Vision testing
。
Menace response - positive OU
Visual placing and tracking reflexes - positive OU
。
Obstacle course - the results are considered to be unreliable as the cat is
unwilling to move around the examination room.
In this cat, these findings suggest that the left eye has absent motility, the left pupil is
abnormal and that the lesion involves the efferent pathway of the PLR.
Fig. 10.2c Vestibulo-ocular reflex. During cervical extension, the right eye rotates in a
ventral direction (normal) and the left eye remains fixed in position (abnormal).
Fig. 10.2d Vestibulo-ocular reflex. When the head is turned to the right side, the right eye
moves in a medial direction (normal) and the left eye remains fixed in position (abnormal)
ou u said an eAg pas si j aapo mday aqu (is a ny ms a
evel of the chiasm). To perform a SFT first ass
he PLR
hinethelight
inthe
and is a pathognomonic clinica1 sign for a unilateral pre-chiasmal lesion
· Pharmacological testing - following one drop of 1% pilocarpine in both eyes, both
pupils constrict but the response is asymmetrical. The mydriatic left pupil constricts
(oe    a n x  e on p ( t ) i o
This result confirms that the mydriasis in the left eye is caused by a neurological
problem but does not localise the lesion.
 Tonometry - IOP 18 mmHg OU
Fig. 10.2e Response of both eyes to topical 1% pilocarpine eye drops. (A & B) Resting
anisocoria (Os > OD) before administration of pilocarpine. (C & D) Ten minutes following
administration of pilocarpine: the abnormal left pupil constricts to a greater extent than
normal right pupil, consistent with a parasympathetic lesion on the left side
e ausy une pm aadau ag pnys pue agam aq ue ssa ay ng ad o adus s usa e
nerve lesion (Adie's pupil).
Retropulsion of both eyes is unremarkable. The remainder of the ophthalmic and
neurological examination reveals no further abnormalities; a general physical examination
is also unremarkable.
Further Diagnostic Tests
· Laboratory tests - routine haematology, biochemistry and urine analysis are
recommended prior to general anaesthesia which is necessary for advanced imaging.
All results are unremarkable.
· Forced duction test - this test helps to differentiate mechanical restriction from a
neurological disorder in an eye with reduced motility. It can be performed in a
conscious (active forced duction) or unconscious, anaesthetised animal (passive
forced duction).
· A passive forced duction test is performed in this cat. The left eye is grasped with
fine rat-toothed forceps close to the limbus and is freely moveable in all directions.
This excludes the presence of mechanical restriction and suggests that the abnormal
vestibulo-ocular reflex is the result of a neurological problem.
● MRI brain scan - the sagittal and transverse T2-weighted MRI images of the brain
demonstrate a right-sided mass, 1 cm in diameter, ventral to the thalamus and causing
a mild midline shift to the left (Fig. 10.2f). The appearance of the mass is consistent
with a meningioma.
Fig. 10.2f MRI brain scans (sagittal and transverse T2-weighted images). There is a right-
sided, 1-cm mass (arrow) ventral to the thalamus causing a mild midline shift to the leff.
The appearance of the lesion is consistent with a meningioma.
Re produc ed with permission from R De nnis, Animal Health Trust.
R
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, the diagnosis is internal and external ophthalmoplegia
in the left eye secondary to an intracranial meningioma.
Treatment
Management options for intracranial meningiomas in the cat include corticosteroid therapy,
radiotherapy and surgical excision. In contrast to the dog, adjunctive radiotherapy after
surgical excision is not usually performed in the cat because the lesions are generally
benign and progress extremely slowly. Systemic corticosteroid therapy may be beneficial if
there is oedema surrounding the tumour, as it can temporarily improve demeanour and
clinical signs in some cats. Surgery is not an option for the meningioma in this cat because
of its location. A detailed discussion of the treatment options for meningioma is beyond the
scope of this book.
Prognosis
Although meningiomas in the cat are slowly progressive, the prognosis for survival is
guarded. At the time of writing there is very limited recent published information on the
prognosis for survival in cats with meningiomas, which is in contrast to the dog (Ch. 1l,
case 5). Depending on the location, surgical excision of a cerebral meningioma is possible,
and the reported median survival in the cat is 71% at 6 months, 66% at 1 year, and 50% at 2
years (Lori et al., 2008).
Discussion
This case demonstrates the complexity of localising neurologic lesions affecting the pupil.
In cats, a neurologic deficit which results in anisocoria is more frequently attributed to
Horner's syndrome than to a lesion involving the oculomotor nerve.
See the “Discussion' in case 1 of this chapter for more details on the principals of
pharmacological testing. Physostigmine and pilocarpine are parasympathomimetic agents
and both can be used in the pharmacological testing of an eye with a dilated pupil that is
 o     o   s   
directly on the iris sphincter muscle, inducing miosis. A mydriatic pupil secondary to an
occurred in this cat). The timing of the constriction depends on the concentration of drug
          m  i a 
can  confirm  that the problem  is neurological and  can  also  differentiate  between a
previous application of topical atropine). However, pilocarpine does not localise the lesion.
Physostigmine has an indirect action because it requires an intact postganglionic neuron to
induce miosis. Physostigmine will cause a normal pupil to constrict within 45-60 min but
 )           s 
Physostigmine can be used both to confirm that the problem is neurological and to localise
the lesion. If available, physostigmine should be used prior to pilocarpine, with an interval
of at least 24 h between drugs. In the clinical setting, pharmacological testing is usually
performed with pilocarpine only because physostigmine is not readily available
Internal ophthalmoplegia refers to paralysis of the iris sphincter and ciliary body muscles
    n      r s 
paralysis of the extraocular muscles (innervated by oculomotor, trochlear and abducens
nerves), and appears clinically as an eye that is unable to move in any direction. However
because the parasympathetic and motor nuclei of the oculomotor nerve lie adjacent to each
other in the brain and their axons travel together within the oculomotor nerve, the most
common clinical presentation is concurrent internal and external ophthalmoplegia, i.e. total
ophthalmoplegia. For example, cavernous sinus syndrome results in total ophthalmoplegia
(and reduced corneal sensation). The extraocular muscles are innervated by the oculomotor,
trochlear and abducens nerves and so it is possible that a small degree of globe movement
could   be  retained  if  only the  oculomotor  nerve is  affected   (partial  external
     s     
ophthalmoplegia can occur alone because the parasympathetic fibres along the medial side
of the oculomotor nerve are superficial and more vulnerable to trauma.  External
ophthalmoplegia is most likely to occur when the lesion is central - this provides valuable
diagnostic information which can aid with localisation.
References and Further Reading
Czederpiltz JM, La Croix NC, van der Woerdt A, et al. (2005) Putative aqueous humor
misdirection syndrome as a cause of glaucoma in cats: 32 cases (1997-2003). J Am Vet
Med Assoc, 227 (9), 1434-1441.
Thomson HS (2003) The Pupil. In: Alder's Physiology of the Eye, (ed. WM Hart, Jr), 9h
edn, pp 429-434. Mosby-Year Book, USA.
Lori EG, Thacher C, Matthiesen DT, Joseph RJ (2008) Results of craniotomy for the
treatment of cerebral meningioma in 42 cats. Vet Surg, 23 (2), 94-100.
Troxel MT, Vite CH, van Winkle TJ, et al. (2003) Feline intracranial neoplasiai
retrospective review of 160 cases. J Vet Intern Med, 17, 850-859.
See Appendix 2.
CHAPTER 11
The Blind Eye
Introduction
The visual pathway begins in the eye and terminates in the visual cortex of the brain. An
abnormality anywhere along this pathway has the potential to impair vision and, if severe.
to cause blindness. A thorough investigation into the cause of blindness requires assessment
of retinal function, which may include electroretinography. Advanced imaging with MRI or
CT is often necessary to assess optic nerve or central causes of vision loss. The onset of
blindness in animals is often characterised as sudden or gradual. However, an owner's
observations of a pet can be misleading, as an animal that has previously adapted well to
slow but progressive vision loss can suddenly appear blind.
CASE STUDY 1
History
A seven-year-old female neutered English Cocker Spaniel is presented with a 12-month
history of progressive visual impairment. The vision loss is most apparent during evening
walks and the owner has also noticed that both eyes appear glazed'. The dog has received
routine vaccinations and regular anthelmintic treatment and is otherwise clinically well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 11.1a, b and c.
Fig. 11.1a
Re produc ed with permission from J Mould.
Fig. 11.1b
Fig. 11.1c
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
hazy.
appears as a homogeneous sheen, and attenuation of the retinal vasculature. The optic disc
with optic nerve atrophy. Similar changes are present in the right eye (not shown).
Fig- 11.1c Left eye - there are diffuse, irregular opacities and vacuoles (bubbles) in the
(not shown).
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the bilateral fundic and lens abnormalities, the clinical diagnosis is
advanced generalised retinal degeneration and early cataract formation. The following
conditions should be considered:
·Hereditary retinopathy
+
Progressive retinal degeneration (PRA) This term refers to a group of
   d e  s   
photoreceptors in the neurosensory retina. Although the primary defects at
the cellular level differ, the clinical signs are remarkably similar between the
different forms of PRA. The most important clinical sign is visual
impairment, which always ultimately leads to total blindness. As rod
photoreceptors are usually affected before the cones, night blindness
onset and the rate of progression of the disease are different, depending on
the breed. Secondary cataracts are common. The photoreceptor defect leads
to atrophy of the neurosensory retina, which appears ophthalmoscopically
as   tapetal  hyperreflectivity. This is  followed  by  retinal  vasculature
attenuation and optic disc atrophy (pale optic disc with an indistinct venous
circle). In advanced disease, there is a loss of pigment in the non-tapetal
fundus which results in a patchy, mottled appearance called *pavementing'.
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED) (formerly known as central
progressive retinal  degeneration)  A   hereditary   retinal  degeneration
characterised by an abnormality in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). A
light
tbrown pigment accumulates within the RPE cells, causing
hypertrophy, and subsequent degeneration of the overlying photoreceptors.
The pigment is autofluorescent and is similar to ceroid and lipofuscin.
      s    
blindness in some dogs. Vision tends to be better in low light levels and for
they may occur in advanced cases. Ophthalmoscopically, RPED appears
initially as multiple brown pigment spots in the central tapetal fundus; these
pigment    foci   later   become   interspersed   with    areas   oftapetal
    s n so s d (e t  a
is uncommon.
Retinal dysplasia Abnormal development of the retina, with proliferation of
one or more of its elements. Although a hereditary cause of retinal dysplasia
is most common, there are non-hereditary forms, e.g. those caused by viral
infections and intrauterine trauma. The typical fundoscopic appearance of
retinal dysplasia  is multiple  greyish-white  dots  or  linear  steaks most
prevalent in the central region of the retina; larger geographic lesions and
retinal detachment may also occur. This is a congenital condition and is
generally not associated with progressive visual impairment.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis A group of progressive neurodegenerative
diseases characterised by brain and retinal atrophy because of an abnormal
accumulation of autofluorescent lipopigments in neurons. Cortical blindness
is most common but the retina may be affected in some breeds
· Post-inflammatory retinal degeneration Inflammation of the retina (retinitis) is
usually secondary to inflammation from the adjacent choroid (chorioretinitis). Post-
A   s    s s 
and increased pigmentation. This is because of atrophy of the neurosensory retina
and melanin proliferation in the RPE, respectively. Localised vascular attenuation
may accompany the lesions. If the problem is bilateral, the appearance is usually
different between eyes. If the initial inflammatory process is generalised, then diffuse
retinal degeneration may occur.
· Retinal degeneration following retinal detachment and subsequent reattachment
Retinal detachment almost always involves separation of the neurosensory retina
from the underlying RPE on which it depends for normal function. This loss of
structural integrity causes degeneration of the affected retina to begin within hours.
Even if the retina subsequently reattaches, there will be a loss of function. If the
detachment is extensive, the affected eye may subsequently be blind because of
 generalised retinal degeneration.
· Retinal degeneration secondary to glaucoma Glaucoma can lead to optic nerve
damage alone  or  in addition  to  localised or  generalised retinal degeneration.
Localised retinal degeneration may be restricted to the peri-papillary area (tapetal
radiating from the optic disc; these areas are known as 'water-shed lesions'. In retinal
degeneration secondary to glaucoma, the inner retinal layers are affected first, and
more specifically, the retinal ganglion cell layer.
·Nutritionalretinopathy
Vitamin A deficiency This can lead to nyctalopia but is clinically very rare in
the dog.
Vitamin E deficiency Vitamin E is an antioxidant which maintains cell
membrane stability and its deficiency can lead to pathologic changes within
the retina, muscle, central nervous system and reproductive tract. The
  a        s g
suggest that there may be a common aetiologic factor. This has been
substantiated in the English Cocker Spaniel in which a familial primary
vitamin E deficiency has been described.
· Toxic retinopathy Bilateral retinal degeneration has been documented to occur with
some systemic drugs, e.g. ethambutol, azalide and closantel.
exposure to light, e.g. indirect ophthalmoscopy, or from an operating microscope
during intraocular surgery.
therapy for neoplasia involving regions of the head and neck.
           
brown pigment foci scattered throughout the tapetal fundus, interspersed with tapetal
hyperreflectivity; there is also secondary attenuation of the retinal vasculature.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
● Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - positive direct and consensual OU, albeit slow and
。
incomplete
 Dazzle reflex - positive but reduced OU
。
· Vision testing
Menace response - equivocal OU
。
Visual placing and tracking reflexes - results are unreliable
。
Obstacle course - this dog is able to navigate around large objects without
conditions.
In this dog, these findings suggest reduced vision in both eyes which is most pronounced
in dim light.
· Examination with a focal light source - in both eyes, slit-lamp biomicroscopy
identifies the lens opacities as vacuoles and localises them to the posterior cortex and
the equator.
· Tonometry - IOP 17 mmHg OU
· Electroretinography - this is not indicated because retinal function will be decreased
if diffuse retinal degeneration is visible on fundoscopic examination.
● Genetic testing - DNA-based tests are commercially available to identify many forms
of PRA. Genetic testing can be helpful, particularly as the breeding age may be
earlier than the onset of the disease. Most laboratories request either a blood sample
or a cheek swab for a DNA-based test.
Genetic testing is not performed in this dog because the breed, age, history and clinical
presentation are considered classic for PRA.
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no further abnormalities and a
general physical examination is unremarkable.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of PRA with secondary cataract is made; in
the  English Cocker Spaniel,  this  is more  specifically termed progressive rod-cone
degeneration (prcd)
Treatment
Currently, no treatment is available for PRA in the dog. The dog is an important animal
model for inherited retinal degeneration in humans - potential therapeutic approaches are
being investigated in animal models and in human clinical trials. These include gene
therapy, retinal neuroprotection, retinal transplantation, stem cell therapy, retinal prostheses.
and dietary supplementation.
Prognosis
PRA always leads to total blindness. However, most affected dogs cope well as the
deterioration in vision is gradual (years in some breeds) and there is no associated ocular
discomfort. Cataract surgery is contraindicated in dogs with PRA unless the cataracts are
           n  e
commonly in the English Cocker Spaniel. In this breed a small number of affected dogs
may benefit from cataract surgery to prolong vision, even if it is for a limited period
because of progressive retinal degeneration.
Discussion
PRA in the dog can be simply divided into developmental and degenerative disease, and
further subdivided on the basis of the cell type that is affected. The most common form of
PRA is prcd, an autosomal recessive, late-onset retinal degeneration. First described in the
1980s, prcd is an allelic condition, i.e. the same gene is responsible for the disease in
several different breeds. The specific defective gene for prcd has since been identified.
          e  
American and English Cocker Spaniel. Cataracts secondary to PRA are common - they are
generally bilaterally symmetrical and occur when the retinal degeneration is advanced but
there are some exceptions, e.g. English Cocker Spaniel. The cataract begins in the posterior
cortex and  extends into the equator and  anterior cortex, ultimately forming a
mature/complete cataract. Vacuoles in the equatorial region of the lens are a common
finding in cataracts secondary to PRA. Lens vacuoles are bubble-like lesions that represent
swelling of the lens fibres and are usually indicative of active cataract formation. Although
a characteristic finding in dogs with PRA, lens vacuoles are also commonly seen in rapidly
developing cataracts secondary to diabetes mellitus and trauma.
FurtherReading
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY 2
History
An 8-year-old female neutered cross-breed dog is presented with a history of acute vision
loss over three to four days. The owner also reports that the dog is polydipsic and polyuric,
the onset of this problem; she has received routine vaccinations and regular anthelmintic
treatment
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Fig. 11.2a
Fig. 11.2a
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figure Shows
Fig. 11.2a Fundic photograph. Both eyes - the optic disc is a slightly different shape in
each eye because of pronounced myelination; this is a common and normal finding in the
dog.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the history of sudden onset blindness together with the normal appearance of the
fundus in both eyes, the following conditions should be considered:
· Sudden acquired retinal degeneration syndrome (SARDS) A retinal disorder of
unknown cause that results in sudden onset blindness in affected dogs. The clinical
presentation is characterised by a sudden loss of vision over several days to weeks
which may be associated with polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia and weight gain. Any
breed or cross-breed dog can be affected and most affected animals are middle-aged
The fundus initially appears normal but signs of retinal degeneration (tapetal
hyperreflectivity, retinal vascular attenuation and optic disc atrophy) develop over
several months. Electroretinography produces a flat-line’ response, consistent with a
lack of retinal function.
· Optic neuritis Inflammation of the optic nerve can affect the intraocular (at the level
of the optic disc), intraorbital (retrobulbar) or central portion of the optic nerve. Optic
neuritis can be unilateral or bilateral and typically causes a sudden loss of vision in
the affected eye. The optic disc is swollen and raised; its margins may be blurred and
haemorrhages may be present. However, if the intraocular portion of the nerve is
unaffected, the fundus will appear normal. In contrast to SARDS, electroretinography
is expected to be normal because retinal function is generally unaffected (case 4, this
chapter).
· Central blindness (amaurosis) A lesion involving the central visual pathway can
cause blindness. From the optic chiasm the optic tracts carry visual fibres which
synapse within the lateral geniculate nucleus. Post-synaptic fibres then leave the
lateral geniculate nucleus as the optic radiations, which terminate in the visual cortex
of the cerebrum (lateral, caudal and medial aspects of the occipital lobe) (case 5, this
chapter).
· Immune-mediated retinitis (IMR) A syndrome recently described by  veterinary
ophthalmologists at Iowa State University in the USA; the clinical appearance of dogs
with IMR appears to be similar to that of SARDS. Investigations into the
characterisation, diagnosis and treatment of this syndrome are on-going at the time of
writing.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - negative direct and consensual OU
Dazzle reflex - negative OU
Vestibulo-oculocephalic reflex - positive OU
。
· Vision testing
Menace response - negative OU
Visual placing and tracking reflexes - negative OU
。
Obstacle course - the dog is unable to navigate around large objects in both
photopic and scotopic conditions
In this dog, these results are consistent with blindness in both eyes
· Tonometry - IOP 17 mmHg OU
· Colorimetric PLR testing - a recently described simple and inexpensive method for
assessing photoreceptor and retinal ganglion cell function. This test investigates the
response of the PLR to a red and blue light stimulus. If retinal function is reduced or
absent and the disease involves the photoreceptor layer and/or the retinal ganglion
cell layer, e.g. SARDS or IMR, the PLR is positive with a blue light stimulus but
negative with a red light stimulus.
In this dog, the direct and consensual PLR is negative with both the standard white light
and red light stimuli, but positive with the blue light stimulus. This is consistent with a
disease involving the photoreceptor layer and/or the retinal ganglion cell layer
· Electroretinography - flat-line response OU. This is consistent with absent retinal
function in both eyes (Fig. 11.2b)
· Laboratory tests - routine haematology, biochemistry and urinalysis are beneficial in
cases of sudden onset blindness because clinical signs and biochemical evidence of
abnormalities  in SARDS  include elevated alkaline phosphatase (AP), alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), cholesterol and bilirubin. Elevations in cortisol and sex
hormones and proteinuria have also recently been shown in affected dogs (Carter et
al., 2009).
Fig. 11.2b Electroretinogram. Flat-line response confirms absent retinal function
7.8μV/div
Amplitude(uVolt)
20ms/div
Time(useconds)
Although the serum biochemistry is abnormal in this dog (elevated AP, ALT, and
cholesterol), the results of the ACTH-stimulation test and sex hormone levels are normal.
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination, including a neurological assessment, is unremarkable.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of SARDS is made.
Treatment
               
concurrent hyperadrenocorticism, options to manage this disease should be discussed with
the owners.
Intravenous therapy with human immunoglobulin (IVIg) has recently been described in a
small number of dogs affected with SARDS and IMR with favourable results (Grozdanic et
al., 2oo8). IVIg has been used extensively in human medicine for a variety of immune-
mediated    diseases   that    are poorly   responsive   or   non-responsive   to    traditional
             
antibody-mediated retinopathies in humans.
Prognosis
The prognosis for vision is hopeless in that the blindness caused by SARDS is permanent.
In time, most affected dogs adapt and cope well. The systemic signs (polydipsia, polyuria.
polyphagia) usually take several weeks to months to resolve unless hyperadrenocorticism is
present, in which case specific treatment and long-term monitoring are indicated.
Discussion
The cause of SARDs is unknown. Although affected dogs may have concurrent
hyperadrenocorticism, there is no evidence of an association with adrenal, pulmonary, or
pituitary neoplasia, as there is in humans. An immune-mediated component has been
postulated but studies looking for the presence of circulating retinal antibodies in affected
dogs have so far produced contradictory findings. The initial abnormality involves the
photoreceptor layer of the neurosensory retina, i.e. the rods and cones. On histopathology,
remaining retina follows, resulting in end-stage retinal degeneration. The fundoscopic
appearance several weeks to months after the onset of SARDS cannot be differentiated from
generalised retinal degeneration resulting from other causes.
References and Further Reading
Carter RT, Oliver JW, Stepien RL, Bentley E (2009) Elevations in sex hormones in dogs
with sudden acquired retinal degeneration syndrome (SARDS). J Am Animal Hosp Assoc ,
45,207-214.
Grozdanic SD, Harper MH, Kecova H (2008) Antibody-mediated retinopathies in canine
patients: mechanism, diagnosis, and treatment modalities. Vet Clin North Am: Small Animal
Pract, 38 (2), 361-387.
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY3
History
A 12-year-old female neutered domestic shorthaired cat is presented with a history of acute
onset bilateral mydriasis and reduced  vision five days after starting medication for a
suspected tooth root abscess. The cat had lost weight over the previous few months but the
owners assumed that this was because of its age. Based on an estimated bodyweight of 5
kg, the systemic medication consisted of enrofloxacin (an initial intravenous dose of 25 mg
followed by 25 mg once daily per os, and oral meloxicam 1 mg/kg once daily).
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 11.3a and b.
Fig. 11.3a
Fig. 11.3b
Reproduced withpermis
2. What differential diagnosis should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 11.3a Both eyes - the pupil is very dilated
Fig. 11.3b Right eye (tapetal fundus) - there is tapetal hyperreflectivity, which is
predominantly central, and retinal vascular attenuation. Similar changes are present in the
left eye (not shown).
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the history of sudden onset blindness together with bilateral retinal abnormalities, the
following conditions should be considered:
recently recognised in cats is enrofloxacin-associated retinal degeneration (Gelatt et
al., 2001; Ford et al. , 2007). Affected cats present with mydriasis and blindness
which  is  usually permanent.  Characteristic fundic  abnormalities  include  tapetal
hyperreflectivity, retinal  vasculature attenuation,  gold/rust-coloured spots in the
tapetal fundus, and a pigmentary disturbance in the non-tapetal fundus. Other
reported retinal toxins include the concurrent administration of methylnitrosourea and
ketamine, and griseofulvin.
· Retinitis/chorioretinitis Active retinal inflammation (retinitis) typically appears as
  ss (s   r re  
haemorrhage. Post-inflammatory scarring is seen as areas of tapetal hyperreflectivity
with or without pigment deposition and areas of depigmentation in the non-tapetal
fundus. ln the cat, chorioretinitis (choroidal inflammation that extends to the retina) 1s
more common than retinochoroiditis (retinal inflammation that extends to the
peritonitis  virus), fungal  (e.g.  cryptococcosis),  and  protozoal infection  (e.g.
toxoplasmosis).
· Retinal dysplasia An abnormal development of the retina with proliferation of one or
more of its elements. It is uncommon in the cat; however, retinal dysplasia has most
often been associated with intrauterine or intraocular infection with FeLV. The typical
fundoscopic appearance is multiple greyish dots or linear streaks which are most
obvious in the tapetal fundus.
· Nutritional retinal degeneration (taurine deficiency) Taurine is an essential amino
acid in the cat and the highest tissue concentrations are found in heart muscle, retina
and liver. Fundic changes are bilaterally symmetrical - initially there is a focal area of
tapetal hyperreflectivity dorsolateral to the optic disc and this ultimately progresses to
Since the association between the dietary deficiency of taurine and the development
of retinal disease was made in 1978, the condition has rarely been encountered, as
dietary levels of taurine have been increased in commercial cat food.
· Inherited rod-cone dysplasia and degeneration Inherited retinal degeneration is rare
in the cat. However, early-onset, autosomal recessive progressive retinal atrophy has
been described in the Persian cat and affected cats are usually blind by four months
of age (Rah et al., 2o05). The Abyssinian breed is known to be affected by two forms
of inherited retinal degeneration, both of which have been described in detail. The
first is an autosomal dominant rod-cone dysplasia that leads to blindness by one year
of age; the second is an autosomal recessive rod-cone degeneration that leads to
different forms of retinal degeneration is similar, i.e. tapetal hyperreflectivity, retinal
vascular attenuation and depigmentation within the non-tapetal fundus.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
o Pupillary light reflex - negative direct and consensual OU
o Dazzle reflex - negative OU
● Vestibulo-oculocephalic reflex - positive OU
· Vision testing
 ° Menace response - negative OU
 Visual placing and tracking reflexes - negative OU
。
Obstacle course - results are unreliable as the cat will not move around the
consulting room.
In this cat, these finding are consistent with blindness in both eyes.
· Tonometry - IOP 20 mmHg OU
The bodyweight of the cat is 4.1 kg. The remainder of the ophthalmic examination and a
general physical examination is unremarkable apart from dental disease.
Further Diagnostic Tests
· Electroretinography - this is not indicated because retinal function will be decreased
if diffuse retinal degeneration is visible on fundoscopic examination.
● Laboratory tests - routine haematology, biochemistry, total T4 and urine analysis are
unremarkable apart from mild azotaemia; urine specific gravity confirms adequate
concentration consistent with dehydration.
· Systemic blood pressure measurement -  indirect assessment with a Doppler
sphygmomanometer  (ultrasonic  detection  device)  reveals  an acceptable  systolic
blood pressure of 165 mmHg (upper limit for systolic blood pressure in the cat being
160-170 mmHg).
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, the cause of sudden blindness in this cat is presumed to
be enrofloxacin-associated retinal degeneration
Treatment
Immediate  discontinuation  of  enrofloxacin   therapy   is indicated.  Administration  of
intravenous fluid therapy has also been advocated, despite the fact that pharmacokinetics
and metabolism of enrofloxacin are unknown in the cat. No other treatment options are
available.
Prognosis
Blindness is usually permanent although there are reports of cats that have regained vision.
Discussion
A remarkable feature of enrofloxacin-associated toxicity is the speed at which the retina
degenerates, and the fact that it can occur even after a single dose. The degeneration
            
photoreceptors. Although all fluoroquinolones should be regarded as potentially retinotoxic
at high doses, enrofloxacin in cats is the most relevant in the clinical setting.
Several important risk factors for enrofloxacin retinal  toxicity have been  identified
(Wiebe et al., 2007). These include age (>12 years), pre-existing renal or hepatic
impairment, dose and duration of treatment and route of administration. Retinotoxocity has
been reported in cats even after treatment with the recommended dose, and for this reason
enrofloxacin should only be used in cats when there is no alternative antibiotic therapy, i.e.
its use should be based on culture and sensitivity testing. If treatment with enrofloxacin is
necessary, the following guidelines should be closely adhered to: obtain an accurate
bodyweight, do not exceed the recommended dose (5 mg/kg q24 hours), avoid intravenous
administration, use a 1-ml syringe for accurate dosing (subcutaneous injection), assess renal
            
cats, and consider the effect of drug interactions, e.g. with systemic NSAID therapy. Age,
undiagnosed systemic disease related to weight loss, inaccurate bodyweight, intravenous
administration and concurrent NSAID therapy are identified as risk factors in this cat.
References and Further Reading
Ford MM, Dubielzig RR, Giuliano EA, Moore CP, Narfstrom KL (2007) Ocular and
systemic manifestations after oral administration of a high dose of enrofloxacin in cats. Am
J Vet Res, 68 (2), 190-202.
Gelatt KN, van der Woerdt A, Ketring KL, et al. (2001) Enrofloxacin-associated retinal
degeneration in cats. Vet Ophthalmol, 4 (2), 99-106.
          
progressive retinal atrophy in Persian cats. Invest Ophthalmol Visual Sci, 46, 1742-1747.
Wiebe V & Hamilton P (2002) Fluoroquinolone-induced retinal degeneration in cats. J Am
Vet Med Assoc, 221, 1568-1572.
See Appendix 2.
CASE STUDY 4
History
A 6-year-old male neutered terrier is presented with a history of occasionally bumping intc
objects on the left side over the past two to three days. During the same period, the owner
has also noticed that the dog's eyes looked different from each other. The dog's general
health had been unremarkable prior to the onset of this problem and he has received routine
vaccinations and regular anthelmintic treatment. There is no travel history or changes in the
dog's environment.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 11.4a and b
Fig. 11.4a
Fig. 11.4b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 11.4a Both eyes - there is a marked anisocoria (Os > OD); the blue tapetal reflection is
a normal variation.
Fig. 11.4b Fundic photographs. Left eye - the optic disc is swollen and pink and has
blurred indistinct margins. The blood vessels on and around the disc are engorged and
tortuous, they appear to deviate from their normal path as they reach the disc. The peri-
papillary region is hyporeflective, consistent with a retinal detachment. Right eye - the
optic disc is normal. The irregular outline is because of pronounced myelination; the central
2. Differential Diagnoses
         o      
conditions should be considered:
· Optic neuritis lnflammation of the optic nerve can 1nvolve the intraocular (at the level
of the optic disc), intraorbital (retrobulbar), or central portions of the nerve. Optic
neuritis can be unilateral or bilateral and typically causes a sudden loss of vision and
a reduced or absent PLR in the affected eye. The optic disc is swollen and raised; its
margins may be blurred and haemorrhages may be present. However, if the
intraocular portion of the nerve is unaffected, the fundus will appear normal.
Electroretinography is expected to be normal with optic neuritis, as retinal function is
generally unaffected.  The  following causes  should be  considered: idiopathic,
inflammation, infection - viral (e.g. canine distemper virus, tick-borne encephalitis
virus),   fungal  (e.g. Blastomyces dermatitidis,   Cryptococcosis   neoformans,
Histoplasma capsulatum) , bacterial (e.g. Rickettsia rickettsii, Ehrlichia canis,
Borrelia burgdorferii), and protozoal (Toxoplasma gondi, Neospora caninum),
neoplasia, granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME or reticulosis), trauma and
· Papilloedema A non-inflammatory swelling of the optic disc usually associated with
raised intracranial pressure, papilloedema is usually bilateral and, at least initially is
not associated with visual or PLR deficits. Papilloedema has been reported in dogs
with brain tumours; in contrast to humans, dogs rarely develop papilloedema
secondary to raised intracranial pressure because they lack a central retinal artery and
beyond the anterior lamina cribosa, and is considered normal in the dog; it is seen in
several breeds including the Golden Retriever and the German Shepherd Dog.
Careful observation, and some experience is needed to differentiate papilloedema
from pseudo-papilloedema, and therefore avoid unnecessary diagnostic procedures.
exophthalmos, mydriasis, papilloedema and/or optic neuritis. Clinical signs can arise
as a result of primary tumours, e.g. optic nerve meningioma, nerve sheath tumour or
secondary to local extension of orbital neoplasia.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - negative direct and consensual OS, positive direct
and consensual OD
Dazzle reflex - negative OS, positive OD
。
Vestibulo-oculocephalic reflex - positive OU
·Vision testing
Menace response - negative OS, positive OD
Visual placing and tracking reflex - negative OS, positive OD
Obstacle course - the dog is unable to navigate around large objects in both
navigation is normal when the left eye is covered.
In this dog, these results are consistent with blindness in the left eye.
· Tonometry - IOP 19 mmHg OU
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination, including a neurological assessment, is unremarkable.
Further Diagnostic Tests
● Laboratory tests - routine haematology, biochemistry and urinalysis are indicated in
cases of optic neuritis and papilloedema to screen for the presence of systemic
disease; serology for infectious disease should be also considered, based on endemic
diseases and travel history.
· The results of routine haematology, biochemistry and urinalysis, and tests for
Toxoplasma gondi, Neospora caninum, and Ehrlichia canis are normal in this dog.
the orbits and the brain in order to determine the extent and nature of the pathology.
This has important implications for both treatment options and for prognosis.
· Abnormalities in the left eye include marked thickening of the optic nerve, a swollen
optic nerve head and a peri-papillary retinal detachment (Fig. 11.4c). There is no
evidence of orbital disease or brain involvement.
· Cerebrospinal fluid analysis - this is indicated to look for inflammation, infection or
neoplasia. CSF analysis is normal.
Fig. 11.4c MRI scans (dorsal plane 3D-fiesta). (A) Marked thickening of the optic nerve
      (           
-- swollen optic nerve head and peri-papillary retinal detachment.
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of idiopathic optic neuritis in the left eye is
made.
Treatment
Treatment for optic neuritis depends on the underlying cause. The treatment of choice for
idiopathic optic neuritis is immunosuppressive doses of oral prednisolone, e.g. 4 mg/kg
bodyweight per day for 48 hours, followed by 2 mg/kg per day until clinical signs resolve;
the dose should then be tapered over two to three months. Early discontinuation of
treatment carries the risk of recurrence. Close monitoring as the prednisolone is tapered is
            s
overlooked.
Prognosis and Discussion
The prognosis for return of vision with idiopathic optic neuritis is generally poor. Some
eyes regain vision, often only temporarily, whilst others remain blind. Recurrence is
possible and regular monitoring is indicated.
This dog does not respond to treatment and marked optic nerve atrophy develops within
10 days. Fundoscopic examination reveals a dark and small optic disc surrounded by
pigmentation; the venous circle is barely visible because of attenuation of blood vessels
(Fig. 11.4d).
Fig. 11.4d Marked optic disc atrophy: a small and dark optic disc, attenuation of the venous
circle and peri-papillary pigmentation.
Although optic neuritis may be unilateral, sudden onset blindness because of bilateral
disease is the most common form in the dog. Both eyes may not be affected
simultaneously, and the prognosis is generally better for the eye that is most recently
affected.
References andFurther Reading
Boroffka SA, Gorig C, Auriemma E, Passon-Vastenburg MH, Voorhart G, Barthez PY
(2008) MRI of the canine optic nerve. Vet Radiol Ultrasound, 49 (6), 540-544.
See Appendix 2.
CASE STUDY 5
History
An 8-year-old female neutered Collie-cross dog is presented with loss of vision over three
to four days. The owner also reports that the dog appears depressed. The dog's general
health has been unremarkable prior to the onset of this problem; she has received routine
vaccinations and regular anthelmintic treatment.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 11.5a and b
Fig. 11.5a
Reproduced withpermission from JMoutd.
Fig. 11.5b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 11.5a Both eyes - the pupil is very dilated. The fundic reflection is a different colour in
each eye - yellow in the left eye and red in the right eye. Both are normal variations in the
dog. The red reflection is a result of subalbinism (reduced melanin in the hair and iris). The
white coat and blue iris on the right side are also a result of subalbinism; the grey coat and
brown iris on the left side indicate a normal level of melanin
Fig. 11.5b Fundic photographs of the left and right eyes. Left eye - normal fundus with a
yellow/green tapetal region; this results in the yellow fundic reflection seen in Fig. 11.5a
Right eye - subalbinotic fundus which is a normal variation in the dog. The choroidal
vasculature (dense orange/red stripes) and sclera (white) can be directly observed because
of the lack of melanin in the choroid and the overlying retinal pigmented epithelium, and
the absence of a tapetum. The choroidal vasculature produces the red fundic reflection seen
in Fig. 11.5a
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the history and normal appearance of the fundus in both eyes, the following
conditions should be considered for the cause of acute onset blindness:
· Central blindness (amaurosis) A lesion involving the central visual pathway can
cause blindness. From the optic chiasm the optic tracts carry visual fibres which
synapse within the lateral geniculate nucleus. Post-synaptic fibres then leave the
lateral geniculate nucleus as the optic radiations, which terminate in the visual cortex
of the cerebrum (lateral, causal and medial aspects of the occipital lobe).
· Sudden acquired retinal degeneration syndrome (SARDS) A retinal disorder of
unknown cause that results in sudden onset blindness in affected dogs. The clinical
presentation is characterised by a sudden loss of vision over several days to weeks
which may be associated with polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia and weight gain. Any
breed or cross-breed dog can be affected and most affected animals are middle-aged
The fundus initially appears normal but signs of retinal degeneration (tapetal
hyperreflectivity, retinal vascular attenuation and optic disc atrophy) develop over
lack of retinal function (case 2, this chapter).
· Optic neuritis Inflammation of the optic nerve can affect the intraocular (at the level
of the optic disc), intraorbital (retrobulbar) or central portion of the optic nerve. Optic
neuritis can be unilateral or bilateral and typically causes a sudden loss of vision in
the affected eye. The optic disc is swollen and raised; its margins may be blurred and
haemorrhages may be present. However, if the intraocular portion of the nerve is
unaffected, the fundus will appear normal. In contrast to SARDS, electroretinography
is expected to be normal because retinal function is generally unaffected (case 4, this
chapter).
· Immune-mediated retinitis  (IMR) A syndrome recently described by veterinary
ophthalmologists at Iowa State University. USA. The clinical appearance of dogs
with IMR appears to be similar to that of SARDS. Investigations into the
characterisation, diagnosis and treatment of this syndrome are on-going at the time of
writing.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - negative direct and consensual OU
。
Dazzle reflex - negative OU
Vestibulo-oculocephalic reflex - positive OU
。
· Vision testing
Menace response - negative OU
。
。
Tracking reflex -- negative OU
Obstacle course - the dog is unable to navigate around large objects under
。
both photopic and scotopic conditions
In this dog, these results suggest blindness in both eyes.
● Tonometry - IOP 20 mmHg OU
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination, including a neurological assessment, is unremarkable.
Further Diagnostic Tests
● Colourimetric pupillary light reflex testing - this is a recently described simple and
inexpensive method for assessing photoreceptor and retinal ganglion cell function.
This test investigates the response of the PLR to a red and blue light stimulus. If
retinal function is reduced or absent and the disease involves the photoreceptor layer
and/or the retinal ganglion cell layer, e.g. SARDS or IMR, the PLR is positive with a
blue light stimulus but negative with a red light stimulus.
· In this dog, the direct and consensual PLR is negative with the standard white light as
well as with the red and blue light stimuli. This is consistent with a disease process
that does not involve the photoreceptor layer and/or the retinal ganglion cell layer
  ss     e  sn  
if SARDS or optic neuritis is strongly suspected (cases 2 and 4, this chapter) and
should also be considered prior to general anaesthesia in any middle-aged to older
patient.
· In this dog, results of all laboratory tests are unremarkable.
· Electroretinography - this reveals b-wave amplitude and latency values which are
considered to be within the normal range in both eyes, confirming the presence of
satisfactory retinal function (Fig. 11.5c)
 s r   d d sq  s  - os r o
rule out retinal causes of blindness first. This is because electroretinography is less
expensive and can, in some dogs, be performed with sedation rather than under
 general anaesthesia (which is essential for MRI).
· An MRI scan to evaluate the optic nerve, orbit and brain in this dog reveals a lesion
at the optic chiasm typical of a meningioma (Fig. 11.5d).
Fig. 11.5c Electroretinogram. Normal response confirms that satisfactory retinal function is
present.
7.8μV/div
b
Amplitude (uVolt)
20ms/div
Time(useconds)
            
Meningioma at optic chiasm (arrow).
Re produc ed with permission from R De nnis, Animat Health Trust.
B
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of central blindness (amaurosis) secondary
to a meningioma involving the optic chiasm is made.
Treatment
Management  options  for  intracranial  meningiomas  in  the  dog include  corticosteroid
 q q   s s xa s   i
there is oedema surrounding the tumour, as it can temporarily improve demeanour and lead
to return of vision in some dogs. Optic chiasm meningiomas in the dog are suitable for
radiotherapy. Surgery is not an option for the meningioma in this dog because of its
location. A detailed discussion of the treatment options for meningioma is beyond the scope
of this book.
Prognosis
The prognosis for survival of a dog with an intracranial meningioma is poor. The median
survival for a brain meningioma in dogs treated with systemic corticosteroid therapy only is
58 days; this can be increased to seven to nine months with tumour resection or
radiotherapy. The best long-term median survival is 16.5 months with a combination of
tumour resection (when possible) and radiotherapy (Axlund et al., 2o02).
Discussion
Both pituitary gland tumours and meningiomas can involve the optic chiasm and cause
blindness. Most pituitary gland tumours expand dorsally into the hypothalamus (away from
the optic chiasm) and tend not to cause visual impairment until the tumour is relatively
advanced.
Other causes of central blindness include congenital (e.g. hydrocephalus), inflammatory
(e.g.   granulomatous  meningoencephalitis),  metabolic (e.g.  hepatic encephalopathy),
infectious (e.g. canine distemper virus), vascular disease (e.g. infarction), and trauma. With
  s o  s   n  ss i
further investigation. Advanced imaging techniques (MRI and CT) are essential for accurate
diagnosis and prognosis and for the consideration of management and treatment options in
animals with suspected central blindness.
References and Further Reading
Axlund TW, McGlasson ML, Smith AN (2002) Surgery alone or in combination with
radiation therapy for treatment of intracranial meningiomas in dogs: 31 cases (1989-2002)
J Am Vet Med Assoc, 221(11), 1597-1600.
Grozdanic SD, Harper MH, Kecova H (2008) Antibody-mediated retinopathies in canine
patients: mechanism, diagnosis, and treatment modalities. Vet Clin North Am: Small Animal
Pract, 38 (2), 361-387.
See Appendix 2.
CHAPTER12
Ocular Trauma
Introduction
Most ocular trauma involves loss of vision, compromised globe integrity or severe ocular
pain. The majority of ocular emergencies are traumatic in origin, and prompt action is
required, as delay in treating may result in a blind eye or necessitate enucleation. Following
trauma the appearance of the eye is often dramatic and animals are reluctant to allow
thorough evaluation; the eye may be partially closed, making assessment of the ocular
reflexes particularly difficult to interpret. Observation from a distance first is usually
helpful, but it may be necessary to sedate an animal before a thorough examination can be
performed; if sedation is required it is essential to assess the general condition of the animal
first.
CASE STUDY 1
History
A two-year-old male neutered Lhasa Apso is presented 10 days after treatment for proptosis
or o iso  s    e     o
the eye under general anaesthesia, a temporary tarsorrhaphy and systemic broad-spectrum
antibiotic and NSAID therapy. The tarsorrhapy sutures are removed to allow examination of
the eye.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 12.1a and b.
Fig. 12.1a
Fig. 12.1b
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
Fig. 12.1a The right eye appears normal. Left eye - there is a marked lateral deviation of
the eye (lateral strabismus or exotropia) resulting in increased exposure of the medial region
of the bulbar conjunctiva and sclera and a wide palpebral fissure (Os > OD). There is
conjunctival hyperaemia, a generalised corneal opacity and the Purkinje images are
disrupted.
Fig. 12.1b Left eye - there is diffuse oedema and peri-limbal corneal vascularisation. The
blood vessels in the conjunctiva and the episclera are hyperaemic and there is an irregular
line of grey tissue which represents the outline of a superficial ulcer (arrow). The upper and
lower eyelids and TEL are in a normal position.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the history and the appearance of the left eye, it is possible to make an immediate
however, important to distinguish between proptosis and exophthalmos:
· Proptosis Proptosis results from the sudden forward displacement of the eye with
simultaneous entrapment and inversion of the eyelids behind the equator of the eye.
Entrapment prevents the eye from spontaneously returning to its normal position, an
effect exacerbated by orbital soft tissue swelling resulting from impaired venous
drainage (Fig. 12.1c). Proptosis is the result of trauma, and brachycephalic breeds are
predisposed because of their shallow orbits. To a veterinary surgeon not experienced
with this condition, there may be concern in this dog that the globe is still displaced
from its normal position within the orbit.
· Exophthalmos (Ch. 1, case 3) Exophthalmos can exist following replacement of a
proptosed globe because of soft tissue swelling and the formation of a haematoma in
the retrobulbar space. Fractures and emphysema (from a fracture involving the
frontal sinus) can also contribute to exophthalmos. Orbital fractures are usually
sustained from severe blunt trauma, e.g. a kick by a horse, and are less likely to arise
from a dog fight unless there is a considerable difference in size between the dogs
involved. Unlike proptosis, the eyelid margins are not inverted with exophthalmos.
Fig. 12.1c Proptosis of the left eye of a young, mixed-breed dog following a road traffic
the equator of the globe (arrow).
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - corneal oedema prevents observation of the pupil in
the left eye. Negative consensual Os (left to right eye), positive direct OD.
Dazzle reflex - negative OS, positive OD
Palpebral reflex - negative OS, positive but incomplete OD; the incomplete
palpebral  reflex  in  the right eye  is  consistent  with  breed-related
lagophthalmos (Ch.8, case 3).
Corneal reflex - negative OS, positive OD (Fig. 12.1d)
Corneal sensation can be assessed by touching a wisp of coton wool to the lateral region of the cornea, ie. away from the
visual axis; if a blink response is elicited, corneal sensation is said to be present (Ch.8, case 4). In an eye with marked surface
pathology, a cotton bud can also be used; in a blind eye the stirmulus can be applied to any part of the cornea (Fig. 12.1d).
· Menace response - negative OS, positive OD
In this dog, these results are consistent with loss of vision, and loss of corneal and eyelid
sensation in the left eye.
● Examination with a focal light source - in the left eye, slit-lamp biomicroscopy
determines that the corneal vascularisation is both superficial and deep, and that the
corneal thickness is increased.
· Schirmer tear test - 5 mm/min Os, 17 mm/min OD. Given the overall clinical
presentation, the low tear production in the left eye is most consistent with reduced
reflex tear production because of the loss of corneal sensation, as well as possible
damage to the lacrimal and TEL glands.
· Fluorescein dye - large superficial area of positive staining OS, negative OD (Fig
12.1e)
· Tonometry - IOP 18 mmHg OS, 15 mmHg OD
Fig. 12.1d Left eye following application of fluorescein dye. Positive fluorescein retention
reveals a large superficial corneal ulcer.
The remainder of the ophthalmic examination reveals no additional abnormalities and a
general physical examination is unremarkable.
Fig. 12.1e Left eye following application of fluorescein dye. Positive fluorescein retention
reveals a large superficial corneal ulcer.
Diagnosis
Based on the results of the ophthalmic examination, a more specific diagnosis of blindness
and neurotrophic keratitis in the left eye is made. The blindness is considered to be
irreversible because the trauma to the optic nerve occurred 10 days ago.
Treatment
Enucleation is recommended in this dog because of irreversible blindness and loss of
corneal sensation in the left eye. Enucleation of a blind and comfortable eye following
leads to neurotrophic keratitis which can in turn give rise to complications (chronic corneal
ulceration, corneal neovascularisation, secondary bacterial infection and ultimately corneal
perforation) which necessitate removal.
The eye is removed by  a routine transconjunctival procedure and submitted  for
histopathology. Postoperative treatment comprises systemic broad-spectrum antibiotic and
NSAID therapy for five days.
Histopathological examination confirms chronic ulcerative keratitis and reveals severe
degeneration and atrophy of the optic nerve - the latter consistent with tractional injury
secondary to proptosis.
A ll enucleated globes should be submitted for ocular histopathology. For routine diagnostic purposes, fixation of the globe in 10% formalin
is generally appropriate, although confirmation with the selected laborat
recommended. Prior to fixation, as much excess
extraocular tssue as possible should be removed, and the optic nerve should be left as long as possible.
Prognosis and Discussion
n s   n p sa on siso   on a o n si 
   si   so   s    n  is
about 2o% of eyes retain vision following traumatic proptosis, although prognosis is
influenced by the breed of dog. Relatively little force is required to proptose the eye in
brachycephalic breeds compared to dolichocephalic breeds. Fortunately proptosis occurs
more frequently in brachycephalic breeds for which the prognosis for vision is generally
more favourable. However, the prognosis for each dog should be assessed on an individual
basis based on the following guidelines:
· Reasons for immediate enucleation
Avulsion of the optic nerve (usually apparent on examination)
Corneal or scleral rupture, indicated by loss of the normal shape and
。
turgidity of the eye
Extensive damage to the extraocular muscles - this can result in irreversible
compromise of the vascular and nerve supply to the anterior segment of the
eye, and the development of neurotrophic keratitis
· Positive prognostic indicators
D
Presence of a direct and consensual pupillary light reflex and/or evidence of
vision at initial presentation
Mild degree of proptosis
。
Damage to more than three extraocular muscles
。
Absent or minor intraocular haemorrhage
● Pupil size is variable and is not considered to be a useful prognostic indicator by
many ophthalmologists
· An eye with extensive intraocular haemorrhage has a guarded prognosis but can be
surgically replaced and enucleated later if necessary.
In reality, accurate assessment of the degree of damage to the extraocular muscles can be
difficult and common sense prevails. The medial, ventral and ventral oblique recti are the
shortest extraocular muscles and usually rupture first. This results in exotropia which is a
common clinical sign at the time of the injury and following replacement of the eye.
Surgical reattachment of the torn muscles is usually impractical and is rarely performed.
Exotropia will improve and can even resolve with time.
Poor ocular surface health is a common long-term problem following replacement of a
proptosed eye. Ocular surface disease should be managed with topical lubricant therapy
and/or surgically with a bilateral medial canthoplasty. The benefits of a medial canthoplasty
include improved blinking, reduced exposure ofthe ocular surface, coverage of the
exposed medial aspect in an eye with exotropia and a reduced risk of repeat globe prolapse.
The long-term sequelae of globe proptosis include blindness, lateral strabismus
(exotropia), lagophthalmos, exposure keratitis, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, neurotrophic
keratitis, glaucoma and phthisis bulbi. Although most owners prefer a blind, comfortable
eye to enucleation, many will not wish to provide frequent medical care for a blind eye
indefinitely. If there is any doubt whether the eye can be salvaged, it is acceptable to
replace the eye as an emergency procedure and then, if necessary, to enucleate it later.
Further Reading
See Appendix 2.
CASE STUDY 2
History
A three-year-old female neutered domestic shorthaired cat is presented with evidence of
acute trauma to the leff eye; the cat is subdued and reluctant to move. She has received
routine vaccinations and anthelmintic treatment and is an indoor/outdoor cat.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Fig. 12.2a
Fig. 12.2a
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figure Shows
Fig. 12.2a There is dried blood on the left side of the face and around both nostrils. Left
eye - there is blood at the medial canthus. The palpebral fissure is wide (OS > OD). The
ocular surface has a lack-lustre appearance and is a red/black colour - intraocular structures
are not visible through this dark opaque surface. The Purkinje images are disrupted. Right
eye - is virtually closed and the Purkinje images are normal.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the appearance of the left eye, the following conditions should be considered:
can involve the cornea and/or sclera, although the cornea is more likely to be
involved because of its exposed position. Corneal lacerations can extend across the
limbus into the sclera and may be obscured by conjunctival  chemosis and
haemorrhage. In dogs and cats, scleral rupture usually results from blunt trauma and
is often located at the posterior pole, sometimes at the equator Scleral rupture is
associated with acute pain and mild to extensive intraocular haemorrhage. The loss of
aqueous or vitreous humour secondary to corneal laceration or scleral rupture results
in reduced globe turgidity. There may be concurrent damage to the lens (e.g. luxation
and/or rupture), uveal tract (e.g. avulsion) or orbital tissues (e.g. haematoma,
emphysema and fractures).
· Intraocular  haemorrhage Causes include trauma, uveitis, chronic glaucoma,
neoplasia (primary  or  secondary), pre-iridal fibrovascular membranes, systemic
vitreous) (Ch. I, case I).
· Proptosis This results from the sudden forward displacement of the eye with
simultaneous entrapment and inversion of the eyelids behind the equator of the eye.
The eyelid entrapment prevents the eye from spontaneously returning to its normal
position, and this effect is exacerbated by orbital soft tissue swelling because of
impaired venous drainage (case I, this chapter). The feline orbit provides better
protection for the eye than the canine orbit, which means that considerable force is
required to cause proptosis in the cat and concurrent head trauma is often present.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
The eye is too painful for a complete ophthalmic examination; a limited examination is
performed:
● Pupillary light reflex - the pupil in the left eye is not visible; negative consensual OS,
positive direct OD.
· Dazzle reflex - negative OS, positive OD
No abnormalities are found in the right eye. The physical examination is unremarkable
apart from dried blood at both nares. Given that the cat appears stable, it is anaesthetised to
allow closer examination of the eye and periocular area. Once the periocular hair is clipped
and the ocular surface flushed, the following abnormalities are revealed: eyelid bruising,
       s     
    s     s    s  
than collapsed globe.
The following diagnostic tests are performed to evaluate the nature of the injury in the
left eye in more detail:
· B-mode ocular ultrasound - this is performed on both eyes for comparison. The right
eye is unremarkable. In the left eye there is a deep anterior chamber (9 mm as
            
vitreous cavity, and no visible posterior outline of the globe. These findings are
consistent with posterior displacement of the lens, intraocular haemorrhage and
posterior scleral rupture (Fig. 12.2c).
airgun pellet. The pellet is dorsal to the soft palate and rostral to the lefft tympanic
bulla (Fig. 12.2d).
Fig. 12.2c
c B-mode ultrasound  scan.  Left eye - deep anterior chamber, posterior
displacement of the lens and no visible outline for the posterior wall of the globe. AC,
anterior chamber; C, cornea; L, lens.
Distance=0.91cm
AC
VITREOUS
Fig. 12.2d Skull radiographs. (A) Dorsoventral view. (B) Lateral view. An airgun pellet
(arrow) is located at the base of the skull, dorsal to the hard palate and rostral to the left
tympanic bulla.
B
Diagnosis
Based on the information available, a diagnosis of a traumatic posterior scleral rupture of
the left eye is made.
Treatment
Posterior scleral rupture often results in catastrophic damage to intraocular structures and is
usually permanently blinding. Affected eyes are painful and there is a long-term risk of the
development of feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma (see Discussion below). Enucleation is
frequently the only sensible course of action.
The eye is removed by a routine transconjunctival procedure; gross examination
confirms a posterior lens luxation and a focal posterior scleral rupture (Fig. 12.2e).
Fig. 12.2e (A) Enucleated globe showing posterior scleral rupture (arrow) and position of
the optic nerve (asterix). (B) Gross pathology showing deep anterior chamber, intraocular
haemorrhage (asterix), posterior displacement of the lens and scleral rupture (arrow). AC.
anterior chamber; L, lens.
Reproduced with permission from EJ Scurrel.
大
AC
大
8
Prognosis
The prognosis for a full recovery following enucleation is excellent in this cat. Airgun
pellets are inert and rarely require removal if they remain in a clinically insignificant
location such as in this cat.
Discussion
  i   so  so  ooo  s s o 
result of blunt trauma but can also result from direct penetration of the globe. Accidental
   go   sd p  o  o o i  si
carnivores consists of soft tissue rather than bone and the distance between the upper dental
arcade and the eye is small - both these factors increase the risk of accidental scleral
laceration by dental instruments. Lacerations or ruptures involving the cornea or the
anterior region of the sclera are usually easily identified, whereas a posterior scleral rupture
can be difficult to diagnose even with the aid of ultrasound. In a retrospective study in
dogs, cats and horses, scleral rupture was only diagnosed prior to enucleation in 2 out of 30
affected eyes; the most common site for rupture was the posterior pole around the optic
nerve, and the most frequent clinical signs were eyelid and conjunctival swelling,
subconjunctival haemorrhage and hyphaema (Rampazzo et al., 2o06). In the authors
experience, eyes with posterior scleral ruptures are soft or sunken and very painful on
palpation. It is, however, possible for the shape and size of the eye to appear normal
initially, as orbital haemorrhage can effectively seal the site of the rupture. Mild
exophthalmos sometimes results from orbital haemorrhage and soft tissue swelling.  If
enucleation is not performed, the extensive damage to intraocular structures causes eventual
atrophy of the globe (phthisis bulbi).
One important reason to consider enucleation of a traumatised eye, specifically in the cat,
is the potential for the development of a feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma. This is an
uncommon but highly malignant neoplasm which is usually associated with a previous
history of ocular trauma and lens injury. Affected cats range from 7 to 15 years and the
interval between the traumatic event and the detection of the tumour averages five years.
The clinical presentation is unilateral and can include signs of chronic uveitis, glaucoma.
intraocular haemorrhage and a white/pink mass in the posterior segment. The prognosis is
poor following enucleation or exenteration as the majority of cats die from the effects of
local extension and/or metastatic disease within several months. In the dog it may be
acceptable to maintain a blind but comfortable eye following trauma (Ch. 12, case I) as
there are no known risks of trauma-induced neoplasia.
References and Further Reading
     s (  s  s    g  o
horses. Vet Ophthalmol, 9 (3), 149-155.
See Appendix 2.
CASESTUDY 3
History
A three-year-old male Papillon is presented with bleeding from the left eye after being
attacked by a cat. The dog has received routine vaccinations and anthelmintic treatment and
is otherwise well.
Questions
1. Describe the abnormalities and pertinent normal features in Figs. 12.3a and b
Fig. 12.3a
Fig. 12.3b (A) Right eye (B) Left eye at presentation (C) Left eye after the haemorrhage has
been removed.
2. What differential diagnoses should be considered for this presentation?
3. What tests could you perform to make the diagnosis?
Answers
1. What the Figures Show
 e   i  -         e
surface which appears recent. The eye appears smaller than the right and the pupil is miotic,
resulting in a relative anisocoria (Os < OD).
Fig. 12.3b Left eye - a ragged piece of conjunctival tissue lies over the dorsal region of
the cornea. There is considerable swelling of the dorsal bulbar conjunctiva and
subconjunctival haemorrhage. The Purkinje images are normal.
2. Differential Diagnoses
Given the history and the appearance of the left eye, the clinical diagnosis is ocular
haemorrhage secondary to trauma. The location and extent of the trauma is important to
       s    
· Extraocular trauma Sharp trauma can cause partial thickness lacerations to the
conjunctiva and cornea; the cornea is often involved because of its exposed position.
Corneal lacerations can extend across the limbus into the sclera but limbal/scleral
involvement may be obscured by conjunctival chemosis and haemorrhage. With
partial thickness injuries, the pupil size can be miotic because of reflex uveitis but it
should be a normal shape; dyscoria will only occur from penetrating trauma
involving the iris.
· Intraocular trauma A full thickness injury is usually restricted to the anterior segment
but can involve the posterior segment. As with extraocular trauma, the pupil may be
miotic because of reflex uveitis but dyscoria is common and provides supportive
evidence for a penetrating injury involving the iris. Intraocular haemorrhage is also
common and may be restricted to the anterior chamber (hyphaema) and/or involve
the vitreous humour - blood in the vitreous humour appears as a red haze behind the
pupil. Careful examination for signs of lens trauma is important, as lens involvement
will affect both treatment and prognosis. Observation of the lens is often restricted by
concurrent miosis and dilation of the pupil is required for a thorough assessment -
injury to the lens usually appears as a white opacity which is visible through the
pupil. The nature of the ocular discharge can provide additional information about
the location of the injury. A serous discharge occurs with increased lacrimation and
escape of aqueous humour; a gelatinous discharge is produced by coagulated
aqueous humour or prolapsed vitreous humour.
3. Appropriate Diagnostic Tests
· Ocular reflexes
Pupillary light reflex - direct and consensual positive OU
。
Dazzle reflex - positive OU
Palpebral reflex - positive OU
· Menace response - positive OU
● Examination with a focal light source - the right eye appears normal. The depth and
transparency of the anterior chamber is normal in the left eye. Examination of the left
eye for a corneal or conjunctival foreign body is facilitated by the use of topical
o  o o     oq o o - ss
atropine eye drops are administered to dilate the pupil. (Atropine is used because it is
a more potent mydriatic/cycloplegic drug and the miosis in the left eye is likely to be
a manifestation of anterior uveitis. The administration of both drugs may help to save
time rather than waiting for the effect of tropicamide alone because it may not be
potent  enough  to cause  mydriasis.)  Intraocular  examination  is  repeated - no
intraocular abnormalities are observed. Mild haemorrhage continues intermittently
throughout the examination and its precise origin cannot be determined at this stage.
· Schirmer tear test - this is not performed in the left eye because of the haemorrhage.
It is also not performed in the right eye to minimise stress to the dog and because of
the appearance of a good tear film.
· Fluorescein dye
Staining - negative OD, linear positive staining in the dorsal peripheral
cornea Os. This is consistent with a superficial corneal laceration in the left
eye (Fig. 12.3c).
Seidel test - negative OU
· Tonometry - IOP 12 mmHg OS, 15 mmHg OD
Fig. 12.3c Left eye following application of fluorescein dye. A superficial laceration in the
dorsal peripheral cornea appears as an area of positive linear fluorescein retention.
The remainder of the examination of the right eye, and a general physical examination,
are unremarkable
Tropicamide is a parasympatholytic agent that causes mydriasis but not cycloplegia. It a useful drug to dilate the pupil for an ophthalmic
Atropine
arasympatholytic a gent with potent mydria
Diagnosis
           
corneal trauma to the left eye.
Treatment
Examination under general anaesthesia is important for two reasons - firstly, to identify the
origin of the haemorrhage and secondly, to explore the conjunctival wound in order to
eliminate the presence of scleral involvement. The piece of torn conjunctiva is excised and
exploration of the area reveals the source of the haemorrhage to be a scleral blood vessel
which is several millimetres posterior to the limbus - diathermy is applied to control the
haemorrhage (Fig. 12.3d). The injuries to the cornea, conjunctiva and sclera are superficial
and are left to heal by second intention.
Fig. 12.3d Dorsal bulbar conjunctiva has been incised and reflected to show a focal brown
S             
L, limbus.
Topical atropine (0.5%) is applied to effect’ to dilate the pupil and relieve iridociliary
muscle spasm, i.e. q12 h for two days, then q24 h for two days and then q3 days on two
occasions. Topical and systemic Broad-spectrum antibiotic and systemic NSAID therapy
are also prescribed for seven days.
Prognosis
The prognosis for a full recovery is considered excellent in this dog (Fig. 12.3e)
Fig. 12.3e Ten days after treatment - the left pupil is dilated from topical atropine.
Discussion
Penetrating ocular trauma is common in dogs and cats, particularly from thorn and cat
scratch injuries (Fig. 12.3f). A thorough examination, often under sedation/anaesthesia, is
indicated to determine the full extent of the injury. It is not uncommon for small penetrating
corneal injuries to seal (i.e. not stain with fluorescein) rapidly, even within 24 hours. This
can mask a more serious problem involving the intraocular structures. An injury to the lens
is particularly serious and can easily be missed if the pupil is not dilated for examination. A
short-acting mydriatic agent such as tropicamide may not be sufficiently potent to induce
mydriasis in an eye with anterior uveitis from trauma, and a more potent mydriatic and
   n sn  is a os oe s n nn ds
capsule can heal spontaneously but large tears and traumatic cataract formation should be
managed surgically by early lens extraction (phacoemulsification) (Ch. 7, case 2). If a full
thickness penetrating injury with significant associated lens trauma is overlooked and left
untreated, the resulting phacoclastic uveitis and secondary glaucoma will necessitate
enucleation.
Fig. 12.3f (A) Thorn injury in a dog. (B) Traumatic cataract (blue circle) following a
penetrating injury from a cat scratch in a Labrador puppy, visible only after the pupil was
dilated.
FurtherReading
SeeAppendix 2.
APPENDIX 1 Practical Tips for An Ophthalmic
Examination
A thorough and systematic ophthalmic examination is essential to reach a diagnosis. Most
to perform an ophthalmic examination.
The purpose of this appendix is to explain and clarify those aspects of the ophthalmic
examination which are used in this book. They provide helpful clinical information and are
widely used by clinical ophthalmologists. This section also provides the reference ranges
for the standard ophthalmic diagnostic tests used in the book.
Pupillary Light Reflex (PLR)
(i) Direct PLR
Constriction of the pupil when a light is shone in the eye.
(ii) Consensual or Indirect PLR
Constriction of the pupil when a light is shone in the opposite eye (for example, a positive
consensual PLR in the left eye means the right pupil constricts when a light is shone in the
  n  s s  n o s     s   
other way around (a positive consensual PLR in the left eye would mean the left pupil
constricting when a light is shone in the right eye).
Examination with A Focal Light Source A focal
rather than diffuse light source is preferred for
the ophthalmic examination. It helps in the
general examination of the anterior segment
(cornea, anterior chamber, iris, lens) and
adnexa, and is also used to elicit basic ocular
reflexes, such as the PLR and dazzle reflex. An
otoscope (with speculum removed) and a
Finnoff transilluminator are good examples of
focal light sources, whereas a pen torch has a
relatively diffuse beam. The direct
the PLR because it provides low light intensity;
the instrument is designed for viewing the
fundus with minimal constriction of the pupil.
Indeed, it can create false-negative results for
the PLR and dazzle reflex because of its low
light intensity.
Purkinje Images (or Purkinje-Sanson Images)
These are formed by light reflecting from the
outer cornea (precorneal tear film and anterior
corneal surface), inner cornea, anterior lens and
posterior lens. The effect is shown clearly in
photographs with the reflection of the camera
flash. The Purkinje image caused by reflection
of light on the outer cornea is the most helpful
clinically. If the ocular surface is smooth, the
outline of the image is sharply defined and the
shape of the image corresponds to the shape of
the light source (Fig. 5.2c, E). Assessment of the
Purkinje images provides information about the
nature of the precorneal tear film and the
regularity of the corneal surface. If the anterior
corneal surface is diseased, e.g. corneal ulcer,
the Purkinje images are also disrupted (Figs
5.2c, A). If the precorneal tear film is deficient,
e.g. in an eye with keratoconjunctivitis sicca, the
Purkinje images are disrupted (Fig. 4.3b).
Fig.5.2c,E
Fig. 5.2c, A
Fig. 4.3b
       o   n  i 
(leukocoria) and the tapetal reflection is absent in both eyes.
Re produc ed with permission from J Moutd.
Fig. 7.1f Adult terrier following bilateral cataract surgery and placement of artificial
intraocular lenses. The tapetal reflection is restored in both eyes.
Re produc edwith permission from J Moutd.
Fig. 11.4a Adult terrier with anisocoria.
Tapetal Reflection (or Tapetal Reflex, Fundic
Reflex) This is the reflection of light from the
distance. Tapetal reflection is the reason for ‘eye
shine’ when animals are illuminated in car
headlights at night. Humans do not have a
tapetum but still demonstrate a fundic reflex,
tapetal reflection the visual axis must be clear,
i.e. the path from the tapetum (in the choroid)
through the retina, vitreous humour, lens,
aqueous humour, cornea to the precorneal tear
film (Fig. 11.3a). Any opacity in the pathway
will obstruct the passage of light and cause an
abnormal tapetal reflection, e.g. cataract, iris
cyst. A mature cataract is the opacity of the
entire lens - it will block the tapetal reflection
completely (Figs 7.1a, c, and f). An iris cyst
causes only a focal opacity in the tapetal
reflection (Fig. 9.1e). Tapetal reflection can also
help to determine if there is a size difference
between the pupils, i.e. anisocoria (Fig. 11.4a).
The colour of the tapetum varies between
species and between individual animals (Figs
10.2b, and 11.5a).
DazzleReflex
When a bright focal light source is shone in the eye, the normal response is a bilateral
partial eyelid blink. The anatomical pathway for the dazzle reflex has not been elucidated in
animals but evidence from human literature suggests that it is present when the optic nerve
is intact to the level of the midbrain, most likely the area of the rostral colliculus. The retina
and optic nerve (cranial nerve I1), the facial nerve (cranial nerve Vll) and the orbicularis
oculi muscle form an integral part of this reflex. The dazzle reflex is a subcortical reflex and
suggests that there is the ability to detect a bright light.
Tear Film Break-Up Time (TBUT)
This is a measure of the stability of the tear film and is used in the diagnosis of qualitative
tear film disorders. It involves measuring the time it takes for the tear film to dissociate from
the ocular surface. Fluorescein dye is applied to the ocular surface; the eye is allowed to
blink, then the eyelids are held open and the time until the first dark spot in the fluorescein
appears is measured. Although the changes in the tear film can be observed with a focal
light source, ideally a blue light, the procedure is facilitated by slit-lamp biomicroscopy and
a cobalt-blue filter More readily available sources for a blue light include a Wood's lamp
and the blue light on some models of direct ophthalmoscope.
Normal References Ranges
Schirmer Tear Test (STT)
Dog1 5-25 mm/min
Cat3-32mmin.Lowreadingsare expected incats in the clinicalseting, values shouldbe intrpreted wih cautionandinconjuntion with clinical igns
In both species a difference of >5 mm/min between the eyes is likely to be clinically
relevant.
Intraocular Pressure (IoP)
Dog1 -25 mmHg
Cat 15-25 mmHg
In both species a difference of >5 mmHg between the eyes is likely to be clinically
relevant.
Tear Film Break-Up Time (TBUT)
Dogapproximately 20 s (range 15-25 s)
Cat approximately 16 s (range 10-20 s)
APPENDIX 2 Further Reading
     (      
W. B. Saunders, London, UK
Barnett, K.C., Crispin, S.M. (1998) Feline Ophthalmology. An Atlas and Text , W. B.
Saunders, London, UK
de Lahunta, A. & Glass, E. (2o09) Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology , 3rd
edn. Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, Missouri, USA Dubielzig, R.R., Ketring, K.L., McLellan,
G.J., Daniel, A.M. (2010) Veterinary Ocular Pathology: A Comparative Review. Elsevier
Health Sciences, USA Forrester, J.V., Dick, A.D., McMenamin, P., Lee, R.L. (1996) The
Eye. Basic Sciences in Practice, W. B. Saunders, London, UK
Gelatt, K.N. (2000) Essentials of Veterinary Ophthalmology, Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Gelatt, K.N. (2007) Veterinary Ophthalmology,
Blackwell Publishing, lowa, USA
Gelatt, K.N., Gelatt, J.P. (2001) Small Animal Ophthalmic Practical Techniques for the
Veterinarian, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK
Grahn, B.H., Cullen, C.L., Peiffer, R.L. (2004) Veterinary Ophthalmology Essentials,
Butterworth-Heinemann, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Kaufman, P.A., Alm, A. (2002)
Adler's Physiology of the Eye, 10m edn. Mosby Year Book, Inc., Missouri, USA Maggs,
D.J., Miller, P.E., Ofri, R. (2008) Slatter's Fundamentals of Veterinary Ophthalmology, 4"
edn. Saunders Elsevier, Missouri, USA Petersen-Jones, S.M., Crispin, S.M. (2002) BSAVA
Manual of Small Animal Ophthalmology, 2"d edn. British Small Animal Veterinary
Association, Gloucester, UK
Peiffer, R.L. Jr, Petersen Jones, S.M. (2001) Small Animal Ophthalmology. A Problem-
Orientated Approach, 3'd edn. W.B. Saunders, London, UK
Penderis, J. (2o04) Disorders of eyes and vision. In: BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline
Neurology, (eds S. Platt, N. Olby), 3'd edn. British Small Animal Veterinary Association ,
Gloucester, UK
Riis, R.C. (2002) Small Animal Ophthalmology Secrets, Hanley & Belfus, Inc.,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Glossary
This glossary provides the reader with definitions of ophthalmic terms used in the context
of this book, and is not intended to be comprehensive.
Amaurosis (central
blindness)
 partial or total vision loss be cause of a lesion in the visual pathway excluding the eye
Anisocoria
unequal pupil size
Anterior chamber
region bounded anteriorly by the cornea and posteriorly by the plane of the iris and pupil
Anterior segment
all structures anterior to the face of the vitreous body
Aphakic crescent
crescent-shaped area between the equator of the lens and the margin of the pupil caused by a dislocated lens or by microphakia
Aque ous flare
scattering of light by protein and/or cells in the aqueous humour which occurs as a result of a breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier; also
known as Tyndall's phenomenon
Btepharospasm
spa sm of the orbicularis oculi muscle resulting in involuntary closure of the eyelids
Blood-aqweous barrier
asea s au jo san raua aup pue pog aiea au jo unauda pauaald-uou au jo laaa aune iaeq reisud
Butbar conjunctiva
conjunctiva covering the globe
Buphthatmia/buphuhaimos enlargement of the globe (synonyms, hydr ophtha 1mia, hydrophthalmos, me galoglobus)
Canaticutus
region of the nasolacrimal drainage system connecting the lacrimal punctum and the lacrima1 sac
Canalicutops
cyst of the canaliculus
Canthus
( deiae sna epa aa spaa iam pue iadn aui aiaum anss egaded aun go spua ane uoai ae
Chemosis
conjunctival oede ma
Citiary flush
perilimbal redness caused by dilation of small blood vessels located at the limbus, e.g. in anterior uveitis (synonym, ciliary injection)
Cilium (pl cilia)
eyelash
Coloboma
congenital absence of ocular tissue, e.g eyelid coloboma
Conjunctiviis
inflammation of the conjunctiva
Consensual pupilary igh see Appendix 1
reflex
Cyctoptegia
paralysis of the ciliary body muscle resulting in loss of accommodation; usually accompanied by mydriasis
Cyclople gic
done 8 a eaadooa saanpur yoym anp
Dacryops
cyst within the lacrimal gland
Dazzte reflex
see Appendix 1
 Desmarres chatazion
surgical instrument consisting of a stainless-steel base plate and an opposing circular or oval ring; provides stabilization of the eyelid whilst
clamp
allowing access
Directpupillary light
see Appendix 1
reflex
 Distic hium (pl distichia)  extra eyelash that emerges from the meibomian gland orifice, posterior to the normal eyelashes; condition referred to as distichiasis
Dyscoria
irregular-shaped pupil
Ectopic cilium (pl cilia)
pa ueoga au jo uoai au wog eanono egadd a yanou saaa youa yseaa enxa 
Ectropion
outward turning of the eyelid and eyelid margin
recording of retinal electrical potentials generated by light stirulation of the retina; includes the basic parameters, b-wave amplitude and latency.
Electrore tinography
In the clinical setting it is most commonly employed to assess retinal function when the fundus is obscured by cataract, and in the differential
eou shadde snpuny au uaya ssaupug jo sisoua p
Endophthatmitis
 inflammation of the intra ocular contents
Entropion
inward turning of the eyelid and eyelid margin towards the ocular surface
Enuc teation
surgical removal of the globe and the eyelid margins, third eyelid and conjunctiva
Epiphora
overflow of tears
Episc tera
superficiallayer of the sclera
Episcteritis
inflammation of the episclera
Esotropia
convergent strabismus or medial deviation of the globe
Eurybtepharon
abnormally large eyelid opening (synonym, macropalpebral fissure)
surgical removal of the entire contents of the orbit, including
Exenteration
the eye
Exotropia
divergent strabismus or lateral deviation of the globe
Fittration angle
Finnoff transilluminator
focal light source for examining the eye
Fundus
Bas pue  do iouo uai ssduoo adoso ue ynu pamaa se aa aun go uod asod
Gland of Moll
modified apocrine sweat gland within the eyelid margin
Gland of Zeiss
sebace ous gland within the eye lid margin
Goniody sgenesis
the failure of rarefaction to form pectinate ligaments
Haab's striae
linear opacities in the cornea repre sentative of breaks in Descemet's membrane, indicative of globe enlargement caused by glaucoma
Heme ratopia
day blindness
Heterochromia iridis
two or more colours in an iris or between two irides in one individual
High-fre que ncy
ultrasound biomicroscopy
ultrasound technique using frequencies between 50 and 100 MHz ( higher than traditional B-mode ultra sound). Tissue resolution is increased
approximately 10-fold compared with a 10 MHz probe.
(HF-UBM)
Hotz-Celsus
sur gical technique for correcting entropion
Hyaloid
 pertaining to the vitreous
Hyphaema
haemorrhage in the anterior chamber
Hypotony
abnormally low intraocular pre ssure (usua lly <5 mmHg)
Indirect pupilary light
see Appendix 1
refltex
Intrac amerat
within a chamber; used to describe an injection into the anterior chamber
Iridocorneal angte
(a ao ae en e aqa iae s eaoa a pe s a  pa ae a
Iridodonesis
tremulousness of the iris, usually assoc iated with lens instability or lens removal
Iris collarelte
junction between the central pupillary zone and the peripheral ciliary zone of the iris
Iris re st
dark brown/black focal deposit of uveal pigment on the anterior lens capsule; usually a sign of anterior uveitis
Keratectomy
excision of the cornea
Keratotomy
incision into the cornea
Keratic prec ipitates
aggregate of leucocytes adhering to the corneal endothe lium
Keratitis
inflammation of the cornea
(SOx)
Lacrimostimulant
drug that increases lacrimation
Lagophthatmos
ina bility to fully c lose the pa1pebral fissure
Leukocoria (teucokorea, white pupil
teukocorea)
Limbus
transitional zone between the cornea and the sclera
Macropaipe bratl fssure
(syaqmas) auuado paa ie e
Meibomian gland (larsal
w iea deauoaaid au jo jauoduos pidi a umgau saonpoid seu ura ie paa au um pua snoaagas
gland)
Microphakia
abnormally small lens
Mucinogenic
agent that stimulates the production of mucin (pertaining to the tear film)
Mucinometic
agent that simulates the presence of mucin in the tear film
Mydriasis
 dilation of the pupil
Nucte ar scte rosis
age-related hardening of the lens ( synonym, lenticular
sclerosis)
Nyctatopia
night blindness
Ophthatmoparesis
weakness of the ocular muscles
Ophthatmoptegia
paralysis of the ocular muscles
Optic disc
intraocular portion of the optic nerve in the eye ( synonyms, optic papilla, optic nerve head)
Opic disc cupping
enlargement and deepening of the optic disc, most commonly following glauc oma ( glaucomatous cupping')
Palpe brat conjunctiva
conjunctiva lining the eyelids and the third eyelid
Palpe bralfissure
eyelid opening or aperture
Panophthatmilis
inflammation of all layers of the globe
Peclinate ligament
dtysplasia
 Pene trating keratoplasty  full thickness corneal transplant
Peripapillary
surrounding the optic disc
Persistent pupillary
congenital remnant(s) of the prenatal pupillary vascular membrane; PPM remnants extend from the collarette of the iris to the cornea, lens, or
membrane (PPM)
other areas of the iris
Phac oclastic uwveilis
severe proliferative inflammatory response as a result of rupure of the lens capsule
Phac odonesis
movement of the lens, usually secondary to partial breakdown of the lens zonules
Phacotytic wveitis
lymphocytic-plasmacytic inflammatory response secondary to the release of lens proteins through an intact lens capsule; commonly seen with
developing ca taracts and hyperma ture cataracts
Phthisis bulbi
atrophy of the globe with hypotony
Photopic
light or br ight illumination c onditions
Persistent hy perplastic
primary vitreous (PHPV)
conge nital anomaly in which the hyaloid vascular system persists in the adult eye
Pre-iridatl fibrovasc ular
fibrovascular me mbrane which forms on the anterior surface of the iris, most commonly seen on histopathology
membrane (PFIM)
Poste rior capsutar
aenxa iaeieeo ains aumon uai st loue ansdea sua ioasod a jo do
Ado
Posterior chamber
space formed by the posterior surface of the iris and the anterior surface of the lens; contains aque ous humour
Poste rior segme nt
Baos au pue nouny snoa na au jo aey iouaue au uaamag paenis samonns ap (e susuduoo aa au jo uoniod
Posterior synechia (pl.
adhesion between the pupil mar gin and the anterior lens capsule
synechiae)
Punc tum
 opening to the canaliculus of the nasolacrimal system
Purkinje image
see Appendix 1
Rose Bengal dye
Rhytidectomy
excision of wrinkle
Rube osis iridis
 neova scularisation of the iris 
Schirmer tear test (STT)
 test used to assess aqueous tear production in mm/min; measures both basal and reflex tear production
Scterat venous plexus
ne twork of ve ins in the sclera through which aqueous humour drains
Scotopic
dark or dim light conditions
Seide t test
assessment of corneal integrity by the observation of aqueous humour leakage follwing the application of fluorescein dye
Strabismus
deviation of the globe (synonym, heterotropia, squint)
Subatbinism
 partial albinism, colour dilution, e.g. merle collie
Syneresis
liquefa ction of the vitreous humour
Tapetat refle ction (or
 see Appendix 1
reftex)
Tarsorrhaphy
surgical apposition of the eyelids
Tear fim bre ak-up time
see Appendix 1
(1n81)
Tissue plasminogen
agent that causes the production of plasmin from plasminogen and in turn leads to the lysis of fibrin
ac tivator (TPA)
Tropicamide
parasympatholytic agent used as a short-acting mydriatic
Tunica vasculosa lentis
network of blood vessels originating from the hyaloid artery and the iris which provide nutrition to the lens during development of the eye
Trichiasis
hairs growing in a normal location, which contact the ocular sur face
Index
0.1% dexamethasone
1 % prednisolone acetate
2M myofibre
5% sodium chloride ointment abducens nerve see nerve abscess
acepromazine
adenocarcinoma
ciliary body
mammary gland
meibomian gland
third eyelid
orbit
adenoma
ciliary body
meibomian gland
Adie's pupil
aesthesiometer
Afghan Hound
airgun pellet
aldose reductase
amaurosis
amlodipine besylate
amphotericin B
anaesthesia, topical
aneurysm
anisocoria
anterior chamber
depth
opacity
paracentesis
shunt
anterior lens capsule see lens capsule anterior lens luxation see lens luxation anterior
antifungal therapy
antigen/antibody titre
antihypertensive therapy
aphakic crescent
aphakic vision see vision apraclonidine
aqueous flare
aqueous humour
alternative outflow pathway cells
cytology see cytology drainage
fibrin
opacity
protein
titre levels
aqueous lipaemia see lipid aqueous aqueous misdirection
arterial circle
arteriolosclerosis
arteriovenous fistula
asteroid hyalosis
atropine
Australian Shepherd
axial globe length
axial lens length
axonal reflex see iridocyclospasm, uveitis (reflex) azalide
azathioprine
azithromycin
 Bacillus sp
bacterial culture
bacteriology
barrier cream
bartonellosis
Bassett Hound
Beagle
benazepril
 Bennett's cilia forceps see forceps Bernese Mountain Dog
Bichon Frise
binocular vision see vision
Blastomyces dermatitidis blepharitis
blepharoconjunctivitis
blepharoedema
blepharomycosis
blepharospasm
blindness
central
cortical
day see hemeralopia
night see nyctalopia sudden onset
blink
reduced see lagophthalmos blinking
blood pressure measurement
blood-aqueous barrier
bone marrow
Border Collie
Bordetella bronchiseptica
Borrelia burgdorferii
Boston Terrier
Boxer dog
brachycephalic
brinzolamide
brow-ache
bullous keratopathy
buphthalmos
Burmese cat
Cairn Terrier
calcific band keratopathy
calcium channel blocker
Canada
canalicular aplasia
canaliculops
canaliculus
Candida sp
 canine adenovirus-1
canine distemper virus
canthoplasty
capsular tension ring
carbomer polymer gel
carbonic anhydrase inhibitor carprofen
caruncle
cat scratch injury
cataract
causes
classification
diabetic
heritable
hypermature
intumescent
posterior capsular opacity
PRA
removal
surgery
traumatic
cavernous sinus syndrome
CCT see corneal conjunctival transposition central progressive retinal degeneration see
retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy chalazion
chelating agent
chemosis
chemotherapy
cherry eye
Chihuahua
Chlamydophila felis
inclusion bodies
treatment
chloramphenicol
chlorpromazine
chlortetracycline
cholesterol
chorioretinitis
choristoma
choroidal melanocytoma see melanocytoma, melanoma (uveal) choroidal vasculature
Chow Chow
chronic superficial keratitis see keratitis ciliary body
cyst see cyst
hyperpigmentation
destruction se e laser photocoagulation melanocytoma see melanocytoma, melanoma
(uveal) muscle
neoplasia
spasm see iridocyclospasm ciliary cleft
ciliary flush
ciprofloxacin
clavulanate-potentiated amoxicillin closantel
coagulopathy
coat colour
Coccidiodes immitis
Cochet-Bonnet aesthesiometer see aesthesiometer Cocker Spaniel
American
English
Collie breed
coloboma see eyelid agenesis computed tomography see CT scan condensing lens
conjunctiva
biopsy
cyst see cyst
cytology see cytology fornix
goblet cells see goblet cell graft
hyperaemia
pedicle graft see conjunctival graft conjunctivitis
bacterial
Chlamydophila felis see Chlamydophila felis
  eosinophilic s e e eosinophilic  feline
herpesvirus-1 see feline herpesvirus-1
follicular
lipogranulomatous
parasitic
recurrent
chronic
Conn's syndrome
contact lens
contrast material
cornea
debridement
degeneration
discolouration
graft
haze
healing
laceration
melanosis see corneal pigmentation perforation
pigmentation
 rupture see corneal perforation scarring
thickness
transparency
 trauma/injury
vascularisation
corneal diameter
corneal dystrophy see dystrophy corneal endothelial degeneration treatment
corneal endothelium
cell density
function
pump mechanism
corneal epithelium
bullae
toxic effects
corneal erosion see corneal ulcer corneal lipidosis
corneal necrosis see corneal sequestrum corneal oedema
with anterior uveitis
cause
with endothelial degeneration with glaucoma
with lens luxation
corneal opacity
black
brown
crystalline
white
corneal sensation
corneal sequestrum
corneal touch threshold (CTT) corneal ulcer
cilia abnormalities
dendritic see herpetic corneal ulcer entropion
erosion
geographic
herpetic
indolent
tear film deficiency
corneoconjunctival transposition (CCT) corticosteroids
systemic
topical
cranial cervical ganglion
creatinine phosphokinase
cryogens
cryosurgery see cryotherapy cryotherapy
cyclocryotherapy
Cryptococcus neoformans
CT scan
CTT see corneal touch threshold curettage
Cuterebra sp
C-value see
Goldmann-Witmer
coefficient
cyclocryotherapy s e e cryotherapy
cyclophosphamide
cyclophotocoagulation see laser photocoagulation cycloplegia
cyclosporine
cyst
ciliary body
congenital
conjunctival
inclusion
nasolacrimal
orbital
uveal
cytology
aqueous humour
 conjunctival
Dachshund
dacryocystitis
dacryocystorhinogram
dacryocystorhinography
dacryops
dazzle reflex
denervation hypersensitivity dental disease
dermatitis
dermoid
 Desmarres chalazion clamp
dexamethasone
diabetes mellitus
diabetic cataract see cataract diamond eye
diathermy
diffuse iris melanoma see melanoma dilator muscle see iris diode laser
Dirofilaria immitis
disodium EDTA
distichia see distichiasis distichiasis
Dobermann Pinscher
dolichocephalic
domestic longhaired cat
domestic shorthaired cat
Doppler sphygmomanometer
dorzolamide
doxycycline
drug-associated retinal toxicity see enrofloxacin dyscoria
dystrophy
cornea
corneal endothelial
RPE see retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED) ectopic cilia
ectropion
Ehrlichia canis
electrocautery
electroepilation
electrolysis
electroretinography (ERG)
Embden-Meyerhof path way
endocrine disease
endothelitis
English Bulldog
English Cocker spaniel see Cocker Spaniel English Springer Spaniel
enophthalmos
enrofloxacin
retinal toxicity
entropion
cicatricial
medial
spastic
enucleation
transconjunctival
eosinophilic
conjunctivitis
keratitis
myositis
epiphora
episcleral congestion
episcleral vessels
episcleritis
epithelial inclusion cyst see cyst
Escherichia coli
ethambutol
etodolac
eucalyptus
euryblepharon
exenteration see orbit exophthalmometer
exophthalmos
treatment
exotropia
extraocular muscles
extraocular myositis
extraocular polymyositis
eyelash, extra see distichiasis eyelid
agenesis
coloboma see agenesis conformation
depigmentation
distortion
eversion see ectropion inversion see entropion mass
neoplasia
notched appearance
surgery
swelling
eyelid margin
facial nerve see nerve facial skin folds
fat prolapse
fatty acids
feline calicivirus
feline diffuse iris melanoma se e iris melanoma feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) feline
immunodeficiency virus (FIV) feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) feline leukaemia virus
(FeLV) feline post-traumatic ocular sarcoma FHV-1 see feline herpesvirus-1
fibroma
fibrosarcoma
fibrous histiocytoma
filtration angle
fine needle aspirate see FNA fir trees
fistula
Flat-Coated Retriever
fluorescein dye
fluconazole
fluorescein dye passage test see Jones test fluoroquinolone
FNA
ultrasound-guided
forced duction test
forceps
Bennett's cilia
Graefe fixation
rat toothed
foreign body
corneal/conjunctival
intraocular
nasolacrimal
orbital
third eyelid
formalin
fracture
facial bones
frontal sinus
orbit
frontal bone
fundus
non-tapetal
subalbinotic
fungal disease
fusidic acid
gaze
 genetic testing
 gentamicin
geriatric cat
German Shepherd Dog
gland
lacrimal see lacrimal Moll
third eyelid see third eyelid Zeiss
glaucoma
cat
chronic
corneal oedema
haemorrhage
lens luxation
mydriasis
neoplasia
pigmentary
primary
retinal degeneration
secondary
treatment
uveitis
PFIMs
globe
asymmetry
atrophy
retraction
retropulsion
rupture
small
goblet cell
Golden Retriever
pigmentary uveitis see uveitis Goldmann-Witmer coefficient goniodysgenesis
gonioimplant
 goniolens
gonioscopy
Graefe  fixation  forceps s e e forceps granulomatous episcleral disease  granulomatous
meningoencephalitis Great Dane
Greyhound
grid keratotomy
griseofulvin
Haab's striae
haemangioma
haemangiosarcoma
haemorrhage
intraocular
periocular
subconjunctival
head trauma see trauma head-shy
hemeralopia
hepatic disease
hepatic encephalopathy
hepatic function
Hertel exophthalmometer see exophthalmometer heterochromia iridis
high-frequency ultrasound biomicroscopy Himalayan cat
histiocytoma
histiocytosis
histopathology, ocular
Histoplasma capsulatum
hordoleum, external
Horner's syndrome
Hotz-Celsus
hyalinisation
hyalitis
hyaloid remnant see persistent hyaloid artery hyaluronic acid
hyperadrenocorticism
hypercalcaemia
hyperglycaemia
hyperlipidaemia
hyperlipoproteinaemia
hyperosmotic agent
hypertensive retinopathy
hyperthyroidism
hyperviscosity syndrome
hyphaema
hypokalaemia
hypothalamus
hypothyroidism
hypotony
IC L E s e e intracapsular  lens  extraction
1  idiopathic   granulomatous  disease  idiopathic
lymphoplasmacytic uveitis see uveitis IgG
IgM
immune mediated retinitis (IMR) see retinitis immunocytochemistry
immunomodulatory therapy
immunophenotyping
indolent corneal ulcer see corneal ulcer infectious canine hepatitis insulin
internal ophthalmoparesis
intracameral
intracapsular lens extraction intracranial pressure
intraocular tumour see neoplasia intraocular surgery
intraocular lens (IOL)
intraocular melanoma see melanoma intraocular pressure (IOP)
intraorbital pressure
intrascleral prosthesis
intumescence see cataract iridal melanosis see iris melanosis iridectomy
iridociliary epithelial tumour iridocyclospasm
iridodonesis
iris
atrophy
biopsy
collarette
coloboma
cyst see cyst uveal
dilator muscle
distortion
freckle see iris nevus hyperpigmentation
hypoplasia
leaflets
mass
melanocytoma
melanoma see melanoma (uvea) melanosis
nevus
prolapse
rests
sphincter muscle
iris bombe
ivermectin
Jack Russell Terrier
jaw pain
Jones test
juvenile pyoderma
KCS see keratoconjunctivitis sicca keratectomy
keratic precipitates
keratitis
chronic superficial
exposure
neurotrophic
pigmentary
ulcerative
keratoconjunctivitis, proliferative keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) neurogenic
ketamine
ketorolac trometamol
Labrador Retriever
lacrimal cannula
lacrimal gland
aplasia
cyst
hypoplasia
neurology
lacrimal punctal atresia see nasolacrimal punctum lacrimation
excessive
increased
lacrimomimetic
lacrimostimulant
lactated Ringer's solution
lagophthalmos
latanoprost
lateral canthoplasty see canthoplasty
Leishmania sp
leiyomyoma
leiyomyosarcoma
lemon juice
lendectomy see lentectomy lens
dislocation see lens luxation equator
fibrovascular plaque
instability
nucleus
opacity see also cataract rupture see lens capsule rupture trauma
vacuoles
lens capsule
rupture/tear
lens induced uveitis (LIU) see uveitis lens luxation
anterior
 congenital
posterior
primary (PLL)
secondary
lens subluxation
lens zonules
lentectomy
lenticular sclerosis see nuclear sclerosis leptomeningitis
Leptospira sp
leukocoria
leukocytosis
Lhasa Apso
ligament
 medial canthal
 orbital ligament
limbus
mass
trauma
lipid
lipid aqueous
lipid keratopathy
lipid layer see tear film lipogranulomatous conjunctivitis see conjunctivitis lipoma
lipoprotein(s)
lortalamine
low-fat diet
lubricant
lymphoid follicles
lymphoma
lymphoplasmacytic uveitis see uveitis macropalpebral fissure
malignant histiocytosis
mammary gland adenocarcinoma see adenocarcinoma mannitol
Marcus-Gunn pupil
masticatory muscle myositis Mastiff
mastocytoma
maxillary canine tooth
maze test see obstacle course medial canthal ligament see ligament medial canthal pocket
syndrome medial canthoplasty see canthoplasty medial canthus
fistula
swelling
trichiasis
mediastinum
medulloepithelioma
meibomian gland
adenocarcinoma see adenocarcinoma adenoma see adenoma
 inflammation see meibomianitis opening
rupture
meibomianitis
melanin
choroid
cornea see corneal pigmentation iris
retina
melanocytic proliferation
melanocytoma
melanocytosis
melanoma
amelanotic
cat
diffuse iris melanoma
dog
eyelid
intraocular
limbal
third eyelid
uveal
melanophage
meningioma
meningitis see leptomeningitis metastatic calcification
metastatic neoplasia see neoplasia methylnitrosourea
microinstrumentation
microphthalmos
micropunctum
Miniature Schnauzer
Miniature Shorthaired Dachshund miosis
miotic therapy
Morgan pocket technique
MRI
mucin
deficiency
mucinogenic
mucinomimetic agent
mucoid discharge see ocular discharge Muller's muscle see muscle multiple punctate
keratotomy muscle
extraocular see extraocular muscles rectus (dorsal, medial, ventral) levator anguli oculi
medialis levator palpebrae superioris Muller's
orbicularis oculi
retractor bulbi
ventral oblique
Mycobacterium sp
mycoplasmosis
mydriasis
clinical sign
drug-induced
neurologic deficit
mydriatic agent
myelination see optic nerve myositis see extraocular nanophthalmos
nasal discharge
nasal folds
nasal ostium
nasal tumour
nasolacrimal
 cannulation
cyst see cyst
flush see nasolacrimal cannulation obstruction
patency (see Jones test) radiography
sac
nasolacrimal duct
aplasia
foreign body
stricture
nasolacrimal punctum
Nd : YAG laser
neoplasia
ciliary body
eyelid
intraocular
melanoma see melanoma metastatic
nasolacrimal duct
orbital
third eyelid
uvea see uvea
Neospora caninum
nephrotic syndrome
nerve
abducens
facial
oculomotor
optic see optic nerve trigeminal
trochlear
nerve sheath tumour
neuroectoderm
neurogenic KCS see KCS
neuromuscular blockade
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis neuropraxia
neuroprotection
neurosensory retina see retina neurotrophic keratitis see keratitis neutrophilia
NGE see nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis niacinamide
nictitating membrane see third eyelid nitrous oxide
nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis nodular ocular fasciitis
Norwegian Elkhound
nuclear sclerosis
nyctalopia
nystagmus
obstacle course
ocular discharge
 gelatinous
mucoid
mucopurulent
purulent
serous
tenacious
ocular hypertension
ocular melanosis see ocular surface pigmentation ocular motility
ocular surface
chronic disease
desiccation
disease
flora
health
pain
pigmentation
oculomotor nerve see nerve oesophagitis
Onchocerca sp
ophthalmoplegia
ophthalmoscope, indirect
optic chiasm
optic disc
cupping
dark
haemorrhage
myelination
pale
physiological pit
small
swelling
see optic nerve neoplasia
see optic neuritis
see papilloedema
optic nerve
atrophy
axons
cat
degeneration
enucleation
glaucoma
imaging
neoplasia
pathway
trauma
optic neuritis
optic tract
 optical axes
oral mucosa
oral ulceration
orbicularis oculi muscle see muscle orbit
abscess
cellulitis
cryptococcosis
cyst see cyst
emphysema
exenteration
fat
fibrosis
foreign body
fracture see fracture haemorrhage
immune-mediated disease
infection
neoplasia
smooth muscle
space occupying lesion
surgery
tissue volume
trauma
varices
orbital fissure
orbital ligament see ligament osteosarcoma
otitis media
oxytetracycline
 pain receptor
 painful eye
 palpebral fissure
narrowed
widened
pancreatitis
pannus
panuveitis
 papilloedema
papilloma
Papillon
 paraffin-based ophthalmic ointment parasympatholytic agent
parasympathomimetic agent
 parasympathetic innervation parotid duct transposition (PDT) pars planitis
pavementing
pectinate ligament dysplasia Pekingese
penetrating keratoplasty
periocular skin
 periocular swelling
periocular wetting
Persian cat
persistent hyaloid artery
persistent pupillary membrane persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV) see vitreous
petrous temporal bone
phacodonesis
phacoemulsification
complications
prognosis
phacolytic uveitis see uveitis phenol cautery
phenylephrine
phospholipid
photocoagulation see laser photocoagulation photodocumentation
photophobia
photopic
photoreceptor
phthisis bulbi
physostigmine
pigment migration
pigmentary glaucoma see glaucoma pigmentary keratitis see keratitis pigmentary uveitis see
uveitis pilocarpine
pituitary gland tumour
plasma cell infiltration of the third eyelid see third eyelid platelet disorder
PLL see lens luxation PLR see pupillary light reflex Pointer
polyarthritis
polycythaemia
polymyositis see extraocular Poodle
Miniature
Standard
Toy
 porcine small intestinal submucosa portosystemic shunt
inflammatory  retinal  degeneration see retinal  degeneration  post-traumatic  sarcoma see
feline post-traumatic sarcoma povidine-iodine
pre-chiasmal lesion
   s d   s  n ns
receptor
primary lens luxation (PLL) see lens luxation progressive retinal atrophy (PRA) secondary
cataract
developmental
progressive  retinal  degeneration se e progressive retinal atrophy  progressive rod-cone
degeneration (prcd) prolapsed gland third eyelid surgery
proptosis
prostaglandin analogue
protozoal infection
 pseudopapilloedema see papilloedema pseudotumour
 ptosis
reverse
Pug
 pupil mobility
pupil seclusion
pupillary light reflex (PLR) colorimetric testing
efferent pathway
puppy strangles
pure-breed cat
 Purkinje image
pyrexia
film disorder radiography
contrast study
radiohyperthermia
renal function
respiratory tract infection retina
arteriole
bullae
function
haemorrhage
neurosensory
oedema
toxins
vascular attenuation
vascular tortuosity
retinal degeneration
animal model
diffuse
enrofloxacin-associated retinal degeneration see enrofloxacin late-onset
post-inflammatory
retinal detachment
retinal dysplasia
retinal ganglion cell
retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED) retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) retinitis
immune-mediated
retinopathy
hereditary
light-induced
nutritional
radiation-induced
toxic
retractor bulbi muscle see muscle retrobulbar haematoma
retrobulbar space
retrolental
retropulsion
rhinitis
rhinoscopy
rhytidectomy
Rickettsia rickettsii
rod-cone degeneration
rod-cone dysplasia
Rose Bengal stain
rubeosis iridis
salivation
Samoyed
sarcoma see feline post-traumatic sarcoma Schirmer tear test
sclera
laceration
rupture
scleral show
scleral venous plexus
scleritis
sector iridectomy see iridectomy Seidel test
Shar Pei
Shih Tzu
sialoadenitis
sialogogue
sialolith
Siberian husky
skin sutures
skull conformation
slit-lamp biomicroscopy
soft palate
sorbitol
space occupying orbital lesion see orbit spaniel breed
spindle cell tumour
Springer Spaniel
squamous cell carcinoma
squinting see blepharospasm St Bernard
Staffordshire Bull Terrier
Staphylococcus sp
staphyloma
startled expression
strabismus
lateral
Streptococcus sp
strontium 90 therapy
strychnine poisoning
stye
subalbinism
subconjunctival   fat    prolapse s e e fat 
t   prolapse   subconjunctival  haemorrhage see
haemorrhage subcutaneous oedema
substance P
Sudden Acquired Retinal Degeneration Syndrome (SARDS) sulphonamides
superficial  keratectomy see keratectomy suspensory  ligaments see lens zonules suture
reaction
swinging flashlight test
sympathetic innervation
sympathomimetic agent
synchysis scintillans
synechia(e)
anterior
posterior
systemic histiocytosis
systemic hypertension
tachycardia
tacrolimus
tapetal hyperreflectivity
tapetal hyporeflectivity
tapetal reflection
tapetum
tarsal plate
taurine
tear film break-up time (TBUT) tear drainage
impaired
tear film
aqueous component
distribution
evaporation
lipid component
meniscus
mucin component
porphyrins
stability
tear film disorder
qualitative
quantitative
tear production
tear replacement
tear staining
tectonic support
temporary tacking sutures
temporary tarsorrhaphy
terrier breed
tetanus
thalamus
Thelazia californiensis
thermocautery unit
thermocouple
thermokeratoplasty
third eyelid (TEL)
bulbar surface
cartilage
conjunctiva
depigmentation
encircling
eversion
free margin
inversion
leading edge
lymphoid follicles
manipulation
mass
movement
muscle
neoplasia
plasma cell infiltration
position
prominence
protrusion
scrolled cartilage
thickening
third eyelid gland
adenocarcinoma see adenocarcinoma cyst
hypertrophy
prolapsed gland see prolapsed gland surgery
thoracotomy
thyroid
thyroxine
Tibetan Terrier
tick-borne encephalitis virus timolol
tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) tocainide
tonometry
topical anaesthesia see anaesthesia
Toxoplasma gondii
toxoplasmosis
toy breed dogs
TPA see tissue plasminogen activator trabecular meshwork
tracheobronchitis
tracking reflex
transconjunctival enucleation see enucleation transillumination
transitional cell carcinoma trauma
conjunctival
corneal
extraocular
head
intraocular
lens
 traumatic proptosis see proptosis Travatan see travoprost travoprost
trichiasis
trigeminal nerve see nerve triglycerides
trismus
trochlear nerve see nerve tropicamide
tunica vasculosa lentis
tympanic bullae
Tyndall phenomenon
ulcerative keratitis see corneal ulcer ultrasonography
high-frequency ultrasound biomicroscopy ocular
orbital
ultraviolet radiation
uvea
mass
neoplasia
melanoma see melanoma uveal cyst
uveal tract
uveitis
acute
anterior
cat
causes
chronic
clinical signs
sop
granulomatous
lens-induced (LIU)
lymphoplasmacytic
phacolytic
phacoclastic
pigmentary
posterior
reflex
treatment
uveodermatologic syndrome
uveoscleral outflow
venous circle
vestibulo-ocular reflex
viral adenitis
vision
aphakic
binocular
testing
vision loss
visual axis
visual impairment
visual placing
vitamin A deficiency
vitamin E deficiency
vitreous
degeneration
haemorrhage
opacity
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada Syndrome see uveodermatologic syndrome water-shed lesions
wedge resection
weight loss
Weimaraner
West Highland White Terrier wet eye
Wire-Haired Fox Terrier
Xalatan see latanoprost xeromycteria
xerostomia
yeast
zonules see lens zonules zygomatic papilla
zygomatic salivary gland
WHAT'SYOURDIAGNOSIS
SMALLANIMAL
OPHTHALMOLOGY
WHAT'SYOURDIAGNOSIS?
HeidiFeatherstone
ElaineHolt
WILEY-BLACKWELL